
      
         
            
            
            The refutation of the byshop of Winchesters derke declaratiō of his false articles, once before confuted by George Ioye.
            Be not deceiued by this bysshops false bokes. Heare novve the tother parte, and iudge truely of the trueth. For the veritie vvyll haue the victorye.
             M. D. XLVI.
         
         
            
            
            To the reader.
            
               THou shalt vnderstād (good reader) that 
                  •
               n the yere. M. D. xivi at easter or pash time I receiued this bysshops boke called his Declaration writen agenst me, what tyme, for such trouble and vnquietnes as I sustained in flying & fliting from place to place, it was witsontide folowīg ere I could peruse his boke & gather out these principals and (as thou seest) refute them. And yet then because there went forth a straighte commandement fro the emperour (by whose procurement I know not) but wel I weet, the byshop was in those partis ambassiador not longe before that no englysh bokes be no more prī
               ted at Anwerpe ne in any other places of his nether partes of Germany, I coulde not get this my answer thē printed without troublous tyme for

that the popes frendes so fiercelye hunted for vs & our bokes and resisted oure laboures with so greuous nihibicions cōdempnacions, banishmentes and burninges. If this boke therfore seme to sharpe tothed, consider in howe sharpe a tyme it was writen and by whose counsel and labour then most tirannously and vngodlye so many good bokes, holy bybles▪ & testamentes, yea & the innocent christen holy members of christ were burned. Beholde howe mercilessely and most cruelly and vniustelye with all spede, good men were then vexed, taken, presoned, and condempned for heretiques. No maruell then if anye christen hert moued with pietie and zele to Christ to his holy worde and his poore chirche beholdinge this cruell persecuciō could ether cōtaine teares, refraine speach or penne. And I namely whom this byshoppe that yeare at Anwerpe diligentelie hunted for, and in this his declaration nowe

claundereth with heresye. vntruely reporteth my wordes, and gods holy wordes he violently wresteth vnto his false doctryne. In this tyme therfore very sorowfull also I was to see so many simple vnlearned, hauinge no iugement to decerne his false doctrine 
                  •
               ro the true, hitherto so perellousely deceiued and seduced into so many dāpnable errours by his false bokes and falser preachinge. For so longe as no aunswer was made, ne his false doctrine confuted, his fyrste tale so craftelye handled and painted, myght appere to manye to seme trwe, and the popes false doctrine to be the gospel, especially to such as be more redy to beleue lyes then the veritie, and to them whiche yet more fauour the romish religion then christs and so highly yet depend of & esteme this byshoppes lerning, that thei be addict & sworne into it, as into anye oracle oute of gods mouth. Ryghte heuey I was th
                  •
               rfore that this my

answere cold not be printed so sone as it was writen, that the diligent indifferent readers seinge and heringe bothe the parties might haue iuged which of vs standeth vpon the trwe parte, whiche iugement he geuethe, the that by his spirit geueth the discrecion to decerne al mens spiritis and doctryne thorow Iesus Christe. Amen.
         
         
            
            
               
                  A.
                  Ab ista tua malicia, englyshed, for this thy malice. fol. xix, b
                  Thautoritie & vnderstandynge of scriptures must depend of the bysshop of rome his chirch after Wynchest. fo. xlii. b.
                  Adam and Eu
                        •
                     s repentaunce fol. xxiii. b.
                  Abolysh what it is. fol. c.xli. b.
                  Adsueraunce of saluacion fol. c.lviii. b.
                  Antichristen apprehender fol. c.lxxvii.
               
            
            
               
                  B.
                  Barnes burnt in smythfeld. fol. ii.
                  Barnes was vergiffen eodem.
                  Byshoprikes must fall. fol. v. & vi.
                  The byshop described of Paule. c.xlvii. b.
                  Backewarde plantacions. fol. c.lxi.
                  Byshop eateth his owne wordes. fo. 
                        •
                     ii.iiii
                  Byshops whom they abuse. fol. cxxxi.
                  Byshop confounded with his owne example. fol. xix
                  Beleif is no worke of man before iustification fol. c.v. b. & .xlvii
                  The byshop writeth for the pope, fo. xlii b
                  The byshop is afraide lest he shulde be iustified by faith onely. fol. lxx. b,
                  The byshop beleueth not his owne doctryn fol. lxxviii.
                  The bbshop omitteth .v. wordes in his allegation. fol. lxxix
                  The byshops workes. fol. lxxxiiii. b,
                  The byshops office. fol. lxxxvi.
                  Beleif in Christe is none of Winchesters workes. fol. lxxxiii
                  
                     Baptism cometh after faith. fol. lxx. b lxxi
                  Baptisme is the testification to the chirch fol. lxxi.c.lxii. & .lxxx.
               
            
            
               
                  C.
                  Contentation. fol. xv.
                  Certaintie of our eleccion. fol. xlviii.
                  Couered wt our brothers clothes. lvii. clxiii
                  Charitie iustifieth not. fol. lxi.lxii and .cl.
                  Christ before Ihon baptist. fol. lxxv
                  Commaundementes be not so lyte. fo. cxv.
                  Children dying before vaptisme. clxi.clxii.
                  Christ made our rightwisnes. fol. clxiii.
                  Christ thought as he saide. fol. cxxii.
                  Cause placed after theff. cxxv b. xviii b, cxxvi
                  Charitie hath a sondrye operation from faith, fol. cxliii. b
                  Concupiscence is synne. fol. clxvii.clxix.
                  Concupiscence lyeth lurkinge in 
                        •
                     he soule. fol. clxix
               
            
            
               
                  D.
                  Degrees of heuines. fol. xxii.
                  Dimisia sunt ei peccata expouned. fo. xciii.
                  Doctrine of the pharisais. fol. cxxii.
                  Dead saintes called not vpon. fol. cxxxi.i.
                  Diuide not gods honour fol. clxxxxiii
               
            
            
               
                  E.
                  Exclusion of workes from faith iustifieng folio .xxxvii b. lviii
                  Euil wedes grow with the corne. fo. lxxx, b
                  Enstrucciō boke, foli. cxxx, b
                  Eares of Idols cutte of. fol. cxl b
               
            
            
               
                  F
                  
                     Fayth material formed & vnformed fol. lv. b.
                  Faith material god geueth it not. fol. lv i.
                  Fayth, hope and loue, distinct, but not diuided. fol. lvi.cxxii.
                  Faith by whiche work it iustifieth. fo. lvi b.
                  Faith iustifienge what it is. folio .lv iii.
                  Faith is the lyfe of the iuste. folio .lxi,
                  Faith & not works fulfil ye law. lxvii.cxvi b
                  Faith certifieth vs of our re. lxxvii. b. clxx b
                  Faith is an harde condicion, foli. cii, b
                  Fryer forests confiteor folio .cx,
                  Faith beleueth, hope abydeth, folio, cxii
                  Fleshe is a perellose Hydra, foli. cxv. b
                  Faith and workes lye not together in one bedde. folio, c, xvii.c.xxx, c, xxxi.
                  Frely for his penaunce & workes, folio cxx.
                  Foure thinges appropriated to god onely. folio .cxxxvi.
                  Faith hope and loue compared to .iii, sisters, folio .cxliiii. b
                  Faythes proper workes. fol. cxlv.
                  Faith is no bare foundation ne colde gifte fol, cxlviii, b
                  Faith hope and loue ordered of Paule folio, cxlviii, b
                  Faith as lytle as the mustard seade. clxiii.
                  Faith and goddes promyses be correlatyues. fo. c.lxxiiii. b
               
            
            
               
                  G.
                  God is honoured as him selfe prescribeth it. folio .cxl.
                  George is not to be called vpon. fol. xxxiii b
                  Gedions swerde. Idem
                  
                     God maketh vs to worke wt hym. cxxxii. b
                  God geueth vs comon giftes. fo, cxxviij,
                  God worketh a strange worke in vs. xxij. b
                  God is not honoured after oure deuises. folio .cxxxvij.
                  Graces thre in one soule. fol. cxliiij. b.
                  Gratis what thinge it excludeth folio, vi,
                  Good haithen dedes, folio .xliiij
                  Gods fotesteppes be not sene. fol, l. b.
                  God necessiteth no man to euyll ne to good folio .lij
                  God worketh al thinges in euery thinge. folio .clxxxiiii.
                  Gyftes thre in the iustified, fol. lv.
                  Gods giftes not idl
                        •
                     . fol. lvi.
               
            
            
               
                  H,
                  In hope we be saued. fol. xcix
                  Hopes owne seu
                        •
                     rall operation. fol. cxij
                  Head of the churche chaunged. fol, cxli.
                  Hope with hir workes. folio, cxlv,
                  Hertes two, newe and olde folio .clxxx.
                  Herte newe. folio .clxxxij. b.
               
            
            
               
                  I.
                  Impossible is the lawe to be fulfylled of man. folio .vii.cxv, cxbi.
                  Impossible thinges wherfore god commā
                     deth. folio .vij. b. lxx.vii.cx
                        •
                     iiii. b, cxxvij. b
                  Iose
                        •
                     h wrought a straunge work with his brethren, folio .xxii. b.
                  Iustificatiō how it is estemed of vs. xxviij
                  Iustification by onely faith, xxxvij.
                  Iustified before baptisme. fol. lxxix. b
                  Ioyes fayth. folio .xci.
                  
                     Iairus his onely fayth. folio .xcii.
                  Iacob doth on his elders brothers clothes folio, clxiiii.
                  Iobs workes feared. fol. clxv,
                  Iustifications .iiii. folio .clxxx.
                  Iustificacions .ii. folio .clxxxij
               
            
            
               
                  L.
                  The lorde auengeth al wronge. fol. xxxij,
                  Libert
                        •
                     e fre man hath not. folio, lii,
                  Loue to our selues depely roted. xcxv. b.
                  Lerning to beleue, is one of Wyn. workes before faith, fol, cvii.cxi,
                  Loue hath hir owne seuerall act. foli. cxii,
                  Loue iustifieth not. folio, clv. b, clv
                        •
                     , clvii,
               
            
            
               
                  M
                  Man forgeueth because he beleueth. cxxv.
                  Merit is diffamed. folio .v. b
                  Merits of Christ, folio .vi.
                  Merits be fallen. Eodem,
                  Mercies many, fol. clxxix. b. and, clxxx
                  Merit by participation, fol, b iii, b
                  Meatenes called worthines. clxxxvi, b
               
            
            
               
                  N
                  Necess
                        •
                     tie voluntary fo, xlix, b
                  Necessitie without compulsion Eodem
                  Necessite to sin, wher it shuld be sought lij
                  Nisi an exclusiue. f
                        •
                     lio .lviii b.
                  No idle gyftes. fol, lix, b
                  Nature of man corrupt. fol. clxv
               
            
            
               
                  O.
                  One & the same worke is both good & il lii. b.
                  One gift iustifieth. fol, lv,
                  Only faith iustifieth. lvii, lviii, clii, b, cliii clxxii
                  Office of faith, fol, lix
                  Offices of faith, hope, and loue Eodem, b
                  
                     Operor a 
                        •
                     erbe passiue with Win. fo. cviii
                  One mediator. folio .c.xxxiiii.
                  Originall synne. fol. c, lxvi.
               
            
            
               
                  P.
                  Pretentat cornibus 
                        •
                     iam testudo. cxxi.
                  Popis infinite treasure chist. fol. v. b
                  Participation to merit. xxv.
                  Paules .vij. argumentes. fo. clxxij. b
                  Precept of forgeuenes to harde. xxxiiii. b.
                  Popis faith. folio .xli.
                  Predestination. xlvij. b
                  Pre
                        •
                     estinatiō sought & foūd ī crist. xlviii b
                  Penaunce foloweth baptis. fo. lxxiiii. b
                  Penaunce foloweth faith iustifieng. xvi. b
               
            
            
               
                  R.
                  Repentaunce what it is. folio, xvii
                  Repentaunce 
                        •
                     resupposeth the preachinge of the lawe and gospel. folio, xx,
                  Repentaunce legal & euangelike. xx. b. xxi.
                  Repugnance in Win. wordes, folio .xxv. folio .xxvi, fol, lxxxiiii
                  Reco
                        •
                     c
                        •
                     liacion, what it is. fol. xxxii, b.
                  Repent
                        •
                     unce certifieth the congregacion folio .lxxx. b
                  Rightwisenes, two maner. cliii
                  Receites of the byshop. clxxix
               
            
            
               
                  S.
                  Sclaunder geuen and receiued, fol. v
                  Scripture diuided in to the lawe & gospell folio, clij. b
                  Scriptures must assure vs. fol. xv
                  Synnes where we shulde behold thē, xx, b
                  Sacrament of ye shepe skynnes. fo. xxiii. b
                  
                     Skatre of sinne is synne. fol. clxvii
                  Strange workes worketh god. folio .li
                  Sum is gods name essenciall. fol. liii,
                  Seruauntes wherfore we be vnprofitable, folio, l
                        •
                     iii.
                  Sacramentes geue not grace. folio .l
                        •
                     xiii
                  Stoney hert first taken awaye. fo. cxxx, b
                  Saintes not to be called vpon. fo, cxxxvij b
                  Suscepit Israel. folio c, lxxx. b
                  Stonney hert folio, c.lxxxiii,
               
            
            
               
                  T
                  To tast christes passion. folio .i
                        •
                     i. b.
                  Trayterouse touches of our bysh. c.xxx. b
               
            
            
               
                  W
                  Workes all our best, filthey, folio, vii,
                  Workes iustifye not, fol, xx
                        •
                     vij, lxxvi,
                  Worde exterior and interior fol, xlv,
                  Wherfore we be predestined, folio, xlviii
                  Workes and faith together maye not iustifye, fol, lxxvi, b
                  Workes make vs vncertaine, fol, lxxvii b
                  Works e
                        •
                     cluded frō iustificacion, lxxxviii
                  Workes before iustification ar syn, lxxxix
                  Worke one in the myddes of the erth, c, b
                  Workes and faith concurre not in iustificati, fol. cxvi
                        •
                     ii, b
                  Workes of god in man, and not of man, folio, c, xxix, b, c, xxx, &c,
                  workers with god, folio, cxxxii, b
                  Workes thre in iustification, foli, c, xxxi, b
                  Workes maye not sustaine the iugement of god, fol, lxxiiii
                  Worthynes on our parte iustifieth. clxxxi

fol. clxxx
                        •
                     i.
                  Uayne vocables. folio .xxvii.
                  Uoluntarie necessitie. folio .xlix. b
                  Use of baptisme. folio .lxxi,
                  Use of benefitis deserue not another benefit. folio .cxiii,
                  Wynchesters collet, fo. clxxi, b
                  Winchester maintaineth the popes iustification. folio, cx
                  Wynchest. peruerteth Peters wordes taking Ab for propter, foli. xc, b
                  Wyn, parador. xxxviii, b
                  Wynch. defendeth the pope agaynst his aduersaries folio, xliii,
                  Wyn, refused gods callynge, fol, lxxxi.
                  Win, spake into my fauour for the trueth. folio .lxxi. b
                  Win. sin yet sleapeth in the gates. lxxxij. b
                  Win, false faith correspondinge his iustification. folio .x
                        •
                     . b
                  Wyn. compareth Christes promise to the lyinge man. fol. ci. b
                  Win. cōfuted wt his owne example. lxx
                        •
                     i. b
                  Wyn. iustification .xl. yeres ago. fol, cix.
                  Win. abused vse to merit, fol, cxiii, b.
                  Win. diuisiō to make diuisiō. cxvii.cxviij
                  Wyn. rydle nedeth an oedipus. fol, cxx
                  Wyn relatyue (which) folio .cxx, b
                  Win is afraid to settle 
                        •
                     nd place his condicion. cxxi.
                  Wyn. & his, confounde thē selues. cxxiii. b
                  Wyn. workes before his iustification. folio, cxxviii. &c.
                  
                     Wyn. is but a feble defence for his Rome bysh, folio, cxxxvi. b
                  Wyn. playeth .ij. partes at once. clxxxi, b
                  Wyn. denieth his own wordes, iii. &, iiii.
                  Win. bryngeth into lyghte the thinge he wolde hyde fol. clxxi
                  Wat the heremite cxv, b
                  We must aske to do that we be boden to do folio, xviii
               
            
            
               
                  y
                  yoke of your condicions fol, lxxxvii
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The refutacion of Wynchesters declaration.
            
               YOur entrye to the mater is fitte for your processe:Steuen Gardines the bysshop. for neither dyd I euer write suche articles, ne Barnes was burnte for preachinge onely faith iustifiethe. I was by Barnes choise, his scolemaister at the which tyme we entreted the article of onely faith iustifieth: as shal hereafter appere.
            MY entrie into the matter was very fitte for my processe:Ioye. for although another might perchaūce write these articles, yet do this your owne derke declaration and pertinate defence of thē shewe the same to be yours, althoughe they had not borne your name. For neuer did the child so lyuely resemble his owne father, as do these articles & their declaracion expresse the bysshoppe of

Romes antichristen doctrine, by you both preached and in your other bokes writen for his defence, therebye declaring your selfe to be his owne obedient sworne sonne. It had bene therfore more honesty & lesse shame, yea & more godly for a christen bysshop beinge of a christen kinges coū
               cell, pretendinge to be his frend and faithfull subiecte, for the estiewinge of so violente a suspicion, yea rather so bold a manifest declaration, your selfe to stande yet so styll vppon the popes parte agaynst your so gentle and louynge a prince, to haue vtterly renyed and renownced them for your articles, seing they be so directely against ye worde of god, against the olde holy doctours, againste the abolyshment of the pope, only stinkinge of Pelagiane, leauened with the popes pharisaical sower leauen. Ye speke to me in your preface as excusing your selfe of doctor Barnis death, that he was not burnt for the

article of onely faith iustifieth. How ye handled doctor Barnes your scoler, better learned than his maister, I can not tell. But this wel I wote by your owne wordes, in youre preface, that anon after, the maister and scoler coulde not agre vpon this article of our faithe, & his maister had openly forgeuen him,Barne
                     •
                   was v
                     •
                  rgi
                     •
                  
                  ff
                     •
                  n, the scoler was sent into the tower, and in conclusiō brent in smithfelde. Howe smothely soeuer ye haue here firste of all for your defence painted your excuse in wasshinge your handes with pilate yet by your owne wordes, the contention in this matter of faith was onely betwixt you and him, onelye you he troubled, onely you he offended, onely you, he openly (to vse your termes) encombred with shamefacenes only you complayned of hym so greuously to the kynges maiestie. And who compelled him to recante openly, I can not tell. Onelye you accuse him of heresy in your boke, ye might
saye 

perchaunce with the olde holy spirituall pharisais and byshops, Nobis non licet interficere quemquam. It is not lawfull for vs to kyll anye man. And so after ye haue accused & condemned pore christ, deliuer him vp into the seclar handes to do execucion, because so holy bishops wold not pollute their sacred anointed fingers with innocent bloud. But this is plaine: openly he asked you forgeuenes at saint Maries spittel, where ye gaue it him in an outward signe, but whether in herte, god knowethe it. And he stondinge at the stake asked the shryue the cause of his death and he saide he knew it not. And thē last of al, doctor Barnes as one suspectīg only you, sayd these wordes. If doctour Steuen bishop of Winchester be the causer of my deathe, oure lorde my god, for christes sake, forgeue it him, as I wolde my selfe be forgeuen. And besides all these euidences, the comon fame can not be

stylled. But this so waighty a cause in a bisshop, that shulde be an edi
                  •
               ier and no destroier, a feder, a nourisher to minister life, and not a bloudsouper, I leaue it to the iudgemente of God, when doctor Barnis and you shall both shortely stande before the iudgement seat of Christe,
            
               It is of lyke truth that ye affirme of me,
               The bysshop. 
               that I shuld by these articles proue that workes must iustifye. I neuer went about to proue that, how so euer it liketh you to reporte of me, I neuer wrote so, I neuer preached so, I neuer affirmed so ne enterprised to teache Barnes so.
            
            This is my iust reporte of you in my former booke gathered of youre articles.Ioye. That ye wolde proue that workes must iustifye, that is,when I alledge then
                     •
                  
                  ber and the leafe of hi
                     •
                   boke, it is of his first 
                     •
                   prīted bok
                     •
                   in the greater volume with our workes, we must merite the remission of our sinnnes, whiche whither it be of lyke truthe, with my former saienges, your owne wordes wt
               in .viii. lynes folowynge declare it, sayenge. Ye wolde not be afrayde to

vse that speache, that with our workes we must merite the remission of oure sinnes, if I and other had not diffamed ye word, merite. And in the next leafe ye saye, we with the grace of god doing the workes of penaūce taste and fele the passion of Chryste. Whiche taste and felynge commeth by doinge the workes of penaunce. Which what els is it then by doing the workes of penaunce to deserue the taste of christes passion, felynge therby ye remission of our sinnes?ioan. 6.
                For to tast & fele christes passiō is to tast and fele certainly oure remission of synnes as Ihon declareth it, by the eatinge of his fleshe, and drinkinge of his bloude, by our faith, therof the iustified to lyue. And if by doing the workes of penaunce (as ye teache) we deserue this taste and felynge, so deserue we by your penaunce doing our iustificacion. And euē by and by ye confirme this your false doctrine of meritinge, sayenge. That good men haue called it meritinge to vse

the benefites of Christes passion. Whiche your iuglynge I shall disclose, when I come to the place. And in the laste lyne of the same syde, ye saye. And sinners be called to grace to do the workes of penaunce, wherby to recouer yt fauour of god with remission and forgeuenes of their sinnes. And in the next lefe, ye saye. So as Christ merited and deserued thorowly, we by participation in vsinge his giftes, merit and deserue. And saye ye not that they that wyll enioye the remission of their synnes muste fulfill your condicion? which condicion ye declare to be stuffed ful of all your owne good workes, callynge them Winchesters workes. Turne to your .xlix. lefe folowinge, and ye shall see it true that I saye. What els do ye seme to proue, but by workes to merit our iustificaciō? And yet is your doctrine so intricate perplexe and repugnant, that in many places ye fight against your selfe to seeke oute youre shiftes to make

youre popish parte to seme true to foles, that haue neither learninge ne iudgemēt. What els didde I confute with the manifeste scriptures against you, then youre meritinge by workes youre remission, you euer sweatinge youre feble defence with pelagians papistry, as it shall appeare hereafter? And therfore neuer denye it for shame that ye euer went about to proue it or to write it or to preache and teache it. Ye haue gone about it in deade, for ye neuer coulde hit it with all the shaftes ye haue shotte. It is greate shame for one that wolde be sene so highly learned, and a byshop to, so sone to eate his owne wordes, & deny his owne hand writing, whē he seeth his part naught, and so false that he is not able by scriptures to defende it.
            
               The bys.
               I wolde not be aferde to vse this spech (with our workes we muste merite the remission of our sinnes) had not you and other, to the worlde diffamed and sclaundered the worde (merite).
            
            
               It is in dede a sclaunder,Ioye. not of vs geuen, but of you superciliouse pharisais receiued: who for youre concupiscence of the flesh,A sclaunder geuen and a sclaūder receiued. & of your eyes, and for your pryde, be the very worlde in deede, as Ihon painteth your romysshe court. For a receiued sclaunder is when a thinge wel done or saide, is sinistrely of malice euell taken, as Mathew describeth it.
            But as touchinge the churche of Christ takinge it, I tell you againe as Elyas tolde kinge Achab. It is you and your fathers house of rome for that ye haue forsaken the lordes preceptes, & be gonne after Baalim folowing your fathers false doctrine Pelagiane, whiche haue diffamed the very onely trewe merites of christes passion with your owne stinkīg merites of your sinful workes therby to deserue remission of youre sinnes. Which ye so laden with mo merites then ye nede of in youre superfluouse supererogations, that ye sel

so dere your owne ouerplus merites your misses, fat fastinges, myndles prayers, vnwylfull watchinges, &c. Your holy father Paul .iii. of Rome hath yet in store, & nede be, his churches treasure, an infinite chistefull of your saintes merites, yea and of Christes merites to, wherout by participation, for mony, he is readye to lash out this your marchaundise of merites, and yet in nothinge (to vse your wordes) diminishing theffecte of christs passiō. This is your diffamacion of merite, whose good name ye ought to restore by gods worde, if ye wil not be sene to stand vpō your father the popes side. Of what elles foundacion stode al your abbeis monasteries chauntries, yea and youre bisshoprikes to, but vpon these your popisshe merites, in prayers and mysses, for the deade, to plucke them out of your fained purgatorye? And therfore be thei worthely subuerted Christ so prophecienge of them. Euery

plantacion which my heuenly father hath not planted,Math. 5
                        •
                     
                  
                shalbe vproted. Your byshoprikes therefore do but tarye the verifienge of the same. Neither I, ne anye true christiane knoweth any other merites for sinne then the plenteouse merites of christes passion, by his mooste preciouse bloude, perfitly & perpetually deseruinge for al that beleue in him forgeuenes of their sinnes. And am certified by this his almyghtye euerlastinge worde. That man is frely iustified by the grace of god thorowe faith in Iesu Christe: so that this worde gratis, frely,Rom. 3. excludeth all the merites of any worke of the law, frō faithe iustyfyenge, but not from the faithfull iustified man. If this sayenge be sclaunderouse to meryte,In his pistle to etesipho. & dialo i. Austē. in. psal: xxxi. & lxx. & in his pistle .lii. &c. so be Hierome and Austen great sclanderers of Meryte, whiche constantelye affyrme agaynst the Pelagyans man to haue no merytes. If thou wylt (sayth Austen) be quite & voide

of grace, bost thy merites. And god croneth his owne giftes, and not thy merites. And the scriptures affirme euery where all rewarde celestiall to be geuen vs oute of the free mercye of god for christes sake,Ro. iiii. & .xi and not for any of our merites, Ye myght haue sene it clearely, yf ignoraūce & malice had not blyndened you, by the so manye mightye argumentes made of Paule. ex contētione, of these contraries: workes and grace, merite and free gyfte, ryghtewysenesse of the lawe and of faith, from vncertaine to certaine, from to haue any thinge of grace, and of dewtye deserued, frō the waueringe infirme vnperfit deades of the lawe, to the ferme promise receiued by faith, that merites and grace, ne faith and workes beynge so contrary in this cause of contēciō can neuer be cōcurrant into one, and the same acte of our iustificacion.
            The scripture holly consenteth that all our beste workes of the lawe be

sinne & filthy, & therfore not to haue that dignitie to deserue remission of sinnes, as I haue sufficientlye proued it in my cōfutatiō of your false articles, which ye haue not yet, ne cā disproue. The lawe is the wyll and mynde of god, holy, spirituall, iuste, and good, and requireth suche perfit holy, and iust workes, as be not corrupte ne stained with any carnall affect of man, but suche workes were there neuer perfourmed but onelye of him, of whome the father testified This is he in whome I am pleased Wherfore man so longe as he is called fleshe, can not deserue by doinge the workes of the lawe. God promiseth rewardes to the fulfyllers of ye law,Rom. viii. but because it is impossible for man called fleshe to fulfyll it, therefore he sent his sonne Christe to fulfyll it, that his fulfyllynge by oure faith apprehended, shulde be oures, thus made of the father our rightewisenes, our holynes, wysdome.i. Cor. i. &c.

And here I write it yet againe, that ye laye so heuily to my charge. Euen that god commaundeth to man,Rom. viii. so longe as he is called caro (whiche is as longe as he lyueth) thinges impossible,i.li. retract. ca. ix. In en
                     •
                  h. ad 
                     •
                  auren. de gratia 
                     •
                   li. arb. ca. xvi. homili. in Io. xxix. et episto. xxiiii as Paule, and Christe, and Austen testifieth saienge. Man hath not in his power to be good, eather not seynge for hys ignoraunce what maner one he oughte to be, or els, if he see it, yet is he not able to be suche one, as he seeth him selfe to oughte to be: And therefore sayeth he in many places. God cōmaundeth impossible thinges to man, that he knowinge his owne imperfection and impossibilite, shuld seke helpe of him in whō is all perfection, & helpe in our nede. And all to depresse mans arrogancy, and to shewe him to hym selfe to be but a synner, so to be saued only by the grace and mercye of god and not for his owne merites not to glorye in our selues.i. Cor. i. Ephe. ii. Thus is the lawe the vssher of ye scole to take vs forth

to christe, it sheweth vs our synnes, it woundeth vs but healeth not, It prouoketh vs by faith to seke helthe in Christe, that all the glory myghte be geuē to the grace of god in Christ Which geueth not his glory to any other nether by participation,Ephe. i. nor by retaliacion. And then ye saye playne contrarye to all your owne doctryne in your hole boke thus.
            
               Christes passion in the sight of god,
               The bys 
               is (onl
                     •
                  ) sufficient sacrifice for the sinne of all the worlde, so ful and so perfite, as nedeth not any addicion or supplemēt of any mannes desert to the appeacynge of gods iuste wrath against man for synne.
            
            By this exclusiue (onely) & youre absolute speche,Ioye. it shulde folow that all men without faith, shulde be saued. yea and without youre condicions to. Ye shulde haue added therefore, is onely sufficiente sacrifice to the beleuers in him. But howe standeth this peece with your so manye good condycyons, so full of youre workes to deserue your remyssyon?

which all, ye saye, be required to that tainement of oure iustification. All your principles, argumentes, reasōs autorities violently wrested, youre collettes, versicles, with sancte marie & omnium sanctorum meritis, With sancta maria ora pro nobis, sancte Georgi, with al your lyke papistry, tend to the contrarye that ye haue here sayd.To merite by participation. For euen your owne praphane vaine voice of your participation, maketh christe but halfe a deseruer, halfe a satisfier, and but a party patched sauiour. For what is it els to merite and to satisfye (as ye say) by participation, then to diuide part or halfe to him, and part to vs. It behouethe a lyer, euer to haue a good memory, lest his wordes fight against him self, compelled to vtter his lyes with his owne mouthe, as your selfe hath here done openly. Diuide not gods essenciall indiuisible names from him. Halt not thus (for shame) with Baalis byshoppes into

both partes, as Ely the prophet forbiddeth you, Eyther let christe be an hole entire sufficient sauiour, deseruer and satis
                  •
               ier for synne, or elles none at all: Diuide not his glorye to your synfull merites and satisfactions. Christe is not diuided saithe Paule. It was he that al alone trode the wine presse in his bloudye robes none of all the worlde to haue holpē him, Isaie .lxiii.
            
               Christ onely is our hope, only Christe is our lyfe, our waye,
               The bys▪
                
               onlye Christ is oure sauiour, holly thorowly perfetly abso
                     •
                  utely, totally, entirely. &c.
            
            If christ be suche one, then away with all your meritinges,Ioye. satisfaccions contentacions for sinne, awaye with all your condicions for thattainement and enioyinge of the remission and saluacion. Here may euery reader see howe shamefully repugnant is your doctrine
            
               The contencion is not of the preciousnes validite and effect of christes passyon but of the vse of it.
               The bys.
            
            
               
               Ioye.A goodly shameles shifte lo. Be ye slypte now from theffect so sodenly to the vse? Euen an euident token of a gilty conscience, that mis
                  •
               rusteth and is a fraide of his owne doctrine, Do not the remission of oure sinnes pertaine to the preciousenes of Christes passion? Is it not the validite & th
                  •
               ffect therof that iustifieth and absoluteth the beleuers from synne?
            Saye ye not youre selfe firste of all. Theffecte of Christes passion, requireth a condicion? ye neuer saide the vse thereof requireth the condicion. Theffect therof was euer the marke that ye dyd shote at, and I confuted it. The contencion was euer betwixt vs. whether by faith onely, or by workes or by faith and workes together mā is iustified, & at the same marke yet bend ye al your feble ordināce in this your declaraciō. And as for the vse of Christes passiō ye neuer spake of tyl now for a shifte as one wery of his false part. The vse therof presupposeth

the hauing therof whiche is the iustification by onely faith. Whiche once obtained we well vse it in yt we remēber it wt perpetual thankes geuing, lauding & praising our heauēly father, thorow our sauior christ for so ryche inestimable a benefite. What faithful man doubted of this vse after he had enioyed the gyfte? And this vse of it, is the gift of god. Nowe what contencion and matter can ye moue or make of this vse? Except ye wyll contende to shewe your highe witte and wilye rethorike to fynde a knotte in a rishe, as haue the prouerbe. In youre scole with Barnes, ye saye ye traueled to enstructe him of the condicions before theffect & agreed vpon faith to be one, & then ye brought in mo cōdiciōs & workes as to forgeue your neyghbor, & your incorporaciō into christ by baptisme or returning to him by penāce. whiche all, for that they go before the forgeuenes (after you) they can not be ye vse of the thinge not yet obtayned,

wherfore nether with hī, ne in your articles is there, ne coulde be any cō
               tention of the vse of christes passion. But I wyll by waye (as they saye) of communication, admitte your cauillacion, and trappe you in youre owne wordes, thus saing in the next syde of your lefe.
            
               And we with the grace of god, doinge the workes of penaunce, taste and fele the passiō of Christ,
               The bys, 
               and as good men haue called it meritinge and deseruinge to vse the benefites of Christes passion.
            
            Before ye were in the vse of christes passion,Ioye. and now ye be fledde to the meriting to vse the benefites therof. And this is your mistye maze ye wold leade your readers into, more to wonder at your highe lerninge & wyly witte, not perceiued ne vnderstanden, then to gette any frute therby. This is your iuglynge cast with your wide wordes of (vse, and meritinge to vse) as ye iugled with your confuse condiciō so ful of your yong condicions. Nowe euerye man seeth

the benefites of Christes passion to be infinite and innumerable, and euerye one to haue his proper vse
            And thus haue ye broughte vs into a confuse wylde wyldernesse wherin ye maye with your wilye romyshe foxe, wynde your self into many perplexe wayes as into an C. angles. Amonge therfore so manye benefites, for youre pleasure, to take your course with your worde (vse) let ye remission of our sinnes in christ by faith (if it so lyke you) be one of these benefites. To vse a benefit wel, is to encrease it, remember and acknowledge it with thankes geuing dailye to thautor therof. This vse we must deserue with the workes of penaunce (saye you) ere we haue the benefit vsed: a goodly godly dreame lo. I had wende that the vse of this benefite, as to acknowledge it, to remember it, to encreace it, & to thāke god, had ben also the giftes of hym that saith, without me ye can do nothinge,

no not so muche as to thinke wel, to wil wel, or to begin any good worke: Or els after you & your good men, these benefites we must deserue to vse them with ye worke of penaūce Now hath penance hir vse, ergo we must wt a nother former worke deserue the vse of penaūce, and so with a nother former to deserue that vse, & thus haue ye brought vs by your fōd dreme into your infinite intricate & endeles maze of your meriting to vse If (ye say) I obserue not how charyly ye speke, saieng thus. And we wt the grace of god doīg yt workes of penāce tast & fele ye passion. Uerely I so obserue it, yt I se it maketh against your self. For christes passiō is tasted & felt by faith. And god geueth no mā such a grace as by workes to deserue another grace, for so shulde he make his grace no grace, as Paule proueth it. Rom. xi. Then ye saye addynge.
            
               The bys.
               And by the strength of christes passion we deserue to do penaunce for synne.
            
            
               Ioye.This tale repugneth to the former

head sentence. For there penaūce deserued to tast christes passion: & here by christes passiō we deserue to do penaūce, here is wondres shiftinge wt these two thīges one to deserue ye tother, now by penāce to deserue to tast the passion & anon by the strength of the passion to deserue to do penance. Suche is the incōstant doctrine of ye vnlerned papists, plaing fox to hole wt their penaunce & christes passion. Ye know well yt christes passion not tasted by faith profiteth nothīg at al ye infidele turke or false christian, but is the sauour of death vnto death to thē. And how then can ye by ye strēgth of it do penaunce before it be tasted, by faith? ye said first that penaunce goth before ye tast: ergo that penance before faith tasting the passion cā be but a sower and an vnsauery penāce euē such one as was in Esau Iudas & in the turkes penaunce, whiche yet haue not by faith tasted ye swete sauor of their forgiuenes in christes passiō
               
And euen this lo, is your popysh penaunce ye wolde teache before fayth iustifieng. Now then sith there be so many workes, and partes of youre popish penaunce, tell vs playnly by whiche parte or worke of youre penaunce, taste & fel
                  •
                ye christes passion? nether by youre broken contricions and attricions neuer healed, ne by your neuer satisfyed satisfactions ne satispassions in your purgatorye, ne by yours to skant contentacions or whisperinge dome absolutions, ne by your auricular confessions, hauynge not one worde ne promyse of God to tast so great a benefite, do ye taste and fele Christes passion, or by whiche worke of youre penaunce enioyned vnto your gostly children do they taste it? I haue herde (the more shame it is) your ghostly fathers in their auriclar confessions to haue tasted and groped ryght knauyshelye their goostly. But neuer therby to haue tasted Christes passion. For yt
               
onely so bitter cup, none tasted therby so to merite but Christ, and yet ye skof, with potestis bibere calicem. &c. Maye ye drinke the cuppe whiche I shall drinke? It appearethe here by your wordes, sayenge, It to be necessarye some to taste and fele of Chrystes passyon by youre penaunce and alledginge of the texte, yt ye neuer tasted it your selfe, ne tasted the true vnderstandyng of Christes wordes, by potestis bibere calicē. &c. Iudas dyd all youre workes of penaunce. He came and confessed openly, (which agreeth better with gods worde then auricularly) his sinne to the highe byshops your predicessors he made restitution to them of the monye, which they gaue him to betraye Christe, he was heuye, contrite and attrite. They gaue him their absolution with. Quid ad nos? what is that to vs? if thou hast betrayed the lust bloud. Tu videris. Take hede to thy nowne charge, and let vs alone.

And yet so farre was Iudas from ye taste of christes passion, for all these his & your workes of penaunce that of a desperate mynde he hanged him selfe▪ And wherfore came Iudas wt his & this your penaūce to this wretched ende? verely because it proceded not oute of the roote of faithe in Christe ne of the knoweledge of the mercy of god in Chryste, oute of the whiche faith and knoweledge what penance or worke soeuer procedethe not,Ro. xiiii. it is syn. And yet wil you so īpudently cōtend & sweat for your workes of your penāce to go before faith iustifyeng, & to merite ye fayth where by we taste and fele Christes passion and the remissiō of our synnes. Here is holsome doctrine that ye teache. Ye saye good men haue called penaunce meritinge and deseruing to vse the benefites of christes passion. Euen suche good papistes as ye be to restore your misteres, merit meretrix to hir spirituall spouse the pope

and to you againe. If your penaūce shulde deserue to vse these benefites of christes passion, so shuld one dede and euer the worse dede deserue to do a better (a wise doctryne, I warraunt you) sette in a circle withoute hed & taile, ye shuld loke vpō ye scriptures rather thē on your good pope holy men. Which scriptures tel vs, yt al our best dedes be corrupt & filthel
                  •
                stained wt sinne,Isay. 64.
                so yt they be not able nether to deserue any reward gostly ne to sustaine ye iudgement of god,Ps. c, 
                     •
                  i. but will condempne you before hym so farre of be thei to merite, And therfor said Austē. Thy good workes ar ye giftes of god lest yu shuldest thinke thē to be thy merites.Rom. 
                     •
                  x. It is not in the willer nor doer to wyll or to do well but it belongeth to the mercy & grace of god preuētīg thy wil wt his grace to do good. what is it yt god biddeth vs to do but he biddethe vs to aske grace of him to do the same, tellīg vs plainly yt if it were in our power to

do it, so were it no nede for vs to ask the doyng therof. For no man asketh the thinge which he hath.
            
               The bys.
               Penaunce hath ben called lykewise satisfaccion, as wherin man satisfieth, that is contenteth God.
            
            It hath ben lykewise so called in dede,Ioye. euen of lyke papists, with lyke autoritie out of no scripture, but likewise against gods worde in like blasphemye to christes merites, and his satisfaccions. To satisfye is to content god, ye saye. And here ye make a sodaine stoppe, ye shuld haue added boldely, to content god for synne, as ye saye in your boke of your necessary enstructions, affirminge that it declareth a desire in man, to cōtent god his father for his synne. And yet in the same boke,Hebre. vii.viii.ix.x. as in this, ye say clene contrary. That chryste onelye is the sufficiente, ful and perfit satisfaction for sinne, which is the truth. The fathers almyghty voice so testifienge of Christe, to be his derely beloued sonne for whose sake onely he is contented,

satisfied, and appeared. God geue ye grace once to euomite these antichristē popish blasphemies, & to know christes onely sufficient satisfaccion and merites for your sinnes. If you coulde satisfye and contente the iustice of god againste your synnes with your rightwisenes of workes, so were Christe deade for you in vayne. Paule to witnes. gala. ii. neyther were you subiecte to the rightewisenes of god. Rom. x. But yet happy is your sely satisfaction, that she hath gotten hir a newe name called now (cōtētaciō).Cōtentatiō
                The fathers iustice coulde not haue ben contented with man, vntyll one had contented and satisfied him, fulfyllinge the whole lawe in euery poynte, but suche one was onely that innocent lambe oure sauiour Christ, as testifieth the scripture. wherefore awaye for shame, wt your counterfaited contentaciō, and with youre synfull satisfactions to. And at laste to wynd
                  •
                vp youre tale

of merites, ye bringe vs in a blynde collet out of your popishe portewes, with. Meritis & precibus beate Marie & omnium sanctorum. by ye merites and prayers of blessed marye, and of all saintes, for wante of scriptures. Peter byddeth you to speake and alledge the scriptures, for your doctrine, Therout to geue a rekeninge thereof. For the ferme worde of God muste assewer vs of the true doctryne and not the deade dreames of lyenge men.
            That thynge whyche I commaund the to do or to say, do it saith the lord Deuteronomii .xii. nether shalt thou adde to, ne minishe any thynge therof. Nether wyll we receiue of you any thinge in thys contencion which the worde of god hathe not or with the worde fighteth, yea shulde there an aungel out of heuen affyrme it. God hathe sufficientlye shewed it by Nadab and Abiu, Leuiti. x, where he wolde not anye straunge fyer to be

offred vpon his altare nor broughte into his temple, but vehemently dyd he so abhorre humane tradicions & mennes deade dreames, that with their owne straunge fyer he destroyed them as he shall destroye you and confounde you with youre owne straunge doctryne, as in this your declaration it shalbe sufficiently declared.
            
               Men in ye state of grace purchased by christes mediacion do the workes of iustice,
               The bys, 
               & synners be called to grace to do the workes of penaunce / whereby to rekouer the fauour of god with the remission of their synnes,
               Ioye.
            
            These men in the state of grace, do not the workes of iustice but oute of fayth iustifienge. But tell vs playnly what coloure ye rekouer vnder your worde rekouer? To rekouer is to obtayne agayne a thynge loste. ye shulde haue sayde playnelye. By ye workes of penance, sinners obtain

or purchace grace loste which is the fauour of god and remission or their synnes: And nowe what els haue ye couered, then that penaunce deserue forgeuenes of sinnes▪ which is our iustificacion. And yet ye saye before, ye neuer went about to proue it 'that workes must iustyfye. And yet in so sayeng, as workes of penaunce to rekouer grace and remission ye bothe wolde proue it and also make grace no grace, ne Christes passion of none effecte. For a iuste confutation of this your doctrine. I shal therfore proue it clerelye by scriptures, that man muste be firste iustified by faith,Repentaunce foloweth faith iustifienge. ere either he repent holsomely or be baptized with water. And because ye haue diffamed true repentaunce and iuggled so longe with your do penaunce, makyng the people beleue they haue done it. when they haue done or sayde all their penaunce enioyned them by their goostly fathers, ye shall know, that repē
               tance

is a turninge to the lord god, wherby we of ye syncere feare of god humbled, aknowledge our synnes, and all our hole lyfe we make newe: So that the hole lyfe of a penitente faitheful is a perpetual mortificacion of his fleshe and a reuiuinge of the spirit, euen the perpetuall custodie of his lyfe fygured in baptizme of water, wherin the dopinge & buriyng signifieth our mortification, our synnes buried in Christe his deathe: and the lyfting vp oute of the water teacheth oure arysinge wyth Christ reuiued into a newe lyfe. Also the hebrewe worde (his) and the greke Metanoite, in latyne, Resipiscite, signifye to be turned to a better minde or chaunge your lyfe. Which worde Ioan and Chryste vsed sayeng. Resipiscite in propinquo enim est regnum coelorum. Repēt ye, or chaunge youre lyfe, or be ye turned in mynde for the forgeuenes of synnes is nigh And Chryste beganne his preaching

lykewise sayenge. Be ye turned or repente ye, and beleue the good tydynges of youre remyssyon. They preached not onely saienge repente ye, as ye dreame, and there stopped, but they euermore in all their sermons, as did his apostles, added the cause why they shuld repent, whyche cause implyed and conteined therin the promise of remission of their synnes sayenge, for the remission of your synnes is at hande. For so much signifieth the gospel & the kingdome of heauen in those places. Which promise apprehended by faith, anon the herers prepared them to repentaūce turninge their myndes, conuerted to god whome they before knewe by faythe beleuynge hym for hys mercyes sake in Christe to receyue and to forgeue them. For who turnethe hym selfe, to God, whome he nether knowethe ne beleuethe to be mercyfull to hym, ne loueth him before he turneth to hym? For they preached

fyrste the lawe whereby came the knoweledge of theyr synnes, and eft sone the gospell of forgeuenes promysed in Chryste, whyche by faythe apprehended, then beganne the true repentaunce. Also we are often commaunded to repent by these wordes of god spoken of the prophetes. Conuertimini ad me & salui eritis, conuertimini ad me & ego conuertat ad vos. Be ye turned to me and ye shall be salfe, and I shall be turned to you. Where ye se that God commaundeth vs nothinge but he biddeth vs aske the same of him, as Austē confirmeth and declareth it, your selfe alledgynge his wordes, sayeng Iube quoduis modo des quod iubeas
            
            Ergo we muste aske oure repentaunce and conuersion of god, saing Conuerte nos deus salutaris noster, and Conuerte me domine & ego conuertar. Conuert me, LORDE and I shall be conuerted. If thys prayer be of faythe, as it muste

nedis be, if it be made to the father in christis name so must faith go before the conuersion and the peticion and prayer before the thinge obtayned, therebye. Agayne, when I am promised of god to be saued if I turne to him, there my faith, first apprehendinge the promise procedeth to the precept in turning to him, as doth the seruant beleuinge his masters promised couenant, addresse him to his seruice and fulfillinge of his masters cōmaundements, althoughe his seruice in folowinge his master be placed befor the cause, as your self here after gyueth an example, saing, he that foloweth me is my seruant, placinge theffecte before ye cause, in your lxxxviii. lefe & seconde syde of this your boke & in the lxxxix lefe ye saye. In this speche. I ioyne that is out of al kynde of causes to theffect, as to folow me is no cause to be my seruant but rather ensueth of seruice and of the couenant which

is the cause why that he folowth me, & importeth that he was my seruant before he folowed me. Euen so do the scripture place theffecte of our conuersion before the cause, which is faith first apprehending the promise in this & lyke speches. Be ye turned to me and I shalbe turned to you, be ye turned and ye shalbe salfe. Repēt ye for the remission is nighe. And thus lo, be ye confounded & proued to teache false doctryne & to peruerte the scripture, by your owne wordis & by your onwe exāple. And that faith iustifyinge muste nedis go before repentance, and our conuersion to god as the scriptur teacheth vs, contrary to your popishe papistry. But I knowe howe falsely ye iugle with youre do penance in your boke of enstructions, saing Resipiscite & credite euangelio. thus englyshing it sayenge. Fyrst be contrite & knowledge your synnes, and then receiue the gladde tidinges of remission. &c

Because theffecte is placed before ye cause therefore ye wolde make foles beleue theffecte to be before the cause cōtrary to your owne wordes in this your booke in the .lxxxix. lefe, and by this placinge, ye wold proue penace to be before faith iustifyenge: But yf ye hadde redde but .ii. lines before in marke, ye shoulde haue learned playnely the preachinge of the gospell, that is of ye glad tidinges of ye promised remission of synnes, which is ye cause of repentaūce as Io. bap. affirmeth it. Math. iii. to haue gone before theffecte of repentaunce commaunded. But this licenciouse libertye, to peruert the holy gospell, that ye take to your selfe also by your do penaunce, as ye do vpon Peters sayenge to Symon Mago: Resipisce igitur ab ista tua malitia, Englyshīg (ab) with (fore) thus sayenge. Do penaunce for this thy malyce. when the texte is. Turne thy mynde from this thy malyce: so fayne wolde ye

holde styll your popishe sacramente of do penaunce, to merite forgeuenes of synnes. The true conuersion to god presupposeth the knoweledge of sinnes which commeth by the preachinge of the lawe: It presupposethe also the preching of the gospel wherby commeth faythe, and knoweledge of the mercy of god, promising forgeuenes in Christ. wherfore ye se it necessarilye that repentaunce and the conuersion vnto god muste folowe faith iustifieng cōceiued by hearing the gospell: Also faythe iustyfyenge muste goo before baptismefaith iust
                     •
                   fien
                     •
                   is befo
                     •
                  e bapti
                     ••
                   Mat. xxvii For Christe bodde his Apostles go forth and teache all nacions ere they baptized them. And what thinke ye they taughte them? Uerelye euen the lawe and gospell as he had commanded them, and then as many as beleued they baptized them: So that fayth iustifieng them, went euer before the baptime of water, as it is

to see in the actes of the apostles.
            Albeit I see howe falselye and howe vnlearnedly ye bringe in your Baptizetur unusquis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   uestrum in remissionem peccatorum, for the contrarye as I shall declare your ignoraunce and falsifieng of ye scriptures, when I come to the place.A note worthy to be obserued. And here note it (christen reader) that so longe as we see our synnes in the lawe and in our consciences accusing and condempnynge vs: & behold them not by faith in the promysed forgeuenes in the gospel of Christes death, to haue suffered for the remission of them, thus our faith rechinge the mercy of god our father vnto Christes passyon suffred for them, Chryste thus made of hym oure ryghtwysenes, and oure satisfaccion: all oure heuinesse and sorowes contricions and attricions are but suche repentaunce and heauynes, as toke Cayne, Saule, Achitophel, and Iudas, whiche call it an extorted legall heuines (and ye wyl)

contrarye to the wyllynge euangely call heauynes and holesome repentaunce: whyche legall heauynes is lyke the extorted heauynes and heuye fearefull paynefull repentaunce that is wrested out of the racked and pyned Malefactours, confessynge their synnes for very fear and payne onely:ii. Cor. vii. which vnholsom repentaunce after the worlde, Paule teachethe it to be repented and caste of. But the true holesom repentaunce after god, beinge his gyfte, begynnethe at the contemplacyon of oure synnes by faith, forgiuen in Christes death and resurreccion, hys ryghtuousnes, hys satisfaccion and merites felte and tasted by our fayth certaynelye and fermely to be communicated vnto vs. In the boke of nombers we read that the chyldren of Israell were not healed ne delyuered from the hotte styngynge serpentes so longe as they looked vpon them, but rather with feare and payne, the more vexed,

with thir venome. But when thei turned their eyes from those serpentes stinging them and behelde the brasen serpent exalted and hanged vpon the tre, then were they healed. And lykewyse, so longe as we behold our sinnes in our owne consciences accusinge vs or in the lawe forbiddinge sinne, workinge wrathe and makinge sinne the more to abound, we maye well feare, be heauy, ful of horrour for payne & dread of dampnacion, but as for any quietnes, rest, and peace of conscience, we fele none vntyl we conuerte & turne our eyes by faith lyftinge them vp beholding the brason stronge serpēt christ god and mā exalted vpon the crosse there sufferinge for our sins, appeacinge the fathers wrathe, makinge the satisfacion withe the oblacion and sacrifice of his blessed bodie. wherefore your repentance, before our sinnes be here knowen & sene with the eyes

of our faith in christ lyfted vpon the crosse there sufferinge for them and purgynge or wasshynge them away is but Iudas his repentaunce.
            Also it is to be noted,Rom. vii. that as there be dyuers degrees to ascende frome vnder the lawe vnto the grace of the gospell of remyssyon, so be there dyuerse heauynesses ere we come to the holesome and frutefull repentaunce vnder the gospel perpetuallye and gladlye to be Practysed.
            For we muste fyrste fele and taste of a desperate state deduced to hel, ere we be reduced to heauen, mortyfyed ere we be reuyued. Paul entering to clyme these degrees of the lawe in lyke heauines,Rom. vii. and mortificacyon sayde that synne was then deade, when he lyued wythoute the lawe shewynge hym hys synne, but when the lawe was comen and had shewed hym hys synne, then was he deade & his sin aliue. For sinne now knowne

by the lawe, the lawe worketh wrathe euen her lyuelye offyce to feare and to condempne the synner, to make synne the more aboundaunte thrustynge man to hell and slayeth hym. And here maye we see wyth Esaye the prophete, God to worke in vs a straunge worke to do his owne.Isa. xxviii. In whyche straunge worke workynge, yet we knowe hym not (for he wyl be for a lytle space a hydden god) no more then dyd Iosephes bretherne knowe hym for their brether Ioseph but toke hym for some cruell straunger al that whyle he dissembled with them, feared them, threatened them, and troubled them, whyles he hydynge hys face from his owne brethren so vexed them with greate heauines & feare,Genes. xlii.xliii.xliiii. or he wold be knowne to them, yea and all that whiles in so workynge that straunge worke it was greate paine to Ioseph to hold in his teares,Ioseph in this straung worke with his brethren fygured god in chryste for that he muste haue wroughte so straunge a worke with

them to worke his owne bretherly louyng worke, at last to open hym self to them. This worke also god fygured to Moyses, when he dydde sette hym in the clyffe of the rocke telling hym,Exo. xxxiii. hys hynder partes he shulde se but not his face. The former compunction and heauynes, euen gods straunge worke in vs before faythe iustifienge, his heuye hande yet coueringe our face, we knowe it not to be his work, ne as yet beleue we god to be oure sauyoure and forgeuer in Chryste, vntyll he shewe vs his hinder partes: that is the incarnacion of Chryst, sent and suffrynge for oure synnes. Adam as sone as he hadde synned, hadde an heuye conscience, horryblye feared with the wrath of god, vnto deathe and dampnacyon,Gen. iii. flyenge from his voyce and presence euen in the midde daye, whiche heauynes was but a desperate repentaunce and farre of to merite anye grace, as it appeareth by his flyenge

awaye frome God callynge hym.
            But yet the myghty mercyful voice of god so staied him, and rubbed hys synne into his remembraunce, that at laste the gospell of the blessed promysed seade preached: Adam conceyued faythe by the hearinge therof, and beganne trewelye to repente, for nowe he sawe his synnes not in hys owne naked gyltye conscyence accusynge hym, ne in the precepte condempnynge hym, but in the blessed seade Chryste, forgeuynge hym. And then to confyrme and to testifye as it were wyth seall oblygatorye that GOD hadde iustyfyed hym for hys faythe onelye, in that seade to come, he added hys sacred sealled Sacramente, euen the skynnes of the slayne sheepe, to kouer Adam and Eues naked shamefastnes, signyfyenge to them that blessed seade, to be offered vp an innocente lambe, wyth hys ryghtewysenes to couer their transgression, and with his blessynge

to couer their malediccion, vpon thys his bloudy sheepes peltch when so euer Adam loked, he myght well wepe and repente him selfe that euer he hadde committed that synne whych as it shoulde brynge so innocente a lambe to so gylteles a death, so coulde it neuer haue bene forgeuen wythoute the sheddynge of so innocente precyouse bloude. And here at the contemplation of hys synne in Chrystes death to come, beganne he frutefullye to repente, doynge on dayly that coote, puttynge hym into a perpetual remembraunce and into repentaunce, the contynual custodye of hys lyfe, euermore seynge his synnes purged in the sead to come, euen in the lambe of God, that takethe awaye the synnes of the worlde. But nowe I retourne to youre booke wherein ye adde thus. sayenge.
            
               
               And nowe I adde this gathered out of scripture,
               The bys. (Ioye. where I pray you) yt lyke as in other actions or qualities being in god essentiall, we be called by participation, by the names attributed to god, and for so miche as we do participate, haue also the thinge in dede: And therfore as god is goodnes it selfe, we by participatiō frō him, be good. As god is lyght it selfe, we by participacion frō him be lyght. As god is wisedome it selfe, we by participation from him be wise, So as Christe merited and deserued thorowly, we by participation in vsing his giftes, merite and deserue And as Christe satisfied fully, so by particion we also satisfy.
            
            
               Ioye.He that gathereth not with me (saith Christ) skatereth, ye haue not iustlye gathered with him, ergo ye haue skatered by your participacion. If your gathering be true in these your expressed accions and essencyals of meritinge and satisfienge, so muste it be true in gods other actions and essencials: but blasphemouse and false, is the lyke gatheringes in hys other names and accions. Wherefore youre gatherynges in these be

blasphemouse and also vngodly. The minor I proue by your owne lyke demonstracion. God participateth to mā his names of wysedom and goodnes by whiche he created al creatures, and yet foloweth it not, without blasphemy that the same man by particicipacion of those names of wysedom & goodnes of god, shuld create any one of the lest creatures that euer god made, no not so muche as a wynge of a gnatte can he make by participaciō. Now how say you, Is this wel gathered, that because god participateth to vs his names, yt therfore we may do his diuine actions? God imparteth his rightwisnes to man wher of man is called iust, yet it foloweth not that therby by participacion man myghte iustifye him self, or any other, let god imparte to you his benediccion, and let vs then see whether therwith by participacion you withall the fingers ye haue, can so blesse an infidele or

turke, yea or your owne selfe, that he or you be blessed and chosen of god. The lorde telleth you that he wyll curse youre blessynges because ye haue applyed your hertes vnto such blasphemies of his holy names.Mal. ii. Here maye euery man see howe vnlernedly, howe blasphemously and fondely ye gather to make your antichristen doctryne to seeme true to the symple vnlearned, to seduce thē into errours Ye must beware howe ye gather wt god from his essencial names, to his diuine actions, participated to synful man. For thoughe in our regeneracion and incorporacion into christ we do Chryste vpon vs, as writethe Paule. Gal. iii, and so be couered wt his ryghtwysenes, holynes, wysedome, merites. &c. yet maye not we there with worke his diuine accions onely appropriated to his godhead, ye speake shamefull repugnaunces in youre wordes, saynge as christe merited thorowlye and satisfyed fully

so do we merite and satisfye by participacion. How standeth these together? he thorowly, and fully, absolutly, totally, perfitely, as ye saye before & yet we by participation, as it were partely halfe deuyded to hym, and parte to vs, when your wordes be al and wholly, and fully, to hym, what parte leaue ye for vs? But admitted your terme of participacion, althoughe I knowe the scripture hathe it not expressely, but the doing vpō vs his rightwisenes, his goodnes and other names, yet albeit it folowethe god participateth to vs his goodnes and wisedome, and so we be good & wyse: it foloweth not that we hauing these names do the selfe same diuine accions & workes of god whiche he wrought wt his wisedōe & goodnes in the creacion of ye world of nothing he participateth to vs christes merites ergo therwt we merit as did christ for vs ye remissiō of our sins? I deny your argumēt, but it foloweth ergo
we by 

his merites be forgeuen and saued & not for our owne, he participatethe to vs his satis
                  •
               accions ergo we satisfy for our synnes? nego argumentum but it foloweth ergo by his satisfaccion doone vppon vs, the fathers iustice is appeaced and he is pleased wyth vs as the fathers voyce out of heuen hathe declared it, your argument (if ye be not deceiued to deceiue other) is a mere deceit called of sophisters. fallacia secundū quid ad simpliciter. If a man shulde aske you howe, and wherein, the wisdom and godnes and light in god differe from these thinges in vs, after the kyndes of diffirences, really or rationally, genere, or specie &c. I thinke ye muste be compelled as your gatheringe here declare you to make suche an answer as shuld proue your wysedome but folishnes,
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. iii as Paule saithe, and the light in you to be but derkenes,Math. vi: as chryst affirmeth it, and your merites and satisfaccions to be

synne and wikednes, yea blasphemy to christes merites and satisfaccions Paule was bothe holye iust & good and yet with those names could he not do ye goodnes he wolde do,Rom. vii. but that euil whiche he wold not do. If christe meriteth and satisfieth for vs fullye and perfetly as the pistle to the hebrews declareth, so is there no parte of your meriting ne satisfyeng by participacion lefte for vs. Away therfore with your prophane vaine vocables as Paule biddeth you,i. timo. vi. where ye reade falsely & in ye greke vnlernedly, nouitates for manitates, to smyte me there with, when with ye same rodde ye worthely smyte yourselfe vsinge these your newefound stertinge termes of participacion, condicions, effectes, to merit to vse ye cannot tell what, and dare not or cannot vse and speke the playne simple wordis of ye scripture left vs of the holy goste. It is an euident token that ye suspecte your doctrine

to be false and mistruste your parte when ye flye from the scriptures to suche sliber shiftes as to merite by participation. ye abuse your patched participation placyng it impertinētly. For the scripture calleth vs good wise, iust, holy, &c. because by faythe in our regeneration of the spirite we by adopcion made the childrē of god do christ vpō vs his vestures as his rightwisenes, holynes, wisedom, merites and satisfaccions, couered now with his, as with our owne of which doing vpon vs or clothing vs,Psal. 111 
                  
                     •
                  phe. 4 6. gal. 3. Rom 13. colloss. 3.
                there is often mencion in the scriptures & not of youre participacion: For these so excellente his diuine essenciall inseparable names kouer non frō their contraries but suche as haue doone Christe vpon them incorporated into him ere ye can make redy your participated merits to place thē a parte post as ye do. ye deale not iustely wt Christe, to couple your vayne merites, & insufficient satisfactions with

his so painefull merites & ful satisfaction expressed out of his mooste tender innocent bodye and bloud in his so bitter passyon. Ye ought not therfore by participation ioyne so contrary merites together so iniuryouslye to christes deth & to his glory which saith I wil not geue my glory to any other. For it is I alone (saith he) whiche for my nown selues sake do away thy sinnes, & not for thy patched merites It is I saith he ye trode the wyne presse all alone, not one to helpe me It is I that wylbe alone, and haue no pere ne match. &c. We esteme not therefore (as ye do) our iustification so vyle a thing, as to be bought and deserued wt our sinful workes. But we esteme it so preciouse as to be bought and deserued with the moost precyouse bloude of that innocente lambe our sauyoure Christ. The remission of oure synnes, in whiche we affirme our ryghtewysenes to stand is so ryche and of so precyouse a price, that it can not be recompensed

ne satisfyed with any good dede of ours. And therfore coulde it neuer haue ben gotten ne bought onlesse it had ben frely geuen vs. But so came it not to christe. For it coste him no small price, It coste him his owne most preciouse blode without which so worthey and so ryche a pryce the iustice of god coulde neuer haue ben satis
                  •
               yed ne the redempciō paide for vs. These thingis when we teache men, then are they monished that as oft as they sinne, so oft do they shede that most innocent bloude of christe. Also we teche our filthines to be so lothely and stinkinge that it coulde neuer haue ben washed away but with the only fountaine of this most preciouse holy bloud. This doctrine who so heare it, conceiue they not (thinke ye) a greater horrour displeasure and feare for their sinnes then if we shulde teache them falsely (as ye do) their sinnes to be so easely wiped away wt a buzing absolutiō y• prestes

hand laide vpon their headis, with a Lady psalter penaunce, or with a wyll worke of oures, with an euyll wyll doone, as for the choyce of a meat and such lyke? yea and yf there be any sparke of gods spirite in thē, home afraid wil they be, and tremble beinge once purged, any more to walowe them selues wrapped againe in the myer, wherby (as much as in thē lyeth) they trouble and infect the puritie of this so swete and cleare a foū
               taine. I haue wasshed my fete (saith the faithful soule) and shall I defile them againe?Canti. v. Nowe is it plaine whether of vs two make the forgeuenes of oure sinnes moste vyle, & do most sclaunder to the dignitie of oure iustificacion, As for your popishe doctryne in this article is but a spightefull mocke and skorne, to saye god to be appeced and pleased with your owne friuole synfull satisfaccions and merites, that is with dirte and derme. But we affirme the offence

& our synnes to be muche more greuouse thē wt such maner light trifles (I cal thē no worse) to be purged & wyped away, yea we teache ye offence commytted agaynste the high maiestie of god to be more waightye, and therfore so muche the more to be abhorred then wyth these youre easye & vaine of noughte worthe satisfactorye merites to be remitted. And therfore it to be the only prerogatyue & pryce of Christes bloude to satisfy and deserue our remissiō. As for you if rightwisenes faile, ye teache it to be restored by your owne satisfactory workes, but we affirme it with goddes worde, to be muche more preciouse then maye be compared and recompensed with any work at all ours. And therfore for the restoringe therof we constantly teache almen to flye onlye to the mercye of god apprehended by onely faythe in Christe Iesu.
            
               
               But I dyd neuer vtter this proposition in these termes,
               The bys. 
               to saye that man must merit remission of sinne, nor haue not redde it in this forme:
            
            No. But ye saye it by participation,Ioye. and vnder your forme and colour of youre condicions ye speake it plainly. Ye say that by the workes of penaunce men taste and fele Chrystes passion, whiche the scripture sayth is tasted by felynge remission of synnes ye say that sinners be called to grace to do the workes of penaunce wherby to recouer remyssyon of theyr sinnes. And in your collette ye praye ut mere amur assequi quod promittis. That we myghte deserue to obtayne the thynge God promysethe whiche is remyssion of oure synnes. And in youre seconde article ye saye They that wyll enioye the remyssyon of theyr synnes, muste fulfyll poure condicyon, whyche, as ye declare it, is stuffed ful of your merites

and winchesters good workes. And all youre argumentes reasons gatheringes and deduccions tende to the same popishe point.
            
               The bys.
               Without I wold encounter with you in raylynge I haue nothinge to saye here vnto: &c.
            
            
               Ioye.I raile not on you, I tel you of your false doctrine, confutinge it wt gods worde. It is you that rayle vpon me and rebuke me mooste impudentlye causeles for writinge the truth, and confutynge your popyshe Antichristen doctrine, whereby ye seduce the people into errours, into theyrs and your dampnation, and in many places ye belye me deadely: and sclaunder me most haynouslye with heresye and be not able to proue it. It is you yt peruert & falsefy gods worde to stablish your antichristē heresies. It is your deuillysh dryft, & wycked counsel to thrust gods holy eternal worde of saluacion out of that noble realme. persecutynge it so cruelly wt swerde and fyer so mercylessely burninge

the innocent lambes of christe for professinge Christe and his holye worde. Ye can saye nothing against me alledginge the scriptures trulye as I do, except ye wyll impugne the veritie as ye do, ye haue not yet in al your bokes iustely soluted one texte that I haue brought against you, as euery reader maye see it, yf he lyst to compare our bokes together.
            
               I for my selfe boste not my workes to the worlde,
               The bys. 
               but do the office of an hand at a crosse to saye, this is the right waye, &c. Except ye do thoffice of a true hand and iuste minister, not onelye poyntynge the right waye into whiche ye hande nayled to the crosse neuer entred it selfe,Ioye. ye shall not be so excused with onely pointinge before christes iudgement seat. If ye be christes or his apostels successor, ye must folow their exāples which did not point to other the waye, standynge them selues styll, lyke idle handes, but they wente before their flocke into the right waye bothe in trewe doctrine

preachinge and also in example of godly lyuinge. And ye must remember yt Chryst commandeth sclaunderouse and false pointinge handis (as ye be one) into wronge wayes, to be cutte of from the body as he did euel eyes, whiche be euel bysshops, to be castoute of their bysshoprykes. Nether do I iuge you otherwyse then god biddith vs iuge the tree by hir frutes, and to be ware of you. Ye call me a runner about, and dare not appere euery where. I am so i dede, but for no offences committed agenste god and my prince ne agaynste any other, whiche is my counforte in an vpright conscience before god and his holy chirche. I am by you drouen out of my natyue lande from my frendes to wander and trauell in a strange contrye, the more is my heuines and sorowe and payne especially in my syknes & olde age: wherof I may thanke you & your popisshe impes persecutinge the gospell and

diuisinge your vngodly and vncristen actes, inhibicions, enstructions condempnacions and articles wherby ye haue & yet make many a pore man to smarte.z
                     •
                  par. 24. Psal. 103.
                
               Sed dominus meus uideat inquirat et iudicet, qui ius reddit ac uindicat omēs qui patiūtur istam iniuriam. But the lorde wyll se to and serch it, & be your iudge, whiche geueth true sentence vpon you, & delyuereth al yt suffer this wrong.
            
               When I traueled to enstructe doctoure Barnes I declared to him this proposiciō (Theffecte of christes passion hath a condicion) nether derkely nor confuselye.
               The bys, 
               And why ye shulde so call it, I see not, for both the matter is certaine and the wordes cō
                  monly vsed and vnderstanden. Theffecte of christes passion is the worke therin entended, that is to reconcyle man to god & to brynge hym to saluacion.
               Ioye.
            
            If your termes of cōdicion & effecte had ben so playne as ye saye, so had they neded no declaratiō to D. Barnes ne now to me, ye know yt christes so plenteouse a passion broughte to man manye ryche and innumerable

benefites and effectis, as ye cal them And againe, your confuse condicion, wente greate with infinite condiciōs as your selfe declare hir to containe all the willes and pleasures of god. And is it not nowe a confuse derke speache to saye. Theffect therof hath a condicion
                  •
                who knoweth of whiche effecte and of which condicion amōg so manye ye speake? Now ye declar
                  •
                theffecte to be the reconciliacion of man to god and the bringing of him to saluaciō. And yet is it not so clerely ne clerkely declared, seinge there be so many thinges yet contained in theffecte and betwixt it, and mannes saluacion, standinge the course of mannes lyfe. I wyl therefore helpe you to declare it. A reconciliation whiche is an atonemente or a peace makinge presupposeth a discord and inimite betwixte the parties, wherof one hath offended the tother. The parties at discorde were god and man. The thinge that made the discorde

was the synne cōmitted by mā againste god his creatore. The atouemaker was christe god & man by sufferinge his passion for the sinne commytted therby so apeacynge hys fathers wrathe and satisfyenge his iustice that the manne beleuynge in Christ to haue suffred for his sinnes and to haue rysen for his iustifycatyon shall neuer haue hys synnes imputed vnto hym but be cleane remitted and forgeuen. And thus we haue your effect of christes passion to be the forgeuenes of oure synnes, whiche is oure iustification and absolucyon vpon thys condicion that we beleue in christ. Thus doth paul in many places declare it,rom. v. i. cor. v. collos. .i and also the fathers voyce out of heauen vppon Christ made for vs that oblaciō expyatory purging our synnes, that we myght be perfitlye made ryghtwyse thorowe hym.
                  2. cor. v. Now it is playn what is mente by your effecte. Euen the remyssyon of our synnes thorow

faith in Iesu christe. And thus accordynge to the wordes of the scripture will I hence forth cal it, and let your straunge termed confuse effecte passe wyth all youre confuse condicions, saue onely faith in christ. Which cō
               dicion who so haue it, he enioyeth his remyssion, and if he hath it not, he is dampned, had he done all Wynchesters workes contayned in his condicion, Then ye saye.
            
               Barnes and I agreed vpon faith to be one condicion.
               The bys. 
               And because he was my scoler I wolde learne him mo condicions then fait
                     •
                   required for mannes forgeuenes of his sinnes, euen this where in he openlye inuered against me, in his sermone. That is to forgeue my neighbour or els I shall not be forgeuen. And concluded vpon that he had graunted to me before that the fulfyllynge of this condicion was not the diminucion of the glorye of christes passion.
            
            Here ye shewe one of your iuglynge castes with doctor Barnes,Ioye. ye say ye wolde lerne hym mo condicions thē faithe, and ye brynge in the precepte

of the forgeuenes of your neighbour whose fulfyllynge is requyred for the forgeuenes of sinne say you, And then ye runne thorowe as it were in washe waye to your conclusion that he had graunted you, That the fulfyllynge therof diminisheth not theffecte of christes passion, as thoughe the precepte were now fulfylled and you at youre wayes end krowynge vp your triumphe before the victorye. But herken a lytle, and lette me aske you thys one questiō? Whether fayth in Chryst be your fyrst condycion goyng before your precept or no? whervpon ye saye doctour Barnes and you fyrste agreed: By your own saienge it is the first condiciō. Then thus. Faith in Christ implieth in it selfe ye ferme assiewred beleif in christ to haue suffered for hir synnes accordynge to gods promyse whych affyrmeth to the same beleuer that as he beleueth accordinge to hys promyse so commeth it to hym. Wherefore

this man must nedis be iustifyed, ere youre second condicion be spoken of And yet ere ye come to your conclusion I muste staye youre hastye iourneye in the fulfilling of this precept of the forgeuenes of youre neyghboure euen as ye wolde be forgeuen youre selfe of god. This is an harde precept of the law and is not so sone fulfilled of man, as ye weene for.
            It is not in mans power to forgeue his brother with the same affecte as Christe forgeueth vs beinge hys enemyes.
                  
                     •
                  uke .xvii. And therfore hys dyscyples hearinge this to harde a precepte for their free choice (as ye terme it) in continently prayed hym saing. A dau ge nobis fidē., encrease our faith, teachynge vs, fayth to supple the impossibilite of the preceptes, & that no man can so forgeue without the gift of faythe iustifyenge. And therefore I wyll denye it vtterlye to be anye condicion required for the forgeuenes of our synnes, tyll I be perfitlye

assured, you or any other to haue fulfylled it accordinge to the mynde of the lawe geuer, and withoute faithe goynge before. And the cause why I denye it and exclude it from the acte of iustification is this.rom. iii Paule excludeth all the workes of the lawe from the act of iustification, this precepte in your condicion without faith is a worke of the law, & therfore I admytte it not into the attainemente of the remission of synnes as cause or condicion without whose fulfyllyng hys sinnes be not forgeuen, Another cause is, I consider,
                  1. cor. x, & 1. Phi. 2.
                this precepte of loue who sekith not hir owne profit but other mennes, is geuen to man yet corrupte with his carnall affectes and stayned with a natural loue to him selfe and with hatred to him yt displease hym or hurt him and is his deadly enemye whiche is his neighbour notwithstandinge, whom he is commaunded to loue as him selfe, & to diuyll and diuide this naturall

loue from him selfe into hys enemyes bosome hym to fede to comfort, to helpe and to forgeue as hym selfe.
            But this our loue to our selues is so depely roted in our hertes, that we can hardely depart from it to geue it to our frendes, muche lesse to oure enemies.Mat. v Also for the forgeuenes of my neyghbour whiche procedethe of loue, I am commaunded of god to haue so perfyt loue,Phi. ii. collos. iii. Rom. v. and to be so affected towarde hym as was christe towarde me when I was his enemye whiche then, dyed for me. yea who is glad to die when he hathe deserued to dye. yea a man wyll skante dye for hys frende. This precepte therfore of loue and forgeuenes was once onely in one Iesu Chryste perfytlye fulfylled: when bothe the preyst and the leuite the holyest order amonge you and the Iewes slypte by their wounded neyghboure lyenge halfe deade, and neuer turned theyr faces towarde hym. In our common forgeuenesses,

lurketh there no synne? Shrewd, subtyle, false, and vnserchable is the herte of man who knowth it?Iere. .xvi Psal. xix. who seeth his owne sinful secret nature? Fro my secrete vnsene synnes to my selfe clense me lorde, sayth the prophete. who forgeueth without litle or miche of these affectis? ether because he wold haue him stil to frende to do him seruice or pleasure or for a vauntage or for feare of displeasure or for shame or hatered, or feare to be noted as no chrysten man with many moo then one man can serche out of a nother or espye in himself. Also sith fayth & loue be imperfit in mā corrupt with his concupiscence, what perfit loue can procede into the forgeuens of his neyghbour? The lawe is bothe holy iuste spirituall and perfet and requireth euen so persitly & spiritually and euen of siche one to be fulfilled. Be ye persit, saith chryst as your heuenly father is perfit, & if we

shulde saye, that this worke of loue and forgeuenes were so perfitelye, done that there remained in vs no synne but that ye dignitie of the dede deserued forgeuenes, so neded that man not to praye in his pater noster forgeue me my dettes: but suche a man I
                  •
               an calleth a lyer.Ioan. i. But admit the fulfillyng of thys your sec
                  •
               nde condicion after faith, yet it foloweth not that this your forgeuer hath also f
                  •
               lfilled all the other preceptes of the lawe as the loue of God aboue a
                  •
               l with all his herte, soule, minde. &c. and the last precepte, Thou shalt haue no concupiscence. He is accursed saith the lorde that perfetly perfourmeth not,
                  
                     •
                  eut xxvi
                     •
                  
                ne abideth in al the precepts writē in ye law, wherfore a man is not iustified for fulfyllyng of one or two of youre condicions, but he must fulfyll all written in the booke of the lawe, or els he is accursed.
            Nowe when you or anye other wyll come forthe and dare saye, ye haue

so perfitely, as gods mynde is, fulfilled this your condicion and all the rest of yours, and all the lawe, then wyl I dispute with you of your conclusion whervnto ye hasted so swiftly, whether the fulfillyng therof dymynysheth the glory of Christes passion, In the mean season. I wyll tell you as Paule sayth. If you or anye other coulde gette ye remission for ye dedes of the lawe workynge, so were Christ dead in vayne for suche men.Gala. ii. God acciteth the man that wilbe iustified by his workes vnto hys iugemēt seat and pleadeth with him thus sayenge. Isay .xliii. Put me in mynd and we wyll reason the cause in iudgement. Shewe me that thinge or worke wherby thou wilte trust to be absolued and iustified. And here god beginneth with the firste man & so commeth to the most holy fathers as Abraham and Moses, and concludeth all men vnder synne none to haue deserued their forgeuenes by

any of their workes, but faith. Thou haste made me thy seruaunte to bere awaie thy sinnes and thrustedst me downe ladē with thy iniquities. Man is therefore iustifyed, saith Paul, frely by grace thorow faithe in Iesu christ. wherfore your condicion of workes cannot be placed in the accion of iustificacion. I exclude therfore with Paule by this exclusiue, Sola fide, all the workes of the lawe from the said accion affirming constantly with him. That by fayth man is frely iustifyed without the workes of the lawe. where is nowe your gloriacion,rom. iii in your confuse condicon? exclusa est. It is excluded saith Paule, and yet ye wil haue no exclusiue as to say sola fide. But skof it out wth your karoll alone alone Qua lege? or quo iure? by what autorite or condicion. by the condicion or reason of workis? No no saith Paule. Imo per legem fidei. But by the autorite of faith. And therfore he

concludeth. Man by fayth to be iustifyed without the workes of the law, what can be spoken more playnly agenst your condicion and merits, for our free iustificacion by only faith, all the workes of the lawe excluded from fayth in the accion of our iustificacion? Thus ye see your operose condicion clene excluded frō this accion. And now to your second Article: that is, to vse playn speche,The bysho
                     •
                   his .ii. articl
                     •
                  
                
               They that wil enioye the remission of their sins, must beleue. (for faith ye saye is your firste condicion) And because ye fantazie so many faithes and knowleges and belyke haue as many beleifes, I wil restraine you to the only beleife in Iesu Christe to haue suffred for our sinnes. And nowe let vs adioyne your next article in as playn wordis banishing youre effecte and this terme condycyon. Sayenge thus.His. iii. a
                     •••
                  
                  cle. The fulfillinge of faith (for as yet I medle with no more of youre other condicions

but with onely faithe youre firste condicion) requireth the knowledge of faithe, whiche knowledge (say you) we haue by faith. And thus haue we your paradox.Wīchesters paradox. That faithe is knowne by faythe. Is not this a proper naked mouse, wherof so great a gronynge mountaine hath so long traueled? Who laughe not at this naked sayenge, faythe is knowen by faith? This is lo, your confuse artycle wrapped in so many perplexe termes, when it is resolued into playne speache and sifted from youre combrose condicions and derke effectes. If you and your doctrine feared not the lyght it shulde neuer haue ben inuolued in such obscure, vayne, and perplex speache. The symple playne truthe knoweth no deceytful coloured sophems ne any perplexed persuasions wherby as the serpent deceiued Eue, so wold you deceiue the simple of whiche wyly deceite and deceitful wylines in suche teachers Paule diligently

warned the Ephesiōs, and abhorred it in the simple veritie to be myxed.Ephe. v i. cor. ii
            
            
               It may appeare in you euidently howe malice blyndeneth you,
               The bys. 
               when rehersynge my wordes, ye aske me whether fayth goeth before workes. &c.
            
            Beware malyce hath not so blyndened you, that when,Ioye. as once before ye were promoted, ye sawe and professed the truth, but now drowned with the worlde ye be so blynde that ye see not the sonne in the cleare myddaye. Malyce blyndened me not, for I perceiued your craftye iugglynge with your confuse condiciō therin to wrap your workes to iustify. And purposely I asked you, whether fayth wente before workes euen to souke oute of your owne wordes, the same truthe whiche ye impugned, euen onelye fayth to iustifye, which ye haue now graunted, aunswering faith to haue the fyrste place.Only faith iustifieth by his owne graunt. Of whiche graunte let this be the principle. The remissiō of our sins requireth faith ī christ

in the first place. Then thus, who so beleueth his sinnes forgeuē in christ the same is iustified, this man so beleueth, ergo he is iustified, he is iustifyed by no nother of your condiciōs then by faithe, ergo fayth onelye iustifyeth, The maior is the scripture in an C. places That who so beleue in christe hath lyfe euerlastynge, the minor is euident in euery beleuer in Christ. Also whersoeuer is fayth and beleif into christ to haue suffered for hir synnes, there is remyssion of synnes, here is faythe fyrste of all into Chryste: wherefore here is remismission by youre owne graunte by only faith whyche is your fyrste condycyon. For as thou beleueste accordynge to my promyse (sayth chryste) so commeth it to the, but thou beleuest in me to haue suffred for thy synnes as I haue euer promysed, ergo it muste nedes so come vnto the thus beleuinge. Nowe if ye geue vs forth 
                  •
               ny mo of youre condycyons after

thys faythe iustyfyenge, whyche is your firste condicion, so come they al to late to iustyfy, for the faythfull is nowe alredy iustified by onelye faith ere your other condiciōs cā be made redy or fulfylled. Then ye aske me a question wakyng, because I sayd ye dreamed an externe knowledge. In dede I then dreamed ye wēt aboute such a thinge. And now I haue my dreme: for that ye say, faith is knowē by fayth: And then ye coupled youre newe found faith (as I said) to an externe knoweledge of your outwarde condiciō, so yt now by your owne wise deductiō we be comē into this youre fynne narowe issew. Faith is knowē by faith, for these be your words. The fulfilling of ye cōdiciō requireth first knowledge: your cōdicion ye say, is faith. the fulfilling of faithe is to beleue in christ: Then is this ye playne sence. To beleue in christ, faith into hī is first required, thē ye adde, which, knowlege we haue by faith: Now is this yor saiēg resolue it īto plain

speche. The remission of our sinnes by chrystes passion, hath first faith into christe. This beleife into christe diminisheth not the forgeuenes of our sinnes. Then ye say, they that wil enioye their forgeuenes muste beleue in christe. To beleue in chryst requireth faith, which faith is knowē by faith. And thus by derkening the trwe iustificacion with your vayne termes haue ye brought vs in, two faithes,The bysshop
                     •
                   two faithes. one to be knowne by the tothere. Nowe yf it shulde be asked: wherby knowe you your first faith? Ye must seke vs out a nother former faith therby to know it, and so be we lyke to fall into infinite faythes.
            And here let vs sette togither all your skatered sayinges folowinge towchinge this knowlege of faithe by your firste faith. First, ye saye, by faith is all our certaine knowlege of gods wyl and pleasure,folio .xviii. and .xix. And here it wold be knowen, by whiche faith, ye meane, is al this knowlege, by your

former faith or by your latter sayth. For ye said, faith is knowē by faith. And thē ye say. That Barnes & you came to this. that we must haue 
                  •
               aith first of al to know what we shuld beleue. And here ye iugled ageyn wt hī in dede, whiche I espiyd before in your two faithes by one to know the tother.
                  
                     ••
                  e popes faith. For I sawe it before howe priuely ye went about to bringe vs into the popes faith, & your popisshe beleue to be extolled aboue christis faith. For the thinge that we shulde beleue is the word of god in the old & new testament perfitly conteined: vnto the which word redde or herde of siche as god hath ordeined to be saued,Acte. xiii, faith is geuen to beleue it and to know god the father in christe, to cleaue to it and lyue therafter. But you, and youre holy father anticryst of Rome haue dreamed & decreed vs another former faith which ye here cal your faith firste of all,Fayth fyrste of all. to knowe whether the bible and the holy scriptures

writen by the holy goste and withe the finger of god, spoken out of goddis mouthe be the worde of god or noo: as thoughe ye wolde wt the serpente the deuil deceiuinge. Eue, call it into doute whether we must & shuld beleue the holy scriptures or no, except ye had so admited it, so to make the holy gost and the spirit of trewth euen god him selfe a lyer. and to doute whether our faith geuen vs of god fully and fermely perswading vs thē to be gods very word be the trew crysten faith or no? And thus bringe ye the vnlerned simple & all that yet beleue in your popishe doctryne into doute of all y• is writen in the holy byble: as whether God created heuen and erthe, and cryste be the sonne of god made man, borne of the virgin and haue redemed vs wt his death and resurrection. &c. Into this dampnable doute when ye haue by your deuillyshe doctrine brought your disciples, then to

be delyuered theroute, ye haue vsurped an autoritie aboue & ouer gods worde by bringinge in this your former faithe to knowe what we muste beleue, which your first faithe is ioyned and stayed vpon youre fathers holy decrees as ye well wete it. No man so hardly to beleue or to receiue the scriptures as gods worde onlesse he with ye court, church (I shuld say) of Rome had graunted admitted permitted and delyuered them to vs as to be the catholike scripture. No ne any man so hardy otherwise to vnderstād or beleue thē, then as this antichriste of Rome and you his bysshoppes by your falsely vsurped power haue falsely expouned and interpreted thē. So that this your first faith of al (as ye cal it) is plainly placed vpon & correlatiue to the popes holy decrees. And you folowīg your holy fathers steppes by your tirannous cōpulsiō wt fier vsurping the same auctorite aboue god, & ouer his

word compell vs yet so to beleue it as ye falsely expowne it in this your deuellishe derke declaracion & in your other false bokis.Thauctori
                  
                     •
                  e and vn
                  
                     •
                  erstanding 
                     •
                  f the scrip
                  
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  e must do 
                     •
                  ende vpon 
                     •
                  he pope 
                     •
                   Gardiners 
                     ••
                  en & mouth whose arrogant exaltacion aboue god & his holy word Daniell & Paul so lyuely describe, and at laste afirme you to be slayne withe ye same breath of gods mouth whose course ye cōtende so mightely this daye to stoppe and to suppresse. And euen this is your popishe drift with your derke termed effect condicion and dowblinge with our onely simple plain faith to place the popis faith firste of all, therby to knowe chrystis faithe, euen anticryst euer contrarye to Chryste to his faithe and to his word, to bringe vs in to the knowlege of chryste and beleife of his gospell.To be confedered with the popes frendes and to wryte against hys enemies, is a shrewd tokē of a papiste. which is an euident profe that ye stand yet vpon his syde to bringe him in againe wt his firste faith of all, as (your bokes declare you) writen for his parte and doctryne, ageynst the popis enemies. I

knowe it reported of diuerse papistes, that the pope is more be holden to you for so defendinge him withe your penne agenste his aduersaries then to any other of his cardinals and bishops. And therfore ye may be glad of so high commendacions & prayse and so good a reporte of the popes frendis. But we yt be chrysten men vnder our moste noble kinge & haue renounced the pope with his false first faith and falser doctryne, wil not admitte this your popishe assercion. That we muste haue this his firste faith of all to knowe what we shuld beleue. For we knowe it by our vndouted assewered faith which is the knowlege of gods mercye towarde vs in christe geuen vs of god that ye holy byble is his vndowted euerlastinge worde, and constantly we beleue all that is contayned ther in when we read or heare it, althoughe your holy fathers autoritie had neuer so affirmed ne admitted it.
            
               For by ye word of faith, as paul calleth it,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . l
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  om. 10.
                faith is geuē vs, & not by ye false decrees of antichrist. And our faith stayed vpon gods holy word is the selfe same knowlege of god in christe. Ioan confirminge the same,
                  
                     •
                  oh. 17. 
                  
                     •
                  sai. 53. Collos. 
                     •
                  . i. Ioan. v. sainge we be certainelye perswaded that the sonne of god is commen & hath geuen vs mynde to know him, which is the trueth and we are in ye truthe. At laste, sith the scriptures be ye thing whiche we shuld beleue, and your first faith of all, must go before the knoweledge of the scriptures to be beleued, so must your first faith be ioyned to, and sustained, not vpō the scriptures, and worde of god, but vpon mans worde. But euery man is alyer, both your holy father, and you to, ergo your first faith of al must nede stande vpon and be stayed with lyes.
            
               The bys.
               The
                     •
                   I asked doctour. Barnes if a gentil felte h
                     •
                  m selfe moued to go heare a preaching or read some part of scripture, whether wolde ye call it well done of him so

to do, or were it sinne because it were before fayth seing faith is of hearynge. And he saide it was good, &c
            
            It is good as the heithen philosophers call their ciuil morall vertewes good and the popes scole bona ex,Ioye. or in genere or moraliter & not ex fide yt is a good haithen dede. But seinge we be entred into the Christen religion grounded vpon fayth iustifyenge. I aunswer that he beyng (as ye say) a gentyle, whiche is an idolater not yet beleuinge in christe, his goinge, his hearinge or readynge is naught and sinne before god, though it apere good before men, for the tre is yet euyll, and vnto the vnpure & synful, saith Paule, nothīg is cleane for his herte is not yet purified by faythe. Wherfore as Paule saythe, what is not of faith is synne.
            But because ye saye he is moued.
            I muste aske you farther, whether thys mocyon telleth hym that hys haythen gentylysshe relygyon is

false and dampnable, and the christen religion to be the true waye to his saluacyon in Chryste? which motion now thus conceiued by the spiryte of fayth, I say, this man, goethe forth to heare the worde for the confirmation of his faith into chryste to be encreaced and more knoweledge of the same to be augmented,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . thirsting his saluacion, as did Cornelius the centuriō, which had his faith iustifienge him, ere he went forth to heare peters sermō. And as for your vayne replicacion of no graunt, that heithen good dedes iustifye before faith whiche commeth of hearinge, it is not worth a podyng. For because Barnes graunted the gentiles dede to be good whiche had not yet herde the word, therfore ye conclude to hastelye, ergo, men be iustified before faithe, for thoughe youre gentiles dede be one of your good dedes, yet i
                  •
                iustifieth not, ye aske how he shuld haue faith before he heareth the

sermō, sith fayth cōmeth of hearing? for Barnes (ye say) had graunted, in that mocion he was iustified. Youre argument therfore is naught worth For ye must learne by christes wordes, that as there be two maner of wordes, that is to saye, the inwarde, and exterior worde, so are there two maner of hearinges, For faith commeth not onely of the outwarde hearinge of the sowne that smyteth the exteriour eares, but especially out of the hearing of the interne word that persethe the herte by the secrete instincte and mocion of the spirite regenerynge the faythfull. Of whiche interne hearynge the scripture speaketh sayenge. Audiam quid loquatur in me dominus deus. I shal heare what thynge the lorde god pleasethe hym to speake in me. And christ saith all that haue herde and be learned of the father, they come to me, and we be al taught of god, of yt which eares and interne hearinge, Christe when

he had taught certaine lessons spiritually to be vnderstanden out of his allegorike speches: he cried loude, who so hath eares to heare lette him heare. Of this interne word of faith speaketh Paule saienge. Nighe in thine harte is the worde of faith,Rom. 10.
                and also in many other places.
            
               And because they nether mynde to do any good dedes.
               The bys,
            
            (Ioye. None of your gentile iewishe good deades.)
            
               They wolde perswade to the worlde that we can do no maner of good dedes till we haue no nede of them. (Ioye. As thoughe a iustified man were not boūd ne obediēt to gods precepts, lo)
            
               for our saluacion, That is to saye, till we be iustified and clerely in gods perfit fauour, & assured by our own beleif of life euerlasting. And as though we shuld say to god geue me my wages afore hand, & make me sewer that I shal haue heuen and then I promise yt I wil forgeue my neighboure Oh blasphemy,Ioye. pernyciousely peruerting christes holy worde & doctrine, oh wicked lye most impudente for neuer find ye these blasphemouse

lyes in myne ne in any other christen writers bokes, we exhort you to moo good workes in one lefe of oure bokes, then ye be able to do all the dayes of your lyfe. And euen this is a good dede, with goddes almyghtye worde to confute youre popishe doctrine: wherwith ye wolde yet mayntaine the pope, and bringe him in againe at your daye so sore longed for It is a good dede to stande on gods part with his word to resist such antichristes with all your impes. For all oure bokes, if ye wolde suffer thē to be sene, perswade, and exhorte the readers to such good workes as god commaundeth, and disswade and dehort al men from youre dampnable superstitious workes, rites, and tradicions of lyeng men. we with christ laye firste the foundacion stone, euen Christ him self in our ferme and constante faithe. But you peruertinge goddes order in doctrine sette youre workes, yea and that Heathen

infidele iewysh workes, before faith If a iewe or a turke shulde come to your scole, wolde ye first teache hym your good workes and popish ceremonies before the true beleife into god thorow christ? and baptize hym ere he beleue? The Iewes and Turkes do such good ciuyle workes before men as ye teache men to be iustified thereby. They praye, they faste geue almose, heare and rede the scriptures, pay their dettes, bye and sell, and make their wares truely and iustely, kepe matrimonye, whiche they do not withoute the common helpe and grace of god, and yet be thei not iustified by them before god, but before men after youre iustificacion wt
               out and before faithe. But we which haue professed the christen religion, groūded vpon faith in Christ, teache the good workes which be the frutes of the spirite of faith, and not youre pharisaik rightwisemakynge, ne your iewishe iustification, For what

hath belial with Christ & the derkenes to do with the lyght?gal. 5.
                The tree muste be firste good, ere it bryngeth forth good frute.
            
               And so if beleif be required before iustificacion, there ariseth then a meruelous perplexite,
               The bys, 
               how I shulde worke well ye worke of beleife, before I am iustified. But as we saye, my synnes be forgeven because I beleue, so because my synnes were forgeuen I dyd beleue.
            
            Go to,Ioye. and skoffe and deride God and his holy worde whiles the lorde that sitteth in heauen laugheth you to skorne, and shall at last smyte you sodēly with his yerney scepter, declaring your arrogante ignoraunce in that ye here affirme the worke of beleife to be mans worke, when christe and Paule telleth it you, if ye had euer learned so farre.Ioan. vi. That hoc est opus dei (& non hominis) ut credatis. &c. This is the worke of god and not of man, to beleue in him whome god hath sente, Neyther for the defence of anye errour, as ye falselye

reporte vs, do we enter into so harde a matter of gods priuey counsell, as ye call predestinacion and make it the immediate cause of oure saluacion, as your selfe blyndely stomble in to it, no occasion geuen you, but to declare onely your ignoraunce, as ye saye, lest any other, espienge it in dede shuld iustely preuent you with the same strype. For we say wt Paul That god hath chosen vs in christe accordinge to his gracyouse good wyll and pleasure and not for oure merites,Ephe. 1. & 2.
                before to worlde, was made But wherefore? to do what we lyste? as reasoneth the forlorne saiēg: If I be predestined to be saued, so shall I be saued do I neuer so euel, god forbyd. but we be predestined saith paul to this ende that we shulde here be faithfull holye and blameles before god by loue.Ephe. 1.
                which hath predestined vs to be his sonnes by adopcion thorowe Iesus Christe.Ephe. 2.
                &c. that the glorye of his grace shoulde be praised.

And that we be created of god in crist Iesu to do good workes prepared of god, and not of oure selues,Ephe. 2
                        •
                     
                  
                that we shulde here walke in them ere we obtaine that promised saluacion. And that we be after our election and predestinacion called to be regenered of the spirite by faith, whiche spirite of faith in Christ certifieth vs of oure eleccion, hauynge nowe the pledge and ernest of the spirite,
                  1. co
                     •
                  . 1. Ephe. 1. Rome. 8.
                euen Christ hym selfe geuen vs, testifieng to our spirites, yt he hath chosē vs to be his. This assewraunce in faith is taught vs euery where in scripture by gods promises, sealed both with the interne obsignacion of the spirite of faith and also with the visible seales of his sacramentes testifienge to vs his beneuolence towarde vs in christ both by baptisme and his holy supper.
            And dare you then so arrogātly saye against this holy assiewerd certaintie & obsignation of the spirite in the promises of GOD receiued in the mooste certytude of oure

faith, and be so bolde as to impugne this ferme assewrance and perswasion of ye spirit of fayth, to perswade any man (as ye do) to dubitacion ignorance vnbeleif & to doute of gods holy promised eleccion and his predestinacion in chryste? wyl ye saye agēst this. That ye faitheful be saued by predestinacion and their eleccion in christe? whom god hath predestined and chosen they shalbe saued, for god repenteth him not of his eleccion, but it must necessarelye and immutably come so to passe in his elect accordinge to his ferme purposed decre in his euerlasting immutable prouidence, so that it lyeth in no mannes hande to resiste his wyll ne to take any of his chosen from hym. And therfore whiles we that beleue to be predestined and chosen in christe,Our predes
                     •
                  ination election sought and founde in christ onely thus serche and treate the knowledge of oure predestinacion in christe, and not in goddes secret counsayle, ne in oure selues, in Christ, I say, within

the limites of goddes expresse wyll & worde, there is no such perill therin, ne is it so harde a mater as ye make it, but ioyouse, swete and counfortable to euery faithful humble cristian But if ye leaue ye light and the waye of hys worde, and will serche, treate, and measure it with your owne fond reason and curiositie of your witte (as ye here do) then be ye worthely caste vp of god into your owne forlorne sence and ignoraunce, strayed awaye into labyrinths inextricable into your owne confusion, compelled to peruerte and to falsefye the scriptures wresting them to seme to agre and to serue your ignoraunte reason for feare (as ye saye) of your mere necessitie all thinges to be done, dreamed out of your owne feble brayne which cannot in the scriptures see wyth saynt Austen, the necessyte in ye wyll of god predestenynge to stande with the free wyl of the predestined, to do good. And againe with the necessitie

of reprobacion in gods wil to stande the libertie into euyl in the reprobated, so that his dampnacion be imputed vnto hym selfe, for his owne voluntary faulte.
                  
                     •
                   volun
                  
                     •
                  ary neces
                  
                     •
                  ite. Nether can ye see howe this necessitie is no compulsion, ne constrained necessitie but a voluntary necessitie. God wil haue mercye of whom he lyst, and harden whom it lyketh him. The cause inscrutable of his diuine secrete will is worthely hidden from vs, so profounde are his iudgementes that mannes reason cannot attaine to thē and yet will your fonde witte be ready to accuse god of vnrightwisenes, oneles he geue you a reason to your mynd, and a rekening why (sith all things depende of your mere necessitie▪ and of the secrete godly iuste wyll) he shulde dampne any man?
            As thoughe the potter were bounde to geue a rekenynge to his claye, wherefore he hath not made all his

vessells therof a lyke in honoure. And as thoughe gods depe inscrutable iugementes and wyll, must be measured with your hyghe witte.
            Oh myserable man, that thou art (sayth Paule) whiche darest replye reason with, and incuse thy maker on this maner: as thoughe God were bounde to attemper the magnitude of his secrete workes to thy rude capacitie. Are his diuine workes peruerse because they be hid to thy sinfull reason and carnall witte?
            Be we therfore content with this answer of God,Mat. 20.
                to the murmures in his vyneyarde. It is my wyll, It is my pleasure thus to do wyth my now
                  •
               e, and thus to vse my creatures to my glorye. It is god that hathe made all things for him selfe,prour. 16.
                and for his owne wil, euen the wiked vnto an euel day. And hardined pharaos hert worthely, and yet is he not

therfore thautor of euil as mans fōd reasō gathereth therof. For we know that as the fote pathes of the lorde lye in the seas,
                  
                     •
                  sal. lxxvi. and his foote steppes be not sene, euen so lye his workes in al thinges euen in the wicked forlorne, and be not sene to mans reason, which at his godlye pleasure so disposeth and ordeineth ye secret depe iugementes of his vnsercheable wyl by his godly prouidence in all men, that as it perteineth to his wisedom to forsee all thinges to come, so belongeth it to his power to rule and moderate all thinges with his almyghtie presente forthe stretched hande. Senharib was a wicked heithen kynge, and yet God vsed the same (hym selfe not knowinge it) to be hys instrumente to scourge his people,Isay .x. the kynge hym selfe entendynge nothynge els then ambicion cruelty, and myscheife,. Here didde neyther the kynge ne hys people the

the Iewes in this worke of god espy his iote steppes, much lesse in his predestinacion and reprobation, for yf they had sene them, blynde reason wolde haue anone concluded, God to be ye autor of euyl, or els not haue iustely punished the kinge, seinge he did but gods wyll and his message. Let god therefore as Isaye saythe worke s
                  •
               raunge workes vnknowen to vs to worke his owne,Isay .xxvii
                     •
                  
                as he did when he sprange forth in the mount Perazim, and declared his fury in ye vale of Gibeon. All that is before writen of this mater, it is writen saith Paule for our doctrine to haue counfort by the scriptures and hope thereby of our saluacion,Rom, xv and not to feare vs from the holsome study and meditacion therof, ne to bring vs into any perplex dout of oure electiō & predestinaciō ī christ, as your proces appereth after ye lefte Pauls wordes and fell into your owne reasonynge

therin, callinge the wordes of the holy ghost, idle reasonyngs, and wrappinge them in vnreuerently, with the idle saings and reasonings of the grekes (as ye terme them) bryngynge in your absolute mere necessite, and mans lyfe, death, maners behauioure. &c. and euery thinge to be fixed (ye saye bothe in skoffe and derision) of God, and fastened in hys place appoynted, wyth nayles, ryuetted and clenched with mere necessitie. &c. By suche blasphemouse skornefull speche and wrytynge of the mere necessitie of gods eternall moste myghty immutable wyll, wysedome and power, effectuousely to perfourme his diuine decreed operations and actions, vnable to be resisted, ye openlye declare your selfe to be not so perfytly mynded as ye oughte to be thus vnreuerently wythoute feare, to wryte vpon your creatore. Of whiche maner men of so depraued and corrupte

mynde, Dauyd speketh saing The skoffinge fole saith in his herte, that god is not god.Psal. 13. c 2.14.
                Then ye reherce many that may be made obieccions against you of gods in
                  •
               allible foreknowlege and necessarily decreed will and prouidence and predestinacion, but with all the coloured rethrike ye haue ye cannot assoyle one of them. And as for fre libertie to do good, no man hath it, til the spirite of libertie, thorow christ, hathe taken awaye his bonde libertie (if suche one may be called fre liberty) to sinne and made in him a free lybertie to do good as the scripture and Austen euery where declareth it. And again, That the necessite vnable to be changed in gods decreed will, necessiteth no man by coacction to synne but it is the voluntary necessitie of mans corrupte nature that driueth him to synne in whiche corrupte nature ye shuld yf ye were lerned, & not ī gods 
                  •
               ecret wil seke mās necessite to sin. so

that God is no autor of sinne (whiche be farre from all christen mens thoughtis) but iust and holy in all his workes, & vsed pharaous worthely deserued voluntary induraciō vnto his owne glory. He tempted Iob, and Satan temptid the same, here is one and the same accion, but of vnlyke entēts willes & endis, For god tempted, him to proue his pacience, to excercise his faith hope & loue and to set him vp an example of pacience before all afflicted faithful men, But Satan tempted him to bringe him into blasphemouse murmurings ayenst god by impaciēcy, & so to despayer and to dampnacion. The scripture saithe that the father delyuered vp his owne sonne to be crucifyed for vs, & christ delyuered vp him selfe into their handis. And Iudas and ye byshops delyured him vp into his crucifiers handis, But god did it for his glorye and our redempciō Iudas & the hygh preistis

did it of auarice enuye and malice. So that the diuersite of the endis, maner, willis, entent and the affectis of the doers in the same acciō, make it good to one and euill to a nother, Ye prouoke me muche to digresse & to contende with you in the mater of predestinacion and fre libertie, therby craftely to call me into a new feld from our proposed cause of iustificacion, as thoughe ether ye were wery of, or mistrusted your false part therin, And especially in this place.
            
               Antequam Abraham fierer, Ego Sum. In whiche text, ye playe and daley before tyme, aftir tyme, aboue tyme, yea and out of tyme to, asking me whether (before) signifieth tyme or no tyme, wherof ye saye my playn scolers can no skill. (And I dare sai, nomore can you) For in this text ye tomble in your tences present and paste, done, vndone, or in doing, placinge ye present tence, in god before the pretertence in man, as thoughe,

Sum, in that place, ego sum, were a verbe substantiue, and not the essenciall name of god to Moses. Exo. iii. that he shulde tell his people his name to be this worde, sum, when he was bode to saye. sum misit me ad uos. that is to say, Iehouah, he that hath his beinge of him selfe, and all creatures their being of him hath sēt me to you. For god is not measured ne tenced with tyme, ye shulde haue conferred the text and ye shuld haue sene that christes mynde was firste to declare him selfe to the Iewes to be very man in that he tolde them, Abraham desyred to see his daye, that was of hys incarnacyon, and then in ende of the chapter he declared him selfe to be verye God namynge hym selfe by his essencyall name expressed to them in Exodo, where he sayd, ego sum qui sum Whyche is but as colde a speche as to saye. A man is a man.

excepte the sharpe demonstracion called emphasis be intended vpon the later, Sum, in an higher sharper and harder accent. So that if that name ineffable might be expressed, as it cannot be of man, yet to pointe vs vnto it as it were a farrof, the lerned in the tongues insinuat it by this latyn nowne, existo existonis as one might saye, I am that essenciall beinge as I said before. So that ye haue declared your ignorance in dede to take gods essenciall ineffable name, for the verbe Sum es fui, a verbe of the present tence: makinge no difference betwixt the first Sum and the last, in this sentence. Ego sum, qui sum. For ye may tyme and tence the first Sum, but so canne ye not the later Sum. whiche god vsed when he bode Moses tell them, Sum, hathe sent me vnto you, and Chryste vsed the same his essenciall name, here vnto the Iewes,

in this texte Antequam Abraham nasceretur ego sum. Before abrahā was borne I had my beinge of my selfe and al creaturs their beinge by me. This is the trwe englishinge ther of as we maye wtours to skāt a spech declare it. And therfore saith Austen. Appende verba, & agnosce mysterium &c. Antequam Abrahā fieret. Intellige fieret ad humanam naturam. Sum, veroad diuinam pertinere substantiam. way these words and aknowlege the mystery. Before Abraham was made, vnderstande thou, this worde (was made) to pertayne to his humane nature. But ye worde (Sum) to pertaine to the diuyne substance. But it wold aske to greate a boke to refute all your errours and ignorances in this pese and in other of your boke, and therfore I towche but some of them, and haste me ayen to your sainge in your xlvii. lefe folowinge cōcerninge our firste proposed mater of iustificaciō,
            
               
               A controuersie there is, howe god worketh this iustificacion in man,
               The bys. 
               whether to iustifye he giueth him one gifte of faith or two giftes of faith and charitie. And in this cōtrouersie one thīg is very peruerse, that these which saye that god iustifiethe man with one gift of faith onelye, will be sene more to extoll god in his fauour vnto man then they that saye god geueth thre giftes in the iustification.
            
            I saye with Christe, sainte Paule and with all the olde holy doctours that god to iustifye man geueth but onely the one gifte of faith beleuing into Christe vnto the onely accion of his iustificatiō,Ioye. albeit there be three giftes in the man iustified, as faithe, hope, and loue, not idle waiters to be sette a worke, as ye raile and ieste of goddes holy giftes. Neither Paule taught of god, bringing but the one gifte of faith, excludynge all the other from the acte of iustificacion, doth peruersely (as ye saye) in extollynge god therby when he bryngeth in Abraham onely by faith iustified and therfore to geue all the glory vnto god. Rom. iiii. and likewise of euery

man by faith onely iustified and not of workes. Ephe. ii. howesoeuer it lyketh you to skof it oute, I know of howe fonde a dreame and false a grounde ye argewe agaynst me and maister Bucer to proue your charite to be concurrante with faith in the act of iustification, or els (as ye full wisely saye) charitie to stand by ydle tyll she be sette a worke.Gardiners faithe formed, and vnformed shapt and shaples. For ye haue dreamed it with frier dunce, that there is a material shaples faith and a formall fashioned faith. And that your material faith must stand idle, as ye teste of Charite, & canne do nothinge without hir shape and formalitie, whereby she is formed and shaped into accion formed with charite. By whiche fonde dreame ye wolde make (I say) your shapeles faith to stand idle tyll youre colde charitie had set hir a worke A goodly godly frierly dreame lo. But the scripture teacheth vs that faith in hir owne essenciall selfe and consideration is

as actual, effectuouse, and as formally fashioned as is charite in hir essencial selfe. For the syngle spirituall giftes of god admitte no suche phisicke composition as ye dreame. And as effectually as charitie loueth god knowen firste by faythe in Chryste so effectually and as formally worketh onely faythe firste hir proper accions, as to beleue in god apprehendinge his promises in christ, and there is no idlenes in eyther of the gyftes, for as God geueth none of your materiall shaples giftes, so geueth he no idle giftes, as ye blaspheme hym and his giftes, we teache therfore with gods word, faith hope and charitie, to be essencyally distincte, but not diuided in sondry: And we knowe, and teache it, that saythe in her selfe hathe hir owne proper formal accions as to purifie hertes, to certyfye the soule of hyr forgeuenes in CHRISTE, faythe. knoweth god in Christ, faith setteth

ye conscience at reste, faith apprehendeth the fre promises in christ, faithe seethe god and thinges inuisible, faith pleaseth god, faith goeth vnto god with many mo hir owne peculiar workes expressed. Heb. xi. Faithe declareth hyr selfe effectuouselye by the workes of charitie of hope of pacience, almose. &c. But by whiche of al these hir proper workes doth faith iustifye? verely the scripture saith by hir beleuinge in god thorowe christe Iesu, hym to be geuen hyr, to haue suffred and satisfied for hir sinnes, made of god the father hir rightewisenes, holynes, wisedome and redempcion. By this onely act of faith is man iustified before she declareth hir selfe by hir workes of loue, for the thinge loued muste be firste knowen by faith. Faith iustifieth in that she worketh by beleife into christ certifieng and inducyng vs into the cō
               munion,by whiche worke faith iu
                     •
                  tifieth. and doing Christes ryghtwysnes vppon vs to be oure owne

vesture comon to him and to vs coueringe vs thus beleuinge in him:Gene. 27.
                as it was wel fygured in Iacob couered with hys elder brothers clothes and vestures so well sauoringe in his fathers nose whervpon he receiued his blessinge in that blessed sead contrary to the curse and malediccion.
            
               This word onely faith hath and doth maintaine muche bablinge when ye ioyne it to faith sayenge, onely faith iustifyeth,
               The bys. 
               & defendinge y•, ye trouble the people. &c.
            
            It mainteineth the more bablyng and gendereth the mo erroures by your popishe Antichristen doctryne teaching with other heritiques that faithe and workes together must iustifie,Ioye. It is your popishe Pelagians bablynge, for your workes, dāpning christe and saint Paule in the places I alleged against you, and ye haue not yet soluted them, ye accuse of sich bablynge Austen, Ambrose, Hierom, Uulgarye, Chrisostom, Hugh Cardinall, Erasmus, so ofte in his learned

& godly worke of his Paraphrase vpon ye newe testament with many mo bothe godly and learned men afformynge onely faith to iustifye.
            Reade Origene (and ye 
                  •
               yste) vppon this place. Arbitramur hominem fide iustificari. &c. and call hym and the other reherced, mainteiners of muche bablynge. If to saye onelye fa
                  •
               th iustifyeth mainteyneth so muche bablynge, as ye bable and blustre for your synfull workes, so haue all these said great learned and holy men interpretinge the scriptures done muche hurt and troubled their readers. It is no meruayle ye bable so boldely, and impugne so blyndlye this verite of faith onely iustifieng, for ye neuer knewe what this faith is. It is neither your acquisite ne your formed ne vnformed faith, nether your assentynge historik faythe, neither your explicite ne implicite faith, neither your fained ne deade

faith, neither the diuellis faith, nor yet your firste faythe of all, that we ioyne with the exclusyue, onely, but it is the lyuely iustifienge faithe,faith iustifyinge. euen the ferme assiewred knowledge of gods beneuolence towarde vs, whiche grounded vppon the veritie of the free promyse in Christ, is both reueled to oure myndes, and presented into our hertis by the holy gost. And therefore are these wordes, Iustitia iustificatio and iustificari often tymes ioyned to faithe onely, and neuer to Charitie ne to workes to iustifye before God, Paule vsynge in expresse wordes these exclusiues. Abs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   operibus and sine operibus legis, gratis nisi. &c. That is frelye withoute the workes of the lawe.
            And where the Iewe (as nowe do you) for his iustifycatyon obiecteth his workes. Paule telleth hym playnelye. Thy gloriacyon in thy workes is excluded byrom. 3.
               
               
by the auctoritie of faith. And to exclude all other accions, and merits of workes, he addeth. Gratis per gratiam per fidem. that is frely thorowe faith. And Christe biddeth him beleue onely, and thou shalte haue thy desier: Also Paule expresseth it with this exclusiue,Gal. 2.
                nisi, affirminge, we knowe it, man not to be iustified of the workes of the lawe but by faith, which lyke speache Christe vseth by the same exclusiue,luke. 18.
                nisi, to proue only God to be good, sainge. Nemo bonus nisi unus, Nempe deus. There is none good but one, that is god, as muche to saye as christe him selfe expresseth it, there is none good nisi solus deus, but only god. For the same power hath, nisi, to exclude in negatiue propositions, as haue Solum & tantum in affirmatiues.
            
            
               They trouble the people with a fyne distinction of offices, sayeng that in iustificacion of man,
               The bys, 
               it is the onelye office of fayth to iustyfye. And charite and hope

there waytyng without office whiles the man be iustified.
            
            Here ye playe sir Thomas Moris parte, whyche when he was suborned of you the spiritualtie to wryte agaynst the truthe,Ioye. and coulde not solute the scriptures ne argumentes layde agaynste hym, then he skoffed and iested them out. Better learned men then you call the actes of fayth and charite, offices, ne a more proper terme can there be geuen them, if ye lyst to se what officium is, and wherof it commeth, mary I meane not of suche offices as ye constitute among your officers, as butlers, cokes. &c. And here because the truth of God, and youre lyes be at so deadly a discorde you hauynge no truthe for your cause to be defended, ye putte to this shameles lye of me, that I shuld write, Charitie and hope there to waite withoute office whiles the man be iustified, whiche nether I ne any els but suche as ye be didde

euer saye it. But I say it yet againe to you this which ye shal neuer iustly auoid ne confute,The officie of faith, of hope, 
                     •
                   of loue That it is the office acte propertie or nature (call it as ye lyste) of faith onely to apprehende the free promised forgeuenes in christis moste preciouse innocent bloud. Nether is hope idle. For it is the constant expectacion of those things conceiued by faith oute of the worde of god, which hope shameth vs not. Nether is loue there idle, but is the frute of faithe euen the good affecte toward god and beneficence toward our neighbour to fulfil the works of mercy. For the gifts of the holy gost breke not forth into workes in the same instant thei be sowen into ye soul of man, but receiue their nourishment and encreace and be nolesse idle then is the good erthe and the grane sowen lapped therin all that tyme before the grane spiereth & apere aboue ye grounde, The

holy goost as he geueth no idle but frutefull giftes at their dewe tune, so suffereth he not his giftes to lye idle in his good soyle, althoughe ye haue litle grace to consider & see it, but rather to blaspheme him and his gifts with youre skoffinge idle waiting, hauyng rather respecte to your idle wayting seruauntes in your skornefull allusion. Thoughe your self slepe or winke and se not at al times yet maye ye not saye in suche tymes, that God hath geuen you idle eyes. And for that your superciliouse morositie, is so of
                  •
               ended with the terme (office) of fayth, what difference (I praye you) put ye betwixt these two sainges. The eye onely seeth, and it is 
                  •
               he onely office therof to see? neyther is there any man so brutyshe, as in this speache. It is the onely office expressinge the cause formal, of faith to iustifie, to exclude god the cause efficiente out of his office. For (onely as Paule teacheth, excludeth the

workis of the lawe & not god from the acte of iustificacion as ye cauill to seke euasions, verely if ye were of god, ye wold neuer impugne so manifest verities with siche trifflinge skoffes and cauillacions ne trouble and hynder chrystes chirch to seduce them with these your fonde and false bokis. But ye stande a litle to highe in your own conceight, beware ye fall not. Dominus videt et iudicat. Que stat caueat ne cadat. he yt stond let him beware he falleth not.
            
               The. bys
               And so (onely) is nowe shifted from faith to thoficie of faith, And these be thei that accuse other men of darknes.
            
            Nowe herken (good reader) wether this be so derke a shift,Ioye. Onely ye eare heareth, and it is the onely office of the eare to heare. this bishop wolde haue it the office of charite also to iustifie, and I, to exclude charite frō yt office, tell him that it is the onely office of faith and not of any other gift to iustifye. & haue constantly confirmed it by scriptures.
            
               
               But the scripture telleth me that who so loueth not remaineth in death.
               The bys. 
               And therfore if the state of a iustified man be lyfe in Christe, which is godly loue hath as well hir office in iustification to geue lyfe as faith hath hir office to be in knowelege the most certaine grounde and foundacion of it, and hope hir office to be placed and establyshed vpon them bothe.
            
            I denye your longe bablynge vaine and darke argument which is this breifely in fewe wordes.Ioye. The office (here be ye compelled to vse this terme office) of charite is to geue life ergo charitie iustifieth. A lyke argument the office of charitie is to be pacient, ergo charitie iustifieth. But what and if I denye your antecedence, and proue it by scripture, that faith and not loue is the lyfe of the iustified. Abacuc. ii. The iust man liueth in his faith. For faith hath not this epithete, ut uiua dicatur, that is to be called lyuely except there were lyfe in hir, wherof the iust lyueth.
            Abacuc. ii. Also Paul sayth. The life which I nowe lyue in my fleshe, per

fidem uiuo filij dei. I lyue it by the faithe of the sonne of god. And Iohn saith, he that remaineth in loue dwelleth in life, the cause why Abacuck & Paule declareth for that he that remayneth in loue dwelleth in faythe, whiche is the lyfe of the iuste, So yt to abide in loue, declareth the man to continue in the lyfe of faith. But I argew thus to you, Charite can not loue god onles she first knowe god. but by faith iustifienge god is firste knowne, ergo faith iustifienge is before charite louinge. Wherfore charitie iustifieth not. For the thynge muste be firste knowen ere it be beloued, Then thus, faith iustifienge is before charitie louyng, For the man is iustified in the former accion of faith knowyng & beleuinge in gods mercye thorowe christe. For faith is a lyuelye faith in hir owne proper work of beleif into christ, ere she worketh by charite. But you wold make charitie egall in accion with faythe, in the worke of iustificacion, whiche

ye shall neuer do with all the popes lawe ne with all his dirtye diuinite, ye haue. And to proue your popishe parte, ye sweate greatly to ioyne life to charitie as though then ye hadde your purpose. And in your .lv. lefe folowinge, ye saye the scripture geueth lyfe to charitie, but ye dare not alledge that scripture: as I haue alledged lyfe to be geuen to faith, ye wold here by adioyning lyfe in charitie, to be concurrant wt faith in iustificacion (as I perceiue) make faith your materiall shaples dead and an idle faithe, till charitie setteth her a worke geuing to fayth hir forme & lyfe. But this dreame wil not serue you, as I haue tolde you before.
            And then ye saye hope muste be placed and establyshed of faith and loue contrary to the hole order and treaty of them thorowout all the scripture, as ye se it distinctly, orderlye, and playnlye in all and in euerye parte and pistle of the Apostles,

and in the prophetes, firste of faithe, then of hope, and laste of all of loue, yf you vnderstande them. Then ye prate pertly of your workes before your iustificacion. And I tell you Shew me but any one of your good workes before your iustification before god and I shall soone tell you whether it be good or badde, yea and that by the true twich stone of godis holy word that lieth not.
            
               Ioy violently writeth this text of scripture,
               The bys. 
               when ye haue done al that I haue cō
                  maunded you then say you we be vnprofitable seruauntes. &c, and all to diminishe thestimacion of good workes,
            
            
               Ioye.
               after. 
                     •
                  udolph in vita Christi.This byshop violentlye wresteth this texte with the monkes exposicion of the chartir howse to serue for his and their merits wherevpon theirs and all other monkish howses were founded and buylded till the gospell ouerthrewe them as it shall shortely subuerte your byshoprykes to, as christes owne exposition of the same texte playnelye declareth

it. Your monkish glose is. That be cause god is riche enough. and want nothinge, ne nedeth our commoditie goodis ne profit by our dedis, therfore we muste say, we be seruāts vnprofitable to him. But christ telleth vs a nother cause, sainge. Say that ye be seruants vnprofitable, be cause ye haue done but your abounden dewty. For what thanke hath that seruant because he hath done but yt he is commaunded to do? These be Chrystis wordis to destroye your merits and supererogacion workis to merit more then ye nede which ouerplus ye sel to other men for money and londe to be geuē to your bishopriks, & abbeis, therfore ye may be ashamed to render any siche a popishe cause cōtrary to christis owne wordis: ye saye god hath no nede of our commodite, profit, and seruice, It is trwthe. & therfore ye serue him theraftir, redier to serue your lustis the deuil the pope & the world. God

cōmādeth vs & al creatures to serue hī, but aftir you, nether to ꝓmoue ne to set forth his glorye name & goodnes ne one to profit a nother. Christ biddeth vs so to let our lyght shyne before mē that thei seinge our good.math. v. works might glorifye our father in heuen. And what ye do to the lest of myne, ye do it to me, saith he, so that his pleasure profite and commoditie by our seruice consisteth and remaineth yet still in his chirche and his members. And as the tolerances, persecucions, & inuries, done to his members he rekeneth them done to himself, as it is to se, collos. i. act. ix. so accepteth he al benefites and workes of mercye and seruice done to his chirche of the pore faithful membres of christ as done and comon to himself. as ye se mat. xxv. For which vtilite and profit done to him in his members he calleth vs (contrary to your exposiciō) profitable & faithful seruants to hī, For he nedeth our seruice

in his chirche and mēbers, and necessarye it is yt all his creatures so serue him, sith he hathe therfore created them to celebrate his gloriouse name, and geuen them and vs commandement so to do. Albeit god is omnisufficiente & almightye riche in himself, yet standinge the creacion of al things in heuen & erth to minister and serue him accordinge to his precepte, it is necessary his glory & goodnes to be spred & celebrated by their seruice. God nedeth not our goodes, ergo he nedeth not our seruice? how folowteh your argument? seinge he hath created al things to serue him. ye be a riche bishop hauinge of al things enoughe and nede not your seruants goodes, yet seing ye haue seruants it is necessary that thei serue you, al thoughe ye be able to serue your selfe, wherfore I pray ye be as good for gods seruice as for your own, for it standeth & maketh as miche for his honour to require our seruice as it dothe for youre

honour to be serued, orels ye wold peruert the vniuersal order of the worlde, if kinges and magistrates hauinge, seruants shulde haue no nede of their seruice. Ye saye god nedeth no seruice of vs. whē he biddeth you therfore, to go into his vyneyarde to plough vp mens hartes with his worde therin to be sowen and planted, & to fede his flock. Tushe, may ye say, god nedeth none of my seruyce by your exposition, for he is able enoughe to do it him self, my seruice can not profite him, and so his seruice and precept forsaken, ye maye go into the popes garden there to playe the gardiner, plante, & sowe his popishe rites, tradicions & deuyllishe doctrine still as ye haue done to poyson the simple soules wt errours and heresies. To whome it shal be sayde at laste. O euel and vnprofitable seruaunt. &c. take him awaye and his handes and fete bounden, cast him into exterior derkenes,

where is weping and gnasshinge of tethe. Then ye saye. Gods seruice is profitable to vs, but if ye did beleue your owne saieng, ye wold serue him ernestlier then ye do, and seke that profite in his seruice with the perell of your lyfe, as didde Christ and his apostles with their true successours, forsaking all that they had to folow hym in his seruyce of faythfull and free preachinge his gospel. Paule in his vocation euer sought the profit of the other to be saued with the great paines, presonmentes, and perel of his owne lyfe, so that he said it were more profit for him selfe to be with Christe then here stil. Where ye se that Christes seruauntes, serue not for their own profit, as ye saye in youre false exposition, but for other mens profyt, for charitie seketh not her owne but other mens profyt. Then ye saye, the state of mens seruauntes is to do their masters profyt, and not their own. But I thinke

euery good faithfull seruaunt to rekē his maisters profit to be his own and so shulde ye teache them if ye wil haue good seruantes. Let vs se whether this seruaunt in the parable beinge all the daye in the felde,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   xvii. doinge his maisters profytte, contrarye to your exposition, didde not also his owne? Had he not all his liuinge of his maister? whiche was no smal profit to him selfe.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   xix. Then ye bring in for your tother seruaunt that profitethe hym selfe and not his maister christ, this text. Si uis ab uitam ingredi serua mandata. If thou wilt enter into lyfe kepe the commaundementes, as thoughe he keping the commaundementes shulde haue therfore deserued heauen. And then as Paule saythe, Christ hadde dyed in vayne for that seruaunt. But ye knowe to what seruaunte Christe spake those wordes, euen to the yonge ryche lawier and pharisaies scoler, taughte of them to go to heauen, by doinge

good dedes & not by faith in christe. The person of the speaker, and hys question induced Christe, so to temper his aunswere to his mynde. For this lawier was so sene & noseled in the law & workes that he was (as ye be) persuaded by the pharisais to go to heauen by his owne doinge and not by christes suffringe: and thus went he forth blyndened with the cō
               fidence of workes. Nowe (I praye ye) what profit gote this your yonge pharisaicall scoler, who ye say so profited him selfe and not his maister by his seruice? althoughe he sayde he hadde kept all the reherced commandementes from his youth, he had no profite by that seruice, as ye saye, he had, for euen here he forsoke his maister, and went his way heuely, christ pronouncynge howe impossible it was for suche a seruaunte to come to heauen. Wherefore this texte with all the former exposition of the

the first text make plaine againste your selfe and against all your seruauntes, and their seruices so wisely brought in for your fonde and false purpose and are all your own kayes to cleaue your logges and your own hatches to open your lockes. Euen the processe and conference of the text before from the beginning of the chapter wherof christ was moued to tell his disciples this parable of that bonde seruaunt not to worke for wages, but because it was his aboundē deutye, wold leade you into the true vnderstanding therof, had ye grace so to obserue your owne so oft reherced rule. For Christ had geuen his disciples in the beginninge of that chapter all to harde and impossible to man,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   xvii. a precepte of iniuries, and hurtes, so often to be forgeuen, and bodde them beware, and take hede to them selues, seynge that nedes muste suche sclaunders and offendicles come. This precept of pacience and

loue to forgeue their enemies, sclaunderers and hurters so oft as they offende vs, they knowinge it to be so impossible to the nature of man to corrupt with the naturall loue of him selfe, and againe, seinge faith to be so mighty a gift whereby the law is fulfilled,rom iii.x. cetle. xxxii when loue is to weake to do it, praied him to encrease & strengthen their faith. Then Christ telleth them the power and might of faith, being as lytle as the musterde seade, yet therby shuld they do things impossible to the nature of man to do, euen to commaunde the depe roted great wylde fygtree to rende vp hyr rotes, and to be transplanted in the sea, declaringe therby, that the lawe impossible to man to be fulfilled, yet by faith,how faith not worke fulfilleth the lawe. we beleuinge christ to haue fulfilled it for vs, do remoue his fulfillynge so transplanted in vs, that we by fayth fermelye haue his fulfillinge of the lawe as oure own, he beinge made of his father oure

ryghtwisenes, in whiche his ryghtwysenes, and not in our owne we appearinge before his seat, & presence haue not our synnes imputed to vs, so iustified, obteyning that laste and perpetual blessinge geuen to all his blessed chosen children. To confirme this doctrine, and to destroye your false popish supererogiciō workes and merites. Christe knytteth to the parable. Sayenge, which of you hauinge a bonde seruante, (al gods elect be his bonde seruauntes to do his commaundementes of deutye, & to serue him lokynge for no wages) ploughinge and fedinge your catell in the felde wyll saye to him as sone as he come home, come, sit downe & eate, but will rather byd him, saieng, go and prepare for my souper, and dresse the to serue me till I haue eaten▪ which done, eat thou and drink: wyll he commende or geue hym any thanks for doinge but his dewtye? No I thinke. Here ye see how Chrsti

expoundinge hym selfe, destroieth youre merites to be loked for youre dedes of deutye and bond seruice.
            And euen so (saith he) saye ye and thinke it in dede, we be seruauntes vnprofitable, for that we haue done but our abounden deutye. Now go to, and tell you vs your other tale & monkishe dreame, that we be seruaū
               tes vnprofitable, because god is so riche that he nedeth not our seruice. a faier reason, and goodly glose for your merits, ye be a riche and valeaunt byshop, and be able to sette vp wype, and curry your owne horse, ergo ye nede no seruice, but maye do it your selfe. Do not the obediente ministration of his aungels and the obedience and seruice of his creatures al make for the glorye of god to be celebrated amonge vs, althoughe we knowe hym omni sufficiente?
            Here thou seest, christen reader) how impudently and arrogantlye this

byshop dare render another and cō
               trary cause and exposition of the text then Christ him selfe hath left vs in plaine wordes, and then saye, that I in expressynge and alledginge iustely Christes wordes, do violentlye wreste and wryte them. But what is it that Antichriste dare not do and saye agaynst christe and his veritye to falsefye the scriptures, to thentent he myghte wreste them to seme to serue hys deuyllyshe doctrine? We knowe that god is almighty, infinite riche, and nedeth not our goods but yet as he commaunded the firste frutes of euery thinge to be offered vp vnto him, so wolde he all his giftes in vs, yea and all oure dedes, seruice, wordes, and thoughtes to be cō
               secrated into his glory and honour, and into the edification and profit of his bodye and membres, whiche so doynge we be seruauntes faithfull and profitable for him, and to other, as the scripture calleth vs,

and thus we sanctifye and celebrate and magnifye his holye name, as he commaundeth it, Then ye chopin this text of zachary. Vtsine timore. &c. To proue your merits to deserue deliueraunce from our enemyes, and so to lyue and serue him in holynes and well doynge. But ye sleyghtly leaue out hym, by whose merits we be thus delyuered.
            Ye shulde haue redde the verses before, and then ye shulde haue seene, that GOD the father hadde erected oure myghty helthe, euen christ, that by hym, and his power and merites, we delyuered from oure enemies myghte serue hym withoute feare in holy lyuynge. But suche peces ye can omytte as impertinente to youre euyll purpose. And these be the hatchets ye bringe in, to open your lewde lockes.
            
               
               And after this sorte thei vse predestinacion,
               The bys. 
               which being signified to vs for our counforte, do declare what care god hathe of vs whereby we shulde be the more encouraged to worke hauynge god to oure helpe. &c.
            
            
               Ioye.
               Why then in your boke of necessarie enstruccions commande ye the people to beware of predestinacion and not to medle therwith leste they fall into any vayne trust in it, these be your wordes, and teache that no man shulde be sewer therof, ne of his election? Nowe ye saye it is writen for oure counforte, and anon ye feare men from it, nowe it is a vaine trust and then it is a counfortable adsewraunce, and anon ye put all men in dout therof and of their election in Christe, makinge faith no faith, but a waueringe doute, ne gods promise of no effecte. So inconstant and waueringe is youre doctrine. Whiche predestinacion, ye saye, we vse it as your hatchet to open lockes. And I say, your selfe vse it, as a nose of waxe

against the fier.
            
               But now I returne to you maister Ioye.
            
            (Ioye, And I to you my lorde.The bys.)
            
               And where ye appose me, whether when I considered theffecte of christes passion, I beleued it or no? I professe I beleued.
            
            
               Then ye aske whether I beleued it to be effectuall to me. To this I aunswere you That first I beleued, it was and is effectual to me in my baptisme wherein I obtained remission of my synnes and renouacion of lyfe.
            
            I perceiue ye lete great skorne to be apposed of me.Ioye. But yet I wolde ye aunswered me directely to my question, For I asked you whether now seen your baptisme when ye taughte your scolers this conclusion, then beinge a synner, as euery mā is, whē ye firste considered your sinnes in your self and loked vpon your effect that is remission in christes passion, whether then, I saye, ere ye loked to any other condicion thē vpon onely faith, whiche is your fyrste condicion, ye beleued Christes passion to be effectuouse to you or not? If ye dydde, so muste ye neades be

iustified by only faith & by no other cōdiciō, which ye must nedis graunt magry your tethe, For as ye beleue, accordīg to gods promise so must it infallibly cōe to you. But in your answer, fearing lest ye shuld be iustified by faith only,the bishop is afraide lest he shuld be iustified by onelye faith. ye shift frō this tyme, to your baptism wher ye wold couple your faith diuided, part to christ & parte to your baptysme by bothe to gither to be iustifyed, as though not faith only in christe, ne christes deathe were sufficient, But I wil stoppe ye in from that stertinge hole therby not so to escape, And muste by your leaue appose ye yet agen, & aske you whether before your body was doped into the fonte with the wordis of baptisme, ye beleued or no. If ye saye no, so make ye your godfathers and god mother lyers and your selfe to, which all affirmed in your person Credo. I beleue, or els the preist had chrystened an infidele. For the order of Christis doctrine is yt the doctrine

and profession shulde go before the baptisme as ye see it bothe in infantes and waxen. If one shuld come to you to be baptized, ye wold first enstructe him in our faith and heare him openly professe it ere ye put him into the water as chryste taught and commanded his apostles to do, sayinge, Go and teache all nacions my gospell and whatsoeuer els I haue taught you & them that beleue baptize into the name of the father and &c. This order obserued the apostles in their actes first preachinge ye lawe to shew them their sinnes and then the gospell of remissiō in christ,the vse of baptisme: whiche thinge beleued, the hearers be iustifyed before god & regenered of the spirit of faith therby obsigned and sealed certifyed of their eleccion in christe, And then is the exterior obsignacion of baptisme with water the testificaciō to the chirche added to certifye them the same persone to haue had receyued ye spirit of faithBap
                     •••
                  me is the testification to 
                     •
                  he churche of the regeneration of the spirite.
               
and to be regenered before of god, so that as circumcision was to the Iewes chirch, signaculum iusticie fidei that is the exterior seal testimoniall of the iustification by faith, lo is baptisme with water the exterior seal testifienge to vs that the baptized is iustified also by faith, and certifieth the congregacion as a testification of the beneuolence of God towarde the baptized, and of his spiritual giftes receiued. For the water saith Austen, is but an elemente and nothing withoute the worde of promise, whiche is the worde of faith iustifienge before the persone be baptized.
            Baptizme with water therfore is the testificacion and seal, certifyenge the hole congregation of his incorporation and member of christes chirch to be admitted into their societe to praye to heare the worde with them and to receiue the lordes supper. Besides that baptisme in figure

is ye perpetuall custodi of ye christen life by mortificaciō & repētaūce signified by the dopinge into the water in the death and burial of christe, and his resurrection vs to ryse vp continually into a new lyfe,ephe. iiii collos. ii. gal. iii. as Paul teacheth vs. Rom. vi. Thus did Philip first enstruct the queens courtyer of Candace, and then asked him whether he beleued with al his hert, that is constantly and purelye, before he wold baptise him. And Paule and Silas obserued the same order with the keper of the presone,act. xvi. when the keper beinge in a desperate mynde for feare they had ben fled, wolde haue slaine him selfe, but otherwise aduertised by Paule, he comen to hym selfe, saide. Maysters what must I do to be saued. whiche aunswered. Beleue into the LORDE Iesu, and thou with all thy house shalte be saued. After whiche beleife they were baptized.
            
               This is sufficient to declare the vse of oure baptisme with water, & that we be iustifyed by faith only before it, ere we can repent frutfully, & thus is al your popish trysh trash contayned in your other second condicion cleane wypt awaye frō thatainment of iustificacion. And if ye haue any workes els in your condicion, ye see that thei must come bake and folow faith iustifyinge, and not go before it. For when Peter affirmeth (whom ye alledge for Paule) that by fayth hertes be made pure,act. xv. he sheweth it, that by no externe visible ne materiall signes or creatures as causes essenciall as by water and suche lyke, mens hertes be purified, but onely of God thorow faith, wher Chrisostom saith. A sola fide illa assecuti sunt & non operibus vel circumcisione. Of onely faith haue they obtained those thinges & not for workes or circūcisiō. Then ye say. By yt sacramē
                  
                     •
                   of your penaunce ye beleue to recouer

the state of grace. I perceue that althoughe ye be a lawier, yet wolde ye seme to be sene in scole mater bringing in dunces and such fryers dead dreames now articled in louayn saienge. That the sacramentes of the newe lawe iustifye and confer grace. Sed hoc uerum est ubi non interponitur obex. But yt is true where there is no lette to barre them out from yt high preuilege. The scripture affirmeth Christe euery where to be the dore barre, to let them and all other creatures from that priuilege to geue grace and remission of synnes, for els he shuld haue dyed in vayne. But ye muste aske your doctoure dunce and his fryerly faryne of lovaine, by what scriptures he & they proue this dreame, and then are ye all set a grounde. If your sacrament of penaunce shoulde recouer and geue ye grace, and your penaunce a weary worke, so were grace tediously deserued, and then (saith Paule)

grace were no grace, Grace is a fre gifte geuen vs for christis merits only, here ye do with the scole men tectely withe your (rekouer) declare your selfe a palliated pelagian. Beware of suche doctryne for it is naught, and vnkouer it agen with your rekouer. For ye kouered this pelagians potte before with your penance as I haue iustely refuted it. For and if ye were asked by whiche parte of your popish penance, as whether by your confession auriclare, or by your contricion, or your insufficient satisfaccion, or whisperinge absolucion, or by any other dede inioyned you ye rekouer this state of grace, ye shuld bringe vs forthe but a nakedneste out of your condicion. For if ye beleue (as ye saye ye do) in any of the popis sacraments or in any part of them therby to enioye theffecte of Christis passion, hauinge no worde of faith ne promise of christe therin, ne worde of institucion of the same

to stablish and sustayn your faith, ye shall haue but a doutful waue ringe forgeuenes and as fearful and vnquiet a conscience when ye shalbe apposed in ye article of death of your gostly aduersaries and assawted with synne, desperacion, the iugement of god,our workes may not sustaine the iudgement
                     •
                   of god. death and hell, For your faith in your sacramente of penance not sustayned of gods promise, wil then fainte and haue a fall. The mooste holy repentant men praid god not to entre into iugement with them accordinge to thir desertis, for then shuld noman lyuinge be iustifyed in gods sight. And ayen in the psalme If thou, lorde, shuldst loke narowly vpon our wykednesses, Lorde, who might abyde it? Hitherto haue I proued constantly by scripturs, Faith iustifynge to go before baptisme. And now what condiciō of yours soeuer cometh aftir baptysme the same must folow iustificacion, but your penance folowethe

wrapped in clothes as rocked in cradle, when ye worlde was yet. And euen thē, Adam by faith in that promised sead obtained remission and was iustifyed as were all the holy fathers longe before Ioan bap. was borne, and Ioan bap. himself, thinke ye not but that he was iustifyed before christ preched? ye wold make a meruelouse world & brīg vs in a new strange doctryne, if there were no remission of synnes tyl christ had preached & suffered. was he not the lōbe slayne from the begininge? If ye loke well of abells oblacion, and of the sheepe slayne to kouer adam and Eues nakednes with the skynes, ye shal see Christes remission of sinnes longe before Ioan preched penance. when Ioan preached sainge, Repēt ye and be conuerted to God for the remission of sinnes is nighe: and said lo, this is the lombe of God that taketh awaye the sinnes of the world, and who so beleue in him hath lyfe euerlastinge, did he not preche the

gospell annexed as the cause to perswade them to repentance? yisse trwly & thei beleued in Christe ere Ioan baptized them. And thus ye may see vpon howe feble a Maxime as ye call it, ye a rather a minime, ye laid your false grounde to argewe your popish penance to precede remissiō. wher fore tell vs plainly & be shorte, whether ye will teach men to be ius
                  •
               ifyed, by faith only, or by workis onely, or by faith and workes bothe togither? If by faith onely, so be we agreed, If by workis onely without faith, so were the haithen infidelis faithls iewes iustified, and Christ dead in vayne,rom. ii
                     •
                  . and al the scripture ayenst you, as Paul proueth it, All men to be sinners, no not one iuste by the works of ye lawe stoppinge euery mans mouth shewing al ye worldholden gilty obliged to sinne, no fleshe by the workis of the lawe to be iustifyed be fore god, and in an hundred places moo in the scriptures.Esay. lvii▪
                I shall, saith the lorde, disclose thy

good workes (as thou takest them) and shew ye that they shal neuer profit the.
                  
                     •
                  et. xiii. Also Paule concludeth mightely and manifestly his sermon declaring playnly the lawe impossible to be fulfilled of vs, and so to iustifye no man, and therfore by onely faithe man to be iustified, saing thus. wherfore we conclude doing you to wete, ye men and brethern, that by this mā I say, Iesus Christ, the remission of synnes is brought vnto you, the remis
                  •
               ion and absolution (I tell you) from al the sins frō which it was impossible for you to be absolued by the law of Moises. By this Iesus christ I tell you, euery man yt beleueth is iustified. And what so euer is not of faith is sin, of faith saith peter purifieng ye hertes.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . xiiii. 
                     •
                  . xv. wherfore workes alone cannot iustifye. Nether faith & workes togither as concurrant into the same acte of iustificacion may iustifye. For the workes of the lawe (by whiche be vnderstanden al the ceremonial,

iudicial and moral precepts (as Paule proueth it) and al the old holy doctours, especiall Austen, called iustitia legis, iustitia ex lege.
               li.iiii. de spā et littera. 
               and iustitia operum. be excluded frō that acte as contrary to the rightwisenes of faith, as the scripture setteth them in so manifest opposition and contrarity, that as the ryghtwisenes of the lawe was the cause of the reieccion and fall of the Iewes out of gods fauour, so was ye rightwisenes of faith the liftyng vp of the gentiles into his grace and fauour, as your selfe (I thinke vnwares) in the expoundinge of Paule in your predestinatiō, here in your .xxvii. lefe, haue said it against your selfe, where ye set thē with Paule to be so contrary causes yt it is impossible for these two rightwisnesses to be concurrant into this one effect of iustificatiō, & iustificaciō of faith & workes be so contrary that whereas is ye one, ye other must nedes auoyde and geue place, as Paule in

contencion comparinge them togither estemed his own rightwisnes of the lawe as donge and dirte in respecte of the rightwysnes of faith before God.philip. iii. rom. ix. & .x. and said, that our rightwisnes which cometh of the lawe was the fall of the iews, because thei goinge about to seke to stablish their own rightwisnes, therfore were thei not subiect to ye rightwisens of god. Agen sithe your doctryne is, noman to be sewer & certain of his forgeuenes, by your text not wel vnderstanden, nescit homo an dignus sit odio uelamore, And our best workes, as Isay saith, be so sinful and spotted, and therfore not to quiete and certifye our consciences, and agene faith to be the ferme certitude that excludeth al dubitacion and vncertainte seing now that faith and workes be of so contrary effectes,Workes make vs vncertaine faith c
                     •
                  rtifeth vs al dubitation excluded it must nedis be impossible these two inconsistents & repugnātes to sich an effect, to may go together into one & the same effect

and accion of our iustificacion. And by this means of your merits (yf ye coulde) ye wold make Christ no hole intiere perfit sauiour, contrarye to your sainge before: Now if your condicion so ful of your good workes be in any of the .iiii. kinde of causes to serue your effect, put it in formallye like a philosopher, & I shal by gods worde displace it. But I can neuer thinke it that ye beleue your owne doctrine of workes to iustifye, for if ye did sewrely ye wolde worke beter workes then ye do. For what els do ye then wryte and striue against the gospoll, yea ye worke your brother Cains worke, slaieng your brothern for the truth, ye preson ye persecute, ye burne, ye banish, ye condempne al good bokes & professours of gods word, to set vp your own antichristē articles, & dāpnable popish doctrine Thē ye say. The scripture requiret of a christē mā yt he be baptized wherby to be incorporated into christ. it is

true. For noman wil baptize him tyll he hear his belif and know him to professe faithfully the Christē religion. For the onely vtwarde baptisme maketh not a christian be fore God, as ye se it in Iudas and Simon mago. For a very christian must be first by his regeneracion of the spirit of faith incorpored into christ ere he by baptisme of water be incorpored into the congregacion, for ye visible incorporacion auayleth not (Saith austen) without thinuisible incorporacion and sanctificaciō by faith. At last ye bringe in this texte. Baptizetur vnusquisque in remissionē peccatorum, whiche, as I remember, is the frist scripture I haue herde ye allege yet for your false doctryne, ye brought in a colet and a versicle out of your porteus to proue your parte besydis your participacion in dede, And yet in this text ye make so great haste into remissionem peccatorum to be conioyned to baptizetur, that

ye leaue out .v. wordis, and euen the chefe mater, betwixt your first worde & the last. For the text is Resipiscite & baptizetur vnusquisque vestrum sub nomine Iesu Christi in remissionem & &c. Repente ye, & let euery one of you be baptized in the name of Iesu Christe into the remission of sinnes. Nowe ye know that noman wilbe baptized and ther by professe the name of Iesu Christ, but he first beleue & knowe what is Iesu christ and his name, which is the anoynted sauiour, which who so beleueth him sichone to be to him, he is iustifyed by that same faith onely in Christe Iesu to be his sauiour. But I will not gretly steke with you for this litle ouerskippe. ye speke of a good rule in your boke. How ye scriptures, albeit thei seme contrary, yet is the
                     •
                   but one veritie, and al one trwe word which muste be gathered out by the conference of ye places notinge what gothe before, and what folowth,
               
which your own lesson if ye had ther diligently obserued, ye had sene this text to haue made iustly against you For note first what went before preached of Peter in that longe sermone and ye shall see that he preached to them bothe the lawe shewinge them their sinnes in putting to deth the innocent blod christe author of lyfe, & quitinge a murtherer, and also ye gospell of remission and saluacion in Iesu Christe as it standeth in euerye place of that sermon, and playne it is, that these men beleued that sermon whilis it was in preachinge as many as were predestined vnto lyfe. wherefore thei were iustified first by their faith ere thei were baptized. And to confirme this, lette vs see what foloweth, and conserre all together. When Peter had all done his exhortation, the texte saith. Qui ergo libenter acceperunt sermonem eius baptizatisunt. And thē All that hadde gladly receiued his

sermon were baptized, gladly to receiue his sermon, what els is it, then to beleue his sermō which receiuing by beleif, ye see went before their baptisme.Baptism is the seal testimoniall to the churche of the remission of sins But yet wherfore saith the text into the remission of sinnes? verely. Baptisme is the visible
sygne of the former regeneration of ye spirit by faith, and testificacion to the congregacyon that the baptized hathe hys synnes forgeuen hym, and therefore to certifie the Churche that he is a member of them and hathe receiued signaclum iustitie fidei, that is the seall and obsygnacyon of the ryghtewysenes of faith to be incorporated into them, to pray, to heare the worde in their societe, is it added in remissionem peccatorum. that thei nowe doute not of remissyon of hys synnes.
            And therfore it foloweth immediatly Et accesserunt in die illo. And there were commen into that cōgregaciō ī
               
that daye aboute thre thousand soulis, For before thei were thus certifyed of their religion, and faith and remission of their sinnes, by that externe seall testimoneall of baptisme with water, they were not receiued into the chirche of the faithful. So that to be baptized into the name of Iesu Christe into the remission of sinnes, be fore the hole congregacion, is by baptisme, as by the visible sygne openly our professiō into christes religion to be declared and testifyed to the chirche, and that we be conseigned with the seall and testimonye of the rightwysmakyng and remissyon by faithe. A lyke phrase is vsed where it is writen, Ioan preached repentaunce into the remission of sinnes, he saithe not, preached repentaunce, as for or by the whiche dede they deserued or shuld deserue remission, but that therby openly sene and knowen, the congregacion shuld be certifyed as by a

ferme and infallible testimony, such repentant persōs to haue their forgeuenes not for their doinge penaunce as the papist teach, for that false doctrine the churche of christe neuer knewe it, but for their faith onely in Iesu christe, and so the chirche not to doute of their faith but to receiue them into their societe.
            
               And this is also one of winchesters workes,
               The bys, 
               to go to god when he is called wt the help of the caller. And this is also one of Winchesters workes, when god saithe, beleue, I must beleue.
            
            Why then went ye not to him when god called you in cambridge ere the cardinall called you to his seruice?Ioye. ye were there once so called that ye defended the truth against this papistry which ye now maintayne.
            when I was brought before doctor Shirton dean of the cardinals chappell and before doctour capon his almonor sent to cambridge to enquire for vs that professed the gospell and for our bokes, you standing by them

at the cupborde in peter college aule did speak for me & for my bokes as by name for pseugmata Chrisost vpon Gnes. which Ihon Oecolampadius had translated, And gaue vs both your good word, so that I kept the boke stil. And what fauourable letters afterwarde ye wrote to maister George Stafforde to geue hym warninge when he was complained of to the cardinall for readynge and declaringe truely and faithfully the pistle to the Romains & shewed him howe he shulde temper his lection in vtteringe the truth and excuse of him selfe, &c. I know it, and remember it all. For maister George didde euer shewe me your letters. Also I saw M. Chikēs letters both sent vnto you & yours sent to him agen as concerning ye cause of ye gospell then in growing & fauored of you gretely as I & thei perceiued by your letters wherin yet I remember and forget not your wordes. And when I was

sent for to the cardinall and accused by the byshope of lincolne langley by sir william Gascoine knight ye cardinals treasurer and by the prior of Newnahams letters, whiche letters ye had, it was shewed me what good words & good counsell ye gaue me, and euen after it I did, and so escaped the cardinals and the byshops handes. For ye saide, I did wisely, if I coulde kepe me out of their hands for that tyme did M Bylney and arture apere before him, and I was sent for, to kepe them companye to haue holpen them to bere fagots or els to burne for gods word or to recant, But I thanke god and your good premonicion and counsell for that I toke another waye. But ah lasse for pitie anon after yt yours so gracious a callīg of god to his truth in cambridge ye cardinal called you frō ye calling, & the world called you to promocions, and he that called christ into the top of so high an hil & shewed him al the pleasures & glory

of this wretched worlde, called you vp to him also, sainge, that he wolde geue you them all if ye wolde fall downe worship and serue him. And verily, ye haue worshiped him highly and done him the most highe seruice in persecutinge and writinge ayenst gods holy eternal veritie whiche ye once tasted and fauored ye haue done satan great plesures in slaying and burning christis innocent faithful litle floke, and yet ye ceasse not to serue him. But take hede your Master is a false lyer and a murtherer from the begininge, and thoughe he hath kept promise with you for these .xix, yeres, yet wil he in conclusion paye youe with a contrary expectaciō If ye by faith turne not to Chryste repent and change your lyfe. ye be yet caryed awaye of your worldly fleshly stronger affectes for vainglory, And in a certain, slomberinge securite your sinne lurketh, yet hidden to your self, wt cains

brothers murther, It sleapeth yet, but where? In foribus, saith the text. In the gates.gene. iiii So that when your sinne shalbe awaked at ye day which drawth nighe, then not onely your selfe shall see and fele it a perpetuall gnawinge worme vpon your consience euen in the brode open gates where all men also goinge in and cominge out, shal openly know that it is the very almighty word of god that ye persecute with powr penne and mouth. ye saye when god callethe you, ye will go, and when he beddeth you beleue, ye wilbeleue. Ye knowe that god calleth you incessantly and biddeth you beleue at all tymes.Io. vi Hebrew .xi. And therfore make no (whē
               nes) at it. Nether go ye to him with your fete, but by faith and beleife in Christ, as Christ, declareth it, but as faith is non of your giftis, so is beleif in christ non of winchesters workis but the worke of god. Ioan .vi. ye saye, to go to god, and to beleue

be winchesters workes. In dede to go to god otherwise then by faithe, may wel be one of your own workes and not gods worke. And to beleue indiffinitly or absolutely without any addicion of christ, as ye speke nakedly expressing nothing into which your beleife shuld tende, may be wel also one of your workes, for the deuyll so beleueth as Iames saith, and the turke beleueth with suche a beleife that there is a god. But to beleue in christ, belike is non of your workes ye be so loth to expresse & put to yt name to your beleife. And when god biddeth you loue ye say ye must loue. But yet ye do not so, for then shuld ye neuer hate. To beleue thus & to loue euer, as god biddeth you be no light ne easy burdens of ye law as ye make thē. Then when ye haue reherced al the works of the lawe in fullyng al gods wyll ye say thus.
            
               The bys.
               And all these workes which seme a great heape of workes, be conteined in ye cōdiciō yt must be fulfilled for ye obteining theffect

of christes passion being remission of sinne & a new state of life. And thus haue I told you plainly my faith & also the workes I meane of before iustificatiō & likewise ye cō
                  diciō which ye call so confuse & blind. And thus I taught Barnes & otherwise then thus (which is ye catholike beleife) I thāk god, I haue not beleued, nor dare not. &c
            
            What is all this els then by your workes to merit your remission and to be iustified by your owne merits?Ioye. which ye said at first ye neuer went about to proue ne to affirme preache ne teache it, and yet nowe ye saye ye taught Barnes thus, and ye beleue it to, If ye shulde find such shameles contradiction, lies, and repugnaūces in our bokes, lorde how wolde you triumphe ouer vs? But howe dare ye be so bolde as to set your saluaciō vpon so many harde and impossible condicions hauinge not one worde of faith to sustaine your beleife?
            Ye haue in deade recited an importable heuy heapes of workes conteined in your condicion, as I euer vnderstode it, & your self haue now dclared

it, and as I fyrst confuted it, and yet ye say I vnderstode not your articles. But and if ye cā fulfil al these condicions thereby to haue remissiō and saluation, as ye saye, so maye ye be heuey in your harte yt Christ hath died for you in vayn. gal. ii. But let vs see some one of these cōdiciōs containing gods will, whiche ye wil fulfyl (ye say) ere ye obtaine your remission of sinnes.
                  
                     •
                  he bishops 
                     ••
                  ndicio
                     •
                  s your vocacion is to be & byshop a diligent superintendente watcher ouer christes flocke to fede them with the pure worde of god frely faithfully and truly preached continually to them, to se that none wāt this gostly fode, ne perishe for lacke t
                  •
               erof, ye must tell them their sinnes what and who so euer thei be. Gods will is, to helpe, socour, and releue ye pore, hungry, naked, and destitute, ether counsel or any other thing, yea althoughe they be youre enemies, & that with the same affects of loue as Christ had toward vs when he died

for vs, and lete his lyfe for his shepe But ye persecute, preson, and burne them for the truth, and wilbe cruelly auenged of them that resist your deuyllysh doctrine. And if thei were he retiques, whom the mouth of God, their profession, their godly lyuynge & their constant pacient martirdom, declare to be the very chosen childrē of god, yet doth christ cōmande his disciples to permit theuill wedes to growe together with the good corne vntill the haruest be comen, leste in pluckyng vp so cruelly the euyll ye pluck vp the good with all. If Paul (saith Austen) had ben roted vp an heretike,i. cor. xi. ii. timo. ii. he had neuer ben so good corne. There must be heresies (saith Paule) amonge you, that the proued men maye be made manifeste amonge you. Also he byddeth the seruaunt of god in your vocacion to be no brawler, no chider, ne mocker or rebuker (so farre of shuld ye be from so cruel persecution, & bloud sheding

but to be pleasaunt, swete and ientle to almen, redy to teache the ignorant and sich as be out of the waye, sufferinge the euil withe mekenes and to enstructe them that withstand your doctryne (albeit it were trwe as it is openly knowne to yourselues and to almen to be false and erroniouse) that yet it wolde please God at any tyme to geue them repentance to turne to the knowlege of the trwthe and so to ryse by repentance out of the snares of the deuil, But you mistruste your own false doctryne so miche that ye nether dare dispute with them and vs with gods worde ne suffer them to speake ne permitte our answeres to your false bokis to be sene but condempne and banesh them. But what speke I to you that yet wil not knowe the gospel from heresye? but be so blyndened with blode and mischif, that moste blasphemously ye call gods holy worde, heresye, and the popis antichristn

doctryne ye call christis gospell. whom god stryketh worthely with this dampnable comminacion sayinge. wo be to you that saye Good is euil, and that as is euil to be Good & cete. If ye were trwe bishops and Christ is successours, so shulde ye be sent as the father sent Christ, and as Christe sent his apostles, to preche his worde and not your owne popishe dreames, to fede his flok and not to poysyen them, to gather in the out strayed and not to persecute the trwe teachers and to hunt them out of ye realme orels to burne thē for not holdinge your vngodly antichristen doctryne & not beleuinge your deuillishe articles, ye shuld be sent to edify and not to destroy, to plant & not to pluk vp by ye rotes, to water & not to burne: to go preache & not to ryde about lyke princes, hauing but meat & drinke & sufficient lyuing for you and a minister. He bode ye also that in no wyse ye shuld be called lordes.

And that ye shulde not tangle your selues with worldly & seculare businesses. Nether by gods will shuld ye haue so great possessions, but the stewardes to distribut them according to the firste geuers myndes, to the pore, to whome ye be bounde to restore, that as ye haue so longe holdē vniustly from them. These be but a fewe of your easiest condicions to be fulfilled or ye attaine your remission as ye say, and your saluacion. Then is there yet amonge many, one litle one, and the last condicion, called Non concupisces. Thou shalt haue no concupiscens in ye, that is no lust ne desyer ne any affect contrary to gods will and his holy spirit: Paul was a right chosen spirituall vessell, and wrestled with this precept all dayes of his lyfe aftir the lawe began to lyue in him, and him selfded, and yet he confessed it with an out cryeinge that he was ouermatched and
                  
                     •
                  om. vii. all to weake to fulfill it crying

to god for helpe sainge. Miser homo ego. &c. Oh wertched man that I am, who shall delyuer me out of this body of sinne obliged and gyltye of death?act. xv: Saint Peter argewith also ayenst your condiciō, of an inutilite and impossibilite thus gatheringe his argument. The lawe was not geuen to iustifye, nether were our fathers iustified by it, and therfore shall not we be iustifted by it. Wherfore then will ye now tempt god?
            Thei tempt god that will rather folowe their owne imaginacions then gods worde, as wolde the Iewes at that counsell, and as nowe wold you go to heauen by a nother waye then god hath cōstituted to vs, as thoughe ye wolde be sene wiser then god whom by this your pertinate obstinacie, as dydde the Iewes ye haue prouoked to caste his heauy wrathe vppon you, as dydde the Iewes vppon them selues, euen to

laye siche a yoke vpon the neckis of your disciples whiche nether our fathers nor we (saith peter) were able to bere. Here ye se peter to call the yoke of your condicions imposible to be borne. wherfore he concludeth, thus. we beleue, by the grace of our lorde Iesu christ to be saued as were thei. Now if ye list to go a nother waye by other condicions to heuen then went our fathers, trwly I tell you, ye be lyke neuer to come there. As many, saith Paule as be vnder the workis of ye lawe, which be your condicions, that is, beleue to be iustifyed by the doing o
                  •
                them, ar obliged and whelmed vnder the curse, which is contrary to the blyssinge in the blessed promised sead christe, he proueth it by Moses sainge. Cursed is euery man that standeth not,
                  
                     •
                  eut. xxvii. ne continueth in all the preceptes writen in the boke of the law to do them. ye said before often, That Christe is an hole sauior, and hole forgeuer,

redemer &c, wholly, totally &c. so that his sufficient sacrifice of his body nedeth not any addicion or supplement of any manis desertis to the apeacinge of gods wrathe for sinne. And why then here do ye patche his absolute and perfit remission with these so many your patched to condicions for thatteinment of your forgeuenes makinge him but a peesed sauior by participacion? ye haue rehersed here many of wincchesters workes, but ye place thē in a wrong place vnderpropped with a false opinion, ether to iustifye or to be placed before faith iustifyinge. God commuandeth vs to be holy and perfit as is himself, but this burden of the lawe ye will spotte it oute by youre particypation, but yet will not this glose helpe ye before his iudgement seat. Paul therefore to geue all the glory to god and non to our workes, excludeth all the workes

commanded in the lawe, from faith, in the accion of our iustificaciō tellinge the Galathians. That if ye be circuncised Christe profiteth you nothinge. By circumcision
vnderstandinge the hole profession and lawe of the iewes, as do we by baptisme the hole Christen profession. vpon which place. Erasmus a man of nolesse lerning then iugement, writeth in his paraphrase thus. perchaunce ye so please your selues, sainge that we swarue not, ne fal frō Christe but with Christe we couple the lawe, that the expectacion of our saluacion might be the sewerer. But Christ (I tell you) as he wolde this whol benefit to be comon to almen, so wold he it to be thankfully accepted and imputed to faith onely. He wil not suffer any to be his felowe ne matche in this mater. For if ye trwly beleue your perfit sauinge helthe to may be geuen you of this onely Christe, wherfore then plucke ye to

you circumcision? If ye mistrust christes onely remission, so knowledge ye not yet the benefit of christ of whiche they may not be partakers that mistrust him. For by onely faith and not for your merits is it geuen you. These (I think) be sufficient for the refutation of this declaraciō of your condition stuffed 
                  •
               o full of so manye meritoriouse workes to deserue your remission contrary to the iustification by onely faith. yet here ye harpe mich of your good workes before iustification which (as I haue tolde you oft) because thei procede not out of a good roote whiche is faith purifieng the hert, they muste nedes be synne, as Paule and Peter affirme it, and as Austen constantly writeth. What good workes did Paule before his iustification? he persecut
                  •
               d the christians to death, and yet he kept the lawe and precepts a
                  •
               ter the pharisais fashion, which is called ye ryghtwisenes of the lawe. In which

rightwisenes (he saith) if any shulde haue had confidence, I might haue had as great a cause to reioyse as any other, I was circumcised ye eight daye, I was an Israelite in profession of the lawe as holye a pharisei as the best and so zelouse for my rightwisenes of the lawe, that I persecuted the congregacion, and was as touchinge the rightwisenes and iustificacion which is in the law blameles before al men. But these good dedes whiche semed to me then so profitable, as I beleued to be saued by them, I nowe beter taught take thē for hindraunce and damage, for that I now know christe to be my lorde and sauiour, for whom I esteme thē all but for detriment and dunge that I might be more profitablye ioyned to christe and be founde in hym not hauynge my nowne good deedes, and ryghtwisenes of the lawe, but that rightwisenes which is thorowe the faith and beleif on christ whiche

is the rightwismaking of god vpon faith. phi. iii.The bys.
            
            
               Upon the confidence of the texte ye bringe a lyke kaye to cleaue a logge sainge As thou beleuest so come it to the. Christe spake these wordes to Centurio allowing his faith so muche, &c. And it is a ioye to see howe ye wil apply this to al men how soeuer they haue cōceiued their faith whether it be catholyke or no. And then the arriane may be saued by his faith and the sabelliane, the Lutherane, the zwinglyane, & Ioye by their faith, for the text serueth al As thou beleuest so come it to the. And if any beleued that glotony were no synne, as thou beleuest so come it to the:
            
            Nowe truely I meruell that siche a bishoppe as ye wolde be sene to be shulde be so farre caried awaye of these your so vngodly and corrupte affectes, as so peruersely, so falselye,Ioye. and so vngodlye to reporte me and so sinistrely to interprete my alledginge of Christes wordes. Ye saye I applye them for all mens false beleife. If I shulde haue so shamelesly belyed you or any man, I hadde ben

worthei the most shame and rebukes T
                  •
               rne to my wordes in your thirde article and loke whether I applye them not to you thus. If ye beleue your sinnes to be forgeuen ī christes death? thus sayeng. If ye so beleue so be ye iustified by your faith onely ere any other condicion was knowē or spokē of, or els ye must make christ a lyer, whiche saith, As thou beleuest so come it to the. Loke (reader) and these be not my wordes in that place alledged as christ spake them to the true beleuer centurio, and to euery a like beleuer to the worldes ende, beleuinge according to christes worde and promise. But nowe I wil (because I see you in a false beleife) verefy your exposition vpon your own selfe, sith ye haue ministred the occasion, beleuynge youre selfe to be iustified by your workes, euen so come it to you as ye beleue, euē a false faith to haue a false iustification, and lyke saluacion to like faith and forgeuenes.

And as for Ioye, thorowe the grace of god in his sauiour Christe, beleueth to be forgeuen and saued by the only sufficient merites of christes passion and his resurrection, and that CHRIST is made of my father my onely rightwisnes & rightwismakyng, my holynes, my wisedome, my satisfaction apeacyng my fathers wrath for my syns neuer to be īputed to me for my faith only in Iesu christe, my fulfillyng of the lawe, my free redemption, expectation, lyfe and resurrection and the impleciō of all my iust desires, my faith and confidence is in him onely, and not in any of my deades, which I aknowledge to be sinful, imperfit, and naught, worthei dampnacion. And therfore this litle faithe whiche god hath geuen me of his fre benigne mercy and fauor in Christ, for which with al his other giftes I daily geue thankes I praye to be encreaced and not to take his holye spirite ne

worde of truthe at any time fro me, certi
                  •
               ieth & adsiewerth me withoute any dubitacion of my forgeuenes & saluacion in and for my onely sauyoure Christe. And as I thus beleue accordinge to gods terme promise in Christe, euen so am I in sewer hope and confidence in him onely, to come to me, to whom be glorye, praise and thankes for euer. Amē. And as christ vnderstode his saienge alledged of the true faith euen so do I (and not of any mans false faith, as ye so impudently belye me) vnderstande it, and alledge it, and reade it withe beleife in hys promise to be fulfylled onelye of euerye trewe faythfull.
            
               The bys.
               And it is as fonde that ye bringe in of Iairus, and maketh nothing to the purpose ye bring it for, For albeit the faith of myracles were alone w
                     •
                  th the faith of saluacion, which your autours abhorte (because Christe sayde to Iairus beleue onely) do that proue that christ requireth no nother whereby to atteine saluation?
            
            
               Ye wolde mocke oute this texte by wyndynge in impertinentlye youre faith of miracles.Ioye. Whiche faith, neither hadde Iairus, ne christ ment it, but onelye the true faith in Christe, Iairus beleuinge hym to be the very Messias god and man and sauiour of the worlde. And of this faith came Iairus to Christ, and Christ speake therof onelye, sayenge onelye beleue and thy doughter shalbe salfe. For the faith to do miracles is suche one as Paule speaketh of to maye be withoute charyte and without the faith iustifyenge, as is in the enchaunters sorcerers and wytches whyche cannot stande with the faythe of saluacyon as ye dreame. Wherefore these wordes of Chryste. Onelye beleue make all for the purpose. Onely fayth iustifienge to obtaine oure desyers of god in Christe, whether it be remission of our sinnes, our saluacion

our helth, or the reuiuinge of our soules, as it obteined to Iairus the reuiuinge of his daughter, a miracle necessary in the beginning of ye chirche to confirme the gospell.
            And you could find so plaine a texte of loue, as to saye. Onelye loue me, and thou shalt be saued, or thy loue hathe saued the, then yet mighte youre doctrine haue some appearaunce of truthe. Neither because (as ye blaspheme) that Chryste bode Iairus onelye beleue, and so to haue his doughter againe alyue, therfore didde he discharge Iairus of all good workes, neuer any to be done of him, what peruerse papist, wolde so gather of christes sayenges? And you likewise inferre of onely faith iustifieth, ergo, saye you, let vs do no good workes. But we with Paule and the scriptures teache constantlye and inferre, ergo we muste do good workes. Nowe howe saye ye to

the argument? For it is impossible for true faith to be idle, but is as Paule saith, effectuously workinge thorowe loue although I see howe falsely and vnlernedly ye interprete the greke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                with a contrary significacion, violētly to wrest Paules wordes to your sinfull sentence.
                  Agens sci
                        •
                      occult
                        •
                      & innata sibi 
                        ••
                     rtute
                Trewe faith wil be declared by hir workes as the tree by hir fruites.
            And therefore it is shame to you to gather vpon christis wordes to Iairus. Onely beleue, that Christ wold haue him therby to do no mo good workes but to lyue vngodlye in an idle false and fayned deade faith.
            
               Ioye bringeth in another miracle of Christ, when he sayde,
               The bys. 
               thy faith hath saued the. And here Ioy saith is no condiciō but faithe,
            
            It is Christ that saith it adding no nother condicion then faith.Ioye.
            
            
               To this I saye, that this is not all the sripture.
               The bys. 
               And he that wyll truelye iudge of scripture must ioyne altogither, for that is not spoken in one place is spoken in a nother and all at laste must make

one worde. That is in some part attributed to faith (as in this miracle) is in a nother attributed to charite, as when christ sayth Dimissa sunt ei peccata multa quia dilexit multum.
            
               Ioye.Can ye ioyne your scriptures no better to gether for loue to iustify? truelye ye be but a yonge scoler, or els ye haue hadde but a leude maister. But hadde ye gonne as longe to scole with that conuerted penitēt woman as ye haue done with Symon that gloriouse phariseye that then bode chryste to dinner, she had lerned you in the same parte of scripture euen the same lesson that christe taughte hyr sayenge. Fides tua te saluam fecit.
               Luc. vii. Thy faith hath saued the go thy waye in peace, ye wolde haue the scriptures ioyned togyther, and howe saye ye nowe? See ye not in the same place, to ye same womā spoken before the same Phariseye and for the same remission and saluacian, sayd vnto hir of CHRIST

Thy faith hath saued the? And ye had red but .v. lynes farther of the same mater & marked the hole conclusion of all, ye shuld haue sene it playnly. Thy faith hathe saued the. But belyke ye fetched out this versicle, Dimissa sūt ei peccata, of your portews where it standeth alone without the circumstance of the hole gospell. whiche hathe in the correcte text. Remittantur peccata eius. &c. whiche maner of speche, mode and tence, differe miche from your versicle, confer the scriptures and loke how ofte ye fynde Thy faithe hathe saued the, onely beleue &c. If thoue canst beleue &c. by faith man is iustifyed, and siche lyke, and agene how oft ye fynd, Thy workis haue saued the, for thy workes or for thy loue thy sinnes be forgeuen the or saued for thy charitie, and so for youre pourpose? For the conciliacion therefore of these textes whyche

(as ye haue rend one out of your portews, and the tother alledged of Christ in the gospell) seme to be contrary, one to make for you, and the tother for me, we must confer the hole context, but firste, to go to the breste of the mater, be cause it were to longe to reherce the hole story, ye muste note. That the phariseis faith and doctryne was as now is yours, that thei shuld be iustifyed by their workes, and therfore christ, when he had reherced the workes of this womanis loue, vpon whiche siche false teachers onely gaze and wonder as vpō only Ioans vtward camels cote and letherne girdle and not vpon the faithe wherof the workes of loue procede, he added propter quod dico tibi For the whiche thinge I tell the (ye I say) which art a pharisay and lokest but vpon hir workis. so that the pronowne, hathe heir propir vehemency and pithe in the demonstracion to the pharisei

whiche as he sawe but hir workis & not hir faith, so coulde he not beleue it, no more then you, that faith onely shuld iustifye, but loue and hir workes of the lawe, and therfor for the tother doctryne of onely faith to iustify, thei (as do you) conceyued great hatered ayenst christ & all his, fore teachinge only fayth to iustifye so short away to heuen as thei and you fantazye. And therfore to condempne his, and yours hipocritish hatered and malice which fight so cruelly for loue (and haue non at al) to iustify, to condempne, Isaie, your hatered with that sinners loue, and it to be a testimony ayenst yours selues in your own opinion of your iustificacion ful of malice ranker and enuye, let it be so said also to you yt loue not, I wil, or let it apere to you hir many sinnes (in your sight and aftir your opinion) to be forgeuē be cause she hath loued mich. So that, hir loue, Christe made it not to the

pharise the cause of hir remission but the probacion therof into his own codempnaciō iudging him self an holy pharisei for biddinge Christ to diner and the woman to be agreat sinner not worthi to haue had comen into his howse but must haue washed it aftir hir. It is an argument a postetiore, wherby the thinge is shewed to him that onelye gazethe vppon the externe workis and not of faith, and proued of the euident signes folowinge faith as Christes similitude declareth it by the two detters. This is the storye (to ioyne the scriptures togither aftir your rule) which your self so lowdly obserue. Acertain pharisei bode Christ to dyner (for no greate loue ye maye be sewer) but as you and such lyke nowe a dayes, will haue some good simple menne at your table, ether so soucke out, or to trappe them vnwares or to make a testinge stoke of their godly communicacion if thei speake the truthe so circūspectly yt ye cannot set hold of

them. And a non as thei wereset commeth in this notable sinner (meruel ye holy pharisei stopped not his nose) stādīg behind christ wt a boxe of oyntment wepinge at his fete, washing them with hir teares runninge downe by hir chekes, wyping them with hir heare, and often kyssinge them in the anointinge. Here was great oddes betwixt so holy a pharisaye and so sinful a woman, In so miche that he thought, If Christe had ben so holy a prophete as he was takē, he shuld haue knowē who & how greate a sinner she was that towched him, and so aftir the pharisei to haue thruste hir out of the house. But here Christ comen to call sinners to repentance, and not siche holy phariseis, so iuste in their owne conceight, so ful of your good condicions of workis, yt thei wil be iustifyed by their good workes & breke open heuen gatis withe their holy dedis, hauinge no nede of Christis

merits by his passion, putteth forth his similitude tectely, comparinge the holy pharisei to the famose sinner present teachinge him and vs that the comon misse women beleuing in Christ and repentant shal go be fore ye holy hipocrits bishops and phariseis for al their holy holy workes, into the kingdom of heuen, and that he came not to call sich iust hipocrites that wil be iustifyed by your good condicions & there own good workes, but to declare them to be farther of from forgeuenes and saluacion then the publicans and misse women yt in faith acknowlege themselues sinners whom Christ is comē to cal to repētāce. And here is to be noted yt christ by this smilitude of the two detters maketh the pharisaye in his own answere to condempne himself, and to iustifye the sinful woman. There were two detters, saith he, one ought fyue hōdred pence, the tother .l. And when nether

of them was able to paye their dettis where be now your meritis in your condicion to deserue remissiō? where be your satisfaccions with your contentacions for your sinnes by partipacion? Cum non essent soluendo, saith christ: when thei were not able to paye, to satisfye ne to content ne to deserue, then their creditor merciably & frely forgaue them both. Here ye must note, where Christe placeth his forgeuenes, whether before or after loue? He saith when neither of them was able to paye he forgaue them, Ergo not for their loue were thei forgeuen. But nowe speake Simon ye pharisei & condempne your selfe and your owne false doctrine of workes to iustifye? whyche of these two shall moste loue his creditor? Mary quod Symon (I thinke he to whom is most forgeuen. Thou hast iudged ryght. lo, here it is plain that forgeuenes goth before loue, Ergo for hyr loue was she not forgeuen,

but because she was forgeuen mich,Thinnersion of t
                     •
                  e cō
                  sequence therfore she loued mich. And here christ inuerteth ye consequence, turninge himself to the woman, but spekinge to the pharisai sainge.
            Seest thou this woman? (he saw the woman and hir workes of loue, but not hir faith) I am comen into thy house, and thou haste done none of these tokens of loue to me (he hadde geuen christe a dyner, but neither of faith nor yet of loue) Thou hast not geuen water to my fete, she hath wasshed them with the teares of hir eyes &c. For which thinge I tell the (but the womā he told hir another cause) Remittantur peccata eius multa that is, lette hir greate and many sinnes be forgeuen (as thou iudgest and beleuest) because she hathe loued mich. And nowe because we shulde see the inuersion of the consequence and the euydent probation to the pharisey more clearly, Chryst clerelyer to vs and to her expresseth the remission to

go before loue saienge. To whome is lyttle forgeuē he lesse loueth, whiche importeth. To whome is miche forgeuen, he most loueth, declaringe loue and hir degrees to followe the degrees of forgeuenes procedīg out of the degrees of the rote of faith iustifieng. But in conclusion to certify the woman whose faith was known to him and to hir onely, and not to ye pharisey that seeth and wondrethe only vpon his own holy works therby to be iustified and by his owne rightwisenes, he telleth hir constantly affirming for the peace and tranquillite of hir conscience all dubitacion and doute set a parte. sainge.
            Thy faith hath saued ye, go thy waye in peace,rom. v. as Paule saith we iustified by faith haue peace. &c. Here is plain by your owne rule of the conference of scriptures, that of faith commeth forgeuenes, & out of forgeuenes cometh loue folowing faith & forgeuenes into ye iust confutacion of al yt ye

haue and shal hereaftir bring in for your charite to iustifye. So that except ye frame the scriptures better and iustlier for your part, ye shal (as ye so scornfully and skoffingly tell it me) bringe but your croked keyes to cleaue your knotty logges. But sith ye will nedes stryue so fondelye and so vnlernedly againste the truth, I shall by gods grace to my poore and litle talent by gods helpe defende it And tel if you euē here, yt if ye were in very dede so well lerned in the scriptures as ye couet and glorye to be sene in your bokes and shewe youre selfe, and as ye make foles to beleue, and knewe it in hert, descended vnto your self to see your own ignoraunce as with your lippes and painted pen ye faine your self to teach in your predestinacion, ye wold neuer moue penne ne open your lyppes thus arrogantly▪ and so blyndly, & so boldly, ye and blasphemousely agenst the lorde and his annointed. For I tell

it you constantly that suche hipocritishe phariseis as esteme them selues better for their shininge vnfaithfull workes, then be the sinners for their onely lyuely faith into christe, do but byd christ and his to diner to trappe them, and owe more vnwares then thei be ether able or willing to pay hī. As lyke an vnhandsom hatchet to open your lockes make ye of, spe saluati sumus. that is. In hope be we saued. To open this locke that ye may see how lytle it maketh for your purpose, I shal by ye ioining of yt as goth before, and that as foloweth, shew ye what is hope, and Paules mynde.cap. viii.
            
            He had before mightely proued, by faith onely man to be absolued from sin, treating sin, the lawe, faith, and grace, and here he commeth to the worke of hope, whiche is exercised & shineth in pacience proued by tribulacion, wherof he here maketh large mencion setting forth our consolacion in the middes of oure affliccions

by the hope of our saluacion to come calling hope the expectation of those thinges which haue bē before conceiued by faith,Hope yt is to wete our saluatiō and the redemption of our bodies in the resurrecciō, for in this hope, saith he, we loke and abyde for our saluacion. For we must first know ye thing ere we can ether waite and hope for it or loue it, and be firste assiewered by our faith apprehendinge the promise therof to haue it, ere by expectacion we wait for it, wherefore the scripture saith: firste we be saued by faith, and then in ferme hope we wait for our saluaciō, For if ye thing waited and loked for by hope were sene present, saith Paule, so were it not by hope loked for, for wherfore shuld a man hope for the thinge which he seeth? For asmuche therefore as we se not the saluacion whiche we hope to haue, therfore thorowe pacience we tary and hope for it. Hitherto be Paules wordes wherby ye se yt we be

first iustifyed and saued by faith, as the order and processe before of his pistle declareth it, ere we tary and wait for it by hope. Is this a Good argument, By hop, or in hope we abyde in a ferme expectacion for our saluacion conceiued before by faith, ergo hope sauethe? By faith in hope we be saued, that is faith setteth vs in a perfit hope of saluacion, For the saluacion is promised and receiued first into faith beleuinge and knowinge it ere it be waited for by hope.
            
               Men vse now a dayes this blasphemouse sophistry, whē thei wil īpugne such deuout saings as haue ben vsed in our chirch,
               The bys. 
               whē eche man exhorteth other to saue his own soul, or desireth a nother to saue his neighbors soule, or els moueth his frende by almos, praier fasting, & good dedes to worke the welth of his soule. Al which saluaciōs & workts of saluacion, good & deuout men vnderstand to be done (as in dede thei cannot be done otherwise) by the merites of christes passion and gifte of god. And yet these beastes that put no differēce betwene a key and an batcher diffame the speache.
            
            
               If you or any of your scolers shulde come to me with this fonde speche to desier me to saue his soule,Ioye. I oughte to teache you, and them, accordinge to scriptures, that there is but onely one sauiour Iesus Christe god and man, and so shewe you the waye to him, as testifieth Paule and christe, to go to hym by faith into him, and to tell you that I am no sauioure of soules, no not of my nowne. And as for the deedes whiche ye so blasphemousely call saluations, and workes of saluacion therby men to saue eche others soules, in so detestable a blasphemy▪ as no godly eares may heare as the scriptures abhorre and detest the speache, so oughte nether your mouth to haue vttered it, ne wt pen to haue writtē it, For the scripture knoweth but ye onely worke of oure saluacion and redemption which only christe Iesus once for euer and also perfitly, openly and so plentuouslye wroughte in the myddes of the

erthe, as witnes the psal.lxxiii. when he offered vp to his father in sacrifice his owne blessed innocent body to be crucified on the crosse for our sinnes.
            And as for prayers almos, fastynge whyche god commaundeth, and not you, the scripture calleth them the fruites of our faith and the frutes of the spirite declaringe our obedience to god and his preceptes testifienge our faith iustifieng and our loue to god and to our neighbours. Ne call vs not beastes because we will not vse, but rather impugne with gods worde those blasphemouse speches of your popishe chirch and deuoute papistes pilers of the rome churche or rather of the courte of rome, we be nowe god be praysed vnder a nother head and in a nother chirch. Is this a godly vnderstondinge of your deuout papistes, To saye that by the merits of christes passion, men by their dedes shulde deserue to saue them self. ye blaspheme & diffame y•
               
merets of christes passion and robbe him of his glory with youre speache in so sayenge, and of his merits to.
            And euen these lo, be youre romyshe craftye kayes and youre owne beastly hatchets ye vse to deceiue the simple christians and to seduce them from their onely and sufficient sauyour Christe into mennes saluacions by workes of your owne inuented popish saluacion.
            
               After your lende diuiniti ye fal to fond policie,
               The bys, 
               askinge whether it be more profitable to take forgeuenes of synnes without a condicion or tary till the condicion were fulfilled? whiche question is so fondly conceiued that I wil aunswere merelye to it, as the prentis of London did aunswere his maister before the wardens, when he asked him, why sonne. Is not a colde capod good meat? yes quod the prentis if I had had it.
            
            Ye both falsely and truncatelye reherce my question whiche is thus in my booke.Ioye. whether you laden with synne Christe callynge you and promysynge to ease you, frelye

forgeuynge you for your faith I ask you were it more profitable to you by that onely condicion of faith to set holde of his fre forgeuenes now offred you by Christ that cannot lye, or to tary and send him worde, ye will first knowe and fulfill your condicions? And you answer as did the prentes, That his master had spokē of miche good meate if a man coud haue it, As thoughe Christes wordes and his promyse to be forgeuen for our faithe, were but vayne rehersallis of vayne things neuer offred ne promised ne let before vs, as neuer were the colde moton befe ne capons recherced of that vaine lyinge man the prentices master. Compare ye Christes almighty infallible promises to vayne menis lyes? And matche ye Christes ernest holy wordis with siche a prophane light iest? Now I se ye god worthely punisheth in you one syn with a nothere euen your obstinate arrogāt impiete & cō
               tempte

of god and his worde, with blyndnes, & hath made folishe your wisdom,rom. i. and hathe casten you vp thorow your own lustes into a forlorn mīd, god geue ye grace to know nomo condicions & wais into your remission and saluacion but only faithe in Christis moste preciouse blode and shortly to repent.
            
               And so your maship hath said trwly that a man were beter,
               The bys, 
               if any thinge could be beter then god hath ordined it, to take remission of sinne without any condicion. For then without any endeuore all shuld haue it.
            
            
               Ioye.And your lordeship shuld haue lerned ere this that God hath offred and promised to vs all remission vppon this onelye condicion that we beleue in Christ, and not vpon your condicion of works, as I haue iustly by scriptures hytherto proued it. Nether therfore folowth it, That then with out any endeuer almen shuld haue it. Is not faith an harde condicion think ye? Shal euery mā
               
beleue in Christe when he lestethe? and haue faith when he wil, without the sharp assawtis of hir contrarie enimies as of infidelite desperation sin deuil and dubitacion? shal euery man haue it encreased at his idle pleasyre, loke vpon Abrahams faith so sore tempted vppon Iob Dauyd, and of his that saide, lorde I beleue but help my vnbeleif? and loke vpon the apostles faith tempted vpō the seas and in other places. Faith is a rare and mighty gifte, geuen not without the merits and intercession of our sauior Christ. And if euer ye shal fele ye batails of sin death hel the deuil, the iugement of god and desperacion preassinge agenst the spirit of faith in you, and wrestlinge with your spirit and litle faith to dryue you in to vnbeleif and dubitacion of forgeuenes & desperacion, whilis ye beholde your sinnes only in the lawe in your own conscience and iugemēt of god, your aduersary accusing

you, & not in the death of chryst with a constant and manly saith in him, but to be brought into this desperat state to see your self wetingly and willingly of a set malice to haue resisted and thrusted the worde of saluacion from you, when it was so benignely offred you, to haue closed vp your eyes agenst the light, to persecute the gospel, to wryte and speke ayenst it, to impugne ye trwthe and with your dampnable doctryne to haue seduced so many soulis into hell and with your false enstrucciōs to bringe many into damnable errours, and with your cruel vngodly actis and articles to be the autor of somiche innocent bloudshedinge wt infinite moo accusacions ayenste you, ye shal fele them to be to laboriouse and hard an endeuer, and harder a fre choise of you to assent with your faith to breke thorow and smit of, and auoid all these heuye accusacions? If this shalbe so hard and heuey a batail ayenste the trwe faith,

loke neuer then that your false faith with your fre choise and assent to it when ye list, shal stand & sustain and abyde it, ye shal fynde it no smal endeuor ne lyght batail to hold faste your faith in Christ, if ye hade it as litle as the mustard sede. Many an holy man felinge this stryff & temptacion haue cryed. Lorde geue me faith, lorde encreace my faithe, Lord strengthen my faith for christis 
                  •
               ake lord lede me not into this temptaciō If ye had red the psalmes with faith and the story of Iob and trwly vnderstode them, ye shulde haue sene how iuste menis faith hath ben tempted tried and ouerthrowen, and how thei be first slayne ere thei be quikened in spirit, first drouen down into hell ere thei be reduced into heuen. first to tast of desperacion & damnacion ere they tast of any strong faith and saluacion. This is ye souldyers lyfe, and Hercules labor, by faith to fele remission and saluaciō assiewred vs in oure soulis and not so easye a

pleasant passetyme as ye yet dream
                  •
                in your idle worldly welthines an
                  •
                sinful securite. Trewe faithe is n
                  •
                idle assent ne acquisite qualite as y
                  •
                list to haue it with your dremed endeuor, But as ye course of ye wynd is not knowne so know ye not yet what faith is, as your bok is playnly shewe your ignorance. But here I omitte ye accusacion brought ayenst you for not doinge your pastorall office accordinge to godis vocaciō and lyke the successour of any one of the apostles, in whiche office (if any one of your floke be founde, to haue perished for want of the very fode of godis worde, purely faithfully and frely not preched of you) his bloude shalbe required at your hādis. Now say on.
            
               We muste take godes benefit as it is offered,
               The bys. 
               and not as we wold haue it.
            
            ye saye trw. For the benefit of our remission and saluacion,Ioye. is euerye wher offred vs in the scripture. For

our faith into christ, and not (as ye wolde haue it) for the fulfillinge of your condiciōs shewinge your selfe therin to be wiser then god and to inuent a nother and better way (as ye beleue) to heauen then by Christe, as god hath decreed and ordined, ye wolde belyke sette god to scole. as ye did take vpon you to teache doctour Barnes better lerned then you.
            
               Ergo by the gift of god I may do wel before I am iustified.
               The bys. 
               your handlynge of this my conclusion declareth plaine that ye vnderstande not what ye saye. For ye 
                     •
                  ondely improue a conclusion that mighte stande and be true. (Ioy. yea after your truth) with your 
                     •
                  onde paradox of onelye faith iustifieth, onlesse in teachīg ye wil so hādle ye mater as Barnes dyd Thaia man is iustified before he beleueth. For if beleue goth before iustificacion, as a cause dothe theffect, then seinge in scripture, beleif is called a dede and procedinge from the gift of god must nedes be a good dede, it foloweth necessarely, ergo I may by gods gift do a good dede before I am iustified.
            
            A wise argument lo,Ioye. as though to beleue in Christ were the dede of mā
               
& not as christ affirmeth it the work of god. Ioa. vi. saieng. This is the work of god yt ye beleue in him whō he hath sent. ye shall know that by ye handlyng of your conclusion I vnderstand it better then ye wetesaffe, & haue iustly confuted it in my former boke, as euery reder may se it, & your self know it, if arrogāce & malice had not blyndned you to not se faith in christ iustifieng to be ye rote & foūtain of al good works and what is not of this faith purifieng the hert to be sin I haue hitherto remoued al your cō
               dicions as your penance baptism. &c from the place before iustificacion & haue compelled you by scriptures to place them after faith iustifieng. And now ye be brought to thꝭ narow shift as to seme to proue beleif to go before iustification which ye say is a good dede ergo. But I shal driue you (as euery reader shall se it openly) from this your last shameles shifte that al mē shal se you to stand naked of al euasions

without any mo sterting holes, First ye must graunt that faithe into christ is the gift of god: now ye speak of beleif. and ye set it confusely tantum as ye sophisters say, without any thing into which ye acciō & work of ye verbe shulde passe. And if ye wil haue it stand so absolutely, nothing added, so is it as good a dede as ye deuil doth ye same. For as Iames saith The deuils beleue, & the turkes and Iewes beleue. But speake you like a christian expressing the very work of faith as it is gods gift, euē to beleue in christ iesu to haue suffred for your sins. And now se whether this good worke be yours, as of you, or gods work in you? It is not yours saith christ, but ye work & dede of god.Io. vi. Mat. xv. And agē vnto Peter he said flesh & bloud hath not shewed yt this thing, yt is to beleue in me, but my father in heuen. And now let vs se wether this work thus to beleue in iesu christ, go befor iustificaciō or be ye self same iustificacion.

The scripture saith that who so thus beleueth is al redy iustified, yea and moreouer is passed from death into life.Ioan. 3.
                  
                     •
                  .v Now is your iugling wt bare beleif disclosed. Let vs se what shift els can ye make? yet say on a gods name
            
               The bys.
               But I moued Barnes of a dede before beleif. That is the lerninge to beleue by bearinge sermons or redinge wherein the grace of god prepareth mans will, as the scripture saith (so truely do ye saye when ye call me Pelagiane) I asked Barnes of that deede whether it were good or no, and pro
                     •
                  ed it good.
            
            If your lerning to beleue were ye dede of your gentile,Ioye so haue I tolde ye before in what kynde of goodnes it standeth. But ye may not iugle I say, with your naked and bare beleif but adde to, in christ to haue died for your sinnes. And then the mater is playne. That this learninge is faith & beleif it selfe in christ, taught and geuen vs of god: for ye geuer of faith geueth ther wt ye lerning therof. Redye neuer that so oft repeted texte. we be al taught of god? And I shal geue

my lawe into their mindes & wryt it in their hartes, and how ofte pray ye the lorde in the psalmes to teache you his waies, and not your owne dead dreames. This lerning is the knowledge and the same disciplyne to beleue in christ to haue suffred for my sinnes, wherof god saieth by his prophet Isaye. In scientia uel cognitione sui iustificabit iustus meus multos.
               liii In the knowledge of him shall my rightwise one christ iustifye manye: of the same knoweledge speketh Iere, ix. wherin he wolde vs only to glory. & the wisdom saith. To knowe the is the perfit iustificacion,xv whiche thy rightwisnes and power in iustifienge is the rote of immortalite. And where hath god set forth this moste absolute knowledge of him selfe clerlyer then in the scriptures & in christ his expresse image? I cal ye not pelagiane for sayng god prepareth mās will, but because ye write and teache that when god promiseth to vs any

gift or grace we haue fre wil on oure part and assent by fre chose to receiue it and to work wt it, which is theffectuall receiuinge and the worthines on our parte whereby we be iustified And note wel (say ye) yt there must be on our part a worthines. &c. these be Pelagiās heresies as euery mā may se in the pelagians pistles, & in austens bokes agenst pelagiane & celestium. And these be your wordes in the, lxviii. lefe of your boke on the seconde side of the lefe in ye beginning declaringe your selfe what an enemy ye be with pelagyane to grace, yea and that in manye places of thys your most pestilent heretical boke as I haue & shal shew you in ye places.
            
               As for the matter of iustificacion by faith and workes,
               The bys. 
               was not ment betwene Barnes and me to be spoken of in thys conclusion. And therefore ye stryue not with me but with your self and beat your owne shadow.
            
            
               IoyeNo I thinke ye ment then rather to bringe him to the fier. And it is

best now for ye to saye ye ment not ye mater of your iustificaciō and so not to defend it any lenger against gods word, for ye may be ashamed of your false part. Notwithstanding yet all your declaracion in the defence of this matter al your argumentes gatheringes, and reasons tende into ye iustificacion by your condicion so ful of good workes. For ye say here folowinge to proue charitie to iustifye and so to set faith a worke, as ye englyshe fides operatur per dilectionē, and that the scripture geueth life to charitie to iustifie, but ye allege not that scripture. It is a greate iniury that ye do to y• verbe, operor, whiche being so longe a verbe deponent in an actiue signification nowe to presse it downe with a passiue: saing fides operatur, faith is set a worke. So maye ye by like poetry make loquor to signifie I am set a worke to speke & to aske you. Whē christ said. Pater meus operatur & ego operor

ad hoc vs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   temporis, My father and I am sette a worke vnto this daye, who did set them a work I pray you especially when they created ye world of nothing? If charite shuld set faith a work, so shuld she be before faithe, both in gift and operacion, contrary to Paule, saing, loue procedeth oute of faith vnfained.
                  
                     •
                  . timo. i. But this absurditie and ignoraunce is groffer then nedeth refutacion, ye shulde haue learned better of Erasmus in his annotacions what the greake signifieth: & then ye shulde haue truely thus englyshed it. faith which effectuouslye worketh thorow loue, or doth by hir natural in graffed powr hir workes by loue,
            
               Cōsider wt your selfe whether this turnīg vpsidown in cōsideraciō in the doctrine of iustificacion. xl yeres past may be verefied on you or of me.
               The bys. 
               I affirme the same iustificacion that was then taught, and you be the turners, and by your owne prophecy be noted for antichrist
            
            If ye wil affirm and stand stil in the sameIoye iustification that was taught &

knowen xli yere ago, so stand ye still in tht popes false doctrin and in his iustificacion and is not yet abolyshed out of your crede. The iusti
                  •
               icacion by faith only hath standen these fiue thousande and fiue hondred yeres & more.Hebr. xi For by faith Abel offred a plentuouser host to god thē Cain, by which faith he deserued testimonye that he shuld be rightwise. And as for ye popes iustification by his workes began with him self of late, when he iusti
                  •
               ied with his indulgences pardōs and pilgrimages & with his merits for buyldynge saint Peters church and for giftes and lond geuen to his sinful seat, yea he was & is so plentuouse in iustifieng for workes that he steketh not to iustifye. and wil geue clene remission a pena & a culpa. to as many as wil lifte vp weapon againste our mooste noble kinge and his realme, and agenst al them that haue abolyshed his holynes. And if ye wyll stand still to this iustificaciō so be ye not the kinges frende albeit

we see howe craftely ye turne & wind it in, vs not to be the kinges frendes which standing on the kinges parte in perell of our liues with penne and mouth with the scriptures fighting against ye kinges vtter foo the pope whiles you wt mouth & pē fight sore for ye pope stand vpō his part in his defēce against vs & his enemies whiche haue and shalbe the fall of him whom ye sweat so sore to sustain and set vp, ye knowe that his and youre iustificacion .xl. yeres agoo stode vp on merits & satisfactions by works vpon his penaunce absolucions and receiuing of his inuented sacramentes and euen vpon his false faith, & antichristen religion. and yet it standeth vpon the same feble foundaciō as your selfe may see it in this youre defence of him and his iustificacion declaring your selfe stifly to stande vpon the popes parte, whiche sith it be so greate an offence against your prince, I meruel it is not espied ne

loked vpō. It shuld be quickely espied in me or in any other thus openly by bokes as ye do for the popis defence to wryte ayenst the popis enimies and to succoure the pope & his false doctryne in all that ye may to retaine him or to brynge him the easilier in again at your day so sore lō
               ged for. For what els is the pope to be still in englond then his faith his doctrine & al his religion there to be mainteined stil depelier autorized & fermilier roted then euer it was before? For this iustificacion which ye so strongly defend is ye principal foū
               dation stone of ye rome chirch which so long as it stil remaineth in englōd (colour it & couer it as ye can) the romish foxe is not put out of his hole And he yt mainteneth this his chefe erth castell & couert, he muste nedes be ye foxes frend. Whē d. Butte herd frier forest ī saīg his cōfiteor for his absolution (for he had once recāted & was comē to ideo p̄cor & added ideo

beatam Mariam et beatissimum ac sanctissimum patrem franciscum orare pro me: By my trowth, quod he, and this fryer proue not a false herlet, let me brent for him: and in dede it proued euen so, For he fill to his vomit ayen and was brent with the idole of wales. And if ye will not turne but still affirme the same popishe iustificaciō yt hathe ben taught these .xl. yeres of the popis disciples and of his apostles, standinge still in his faith and defendinge his religion truste you whoso will, ye come not into my crede. When ye make answer to the bokis agenst your vnaduysed vowes and to the croppe eared foxe, handle them craftilier & wryte more circumspectely for bewrayinge your selfe. Ye bid me go bake fro my bakwared iustificacion &c. But I tell you, by gods grace, I wil neuer go bake from chrstis rightwysmakinge by faith onely in him to the popis and yours antichristen

absolucion as ye do openly and so declare yourselfe by your own hand writinge. And if I do not, ye say, I must place your studiouse worke of, your lerninge to beleue with ye work of baptisme. &c. before iustificacion. To this ye be answerd oft before, except ye take the studiose worke of ye lerninge of your beleif, for the spellinge and redinge that childrē lerne ere thei cane their credo. which as I haue proued it enioied their iustificacion before their baptisme and lerne their beleif aftirward. But take it for the lerninge of ye beleif in Iesu Christe to haue dyed for our sinnes printed in our hertis, so be all thus taught of god blessed, as hathe the psal. Blessed is he whom thou teacheste O lorde, out of thy lawe. So that god by his spirit, in teachinge geueth faith into Chryst, and his scoler in lerninge receiueth it at ye same tyme, and is belessed in teachinge & taught in his blessed iustificacion by

the same lerninge. And as for the baptisede with water, God biddeth and teacheth vs to prepare them before, bothe by the lawe and gospell taught them, by the lawe to shewe them thir sinnes and by the gospell to conceiue faith into christ for their remission, and thus the faithful regenered first of the spirit, be often asked whether thei beleue the articles of our faithe recited, and if thei saye credo &c. then must thei be baptized and not afore, aftir your arswarde popis iustificacion plantinge your herbes withe ye rotes vpwarde.
            
               God iustifyed noman without the gifitis of faith and loue,
               The bys. 
               this ye gaunt.
            
            (Ioye, Yea, and put in hope to)
            
               Which when man receiuethe, he reciueth by them iustificacion,
            
            No sir, not by them, but by faith only he receiueth it,Ioye saith the scripture. Ye wold fayne (I perceiue) by your by worde (By them) tomble them in both togither as the causes of iustificacion. But therfore I denye

your by worde (By them) as by siche causes. for only faith hath that office and strength sufficient and is the Cause formall or instrumentall by which only man is iustifyed. I wyll disclose your iuglinge (By thē) in a playne example. Albeit a man hathe bothe eyes eares and nose all togither in their places in one head, as be faith hope and loue togither in one soul, yet it folowth not but is a grosse absurditie to say the man seeth by them: or heareth by them, but as he seethe and heareth but by one onely sence, so is he iustifyed but by one onely gift geuen him for the same office & cause. For as we geue to euery sence hir distincte & seuerall accion, so attribute we to euery distincte gifte of faith hope and loue hir proper seuerall operacion & distinct accion.Faith beleueth. hope abydeth and waiteth for Charitie leueth. Faithis proper acion is to iustifye in apprehendinge ye promsed remissiō in christ, hope by expectaciō waiteth for the saluacion conceiued

knowne and beleued before by faith▪ Charite loueth the thinge knowne before by faith, and waited for by hope. Now go to and say on.
            
               The bys.
               When man receiueth faith and loue, he receiueth by them iustificacion, wherin I call mans deserte and meryte. (Ioy you so call it but not the scripture so calleth it) onely the vsinge of the benefits offred of faith and loue.
            
            
               Ioye
               Lorde what a confuse perplexe blyndnes is there in these
latet wordes (wherin I cal mans deserte and merits in vsinge. &c. wherin ye saye) In which wherin mean ye? In faith or in loue or the receiuinge by them iustificacion or in the iustification it selfe? Me thinke ye wolde the man to merit in the receiuinge by them, iustyfycacyon but as no man receiueth by them, but onelye by faithe, iustificacion, so can no man merit by or in suche a false receiuing. your receite by them is false and vngodly (as I haue proued it) ergo the meritinge

therin is as false and vayne. here wold ye buyld your merits vpō a false grounde and cleue them to the vsinge of crystes benefitis, as before but that false foundacion withe the reste of your popish tymbringe, ye se, I haue clerely ouerthrone and subuerted it: I meruel ye haue so sone forgoten yourself saying before (belyke your boke was longe ī making, or els your memory is naught) in the xii. and xiii. leues, Sinners be called to grace to do the works of penance to recouer the fauor of God with remission of their sinnes, and that Christe is thonely sufficiente sacrifice for sinne, so perfit so total so absolute as nedeth not any addicion or supplement of any manis desert and merit & cete. Did not Christe, think ye, in that his so sufficient a sacrifice merit for vs and obteyned vs grace well to vse his benefits? Do man merit ether in receiuinge faith or in vsinge his faith and loue? ye ar an enimye with

Pelagiane to Christes meritis and to grace. who worketh our will and moueth it to receiue faith? Paule saith it is god that worketh it in vs for his owne graciouse good willes sake and not for our merits. Haue ye not yet red, that as Paule writethe to the Philippians in the second chapiter? Deꝰ est is qui agit in uobis & ut uelitis & ut efficiatis pro bono animi proposito. That is to saye. It is god yt worketh in you, both that ye may will and also your will to bring it into effect, ye & yt for his own good propose of mind. Paule teacheth vs yt ye fre gift of god, & our workes and merites be so cōtrary yt ye thing, whiche is of grace may in nowise be said to be of workes, or els grace were no grace,rom, 
                     •
                  i, ne workes were no workes. But you wolde, by the vse of the first grace or gifte, deserue a better grace or gifte, which saing maketh the seconde gift but a very seconde grace, that is no grace at al, for yt as it so deserued with your abused vse, cā be

no fre gift ne grace. Giue we therfor al the glory to god, and shame & confusion to our selues remembringe.ii. cor. iii. That we ar not apte ne able of oure selues to think any good thoughte as oute of our selues but al our abilitie and aptnes is of god who be praised and glorified for euer. amen. For what hath any man good that he hath not receiued?
               The bys. 
               And therfore the commaundements of loue with our hole hertes mindes. &c. is not so extreme as ye make it to a christen man whose faith speketh to god boldly, da quod iubes as S, Austen saith▪ Geue that thou commaundest, by reason wherof the yoke of the lawe impossible to be borne, is in christ easy thorow the gifte of god by christ in whom we may do all.
            
            I am glad ye haue graūted ye thing for which ye rebuke and reuile me so spightfully,Ioye euē ye yoke of ye law īpossible to be borne of man. For now be fallen therwt al your merits both in vsing & in deseruing youre iustificacion by the workes of the law, & your satisfactiōs wt hir cōtēta
                  •
               iōsly flat in ye dust which fal ye wel cōfirme wt your first text saing, what hath anye mā good that he hath not receiued?

here ye bringe in bothe scriptur and austen for the destruccion of al your owne hole doctryne. For if we pray god to geue vs yt he commandeth, so is it not in our power to get it, for noman prayeth for that he hathe or can haue it when he lyst. Nether is the commandment of loue so easy as ye wene for, ne be ye comen so easely ne so sone into christ to bere the yoke of his lawe so easely yt it be so sweete and his burden so lyght to you. we must be firste sharpely whipt and sewery scourged ere we come to this highe lesson of perfeccion. Remember ye not what christ said to ye yong riche man? If thou wilt be perfit, go sell all thou hast, geue it to the pore and come and folowe me. And who taketh not his crosse & folowth nothī going to his passiō when he is called he is not worthei to do him seruice. Euery chylde he loueth he chastiseth, christ nourtereth vp his childrē in the scole of his crosse & in ye profesion

of their baptisme practizinge them in the perpetuall mortificacion of their flesshe to dye with him from synne and to burye them ere thei ryse with him into their neweslate o
                  •
                holy and innocent lyuinge ye speke of. Ye say, the yoke of the law impossible to be borne, is in Chryst easye thorowe, the gift of God, but ye expresse not ye gift of faith ne loue wherby it is fulfilled and the yoke therof so easy to be borne as the scriptur declareth it, when we by faith onely apprehendinge the promise in Christ, do vpon vs his rightwysnes his fulfillinge for ours rom, iii.viii.x.i. cor. i. gala. iii. Belike ye fansy not faith in hir proper place and office, ye haue so great mind to loue. The continuall batil betwene the fleshe & the spirite in euery iust man is not so easely faughten as ye dreame in your pleasaūt s
                  •
               ombringe securitie and welthines, as ye may se in the lyues and examples of them whom ye banishe their

natiue countrey, persecute at home presonne and burne, and in the liues of christ and his apostles. Man called fleshe is a perellouse sturdy hydra to be ouercomen of the spirit, for when one head sinne is smiten of, thre for one arise more fierce. And when al perchaunce be somwhat tamed yet will not concupiscence and the loue to our selfe let the spirite be at rest but make businesse against it Subtile and shrewd and vnserchable is mans hart. I haue geuen you but a fore tast of this easy coming to Christ to bere your easy yoke so pleasauntly. Thei that haue experience of that sharp thorney iourney as Isay hedgeth it in, and of that bitter batail, as Paule complayned therof when he felt ye lawe aliue & working hir offices in him, can tell ye more of this. But wote ye what watte the herimite in cambridge once said,
                  
                     •
                  atte the heremite. when one saide to him, Watte, I meruel y• once being so lustye a rutfler and so

and ioyly a courtyer woldst take this straight religion vpon the. Tusshe quod watte. It is easy enough as I vse it. And so belike the impossible heuy yoke of the lawe, and the burden of your pastoral office dilated so wide be lyte and easy enough as ye vse them. The loue of god with all your harte mind and soul. &c. and to loue your neighbour as your self be all lyte and easye enough to you as ye vse them.
            
               Nether loue nor faith can be in man perfit,
               The bys. 
               and thei nede both cōtinu al encrease. It is truth,Ioye rom. vii and therfore sith the law is perfitly good iust holy and spiritual, it requireth as perfit iuste and holy workes in like degree of perfeccion out of as perfit faith and loue, whereby ye se the lawe impossible to be fulfilled of man. For which saing lorde howe fiercely runne ye vpon me herafter as though ye wold gore me thorow with your byforked hornes, and thrust me downe quyck into helwith a.M curses & excecratiōs

And yet here your self saye the same again & againe to, nothinge afraide of Hieroms curse.
            
               But he that knoweth our infirmities taketh in good part our imperfection for our sauiour christes sake,
               The bys. 
               vpon whom our saluaciou is grounded and neither vppon workes ne faith with your diuision.
            
            
               IoyeIt is impossible for our weke sinfull fleshe perfitlye to fulfyll the law And therfore god sente his sonne to fulfil it for vs,rom. viii. yt our faith reaching
                  •
                to vs his fulfilling might couer ou
                  •
                transgression with his rightwisene
                  •
                so to do christ vpon vs.gala. iii. i. cor. i. Or els if y
                  •
                take it absolutely as ye speake it, s
                  •
                were euery mans imperfeccion tak
                  •
                in good worthe and after you, euery man shulde be saued. Wherefore to haue spoken perfitely and plainely
                  •
                after the scriptures, ye shulde hau
                  •
                added (for our faith in our sauiour
                  •
                christ, god taketh oure imperfeccio
                  •
                in good worthe) and thus expressed the condicion. for christes sake ye say And shal I be so bold to add, to mak
                  •
               
               
all se wer, & not for your merits ne for the meriting to vse his benefites, as ye say. Upon whom ye say, our saluacion is grounded, and nether vppon workes ne faith with my diuisyon. Then tell vs after your deuise and diuision, howe saluacion in christ is grounded vpon faith with your wel deuised diuision? Christ spekinge to Peter without any diuision of saith, grounded his chirche vppon plaine faith as ferme as the rocke. And Paule sayth: one LORDE one faith one baptisme one chirche one christe and one saluacion, ye wolde not (I se) haue me to diuide faith in christ from your condicion of works ne from your first faith of all, but ioyne them together as Iermans lippes to be the ground of saluacion But Paule telleth you, workes and faith to be so contrarye vnto this effect that thei may not both lye together in the foundacion,titum. iii. for when the benygne loue of GOD oure sauiuiour

toward vs was declared, he saued vs, not for oure good workes which we did, but of his mercye dyd he saue vs, lo he excluded oure good workes called opera que sunt in iustitia. Yea saye also, ne vpon faith wt my diuision wherof I deceyue the simple peple: In good faith, when I speake of faithe iustifyinge and faithe sauinge, I diuide it not into manye members but saye onelye faith in Christ & so make no diuision therof. For I speake plainly wt Chryste paul and all the olde lerned doctours, excludinge from the acte of instificacion all the works of the law. And I place works aftir iustificacion as the frutes of the iustifyed tree declaringe hir obedience & loue to God and to his lawe. But ye be to busye withe your terme of diuision to make siche diuision contencion & brawlinge aboute wordis, when ye espye your parte is naught ye goaboute to make sectis and diuison & heresies in Christis chirche wt your

               
                  •
               rophane vayne vocables of Diui
               
                  •
               ion, participacion, to merite the vse, meritinge to be the vse, vse meritinge, one dede to deserue another, to merite grace, learninge to come to beleif, Fayth to come to the knowlege of faithe, works to vse the giftis, a faith firste of al, with many mo siche monsirose prophame speches to consound men and to make diuysion heriseis and sectis amonge y• simple people: Thē ye adde. saying As though works were at a contencion with faith. verely Paul so setteth them a sonder in contencion and contrariete in the acte of iustificacion that he vtterly excludeth workes frō faith, in plain and many wordis frō that act to set faith onely to iustifye as maye euerye man se it, where he settethe iustitiam legis contrarye and agaynste iustitiam fidei, and commonlye vseth his arguments ex contētioneor a loco contrariorum whiche is the moste euident and strongest kynde of argumentacion.

Also the contrary effectis of faith and workis (as I haue often out o
                  •
                paul declared them) shewe them to be so contrary in the cause of iustificion that thei in no wise may be concurrant into yt effecte. It is sone sene by your maner of argewinge, that ye neuer knewe the stacion or state of the cause of the pistles to the Romans and gala. Ne vnderstande ye the arguments of them. except of a sette maliciouse porpose (whiche God forbyd) ye so wilfully so openly and not of ignorance impugne the verite, Nether knowe ye Pauls wōt and proper phrases in these wordis, lex iustitie, iustitia legis, iustitia exlege, iustitia nostra, and agene, Iustitia dei, iustitia ex fide and lex fidei iustificatio legis, & iustificatio fidei ne the difference of these contraries ye know not. For when ye adde. sayinge lyke as the works of Moses lawe were at a contentiō with faithe ye vnderstande not of what works

               
                  •
               f Moyses lawe Paule speakethe 
                  •
               hen he so oft mencioneth circumci
               
                  •
               ion and the workes of the lawe ex
               
                  •
               luded from faith, nether knowe ye what faith is.The bys.
            
            
               And some talke of faith wherwith to ap
                  
                     •
                  rehend gods mercy, as though faith had 
                     •
                  ādes to take and hold fast, and loue none 
                     •
                  nd thei graunt that noman is instified wt out charitie, but yet faith properlye thei say apprehendeth the iustificacion wherof how properly thei speke, I shal speke hert after at large. (Ioye, and I shall aunswer you as largely.
            We speke of faith truely and reuerently according to gods worde and not after your own vayn imagined material and formal faithes.Ioye
            
            And we saye, by faith we set holde of gods merciable fre promises ī christ and our setting hold is beter vnderstanden of the lay man then your apprehens
                  •
               on, And we and our readers know as well 
                  •
               aith to haue no materia
                  •
               l handes, as faith to haue no fete when Paule saith, by faith we come to god. And christe biddeth vs all

that be burdened come to him. If 
                  〈◊〉
                li
                  •
               t of your liberalite to geue to lou
                  •
                handis fete and winges to, to sethold & fly to god aftir faith iustifyīg hath enbraced him in Christ and shewed him now knowne by faithe to loue, I wil not ageine saye.
            
               The bys.
               ye cannot tell what condicious. Barne 
                     •
                   I spake of.
            
            
               Ioy.Of what condicions soeuer ye spake ye say yt he & you agreed of faithe to be one, and the first. And here ye declare your second cōdicion to be full of Winchesters good workes as your selfe cal them, again the which good workes to iustifie I wrote and confuted them, and therefore I know of what condicions ye mente as your self now declare them.
            
               I euer affirmed that we be frely iustified and frely saued.
               The bys. 
               And yet god in geuing vs this fredome for christe, worketh so in order, and so willeth vs to obserue it, which I call the condition. As for wante therof we shall ether not obtaine this fredome, or lese our fredom when we haue obteined it.
            
            
               Ye euer affirmed that ye be frely iu
               
                  •
               tified by your workes of penaunce baptisme.Ioye &c. both here and also in your boke of necessary enstruccions which is a lyke speche as to haue a dynner geuen me frely for my mony If ye can set these two contradictories togither in figure, frely and the same for mony and frely for works, so are ye he that can blow forth oute of the same mouth both hotte & cold at once with one breathe. But yet here is but a derke and a slyber shift that ye make to set frely and merits togither, It is but an obscure ridle ye adde, & nedeth another oedipus to expoune it, ye meane some falsehead in this pese to settle youre croked confuse condicion I can not wel tell wher, ne vpon what vnstiethey stole, ye say (which I call the condicion) my grammer master, when he gaue me englysh to be made in latin and came to the relatiue (whyche) he wolde euer aske me, whyche

what? because of the concorde with his antecedent. And here it is necessary I aske you ye same, which what call ye the condicion? Before ye called the workes of the law, with your penaunce, baptisme, and the ful
                  •
               illyng of all gods wyll and pleasures the condicion, & in the, lxix lefe folowing, ye call oure worthynes youre condition. And here goo before your relatiue (whiche) many antecedents, o
                  •
                whiche, one is a fredome, whiche I canne not tell whether ye take it for the fredome in iustifycacion, wherein the spirite of libertie thorowe faithe into Christe maketh vs free from sinne, or for yours and pelagians free choice and consent, when grace is offred you, either to receiue it or to refuse it, as ye wryt in your enstruccion boke and agene in this boke ī your .lxviii. lefe, which is euen playn pelagians herelye: yet be there mo antecedents nierer your relatiue, as the workinge in order,

and the orde it self, & the obseruing of the workinge in order: here is a shrewd perplexe pese of work, to settle your croked combrose condicion with frely. It is hard here to knowe which is your condicion. Here haue ye shapt oute shiftes enoughe and digged ye vp many (but yet all to narowe and to straight) sterting holes The blynd slymey snaile yet for fear of to harde and hurtfull resistence pretentat cornibus uiam, gageth the way before with hir leithey hornes. The fredome ye say is geuen vs frely in christ, ergo we deserue it not by obseruing the order ye speake of so derkly. Place once your confuse condicion vpon some certain seate, and if ye be not afraied ne ashamed of your doctrine, call youre condicion by one or other certain proper name It is a token that ye feare your part as false and naught, that ye dare not speake in plaine wordes plainly and tell vs what thing here ye cal youre

condicion. ye say, which I cal ye condic
                  •
               on, as for yours so callinge, ye be but a mā & euery mā is a lyer, nether will I accepte your wordis in this cause for truth, excepte ye confirme them with scripture or arguments grounded therof, no man is bounde to beleue your condicion seinge ye dare not openly expresse it, ne cannot proue it by scriptures to be the cause of your effecte. you call it so: but tell vs where the scripture so calleth it? ye shulde haue added plainly with Paul, speakinge thus. Frely be we iustifyed by grace thorowe ye redēpcion by Iesu Christe by faith in his bloude,
                  
                     •
                  om. iii. & not as ye falsely saye, frely by workes of penance.
            
               Ioye depraueth gods preachings so abhominably & detestably as euen in this place God suffereth him to wryte so vndiscretly of him as hathe not ben lykly sene or herd.
               The bys. 
               For not beinge content to allege Christes wordis in a sence of his owne imaginacion he vttereth it thus. christ so said or rather so thought. &c.
            
            
               Here ye rage,Ioye here ye exaggerate and heap vpon me a thousand blasphemies for saing ye trwthe, That chryst thought as he said, as he expres
                  •
               ed his thought by his worde. The phariseis yonge scoler came to him to know by what dedis doinge, as ye teache, he might come to heuen, For thei teache men to come thither by their free chose and liberty to do the works of the lawe, their scoler, not yet knowinge his owne weakenes to do it, ne thimpossibilite of the lawe to his free libertie. For the yssew and ende of this story is to declare man to haue no fre libertie of himself to fulfill the lawe, and also thimpossibilite therof to man, as Christe declareth it, vnto this mā thus drowned and deceiued with ye phariseis false doctryne. Christ reciteth certain precepts, whiche all saide the scoler he had kepte frome his youth, He hadde kepte them aftir the phariseis

fashion and yours concerning the outward iustice and letter of the law, but not as christe had expouned it of mens affectes to be repressed. When he sawe the arrogante boldenes of this yonge pharisei, he thought by a nother precept to bring him into the knowledge of his owne weaknes, and how lytle fre libertye he had to do gods commaundemēts and how muche free libertie and of your bonde choice to euil and to not do as Christ willeth vs to do, and againe how impossible it is to man to to do that god commaundeth him, & herof commaunded him that thinge which as it laye not in his fre libertie to do it, so was it impossible for hī to fulfill it, as christ expressinge his owne former thought saith. Soner shal the camel go thorow the nedles eye then the rich enter into the kyngdome of heauen, addynge. That as is īpossible to mā is possible to god Nowe howe saye ye? Dyd not christ

thinke to commaunde that rich man a thinge impossible when he said. If thou wilt be perfit goo and sell all thou haste and geue it to the pore & cōe folow me? If ye say he thought it not, so make ye him a dissembler to saye one and to thinke another.
            What so euer he then commaunded him, he thought the same, but he cō
               maunded him a thinge impossible. Ergo he thought the same, ye minor is Christes wordes, solue the argument if ye can. Whiles I tel you yet mo of Christes thoughtes, when he saide, he came not to cal iust men but sinners to repentaunce he thoughte not to call such obstinate arrogante pharisais that wolde be iustified by their condicion so full of good workes as is yours.psal. lxvii
                     •
                  
                Also when god said let their owne table be turned into their owne snare thoughte he not to halter you with youre owne pleasaunt policie whereby ye thinke to banyssh and to suppresse his gospel
                  •
               
               
ye alledge the scriptures for youre false doctrine, and ye be haltered and confounded with your owne textes. ye make bokes thinking by the same to extinguish the verite and to confound vs, and se ye not therby the truth the wyder to be spred, and the mo to knowe it into your owne vtter shame and confusion? he tolde his, yt the haithen kinges shulde be tikled with these flateringe titles and names of your lordship and your grace, and saide to you uos autem non sic, But se that you be not so called. Thought he not therby to knocke downe your arrogant pryde and to teache you humilite? verelye he forsawe and thought euen then vppon your pryde and lordeships to be exalted aboue him selfe. But sone findeth the wolfe an occasion to deuoure the innocent lambe for drinking of the swete waters which shulde be comon to them both geuen of god to quench their thirst. Here may euery

reader see the venome of your kancred hart how gredily ye hunt for occasions to depraue, bely and to sclā
               der me causeles, ye say I alledge christes wordes in a sence of my nown imaginacion. It is you and such popishe impes as yet defende his antichristen doctrine that wrest so violētly the scripturs to your own damnable deuises. For of al sich scriptures Si vis ad vitā ingredi. &c. Si vis perfectus esse. &c. and forgeue and ye shalbe forgeuen, ye gather with pelagiane your fre choice and libertie to do good, and to kepe the commaū
               dements, and to set vp your popishe merits and iustificacion of workes all damnable and iniuriouse to christes bloud as very enimies to grace and to god. when christ proueth by siche textes man to haue no fre libertie to do good and his commaundementes to be impossible to man, and that no man can therfore merite his remission ne saluaciō. And euē your own wordes fight against your own

exposicions. God commandeth vs things impossible to shewe vs to our selues nether to haue free libettie to do good ne to be able to merit oure saluacion, that we shuld not glory in our dedis ne reioise ī our worthines but to render all glorye merits and dignitie to him, and that we aknowleginge our own infirmite and impossibilitie shuld seke strengthe and power at him, and that we shulde by faith enbrace his rightwisnes, his holines, his merits, and satisfacciōs, and his fulfillinge of the lawe, for owr owne, thus to geue all the glory and thankis to him for our remission, redempcion & saluacion thorow Iesus christ. These saings. Forgeue and ye shalbe forgeuē, and siche lyke containe in them bothe a precept and also a promise (if ye godly expended them) whiche promise assone as faith a
                  •
               prehendeth she addresseth hirself effectuosly by loue to ye fulfillinge of ye precept, ī forgeuinge hir neighbor

For ther is nomā yt forgeueth trwly onlesse he beleue first in christ is promise to haue forgeuenes hī self. And therfore, when christ saithe, Forgeue & ye shalbe forgeuē, faith first setteth holde vpon hirowne promised forgeuenes in the later sentence and so of faith procedeth to do the precept. your self heraftir can place theffecte before the cause & yet tell vs ye cause to go before theffecte, And canne ye not as well see and admitte the same order in Christes word is as in your own examples? So that the man is not forgeuen because he forgeueth as ye arsewardly imagen, but because he beleueth God to forgeue him therfore is ye beleuer both forgeuen himself & of that faith he forgeueth his brother. Ye shuld therfore acordinge to your owne example & doctrine hereaftir, of him yt folowth you to be your seruant, haue cōsidered & lerned, yt your forgeuenes of your neghbour, is the effecte declaringe

you to be forgeuē of god, & ye forgeuenes wherby god forgeueth you to be ye cause of your forgeuenes of youre neighbour, & thus ye effect to be placed before ye cause. Sich inuersiōs of cōsequēces in arguīg fro ye effect to ye cause called argumētes a posteriore, ye comē speach & ye scriptur o
                  •
               tē vseth As to say. y• flowers be sprōgē forth & spred. & ye trees waxe grene, ergo it is sōmer. And yet is somer ye cause of this effect & theffect placed before ye cause. And christ told the phariseye. Hir sines be forgeuē hir because she loueth mich. But ī declaring ye very cause wt theffect he expresseth hir forgeuenes of god to be ye cause of hir loue, saīg. To whō is mich forgeuē thei be boūd mich to loue: & euē thus declareth it christ ī his parable. mat. 
                  •
                teachīg vs god first to forgeue vs ye greter detts to thītēt yt we seīg hī self mercifull in forgeuing vs, shuld be moued y• more gladly to forgeue our brethern ye lesse dettes. So that his former forgeuenes of vs is ye cause

mouīg vs to forgeue other, saīg. Behoueth it not ye therfore to haue pite & cōpassiō of thy felow seruāt, seing yt I am so redy to forgeue y•? yea I had forgeuē ye before, as yu knowst it, & therfore yu oughtest lykewyse to haue forgeuē hī, where it is plaine, our forgeuenes of god to be ye cause which shuld moue & excite vs gladly likewise to forgeue our neighbour. & yt ye forgeuenes of our neighbour is placed first as theffect befor ye cause as it is there & ī other placs īferred saīg. Forgeue & it shalbe forgeuen you. your own exāple of your seruant folowing you hereaftir brought in of you cōfoūdeth your self, if malice had not so blīdned you, & for your malice god so worthely to haue hardened your hart against ye truth, yt in redīg his word ye nether vnderstande it truely ne with feare & reuerence enbrace it, but abuse it into your owne dāpnacion & into the destruccion of many other soules. If one shuld cōe to you sekinge youre seruice, and

you couenant wt him sayinge, Folowe or waite vpon me and thou shalt haue .xl. s. yerely. Is not this comon couenant consented ther vpō ye cause why he serueth you? And yet is theffecte here in your owne wordis placed before the cause of his seruice for except the mā had beleued your promise and trusted to your wordis he wolde neuir haue done ye seruice. And euen so ī this and lyke speches. Forgeue and thou shalt be forgeuē, we first by faith in gods promise apprehend our own promised forgeuenes of god which causeth vs to forgeue our brothern. For excepte ye obserue this order ye shall fynde it but a faint fayned forgeuenes. I wil not saye agenst it but that ye may be a good lawyer and a ciceroniane rethricion bold & eloquent in doggish eloquence to perswade blasphemies and lies by crafty colours to turne whight into blak and to make foles beleue ye krow is whyght lest ye lese

your estimaciō But as for any good & godly lerninge or trwe vnderstandinge of the holy scriptures I know there is but litle or none in all your bablinge bokis. Had ye counseld bu
                  •
                with. S. Austen vpon siche texts Si vis ad vitam ingredi. Si. vis perfectus esse. &c. he wold haue lerned you a truer lesson. or if ye had lerned the promyses & precepts contained in siche speches and consydered the proper cause with hir effect ye shuld haue sene the vnbeleif of the yonge scoler of the phariseis ī the promised perfeccion offred him of Christe to haue ben the cause of his departure and to not fulfill the precepte of sellinge his good and to geue it to the pore, as is the beleif of the entrie into lyfe promised in these wordes (If thou wilt entre into lyfe) the cause why man endeuoureth him to the keping of ye commandements. And yet is it god yt worketh bothe thought wyl and endeuour in vs to kepe

them, which when god commandeth vs to aske of him to kepe his preceptis, ye se it not to be in our powr to fulfill them, wherefore ye be to haasty so fyercely to run vpon me with so many excecracions and fulminacions out of hieroms mouthe, for sayinge the trwth with Chryste and Paul that is The lawe to be impossible to man, whiche your self haue herto before said and affirmed the same, spekinge of mans imperfection and imfirmities, sainge that the yok of the lawe is impossible to be borne of man. Read Austen for this mater. and conferre them to gither wt iugement as he wold haue al menis writings to be iuged & tryed by ye scriptures,lib. ii. de pre
                  
                     •
                  atorum merites. 
                     •
                  a. ii. &. iii, & the sciptures to be red with faith. epist. lxxxix.cc.xcv.li. de. co
                     •
                  
                  rept & gratia in psal. lxx. & .cxviii. & concio. xxvii. Ambro. ca. i. de lac. & uita bea. ca. vi. Aug. ad ualenti. God cōmandeth things impossible to vs, that we might know what w
                  •
               
               
ought of him to akskē.
            
               As ye expowned my sayinges, so haue ye expowned scripture,
               The bys, 
               onely as ye wold haue it, or as ye gesse at it, withoute any consideracion how one exposicion agrethe with another, ye be lyke your self ī peruersitie thorowly. &c.
            
            My confutacion & your declaracion be ioined together in one boke let the lerned Christen reders iuge bothe our exposicions, and in this boke to,Ioye if ye dare permitte it to be sene. But in this peece ye triumphe ouer me ayen, ere ye haue goten the victory as thoughe ye had me now vnder your fete. But yet I stande, & haue you in my daunger to declare your ignorant blyndnes & blynde ignorance, how vnlernedly, impertinently and peruersely ye alledge ye scriptures for your popissh doctryne. as euery reader shal see here aftir.
            
               When I had proued to barnes that it was vnaduysedly said of him that man might not do well by goddis grace before iustificacion,
               The bys 
               I did first inproue that fond saing wherby he confounded y• order of iustificacion.

And when I had declared that (as I haue before touched) then I told him how it folowed also, that by the gift of god, mā might do good towards thatainement of iustificacion.
            
            How truely ye reporte of doctour Barnes I know not.Ioye But and if ye had no nother probacion then of the good worke of your gentil idolatar going to heare a sermon, it was but fonde and feble as I haue iustely before cōfuted it. And here agen I say That as god geueth his sonne to shyne both vpon the faithfull and infideles, and geueth them both forme, beutye and riches, so geueth he them of his common and general influence and grace. as well to the turkes as to the christianes, victories, faier wether, corne, catell, to moue, to lyue, yea and to kepe their promises faithfully in contractes and confederacions and lyue in a ciuile morall iustice, as men saye that knowe them, more iustely and faithfullyer thē some baptized with water. Thei

be merciful in helpinge eche other with almose, thei faste. &c. But before god in any good work of faith in Chryst, thei haue not to reioyse of, which good works christē mē ought to treate teache and proue their partes, and not as ye do of the turkes & iewes faithles good works before men onely. How proue ye that the turke may do well to thatainement of iustificacion when he neuer entendeth to knowne beleue in Christe to be God and man, his sauior, ne to be iustifyed by his passion? but only by the good works of Mahumets lawe as ye by ye good workis of the popis lawe. by which your good dedis nether thei ne you shal euer be iustified Where vnto herken a litle here how wysely ye speke in your iustificacion by onely faith. This I aske, who beleueth?
               The bys. 
               god or man? I think ye wil say man by gods gift. and so god geueth the gift of faith, & man receiueth it. Do not here concurre in two workis god and man? which lye bothe in one bedde, & be kouered with one kouerled to thacomplesshment of iustificacion.

And is god so ielouse then that he will not haue it spoken when he worketh, and man also worketh with him by his gift & helpe? Be not we called cooperatores dei in scripture 
                     •
                   &c.
            
            But herken you agen and behold here your iugglyng castes.Ioye ye aske who beleueth, god or man? If ye had asked who beleueth his remission of his sinnes in christ. I wold aunswer you, ye iustified man. or els I know the deuil beleueth and the turke to, so absolutely as ye speake it, but to speake of the true beleif into christe, who so beleueth he is alredy in the same worke of beleif iustified. And thus ye come to late to proue this man to do any good worke before he be iustified or any concurrant work with god to the same effecte. For the very selfe same dede of beleif into christ iustifieng him, is his iustification wrought of god in the beleuer in christ, & not of ye beleuer. I se well enough your fallace in iuggling wt a truncate beleif, omitting christ into

whom y• accion tendeth in the iustificacion, & al to forme your informe faith and material beleif. I see also howe sleithely ye slip out from the i
                  •
               uisible worke of iustificacyon into the outwarde offyce of mens prechyng called in that ministracion cooperatores dei, the instrumentes of god in plantinge and wateringe,i, cor. iii, god geuinge thencreace, as Paule declareth them. Can ye conueye no clenlier god and man into one bed? I tolde ye before ye shulde finde the couerled to skant (as Isaye saith) to couer thē both in this one acciō of iustificatiō. For to beleue in christ, is not the worke of man,the work
                     •
                   of god ī mā & not of mā
                but of god in man, as christ telleth you. And if ye aske who receiueth faith into ye mās hert so to beleue in christ? I answer with Paul, non ego, sed gratia dei in me, not I but ye spirit & grace of god in me, and not the man by yours and pelagiās fre choce, as ye & he techeth like false heretikes & enmies to grace For ye geuer of faith & grace, taketh

away first the stonney hert fro mans fleshe ere he giueth him a newe softe hart and put into him a newe spirit.Ezec. xxx. It is god that worketh in vs bothe the will to receiue it and to beleue therwt in effect for his own good willes sake and not for your merites by your fre choice as ye with pelagiane teache men in your boke of enstruccions a booke full of repugnances of false and popishe doctrine,Philip. ii. ii. cor. iii, as it is to se to euery learned reader, a boke belyke penned of you, for it sauoureth euery where of your dampnable doctrine. And therfore fearing lest it shulde haue ben writen against, you amonge your selues haue armed it with the kinges title and autorized it with his name, being afraid to iustifye your owne bokes. And euer there were any traiterouse touche cō
               mitted agenst his maiestie, that was one, and the most ingratitude so vnthankfully to abuse the ientle noble clearnes & ye most benigne ientlenes

of so gracious a prince to you which hath promoted you out of the donghill to sit felowlike with lordes and dukes. And is this the thanke and honor and humble seruice ye rendre therfore to his maiestie, to father a false boke vpon his highnes into ye denigracion of his cleare fame making his grace to sustaine the infamies and sclaunders of your damnable popish boke? It is verely no smal offēce, subiects so to abuse the goodnes of their prince, if it were well loked vpon. The byshops and phariseis in christes time, when they coud not by their own learninge suppresse christ and his doctrine, then thei studied to extinguishe him & his worde with the secular autorite and power abusing the simplicite of the magistrates. I haue therefore iustlye by scriptures cōfuted your boke (yours I call it and not the kinges boke so vnworthy his name or title) whiche confutacion wold god his maiestye

might reade once printed and iuge it by the scriptures to know you in fel and fleshe. Take hede. ye shal bewraye your selues at last and mashe your selues in your owne knit nettes. But returne we. ye say that man on his parte by his fre choice and assente receyueth the grace of god offred him. And here ye harpe agene secretely vpon the same stringe, but dare not make it to sowne ouerloud. And then ye breake out boldelye as though I had graunted and not espied your iugling with your naked shaples beleif, and ye ask it stoughtly as though your premisses coulde not be denied. Do not here concurre in two workes god and man whiche lye both in one bedde? & couered wt one couerled to thacōplishmēt of iustificacion? I aūswere, here is bothe god & mā, & here be .iii. works, one is ye receiuing of faith which is ye work of god in man (as I haue proued it before (for no man cometh to christe

but his father draw him. The secōd worke is the beleif into Iesu christe forgeuing the man his sinnes,philip. i & this is also ye worke of god. Io. vi. the, iii is the remissyon of his synnes or iustificacion, whiche is also the onelye worke of god. Nowe is not youre bedde to shorte and your couerletts to skant in this act of iustificaciō, to kouer & containe your mans concurrant worke before his iustificacion? Shewe vs here anye one worke of mā as his own & not geuē hī of god to do it? For he is here but as ye yren or mater vnder the smythes handes to be made the sawe wherewith god entendeth to worke his workes and as the clay in the potters handes.
            Then ye triumph wt a true text, but falsely applyed, saing. Be not we cooperatores dei? that is workers wt god? yis verely as instruments in ye externe ministracion of prechīg his worde as Paule allegeth it:i cor iii but not in the hyd inuisible worke of our iustyficacion before god, as ye falsely

alledge it. There Paule speaketh of another maner work, which ye wold confounde with the worke of iustificacion.God maketh vs to work with him. And yet euen that worke of preaching do he not attribute to thē selues but to god onely, esteminge them selues of no valewe but as britle vessels wherein god putteth his tresure & as instruments wherwith he worketh as the sawer with his sawe, and addeth iuxta gratiam dei accordinge to the gift of god geuen vs to worke with him. A like key to cleaue your logge bring ye in of Gedions swerde, which god vsed with Gedion as visible instrumentes to gete the victory of the Madianites, As iustly might ye haue brought in this text. in circuitu impij ambulant Byshops, friers, and monkes, walk rounde about in their cloisters and galeries for your purpose which ye go so far about in compasse to proue that man worketh with god into the accomplishment of his iustification.

Thus ye snak & rende out textes wt
               out any respect of the circumstance of the mater, how impertinently soeuer thei be to the thinge ye wolde proue, ye passe not therof, so ye maye at all auentures cast thē at your aduersaries head, as do the dronkerds in their fury, what so euer come next to hande, be it potte plater, or candel sticke, it flieth at his head. Because thei called vpon Gedeon then a liue present in batail animating him to fight for thē, therfore your a like reason is, we must nowe lykewise cal vpon Gedeon and his swerd, & vpon saint George, and siche lyke saintes dead which nether heare ne knowe vs. The lord asketh vs sharply saīg with a thretening.Isai, 6
                     •
                  .
                     •
                  
                
               Pro uiuis ad mortuos? Wil ye seke helpe at the deade for men liuing? Do not euery naciō seke it at their own gods? If we therfore be christians let vs fetch coūsell & seke helpe at our only lyuing god one alone for vs al sufficiēt, & nether

at Gedion ne at Georg, The faithful. uicerunr regna per fidem. Thei had the victories vpon kingdoms thorowe faith. what and if Gedions swerde was the worde of god promisynge him the victory gedion at last with faith apprehending it?ephe vi Pauls interpretacion maketh al for it. Belyke as ye imagine of george to be called vpon in bataile, so ye beleue, that as he was valeant (if there were any sich) in batall, so helpeth he now likewise fighting and florishing in heauen or in the ayer, so that what he once didde aliue, as to kill a dragon, the same he now deade is yet redy to do ayen. Hitherto tēdeth al your fond & vain bablyng in hole two leues folowing crieng,
                  
                     •
                  he bys. ye swerd of god & of gediō. & dn̄o & gedioni After which sort knowing that god vseth the members of his chirche in the ministery of his workes with mutual prayer one to helpe another, we saye.
            
            (Ioy. but the scripture neuer said it) God and our lady helpe vs wherein god geueth the helpe, & our lady prayeth for it Ioy. what then doth christ if he be at

home.? which is an help to obtayne helꝑ. (Ioye. And who shall obteyne vs hir help) And so in the honor of God and our lady. (Ioy. Soli deo honor & gloria.) God geueth not his glory from him, (Ioy, No, he parteth it betwene him selfe and our ladye. soo)
            Here is a goodly dead dreame out of the popis portews,Ioye and not one worde of scripture for it, but playne ayenst it. Saye not the scripturs that there is but onely one mediator betwixt God and man with his praier Iesus christe,gala. iii i timo ii and that the helpe of God is omnipotent and omnisufficient? we be here al members of christs chirche in the ministery of his workis with mutuall teachinge exhortinge helpinge and prainge one forother, ergo shal menis workes helpe God to iustifye or shal the departed into heuen do ye same ministery there for vs which thei did here liuing? hitherto tēdeth yor deducciō out of yor prīcipal purpose. Is it not ye diminishīg of gods honor into ye derogatiō
               
of his glory to attribute ye proper helpe and his proper essenciall workes reserued to his godhed ī christes onely humanitie deserued and father them vpō, or imparte thē to mā or womā? As Gediō dirst not saye, My swerde, but the swerde of the lorde gote the victorye, so neuer bode thei Godion fight for them aftir he was dead. Nether doth gods worde bid vs praye to any saynt departed, albeit beinge alyue we helpe eche other wt mutual prayers, what we do here for other, it folowth not, the same to be done of vs in heuen, or els let Paul preache in heuen & make tentes. &c. If Paul beinge in heuen in spirit, had ben, or is, as profitable with his prechinge or prayers to the congregacion as he was here in bodye & soul, he wold neuer haue writen these wordes to the Phillipians thus sayenge.
            As for myself to be in heuen with Christe it is miche better and farre more profitable: but to tary here still

in my fleshe, I were more necessary and profitable for you. Where ye see, Sayntes to be more necessary & profitable to their mutall members whē thei & we be here togither, thē when thei be taken from vs into heuen.
            But this place of scripture, you ne your papistis, euer espyed ne vnderstode it belyke, ne many othermoo lyke places ayenst you. what els is mēt by Iacobs vision beholdinge thaungels descendinge and ascendinge by the ledder,Gen. xxvii the lorde of powers onely sittinge vpon the toppe therof, then the onely Christis intercession and merits by the ministracion euen of thaungels to be brought vnto vs? And albeit abrahams seruant was committed to ye custodie of the aungell, yet did he not pray to him in the iourneye, but vnto the lord to prosper it and to shewe his mercie to Abraham.Gene. xxiii So that God therfore maketh not his aungels (& then miche lesse ye soulis departed) ye ministers

of his power and goodnes, ne to be prayd to, so to diuyde (as ye dreame) any of his glory to them. Nether promiseth he to vs his help by ye seruice of soulis or spirits to thentent we shuld diuide our praiers faith and confidence betwxt god and thē. For it is platos playn philosophy and the popis heresie to go and seke to God by aungels and spirits of the deade (and not by christ only) them therfore to be worshiped because thei may get vs helpe with God.
                  
                     •
                  n epi, 
                     •
                  . cra
                  
                     •
                  ill. All the promises of God ar in Christ, etiam and amen,i
                     •
                  . cor. i that is to say adsewerdly confirmed & fulfilled perfitly, wherfore there be none confirmed in mary peter George or nicolas nor ī gedions swerd by their intercession & prayers vs to be helpen, and therfore we cannot aske helpe of them in any faith or beleif, and if we aske it not in faithe of thē, neuer let vs hope to obtayne our peticiōs at them. Shew me one worde of faithe to praye to sayntes?

These .iiii. things where in cōsisteth the glory of God we ought only to attribute them holly vnto him and not to imparte ne diuide them to any creature. that is to wete,iiii, thinges giuē to god onely adoracion, faithful confidence, inuocacion, and thanks geuinge. These be appropried to god only as the scripture testifyeth euerywhere. And it is the next synne ayenst the holy gost to attribut the onely helpe of God to any mortal man or creature & so to diuide his own glory or any parte ther of frō him. Ye haue nether scripture ne example ī al the bible for your prainge to saints, but ye playn contrary. And ye be commanded to teache nonother doctryne then ye can geue a rekenīg therof out of the scriptures. Ye brīge in to confirme ye menis works must be concurrant with gods works in iustificacion (for herof yssewth all your deduccion) this childish fainge

               Christs crosse me spede & saint Nicolas. And God and our ladye help. God and S. George helpe. who laugheth not at these fonde probacions? lorde, what shameles shiftis be thei compelled to seke, and how blinde be thei, that haue hardened their hertis agenst ye veritie? Be these your scriptures to proue your parte? It is as I euer said. Selden be these popish lawyers good & lerned diuyns. Had the bishop of rome no beter learned capitains to defend his false religiō it were sone fallen. But your puft vp autoritie and arrogant boldenes armed with crueltie be mightier in mischeif then your lerninge, ye may now lye as ye liste and wryte what ye will, when ye haue banished and condempned all mens bokes and answers agenst you. where fynde ye in scripture that, S. nicolas praieth for vs, or that. S. george or Gedion fighteth for vs? Be it in case George were the patrone of france, and the

frenche men shulde call vpon him as effectuousely as the englyshemen in batail, shuld not saint George fight againste him selfe?
            
               And god helpeth by geuinge of helpe,
               The bys 
               and Nicolas by praienge for helpe.
            
            (Ioy. And what then doth our only intercessor christ for al sufficiente?) In confession wherof we set forth the honour of god. (Ioye. yea ye stele it from him like theues and murtherers.) Euen as god wolde haue it magnified. (Ioye. unde uersus.)
            Yea euen as ye wold haue it honoured and magnified after youre owne wicked inuencion of which deuillyshe deuisers of gods worshyp and glorie after their owne beastely wittes, Paule thus saith.Ioye
               rom. i when thei had knowen that there was god, yet did thei not worship him as god, but shewed their own vaine curiositie and arrogancie, and curiouse vanitie in their owne reasoning for gods gloriouse honour, In so miche that thei obscured their owne blynde ignorant

hertis, and where thei thought them selues to haue done most wysely for gods honor and glorie, there thei proued themselues starke foles and fil to wo, shipinge and callinge vpon the creaturs in stede of God ye creator of all. Agene, beholde how greuously Christe stryketh you with the autoritie of Isay for honouringe God with menis precepts and tradicions?mat. xv. God tolde Abrahā that his name was (el, shaida) that is one alone for al sufficient and almighty And if ye beleue him not to be siche one to helpe you, then cal to nicolas, runne to George Marye. &c. & saye, the moo, the beter, as do your blynd disciples. And if ye beleue that Nicolas his helpe must helpe God to helpe you, so make ye God no God, or if ye think yt Nicolas his eares be not stopt ne kut of (as ye list to lye & iest of vs) or not to be a slepe. wel, kry on hard vpon him as did Baals prestes

vpon their God tyl Nicolas answer you. Cal lykewyse vpō George, in batail, whylis yet God winketh at your false and supersticiouse inuocacions, at last for your hardnecked idolatrye, and for your persecutinge and shedinge of innocent blode, worthely to turne the edges of your sathanik swerdis and there popishe pointes ayenste your selues mooste vnhappely to fight for your false God. God neuer bode vs go and call vpō any other then on himself onely in cryste and for his sake. And if ye beleue not him, gete ye to some other helpers & sauiors by participation and make them your false gods by adoracion and inuocacion. For vnto whom soeuer ye go and cal vpon in your anxt and nede beleuinge the sāe to helpe you, whether it be niclas Ian or George, the same is your god in whom ye beleue, For howe can ye call vppon him (saith Paule) inrom. x
               
whome you beleue not? And ye be maried to yt god in a false saith hope and loue committing with him as ye prophets testifye aduouterouse idolatrye. Beware god is a ielouse god and loketh to haue our hole faith cō
               fidence, hope and loue, with all oure hole hertes. And how standeth these together,timo, i. onely to god be honor glory and praise, and yet ye geue his honour and diuide it betwixt him and mary and Niclas. &c. by participacion? He is contente that parents and magistrates haue their dewe ciuile honor and reuerence, but gods own glorye honour and worship in spirit and veritie by inuocacion of faith, I pray ye let him selfe onely enioye it, totally entierly absolutely, and holy as ye terme it and robbe him not of it ye may aswell by participation impart
                  •
                his godhed and his diuine power from him as his glorye and honoure whiche be hys inseperable essencials. Your doctrine is blasphemose

to gods holy name and glory. Rpent ye. And to confirme this damnable doctryne ye peruert christis wordis. sainge If any man honor me, my father shal honor him in heuē where the text is. Si. quis mihi ministrat, pater meus cohonestabit eum. that is. Whoso ministreth vnto me (meaninge in his vocacion by preching or gouernīg truly in his office) my father shal beutifye him in glorie, euen the same that Paul saith If we here suffere with christ in his trwe seruice any ignominy, we shalbe glorifyed wt hī ī heuē. For he setteth ignominie agenste glorye. But your wordes sowne naughtely, as to saye, whoso honoureth me (where honor is taken for gods honor) and then continently to say My father shall honor him, as though ye wold haue honor in bothe places to be taken a lyke, makinge God to honour his creature with his diuyne honor. Ye muste recite the scriptures as thei

stande and alter not christes words for your wiked purpose lest, as Salomon saithe, ye be reproued as a lier.
            
               God spendeth not his glory and honor ne hathe the lesse,
               The bys.
            
            
               Ioy
                     •
                  
               No but you asmiche as in you lyeth wolde robbe him of them, and ye cō
               mitte that excecrable sacrylege that Paule speaketh of Roma. ii. For as in his adoracion, confidence, faith, inuocation and in thankes geuyng consistethe hys glorye and honour, so be they not diuisible from hym. But because (as ye saye) GOD is ryche omnisufficiente and aboundante in glorye, yet therefore ought ye not to steale anye from hym, as saye theues. It is no synne to robbe the ryche that haue enoughe.
            
               The bys.
               But god so spredeth his honoure abrode and is thereby magnified amonge vs.
            
            
               IoyeHe spreadeth it not abrode either to

be stolen or diuided from hym as ye wold, and teach by your participation, but to be acknowledged of vs and thanked for it, which his glorye and honoure if ye vsurpe or diuide them to anye other so dishonoure ye and blaspheme god, and ye honoure the deuyll. For god w
                  •
               lbe honoured and magnified after his owne prescripte wordes and not after youre vaine imaginacions as thei leade you thoughe they appeare in youre eyes neuer so gloriouse.deuter. xii. There is no creature in heauen ne vpon erth, excepte it be antichrist, but abhorreth & putteth it from him when it is offred hī. But ye wil eat still of the tree of knoweledge of good & euell at the perswasion of the serpente, decerninge and deuisinge to God what glory and honour ye list, and teache it to be good withoute his worde. ye saye we cannot abyde that christe suffred for oure example. yisse better then you, that neuer folowed hys'

example, and yet will be called his successors.
            
               The bys.
               Also ye loue christ but ye diuide him fro
                     •
                   his seruantes his saints departed vnde
                     •
                   a wronge pretence of the preseruacion o
                     •
                   his holy honour.
            
            
               IoyeChrist wil haue his hole honor reserued to him selfe onely, as Paule and Isay saye. Nether will his saintes departed desire it but refuse it offred them, as did the apostels and aungels vtterly thruste it from them, as did the aungel in the apo. xxii. and not christ in the forme of an aungel: Christ him selfe ye call lyfe,
               The bys, 
               but ye call his seruauntes the saintes departed dead mē and for spyte cut of their eares.
            
            Thei be no liuinge men but liuinge spirits and dead bodies,Ioye nether can men cut of their eares, seinge the spirits haue nether eares ne bodies ne heades, but as touchinge yt bodely part: be resolued into dust▪ Thei be idle idols eares, that haue eares and heare not, eyes and cannot se, whose eares ye say men cut of, and by your own consent their stockish dead bodies

cast into the fier. because ye cō
               mit idolatry before them.
            
               Thus diuide ye christ and make strife betwene his giftes also wt your onely faith to put charitie out of office in iustificat
                     •
                  
                  on.
               The bys
            
            Onely faith to iustify maketh no strife with charitie which is pacient and enuieth not faith to do hir owne proper office as ye of enuy vncharitablye contende and s
                  •
               riue so falsely:Ioye But it is your popishe doctrine that maketh the strife & scisme diuidinge your selues from all christen faithfull and true religion. For as the londe is diuided in situacion frome all other, so wold ye forme it to your selues a sondrye faith and religion from all other nations. Christ neuer chaunged the heude of any chirche ether in the Iewes or gentiles, but he also with the same chaunged the bodye euen the chirche, or els it were but a monstrose thinge an antichristen church to haue a Chrysten head and a Christen head to haue Antichristē
               
ministers, as ye haue studyed longe craftely to bringe it to passe in englond till your tyme & daye becomen, when ye maye agene ioyne your abolished head to his owne reserued body so craftely kepte of you for the same ende. For ye knowe it ful well, what muste nedis folowe so longe as the popis chirche stonde, and his bodye lyueth amonge you. And euen here if ye list, take a taste of winchesters wylye witte to bringe home agene his, in name and title onely with him and his holy abolished father. To abolish a thinge is so to skrape and blott it out into naught that nether s
                  •
               nt ne sauore ne any vestigie stepe or figne remayne therof.To abolish But whether the popis faith & religion, with his rites ceremonies & tradiciōs be so abolished, I reporte me to all y• realme. I bode ye in my former boke seke out ye text wher charite iustifyethe, but yet haue ye not found it. And therfore ye now fal to

your own fonde witte with this fō
               
                  •
                sophisticall argument.
            
               God iustifieth: god is charitie,
               The bys. 
               ergo charitie, iustifieth.
            
            I denye your argument,Ioye for that your termes in the premisses and in the conclusion be not of one & lyke significaciō as ye wel know. Thē ye bid me reade a certain text of Paule agen & do as plato was wōt to do, saing, do it not touch me? I haue red it agen & here I write it to you againe to see whether ye cā yet se & fele whether it toucheth you, & let all indifferēt reders be iuges whether it hit ye not & set ye not out in your own colors & it were apelles hī self had paī
               ted you saing. he yt wilbe iustified by workes & not by onely faith in Iesu christ, is in the way of perdicion euē in a corrupt mind caried away of cō
               trary lustes and affeccions, euer lerning & neuer comē to the true knowlege. For sich deceiuers shal go forth

worse and worse til their wykednes be rype leadinge other into errours, theirselues beinge blynde and farre out of the waye, auerted vnto vayne speche and false doctryne willinge to be sene Doctors and teachers and yet vnderstand thei not what thei say ne of what thing thei make their articles actes and enstruccions.
            paraduenture ye wil say ye make thē not) but I dare saye ye geue euil counsel bothe to the makinge and also to the cruel execucion vpon thē that will rather obey god then mens tradicions.
            
               To the atteinment of iustificacion is required faith and charitie.
               The bys.
            
            
               Ioy.This sainge I confuted in my former boke thus. Faith only saith christ and Paul, is required to thatinment of iustificacion which is of God. Nether is charitie diuided frō fayth but from the efficacie effecte & office to iustifye, for to this effecte and office is faith onely sufficient effectuously: As from fyer or fro the

sone we exclude not heat ne brightnes, but yet hathe hir heate and brightnes their sondry effectes and offices, for the heat warmeth & wt hir brightnes she shyneth and geueth lihgt Here may euery reader se how falsely ye report my wordes and how maliciousely ye reporte of me faininge and forminge your owne false foundacion thus.
            
               ye saye that charitie is ioyned with faith and ye take faith and charitie for .ii sisters, but ye make faith the elder sister.
               The bys. Hitherto ye say truth of me,Ioye. for in ye natural order of their proper operations faith worketh hir accion in knowledge of god and iustificacion before charitie worketh hirs in louinge god. &c:
            
               And ye affirme that in iustification, charitie,
               Ioye 
               that ye call the yonger sister is not excluded. These be your wordes wherin ye saye the same. Isay.
            
            No ye belye me deadly,The bys. they be not my wordes as euery reader may see it. But they be yours fained false wordes therevpon to deduce your

false doctrine folowinge. And here thrise ye rather your false inuented saing vpon me which I neuer said ne thought ne wrote them Isaye that chartie is with faith, but yet excluded from thefficacy effect and office to iustifie so that she is not cō
               currant with saith in the accion of iustification, as I geue my plaine example, but charitie hath a sondry act and operation from faith as to beleue in christ and to loue him be two actes as be to see and to here the sondry offices and actes of two distinct sences albeit thei be both together in one head. And Isaye charitie is in the iustified man, but not concurrāt into theffect of ius
                  •
               ification as anye cause formall with faith thereof, as ye falsely report me. Here maist thou see, good reader, what crafty falshed he vseth to argew, ex non concesus. of that I neuer graunted it him, to make his false parte appere true, I wrote more circumspectely addinge a plaine example, for I knewe howe

sinistrely capciouse this byshop is, lest he shulde take any aduauntage at my wordes, And nowe when his owne conscience telleth him that charitie is not concurrante with faithe in the worke of iustificacion contrary to his conclusion, then he seketh his shiftes, first in the, xlvii. lefe therto place loue, because thei that abide in loue (saith he) abyde in faith whiche is the lyfe of the iust. There he went about to proue charite to geue lyfe, which I haue refuted iustly.
            Then in the .lv. lefe, he saith scriptur attributeth lyfe to charite, but that scripture can he not yet finde. And now at last, as mistrustīg al this not to help him. he saith. That Isaye ye charitie is in iustificaciō & yt I say ye same yt he saith & belieth me falsly, for I neuer said it, as myboke testifieth. Another variance betwene you and me is ye say,
               The bys 
               Albeit both sisters faith & charitie be in iustificacion, yet charitie the yonger sister (as ye terme it) standeth stil idle and only waiteth vpon hir elder sister.
            
            
               I neuer said these wordes as euery man may seeit it in my boke.Ioye When theirwith wil not serueye, then be ye compelled to flye to lyes. In dede I call by waye of doctryne faith and charitie two sisters and faith to be the elder because she is the rote of charitie and is first in operation.
            And nowe I wyll compare faithe, hope, and charitie to .iii. sisters or wt Sophocles to the .iii graces called charites, so connexed hand in hande as it were inseperably linked togither ut gratia gratiam pariat uel trahat, impugne the similitude if ye cāꝭ These .iii. graces or giftes put into one soule are not idle giftes of god as ye blaspeme hys giftes, but be in their continuall encreace vnto their proper distincte accions, and may be well called after their autor, or soule wherein they are. Entelechia that is a lyuely perpetuall vnwearye workynge substaunce, althoughe the body sleapeth, which solicite the good

tree to bringe forth hir frute in hir tyme. which graces in their encreace be knowen by their orderly operations and frutes. Faith in christ firste beleueth into hym and iustifieth and teacheth man al his good workes to be wrought in him of god, and not of himself, faith purifyeth hertes, and maketh a quiete conscience whiche is our holy sabboth and rest, so oft commanded in the lawe to be sanctifyed of vs. By hope we continue ī the thinge now known and promesed. By faith, and by expectaciō paciently tary for it. Faith beleueth God to be trwe, hope taryeth tyl God exhibeth his trwth in tyme when thoccasion shalbe geuen. Faith beleueth God to be hir father, hope taryeth tyl he declare him self fatherly to vs. Faith beleueth eternall lyfe to be geuen vs for christis sake, hope waiteth for the daye where in it shalbe reueled vnto vs. Faith is ye foūdaciō stone wher vpon hope and charitie

reste and leane fast to it. charitie extendeth hir to god knowen by faith, and to hir neighbour. These .iii. giftes, I may also by waye of doctrine compare to .iii. di
                  •
               tinct knids of leades throne into one and the same grounde, whiche albeit anon thei apere not aboue the grounde, yet nether is the earthe ne the seades idle, (as ye taunt and terme it) but by the secrete power of the moost high seadisman worke their naturall distinct operacions and officies ere thei appere and fructifye their distinct frutes. Neither adde I anye (onelies) otherwise to faith then the scripture, and all the olde holy doctors do, as hir onely proper distincte operation requireth, In the iustified man they be al .iii. but not concurrant into the one and same effecte of iustification. but eche gifte seuerally tendeth into hir proper accion and be not idle, no notherwise then whē the man hauing both eies eares & nose, seeth with his

eyes onelye, yet be not therefore his eares ne nose idle sences. Then by an other false supposiciō wold ye deduce a falser conclusion, sayeng.
            
               In dede theffect of faith is properly to illumine the vnderstanding & of charitie to warme.
               The by 
               Now if the iustificacion of man implyed only thexpulsion of derkenes frō mans vnderstāding, theffect of faith wold suffice: but seing god in iustification moueth mannes hert and kindleth loue in it, why may not these two vertues with their two effectes by gods working concurre in mans iustification?
            
            Fyrst the scripture teach you that to illumine the vnderstandynge is not so properly attributed to faith but also to the declaracion of ye word saienge,Ioye 
               Declaratio sermonum tuorū illuminat & intellectum dat paruulis. The declaration of thy wordes illumineth and geuethe vnderstandyng to the litle ones. And agen, praeceptum domini lucidum illuminans oculos. The precept of the lord is pure & bright illumininge the eies of oure vnderstāding. And in another place lucerna pedibus meis uerbum tuum
               
thy worde is lanterne and light to my fete. If ye had red diligently and vnderstanden the psalmes ye shulde haue sene this propertye attributed to the worde, but I will not steke wt you for so litle ignorance. Then ye saye. If the iustificacion implyed onely thexpulsiō of derkenes theffect of faith were sufficient, As thoughe if the iustificaciō implyed not onelye that effecte but many other it shuld not be sufficient but it implyeth manye mo effectes besyde youre warnynge with charitie and yet is it sufficient. For in the iustifycacion by faith onely, God purifyeth the herte, In the iustificacion is implied thexpulsion of dubitacion of the remissiō, and is implied the peace and setlinge at reste of a tranquill conscience and yet all these imp
                  •
               yings let not faith onely the lesse to iustifye. But what and if I saye, that God by faith warmeth the hert and kindleth it to loue as by the rote of charite? I am able

to proue it. Thus, God geueth no cold faith into manis hert but a warme faith effectuouly to warme, ergo. Faith warmeth charite and kindleth loue with oute the which warminge faith, your charite were as colde as yse. Nowe is this youre wyse argument, God in iusti
                  •
               icacion kindleth loue in man, ergo charite iustifyeth. I denye your argumēt: proue it if ye can, For God kindleth not loue by loue, but kīdleth lou by faith For if loue be not warmed by faith it shalbe but a cold and faithles loue. I meruel ye be so blyndened & wil not see the trwth but so sinistrely of malice to seke these feble childish shiftis had ye rede but this one text of Paul (malice not blyndinge your vnderstandinge) Porro finis precepti est charitas ex puro corde & cōsciencia bona & fide non simulata,
               timo. 
                     •
                  
                Thende of the precept is loue procedinge out of a pure hert and out of a good conscience, and out of faith vnfayned. ye

might haue sene plainly out of what rote charite springeth, and faith iustifienge, purifienge, and makinge a good conscience to go before charitie But herken what foloweth, a quibu
                     •
                   quod aberrarunt quidam, defecerūt ad uaniloquium, uolentes legis esse doctores non intelligentes que loquuntur neque de quibus asseuerant from the whiche doctrine and order of faith and charitie. &c. because some men haue erred and gone farre from it, therfore are they fallen back from the truth vnto vaine and lieng spech false reasons and arguments agenst the veritie, willinge to be seene and to be doctours of the lawe and teachers of gods law not vnderstāding what they speke, ne of what thinges they make assertiōs articles and sich lik affirmaciōs, enstrucciōs, &c. now how say ye, haue not S. Paul liuely described you here, & set ye forth in your iust colors? Blame not me for recitinge these words, but Paule for

writinge them and your self for verifieng them of your sel
                  •
               e with youre owne dedes wordes and writinge. Trewely, not with all the learninge subtilite, rethrike, and witte ye haue shall ye proue charitie to helpe faith to iustifie, but only faith to do it, for ye striue against the truthe and as christe tolde Paul It is to harde for ye to kick against yt prick. God once illumine your hert wt his word to se once onely faith to iustifye. amen.
            
               As for Paul declareth 
                     •
                  lainly that albeit he speketh sometime of faith without mē
                  cion of charitie,
               The bys 
               yet he meaneth not faith, as a bare foundacion, but faith with charitie to iustifye.
            
            Albeit,Ioye ye be the popes lawer and doctour to, yet do I not take ye to be of so highe autoritie, as to beleue these your bare wordes concerninge the vnderstanding of Paules mynd But & if Paule haue so plainly declared his minde, as charitie wyth faith to iustifye, seinge ye be so well seene in Paule, expresse Paules mynde

with Paulis wordis for this mater, lyke a lerned bishop. Nether we ne Paule ne Christ call faith onely iustifyinge, a bare foundacion, for god geueth no siche idle, bare cold giftis, as ye prate of, nether christ buylding his chirche of that rocke of faith onely in him, wold haue it called a bare foundacion, al this your extenuacion of faith to make it youre material shaples faith I tell ye, wyl not serue your popishe purpose, the almighty power of gods euerlastinge worde preaseth to sore vpon ye, for onely faith iustifyinge. Ye coud neuer haue cōtended in a more difficile yea impossible argument and mater to proue, then not oneli faith to iustifye, but charite to be concurrant ye shulde haue red it. Hebreus .x. how Paul declareth his mynde and order of these giftis sayīge and affirminge, vs to come to our great priste Christ with pure herte in the certaintie and asseweraunce of (faithe) ourr hertis
                  
                     •
                  aith
               
sprincled, and theuil conscience put a waye, the body wasshed with pure water, we holdinge the confession (of hope) not waueringe (for he is 
                  •
               aithful which hath promised) & consider we one another,Hope
into this en
                  •
               e that we maye prouoke vs (to loue) & to do good workis,Loue. where ye see in what place fayth first standeth with hir proper seueral operacion, wher hope with hirs, and laste of al charite placed with hir workes, whiche order of these .iii. giftis the scripture euery where obserueth, placinge faith as the foundacion and rote of hope and charite & of al other vertews, so yt as Paule saithe, what soeuer is not of faith is synne. And here, aftir your longe vain bablinge of faith ye bringeth knowlege and faith that hath not charite, (as though trwe faithe and knowledge contrarye to Isaye were not all one, or were withoute charite) and faithe not to geue lyfe but loue to be ye lyfe of ye iuste cōtrary

to all the scriptures, then ye wold haue youre onely. onely ioyned to onely god & not to faith. As thoughe when the scriptures with ye doctors saye, by onelye faith man is iustified, thei wolde exclude god the principal cause efficient from our iusti
                  •
               ication and remission whiche plasphemye to think, who is so madde and brutish? And to confirme your deuillish drift ye adde stoughtly, And this i
                     •
                   the plaine teachinge and agreable with scriptures whiche muste be vnderstanden as one parte be consonante wt another without siche hacking as ye make of it, But not one worde of scripture bring ye for your teaching ne agreablenes, but lordly ye say.
            Thus we must vnderstand them, as though ye had ye same falsly vsurped autoritie ouer ye scripture & our faith as hath your ātichristē father of rōe to cōpel & cōmaūd vs to beleue & to vnderstād what ye list, which is yt vsurped powr & honor aboue god wherof

daniel and Paul speke. For when Christ euer referred his doctryne to the lawe and prophetis, yet will this blody beaste and hir whelpes compel men to beleue their false doctryne & falser faithe for their owne popishe persons vsurped false autorite only. God gaue abraham faith where with to beleue in him,
               The bys. 
               and charite wher with to loue him. And abraham as he beleued in God so he loued him, bothe to gither.
            
            (Ioy It is trwe, if he coud do bothe at once with one acte)
            Here haue ye condemped your self For fyrst ye saye,Ioye God gaue Abraham faith to beleue in him. And now as touchinge this firste gifte what saith the scripture? credidit. Abrahā deo et imputatum est ei ad iusticiam, Abraham beleued in God and it was imputed him vnto rightwisenes, here ye se that same only acte of beleif in God, to be rekened to him for his rightwysnes, ere loue procedeth to hir proper worke for loue presupposeth the thinge knowne by faithe ere she canne loue it.
            
               As your selfe saith within .xii. lyues before, and that faith brīging knowledge must nedes procede loue, and yet blyndely, ye forgetting your self harpe still of this your onely vntewned stringe. Charitie loueth, ergo charitie iustifieth. your selfe see it, & ye say and write it, that faith & loue being two distincte giftes, muste nedes tende into two sondrye, and distincte effectes, and yet be ye so blynd that ye wolde violently make them concurrant into the one effecte of iustification. And ye saye, charitie iustifieth, which speche of faith, as to saye faith iustifieth, offendeth your dilicate eares, because, I speake it. As thoughe all lyke speches, saue suche as come out of your mouth thorowe malyce and arrogancy, yea and that so proudly, shuld stinke as saith the psal. lxxii. vpon you. I maruell ye sweat so sore with so many wordes, for charitie to iustifye and haue so litle charite your selfe and lesse loue

to faith iustifienge, whiche is truth And as often as Paule nameth faith not speaking of loue,
               The bys. 
               so ofte and oftener, speaketh Ioan in his pistles of charitie, without mencion of faith.
            
            If the often speaking of a thinge shulde proue,Ioye so do Ioan speake as often of synne, withoute mencion of faith, as doth Paul of faith without mencion of loue. I wonder ye shame not thus fondly to reason. But shew vs where saith Ioan, charitie iustifieth, as oft as Paule saith, by faithe we be iustified? who seeth not by these your vain shiftes and febler weak arguments, how falce is your parte, when ye can neither by scripture nor reason proue it, howe oft saith Paul in one chapter. By faith all oure fathers haue deserued the testimonye of rightwisenes? Then wolde ye by as f
                  •
               nde a profe make it appere that charitie iustifieth, because christ saith The father drawethe vs to him by faith. which to make it somwhat like ye falsely expowne christs words by

putting to your owne dreame, saing that by loue we be drawne to Christ. But and if ye had red but two lynes forther, ye shuld haue sene Christ to haue expowned himself, sainge, vs to be drawne and to come to him onely by faith: thus concludinge. Euerye man therfore that hath herd of my father and is lerned of him he cometh to me. To hear of ye father, the scripture expowneth it, to beleue and to haue faith geuen vs of him, as christ affirmed it to peter:Mat. xvi. and as Paul declareth it, faith to come of hearinge, And therfore to hear of god, and to be lerned of god, and to beleue in him thorow christ be alone, Paul calling it, auditum fidei, that is the hearing of faith, or faith had by hearinge.
            And turne to ye pistle to the hebrews and loke whether we come not first to God by faith ere we loue him, ye had nede go studie the scripturs yet beter & lerne to conferre ye places, & not thus to allege thē at rouers. Ye

say a litle before, Thei muste be vnderstanden as one parte be cōsonant to the other, without hackinge as I make of thē, but in so saing, ye twich your selfe by the nose. Yt here openli chop your hackinge knyfe into your own sower herbes with a false glose hackt into your owne potage. For ye neuer obserued the context ne conference of the places, which is a token but of a popish lerned doctor. And as for me, I haue not, ne desyre I any other waye, as euery reader may see it, to confute your falsely alledged & falselyer expowned autorites then by the circumstance & conference of y• context & by lyke places, nether can I, ne will I vse any other weapen to confute your false bokis.
            
               And as for the speche of (onely faith iustifieth) the scripture hath it not And yet hath it ben spoken by some lerned men to exclude the workes of moses lawe.
               The bys.
            
            Albeit the scrpture hath it not in the same syllables,Ioye yet it hath the very self same sence, as I shall so manifestly

shewe it, and proue it that ye shall not be able to auoyde it. For christ saith, as it is written, bothe in Luke and Marke. Only beleue and thy doughter is safe, nothinge els requiring of the man for the restoring of his daughter, but faith onely into him. In a nother place he sayde. If thou canst beleue, I can helpe the, & all thinges be possible to him that cā beleue, here is nothing els required then faithe of the man for driuinge out that euil spirite of his sonne. In all other his saluacions and helpe, & hearing and grauntinge their peticions, christ required onely their saith into him, as all the story of the gospell testifieth. Now commeth Paul as the most faithfull treater, and expouner of the lawe and gospel, whiche diuideth the hole scriptures and the ministracion of the preachers & apostles of christ into ye preaching of ye law and of the gospel. And here he proueth the state and cōdiciō of euery

man, ether to be vnder the lawe or vnder the grace of the gospell, wherof he deduceth two maner of rightwysmakinge or rightwysenesses, one rightwysnes of the lawe and the tother of the faithe of the gospell, excluding with expres wordis mightely and clerely the rightwisnes of the lawe from the iustificacion by faithe, as one contrary to the tother, affirminge constantly, and often. That we be siewer and certain, man to not be iustifyed by ye workis of the lawe (which iustificacion he euery where calleth the rightwisnes of the lawe) but by faith. And we conclude man to be iustifyed by faith without the workes of the lawe. And clerely to exclude al the workis & rightwysnes of the lawe, that the onely rightwisnes of faith might stand clerely in sight, he saith men be iustified frely, thorow grace, by faith. Now ye see, That ther be but two thingis in controuersy, one contrary to the tother,

to iustifye, that is to saye, the workis of the lawe, & the gifit of faithe. But Paul constantly excludeth ye works of the lawe, and admitteth and affirmeth onely faith to iustifye. For nothing els then faith is annexed and ioyned to this iustificacion, wherfore it is must nedis folowe only faith to iustifye in the iustificacion of fayth Also man is not iustified by any thīg els then by faith, ergo only faith iustifieth, man seeth not with any sence els then only with his eyes, ergo his eyes onelye see. What beast is so brutishe as to denye or cauill agenst these so plaine speaches? Of these Paules argumentes & christes wordes, all the olde holy doctours gathered this ferme conclusiō. Only faith iustifieth, which you ne anye els can iustly impugne, ye haue hitherto therfore shet out al your shaftes at a wronge marke, which yet could not see ne euer hit the truth ne vnderstād what Paule meaneth by the contrary

position of these his wont words. Iustitia fidei, & iustitia legis, iustitia ex fide, & iustitia ex lege, iustitia pro pria & iustitia dei, wt such like phrases, often he saith by faithe man is iustified, but neuer by charite, ne in any place of the scripture is it writē. And yet you of a set proposed malice conceiued agenste the veritie, contende thus arrogantly to impugne ye truth and all to shew your wily witte, and high lerning in perswading blasphemies to foles, leste ye shulde lese the false opinion, and vaine estemacion whiche the vnlerned haue conceiued vpon you. ye saye some learned men haue so spoken it, as onely faith iustifieth. And be ye so highly learned in your own conseit, yt ye be ashamed or let scorne to speke ye same, but thus arrogantly & vnlearnedly to impugne such learned mens sainges? ye saye, they sayd it to exclude Moses lawe. And I tel ye, that Paul also therfore said it, euē to exclude Moses law frō the act of iustificacion. And why wil

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
not you say the same also with the same lerned men to exclude the same lawe of Moses? ar ye so wyse as to varye and agen say these lerned mē? what other law wold ye exclude then moses lawe? Be not the .x. preceptis conteined in Moyses lawe?
                  
                     •
                  n your. 4 article. which I haue constantly proued by the scriptures bothe here and in my former boke that Paule and Peter vnderstode and proued it playnly euen by the workis of the lawe, the .x. commandements whiche ye call the moralls to be excluded from faith in the acte of iustificacion as in nowyse to to be concurrant into that effecte.
            Which ye cannot auoid ne solute wt all the learninge ye haue, And for the texte ye bringe in of Paule. Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   circumcisio &c. maketh directelye againste you, as I haue playnely declared it afore.
            
               The bys.
               And he that hathe not charitie is nothinge.
            
            
               IoyeAnd why? because he hath not faythe

into Christe which is the lyfe of the iuste and rote of charitie. Then this is your argument. He that hath charitie is somewhat, ergo charitie iustifieth, your argument is naught: Nether yet this, God makethe his promise to them ye loue, as well as to thē that beleue, ergo charitie iustifiethe, this is naught also. A lyke argumēt God maketh his promise to him that worketh, writeth, honoureth his parentes, is paciente, ergo workes writinge. &c. iustifye, these argumentes be worthei the wisedom of him whō god hath blyndned and made folish his wisedom snarled in his owne wily craftines.
            
               Ioan sayeth, he that loueth not god, knoweth not god.
               The bys.
            
            And why? because he hath not faithe into christe whereby he shulde know god the father in christ.Ioye
            
            
               So that without loue I cannot frutefully beleue, no not the beleue of knowelege. &c. ergo loue iustifieth.
               The bys
            
            Loue is not the cause of beleif inIoye
               
christ, but the beleif into christ is the cause of loue. ye must, I tel you leaue your iugglynge cast with your truncate absolute beleue, and lyke a christen beleuer, put to christe in your beleif, or elles the deuyll and the turke beleue without loue, with the beleife of your knowledge & with an historike faith, ye say ye cānot beleue frutefully wtout loue. I beleue ye wel: yt nother wt your loue, ne without it, cā ye beleue in christ. But I, and all other faithfull to whome god geueth his gifte of faith in Iesu christ, we cā beleue in him, loue not beinge so concurrant into the act of beleif in christ as to say with loue I beleue in christ as well as with faith. As to saye in a like speach. I am not iustified without my .v. senses, and yet do thei not iustifye me. ye speke in a lyke fallacie as the man told the boter wyfe yt she made hir boter with her eares. It is truth, quod she, I made it not with out them, but hadde them when I

made it. Your self lo, now be ye come to daley with sich idle ridels. For no iust argumētes can ye make for your loue to iustifie. Ye shulde impugne this sayeng. That without faith and beleif in christ iustifienge I cannot loue christ. And then let vs see what ye can bringe in for the yonger sister to helpe hir elder in iustificacion, or theffect to helpe hir cause to worke. ye argue, as the creues goeth, lyke ye peruerse gardiner of whom speaketh Alexander Macedo, turninge the toppes o
                  •
                your herbes into ye ground and the rotes vpwarde, from theffecte to the cause, from the toppe to the roote, all backewarke and arsewarde.
            
               But ye now preasse vpon me to shew ye scriptures in this forme of sillables,
               The bys. 
               charite iustifieth, and yet ye haue no scripture so framed for faith, as to saye, faith iustifieth.
            
            No, but I haue scriptures to shew ye.Ioye That christ faide often and to manye. Thy faith hath saued ye, & Paul

oftener saith, that man by faith is iustified. and what differēce is betwixt these two sentences. To him that beleueth in him that iustifieth the vngodlye, his faith is rekened to hym for rightwisenes, & faith iustifieth? what differenc make ye betwixt these two sentences. By faith man is iustified, and his faithe iustifieth hym? And now shewe me as mich for your charite, where ye haue but once this sentence By charite man is iustifyed and I wil graunte it you that charitie iustifieth, but as I know ye shall neuer shew it nether in sēce nor sillables so shal I neuer to you graūt it. But to aunswer you according to your folyshenes and to stoppe your mouthe,
               The bys. 
               who begin to appose me as children were wont eche other in their primers to aske, where fynde ye me two deus withoute a meus. This miche I say, I find in Paul. deus iustificat and then in Ioan, deus est charitas and so I fynde charitas iustificat.
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  oyeAnd is this all the scripture ye can fynde for loue to iustifye? Then I se

well ye haue not forgotten all youre boyes plaies, nor y
                  •
               t all youre bragginge sophistrye. I am content to be called fole of you so worldly a wise, but yet Paule telleth me agen. That the folyshnes of this worlde is wisedom before god, and the wise of this worlde be very foles before god, But at leste wyse ye shulde haue rememberd the wysemans counsel, biddīge you, Not to answer the fole accordig to his folishnes lest ye be made a fol
                  •
                your self. In good faith I thought not of siche childish fashions and Plays when I saide. Where fynde ye that charite iustifyeth? but ment it simply and playnly askinge it you, to shewe me the place in scripture which perchaunce meself had neuer sene ne hered of before but now ye, knit vp your syllogisme thus sayng. Deus iustificat, deus est charitas, ergo charitas iustificat. For quicquid predicatur de subiecto predicatur de predicato. And so if deus predicatur de iustificare to say. Deus iustificat and then charitas predicatur de

deo deus est charitas, the scripture y• faith deus iustificat, saith also charitas iustificat. And thus I geue ye wordes for words who deserue none other. For els I know yt charitas que de deo predicatur est iucreata, and so differeth it a charitate qua iustificamur.
            
            
               IoyeMary sir, I thanke you with all my harte, for thus haue ye soluted your own false argument, as the sophisters solute such false sillogismes sainge, non tenet syllogismus ubi ter mini non supponunt omnino pro eodem. But yet here me thinketh ye haue forgotten youre sophistrye and knowe not whiche is subiectum copula and praedicatum in propositione. Ye saye that in thys youre fyrste proposicyon. Deus iustificat deus praedicatur de iustificare. where ye shewe youre selfe not to knowe whyche is subiectum and praedicatum, ne copula. For copula nusquam incidit in subiectum uel praedicatum. Ye saye deus predicatur loke beter of your maior, and how

your argument shuld stād in ye third figure if deus were predicatum in ye maior and subiectum in ye minor. Ye be so hyghe in diuinite that ye haue forgoten your logik and sophistry.
            But ye saye thei be but wordis for wordis ye geue me. In dede wordis be taken for deceights without any trwthe, as ye vse youre vayne wordis in all your bokis, all verite set a parte. But in erneste, let these your trifles & skoffes passe frō so graue a cause. And shew vs in sēce seriously as I haue shewed you of faith iustifyinge, albe it not in forme of syllables, where it standeth ī scripture, Charite iustifiethe? For I nowmber not your syllables but I seke out of you the very trwe sence onely, from which ye now slip lyke ye slyper ele and the deffe aspe into a nother tale sayinge thus.
            
               Now where as ye say, yt if the forgeuenes of oure sinnes and oure suluacion shulde
               The bys
               
               depende of the condiciō of our workes, we shuld neuer be sewer and certain of one iustificacion, for al oure workes be vnperfit and foule. Thus I aunswere you, That what sewernes ye wolde haue, I cannot tell, but of this am I sewer, that god hath thus ordeined, that baptisme is necessarye to attaine saluacion, and yet all children be not sewer to be baptized. And this do scripture tell me assewerdlye that a man must perseuer in good doinge to thende or els he shall not be saued. And that he that standeth in vertu, may fal and be cast out. In all these your assewranees haue ye not one worde ne mencion of faith into god and Christe,
                  
                     •
                  oye nor yet of his most adsewered promised forgeuenes apprehdesd by faith euen the very vndoubted certitude it self. Wherby men may see howe faithles & vnsewere is your doutfull waueringe popish doctrine, which al these your assewerances the turke and iew may haue without faith iustifieng. ye say ye cannot tel what sewrance I wold haue. wherin ye say not tru. For how oft haue I laid before you the assewred promises in Christe holden by

faith, agenste your waueringe workis? And yet I tell ye agen. That if the kinges maiestye wolde promyse you before all his nobles another bishopryke nowe perchance voide, and therto put his owne seall and wrytinge to confirme his promise, wold ye not reken your self sewer therof? Miche more then, If god y• verite promise me forgeuenes ī christ & geueth me ferme faith to beleue it, wryting his promise wt his own hād sealled with Christis death and most preciouse blode, yea and geueth me thernest and pledge of this promise, euen his own sone Christe and his holy spirit, the pledge as Paul saith and ernest of our forgeuenes and saluacion testifyinge vnto my spirit that I am his chosen beloued predestined childe in christe, commandinge me to call and beleue him to be my merciful father, shuld I not beleue in him & be assewered of my saluaciō forgeuenes & perseuerance in hope?

al dubitacion and dout excluded? If I did not beleue & constantly hope for it, so shuld I dishonor gods vecite (which syn be satte fro me) wherfore hathe God geuen me the certitude and vndouted assewrance, but in hope to abyde paciently waitinge certainly for his performance? wyll ye beleue beter, men then God? And to excercise this owr assewerd faith and hope, he sendeth vs continuall crosse and affliccions, And we haue the continual reading & hearing of his holy scripturs vt permaneamus fide fundati ac stabiles, that we perseueringe grounded and faste roted in faith shuld not swarue from the hope of ye gospel. And al be it, in ye straight and narow path of charite I swarue and fall by ye waye, yet haue I gods promyse apprehended by my faithe that I shal not so fall as to hurte me & be broken, but to ryse agene. For ye Lord hath promised to put his hand vnder me to lyft me vp ayen, wt an c. lyke counfortable promyses to reduce

repentant sinners into the waye which promises humbly with reuerence and fear and thanks I enbrace It is thou, oh lorde, that assewerest me to perseuer certainly and settest me in assewerance.Psa. iiii, Howe many promises haue we, God to be our strength, our rok, bulwerk, castel tower, defence, helper, for Christ our intercessour and reconciler his sake with a thou said lyk confortable excercises of our faith to strengthen and confirme our hope and expectacion in sewerty and perseuerance? But your doutful doctryne knoweth nether God ne Chryst ne faith. But to confirme ours, yet aftir this a fore said obsignacion of the holy spirit, God assewerth also his congregacion therof with the visible seals of baptism & his holy souper to put vs in mynde of his beneuolence towerd vs, & of his testamēt & couenāt ī chrstis blod In baptisme dewli ministred I remē
               ber & se his deth burial & resurrecciō
               Baptisme
               
wherin also I am taught to be mortifyed, my sinnes buried in his woundis,Roma. vi. and to ryse agene into a newe lyf. And in the holy souper of the Lorde, dewly ministred, I remember and see with the eyes of my faith,The supper of the lor
                     •
                  e. in the breakinge and geuinge of the holy bread his bodi brokē crucified & geuē me into the remission of my sinnes, And in the holy wyne lykewyse powered forthe and geuē me, I remember and see his most preciouse blode shed for me into the remission of my synnes. And euen these be holy sacred adsewerances in my faith and hope of my saluacion thus dayly excercisinge my faith and hope into a perpetuall perseuerance in the same adsewerance while I lyue, which as
                  •
               
               werances (ye saye, ye cannot tell of) A shameles ignorance in a bishop & great infidelite and blasphemy is it in you, if ye will not know this so manifest a sewerance offered and geuen into euery faithfull Christianes

hand herte and mouthe,
            
               Thus haue I lerned ī scripturs, If we turne when god turneth to vs.
               The by
                     •
                  
                
               If we beleue when god illumineth vs, If we loue as god kindleth vs. If we be baptized as god, commandeth vs we shallbe iustified.
            
            Ye iugle with your (Iffes) and half turnes.Ioye For as there is no man turned to god with frutefull repentance but he first knowe gods merciable forgeuenes in christ by his faith iustifienge him, so is there none but thei first knowe God in christe, ere thei loue him, & beleue ī god thorow Iesu Christ ere thei be baptized into his name. For who professeth god ye father the sonne and the holy ghoste and the christen religion, onlesse he knowe it. It were a backward order and an vpsidowne preposterouse plā
               tynge, the profession to go before the doctrine and knowledge of the religion, as it hath ben a longe season vsed, and therefore all suche preposterouse religions (as ye see) degenered into apostacye and into all the most

filthy abominacions and idolatrye be now come to naught, as christ prophecied of all such backward plantacions. And therfore your (Iffes) stād in a wrong place. For your baptisme with water is such a condicion, that as al thei that be baptized therwith, be not therfore saued, so were not all they that beleued in christ, and al the chosen infantes conteined vnder the promise, dyinge before circumcision or baptisme dampned, but withoute circumcision and baptisme of water saued by election and their beleif.
            And therefore your doctrine of your (Iffes) holdeth not. And if the quene of Candaces courtman, so enstructe of Philip in the wagen▪ had died in that faithe before his baptisme with water, yet had his onelye faith saued him by christes own wordes sainge, who so beleue in me hath life eternal. It is not ye baptisme with water, ne your penaunce yt saueth vs (as ye dreame) for no element, ne creature,

ne mans work may do that thing. It is god only in christ that regenereth with the spirit of faith,i. pet. iii. Titu. iii. Ioan. iii. i. Ioan. v Ioan. i and by that inuisible baptisme be we saued of god thorowe Iesu christe. If you shulde tarye till ye haue fulfilled all your conditions for your saluacion, ye shulde come to short of the gates shuttinge. And therefore merciablye saith the lorde in Isay. He wyl make short his word of rightwismakinge,Isai, x. and finish it in a plenteous aboūdāt rightwisenes, euen in christ made of him our rightwisnes holden by faith onely. Children by your popish doctrine, that dye before baptime, and ye infantes in Moses law diyng before the aight day, shulde be dampned as ye teache, whiche is to harde for you to proue, when the scripture is plain agenst you, as I am able to proue it and can shewe it plainely. The baptisme therfore with water wasshethe onely the body, and the minister bringeth the water and wordes onelye &

no saluacion nether as causes efficientes ne formall. So that baptisme with water is but the visible seall instituted of god,Baptisme and ferme token of the former iustification by faythe in the regeneration of the spirit, ye seall (I say) testifienge to the congregation that he is incorpored into them. For thus it correspondeth (sayth Peter) the newe byrth, wherby the spottes of the soule be taken awaye.i. Pet. iii.
            
            And thus is baptisme with water, signaculum iustitie fidei, the seal and testimony of the rightwisnes of faith as was circumcision, and not ye selfe same rightwisnes it selfe, as ye teach ye may make it signum iustitie operis operati siue iustitie baptismi, after your scole men that is the sacrament or seall of the rightwisenes of workes or of the rightwisnes of baptism with water, and man thereby to be iustified as ye dreame, and so Christ in vaine to haue dyed. Besydes this it is the fygure of our perpetuall mortificacion

and repentance as I haue o
                  •
               ten declared the vse therof before. And as touchinge the imperfeccion of faith and charitie in man (as ye saye) Albeit our faith (I saye) be as litle as the mustarde sead, and as imperfit as was his that saide, lorde I beleue but yet helpe my vnbeleif, yet god accepteth it for our iustificatiō for christes sake bidding vs, daylye to praye for thencreace therof. Then ye saye, all our workes be imperfitte.' It is truthe that ye saye. And in so sayeng ye haue condempned al your own doctrine of merits satisfacciōs, and condicions of workes, to deserue remission. For no imperfitte workes may deserue perfit remission ne make perfit satis
                  •
               acciō, as ye well know it. And for this cause of our imperfeccion, indignitie, & impossibilite by workes to merit our remission & saluaciō god hath taken it out of our handes and from our workes & layd it vpon christ as ye se in the prophete Isaye,

him by his perfit fulfilling of the law & by his so perfit workes to merit, to satisfye fully and perfitlye and so to obtaine vs ye remission and saluation for our faith into him. And thus is he made of his father & ours, for vs our iustificacion our rightwisnes, redēptiō, our holines, our wisdom, our satisfacciō,Rom. viii & our implecion of ye law, whiche all we by faith receiue as our owne for that he is geuen to vs, holy with al his that he ether dyd or suffred in his blessed innocent body and soul. And euen these be our elder brothers clothes,Genes. 27
                done vpon vs by faith so swetely sauouring, which so delite and please our celestial father, as did Iacobs elder brothers fragrant vestures sauor in his father Isaac his nose, that he gaue him his brothers blessing, as shal our father for ye same doing on by faith (& not for your participatiō) of our elder brother christe his swete clothes of his rightwisnes merits.Gala iii. i. Ioan. v. &c. For who so euer be baptized

of the spirite by regeneration of faith, they haue done christ thus vpō them. And thus wt Iacob be we made Israelites. And thus be we all made ye sonnes of god, for that we haue beleued in Iesu christ, saith Paul, & not (as ye say), for yt ye haue done youre good works & ful
                  •
               illed your cōdiciō Thus ye se how Paul, Ioā, & Peter & christ speke of ye baptism of ye spirite & not of ye visible baptism of water to geue remissiō & saluacion. ye geue imper
                  •
               eccion to our works & to faith, & to loue, it is truth. But yet muste ye cōsider yt thimperfecciō in our works so minisheth & takethe so awaye the goodnes & dignite or worthines of thē, that thei may not be called good ne meritoriouse. But faith Isaye 
                  •
                being imperfit & as litle as the mustersede, or as weke as his yt said, help lord my vnbeleif, yea or so matched in perel with temptacion, wt feare, & dubitaciō as was peters faith so boldly leaping into ye sea to mete his maister christe, when the sourges arose

agenst him so highe that with his litle weake faith he began to sinke, yet as litle as it was, it was ye good gift of god, & saued hī for christes sake frō drowninge. For it is our perpetuall byshop and onely intercessour in heuen that continually prayeth (as he dyd for Peter & his felowes) lest our faith faile vs, euen in the middes of the stormye tempestiouse floudes of the troublous sea of this world. For the giftes & calling of god be sich as it cannot repent him of them in hys chosen.Rom. xi. Then ye say, Iob sayd, I feared al my workes, in which, faith (ye say) may be comprehended. But it appereth, that ye vnderstand not Iobs wordes, for he neuer feared his faith but his works only, which were euil & imperfit. And the ebrw or chaldie worde, signifieth erumnas and labores meos omnes, that is to saye, I feared al my miserable workes, and laboriouse miseries, which he called his own euil workes, for it foloweth

               sciens quod nō parceres delinquenti knowing that thou woldst not spare the trespasser. So that here ye see how that ye manakle and rende oute by patches the textes for youre wicked purpose not consideringe what gothe before ne foloweth, nor yet what the wordes properly signifye. If ye coulde comprehende faithe in Iobs works, so wolde ye make faith no gift of god, ne beleif gods worke, but Iobs worke so feared of him self And all the scriptures agre wt Iob so speaking of his owne workes only and not of faith. For manye holye men fearing ye same, desired god not to enter into iugement wt them ne to iuge them after their workes. Then ye take in hand to describe the sinfull nature of man as borne out of Adam and Eue, sayeng that the powers of our soule properly receiue faith and loue, and vpon the occasion of the worlde and the flesh & suggestion of the deuil be redy to rebellion. &c. In

whiche saienge ye speke not truelye of mā in his corrupt nature as borne out of Adam, conceiued in synne roted in his soule, called altogether in scripture, flesh, the olde man, the body of sinne and deathe, inimitie agēst God, naturallye the childe of wrath a contynuall rebellyon agaynste gods spirit. For occasion or no occasion geuen,
                  
                     •••
                  es. vi .vi
                     •
                  i. sich one is he before he be regenered as god painteth him, saienge, after the hebrewe verite. Euery imaginacion of mannes harte is onlye euyll, is, sayth the texte, and not prone or redye (as ye terme it) yea and that at all times, euen from hys youthe, withoute the spirite of God regeneringe hym, he is brydeles runnynge into the free felde of all carnall lustes. Of the power of this corrupt mans nature, ye speake, as by his fre choise to receiue faith with loue. &c. Uerilye this man hathe no suche a Pelagianes power of hym selfe to receiue faithe, no more then

hadde ADAM. him selfe power to come to God when he fled from his voice in paradise so ferefullye with shame sekinge where to hyde him frō his presence. There is no sich proper power properly (as ye terme it) in mā to receiue faith or any grace, except that naturall proper powr be properly taken a waye and pourged with the spirit of libertie by faithe purifyeng the herte so makinge in him a newe hert prepared to receiue faith makinge a new and free powr from his naturall bondage to synne. So that your fre choice to receiue grace may not here be placed withe pelagians errour enimie to grace to set vp your fre choice & bonde libertie to syn.
            
               For althoughe the gylt of originall sinne be t
                     •
                  ken away in baptime yet the skarre of it,
               The by
                     •
                  
                
               and (as it were) the mater of it dothe remayne. whiche as it trobleth and letteth manis perfection in vertew and therby is maintained a continuall stryfe & debate, so is it not to be accompted

our syn tyl we conceiue it by enbracinge & agre in to sich carnal mocion
                     •
                  .
            
            
               IoyeIn this your bare sayings without any scripture be contayned many errours as it must nedis come to thē yt teache out of their own headis. First false it is that baptisme with water taketh away the gylte of any synne. For it is God onely yea and that by Chryst onely that taketh a waye the gilte of synne. And therfore Paule saith playnly that the original synne whiche entred into ye worlde by only one man Adam,Rom. v. is taken awaye (he speketh there, of ye gylte) by ye grace of God euen by that only one man & fre gifte geuen vs Iesus Christ, and not by any creature ether of water, worde or minister, as cause withoute which the gilt is not taken awaye. For ther, Paul in a longe contenciō wt many wordis setteth onely chryst his gift, grace, his iustificacion and his obedience ayenst the gylte of original synne of that onely one Adam.
And where ye saye, 
The skarre (as it were) ye mater yet remaineth, ye speke very fondly and grossely, yea falsely so to teache and so to diuyde it, as thoughe there were in synne a physik and na
                  •
               urall corporal composicion ex materia & forma as ye dreame of the simple giftis of faith hope and loue. which all your dead dremes ye imagine to stablesh your popish doctryne with the aristotilyk scolemen. The scripture, austen and ambrose call playnly your skarre (as ye terme it) euil concupiscence, euil lus
                  •
               e and desyer forboden in the laste precept, and Paul calleth it the law of sinne, the body of synne, the body of death and euen syn it self, And your owne wordis folowinge say the same, in that ye affirme it to trouble and lette manis perfeccion in vertewe &c. For that as dothe and worketh siche vngodly impediments so troublinge manis soul hindringe it frō vertew and fightinge ayenst the holy spirit

of god that wold make him perfit, must nedis be the mother of synne & sinne it self stryuinge agenst the wyl of God. Paul speking of this concupiscence, whiche ye cal ye skarre, saith he had not known it to haue had ben synne, had not the lawe sayd. Thou shalt not haue siche lust or desire in the. This synne originall, although it be not imputed, ether to the chosen infants for their eleccion in christ, or to the faithful waxen for their faith in Christ, yet is it not so roted out of the childerne of Adam, but that it lyeth lurkinge in vs as longe as we lyue, as doth heat or fier in ye flynt & chalke, and as venome ī the serpent, and is not sene tyll either water be cast vpon the chalke, or the serpent angred. For man is pacient enough tyl occasion of wrath be geuen him, & wel pleased so longe as he hathe his desyre & mind fulfiled. & so of alother sinnes. ye say this skarre (or rather concupiscence & syn as ye scriptur calleth

it) is not to be accōpted our syn tyl we cōceiue it by cōsēt. which saing is plain false. For whose sin els shuld it be then his in whose soul it lyeth? Is not mā conceiued & borne therin and therewith? It is, saith austen, by traduccion drawne out of Adam in a perpetual ysew īto al his posterite, & was daugher of ye synne in Adā & is mother of al the synnes in vs. ye say, It is not ours tyl we conceiue it by enbracinge & agreinge by consent to our carnal mociōs, And therfore, ye say s. Iames saith. yt concupiscēce (lo, here your self is cōpelled to cal your skarre & mater concupiscence which is synne) whē it conceiueth, bringeth forth synne. ye vnderstand not what Iames saithe. For he presupposeth concupiscence to be ī man (as Dauid and Paul saye) from his concepcion, as an euil sead or plant ingraffed in to ye nature & soul of man, as Austen declareth it to bring forth opēly euil frut, and therfore Iames saith not as

ye saye, that we cōceiue it not tyl we en
                  •
               race & agre to it by consent, But he saith (if ye loked a litle before) thus Euery man is plukt awaye, and (as it were) with a baight taken & holden of his own proper natural concupiscence. And thence forth, he saith, cō
               cupiscence aftir she hath conceiued by cōsent, synne is brought forth into light, meaninge sin actuall & not original. where ye see your skarre or rather concupiscence firste to be conceiued into the soul ere she enbrace by consent any syne actual, as is the woman a woman and apte to conceyue before she conceyueth and as is the mother before hir daughter, & if the daughter be syn, nedis must the mother goīge grat wt the daughter be sinful. Thē ye compare as wysely, Concupiscence to a baron woman without a man, so makinge hir man the agrement of his frewil cōsenting to the yll mocion, of whiche as out of man she conceiueth. ye shulde haue

loked beter of your baron woman, & noted wether she cōsēteth not as wel as hir man, and so in the woman also to be a mutual consent, lust and concupiscence as well to be the mother of syn, as hir man to be father therof. But concupiscence hir self, ere she cō
               ceiue and consent to commit actual syn, is (as Paul tell you) sin it self, euen the daugher (as austen saith) of sinne ere she be ye mother of actual synne in sighte, and ere she conceyue (as ye say) of hir man. And although she (concupisence I mean) consēteth not, but lyeth secretly in the soul, so sone as it is created & ioyned to the bodye, not yet stering, yet is she an hidde venome and preuey, heat as it were in the chalke or spark hid vnder the ashes not aperinge: vnto ye which hid sinne the prophete loked when he said, who vnderstandeth or seeth his synnes? and fro my hid sinnes clense me, And shreud and vnserchable is manes herte said Iere. wherof Ioan

said. If we shulde saye that we haue not sin in vs, we deceiue our selues & ye truth is not ī vs. And therfore said Dauyd, Blessed is he to whom god imputeth not his sinne, he saith not blessed is he that hath no synne, but he that hath synne, & is not imputed ne rekened to him for his faith. Paul commaunded the Roma. that synne reigned not, ne shuld haue dominion ouer them, so that thei obeied not it by hir concupiscence. But to be clene without concupiscence, he could not so be him selfe, as ye se in the .vii. cha. complaining of it saieng. I am solde a bonde man vnder sinne to do yt euil which I wold not do. &c, And as for your parēthesis (although mē might by grace be without syn) it is so rare a byrde as was ne neuer shalbe sene, but only christ, as the scripture & Austen affirme it. Nowe haue I shewed it to you clerely by scriptures, yours (as it were the skar and mater of originall syn) to be no skar but sinne it

self, ne to be none so healed a wounde but that we must be regenered of the spirit, and taught by the baptisme of water to mortifie that concupiscence, & that it is in mortifying, neuer mortified, tyl at the last breath out of our bodies. Paul him selfe & al faithfull felt this cōcupiscence dwelling in thē striuing against the renouacion of ye spirit whiles they lyued. It is therefore so blody and so skabby a skar in the soule, that it is euer in cure in the woūded half dead & half a liue, whō the samaritane committed to the inholder. luc▪ x. and not so cleaue a skar as ye go about to cure it by baptism.
            
               And so maister Ioye to returne to our mater,
               The byss▪
                
               yf ye wolde for policie fle from the worke of loue to the work of faith because ye wolde be assewred, ye be no more assewered in respect by your own worke by faith then ye be by charitie, but all oure asseweraunce is in gods promise. quia deus verax & omnis homo mendar.
            
            No (my lorde) I fly not frō the work of loue to the worke of faith,Ioye as ye do frō faith to loue, thei both flyinge frō
               
you. But I do enbrace them bothe. But in the worke of my iustificacion I obserue the order and doctryne of the scripture, onely by faith to be iustified, and so to procede to ye workes of loue, first assewered by my faithe (which assewerance loue can not geue me) into Christe, that he hath forgeuen me my sinnes. Nether speke I of any other assewerāce by my nowne works (as ye wolde falsely impinge it vnto me) but onely by the worke of faith into Christe, which is not my worke, but gods worke and his gift in me. But I spake plainly of faith it self, which is the very self certitude & vndouted adseweraunce, ioined to gods infallible promise, sealled with his holy sprit my pledge, pant, and ernest peny geuen me in Christs promyse, with which my faith thus sealed I am assewered of my remission and saluacion thorow hope. But all our adsewerance (say you) is in gods promise. Ioye. But what asewerance

haue ye in gods promise except ye beleue it? Euen here haue ye condempned your self, and of purpose left out faith the assewered certitude of gods promise, and not charite, ye wil vtter the trwth and bewraye your self vnwares, the infallible prouidence of God so bringinge into light by your selues the same thinge ye contende to kouer and to suppresse. For, this my former boke ayenst you (I dare saye) ye wold haue punished him yt shuld haue brought it first into the realme, and now haue ye made lawes yt none siche bokis be openly redde ne solde in the realme, but haue condempned them. And yet hathe God so blindened and infatuated you in your own false tyranye as to make your self to printe the same boke agene and yet agen to, & to be openly & frely redd wt yours, and sold in the realme. And for one secret. C. by your own blynd procurement are there now openly a M. distributed in ye realme into many

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
hādes that neuer had thē before.
            
               The byss.
               And therfore how soeuer ye and yours wyll test at it, I wyll retourne to my common collet a prayer in the churche. Omnipotens sempiterne deus, da nobis fidei spei & charitatis augmentū, & ut mereamur assequi quod promi
                     •
                  ti
                     •
                   fac nos amare quod precipis.
            
            
               IoyeNow I pray ye returne to it againe, and into the popes portewes, youre versicles, litanies, matens, euensōg, and misse to, that yet prayethe in the same to merit to obtayne remission of sinnes and saluacion by their popish workes pardous, and pilgrimages. For in deed ye be drouen frō the scriptures, and compelled as euerye man seeth to flye to your popysh portews and missale to begge your false and beggarly autorities to cōfirme your doutfull doctryne. I dare saye, yf ye had knowen the scriptures to haue confirmed it, ye wolde neuer haue sought suche shiftes.
            
               The byss.
               Wherfore the some of our helth beginneth continueth: and is accomplysshed by gods mercye. Quia ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   volentis ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   currentissed

miserentis dei est: so the seweraunce of our helth depēdeth vpon gods promyse.
            
            I am afrayde lest as ye iugled wt your bare beleife,Ioye so wolde ye do with gods promise, ye shuld haue therfore added to it, saying playnely (The asseweraunce of our helth dependethe vpon goddes promyse of remission & saluacion in Christ apprehended by faythe.)
            
               Mary (quod you) and that is truthe.
               The bys 
               And here you wyll clappe your handes & extoll the strength of treuth.
            
            (Ioye. yea and of fayth to.
            
               As though we pharseis, as ye saduces call vs, wolt oppresse it. The promise of god is all. Et ideo ex fide, say you.
            
            (Ioye. And therefore oute of faithe (saith Paule) is the heretage geuen. Geuen he saith and not deserued, vt firma sit promissio. that by grace and not by Wynchesters workes it be geuen, that ferme and sewer myghte be the promise)
            
               
               Ioye.I think there was neuer haithen gentyle or Iewe that so spightfully and so blasphemously mocketh out gods holy word, as here do you of a sette proposed malice, sinning agenst the holy goste. For here, because ye shuld not erre of ignorance, god hath su
                  •
               fred you to fall into the place of S. Paul which vtterly conuinceth & destroieth all your dampnable doctryne. Here Paul, setting the lawe against the promise of the gospel, as one contrary to the tother in the acte of iustificacion, maketh .vii. mighty arguments to proue onely faith wt
               out the workes of the lawe to iustifye, because the rightwysnes of workis and of the lawe cannot stand togither. For that as cometh to vs by the promise (he saith) it cannot come to vs out of the lawe, but the heretage cometh to vs by the promise, ergo not out of the lawe, emonge the whiche arguments this is one. If our iustificacion shulde depende of

the works of the law, no man were sewer of his iustificacion, bothe for thimperfeccion of his works, & also for thimpossibilite of the lawe to be performed of mā. And agen, the lawe worketh wrath and maketh sinne the more breeme to abounde. Onely that thinge iustifyeth which settleth, maketh sewer and fast our consciences out of doute, but that is the fre promise of God receiued by our faith, & not the werkis of the lawe, wherfore our faith onely staid vpon gods fre and vndouted promise iustifyeth. Then he argueth agen thus, Euery fre merciable promise of god in christ to forgeue vs our sinnes is receiued by onely fayth, our iustificacion is the free merciful promise of God in Christ, wherfore it must nedes be receiued by faith onely. For our iustificacion were promised in vayne, if we our selues might deserue it by works. For not by the works of the lawe, saith Paul, cometh the promise

to Abraham or to his seade, him to be the ayer of the world but by the rightwysenes of faith. For if they that wyl be iustified by the workes of the law be therefore made the heyres, so is faythe and beleife in vayne, and the promise voyde and frustrate. For the lawe worketh wrathe, and where as is no lawe, there is no transgression. Wherefore out of faith is ye heretage geuen as out of grace, that the promyse shuld be the more ferme & sewer vnto all the seade, not to it onelye that is oute of the lawe, as be the Iewes, but also to it that is oute of the faythe of Abraham, euen to the gentyles, whyche Abraham is the father of vs all, yf we resemble him in lyke fayth. Into this playne peese, when this bysshoppe hadde broughte hym selfe so wrapped and masshed as it were in a nette, so accombred that he coulde in no wyse wynde oute hym selfe, then beginneth he to mocke, to rayle, and to ieste vppon Paules

wordes, with Ideo ex fide, saye you, and these wordes hath the scripture, saye you, ut firma sit promissio, saye you, And ye saduces tell vs phariseis, we wolde oppresse the trueth.The promyse of God is all saye you. And ye Saduces wolde extolle the strengthe of the trueth.
            
             Ioye. It is Paule the vessell of God that saythe all these wordes and not we. And why shulde not we Christianes extol gods trueth and defende it, agaynste you popishe Pelagians, and with the scriptures confirme it agaynste you Antichristes? Be ye angrye that we extoll, honour and prayse trewe faythe ioyned to gods promyses agaynste you rancke phariseis, & peruerse popyshe pelagians? Be ye not contente that we take gods parte to defende his honoure, and magnifye his glorye agaynste your deuyllyshe doctrine oh antichristen papistes
            
               And nowe ye wyl percase bring in Melancthons correlatiues of faith and promise.
               The byss.
               
               And that ye cause why we be iustifyed by charite (saith he) is, because the promise cannot be receyued but by faith?
            
            
               IoyeIt is not Melanch. that sayth the promyse of god in christ is not receiued but by faith onely, It is Paul, it is Christ that say it. For what auaileth a promise and no man beleue it? Be not faith and gods promises correlatiues in the faithfull beleuers, to whom god maketh his promises? Cā ye separate the faith of the iuste from gods promises, or his promises frō their faith? Can ye confute Melan. doctrine in so teaching? ye scorne his lerning and iest vpō his doctrine, & of all the learned men this daye whiche write in Germany. And why? verely because with their pennes, and by goddes worde, they haue geuen your gostly father of rome his deadly heade wounde. ye may mocke Melanchton, and scornefullye skof and ieste of the lerned Germaines (as ye do) but confute their doctrine iustly, ye cannot, ne attaine to their knowledge

and learninge, ne come nighe their cleare iudgement. But it is the propertye of all arrogante papistes, to contempne and mocke them whose bokes they be not able to beare after them.
            
               And thus they reason. Seing our saluacion dependeth vpon gods promise,
               The byss. 
               and a promyse cannot he apprehended but by faith onely, we must nedes saye onely faith iustifieth. And to make the matter playne, they bringe in a similitude. If one man promyse another .xx.li. how can he to whō the promyse is made apprehende the promyse but onely by beleuynge him that promyseth? And this is the newe scole of germany, where sophistrye is not banysshed, but hath a newe garmente, and is clothed with pretence of simplicite. For in this teachinge is a maruelous apperaunce of plainnes, and thorowly cōsidered, it containeth a mere deceyte. And note well reader that thou maiest perceaue this iuglynge sophistrye where it deceaueth the. It is not denied, but onely faith apprehendeth the promyse therin is no controuersy.
            
            If ye this graunt, what deceitful sophistrye what iuglinge call ye it man to apprehende gods promise by his faith only?Ioye God promiseth me remission

in christes death affirminge him to be iustified, and to haue lyfe eternall that beleueth in hym, and by faith apprehendeth this promyse of god. Call ye this iuglynge sophistry and mere deceite to beleue gods promyse? Here lo reader, maist thou see whother this popish byshop is caried of his arrogante affectes, so blasphemousely to raile of onely faythe, apprehending gods true promises? He graunteth him selfe onely faithe to apprehende gods promise, and yet he impugneth onely faith to iustifye to make god false of his promise, as though Christe neuer sayde, As thou beleuest so come it to the. Now let vs see how ye can wynde your selfe oute of the bryars.
            
               The byss.
               But marke well this when god iustifieth man: god ministreth mercy to vs, whiche was the thinge god promised to geue vs, as zachary ꝓphecied, God to geue him selfe to vs, who 
                     •
                  s all mercy whervpon is grounded our saluacion.
            
            
               IoyeIn this prophecy of zachary, it is

playne that God of his merciable goodnes and not of any mannes desertes had made a promise to Abrahā and to our fathers to sende vs that blessed seade Christe oure sauyoure, which promise who so beleued had remission of their synnes. Of mercye was the promyse made, and the thing promised was remyssion of synnes in Christ. And who so beleued the promyse was iustified, wherefore onelye faith iustifieth, now what can ye iugle or discant vpon this? Sing on a goddes name.
            
               Wherin we must considre distinctly and apart the promise of god,
               The byss. 
               and the thinge promised, which is mercy.
            
            I thought as mich ye wold iugle wt mercy,Ioye which in zachary is taken as euery mā may se by the conference of the text for the fre merciable fauour & goodnes wherof without any merits of man, god was moued thorough: Christe to promyse, and now ye wold make it the thinge promysed, wyth whiche alteringe yet am I concente,

yf ye take mercye as the scripture oft taketh it in other places, for the forgeuenes of sinnes in christe to the beleuers. But yet go to procede ī your wycked porpose tyll ye haue haltred your selfe againe.
            
               As 
                     •
                  n their example (for I dare make no newe) when one frende promiseth another .x
                     •
                   li. the promyse is the bonde,
               The byss. 
               the thinge promysed is the .xx.li. In whiche example, though I graunt that I apprehende my frendes promyse with beleuing hym, yet I apprehende not that is contayned in my frendes promise with beleuinge hym, For I apprehend that with my handes, if it be paid me. And so althoughe we apprehende gods promyse with our bele
                     •
                  f, yet the e
                     •
                  hibiciō of the mercy of god whiche is the thinge comprehended in goddes promyse, we apprehende that with al sich partes of vs of bodye and soule, as be conforted and healed by that mercy.
            
            
               IoyeBe not here ioly iuglynge castes with apprehending with handes and with al partes of body and soule, and apprehendinge with faith, nowe the exhibition of the mercye and then the thinge promised, and the promise to 
                  •
               e apprehended, who se not & laugh
                  •
               
               
not at this antichristen apprehender and holy holder of so siyber an ele by the taile? Because I receiue my frendes promised money with my hand and his promise wt beleuynge, therfore I must receyue my forgeuenes in Christe with a nother instrument and mean then with my faith. For I must receiue my ꝓmised forgeuenes with faith only, and yet the exhibiciō therof saith he, I muste receyue with all the partes of body and soule, now go to, and tell vs your wyse reason, and whether faith in receyuinge the promised forgeuenes receiueth not al so therwith your exhibicion, that is in englishe, the geuinge or gifte?
            
               As in the workinge of Christis miracles,
               The bys 
               the promise of helthe in body & soul was receiued by faith in the vnderstandinge lightened by god, but ye helth was receiued in al the partes healed of body and soul.
            
            But & if by faith onely,Ioye the healed persone had not first receyued his promised helthe, it had neuer comen

into his bodye nor soule, wherfore by faith onely is the helth promysed of body and soule receiued, and thus be ye confuted & confounded with your owne exāple contrary to your former apprehending. Now say on yet agen.
            
               Now if ye wyll yet wrangle and saye that the promise of god is mercye,
               The byss. 
               and god wyll surely fulfyll his promise, so as the apprehender of the promise apprehend also mercy, I wyl not vary with you. For oure lady said. Suscepit Israel pucrum suū recordatus misericordie sue. God hath takē to him Israel his seruaunte remembrynge his mercye, that is accordinge to his merciful promise which the next verse declareth. Sicut locutus est. &c. yet ye shal note here a distinction in degree of mercye, betwene ye mercy in ye merciful promise when our lady saith, recordatꝰ misericordie sue, & ye very receiuing of Israel to his seruice, which god deth in ye iustificacion of man. For thē he taketh Israel the beleuer that seeth god to his seruaunt, which is a further mercy. (Ioye. Are not all mercyes and forgeuenes a lyke nyghe to ye beleuer? Paule sayth, nygh vnto the is the worde of faithe, euen in thy mouth and herte.
            
               The byss.
               And the very mercye promised. So as Israel

apprehēdeth the merciful promyse by faith. But being taken to seruice, receiueth the further mercye promised, in receiuinge a newe hert a newe spirit, which god createth in man with the gifte of charitie and resuscitateth in man lyfe.
            
            Ioye.Ioye But tell vs, ere ye wynde your selfe any farther into this youre laborouse labyrinth and mysty maze, whether, when Israell receiued hys mercifull promyse by faythe, he was not euen then taken to seruice, and receiued a newe herte, and new spirit and was euen then (ere charitie wroughte resuscited to lyfe) yf ye say no. So make ye Israels faith receiuinge the mercyful promyse no lyuely fayth, no faith purginge the herte, no true faith, but a deade faith of no efficacye ne power. If ye saye yea: so is all youre confuse bablynge fonde vayne lyes. But say on.
            
               Wherefore we maye not properlye saye,
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                
               we apprehende iustificacion by fa
                     •
                  the whiche is the exhibition of mercye.
            
            But how happenethe it nowe yt toIoye
               
iustificacion ye geue this new name of exhibition of mercie, and cal it not by her wont and playne name as the forgeuenes of synne, the absoluinge from synne, or your effecte of christis passion, or remission, as ye were wont to cal it? Trwly ther lurketh some deceit in this your new foūd word (Exhibicion) but say on agen?
            
               Which is thexhibiciō of mercy promised by God to iustify man,
               The byss. 
               onlesse we wold call the promise of God and thexhibicion of y• thynge promised all one.
            
            Ioye.Ioye when God of his mercie promiseth me remissiō of my sinnes, & euen then, I hearing it, receiue it by faith onely, am I not nowe in that same receiuinge ther of iustifiyed? Christ the write affirmeth it, as thou beleueste my promise so is it to the. And what then prate ye and bable ye all in vayne of your distincte exhibicion and of so many receytes &c. but saye on yet more,
            
               The byss.
               And here in is the sophistrye of this

newe scole slythely to passouer and iugle as this man speketh of vnder the borde?
            
            Here hast thou (good reader) a longe cōfuse talke of this bish.Ioye which as it is all out of his owne brayne dreamed withoute anye scripture, so hathe it nether head ne tayle, but full of croked cauillacions, and diuersely diuised distinccions, al to forme and to fashion vnto him selfe some slyber shyftes, that ye simple readers might not espye him to be confounded and confuted, but that he wold haue euer somewhat to saye for him selfe agenst the plaine veritie, whiche saith. God hathe of his mercye promysed vs in Christ oure free forgeuenes, whiche promysed forgeuenes we by faith only in Christe receyue and in so receiuinge it we be iustifyed. This olde breife and playne speche of the scriptures, he calleth the new scole and sophistry of ye germans. But loke thou vpon these his new rehersed receits, one of the merciful promyse by faith, an other receite of the further mercye

promysed, and a nother receite of a newe hert.
                  
                     •
                  is recei
                  
                     •
                  is. &c. and a receite of ye thing promysed, and of the exhibition therof, and thou shalte see another maner straunge termed nouities bothe of scole papistry and sophistrye, yea and euen confuse perplexitie and perplex confusion it selfe in all this said peese and in that as foloweth. For here yu haste a promise and the thinge promysed,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                a promyse without the thinge receiued, bothe dystincte. Here haste thou the exhition of the thinge promised, a receiuinge of the mercifull promyse by faith,
                  
                     •
                  oy
                     •
                  
                another receauing of the further mercy, and another receit of a newe hert. And al these must be thinges distinct, and yet all knitte together in one bonde, one promyse is apprehended by faith, the thynge promysed must be receaued with body and soule, handes and fete. &c.
            Then hath this multiplier made vs a promised mercy, & an exhibited mercy by exhibicion,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                a mercye receiued

one with faith and another with hā
               des and partes of oure bodye a mere mercye, a further mercye, and I wene a mercye furthest of all that shall neuer come nigh him. Anon he teacheth of a mercy receiued by faith, but the exhibitiō therof with another instrument. Then he minceth mercye diuided into degrees betwixt the further mercy in the promise & the nierer mercy in the receiuing. So as mercy promysed, and mercy exhibited and mercy receiued, and mercye fled so farre from hym, shulde not be all one. And here hath this myghty multiplier of mercye created vs two newe hertes, one created by his faithles faith, and another by his colde charitie, and yet hath not this meruelous maker fyrst taken awaye his owne stonney herte wt his fre choise. And at last (as he is an ingeniose artificer) hathe he iuggled vs forth .iiii. new iustificacions called of him exhibicions. One not properlye apprehended by faythe,

another properlye apprehended by fayth, the thirde is properly called ye exhibition of mercye. And the fourth is kaught by his colde charite. And this is all this highly lerned lawiers diuinite lo. For the which to be cōfirmed, he bringeth in our ladies songe Suscepit Israel puerum suum. &c.
            
            But I dare say, that as for hir, so holy, graciouse playne woman, by those wordes, neuer thought ne mente all these so mysty mazes so ful of perplexities, and inextricable angles. In good fayth when I sawe hym bring in suscepit Israel puerum. &c. for his popish purpose, I meruayled greatly therat, and thought of some other straunge subtyle knot (as it were) of another Gordias, not to be cut in sunder of euery mans swerde. And here I remembred the swerde of a good mery florishinge felow, which in construccion dyd diuyde and cutte Suscepit a two in the myddes, and made these two wordes therof saienge. Sus
               
the wyld bore of rome, cepit hath taken away Israel puerum suum, oure ladies sonne Christ called Israell, in that by his antichristen religion he taketh away and deuoureth christes faith and his worde, alluding vnto ye lxxx. psalme, describinge the wylde frothei bore of rome, wrotinge vp the vyneyarde of christe in burnynge his churche. But returne we to Sampsons foxe tayed by tayle to his felowes with fier brondes to burne vp the philistens good corne.
            
               As sone as man beleueth,
               The byss. 
               god procedeth to the fulfyllynge of his promise for his parte, and geueth vs a newe spirit and a newe herte and so iustifieth vs (Ioye. What thinge then doth your charite whiles man as sone as he beleueth is iustified? ye wyll condempne youre selfe.The byss. 
               If we receiue it and assente by oure fre choise vnto it, and worke with it, whiche is theffectuall receiuinge and the worthynes on our part, wherby we be iustified
            
            Yea marye.Ioye It was tyme to adde youre (yf we receaue it. &c.) but yet

your (yf) commeth all to late to your man yt beleueth. For ye saye that as sone as he beleueth god iustifieth hī, ergo he is iustified and hath alredye receiued his iustificacion before your (yf). But belyke ye wolde haue saide when god offred to man faith, and yf we receaue it by oure free choise and assent▪ then god procedeth to the fulfyllynge. &c.
            
               The byss.
               And note well this, that there muste be on our part a worthines & therfore howsoeuer ye wyll smyle at it, It is a good prayer, or a pro nobis sancta dei genitrix ut digni efficiamur promissionibus christi. Pray for vs holy mother of god that we maye be made worthy of Christes promises.
            
            Here thou seest the byshop to play ii. partes at once,Ioye one contrary to ye tother. The fyrste, he sayth, is goddes parte, in procedinge to the fulfilling of his promyse to the beleuer, the seconde is playne Pelagians parte, whiche was a rancke heretyque and enimye to GOD and to his grace, affirmynge man on his parte to haue fre choice to receiue goddes gyftes,

and to assente to them when they be offered him, and so workinge with them to make our selues worthye, as Wynchester saith, to be iustified effectually, And here this myghtye maker maketh two iustifications, one for goddes part goten by only faith, and another on oure parte goten by Pelagians fre wyll to receiue grace and to worke our owne worthynes, whereby we be iustified, I thoughte Pelagiane wolde halter hym selfe at laste, or els ye must thruste these two contrary iustifications both into one poke, where they shall agre togither as the foxe and the hounde, and as Pelagiane and saint Austen, for this is plaine that heretique Pelagians opinion and heresye, which Austen so myghtely confuteth in his bokes against pelagian and celestiū, de gracia christi & in li. de remi. peccatorum sayenge. Men laboure to finde in oure wyll that as is ours and not of god, but howe it maye be founde

I know it not. In this peese euerye man maye see, what an enemye with Pelagiane the byshop is to grace, & wolde priuily drope into the peoples hertes this present poison of Pelagians scole. That the grace of god doth but helpe our weake wyll and infirmitie: and so to make vs chekmates. and felow workers with god, vs on our part and him of his part, for oure iustificaciō diuided betwixt vs both. diuidinge Christe, whiche was and is euer an hole entier sauiour. Agēst the which heresy, god by his prophet Ezechiel,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                declaringe of what power our wyll is left to it selfe, speakethe thus, I shall geue ye a newe herte, & put a newe spirite in the middes of you. And I shall take awaye the stoney hert frō your flesh and geue you a soft herte. Nowe tell vs. Howe can mans owne naturall stonney rebellious hert helpe god, and by his free choise and assent worke with god in his conuersion to worke his owne

iustification, ether to wyll well, or to endeuoure, or frely to chose good or to assent, or to conforme him self (as ye saye) to gods wyll and to vse his gyftes? when god saith plainelye.
            This stonney hert muste be first taken awaye, and a newe made put into man, clene contrarye to his firste herte and wyll. But here may euerye learned christen reader see howe peruerselye ye handle the scripture, leauynge out quyte the taking away of the hard stoney hert, as though your fre choiced man hadde none siche, ne were the sonne of Adam, leaping ouer it into a newe herte and newe spirite, euen sich one as was Adam created before he lost his fre lybertie to good by synne, you diuidinge his workes betwixte the man and god, affirming in the same, god to worke his parte, and the man with his free wyll and herte, with his assent and youre free choice. &c. to worke his owne worthines on his parte, as two men shulde

draw out a logge together bothe by one lyne, one to helpe the tother. But aunswere me (by youre fayth) trewly to these two questions? what thinge worketh the man on his parte in the takynge awaye of his stonney rebellious herte? If he worketh any thinge with sich an hert,The affectes of the flesh be inimitie to god. it must nedes be againste god, and not with God, for what els can such an hert worke but euyll,Rom. viii and agaynste God, and not with GOD, but againste his owne helth? Also whether is thys newe herte and wyll, oure owne naturall hert and wyll or no? These can not be ours, for our owne stonney is takē away & this new hert is contrarye to ours, so that we cannot haue two cō
               trary hertes and wylles at once.
            Wherfore seing they be gods giftes, let vs not vsurpe them for oure free choice, but geue that belongethe to god to hym selfe, and that as is ours to oure selues, and make them not oure workes on our parte (as ye do

so pertelye and distinctlye) settinge them checkmate againste gods workes in contention for our part, as ye do with Pelagiane enemye to goddes grace and glorye, and to myche a frende to your owne blynd nature. Repente ye and obserue the trewe Sabbothe, which god so ofte in the lawe and prophetes commaunded so religiousely to be kept. Euen in restinge and ceassynge from your owne false opinions, euyll wyll, and worse workes, and suffer god to abolysshe all that your owne is, and to worke his wyll and workes in you. And let vs be so called cooperatores dei, as Paul expouneth it of him self vnder correction sayenge, not I haue so wrought and laboured in the gospel preching,i. cori. xv. but it is the grace of god in me. We shuld be rather sufferers thē doers or workers wt God, suffring hī to draw to work, to handle vs wt his holye spirite, as the sawer drawethe

and handleth his sawe and attribute ye worke to the cheif workmā, & not to his sawe. For it is god that worketh in vs, to wyll, to perseuer, and to finishe for his own goodnes sake and not for our desertis. The firste parte of any good worke is our wyll, the othere is enforce and endeuor to prosecute and to finisshe it, and here ye see god to be the author of them bothe. Thus ye se god to worke all in euery thinge both beginninge, middes, and ende,i. cori. xii. who be praysed, glorified, and thanked for euer. But you with pelagiane, wyll worke with, and help him and for the confirmatiō of this heresye of your fre choice to receiue grace and so to worke your owne worthynes, ye bringe in youre autoritie oute of the popes portewes. Ora pro nobis sancta dei genitrix. &c. Praye for vs holy mother of god (and yet was she mother but to his manhead) that we myght be effectuousely made worthy the promyses of Christe. For scripture

haue ye none. In whiche prayer (saye you) we acknowledge and truly professe, that the promyses of god require in vs a worthines, whiche worthines standeth, in our fre choice, to receiue the promise. For the promises be not to all men without condicion absolute. Ioye, No they be made to them that receaue them by faithe which is the fr
                  •
                gift of god, and not to them that receiue them by your fre choice.Rom. iiii And therfore it is asked what and if some of them beleue not gods promises? shal their vnbeleif frustrat the promise? God forbid (sayth Paul) for god wilbe found true of his promises when al mē be found liers. For as he knoweth to whō he maketh his promises, so forseeth he who shall by faith onely receaue and cleaue to thē. Then ye wold proue vs to haue goten to vs this worthynes by our free choice in receiuinge the grace and gyft of gods merciable promise by ye sainge of Wysedome. God tempted

them and found them worthey of him This text sayth that god found them worthy after he had proued their pacience by aff
                  •
               yctions, but not by their fre choise for receiuynge grace, but because him selfe in geuynge them his giftes of faith pacience and other vertewes maketh them worthey.
            And your owne popysshe prayer, ora pro nobis. &c. is directly against you. For no man prayeth for that thynge sayth Austen which he hathe, or can gette it with his free choice when he lyste, and youre selfe alleged Austēs wordes for ye same, saying. Iube quod uis, modo des quod iubeas, lorde cō
               maunde what thou wylte so thou geuest me grace to performe it. Then ye bring in Centurio, who, ye say, because he sayde he was vnworthy that Christe shulde come into his house, therfore wolde ye proue vs to be worthy of god. wherein me thynkethe ye be besides your selfe and se not what ye saye: to proue vs worthy because

Centurio sayde he was vnworthye? This shoulde proue vs rather to be vnworthye, excepte ye wold make vs worthy because we confesse vs with him to be vnworthy, and so be we vnworthye in dede, or elles our confession is false we makinge oure selues therby lyers and vnworthey. Thus maye euery reader see how false doctrine wyll neuer agre with it selfe, & lyes wyll euer breake forth and apere with ye longe eares of the asse ietting in the lyons skynne, presse ye them downe neuer so stiffely. At last, when ye haue prynted depe and faste, this Pelagians heresye of free choyce in your readers hertes, then to blere the eyes of some not so symple readers, but may perceaue your iuglynge, ye wolde seme to them to mytigate or to qualifie your heresies with a mitigacion,His worthines is now calle metenes. and moderation of ye word (worthines) calling it metenes after goddes acception, as ye myghte thus

saye with your wont false coloure of correction to your scolers. Albeit I haue taught you, with your fre choice and working with the same in assentinge, to receyue gods promysed mercye and grace and thus on youre parte to obtaine your owne worthines whereby to be iustified, yet thys notwithstandinge, ye must mitigate the worde, worthines, and cal it Metenes after gods acceptacion. (Ioye. A worthey couer to Pelagians pot, loo.) Gard. so that al siche may be accompted worthey as conforme themselues to gods pleasure and vse siche giftes of god as wherby god maketh vs worthy, both the giftes receiued and other mo. (Ioye. Lorde how this slymei snayle pretenteth hir doutefull slyber waye groped before with hyr leithey hornes for feare of resystence and obstacles? Here Pelagian perceiuynge, the deseruinge of his worthynes by fre choice to be to grosse to be hyden or colored, is compelled

now to flye from that speache to a newe fantazyed phrase. That we must deserue our worthy makinge of god, or our new mitigated Meatnes after his acception, by conformynge oure selues to gods pleasure and by vsynge suche giftes of god as wherby god maketh vs worthey both the giftes receiued and other moo.
            
            Ioye. Beholde, good reader, what s
                  •
               yber shyftes pelagiane is compelled to seke for his merites and free choice in endeuouringe and conforming him self to gods wyll and by his free choice in meriting to vse the giftes of god to make vs worthy and meat for god. Before he saide. By fre choice, we on our parte had gotten & deserued this worthines, and that there were workes of penaunce called the meritinge and deseruynge to vse the giftes of god: Mary (as I remember) he added by participation. So that this is the sence of his prayer nowe to our ladye, and not to oure

lorde. That he might be made worthy, on his part, and not o
                  •
                goddes parte to be made meate and conformable by his free choice, bonde to synne to the fulfyllynge of goddes wyll. &c. And after all these so intricate speaches, he makethe a playne note agaynst hym selfe sayinge.
            
               The byss.
               And it is to be noted, that we pray, that we may be made worthy (for we canne not make our selues worthy) but muste receiue all of god.
            
            (Ioye.Ioye No, of our ladye we must receaue somewhat, and part of our selues. Haue ye so sone forgotten youre prayer to our ladye. ora pro nobis, praye for vs holy mother of god that we maye be made worthy?)
            
               The byss.
               Of whome is all our worthynes, and of our
                     •
                   selues vnworthines.
            
            
               IoyeWhere is your fre choice by assēt to receiue grace and to worke with it, whiche ye called before theffectual receiuinge and the worthines on our part whereby we be iustified? where then be your dedes of penaūce to merit the vse of sich giftes of god? wher

be your merits to deserue your meatnes, your worthynes, and conformite ye spake of wherby men maye conforme them selues to gods pleasure and to vse his giftis?The byss.
            
            
               And yee in thateinment of worthines, we be workers wt god by grace as is afore said ye laide before we be workers by our fre choice on our part,Ioye for this worthines. How stand these togither? But whē thapostles mēcioned gods work in them, thei said, nether the plāter ne the waterer is any thīg, but it is god that geueth the encreace, and Paule sayth of hym self laboringe aboue all his felowes, as correcting his speach not I, but ye grace of god in me wrought it. So yt thei attributed al theyr workes and labours, ye & their wyll & endeuoures and worthines all to gods grace wholly & nothing to thē selues and so shuld ye do, if ye taught truly. But here ye harp agen of your vntewned 
                  •
               arring condicions saing.
            
               The promises of god requyre the condition of worthines on our behalfe wherein is required our endeuour.
               The bys
            
            
               ye shulde speake playnly accordinge to the scriptures sainge.Ioye The promised forgeuenes of our sinnes in christ requireth our faith whiche is ye gyfte of god geuen vs for christes merits, and put your good condicions your worthynes and endeuours in youre purse, and deale them forthe into your almose. For by this scorpions tayle added. (The condicion of oure worthynes is requyred on oure behalfe wherin is required oure endeuoure) so smelleth of Pelagians fre choice and merites contrary to grace that it poysoneth all the reste of your doctrine. For oure endeuoure muste procede oute of oure wyll and vnderstandinge, which both, if they be vnto any good thinge moued, it muste come all of god.
            
               ye bryng in a text of Paule, lyke a keye to cleaue a logge,
               The byss. 
               for his spekynge in that place, nothinge parteineth to the iustificacion we spake of.
            
            The kaye that I bringe in of S. PauleIoye openethe the doore so wyde

that all men not being starcke blynd (as ye be) may see that our best, workes iustifye vs not. These be his wordes,i. Cor. iiii where he speaketh of his office of preaching, affirming him self to haue done it to trewelye and faythfullye that no man coulde blame hym, no not my nowne conscience, sayde he, can accuse me of anye vnfaithfulnes or slaknes or negligence therin, saīg thus of him selfe. Nullius mihiipsi conscius sum. I know me self fauteles, in nothinge concerning my ministery gilty, Sed nō per hoc iustificatus sum, now conster you it forth & se whether in englysh it be not. But yet for this doīg, or by this, am I not iustified. Wherfore if Paul graunt hī self not to be iustified for so blameles laborouse, so perellous and so hyghe an office and so good a dede, loke not you to be iustified for anye of youre good condicions yet not perfourmed
            Hitherto thou seeste (christen reader) howe this byshops doctryne is

patched togither of mere papistry & sophistry & of shāeles lies, & heresies, buylded vpon s
                  •••
               er soft sādes, euery wher inconstant, lyke it selfe, wauerynge, repugnante, slyppinge from one shyft to another, sekyng cauillacions and corners to couer him selfe wt colets, versicles, litanies, popishe prayers, with blynde and balde reasons sukt out of his owne wyly wicked wit, no scriptures groundlye ne faithfully nor truely alleged for hys part, ne for his doctrine and declaracion. And as thou hast now hitherto a tast therof, euē of ye same sowersauor smelleth all the rest of his boke, as I shall vtter it in the next part of mine aunswer god wyllyng. For I know that the holy scriptures, procedynge fro the mouth of the euerlastinge veritie. (Albeit Satan with his sworne Antichristis haue euer contended to peruert, and yet ceasse not by all their subtyles engins and fraude serpentyne and false doctryne, by teachinge

ignoraunce (as wryteth this bishop) to blot oute of mens hertes the knowledge of goddes holy gospell, neuermore to be harde ne redde, but vtterlye to be extynguyshed with fyer and swerde as heresies, addinge theyr bitter comminacions and cruell condempnacions in banyshing and burnynge thys yeare so manye godlye bookes and bybles) yet are they by the almyghtye merciable power of GOD, so preserued roted, defended and nourisshed in the brestes of his chosen, that lyke as the ferme strong palme tre, the greater waight be laide vppon hir, the mightylyer she aryseth and spreadethe: euen so, the worde of GOD, the cruellyer it is depressed and resisted with the tyranny of the byshops & priestes the stronglier it arysethe, the wyder it is dylated, the myghtilyer it ascendeth the deper it is rooted, the fasterit standethe. For there haue bene manye excellente wittes,

bothe of the popis sophisters, of his scole diuines, of his rethricions and lawyers mighty in perswadinge blasphemies and as subtyle by sophems to peruerte christis pure veritie which haue stretched forth their venomouse tongues, excercised their wylie wit is and popish pennes, armed with the seclare swerdes, with al their senews bent ayenst ye pore plain gospel, which all, as thei haue hitherto enforced into their owne confusion and wretched fall, so haue thei the highlyer promoued it ayenst their owne willes. And yet these blynd beastis, worthely thus caste of frō god, see not their own blody entents nowe plainly frustrated, and their own wiked enforcements to haue preuailed ayenst them seluis. What, thinke ye, shalbe the ende of themprowr nowe encensed of the pope to subuerte christes gospel receiued in germanye?
            Shall it not be turned into their mutuall confusion one to be the destruccion

of the tother and eche of them to be the minishing of ye others strēgth? one to consume the tother, the worthi wrath of God at laste to be powred forth on them both? when the seclar arme thus longe defendinge and enrichinge the beaste of Babylon shall at last eat vp hir fleshe and burne vp hir citic.Collo. ii. Christ in whome are hidden the treasures of all knowledge and wysedome, was once foreuer reueled so plentuously & manifestly, that nothing necessary for our saluaciō may be added ne desyred, but we ought to be content with his sufficient articles and sacramentes left vs in scripture al vnwritten verities (as they cal thē vtterly detested. And euen then were ye last dayes and houre. as Ioan and Paule testify,Heb. i. wherof his sacraments and articles and his doctrine be called ye last yt shuld be taught & delyuered vs, the fathers voice with greate maiestie out of heuen commaunding vs to heare his sonne as the last and

sufficient most perfit teacher & maister, vs not to wayte for any other after hym, lest any thense forthe shulde be deceiued by any further vayne expectation and loking for any false techers and writers as haue this bysshoppe with his Antichristes hitherto seduced men withe their false bookes and falser doctrine: from yt which our lorde preserue and defende this his church of englonde, to whom be prayse for euer. Amen.
            And now vnto you (my lord) send I this fyrst pece to occupy your selfe in makinge aunswer. It was Easter ere I had your boke, & thē had I litle tyme skant .xx. dayes to read it & to make this answer, and lesse quietnes to wryte. For in dede ye made me a runner about into vncertaine seates and vnder, and otherwhiles aboue vncertaine sower elements. But the lorde see to it, and 
                  •
               e iudge which taketh out of your handes into lyberte all that yet suffer wronge of you.
            
         
      
   