
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ 
               Of the Crinitall Starre, which appeareth this October and Nouember. 1580.
            
               IT ſeemeth (gentle Reader) a difficult and hard matter, for any man to wryte or doo any thyng that ſhoulde be well accepted in theſe dayes, eſpecially, when the opinion of men is growen ſtrange and diuers, accomptyng ech thyng, eyther too whyte or too blacke, too ſweete or too ſowre, too woorthie or too vilde: Yet at this tyme, not reſpectyng curious opinions, neyther regardyng the ſpeach of the Captious, ſo muche as the requeſt of friendes, doo ſet foorth this my iudgement touchyng this Crinitall Starre, ſhewyng to vs the greatneſſe of Gods goodneſſe, by ſuch a forewarnyng to repentaunce. But ſuche is the corruption and hardneſſe of this Age, that we contemne and neglect all tokens in the Heauens, by reſpectyng our onely ſecuritie, for the tyme preſent. And yet, yf euery man woulde recken the courſe of his lyfe paſt, he ſhoulde ſee in hym ſelfe great cauſe to tremble at theſe

thynges. And alſo, if we conſider what great rout of euylles doth beſet vs, and way how many hath been deſtroyed, or what hurtes hath been by Lyghtnynges, Earthquakes, Ground openinges, Flooddes, tempeſtes of the Sea, great Windes, infectious Ayre, Warres, Mortalities, Plagues, ſtrange Diſeaſes, and ſuch lyke, which thynges, Commettes doth commonly pronounce to enſue: I ſuppoſe that the remembraunce of ſuch dangers, woulde make vs not to be altogether cardleſſe of theſe Tokens, threatnyng to vs calamities for our vnthankfulneſſe. And therefore, who ſo euer doth make light accompt of Earthquakes and gleming Starres, and is not mooued at the ſyght thereof, with the ſeare of Gods diſpleaſure: the ſame people doth alſo as lyghtly, and as lytle regarde their owne conſcience, and amendment of lyfe. Wherefore it is tyme that we ceaſſe from puffyng vp our ſelues with pryde, letcherie, and enuie, and to cleaue to repentaunce, and to lay holde vpon Dauids Anker, which is the multitude of Goddes mercie: For as it is in the .xxxi. Pſalme, Mercie wyll muiron them which truſt in the Lorde.
            
            
               
Nowe, if any man ſuppoſe that nothyng can be rightly gathered by Aſtronomie of Comettes, he is muche deceiued, and he is too blynde in his hart, that thinke it ſignifie nothyng: for, touching the laſt tayled Starre, which appeared. 1577. agaynſt the face of the great Planet Saturne toward the Southweſt, it is euident, that the effect of his ſignification was to continue three yeeres, and dyd ende but a lytle before Michaelmas laſt paſt.
            And touchyng the fyrſt yeere. 1578. the effect was ſeene Southwarde by Warres, with the ſlaughter of Princes. And in the ſeconde yeere. 1579. it brought foorth great irruption of Waters and Floddes. And in the thirde yeere. 1580. the effecte of that Commet was dreadful, by a feareful Earthquake, the ſyxt of Apryll, betweene fiue and ſyxe at nyght: And with Warres againſt the Portyngales by the Spaniardes: vnto whom that Commet was ſpecially appropriate, by vertue of his place and terme in whiche it ſtoode: And alſo with a new kinde of ſtrange diſeaſe, as it were a Sommer Rewme he hath ended his effectes.
            And immediatly vpon the endyng of all

theſe effectes, there is come to appearance a Crinitall Starre, farre different from the other, in place, ſituation, and cooloure: which I obſerued to appeare immediatly after the new Moone, the .viii. day of October, placed betweene the .xii. and .xi. houſe of the Heauens, after Sunne ſettyng, the Moone fyrſt of al receiuing the ſhadowie vmbration of this Crinita, by a quartyle radiation from Scorpio. Secondly, I noted the Sunne to receiue the next ſhadowe by ſtrong aſpect, and that the Sunne aboue all other Planettes, is moſtly and woorſt radiated, in the tyme of the continuance of this Crinita, fyrſt with the quartile of Saturne, ſecondly with the oppoſition of Mars: Which thyng doth ſignifie, in that the Sunne and the Moone (which be Animae mundi) doth eſpecially receiue the impreſſion of his euyll aſpect, that the Sympathy of his influence ſhall be greeuous, with Plagues, and infectious Ayre, with calamitie among the people, and with captiuitie and euyl to ſome perſons. And this ſhall be to the Countreys lying within the eyght and nynth clymate.
            Alſo I note, that this Crinita is fixed agaynſt a Starre of the thyrde Magnitude,

neere vpon the Dolphyn, of the nature of Saturne and Mars, and is of a Septentrionall Latitude from the Zodiacke: And alſo, that this Crinita is fixed vnder the Signe called Aquarius, beyng an Ayeryall and Weſterne Signe, there placed, neere vnto that ponderous Planet Saturne, poſſeſſing his owne houſe, with the company of Caput Draconis, whiche portendeth towarde the Northeaſt, and Northweſt Countries; within the tyme of his effect, great corruption and infection in the Ayre, great harme and hynderaunce by ragyng Windes, Waters, and Flooddes, miſerie among the people of the ſayd Countreys, Damnum altis hominibus, deceitfull deuyſes, and great terrour to ſome, with captiuitie.
            Next to this, I doo obſerue the coloure of this Crinitall Starre, to be wateryſhe, darke, pale, and Saturnine, which is the very coloure of death: whereby it ſignifieth ſadneſſe, ſorowe, Plagues, miſerie, mortalities, feare, and hunger, to be among the people dwellyng within the eyght and nynth Clymate. And all this for our vnthankfulneſſe, vnleſſe we repent vs of our ſinnes, which are ſo ryfe among vs.
            
               
Farther I note howe that the tayle of this Crinitall Starre, is extended towarde the face of Mars, and towarde the Northeaſt partes, which is the true teſtimonie of Warres, bloodſheddyng, of ſodayne irruption of Souldiers, of Sickneſſes, Plagues, Sweattes, blooddy Flixe, and heapyng vp of ſorowe among the people in the Northeaſt and Weſt Countreys.
            Finally, I obſerue that this Crinitall Starre, is of a thyn ſubſtaunce, & that it ſhal laſt tyl the Sunne hath paſſed vnder the end of Libra, Scorpio & Sagittarie, and ſo long it ſhall be apparently ſeene at Sunne ſettyng, in the tyme of his continuance, to be in the xi.x. and part of the .ix. houſe, and that it is in the .xi. Signe from Aries: Which doth ſignifie euyll conſpiracies, deceitfull dealynges, and muche terrour and daunger to many men in the Northeaſt and Weſt Countreys, ſo that to conclude this fyrſt part, the full ſignification of this Crinita, is to continue two yeeres and three quarters: And therefore let vs pray, that GOD may diuert and turne from vs the daungers, which it ſignifieth, in Plagues, warres, and inundation of flooddes, windes, and waters.

And thus generally of his place, coloure, and ſignification: next folowe, what, where, and when, his effect ſhall fall.
            
               The ſeconde part, touching this Crinitall Starre.
               WHere as I haue ſhewed generally what this Crinital Starre ſignifieth, it foloweth in this ſeconde treatiſe, to declare in what countryes the effectes ſhalbe, and at what tymes. For ſeeyng the earth is diuided into foure partes, Europe, Aſia, Affrica, and America, and euery one of theſe comprehend a multitude of Countryes, and euery Countrye is ſubiect to diuers perylles of the heauens, and doth dyffer in clymates, and in the obliquitie of the Horizon: Then it muſt needes be, that no Comet or tayled Starre, can ſhewe his effect generally in al the foure diuiſions of the earth, but properly to thoſe Countryes ouer which it is placed, accordyng to clymatical and parellell lynes. So then touchyng this Crinita, waying his aſcention, & his Latitude Northerly from the Zodiacke, with the extractyng of his euyll

ſhadowes vpon certayne poyntes of the heauens, with his place and terme in which i
                     •
                   ſtand, I finde by Aſtronomical diuiſion, that the effect ſhall not reach into Africa, nor to the middle Seas, neyther to any Countryes ſpecially, but to thoſe which are within the viii. and .ix. Clymate, and properly to thoſe places, Cities, and Townes, which are vnder Aquary, Taurus, Leo, and Scorpio, placed in the foreſayd climates. Wherefore to come to proper places, I finde that the effect of his ſhadowes ſhal be ſeene in thoſe places which be neere to the Ryuer of Rhene, and Danubius, ſo that Germany ſhal feele of it.
               Alſo the force and euyll ſhalbe ſhewed vpon Flaunders, Hollande, Zealande▪
                   and Freeſelande, and no leſſe vpon Denmarke, Danſke, Englande, Scotlande, and Irelande. And in lyke caſe to Pollonde, and Belgica in Fraunce and Pycardy. Some of theſe Countryes feelyng it with Plagues, mortalities, ſome with blooddie warres, ſome with the death of great Peares, and other ſome with miſery by great Floodds, wyndes, and ouerflowes of waters: of which, other countryes Southward, & Eaſt, as Spayne, Barbarie & Italy, Turkie, Greece, and all which dwell

out of the eyght and .ix. clymate, ſhalbe free, in reſpect of the corruption of ayre, & greeuous harme which is portended by weather, both by Lande and Sea.
               Next, whereas I note that the effectes of this Crinita, ſhall appeare two yeeres and three quarters, I obſerue by the profectional Athazer, and other circumſtances, that the next yeere. 1581. the effectes ſhal be as folowe. Firſt touchyng diſeaſes, there ſhall raigne Inflammations, Burnyng Feuers, Plagues, Hart burnynges, Blood ſhotten eyes, Blooddie flyxe, Meaſles, Pockes, Pleuriſies, heate in the ſtomacke, fallyng ſicknes, Phrenſies, and the ſtone: theſe be the pryncipal diſeaſes. Alſo the partes that ſhall be moſtly touched, be the hart, cheſt, brayne, eyes, backe, bladder: but it geueth the ſignification forcible vpon the mynde and brayne of man, that men ſhall be geuen to be peruerſe of hart, and that madneſſe, furiouſneſſe, phranticknes, ſadneſſe, melancholy, and cholericke diſpoſition ſhal be ſeene greatly to abounde in men of the foreſaid countreys the next yeere, and therefore let vs pray to God, leſt for our wyckedneſſe he turneth vs to a reprobate ſenſe. Alſo the next yeere it bryngeth 1581.
                  
foorth adrye Sommer, that the earth ſhalbe ſcorched, and waters ſhal be ſcant, and 581. betweene 
                     
                        •
                     amma, and Michaelmas, ſhal the full terror appeare in ſome of the foreſayde countryes, in Plagues, Warres, Craftie deuiſes, captiuities to ſome eſtates, and with great ſadneſſe to people. And betweene Simon and Iude, and Hallowmas weeke, ſhall Hollande, Zealande, and many partes of Englande, be greatly indammaged and indangered with ſodayne ſtormes, and flowes of great waters, and greeuous weather.
               Nowe touthyng the yeeres folowyng, 1582. and. 1583. marke what two euyl yeeres they ſhalbe for wyndes, rayne, and flooddes, and inundations, in the foreſayde countryes.
               This Crmita ſhal by his vmbration and courſe of his ſignification, bryng foorth two 1582. ſtrange & marucylous Candelmas Termes, 1583. for euyll weather, huge raines or ſnowes, and wyndes, with inundation of great waters, and two ſorowfull Sommers, for abundaunce of wet, raine, & ouerflowynges, whereby theſe Monethes ſhall be very greeuous and hurtfull, Februarie, March. 1582. 1583. and Iuly, Auguſt. 1582. 1583.

Wherefore ſeeing this tayled Starre, by his pale coloure, doth ſignifie great loſſes and hinderaunce to the Countreys aforeſayd, by irruption and inundation of great Flooddes, and by one hard Winter the next yeere. 1582. and two wette Sommers, to the great indammagyng of many places of the foreſayd Countreys, and to the hurt of the Huſbandeman and Merchaunt, wherevpon myſerie, dearth, penurie, and calamitie, may growe to ſome of the foreſayde Countreyes, in the ſame yeeres: For that cauſe, it ſhall be neceſſary for vs to pray to GOD, that he may ſtay his Plagues and Warres the next yeere, and to geue vs more moderate yeeres, then this Crinita ſignifie of. 1582. & 1583. For the ſpeciall ſignification of this Crinital Starre, is in brynging corruption in the Ayre, by vnſeaſonable weather, the next yeere. 1581. by Taurus, impreſſing ariditie and dryneſſe vpon the Earth, with infectuous exhalations, bryngyng plagues and Cholericke motions in the hartes of men. The monethes the next yeere of ye appearance of effectes, be Apryl, May, Auguſt, September, Nouember. The ſeconde yeere. 1582. the impreſſion is by Gemini,
                  
in procuryng much agitation in the ayre, & vntemperate times, by great windes, raine, ſnowes, & floods. The worſt moncthes be February, March, Iuly, Anguſt, October.
               
               The thyrde yeere. 1583. the Athazer fall vpon Cancer, whiche ſhall bryng foorth a wet yeere, much rayne, and darke wether, with many flooddes, that the groundes ſhalbe much harmed, and rottes among the heardes. The woorſt Monethes of theſe effectes, be February, March, Apryl, Iuly, Auguſt, September, October. Thus thou haſt (Gentle Reader) my extraction of this Crinital Starre, with the iudgement of the Eclipſes 
                     •
                  omoyned. Hopyng that thou wylt iudge of it, accordyng to tryal, and not by a captious opinion. And ſo I conclude, wyſhyng euery one to feare GOD, and his ſignes, and to pray that he may turne from vs what euyl ſo euer his Comettes ſignifie, indewyng vs with his holy ſpirite.
               
                  Fare wel.
               
               
                  F. K.
               
            
            FINIS.
            GOD ſaue and long preſerue our moſt woorthy and gracious Queene ELIZABETH.
            
         
      
   