
      
         
            
            To the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie: the honorable Lords, Knights
and Burgeſſes aſſembled in Parliament.
            The humble Petition for your Maieſties moſt miſerable (yet moſt loyall ſubiects)
the Priſoners for debt in the Kings Bench.
            IN all humilitie ſhew, that they vnderſtanding that many Vſurers and other vnconſcionable men (vnder the colour of Creditors in London)
haue combined together to frame a Complaint into this Parliament againſt all Priſoners for debt: And that their petition
might the better be heard, they haue of late (by way of preparation and cunning) preferred a Petition (to the Commiſſioners for Grieuances
and decay of Trade,) which Petition as yet your poore ſubiects haue not ſeene.
            Humbly therefore beſeech your moſt ſacred Maieſtie and Parliament, if any ſuch Bill or Complaint happen to be preferred,
that you would graciouſly be pleaſed to heare your poore ſubiects anſwer, before ought be concluded againſt them.
            And in the meane time that your Maieſtie and Parliament would be pleaſed to take into your wiſe and Chriſtian conſideration
theſe briefe notes following.
            
               Reaſonable Conſiderations, touching impriſonment for Debt, Penall Bonds, and Vſuries.
               1. That by the ancient Common lawes of this Kingdome, no man free borne ought to be impriſoned for debt.
               It is one of the great fundamentall Lawes in force to this day.
               It is the common Birth-right of euery man. For life, libertie and dower are the maine and principall things which the Law of the Kingdome
doth chiefly and abſolutely intend to preſerue and maintaine aboue all other.
               2. The body of euery ſubiect is the Kings, for his owne and the Common-wealths ſeruice; not onely in the right of the abſolute and
tranſcendent power of his Maieſties Crowne, but by the very Law it ſelfe.
               The Statute by which mens bodies are impriſoned for debt, is ſhort and obſcure, without cauſe, circumſtance or reaſon expreſſed for the
ſame. And there were no penall Bonds or Vſuries knowne or practiſed by Chriſtians in thoſe times.
               Nor doth it any way appeare that theſe two ſo great and maine rights of the King and Subiect, were had in thought or conſideration at the
making hereof.
               It may be doubted therefore whether that Statute be of power and value to deſtroy ſo great rights, againſt the ancient fundamentall Law,
and againſt the ancient Crowne Rights, without mention, repeale, or reaſon alledged.
               3. That nine in ten parts of all the debts for which men are kept ſtaruing in priſon, are vſurious and corrupt loanes and contracts, or forfeitures
vpon penall bonds and engagements, which are things pronounced extortions, odious and deteſtable ſinnes, forbidden by the lawes
of God and man, as the Statute de Iudaiſmo and diuers others doe ſhew.
               4. Nor is the tenth part of the ſummes; recouered by Iudgements at Law (and for which men are kept ſtaruing and periſhing in priſons)
iuſt or due debts, but are in truth ſmall principall debts, or ſmall remainders of great principall debts, multiplied to incredible height by forfeitures
of penall bonds, counterbonds, counter-ſecurities, &c. all which yet the priſoner muſt pay, or ſtarue in priſon for. Here are very many
ſtrange and incredible examples of this kind.
               5. That the Law it ſelfe ſeemes too hard, in that it iudgeth and ſtriketh with the ſword of execution, vpon hearing the actuall parts onely
of mens cauſes, and reiecteth the equitable parts (which yet is one halfe of the cauſe.)
               The other eare of Iuſtice for hearing the other halfe, is in the Courts of Equitie, which are far off, and ſo full of trouble, charge and delay,
as the remedie cōmonly proues worſe then the diſeaſe, as many men (who are no priſoners) know by experience. For the Law is ſent and miniſtred
in euery Countie, but there is no Court of Equitie for the Defendant but in London onely.
               6. That no Chriſtian Country impriſoneth the bodie for debt, but England only: but as ſoone as the Debtor doth relinquiſh all his eſtate
to the Creditors, his bodie is free from impriſonment, and he ſtands liberatus à debito. And yet hee ſhall be reſtored backe his wiues Dower
for her and her childrens liuelihood, and the neceſſary meanes or inſtruments of his profeſſion, trade or qualitie.
               Nay, this our impriſoning Statute exceeds the Turks and Mahometans, where the Creditor may impriſon the Debtor, but then hee muſt
keepe the Debtor and all his family with ſufficient maintenance, leſt any be ſtarued by reaſon of the Debtors impriſonment.
               All which reaſonable and charitable conſiderations the Statutes of England haue not hitherto prouided for.
               7. That this practiſe of impriſoning mens bodies for debt, tendeth not to the good of the Common-wealth, but to the aduancement and
increaſe of Vſurers and vnconſcionable dealing men in an vnlawful calling, who (as the ancient Iewes of this Kingdom) haue gotten ſo great
a portion of the maine ſtocke and common moneys of the Kingdome into their hands, that vpon any extraordinary chance or occaſion that
diſcourageth or diſpleaſeth them, they make a dearth of money at their pleaſure, to the infinite hurt and preiudice of the Common-wealth
and common commerce.
               And who ſeeth not, that if there were no gain by loane of moneys, there would be free and friendly lending and borrowing, to the increaſe
of loue and charitie amongſt all, and of freer and more gainfull trading: but this gaine by vſurie, ſhutteth vp the hand of all good and Chriſtian
offices amongſt men.
               And it is not to be doubted, but that the great vſury which is gotten in England out of all ſorts of trades, is the true and reall cauſe that the
Low Countries and other Kingdomes and Common-wealths thriue, advance, and outſtrip vs in trade and nauigation, though we abound and
exceed all the world with the beſt matter, meanes and place, for both.
               8. That priſoners for debt are willing and deſire with the Vſurers, that fraud and cozenage may be made fellonie, not only for the future,
but for the paſt and preſent times alſo, ſo as the Vſurer or Creditor may loſe his debt, and pay coſts and damages for the ſlander (according to
the qualitie of the Debtor) if he faile in proofe.
               9. That impriſonment of the body is needleſſe; for it neither is or can giue ſatisfaction to the Creditor, though he ſtarue it by impriſonment.
               Beſides, it deſtroyeth the Debtor in his credit, friends, qualitie and trade, in his rights and ſuites; it conſumeth all his meanes to keepe himſelfe
in life; and to pay fees and vnconſcionable pretences, for fauorable vſage of Bailiffes, priſon-keepers, and ſuch as liue vpon the extremities
and neceſſities of priſoners.
               Nay more, it deſtroyeth the Debtor his wife, children, and all that is deare vnto him; yea commonly his life and all: for there haue died
within theſe twelue moneths aboue lxxx perſons in this priſon alone, by want and infection; beſides many then preſerued by the vſe of the
writ of Habeas Corpus. So that it is hereby manifeſt, that life, libertie and dower, which the law intendeth chiefly to preſerue, is by impriſoning
the bodie for debt, ouerthrowne and deſtroyed. And yet after ten or twentie yeares impriſonment, in which the priſoner hath ſuffered
more miſery then the higheſt criminall offender, there is not come one pennie thereby into the Creditors purſe, nor one pennie diſcounted
of the Debtors debt.
               10. If Creditors were to take their ſatisfaction vpon all the Debtors eſtate, without impriſonment of the bodie, (as by the ancient fundamentall
lawes and practiſe of other Countries,) then it would follow that the Debtor, though he had departed all his eſtate to the Creditor or
Vſurer, yet hauing his perſon, qualities and endeuors free, his friends conſtant, and his credit vnſtained with the priſon, would ſtill be able,
readie, and fit, to do honor and ſeruice to his King and Country, and to win and purchaſe to himſelfe a new eſtate, to the aduancement of
his owne and his poſterities fortunes.
               In all humilitie therefore, they pray your moſt ſacred Maieſtie and Parliament to take the premiſes into conſideration, that ſatiſfaction
of all iuſt debts may be taken vpon all the Debtors eſtate, as a thing moſt iuſt and proper; and that mens bodies may be ſet
free, as a thing moſt agreeable to the lawes of God and man, to Chriſtian charitie, and to the aduancement, good and honour of
this Kingdome, and to the preſeruation of the liues of thouſands of able and well qualified ſubiects, which yearely pine and periſh
in the Priſons of England onely.
               That your ſubiects and all poſterities may euer bleſſe and pray for the increaſe of your Maieſties health and happineſſe,
and the proſperitie of this moſt hopefull Parliament.
            
         
      
   