
      
         
            
               
                  
                  Of misrules contending / with gods worde by name. And then / of ones Iudgment / that heard of the same.
                  
                     
                        I Heare saie, that some saye, ther chaunsed of late
                     Betwene one madmisrule, & goddes word great hate
                     The cause of there out fall (as some saye) is this
                     By here saye, I harde it, now marke what it is
                  
                  
                     This misrule, was moued, and madde in his mynde
                     That goddes worde with great men, such grace shuld still finde
                     Wherby as an out caste he myght be reiecte
                     Thys some say, and here saye, to be the effecte.
                  
                  
                     But douting where all things, whyche some saye were ryght
                     Sith some saye, by here saye, a lye spred be myght
                     I sought, and harde some saye, they did it beholde
                     By whose wordes of credit, my doutes were resolued
                  
                  
                     But now to my purpose, agayne for to come
                     This misrule, through madnes, at last frynds had some
                     Of whome he gat comforte, as it maye well seme
                     His boldnes well wayed, who would not so deme.
                  
                  
                     And beyng in fauor, at laste well was he
                     That could vnto mysrule, from good order flee
                     Who lost not ther labor, as some saye for that
                     But were well estemed, and had, I harde what.
                  
                  
                     That gods worde muche lothing, could it not abyde
                     But stepped fourth boldly, and misrule defied
                     Wyshing from misrule, all men to refrayne
                     As from a thing noysome, to vile, and to vayne.
                  
                  
                     But misrule that hearyng, beganne for to starte
                     Lyke one that were vexed, and that to the harte
                     As it well aperethe, by his subtil shyft
                     Who so well can ponder, the truth of his dryft.
                  
                  
                     He knew well, he could not, goddes worde well withstond
                     To mete hym as men do, that fyght hand to hand
                     But sought his fetch farder, by couler to craue
                     And so vnder couler, goddes worde to depraue.
                  
                  
                     But now if in conscience, speake frely I maye
                     In mynde I digresse not, from that whyche some saye
                     If mysrule mayntayned be, and seke to ascend
                     In this casse I doute muche, but mark well the ende.
                  
                  
                     ☞What regions to Ruyn, hath there not bene brought
                     Where misrule was chosen, and good rule vnsought
                     Weales publick full welthy, to nought brought it hath
                     For mysrule to myschiefe, must nedes be the path.
                  
                  
                     What caused gods wrath, all fleshe to distroye
                     Saue onely. viii. parsons, with olde father Noye
                     But for that this misrule, gods worde did deface
                     And moued that all men, misrule shuld imbrace.
                  
                  
                     In Sodom and Gomor, suche lyke stryffe began
                     Betwene this madde mysrule, and gods worde: but than
                     Could god longe abide it? when he in his fume
                     With sulphire and brimston, mysrule dyd consume.
                  
                  
                     His owne Iewish people, as ofte as they ranne
                     A maddyng with mysrule, wyth plages God beganne
                     To lerne vs that mysrule, he alwayes did hate
                     And yet (alas) se you? how he plaith chek mate.
                  
                  
                     By misrule the subiectes, be so far past grace
                     Theyr heddes and their rulers, they know not in place
                     But lyke to beastes brutall, with vngodly strife
                     As rebelles resyst wyll, wyth losse of their lyfe
                  
                  
                     What law is so strayt made, they feare not to breake
                     What threat can suche tounges stoppe, they feare not to speake
                     What doctrine can dryue them, to know what they be
                     What myschief may moue them, that onely they se.
                  
                  
                     What nede mo examples, then this our owne realme
                     To teach vs that mysrule, hath bene to extreame
                     In preasinge so proudly, to noble welfare
                     As some saye, so boldly, as it were Iack hare
                  
                  
                     And so, vnder couler, of space, and beware
                     To taunt at gods prechers, as muche as they dare
                     Sayeng, such passe not, by here saye to go
                     And preach in ther pulpittes, that thus some saye so.
                  
                  
                     Of some saye, and here say, this well tell I canne
                     That here say, and some say, the truth now and than
                     Of such, as both some saye, and here saye, dysdayne
                     Bycause that both here saye, and some saye, so playne.
                  
                  
                     But be it, that some saye, by here say a misse
                     And saye not (through here say) the truth as it is
                     Doth it therfore folow, for that thinge fourth brought
                     That al thinges whyche some say, therfore shuld be nought.
                  
                  
                     If it be vnlawfull, by here say to wade
                     I meruell what Paull ment, to vse the same trade
                     Who speaking by here say, belyue did the same
                     Which purgeth (as some saye) the rest from all blame.
                  
                  
                     But gods worde of one thing, hath cause to reioyse
                     For that this sharpe taunting, is but mysrules voyce
                     Who beinge accepted, to muche thus I feare
                     Of ryght shuld leaue courtinge, and not remayne there.
                  
                  
                     But who shall stand douting, when our noble kynge
                     Wyth his faythfull counsaill, perceaue shall the thinge
                     But that they wyll shortly, mysrule so represse
                     That glad shal the good be, to se suche redresse
                  
                  Finis.
                  
                     Quod Wyllyam Kethe. Dominus mihi adiutor.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Imprynted at London in Temestrete by Heugh Syngelton dwellynge ouergaynst the Stiliardes.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A PROCLAMATION CONCERNYNGE BOVCHERS.
                  
                     
                        FOR AS MOCHE AS THE KINGES maiestie is credibly aduertised and infourmed, that beafes, muttons, and veales, are lykely to be more scarse and dere nowe ayenst this holy tyme of Ester, than in other seasons of the yere, by reasone of the charges of kepynge of suche cattelle with hey and other stouer, in the wynter: by occasione wherof the bouchers and other that shall sell such beaues muttons and veales by retayle by weighte, can not bye theym of the breders proggers fermours drouers owners and feders of suche cattell at suche reasonable prices in grosse, as they may sell the same ayene by weight by retayle at such prices as are limitted in the ace made for 
                        •…
                     ynge of fleshe by weight, onelesse it shulde be to their vtter losse and vndoinge: His highenes therfore wyllynge, that the same bouchers, and other sellyng fleshe by retayle for the tyme hereafter lymitted in this proclamation, shuld be so conueniently prouided for in the premissis, as they shulde not haue any cause reasonable to forbere theyr prouisions for such vitall to be solde by retayle ayenst this holy tyme of Easter, for reliefe and succour of his subiectis, in as ample man
                        •
                     er as heretofore hath ben accustomed: Is therfore contented and pleased, that from henseforth vnto the .xxiiii. day of Iune next commyng, bouchers and all other, that shall sell fleshe of the kyndes aforesayde by weyghte by retayle, shall and may sell from tyme to tyme, vnto the sayde. xxiiii. day of Iune enxte commynge, euery pounde of beefe good and holsome for mans bodye, for an halfepeny and one halfe farthynge and no more: And euery pounde of mutton for thre farthynges onely and no more: And euery pounde of veale for an halfepeny and halfe farthynge, and no more. The sayde acte of prouision heretofore had and made for sellynge fleshe by weight by retayle, or any thinge therin conteyned, to the contrarie herof not withstondingye.
                  ¶Prouyded alwayes, that no bouchers or other shall kylle any calues to selle by retaylle for the terme of two yeres ensuinge, from the first day of Ianuarye laste, vpon the peynes lymitted in the acte made for kyllynge of calues, this proclamation no withstandyng. And his highnes hath ordeyned, that if any boucher or other sellyng by retayle, do selle any of the kyndes of vitalles aforesayde, otherwyse then by weight, or at any other prices than is afore lymytted, or refuse to selle accordinge to this proclamation: thenne euery boucher, or other so offendynge shall suffre lose and forfayte all suche peynes and penalities, and also be ordered in all thinges as is conteyned and limitted in the acte made for the premisses. This proclamation in any wyse-not lettynge.
                  ¶And futhermore the kynges hyghnes straytely chargeth and commaundeth all and euerye the sayde breders broggers drouers fermours feders and owners of suche cattell, that they and euery of them furnysshe the fayres & markettes with suche fat cattell as they haue to selle from tyme to tyme, in as large and ample maner as hath ben accustomed: And to sell theyr sayde catell at suche reasonable prices, as the sayd bouchers or suche other, as shall retayle the same ayene by weight, may vtter and sell the same to his louynge subiectes, at suche prices as are aboue lymytted, as they wyll auoyde his graces hygh dyspleasure, and answere to the same at theyr vttermoste perylles.
                  ¶AND THAT after the sayde .xxiiii. day of Iune, the sayde bouchers and other sellyng fleshe by retayle, shal from thens forthe sell by weyght by retayle, accordynge to the pryces limitted in the sayd act made and prouyded for the same, vpon the peynes and penalities conteyned in the sayd acte, without any abstinence or redresse to be hadde therof after the sayde .xxiiii. daye. Wherfore the kynges hyghnes straytely chargeth and commaundeth all and synguler Maires, Iustyces of peace, Shireffes, bayliffes, constables, and other his officers and faythfull subiectes, to whom it shall or in any maner of wyse may appertayne, that they and euery of them cause this his proclamation to be put in due and effectuall execution accordynge to the tenour therof, as they wyll aunswere to his hyghnes at their vttermoste peryls.
                  
                     GOD SAVE THE KYNGE. 
                     Tho. Berthelet. regius impressor excudebat. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A PROCLAMATION that straungers shall paye lyke custome and subsydie as the kynges subiectes.
                  
                     
                        FOR AS MOCHE as it is the offyce and duetie of chiefe rulers and gouernours of all ciuile cōmynalties, to study deuise and practise by sondrye wayes and meanes, to auaunce set forthe and encrease theyr common welthes, commytted to theyr cures and charges, and to mayntayne and obserue suche ordynaunces and orders, as by them shulde be deuysed for the same, if by the experience of them, suche goodnes profyte commoditie and benefyte succede therof in and amonge theyr ciuilitie, as they entended, and if not, then to reuoke repeale and refourme theyr sayde ordynaunces and orders, and establyshe newe from tyme to tyme, as the necessitie of theyr common welthe shulde require: The kynges moste royall maiestie, HENRY the VIII. by the grace of god kyng of Englande and of Fraunce, defendour of the fayth, lorde of Ireland, and in erthe supreme heed of the churche of Englande, of his moste excellente goodnes, depely ponderynge and consyderynge his kyngely office and charge, and that although in the tyme of his moste gracious reygne, a great multytude of lawes ordinaunces and orders, haue ben deuysed made and ordeyned by his most excellent wysedome and polycie, for auauncement and encrease of the common welth of his realme, and the great profyte and commoditie of his louynge subiectes of the same, yet his moste graciouse highnes, lyke a moste godly and worthy ruler, not myndynge to cease, but dayly to trauayle and labour in deuisynge and settynge forthe orders and ordynaunces from tyme to tyme, as his grace by his moste excellent wysedome maye perceyue iuste occasion of necessitie in his common welthe, and nowe amonges other thynges callynge to his moste graciouse remembraunce, that all be it his highnes is iustely and laufully entytled in the ryghte of his imperiall crowne, to take and perceyue for Custome and subsidie of marchauntes estrangers conueyenge or transportynge, into this his realme or out of the same, their wares, goodes, and marchandyses, greatter and larger sommes of money, than of his owne louyng and natural subiectes, and beinge in good hope and confydence, that although the moderation therof shuld tende to his gracis owne detriment and losse, that yet it shal be a great occasion, to haue more plentiful resorte trafyke and commutation with in this his gracis realme, with and amonge his louynge subiectes of the same, for their enrychynge welthes and commodities. Takyng therfore more respect to the auauncement of his gracis common welthe, than to his owne syngular profyte, and lyke the moste godly and moste worthy chiefe ruler of this realme, myndynge to proue and assaye, whether by the attemperaunce and moderation of the sayde custome and subsydie of straungers, goodnes, profyte, and commoditie, shall succede, encrease and growe to the common welthe of this his realme, accordyng to his gracis hope and expectation in that behalfe, Is therfore, and for other considerations, mouyng his highnes, pleased and contented for the experymente therof, that from the. vi. daye of Apryll, in the .xxx. yere of his gracis reygne, durynge the full and hole terme of .vii. yeres, from thense nexte folowynge, no persone or persones, beinge straungers or denysens, conueyeng or transportynge any goodes, wares, or marchandyses into any porte creke, or other place of this realme, or out of the same, shall for and durynge the same tyme of .vii. yeres, paye any other more or larger custome and subsidie, than the kynges owne louynge and naturall subiectes, haue vsed and ben accustomed to doo and paye at this present tyme (custome and subsidie for wolles onely excepted.) And his hyghnesse straytely chargeth and commandeth all and syngular Customers, Comptrollers, and other his mynisters, hauynge charge of receyte of his customes and subsydie, that they ne any of them, by any maner of colour or meanes, durynge the sayde tyme of seuen yeres, shall exacte take or receyue of any straunger or denysen, any other more or larger custome and subsidie, than is aboue especified in this his gracis proclamation, vppon peyne of forfayture of their offyces, and makynge fyne at his gracis wyll: And ouer that vppon payne to yelde and render to the parties greued, tenne tymes so moch as they shall exacte and take, contrarie to this presente proclamation. And his hyghnesse also chargeth and commaundeth, as well the Treasourer Chauncellour Chamberlaynes and Barons of his exchequer, and euery of them, as all other his Auditours, hauynge charge to take accomtes of his customes and subsidies, that they, ne any of them, from the sayde syxte daye of Apryll, durynge the sayde tyme of .vii. yeres, from thens nexte folowynge, shall charge any the sayde customers, comptrollers, and minysters of any other further or more custome and subsydie, for straungers or denyzens, then aboue is expressed, as they woll aunswere to his highnes at theyr vttermoste perylles. Sygnifienge and declarynge, as well to the sayde treasorer chauncellour chamberlaynes barons and auditours, and to euery of theym, as to all and synguler the sayde customers comptrollers and mynysters, that they folowynge and ensuynge this his gracis proclamation, the same shalbe to them, and to euery of them, theyr heyres and executours, and to the heyres and executours of euery of them, a sufficyent warrant and discharge agaynst his maiestie, his heyres and successours for the same, without any other byll, warraunt, writ, or other commandment to be sued in this behalfe.
                  ¶Prouyded alwayes, that this present proclamation, ne any thynge therin conteyned, shall not extende, to gyue lycence or lybertie to any person or persones straungers or other, to conuey or transporte into this realme or out of the same, any goodes wares or marchaundises, contrary to the fourme and effect of the lawes and statutes of this Realme: But that it shall be vnderstande taken and expounded alonely, that custome and subsidie of straungers and denyzens, shall be agreable and equal with the custome and subsidie of the kynges owne naturall subiectes, and not aboue, durynge the tyme of .vii. yeres afore lymitted.
                  
                     ¶Yeuen at our palays of westin̄, the. XXVI. day of February, in the. XXX. yere of our Reygne.
                     GOD SAVE THE KYNGE. Tho. Berthelet Regius impressor excu. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
                  
               
            
         
      
   