
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON
PREACHED IN OXFORD:
the 5. of November. 1607.
            By
JOHN KINGE Doctor of Divinity, Deane
of Christ Church, and Vicechancellor
of the Vniversity.
            At Oxford,
Printed by Ioseph Barnes. 1607.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Text.
            
               46. Psal. vers. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
               
                  7 The Lord of hostes is with vs: the God of Iaakob
is our refuge.
                  8 Come, and behold the workes of the Lord, what
desolations he hath made in the earth.
                  9 He maketh warres to cease vnto the ends of the
world: hee breaketh the bow, and cutteth the speare,
and burneth the Chariots with fire.
                  10 Be stil and knowe that I am God: I will be exalted
among the heathen, and I will be exalted in the
earth.
                  11 The Lord of hostes is with vs: the God of Iaakob
is our refuge.
               
            
            
               MY travaile for the choice of my
text parallel to this daies worke,
was as the flying of Noahs doue,
or floting of his arke; the one had
no footing til it came to the arke
againe, the other noe restinge
place but on the mountaines of
Armenia; nor I where to settle my diuided thoughts,
til I fel vpon this Psalme: here I met with manie vniformities.
            
               
               
                   The event the same. We maie as trulie and as happily
say, as these might of whō the Psalm treateth, God
is our hope, and strength, in angustijs auxilium praesētissimum,
or adiutor in tribulationibus, quae invenerūt nos
nimis, our readiest help in our sorest dangers. v. 1. Wee
were the children of death, and were euen come to
the birth, there wanted a verie little strength to bring
vs forth. Tempus faciendi domino, it was then time for
the Lord to put to his hand, yea the time was almost past.
                  —digitis à morte remoti
                  quatuor aut septem.—
               there remained
but a few houres to accomplish their mischeife.
            
               
               The extent of the danger noe lesse. Theirs was against
both their Citie of God, and the sanctuarie of his
Tabernacles. vers. 4. Ours against both city & sanctuarie,
the two sisters, the Martha and Marie, policie
& pietie, Commonwealth and Church of our Countrie:
The thrones of Dauid & chaire of Moyses, golden
sceptre, & golden candle stick, our 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                21.
Act. 28. & our 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               also, people, law, place, temple must
haue beene dissolued.
            
            
                The places seeme to accord. With them, their citie
of God; so with vs too. Our city of God▪
                the faierest, the
excellentest, the absolutest that we had (or contiguous
to it) our Ierusalē, the Princesse of the thousands,
the mother of al the daughters of our land, the Chā
               ber
of our famous Kings & Queenes, ioie of our English
earth, empresse of the Island, and the renouned
Emporie and Mart of the whole Kingdome.
            And the Sanctuarie of our Tabernacles no lesse as
theirs. Our Bethel, our Siloh, our Hill of Sion; where

were our goodliest Tēples and Basilikes, Chappels &
oratories, where our verie oracles were wont to bee
giuen, the fountaine and spring of religion, the arke of
the presence of God aboue al other places of this land.
            Omit not the season vers. 5. Their deliuerance was 
               verie earlie. Manè diluculò ante auroram, ad cōspectū
aurorae. So was ours. For by fowre in the morning of
that daie, which had bin the evening and long night,
the blacknes of darknes to our state, was the treasō discouered,
the Lords of the priuie Counsaile acquainted,
and the King in his bed chamber awaked and aduertised.
There wanted but a mornings worke, which
if it had sped, sufficient vnto the daie, the yeare and
many ages of the world had the malice of that morning
bin. Betwixt the midnight of that eue, whereon
the Incendiarie kept his vigilles, & the middaie of
their feast, their greate Iubilee expected, were but 12
houres▪ and on of those twelue, as of the 12. Apostles a
devill, so must haue been hora & potestas tenebrarum
the houre and power of the deuil, the houre of firie
trial, hora nefasta, nefanda, the blackest that euer the
eie of the sunne looked vpon, worse then the worst
Sodomiticall and Gomorrhean, the most accursed and
infamous, that euer was accompted in anie Kalendar
of time.
            Mee thinketh the whole phrase of the Psalme 
hath great congruitie. For surelie our ground had bin
shakē
                vers. 
                  •
               . yea her ioints had bin shiuered in peices;
and our mountaines if not of nature, of art, monumēts
of age and honor, as stable and statelie as mountaines,
huge masses and piles of magnificent buildings, roiall

pallaces, religious temples, Mausolean sepulchers &
shrines, which the holie Ghost calleth domos seculi▪
houses of eternitie,
               12. Eccl. had beene throwne into the midst
of the riuer, if not the sea; and our waters had raged &
beene troubled vers. 3. yea the foundations of their chā
               nels
had been discouered: And that Riuer of ours, the
streames wherof make glad our Citie of God vers. 4. had
changed hir gladnes into mourning, died her christal
into rubies, and turned as the riuers of Egypt into a
riuer of bloud; running as a Maister-veine with a full
tide of bloude along the sides of the city: hir carriages
in stead of wonted cōmodities had beene dead corpses;
manie a thousand discerpted limme both of men
and buildings must it haue drank downe, & buried
within hir bosome.
            
                Lastlie and in a worde the subiect of the Psalme
throughout is very like. The incursiō of the enimie to
both strong and furious: the danger imminēt, vast, &
peremptorie; the deliuerance strange & glorious; the
preventiō of the mischeife suddaine; the commemoration
and thanksgiuing solemne; and most generous,
heroical, invincible as in them, so in vs, (J hope) the resolutiō.
The Lord is our refuge &c. Therefore wil wee
not feare though the earth be mooued &c.
            
            
               —Si fractus illabatur orbis.
            
            Notwithstanding al these resemblances, the reede
& metwand of that danger and deliuerance of theirs
is far to short to bee the measure of ours. Ours is casus
omissus, a transcendent of transcendents a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ;
our danger a monster of dangers
such as nature neuer brought forth; our deliuerance

a mirrour, a miracle of deliuerances; such as the finger
of God neuer wrought. But taking my text as it
is, you shal finde in the opening of it

                  1 A proposition, professiō, protestatiō as it were
to the whol world The Lord of hostes is with vs v. 7
                  2 A probation, or demonstration therof. Come &
behold his workes. vers. 8.
                  3 Confirmatiō, explicatiō, enumeratiō, he maketh
warrs to cease &c. he breaketh the bow &c. v. 9.
                  4 Exhortation, aduise. Be stil and know &c. v. 10.
                  5 Conclusion, acclamatiō. The Lord of hostes &c.
vers. vlt.
               
Which being a repetition of the seauenth verse, in
the self same words and syllables, carmen amaebaeum,
maie seeme to stand in the first place as a challendge
and defiance to al aduersarie forces. Dominus virtutū
nobiscum, we wil not feare for thousands, and tē thousands,
whole armies of mē, legiōs of deuills, the gates
of hel: and when they haue proued, demonstrated,
cleared the truth of their assertion, they singe it once
more in the last place as their Paean, their victorious
and triumphāt songe, Dominus virtutum nobi scū
                  ▪ &c.
            
            Looke not for much explication & discourse at my
hands, you shal finde me a short paraphrast or scholiast
application is my end. My text seruing me to noe
other vse then as a seal, or stamp, or mold, which whē
J haue set to the late storie of our times, you shal find,
if not so liuelie in al points of collation; yet some liklie
expression and forme of my text sticking vpon it.
            For the order then and connexion of the words in
breife, thus it standeth.
            
               
               1 They propose. The Lord of hostes is with vs.
How proue they that?
               2 Thus. Come and behold his works. That were an
endlesse taske.
               3 They giue Instance in a species. VVhat desolations
he hath wroght. Yet this were to lardg a feild
to range in.
               4 They exemplifie some one kind of them: hee
maketh warrs to cease. How shal that appeare?
               5 By a sufficient enumeration. He taketh awaie
al instruments of warre, breaketh the bow &c.
               
               6 Then followeth the counsaile. Lastlie the conclusion.
            
            
                Touching the proposition, Dominus virtutum nobiscum
&c.
               The Proposition. They not onlie presume it, & laie it for their
surest ground, as a maxime and principle which they
wil neuer bee driuen from; but assume it vnto themselues
in the hypothesis, and appropriate it to their
people & persons, Nobiscum, noster. Which are not
onlie voces charitatis, words of charitie, whē by a stile
of pluralitie and community they comprehend al the
members of their state but voces fidei, words of faith
also, when they make Iehouam exercituum, the vniuersal
Lord of the world, whose power is over al, to bee
their proper & peculiar God. Like wise builders, that
build vpon the rocke, al the winds and stormes in the
world maie beate vpon their house either of Church
or Kingdome, but cannot shake them. Wise Merchāts
that sell al the substance they haue to buy one pearle
more valuable and precious then al the rest. Vnus omnia.
And omniam omnibus: Compendiū mirabile. One

               Lord of hostes is more vnto them, then al the armes of
flesh and bloud, al armies of men and Angels, all the
powers in heauen and earth: One God of Iacob more
vnto them then al the Gods of Ammon, Aram, Moab,
and whatsoeuer is named God throughout the whole
world.
            But that which I obserue principally in the proposition
is the wisdome and perfection of their speech.
For according to the two members of it, so doe they
stile God with two titles, and ascribe vnto him two attributes 
or actions. His titles are Dominus virtutum, &
Deus Iacob.
               Dominus virtutum: Deus Iacob. That is to saie strong & sweet. The one virium
the other voluntatis, the on of ability, the other
of willingnes, the on roboris, the other faederis. One of
power, an other of fauor, one of maiestie, an other of
mercie, on of puissāce, another of promise: in a word,
one vniuersal, the other more special. J remember the
counsaile of the Sonn of Syrach: Facito verbis tuis stateram.
               28. Eccl. 25. 
               Ballance thy words euē. Was there euer speech
in the book of God more equallie ballanced? In the
one skale you haue the Lord of Hostes,
               15. Exod. 
               virū, or rather
Deum bellatorem, vvith whom it is al one to saue with
manie or vvith few, the God of Gods with his out.
streched arme of power, and his right hande bringing
terrible things to passe; whose throne is the heauen of
heauens, the earth his footstoole, the sea his washpot,
Angels his ministring spirits, men his vessels of claie,
Deuils the vassals of his wrath, and al the creatures in
the vvorld, euen the poore insectes & flies, the scorns
of nature, executioners of his vengance, and able by
his appointmēt to lay one sure strokes. O this is a glorious

and feareful skale, who can abide it? Who euer
saw God in his strength & liued? What piller of heauen,
or what foundation of the vvorld could stand, if
there were not an nother skale to match and mitigate
the rigor of his strength?
            
                Behold then in the other part there is the God of
Iacob: in which name is comprised vvhatsoeuer belō
               geth
to mercie▪ fauor, compassion, whatsoeuer to election,
dilection, purchase, inheritance, promise, couenant,
word, sacrament. Nay, the prescription and
antiquitie of his loue is exprest herein, for Deus Iacob
beareth an auncient date. And these two together
(Lord of hosts, & God of Iacob) make a iust aequi-libriū
               
betweene greatnes and grace, and bring al things to
a faire medlie, a sweet and acceptable harmonie, like
that in the 34. of Exod. The Lord, the Lord Stronge,
there is the roote of all, afterwards mercifull, gracious
&c. a number of goodlie branches springing frō that
roote.
            The actions ascribed vnto him are likwise two.
The one of presēce Nobi scum;
               Nobiscum, susceptor noster. the other of protection,
susceptor noster, arx, exaltatio, locus editus, the latter
is an auxesis, increase to the former.
            
               Dominus nobiscum is not so much (vnlesse you vnderstand
that great mysterie which was hidden from
the beginning of the world, and reuealed in fulnes of
time, that is Emanuel, Dominus nobiscum, God in our
nature, God in our flesh) for God is present to al his
creatures. Iouis omnia plena: caelum & terram impleo
I fil heauen and earth. VVhether shal I flie from thy spirit?
if I climbe vp into heauen &c. Hee is present with

those that shunne his presence, that saie vnto him (depart
from vs) and thinke they are safe from his sight:
Tush, none seeth, the God of Iacob regardeth not.
But when it is added, that God is not onlie with vs,
but for vs, nobiscum, and pro nobis, then are we safe &
secure from all possible dangers.
            The assertion,2. Probation I confesse, is verie audacious, if it be
not wel warranted. Many haue trusted in lying words,
as the Prophet Ieremy speaketh: Templum Domini,
Templum Domini: and whie not these aswel brachium,
Domini, brachiū Domini, the arme of the Lord is with
vs, and perhaps noe such matter. They are not the first
that haue been deceaued. There were that called thē
selues, the children of Abrahā, the disciples of Moyses,
the sōnes of the most High, & were nothing lesse.
You saie, the Lord of hostes is with you, and the God of
Iaakob your defense. How proue you it? Or why yours
more then the whole world's besides?
            Assured it is, there were noe outward, apparant,
transient worke from God to perswade vs of his presence
and defense, if besides his promises (which promises
are yea & amen) besides his word & othe (which
word and othe are 2. immutable things) wee had nothing
to stand vpon; if he made as if hee slept, and had
thrust his hand of working into his bosome, & would
not drawe it out, but might seeme to haue forgotten
to be gracious, and to haue buried his mercies
in euerlasting forgetfulnes: more thē this, if his works
were quite contrarie (as wee might conceaue) to his
works of mercie, not diuersa, but aduersa, which the
Prophet calleth opera peregrina,
               28. Es. 21. 
               strange and vnproper

workes, aliene almost from his nature, I meane of
troubling and afflicting his people so farr forth, that
the verie heathen should say of vs, where is now their
God? Yet should we liue by our faith, and possesse our
soules in patience, and waite for the time when the vision
should speake, for it shal certainelie speake, and
shal not lie vnto vs.
            But there are that beleeue not vnlesse they may see.
plus oculo quàm oraculo. Non videmus signa. An adulterous
and wicked generation, carnal at least, seeketh a
signe. Vnlesse wee maie see with our eies (saie they)
and handle with our hands, & thrust our very fingers
and nailes into the prints of Gods works, wee wil not
beleeue; it must be brachium reuelatum, demonstrated
to sense, or it cannot moue them. For the satisfaction
therfore of them and the whole world, they ioine potentèr
& patentèr togither, the works and the euidēce
of thē: Venite & videte opera. Come & behold his works;
wee feed you not with deceaueable fables. Sensus assensus
sunt. See them, touch them, handle them, they are
not spirits, fansies, speculations, they are true bodies
and haue the flesh & bones of real, acted, accomplished
workes. It is iustlie that answere that Philip shaped
to Nathanael 1. Iohn. when he asked him, commeth
there anie good thing out of Nazareth? Come and
see. Let thy foote bring thine eie to behold that which
thou beleeuest not. Yea our blessed Sauiour himselfe
vouchsafed to perswade with this argument 
                  •
               o Iohn.
If you beleeue not me, beleeue my works; opera testantur
de me, for my works beare witnesse of mee. Now though
the noblest demonstration of things bee from their

causes and principles, yet the nearest to vs warde and
most apprehensible is from effects and performances.
            But what are the works they tel vs of? The workes 
of God are without number, if wee saile in the maine
Ocean of them, & put not in into some special arme
or creeke, we shal neuer find an end. 104. Psal. Quàm
magnificata, o how manifold are thy works o Lord! In
wisdome hast thou made them al. The earth is ful of thy
goodnes. So is the great and wide sea, wherin are things
creeping innumerable, both great and smale beasts. &c.
Manifold are they and maruaillous, from the huge
Leuiathan to the little worme. Omnia in sapientia.
But that as St, Austin speaketh, Consuetudinis perseuerantia
amisit admirationem: we maruaile not, because
they are common. The like Tertullian, Semper
abundantia contumelio sain semetipsam est. Of fulnes
commeth lothing, at least neglect. VVee see nothinge
but this Man. Assiduitate oculorum (saith Tully) assues
cunt animi. It is vse that beguileth vs, and it is not
magnitudo but nouitas, the greatnes but newnes of the
thing that draweth vs after it. Otherwise (to goe noe
farther) how admirable are the works of God, euē vpon
ourselues? It is hee that hath made vs wonderfully
in our mothers wombes, & tooke vs forth of our mothers
bellies, and when father and mother forsook vs,
tooke vs vp, that giueth vs our dailie breade to feede
vs, and our dailie breath to quicken vs with many the
like blessings. Al which shew, that hee is not far of frō
every one of vs, Act. 15. but watcheth continuallie ouer
vs with his heauenlie and fatherlie prouidence.
But of the works of God there is noe end, if we thinke

to take a view of the whole sūme of thē. Come therfore
to some particular.
            
                The holie Ghost teacheth mee to distribute the
workes of God into 2. sorts. One of which sorts is exprest
in my Text,Qua
                     •
                   solitudi
                  
                     •
                  es. 
               Solitudines desolations Some reade
mirabilia wonders, not ordinarie workes: some prodigia
prodiges, not ordinarie wōders. The most solitudines.
            
            So then by the light of my Text J perceaue the
workes of God are two fold.
            
                1 Sōe of position, cōstitution, creatiō, [in the beginning God made heauen and earth]Genes. 
               & quicquid me diū
cum ipsis finibus exortum est,
               Basil. 
               al things contained with
in them; of supportation, and gouernment. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
1. Heb. He carrieth althings with the word of his power:
of redemption, purchase, reconciliation 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ;
2. Cor 5. 10. of restitution,
reparation, renouation. 3. Act. 20. there shal be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
times of the restauratiō of al things.
These bee his positiue works 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
whatsoeuer, I meane, either giueth,
or maintaineth, or bettereth, and amendeth the
beeing of things; of which we maie read plētifully the
mean time in the book of nature, more happily in the
bookes of grace, but hereafter most blessedlie & contentedlie
in the lardge volumes of glorie.
            2 Other are his workes of corruption, dissolution, &
as my text calleth them desolation. The Scripture testifieth
of both, viuifico, occido▪ I quicken, I kill. Creans
lucem,
               32. Deut. 
               formans tenebras, Creating the light, and forming
darknes.
               45. Esay. These workes of desolation are not such,
the onlie end wherof (without farther good) is to

marre & destroie, & depriue of beeing, as the drowning
of the old worlde, the burning of Sodome with hir
sisters, the sacking of Ierusalem; where the scope proposed
to God was to overturne, ouerturne, overturne,
without sparing they are desolations to our enimies,
but consolations to vs, ruins to them, to vs resurrections,
20. Psalm. 
               (they are falen downe, saith the Psalme, wee stande
vpright) corruptions to them, generations, creations,
recreations to vs. And without these corruptiue, destructiue,
works of God (to let passe the other mēber)
we could not bee, or at least wise not so happie. Take
for example. God neuer made death. Inuidia diaboli
intrauit. 2. Wis. through the enuie of the deuill it entred
into the world; through sinne the inspiratiō of the
deuil 5. Rom. & not onlie 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , entred, but 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , wēt
ouer al, as a gangraine and infection; & more thē that,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Alexander the great, a triumphant conquerour
Curt. 
               [peruenimus ad solis ortum & occasum] reigned
ouer al the sonns of Adam. Now vnder this accursed
brat thus entring & borne by equiuocal and spurious
generation, vnder this epidemical & oecumenical
contagion possessing al the corners of the earth,
and not a King, but a tyrant vsurping & bearing swaie
ouer al flesh, what flesh could euer haue beene saued
(for what man had liued and not sinned, or sinned and
should haue liued, & not died the second death?) but
for a worke of desolation comming betweene, to desolate
and disapoint the works of death? Of this worke
you maie read I. Ioh. 3. 8. To this end was the sonne of
God manifested 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               that he might dissolue the works
of the deuil, that is to saie, sinne, and death, 2. Heb. 14.

               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that through his death he might euacuate,
abolish him that had power of death to weet, the deuil.

                  •
               . Col. 14. it is most amplie described 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a word
of desolation, he hath razed out the hande writing against
vs 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a phrase of desolatiō 
               tooke it awaie,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , fastened it to his crosse: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               &c. And hath spoiled, vnharnessed principallities
and powers, and made a shew of them openlie, and
triumphed ouer them vpon his crosse. Al are tearmes of
desolation; so that now the Prince of this world is cast
out, and the children (that were appointed) of death
& gehēna singe a songe of thāsgiuing, O death where
is thy sting? O hel where is thy victorie? This is the great
and wonderful worke of desolation aboue al others, &
appertaineth to soules as wel as bodies, and to our deliuerances
both from first and seconde death, our redemptiō
from spiritual wickednesses rather then corporal,
from our immortal foes, and endlesse calamities.
            
               Dauid is content to insist in one of the workes of
God, but of temporal, and corporal desolation, & that
is the ending of warre.
            
               He causeth warrs to cease vnto the ends of the earth.
               5. Auferens bella.
That he proueth by sufficient induction, a recitall of
instruments and weapons of warre. He breaketh the
bow, and cutteth the speare &c. As whē the Philistins
tooke the Smithes out of Israel,
               1. Sam. 13. they could not fight.
No smithes, noe armour; noe armour, noe warre.
            Warre of it selfe is opus de solationis, a worke of desolation,
havock, wast, ruin, it turneth a land in solitudinē, into a desert, an habitatiō for foxes, & wild beasts.

Let it bee sowed with the seed both of man and beast,
as a field with wheate, warre wil consume it & eate it
out. Bellum si naturā spectes, mininè bonum. rather, in
vicinity to the name, mos bellurum, fitter for beasts
then men.Liuy. As for men, iustum quibus necessarium, never
iust but when they cannot avoide it; nor euer to
be waged by a christian,205▪ Epist, but obseruinge St. Austins
rule, Esto bellando pacificus, though thy hand be bloody,
thy hart must be peaceable. Pacem habere debet
volūtas, bellum necessitas. You see the instruments nā
               ed
in my text, are not mattocks & spades, tools of husbandrie,
or manuarie crafts, but instruments of murther
and spoile: the bow to doe mischeife eminùs,
               Arcus, hasta, Currus a far
of, the speare cominùs, neare at hād: the chariots especiallie
ferrati, falcati, shod and prepared with iron, &
whinged like birds, with their siths and hooks on both
sides, to mow downe al that they mett with: they rage
in the streets, their burning is like lamps, & their shooting
like lightning. 2. Nahum.
            Now in the heate and height of these desolations,
when an enimie of a feirce lookes, and truculent hart,
who neither reuerenceth the person of the aged, nor
pittieth the sucking babe, dasheth the infants against
the stones in the streets, and rippeth vp the woemen
with child, (as the booke of God describeth him) one
whose breath is slaughter and destruction, whose nū
               ber
is as the locusts hiding the face of the earth, able
to deuoure a countrie, as an oxe licketh vp grasse; all
whose purposes and designes are, Downe with thē,
downe with them, let vs cut them of from beeing a people,
and roote out their name; al whose promises to himselfe,

               Thy siluer and gold is mine, thy woemen and faire
children be mine,
               1. Reg. 20. and if anie be denied, the Gods doe so
vnto me and more too, if the dust of thy land bee enough
for my people, euerie mā to take an hādful: whose threatnings
rest not in men, but their insolencies & blasphemies
ascend against God himselfe Let not thy God deceaue
thee, in whom thou trustest (you knowe whose
word it was and it is thought by the learned, that that
victorie gaue occasion to the writing of this Psalme:)
thinke with your selues how strange and prodigious a
thing it is, by the vnexpected help of this Lord alone,
often by vnprobable meanes, somtimes by the hande
of the weaker sexe, al this intended desolation, to bee
desolated, disapointed, defeated, al their warlike prouision
dissolued, their companies, and troupes scattered,
discomfited, the eater himselfe to be made meate,
the spoiler to be spoiled; for not onlie bridles to be put
into their lipps, and hooks into their nostrels to turne
them backe to their home, but their swords and spears
to be turned each mans into his fellowes bowels, till
they become drunck with their owne bloud, as with
new wine.
            Manie such wonderful works of desolation hath
the Lord wrought; vpon Pharao and his host, when
they sunck like stones to the bottome of the sea, vpon
Iabin and Sisera, and al the Kings and people of Canaan,
vpō 
               Zenacherib & Rab saketh (which is thought
to be the storie here aimed at) where Iudah hunge
downe his head, and couered his face for shame, and
rent his clothes, and there was nothing left vnto thē,
but Domine inclina aurē, & audi, aperioculos & vide.

O Lord bow downe thine eare and heare, open thy eie
and consider, saue vs out of the hands of our enimies:
O how memorable, & renowned is it to al posterity,
that in that exigent of theirs, by an angel of the Lord,
an invisible hand, there should be slaine in one night
an hundred fowrescore and fiue thousand;2, Reg. 19. 16. when the
morning arose, they were al found to be dead corpses?
—Octoge simus octauus mirabilis annus;
for as strange a deliuerie, from as prowde an enimie,
with as vnquenchable furie, and a most inuincible navie,
they bare the ensignes of victorie, as others of
Castor and Pollux, vpon their ships, brought with thē
instruments of slaughter and torture against our bodies,
and swallowed a plentiful hope of ouer-running
& desolating the whole Kingdome. But they that wēt
downe at that time into the sea with shipps, ipsi viderūt
opera Domini,
               Psalm. 107. 
               & mirabilia, [prodigia, solitudines]
eius in profundo. They saw, wee al knowe. O that men
would therfore praise the Lord for his goodnes, and declare
his wonderful workes before the sonnes of men!
That our childrens children to the last point and period
of anie generation within this Island, maie be able
to saie, O God wee haue hard with our eares, & our
fathers and grandfathers haue declared vnto vs that
noble worke of deliuerance, which thou wroughtest
for them in forepassed times.
            Hauing sufficiently proued, demonstrated, evicted 
the matter in question,Counsaile: and stopt the mouthes of all
gainesaiers, vt iustificetur in sermonibus, at length hee
falleth to aduising, or rather by a prosopopaeia, bringeth
in God perswading in his owne person.
            
               
               Bee still and knowe.
               Vacate & videte. Before, when they were absent
and not come, then was it venite & videte, come &
see:Vacate. now they are present vacate 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , stande stil, or
sit downe, as Mary did, take leasure, make not hast to
depart from it. Before it was videte, to those that were
ignorant,Videte. 
               see, that is, vnderstand, and learne, & knowe
that which you know not: now it is videte of an higher
reach, you that know alreadie, acknowledge consider,
apply, make vse of that you knowe. What shall
they knowe? that you your selues are but men (put thē
in minde o Lord, that they may knowe they are but men)
wormes, vanitie, nothing, Ego Deus: it is I that am God:
Ego,
               Ego Deus. 
               ego, I even I, et non est alius praeter me, and there is
none besides mee. And not a popular, idle, abiect God,
like the Gods of the gentiles, which are not able to
wipe the dust from their eies:Exaltabor. 
               I wil be exalted:
            
            
               Not onlie amongst my people of Israel▪ 
               but in gentibus,
amongst the nations▪ 
               if they receaue mee, volentibus,
with their good contents; if they reiect me, inuitis,
In gentibus maugre their wills.
            And if there bee anie ground▪ the lines wherof are
extended farther then people and nations inhabit, J
wil be exalted there also.In terra vniuersa. 
               Exaltabor & exaltabor, I wil
be exalted, J say againe I wil in the whole earth.
            
            It maie be spokē to two sorts of mē. 1. to freinds,
and then it carrieth the same sense that the speech of
Moyses to the children of Israel 14. Exod. 13. Feare
yee not, stand stil, & behold the saluation of the Lord,
which hee wil shew on you. The Lorde shall fight for you,
therfore hold you your peace. Trouble not you your
selues with your enimies, neither trust in your

owne strength, nor saie to your selues Manus nostra
excelsa, our owne high hande shall deliuer vs. These
were Dauids conclusions 44. Psalm. &c. I wil not trust
in my bow, my sword shal not saue mee. And, an horse is
but a vaine thing to saue a mā: And, some trust in horses,
other in chariots, but wee wil remember the name
of the Lord of hostes. 3. it may bee applied to enimies
after this sort: vacate, that is desistite, cessate, giue
ouer your wicked purposes and plottinges, it is harde
for you to kick against the pricks of Gods prouidēce;
there is noe coūsaile, noe strēgth against his decrees.
            Last of al followeth the conclusion, a repetition of 
the first verse,Conclusion. the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , like the iterū dic
                     •
                  , I say againe
4. Philip. Seruing in the first place for the prooeme, in
this last for an epiphonēe; the Key of my whol speech,
it opened me a dore of entrance at the beginning, &
now at my giuing o
                  •
               er, it closeth & locketh vp all againe.
The Lord of hostes is our refuge.
            
            This is the seale or stāp wherof I told you before.Application.
Spare me a while to applie it, & to effigiate, & shape
forth to the patterne and tipe of my text that most
prodigious de solation intended by the aduersarie, but
intercepted by God, which this fift of Nouember, so
long as the sun and moone last, shalbe both famous
and infamous for.
            1 First as touching the proposition and conclusion
being both the same, the carceres & metam, head and
foot of my text, as it were voice and echo, a circular
annular, serpentine verse, winding into it selfe againe,
like that in the 8. Psalme. O Lord our God how excellent
is thy name in al the world? The two tropicks & points

betweene which the whole motion of this scripture
goeth, and like the two Cherubins ouer the mercieseate,
which turned their faces each to other, your
selues giue sentence, if euer anie nation or language
vnder heauen had iuster cause to saie, and saie againe,
once in their harts by beeleeuing, & once more with
their mouthes by confessing, to make it both their
morning and euening, sacrifice, the proram & puppim,
beginning and ending of their dailie meditations, to
common it in priuate with their owne spirits, and to
publish it forth in the greatest congregations and assemblies,
Dominus virtutum nobiscum, The Lorde of
hostes is with vs, with the presence of his power whē
there was opus Deo, a worke euen of the deity to bee
wrought, a knot worthie the finger of God: and Deus
Iacobi, the God of Iacob assisted vs with his grace; Iacobi
& seminis, Iacobi & populieius, euen the God of the
seed & people of Iacob. Say whither hee loued not the
tents and habitations of Iacob, more then al the taber
nacles and conuenticles of Mesek, vngodlines, superstition,
idolatrie: whether he gaue not ample testimonie
to the world that hee loued Iacob, his house, his issue,
and hated Esau, and the whole Esauitical, hairie,
rough, barbarous, sauadge generation of mē, which
said, The daies of mourning are come, venite, occidamus
IACOBVM, let vs kil Iacob & subvert his Kingdome.
            And whether wee maie not adde in the end of our
praiers and thanksgiuing,Salah. as the strength and sting of
the bee that lieth behind, as a goad to awake vs, & stir
vs vp, a naile to fasten it in our harts as in a sure place,
a diapsalma & rest to our song, a pawse to our meditaons,

that wee passe not lightlie awaie (for qui credit nō
festinet) and lastlie the amen, the fiat, the closure of al
our deuotion, Selah, as much as to saie, o rempraeclarā
& admirabilem, Deum habere defensorem! o magnum
& inexpugnabilem defensorem! O happy, thrice happy
we that are in such a case! Blessed thrice blessed people
that haue the Lord of hostes, the God of Iacob for
our defense!
            
            Doth anie man doubt of this?Come. or is anie ignorant?
Venite & videte opera▪
                Come from the vttermost ends
of the earth, as far as the fowre windes blowe one against
the other, if you wil see a worke, a strāge worke,
wherof you wil saie when you see it, wee neuer saw it
after this sort, and when it shal bee told you, you will
not beleeue it, Come.
            
            And you that turne your backs to the temple of
the Lord, and are euer departing from vs and our congregations,
you whose motion is not comming. Eamus
in domum Domini, but going, our feet shal stand within
thy gates o thou sinagogue of Roome, you that cannot
perswade your selues that God is the God of Protestants.
Tush (say you) God hath forsaken them, God
and man haue concurred to punish the wickednes of this
time (you knowe the text) & you prophecied against
vs terrible things quandocun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   contingeret miseram illam
faeminam e vitâ excedere, and saw in the visions of
your heads our streets flowing with bloud &c. And
magnū annum Platonis, a returne and reuolution of al
things, your temples, altars, sacrifices, restored, reformed
secundum vsum after the forme of Romish superstition,
Come and bee not incredulous but beleeue,

harden not your hartes as in the daies of idolatrie and
blindnes,Behold. 
               behold the mightie hand of the Lord, & the
workes hee hath wrought for vs: we follow not deceauable
fables, we haue seen them with our eies, & handled
them with our hands; nor were they done in a corner,
but in the light of the sun, that al the world may
take notice of them. O that my words were now written,
Iob. 19. O that they were written in a booke, and engrauē
with an iron pen in lead or stone for euer! I knowe that
my Redeemer liueth, said Iob. We know our Protector
liued, and you your selues knowe it, and heauen and
earth knowe, King and captiue knowe, yea the stones
in the wals, and timber in the beames knowe that our
Protector liued, and that the Lord of hostes was with
vs, and the God of Iacob was our defense, whē mē were
so furiously set against vs, and meant to haue destroyed
flesh and arme, head and members in one daie, and
at one instant.
            I could lead you by a long tract of the works of God
in the daies of that glorious Saint, our late soueraigne
of happie memorie Queene Elizabeth▪
                a woman after
Gods heart, who walkt in the waies, and ouerliued the
daies of hir father Dauid, and led hir people as a flock
forty & fiue years through a wildernes of many distresful
dangers; a Queene of Queenes, a Paragon (whilest
she liued) of mortal Princes, the diamond in the ring
of the monarches of the earth, the glorie of hir sexe,
the pleasure of mankind, the miracle of the christian,
& the mark & scope euē of the infidel world, (for they
had an eie after hir) who notwithstanding al the rorings
of the bulls of Basan, Centaures, and Minotaures
               
of Rome, their thundrings, lightnings, excommunications,
execrations, incantations, conspiracies, rebellions,
drugges, daggers, dagges, yet liued to out-liue the
malice of hir enimies, drew vp hir feet vnto hir in hir
bed of peace, had hir eies closed with the fingers of hir
seruants, & frends, and was buried with Regal burial
in the sepulchers of the Kings and Queenes of England
hir noble Progenitours.
            When we had exchāged hir for our gracious Soueraigne
that now is,—Luciferum roseo cum sole, how
glorious were the workes of God in his most peaceable
entrance, not so much as a fly mouing the whinge
or hissing against him? Besides manie vnexpected escapes
of manie vnsuspected dangers. Al these were
his workes of desolatiō. But there is one behind aboue
al the rest, which I maie call the desolation of abomination,
(in the hart and purpose of the enimie) the most
abominable, detestable, vnmatchable, that euer was
thought vpon. It was not solitudo in terra with them,
but subter terram—itum est in viscera terrae, for
the perpetration of it they went downe into the bowells of the earth, but for the inuentiō to the very vmbilicke,
and centre of the earth. I had almost askt

                  —qui gurges, aut quis tartarus hoc scelus
                  —est ausus attrectare?
               
 sith in so many thousāds of years
from the fal of the reprobate and faithlesse angels it
neuer came into the head of anie deuil to suggest to
the hart of any mā before this time so nefarious, flagitius,
portentuous a wickednesse, as this was?
            Actors it had vpon the earth, with whome I must
acquaint you. 1. that Lateran Iupiter, that Balaam,

Caiphas, high-preist of Rome, the great Antichrist, the
maine Alastor, Abaddon, destroier of the christian
world, whose first prize in the Church of God was
that he might be Episcopus episcoporum, cheife and vniuersal
Bishop, (a proud, prophane, sacrilegious, Luciferian
name) afterwards Rex regum, King of Kings;
and Terror regum, terrour of Kings, and the hammer of
nations; turning the keies of the Kingdome of heauen
into the keyes of the kingdomes of the earth: and not
medling with the crimes and sinnes of the people, but
crownes of Princes, not soules but scepters; nor contenting
himselfe with his first commission (though
corrupted with false glosses) pasce oues,
               21. Ioh. vnlesse there
were added occide,
               10. Act. 
               & mandūca, that is excōmunicate,
depose dispoliate, Eagle & Falkons, Emperor & inferiour
Kings, not onlie of their dominions & possessions,
but of their liues too. It were infinit to follow histories.
They were not so readie to chandge their names at
their first inuestiture into their sees, and to be called
Vrbanes, Bonifaces, and the like, as afterwards the christian
world to change them againe, and to call their
Vrbanes, Turbanes, Bonifaces Malefaces, Eugenies Dusgenies,
Hildebrandes, titiones infernales, hell brandes
indeed, Pios Impios, Clementes Inclementes; instead of
Caput Ecclesiae to tearme him Caudam Ecclesiae, and fū
                  damētum
detrimentū; they proued so pernicious both
to Church and Christian policies.
            2 Al other ministers of this man of sin, pillers & props
of his Chaire of pestilence I let passe. There is a generation
of men more degenerate then euer Nabuchodonoser
was, not men into beasts, but verie deuills incarnate,

of al the sectes in that Popish Sodome, which
haue beene multiplied as the monsters of Africke,
the most pestilēt. You cal them Iesuites, Bar-Iesuites,
you wel may, of that damned Sorcerer Act. 13. or Iebusites,
Esaüites, Suites, as some haue done, the disloiall
broode of Ignatius Loiola, the notorious Incendiaries,
Bustuaries, of Christian states,In eo nimium sapientes, quod se putant caelo vel ipsi quando
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   imperaturos. Pap. Mat. in Paul, 4. 
               they thinke one daie to be
rulers even over heauen it selfe; satanicum genus (one
stiled them) the ofspring of Satan; the fallest Sinons,
impostors, couzeners of the world, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Stelliones, Bispelliones, you knowe not what to
make them; their liues, their tongues, their harts, their
habits all are so false.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
as hee said of the Spartanes, & Nulla fides nisi quantū
expedit, as the rule of the Parthians was. The new Priscilianistes
of our age, of whom St 
               Austin cōplained,
soli inuenti sunt dogmatizare mendacium, the onlie
men that are found to dogmatize & defend lying; yea
and periurie also, and that in the worship of God, Cū
Dei nomen, Deus testis, Dei sacramentum interponitur.
Wherof St 
               Austin added, o vbi est is fōtes lacrymarū?
quo ibimus? vbi occult abimus nos a facie veritatis? O
where are you fountaines of teares! whether shall wee
go, or where shal we hide our selues frō the face of truth?
whose mixt, Hermaphroditical, epicaene, half-borne,
and half-vnborne propositions are like J say not there
seruations of the Gentiles—Iuraui lingua, but the oracles
of the deuiles themselues. Jn a worde, they are
the marow, and spirit of the mystery of iniquitie, the
trumpets of sedition and rebellion 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,

their crie is, dirumpamus vincula, proijciamus funes
let vs breake their bonds, and cast away their cordes:
Noe bond of nature, consanguinitie, allegiāce, alliāce,
affiance, wedlock, oath, sacrament stādeth good, if they
list to dissolue it. Of al the religions in the world J denounce
vnto you (let me a little inuert the wordes of
the Psalme) Nolite fieri sicut equus & mulus (they differ
not much in kind) in quibus non est intellectus. Bee not
like Iesuite & Priest (they are not far a sunder) in whō
there is noe conscience, no religion: whose mouthes
thou canst not hold in with bit or bridle of anie, either
ciuil or sacred restraint, but they wil euade thee.
            
               —Dij talem terris auertite pestem,
               Nec louis imperium, nec Phlegetonta timent.
            
            And therfore as they said in Rome, Exeat ex vrbe
Catilina, Catiline must bee spewed out before the Citie
could haue quiet; so maie we saie, if we wish peace
to the Kingdomes and Countries of the earth, Exe
at ex vrbe and ex orbe Iesuita, from whom there is
noe peace, but rebus sic stantibus, and dum vires suppetunt▪
til they be able to make their partes good.
            
            
               —Sed tua praecipuè non intret limina qui squam
               —Frater, vel monachus, vel quâvis lege sacerdos:
            
            And aboue al things take heed that you admit neither
Preist, nor Iesuite, nor Iesuited busy Papist within
your houses.
            Of these there were sundrie in this bloudy attempt:
Some of them fixed as it were in their orbes, staple &
Legier Iesuites, like principal bad angels set ouer provinces,
Baldwin ouer Flanders, Creswel ouer Spaine,
Garnet ouer England; other planetory, cursorie, moueable

from place to place, as Gerard, Tesmond, Hammōd,
Hal, with the like. Their offices were▪ to animate,
authorize, warrāt, absolue, sacrifice, pray, yea & prophecie
too. You remēber their psalmodie, The memorie
of nouelties shal perish with a CRACK; and hee shall
come as a flame that bursteth out beyond the fornace, and,
his furie shal flie forth as a thunder, & in a moment shall
hee crush their bones: that when it had come to passe
according to these predictions, they might haue said,
dixit dominus, os domini loquutum est, The Lorde hath
said it, the mouth of the Lord foretold it.
            
            There wanteth yet a third sort for execution. Vlysses
               
maie perswade, but Diomedes must through with it.
There must bee hands as wel as heads. Behold a number
of Gentlemen, (with others their followers) some
of noble and worthie descent (sed quantae tenebrae a
quo fulmine?) al our countriemen and patriotes, all fed
with the fat of the land (but a viperous generation, not
sparing the bowels of their mother that breed them)
some that are the salt of the pallace, and beheld the
face of the King in place of neare attendance, al drūck
with the dregges of the cup of Babylon, and ful as the
spider with Iesuitical poyson; they ouerflow with the
gal of bitternes, and want but meanes & matter wherin
to disgordg thēselues: to the attaining wherof they
lay their heads together, and according to the worde
of the Psalme scrutati sunt iniquitates, & defecerunt
scrutantes scrutinio, they beate & wearie their brains
to devise to some purpose: At length they draw together
into a knot as an impostume to an head, & close
like the skales of Leuiathan that the breath cannot get

betweene, they take oath of secresie and persistance,
(was euer the name of God so fowlie dishonoured?)
they confirme it with the blessed sacrament (o more
then Iewish impietie; they vowed they would neither
eate nor drinke (at their common tables) till they had
the head of Paul, they would fast it out! These eate &
drinke at the table of the Lord, the bodie and bloud of
our blessed Sauiour vpon a bargaine of bloud, to haue
the heads both of head and members, and to make a
poole, a floud, a whole red sea of bloud, with the slaughter
of manie thousands. (Busirides arae clementes.) Are
these their sacrifices? these their sacramēts? In a word,
they vndertake, they resolue, they sweare, they deuouer
and execrate themselues with that tragick instigation,
Excede pietas awaie yee bowells of compassion,
natural affection begone, thoughts of humanitie, prickles
of conscience, sparkes of reason, barrs of religiō,
feare of God, reuerence of men, difference of persons,
high, low, old, yong, nocent, innocent, al depart,
            —Sic sic iuvat ire, our harts are fixed, our harts
are fixed to vndergoe a worke, opus solitudinis, a work
of desolation opus mirabilitèr singulare & singularitèr
mirabile, a work, which whosoeuer heareth of, his two
eares shal tingle, and his hart-strings shal tremble; one
for al, a worke that containeth in it▪
               —mille actus vetitos & mille piacula:
to become paricides, Reginides, Regnicides at once, &
with on catholike, that is vniuersal, blow to cut of all
the heads of the land as it were vpon one & the same
shoulders.
            The kind of desolation that Dauid giueth instance

in, is auferens bella, he maketh VVarrs to cease. Ours is
not species but monstrum, cannot be defined within anie
kind. Their first proiect was warre whilst our Debora
was yet liuing: to that purpose they had a treatie
with Spaine for an other inuasion. But then we would
haue buckled our armour vnto vs, and haue girt our
swords vpon our thighes, we would haue brought into
the field. pares aquilas, alike forces, and haue opposed,
bow vnto bow, speare vnto speare, chariot vnto
chariot. But maior mihi metus ex leone quam ex vulpe,
I euer feared their fraudes more then forces, their
warrs neuer did, neuer could anoy vs—. Astus polenti
or armis. Their trust is in stratagemes and trecheries.
Insidiantur in abscondito, quasi leones in spelunca sua.
They lie in waite in their the euish corners, as a lion lurketh
in his den. They saie to the ground couer vs, and to
a subterraneous vault, keep vs close. Vt sagittent in occultis
immaculatum, that they may shoot at the innocent
in secret;
               64. Psal. and if their occultum speed, it followeth
in the Psalme, subito sagittabunt eum, they wil also do
it suddenly. They shal receaue a terrible blow, and not see
who hurt them. They begin their worke with a mine vnder
ground (Romish pioners, Antichistiā molewarps,
hellish Tenebrios) and with improbitie of labour to
speed the impietie of their harts, half dig through a
wale of three yards in thicknes. Cursed bee their rage,
for it was cruel, and their malice for it was verie painful.
They might haue plowed vpō the rock as wel. Frō
the mine to a cellar, as fit for a dē of theeus as the mine
was iust vnder the Capitol, the higher house of Parliament,
that where the lawes had beene made (said they)

there the lawmakers might receaue their punishment.
This cellar they store with 36. barrels (great and smal)
of gunpowder (the inuention of a Monke, a deuill, the
daughter of salt and sulphure, mother of the first borne
of death; nothing maketh a quicker end) together with
billets, and fagots, and peeces of timber, and barres of
iron, and massie stones, al deadlie and murthering artillerie,
and are now euen readie with match & touchwood
in the hād of FAVX a firebrand indeed, against
the 5. of Nouēber was two yeare; at what time these
smokie Locustes out of their mercilesse pit of more
then Neronian & Catilinarie dispositions, crying 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
and incendium ruina extinguam, let heauē
and earth burne, and let nothing quench the fire but
the ruine and downfal of al, these audacious Phäetōs
running a desperat & dreadful course, meant to haue
made a general combustion, communē rogum, a common
bonefire not onlie of mortal men, but of immortal
monuments, trophees & pillers, yea charters and
records of eternitie; and to haue offered holocaustum
a whole burnt offering of vs, to haue caused to passe
through the fire to their Moloch of Rome, our sonnes
and our daughters, our King, Queene, and Prince, Nobles,
Senatours, and Priests, with the flower & people
of our Land, without distinction of Maiestie, dignitie,
degree, sexe, age, merit, yea or religion it selfe in some
part: which what had it else beene but a type of the deflagration
of Sodome & Gomorre, an image of Tophet.
30. Esay. the burning wherof was much fire & wood,
a verie represētatiō (the nearest on earth that cā be) of
that ignitū diluuiū
                that shalbe at the end of the world

of that Gehenna ignis, which God hath prepared for
the wicked; when both root and branch, flesh & arme,
father and sonne and nephew, damme and yonge in a
neast together, al had beene blowne away with a blast,
a whirlewind of destruction, and the whole state of
Kingdome and pollicie dissolued, as a man turneth a
platter vpside downe; and that in an instant of time, before
wee could haue swallowed downe our spittle, or
in remembrance or remorse for our sinnes haue said,
Miserere Deus, O Lord haue mercie vpon vs. Like to
the destruction threatned to the house of Ieroboam. 1.
Kings 14. The house of Ieroboam shal be destroied in
that daie. VVhat? Euen now, as you would saie in a moment,
before they had leasure to thinke of it.
            This was the worke of desolation meant and proiected,
wherof J haue told you so often. Aske now frō
one end of heauen to the other, and throughout al the
generations of the earth if euer the like were. Herein J
must confesse, my text faileth me, and scripture, and al
nature faileth me. There neuer was example in the
world of so facinorous a fact, a sin so exceedingly sinful,
the primum genus of al sin, and not a crying, but a
roring, thundring sin (as his excellent Maiestie tearmed)
it) nor of bloud, but of fire and brimstone, a whole penuarie
and store-house of sin, wherin was proditiō, perdition,
deperdition, al congested and heaped vp in on.
            But the goodwil of him that sat in the bush (as Moyses
spake) (the bush that flamed but consumed not) &
the compassion of his sonn, who waded in the midst of
the firie fornace of Babylon, deliuered vs as the bush, &
the three childrē frō the Stygiā
                lake, & the mouth of hel

freed vs from their Catholike dooms-daie, and in a parable
brought vs back from death to life: & as for those
Salmoneā
                artificial fireworkes, he confounded many of
them by their owne skil, and brought their intended
mischeefes vpon their owne heads.
            Now (according to my text) come and behold the
works of the Lord, what desolatiōs he hath wrought vpon
the earth: shal J saie he causeth warrs to cease? Or
breaketh the bow? It was far worse. For at that very
time when they said of our soules, There is noe help for
them in their God, there there thus would wee haue it,
their stratageme being as ripe as the mellowest sommer▪
fruit, there wanting nothing in the world but the
last hand to act it, at that very time (that God maie be
al in al, and that the honour may be wholy his without
anie thought of copartnership) were al these machinations
of theirs desolated, discomfited, and defeated:
And notwithstanding their vowed and dejerated secresie,
their threefold bond of keeping counsaile, religion,
oath, sacrament, [You shal sweare by the blessed Trinitie,
and the holie sacrament, that neither directly nor
indirectlie, by word nor circumstance &c] Yet was their
worke of darknes discouered, their Troian horse of the
most barbarous villanie that euer eare hard opened,
their Labyrint, their dungeon, their hel of secresy, yea
the deep and vnsearchable hell of their harts (who cā
find them out saith the Prophet?) eviscerated, rāsacked,
and manifested to the light of the world.
            Then were we as men that drempt, when the Lord
waked ouer vs, wee sat vnder our vines and suspected
nothing, peace, peace, and al is wel, the noise of milstones

& light of cādles, bride & bridgroome was our
song: at what time (that the word of the Psalme may euer
be verified, dedisti metuētibus te significationē ut
fugiant a facie arcus, that he wil euer giue warning to
his seruāts to flie from a flash of powder before it cō
               meth)
from one of this Plutoes band is a letter sēt to a
Noble, thrice noble Lord (whose memory be euerblest)
that letter not kept but imparted where it was fit, examined,
skanned ouer againe & againe; & afterwards
by One wise as the Angel of the Lord to knowe good
& bad, a regius propheta, who spake not by priuate motion,
but as he was inspired by the holie ghost, interpreted
against the rules of art. Whervpon those penetralia
mortis, in most chambers of death were narrowlie
searched, the last designed actor of the bloudy tragedy
deprehēded, & the whole matter detected, with such
amasemēt to the actor himselfe, that he said it was not
God, but the deuil that discouered it. J now aske in the
language of the 9. Psalme rendred by Tremelius, Oinimice
absolutae nesūt vastitates in aeternum? an ciuitates
extirpasti? Haue thy desolations sped? (so maie they euer
speed, & thus bee thy handie▪ workes alwaies prospered)
hast thou spoiled, and gotten possession? Quies
cite & videte, if there bee any sparke of grace left in
you, giue ouer your deuilish practisings.
            
               —Si genus humanum et mortalia temnitis arma,
               —At sperate Deum memorem fandi at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nefandi
            
            If you thinke that the Lawes of Princes be to weake
against you, & their punishments too easie, yet feare
the iudgments of the dreadful Lord of hostes.
            And you the faithful seruants of God and subiects

of your Soueraigne whersoeuer, deliuered, as the scapgoat
in the law, frō the danger of death, & pulled out
of the gulfe and bottomlesse pit of imminent destruction;
quie scite et videte, put your trust in the Lorde,
hang vp your votiuas tabulas, tables of boundē thankfulnes
in the open sight of the world.
            And let the scription of those tables bee, Non nobis
domine, nō nobis, sed nomini tuo. O Lord al wisdome
goodnes, saluation in disclosing and dispersing the hole
of those aspes belongeth vnto thee, thine is the honor
and thankes, wee take to our selues noe part of thy
glorie.
            I knowe you haue long looked for an end. Much
speaking is wearines to the flesh, and long hearing is
offense to patience. Wil you heare the end of al? Thus
began, thus endeth my text. The Lord of hostes is with
vs that Dominus virtutum, with and for whome the
starres in their courses fight.
—Et coniurati veniunt in praelia venti,
the winds and waues fight, and pugnat orbis terrarum,
al the creatures in the world fight to take vengance of
his enimies; himselfe fighteth for vs: & Deus IACOBI
(of whom I trust he hath sworne by his holinesse, that
hee wil neuer faile him, and hath made an euerlasting
couenant with him and his seed, his image our hopeful
Prince, and his whole happie race (si custodierint,
if they wil keep his testimonies, & walke after his laws)
this God of Iacob is our defense.
            
            To this God, the author and finisher of al our welfare,
Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, be ascribed almight
and Maiestie, praise and thanksgiuing, this daie

and al the daies of our life, in our Chambers at home,
and abroad in our Churches, for our time and
throughout al the generations of our
Childrens children after vs, til
Christs comming in
the cloudes.
Amen,
Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   