
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON
PREACHED AT WHITE-HALL
THE 5. DAY OF NOvember.
ann. 1608.
            BY
JOHN KING Doctor of Divinity, Deane of
Christ-Church in Oxon: and Vicechauncellor
of the Vniversity.
            
               Published by commandement.
            
            AT OXFORD,
Printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the
Vniversitie. 1608.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               11. Psal. 2. 3. 4. vers.
               For loe, the wicked bend their bow, & make ready their
arrowes vpon the string, that they may secretlie
shoote at them which are vpright in heart. For the
foundations are cast downe; what hath the righteous
done? The Lord, &c.
            
            
               THe parts are two. 1. the danger,
distresse; 2. the deliverance. Jn
the danger; 1. the 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
preamble, introduction, quoniam
ecce, and some turne quoniā
               
into certè; then haue you asseveration,
certè, and demonstration,
ecce: 2. the prosequution,
explication, narration it selfe. The wicked bend, &c.
The preamble noteth two things: 1. that the wickednes
of the wicked is inseparable to him Certè,
               Certè, eccè 
               verily.
His iniquity is bound vp in his hart, he cannot part
from it.Psal. 
               The vngodly can set himselfe in no good way.
               Es. 26.
               Let mercy be shewed to the wicked,
               Senec. 
               hee cannot learne
goodnes. And then, quid eo infoelicius, cui iam esse malum
necesse est?
               Iuv.—monstrū nullâ virtute redemptū.
2. that his wickednes is not only inseparable, but sensible

and notorious, it may bee admirable and prodigious,
such and so great as deserueth an ecce, behold.
So that the very dore-posts of my text haue a sprinkling
and blessing vpon them: Certè telleth you that
the wicked wilbe wicked,Ier. 
               Can a Morian chandge his
skin? And ecce, that hee wilbe wicked with note,
—vt declamatio fiat, that he may be talked of for it.
            But I must with Abraham, not sit still in my tent
dore, I must go in to make provision. Jf you walke
further with me, you shall see persons & matter worth
your seeing.Peccatores intendunt, &c. A ternary of persons. 1. the wicked. 2. the
vpright in heart, or iust. 3. Iehovah. the things, 1. on
the part of the wicked, their bow bent, & arrowes prepared
on the string, to shoote, and that secretly, & that
at the vpright in heart, and till the verie foundations
be cast downe. 2. In the iust, I finde nothing but suffering,
bearing, for iustus quid fecit? what hath the righteous
done? 3. In the Lord, his being in heauen, beholding,
examining, and finally rewarding. But thereof
anon. Meanewhile the hand of my text, leadeth you
to these remarkable particulars. 1. the actors, wicked.
2. the patients, or spectators, vpright in heart. 3. the
indoles, disposition, provisiō, furniture of the wicked,
their bow is bent, and their arrowes prepared vpon the
string. 4. their execution, to shoote. 5. the adiunctum, in
secret. 6. the extent, till the foundations be cast down.
7. the reason. I see none, but the wickednes of the
wicked, & in the vpright of heart, righteousnes it self.
            The holy ghost in that dore of my text, frō which we
are already past, standeth at the dore of your hearts,
& knocketh for attentiō to all these. They are neither

fables, for certè, nor trifles, for ecce; they are both
true, and great, & important. For what is there in the
whole body of my text that deserueth not this character
ecce to be stamped vpon it?
            1 Behold, that there should be men vpon the face of
the earth, styled by the name of men, endewed with
reasonable soules, effigiated to Gods image, the deliberated
workmanship of his owne divine hands, his
generation, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , yet such as are hight in my text
impij, improbi, without piety, without probity, godlesse,
gracelesse, worthlesse men, peccatores, (saith the
vulgar) 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , sinners exceedingly sinful, sinners
with seared consciences, habituated, inured sinners,
from the crowne of the head to the sole of the
foote, inwardly, outwardly, nothing but sinfulnes.
            2 Beholde, that their bow is ever bent, that they are
strong & studious, to worke mischiefe, their braines
exercised, their labours emploied, no contention of
minde, no trauaile of body denied to the accomplishment
of sin: not sins of ignorance, sinnes of infirmity,
which wee all cōmit, but sins of industry, purpose, delight;
not sins of precipitation, passion (as Gregorie calleth
thē) but sins of deliberatiō, resolutiō, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
1. Rom. they doe them, and take pleasure, liking
in so doing: And their arrowes are ever prepared vpō
the string, there wanteth but opportunity to loosen,
and discharge them; alwaies full of the strength, and
spirit of wickednes, as a vessel of new wine, labouring
as the clowde of a burthen of vapor, so they of maliciousnes,
and swelling as the Spider with poyson, only
awaiting the time when to disgordge thēselues, &

burst with most aduantage.
            Behold, in the third place, that their sinnes are not
sinnes of pleasure but horror, not sinnes of delight,
but cruelty, bloudshed, none of those easie, & gentle,
and fauourable sinnes, that touch not life, and hurte
but their owners themselues, as pride, prodigality, &
the like, this is an armed, enraged, military sinne, it
shooteth forth arrowes, and darts, to pearce, to wound
to slay, to bring to destruction.
            4 Behold, that not contēt with it selfe, cruelty I meane
with hir owne effects, which perturbation of minde
often bringeth foorth, and leasure dearly repenteth;
for the better prospering, and speeding of her bloudy
hand, she maketh subtilty hir assistant: sagittant in
obscuro,
               Val. Max. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , in obscurilunio, it is skilfull, artificiall
cruelty. Crudelitatis horridus habitus, truculenta
facies, violentus spiritus, vox terribilis. Let cruelty
looke and speake like it selfe, and men wil bee warned
to avoide it. Tamberlaine his bloudy tents made opē
profession what his meaning was. Here are Cruelty &
craft coupled togither, a smoothed, dissembled, disguised
cruelty. Venite, sapienter opprimamus eum .1.
Exod. They will be cruell in oppressing, yet they wil do
it wisely.
            
            Or if all these doe not moue,
            5 Behold, it is a wonder, they can finde no marke but
the vpright in heart:
            
            6 Behold, it is a wonder, they can make no ende till
the foundations be cast downe.
            
            7 Behold, it is a wonder, they can giue no cause of
their malice, the righteous neuer offended them.
            
               
               Eccè, behold all to gether; wicked, the actors; bending
the bow &c. their diligence, eagernes; to shoote,
their cruelty; secretly, their subtilty; The vpright in
hart, their mistaken marke; til the foundations bee cast
downe, their vnmeasurable extent; and what hath the
righteous done? their vnreasonable reason.
            The Actors, and Archers in my text are impij, improbi,
peccatores, you knowe them already, they neither
feare God, nor reverence man. They drinke wickednes
like water, and adde thirst vnto drunkennes,
that is, when they are drunken with sin, they thirst after
it againe. This world of people, since it first had
being, hath bin diuided into two disparate species and
sorts of men, wicked, and righteous: betweene which
two as betweene Abraham & the rich man, there
hath euer bin 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                a great distance & gulfe, not
in nature (figmentum vnum, one bloud, one breath,
one image,) but in condition, conversation. This division
first began when God set vp that wall of partition,
Gen. 3. betwixt the seed of the serpent, and the seede of
the woman. The serpent hath had his seed ever since,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , his viperous generatiō, dedicated in
Cain his first borne, and thence forth the line continued
along in Nimrod, and Cham, & Ismael, & Esau,
and many persons and people of the earth, vncircumcised,
vnholy, vncleane, the seed of the adulteresse and
witch, people of the curse, sonnes of Belial, children of
disobedience, darkned in their vnderstandings, dishonored
in their affections, defiled in their consciences,
abominable, incredulous, and to everie good worke reprobate.
The counter divided members of this diuision

thus sundred the meanetime, God shall evidently
and conspicuously diuide at the ende of the world
in the open sight of men and Angells, and shall cut
betweene thē as by an euen thread, with the two-edged
sword of his mouth, whē he shall turne the wicked
to his left hand, and set the righteous at his right.
            This diuision I finde in my Text, wicked and righteous,
these, as commendable in their order & ranke,
as the other damned & deplored in theirs. Those are
impij 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , wicked in the highest degree, wickednesse
giueth them nomen & esse;
               Eccles. 12. 
               hoc enim est totū
hominis, this is all they are. The other, in the aime and
purpose of the holy ghost, seeme to haue the absolute
and full composition of righteous men. For first they
are called recti corde, vpright in heart, and afterwards
iusti, iust men. The former, rectitudo cordis, is the Canon
and rule, The later, iustitia is the application &
vse of it. Rectus corde without iustus is not sufficient,
but iustus without rectus corde is stark naught. Rectus
corde,
               1. Cor. 4. is good, Nihil mihi conscius sum, but not complete,
2. Cor. 1. 
               non in hoc iustificatus sum; rectus corde, may say
gloria mea testimonium &c. my reioicing is the testimony
of a good cōscience; but except he be iustus also, he
hath not learned the rule of his master,5. Math. 
               sic luceat lux
tua,
               8. Act. thy light must shine for the good of others. Simō
Magus apparantly to the eie of the world was as iust
as any man, yet the Apostle told him, Non est rectum
cor tuum, thy heart is not right. Here are both, & both
must be: heart, & hand, habit & action, radix & germen,
roote & propagation, vprightnes of heart is bonum
tuum, thine own good, but iustice is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
               the good of others: the one keepeth thee streight & vpright
in thy selfe, the other distributeth suum cut
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               
that vnto every calling and every person that rightly
belongeth to them.
            
               The wicked haue bent their bow and made ready
their arrowes vpō the stringe.
               2. Haue bent &c. I need not acquaint you
how eager & sollicitous the wicked are to perpetrate
wickednes, as a woman with child hath sorrow til she
bring forth. Their artillerie is not far to seeke. Their
bow hangeth not vp by the wals,Esay 48. their arrowes sleepe
not in the quiuer, the one is bent, the other are prepared
vpon the stringe; in this sense Non est pax impijs.
As the sea is euer working, and boyling like a pott of
ointment, so they alwaies hammering, and fordging,
some mischieuous act.Mich. 3. 
               Noctes ducunt iusomnes; operantur
malum in cubilibus, they deuise mischeefe in
their beds, and when it is light, they put it in practise.
Act. 9. it is said of Saul (as yet a persequutor) that he
went 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , breathing threatnings & slaughter
—& si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset,
vnlesse he had murthred the Saints, hee had wanted
breath. The Psalme saith, Alienati sunt peccatores à
vulua,
               Ps. 58 
               errauernnt ab vtero. They become strange euen
from the wombe. This spurious, degenerous brood beginneth
to be wicked betimes. Diuines wel obserue,
that originall sinne and hereditary corruption, hath
a quicker, stronger vegetation, and sooner displaieth
it selfe,Sueton. in them, then in other men. Tiberius would
often say of his sonne Caligula that he liued for the ouerthrow
of him, and his people, & senatricem populo
Romano, Phaëtontem orbi terrarum educare, and that

he bred a serpēt to the people of Rome, an incendiary &
firebrand to the whole world. There you haue one of
that serpents seed, whereof I spake before. Alexander
Aegaus called Nero his scholler 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               clay not mingled with water as other mens, but, macerated
in bloud. He saw a sanguinary disposition in him:
To his freinds that congratulated the birth of him,
Domitius his father answered, scitote ex me & Agrippina
nihil nisi in faustum, et horrendum, et publicè nociturū
potuisse procrear
                     •
                  . Such egge, such bird; there
is alienatus à vuluâ, one estranged and corrupted frō
the wombe. Examples are infinite. Saul had euer his
bowes and arrowes ready against Dauid Hee sought
him as a fly,
               1. Sam. 26. 
               and hunted him is a partrich vpō the moū
                  taines,
as Dauid spake. A right archer, and fowler indeed.
So were the Scribes & Pharises against our Sauiour.
They watched him vpon all occasion 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
how they might catch him. So the Arrians against
the Orthodox, Athansius by name, the great
Atlas, for diuerse yeares, of the christian world. It is a
world to read, how with their bowes, and arrowes, of
implacable hatred, and indefatigable deuilish policies
neuer vnbent, neuer intermitted, they persequuted
that Saint.
            From their inclination,3, 4. To Shoote priuily. propension, promptnesse
to mischiefe, Come we to their practise. They beare
not their bowes & arrowes as skar-crowes in a garden
of cucumbers, to fray, but to shoote, not at stakes,
but men, their arrowes are iacula mortifera, 7. Psal.
deadlie arrowes, & least they should faile to hit, they
take advantage of the darke, of privacie and secresie.

They shoot privilie. Now this is the couenant of hel
it selfe. For what created power in the earth is able
to dissolue that worke which cruelty & subtiltie, like
Simeon and Levi, sisters in euill are combined, and
confederate to bring to passe? Where subtilty is ingenious,
insidious to inuent, cruelty barbarous to execute.
Subtilty giueth counsaile, cruelty giueth the
stroke. Subtilty ordereth the time, the place, the
meanes, accōmodateth, cōcinnateth circumstances,
cruelty vndertaketh the act; subtilty hideth the knife,
cruelty cutteth the throate; subtilty with a cunning
head laieth the ambush, plotteth the traine, the stratageme,
and cruelty with as sauage an heart, sticketh
not at the dreadfullest, direfullest obiects, ready to
wade vp to the anckles, the necke in a whole red sea
of humane, yea country bloud; how fearefull is their
plight that are thus assaulted? It was the case of our
first parents. The Serpent commeth vnto them with
faire words and fierie darts, subtilty, and cruelty. Proponit
quod delectabile, supponit, quod Exitiale-Vngit,
pungit. His, eritis tanquādij you shalbe as Gods, made
them like deuils. Thus righteous Abell was betraied,
and butchered by his vnnaturall brother. Egrediamur
for as, come brother, Let vs go walke and talke togither.
Meane time whilest the tōgue anointeth him
with oile, the hand murthereth him. Ioab killeth not
Amasa like an open foe. Estne pax mifrater, brother
is all well? was the vnsuspected traine to make way
for his fatall weapon. All these shot in obscuro, privilie,
and by stealth, it is the safest & surest shooting.
Else what doth Iudas with a kisse, and all haile in his

mouth, in the very forefront of his treason? What so
many wolues in sheepes clothing? or Deuills frō the
blacknes of darknes, in the formes of Angels of light?
Or locusts from the bottomlesse pit with womēs faces?
Or Hyaena with the call of a man? Or the Syren
with notes of melody? Or the Crocodile with teares
of mourning? Or the whore of Babylon with her cup
of fornications golden without, and sugred within,
that the kings of the earth may be drunke, and die as
it were senseles, and sleeping? Or finally whie doe the
rankest impostors and seducers of the earth, write
pharmaca, medicines vpon the outside of the boxe,
whē they deliuer venena, poisons? You see what mettals
the wicked are tempred of
                  •
               edged with cruelty, &
backt with subtiltie. They carry both the Lion & the
Foxe in their brests, as Carbo spake of Sylla (the Scylla
indeed and wrecke of the Roman people) In imitatiō
of whom rather then of St 
               Peter, they write of Alexander
the 6. that intrauit vt vulpes. There is subtelty,
regnauit vt leo, there is cruelty, (for he was tearmed
spongia sanguinis, a spunge of bloud) and to make vpp
the full period of all his acts and monuments, mortuus
vt canis, he died like a dogge.
            
            But against whom is this double engine prepared?
If they will needes shoote,5. At the vpright. let them take their marke
aright. Let them shoote at him that shooteth at thē,
the great Nimrod and hunter before the Lord, the devill
6. Ephes, he shooteth the arrowes of temptation
& death, let them shoote the arrowes of praiers, and
orisons. Or let them shoote at the wicked the limms
of the deuil-Diluculo interficiam,
               Psal. 101. I will make hast (saith
Dauid) to destroy the wicked from the earth. Not so▪
               
Seldome shall you see the wicked against the wicked.
Squama squamae coniungitur, they stick too close together,
they symbolize to nearly in wickednesse (vnlesse
by an overruling hand of God, and some extraordinarie
iudgment, somtimes they turne their swordes
each into others bosome,Iud. 7. and are drunke with their
owne bloud, as with new wine) But for the most part,
even for that league, & kindred of wickednes, which
they all hold, be their sects and professions of wickednes
neuer no different, their rites, and religions neuer
so opposite one to the other,Prov. 1. yet Marsupium (they
say) sit vnum omniū nostrûm, Let vs all haue one purse,
there is concors discordia, an agreement in their disagreements,
an vnanimous cōsent in them al to bande
against the innocent: Cōiunctis caudis, though adversis
vultibus: Foxes will make shift to carry firebrands
in their tailes to burne the cornefields. Thus Herode,
and Pilate notwithstanding their priuate iarres, could
quickly put themselues in tune to Crucifie Christ.
And Scribes, Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, Roman
souldiours, Iewes and Gentiles, though nō Coutuntur,
they conuerse not in many things, yet [deponamus
hic inimicitias] leaue their quarrels & grudges
at home,Niceph. if the cause be against the righteous. Meletians,
and Arrians at the first were at variance betweene
themselues. At length in the common pursuit
of the church, they became 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
so knit togither in amity, that they exchāged names,
and Arrians were called Meletians, Meletians Arrians.
Ten seueral nations, 83. Psal. faciunt vnitatem
contra vnitatem (to vse S. Austins word) make an venitie,
               
or rather a cōspiracy against one people of the
Lorde. The reason is, the wicked with the wicked agree
in multis tertijs, in many thirds; but the wicked
with the righteous (except in the nature, and shape
of man,) communicateth in nothing. Quoniam invtilis
est nobis, & contrarius operibus nostris, &c. The
righteous is wholy vnprofitable to vs, and contrarie to
our workes. His life is of an other fashion, wee cannot
abide to looke vpon him. 2. Sap.
            Let al this haue his passage.6. Til the foū dations. They shoote, and shoot
Priuily, and that at the vpright of heart. But filij hominum
quovs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ? How long, O yee sons of men! Is your
malice vnexorable as the graue? Deepe and bottomles
as hell? O sworde of the Lord (cry they in the Prophet
Ieremy) how long will it be ere thou cease? returne
into thy skabberd rest, and be still. O yee arrowes of
the wicked, how lōg? Returne into your quiuers. Not,
till the foundations be cast downe, and not a stone stā
               ding
vpō a stōe, nor a soule breathing vpō the earth,
that beareth the name of a righteous mā. Truth must
first be banished frō the earth & righteousnesse troddē
down as mire in the streets, & Christ driuē out of
his kingdome amōgst vs, or els no peace. In this case
the wicked is like the beast, nō numerat, cānot endure
a seed, a remnant, a berry here and there in the vtmost
boughes, not one that professeth to know God, no not
one. Vtinam Pop. Rom. Vnam haberet cervicē, was the
wish of Caligula, that the people of Rome had but one
necke, that at one blow he might cut it of: so these of
the righteous. Venite, disperdamus eos de gente 83. Ps.
Come, let vs cut them of from being a nation, and let

the name of Israell be no more in remembrance. 137. Ps.
The voice of Edom was like vnto it, in the day of Ierusalem,
Exinanite, exinanite vs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad fundamenta in
eâ, Downe with it, downe with it even vnto the groūd.
It was Pharao his pollicy for the rooting out of Israell,
Exod. 1 
               quicquid masculini sexus, all that is borne male cast
it into the river. And Hamans pollicy in procuring
those letters of the King for the killing of the Jewes
in al the prouinces of his kingdome. The foundations
must be cast downe.
            
            
               The last is the cause of all this bitternes,
               VVhat hath the iust dōe? 
               which in
the righteous I finde none. For what hath the righteous
done? The subiection or answere implied must
needs be, nihil, iust nothing But Aristides must be banished
out of Athens, iustus quia iustus, for no other
cause but for iustice, and Christians must be thrown
to the Lyons,
               1. Sa. 26. Christianus quia Christianus. Davids apology
to Saul is, wherefore doth my Lorde thus persecute
his servant? what haue I done? Or what evill is in
mine hand? O Lord my God (Psa. 7.) if I haue done this
thing, &c. nay, if I haue not done the contrary, then
let mine enimie persecute my soule, &c. but when they
were sicke I put on sackcloth, and mourned for them as
for mine owne mothers sonne; this was all the hurt I
euer did them. 1. Sam. 12. Behold (saith Samuell) here
am I beare recorde. VVhose Oxe haue I taken? Or whose
Asse haue I taken? Or to whom haue I euer done wrong?
They answere, Thou hast neuer done vs wrong. Wherfore
then do yee call for a king? VVhat iniquity haue
your fathers found in me? saith God. 2. Ier. VVherein
hane I grieved thee? Testifie against me. 6. Mich. Many

good deeds haue I done amongst you, for which of my
good deedes?Ioh 10. 
               saith our Sauiour in his Gospell.
            
            The conclusion of all is,Psal. 35. 
               Oderunt me gratis. The
righteous Lord, and his righteous Christ, and their
righteous seruants suffer these wrongs from the wicked
without cause.
            You see what aggrauateth. Men as innocent as innocēcy
it selfe, yet persequuted with mortal, immortall
hatred, both by force and fraud, and that to their
vtter extinguishment and eradication from the face
of the earth. So much of the distresse: the deliuerance
which was my latter part, I referre to conclude with.
            
               The wicked bend their bowe &c,
               Application. Haue I spoken all
this while as to men that slept? Or doth any man aske
me in fine narrationis, at the ende of my tale, quis est
hic what meaneth the man?
               Eccles. 22. As when the high Preist
adiured our blessed Sauiour, Art thou the Christ, the
sonne of The liuing God? & Pilate the like, about his
kingdome, Art thou the King of the Iewes? His answere
was, Thou saiest it, what need more words? So
the very words of my text only read and recited in
your eares doe sufficiently declare what my meaning
is. J say againe (which were enough for application)
The wicked had bent his bow, and made ready his arrowes
vpon the string, to shoote privily at the vpright
in heart, and our foundations must haue bin cast downe
and what had the righteous done? Certè;
               Certè. it was as sure
as that we haue breath and being, to praise the name
of our God, who are heare mett together. It is no fictiō,
Pag. 34. as that (they wil tell you) of Squire out of Spaine, you know the author. It is no questiō betweene them

and vs:Pag. 6. 
               for Catholikes (they say) no lesse then Protestāts
admit the due detestation, Ergo the true concession &
conviction of it. It was not done in a corner; It was a
spectacle to God and Angells and men. It is not so auncient
& superannate as the story of Pope Iore, which
hath gained by the age of it, now skarsly to be beleeued.
This was recenti memoriâ factum, a matter of
yesterday, this very day three yeares, the fift of Nouē
               ber
(blessed be Gods holy name) did this popish prodigious
brat suffer abortion. I must adde the Eccè
               Eccè. to,
Behold. But an eccè of an higher straine thē any other
in the booke of God; not an eccè as at a pyramis, or
Pharos, 'or Colossus solis, or any the like wonderfull
but with all delectable and pleasing obiect, rather an
eccè, as at some portentuous comet, or fearfull firie
meteor in the aire which men behold, both with wō
               der
& horror, Eccè. I may be bold with the tongue of
Moyses Deut. 4. to saie, Aske of the daies of olde
that haue beene before you, since the daie that God
created man vpon the earth, and from the one ende
of heauen to the other, sifacta est aliquandò huiuscemodi
res, if euer the like thing were done: and it
may bee answered by that of the 12. tribes of Jsraell
concerning the dismembred Levites wise 19. Iud.
Nunquam res talis facta est in Israel ex quo, &c. The
like was neuer done nor heard of in Israel nor throughout
the world since the first day that mā was created.
When Sixtus quintus began his encomiasticall oration
of the Jacobine that killed the French King,1 Habb. he
taketh the words of the Prophet Habbacuk for his entrance.
Behold, a worke wrought in your daies, you will

not beleeue it when it shall be tolde you, a poore Friar
hath slaine a king, not a king in paper, a painted king,
but the great king of France, &c. Antisixtus returneth
them vpon him againe, Behold a worke wrought
in our daies: you will not beleeue it when it shall be tolde
you. Our holy father the Pope hath defended a most
nefarious parricide, regicide. I haue more right to the
words then they both togither with the preface vnto
them. Aspicite ingentibus, & videte, & admiramint,
& obstupescite, see and behold and wonder and bee astoed,
let me adioine from the 13. of the Acts where the
place is alleadged, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vanish, cease to haue power
in your selues to see or thinke any more, quia opus
factum in diebus nostris, shal I saie, a worke done? No,
it was the worke of the Lord in die illâ, that it was not
done: but an attēpt & parturitiō of a worke brought
to the very instant of birth, such as let strangers heare
the report of, they cannot beleeue it. Behold, that
which so many millions of eies, since those windowes
were first opened in the head of man, to behold the
light of heauen, I say so many millions of eies in their
seueral generatiōn, now sunke down into their holes,
and consumed within their tabernacles neuer saw:
neuer those glorious and constant lights of the firmament,
those cleare and christalline eies of nature,
which walke through the whole world, and giue no
rest to their temples, the sunne that wardeth by daie,
and the moone that waketh by night, they neuer saw
the like, I say not for the indiuiduum, but not for the
species, though let them not deceaue themselues nor
you, this was not species but monstrū. They wil bring

you precedents to this from Antwerpe, & the Hage
and I know not whence.Gallob. to. 8 A succedent I graunt, nearest
vnto it of all others, I thinke from hence it tooke
light, in the yeare 1606, whē Boris the vsurping Duke
of Moscua foreseeing his death, placed in a subterra
neous vault of the pallace, a statue with a burning
lampe in the hand of it, the burning to continue till it
should take a traine of powder, purposly hid there
to haue blowen vp the Pallace, & destroied Demetrius
his rightfull successor. But it commeth far short of
this.
            The wicked: and what God hath ioigned,Impij. let not
me put a sunder eccè, impij, behold the wicked, wicked
with an eccè, demonstrable, rather indemonstrable
wicked, we demonstrate not principia, these were
principles and first heads of impiety. They may be articled
as the deuill in the gospell 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               the wicked,
the most abominably, desolately, deperditely wicked
of all others, in whome was the roote of wickednesse,
and the deepnes of Sathan had possest their hearts. Mē
of wicked witts, wicked wills, wicked hands, wicked
labours (it was labor improbus indeed) wicked dispositions,
wicked designes, wicked names (some of them)
wicked vowes, wicked othes, wicked sacraments, wicked
praiers, wicked religion, wicked all things.Psal. 16. 
               Their
offrings of bloud wil I not offer, saith the Psalme. Apud
Barbaros (saith Lactantius) sacrificatum cum humano
cruore. Barbarians sacrificed with mans bloud. He goeth
a step farther:Lib. 1. de fal. rel. 21. 
               Latini non expertes. The Latines
are not free from it: and addeth Latialis Iupiter etiam
nunc sanguine colitur humano. Etiam nunc, even at

this day (but howlong, Lord, righteous and true, before
thou avenge it?) the Latine, Laterane Iupiter, or rather
Saturne, the deuourer of his children, or rather Moloch,
must be sacrificed vnto with humane bloud. O
dementiam in sanabilem (the same father) incurable
madnes,
               Cap. 18. when sacrifices are so sacred and execrable,
sacraments for assasinates, masses for massacres. Quid
illis isti dij amplius facere possent si essent iratissimi,
quàm faciunt propitij, cum suos cultores parricidijs inquināt?
Is this religion? Nonne satius est pecudum more
viuere, quàm deos tam impios, tam prophanos, tam sā
                  guinarios
colere? were it not better to be without religion?
I say no more of them: Populus Romanus est. Nec
breuiùs potui,
               Ber. 4. de Consid. 
               nec apertiùs. Bernard spake of the citizens,
I of the members and disciples of the Church
of Rome. They belong to Rome, that Laerna malorum,
where Hydra, the beast with many heads dwelleth,
the Colluuies and common sewer of all infande wickednes,
where no lawe of God nor man, nature
nor nation escapeth breaking: where Dominus Deus
noster papa, with a plate of blasphemy nailed on his
browe, the greate Archimandrites of the worlde,
and his stables and stalles of vnhallowed breasts, fax
sacrificulorum, grex monachorum, armentum Cardinalium,
with their decrees and decretals, canons and
glosses, bulles, breues, & indulgences haue concluded
& caused to be done, & after the doing dogmatized,
defended more outragious, exorbitant wickednesse
then euer hath beene red or heard of vnder the cope
of heauen. The woman iniquity Zach. 5. which was
carried into the land of Sennaar, vt aedisicetur ei domus,
               
hath bin long since transported into the cittie &
church of Rome, vt ibi ponatur super basin suam;
there is hir surest dwelling.
            The wicked bend their bowe,
               Intēderunt arcum &c. when they wrest & pervert
scripture; & make ready their arrowes, when they
end forth sharpe and sophistical arguments, witty &
wily pamphlets, and shoot priuilie at the vpright in
heart, when with their subdolous & sly insinuations
of reconciling them to the mother church, and converting
their soules they overreach the simple & credulous.
This they do daily. But these are not the archers
I now meane. They are of an other band, pyrobolarij,
they shoot wild-fire, hell-fire. Their arrowes
haue spiritum in alis,
               Zach. 5. 
               winde in their fethers, (they
should haue flowen and blowne with a witnes) & miserable
destruction in their heads. Such archers, such
artillery neuer was. No meruaile; they were Roman
archers, and their artillery was shaped in the shop of
Iesuits and Priests (I seuer them not,Ambros 
               Iannes & Iambres
are fellowes in sorcery; and the Libbard & Lyonesse,
though of diuers kinds, will company togither
to make a Leopard, Jesuits and Priestes, to doe a mischiefe)
I say of Iesuits and Priests, the cunning Pyracmons
and Cyclopes, fireworkers in the world, and maisters
of all villanies. These shoot not at clowtes, but
Crownes, Sceptres, Monarchies, Empires; not at
crowes, but men, Kings, Queenes, Princes, peoples,
states; not for wagers & pastime, but to make havock
and wast vpon the earth, and to bring al that withstā
               deth
or offendeth, to vtter destruction.
            The bow that the wicked in my chase bent, was neither

of yron, nor steele. A man may flee from the iron
weapons Iob. 20. & a bow of steele hath beene broken
by the arme, Psal. 18. This was a bow of a stronger,
tougher making, & more vnresistable stuffe, I meane
a Cellar of strong sides, & impenetrably thicke wals,
darke and deepe, closely compact, that is as much as
to say, hard-bent, where little or no vent, and passage
was left for the breath and furie to issue out, like the
amphora or pitcher in Zacharie, wedged with a talēt
of leade at the mouth of it to keepe in the strength. Jt
was as wel and as strongly strung with 36. barrels of
gun-powder great and small, for the more violenteiaculation,
vibration, and speed of the arrowes. Their
arrowes were fagots, billets, peeces of timber, barres
of iron, massy stones, togither with all the timber in
the beames and iuices, al the tubble and stones in the
wals of that great and glorious pile, rather pallace of
building, where they framed their engine. The Campus
Martius they were to shoot in, the soile, the seat,
the very centre of the parliament-house. Their marke
the fairest in the field, the tallest poppies in the gardē.
Fight neither with great nor small, saue onlie with the
king of Israel, was the chardge, 1. Reg. 22. here otherwise;
shoot not only at the king of Israell, but at reginam
à dextris, the Queene at his right hand, and principem
haeredem at his knees, at the counsaile both of
secresie and state, at Moses and Aaron, prelate and
potentate, angulos populi, & angelos domini, at all the
worthies of David, the first, second, and third rancke,
the great Sanedrim, the strēgth & flower of the land,
the whole land it selfe in collection and representation,

the 3. estats, 3. essential parts, like the head, heart,
and liuer, without either of which no life of pollicy is.
This was their archery, and this had surely come to
passe, (the arrow was euen then vpon the string, their
doome (day was come, the candle and match were
in the hand) to the vtter extirpation of the King and
his race, the alienation of the sceptre of Iudah, the extinction
of Preist and sacrifice, eversion of Nobles,
and their families, extermination of Christ and his
Gospell out of the kingdome, profligation of iustice
and religion, if our gracious Lord God (by the reuolution
& returne of yeares, now publikely and solēnly
thrice blessed, and to the latest generation of the
world to be blessed for euer) had not giuen warning
to those that feared his name, vt fugerent à facie arcus,
to fly from the rage of this bow, by letters more
then hieroglyphicall, aenigmaticall, interpreted by a
wisedome more then humane,Aug. not lesse then angelicall.
But ne glorietur, let not the wiseman glory in his
wisdome. Da veniam imperator, pardon me gracious
Soueraigne, it was not flesh and bloud that revealed
these mysteries and riddles vnto you, sed Pater qui in
coelis & angelus magni consilij, your father & Sauiour
that is in heauen. You haue seen their bow & arrowes
artillery, weapons, engines, ordinance for battery,
more then double, centuple Canon. Iouius writeth
of Alfonsus D. of Ferrara, that hee made with his
owne hands 2 peeces of ordinance invsitatae magnitudinis
& violentiae, the one of which had to name
terraemotus, earthquake, the other Cacodaemon, the devill
himselfe, so was this of theirs.
            
               
               They had bent their bow & made ready their arrows
vpon the string: and bee not deceiued in them. Crie
not peace, peace, all is well. Their bow standeth euer
bent, and their arrowes are euer prepared. Pharetra
eorum sepulchrum patens Ier. 5. their quiver is an opē
sepulchre.
               Bern. 4. de Consider. 
               Gens immitis at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   intractabilis, & adhuc
snbdinescia, nisicum non valet resistere. The Aspelyeth
in her hole & waiteth for the warmth of the sunne.
The Lyon lurketh in his den, and watcheth for his fit
test season. Their quiet and forbearance is rebus sic
stantibus, whilest it is, as it is; but rebus cadentibus, let
some declination of the state be, let the vigor of iustice
and rigor of execution cease a while longer, and
they multiply & swarme as they haue done, you shall
see them betake themselues to their bowes and arrowes
againe. Echidna Excetram, is the prouerbe, &
de radice colubri egreditur regulus 30. Es. Of a Serpent
cōmeth a serpēt, & of a viperous & traiterous brood,
looke for vipers and traitours. One complained to
Phillip of Macedon whose treason the king had made
vse of, that his people called him traitour. The King
answered, Rudes sunt Macedones, & scapham vocant
Scapham. The people of Macedō are a rude & plaine
people, and call a traitor a traitor. Liberaui animam
meā. When such are the Masters, such will the schollers
& disciples be. When such their principles, such
wil be their practises. Though one vault be discouered
& couered againe, yet so long as that other more
deepe and dangerous vault remaineth prauum & inscrutabile
cor,
               Ier: 17. 
               a wicked and vnsearchable heart, an
endlesse and liuing veine of powder & salt-peeter, an

everlasting burning Aetna, of rooted, engraffed, settled
maliciousnes against Christ and his members,
Looke for no better from them.
            
               —Si fas caedendo caelestia scandere &c.
will every Iesuite and Preist, Iesuited and reconciled
apostata, transfuga, mal content say, if this bee the
way to the kingdome of heauen, thus I may meritt, &
shine as a staire in the firmament, by embruing and
bathing my handes in the bloud of a king, I will bee a
starre. The end of their preparation was, to shoote, &
shoote closely.
               Vt. Sagittēt in obscuro. Cruelty executeth for them, suttelty directeth.
These were cruell enough, when they shott
at all. And they were subtile enough when they said
to a vault in the ground, couer vs; and vvent downe
into a mine of the earth, as it vvere quick into their
graues, out of the land of the liuing into the regiōs of
death, the territories of Sathan, the Limbus & border
of hell to hide their vvickednesse. VVhether the one
or the other both were transcendents not to be placed
in the classes or rankes of hitherto experienced or
practised wickednesse.
            
               Cruelty is the ensigne and badge of that church.
the habit of the harlot is according to her heart,1. Sagittant.
               skarlet and purple, hir diet, the diet of the Cannibals.
I saw hir drunken (saith the Apostle) with the
bloud of Saints-
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,Apoc. 17. 
               I wondred
to see hir so wonderfully drunke. The Citty was first
founded in bloud; the bloud of a naturall, germā brother.
And the papacy also foūded in bloud, the bloud
of a naturall leidge Lord and Emperor at what time,
it was truely written,

               —Suffocas Phoca imperium, stabilis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   papatum.
            
            Emperour and Empire must downe to aduance
the popedome.Gul. Stamphurdius. The issue of bloud hath runne ever
since, & cannot be stopped to the worlds end. It was
wel obserued, that at one & the same time were these
three Bonifacius 3. Vniversalis Episcopus, Phocas Caesaricida,
& Mahumetes Arabs. Mahometisme, and
the Popedome, & the murthering of christiā Emperors
and Princes began at once. So that as the Pope hath
gottē to name, domesticus Turca, a homeborne Turke,
so the Turke may as iustly bee called exterus Papa, a
forraine Pope, they cōmunicate so nearly in cruelty.
Now the greatest 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , festiual cruelty, solēnity
& feast day of sacrificing & slaughtering the seruāts
of Christ, that Rome ever kept, had beene that,
without Gods mercifull preuention, which was
now intended. It greiueth them to heare it stiled
singular from all example.
               Pag. 6. But so it was. Neither
shall all the indices expurgatorij in the worlde,
blot out the memorie of the fact, or ease them of this
attribute. Detestable I confesse was the mind, & not
lesse the memory of Nero, who caused the citty of
Rome to bee fired in twelue places at once, that he
might see an image of the burning of Troy. Himselfe
sate singing the meane time. Jt was the losse but of
houses & goods.Sabellic. 
               Heliogabalus vpon one of their feast
daies, when the people had taken vp their places in
the theatre before day, to behold the sports, caused a
nūber of serpents & venemous wormes to be turned
in amongst them, to sting them to death, the acting
whereof was much to his comfort; it was the wracke

but of common people. Maximinus for the immanity
of his mind & doings, was vsually tearmed Cyclops,
Busiris, Phalaris, Typhon. Al these were Abaddons, Apollyons,
destroiers of nature and mankind. The storie
saith of Annibal, that his vertue for the most part saevitiâ
constabat,
               Val. Max. 
               consisted of cruelty. When it cōmeth
to report of L. Sylla, Vix mihi verisimilia narrare videor,
I scarsly seeme (saith the story) to speake likelyhoods.
Hee stroue to be sirnamed Foelix for cruelty.
En quibus actis, saith the authour. He kept a Register
and Kalendar of al his bloudy actes.Id. 
               Cuius tamen crudelitatis
C. Marius invidiam levat. Yet doth C Marius
iustifie Sylla. You haue heard before of the cruelties
of Caligula. But of Nero (Suetonius telleth you)
debebatur hic partus moribus Ro. qui Caligulae nomen
ac titulos obscuraret. Nero must be borne to iustifie
Caligula. Nihil extra humanam figuram Tartarus nisifera
bellua. Dubravius affirmeth it. The Tartarian
is a savage beast in a mans skin. Adde vnto al these as
famous in their times and generations (if bookes bee
true) the Spaniards amongst the poore Indians. But
frō the 5. of Nouember was three years henceforth,
til time shalbe no more; Let the name of Nero with
the rest, rest in peace, and bee buried in silence, and in
steed of Syllan, Marian, Scythian, Tartarian, Barbarian
Turkish, Spanish, Let Romish, Popish, Antichristian,
Catholique, Catacatholique cruelty be a proverbe,
astonishment, hissing for all nations and ages
to come.
            As for their subtilty,In obscuro. doubt not of it. Whose very
profession is to be false-prophets, seducers, Antichrists,

their religion a mystery of iniquity, and their
working vneffectual without strong illusions, & lying
wonders. Especially where the great Mercurialists of
the world for wit & deuises, those 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (as they
called Archimedes) 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , centimani that haue
a finger in the menaging of al Christian states, are at
one end of the busines. J meane the Iesuits, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               Iesuitae, falsly-named Iesuits; Iesuits by antiphrasis,
(some say) as those Emperors were called Africani,
Asiatici & the like, because they were most opposite
and maligne to those countries, so these most
contrary and fatal to the name of Iesus. With others
Iesuitae by Aphaeresis, Suitae, as regulares vvere named
gulares, epicuri de grege porci, for their swinish &
impure liues. vvith others Iesuitae by diaeresis, asmuch
as to saie, Iesum vita, who in their whole order, institutes,
practise, say in effect to Christ as the deuills did,
Quid nobis & tibi Iesu? What haue we to doe with thee
o Iesu? Lastly. Iesuites by 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               agnomination
Iebusites: and then whilst the Iebusite (or his proselite)
is in the land looke for no good to Israel. Their names
are diuerse according to their natures and manners.
Ignatiani in Spaine, Theatini in Italy, Iesuini in Cā
               pania,
Scofiotti in Ferraria, Presbyteri S. Luciae in Bononia,
Reformati sacerdotes in Mutina, alia
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   passim
nomina habent, together with sundry other appellations
as Pap. Massonus reporteth,In Paulo. 4o
                but commonly best
knowne by the name of Iesuites, And what are those?
The Iesuits catechisme telleth you,2. Lib. 17. not such men as
we are. They haue 2 seules in their bodies (he might as
wel haue said, ten soules) a Roman soule in Rome, and

a french soule in France,
               3. Lib. 26. so an english soule in Englande.
They vse to make a iest at perfidiousnes & trechery,
for aske them amongst their freinds what a Iesuite
is, they answere, everyman.
            
            
               —Quoteneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?
what meanes shal we find to encounter these chādglings,
Camaeleons, these Mathaeos tortos, crooked apostles,
Tortuous Leuiathans, as ambiguous in their answeres
as 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in his oracles, this serpent surrepent
generation, with their Maeandrian turnings & windings,
their mentall reseruations, their amphibolous,
amphibious prepositions, which liue, as those creatures
part in the land, part in the water, so these halfe
in the lipps, halfe in the heart and conscience. Of
which I may saie, as S Ierome of the letters of Iouinian,
has praeter Sybillam leget nemo.
            
            
               —Non lectore tuis opus est sed Apolline scriptis,
               Martial.
they are not to be vnderstood by any mortall man.
what hope of truth and simplicity from these or their
impes, when they haue not only practised through
infirmity of flesh & pusillanimitie, but with the faces
of Sodome and Gomorrhe haue patronaged, published,
perswaded to the whole world the lawfullnesse
of their heterogeneous, mungrell propositions? Frō
henceforth therfore let them ease the inhabitants of
Crete from that deserued infamy which the Apostle
laieth vpon them 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ; & adde vnto these
the Cilices & Cappadoces, nations renowned for false
hood,Cretes Cilices Cappad. whereof the prouerbe was 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
And let those 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               Kings of lies, as Andromache
called the Spartans, and trilingues Siculi, as

               Apuleius called the Sicilians, togither with all their
companions, craftesmasters for fraud and forgerie,
resigne to the Jesuits.
            Now if euer the word of the Psalme were verified
of any,Psal. 83. 
               malignaverunt consilium, they deuised a pestilent,
Prov▪ 1. devilish counsaile, and that of the Prouerbes,
Come let vs lie in waite for bloud, ponamus tendiculas,
let vs set snares, the margent saith, voraginem, a very
gulfe, Deglutiamus eos, Let vs swallow them vp quick
as hell, it was true of this machination. For marke the
excesse and height of their fury.
            They shoot not at fanes and wethercocks,Fundamenta diruta. Senec.
                at pinnacles
and peeces of temples. The very foundations
must be cast downe. Nolunt solita peccare quibus peccandi
praemium infamia est. Ordinary factes cannot
make them famous. In tā occupato saeculo fabulas vulgaris
nequitia non invenit, Erostratus must burne the
temple of Diana, to get him a name, these must not
rest, til they see the foundations downe. The variety
of interpretations frameth my iust application to my
hands.
            1 Fundamenta literally. Materiall foundations indeed
had beene cast downe by these sonnes of the
earth, which the hands of ancient Kings had laid, Pallaces
of incomparable honour and state had beene
shaken into stones of emptines and consumed into
cinders and dust, if their day had sped. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (say
the 70) buildings of absolute, consummate perfection.
Positiones (with Genebrard) settled and pitched in
their places, not likely to haue stirred, without violence,
till the pillers of heauen and earth had beene

dissolued. These foundations had beene cast downe.
            2 Some saie, these foundations were Preists. & indeed
in the story of Saul (of whom it is thought this
psalme treateth) 85 Preists of the Lord which ware
a linnen Ephod, were slaine by the hands of Doëg in
one daie.1 Sam. 22. Preists are foundations. They are fulcra
reip▪
                proppes of the common-wealth. They beare the
arke of the Lord, and their lippes are arkes and coffers
to preserue knoweledge. These foundations had bin
cast downe▪
            
            3 Some say, these foūdations were 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , doctrines;
the knowledge of God and his lawes. These
are also foundations; fundamentum aliud nemo, No
man can lay any other foundation then that of the
Prophets and Apostles &c. It was the law of the euer
liuing God that brought Dauid into so much hatred;
and it is the Gospel of Christ that bringeth vs. These
foundations had also beene cast downe, It was the
cheefe marke they aimed at.
            4 Fundamenta with others are foedera, covenants,
leagues of amity, often made and often broken by
Saul. Now what couenant, what bond, either of nature
and humanity, or of natiue country, of consanguinity
with some, with others of alliāce, with others
of religion (for on some of either sort had the Lot fallen)
had withheld this false and fedifragous nation of
men from this barbarous action? These foundations
had also been cast downe.
            5 Fundameuta with Symmachus and Ierome are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Lawes. These are foundations to, and were then
vpon the anuile, the assembly was for lawes. Lawes

and law-makers, with the reuerend Judges and Iusticers,
Mutae and Loquentes, al must haue gone; these
foundations had beene cast downe.
            6 Kimhi & Aben Ezra say that foundations in this
place, are Consilia, Counsailes. Counsailes are foūdations.
Prou. 15. 
               For where the multitude of counsailours is, there
is health. Consilia Solonis were held as behoueful to Athens
as trophae a Themistoclis. The ones counsailes, as
the others triumphs. And Agamemnon wished that
he had had ten such about him as Nestor was. They
are not the eies of a king, but perspicilla regis (one calleth
them) his spectacles through which he looketh▪
The thrice honored & renowned order of these, were
likewise appointed to the slaughter; these foundations
had beene cast downe.
            7 Lastly, fundamēta with others are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , vices,
successiones, successions, supplies. Obstupe scite coeli,
super hoc. Behold, the King, Queen, & their issue, not
adolescens secundus alone,Ecclesast. 4 
               deliciaegentis Britannicae,
but the whole progeny, father and sonne, damme &
young, roote and branch, res and spes, present and to
come, all must haue drunke of this deadly cup of woful
desolation. Now to put al togither, if foundations
of buildings must haue beene cast downe, and Priests
the foundations, doctrines the foundations, couenāts
the foundatiūs, lawes the foundations, counsailes the
foundations, and successions the foundations, we had
beene, as one summeth it vp, Eversi à fundamentis,
quite turned vp by the rootes, & razed from the lowest
foundations; our church, our common-wealth,
our gouernment, our bodies, our families, our posterity

had beene vtterly ouerthrowne. When Elizaeus
eied Hazāel 2. Reg. 8. with the teares running downe
his cheekes, to thinke of the euill he should doe to Jsrael,
in burning their citties with fire, dashing their
infants against the stones in the streets, and ripping
vp the women with childe; Hazâel answered, Num
enim sum servus tuus canis, vt faciam rem istā magnam?
Am I thy seruant a dog? can I bee so forsaken of
humanity, and loose the bowels of manly compassion?
What then doth res ista magna deserue to bee
thought of?Pag. 6 not the rash and wofull attempt of vnfortunate
gentlemen (as our Italionated Mountebancks
seeke to salue it) but the most nefarious, facinorous,
flagitious, incogitable fact, of persōs (with their proctors
and patrones) neither generous, for what drop
of ingenuous bloud was in them? Nor men, for what
sparke of humanity? Nor dogges, vnlesse of the brood
of Cerberus, nor Tigers, nor Panthers, nor euening
Wolues, nor shee-Beares, nor any thing, but by the
vnnaturallest, strangest 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that euer was
feigned by Poets, very incarnated, transanimated
devils? Who that they were vnfortunate in it, that
God that sitteth in heauen, and ruleth not by fortune
or chance, but by an architectonicall, soueraigne art
of vnfallible prouidence, be praised for euer and ever.
Amen, Amen.
            
            I haue yet the cause to demaunde.Iustus quid? 
               VVhat hath the
righteous done? Quid commeruit? What hath he deserued?
Bucer. Quid enim mali? At leastwise what evill?
Arnob▪ what had David done? Or what Davids like,
who walketh in the steps of David? I appeale to the

conscience of your Maiestie, that inwarde reflexe of
your Princely heart, and to the open and broad eie
of the world, what harme had you euer done them?
Was it bycause you eased them of their fines and impositions?
Or sent them with life and limme vntouched
beyond seas? Or admitted them to your gracious
presence, and let the light of your countenance
fal vpon them, Hebrewes and Aegyptians both alike?
Or distributed your fauours, honors, aduancements
of them and their houses with an equal hande?Cic. ora. pro Ros. Am. 
               For
which of your good deedes? Or was it because you receaved
not the whole weapon into your bosome, as C. Fimbria
complained of Q. Scaevola? That you diuided not
the halfe of your kingdome to the Pope, as Herode
promised halfe of his to an harlot? That you allowed
not copartnership in supremacy with you within
your own Dominions & Realmes? Admitted not altare
contra altare, a linsey wolsey, miscellan, medlyreligion
within the land, here an house for the arke &
there a temple, for Dagon? More then this (which as
far be from your sacred Maiestie ever to yeeld vnto,
as you are neare to Christ and christian simplicity)
iustus quid fecit? VVhat hath the righteous done? This,
this is the true cause, and euer wilbe the quarrell whilest
the couenant of daie and night standeth, that the
Gospell of Christ and the faithfull professors thereof
are not either wholy expelled the kingdome, or affronted,
mated at least with a pellex, I meane an adulterous,
idolatrous religion, to haue as firme footing
in the land as the other hath. In the daies of your
predecessor of memorable glory whilst she liued, &

now of as glorious a memory, what was the cause of
their multiplied, variated complotments against hir,
like the monsters in Africk, everie daie almost a new
conspiracy, that then they gaue hir not leaue to liue,
now not leaue to be dead, and to sleepe in hir dust,
but are angry at hir very manes,
               
                  —Nec mors mihi finiet iras,
                  —Saeua sed in manes manibus arma dabo,
               
that they haue ript hir vp from hir cradle, runne
through hir life to hir graue, and will needs go down
into hell to seeke hir immortall & now immaculate,
incorruptible soule amongst hobgoblins and infernall
spirits (you knowe my author) what is the cause? J say
Iusta quid fecit. Rather man sueta quid fecit? Gracious
Lady, what had shee euer done? Whose finger
did she euer cause to ake, and hir heart aked not with
him? Only this, that she nurst vp with the milke of hir
breasts, and hazarded to haue done with the dearest
bloud in hir veines, that euangelicall truth, which by
the blessing of God and your Maiesties zeale, this
Church yet retaineth?Sim. metap. in Clem. Ro But our comfort is: Si canes
nos allatrauerint & consciderint, auferre nobis nō possunt
quin simus homines rationis participes, illi autem
sint canes latrantes. Men shall be men notwithstanding
the barkings of dogges, & dogges shall be doggs.
And therefore avaunt, now not Hazāels dog (whosoeuer
thou art) but hellish Curre, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
(for what was the fire of hell prepared, if not for such
tongues?) Go seeke thy Popes, & Cardinalls, & Cortizās,
thy Incubos, & Succubos amongst hobgoblins &
infernall spirits; surrexit non est hìc, she is in heauen,

she is not there, she shalbe a Saint in heauen, when
thou shalt be a dog without, and as shee sate vpon a
glorious throne in earth to iudge hir people, so shall
she sit vpon a far more glorious throne in heauen, to
iudge such miscreants as thou art. Nullam habet authoritatem
illa sententia, vbi qui damnandus est damnat.
Thy tongue cannot hurt hir with God nor good
men, though it be as peircing as hot irons, hette like
the ouen of Babylon seuentimes red-hot, at the fornace
and hearth of hell it selfe.
            Most Gracious Soueraigne. You are yet a liuing
Lion. And the Lion of the tribe of Iudah graunt you
may long and long so be. It may be they feare the Lions
paw, and dare not as yet breake forth. But when
you shall bee a dead Lion (as that imperiall Lionesse
now is, and Lions must die as well as wormes) these
dogges will barke at your manes to, these Aegyptiacal
dead flies will cause the sweet ointment of your precious
and glorious name, to stinke vpon the face of
the earth, what in them lieth, with their Leprous, venemous
breath, and libellous, infamous pamphlets,
as they do hirs. Jt is not this plea, Iustus quid fecit?
That can excuse you. I would they had iuster cause
to aske, iustus quid facit? That your Maiesty would do
them right, and administer iustice vpon them, in the
timely execution of your Lawes, and necessary castigation,
coercion of their vnrestrainable audaciousnesse.
That your faithfull and good subiects did not
demand with grones of heart, Misericors quid facit?
VVhat meaneth his Maiestie to deale so graciouslie
with them: Some iustice with mercy and lenitie

woulde doe wel. Some frostes with the fire that
warmeth these snakes in the bowels of your lande.
Some pluckes at these thornes and prickles in our
eies, (the meane time) and wilbee hereafter in our

                  •
               ides and hearts. Least if iustice goe on to sleepe as

                  •
               t were hir dead sleepe, the tares of disloialty, treasons,
and seditions be so thicke sowen in the field of
your kingdomes, by those envious men, the seedes-mē
of Rome, that it wil be difficulty and maistry afterwards
to remoue them.
            The foundations (you haue heard before) were in
sundry acceptions.2. Part. Dominus in tēplo. I omitted one of all the rest, that
fundamenta were retia, nets which the wicked spred
to entrappe the righteous, their crafty and clandestine
coūsailes, whervpon they built the whole frame
of their mischiefes. These were cast downe, al their
proiects descried, their purposes frustrated. But by
whom? For iustus quid fecit? What hath the righteous
done, to breake those snares, and to deliver himselfe?
That is the path which Basill with some others
walke in, so they make the connexion. The answere
is,Basil 
               nihil, nothing, lesse then nothing. Ad dominum
ceu anchoram sacram confugit, hee fled to the Lord
as his anker, altar, sanctuarie, cittie of refuge, tower
of defence, mons in vertice montium, mountaine aboue
all mountaines, that is to saie, helper aboue
all worldelie helpers. The Lorde is in his holy temple.
               Psalm▪ 124 
               The Lordes seate is in heaven. Our soule hath
also escaped as a birde from the snare of the fowler.
The snare is broken, and vvee are delivered. By
whome? Benedictus d. Blessed be the Lorde that hath

not giuen vs vp a pray to their teeth. That is, Dominus
in templo suo sancto. If the Lord had not bin
on our side (may England now saie) if the Lord had
not beene on our side▪
                what then? Our foundations had
beene cast downe, and theirs had beene reared vp.
But adiutorium nostrum, Our helpe standeth in the
name of the Lord which made heauen and earth. Dominus
in templo sancto suo. But what will the wicked
saie? Dominus in templo sancto suo, Dominus in coelo.
&c. What is that to vs? populus in scabello, maie doe
what they list. Dominus deseruit terram. The Lorde
hath forsaken the earth. Not so. Jt is answered in my
text, Oculi eius respiciunt, his eies behold, nay, palpebrae
eius interrogant, his very eylidds consider, hee
siteth not idly in heauē, as the wicked imagin. There
is apertio oculorum, saith S Austin, and opertio. Opē
               ning
and shutting the eie in God, his eie & his eielid.
God seeth with his open eie, when hee discouereth
a thing at the present, and causeth vs also to see it,
But considereth with his eielid, when he maketh as if
he slept, winketh at the waies of sinners, taketh leasure
and respite before he bring them to light. It is
not to be thought but that oculus respexit, if you cō
               sider
himselfe, the bright eie of the Lord was vpon
the first thought and imagination of this Salmonean
thunder and lighning, and followed thē in the whole
course therof, went with them, when they trudged
to Doway, and gadded to Spaine, marked the hissing
of the bee of Aegypt to the fly of Assur, all the intelligēce,
I meane, that past betwixt the Leiger Iesuite in
England, with the leigers of Flaunders and Spaine;

yet he bewraied not this at the first, but palpebrae eius
explorarunt, he sate with his eies shut, & considered
vnder his eieliddes, bare himselfe silent and stil, & let
them runne on, til they had runne themselues to perdition.
You see what palpebrae are. I could giue you
strange examples, perhapps not proper to this daie
more then others, yet neither impertinent to my duty,
nor vnacceptable to a loiall auditorie, nor strangers
to my text, where palpebrae are mentioned, nor
aliene from the worke we haue in hand, our greate
Hallelüiah, and solemne sacrifice of praise & thanksgiuing.
For doe we blesse God for preseruing the life
of our King, and shal we not blesse him for preseruing
the honour of our King? I verilie assure my selfe, that
discrimen and narrow exigent of life, which his Maiestie
was put vnto, when he was in the fanges of the
Lion, & in the very armes & gripes of death, did not
so much afflict him, as an vndeserued crime & imputation
cast vpō him, of a dishonorable fact done. Qui
negligit famā, homicida est. It was 8. years since, vpō
the fifth of August last, that the Gowries conspired
against the life of the Lordes annointed, and receaued
their deserued meed. There haue beene oculi nequam
in the world, mistrustfull eies that haue looked
awry vpon that fact euer since, & would not beleeue
it. But what hath the Lord done the meanetime? Albeit
oculus non respexit, his eie did not open out of
hand, and giue them present satisfaction, yet palpebrae
explorarunt, his eieliddes considered, he thought vpon
it in secret, in the counsaile of his owne heart, and by
a posthumous, penitent tonfession (after the conspirators

were most of them dead, and almost rotten) of
one of the complices themselues, laid it as it were
in the sunne-beames, and put it past al question. It
were strange to giue you a parallele to this, coetaneous
I thinke in time, and of the same standing. It
was eight yeares since likewise, in the daies of Clement
the eighth, that Letters were sent vnto Rome,
to the Pope and two Cardinals, Aldobrandine
and Bellarmine, wherein the hande of the King was
abused, his heart neuer coulde. (I doe but touch
by the way: I am vox clamantis, the voice to a famous
crier and lowde trumpetter of these thinges)
The matter hath long slept, yeares after yeares haue
expired, and Pope deceased after Pope. But palpebrae
eius explorârunt, though the eie of the Lorde
hath not seemed to stirre al this while, his Eie-liddes
haue considered, and bethought of the meanes and
opportunitie to bring all forth. And now at length,
truth the daughter of time, or rather of the euerliving
God, though not by that miracle in the Psalme
Ex ore infantium, yet by an other not inferiour,
Ex ore malignantium, out of the mouthes and hearts
of enimies, which intended a scandall to his sacred
person, hath as strangely discouered this as that other,
to the glorie of his great name, and the honour
both of king and kingdome. Both these haue
the eie-liddes of the Lorde considered and revealed
the one after eight yeares, and the other after eight;
the one by an actor or accessarie to the fact, the other
by the actour; the one by occasion of papers
and skrolles, the other by occasion of papers and

pamphlets. And now to the seruice of this happie
day, wherein wee sing our Hosanna, and commemorate
our great and general iubilee, Let this bee added
as not the least part of our Christian ioie, that his religious
Maiestie, so farre is it from him, with other
kings of the earth to receaue the marke of the beast
imprinted in his forehead, that he is iealous, impatient,
cannot endure that any scratch of a pen, or type
of a Printers Presse should leaue the least note or suspicion
vpon him, as if euer he had but a thought in
his heart to fal downe and worship that golden calfe.
I returne where I left. The Lord is in his holy pallace,
&c. There he sitteth, and seeth, and considereth both
with eie and eieliddes,Psal. 58. and in the ende shall iudge.
Laetabitur iustus cum viderit vindictam. If the righteous
shal reioice to beholde, much more to escape
vengance. If when he washeth his feet in the bloud
of the wicked, much more that the wicked wash not
their feete in the bloud of Saints. Factum est istud à
domino: this was the Lords doing alone. He shut the
mouth of that pestilent quiver that not an arrow was
shot against vs to hurt one haire of our heades; and
stood as a wall of fire about vs, 2. Zach. to keepe vs
from that merciles Tophet of fire, even ready to haue
devoured vs. And therefore, non nobis domine, non
nobis, not vnto vs, O Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thine
all-onely name, not the names of our king nor princes,
our Sages nor Senators (the greatest names amongst
vs) but to thy name alone, if we be so wretched to denie
it, da gloriam, giue thou the honour and glory of that
daies redemption. But let vs giue it to. Afferte domino

filij Dei, giue vnto the Lord O yee sons of the mighty;
and afferte domino familiae gentium, giue vnto the
Lorde O yee families and tribes of the people, giue
vnto the Lord that honour that is due vnto him. Princes,
and private persons, Prelates and people, Nobles
and Commons, high and low, one with an other, old
men and maidens, young men and sucklings, praise
the name of the Lord, sing praises, sing praises vnto
him whilest you haue any being. It is the cause of our
meetings and panegyrickes this day, and it shalbee
a Law in Israell and an ordinaunce in Iacob amongst
our childrens children to the last day. Sit nomen domini
benedictum, Let the name of the Lorde bee blessed
from this time forth world without end, and let all the
people say, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   