
      
         
            
            
            STRANGE NEWES
out of Kent, of a Monstrous and misshapen
Child, borne in Olde Sandwitch, vpon the 30. of Iulie
last, the like (for strangenes) hath neuer
beene seene.
            
            
            Imprinted at London by T. C. for W. Barley, and are to be
sold at his shop in Gratious-streete. 1609.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧STRAVNGE
NEWES OVT OF
KENT.
OF
A Monstrous and misshapen
Childe, borne in Olde Sandwitch,
vpon the 30. of Iulie last, 1609. the
like (for strangenes) hath neuer bene
seene, knowne, nor heard of.
            
               GOds wonders, (deare Countreymen
of England) daylie
shewed amongst vs, as well
Celestiall as earthly, may, if
any grace be within vs, procure
a continuall feare and
trembling, and the abortiue and prodigious
byrths from time to time, which many of vs
haue bene eye witnesses of, may sufficiently
summon vs from sinne, and speedily awaken
vs from our dreames of securitie, wherein
wee lye carelesly sleeping.
            
               
God we see is highly offended with vs, in
that hee thus changeth the secret workings
of nature, as he lately shewed, in the strange
birth of a monstrous childe brought into the
World, at Sandwitch in Kent, the strange
shape and vnnatural proportion thereof, not
onely raised much feare, fright, and wonder,
to the inhabitants of that Countrey there
dwelling, which behelde it, but also the reports
(now most trulie) certified, by men of
credite and substantiall reputation, may giue
sufficient cause of terror and amazement to
all people, the whole Kingdome ouer, and
beeing rightly considered of by iudiciall censurers,
and men of vnderstanding, it may
without all doubt, put each degree and estate
in mind, & cōsideration of the heauy wrath of
our angrie God, not onely by this his iudgement
here expressed, but diuers other waies
threatned against vs, for our sinnes & transgressions,
therefore good Countrymen, and
you whose Christianlike mindes will relent
at the relation hereof: good Countrymen, I
say, let mee intreat you, that both your eyes,
and eares, may bee gentle witnesses to the
truth of this strange wonder in nature, and
that your hearts and mindes may be bent to
a repentant vnderstanding, for the discourse
here following, is both strange, true, fearefull,

and full of much wonder, and because
there shall be (no doubt) made of the veritie
thereof, I haue here placed downe the names
of such personages of credite, now dwelling
in London, that were eye-witnesses thereof,
and personably saw the same, to their great
hearts griefe and sorrow, which I hope, will
be sufficient to approoue the truth.
            
               ¶The names of such Witnesses that saw
this Monstrous Child, now dwelling
in London.
               1. M. Bills, at the signe of the Shippe in
Thames streete.
               2. M. Dickson, a Cooper, in Thames streete,
neere to Saint Dunstons church.
               3. M. Smith, a victualer, in long-Southwark.
               4. Richard Rawson, Waterman, dwelling in
East-Smithfield.
               5. Ales Smith, dwelling in Byshops-gate-streete.
               6. Amie Ratcliffe, of Shore-ditch, with diuers
others, whose inward griefes there taken,
is yet fearcely worne away, and cannot
well (for the strangenesse thereof,) be
forgotten, and this is the onely truth.
            
            
               
It is not vnknown to most part of the kingdome,
that Sandwitch is one of the principall
townes in Kent, bordering vpon the
Sea, rich, and populous, and well stored
with substantiall and welthy inhabitants,
nere vnto which towne now standeth a very
olde house, (being the dwelling place of one
Goodwife Wattes, whose husbād is a shepheard)
which house is the onely remnant of
an other towne, which time hath ruinated &
worne away, nowe called by the name of
old Sandwitch, in which house, being some
quarter of a mile from Sandwitch, wherein
as I said before, dwelleth one Goodwife
Watts, a very honest poore old womā, wel-beloued
of the country, and of an honest conuersation
amongst her neighbours, one that
takes great paines for her liuing, and most
willing to keepe her credit vpright.
            Upon the thirty of Iuly last past, 1609. being
satterday, there came vnto this old pore
womans house, a certaine wandring yong
woman, as it seemd great with child, handsome,
and decently apparelled, and being not
well able to trauell further, by reason of her
great belly, euen ready to be deliuered, desired
succour of this kind-harted old woman
Mother Watts, and that she would graunt
her some help and comfort in this her extremitie,

and with weeping teares running
downe her cheeks, requested for Gods sake,
that some Christian-like charitie might be
shewed her, & houseroome for that night offorded
her for womanhood sake, otherwise
her selfe, and the babe within her body were
like to perish. This request of hers seemed so
reasonable, and the regard of her bigge belly,
drew such pittie and womanly nature from
this good old woman Mother Watts, that
she not onely granted her houseroome and
lodging for that night, but also sucker, helpe
and furtherance, (if it so stould happen) at the
painefull hower of her deliuerie: to be short,
this bigge belly wandring yong woman hauing
thus by her humble intreaties obtained
lodging, where the very first night of her lying
there, fel into a most strange labor, where
her wombe was tormented with such greeuous
paine, that it much affrighted the old
woman Mother Watts, and in her minde
strook such a fear, that she immediatly called
in her neighbours, being women all of a willing
forwardnes in such a busines: but
through the inward laboring of the womans
bodie, not any of them all knew how to shift
in such a dangerous case, wherefore amazedly
they looked one of another, til such time as
one goodwife Hatch, the yōger, was sent for,

being a Midwife of a milde nature, and of
good experience, who at her comming thither,
so cunningly shewed her skill, that with
the helping hand of God, this distressed yong
woman was speedily deliuered, for which
diligēt paines she gaue her vii. shillings, but
her wombe yeelded forth into the world a
kind of creature, but no childe rightly shapt,
for it was most strange & dreadful to behold,
and droue the Midwife goodwife Hatch and
the rest of the company into a great fright, euen
readie all to sinke downe dead to the
ground with feare, whether it were for the
sinnes of the Parents, or that God would
haue his Iustice, in the estranging of nature
for our sinnes here shewen, let the wiser sort
imagine: but surely this vnknowne woman
yeelded from her wombe such an abbortiue
and prodigious fruit, that this ages memorie
cannot call to mind the like: for it had no
head, nor any signe or proportion thereof,
there onely appeared as it were two faces,
the one visibly to be seene, directly placed in
the breast, where it had a nose, and a mouth,
and two holes for two eyes, but no eyes, all
which seemed vgly, and most horrible to be
seene, and much offenciue to humane nature
to be lookt vpon, the other face was not perfectly
to be seene, but retained a proportion

of flesh in a great round lump, like vnto a face
quite disfigured, and this was all of that
which could be discerned. The face, mouth,
eyes, nose, and breast, being thus framed together
like a deformed peece of flesh, resembled
no proportion of nature, but seemd as it
were a caios of cōfusion, a mixture of things
without any discription, from the breast
downeward to the bowels it was smooth
and straight, all the other parts of the body
retained a most strange deformitie, for the
armes grew out at the toppe of the shoulders,
hauing neither ioynt nor elbow, but
round and fleshy, at the end of which armes,
grew two hands, with fifteene fingers, the
one hand had eight, the other seauen, of a contrarie
shape, not like to the naturall fingers
of new borne children: also it had foureteene
toes, of each foote seauen, beeing as it were
like vnto geese or ducks feete. The wast and
middle as I said before, was straight and
without ioynts, but the lower parts were al
in a lump of flesh, like vnto a lambs paunch,
or such li
                  •
               e loathsome thing to be seene, and
withall the legges so short, that they seemed
to haue no proportion. This miracle in nature,
or rather Gods wonder, thus brought
into the worlde, quite disfigured from humaine
creation, as by the picture is rightly

deciphered, wrought such an amazement in
the beholders hearts, that for a time, they
were strucken almost sencelesse: the Roome
also where this childe lay, smelled so earthly
(for it was dead borne) that not anie of them
all could hardly endure the sent thereof.
            
            
               
Among other remembrances, this is to
be obserued for a thing of strangenesse, that
the woman her selfe cōfessed, that this monster,
a little time before her deliuery, moued
in her belly, not like vnto other naturall children,
but as shee had beene possessed with an
euill spirit, which put her to extreame torments.
            Not many hours passed, before the reports
of this strange byrth was bruited abroade,
and the eares of the inhabitants there-about
dwelling, so filled with the newes thereof,
that they came in multitudes to behold it, in
such aboundance that it was wonderfull.
            But now againe to our purpose. On Sunday
beeing the last of Iulie, this new deliuered
woman, in reason seeming to bee weake
and sicklie, lying in her bed, desired the olde
woman her hostis, Mother Wattes (within
whose house shee lay) to goe into the towne, &
to buy such necessaries as was needefull for
a weake woman in child-bed to haue, giuing
her money for the same purpose, the which
mother Wats most willingly did: But now
marke what in tht meane time hapned, & let
all women in such a case cōsider what might
be done, & how strongly nature in this newe
deliuered woman preuailed, for before Mother
Wats could returne from Sandwitch,

which was in lesse time then two houres, she
had got vp out of her bed, put on all her cloathes,
and was gone from the house, leauing
behinde her eight shillings, lying vppon the
Table, the child being dead, layde by it, with
an intent that the money should pay for the
burial of the same, all which at mother Wats
her returne, beeing found in this order, seemed
to bee an accident most strange, wherevpon
she immediatly called in her neighbors,
where (making knowne vnto them all these
aforesaid proceedings) with a generall consent,
they certified the same vnto the Magistrates,
who vpon good consideration, togither,
with the aduice of a reuerend and learned
Minister, of Saint Clements church in
Sandwitch, one M. Simons, who verie
charitably gaue it buryall, & withall, giuing
many godly admonitions to the people, concerning
this most strāge birth: from such like
terrible examples of Gods wrath, sweet Iesus
bee mercifull vnto vs, for such like domb
warnings of our owne ouerthrowes as this
is, if wee be not graceles, may lead vs out of
the pathway of perdition, & guide vs aright
into the true way of happines.
            Some other things concerning this
wonder is to be considered of, the one is, that
there was one of the Sergiants Wiues of

Sandwitch, that by the sight, and corrupted
smell proceeding from the child, receiued such
a conceit, that to this day she is not scarce
well, but sickly, and much decayed in health:
likewise, in the time of this womans continuing
in Mother Watses house, it could not
be knowne by any meanes what she
was, from whence she came, nor whither she
was going, nor as yet it is not knowne for a
truth to what place she is trauelled, but for a
certaintie she was proued to be a wanderer,
& supposed to be ones daughter in the Ile of
Tennet, but of what life and conuersation
she hath bene, and is of, none can iustly say
as yet, but surely the birth of her wombe hath
bredde much cause of feare.
            God in his other creatures, shewes the
like examples, onely to put vs in mind of repentance,
both by birds, beasts, foules, and
fishes, as there hath bene diuers straunge
birds, and foules sent into the world with
the likenes of great ruffes about their necks
some with periwigs, chaines, and such like.
            The Sea in like manner yeeldes forth
her monsters in sundrie likenesses and deformed
shapes. London had lately a feareful
patterne of the same, by a huge deformed
fish, that would groane and roare contrary
to his kind, which by many people was seene

at the Swanne within Newgate.
            There be many I know that remembers
the late groning tree neere Burndwood in
Essex, ye sinking of ye groūd in Sussex, with a
number such other like wonders wrought by
the hand of God for our amendments, yet
carelesly we still run astray, regarding nothing
at all these larum-bels sent from our
gentle redeemer.
            And if we doe consider thereof aright, we
are to make our prayers to God daily, that
in mercie he would looke vpon vs, and not
in this manner make a deformitie of
nature, examples of his heauie
indignation, threatned against
vs: from such and
all other the like, God
in his sweet mercie
deliuer vs all:
Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   