
      
         
            
            
            ¶ An answer at large, to a most hereticall, trayterous, and Papisticall Byll, in English verse, which was cast abrode in the streetes of Northamton, and brought before the Iudges at the last Assises there. 1570.
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdelye.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶An aunswere at large to a most heretical, trayterous, and papisticall Byll, written in English verse.
            
               ¶The papisticall verse.
               
                  1
                  How now my Maisters maryed Priestes, how lyke you of these newes?
                  You must forsake your wicked synes, your wyues must to the stewes.
               
            
            
               The Christian aunswer.
               Such thoughtes, such wordes, such men, such deedes such faith, such fruites appeare:
               Such mind, such moode, such harts, such feates as Papistes shew you heare.
               The filthye image of their mindes, their poisoned tonges bewray:
               As Gospell getteth good successe, and Popery doth decay.
               Still spuing out the spirit of spite, whose loue Gods lawes defies:
               Which hate the thing that God doth loue, and what God doth despise,
               That they maintaine against his word, by Canons of the Pope:
               For whose behoofe some haue of late, bene sensed in a rope.
               Because Gods word hath cast a downe, their Priests of Romish Ball:
               
                  With whom the vice of whoredome is estéemd no vice at all.
               But Mariage (which God hath made for man to liue well in:
               Which also he hath sanctified) they do condemne as sin.
               They spit out spitefull rage at this, as all men now may see:
               For that that Christ doth make hys Church, from popish bondage free.
               His Ministers and Preachers true, haue libertie no lesse:
               Then other men to take them wiues, as Paule doth well expresse.
               But they of Ministers make scorne, resemblyng Aarons breed:
               Though Christ becam the final Priest by shedding of his blood.
               And brought that office to an end, appointing others iust:
               To serue him in his ministrie, such as his Church might trust.
               Not Balams brood of Iudas sect, not Romish shauelinges sure:
               Which vnto vile Sodomitrie, do all men so alure.
               Whose Gotish church is common Stewes, of Fornication vile:
               
                  In which who séekes Gods lawes to kéepe, can tarie but a while.
               But Ministers of Misteries, no Sacrifice to giue:
               But such as séeke by Gods true hestes most holylye to liue.
               Not like to Priestes, but like to men, so mortified by grace:
               That Romish boarish lecherie, in them can take no place.
               Which haue ech one his maried wife, with bed most vndefiled:
               As Paule doth teach, to euery man, which whoredome hath exiled.
               And therefore Popish Sicophant, that newes doost spread a pace:
               That Christian men must vertu leaue and honestie deface.
               All men do sée your beastly lyues, which you were best forsake:
               Least that your porcion be full sore, amydst the firy lake.
               You that like double Traitours gaspe for time of your returne:
               And gape for breath, & hope for change that you the truth might spurne.
               How like you this, your knauery is in euery cost espide:
               
                  You romish Priestes which haue no wyues, all Christians you deride.
               And these be newes for you, take hede, leaue of, repent, amend:
               God hath disclosed your vilanie, and hastened hath your end.
               Now must you leaue the Romish stewes, and eke your God the Pope:
               Or els prepare your selues to wyn, a gybbet with a rope
               Now take you wiues, leaue romish stewes, and learne to lyue well.
               For why adulterous whoremongers, for aye shall hang in hell.
            
            
               The papisticall verse.
               
                  2
                  What neede our women now take care, what life they go or leade:
                  Sithe euery preaching knaue must haue a whoore in house to treade?
               
            
            
               The Christian aunswer.
               Such hart still sée, such study bent, such study, such deuise:
               Such thought, such mocion of the mind such question doth arise.
               All Papistes shame at this demaund, which haue the sparke of grace:
               To heare such hainous wordes blowne out, from such a shameles face.
               When euer was there lesse regard of chaste lyfe, then was then:
               When Dispensatiōs made the Priests lyue more like beastes, then men?
               When euery Priest had not his wyfe▪ but many Priestes ten whoores:
               When priestly lecherie did defile their honest neighbours doores.
               When neither mayd nor maried wyfe in honest life could stand:
               If shorne shaueling might deuise, to haue them vnder hand.
               When one Priest had two dosen of whoores, to vse them at his wyll:
               And scotfree scapt in Boners dayes, and kept his liuyng styll.
               Then where was care? oh where was grace? surely they were exiled:
               And that made many a virgin then, by Priestes to be defiled.
               Remember well this old prouerbe, of Shauelings great abuses:
               That Priestes & Doues wher euer they come make very filthy houses.
               But beastly man what words be these? what monstrous hart or minde:
               To cast out such inhumaine speeche, so far beyond all kinde.
               Are Preachers now with you but knaues? fye Papistes, blush at this:
               The Preacher is the Trumpe of God, this sure is spoke amis.
               A lying knaue, a brauling knaue, a romish knaue more fyt:
               But sure thys Epithite thou adst without reason or wyt.
               For Epithites we adde to shew the nature, force, and kinde:
               Of men, of things, and wordes as we in Rethoricke rules do finde.
               But contraries for Epithites, wyse men do neuer place:
               
                  Epithetons of lyke must be, to shew of wordes the grace.
               Preaching a woord of Maiestie, and Knaue, doo disagrée:
               Although a Knaue hath ioynd them thus, from wyt and learning frée.
               A sclaunderous knaue, a foolish knaue, a foule malicious knaue:
               These Epithites may sound more fyt, for him that thus doth raue.
               Which doth enuy Gods preached word a blynde erronious elfe:
               Which hath with that vile hoore of Rome, 
                  no dout bewitch him selfe.
               Which flattering whoore that Serpentine, full often hath bene trode:
               Whose fruites & brood throughout the world, are now disperst abrode.
               Marke these newes then, ye popish brood, feare God, repent I say:
               Dread Christ, and leaue your trade in time▪ least halter be your pay.
            
            
               The papisticall verse.
               
                  3
                  Here is not now a strumpet whoore, in all the land to haue:
                  They are so sodainly snatched vp, with some Geneua Knaue.
               
            
            
               The Christian answer.
               The lying toung doth slay the soule, sayth Salomon the wyse:
               Shall Papists then escape trow you, which all delight in lyes?
               There is not now a strumpet whoore, (saith he) in all the land:
               Which f
                     •
                  lse reproch from whence it comes, all men may vnderstand.
               Of proposicion false, proceedes conclusion must vile:
               Which Papists sclaūders would maintaine, but Papist stay a while.
               
                  To many whoores are yet to finde, if Gods wyll were not so:
               Although when Poperie raignd, there were ten times as many mo.
               It is no shame that whores decrease, but shame it is to see:
               All Papists haue such whoorish hartes, as now appeares in thee.
               When Pope bare rule, whoores were mayntaynd then whoores did much augment:
               But now I trust that Christ beares rule, all whoores wyll soone be spent.
               Though Papistes more delight in whoores, lyke knaues méere bestiall:
               Then in the maried Matrons lyfe, which vertue passeth all.
               And though the Pope, and Romish filthes, in Rome haue open Stewes:
               If in Geneua Pope should dwell, he should heare other newes.
               His gotish hart would right soone ake, there whooredome for to vse:
               Their heads there from their shoulders leape which so them selues abuse.
               But Pope receaues the golden rent, of whooredomes filthy sin:
               To decke his crowne, for whoores do bring him mickle treasure in.
               
                  Geneuian men that there haue séene, true discipline take place:
               Hold Rome sinke of Sodomitrie, and Papists past all grace.
               They séeke no whoore, though Romaines do, it is their common trade,
               As may appeare by such a Knaue, as this complaynt hath made.
               For sure a merry day it was, when whoores in euery stréete:
               The Papists might obtaine to haue, an act adiudged meete.
               But since Geneua gaue vs light, whoores Priests & whoores are fled
               And so wyll Papists soone I hope, when gallowes hath them sped.
            
            
               The papisticall verse.
               
                  4
                  Maister Wyborne, alias tiburne tyke, here dwelleth in this towne:
                  Which sought by all the meanes he could, the Easter to plucke downe.
               
               
                  5
                  But I of hym dare well pronounce, and tyme the truth shall try:
                  That he shall trust vnto his heeles, or els in Smithfield fry.
               
               
                  6
                  Not he, but thousandes of his sect, must to Geneua seeke:
                  The wrestlyng of the Gospell wrong, preuayles them not a lecke.
               
            
            
               The Christian answer.
               These be the fruites of Papists blynde, loe here the hartes of those:
               Whose traitrous slaundring tonges do shew they are prefest Gods foes.
               Of Sathans seede, which loueth lyes and sclaunders to blase out:
               Against the truth, and Church of God, I put you out of dout.
               Whose eyes do weere, and téeth do gnashe at sincere Preachers true:
               Because they see what good successe, doth after them ensue.
               This Maister VVyborne well is knowne, thou Papist to thy shame:
               (And all the rable of thy rout,) that seekest him to defame,
               To 
                     •
                  e a man of learning graue, of iudgement sound and right:
               A maryed Minister he is, of lyuing most vpright.
               A worthy Pastor of Gods flocke, a zealous teacher knowne:
               Which hath in deede by studious payne much popery ouerthrowne.
               A modest man and curteous, of gentle sprits, and milds:
               
                  Who séekes the hurt I dare wel vouch of neither man nor child.
               No sclaunderer is he no dout, but one that meaneth good:
               Yea if it were to such as hee might know to séeke his blood.
               A reuerend man for knowledge sake, thou doost thy wit abuse:
               With such a name hym to reproch, and so him to misuse.
               But what is sclaunder thine, thou foole, thou trayterous tiburne tike?
               The gallowes grones for thée no dout, the rope will breake thy necke.
               For where thou saiest he sought to pull the Easter downe to ground:
               His doctrine tended your abuse of Easter to confound.
               Which feast no dout you much poluts, but he sought to erect,
               The simple sincere truth of Christ, which you do all reiect.
               Like Romish Rebels, hopyng styll, the darkning of thys day:
               But first I trust all popish knaues shall be the gallowes pray.
               And where thou sayest thou darst pronounce, that time the truth shall trye:
               
                  That VVyborne must trust to his héeles, or els in Smithfielde fry.
               This happy time hath tryed in déede, out truth to your decay:
               And to the ruine of your rout, which hope but for a day.
               Your sacke of lies is ransackt now, your ware appeareth drosse:
               You leane vpon a broken staffe, Gods truth bringes you to losse.
               And time hath lent by Gods good grace, such comfort for the nonce:
               That all Gods Preachers shall not neede, abrode to lay their bones.
               Their safegarde sure in England is, they neede not feare the fier:
               Although the Papistes do begin to hang a litle hyer.
               God hath reueald your counsels, fooles, God hath layd open now
               Your traitrous harts, which vnto God and Queene will neuer bow.
               Darst thou pronounce thou traitor hold that VVyborne hence must flee?
               Is neither godly feare at all, nor Subiectes loue in thée?
               What should him moue to step one foote? your hope is surely spoyld:
               
                  God hath himselfe your poysnous pride in open battayle foyld▪
               
               Shall Smithfield be your shambles yet Gods Sayntes to kyll and slay?
               Stay Papist, packe vp Holburne hill, for you the fitter way.
               Shal VVyborne trust vnto his héeles? No, VVyborne trust in God:
               And Carts shall trusse vp these in time to Tyburne loade by loade.
               Shal thousands packe for feare of you, thou Traytour, darst thou say:
               When thou & thine hast well obtaynd old Saturnes second day?
               There is no cause, God haue the prayse but thousandes of his sect:
               Of other landes that worship Christ may here themselues protect.
               And boldnes more encreaseth still, through Gods almighty grace:
               When traitrous Papists dare not once to shew their double face.
               For euery one that thou doost méete, thou thynkst wyll thée betray:
               Thy wits be breetch, thy braynes all duld: thy hart hath neuer stay.
               If worst should fal, that God for synne, and for our negligence:
               
                  Should plague vs so to geue you power, and vs to driue from hence:
               God hath that happy Citie made, Geneua of great fame,
               For his poore peoples safe defence, to shroud them in the same.
               But when your Pope shall downe be cast and hence now you must flée:
               Like vacabondes or Foxes whelpes you know not where to bée.
               Your stay is gone, a Papist, fye, all men do you detest:
               He stayes not here, saith euery man, so you shall haue no rest.
               And this is true, the time is come, Ile tel you truer newes:
               Al Papists which haue traitrous harts and do their Prince refuse,
               Must now relent, and turne forthwith, and true become God knowes:
               Or els prepare to geue their flesh, at once to fede the Crowes.
               Or els if that their hartes wyll not, be true to Princely state:
               Get hence to Alba, there lye safe as Story dyd of late.
               And if you get in hys sure court, God cannot fynde you there:
               
                  
                  Dalba shall kéepe Story in store, his Quéene he néedes not feare.
               Your wresting long of Gods true wor
                     •
                   can nothing you preuaile:
               Haue done I say, dispatch therefore, plucke downe your Pecocks tayle.
               Downe on your knées you Asses stout, pray God and Quéene for grace:
               You can no longer now preuayle, your practise takes no place.
               It bootes you not to Pius now for mercy for to seeke:
               For you be traytours proude at home, his Bul is not worth a léeke.
               Therefore as thousands traitours are, by thousands all agree:
               To turne to God, or els make hast, to scale the gallow tree.
            
            
               The papisticall verse.
               
                  7
                  The Deuil when he would Christ tempt in Scripture seemed wyse:
                  And for him they do Scripture take, to mayntayne all their lyes.
               
               
                  8
                  Therefore be packyng pratlyng knaues▪ your rayling is to playne:
                  Commy
                        •
                      your Baltacos to the bag, and hye you hence agayne.
               
            
            
               The Christian answer.
               
                  
                  Goliah brought a sword to field, which cut his throte in fine:
               And wherwith all maist thou be beate, but with this rod of thine?
               The Deuil when he tempted Christ, in Scripture semed wyse:
               And therefore thou and Papists all, do Scripture cleane despyse.
               An argument right strong no doubt, Christ was 
                     •
                  diudgd to dye:
               No iudgement therfore must be vsde, fye, fye, blinde Papists, fye.
               Because the Deuil falsified the Scripture at his wyll:
               The Papists w
                     ••
                  l no Scripture haue, it doth their market spyll.
               But now in earnest we or you, the 
                     ••
                  uth is tryed or this:
               Who haue the Scriptures most abusd and taken them amis.
               You like to Sathan proue I may, c
                     ••
                  se out what serues your turne:
               And all the rest that you confoundes, you 
                     •
                  o condemne and burne.
               We for tr
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  es sake true scripture vse you wrest with staring eyes:
               All our to 
                     •
                  u
                     •••
                  e for IESVS CHRIST, but yours for popish lyes.
               
                  Therefore to you I say packe hence, your glosing will not stand:
               Go practise now your poperie out of our Christian land.
               Your whispering, your priuie prates, lyke Knaues where as you lye:
               Preuailes no more in Christian eares, it is not worth a Flye.
               Your fained fables false are found, your tales of little Iohn:
               Your pagents playd of Robin Hood, are knowne to euery one.
               And wher thou bidst them to commit, their Bastards to the bag:
               All men do see how on your part, the world now doth wag▪
               
               God be the iudge twixt time and time, when Bastards hye did sit:
               Your Popes own Bastards, for whom sure the gallowes was more fit.
               Bastards of Bishops, ye Cardinals brood, Priests Bastards euery where:
               The Votaries compilde by Bale, can tell you then and there.
               Commit remembrance to your harts, you Papists yet in time:
               And hye you from your Romish waies, yet do forsake your crime.
               
                  Bid Basans Buls, and Bastards theirs hye hence and get the bag:
               Their pompe decays, & on their partes the world will not wag.
               Bid Pope come downe that sits so hye aboue all Princes thrones:
               And set his hands to hold the plough, these newes are for the nonce.
               And if his traiterous idle bones, will not so fadge to worke:
               Let him go get into the field, and sue to serue the Turke.
               If that him not will satisfie, now that he is downe cast:
               Let him go learne to clout old shoes, and that in all the hast.
               For his reuenewes will bee spent, to begging he must trudge:
               Or els go learne to be hangde, full like the Deuils drudge.
            
            
               The papisticall verse.
               
                  9
                  And where I told you of your wyues, take you for them no care:
                  Shift for your selues, and trudge with spede lest halter be your share.
               
            
            
               The Christian answer.
               Like matter, like conclusion. a monishing he geues:
               Who warning lesse leades all his life, as he at randon liues.
               I might no lesse geue warning to, to you of Baalams sort,
               Which do belye Gods litle flocke to make your selues a sport.
               That you would haue some more regard, both for you and your wyues:
               Which lyue now most laciuiously, and lead most wicked lyues.
               And some which most vnwisely leaue, their Children, wyues and all:
               And run like traytours from the land, to serue the Romish Ball.
               
               But of your wyues I do not speake, your lyues I touch in déede:
               Whom I do wish in IESVS CHRIST repentant faith wyth speede.
               Or els to shift and leaue this soyle, it is no place for such:
               As do at Christes Gospell kicke, and at Gods truth so grutch.
               Your time is come, I warne you now, most friendly to beware:
               Least that you finde it come to passe, when halter is your share.
               And when we see your daies preuayle,  as here tofore it was:
               Which day shall be euen shortly now, Post calendas graecas.
               That Papists rule, and popery raignes and truth is layd in dust:
               Then wéele begin still come the time, your warning for to trust.
               And leaue our wiues at your curtsy, and shift our selues to saue:
               But till that day, I leaue thee still, a very traitrous knaue.
               ¶ And God preserue our noble Quéene Elizabeth ech houre:
               That she by drawne sharpe sword may quite cut downe the Papistes power.
               And GOD enlarge her noble raigne lyke heauens daies to bée:
               That all the Papists hope by her, cleane spoiled we may sée.
               That Gods true word she may defend▪ and all her foes deface:
               Which enmies be to Christes truth. and traitours to her Grace.
               AMEN.
            
            
               The Papist.
                
               FINIS.
               
                  ꝙ Non est inuentus.
               
            
            
               The answer.
               
                  
                  Non est inuentus made this sclaunder so bolde,
               But Est inuentus tooke in hand it to vnfold.
               Veritas non quaerit angulos, Shew thy face:
               
                  Non audeo dixit, For my deedes deserue no grace.
               
                  Tunc desine, Thou Foole, leaue of thy works, dispatch
               
                  Aut prode mendax That straight the gallowes may thee catch.
               FINIS.
               
                  Tho. Knell. Iu.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
vpon two kinde of people, 
                  •
               āke Popish priestes, repynynge agaynst the kynges holsome doctrine, or vpon the cōmon runne-gates, seedmē of sedicion, of the which we haue plentye here, agaynste whome. If the martiall law were executed, and were currante quoyne in euery shyre, as I here say, there is a Proclamation for the same (which I haue not yet sene, but by youre nexte letters trust to receiue) I thinke there wolde be as fewe runners abrode, as now there be many. You must geue me leaue to talk a litle more after my wounted maner, which is to sai my mynd frākly vnto you without offēce. Nowe me thinketh the ende is such of your matters there, as euery state of people wilbe content

therwith, and so the mooste trouble wil rest with these traytours. For with you, the kinges people which deserued death, be by mercy preserued, & the thynges euell vsed (as in dede disceases there be in the cōmō wealth) shalbe now wel ordered by Parliamēt. And if the cōmon people shalbe eased of their griefes, the gentelmen shall also be relieued of them, for se how much the fermour crieth oute of hys rent, so may the gentelman wel crye out of the market, the one as muche greued as the other, & one remedye I trust shal serue both. For me thinketh it is no more difference for me, to haue .xx. pound, spēdyng .xx. pound, then to haue xx. marke, spendinge .xx. marke, so that my estate be kept like wt
               
both, you wyll thynke I wryte now at my wyl, because yf ye remēber the last y
                  •
               re in the parke at Wynsour when the Court was there, thys question made great argument betwyxte you and me, whether for the amendement of thinges in the common wealth the fermour should fyrst abate hys pryce, and then the Landed man, his rent, or in contrary order, at whyche tyme, I remembre you stode vpon one poynte, whych I could not denye, that the Gentylman by deere byeng, was dryuen to let deere, and I vpon an other poynte (not al vntrewe) that the deere hyrynge made deere 
                  •
               ellynge, But where the fault fyrst beganne, neyther of vs woulde graunt to the other, neuerthelesse,

so wayghty a matter it is, as no wayes to be discussed but by Parliament. Where when the argument is at an ende, it may be establyshed by a lawe, wherof there was neuer more lykelyhood, because the amendement therof, wyl helpe so many as well Lordes and Gentilmē, as al other Commoners, no man hauyng cause to repyne agaynst it, but suche as gather, not to spende and improue their lyuinges not for their charges, as many Gentilmen haue done, but for their coffers. So that to conclude, improuemēt alone maketh no man ryche, but improuement and sparynge. But what medle I wyth thys matter and yet what dare I net to you my fryende, by Sayncte G
                  •
               orge

I saye to you merely out of bourde, no one thinge maketh me more angry with these rebelles then one article, which toucheth me on the quicke, and I beleue, there be few in the realme, but it will make them smart, to forgoe his Abbey & Chauntrye landes wherin I for my part am so heated, that if I should fight wyth those traitours, I wold for euery two strokes to be stricken for treason strike on to kepe my lā
               de, the which I bought to suerlye, to deliuer it at a papistes appoyntement. Thus I haue exceded in woordes, & yet you shal counte it littel, because the matter is large, & therby you muste measure me, & not by my lynes, One thing I wil ye shal marke and then I ende, the matter of

Cardynal Pole (as in this case) of greate importaunce, lyke as I am sure my Lord Protectour is aduertised, for emonges these rebelles, the chiefe Captayne of all, sauinge one, was the Marques of Excetters man, and setteth forth the matter of the Cardinall so much, as in dede, he maketh no other matter. Hys name is Berry, one of them which subscrybed the Articles. Yf ye can conuenientlye sende me▪ a Dagg when the kynges Maiestyes ordynance commeth doune. Ye shall receyue moneye for the same of my Brother Henry. Ye shall take payne to do my humble commendacyons to myne olde Mayster (good Syr Anthonye Dennye knyght) and especyally to my Coosyn Mayster

Iohn Peres of the Garde, who I woulde were here with one or two hūdreth of ye Garde, to knec
                  •
               e these knaues wyth theyr Palo
                  •
               rr
                  •
               s. Thus f
                  •
               re ye moste her
                  •
               elye wel, and pr
                  •••
                you, as I do, that w
                  •
                maye mete merelye.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
         
            
            The Articles of vs the Commoners of Deuonshyre and Cornewall in diuers Campes by East and West of Excettor.
            
               FYrst we wyll haue all the general counsell & holy decrees of our for fathers obserued, kept and performed, and who so euer shal agayne saye them, we holde them as Heretikes.
            ¶Itē we will haue the Law
                  •
               s of our Souerayne Lord Kyng Henry the .viii. concernynge the syxe articles, to be in vse again, as in hys tyme they were.
            ¶Item we will haue the ma
                  ••
               e in Latten, as was before, & celebrated by the Pryest wythoure my man or woman cōmunycatyng wyth hym.
            
               ¶Item we wyll haue the Sacrament hange ouer the hyeghe aulter, and there to be worshypped as it was wount to be, and they whiche will not therto consent, we wyl haue them dye lyke heretykes agaynst the holy Catholyque fayth.
            ¶Item we wyll haue the Sacramēt of ye aulter but at Easter delyuered to the lay people, and then but in one kynde.
            ¶Item we wil that our Curattes shal minister the Sacramēt of Baptisme at all tymes aswel in the weke daye as on the holy daye.
            ¶Itē we wyl haue holy bread and holy water made euery sondaye, Palmes and asshes at the tymes accustomed, Images to be set vp again in euery church,

and all other auncient olde Ceremonyes vsed heretofore, by our mother the holy Church.
            ¶Item we wil not receyue the newe seruyce because it is but lyke a Christmas gāme, but we wyll haue oure olde seruice of Mattens, masse, Euen song and procession in Latten as it was before. And so we the Cornyshe men (wherof certen of vs vnderstāde no Englysh) vtterly refuse thys newe Englysh.
            ¶Item we wyll haue euerye preacher in his sermon, & euery Pryest at hys masse, praye specially by name for the soules in purgatory, as oure forefathers dyd.
            ¶Item we wyll haue the Byble and al bokes of scripture in Englysh to be called in agayn,

for we be enformed that otherwise the Clergye, shal not of lōg time confound the heretykes.
            ¶Item we wyll haue Doctor Moreman and Doctor Crispin which holde our opinions to be sauely sent vnto vs and to them we requyre the Kinges maiesty, to geue some certain liuinges, to preache amonges vs our Catholycke fayth.
            ¶Item we thinke it very mete because the lord Cardinal Pole is of the kynges bloode, should not only haue hys pardon, but also sent for to Rome, & promoted to be of the kinges coūsayl.
            ¶Item we wyll that no Gentylman shall haue any more seruauntes then one to wayte vpō hym excepte he maye dispende one hundreth marke land and

for euerye hundreth marke we thynke it reasonable he should haue a man.
            ¶Item we wyll that the halfe parte of the Abbey landes and Chauntrye landes, in euerye mans possessyons, how so euer he cam by them, be geuen again to two places, where two of the chief Abbeis was with in euery Countye, where suche half part shalbe taken out, and there to be establyshed a place for deuout persons, whych shall pray for the Kyng and the common wealth, and to the same we wyll haue al the almes of the Churche boxe geuen for these seuen yeres.
            ¶Itē for the particular grieffes of our Countreye. We wyll haue them so ordered, as Humfreye

Arundell, & Henry Braye the Kynges Maior of Bodmā, shall enforme the Kynges Maiestye, yf they maye haue saluecōduct vnder the Kynges great Seale, to passe and repasse, with an Heroalde at Armes.
            
               ¶By vs 
                     
                        
                           Chiefe Capytaynes.
                           Humfrey Arundell.
                           Berry
                           Thomas Underhyll.
                           Iohn Sloeman.
                           Wyllyam Segar.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           The foure Gouernours of the Campes.
                           Iohn Tompson Pryeste.
                           Henry Bray Maior of Bodmā
                           
                           Henry Lee Maior of Torriton
                           Roger Barret Prieste.
                        
                     
                           
               
            
            
         
      
   