
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON
OF PVBLICKE
THANKS-GIVING
for the happie recouerie of
his MAIESTIE from his late
dangerous sicknesse:
Preached at PAVLS-Crosse
the 11. of Aprill, 1619.
BY
The B. of LONDON.
            Published by commandement.
            LONDON,
Printed for THOMAS ADAMS.
1619.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ESAY 38. 17.
               Behold, in my peace I had great bitternesse;
but thou hast, in loue to my
soule, deliuered it from the pit of
corruption: for, thou hast cast all my
sinnes behind thy backe.
            
            
               WHen our SAVIOVR rode
into Ierusalem, accompanied
with such multitudes
of people, some vnclothing
the trees, others
their backes, to spread in
his way, all of them shouting vp to heauen,
with Hosanna,
               Math. 21. and Benedictus; it is said in
the storie, that all the Citie was moued,
and it gaue them occasion to aske, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
who is this? The representation of such a
person, with such a traine, in such a fashion,

and with such a dittie, made them conceiue
it was some rare and vnusuall thing.
            My message this day is something out of
course, and might well require a preface, (I
am sure, Hosanna, and Benedictus, will be the
summe of it,) besides a presence not ordinarie,
of the heads and corners of the people,
and a face of Solemnitie, such as reserueth it
selfe onely for festiuals. I thinke there is
none so vnsensible, that is not moued hereat,
and will aske, (at least) to himselfe,

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ;Ier. 32. what meaneth this? Creauit Dominus
nouum super terrā: Surely the Lord hath created
some new worke in the Land, that hath
produced this new meeting.
            The very exhibition of these dumbe
shewes, though they haue neither language
nor speech, without the helpe of the tongue,
were sufficient preface.
            And yet I haue a preface in my text.Ecce. 
               Ecce,
behold, standeth at your doores, I meane the
eares of your flesh, to lift vp their heads and
hatches, I say not, that the King of glory, who
is the King of kings, but yet that a glorious
King, and his gracious confession may enter
into your hearts.
            
               
It is placed at the gates of my text, and a
thousand others in this booke, as Porters at
the gates of great mens houses: Strangers &
Wanderers, and Passengers, and Circumforaneos,
idle Companions that stand to gaze,
they keepe out; admit none but friends and
bidden ghests,Math. 22. such as are worthy to come
in, and bring their garment with them; so
is the office of Ecce here.
            Those who come to these sacred assemblies,
with vnsanctified eares and spirits, only
ad augendam turbam,
               Senec. to make vp number,
it repelleth with indignation and disdaine,
as the Crier in their gentile sacrifices repelled
prophane persons,—
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Away,
away prophane persons; but such as shall
lend their eares, and bend their intentions,
and lay vp in their hearts, with Marie, that they
may bring forth of their treasuries for their vse,
with the Scribe; these, and none others it
inuiteth, and pulleth after it, as with the
cords and cables of the holy Ghost, as that
chaine that was tied to the tongue of Mercurie,
and fastned to the eares of the people,
drew his Auditors. Behold.
            
            And (me thinketh,) it is somewhat like

the King that vttered it; for the King is no
more then another man, mole, in bulke of
body; virtute, in power, he is more. We say,
that a King hath long hands, he may sit in
Ierusalem, and reach to the ends of his kingdome;
as the body of the Sunne is in his
sphaere alone, but his beames vpon the
earth: and the blaze of a Comet is much farther
extended then the starre it selfe goeth:
so, though the body of Ecce, be but in the
frontispice, and at the threshold of my text,
yet doth the hand, the beames, the blaze, the
vertue, and strength of it go into euery part.
For, whether you consider his sicknesse,
which he styleth bitternesse; and the time of
that sicknesse, in peace, when he least looked
for it; or, whether his recouery, Eruisti animam
meam, and the motiue to that recouery,
in loue to my soule, perhaps when he least deserued
it; or, whether the cause of that sicknesse,
Sinnes, and the full remission of those
sinnes, Proiecisti posttergum, when he did not
so much as craue it; Ecce, imparteth it selfe
to them all alike.
            I fell vpon the mention of a King. I will
set one Ecce more vpon the person from

whom this speech came: It was the speech
of Hezekiah the King: a great and magnificent
King, both at home and abroad; a vertuous
and religious King, which is the pure
gold in the Crowne of a King, the rest is but
drosse; a King of the holy land, so was not
Merodach Baladan in the head of the next
Chapter, for he was the King of Babylon. It
will be the more gratefull for the authors
sake.
            Said I, a speech? it is more: Scriptura Hezekiae
Regis, the 9. verse, the writing of Hezekiah
the King: the labor, not of his tongue,
but of his pen; he did not fundere, but fingere,
poure it forth at aduentures, but frame it
vpon aduice. I put a great difference betwixt
speech, and writing. Speech hath wings,
volat & auolat, it flieth and dieth; so doth
not writing: you must seeke for a word, in
aure, in the eare of him that receiued it,
where it hath but slender footing; or in aëre,
in the aire, where it perisheth with the sound.
If you will seeke for a writing, you shall
find it in aere, or in marmore, in plates of brasse,
or in tables of stone, where it may be a monument
to after ages: It suruiueth the author,

and doth good to the liuing when the
author is gone. In this sence it is true, Surgunt
ex mortuis,
               Luk. 16. they arise from the dead, by
whom the succeeding posterity is instructed
and bettered; so sayd he of his writings, Posterorum
negotium ago,
               Senec. I prouide for the times
to come.
            Yet there is more: for it is the writing of a
King, I say not before his death, (from which
he was newly deliuered, as in a parable of the
resurrection, Heb. 11.) but instantly vpon that
time, wherein he was neare to dying: and
then are the words of a man most gratefull,

                  vt esse Phoebi dulcius humen solet, iam iam cadentis,
               
as the light of the Sun, most pleasant
about his going downe. But that which is
most of all; it is written with the point of a
diamond, to remaine for eternitie, and is a
part of the euidences and muniments of the
Church, layd vp amongst her sacred Records,
for a memoriall of his thankfulnesse,
offered, and consecrated to God vpon that
deliuerance.Plin. 2. 
               Beati, quibus, deorum munere, datum
est facere scribēda, aut scribere legenda: Happie
are they, whom God hath enabled, either
to do things worthy to be written, or to

write things worthy to be read: Hezekiah
did both.
            This is a part of his writing; the composition
whereof is of sundry and contrary
parts: To giue you a summary view of all
the materials therein, and their natural consequence:
            First, you haue Peace, that leadeth to all 
the rest; but Peace had an ill neighbour that
troubled it, Sinne, in the hindmost part of 
my Text. Sinne bringeth forth bitternesse:
               
and not onely so, but bitternesse added to bitternesse.
               
            
            
               Bitternesse thus accumulated, must needs
haue brought to the pit, and the pit, in the 
end, would haue turned to corruption, or consumption.
               
Thus farre goeth the blacke line of
my text, the shadow of sorrow and death.
            But then cometh the other Hemisphaere
of comfort and light; wherein you haue,
first, the loue and good pleasure of God: secondly,
               Redemption from the pit of corruption, as 
touching the body: thirdly, Remission of sins, as 
concerning the soule. So it is not here as in
the 68. Psalme, where the singers go before,
and the minstrels follow after, &c. here, the

mourners go first, like the captiues in their
ancient Triumphs; sinne, and sicknesse, and the
pit, and corruption; then come the minstrels
and singers, I meane the mercies of God, as
in a triumphant chariot, curing both the
body from sicknesse, and the soule from sins.
            
            The three parts and roomes of my text
wherein this whole matter is lodged and disposed,Diuision.
are as clearely distinguished, as the
three tabernacles of Peter, Matth. 17.
            
               The first is, In my peace I had great bitternesse.
            
               The second, But thou in loue to my soule, hast
deliuered it from the pit of corruption.
            
               The third, For thou hast cast all my sins behind
thy backe.
            Let these parts be, as those three tabernacles.
            Me thinketh I see Moses in the first, of a
fearefull visage that hath need to be veiled,
Bitternesse, Bitternesse.
            
            Elias in the second, when he is raising the
widowes sonne at Zareptha, 1. Reg. 17. Thou
hast deliuered my soule from the pit.
            
               CHRIST in the third, full of grace and
truth, casting my sinnes behind his backe.
            Or, if you please, let my text be as the

               Arke of testimonie, wherein there were kept for
store, the tables of the Law, the pot of Manna, &
Aarons rod, Heb. 9. They conceipt it well that
the Arke is the Church; the Tables, the word;
the Manna, the Sacraments; and the Rod, the
discipline.
            I am sure in the Arke of my text, there is
first a rod, of bitternesse, bitternesse; and secondly,
the manna of deliuerance from the consuming
pit; and thirdly; the tables, not of the
Law, but of the Gospell; not of the Old, but
the New couenant; of the Law, not of facts,
but of faith; the tender mercies of God, in
absoluing from sinne.
            In three words, Hezekiah is sicke, in the
first tabernacle: sound, in the second, sanus,
or sanabilis, onward to his health, as touching
his body: safe, and secure in the third,
as concerning his soule. And in euery of
these three are two remarkable things.
            In the first, 
                  1. sicknesse
with the

                        qualitie, bitternes; extremity
and degree,
bitternesse, bitternesse.
                        
                        2. the time and aduantage that
the sicknesse tooke, In my peace.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               In the second 
                  1. deliuerance, Eruisti animam
meam.
                  2. the motiue that induced
God, thou in thy loue, &c.
                  
               
            
            In the third, 
                  1. the cause of the sicknesse,
Sinnes.
                  
                  2. the remoue of that cause,
Thou hast cast, &c.
                  
               
            
            
                I began at the first tabernacle, and therein
first with the rod,
               Amaritudo amaritudo. his sicknesse: In my peace
I had great bitternesse.
            
            The kind of this sicknesse is not mentioned
till the 21 verse, there it is called vlcus,
a botch; it is thought to haue bene a plague-sore,
I dispute it not, I am sure it was somewhat
neere; I will but drinke of the brooke in
my way, and giue you a short note. Wee
haue knowne by bitter, bitter experience,
what a plague is; but God tooke a plaister of
figges, of his sweete mercies in Christ, well-nigh
fifteene yeares sithence; and applied
to the botch, and healed the sores of this

land: in the vertue and strength whereof,
we haue walked to this present day: and we
for the figges of his mercies haue returned
him the thistles of our sinnes, the clusters of
Sodome, and the wine of Dragons; and yet,
Ecce in pace, we heale our hurts with sweet
words, crying, peace, peace, all is well, and so
shall be; To morrow shall be as this day, and
much better, and this yeare as the last, and
freer.
            Deceiue not your selues: you haue a great
and populous Citie, sowne with the seede of
man, as the Prophet speaketh; I may say,
with the seed, rather the weed, of building.
I say not, that your Citie may go out at your
gates; surely, it may go out at your Suburbes;
the hemme of your garment is more
then the garment it selfe: the lop, and burthen
of the tree, more then the stemme can
beare, and threatneth the ruine of the whole
body. To speake plainely, the regions are
white and drie to the haruest; there is matter
enough within, in respect of your sinne; without,
in respect of your building, for a pestilence
to worke vpon, vnlesse, as the antidote
of the blessed goodnesse of God, then

cured, so the preseruatiue of his sauing
grace, now keepe you from it. I go on.
            Whatsoeuer were the species, manifest it is
what the qualitie of the sicknesse was, bitternesse;
what the quantitie, bitternesse, bitternesse;
some sharpe and wringing disease; as when
the Prophet cried out,Ier. 4. 
               My bellie, My bellie; the
very doubling of the word expressed what
his paine was.
            We are alwayes ill, when we are in our
best health;August. in Psal. 102. 
               Longum languorem trahimus; we
liue in a long and languishing sicknesse; our
wearinesse after labour and trauell is a sicknesse,
and sitting, or lying is physicke to
cure it: sitting, and lying is a sicknesse, (wee
cannot continue therein;) rising, and walking
is the cure of it: hunger, and thirst is
sicknesse; eating, and drinking is the helpe to
that: Eating, and drinking sicknesse; fasting,
and abstinencie physicke to it.Gregor. 
               Quotidianus
defectus quid aliud est quàm prolixitas mortis?
Our daily decay in nature, what is it else, but
a lengthning of death? I will say briefly, triplici
morbo laboramus, principio, medio, & fine;
We are sicke of a threefold sicknesse, our beginning,
midst, and ending: As Saint Augustine
               
told the Manichees, of their idle and
impious writings; principium truncum, medium
putridum, finis ruinosus; their beginning was
naught, their proceeding naught, their ending
naught; So is it with vs; Ingressus flebilis,
progressus debilis, egressus horribilis, a mournfull
natiuity, wofull life, dreadfull death.
            
               Morbi, citatio ad mortem; sicknesse is a summons
to death: he that is least sicke, may,
and in the end must die. Death hath euer her
arrow in her bow, though in the prime ages
of the world she was sometimes nine hundred
yeares before she sped, yet now she hitteth
quickly; and when God saith, shoote,
she shooteth; and so long as God saith, spare,
she spareth. For what is thy life? Breue suspirium,
a short panting. Canst thou measure
the blast of winde? (said the Angell to Esdras;)
canst thou measure (say I) the blast
of thine owne winde? the breath within thy
nostrels? spiras, exspiras, now thou art breathing,
anon thy breath is gone. It dealeth
with the arke of thy body, as the doue with
the Arke of Noah, which goeth forth, and
commeth in, and goeth forth, and neuer
cometh backe againe. So doth thy breath.
            
               
But, he that is sicke of a sicknesse indeed,
a sicknesse that is mali moris, as the Physitians
speake, such as this sicknesse of Hezekiah was,
bitternesse, bitternesse, hath but a short reckoning
to make to the houre of his dying. For
it fareth with the bodie of man, as with a
vessell of wine in a frugall house; being kept
for our selues, and our friends which drinke
moderately, it is long in drawing; but, if
sponges,
               Spongiae, Infundibula, Amphorae. and tunnels, and barrels come to it, such
as are mightie to drinke, and strong to poure in,
they will spend that in a day, which would
haue serued a long time. So may the thread
of my life be long in spinning, to the fortieth,
or fiftieth yeare thereof; it may be, ad terminum
constitutum, Iob 14. vnto mine old age,
(for that is the bounder of nature, and, maledictus
qui transfert terminos, Deut. 27. that
thinketh,Senec. being old, to liue long; Huic vni
aetati non interceditur, there is no dispensation
for this age:) but if such quaffers shall come,
as a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a burning feuer, or the like malignant
diseases, that drinke vp humidu naturale,
all the moisture in my bodie at once, and
drie it vp like an harth, or like a bottle hung vp
in the smoke; that is done in an houre, a moment,

which had not else bene done in many
yeares to come.
            Now, but in a word consider the person
that is sicke;Mihi amar it is Hezekiah the King.
            
            If any person in the earth be capable of
that style,Dan. 3. 
               Viue in aeternum, liue for euer, it is a
King. What wanteth a King, of all the
beasts of the field, or fowles of the aire, or
fishes of the sea, what either nature can affoord,
or Art condite, to the diet of his bodie,
comfort of his heart, refreshing of his
spirits? It seemeth, by a phrase vsed by the
holy Ghost, that a King wanteth nothing.
Nabal feasteth like a King, 1. Sam. 25. Araunah
offereth to Dauid like a King, 2. Sam. 24. the Corinthians
reigne like Kings, 1. Cor. 4. and yet is
Hezekiah the King sick vsque ad mortem, vers. 1.
euen vnto death, that is, bitterly, bitterly: death
had stretched forth her hand against him, as
Ieroboam against the Prophet, to haue smitten
him, 1. Reg. 13. but that the Lord withered it.
What is the reason? Sum quidem & ego mortalis
homo, 7. Sap. for I my selfe (saith the King)
am also a mortall man.
            There is no difference in nature betwixt a
King and a meaner person.Quintil. 
               Interuallis distinguimur,

exitu aequamur; we differ in condition,
agree in dissolution. When Diogenes was poring
amongst dead mens bones, Alexander
asked him what he did there? he answered,
I seeke the bones of Philip thy father,
               Ossa patris tui Philippi regis Maced. quaero. 
               King of Macedon,
but cannot find them. I may well apply
the words of the Psalme to them, Constitue
Domine legislatorem super eos,
               Psal. 9. 
               sciant se esse
homines; Set thou ô Lord, a Law-giuer, or
Ruler ouer them, that they may know they
are but men. They giue lawes to the earth;
and death to them, and her law is an euen &
equall law, to King and people all alike.
            It is a probleme worthy the inquiring;Homo est animal rationale, mortal. sith
other creatures are subiect to death no lesse
then man, why Mortale is placed in the definition
of man alone. It is a parallell to this,
(and one answer may serue to both) which
the Prophet hath, Psalme 82. I haue said you
are gods, but ye shall die like men. Why like men
rather then other creatures? I will not giue
that eminent and conspicuous reason, that
when beasts die, by reason that their soules
arise from the matter of their flesh, they die,
and die thorowly;Moriuntur permoriuntur. so is it not with man, but
first he dieth, and endeth not there, but after

death, Iudgement, Hebrewes 9.
            I should rather say, that beasts, for the more
part, liue out their time determinate by nature,
til nature be annihilated, vnlesse violēce
and casuality come betweene: the Elephant
liueth longer then the Hart, the Hart then
the Lion, the Lion then the Horse, the Horse
then the Dog; all to their full age, vnlesse
they be forced out of life: but man dieth in
his infancie, and oftener in this then any other
age; no sooner saluteth the light of heauen,
but he biddeth farewell to it; and that
which is more, death entreth the very secrets
of nature, the vault of the wombe, and with
her Lynces eyes findeth out the wayes which
the Eagle and Kite neuer found out, and killeth
the babe in the wombe before it commeth
forth.
            You haue heard of the sicknesse:2. In pace. Adde
thereunto the time that his sicknesse watched;Senec in Agam.
               In my peace. Victor timere quid potest? (said
he in the Tragedie) and it is answered with a
breath, Quod non timet.
            
            
               Hezekiah had newly escaped from the
iawes of a fearefull King,2. Reg▪ 18 & 19. one, that vaunted
himselfe, that with the soles of his feet he had

dried vp the riuers of the earth, (& thought
(like Leuiathan) to haue drunke vp him, and
his kingdome) who asked in the pride of his
heart, where the Kings of Arphad, and Hemah,
and Zepharuaim were; and, Hezekiah, Let
not thy God deceiue thee, in whom thou trustest;
and he would make the people to eate their
dung, and drinke their water.
            Now he is fallen afresh into the hands of
the King of feares,
               Rex terrorum, terror Regum. as Iob calleth him, Iob 18.
and feare of Kings; who is, Rex super omnes filios
superbiae, Iob 41. who may say with much
more confidence, then euer Zenacherib did,
Where euer my foote treadeth, I drie vp the
riuers; riuers of bloud in the veines, and of
milke in the breasts, and of marrow in the
bones; and aske for the Kings, of Arphad, and
Hemah, and Zepharuaim, and Zenacherib himselfe;
and admonish the Kings of the earth,
Let not your gods, your Idols of greatnesse, and
glorie, and maiestie, deceiue you, wherein
you trust; and cause them to eate the dust of
the ground, and that the slime of the pit shall
be sweet to them. Ecce, cùm dixerint pax, pax,
Behold, when men shall cry peace, peace, sudden
destruction shall come vpon them. I

will vse the words of the Prophet, 1. Reg. 14.
I will do it in hac die, & in tempore hoc, at that
day, and at that time; Quid? etiam nunc: what?
yea, at this very instant; Ecce, in pace, at this
very instant of time, when Hezekiah thought
he had clipt the wings of peace, that it
should neuer flie away againe; when strangers
from abroad saluted him, Estne pax frater?
is all well? when he did not much lesse,
then say to his soule, Anima quiesce, Soule take
thine ease,Esay 28. 
               flagellum transijt, non veniet, the
scourge is past, and shall neuer come againe.
Did he then thinke of a Iebusite in the Land,
that should be a thorne in his eyes, and a
pricke in his side? of a bosome enemie? a
warre within his bones? an armie of trouble
and temptation in his owne bowels? When
a forreine enemie is discouered, the Beacons
are fired, and an Ecce is giuen to the Country
round about. Here is a domesticke, intestine
enemie, without Beacon, or any admonition
at all; but whilest he sitteth in the armes
of peace, as Sampson in the lap of Delilah, a
sudden alarme is heard, Vp Sampson, the Philistines
are vpon thee; Vp Hezekiah, bitternesse,
bitternes is vpon thee. This deserueth the Ecce;
               
for bitternesse in the time of war is no newes,
Knowest thou not that it will be bitternesse in the
later end? (Abner to Ioab 2. Sam. 2.) but bitternesse,
and doubled bitternesse in the midst of
peace, this is strange.
            An image, a glasse, a sea of glasse, that all the
people of the earth may stand vpō the shore
of my text, and see the face of their fraile &
vnconstant condition. A man, and the best
of men, a King, & the best of Kings; (I speake
not of Balthazar, but as he in the midst of his
cups, so this) in the midst of his comforts,
seized and surprised at vnawares with a grieuous
disease that added bitternesse vnto bitternesse;
and cut not off the lap of his coate,
(that is) pinched him in a finger or ioynt,
but assaulted the life, in the inmost and strongest
fort it had, and had it in her clutches,
to bring it to the very pit.
            One maruelled that men were so hardy to
aduenture to Seas: why? Cùm multi pereant in
aquis, sith many miscarried in the waters:
He that answered him, maruelled as much
how he durst goe to bed, sith many die in
their beds. Had he nothing to wonder at
but the Sea? I maruell he feared not his

owne flesh, and that he durst trust himselfe
with his owne body, I am sure, it is as fluide
as the Sea. Liquescimus, we melt, we thaw daily:
our life goeth away per stillicidia, as it were
by droppings.2. Sam. 14. 
               Omnes nos velut aquae dilabimur,
we all glide away like water that is spilt,
and cannot be gathered vp againe. Here he
shall find tempests, and gusts, and surges,
and waues, and rockes, and quick-sands,
and gulfes, and sea-monsters, no lesse then at
Sea.
            I wonder that men dare liue in such flesh,
tam putri, & ruinosa domo, so rotten and ruinous
an house; where, not onely the gates,
posternes, and windowes, but euery little
creuis and chinke letteth in death: Looke
how many members and parcels of the body,
so many vessels of sicknesses, receptacles
and harbours of death. Euery Apoplexie in
the head; Swelling in the eare; Bleeding at
the nose; Canker in the mouth; Squinancy in
the throat; Pleurisie in the side; Stone in the
kidney; Cholicke in the belly; may be a
meanes to death.
            I maruell againe why he commeth to
his table, to eate and drinke there, why?

               Cum multi pereant in mensa, sith many die at
their Tables: Did Tarquinius Priscus thinke,
that the bone of a fish going crosse his throte,
should haue choked him? or Sophocles, and
Anacreon, that they should haue died of a raysin
stone? or Fabius a Senatour, that an haire
in a draught of milke should haue bene his
end? or Ruffinus the Consull, that in kembing
his head, the tooth of his Combe entring
the flesh, should haue bene his deaths
wound? or Lucia the daughter of Aurelius,
that her Childe which she bare in her armes,
thrusting a needle into her breast, should haue
shortned her dayes? I could be infinite: So
long as there shall be a man in the world, &
mortalitie, casualtie, corruption to accompanie
that man; there shall be occasion for
this ecce; behold in my peace; when I was most
secure: to the stupor, and terror of all those
that trust too much to their peace.
            
            It is a singular part of the gracious prouidence
of God vpon vs, to hide the houre
of our deaths; as Isaack spake to his sonne,
Gen. 27. Vides quòd senuerim, & ignorem diem
mortis meae: Thou seest I am old, and yet notwithstanding,
I know not the day of my

death: Semper incognitus, vt sit semper suspectus;
that being alwayes vnknowne, we might
alwayes haue it in suspition: and make that vse
of our ignorance, that Cassian aduiseth, Omnis
dies, velut vltimus ordinandus est; to dispose
of euery day, as if it were our last day. Certaine
it is,Gregor. 
               Supremus vitae dies, supremus mundi
dies; the last day of my life, is the last day of
the world to me; for qualis hinc quis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   egreditur,
talis in iudicio repraesentabitur; such as I am
at my death, such shall I be at my iudgment.
And as certaine againe, that it is the greatest
worke in the world, to die, to exchange life
with death; and the best, to die well; as Anacharsis,
being asked, which was the best ship?
That (said he) which is safely arriued. Adde
vnto these the rule of Saint Angustine, Non
potest malè mori, qui benè vixerit; and on the
otherside; vix benè moritur, qui malè vixit;
He cannot die ill, that hath liued well; and
scarcely dieth well, that hath liued ill. These
things conferred; be ye readie prepared for
that day;Exod. 19. 
               Estote parati in diem tertium; that it
may find you in pace, in the peace of God,
and of a good conscience, which passeth all
vnderstanding.
            
               
I told you before, you had three sicknesses,
I tell you now, you haue but three dayes of
your liues: the one of your coming into the
world; the other, of your stay; the last of your
going out.
            Be ready against the third day, the day of
your going forth; which you cannot well
be, except you begin to prouide on the first,
and the second; lest that should betide you
which is bemoned in my text, Ecce, in pace,
amaritudo, amaritudo; Behold, when we
dreampt of peace, we awaked to extremitie
of bitternesse: and being taken in an euill time,
you complaine, as in that mimesis of Saint
Chrysostome, Valete amici, farewell friends, I
must go an vnknowne iourney, by wayes
vnknowne, into Countries farre remote: Vbi
quale diuersorium habiturus sum, angelorum an
daemonum, ignoro: where what lodging I shall
find, amongst Angels, or Diuels, I know not.
            
               Et tu,
               2. Part. 
               complexus amore, eruisti, &c. I am now
come to the second Tabernacle of my text:
wherein you haue Elias, & the manna I spake
of. It containeth two things: first, the redemption:
Eruisti, secondly, the reason or
motiue, Complexus amore.
            
            
               
The recouery so much the sweeter,1. Redemption. by how
much the danger the greater: Transisse de
morte ad vitam,
               Bern. 
               vitae gratiam duplicat, to passe
from death to life is double life: So is the light
more gratefull to him that was in the power
of darknesse; and assurance, to him that despaired
of assurance.
            There was danger enough in the former
clause, for there it was bitternesse, bitternesse,
that is, as the Apostle calleth it, Act. 8. fel amaritudinis,
the very gall of bitternesse: which importeth
a disease, pessimi generis, of the worst
sort, and in the paroxysme, and very height of
it; but now, you haue it amplified by three
circumstances more:
            First,1. Ab obiecto. from the obiect; it striketh not at a
bough, no defluxion in the eye, nor mutilation
of an hand, &c. but is securis ad radicem,
the axe laid to the roote, to hew downe life
it selfe. Eruisti animam.
            
            Secondly,2. Atermino. from the tearme, or, extent: for
it is not the life infested, annoyed, disquieted
alone; but lifted, and heaued at, to be throwne
into the pit: Eruisti è fouea.
            
            Thirdly,3. Abattributo. from the attribute of that pit, for it is
not fouea refugij, or refrigerij; a pit of repose or

comfort, such as Elias went into, and Dauid,
& the Prophets that Obadiah hid, & the Saints
that the world was not worthy of, Hebr. 11.
but fouea corruptionis, consumptionis, putredinis,
a pit of corruption, consumption, and rottennesse.
            
            Take it altogether in the masse and
lumpe, and see what it is, (besides the kind
of the sicknesse, which is not here mentioned.)
First, it is bitter: secondly, bitternesse it
selfe: thirdly, bitternes, put to bitternes; fourthly,
against life; fiftly, to thrust it downe to the
pit: sixtly, the pit of corruption: this being his
case, and then, to be pulled out of the teeth of
death, as Dauid pulled his lambe and his kid out
of the mouth of the Lyon and Beare, was the singular
mercy of God, worthy another Ecce,
as at the first I declared.
            Is it not mercy, (I aske,) to be saued from
death? Death, whensoeuer it shall come vnto
vs, and howsoeuer qualified, the grimnesse
of her visage disguised, yet will it be fearefull
enough. It is dissolutio naturae, the dissolution
of nature, and the dissociation of body
and soule, ancient friends, and of long acquaintance:
Dauid and Ionathan wept, and
kist when they departed.
            
               
When Vzza was smitten dead for putting
his hand to the Arke, 2. Sam. 6. Dauid was
(angrie, shall I say?) troubled, grieued at it,
and called the name of the place, rupturam
vzzae, the breach of Vzzah. I am sure, when
body and soule are sundred, there is ruptura,
and cannot be without commotion, & passion,
Si nulla esset mortis amaritudo, non tanta
esset martyrum fortitudo; if death were not bitter,
Martyrs should want of their honour.
            But what may the motiue be that procured
this deliuerie?2. Motiue. Placuit tibi. I aske not now, with the blessed
Apostle, Vbi conquisitor saeculi? 1. Cor. 1.
where are the wise of the world,Aquilae rationis, Talpae religionis. Eagles for
reason, Mowlewarpes for religion? but Vbi
conquisitor Ecclesiae? the most regenerate, sanctified,
illuminate Contemplatiues of the
Church; Let them say to themselues, as the
Preacher did, Eccle. 7. I haue sought, and sought,
one thing after another, to find out the reason,
and adhuc quaeri anima mea, and yet my soule
seeketh: I haue found a man of a thousand, but
not a woman amongst them all. Giue me leaue
to applie it. If you looke on the part of man
which is as it were the weaker sexe; no reason
can be giuen of this goodnesse of God

towards him: but on the part of God, there
is, one, for a thousand, and in stead of all the
rest: Quoniam volens misericordiam est, Mich. 7.
Because mercie pleaseth him.Dilexisti, Desiderasti, Coniunxisti Cinxisti, Complexus es. So in my text,
placuit tibi, &c. God so desired, and knit, and
conioyned, and girt, and embraced, and couered,
and tooke pleasure and liking to the
life of the King, that death could not hurt
him:Operuisti. The very varietie of reading may stand
for a rich Cōmentarie: but neither tongues,
nor pennes, of men, nor Angels can expresse
the riches of grace, when God is pleased
to shew mercy vpon vs. The sweetnesse
of nature brought forth beneplacitum in
him: pleasure, brought forth loue; Loue,
desire; desire, Vnion; Vnion, embracing:
embracing girdeth close, like a girdle about
the reines; and couereth and keepeth from
hurt, that, that is beloued: In amore haec insunt
omnia.
            
            Before I forsake this part,Animam eruisti. I must note vnto
you two things. First, that in death there
 is no danger to the Soule, no more then was
to the soule of Hezekiah: for anima, in my
text, is not the substance, or essentiall part,
(as principally it signifieth,) but an act and

effect of that soule, to weet, that life, which it
brought to the bodie in dowre, and portion
when she married with it: and when she departeth
from her bodie, she resumeth, and
carrieth away with her that portion againe.
So that, the Soule it selfe, is no way subiect to
the pit.
            
               Occidisti & possedisti?
               1. Reg. 21. said Elias to Ahab. So
saith God vnto death, Hast thou slaine, and
gotten possession too? but of what? the flesh
onely, not the soule: and that flesh shall lie as
a surfet in the stomacke of death: and as
the drunkard, regurgitat bilem suam, so shall
death cast it vp againe Mors is Morsus,
               Senec. death
is but biting not a consuming, and vtter deuouring;
as he that biteth, taketh some, and
leaueth some, so death getteth a morsell of
flesh, as the Kite taketh garbidge from the
dunghill, and the dogge offall from the
shambles; but the soule, it medleth not with.
I cannot therfore better compare the graue,
then to the hony combe, wherein is both
hony and waxe. The hony of the soule is taken
out, the waxe of the flesh remaineth behinde,
till the resurrection of iust men.
            But as touching the flesh, the life whereof 
               
is properly aimed at, here is her lot, her end,
fouea corruptionis, the pit of corruption. The
Riuers haste to the Seas, Stars to the West,
Man to the pit:Iob 30. it is domus constituta omni viuenti,
the house appointed to euery liuing
man; domus Conuentionis, the house of Parliament,Eccles. 12.
for all estates to meet in; domus saeculi,
the house of perpetuitie, till Christs second
coming. Solum mihi superest sepulchrum, saith
Iob, cap. 17. He is sure of nothing but his
graue. It were a worthy Epitaph, to be set
vpon the monument of euery man, I haue
nothing but a graue: or if you wil truly reade it,
Sepulcra, mea sunt, Graues, are mine. What
need more then one? Yes, A Graue for his
bodie, A Graue for his vanities, A Graue for
his riches, A Graue for his hopes: all is buried
with him. He that shall say, I haue houses,
and lands, and vineyards, and fields, and gardens,
deceiueth himselfe, and the truth is not
in him; he hath nothing certaine but his
graue. When Lazarus was raised out of his
graue againe, what brought he out with him,
sauing fascias sepulchrales, & sudaria, his napkins
and Graue-cloathes?
            The Astronomers maid laughed at her

master, that stood gazing at the starres, and
saw not the ditch that was before his feet. I
know not what castles we are euer building
in the aire, and we will saile vpon the
mountaines, and make our nests with the
Eagles, and touch the stars with our heads,
when there is fouea, a pit, before our feet,
which we neuer thinke of. Proud earth and
ashes, terra calcans terram, earth so treading,
and ietting vpon the earth, as if the earth
should neuer tread vpon vs; when notwithstanding,
this base and contemptible element
(the sediment and dregs of the world)
shall set her foot vpon our faces. Do we remember
the pit, the land of forgetfulnesse, the
regions of darknesse, the place of silence, wherein
our proud, and pampered, and stall-fed flesh
must lodge? we that eat the fattest, and finest
of the earth, and deuoure whole Countries,
as the Oxe licketh vp the grasse; yea, beasts
will not serue our turnes; we eate vp Man,
deuoure a man and his heritage,
               Ecclus. 13. 
               Mich. 2. pascua diuitum
sunt pauperes, the poore are the pasture
of the rich; do we beare in our minds foueam
exedentem, consumptionis, the pit that shall
eat, and consume our selues? we that lie and

rot in the dung of our sinnes, (our flesh indeed
is so rotten vpon our backs, with foule
& loathsome diseases, that peece will scarce
hang vnto peece, so as our very bodies are
alreadie become the graues of the liuing) do
we remember foueam putredinis? the pit of
corruption and rottennesse, whereinto wee
are going? when, albeit from the body of
a dead Lion, there came bees and hony: and
so from the bodie of a dead horse, droanes,
(they say) and from the body of a dead asse,
hornets; yet from the bodie of a dead man,
nothing but wormes and filthinesse. Haereditabit
serpentes, bestias, & vermes, Ecclus. 10. he
shall inherit serpents, beasts and wormes:
nay, haereditabunt, they shall inherit him; the
Serpent gapeth for his soule, Beasts for his substance,
that shall reuell in his goods, Wormes
for his flesh.
            
               Quia proiecisti.
               3. Part. I am now at the last Tabernacle,
wherein you haue Christ, with his benefits,
and the Tables of the Gospell; and therein,
as I told you at the first, are likewise two
things: First, the cause of his bitternes, sinnes;
Secondly, the discharge of that cause, For
thou hast cast, &c.
            
            
               
I haue bene lately vpon both these
points,
                  At White-Hall. in the hearing of many of this auditorie:
I shall say the lesse now. But Sinne, the
sicknesse of the soule, is the reall and radicall
cause of all bodily sicknesse. I alledge but
one storie, from the 1. Reg. 17. The widow
of Zareptha cometh to Elias, (her sonne being
then dead) and saith vnto him: What
haue I to do with thee, thou man of God? art thou
come vnto me to call my sinnes to remembrance?
She was an excellent woman, and her praise
is in the Gospell: when she had but a little
meale, & a little oyle in a cruise, and was gathering
two stickes, to make a widowes fire, and to
dresse for her sonne and her, that they might eate
and die; yet vpon the bidding of the Prophet,
bring vnto me, and first vnto me, such was her
faith, that she did it: yet she imputeth the
sicknesse and death of her child, to her sins.
Vespasian was of another minde; being sicke,
and out of hope to liue, he threw the curtaines
aside, and spread his hands vnto
heauen, and complained of his gods, immerenti
sibi vitam eripi, that he deserued not
to die; had neuer committed any thing
in his whole life, whereof he repented, but

one; he had so much the more cause to repent
him.
            I hope, when Hezekiah prayeth at the third
verse, O Lord, I beseech thee, remember how I
haue walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, &c. He speaketh but secundum quid,
not simply; and comparatè, compared with others,
importing affectum, and profectum, rather
desire, and endeuour so to do, then any
perfection; and that he had no meaning, to
thinke that he had no sinne; for it plainly appeareth
in his owne speech, by the reason he
giueth, that he thought sinne to be the cause
of his sicknesse. Eruisti, quia proiecisti, first he
remitteth his sinnes; (which was the course
of our Sauiour in the Gospell) and then releeueth
him of his sicknesse.Math. 9.
            
            
                But when I looke vpon the cure, the remoue
of the cause, I cannot but remember
what God spake vnto Abraham, Gen. 15. Ego
merces tua magna nimis, I am thine exceeding
great reward: what, vnto Dauid, 2. Sam. 12.
I haue done this, and that for thee; & si parua
sunt ista, and if these things were too small,
I would haue added much more. Iust as the Apostle
writeth, Ephes. 3. abundantly much more thē
                  
we either aske or thinke. For did Hezekiah
craue the remission of his sinnes? In his
whole song there is not a word, a syllable
of it: You haue heard of his truth and righteousnesse,
and perfect heart, no mention of
sinne: and all his petition, and moane, and
teares that he spent, was for his life alone.
God granteth him that, & aliquid ampliùs,
and somewhat more, & aliquid melius, something
better; for admit he had died, yet had
his case bene good enough; Mori non timeo,
quia ad bonum Dominum vado, I feare not to
die, because I go to a good Lord. But if I
die in my sinne, if that circumstans peccatum,
Hebr. 12. cleaue to my soule at my going
hence, it will be as mill-stones vnto it, to
plunge it into the bottomlesse pit of eternall
destruction: therefore besides, and before
the cure of his sicknesse, he pardoneth his
sinnes.
            Wherein he dealeth with Hezekiah, as he
did with Moses, Num. 17. when he bad him
bring twelue rods for the twelue Tribes, and
lay them in the Tabernacle before the testimonie;
and the rod for that Tribe which the Lord
would chuse, should bud. When Moses came

to reuiew the rods, the rod of Aaron had not
onely budded, that is, chipt, or broken the
rinde; but the buds were swolne, and fully
brought forth, and after buds, blossomes and
flowers, and after these, ripe Almonds.
            
            So befell it Hezekiah; so shall it all the elect
of God, who know no more what to aske,
then Hezekiah did; he thought of no more,
but the bud of his bodily health; but he giueth
him withall, the ripest, and sweetest
fruit of all others, forgiuenesse of his sinnes:
and (me thinketh) he fulfilleth all the degrees
of that former storie; for, let the pardon
of sinne, be germen, the bud; and the
pardon of all his sinnes, be gemma, the knot
or swelling bud;Peccata omnia post tergum proiecisti. and the leauing them behind
his backe, flos, the blossome; but the
casting them behinde his backe, as if he were
angry that they prest before his face, is amygdala,
the fruit, more then all the rest. He that
will purge the body, leaueth no dregs of the
sicknesse, for feare of relapse: so is the pardon
of God, a plenary pardon of all his sins:
and whereas before they were vnder those
pure eyes that cannot behold wickednesse,
now they are set behinde his backe, that he may

not behold them: and not onely set, or left,
(for then, Clamabunt post nos; they will follow
God againe) but throwne, as stones from a
sling, and, with violence offered to his iustice,
banished in such sort, as that they may neuer
returne againe: so speaketh he (in effect) Psal.
103. Quantum distat ortus ab occasu, Looke how
farre the East is from the West, so farre hath he
set our sinnes from vs: so Mich. 7. proijcit in profundum
mare, he taketh our sins and throweth
them into the bottome of the sea.
            
            You haue heard of Hezekiah the good
King of Iudah,
               Application and his double condition, the
one which nature and sinne brought vpon
him, sicknesse, and approch to death: the other,
what grace and indulgence did for
him: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                (had I almost said
with the Apostle, Galat. 4.) these things were
spoken in an allegorie, sure I am they were
spoken propter aliud, for another purpose,
not for Hezekiah's sake. But as Ezekiel
(Ezech. 4.) lieth and sleepeth vpon his left
and right side, and maketh him bread of
moulter corne, and baketh it in bullockes
dung, &c. to shew the siege and famine to
come: So haue I chosen this storie of Hezekiah,
               
to be but a modell and patterne of
those things which hapned to our gracious
KING.
            
               Hezekiah our King,Hezekias. our religious King,
who though he restored not religion, as
Hezekiah did, (which he found restored to
his hand) yet he maintaineth, and propugneth
religion, and spared not the high places
no more then Hezekiah did, I meane the
throne of Antichrist himselfe, not that brasen
Serpent, pearched vpon his pole of supremacie
aboue all the Kings of the earth, and the
whole Church of God: And as famous to
the world, (he will be in succeeding ages)
for his miraculous deliuerance from that
generall gunpowder-massacre, as euer Hezekiah
was for his miraculous deliuerance
from Zenacherib the King of Assur; in a
night, was that host discomfited, and in a
night, the labours and hopes of many
moneths defeated: I am sure, as renowned
as euer Hezekiah was, propter scripturam, for
his bookes written and published to the
world, in defence of the Gospell and Church
of God.
            Not to recede from the tearmes of myEcce in pace
               
text, I am sure he is a King of peace. And
here you may stand, as at a pillar or moniment
by the high-way side, and take a view
of it. Ecce, in pace: it is worthy admiration,
that for sixteene yeares space, (to keepe the
phrase of this Story, 2. Reg. 19.) there hath
not an enemy shot an arrow, nor come with
a shield, nor raised vp a rampart, against any
Citie or towne of his kingdome: (in an
happie houre be it spoken.) Hath your Manna,
the meane time, bred wormes? or do the
Quailes come out of your nostrels? or are you offended
with your peace? Hath it made you
proud, and petulant, and lasciuious, and
improuident, and vnprouided against your
Enemies? Where is the fault? I must answer
with Christ, Duritia, malitia cordium vestorum,
the hardnesse, the badnes of your own hearts;
The Manna was good, the Quailes good, the
peace good, both in him that bestowed it,
and in him that procured it; your selues
naught that vsed it not aright. Cast but
your eyes backe to the latter part of the
reigne of that Mayden Queene, (the maiden-head
and honour of whose gouernment
was neuer stained) whose bones are in peace,

her soule in blisse, and her name in eternall
remembrance; thinke vpon one poore and
beggerly warre, (as the Apostle named poore
and beggerly elements,) vile, seruile bellum, rather
rebellion then warre; with beasts, rather
then men, or men, after the manner of
beasts, earthed in their thickets and bogges,
as Foxes in their holes; (to speake nothing
of the treasure it wasted,) how much of our
English bloud, of the very flower and prime
of our gentrie, that one warre suckt out: and
then tell me if peace, for her owne sake, (without
the weedes that grow vp with it,) be to
be disliked?
            All this while I haue bene vpon the subiect
of my text alone, Hezekiah our King,
without adding any attribute, or telling you
what he hath suffered. Now it followeth,
Hezekiah our King was sicke, and sicke as
Hezekiah was,Aegrotauit. 
               vsque ad mortem, euen vnto
the death; his sicknesse was bitternesse, bitternesse,
downe to the very side and mouth of
the pit,Marke 5. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Iairus his daughter, he
was at the last cast; 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , as Paul
spake of Epaphroditus, Philip. 2. at the next
doore, the nearest neighbor to death, (I may

now by the blessing of God speake home;
Habet praeteritarum calamitatum secura recordatio
delectationem quandam, when a danger
is gone and past, it is pleasure to repeate it:

                  Libet sinistras res meas percurrere.
               ) I go forward
with that text, the prouidence of God
hath euen fitted it to my mouth; I say he
was sicke to the death, but God had mercy vpon
him, and not vpon him alone, but also vpon
vs and the whole kingdome,Philip. 2. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               lest we should haue sorrow vpon sorrow;
sorrow, for the losse of our Queene, (like
the losse of our eyes, our bowels) his Ladie
and Consort, as his rib pluckt from his side,
the halfe of his soule torne from him; and
sorrow for the losse of himselfe.
            I am yet in the sicknesse. It was bitternesse,
bitternesse; and yet to the children of God, in
the fruite and effect of it, dulcedo, dulcedo,
sweetnesse aboue the hony and hony comb.
It is a paradoxe in nature what I shall deliuer:
Would you looke for grapes from
thornes? or water from a rocke? or oyle from
a stone? or good out of euill? or sweetnesse
out of bitternesse? that is, comfort out of
sicknesse?Nazianz. Yet so it is. Morbo crucior, & gaudeo,

non quia crucior, sed vt alijs patientiae sim
magister, I am sicke and tortured with sicknesse,
yet am I glad, not for the torture, but
for being a patterne of patience to others.
Antigonus made the like vse of his sicknesse,
Nihilo peiùs fuit, hic morbus submonuit nè animo
efferamur, cum simus mortales: I am not
the worse for it, my sicknesse putteth me in
mind not to be proud, seeing I am mortall

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , was the saying of
Croesus another king in Herodotus, rich euen
to a Prouerb: My sufferings, grieuous though
they are, are my lessonings; which Lipsius
well rendred, nocumenta, documenta; and
Gregory not worse then he, detrimenta corporum,
incrementa virtutum, paine to the body,
gaine to the soule. The bed of a sicke man
is as a schoole, a doctorall chaire of learning
and discipline; then are his words written
with an adamant claw, and go deepe into
the minds of them that heare them; then is
his tongue, the tongue of the learned, as touched
with a cole from the altar; and his
mouth the veine and fountaine of life, when
the soule is weaned from the world, the flesh
mortified, the spirit consecrated to God, and

himselfe rapt vp, as it were, into the third
heauens, where he seeth and heareth those
things which he neuer saw nor heard aforetime.
            There are that are able to report his
Swans songs, the last before his death, (for
ought appeared to the contrary) how he behaued
himselfe towards God and man, and
acted both King and Priest; and setting himselfe
in articulo mortis, in the very ioynt and
poynt of dying: Looking backwards to his
life past, and forwards to the life to come,
neglected not any thing, neither of his priuate
nor of the publicke State, with many diuine
meditations, holy professions, religious
promises, prudent instructions, which (for
my part) I wish they were scriptura Hezekiae
regis, brought to the light of the world, that
all might vnderstand them.
            But what becometh of this sicknesse?Eruisti. remaineth
it still? No. For the sweet wood of
the mercies of God, was cast into the waters
of Marah, and altered their bitternesse.
            And so must I alter my text. Iordan is now
gone backward. Behold in my peace, bitternesse,
bitternesse, (said Hezekiah.) Behold

in our bitternesse, bitternesse, peace, must I say.
Ecce euangelizo vobis gaudium magnum quod
erit omni ciuitati, (as the Angel in the Gospel)
behold I bring you tidings of great ioy,
which shall be to the whole Land; and God
say Amen to it; that I may euer be as Ahimaaz
2. Sam. 18. to bring you good tidings of
such things. His soule is deliuered from the pit
of corruption. And we trust that God hath added
to his yeares, as he did to the yeares of
Hezekiah, we pray that it may be, and likely
it is, if we adde to our prayers, that God will
adde to his yeares. If we aske life for him,
God shall giue him a long life; and after that
long life ended, A life for euer and euer.
Psalme 21.
            But of all other things you will aske the
meanes how he was deliuered.Placuit tibi. He wanted
not any thing that the earth could minister
vnto him, neither the helpe of learned and
painfull Physicians, (benedictio Domini super
eos, &c. Psal. 129. the Lord prosper them,
we wish them good lucke in the name of the
Lord,) nor the intercessions of his faithfull
Subiects, that haue bowed the knees both of
their bodies and hearts, and with their prayers,

as an incense in the morning, and the lifting
vp of their hands as an euening sacrifice,
they haue pierced through the clouds, and
knocked at the gate of his mercy at midnight,
and giuen him no rest on behalfe of
their King,2. Reg. 2. 
               Our father, our father, the Chariots
and horsemen of Israel, is going from vs, O
Lord spare him.
            
               Ariston was a good King, but wanted Issue:
and the people desirous to haue one of his
race to gouerne after him, begged him Issue
of their gods. That sonne so obtained they
named Demaratus,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Votis populi expetitus. because the people had
gained him by their prayers. I doubt not
but our King was another Demaratus, begged
by his people at the hands of God; or rather
(according to his owne name) that our
Iacob was another Israel, and that he and his
people wrestled with God by their earnest
supplications, to gaine a blessing of health
from him: and although, as to Israel, a sinew
of his thigh be yet shrunke,Genes. 32. that is, the ability
& strength of his body somwhat abated; we
trust that in time God wil also restore that.
But whatsoeuer I haue yet named, is but
a second and subordinate meanes: and vaine
               
(we know) is the helpe of man, our helpe must
stand in the name of the Lord which hath made
heauen and earth, or we shall neuer be holpen;
therefore the prime, predominant, and supreme
cause, that our King was deliuered,
was the same that Hezekiah found, Placuit tibi,
dilexisti, &c. the good pleasure and loue
of God.
            Now the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush, euer dwell with our King, and marrie
him vnto him with euerlasting mercy and compassion.
The couenant of day and night be broken,
but the couenant of his peace with our King and
his kingdomes be neuer broken. Fathers forget
their sonnes, and nurses their sucking
babes, and mothers the fruite of their wombes.
The Lord neuer forget our King, nor his seed
after him, nor the people committed to
their charge.
            By this time you may ghesse at the reason
of our meeting (so many thousand of soules
together in one place:) though not in the
house of the Lord, I grant, yet in the courts
of the Lords house, euen in the midst of thee
ô Ierusalem, in the fairest and fittest theatre
we haue for such purposes, to make it like

               Araunah his threshing floore, a place for an
altar of our thankfulnesse, whereon we are
to offer the Calues of our lips; our reasonable
seruice; an Eucharisticall sacrifice for the life
of our King, whom God hath so lately rescued
from the fangs and throte of destruction:Sueton.
that as when the tidings came to Rome
of Germanicus his better amendment, (they
had newes before of his desperate sicknesse,
which strucke them all to the heart; and Germanicus
was an excellent Prince, beloued of
the people, and one that said of himselfe afterwards
at the time of his death, Flebunt
Germanicum etiam ignoti, Strangers will misse
and bewaile Germanicus,) they ran into their
Capitoll, men, women and children, and rent
open the doores thereof, and offered their
votes, and filled the whole Citie with the
noise of their congratulation, Salua Ciuitas,
salua Patria, saluus Germanicus, the City is safe,
the country safe, Germanicus safe: So come we
into this our Capitoll, our greatest Panegyris,
inured with the like meetings, (hither came
that Lady of euer-blessed memory,Ann. 1588. to giue
thankes vnto God for her victorie ouer the
Spaniard) with such frequency of people as

you see, with such feruencie of heart to
blesse the name of our God, and congratulate
our selues, because Salua Ciuitas, salua Patria,
saluus Iacobus, the City is safe, the kingdome
safe, our King safe. And as before that,
whē 
               Augustus was likewise recouered, (whom
they styled Patrem patriae, the Father of the
countrey) to shew their loue to their Emperour,Aere collato.
they layd their purses together, and set
vp a Statue to Antonius Musas the Physician
that recouered him, and placed it by the
Image of Aesculapius: So we in affection and
loue to our King, though we giue not titles to
men, and honour the Physician but with that
honour that is due vnto him, yet, Aere collato,
ioyning our hearts and soules together, as if
we were all but one man, we set vp our Statue,
and (if it be possible) raise our Colossus
of thankfulnesse, that may reach vp to the
heauen of heauens, vnto that great God
that hath created the Physician, and taught
him his wisdom, and made the medicines of
the earth to take away the paines of men. Ecclesiasticus
38.
            
            There is but one word more in my text,Peccata.
and so an end. But as it standeth in the hindmost

and dishonourablest part of my text,
as the lees lie in the bottome of the vessell,
the sting in the taile of the Scorpion, so it is
the worst word. It is that, that troubleth Israel
(as Ahab asked Elias, but Elias charged
vpon him) and vtinam ascindantur (say I,Gal. 5.)
I would they were cut off that trouble vs.
Estne pax Iehu?
               2. Reg. 9. (said Iehoram vnto him:) Is it
peace Iehu? What peace, so long as thy mothers
fornications and her witchcrafts are yet in force?
It is Doeg the Edomite that killed the Prophets
of the Lord.1. Sam. 22. I knew it (said Dauid) when Doeg
the Edomite was there. It is Iudas at the board.
Will you know the Iudas, the Doeg, the Iezabel,
the Ahab, the mischiefe, the bane, the
ruine, the wrecke of a kingdome? It is
sinne: that which brought sicknesse vpon
Hezekiah, and will bring it againe; that
which God pardoned to Hezekiah (proiecisti
post tergum;) and the Lord be so mercifull to
vs as to grant vs our pardon. But it is a fearefull
doome which is pronounced, Prouerb. 8.
Propter peccata terrae, erunt multi Principes eius:
For the sinnes of the Land, there shall be many
Princes thereof. Many in the cluster, and
at once; as they cry in the Gospell, Here is

               Christ, and there Christ, we know not where;
so, this your King, and that your King, we
know not who: Many in the change and
succession;Hos. 13. 
               Dabo Regem in furore meo, & auferam
in indignatione mea: I will giue a King in
my rage, and take him away in my wrath,
giuing and taking both in displeasure: either
of both were bad enough, and our
sinnes are accommodated to beare either
iudgement, for they are peccata terrae, not the
sinnes of single soules, but the sinnes of the
Land. Our Sacriledge, not the Sacriledge of
Achan; our oppression, of Ahab; our adulterie,
of an Israelite with a Madianitish-woman;
our pride, of Iesabel which painted alone;
our effeminatenesse, of Absolon which set
more by the haire of his head, then his
whole body was worth; our drunkenesse,
of Nabal; our vsury, of whom shall I say? (I
mistake my selfe: there is not an Vsurer
named in person in the whole booke of
God: their names are written in the earth,
and hardly will they find them written in
the booke of life. The Lord be mercifull
to them:) these were the sinnes of priuate
soules, and haue borne their vengeance. Anima

quae peccauerit ipsa morietur. Ours are cō
               mon,
Epidemicall, popular and populous
sinnes,Senec. both in number and measure, peccant,
& publicant, we sinne and delight to sinne,
sinne and declare our sinnes as Sodome. Feare we
not the sequele? The yeare hath bene fatall
already for the death of an Arch-Duke,
an Empresse, and an Emperour (they say;) and
to looke nearer home, of a great, and glorious
Queene, since the dayes of our Deborah which
ruled in Israel 44. yeares, not her like so farre
as the world is Christian; Great by Parentage,
Great by Marriage, Greater by her Graces,
the beloued and honoured of God and
Man, and my most gracious Mistresse. 
                  Nescis
quid serus vesper ferat:
                we are not yet
come to the euening of the yeare; we haue
had rumors of warres and commotions,
and Earth-quakes; one the most prodigious
birth that these latter ages of the world haue
brought forth; and a signe from heauen
that dazeled our eyes, and might haue daunted
our hearts, but slighted in such sort, as
if we had seene but the shining of a Glow-worme:
I feare not the euents, what hath
bene, nor the portents, what may be; I feare

our portentuous and prodigious sinnes,
which are as significant and prognosticant
of the wrath of God, as any of these wonders.
            We haue yet our King, Serus in coelum redeat,
long and long may we haue him: who
may say vpon better ground then euer Nerua
did,Dion. 
               Se nihil fecisse in regni administratione, quo
minùs possit, deposito imperio, tutò priuatus viuere;
that he hath not done any thing sithence
he came to the gouernment, but laying his
Scepter and Crowne aside, he might liue as
a priuate man without controlement: I
will not ouerflow. But may I without piacle
forget in the very last scaene of one of his
latest actions amongst vs before his departure
hence, (which might haue bene his
last, if God had not fauoured vs) what he
then did? I say not that he rose early, and
sate long in a Court of honour and iustice,
(yet giue me a King vpon the earth, that euer
with so much sollicitude and zeale, spent
so many dayes, and so many houres in a day
in the hearing and examining of one cause.
Of one of their Lewesses in France, they
write, that he sate in a Cloyster from morning

to euening, and lost his dinner to heare
the quarrels of his Monks,) of this I speake
not; nor that he added in the close of his
businesse, that he would make it his studie
night and day, and neither slumber nor
sleepe till he had brought to light the Non
constats, as he tearmed them, which were not
so liquid and cleare as the rest: I meane of a
speech of his during the time that that cause
was in hearing, (I report it in the presence of
many and matchlesse witnesses) when taking
his hat from his head, that he might
do it not without ceremonie, remembring
that tribunall seate whereat he must one day
stand, turning to his sonne who sate by his
side, and out of regard to him, that it might
not be said hereafter, he had bene the child
of an ignoble parent; whatsoeuer his other
sinnes were, wherewith he confessed he was
fraught as the vilest caytiffe vpon earth, yet
for doing of iustice, his minde and purpose
therein, (pardon the zeale and exuberancie
of the speech) he needed not the mercie of
God.Claud. 
               
                  En Princeps, en orbis apex,
                Shew me
his like againe.
            I say, we haue yet our King, & adolescentem

secundum, Eccles. 4. a Prince by his side, quasi florem
rosarum in diebus vernis, Ecclus. 50. as a
prime-rose in the Spring season, sprowting
and spreading himselfe vnder his boughes.

                  Accipiat patris exemplum;
               
               Idem. we haue root and
branch, rem and spem, a morning and a midday
Sunne, the first and the latter raine, or
(to keepe to the story which I haue in hand)
as Zenacherib told Hezekiah,
               2. Reg▪ 18. 
               Thou saist thou
hast eloquence, but counsell & strength are for the
warre. We haue a King for counsell, and a
Prince (if God blesse him) for strength, a
King to instruct, and a Prince to execute:
Onely beware of your sins, peccata terrae, the
sinnes of the Land; breake them off with repentance,
lament them betimes, that they
make not you to lament, when it is too late:
when the lamentation shall be, not of priuate
soules, but like that of Hadadrimmon in
the fields of Megiddon, Zach. 12. when lugebunt
familiae, familiae seorsim, all the families of the
Land shall mourne, the familie of the house
of Dauid apart, and of Nathan apart, and of
Leui apart, &c. But whither am I going?
Wee came to reioyce in the safetie of our
King, and in the name of our God to set vp

our banners of ioy, as in the 20. Psal. and we
pray for our King, as that people did for
theirs, in the words of the same Psalme, that
God will continue his blessing, and perfect
that good worke which he hath begun vppon
him.Psal. 20. 1. 
               The Lord heare thee in the day of thy
trouble, the name of the God of Iacob defend thee.
Send thee helpe from his Sanctuarie, and strengthen
thee out of Sion. Remember all thy offerings,
and accept thy burnt sacrifices. Grant thee
according to thy hearts desire, and
fulfill all thy petitions.
            
            AMEN.
         
      
   