
      
         
            
            
            THE Triall of Truth, wherein are diſcouered three greate enemies vnto mankinde, as Pride, Priuate grudge, and Priuate gaine, which corruptions are the diſturbers of 
                  ••••
               s, cities, common weales, and peoples.
            Jmprinted at London at the three Cranes in the vintree, by Thomas Dawſon, and Thomas Butter. 1580.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the moſte great and higheſt ſoucraigne Chriſte IESVS.
            
               HAuing written this ſmall Treatiſe vnder the protectiō of thee moſt reuerend, moſt ſweete, and almightie IESV (which I did begin with intention to lyne out and directe a way vnto thee the author of all trueth and goodneſſe) taking the cauſe vppon the greateſt abuſes of the worlde, raigning and raging euery where at this day: and continuing, concluded the ſame with exhortation of amendemēt of life according to thine expreſſe worde and commandements, aſwell by thine owne ſelfe pronounced out of thy moſt ſacred mouthe, at what time thou wert conuerſaunt in this miſerable vale, and anguiſhed with the iniquities of Ieruſulem, Coraſm, Bethſaida, the whole land of Iuda, yea and

all the worlde, and continually be fore that by the holy Prophetes which haue bin ſince the world began, whoſe bookes are ſo ful of declamatiō againſt ſinne: and like argumentes to exhort the retourning vnto the Lorde with haſte, and ſo laborious to prepare the way vnto thee. The greateſt matter thē reſted in hand to whom I ſhould direct the ſame, who might take the protection in hand of this my woorke to defend it againſt the maleuolent and malicious worldlings, who furniſhed with all the ſuggeſtions of Satan that olde enemy, who ſeaſeth nullum non mouere lapidem againſt thee and thy truthe: Reſting vpon this conſideration, I founde the great men of the world were buſied, the richemen had no diſpoſition, the meane men were afearde, the ſimple men might anſwer me, they could not iudge. And ſo not to trouble the great, nor to hazard the ſmall, I determined to offer the ſame vnto thee (OIESV) which I preſent vnto thy Diuine Maieſtie with bowed knees, ioyned handes, and all

ſimplicitie of mind, beſeeching thee mercifully to looke vpon mine infirmities who for the multitude of my ſinnes am vnworthy to lifte vp mine eyes to thy mercy ſeate, and vnable to imagine any thing worthy of thine acceptance, but ſtayed on the foundation of thy worde, wherein it appeareth how thou diddeſt accepte of the widowes myte, and how thou diddeſt condemne the ſeruant of ſloth for hyding his tallent, are ſufficient aſſurāces of thy fauourable, fatherly and comfortable acceptance to ſuch as with good intent of the fruites of their labour yelde aught vnto thee, as ſacrifice proceeding from the puritie of hearte whereof thou onely ar
                  •
                the ſearcher, vnto whoſe tuition I doe moſt humbly ſubmit my ſelf body and ſoule.
         
         
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               REuerend Reader, after it had pleaſed God to touch me diuers waies, to what intent I know not (to reforme I hope) I cōmitted me vnto the ſame our eternal God, who pronoū
               ceth himſelfe to bee the way, the truth, & the life, & vnder his protection and fauourable aſſiſtance, I determined as tyme would giue me leaue to proceed & try by my trauel & obſeruance a ſtraighter courſe of life, & for my better proceeding therin for mine own inſtructiōs, I beganne to cōpare & make difference betwixt the ſpirit of truth & the ſpirit of errour, & hauing collected ſundry notes to the intent aforeſaid, as I paſſed by & iudged thē ought worth, I ſet thē down to helpe memory with intētiō to haue brought thē into fourme to the abſoluing of the matter which I had in hand. Whervpō a friend of myne viziting one at my chamber, and finding me ſo ſolitary exerciſed and peruſing my notes conceaued ſo good liking of myne indeuour & the diſcourſe

therof, as hee did not onely intreat me to perſeuer therin, but afterwards at ſundry times very earneſtly required me to put the ſame in print: inſomuch as after my often denial has importunacy was ſuch, that vnleſſe I coulde haue bene content to hazard his frieudſhip & beare the greate reproche of ingratitude, I might not auoid him, and ſo oppreſſed yelded & graunted. Whervnto I did the rather incline, conſidering myne imminent danger ſurpriſed with deadly ſickneſſe, ioyned with diſpoſitiōto do ſome thing plauſible to the good. In which my meaning by deferring thereof I might haue beene preuented, ſeing the lyfe of man is ſo vncertaine, & thus by that neceſſity ioyned with good wil like the poore farmer who plucketh the frute before it bee ſeaſonable or ripe, becauſe he wold bee ſaide to haue preſented of the firſt frute of the yōg ſapling, I was forced to publiſh this myne abortiue yō
               gling ful of faults & blemiſhes, in parte wherof as I cannot excuſe my ſelfe, ſo muſte I needes impute ſome fault too the Printer notwithſtanding howſoeuer it fal out, the giuers mind, and not the thing is that which is preſented: which conſtruction of this my ſimple labour, if I ſhal receaue at your friendly hāds in this work, that might haue required

a workman of greateſt skil to haue treated, I ſhal think my ſelf happy: & ymagining I haue already ſo done, I wil vſe no further intreaty heerin, then I thinke standeth with good manners, which conſiſteth in feweſt woordes vttered with beſt meaning, the frute hereof ſhal be that al in general may receaue the vſe of that which I had written for myne owne obſeruance and priuate inſtruction, wherby euery one may be moued to the conſider atiō of their faultes to the diſmaſquing of theyr yll colloured actions, and bee appointed to dewe regarde of the heanenly manſion prepared vnto the rightuouſe for their euerlaſting cō
               fort. In which reſpect I called this little booke the Tryal of Trueth, leauing the whole contents therof to the worlde, and the cenſure to the good. Beſeeching the Almighty that it may pleaſe him in his mercy to giue vnto euery one that profeſſe his name, an vnderſtanding hart, to the attainment of a true iudgement: As that after this our pilgrimage and this life ended, we may together be made partakers of the life eternal.
            
               Edw. Knight.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The Tryall of Trueth.
            
               THree thinges vndid the Romans raigne viz. Young heades, Priuate grudge, and Priuate gaine, as the principall cauſes of the deſtruction of that great Empire. And I doe greatly lament it, whileſt I do behold ſo great euils in this our age, raging among the people euery where, in ſuch lamentable maner, that what true Chriſtian liuing is there not touched wt the due conſideration of the deformitte of the people: but that if hee had not a flood of teares, hee coulde doe no leſſe then ſhed them foorth in the beholding ſuch dayly prouoking and irritating of God too his heauie wrath, for theyr ſo grecuous diſobedience, and concempt, committed againſt him and his worde. As the Prophet Ieremie was mooued and ſore greued with the beholding of the ſinnes and wickednes of the people committed

againſt God in that former age, inſomuche as he brake foorth into theſe ſpeaches, All my b
                  •
               nes ſhake for very feare of the Lorde, 
                  〈…〉
                woorde, becauſe Ieremie. 24. the land 
                  〈…〉
                Adulterers, and through 
                  〈…〉
                mourneth. Yee and that way 
                  〈…〉
               , is wicked and th
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               othing like the holy 
                  〈…〉
               . Verily is I 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
               kedneſſe of this our 
                  〈…〉
                ſinnes of that 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  ••
               ould euery of vs bluſhe a
                  ••
                
               
                  〈…〉
                therea
                  •
                vnleſſe we be (as it 
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •
               eede 
                  〈…〉
                ſort of vs 
                  〈…〉
                hardened and ſet againſt the 
                  ••
               orde 
                  〈…〉
                manifeſt and 
                  〈…〉
                contempt.
            Wherefore it behooueth to rowſe our ſelues our of the drowſy ſleepe of ſecurity and to crie with this good Prophet, Turne thou vs good Lord, ſo ſhall wee be turned, Conuert thou vs, and ſo ſhall wee be conuerted, and ſo become carefull 
                  〈◊〉
                appeaſe Gods high diſpleaſure, wh
                  ••
               e 
                  〈◊〉
                his Omnipotencie doth forbeare in his mercy, from proceeding to iuſtice looking for a time of repentance

and amendemente of all ſuche as ſeeme to be plunged in ſin and wickedneſſe, and ſo fa
                  ••
               e from true returning to God; as it appereth that there are many ſuche, who neyther doe reſpecte theyr owne harmes, nor yet doe regarde the plagues threatned generally for ſinne, which may happen vnloked for, at what time the wicked and diſobedient may not haue time to ſay, That the Lord is God, which no man can doe, but by the holy Ghoſte. In the meane time it is to be noted how many people, doe meaſure their vnruly affections by the libertie of the time, ſaying, the day of the Lorde is farre from vs. Vnto, ſuche ſtiffnerked people, the Prophet Ezechicll writeth Ezechi. 18. thus, Ther is a by word amōg you, Tuſh the day of the Lordes far of, but that bywoorde I ſhall make to ceaſſe, ſayth the Lorde. And yet euer
                  •
                man proſecuteth his owne wayes, and corrupt affectious, diſcouering their owne ſham
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                haſting theyr owne deſtruction, whichis much to be feared, wyllas haſtily fall, vnleſſe that the more ſpeedye haſte. bee

made in returning to God from all ſuch wickedneſſe, as doeth not onely infect the bodies, but alſo doeth diſtemper the ſoules of men. The due conſideration whereof hath mooued many godly perſons to deſire to be looſed out of the body of this life, for that they haue founde the ſame the ſtage of all ſorowe, care and calamitie, for aſſoone as one miſery and trouble is paſſed, an other commeth by & by in place, and yet the firſt during to the diſmaying of the afflicted, albeit ſuch is the way that leadeth vnto Chriſt, to eate the bread and drinke the drinke of affliction. But ſuche doctrine may hardly bee indured of the worldlye minded: for mans repugnancie hath alwayes been ſuch, as neither gods lawes nor publique authoritie, coulde euer keep the people in their due obedience: for the maintenance, and fenſing in of Chriſtian amitie, as the very boundes of peace. Inſomuche as it is nowe a common ſpeach, that the world is bad, which may not bee denied, and it followeth that the people are much worſe, for it is true

that the worlde is the people. In whoſe conuerſation if there might appeare amendement, the worlde that now ſomuch is complained of, would ſoone be better. So as the liues of the people might bee framed thereunto accordingly: as nowe in time to winde vp the bāners yt ſolong haue bin diſplaied againſt God and his woorde, ſeeing that his Omnipotency is content through his mercy ſtyll to offer peace: which while wee doe ſeeme to contemne and ſet light by, God is prouoked to high diſpleaſure, (and the people in a lamentable caſe) where their frowardneſſe is ſuche, as they doe rather chooſe to be obſcured in darknes, then to walke in the brightneſſe of the light. In the conſideration whereof, it will in this ſmall treatiſe appeare in what deformity and frowarde wayes, the moſt parte of the people in this age doe walke in. What returning God reſpecteth, what puniſhmente is threatned for ſinne, and with what louing kindneſſe God requireth obedience vnto him, and his woord, extending his bountifull mercies vnto al thoſe that in time will returne vnto him

by amendment of life, and ſo to be made partakers of the beneſites which hee ſo gratiouſly affereth: notwithſtāding, the pride of man is ſuche, as that many can not abyde too haue their eares rubbed with ſuch a medicine, but yt if the quicke be once touched, all the body will foorthwith be out of frame, whereby GOD is mooued to diſpleaſure, as it is euident by the ſequell. And now I wyll come to the firſt tryal.
            
               ¶ Againſt the vaine pridings of men and women.
               
                  IN howe outragious deformitie pride is grown vnto, it plainly appereth by the ſtrange behauiors of ye people in this our age. Inſomuch as many young men are become effeminate in reſpect of manhood: and the ſhamefaſtneſſe which ought to be founde in young women, is in many become manly, in reſpect of womanhood: inſomuch as many yeeres paſt, who ſo had bin ſeene in ſuch

ſtrange attyre and apparrell, as nowe is worne by many young men and women, were iudged to be of a light conuerſation in liuing: but now there are many both men and women growne ſo far out of ſquare, and are become ſo heauy in ſin and wickedneſſe, as it is much to be feared that when ſuch ſhall come to be tryed in the ballaunce of good and euill, there wyll too many be founde much too light and the money which by many one ſo waſtefully is conſumed might be better imployed, then ſo to abuſe it to theyr own harmes. Who ought not to be ignorant, that it hath byn an Adage in Englande That pride wyll haue a fal? which is to be feared may be ſo great, as much ſorow may not counteruaile the woe, wt may happē thorow ſo great euils, as god forbid: for it cannot be denied, but that pride was the beginning of ſin, for pride in the beginning of thinges did ſtir the creature againſt the Creator that fourmed and made him, The Angell againſt God: but God threw him downe from heauen: becauſe he continued not in the trueth, he was firſt throwne frō the ſtate of innocēcy into ſin, & frō ſin into miſery:

And he is nowe become the king of the children of pride, inſomuche as the Prophet Eſay ſayth thus much of his fall, O Lucifer which diddeſtriſe in the morning, 
                  Eſay. 14. Apoc. 11. 
                  thou which diddeſt wounde all nations, art now fallē into the earth. Whoſe diſciples many one doe ſeeme to haue choſen to bee, not onely manifeſted by apparrell but alſo in ſumme theyr ſpeaches many doe declare of what religion they are of, when as in their daliaunce and pleadinges of loue matters, they ſeeme to honor the Saint whō they profeſſe to ſhew. In ſuch a lamentable ſence, as God often times is much thereby diſhonoured: and in ſuch wyſe as huſbands raūging from their wiues, wiues from their huſbands, maidens vnſhamefaſt, and young men ſhameleſſe.
               For pride is alwayes deſirous of new things, and the things wt any long time haue beene accuſtomed, that they accoūt wecrineſſe, as to ocupie themſelues in any Godly exerciſes. But this doctrine is ſo vngreeable vnto the children of pride, as it ſeemeth the moſt parte of the people haue ſo framed theyr faces to

looke God in the face moſte impudently feeding theyr ownelicentious appetites with all newe fangled fantaſies, in making the Sabboth day prophane, and agreeable to their own luſtes and liking, with vigilant eyes, and attentiue eares, to vnderſtande where and newe deuiſed folly or tidings is to be learned, whē as there can be no better tidings to reioyce in, then the glad tidinges of the Goſpel. To the hearing wherof many doe require diſcipline, to the ende too bring them into a better compaſſe of obedience, whereas to ſpende theyr time in vaine delightes, there ſhall neede no ſuch ſtrickt order to mooue them therunto, as daily experience teacheth.
               God graunt all ſuche a more conſideration of themſelues, and a perfiter iudgement of ſuche examples, as are left vnto vs by the ſaered woorde of God againſte pride, and all other froward and wicked wayes. Whereunto ignoraunce may not bee pleaded, for that wyll not ſerue our turnes to excuſe vs in the day of the Lordes viſitation, as the examples are many, wherein it appeareth howe much God hath beene from the beginnig offended

by pride, Pride ouerthrewe the Tower of Babylon, Pride hanged vpp Haman, Pride was the deſtruction of Antiochus, Pride murdered Zenacherib, 
                  Gen. 11. Mach. 15. Exod. 14. Reg. 18. 17. the king of Aſſyrians in the temple of his falſe God. Whereby it is manyfeſt that God hath not left pride vnpuniſhed in the offendours: For ſort is written in the Prophet Eſay, The day of the Lorde of Haſtes ſhall came vpon euery proude Eſay. 23. and high minded man, and vppon euery arrogant perſon, and ſuche ſhalbe caſte downe and be made lowe, and the ſtoutneſſe of the valiant and couragious ſhalbe abated: Therefore hath Hell increaſed his power, and hath enlarged his mouth, and ſhall deuoure all the proude and vaine glorious perſons.
               The Lorde hath determined this to out of the pride of the inſolent. As it is written by S. Luke, that the riche man that was clothed in purple and ſilk, was buried in Hell. Dina the daughter of Iacob, 
                  Gen. 34. before ſhee went foorth to buye ornamentes of forraigne women, as Ioſephus writeth, continued her virginitie: but afterwardes Sichem ſonne of the king of

the Amonites violently rauiſhed her: for which his odious fact the ſonnes of Iacob ſlew Sichem, and his father Hemor the king with all the Male in his Citie Salem, and ſpoyled the ſame. As the examples of ſuch are ſundry, who for theyr Dani. 13. Gen. 3. hyre haue receiued like rewarde, with the two wicked Elders, who falſly accuſed Suſanna. Wherefore let neuer pride haue rule in thine heart, for in pride began al deſtruction.
               Woe be vnto the proud wealthy in Sion, to ſuch as thinke themſelues ſure vpon Amos. 6. Luke. 6. the mount of Samaria, which hold thē
                  ſelues for the beſt of the worlde, and rule the houſe of Iſrael, euen as they liſt. Behold, is the borders of the Philiſtines wyder then yours: Yee are takē out for the euill day, euē that ſit in the ſchole of wilfulneſſe, yee that light vpon the beds of Iuory, and vſe your wantonneſſe vppon your Cowches, Yee that eate the beſt Lambe of the Folde, and the fatteſt Calues of the Droues, yee that ſing too the Lute and playing to the Inſtrumentes compare your ſelues to Dauid,

Yee that drinke wine out of Goblettes, and annointe your ſelues with the beſte Oyle, but no man is ſorye for Ioſephes hurte.
               And in the Prophet Eſay it is written this Ieruſalem and Iuda muſt decay, Eſay. 3. becauſe both their woordes and councels are againſt the Lorde, to prouoke the preſence of his maiſtie vnto anger, the changing of theyr countenaunce bewraieth them: yea they declare theyr owne ſinnes themſelues, as the Sodomits did, and hyd them not. Woe be vnto theyr ſoules, for they haue rewarded euill vnto themſelues. Bid the righteous dowel, for they ſhall inioy the fruits of their ſtudies: and woe vnto the vngodly and vnrighteous for they ſhalbe rewarded after theyr woorkes. And in the Prophet Ezechiell it is written, Beholde the ſinnes of Sodome were pride, fulnes Chapt. 16. of meate, abundaunce of idleneſſe,  t
                     •••
                  ſe thinges had ſhee and her daughters, be ſides that, they reached not theyr handes to the poore and needy, but were proude, and did abhominable thinges before me: therefore I tooke them away, when I

had ſeene it, neither hath Samaria doone halfe the ſinnes, yea thou haſt exceeded them in wickedneſſe.
               Moreouer thus ſaith the Lord, ſeeing the daughters of Sion are become ſo proude, and haue walked with ſtretched out neckes, and with vaine wanton eyes, ſeeing they come in ſo nicely tripping with theyr feete: Therefore ſhall the Lord ſhaue the heades of the daughters of Sion, and the Lorde ſhall diſcouer their ſhame. In that day ſhall the Lord take away the gorgeouſnes of their apparrell, & Spanges, Chaines, Partlettes and Collers, Bracelets & hoopes of Golde, the goodly flowred, wyde and broyded raimēt, Ouches and Head bandes, Holy day clothes, and Vales, Glaſſes and Scarfes, and inſteede of good ſmelling there ſhalbe ſtink among them: And for theyr Gyrdles there ſhalbe looſe bands, & for wel ſet beare, ſhalbe baldneſſe, and in ſteede of a ſtomachet, a Sackcloth, and for theyr beautie, wither neſſe and Sun burning: your huſbandes and mightie men ſhall periſhe with the Swoorde in battaile. At that time

ſhall theyr Gates mourne & complaine, and they ſhall ſit as deſolate folke vppon the earth.
               And vnto men the ſame Prophet in his 2. Chapter writeth thus, And therefore get thee in ſome Rocke, & hide thee in the grounde for feare of the Lord, and for the glory of his maieſtie, which caſteth downe the high lookes of the preſumptuous perſons, & bringeth low the pride of man. And the Lord onely ſhalbe exalted in that day, for the day of the lord of Hoſts ſhal go ouer all pride, and laye mans preſumption full lowe, vpon al thē that exalte them ſelues, and ſhall bryng them all downe, both coſtly Towres and ſtrong walles: and vpon all Shippes of the Sea, and vpon all things that is glorious and pleaſant to looke vpon. Then ſhall man caſt away his goddes of ſiluer and his goddes of gold, which he neuertheleſſe had made to honour them. And they ſhall creepe intoo the Caues and rocks, and into the cliftes of hard ſtones for feare of God, and for the glory of his Maieſtie, when hee ariſeth to condemne the earth. Feare yee not then any man

whoſe breath is in his noſethrilles, for what is he of reputation:
               Wherefore, ſaith Samuel, Talke not Samuell 2. muche proudly, let olde thinges departe out of your mouthes, for the Lorde is a GOD of knowledge, and his purpoſes come to paſſe. And in the ſame Chapter it is written, If one man ſinne againſt another. Dayeſmen may be Iudges, but if a man̄ ſinne againſt the Lord, who wil be his Dayeſman? For this ſaith the Lorde, Them that worſhipp me, I wyll woorſhip: and they that deſpiſe mee ſhall come to ſhame.
               In the Prophet Eſdras it is alſo written, Eſdras 4. 8. that thinges preſent are for the preſent, and thinges for too come, for ſuche as are to come: For thou lackſt yet much ſeeyng thou mayeſt loue my creature aboue me, I haue often drawne nigh vnto thee, but neuer vnto the vnrighteous: In this alſo thou art marueilous before the higheſt, in that thou haſte humbled thy ſelfe, that thou art had in ſuch honour among the righteous. Therefore ſhal great wretchednes and miſery come vppon them that in the latter day dwell

in the worlde, becauſe they haue walked in great pride.
               And the Prophet Sophony ſaith, Be Sopho. 1. ſtyl at the preſence of the Lord God, for the day of the Lorde is at hande. Yea the Lorde hath prepared a ſlaine offering, and calleth his gueſtes thereunto. And thus ſhall it happen in the day of the Lordes ſlaine offering: I wyll viſite the Princes the kynges, and all ſuche as weare ſtraunge cloathing. In the ſame day alſo will I viſite all thoſe that tread ouer the threſholde ſo proudly, which fill theyr houſes with robbery and falſhood. At the ſame time ſaith the Lorde there ſhalbe hearde a great crie from the fiſhe port, and a great murder from the hilles, Howle yee that dwel in the mylle, for all the Merchaunte people are gone, and all they which were laden with ſiluer are rooted out.
               Howe much good men haue beene offended by the beholding of pride, appeareth, that in the time as it were of ignoraunce, in compariſon of theſe wherin Chriſte is ſo profeſſed in woordes and more contraryed in deedes. It is ſayde

of Ariſtotle that on a time he ſeeing a young man proude, who was indued neither with learning nor vertue: wherevpon the ſaid philoſopher vſed this maner of reprouing, I would my ſelf be no better thē thou thinkſt thou art, nor my foes to be no worſe then thou art indeede.
               Alſo it is written of one Pambo, that when he behelde a woman proude and very coſtly apparrelled, and attired in ſtraunge faſhion, hee wept and ſobbed: and being demaunded the cauſe thereof, he anſwered, that there were two things that mooued him ſo to doe, in beholding of the woman: The one, to ſee the womā ſo caſt away, The other, for that I that beare the name of a Chriſtian, doe not ſo indeuour with innocency of life too pleaſe God, as this woman doeth with her gay attyre to pleaſe wicked & naughtie perſons.
               What examples haue beene in former ages, of Gods diſliking of ſtrangeneſſe of apparrell, It is noted in our Chronicles, that in Oxfordſhyre, neare vnto a Town called Chipping Norton. there was founde a Serpence hauing

two heades and two faces, one face was attyred after the new faſhion of womens attyre: the other face like the olde array of women, and had winges like a Backe or Flindermouſe, wything that ſuch examples ſhoulde not be lightly ſet by: for that the ſame God which was then offen ded by ſuche abuſes committed in that former age, is now greeued by the like in this preſent age.
               But mee thinketh I doe heare ſome in tempore E. 3. An. Re. 
                        •
                     3. ſay, what hath any man to doe too finde fault or to bee greeued at our libertie: is it not lawfull for mee to doe with myne owne what mee liſteth: if I ſpende and waſte my goods in euyll condition, the harme is mine owne. To whom I aunſwere, it is not ſo lawfull: as for exāple admit yt ſome vnruly, & vnſtayed young perſon, hauing of his owne poſſeſſions left him by his friendes a houſe in the middeſt of the Citie, and that ſuche vntamed perſon, woulde of a vile diſpoſition and deſperate maner ſet fire on his ſaid houſe at his pleaſure, to the indangering of the whole Citie, were it not needefull and the duetie of euery Chriſtian man

notwtſtāding that he were not an officer in that behalfe, too the vttermoſt of his power to vſe the beſt meanes that in him lieth for the reſtraining and repreſſing of ſo great a daunger as might grow there by, & ſpeedily to require the reformation to bee prouided for by the gouernours of euery Citie and place, where as ſuche euils are carefully to be looked vnto and preuented: as cauſes m
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  e neceſſarie leſt the offences come ouer all, & ſo to bee partakers of ſuche plagues as by ſufferance might happen, as God defend.
               In the explaning of the vanitie of pryde, it is written thus in the booke of The. 5. Chap 
                  Wiſdome, What good hath our pryde doone vs: or what profite hath the pomp of riches brought vs? Al thoſe things are paſſed away like a ſhadow, and as a ſhip that paſſeth the Sea, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof may not bee foūd, & as a meſſenger rūning before vs.
               Euen ſo fareth it with vs miſerable Creatures: for aſſoone as we are borne we begin to drawe to our ende. The dayes of our life are few and ſhort: thou O GOD haſt appointed an end whiche

I ſhal not paſſe: naked and bare I came out of my mothers wombe, and naked and bare I ſhall returne againe. Truely all men liuing, are vanitie, whereby wee are admoniſhed that no man ſhoulde ſo conſume away in ſinne and wickedneſſe ſhewing nor leauing no token of vertue behinde him: Albeit it is a ſtraunge caſe to be conſidered howe many of late time haue ſo farre ouerſhot them ſelues, too haue their names ſhut vpp in the Merchantes and Vſurers bookes, by bondes and otherwiſe, therby to ſerue theyr preſent turnes to the feeding of their vaine delightes. In conſideration whereof, if the parties them ſelues were aſwell touched to diſcerne theyr owne follies in that behalfe, as it is a griefe and ſore hearte eating vnto many theyr good friendes, it woulde partly or moſt of all auoyde ſo great inconueniences, as miniſter grief vnto ſo many, and to ſome extreeme miſery. And it is cauſe of reioyſing vnto many riche worldlinges, who ſmile in theyr ſleeues, to ſee the world ſo goe about: although ſuche wyll make the matter very ſtrannge, to credite any

man that ſhal in ſuch ſort ſeeke vnto thē, eyther vpon landes, or bondes, vntyll the neede and neceſſitie of the partie be wel diſcouered. And ſo hauing founde the length of his foote, hee ſhalbe fitted with an Inſtrument of proofe. In ſuche ſorte as then the Title of the landes muſt be
                     •
                   brought in queſtion, which being ſkanned, ſome faulte is founde that the price muſt bee abated, tyll at length the partie being caught with the golden and ſiluer hookes, he may goe play theron. But in the meane time hee muſt geue place to ſuche an owner as that the ſame was neuer ment to by the forpoſſeſſed elders, and muſt bee remooued in one day, out of the poſſeſſions which his Aunceſtours, had continued in many ſcore yeeres, to the vtter impayring of many a one their credites, and names of worſhip.
               To the reformation whereof (if all The way that Gentlemen may continue their ancient poſſeſſions. Gentlemen woulde ſo refourme themſelues, as to plante in them ſuche worthy mindes, as I haue read the Romane Gentlemen ſometimes to haue borne, in ſuche ſorte as after the like deformitie ſprong vp amongſt them, the conſideration

therof did ſo neerely touch thē being mooued thereunto, as it ſhould ſeeme by that good Emperor Alexāder Seuerus, That the Gentlemen in ſhorte time did growe into ſuche a diſliking with them ſelues, and of the maner of the dealing betwixt them, and the riche Citizens, and Vſurers: as that they did count it ſuch an abaſement to the name of a Gentleman, to bee bounde vnto any rich Citizen or Vſurer: As rather the Gentlemen dyd chooſe too take vppon them all painefull exerciſes, ſuche as were moſte conſonant vnto the title of Gentlemen, both in martial feates & other actiuities, and to content themſelues to fare honeſtly, not delicately, too goe apparelled Gentlemanlike, comely, although not ſumptuouly, vnleſſe it were in caſe of triumphe, for the honour of their Prince and Countrey: And ſo did teſtifie the true valure which ſhoulde remaine in Gentlemen: whereby the ſignes and tokens of bearyng of Armes might rightly bee demerited, ſo gained vntoo thēſelues through theyr valiāt ſtomacks and politike wittes, Some by framing

themſelues to become good Councellors at home, And ſome by atchiuing of worthy enterpriſes by theyr Martial ſeruice abroade, both tending to the commodity and benefite of theyr natiue Countrey.
               Loe heere you may ſee what Perſons maye condingly beare the ſignes and tokens of armes: Moſt contrary to one bare reaſon, that the fatnes of the earth doeth put in good liking the ſeruiceable ſteede, & the millers hackney vnagreeable with the true rules and accident of armes, which ought to be followed by the ſteps of vertue, and woorthy deſeruing without deſire of vaine glory.
            
            
               
               A dehortation to priuate grudge, as the ſeconde cauſe of the deſtruction of the Romans raigne.
               
               
                  THis euill is ſuche as may hardly bee auoided and repreſſed, by reaſon that the ſame is couered by many vnder the vile cloake of deepe diſſimulation, as Hypocrites bearing Hony in theyr mouthes, poyſon in theyr heartes, and deceiptes in theyr deedes, and ſo ſhall receiue the rewarde with vngodly perſons. As it is a lamentable age, where the people ſay they cannot liue, without the foule vice of diſſimulation: and that appeareth in this, that where wee doe thinke that goodneſſe ſhoulde harbour, therefrom proceedeth all kinde of ſinne and wickedneſſe, and where wee beleeue trueth to bee lodged, there ſleepeth deepe deceue, I meane out of the frowardnes of the hart of man, moſt contrary

to this good doctrine, Mercy and righteouſnes ſhold kiſſe ech other, Loue Faith, and charitie, ſhoulde ioyne hands with concorde and vnitie, which God graunt for his mercies ſake ſpeedily to confirme in the heartes of all Chriſtians eſpecially of the people of England according to ſuch examples, as are writtē, for our vnderſtanding.
               Alſo it is writen of one Saluſt, who at his death warned his ſonnes to agree within themſelues, alledging vnto them, that by concorde and vnitie, ſmall thinges may bee increaced, but by diſcorde the greateſt thinges that euer were wyll decay, and bee brought too naught.
               Alſo it is noted of one Lycurgus, that certaine Citizens writing vnto him too knowe how they might beſt reſiſt theyr enimies: his aunſwere vnto them was, If you ſhall be content to liue poore as you are in the feare of God, & to abſtaine from mutuall diſſention. By which reaſons it is apparant, and moſt certaine that to feare God and obey his woorde, with a conſtant faith, is not onely the very

key of Religion, but the ſame is alſo an aſſured warātiſe, of the proſperous ſucceſſe of all Councels, and matters ſo taken in hand, without any further diſtruſte of Gods prouidence, without the which if a Sparrowe light not vpon the houſe top, howe muche more wyll hee ſafely conduct the enterpriſes & affaires of all ſuche as doe not attempt or take any thing in hand, but that firſt the feare of GOD, and the aduauncement of his woorde is chiefly regarded, in ſuch wiſe as the good ſucceſſe of all other our external actiōs ought not to be doubted of. For wauering & diſtruſting minds, do manyfeſt the weakeneſſe of the fayth of the people, frō whom the euil nature of priuate grudge ought to bee abandoned. Albeit that the rebellious nature of man is ſuch, as that ſome will not knowe, and ſome wyll not vnderſtande, that brethren deuided among themſelues may not indure: Nor a Citie deuided in it ſelfe, cannot ſtande. As for example, if a man take a Faggot in his handes and aſſaye to breake, the Faggot being bounde faſt togeather, it is a thing impoſſible, albeit

the ſame be but little and ſhort. But once diſſeuer the bande and knot where with it is tyed, and then the ſtickes ſeuerally are ſubiected to be brokē eaſily: which being ſo, then it is behoofull for chriſtian brethren to be firmely ioyned in the bāds of concorde and vnitie, without beeyng acquainted with diſtruſtfulneſſe of Gods prouidence, and that no man hauing built his faith vpon Gods woorde, and truely depending on Chriſte, ſhoulde not neede to doubt of a perfect peace. So long as they continue in the feare of god and do inioy the ſame our moſt gracious ſoueraigne Queene, whom God in his mercy hath vouchſafed to place ſo myraculouſly to be his choſen of ye ſeede of Dauid, for the deliuerance of his little flocke of England, for the preſeruation whereof, her Maieſtie hath had ſo great a care hitherto as it is euident, that the mighty hād of God frō time to time hath bin her director. And ſo no doubt of it, the ſame our eternall God will continue his good bleſſinges towardes her gracious goodnes, as to protect her in all the reſt of the courſe of this life, to the maintenāce of a continuall peace, wherof all her louing

ſubiects may the better aſſure thēſelues if they doe abſtaine from mutual diſſention, without murmuring or grudging with the diſobedient Iſraelites, what time God wrought ſo great benefits and wonders for them, by the hand of his ſeruaunt Moyſes. And againe, howe thoſe people notwithſtanding by their murmuring Exod. 16. and grudging, prouoked the higheſt to bee diſpleaſed with them, for their diſobedience, which is included in three ſpeciall pointes or principles. The firſt is, that his people ſhoulde feare too offende and prouoke his omnipotencie: in the ſecond principall is conceined the due obedience that all people and nations doe owe vnto theyr naturall Prince, Superiours, and Gouernours. And in the thirde is conteyned, the loue which we doe owe vnto our neighbours, and no ſelfe loue to our ſelues, for auoiding the puniſhmentes, threatned for the contrary. For where any people or nation are repugning vnto thoſe three principles, there God is not duely prayſed, and the Prince and Rulers are as frowardly obeied, and the people doe ſeeme altogeather

to depende vppon theyr corrupt affections. But what followed, where God at any time in former ages hath ſo beene contemned, and diſobeyed: Yee ſhall finde it written, in the fourth booke of Eſdras, And like as the death was in Adam: So was the water floods alſo in the time of Noah, namely Noah & his houſholde being leſte, of whom came all righteous men. And it hapned that whē they that dwelt vpon the earth began too multiply and had gotten many children and were a great people, they began too bee more vngodly then the firſt. Nowe when they all liued ſo wickedly before thee O God: theu diddeſt chooſe thee a man from among them, whoſe name was Abraham, him thou louedſt, & vnto him onely thou ſhewedſt thy wyll, and madeſt an euerlaſting couenaunte with hym, promyſing him that thou wouldeſt neuer forſake his ſeede: and vntoo him thou gaueſt Iſaac, and vnto Iſaac alſo thou gaueſt Iacob and Eſau: as for Iacob thou didſt chooſe him, and put back Eſau and Iacob became a great multitude. As it hapned that when thou leddeſt

his ſeede out of Egypt.
               And it followeth, how God did for thoſe people great wonders, and yet god tooke not away theyr wicked hart, wher in Adam tranſgreſſed & was ouercome, & ſo be al they that are borne of him. And in conſideration thereof, this good Prophet in this Chapter in his cōplaining of the wickedneſſe of the people, ſayth thus: When my ſoule ſawe ſo many euil doers, in the thirtieth yeere, my hearte fayled me, for I ſaw thou ſufferedſt them in ſuche vngodlineſſe, and ſparedſt the wicked doers: but thine owne people haſt thou rooted out, and preſerued thine enimies, and this haſt thou ſhewed mee. This part of Scripture may iuſtly ſtirre a feare in vs of this age, who all wold be accounted Gods people, and yet in the manner of many our lyues farre ods. For proofe wherof, how many maiſters in London and elſe where doe geue vnto theyr ſeruauntes wicked examples, in lading their brethren with deceaueable wares, ſuche and in ſuche deformed ſort as nothing degreſſing from the nature of Vſurie, as by the reckoninges and accountes,

wc I haue both knowen & heard ſuche ill conſcioned perſons do make more gaynefull returnes by ſuche theyr wicked and deceiueable meanes, then many honeſt trauayling Merchantes by their tedious trauailes and aduenturing into forraigne & far countries. So that by ſuche peruerſe meanes, the boundes of Chriſtian amitie are muche impeached, and as it were in a maner laide waſte too the increaſing of diſcorde and priuate grudge. Vnto whom are ioyned in League manye euill diſpoſed walking mates, of whoſe ſeuerall euilles you may trye and diſcerne at large as followeth.
            
            
               
               ¶ Againſt the corrupt nature of Vſury, taking the originall of the euill ſeede of Priuate gaine,
               
               
                  THE greateſt euyll that can bee thought vpon, crept into the heart of man, is this that a great number in London and elſe where, doe ſo playe theyr parte in ſuch execrable and curſed maner, to the aduaunſing of that damnable trade: as it may be thought that all ſuche haue beene taught in that wicked profeſſion in ſome diuelyſhe ſchoole, from whence ſuch ſchollers, are growne experte and cūnyng in that profeſſion, as it ſeemeth moſte of them haue ſo farre proceeded in ſuch ſort as theyr dānable ſcholemaiſter can teach them no further: inſo muche as many of them haue more ſhiftes of ſuche ſchoole pointes, then the Diuell himſelfe, whoſe diſciples all Vſurers doe ſhewe themſelues to bee. By

the which deformitie, they doe diſguiſe and defame themſelues: as I haue read that Harphilus & his adherentes were the ſtrongeſt theeues that robbed on the Sea: So the Vſurers of late yeeres are ſo monſtruouſly growne vp in Englande that they exceede al theeues on the land, as one of that trade by the like woordes acknowledged of hymſelfe, in ſaying that hee had beene a Theefe too all the worlde, and ſo dyed deſperately, greatly thereby prouooking Almightie God too haſten his heauy vengeance, too the cutting of of Satans crueltie, who hathvſurped as it were in bewitching of the heartes of men, by ſuche vyllanous means as he findeth men moſt ſubiect to his thraldome: as fitting to his purpoſe, he hath not left vnmindful the vile trade of vſury, which ſo rightly is expounded, by the Greeke and Hebrue definitions, who do applie vſury vnto the biting & eating vp of mēs fleſh, & as it were to bray and bruſe theyr bones in a morter. And yet vſurers wyll not ceaſſe to runne on, more like Helhoundes then Chriſtians, As though there were no puniſhmente

threatned from GOD for ſo greeuous offences committed againſt him and his woorde: for no obedience to GOD nor dutie to theyr Prince can reſtraine them from theyr abhomination: But that they wyll needes hazarde more then the lawes of the realme can prouide for, for repreſſing of theyr wickednes. For ſome of them wyll not let to hazarde both bo
                  
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   ſoule & all that euer they haue: wher by it may appeare that oftentimes ſuch are not excuſeable of murder, for that many a good man by ſuch wicked meanes haue bin ſo ouerladē by the oppreſſion of Vſury. Inſomuch yt ſome ſo ouercharged haue taken thought and dyed, leauing theyr wyues and children in diſtreſſe too crye for vengeaunce for ſo horrible a fact. The ende whereof no doubte of it vntoo all the practicioners, wyll bee deſtruction and endleſſe damnation, vnleſſe all ſuche doe ſpeedily returne vntoo God, not onely by repentance: but alſo with making of reſtitution as is required in the booke of Nūbers Cap. 5. & 6. And as it appeareth how ſome haue liued inſolētly, & dyed miſerably. So here

may you reade of one that confeſſed him ſelf penitently and recouered mercifully hauing grace offered him in the time of his extreeme ſickneſſe, confeſſed hymſelfe as followeth, in the preſence of diuerſe woorſhipfull and of good credite.
               Seeing I muſt die, wc I aſſure you I neuer thought would haue come to paſſe by this diſeaſe wherewith it hath pleaſed GOD too touche mee: I doe nowe moſt hartily deſire you in the reuerence of God, & for Chriſtes ſake to ſuffer mee to ſpeake vntyll I bee dead, that I maye diſcharge my conſcience, and yeelde myſelfe wholy vnto almightie God my Sauiour and redeemer: vpon whoſe iuſtice when I behold, I am cōdemned eternally: But on the other ſide, if I looke vpon his mercies, then I truſte hee wyll ſhewe vnto mee as vnto the worſt ſort of men, among whō I aſſure you I account my ſelfe one: for neuer man had ſo much ſhewed him as I haue had, and ſo little regarded it, as I haue doone: Wherfore good maiſters for Chriſte his ſake geue eare vnto me, and I wyll tell you ſtrange things the wc ſtrange things, I do aſſure

by the faith that I beare vnto God, I ſpeake not of vayng lory, or prayſe of my ſelf or any other cauſe, but only thāk god for his great mercies ſhewed vnto mee diuerſe and ſundry wayes, and alſo too accuſe my aduerſary the Diuell.
               It is ſo that when I was a childe I was brought vpp with a good father and good mother, who vſed me and other theyr children vertuouſly, and kept vs for an houre or two euerye morning at prayers: & when prayers were doone, at our bookes. And in the after noone we were woont to play in an Orchard neere adioyning vnto my fathers houſe. Wher as oftētimes for the ſpace of three yeeres there appeared vnto me in a thick hedge a goodly and comfortable viſion too beholde, ſo louingly and tenderly, as euer any man liuing might deſire and wiſhe, ſhewing ſuche eſpeciall tokens of Gods great goodneſſe and mercies towardes mee, as I thinke neuer mortall man coulde wyſhe the like, which I haue euer kept ſecret to my ſelfe vntill this preſent time, for mine owne comfort and conſolation. Now good maiſters for Chriſt

his ſake geue eare vnto me, and continue in prayers ſtill. So it is that long after I came heere to London, where I was married, ſithēs which time I aſſure you I haue offended my Lord and Sauiour Chriſte Ieſus ſo ſore and manyfoldly, by committing of ſuch abhominable vſury as I am afrayde I ſhalbe condemned eternally: & indeede one great occaſion was, becauſe I neuer gaue my ſelfe too prayer as I was woont to doe, but ſpent my tyme in ouermuche worldlineſſe, for which my conſcience did oftentimes accuſe mee, which ſtriuing within mee brought mee into a marueilous greate feare of minde, ſo that neuer man was in ſuche a caſe of long time. And in this laſte Tearme being in great trouble of minde, the ſelfe ſame viſion appeared vntoo mee againe, and put mee in remembraunce of Gods eſpeciall goodnes and graces before offered vnto mee, and alſo in reſpecte of many other thinges, wylled mee too leaue the trouble of the lawe, and all the buſineſſe of the worlde. Sithēs which time I aſſure you, I haue left of all, and ſo diſpoſed my ſelf to liue

with that which the Lorde hath ſent me notwithſtanding I wyll ſhew you ſtranger thinges, inſomuche that the ſeconde night after I fel ſick of this my preſent ſickneſſe, being of perfect memory, and in my bed broade awake, there appeared vntoo mee ſuche ſtraunge and fearefull thinges which greatly amaſed mee, and put me in a wonderfull feare, I cannot tell what I ſhoulde tearme them or call them, but as I remember they were like Puppets which ranne vpp and downe my chamber, my bed, and vpō my body, toſſed mee, pulled mee, ſtirred mee, and ſo vexed me as I was neuer in my life ſo troubled, ſhewing me ſo terrible & fearefull ſightes, that I was almoſt brought to deſtruction vtterly, ſo far foorth that I coulde not tell what too doe. Yet at the laſt remembring my ſelfe calling too minde the wonderfull graces, that my Lorde and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, had at diuerſe and ſundry times ſhewed mee, I ſayde in my ſelf (O good Lord) what doe all theſe thinges meane? With that there appeared vnto me my former viſiō againe, and ſhewed me in writing all the

ſummes of vſury money which I had receiued in my lyfe time, ſo plainly that I read thē: And indeede the ſummes were true & euery man named with whō I had occupied that trade, and the ſeuerall ſummes, ſhewing mee ſo plainly euery thing as I aſſure you I much marueiled at it. At the laſt I made anſwere too my viſion and ſaide, O Lord all theſe things be true indeede, what ſhall I doe to it? Then my viſion made mee anſwere, and comforted me very much, and commaunded mee too repaye all the Vſury money againe to euery man as hee had ſhewed me the ſummes which came vnto 18. hū
                  dred pounds. Then he bad me pay again fiftie pound which I had gayned for buying of a houſe, and a hundred and twenty pounds which I had gotten by ſtrangers as Italians and ſuche like, and becauſe I knewe not where the ſaide ſtrangers dwelt, to giue it to good priſoners, & good men that were in Priſons. And maiſters I cānot tell of what religiō you be of, nor to tel you the trueth I care not to the end too accuſe my aduerſary the Deuyll:

So as indeede I haue reſtored ſome part already, and wil render al, God willing, and wyll pay all the money gayned by Vſury as my viſion commaunded mee, and doe ſo intende God willing to do tomorrowe if I liue ſo long: If not, I will deſire a ſpeciall friende of myne as my truſt is in hym, to ſee the ſame diſcharged, and preſently to paye out the ſame, that my ſoule may abide no perrill therefore. And theſe thinges haue iuſtly hapned vnto mee, for I aſſure you I haue not vſed to pray as I was woont to doe, nor neuer went to the Church at time of common Prayer, becauſe it condemned myne owne conſcience, for ſuffering mee to commit ſuche abhominable ſinnes of Vſury, and others moſte deteſtable againſt the wyll of my heauenly Father, who of the largeneſſe of his mercy ſo manyfold and ſundry times did ſhew me ſuche euident and ſinguler tokens of his graces and mercies. And thus my viſionleft me, ſithence which time I aſſure you I haue had aſmuch quietneſſe as any man can wiſhe, and haue ſeene ſuch comfortable ſightes, as neither hearte can

thinke, nor tongue can expreſſe. And ſo this reconciled perſon deſired the miniſter being preſent to ſay the vii. Pſalme, Glory bee to God on high, and then hee thought to haue died. But thē the breath being geuen him, he reuiued again, and fell to prayer, and gaue himſelf wholy to quietneſſe, but ſhortly after he departed this life. And as I finde of this one ſo reconciled to God, ſo I can not learne, but that as the number of ſuch are very rare and contrary to many ſuch as God hath ſuffered to periſhe through that ſinne as appeareth vnto what miſerable end, the trade of Vſury brought manye Iewes who occupied the ſame trade in this lande in former ages, in ſuche wyſe as it is affirmed in our chronicles. Thatthere were certain Iewes inhabiting in ye Citie of York. Inſomuch as for ſome one of theyr profeſſion exacted vpon a Chriſtian An. 2. Richa. 1. for lone of money, certaine of the inhabitaunts of the ſame Citie, erected themſelues to be auenged in ſuch ſort as they diſtreſſed all the ſaide Iewes into a Tower of the Caſtle there: which the Chriſtians aſſailed, and the Iewes proffered

money to bee in ſauegard, but the people woulde not accept it: In ſomuche as it is ſaide that through the wicked counſell of one of their men of lawe, all the ſaide Iewes ſo diſtreſſed agreed too cut the throates of al theyr wiues and children, and to caſt theyr dead bodies ouer the Walles vppon the Chriſtians heades, which horrible fact they hauing deſperately perfourmed the reſt not ſo ſlayne ſet fier on the Tower wherin they were, and conſumed themſelues by fire. Loe heere a iuſte rewarde for ſo damnable a trade, themſelues to be the executioners of theyr owne wiues & children heaping vengeaunce vpon them ſelues in a damnable maner: So as it is noted 600. Iewes beſides theyr wyues and childrē thus miſerably dyed. And as it ſeemeth by the ſtory that they vndertooke ſo too dye for theyr lawe: But Engliſhmen are Chriſtiās, then let ſuch do the deedes of chriſtianitie, being forbidden by gods lawe, and politike lawes, haue ſo ordeined, that no man ſhoulde winne or obtayne a pray by an other mans ſimplicity

or ignorance, nor by any falſe meanes, or malice, contrary to the dealings amōg the people in this age, where no difference ſeemeth to be made betwixt honeſt and lawfull bargaining, and corrupt bargaining. Wherevpon Plato writeth, that that which is ſeparated from iuſtice, is rather to bee called craftineſſe then wiſdome: In eſpecially practiſed by thoſe that profeſſe Chriſte, who ought to know that all ſuche as follow mens traditions and their owne inuentions, do as it were forſake God and his worde, by the meaſuring of his woorde by theyr owne corrupt willes and affections, tempting god thereby.
               And as a falſe Diamōd is not ſet in a Ring without a ſubtill foyle, in ſuch wiſe as the deceite of the deceiuer may hardly be diſcouered wtout the help of an expert Lapidarie: So Vſurers are not without theyr ſubtill ſhifts & argumēts for to colour & defend their falſe and deceiueable practiſes. Inſomuchas ſome of thē doſay that ſuch places of the ſcriptures as are written in reproouing of Vſury, is not ſo intended nor to be applied againſt their
               
                  
For then ſay they, that no man may buy and ſell without committing of Vſury, and ſo they doe dwell vppon a nyſe point of definition what Vſury is, albeit the euill nature thereof doth demonſtrate and declare it ſelfe contrary too the condition of ſuch commendable buying and ſelling as ought to be orderly performed in the fellowſhipp of men, without the compaſſe or hauing to doe with Vſury. As it is manyfeſt, that when any honeſt Merchaunt or Retayler of wares, doo put the ſame to ſale, the maner thereof is put in vſe in open market, and that by ſome knowne ſigne, without the ſiniſter dealings that vſurers doe practiſe, whoſe dwelling places are not eaſie to finde out from other mens, for want of a Signe, which is not ſo agreeing to theyr profeſſion, as experience teacheth, for aſmuche as the name of an Vſurer, is not onely hatefull to all good men, but alſo lothſom vnto the Vſurers thēſelues: So as theyr dwelling places are as ſubtill as the lurking of the Serpent that lieth hidden vnder greene leaues, and Vſurers by theyr apparell may as hardly be diſcerned

as a Strumpet from an honeſt woman, onely the difference reſteth in the tryall of theyr ſeuerall conuerſations and maner of liuing: Inſomuche that it is noted in a Parliament holden by the famous King Edwarde the firſte of England, yt amongſt other things Vſury was An. Reg. 
                        •
                     . forbidden to the Iewes, and that they might be knowen from Chriſtians, the King commaunded them to weare a Table the breadth of a palme vpō their outmoſt garment.
               The examples are not fewe whereby Chriſtians are forbidden the vile trade of Vſurye, as teſtifieth the woorde of God.
               
                  Ieremie in propheciyng of the miſeries of the Iewes, and the cauſes, ſayth thus, O mother alas that euer thou diddeſt beare mee, an enimie and hated of the whole land, though I neuer lent nor receiued vpon vſury, yet all men ſpeake euill vpon me. And the Lorde anſwered lead not I then vnto good?
               Thou ſhalt occupie no Vſurie to thy Deut. 23. Exod. 22. Leuit. 25. brother, neyther with money nor foode, neyther with any maner of thing that

Vſury may be vſed withal, that the Lord thy God may bleſſe thee in all that thou takeſt in hande.
               Yf thou lend a poore body, ſaith God, thou ſhalt not lye downe too ſleepe with his pledge, but ſhalt deliuer him his Deut. 23. pleadge againe, when the Sunne goeth downe: That he may ſleepe in his own rayment & bleſſe thee. So ſhall the ſame bee reckoned vntoo thee for righteouſneſſe before the Lord thy God.
               God ſpeaking by the mouth of his Prophet Ezech. 22. ſaith, Thou haſt receiued giftes to ſhed blood: thou haſt taken vſury and increaſe: Thou haſt oppreſſed thy neighbour by extortion, and forgotten me ſaith the Lorde.
               Moreouer it is written, yf a man bee godly, and do the thing that is equall and right, he greeueth no body, he giueth Pſalm. 14. his debtor his pledge againe, he parteth his meate with the hungry, he clotheth the naked, hee lendeth nothing vpon Vſury, Ezech. 18. hee withdraweth his hand from doyng wrong, hee handeleth faithfully bebetweene man and man, hee ſhall ſurely liue faith the Lord God.
               
                  
And to trye the Vſurers vngracious ſubſtaunce, to bee geathered moſt agree able too the nature of ſwines feeding, that as thoſe beaſtes doe ſooneſt increaſe theyr fatty ſubſtaunce in tyme of yeere The maner of vſurers gathering of their ſubſtance, when Acorns are apteſt to bee had, not forcing what treſpaſſe they doe too anye neighbour, according too theyr beaſtly kind. So fareth it wt Vſurers, who ſo lōg as they may increaſe theyr corrupt money eyther by landes, iewelles, or plate, they wil not bee vnoccupied that wayes, And ſome of thē be ſo baſely minded, as if Acorns bee paſt their reach. Then wil they liſten with attentiue eare, where anye Swill or Draffe is too bee had whereon they maye ſatiſfie theyr greedy appetites, with deceaueable Wares, which they call Commodities, houſeholdſtuffe, Apparell, and ſuche lyke, as nothing commeth amiſſe too ſuche monſters. Inſomuche as it is too bee thought that if the Diuell ſhould come to an Vſurer and demaund his ſhare of intereſt, that the vſurer woulde put it in practice to defeate his partner.

for it is not to be thought otherwiſe, but that hee who hath ſo many ſhiftes too check his Chriſtian brethren, wyl not be vnprouided of one ſhift to mate the Deuill. In the meane time tyll they come to ſcratching for the game, the Vſurers neglect not the help of theyr vngracious Brokers, to the ende they may not forſloe no time vpon Billes of ſales, and otherwyſe to helpe to drawe the Vſurers into Hell, wyſhing all ſuche whyle they haue time and ſpace too pray too GOD, that it maye pleaſe hym in his mercy, ſo too touch theyr heartes with ſuche a repentant minde ſpeedily to returne from committing ſuche abhominations, leaſt that ſuche their facting doe turne to theyr owne harmes, and too the Deuilles profite. For it is moſt true that thoſe thinges, which haue byn mens delightes in this life, as cauſes of offences ſhall eftſoones be made the inſtrumentes of theyr tormentes in time to come, vnleſſe the grace of God in this lyfe may mooue them more duetifully to obedience towardes GOD and theyr Prince, with loue to theyr neighbours,

as euery Chriſtian man ought to do.
               
                  As floods that flow againſt their kind,
                  are beſt reſtrained by contrary wynd:
                  So ſuch as ryſe inordinately,
                  muſt be repreſsed by pollicy.
               
               But vnto ſuche as after many warnings from God and his worde, deliuered by the mouth of his miniſters: and nothing may moue the frowardnes of the Vſurer to returne, from hallyng ſynne together, as it were with Cartropes: Then may it rightly be ſaide to all ſuch. O yee fooliſh Galathians, who hath bewitched you: O yee generation of Vipers, Matth. 12. who hath taught you to flee from the vengeance to come: In deed ye may flee, but ye ſhall not eſcape: for God hath a cuppe prepared for ſuche, and they ſhal drink the bitter draught of his vēgeance, and receiue the rewarde of iniquitie. In diſlyking of which wofull eſtate, God be thanked, there are a number in London and els where, whoſe appetites may not be framed, neyther would if they might feede on ſuch euill conditioned ſubſtance,

as is accumilated and gotten together by the wicked trade of Vſury, but do rather abhorre the ſame, as too loathſome a feeding for a Chriſtian mans profeſſion: by reaſon of the yll diſgeſtion which the ſame doeth carry wt it: for experience teacheth yt ſuch vnprofitable ſubſtance may not well agree nor continewe with thoſe who do fill and cloy their ſtomackes therwith. And ſurfiting therby, can not be at quiet tyl ſuch tyme as they haue diſcharged and vnladen them ſelues thereof againe, although to their great indangering both of body and ſoule. For aſſuredly ſuch yll gotten ſubſtance is of an infectious condition and euill operation.
               As appeareth by this doctrine of S. Luke, where it is written. Take heed leſt at any tyme your heartes bee ouercome Luke. 21. with ſurfiting and drunkennes, and the cares of this worldes lyfe: and ſo the day come vpon you vnwares. For as a ſuare ſhall it come vpon all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watche you therefore continually & pray, that ye may eſcape al thoſe things that ſhal come, and that yee may ſtande before the Sonne of man: and the better to drawe on all Vſurers

and all vngodly perſons, to the ende that their deformities myght become loathſome vnto them ſelues: I woulde to God that euery one dyd beare it written in the forehead of their heartes: As it is written in the Propheſie of Abdy. Lyke as thou haſt done, ſo ſhalt thou vs done with all.
               For ſo is the way to finde grace and mercy wt God, that euery one both man and woman do refourme thē ſelues, and refraine frō hauing to do with the felowſhyp of vngodlines, as that no man to lye for his own auaile, to accuſe wrongfully, to preuent deceitfully or frawdulētly. So rich men ſhould not be enuied for their riches, nor poore men oppreſſed by reaſon of their pouertie, & thē ſhold mutual loue be maintained in a common wealth, farre different to ſuche euils as the euil nature of priuate grudge, & priuate gaine hath inforced in the hearts of men which worketh much trouble amongeſt the people, wher ſo great euils haue araied thēſelues againſt the peace of the lande, as more plainly appeareth by the manifolde contentions dailye mooued and ſlyred among the people, in theyr goyng too

lawe one with another, yeldyng them ſelues to euery vayne paſſion of theyr myndes, as it is to be noted by the abuſe in that behalfe.
            
            
               
                  Againſt the frowardnes and abſurditie of Clyents at the Lawe.
               
                  ALthough it bee true that the lawe is neceſſary in euery commō wealth, for keepyng of the people in their due obedience, and that euery man maye inioy his own, according to the peace of the lande, yet the abuſe of the lawe is not ſo expedient: for oftentymes it ſo falleth out, that what ſome Lawyers do ſo gainfully get, many their Clyents forgoeth more peruerſly. As for inſample may bee diſcerned by the tyde Boates, in the paſſing too and fro London: Howe one commeth vp with the wynde, by eaſie labour: an other goeth downe againſt the tyde

by painefull toyle, and not without danger of ſhipwracke: ſo to bee put to their ſhiftes, eſpecially when a ſodaine ſtorme ariſeth vnlooked for, with a contrarye wynde: for in ſuche caſes paſſengers are moſt ſubiect to be indangered & indamaged: which notwithſtanding it fareth not ſo with thoſe that doe come vp the very ſelf ſame tyde, keeping the Lee ſhore, hauing both winde and tyde, with them, ſeldome ſuſtaining any damage in their courſe, be the winde neuer ſo contrary to others that goe downe. Albeit, ſuche as come vpp are not freed of all miſfortune, as ſome times ſubiecte to bee ouerrunne by a greater ſhippe or veſſell, or ſuch like caſualties: which as they do ſeldom happen, by reaſon of the good conducte of the Lodeſman: yet it can dot be denyed, but that ſuch caſuall blaſtes may happen, as are moſt too bee feared, when the wether waxeth darke and glummy.
               But for better proofe, that the euill of priuate grudge and priuate gaine, doth more profite to the Lawyers then vnto any other profeſſion, it is eaſie to bee diſcerned by the diligence that is vſed by a

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
great number of people traueiling from farre, to the ende to helpe the Lawyers in with their harueſt, which is foure Termes or ſeaſons of the yeare: duryng which tymes, many Lawyers are diligent huſbandes for them ſelues, in their attending and gathering of their priuate gaine. But howe ſtack many of them be, in diſpatchyng of their Clyentes cauſes doeth manifeſtly appeare by the prolonging of their ſutes by all dilatory means: Inſomuch as notwithſtanding it is to be thought, that there is no Counſeller at the lawe worthie ſo to bee allowed, but that vpon perfect inſtructions deliuered vnto him, hee is able to ſay or ſhould ſay, of his learned knowledge, whether the caſe ſo put vnto him be in right and truth to be mainteined or not. But this Maxime with many is a Fallax in the law, for that the ſame is not agreeing with many of that profeſſion. So to play the part of expert & cunnyng Surgions, who ſounding the depth of their patients wounds, will foorthwith miniſter a ſpeedie curyng ſalue: But rather too many haue

cunnyng to playe the parte of an yll conditioned Surgion, who hauyng ſounded his Patients griefe, and vpon tryall finding, that his Patient hath any ſtore of hearbes in his Gardeine, ſtraightway will apply a detractiue plaiſter thereby to trye their cunnyng, and ſo doeth practice the ſame ſo long as they finde theyr Pacient to haue any ſuche hearbes as will worke to their myndes. And in the meane tyme ſuch beareth his poore Patient in hande, that his griefe had beene ſooner cured, if ſome tyme one impediment, ſome tyme an other had not hyndered the cauſe in working, accordyng to the quilities and ſlintes of the lawe, tyll ſuche tyme as all his Patientes hearbes are ſpent, by the froward meanes of ſuch Surgions, and many a man ſo left comfortleſſe, and voide of hope of recouery of that which by good meanes might better haue beene holpen, or els not to haue beene taken in hande at all.
               Notwithſtandyng it is certayne, that

hearbes doe worke much in curing, but the better if they be applied in their right nature and condition: in ſuch ſort as men can not vſe the Surgions practiſe, without much payne to be indured by his patient, eſpecially if the Surgion bee indurate of hart: So aſſuredly men can not goe to lawe one with an other with ſuche quietneſſe of mynde, as it is by ſome ſuppoſed. For proofe whereof, if men would examine in them ſelues howe difficult a thing it is, for Chriſtian bretheren too ſpende their tyme in folowing lawe matters: It will eaſily appeare, that for the moſt parte, ſuche common poſting to law as nowe a dayes is vſed, is not perfourmed without greate greefe and vexation of the mynde. As firſt either the partie plaintiue or defendaunt, or both enter not into ſute without offence & grudge of conſcience. And nextly, their money in their purſes will not bee at quiet tyll their proper owner bee eaſed thereof by Lawyers: although with the more paine if the Clyents are dwellyng farre from London, folowing oftentymes their own euill affections, as they are mooued thorowe

the vayne paſſions of their mynds, leauing their more needefull affayres at home vndone, not onely to their owne harmes, but perhappes ſometymes to the want of ſome of their pore wiues and children, in need of that which ſome fond huſbandes doe ſo waſtfully and wilfully conſume in a deſperate manner: without their more due conſideration, what inconueniences may growe vnto them ſelues, by feeding their vaine humours, in attempting the lawe for euery friuolous matter, wherevpon action will lye, and oftentimes vpon no ground at all, ſtirring matters of contention where no cauſe is. As a ſtrange caſe that ſenſible men ſhold delight to weary their bodies by traueyling from farre: to the ende to departe from their goods in ſo ill cōdition, wherin truely the Lawyers are not ſo muche to be blamed in the attentiueneſſe of their priuate gaine, as many fond Clyents by procuring their owne paine. For before the Lawyer was troubled with ſuch Clients and their troubleſome cauſes, and fraighted with their harde gotten mony, the Lawyer did ſit, and perhaps might

ſit quietly at his booke: and in the winter to call for a fyre to warme him: wheras nowe the ouer muche folly of many Clyents hath and doeth maintayne the Law. yers to be both warme within & abroad: whyle many harebraynde Clyents muſt tarry and attend without, hauing forgon that by their owne frailtie and wilfulnes, which woulde haue kepte them ſelues warme at home many a colde day, and eaſed them of many a paynefull iourney. For proofe thereof, my ſelfe haue learned by experience, included in theſe verſes folowyng:
               
                  Who ſo that is forced the law to purſue,
                  muſt offer the Lawyer more thē his due:
                  But ſuch as can keepe them ſelues therfro,
                  ſhal find reliefe of troubles and wo:
                  Qui ante nō cauet, to late may repent,
                  Wherfore with thine eſtate be thou cōtēt.
               
               Whereby it is to bee noted, the ignoraunce wherein many doe ſhewe them ſelues to bee blynded, with the litle confidence

which one neyghbour ſeemeth to haue in an other. In ſo much as I haue thought both my ſelfe and many others deceiued in that behalfe, who ſettyng a parte the truſt of affiaunce, which ought to bee repoſed in honeſt & diſcreet neighbours, haue obſtinately throwne them ſelues into great charges, with the diſcommodittes before rehearſed. Albeit, dayly experience teacheth, that after long and tedious ſute mainteined, the ende of all iſſues growe to one of theſe two poyntes, that eyther the parties are perſuaded by, friendes, or by their Lawyers to put the matter in comprimyſe, or els the nature of the lawe doeth award a Iury of twelue men to trye the iſſue, in ſuch wyſe as perhappes no one of the ſayde twelue are knowne, neyther vnto partye playntyue, or defendaunt: or if to the one, yet not to the other. Wherevpon I deeme this old adage dyd grow, That as a man is befriended, ſo is the law ended. So as often tymes it falleth out, that thoſe carrye awaye the blowes, who leaſte diſtruſted theyr cauſe: farre

contrary to their expectations: In ſuche ſort, as were it not much better that ſuch vnſkilfull perſons had neuer hazarded them ſelues in the fray. As often the matter doeth hang a yeare or two doubtfull, in whom the victory ſhal reſt: and yet in the ende one worde may bee ſo taken at the vantage, as the ſpending of many a pounde may not cure the wounde made thereby.
               And by ſuch means the boūds of chriſtiā amitie is much impaired. In ſo much as Chriſtian loue and neighbourhead appeareth to be very cold, where the people may not be perſwaded ſo to frame thē ſelues, as to commyt their common cauſes of controuerſie, to the hearing and deciding of the worſhipful Gentlemen nere vnto them adioyning, or vnto their honeſt diſcreete neighbours. For it is very vnlyke that a ſtranger who dwelleth farre diſtant from vs, and altogether ignorant of our diſpoſitiōs and conuerſations, ſhold ſooner prouide a redemie thē our knowen neighbours, and ſuche as wee are daily conuerſant with all: and vnto whom our inclinations & maners of liuing is better

knowne.
               As alſo no ſenſible man ought to bee ignorant, that honeſt neighbors wil hold themſelues more thankfully content with one friendly intertainmēt after their trauayles vſed in ſuch behalf, then the Lawyers will accompt of their many fees. But me thinketh, I heare ſome ſay, mine aduerſary dwelleth farre diſtaunt from mee: vnto whom I anſwere, not ſo. But that if thou accompt anye thy Chriſtian brethren for thine aduerſary, then take heede of thy Aduerſary the Deuill, for he is nearer vnto thee then thou art aware off: And appeareth not to be farre from ſuche, as haue choſen to dwell in malice and grudge of conſcience many yeares, yea, perhappes to their ending day.
               And againe me thinkes I heare ſome ſay, that my neighbors vpon ſome grudge may be corrupted, which I can not deny: But then it muſt needes folowe, that the people are very euill diſpoſed, and in a badde caſe, where corruption may ſo take place in the hearts of ſuch as profeſſe the name of God: that ſo many may not bee founde to ſpeake in true iudgement betwixt

neyghbour, and neyghbour, brother and brother: to the vnityng and noriſhing of brotherly loue and felowſhyp, in ſuch ſort as ought to be deſired among all ſuche as beare the names of Chriſtians: As wee are taught in ſundry places of the ſcriptures. In ſo muche as S. Iohn wryting in his firſt Epiſtle and Iohn. 2. ſeconde Chapter. This is the tidings that ye heard from the beginnyng, that yee ſhould loue one another, not as Cayn, which was that wicked, and ſlewe his brother: And wherefore 
                     ••
                  ue hee him: Becauſe his owne workes were euil, and his brothers good.
               And agayne it is written in the ſame Chapter: God is loue, and hee that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God in him. Herein is ye loue perfect in vs, that wee haue truſt in the daye of iudgement: for as be is, euen ſo are we in this world. There is no feare in loue, but perfecte loue caſteth out feare, for feare hath paynefulnes, for hee that feareth, is not perfect in loue.
               Wee loue him for hee loued vs firſt: if

a man ſay hee loue God, and yet hate his brother, he is a lyar. For howe can be that loueth not his brother, whom hee hath ſeene, loue God whom hee hath not ſeene? And this commaundement haue wee of him: that hee which loueth God, ſhould loue his brother alſo.
               Loe here the true fourme, what brotherly loue is required at our hands from God: wherevnto wee ſhoulde the rather bende our ſelues, for that as in the olde lawe they had the ſacrifices: So nowe God be thāked, & ſo gra
                     •
                  ious a Queene, Englande doeth poſſeſſe the true ſacramentes: to the endles comfort of all ſuch as haue in them ſelues a 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  eſire vnto true iudgement and ryghteouſnes, which I pray God to plant in the hearts of the people: And ſo beyng perfourmed, I am perſuaded that there woulde not be ſo manye frowarde ſutes maynteyned in Englande, euen as it were for ſtirring of ſtrawes, vppon euerye friuolous clauſe. In ſo muche as if the people coulde diſcerne ryghtlye in them

ſelues what ſmall goodnes commeth of frowardnes, maliciouſnes, and deceitfulneſſe. I iudge that there woulde not bee ſuch throng in Weſtminſter Hall, as in this our age is nowe folowed with greedineſſe, in weariyng the Lawyers in trudging from barre to barre, whervnto they are not eaſily hyred. Neither the Notaries and Scriueners, ſhoulde not neede to occupie and buſie their heades in deuiſing & framing large inſtruments of writings, with couenaunt vppon couenaunt, and bonde vpon bonde, and all to litle, as nowe thinges are abuſed in ſuch lamētable wyſe, that oftentimes in place of true dealyng and keeping of promyſe betwixt man and man, nowe one couyn foloweth an other, and deceit is met with the lyke, in ſuch odious manner as if hell were broken looſe, and the wicked ſpirits raging euery where, inanimatyng the people to become lyke them ſelues. Albeit, it is moſt true, that the Deuill is the father of all lyes (whervpon the Prophet Micheas hath ſet downe vnto vs an excellent fourme, howe all ſuch as profeſſe Micheas. 6. Chriſt ſhould behaue them ſelues, and to

flee deceitfulnes: Speaking thus, I wil ſhewe thee O man, what is good, & what Miche. 
                        •
                     
                   the Lord requireth of thee: namely to do right, to haue pleaſure in louyng kindneſſe, to be lowly, and to walk with God, that thou mayeſt be called a Citie of the Lorde, and that thy name might be righteouſnes. Heare O ye Tribes, who wold els giue you ſuche warnyng, ſhoulde I not bee diſpleaſed, for the vnrighteous good in the houſes of the wicked, and becauſe the meaſure is diminiſhed: or ſhold I iuſtifie the falſe Ballances, & the bag of deceitfull weightes, among thoſe that bee full of riches, vnrighteouſly gotten: where the Citizens deale with falſhood, ſpeake lyes, and haue deceitfull tongues in their mouthes? Therefore will I take in hand to puniſh them, and to make thee deſolate becauſe of thy ſinnes. Thou ſhalt eate and not haue enough: thou ſhalt flee, but not eſcape?
               And in the prophet Eſai, Chriſt, reprouing Eſai. 
                        •
                     
                   the wickednes of euil doers, ſaith, O all ye falſe of promiſe, companions of theeues, that loue giftes altogether, and gape for rewardes. Therefore ſayth the

Lorde God of hoſtes, I muſt eaſe me of mine enemyes, and auenge mee of myne Aduerſaries.
               By which doctrine all Chriſtians are willed to auoyde ſo great threatenynges from God: and hereby wee learne, that no man can keepe his hands cleane from deceites and bribes, except he firſt waſhe away the couetous deſires from his hart, and ſo ſhal we obtayne a true iudgement: In ſo muche that where the people haue no feelyng deſire in them ſelues of ſuche iudgement, let them thē beware of Chriſtes iudgement, and learne in tyme to be more carefull howe to frame them ſelues towardes God and their neighbour, both in heart and tongue.
               As for enſample, if a priſoner beyng brought before a Iudge to bee tryed by the lawes of this realme, and that the priſoner ſtandyng vpon his tryall ſhould let paſſe ſome ſpeache, makyng agaynſt him ſelfe, which beyng ſo taken in trip by the Iudge, the priſoners life might be hazarded thereby, woulde not ſuche a one gladly wiſh in his hart that he had refrained his tongue from ſuche his vnaduiſed ſpeach, tending to his diſtruction. Howe

muche more ought wee, miſerable creatures feare to commit ſo great 
                     〈◊〉
                   and wicked deedes worthie of death, 
                     〈…〉
                   excuſable before the high maieſtie o
                     •
                   our eternall God.
               And to the ende that no man ſhoulde ſo flatter him ſelfe, as to ſay, that God is no ſuch ſeuere Iudge, let euery one take vnto him ſelf the enſample of the ten virgins ſpoken of in the Goſpell, of whome Matth. 
                        •
                     5. fiue were ſo negligent, as hauing no oyle in their Lampes, whereby to haue entered in with the Bridegroome, who paſſing by, and findyng fyue of them ſo vnprouided, as that they were excluded their entering in with the bridegroome, when as the other fiue wyſe, entered in with ioy, hauing oyle in their veſſels, and lightes in their Lampes, and were made partakers of the promiſed reward, wheras the other fiue were ſequeſtred from the benifit therof: as vnto them reckoned for foliſhneſſe by reaſon of the ſodain cōming of the Bridegroome. And in ſo muche as thoſe foliſh virgines after cōming vnto ye gate ſaid, Lord, Lord, opē vnto vs: but he anſwered & ſaide, verely I ſay vnto you,

I knowe you not, watche therefore, for ye know neither the day nor yet the houre 
                     〈…〉
                   the Sonne of man ſhall come. Which ignorance of thoſe fooliſhe could not excuſe nor auayle thē in ſaying would to God we had done as the other did, for they came too late, and the gate was put too. But mee thinkes I heare ſome ſay, that it concerneth not mee to haue taken in hande the handelyng of ſo weightie cauſes: vnto whome I anſwere this, Admyt, that any one would ſay, that ſaluation belonged not vnto mee, ſhould I yelde therevnto: No God forbyd: for although I am no Publike Miniſter, yet am I a publyke Chriſtian. Although ſome light diſpoſed perſons will not let to ſay thus, by any whome they perceiue to be godly and better diſpoſed then them ſelues, Lo he is touched and ſauoureth of the ſpirit, but we are of the worlde, and muſt lyue after the manner of the worlde, To ſuch I ſay, that this worlds prouiſions and actions, muſt ſo bee tempered with vertue and godlineſſe: as that the one be not diſtempered by the ouer muche follye committed in the proſecuting of the other, for

there is godly ſorowe, and a worldly ſorowe: and two contraryes may not well agree to be ioyned together. No manne Matth. 6. can ſerue two maſters. No man can ſerue God and Baall. By which reaſons all thoſe that doe profeſſe to loue God, ſhold hate and ſhunne all things, that are contrary to his diuine will and pleaſure: for God is of power to make fruſtrate what ſoeuer is repugnant to his will. But this doctrine ſeemeth to be ſeparated ſo farre from the moſt of the people in this age: As it appeareth, that when God doeth touch many with bodily ſickeneſſe, loſſe of goods or friendes, howe carefull euery one ſheweth him ſelfe, euen very penſiue and heauy. And yet how light ſeemeth to be ſet by many greeuous and loathſome diſeaſes of the ſoule, daily experience teacheth. In ſo muche as where it is vſed in Londō, in tyme of Gods viſitation of the plague, to ſhutte vp the doores and wyndowes, as a neceſſary meanes to keepe the infection of the ſicke from the ſounde: euen ſo aſſuredly it is a moſt needful rule, and the beſt preſeruatiue agaynſte the plague that can be vſed, that euery houſholder

woulde ſhutte out of their doores. The ſin & wickednes that doth abounde, wherewith not onely the people, but alſo ſometyme the very ayre is infected, with the iniquitie that can by no meanes bee kept downe, but will needes breake forth lyke a flaming fire. Although all people ought to knowe and remember, that the ſame God that is of power to ſend health and ſickneſſe, wealth, and pouertie, doeth commaund all men to flee and auoid ſin, and to lyue after his commaundements, as a perfect rule or direction: which God graunt may in time, woorke ſuch effect, that ſinne and wickedneſſe may ſo be baniſhed, not onely out of London, but alſo out of all partes whereas God is profeſſed, as that his name may be truely glo
                     •
                  i
                     •••
                  d
            
            
               
               
                  Againſt the corrupt dealings of retaylers of wares, and ſuche lyke.
               
                  NOtwithſtanding that it may be thought ſufficient hath bene ſaide in the former treatiſe of the euil working of priuate gaine among the people, yet the nature thereof, will not bee hyd in ſome retaylors of wares, as may more eaſily appeare in the packyng which many of thē doe vſe with deceites, in euery their ſeuerall profeſſions, in the vending of their wares, to the abridging of this adage, That that realme ſtandeth beſt, wherein moſt members are prouided for. Wherein it is to bee vnderſtoode that ſuche are beſt to be accounted of, that doe beſt deſerue in profiting their countrey with their paynful trauailes, which in my ſimple opiniō is wel perfourmed by three ſeueral vocations, yt is the huſbādmā which

tilleth the grounde, and by his diligence as God giueth increaſe, hee from time to tyme letteth no ſeaſon paſſe tyll hee haue atteyned the fruite of his painful labour, to the comfort of the common welth. Secondly, the Clothier, who by his diligēce ſetteth a woorke a great number of people, to the maintenaunce of the countreys where as they are planted, and to the profit of the whole realme. And thirdly, the Merchaunt aduenturer, a member that may not be ſpared, for by them the commodities which may beſt be ſpared, are tranſported into other countreys: and the commodities, which to their natyue countrey is moſte wantyng, that bring they home by way of exchaunge and returne. As God hath giuen and diſtributed to euery Nation and countrey, a ſeuerall bleſſyng, for which England is not the leaſt indebted vnto God, aboue any other nation, in reſpect of the large meaſure of Gods ſundry benifites receiued in ſuche wyſe: as it may rightly bee ſaide, what is moſt needfull for the ſupplye of mans neceſſity, but that England is plē
                  tifully furniſhed withall, eſpecially of

foode for mans ſuſtenance, & the cōmoditie of wooll. which beyng tranſported into cloth, or otherwyſe accordyng to the lawes of this realme, yeldeth great good to moſt ſortes of people: for which other Nations can not but thinke them ſelues to be rightly beholdyng vnto Englande, as appeareth by the intercourſe, ſought to be maynteined with Englande by forraine Princes: In reſpecte whereof, the felowſhyp of the Merchant aduenturers, haue alwayes declared thē ſelues worthy mēbers. As by their ſundry careful indeuours them ſelues haue, and doe dailye manifeſt, not only in aduēnturing of their ſubſtaunce, in the proſecutyng of their paynfull affayres, with the benifit which by them is brought into their Princes Coffers, which is not eaſily compaſſed, The property of good Bees. nor without aduenture of their lynes, lyke vnto good and profitable Bees, who in their trade doe much differ from the idle Drones, and ſuch as make great buzzing to the diſturbance of the good trauellyng Bees, whoſe inclination vpon examination you ſhall finde more profitable then the droniſhe ones. To try all whereof let

it be noted how euery company of good Bees being ſeperated from their hiues in gathering of their prouiſion far from home, who vpon their ſeuerall returnes againe, no one will couet any other hyue but their owne proper, and that which is incident vnto them ſelues, neyther ſhould be ſuffered if they would, for that by nature as it ſhoulde ſeeme, euery company of Bees doeth ſo holde together, in ſuche wyſe, as euery one of them doeth in the wynter poſſeſſe the fruite of their painefull labour gathered in the ſomer. Being perfourmed by equall labour not without daunger to bee croſſed in their trauayle, ſome tyme by one meanes, ſome tymes by an other. In ſo muche as it appereth in the felowſhip of good Bees, that the want of the out, is not the proſperitie of the other: And that it ſeemeth that their prouiſion is gathered by them with an indifferent care. Albeit, that there are ſome, that doe trauayle further from their home then other ſome: and as there are both great and ſmall, ſo each of them do expreſſe foorth their goodnes by the yeldyng of their increaſe: In the

perfourmaunce whereof, the good wil of each one, ſeemeth to be well allowed, not onely to the comfort of their own felowſhyp, but alſo to euery common wealth, whereas they are ſetled and cheriſhed, declaryng thē ſelues ſo worthie to bee accounted of, cōtrary to Wapſes, not without euil ſtinges in the gathering of their badde prouiſion: And that often tymes doeth appeare by the ſhrewde harme and damage that many an honeſt man doeth ſuſtayne by dealyng with ſuche vnprofitable cattayle: whoſe ſeperation is, not onely required from among good Bees, but alſo their company from among mē. Neuertheleſſe many of that ſort woulde be thought and reputed as good and profitable Bees, although no honeſt bare faced man can well away to haue to doe with that ſort. From whome it may bee thought that many people in this age haue taken enſample, to deale ſhrewdelye and vniuſtly with their neyghbours, as dayly experience teacheth. In ſomuche as it was a common ſaying amonge the people not longe ſithens, that where any one intended to do dammage

to any other their Chriſtian brethren or neighbours, it was ſpeeched in a barbarous manner thus: I warrant you to bee ouertaken with a crooked meaſure, by hauyng to doe with ſuche a one: which God knoweth appereth yet to be too too truly perfourmed by the cōmon practiſe thereof, contrary to this one good inſample. For the true meaſuring of corne in all incorporate Cities and Townes in Englande, where the true meaſure is well knowne to be faſtened in a certaine place neare vnto the market, where as euery one may at their pleaſures, haue the true vſe thereof, and not denyed to any: which notwithſtanding, the greateſt number of the people in their common buiyng and ſellyng, doe ſeeme to haue ſet a parte to deale in true meaſure, as hardly to bee perſuaded to take ſo litle paynes as once to ſteppe ouer the way, or to their nexte neyghbours doore, to the ende to ſpeake or deale in trueth and true meaſure, by reaſon that the crooked meaſure is euery where ſo readie. As often tymes it falleth out too true, that many a true meanyng man is ouertaken, & ſome tymes vndone

by ſuche lyke euill crooked & deceiueable meanes, and yet the Lorde hath ſayde, Luke. 3 that all crooked thinges ſhall bee made ſtraight, & all rough wayes ſhalbe made playne, and all fleſhe ſhall ſee the ſaluation of their God.
               And although all men can ſay, playne Chapmen or retaylers of wares. meanyng and playne dealyng is beſt, as in very deede and in trueth none can deny it, ſo fewe doe folow it. As when any Retaylors, or chapman of wares, doe buy at the Merchauntes handes to ſell againe. Then ſuche can ſay, it is naught it is Pron. 20. naught, but whē he hath it, he doth praiſe the ſame, and that in ſuch deformed wyſe, as that many in doublyng the falſhoode of their tongues, forbeare not to ſweare in a deceiueable manner, that it coſt them thus muche, and that they may not aford it vnder thus muche: when as in deede, ſuche their buying and ſellyng tendeth to deceit: In ſo much as when ſome of them haue beene reprooued for takyng Gods name in vayne, ſome ſuch there haue byn ſo impudent as in defence of their euyll doyng, haue anſweared, that in tyme of their ſwearyng they haue deteyned their

thoughtes in their heartes. Although all ſuch ought not to be ignoraunt that God is a ſearcher of the heartes and raynes. But what may be ſayde then to ſuch horrible monſters, for I may not terme them men: If there be ſuche as I haue hearde to be, who will not let to ſweare vpon a booke, and that before any Iudge, beyng hyred therevnto for money. And ſuch are called by the names of Knightes of the poſte, more fitter for the Gallowes, then to liue in a common wealth where Chriſt is profeſſed. For by ſuche wicked & damnable meanes, truth is oftentimes put to ſilence, and the lawe is ſubuerted contrary to this doctrine, that who ſo liſteth to liue, and would faine ſee good dayes, let him refraine his tongue from euil, & his lippes that they ſpeake no guile. But it may well be, that we in this age do draw neerer vnto Gods iudgementes: which the rather doeth appeare, when in euery ones mouth, yea by the youth euery wher it is now a cōmon ſpeach intaking Gods name in vaine, for euery trifling thing, when it is ſaid, as Chriſt ſhal helpe mee, and as Chriſt ſhall iudge me, in ſuche deformed

ſort as many ſeemeth not to take knowledge in what manner Chriſt ſhall come in iudgement bringyng wyfull tydings to all ſuch as ſhal be found to haue cleane hearts & vndefiled handes. But in a wo
                     •
                  ull & dolefull tyme vnto the wicked whoſe bearres are corrupted, and handes diſtained with abhominations: as we are taught in the ſecond Epiſtle of S. Peter. This firſt vnderſtād, that there ſhal come Peter. 3. in the laſt dayes mockers in deceitfulnes which wil walke after their owne Iuſtes: and ſay, where is the promiſe of his comming: for ſince the teachers dyed, all things continue in the ſame eſtate wherin they were at the beginning: For this they know not and that wilfully, how that the heauens a great while ago were, and the earth out of the waters appeared vp thorow the water, by the word of God: by the which thinges, the worlde that then was periſhed, being ouerrunne wt water: but the heauens & earth which are nowe, In Noahs dayes, the olde world periſhed thorow water: But this world is reſerued for fyre. be kept by his worde in ſtore, & reſerued vnto fire agaynſt the day of iudgement, and perdition of vngodly men.
               Dearly beloued, be not ignorāt of this

one thing, howe that one day is with the Lorde as a thouſand yeares, and a thouſand yeares as one day. The Lorde that hath promiſed is not ſlacke, as ſome men count ſlackneſſe: but is patient to vsward. Foraſmuch as he wold haue no man loſt, but will receiue all men to repentaunce. Neuertheleſſe, the day of the Lorde will come as a theefe in the night, in the which day, the heauens ſhall paſſe away in maner of a tempeſt, and the Elements ſhal melt with heate: the earth alſo and the workes that are therin, ſhall burne. Seeyng then that all theſe thinges ſhal periſh what manner perſons ought yee to bee in holy conuerſation and godlines: looking for, and haſtyng vnto the comming of the day of God, by whome the heauens ſhall periſhe with fyre, and the Elements ſhal melte with heate. Neuertheleſſe, wee accordyng to his promiſe, looke for a newe heauen and a newe earth, wherein dwelleth righteouſneſſe. Wherefore dearely beloued, ſeeyng that yee looke for ſuche thinges, be diligent that ye may be found in peace without ſpotte and vndefiled, and ſuppoſe that the long ſuffring of the Lord

is ſaluation.
               By this doctrine euery Chriſtian ought not to be ignorant howe there is a great differēce betwixt ye record of God and the witneſſe of men, & that euery one ſhould ſo growe in grace & knowledge of our Lord and ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt: As that we be not plucked away thorow the errour of the wicked. In reſpect wherof to the ende that all men may haue a due conſideration what manner of dealing God alloweth among his people in their buiyng and ſelling, I haue here ſet down ſuch certaine notes as the worde of God doeth direct vs vnto.
               When thou ſelleſt aught to thy neighbour or buieſt any thing of him, deceiue Deut. 25. nor oppreſſe him not.
               Deale not wrongfully with thy neighbour, Leui. 19. with meateyeard, weight nor meaſure.
               A falſe Ballance is an abomination Prou. 11. vnto thy Lord God. Moreouer thou ſhalt not haue in thy bagge twoo manner of weightes, a great and a ſmall: neyther ſhalt thou haue in thy houſe two manner of meaſures a great and a ſmal. That thy

lyfe may be long in the lande which the Lorde thy God giueth thee: for who ſo doeth contrary, is an abhomination vnto the Lord God.
               Haue therefore a regarde vnto this doctrine, leſt that God beholdyng your miſoemeanour towardes him and your neighbour, ſay this vnto you, Theſe people drawe vnto mee with their mouthes Math. 15. and honour mee with their lippes, howbeit their heartes are farre from me: but in vaine doe they ſerue me.
               Moreouer it is written, if any man among you ſeeme deuout, and refraine not his tongue, but do deceiue his own heart: this mans deuotion is in vaine.
               By which doctrine wee are learned, that the eyes of the lord are ouer the righteous, & his eares are open to their prayers: and the face of the Lorde beholdeth all thoſe which doe euill and wrong. Wherby it is to be noted, in what dread men doe ſometime ſtand in of their ſuperiors, leſt that for ſome contempt or diſobedience, the tranſgreſſours are ſubiecte to be ſent to ward, in ſuch wiſe as in ſuch caſes men doe ſeeme to bee very circumſpect. And yet a great number, thorowe

their neglecting their duetie & obedience to God, do vnto him ſtande ſubiect euery houre, to be caſt into a woful priſō: where it will be too late for ſuch to ſay, I would other my friends were warned by mee. For then that may neither auayle thee, nor amend them. As wee finde it written: That when Diues deſired that his other Luke. 16. brethrē might haue knowledge of his torments: It was anſwered him: They haue Moyſes, the law, and the Prophets.
               By which enſample all people are admoniſhed, yt in this lyfe while they haue time & ſpace euery one both men and women, to do nothing againſt a good conſcience, and to examine in them ſelues, how they doe delight to lyue in the feare of God, and by their innocency of lyfe, doe indeuour them ſelues to obtayne Gods fauour, and ſo to be brought into the fold mētioned in S. Iohn. Wherin it is noted, Iohn. 10. how the ſheepe of Chriſt are marked: and wt what ſeales they are ſealed againſt the day of the Lorde: By which parcell of ſcripture, Chriſt doeth acknowledge his: In that hee ſayeth, My ſheepe heare my voyce, I knowe them,

and they followe mee, and I giue vnto them eternall lyfe, which is to bee obtayned by earneſt repentance, and mortifling of our earthly members, framyng our felues to bee obedient vnto the voyce of that good ſhepheard of our ſoules. Seeing wee feede all in one greene paſture vnder ſo good a ſhephearde nexte vnder God: as our gratious Queene, of whom rightly it may bee regiſtred in perpetuū, That by the permiſſion of God & his protection, her Maieſtie hath raigned the peaceable Queene and ſhephearde ouer the litle ſhepcoate of the people of England. Wherefore it behooueth the people to be as ſimple as ſheepe, & in their yelding lyke due obedience to God, and our ſo bleſſed a gouerneſſe, & not to ſet light by the callyng of the Paſtors, who watch for our ſoules euen as thoſe that muſte giue account therefore, and vnto ſuch we owe a duetifull reuerence, eſpecially if they be ſuche Paſtors and Miniſters as are required in ſo weightie a buſineſſe: and whatſoeuer the Miniſter be, be hee good or badde, whoſe conuerſation if we will needes looke vpon, yet wee muſt ſo

looke, that our looking be rightly. And although we are forbidden to do as ſome of them doe: yet we are not forbidden to folowe the doctrine which by them is deliuered vnto vs, out of the worde of God. And to trye whether our followyng bee rightly, and howe wee doe profite euery mā in the courſe of this our pilgrimage, Let vs examine it by theſe twoo rules. Firſt, as huſbandment can make no perfit reckoning of his painefull labour & trauayle, The meanes wherby eche man may eramin in himſelfe how he groweth rich to godward. nor of the increaſe of his ſeed ſow en in the ground, vntill he haue had ſome certaine tryall of the yeelde which oftentymes is hindered in the commyng vpp, in ſo much, as although it haue a proſperous tyme, firſt in growyng greene and pleaſant to looke vppon, which notwithſtanding it is apparant, that in that ſeaſon may happen great imperfection, as to be choked with weedes or blaſted. And albeit, it grow to a more forwardneſſe to earyng, yet it is ſeene oftentymes that a tempeſt commeth and beateth it downe. And if there remayne a hope of plentifull increaſe, yet the ſame is not certainely knowne, howe much it will profit the huſvandman,

vntyll it bee houſed in the barne.
               And againe as the Merchant aduenturer can not perfite their accomptes before the dangerous aduentures be returned in ſafetie, to their wiſhed and deſired port: So as after their merchandiſe and commodities beeyng vended, then fall they to caſting and Ballaunſing of their recconings. Vpon the examinatiō wherof, they doe diſcerne, what and how much they haue profited or loſt in their voiage or aduenture: and if they finde that they are brought behynde hand, and fall ſhort of their recconing, then they examine the cauſe, which beyng founde, they become more carefull in their; next aduenturing. An ſuche wyſe, as by their diligence, and God his bleſſyng of their trauayles, in ſo good cōditiō, as their former loſſes oftentyme is reſtored againe with double increaſe, to their great comfort and the diſcouraging of all ſuche as doe fraudently deceiue or waſtfully cōſume their goods, and ſo become bankerupt.
               Theſe examples I woulde wiſhe all

men to imitate, by examinyng euery one in him ſelfe, howe they doe growe riche in the perfityng of their accompt to God warde. Although it is apparaunt that there are ſome men which waxe riche otherwyſe, who ſhewe them ſelues not to knowe what it is to heare the Lord God ſpeakyng to them by his Prophets: and in this our age deliuered vnto them by the mouthes of many learned and godly Preachers, whoſe callyng if they may not be heard and receiued, accordyng as it is written in the Reuelation. Hee that hath eares let him heare, That is to heare rightly, and with ioy, and to expreſſe the fruite thereof in a lyfe agreeable to the ſame, which if riche men doe refuſe to practiſe, then let it be examined how, and what ſuch and their poſteritie ſhall be the better for riches vnlawfully gotten: ſeeing that the more they haue, the more they want. And that which they haue ſo gotten and ſcraped together, ſhel one day bee a witneſſe againſt them. For it is true, that although wee haue here many dayes, God ſhall haue one day. As the

worde of God teſtifieth, That the day of the Lorde ſhall come vpon all fleſhe. And as it is written in the Goſpell of Saint Marke. Except that the Lorde ſhoulde ſhorten thoſe dayes, no man ſhould be ſaued: Mark. 13. but for the elects ſake which he hath choſen, he hath ſhortened thoſe dayes. &c.
               Moreouer it is written in the ſame Chapter, Thus ſaith the Lord. Til theſe thinges be done, heauen and earth ſhall paſſe, but my wordes ſhal not paſſe. But of the day & the houre knoweth no man: No not the Angels which are in heauen, neither the ſonne of man him ſelfe, ſaue the father onely. Take heede, watch and pray, for ye knowe not when the time is. As a man which is gone into a ſtraunge countrey, and hath left his houſe, & giuen authoritie to his ſeruauntes, and to euery one his work, and commaunded the Porter to watch: watch therfore, for ye know not when the maiſter of the houſe will come, whether at euen or midnight, whether at the Cocke crowing, or in the dawnyng: Leſt if he come ſodainly, he ſhould ſinde you ſleeping.
               And that I ſay vnto you, I ſay vnto

all men, watch and pray.
               The due conſideration of this doctrine hath mooued many good and godly men to become ſtedfaſt in the faith of Chriſt, as the beſt meanes to the attainement of ſaluation. But this fayth that is requyred, muſt be no idle fayth: for a perfecte Faith is of a forcible effect. and the ſtay of our life. fayth is as a conſumyng fyre to burne vp all infidelitie, ſinne, and wickednes.
               
                  And as faith of it ſelfe
                  Is the ſumme of our Creede:
                  So good workes are not excluded,
                  in word nor indeede.
               
               As teſtifieth theſe neceſſary places of ſcriptures. Thou haſt fayth, and I haue deedes: ſhew me thy fayth by thy deeds: belieueſt thou that there is one God? thou doeſt well: The Deuils alſo beleeue and Iames. 2. tremble.
               If a brother or a ſiſter be naked, and be deſtitute of daily foode, and one of you ſay vnto him, depart in peace: God ſend you warmeneſſe and clothing. Notwithſtandyng, ye giue them not thoſe things that are needfull to the body, what ſhal it

helpe: Euen ſo, faith if it haue no deedes is dead in it ſelf. As for enſāple, a needle is a needfull thing to make the way, but a threed wt it more proſiteth the workmā.
               And Sainct Paule to the Hebrewes writeth, Fayth is a ſure foundation of Hebr. 11. thinges which are hoped for: and a certaintie of thinges that are not ſeene. For by it the Elders obtayned a good report. By Fayth Abel offered a more plentiful ſacrifice then Cayne: by which he obtayned witneſſe that he was righteous, God teſtifiyng of his giftes.
               And in his Epiſtle to the Galathians, Gal. 6. Beare yee one an others burthen, and ſo fulfil the law of Chriſt, for if a man ſeeme to him ſelfe that he is ſomewhat, when in deed hee is nothing the ſame, deceiueth his owne minde. Let euery man prooue his owne workes: for whatſoeuer a man ſoweth, that ſhall he alſo reape. For hee that ſoweth in the fleſh, ſhall of the fleſhe receiue corruption: And hee that ſoweth in the ſpirit, ſhall reape lyfe euerlaſtyng. Let vs not be weery of wel doing, for whē the tyme is come, we ſhal reape without

wearineſſe: While wee haue therefore tyme, let vs doe good vnto all men, eſpecially vnto them which are of the houſeholde of Fayth: for ſo ſhall we liue and not dye.
               And that I wryte not theſe thinges forth of mens dreames or fables, nor out of prophane hiſtories painted with vaine eloquence, but forth of the infallible truth of Gods worde. As by the authoritie of Saint Peter in his firſt Epiſtle doeth Pet. 1. leade vnto. Knowe this, that no Propheſie in the ſcriptures hath any priuate interpretation, for the Scriptures came neuer by the will of man: But holy men of God ſpake as they were moued by the holy Ghoſt.
               Notwithſtandyng, it is a thing much to be lamented, that any people that doe profeſſe Chriſt, ſhould ſo loue this worlds poſſeſſions, as to leaue God and theyr neighbour vnbeloued. And yet ſuch ought not to bee ignoraunt that the vertue of riches do take their leaue in this life, wheras the ende of godlineſſe neuer dyeth: but doeth aſcende vpp vnto Heauen before the hyghe Maieſtie of GOD, who

rewardeth euery one accordyng to his workes. In ſo much as Chriſt onely, hauing ouercome all thinges, hath prepared a Crowne of glory, for all thoſe that walke in his wayes, and fyue after his commaundements and ordinaunces: So ſhall it neuer repent any of well doyng. As if all riche men dyd ſo loue and feare God, as to feare him for his iuſtice, and loue him for his graces and mercies extended: Then woulde riche men ceaſe to worke ſinne with greedineſſe: who as they will take vnto them the enſamples of the godly, riche Abraham, Dauid, and Iob. Whoſe maner of godly liuyng, all riche men ſhould alſo imitate, and ſet before their eyes, practizing the ſame in their conuerſations, as a perfect tryall to knowe a good riche man by, aſſuring our ſelues that that which Gods worde warranteth, is a perfect touchſtone to prooue the teſtimony of a good conſcience.
               But God knoweth with what ſorowe it may be ſayd, O miſerable world, wheras riches doe remaine: and vertue and godlineſſe in the moſt part of the people appeareth to be fledde, which is to be lamented

in this wyſe: O litle labour for a man to knowe him ſelfe. O litle fayth in ſeeking to 
                     ••
                  eepe Gods commaundementes. And yet a ſtraunge thing howe loth euery on
                     ••
                   is to dye: and yet a number dead in deedes, and yet liuyng. As it is recorded in the ſcriptures of the rich widowe, that while ſhe liued, in all pleaſure and ſenſuatie it was ſayd of her, let her alone, ſheepe dead.
               As alſo ſo long as the prodigal childe lyued in his prodigalitie raunging at his pleaſure, ſo let runne at large: duryng which time his father accompted him as loſt, vntyll hee returned beeyng touched with the conſideration of his miſerable eſtate, and acknowledged his owne infirmitie and weakenes in that he had obeyed vnto his owne luſt in treading of the pathes of vngodlines wherein he being weried confeſſed him ſelfe to haue beene worthily chaſtened, doing the duetie of a childe in yeeldyng of due obedience. By which meanes hee was reconciled and receiued againe into his fathers favour. God grant the like retourning, not onely of all the diſobedient children of

Englande, but alſo of all ſuch as are old enough to knowe what it is to diſobeye God, and that many ſuche as neither wil refourme them ſelues, nor looke to be refoutmed.
            
            
               
                  Agaynſt extortyng Farmers and Graſiers, depending on priuate gayne.
               
                  ANd that the euil ſeed of priuate gaine, is ſowen and hath taken roote, as well in the countrey as in Cities and Townes, it is euident by the practiſe that many riche Farmers and Eraſiers do vſe in this age, in place of ſuch as God alotted vnto Adam, ſaying—In the ſweat of thy face ſhalte thou eat thy bread, tyll Gen. 3. thou be turned again into the ground, for out of it was thou taken, in as muche as thou art duſt, and into duſt ſhalt thou bee turned again. And the Lord God ſēt him forth from the Garden of Eden, to dreſſe the grounde that hee was taken out off:

wherby it is apparant that this profeſſiō was it, that then well pleaſed God, in the firſt creation of thinges. But the euil nature of man, with the conſent of priuate gaine, hath ſo corrupted the way, as God hath bene much greeued & mooued thereby. As the enſample of the riche man ſpoken of in the Goſpell doeth well declare, where God ſpeaking in this wiſe, ſayde: Luke. 
                        ••
                     . Take heed and beware of couetouſneſſe, for no mans life ſtādeth in the abundance of the things which he poſſeſſeth: and he put forth a ſimilitude, ſaying: The groūd of a certaine riche man, brought foorth plentifull fruites, and hee thought within him ſelf ſaying, what ſhall I do? becauſe I haue no roume where to beſtowe my fruite. And he ſayd this will I doe, I wil deſtroy my barnes, & builde greater, and therein will I gather all my goods, that are growen vnto mee: And I will ſay vnto my ſoule, Soule thou haſt muche goods layde vp in ſtore for many yeares, take thyne eaſe: eate, drinke, & be merry. But God ſayde vnto him, thou foole, this nyght will they fetche away thy ſoule agayne from thee. Then whoſe ſhall

all thoſe thinges be which thou haſt prouided: So is it with him that gathereth riches to him ſelf, and is not rich towards God.
               By this part of Scripture it appeareth how ſome men haue grown in welth and yet doe contrarie to Gods liking, which notwithſtanding it is manifeſt that many rich Farmers and Graſiers haue peruerted the way of ſuch as God requireth, and as themſelues ought to be. For it is true that with many of them, all is too little to the inlarging of their borders, as though they would liue alone vpon the earth: Inſomuch as ſome one of that profeſſion haue incroched into his handes the occupation of two or three Farmes mainteyning hardly therevpon ſo many perſons as any one of thoſe Farmes mainteyned before tyme, when as they were occupied by ſeuerall houſeholders, in ſuch wiſe as many ſeruiceable men were thereuppon mainteyned in fewe yeeres paſt beeing nowe ſupplied with a ſhepheard and his dogge, wherin many haue founde ſo great gaine to the increaſing of their deceiuable wealth, by

conuerting their landes into paſſuring and ſeedyng of ſheepe, that many Landlordes haue bene content tolet the dwellyng houſen of their Farmes fal downe, to the ende to inlarge their borders by laying the lands of two or three Farmes all into one: reſeruyng one Cottage or houſe therevnto.
               The which euill of late yeares hath growen the rather by many euill diſpoſed and greedy minded riche Farmers, who to the increaſe of other priuate gaine ſeemeth not to force what damage ſuch doe vnto their more honeſt playne meanyng neighbours, in ſo confuſed and prepoſterous maner: that often tymes it ſo falleth out, that by the lewde practiſe and forecaſting of ſome one, a great manye are caſt behynde hande. By their beyng made deſtitute of thatwhich their aunceſters had the vſe of many yeares before. And that in ſuche reaſonable manner, as one honeſt neighbour might be relieuing and ayding vnto an other, and in good caſe to furniſhe their Prince accordyng to euery one in their callyng. But nowe ſay they the caſe is altered, and many of

their ſtate ſhrewdely abated. In ſuch ſort as they can not doe as their anceſtours haue done in tyme paſt, in the ſeruite of their Prince, nor yet ſo to furniſhe the markets with the fruit of their labours, as many their good effectes doe deſire to perfourme, which impediment they ſay is the rather happened vnto them: by reaſon of late, that ſuche haue payde a great fine to their Landlord, for accompliſhing whereof, ſuche oftentymes are conſtrayned to ſell their more needfull ſtock from their grounde, or els they muſt paye a more greater rent then before tyme.
               Whereof in this age ſo many doe complaine & ſay, that by reaſon of ſo great euill. They muſt moyle and turmoyle all dayes of their lyues and all to litle, to the anſweryng of their Landlordes rentes. The rather by the vnhoneſt and greedie myndes of ſome ſuche riche Farmers and Graſiers as of late haue ſeemed to be more careful in their attentyueneſſe of the terme of their neyghbours Leaſes, then eyther God or humayne nature alloweth: with poſting & trying all meanes

poſſible whereby to remoue the good meaning of the Landlordes from his honeſt Tenaunt or Farmer, by vrgyng the Landlordes to hearken to the euil nature of priuate gaine: So as many a ſuch vnconſcionable rich cormorant Farmer letteth ſlyppe no oportunitie and tyme to practiſe the effect of his wicked intention in offering a more larger fyne or greater rent then before the Landlorde made accompt of, in ſo euill condition as the euill operation of priuate gaine hath moued many Landlords to hearken ſo to the ſuttle workyng thereof, as the ſame hath wrought many their honeſt Tenauntes and Farmers great damage, and greater is like to worke, vnleſſe it may pleaſe God ſo to touche the heartes of Landelordes, as by ſettyng a part the euil condition of priuate gayne, they may auoyde ſo great euils as may happen thorow ſo great an abuſe. Wheras in refourmyng of the euill, if Landlordes would retaine to their Farmers, their honeſt Tenants and their poſteritie, in ſo good condition. as not being ouer burdenous vnto them: So ſhold Landlords not onely bind vnto

them the hearts of their honeſt tennants and Farmers: But alſo thereby ſhall doe a deed commendable in the ſight of God and man. The contrary no doubtes of it hath alwayes bene a thyng diſpleaſaunt vnto God and all good men: as appeareth in former ages. In ſo much as it is written, That Iob in the relating of his innocency ſayth thus. But if caſe be that Iob. 31. my land crye out againſt me, or that the forowes thereof make any complaynt, if I haue eaten the fruite thereof vnpayed for: then let thiſtles growe in ſtead of my wheate, and Cockle for my Barley.
               And in the Prophete Ezechiel it is written thus: Beholde all Soules are Ezech. 18. myne, lyke as the father is mine, ſo is the ſonne mine alſo: the ſoule that ſinneth ſhall dye. The fathers haue eaten ſower Grapes, and their childrens teeth are ſet on edge. If a man be godly and doe the thing that is right: hee eateth not vppon the hilles: hee lifteth not his eyes to the foule Idoles of Iſraell: hee defileth not his neighbours wyfe: he greeueth no body: hee giueth his debter his pledge againe: he taketh none other mans goods

by violence: hee cloatheth the naked: he lendeth nothing vpon vſury: hee taketh nothing ouer: he withdraweth his hand from doyng wrong: hee handeleth faythfully betwixt man and man: he walketh in my commaundements & keepeth my lawes and perfourmeth them faithfully. This is a righteous man, hee ſhall ſurely lyue ſayeth the Lord God. And that euery riche man ought to haue reſpect vnto his neighbours well doyng, It appeareth in this parte of ſcripture of Sainct Paul to the Corinthians. Nowe therfore Cor. 8. as ye are riche in all perfectnes in fayth, in worde, in knowledge, in all feruentnes and in loue, that ye haue to vs: Euen ſo, ſee that yee be plenteous in beneuolence alſo. This ſay I not in commaundyng, but becauſe of feruentnes I doe allowe the vnfeignedneſſe of your loue towards other men. For ye knowe the liberalitie of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, that though hee was riche, yet for your ſake hee became poore: that ye thorowe his pouerty might be made riche.
               But ſuch there are in this age, whoſe hearts are ſo framed to dwel in frowardneſſe,

as to ſay, that theſe be not the daies of innocencie, what ſhall it then followe: that their wickedneſſe would make them the daies of craftineſſe: God forbid, from which euill wee are forewarned in the fourth booke of the Prophet Eſdras. God ſpeaking vnto Eſdras, ſhewyng vnto him the puniſhments which he threateneth to come vppon euill people, and howe hee woulde haue all that profeſſe his name to auoyde the plague.
               Who ſo keepeth my commaundements and precepts, ſayth the Lorde God, Let not your ſinnes way you down. and let not your vnrighteouſneſſe be lifted vp. Woe be vnto them that are ſubdued vnto their ſinnes, and tangled in their wickedneſſe: lyke as a field is hedged in with buſſhes, and the path therof couered with thorns, and ſo be taken and caſt into the fyre and burnt.
               Hereby all that profeſſe Chriſt are admoniſhed to flee ſuche euill wayes, as lead to the deſtruction of all thoſe that trauayle therein, and reſpecting their owne priuate gaine, ſeeme not to make any accompt of wrong doing. As for enſample,

howe many nowe in this age are ſo greedily ſet vpon couetouſnes, as to incroche into one mans hands ſo many tenements and houſes as by all meanes poſſible hee may compaſſe, eyther in buying the feeſimple, or els the graundeleaſe ouer the tennantes heades, in ſuche wyſe as hauyng obtayned the ſame, and doing ſome ſmall reparations thereupon: then doeth the new Landlord not onely inhaunce the rent for which ſuch Tenements went before tyme: But alſo the Tenaunt muſt giue a large fyne, beſides ſome reparations left vndone for him to doe, for the eaſement of the houſe, although the poore Tenantes purſe bee ſo wronged therby, as oftentymes it ſo falleth out, that all the ſhiftes that hee can make, may hardlye recouer ſo chargeable a ſickneſſe as happeneth to many by ſuche yll meanes, in ſuch ſort as ſometimes the tenant groweth in ſo weake a caſe as not able to abyde the ayre, or to goe out of the dooers, by reaſon of the infection of priuate

gain: being an euil in this caſe not much different from vſury: and ſo muche the more to be ſorowed, where the people can apply themſelues to no better trade, then hauing compaſſed a peece of money before hand, to frame thereby a heauy burden wherwith to lade their poore bretheren, as it is too too true, that there are many ſuche, as haue weake handes, and feeble knees to doe good, but are ſtrong enough to keepe down their weaker brethren. And very fewe is the number that do labour truely in the Lords pathwayes in any their vocations, but from time to time it is too manifeſt howe the Lordes wayes haue beene peruerted by the corrupt nature of mankinde in all ages. By meanes wherof, Chriſt his religion hath bene greeuouſly hindered, as it is euidēt by one notable enſample as hereafter foloweth.
               Sometyme there was a great Turke An enſample of a great Turke. whoſe name was called Soldanus Egypti. who was touched with the conſideration of the profeſſion of Chriſt his religion: as that he was mooued and ſtirred in mynd, to haue forſaken his abominable errour

and become a Chriſtian: So as he might bee aſcertayned that the lyues of Chriſtians were agreeable to their profeſſion. Wherevpon in the conſideration of his intention, after hee had long pondered with him ſelfe howe hee might beſt bee reſolued in ſo weightie a cauſe, he determined to breake the matter vnto one nere about him, in whome hee had moſt confidence, and vnto him the ſaid great Turke declared the ſome of his intention, and findyng his truſtie friende readye to accompliſhe his requeſt: who ſecretly was furniſhed about that buſines: So that in ſhort time he arriued in ſome parts of Italy, as a part of Chriſtendom: to the end there to diſcouer the maners and behauiours of the people, where bee founde the maner of their liuyng, ſo farre vnagreeable to the profeſſiō of the names of Chriſtians, as the ſaide meſſenger of the. Turkes, had no neede to make any long abode in thoſe partes, for any better tryall. So as hee hauing attayned the effect of his meſſage which hee had giuen in charge, he returned again from whence hee came, and made relation vnto his

maſter the great Turk in this wiſe. True it is, that thoſe people where I haue byn in Chriſtendome, & that beare the names of Chriſtians, doe in their outwarde appearaunce profeſſe to ſerue a Godwhom they knowe note, and otherwiſe theyr lyues in deedes, are diſtayned with all abominable loathſome ſinne and wyekedneſſe. Whereuppon the ſayd great Turke hauyng taken ſome pauſe, brake out in theſe ſpeeches or the lyke. And is it ſo, then I deceſt and defie them and theyr religion. In ſuche odeous and reprochfull wyſe as may bee an enſample to all partes of Chriſtendome, where as Chriſt is profeſſed in words, and contemned in deedes. In ſo much as we are to praye to GOD to keepe the Turkes ſpyes out of this parte of Chriſtendome, vntyll a more vnifourme order of liuyng may bee founde ioyned with our profeſſion, in ſuche godlye conuerſation, as that Englande eſpecially maye become a Lanterne to other our neyghbours, who haue not as yet ſo large meaſure of Gods louyng kyndneſſe, as it hath

pleaſed him in his mercy to extende vnto Englande, aboue other nations. For the which Englande is the more indebted and accomptable vnto God: in the conſideration whereof, euery member ought to bee ſo heedefull in yelding their due obedience: as that if it were poſſible, the very Turke may be mooued to acknowledge Chriſt. And that the enemyes ſpyes may haue no iuſte cauſe to vſe any ſuche manner of reproouyng the people of Englande. But that euerye one of the congregation, maye be ſtirred to frame theyr lyues in godly conuerſation, and not to delyght to take enſample of euill doyng: but rather to be doing that which is good, and to edifie with all. As not compelled therevnto, but of loue and zealous affection vnto God, who by his word hath left vnto vs perfect enſamples, howe to behaue our ſelues in obedience vnto him, our Prince and rulers. As Saincte Paule to the Romaynes playnely ſetteth downe. Let euerye ſoule bee ſubiecte to the Superiour powers.
               
                  
And againe in his Epiſtle to Titus, he hath ſet downe ſpeciall exhortations, how thoſe that profeſſe Chriſt ſhould behaue them ſelues in godly conuerſation of lyfe.
               (But alas) there are a number of people in this age, both men & women, who by the ſettyng on of the couetous Deuill, and the conſent of dilobedience, doe not ceaſe to take in hand many wicked deeds and euill actions, the moſt parte whereof are yet vntolde. In ſo much as it may be ſayde, who might offende, and hath not offended? Wherefore let euerye one in tyme refraine from their froward waies, and to ceaſe from committyng of ſinne with greedines. And not ſo to ouerweene or thinke of them ſelues, to be ſuche as in deed they are not. For it is true that although any man or woman doe poſſeſſe beautie or riches or any other good gift, yet ſuche thinges are vnperfite in vs, ſo long as wee doe remayne in this vayle of miſeryes, as our ſundry imperfections do declare. But all are as a lumpe of clay lying vppon the face of the earth remayning at the choyſe and will of the Potter

to apply and woorke it at his pleaſure: who oftentymes in the workyng, findeth the clay to fram
                     •
                   but badly to the workemans mynde, by reaſon of the ſundry imperfections which lye hidden therein. Whereby the ſame becommeth in the woorkyng ſo full of crackes and flawes, not ſitting to the vſe for which it was mēt in the workemans beginnyng.
               And ſo oftentymes it falleth out with The heart of man may be compared to a payre of writing tables. the heartes of men, which ought to bee prepared as a payre of writyng tables, which ſerue for to noate in all remembrā
                  ces. and as in infancy none can write, ſo long are they eaſie to be kept cleane. But once beyng growen to iudgement to diſcerne of good and euill: If we haue blotted the tables of our heartes with euill thinges: the ſame muſt firſt bee cleane wyped out before wee may wryte good thinges therein: which beyng ſo orderly kept, vſing the ſame to all good intentes and purpoſes, in which application, wee ſhall finde the ſame as a ready meane to bryng vs vnto ſuch perfect knowledge in our age, as we haue noted therein in our youth. For the perfourmance whereof, the

pen of Gods ſpirite is herein required. But it is muche to bee feared, that there are too many that in their youthe haue written and doe daily to wryte, ſo many euill and peruerſe notes, with the pen of vanitie, in ſo muche as when they come to age, they finde them ſo full, as no roumeth is left to wryte that which good is, beyng poſſeſſed by ſuche as may not bee perſuaded to put out the euil yt hath bene confuſedly written therin: to the end that goodneſſe might bee placed in ſteade of euill, and vertue in ſteade of vice:
               All which notwithſtandyng, mans heart ſeemeth oftentymes to be ſo wrapped in ignoraunce and diſobedience, as hardly many may bee brought to yelde vnto the trueth. Wherin is to be remembred, that GOD hath ſo ordayned that weedes and thiſtles ſhoulde growe vp among good corne. To the end that when the harueſt commeth, the good and iuſte huſbandman may clenſe the good corne from the Teares and Fetches. The good corne with ioye to be houſed in the barne, and the Tares and Fetches to remayne for euerlaſting fyre.
               
                  
Euen ſo hath God placed vppon the face of the earth, of people, wicked and frowarde, good and bad, riche and poore, not to the end that any ſhould vaunt them ſelues of their larger meaſure diſtributed thorowe Gods mercyes. Whereby rich men are forbidden to lift vp them ſelues in the glory of their riches, and pore men not to be diſmayde or diſcouraged thorow their poore pouertie. For what God hath done his omnipotencie hath done yt ſame with a condition which he will haue held firme vnto him ſelfe. That is, that euery man ſhal agayne forgo the things which in this lyfe hee nowe poſſeſſeth, be it litle or muche, at a tyme appoynted, with a promiſe that hee will giue vnto euery one newe poſſeſſions, & to euery man accordyng to his deſeruyng. The conſideration whereof, of late yeares hath ſeemed to bee out of moſte peoples thoughtes, as may eaſilye bee diſcerned, by reaſon. That notwithſtandyng, it doeth reſt in the pleaſure and diſpleaſure of almightie God, to take the aduātage of euery cōdition broken, and forfeiture: Yet note

I pray you the preciſe dealings betwyxt worldly men, howe ſtrickt they are in executyng the penalties of bondes, againſt ſuche as are indebted vnto them, and in makyng of contractes and bargaynes to their owne auayle howe carefull ſuch wil be touching bonds with conditions, ſome tymes in taking aduantage of the penaltie, lettyng no day nor houre ouer ſlyp in that behalfe. Albeit, concernyng many their more duetifull care vnto God, in keepyng couenaunt with him, ſuch ſhew themſelues in a manner careleſſe. In ſo much as it is to be feared, that all thoſe that doe ſo wilfully throwe them ſelues indebted vnto God, and thrall to Satan, ſome by one ſinne, and ſome by an other: who in the ende, vnleſſe they looke better vnto them ſelues in tyme, will be driuen to playe the parts of yll debters, who vpon knowledge of their creditor, his beeyng neare at hande vpon commyng, will ſeeke to hyde them ſelues, to ſhunne his preſence, for auoidyng of ſo great penalties as many in this age, doe ſeeme wilfully to ſubiect them ſelues vnto. Beyng warned to auoyde ſo great ignorance, as

that any creature may hide him ſelf from the preſences of the almightie, for our own ſinnes wil finde vs out, at what time God ſhall he of power, euen in the twinckeling of an eye, to take the aduantage of all penalties, and therevpon to awarde a heauy ſentence for inuiolating and breaking his couenauntes and commaundementes, which when wee wretched creatures doe examine in our ſelues howe we haue perfourmed them, we ſhall finde our ſelues ſo guiltie by our manifolde tranſgreſſions and diſobedience, and ſo vnprouided to make ſatiſfaction, that when we ſhal be ſummoned to anſwer to the plaint which ſhall bee layde agaynſt vs in the great day of the Lorde, where euery one ſhall heare it ſayde thus vnto them, howe haſte thou liued, render accompt of thy Bailiwicke, and howe thou haſt beſtowed thy Talent. Wherevnto we ſhall not bee able to pleade one woorde agaynſt a thouſande. In ſo much as I ſee no way but that here in this lyfe while wee are in the way, that euery one doe ſeeke in tyme to agree with ſo mercifull a creditour before wee come to exegent of outlawry,

which we may with leſſe coſt doe, thē to put in a Super ſedeas at the commō lawe. For he is a merrifull Iudge & eaſie to be intreated. But if we let the matter runne to far, the charge will be the greater, and the pleadyng of ignorance will be nothing auayleable. As to ſay, that we were deceiued, as Eue aunſwered vnto God, for the ſame ſhall rather be a witneſſe againſt vs, becauſe yt by her came the firſt fail, from innocencie into ſinne. Whereby we are forewarned that where ſhee fell once in eatyng of the forbidden fruice, wee ſinfull creatures doe fall euery day and houre. In ſo much, as here I may ſay, Who is he that can number his owne ſinnes. Wherefore ſeeyng that no man may eſcape the day of the Lorde of Hoſtes: Let vs ail while he offereth him ſelf vnto vs, ſeeke by all meanes poſſible to ſhake of the fetters of our ſins, wherein we are bounde. And this is to bee done by no other meanes then wholly to commyt our ſelues vnto the mercyes of our eternall God, and by our earneſt and daily prayers to endeuour our ſelues to obtain his fauour by repentaunce and mortification,

refrayning from committing of ſin and wickedneſſe: for late repentance falleth out ſildome to bee true repentaunce. Wherefore in this tyme of grace, it behooueth vs to be thankfull to God, and kynde to our neighbours: Accordyng to this doctrine of Toby, My ſonne do good Tob. 4
                        •
                     
                   in thy lyfe of that thou haſt, and giue the Lorde his due offerings. Doe good to thy neighbour and friend before thou dye, and according to thine abilitie reach out thy hand and giue to the poore: For God beholdeth and hath a reſpect vnto the giuer, and him that receiueth: To him that deceiueth, and him that is deceiued.
            
            
               
               A briefe remembrance for the poore afflicted.
               
               
                  FOraſmuch as GOD will haue it knowen what a ready meanes affliction is, to come vnto Chriſt: It muſt not bee vnderſtoode, but that afflictions do as well happen to rich as vnto poore: for none doeth alwayes enioy ſuche freedom but that at ſometymes are touched with ſome greeuance or affſiction either in body or mynde. Albeit, the poorer ſort doe beare it in a more harder maner, by reaſon of their poore pouertie, not hauyng wherewith to withſtande the colde, nor to feede their hungry bodyes in ſo large a condition as many riche haue. And as there are many riche that ſeeme not to knowe what it is to be riche in God, ſo are there many poore that do abuſe their pouertie, and as Hypocrites doe deceiue, and as it were robbe from the good

poore, the charitable deuotion of godlye diſpoſed people touched with a pitiful affection vnto all. But often it falleth ſo out that there are ſome ſuche as doe declare them ſelues hypocrite poore, that can hā
                  dle their profeſſion in ſo lothſome a maner, as ſuche are hardly to be diſcouered, becauſe of their deceſtable & vngratious practiſe, vnder the vile cloake of deepe diſſimulation, in makyng an occupation of their more miſerable eſtates. And ſuch ought to bee ſifted out of euery common wealth, as chaffe from amōg good corne: And the cauſe to be examined, howe euery ſuche hath growne into ſo miſerable eſtate, which beyng founde to be by any euill practice or behauiour, then a condigne puniſhment to be miniſtred: and to be ſet to ſome worke and labour whereby to earne their liuyng, and being found to be framed to any goodneſſe, then ſuche to be dealt with all according as God hath wrought the lyke effect of late in Londō, whereas ſuche are prouided for, to the great commendation of the ſame Citie, in relieuyng the lame and impotent, and reforming the abuſes of ſuch euil perſōs

as may not otherwiſe be reclaimed. And that poore childrē might ſupply the places which nowe the deuices of turnſpits and Dogges doe furniſhe. And that it ſhould not be lawfull for the parentes of ſuche children to intice them away being once placed, nor to departe tyll they had continued the full terme of yeares, for which ſuch were bound, and thē to make choyce what facultie ſuche will folow for their better prouiſion of liuyng, accordyng to their towardneſſe. For it is written, if one of thy brethren among you bee Deut. 15. poore within any of thy gates in the land which the Lorde thy God giueth thee. Thou ſhalte not harden thine heart, nor ſhut too thine hande from thy poore brother: But open thine hand vnto him, & lēd him ſufficient for his need, which he hath, and beware that there bee not a wicked pointe in thine heart, that thou wouldeſt ſay: The ſeuenth yeare, the yeare of freedome is at hand, and therfore it greeueth The Lord loueth a chearefull giuer. thee to looke on thy poore brother, & giueſt him nought: and hee then crye vnto the Lord againſt thee, and it bee ſin vnto thee: but giue him and let it not greeue

thine hart to giue vnto him. Becauſe that for this thing ye Lord thy God ſhal bleſſe thee in all thy workes, and in all that thou putteſt thine hād too. The laud ſhal neuer be wtout poore: And therfore I commaūd thee ſaying: thou ſhalt open thine hande vnto thy poore brother that is needy and poore in the lande,
               If thy brother an Ebrew ſell him ſelfe vnto thee, or an Ebrueſſe, and ſerue thee ſixe yeares, the ſeuenth yeare thou ſhalt let him goe free from thee, & when thou ſendeſt him out free from thee, thou ſhalt not let him go away emptie: but ſhal giue him of thy ſheepe, of thy corne, and of thy wyne: and giue him of that wherewith the Lord thy God hath bleſſed thee. And remember that thou waſt a ſeruant in the land of Egypt, & the Lord thy God deliuered thee thence, and therefore this thyng I commaund thee this day:
               And the ſame God hath commaunded children to doe their dueties with diligence, As it is written in Saint Paul to the Epheſiās, in his firſt Epiſtle: Children 
                     Ephe. 6. To children. obey your fathers & mothers in the Lorde, that is the firſt cōmaundemēt that

hath any promiſe, that thou mayeſt be in good eſtate and lyue longe in the earth: and ye fathers moue not your children vnto wrath, but bryng them vpp with nurture and information vnto the Lord.
               Seruants be obedient vnto your earthly maiſters, with feare and trembling, in Seruants. ſinglenes of your hearts, as vnto Chriſt: not with ſeruice in the eye ſight, as men pleaſers, but as the ſeruauntes of Chriſt, dooyng the will of God from the hearte, with good will ſeruing the Lord, and not men. And remember that whatſoeuer any man doeth, that ſhall he receiue again of the Lord, whether he be bound or free.
               For with God there is no reſpecte of perſons. And to the ende that euery one in generall, both men and women, ſhould haue a due conſideration of the benifites done vnto mankinde in his firſt creation. God hath placed mankinde here vppon the earth, makyng him capable of reaſon, with his eyes ſo framed, as in the courſe of this mortall lyfe, euery one both riche and poore, high and low, Publican and Phariſie, ſhould not be forgetfull of the wonderfull omnipotencie of God in

our beholding the Heauers, with the ornamentes thereof. Where the Sunne, the Moone, and the Starres, doe all obſerue their courſe in due order, to the end to put all mankynde in remembraunce of our obedience wherevnto wee were framed in our firſt creation: which benifite of creation, as it was and is denied to all other creatures beſides: who as they are voyde of reaſon, whereof and wherefore they were made and created. So do they take their turnes in commyng vppon the earth, and paſſyng agayne without any further memory to be had of any of them. But man ought not to be ignoraunt, that ſeeyng almightie God hath dealt ſo boū
                  tifully with him, as to make him Lorde ouer all other creatures in obeying him: So is man him ſelfe bounde to the more ſtrickter fourme of obedience vnto God, for ſo many and ſundry his benefites receiued: whereby all mankynde is admoniſhed, that foraſmuch as all other things are ordeyned for the neceſſitie and vſe o
                     •
                   man: ſo ſhould man be more carefull for the thinges apperteyning to the hungering of our ſinfull ſoules: then for the feedyng

and pampering of our carnall and mortall bodyes, which in Spaniſhe is ſo rightly applyed, where a man is called Vmbra, which by interpretation is a ſhadow, which notwithſtanding daily experience teacheth, that a more eſtimation and care is had for ſo vnſtable a bodye, neglectyng the prouiſion of our ſoules, which 
                     •
                  ught to be prouided for, and eſteemed aboue all the Iewels in this miſerable worlde.
               And thervpon Chriſt in his rebuking Matth. 23. the Scribes and Phariſies, ſayeth thus, Woe be vnto you yee Hypocrites, for ye make clean the outward ſide of the cup & of the platter, but within they are full of brybery and exceſſe. Thou blinde Phariſie clenſe firſt that within the cuppe and platter, that the outſide of them may bee cleare alſo. Wo be vnto you Scribes and Phariſies, ye Hypocrites, for ye are like vnto paynted Sepulchers, which indeed appeare beautifull outwarde, but within are full of dead mens bones, and of all filthineſſe.
               Euen ſo are there many in this age, who do ſeeme outwardly to be righteous

and ſo would bee reputed and taken: but within are full of all fainedneſſe and iniquitie.
               Vpon ſuch lyke occaſion, S. Peter in Pet. 2. his firſt Epiſtle ſayth, Wherfore laye aſide all maliciouſneſſe, guile, & diſſimulation, enuy, and all backbityng, & as newe borne babes deſire that reaſonable milke which is without corruption, that ye may growe therein: if ſo be that ye haue taſted howe pleaſant the Lord is, to whome yee come as a liuyng ſtone diſallowed of mē, but choſen of God, and precious: but ye as liuyng ſtones, are made a ſpirituall houſe: and an holy prieſthood for to offer vp ſpirituall ſacrifice acceptable to God by Ieſus Chriſt.
               As it is teſtified in the ſcripture, Beholde I put in Sion an head cornet ſtone, elect and precious: and he that beleeueth on him, ſhall not bee aſhamed: vnto you therefore which beleeue, hee is precious, but vnto them which beleeue not, the ſtone which the builders refuſed, the ſame is made the heade ſtone in the corner: and a ſtone to ſtumble at, and a rocke to offende them which ſtumble

at the worde, and beleeue not that, whereon they were ſet.
               Wherefore to the ende that wee may The reedifiyng of London Bridge, compared to the building and reedefiyng of the houſe of God. examine in our ſelues howe euery one is framed agreeable to Gods good pleaſure, againſt the day of his viſitation, I haue here thought good to ſet downe the maner of the reedifiyng of the new Arch of London Bridge. Wherein may be noted the differēce be twixt a priuate work, and a work for a commonaltie & commoditie of the people in generall. The maner of the proceeding in the ſaide worke. Firſt, the olde frame of building was taken downe to the grounde, which to moſt mens iudgemēts, as trauellers by, wold haue iudged the foreſaid olde building of ſufficiencie to haue continued the charge which the ſame had before ſupplyed of long tyme: wherevpon diligent ſearche was made, and the grounde woorke was founde ſo imperfected, by reaſon of the ſundrye imperfections that were founde therein. In ſo muche as it was thought needefull by thoſe that had the ouer ſight thereof, that the foreſaide olde building ſhoulde bee taken downe as it was, for auoyding

of further danger: hauing a reſpect vnto the time of the yeare, when the viſiters and founders dyd take the ſame in hande. In ſo muche as all the olde defaulted buildyng beyng rydde out of the way, and expert workemen beeyng come to ſearching of the foundation, they found the olde pyles whereon the ſtone worke ſtood in ſo euil cōditiō, as it was thought moſt needful that many ſhould be diſplaced out of their ſeates, which appeared not to be done without paynefull labour. And beyng brought to paſſe, new Pyles of the perfecteſt wood that could be prouided was ordeyned and ſet in the ſeate and places of the old. For the better perfourmance wherof, euery pyle ſo ſet, was not don without like tedious labour, cuerye one beeyng armed and calked with Iron. To the ende to make their way the perfecter: So to withſtande any impedimentes which myght haue hindered their enterance: which was perfourmed in as hard a maner as if the ſame had bin a newe forceable worke. For by reaſon of continuance the olde grounde worke was loth to yelde. Albeit, that nowe by

the perfect experience of cunning workmen, there is placed vpon the well grounded foundatiō of Pyles, a durable ſtonewoorke to the defence of all ſtormy tempeſts: ſo workmanly handled as one ſtone is faſtened to an other in their ioynyng together with Iron catches, thereby to keepe them from ſtartyng out of their offices, beeyng pointed in the ioyntes with Sowder, Rozen, Tallow, and Pitch, as a compound of forceable effect, needfull about ſuch a worke, to the ende that no impedunent ſhould growe or enter in betweene the ioyntes, beyng preuented by ſuche good meanes. In ſuch ſort as now vpon the ſaide foundation, there is erected a well conditioned and ſubſtantiall frame.
               Wherein is to bee noted, the fruite of the workmens diligence. In the perfourmance whereof, it doeth appeare, eche workeman to haue well & ſufficiently diſcharged their ſeuerall charge and vocations, to the well likyng of the Founders and beholders.
               In ſuch wiſe, as when it is conſidered what benifite and commoditie is lyke in

ſhort proceſſe of tyme to grow to the foū
                  ders therof: Then is it not to be thought to haue beene more chargeable then in tyme the ſame may be profitable.
               Which ſtately building being compared with the reedifiyng and building vp of the houſe of God, which conſiſteth not in Temples made with ſtones, according to the traditiōs of men: Albeit, God Act. 7. requireth a houſe of prayer, whereas the people may in all reuerence, congregate themſelues together. As in the Churche there in all obedience to be in a readines with attentyue eares, & reioyſing hearts: to heare the diuine ſeruice of God, and that our hearyng may bee rightly with a gladſome deſire to heare Chriſt ſpeake vnto vs by the mouth of the miniſter and godly Preachers, out of the worde of God, thereby to learne to folowe Chriſt by obedience, in honeſt conuerſation of lyfe. For Chriſt hath alwayes allowed better of obedience, then of ſacrifice: As appeareth in the firſt Booke of Samuel. 
                  Ring. 15.
               
               When it repented God that euer he

had made Saul Kyng by reaſon of his diſobedience. Albeit, Saul had ſpared the beſt of the ſheepe and of the Oxen of the Amalekites, to ſacrifice them vnto the Lorde. Wherein Saul obeyed and hearkened vnto the voyce of the people, and turned away from the worde of the Lord. In ſo muche as it was tolde Saul by Samuell. That foraſmuche as he had caſt away the worde of the Lorde. The Lorde would caſt away Saul, and rent away his kyngdome from him. In which parcell of ſcripture it is woorthely to bee noted, howe muche God hath beene pleaſed in former ages with obedience, and diſpleaſed with the contrary.
               As this one exſample may lead vs vnto. That the voyce of a man may awake one out of ſleepe: So that hee beginneth to ſtart and aryſe, but then if hee ſtraight wayes falleth a ſleepe agayne, vntyll we ſee him ſtande and goe, wee may not truely ſay he is perfectly awaked.
               Albeit, in folowing & obeying Chriſt, it is not ment that wee neyther can, nor muſt doe all things that he hath done before vs: but to folowe him in godly conuerſation

of lyfe and obedience as neare as we may, otherwyſe what doeth it auayle to profeſſe much, and to practice litle. Wherby we are admoniſhed to ioyne practice with our profeſſion, in the repairing and building vp of the houſe of God, in all godlineſſe and humilitie: and with more diligence and care then was vſed in & about the reedifiyng of the foreſaide building of London Bridge, which as you may perceiue in the former diſcourſe was not eaſily perfourmed without great coſt and labour. So ought all Chriſtians to bende them ſelues to the vttermoſt of What fourme ought to be obſerued in the perfiting of Gods houſe. euery their powers, all to agree in one generall conſent and vnitie of brotherly loue, whereby the Lordes houſe myght ſpeedily goe forwarde: And not as Manaſſes, againſt Ephraim, and Ephraim, againſt Manaſſes, and both againſt Iuda: Leſt God beholdyng ſuche a confuſion, come and ſay vnto thee, as vnto the figge Matth. 11. Luke. 
                        •
                     5. tree, Neuer man eate fruit of thee hereafter while the world ſtandeth: Yet Chriſt him ſelfe hungering.
               In conſideration whereof, it is to bee noted, that although the founders vnder

God of his houſe here in Englād, which God euer mainteyne and increaſe, are nowe willyng, & haue bene of long tyme with the aduiſe of the beſt workmen that might be had, in ſo carefull a worke, and about ſo weightie a cauſe, ſuche as God be thanked haue not ſeaſſed to take great paynes in Englande, for the perfecting of ſo woorthie a worke, and therein many good people about London and in other places haue and doe declare them ſelues very ſtudious and paynfull to haue the ſame perfourmed. In ſo muche as God be prayſed there are ſome certaine, that willingly and gladly doe ſhew them ſelues to bee faythfull labourers in the houſe of God. But the greater number beſides, ſeeme to be ſuche as in very deed woulde be accompted good labourers in Gods Vineyarde, who in deedes doe appeare playne, to bee but Loyterers, when as the maiſter of the Vineyarde ſhall come to tryall. It is true, hee wyll not deny his good Stewardes, Bailiffes, and faythfull ſeruauntes their due rewarde: At what tyme all the contrery will be founde to be too too negligent

in ſuche their duetifull buſineſſe, ſome of obſtinate, frowarde, and malicious myndes, and ſome by fooliſhe ignoraunce, lyke vnto the fyue fooliſhe Virgines. And many ſuche as doe flatter Matth. 20. themſelues with the parable of thoſe whō the good huſbandmā was willyng to retayne in his Vineyarde: and gaue vnto him for his hyre that came at the thirde houre of the day, as large as vnto thoſe which entered at the firſt houre, and dyd beare the heate of the day. Whereby it is manifeſt, that the ſame good huſbande man who is our Sauiour Chriſt, hath alwayes had a lyke care for all in generall, and will deny none of their hyre, that came vnto him in any tyme, in mind to be accepted.
               But alas, what may be ſayd or thought of ſuche as doe deferre and ſet off their commyng into the Lordes Vineyarde, euen vntyll their laſte houre. And then perhaps doe as it were looke ouer the hedge, and doe commyt their good deeds to bee ſent after them by Executors, in hope to receiue their rewarde wt the firſt.

Wherein is not to be forgotten, that although our heauenly huſbandman, hath dealt and doeth deale ſo fauourably in his mercyes, with ſo many as hee findeth ſorowful and careful to lyue with him. And not obſtinately or willingly to pine them ſelues away for want of a litle paines taking, wherby to procure vnto themſelues foode and rewarde, which I doe ſo muche the more lament, whyle I doe beholde a number whoſe lyues doe bewray that they care not to haue to do with God nor his houſe, ſuche as may not be perſuaded to enter into the ſame, and other ſome ſuch and that for the moſt parte, who if they happen a litle to enter in, they ſoone wax weary, and ſo ſtealeth foorth againe. In ſo much as it is very doubtfull, that any ſuche ſhall haue any part of reward with the true labourers: but rather ſhal want foode when as they ſhall be hungrye and thirſtie, and ſhall alwayes be drye. And ſo in caſe to periſh for want of that which they ſo contemptuouſly and negligently refuſed, when the large meaſure was offered vnto them through Chriſt his merites and louing kindneſſe. In ſo muche

as rather it is to be deſired that all thoſe that haue any feeling deſire in them ſelus to come into the Lordes Vineyarde, and to dwell with God in his euerlaſting mā
                  ſion, may refuſe no paynes to bee ioyned vnto him in ioyfull gladneſſe of Ghoſtly rauiſhing, which is to be ſought from the high to the lowe, with all due humilitie & reuerence vnto God, loue to our neighbours, & obedience vnto our ſoueraigne, vdder whoſe protection next vnder God, we doe enioye our being and continuyng in ſo good a woorke, for the which euery true member of England is bound daily and hourely to pray vnto God, that ſo good a foundation of the houſe of GOD may become ſo well framed and perfected, as to encreaſe & remayne vnremoueable, to the euerlaſting comfort of all the profeſſors: As is teſtified by the ſcriptures. The earth ſhall fayle, & all things Matth. 5. therein conteined: but the worde of God abideth euerlaſting, and one iotte of his worde ſhall not fayle. And when we haue done all that euer we can doe, yet ſhal we be but vnprofitable ſeruants.
               By theſe words, ſome may doubt what

they ought to doe in ſo weightie a matter, it is in theſe fewe wordes declared. That wee ought to preferre the glory of A ſpeciall note for all that profeſſe Chriſt. God, the promotyng of Chriſt his Euangil, that is, his word, and the ſaluation of our ſoules, aboue all things in the earth.
               So ſhall we bee ſure that though all the worlde beſides were in an vprore and troubles: Though warres and contentions, plagues, & peſtilence, and all inconueniences were round about vs, yet ſhold we be defended and protected. For ſo is Gods louyng promiſes vnto ſo many, as with willyng and obedient heartes doe ſeeke to be preſerued in his folde, expreſſing their inwarde deſires, by their outward conuerſation and actions. By reaſon whereof, many haue beene ſtirred to forſake their froward wayes: and return vnto the Lord, by enſample of Kyng Ezechia, as foloweth. And Ezechia ſent In the 2. boke of the Chro. Chap. 30. to all Iſrael and Iuda, and wrote letters to Ephraim and Manaſſes, that they ſhold come to the houſe of the Lorde at Ieruſalem, & offer paſſeouer vnto the Lord God of Iſrael. And the Kyng helde a counſell with his Lordes, & all the congregation

at Ieruſalem to keepe the feaſt of paſſeouer in the ſeconde moneth.
               And the tenour of his letters was this:
               You ſonnes of Iſrael, returne to the Lorde God of Abraham, Iſaac & Iacob, and he ſhall returne to the reſidue that reſteth from the handes of Aſſur. Be not as your fathers, and as your brethren were, who haue tranſgreſſed againſt the Lorde God of their Fathers, who hath made them deſolate as you ſee. Holde not your heartes therefore. But giue your hands to the Lorde, returne to his Sanctuary, ſerue him and hee ſhall. ſhewe mercy vnto you, to your ſonnes and daughters that be in bondage, for he is pitifull and eaſie to bee entreated. Thus farre dyd Ezechias by letters and meſſengers prouoke the people declined from God, to repentaunce, not onely in Iuda where he raygned lawfull Kyng, but alſo in Iſrael, ſubiecte then to an other Kyng. And albeit, that by ſome wicked men, his meſſengers were mocked, ſo lacked they not theyr iuſt puniſhmentes: For within ſixe yeares after Samaria,
                  
was deſtroyed, and Iſrael ledde captyue by Salmanazar. So dyd not this zealous King Ezechias deſiſt to proſecute his dutie in reſtoring the religion to Gods perfect ordinance, remauyng all wickednes.
               And again, in the Prophecie of Ezechiel, it is written thus: If a man nowe Ezech. 34. heare the noyſe of the Trumpet, and will not be warned, and the Stewarde come and take him away, his bloude ſhall bee vpon his owne head: for hee heard the ſounde of the Trumpet, and woulde not take heede, therefore his bloud be vppon him. But if he will receiue warning, he ſhal ſaue his lyfe. Moreouer, if the watchman ſee the ſworde come, and ſhew it not with the Trumpet, ſo that the people is not warned, if the ſworde come then and take any man from amōg them, the ſame ſhall bee taken away in his owne ſinne: but his bloud will I require at the watch mans hande.
               So is it required at the handes of all good Gouernors in this age, that the order An order of planting or graftyng. of plantyng may be obſerued in ſuche fourme, that euery tree may be ſo orderly planted and ingraffed, that there may be

no confuſed growyng. For it is written, that ſuche as are not ingraffed in Chriſt, ſhall be pulled vp by the rootes: wherefore it behooueth that euery good Tree may be framed to be comfortable and defencible to the other his neighbour and ſtander by, beyng all of one Orchard, the higher to the lower, and the lower not to be ſlacke in vpright growyng, to the end to doe their office, duetie, and good will, vnto the higher. For ſo is it required by the worde of God, and no politike wiſedome rightly may deny the ſame: as that when any ſtormy weather ſhould happen to blowe vp, that then ſuche as before would haue beene iudged Okes, ſhoulde not ſhew them ſelues as tottering reeds, ſubiecting them ſelues to bee ouerrunne with euery ſickle and ſythe. But that rather againſt the time, that god ſhal pleaſe by his prouidence to call vs vnto him more nearer, by any Croſſe of tribulation: that wee the people of this age may rather goe forwarde to meete with God in all reuerence, and valiantly to fight vnder his banner. Then that we ſhould goe backeward with faintyng heartes, and

ſeeke to hide our ſelues from his preſence which no man may eſcape, for that his glorious preſence is euery where, both on high vpon the Mountaies, and beneth in the vallies. How much more ought we miſerable creatures to bee vigilant, and that by continuall prayer and watching, thereby to mooue his Godhead not to be greeued nor diſpleaſed for our diſobedience in tranſgreſſing of his Commaundements: And that it may pleaſe him in his mercie to accept of our contrition in our returning euery one, forſaking his frowarde and vngodly wayes. And that with ſuch repentaunce and mortification, as ſinne may be abandoned and haue no place any longer to dwell in our mortall bodyes: And not to ſeeme too haue more care of thinges temporall, then of things eternall. For ſo nowe is it required at our hands in good earneſt, thereby to ſtop the mouthes of all enemies, as that other nations beholding the perfect fourme of our returning, may haue iuſt cauſe ſo to ſay of England:
               Lo theſe are the people whome God

hath choſen vnto him ſelfe, and that the troubles of our neyghbours may ſounde a continuall watche worde in our eares, to amendment of our former euil liuing, or els wee may aſſure our ſelues, that wee doe but haſten the lyke meaſure of Gods diſpleaſure towardes vs, which I pray God graunt to keepe farre from Englande.
               And in the manner of our returnyng, let vs take and ſette before our tyes, this holeſome doctryne of Saint Paule to Timothie, in his fyrſt Epiſtle. Tim. 2.
               
               I exhort therfore that aboue all things, Prayers, ſupplications, interceſſions, and giuyng of thanks be had for all men: For Kynges and all that are in authoritie, that wee may lyue a quyet and a peaceable lyfe, with all godlineſſe and honeſtie. For that is good and expedient in the ſight of GOD our Sauiour, which will haue all men to bee ſaued, and to come vnto the knowledge of the trueth: For there is one

God and one Mediatour, betwixt God and man: Euen the man Chriſt Ieſus, which gaue him ſelfe a raunſome for all men. That it ſhould bee teſtified at this tyme, I tell the trueth in Chriſt and lye not. Beyng the teachers of the Gentiles with fayth and veritie. I will therefore that the men pray euery where, liftyng vp pure handes without wrath or doubting. Likewyſe alſo the women, that they aray them ſelues in comely apparel, with ſhamefaſtneſſe and diſcreete behauiour, not with broydered heare, eyther gold, or pearles, or coſtly aray: but as becommeth women that profeſſe godlines thorow good works. Let the women learne in ſilence with all ſubiection, in ſuch wiſe as all ſuche as pray, may obtaine the benefit of prayer, which ought to be framed in all zealous maner, and with ſuch a dutifull obedience as we doe owe vnto God in making our prayers and ſupplications: As we haue ſundrye enſamples ſet owne vnto vs by the word of God.
               Firſt, howe Chriſt him ſelfe when he prayed vnto God the Father, that if it were his will, the bitter cup of his paſſion

might paſſe away from him, not for that Chriſt was afrayd of death, but that hee woulde leaue vnto all his Diſciples the true fourme of prayer, deſiryng nothing but that which is good, and to edifie with all, and alwayes to commyt our willes vnto his will: not that our will be done, but that his will be done, and fulfilled, with ſuch obedience as Chriſt, when Iohn. 1
                        •
                     
                   he prayed, lifted vp his eyes vnto heauen.
               And alſo Moyſes & Aaron when they prayed for the people of Iſrael, it appeareth that they did it with their hāds holdē vp, and their eyes lookyng vp vnto heauen, Num. 11. 1
                        •
                     . 15. as a true teſtimony that their hearts were therevnto framed and ſetled. But when Moyſes ceaſſed from lifting vp of his handes and eyes, thoſe people were ouerthrowen. And howe much prayer of good men hath alwayes preuailed. The enſamples are not fewe: As when Moyſes 
                  Exod. 9. 10. prayed for Pharao, the plagues ſeaſed.
               
                  Abraham liftyng vp his eyes, ſawe Gen. 22. the place where God had appointed him to offer vp his Sonne Iſaac.
               
               
                  Abraham for the Sodomytes, Moyſes
                  
for the fathers that ſinned in the wilderneſſe: Samuel, and Dauid, for the deſtruction: and Solomon, for them that came into the Temple: and Elias, for them that Eſdras. 4. 
                        •
                     ooke. receiued raine: and for the dead, that he myght lyue: and Ezechias, for the people in the tyme of Senacharib. And all thoſe receiued the fruit of their prayers. And in this our age, no doubt of it, by the good prayers of godly men powred out before the Lorde God, for the beholdyng of the people of Englande, in ſuche an acceptable a tyme, as God hath bene mooued in his mercyes to protect his flocke hitherto in a miraculous wyſe, with nowe full twentie yeares paſt of returnyng, which large tyme no doubt of it, hath pleaſed God in his mercy to vouchſafe to aſſigne vnto vs the people of England, the rather for the good affectiō which he hath and doth beare vnto our ſo gratious and ſoueraigne Queene, vnder whom by Gods permiſſion we do enioye ſuch good bleſſings, as Moyſes gaue vnto the Tribes of Iſrael, in time of their continuing in Gods cōmandements & ordināces, who is like vnto the people. Thou

art ſaued in the Lord, which is the ſhield of thy helpe, & ſword of thy glory. Thine enimyes haue loſt their ſtrength to thee ward, & thou ſhalt treade vpon the height of them. But then it foloweth, that when Exod. 19. as God did behold the grudging and diſobedience of the Iſraelites, hee appoynted Moyſes to commaund them that they ſhoulde not preſume to come vp vnto the Lord leſt be deſtroyed them. And let the Prieſts which come vnto the Lord, ſanctifie them, leſt the Lorde deſtroye them. Wherevpon God gaue foorth the Table of the ten Commaundementes, left vnto all that ſhoulde come after, to folow them as children of obedience.
               And for that cauſe doe all the godly Preachers crye out daily foorth of the worde of God, Repent betymes as wee all doe admoniſh yee, repent, for your cō
                  tempt and wickedneſſe ſo plainely committed, in ſo bleſſed a tyme as God was not more profeſſed in woordes in many yeares before. But alas, too too farre out of the way in deedes: wherfore we are ſtil called to repent, for repentance is the onely way of our redreſſe & deliuerance.

For, dyd God euer ſo long ſpare anye whome he hath taught by his Prophets without ſome euident repentaunce: Or vſeth any father to pardō his childe, without ſome token of amendment: Conſider howe the Lord hath intreated Iſrael and Iuda, his owne people. Howe ofte they treſpaſſed, and howe he gaue them ouer into the handes of their enemyes. But when ſo euer they repented and turned againe to God vnfeignedly, he ſent them Iudges and deliuerers, Kyngs and Sauiours. This way then of repentance and vnfeigned turnyng vnto God by obedience, is the onely way before God accepted and allowed.
               Therfore was Noah ſent into the old worlde to bring this doctrine of repentance, and all the olde Prophets, as Elias, Eliſeus, Eſaias, Ieremias, and Malichias, and hee who excelled all the Prophets, Iohn Baptiſt, whoſe ſharpe rebukes for ſinnes woulde nowe be hardly abyde and ſuffered. Yet are they not vnfittyng to this age, for that the ſame ſpirite ſtil ſtriueth againſt the malice of our tyme. Albeit, in diuers ſortes and faſhions

                  Noah pronounced that within an hundreth and twentie yeares all fleſhe ſhoulde bee deſtroyed. Wee haue many Noahs that doe crye in our tymes, yet fewe repent. All that tyme that Noah was preparyng of the Arke, to auoyde Gods vengeance, the multitude derided this holy Prophete, as many nowe doe make a ſcoffe at all them that by obedience to Gods worde, ſeeke the meanes appoynted to auoyde Gods indignation and iudgements. Then the people wold not repent: but as they ſhoulde lyue for euer, they maryed, they banquetted, they builded, they planted, but not in God. And ſo it is muche to be feared, that in this age, there are many that do the like: they marry, but not in God: they builde, but not in trueth and righteouſneſſe: and therefore becauſe their buildyng is not accordyng to Gods direction, they know not howe ſoone it ſhall fall downe. And that it may appeare howe God hath vſe
                     •
                   to call thoſe that he would haue ſaued in former ages, I haue thought good to ſet downe certaine places of the ſcriptures, becauſe euery one hath not to buye the

whole booke.
               The Prophet Ieremy ſetteth downe a very notable enſample, what returnyng God requireth of his people, O Iſrael, if thou wilt turne thee then vnto me, ſaith the Lorde, and if thou wylt put away thine abominations out of my ſight, thou ſhalt not be mooued, and ſhalt ſweare the Lorde liueth, in trueth, in equitie, and righteouſneſſe, And the people ſhall be fortunable, and ioyfull in him. For ſaith the Lorde to all Iuda and Ieruſalem, Plough your lande and ſowe not among thornes, be circumciſed in the Lorde, and cut away the foreſkyn of your heartes, all yee of Iuda, and the indwellers of Ieruſalem: that my indignation breake not out lyke fyre, and kindle ſo that no man may quenche it becauſe of the wickedneſſe of your imaginations.
               Here it is to bee noted, that there is a great difference betwyxt the viſible fyre and a paynted fyre.
               Moreouer, thus ſayeth the Lorde, When I haue taken in hand to rootout, Iere. 18. to deſtroye, or to waſte away any people

or kyngdome: If that people againſt whome I haue deuiſed, conuert from theyr wickedneſſe, I repent mee of the plague which I had deuiſed to bryng vpon them.
               Agayne, when I take in hand to build, or to plante a people or kingdome, if the ſame people doe euil before me, and heare not my voyce: I repente of the good which I deuyſed to doe for them. Speake nowe vnto Iuda, Thus ſayeth the Lorde, Beholde, I am deuiſing a plague for you: therefore let euery man returne from his euill wayes, and do the thyng that is good and right.
               And in the Prophecie of Eſai, Heare Eſai. 48. this, O thou houſe of Iacob, yee that are called by the name of Iſrael, and are come out of the ſtocke of Iuda, which ſware by the name of the Lord, and beare the witneſſe of the Lorde of Iſrael: But not with trueth and right, which art called free men of the holy Cities, and are grounded vppon the GOD of Iſrael, whoſe name is the Lorde of Hoſtes. The thynges that I ſhewed you euer ſince the begynnyng, haue I not

brou
                     •
                  ht them to paſſe, immediately as the
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ame out of my mouth, and declared th
                     ••
                  , and they are come. Howebeit, I knowe that thou arte obſtinate, and that thine necke hath an yron bayne, and that thy browe is of braſſe. Neuertheleſſe, I haue euer ſince the beginnyng, ſhewed thee of thinges for to come, and declared thē vnto thee or euer they come to paſſe, That thou ſholdeſt not ſay, my Idol hath done it, my carued or molten Image hath ſhewed it. Heare and conſider all theſe thinges, whether it was yee that Prophecied them: But as for me. I told thee before at the beginnyng, new and ſecret things that thou kneweſt not of, and ſome done nowe, not of olde tyme, wherof thou neuer hardeſt before they were brought to paſſe: that thou canſt not ſay, beholde I knewe them. Moreouer, there be ſome whereof thou haſt neuer heard nor knowen, neither haue they bene opened vnto thine eares afore tyme: for I knew that thou wouldeſt maliciouſly offende, therefore haue I called thee a tranſgreſſont euen from thy mothers wombe.
               Neuertheleſſe, I haue withdrawen

my wrath for my names ſake, & for mine honours ſake, I haue ouer ſeene thee: ſo that I haue not rooted thee out. Behold, I haue purged thee, and not as Siluer: I haue choſē thee in the fyre of affuction, & that onely for mine owne ſake: for I giue myne honour to none other, that thou ſhouldeſt not deſpiſe mee. Hearken vnto mee O Iacob and Iſrael, whome I haue called, I am euen that is, I am the firſt and the laſt.
               Whereby it is plaine, that there is no more redeemers to be looked for, and the Prophets are gone before. Albeit, wee heare daily ſpeakyng vnto vs from God him ſelf and all his Prophets, to the end to gather together the remnaunt of Iuda.
               
               In ſo muche as the Prophet Ezechiel hath left vs theſe comfortes, When the wicked man turneth away from his wickedneſſe that he hath done, and doeth the thing which is equall and right, hee ſhall ſaue his owne ſoule and lyue. For in ſomuch as he remembreth him ſelfe, and turneth him from all the vngodlines that he hath vſed, hee ſhall lyue and not dye.

Albeit, the Prophet Ieremy, doth in this Iere. 5. Chapter folowing, lay hard to the charge of all vngodly perſons, taking occaſion firſt to reprooue whoredome and ſwearing, taking Gods name in vaine. Shold I not correct this, ſayth the Lord: ſhould I not be auenged of euery people that is lyke vnto this: Clyme vp vppon theyr walles, beate them downe, but deſtroye them not vtterly. Cut of their branches becauſe they are not the Lordes, for vnfaythfully hath Iſrael and Iuda forſaken mee, ſayeth the Lorde, they haue denyed the Lorde, and ſayde, it is not hee. Tuſhe there ſhall no harme or miſfortune come vppon vs: wee ſhall neyther ſee ſworde nor hunger. As for the warning of the Prophetes, they take it but for wynde: yea there is none of thoſe that will tell them that ſuche thinges ſhall happen vnto them. Feare yee not mee ſayeth the Lorde: are yee not aſhamed to looke mee in the face, which bynde the Sea with the ſande, ſo that it can not paſſe his boundes: For though it rage, yet can it doe nothyng, and though the

waues doe ſwell, yet may they not goe ouer. But this people hath a falſe and an obſtinate heart, they are departed and gone away from mee. They thinke not in their heartes, O let vs feare the Lord that giueth vs rayne early & late, which keepeth euer ſtyll the harueſt for vs yearely. Neuertheleſſe, your miſdeedes haue taken from you, and your ſinnes haue robbed you thereof: for among my people are founde wicked perſons, that priuily laye ſnares and wayte for men to take them and deſtroy them. And lyke as a Ne
                     ••
                  e is full of Byrdes, ſo are their houſes full of that which they haue gotten with falſhoode and deceite, whereof commeth their great ſubſtance and ryches, whereof they are fatte and well lykyng, and are runne away from me with ſhamefull blaſphemyes: They miniſter not the lawe ryghtfully, They iudge not accordyng to equitie. Should I not puniſhe theſe things ſayth the Lord? ſhould I not bee auenged of all ſuche people as theſe bee: Horrible and greeuous things are done in the lande.
               
                  
Which while the Lorde dyd beholde, See I pray you the louyng mercyes of the Lorde offered vnto thoſe people, and nowe ſpeaking vnto vs, by the mouthes of many godly Preachers, in folowyng and obſeruyng the fourme of the good Prophet Oſee, in daily crying out. Turne Oſee. 13. from your frowarde wayes, and turnyng from your diſobedience with the children of Iſrael: ſaying vnto the eternall God, Thou arte the Lorde our God, and thee will we worſhyp: Confuſion hath deuoured our fathers labour frō our youth vp, yea their ſheepe & their Bullockes, theyr ſonnes and their daughters. So doe wee alſo ſleepe in our confuſion, and ſhame Act. 4. couereth vs: for we and our Father from our youth vp vnto this day, haue ſinned againſt the Lorde our God, and haue not obeyed his voyce.
               For reconciliation whereof it is written thus by the Prophet Ioel. Make thy Ioel. 1. moane, as a Virgine doeth that girdeth her ſelfe with ſackecloth, becauſe of her Bridegroome, for the meate and drinke offerings ſhall bee taken out of the houſe of the Lord. And the Prieſts, the Lords,

and Miniſters ſhall mourne: the fielde ſhall be waſted, the lande ſhal be in a miſerable caſe. Wherefore in the ſeconde Chapter of the ſame Prophet it is written thus. Turne you vnto the Lorde your God, for he is long ſuffring and of great mercy. Proclaime a faſting, call the congregation, and gather the people together, warne the congregation, gather the Elders, bryng the children and ſucklyngs together, let the Bridegroome go Prayers muſt be made out of the Cloſet of our heartes. foorth of his Chamber, and the Bryde out of her Cloſet: Let the Prieſtes ſerue the Lorde betwyxt the Porch and the Alter, weeping, and ſaying: Be fauourable (O Lorde) to thy people, let not thine heritage be brought to ſuch confuſion, leſt the Heathen be Lordes thereof.
               And Sainet Paul to Timothie hath Tim. 2. left vnto vs in this age, a probable reaſon, that the day of the Lord, his tranſlation of this worlde, is neerer vpon commyng then nowe ſeemeth to be made accompt off. This knowe that in the latter Alamentable ſigne, euen as it is come to paſſe in this age. dayes ſhal come perillous times: for men ſhall be louers of their owne ſelues, couetous, boaſters, proud, curſed ſpeakers:

diſobedient vnto father and mother, vnthankfull, vngodly, vnkynde, trucebreakers, falſe accuſers, riotous, fierce, deſpiſers of thē that are good, Traytours, headie mynded, greedy vpon boluptuouſneſſe, more then the louers of God, hauyng a ſimilitude of godlineſſe, but hauyng denyed the power thereof, and ſuch abhorre. For of this ſorte are they which enter into houſes, and bryng in bondage women, laden with diuers luſtes, euer learnyng, and neuer able to come to the trueth.
               If the conſideration of ſuch enſamples, then may not mooue the people in this age to bee deepely touched with repentaunce, let them take the louyng Parables of Chriſt of the two ſonnes, and Matth. 21. of the tylman, vnto whome hee ſet his Vineyarde.
               A certayne man had two ſoones, and hee came to the firſt and ſayde, ſonne, goe and worke to day in my Vineyarde, who anſwered I will not: but afterwards repented and went. Then came bee to the ſeconde, and ſayde likewyſe, and hee anſwered I will ſyr, but went not.
               
                  
Wherein is expreſſed a wonderfull comfort: firſt is to be conſidered, how the Lorde our God maker of heauen & earth, doeth humble him ſelfe, not onely to bee called a huſbandman, a houſholder, and ſuche lyke: But he abaſeth him ſelfe of mercy, to vs vile earth and aſhes, that his ſonne became man to make mankynde glorious in his ſight, to make all thoſe that do not refuſe his grace offered, of the ſlaues of Saten, his ſonnes by adoption: We are his ſonnes, we are his Vinyard, wee are as deare vnto him as the Apple of his eye: As Moyſes ſpeaketh, if you can beleeue it, hee ſweareth that you ſhal be his inheritance, and he will be yours: If yee will onely beleeue his grace offered, and beleeue him when hee ſweareth. Will yee call his trueth into doubt? his glorye into ſhame by your miſreliefe: Better it were that all creatures ſhould periſhe, Heauen, man, and Aungels, then that GOD ſhoulde not haue credite, or that his power and glorye in the leaſt iotte ſhoulde bee diminiſhed. Hee hath called vs hys people of

Englande by his worde many yeares, to worke in his Vineyarde. But what many one haue anſwered, I appeale to your owne conſciences, which witneſſeth, and all the world ſeeth, that ſome haue deceitfully ſayd lyke Belials childrē, & anſwered that ye woulde goe and worke in your fathers Vineyarde, and haue not done it: and otherſome lyke rebellious, haue plainly ſayde they would not.
               But what is in this great matter required, it onely remaineth, that all do repent and returne vnto the Vineyard, with the firſt Sonne. For neuer ſhall ignoraunce excuſe any lande or nation, as it is plaine in the firſt to the Romaynes, neyther can any people be receiued without the fruit of repentance, not onely to acknowledge our ſinne & to lament them, but to amend our liues, and to make ſtreight the Lords pathes, and to be well garded with obedience vnto God, in doyng the workes of righteouſneſſe, in executyng Gods preceptes, to the reſiſtyng of Satan and ſin.
               But if neyther the meanes of Gods mercyes offered, nor his puniſhement threatned for ſinne, may not mooue obſtinate

people to returnyng vnto the Lorde in good earneſt, and that they will looke for ſignes, lyke vnto the Scribes and Matth. 12. Marke. 8. Phariſes, temptyng Chriſt ſaying, maiſter giue vs a ſigne, vnto wheme Chriſte anſwered: The euill and adulterous generation ſeeketh a ſigne, but there ſhall no ſigne be giuen them, ſaue the ſigne of the Prophet Ionas. Inſomuch as wee of this age neede to looke after no further ſignes or wonders then the word of God and daily experience leadeth vnto. For Ieruſalem and Damaſco, neuer poſſeſſed more greater bleſſinges then Englande nowe doeth, nor none of thoſe Cities neuer enioyed more pompe then London nowe poſſeſſeth. And it is certaine, that Chriſt preached three yeares in thoſe two famous Cities, and the Countreys vnto them adiacent. And after fortie yeares Ieruſalem was deſtroyed, ſo long a time dyd God giue vnto them of repentaunce and returning from their froward wayes wherein thoſe people ſo proudly walked in diſobedience. And the ſame God of long tyme hath called his litle flocke of Englande, as the remnaunt of Iſrael, by

the largeneſſe of his mercy offered. But the ſame ſeemeth to haue taken ſo little effecte, as that a great number with the conſent of diſobedience, haue taken occaſion by their owne wickedneſſe, to prouoke Tob. 12. almyghtie God vnto diſpleaſure, in ſuche lamentable wyſe, as many are become enemyes and betrayers of their owne ſoules, for which their ſo greeuous contempt none may eſcape the puniſhement: As it hath bene declared in all notable puniſhmentes from the beginning. For when the originall worlde periſhed by water, when Sodom and Gomorrha 
                  Gen. 7. 19. was conſumed by fyre. And finally, when Ieruſalem was horribly deſtroyed, doeth any man thinke that all were lyke wicked: it is euident that they were not Neuertheleſſe, although ſome were young, and dyd not know what oppreſſion ment, neyther coulde defile them ſelues with beaſtly and vnlawfull luſtes, ſome were pitifull and gentle of nature, and dyd not thirſt for the bloud of Chriſt his apoſtles. But did any in the time of Gods viſitation eſcape the plagues & vēgeance which did apprehēd the multitude. Let the ſcriptures

witneſſe, and the hiſtories be conſidered, which plainly doe teſtifie, that by the waters all fleſhe in earth at that time dyd periſhe, Noah and his family reſerued: That none eſcaped in Sodome and in the other Cities adiacent, excepte Lot and his two daughters. And euident it is, that in that famous Citie Ieruſalem, in that laſt deſtruction of the ſame, none eſcaped Gods vengeance except ſo many as before were diſperſed. And what the cauſe was of this Gods ſeueritie, we are forbidden to diſpute with God. But let all men by theſe examples learne betymes, to flee and auoyde to commit ſuch lyke abominations as the proude contemners of God doe proſecute, if the reſidue liſt not to bee partakers of theyr plagues. And yet the cauſes are euident, for which GOD brought ſo horrible deſtruction vppon thoſe Cityes, manifeſtyng that wee ſhoulde bee ſubiect without grudgyng vnto Gods will and iudgementes, which in them ſelues are moſt holy and iuſt.

Wherefore it behooueth that we of this age, ſhould all humble our ſelues vnder the mightie hande of God, in ſuch wyſe as he in his mercy, beholding our humilitie, may bee mooued to turne away his wrathfull diſpleaſure from vs. For in the originall worlde, none was found in authoritie, that eyther dyd reſiſt tyranny, or oppreſſion, that vniuerſally was vſed, eyther yet that earneſtly reprehended the ſame. In Sodome, was none found, that dyd gainſtande that furious and beaſtly multitude that dyd compaſſe about, and beſiege the houſe of Lot: None would beleeue Lot that the Citie ſhould be deſtroied. And finally, in Ieruſalem was none founde, that ſtudied to repreſſe the tyranny of the Prieſtes, and therefore of one vengeance temporall, were they all partakers. Which examples in ſundry places before touched, ought to mooue euery one that hath any feelyng iudgement in them ſelues, to the deepe conſideration of their dueties, in this laſt age & perillous tymes. Seeyng it is written, that thoſe that doe not labour to their power to correct euill, doe conſent to doyng of euil.
               
                  
And let it not be forgotten, howe that Ionas the Prophet, was but three dayes in his deliueryng of the Lordes meſſage vnto that great Citie of Niniuee: That after fortie dayes the ſame Citie ſhoulde be deſtroyed. And thoſe people knowyng them ſelues guiltie of tranſgreſſion of Gods commaundementes, beleeued the Lorde, and proclaimed faſting with one accord among them all: and put on ſackcloth, as well the great as the ſmall, the rich as the poore. The Kyng did caſt off his coſtly aray, yt he was wont to weare, and put on ſackcloth, as then the manner was of declaring repentance: for he feared God. In ſo much as God beholdyng their contricion in an acceptable tyme, turned from his forepurpoſed deſtruction, which was pronounced to haue fallē vpō that great Citie after fortie daies, according to the meſſage of Ionas: had not both the King & the people bene touched with ſo zealous affection vnto God & his word: As they beleeued the Lordes meſſage without any further doubtyng, and thoſe people founde fauour in Gods fight.
               
                  
As God graunt Englande, in rendering of their due obedience to do the like, in expreſſing our vnfeigned repentance, by our outward actions: for wee can not excuſe our ſelues by ignorance, as to ſay, that we want of ſuch like warning. For common experience may teache ſenſible men, that if one man receiue a hand writing from an other, great credite is giuen therevnto, eſpecially when there is fayth and confidence betwixt the partie who ſent the writing, and the parties vnto whom the ſame is ſent. In ſo muche as euery man and woman ought to examine in them ſelues what confidence euery one doeth repoſe in God his written worde: and what zealous loue euery one beareth in his heart toward the ſame. And let vs not be vnmindfull that there is a time to laugh, and a tyme to weepe, a tyme to go forwarde, and a tyme to goe backwarde. Wherby all are forewarned from goyng backwarde, like the frowarde nature of the Sea Crabbe. But rather ſeeing that we doe beare the Image of Chriſt, let vs in tyme refraine, from glutting & ladyng our ſelues with muddy earth, lyke vnto

the Woluiſh generation: but ſo to frame our ſelues to haue gladſome heartes and willing mindes: to the ende, to fetch water at the liuely fountaine, with the woman of Samaria, who could not deny but Iohn. 4. that ſhee had met with one, who had told her all that ſhe had done in her tyme: and the ſame was very Chriſt our Lorde and Sauiour, who now ſpeaketh vnto vs out of his ſacred worde: bee knowyng from the beginning what hath bene done, and what we nowe doe, and nothing can bee hyd from him ſo ſecretly, that his eares doeth not heare, & his eyes behold. Who of a fatherly affection in his mercy hath left vnto Englande, the moſte perfecteſt meanes that euer was, by the preſcript rule of his worde, how to know what our dueties are, and howe wee ſhould behaue our ſelues in this mortall and tranſitory lyfe. Alwayes, and in all our externall deedes, to preferre his diuine wil & pleaſure, before our carnall willes and affections, vntyl we come to the vnſpeakeable ioyes of his preſence. In the meane time the ſame our God hath aſſured vs by his word, that after Prophets or warnings

there euer after followed returnyng in yeldyng due obedience: Or els alwayes hath enſued a lamentable and fearefull deſtruction. Albeit, our heauenly father hath and yet doeth deale with vs his people of Englande, in the large meaſure of his mercy, euen as a good father or maſter that threateneth and ſhaketh the rod before hee layeth on the ſtry
                     •
                  es, which whyle the diſobedient dee ſeeme to contenine and ſet light by, a heauy puniſhement inſueth: which notwithſtandyng, when he threateneth, he findeth no duetifull obedience in returning vnto him: and when he warneth, there is no repentance for ſinne. For he findeth ſome ſo obſtinate and wicked, as to ſay, the way of the lord is not indifferent: vnto ſuch it may very well be ſayd, Nay, is not your wayes rather curſed: As God forbyd, that any one of his litle flocke in Englande ſhould be ſo obſtinate and indurate hearted, as to thinke that ſo good bleſſings as GOD hath powred vpon England, are lent vs in vayne, ſo to returne from vs as clouds without rayn, or as an Eccho in the aire, 
                     •
                  nleſſe our owne vnworthineſſe doe deſerue

it ſo to be taken from vs, and to be giuen vnto a ſtraunge people that ye
                     •
                   knowe not God. As God forbyd, that we ſhould thorow our diſobedience, ſo as it were, rent the mercyes of God from our ſelues, and ſo become the ſcattered people. But rather let vs the people of Englande, ſeeke by all meanes poſſible to redeeme our euil ſpent tyme, by earneſt repentance and mortification, ſubduing the luſtes of the fleſh, with all the euill concupiſcences of the ſame: bearyng with vs free and cleare conſciences, agreeable to the will of God, for ſo is the way to be at one with him, as his worde doeth direct vs: That to the cleane, all thinges are cleane, and to the frowarde, all thinges are frowarde: with the godly, thou ſhalt King. 2
                        •
                     . be godly: with the vncorrupt, then ſhalt be vncorrupt. And this I ſay further, that I wryte according to the trueth and lye not: let euery man examine his owne conſcience, I do deſire no better witnes. For where any man or woman ſo liueth, as hauing no feeling deſire in themſelues to be at one with God: ſure it is an euident ſigne, that neyther God dwelleth in

them, nor they in God. With ſuch God graunt, that none of the people of England ſhould at any tyme ioyne felowſhip: but that all may growe and become 
                     〈◊〉
                   members for Chriſt his Church, by one generall conſent: So ſhall there bee no complainyng in our ſtreetes, nor no leading into captiuitie, but all ſhall haue a ioyfull peace in conſcience: Thereby to glorifie God our heauenly father, vnto whom with his Sonne Chriſt Ieſu, and the holy Ghoſt, three perſons and one God eternall, be all honor, power, and dominion, now and for euer,
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
Our Sauiour Chriſt pronounceth thus much of him ſelfe, that if we continue 
               Iohn. 8. 
               in his word, then are we his very Diſciples, and ſhal knowe the trueth, and the trueth ſhal make vs free.
               Saue Lord, and bleſſe, with good increaſe, thy church our Queen, & realme in peace.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ IMPRINTED at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawſon, and Thomas Butter. 1580.
            
         
      
   