
      
         
            
            
            AN ANSWER
TO A GREAT NOMBER
of blasphemous cauillations written by an
Anabaptist, and aduersarie to Gods eternal
Predestination. AND CONFVTED
By Iohn Knox, minister of Gods worde
in Scotland. Wherein the Author so discouereth the craft and falshode
of that sect, that the godly knowing that error,
may be confirmed in the trueth by the euident Worde
of God.
            
               PROV. XXX. ¶There is a generatiō that are pure in their owne cōceit, and
yet are not washed from their filthines.
            Printed by Iohn Crespin.
M.D.LX.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            FOr the vnderstanding of the nombres, the
readers shall obserue, that as the writer in
his pestilent booke hath deuided the hole into certē
argumētes, so lykewise haue I deuided myne answers
into certen Sections. And because that
many things in his railing reasons are either vnworthie
of any answere, or els not necessarie to be
answered so oft as he repeteth the same, I thoght
good to signe those thinges in euerie seuerall section,
which I thoght in the same moste necessarie
to be answered. And this I haue done as well in
his reasōs, as in myne answers, so that the figure of
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. which be marked in the mergēt
of his reasons, are answered where the lyke nombre
is foūd in myne answers. This I thoght good
to admonish the reader.
         
         
            
            The Preface.
            
               AMongest the manifold blessinges
where with God hath blessed his
chosen childrē (whom before all
begining of times he hath predestinate
to life in Christ Iesus) it is
not the least (most deare brethrē)
that he hath giuen vnto vs plaine aduertisment,Ephes. 1. 3
how diuerse, vnto dyuerse persons shalbe the effect
and operation of his word: so oft as it is offered
vnto the worlde.2. Cor. 2. 1
                     •
                  
                To wit, that as he him self
was appointed by his heauenlie Father ād forespokē
by the Prophetes,Esaie 8. 14 to be the Stone of offē
               se,
the stombling block, and a snare to the two
houses of Israel, and yet that he shoulde be
to others the Sanctuarie of honor, the Rocke of
refuge, & author of libertie: so should his word
(I say) truely preached be to some foolishnes
and the sauor of death,2. Cor. 2. 16 and yet vnto others, that
it shoulde be the swete odore of life,1. Cor. 1. 28 the wisedo
me and power of God (and that to saluation) to
all those that beleue. I purpose not at this present
to intreat nor to reason, how and why it is
that gods eternall worde, which in it self is alwayes
one, worketh so diuersly in the heartes
of those to whō it is offered, but my onelie purpose
is in few wordes to admonish vs (to whom
it hath pleased God of his owne fre mercy more
playnely to reuele the mysteries of our redēptiō
               
thē he hath done to many ages be fore vs) not to
esteme this a small and common blessing of God
that we haue not onely his trueth, but also the
effect and operation of the same cōfirmed to vs
by experience of all ages. Great & infinite is that
benefit of God, and rightly can it neuer be weighed,
when so euer he doth offer his trueth vnto
the world. But such is either the dulnes of man
orels his extreme ingratitude, that he will not
acknowledge the face of theveritie,Iohn 1. 5 shyne it neuer
so bryght. The ingratitude of the Iewes, is
hereof vnto vs a sufficiēt witnes. For albeit that
lōg they did looke for the Messias and Sauior
promised, yet neuertheles, when he came with
wonderous signes & workes super naturall,Matt. 27. 38. they
did not onely not know him,Act. 2. 23 but also refusing
and vtterly denying him, they did hang him bewext
two theues vpō a crosse. The cause hereof
in some parte we know to be the carnal libertie
which cōtinually they did thirst after, and their
preconceaued opiniō of worldlie glorie: which
because Christe Iesus appeared not to satisfie according
to their fantasie and expectation, therfore
did they contēpteously refuse him, ād with
him all gods mercies offered vnto them. Which
fearfull example (deare bretherē) is to be obserued
of vs. For by nature it is euident, that we be
no better, then they were. And as touching the
league & societie with God, which prerogatiue
long made thē blessed, we be farre inferior vnto
thē. For in cōparisō of that league made with Abrahā
               
the tyme is shorte, that the Gētiles haue
bene auowed for gods people & beloued spouse
of Christe Iesus▪ yea Paule feareth not to call thē
the very natural brāches and vs the brāches of a
wilde oliue. And therfore if their cōtēpt was so
punished, that blindnes yet remaineth vpō thē,
what oght we to feare? They not considering
the office of Christe, & the cause of his cōming,
were offended with his presence and doctrine.Companions of the trueth
And doeth any mā thīck that we be free frō the
same dangers? Few shalbe found, that in mouth
praise not veri
                  •
               ie, & euery mā appereth to delyte
in libertie. but such cōpanyons do follow bo
                  ••
               
the one and the other, in this life, so that both
are despised and called in doubt, whē they be of
fered moste plainly to the world. To speake this
mater somewhat more planely, it is a thīg (as I suppose)
by many cōfessed that after darknes light
hath appeared: but alas, the vices that haue abounded
in all estates and conditiōs of persons,
the terrible crueltie which hath bene vsed against
the saintes of God, and the horrible blasphemies
which haue bene & daily are vomited
furth against Christe Iesus and his eternall veritie,
hath giuen (and iustly may giue) occasion to
the imprudent beholder of such confusion, to
preferre the darcknes of superstition, which be
fore did reigne, to the light of saluation, which
God of his greate mercie hath now of late
yeres offered againe to the vnthankfull world.

For what naturall man can think that the iustice
of faith, planelye and truely preached should
be the occasion of sinne? That grace and mercie
offered shoulde inflābe the heartes of mē with
rage and crueltie? And that gods glorie declared
shoulde cause mē impudētly to spew furth their
vennom and blasphemies against him, who hath
created thē? The naturall man (I say) can not perceaue
how these incōueniences shoulde follow
gods worde, & therfor do many disdein it, a grea
                  •
               e
nōber deny it, and few as it becōmeth with
reuerēce do imbrace it. But such as with graue
iudgemēt shal consider what was the common
trade of liuing, when Christe Iesus, him self did
by preaching and working, call men to repentā
               ce,
what was the intreatement of his dearest seruāts,
whō he sent furth to preach the glad tydinges
of his death and resurrectiō, and what horrible
sectes followed, and daily did sprīg after the
publication of that ioyfull attonement made
betwene God and man by Christe Iesu, by his
death, resurrectiō, and ascēsiō, such (I say) as diligētly
do obserue these former pointes, shall not
onely haue mater sufficient to glorifie God, for
his graces offered (be the liues of mē neuer so corrupted,
and the confusion that thereof insueth
neuer so fearful) but also they shall haue iust occasion
more steadfastly to cleaue and stick to the
trueth, whose force & effect they se alwaies to
haue bene one frome the begīning. The giuers of

these offēses shall no doubt sustein the wo pronounced
against them by Christe Iesus.Matt 1. 7 But yet
must the childrē of God vnderstand, that of necessitie
it is, that such offēses come: that the elect
may first be tryed,1. Cor. 11 19 and after be partakers of that
blessing pronoūced by our master in those wor
des:Luke 7. 13 Blessed is he that is not offended in me. The
cause of these my former wordes is, that as Satā
euer frome the beginnīg hath declared him self
ennemie to the fre grace and vndeserued loue
of God,Sathan hath euerraged against the fre mercies of God. so hath he now in these last and moste
corrupted daies most furiously raged agaīst that
doctrine, which attributeth all praise and glorie
of oure redemption to the eternall loue and vndeserued
grace of God alone. By what meanes
sathā first drew mākynd frome the obediēce of
God,Ephes. 2. 8 the scripture doeth witnesse. To wit, by
powring into their hartes that poison,How Satan drew māfirst from God. that God
did not loue thē: and by affirming that by transgressiō
of gods cōmandemēt they might attein
to felicitie and ioy: so that he caused them to
seke life where God had prounced death to
be. This same practise hath sathan euer frome
the beginning vsed to infect the Church with al
kynd of heresie, as the writings of Moises, of the
Prophetes, of the Apostles, & of the godlie in the
primatiue Church do playnelie witnes. But alas
to such blasphemie did neuer the deuil draw mā
               kynd
as now of late daies, in the which no small
nōbre are become so bolde, so impudent, and so

irreuerent, that opēly they feare not to affirme,
God to be vniust, if that he in his eternal coūsel
hath elected more one sort of mē thē an other to
life euerlasting in Christe Iesus our Lord: which
thing of late daies, is more planely come to oure
knowledge thē before we could haue suspected,
and that by the sight of a book moste detestable
& blasphemous, cōteinyng (as it is intiteled, The
cōfutation of the errors of the careles by necessitie)
with that odious name do they burden all
those that either do teach, ether yet beleue the
doctrine of gods eternall predestination▪ which
booke writtē in the english tōgue doeth cōtein
as well the lies and the blasphemies imagined by
Sebastian Castalio, and laid to the charge of that
moste faithfull seruāt of God, Iohn Caluine as also
the vane reasōs of Pighius, Sadoletus & Georgius
Siculus, pestilēt Papistes, & expressed ennemies
of gods free mercies.The cause of the writing of this worke. The dispitefull railīg
of wt booke, & the manifest blasphemies in the
same cōteined, togither with the earnest req̄sts
of som godlie brethren, moued me, to prepare
an answere to the same: others I dowbt not
might haue done it with greater dexteritie, but
with reuerēce & feare do I lay the talēt cōmitted
to my charge, vpō ye table of the Lord to brīg to
his church such aduātage as his godli wisdō hath
appointed. But lest that some shoulde thīk, that
my labors might better haue bene bestowed in
some other exercise, I thoght expediēt to admonish

all brethrē, & charitably to requyre of thē,
not to esteme the mater to be of small weight &
importāce▪ for seing that gods fre grace is opēly
impugned & disdainfully refused, I iudge it the
duetie of euerie man that loketh for life euerlasting,
to giue his confession to Christe Iesus,
whose glorie is by these blasphemers to ye vttermoste
of their power suppressed. Some do thinke,
that because the reason of man can not atteine
to the vnderstanding, how God shall be iust
making in his counsel this diuersitie of mankīd,
that therefore better it were, to kepe silēce in al
such mysteries, then to trouble the braynes and
myndes of men with curious disputatiōs. I willingly
confesse, that al curiositie oght to be auoided,
and that with great sobrietie we oght to
contemplate & beholde that incomprehensible
mysterie of our redēption. But yet I say, that the
doctrine of gods eternal predestinatiō is so necessarie
to the Church of God, that without the
same,The necessitie of the doctrine of gods eternall predestination. can faith neither be truely taught, nether
surely established: mā cā neuer be broght to true
humilitie, & knowledge of him self nether yet
cā he be rauished in admiration of gods eternal
goodnes, and so moued to praise him as apperteineth.
And therefor we feare not to affirme
that so necessarie as it is that true faith be established
in or har tes: yt we be broght to vnfined
humilitie, & yt we be moued to praise hī for his
fre graces receaued, so necessary also is ye doctrin

of gods eternall predestination. For first there
is no way more proper to buyld and establish
faith, thē whē we heare and vndoubtedly do beleue,The stabilitie of faith. that our election (which the Spirit of God
doth seale in our hartes) cōsisteth not in our selues,
but in the eternal and immutable good pleasure
of God. And that in such firmitie that it cā
not be ouerthrowen nether by the raging stormes
of the world, nor by the assaultes of sathan,
nether yet by the wauering and weaknes of our
own fleshe. Then onely is our saluation in assurance,
whē we fynd the cause of the same in the
bosom and counsell of God. For so do we by
faith apprehend life and peace manifested in
Christe Iesus,Rom. 5. 1. that by the directiō and guyding
of the same faith we looke farther: to wit, out
of what fountaine, life doth procede. In Christe
Iesus now presētly do we fynd libertie ād life,Iohn 14. 6 1. Cor. 1. 30
he is made vnto vs of God, wisdome, & righteousnes and sanctification and redēption: and in the
promes of his Gospel is foūded the stabilitie of
our saluation. But yet we haue a ioy which, far
surmounteth this.Ro 1. 26 For albeit that we should
heare that the mercies & the graces of God were
offered vnto all men, and albeit also that we
should fele that our heartes were somwhat moued
to beleue, yet onles the very cause of our
faith be knowen, oure ioye and comfort cā not
be full. For if we shall think, that we beleue ād
haue embrased Christe Iesus preached because

our wittes be better then the wittes of others,
and because that we haue a better inclination
and are of nature more tractable then be the cō
               mon
sorte of men, sathan (I say) can easely ouer
throw all comfort buylded vpon so weak a
ground. for as the heart of man is vain and inscrutable,
so may it be, that those that this day
be tractable and obedient, hauing also som zeale
toward godlines, yea and also bothe sense and
feling of gods mercie, such (I say) may shortly here
after become stubborn in some cases, disobedient
in maters of greate importance, tempted
with lustes, and finally they may be left so barren,
that rather they shal tremble at the sight of
gods iudgemētes, thē that they can reioyse in the
free adoptiō of his children. And therefor (I say)
that except our comfort be grounded vpon that
foundation which neuer can be moued, it is not
perfect.The vnmouable ground of faith. And that ground is this: That when we
vnderstand that presently we beleue in Christe
Iesus, because we were ordeined before the beginning
of all tymes to beleue in him:Rom. 8. 29 as in him
we were elected to the societie of eternall life,
then is oure faith assuredly grounded,Ephes. 1. 14 and that
because the giftes and vocatiō of God are without
repentance.2. Thes. 2. 13 and he is faith ful that hath called
vs.2. Pet. 1. 2. & 20 his infinite goodnes which moued him
to loue vs in an other thē in our selues, that is in
Christe Iesus,Rom. 11. 29 according to his free beneuolēce,
whiche he had purposed in him, is to vs a towre

of refuge, wt satan is neuer able to ouerthrowe
nor ye gates of hell shall neuer preuail against
it. For how so euer we be changeable, yet is God
in his counsel stable and immutable, yea how
weak, how feble, how dull that euer we be, yet
is there nothing in vs (euen when we be in our
owne iudgement most destitute of the Spirit of
God) which he did not se to be in vs before we
were formed in the wombe, yea and before the
beginning of all tymes, because all is present
with him. Which imperfections, infirmities and
dulnes, as they did not stoppe his mercie to elect
vs in Christe Iesus, so can they not compel him
now to refuse vs. And frome this foūtaine doth
flow this our ioye, that with the Apostle we are
bolde to crye: who is able to seperate vs from ye
loue of God which is in Christe Iesus?Rome. 8 for seing
that the father, who hath giuen vs for a peculiar
inheritance to his onelie Sonne, is so mightie,
that owte of his hand is none able to take vs
away, what danger can be so great? what sinne
is so greuous, or what desperation so depe, that
is able to deuoure vs? for seing it is God him
self who will absolue vs from all iniquitie: and
seing that Christe Iesus his Sōne wil aduowe vs
to appertein to his bodie, what is he that dare
ryse against vs to condemne vs? The comfort
hereof doeth none fele except the chosē childrē
of God, and that in the daye when mans iustice
faileth, and the batt
                  •
               lle of their conscience is

most greuous and fearefull. Therefore as faith
springeth frome election, so is it established by
the true knowledge of that doctrine onely
which this day is moste furiously oppugned, by
those who do not vnderstand the same.
            And frome that same doctrine floweth
the verie mater of trew humilitie. For while
we beholde the condition of those whom nature
hath made equall to be so farre diuers the one
from the other, it is vnpossible but that the
children of God in their own heartes vnfeinedly
shalbe humbled. For whither so euer they
shall directe their eyes, they shall behold fearefull
examples of blyndnes and of such iniquitie
as all men iustly oght to abhorre: but when
they cōsider them selues to haue receaued light
in the midst of such dareknes, and them selues
to be sanctified in the midst of so wicked a generation,
from what fountaine can they say that
this procedeth? who hath illuminated their
eyes, while that others abyde in blyndnes? who
doth brydle their affections, while that others
do follow the same to perdition? yf they say
nature, their own conscience shall conuict
them: for nature hath made vs all equall:
by nature are we the childrē of wrathe as wel as
other: Ephes. 2. If they say education, reason, or
their own studie, common experience shall diclare
their vanitie. For how many haue bene no

rished in vertue,Ham. Ishmael. Esau. Abshalom. Achitophel. Iudas. and yet become moste filthie
in life? And by the cōtrarie how many haue lōg
remained without all vertuous education, and
yet in the end haue atteined to gods fauor? And
therfore we say that such as attribute any thing
to them selues in the grace of their election haue
not learned to giue to God the honor which to
him apperteineth,The Niniuites. Manasses. Paul. Magdelene. The thiefe. because they do not frely cō
               fesse
what maketh thē to differre frō others. It
is vniuersally receaued for a sentēce moste true,
that as humilitie is the mother of all vertue: so
it is also the roote of all godlynes. But how is it
possible,What humilitie is that that man shalbe humbled, that can
not abyde to heare the former miserie in the
which he was borne? neither yet the means by
the which frome the same he was delyuered? If
a begger being promoted to greate honours by
the liberalitie of a king, should be remēbred of
his former condition: and for declaration of
his gratitude he should be commanded to reuerēce
the embassador, or herauld that thus should
say vnto him: Remēber and call to mynde how
wretched, poore, ād miserable somtymes thow
wast, and praise the goodnes of the king, by
whose mercie and gentlenes thow liuest now in
this honorable estate: If this begger (I say) should
stomake that his pouertie should be so often obiected
vnto him, who wold saye, that either he
were humble, either yet thankfull to the king?
No more can it be said that such as can not abyde

the mētion of gods eternall electiō (by the
which onely the elect be extolled to dignitie in
Christe Iesus) be either humble in gods presēce,
either yet thankfull, for that infinite benefite,
which excedeth all measure. To wit, that we be
elected in Christe Iesus to life euerlasting, and
that God according to the good pleasure of his
eternall counsel, hath made separation betwext
those who did fall into equall perdition, as touching
the offence and sinne committed. Such as
desire this article to be buried in silence, and
wold that men should teach and beleue, that the
grace of gods election is common vnto all, but
that one receaueth it, and an other receaueth
it not, procedeth either from the obedience or
disobedience of man, such disceaue them selues,
and are vnthākfull and iniurious vnto God. For
so long as they se not, that true faith and saluatiō
(as in the discourse shalbe more plainely declared)
springe from election and are the gifte
of God, and come not of our selues, so long are
they disceaued and remayn in error. And what
can be more iniurious vnto gods free grace,Ephes. 2. 8 then
to affirme, that he giueth no more to one, thē to
an other? seing that the hole scriptures do playnely
teach, that we haue nothing which we haue
not receaued of fre grace & mere mercie, ād
not of our workes, nor of anythīg in vs, lest any
mā shoulde boast himself Ephes. 2, 28. And therefore
let wicked men rage as they list we will

not be ashamed to confesse always, that onelie
grace maketh difference betwext vs and the rest
of the world. And further we feare not to affirm,
that suche as fele not that cōfort inwardly
in their cōscience, can neuer be thākfull to God,
neither yet willing to be subiect to his eternall
counsel, Which is the onelie cause that these
wicked men moste vnreuerently do storme &
rage against that doctrine which they do not
vnderstād. But let vs (deare brethren) be assured,
that none other doctrine doth establishe faith,
nor maketh mā humble & thankfull vnto God,
& finally y• none other doctrine maketh mā carefull
to obey God according to his cōmādemēt,
but that doctrine only, which so spoileth man of
all power & vertue, y• no portion of his 
                  •
               aluatiō
consisteth within him self, to the end that the
whole praise of our redemptiō may be referred
to Christe Iesus alone whō the Father of verie
loue hath giuen to death for the deliuerance
of his bodie,1. Cor. 1. 30 which is the Church,1. Iohn. 4. 10 to the which
he was appointed head before the beginning
of all tymes.Ephes. 1. 22 To him therefor with the Father
and holie Gost, be all praise and glorie for euer
and euer. So beit.
         
      
      
         
            THVS BEGINNETH
THE BOOKE OF
the aduersaries of Gods eternal predestinatiō.
         
            The first error of the careles by necessitie.The first section.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               WE are not ignorant, nether yet do ye dissemble,
whom ye accuse, but how iustly you term our doctrine
error, and vs careles, at this tyme I omit to speak
becaus that after we shal, haue occasion more largely to
comō with you in that mater. Onely at this present I demand
of you with what conscience can you burden vs
with the odious name of stoicall necessitie, which so often
most impudently ye laye to our charge in this your
moste vngodlie and confused worke: seing that no men
do more abhorre that deuelishe opinion and prophane
name then we do? It is easie to persuade you as I suppose
that we dissent not from the iudgement of the reuerend
seruant of Christ Iesus Iohn Caluin (whome ye in skoffing
and dispite vse to terme and call our God.) And therefore
from hencefurth to put silence to your venemous
tongues and to cause your impudencie more appere to
such whose eyes sathan hath not blinded with like pryde
and malice as in you are more then euident: I will
faithfully recyte his wordes and sentences in this behalf
written thus in his Christian institutions.Cap. 14. Sectiō 40
               
               Those (saieth he, that studie to make this doctryn
meaning of Gods eternall prouidēce and praedestination
odious falsly do calumniate, that it is the Paradox, that is
doubtfull and hard opinion, of the Stoiks who did affirm
that all things chanced and come to passe by fatall
or mere necessitie.Libr. ad bonifa. 2. The which also was ob
                     •
                  ected to saint
Augustine. As touching vs, we do not willingly debate
nor striue for wordes,Cap. 6. & 40. neuertheles in no case admit we
nor receaue the terme which the Stoikes vsed in latyn

called Fatum. Aswel becaus it is of the nombre of those
wordes, the prophane and vnprofitable nouities whereof
Paul willeth vs to auoyd, as also because that by hatred
of it, our ennemies go about to charge the veritie of
God. As touching the opinion, we are falsly and maliciously
burdened therewith: for we imagin not a necessitie
which is conteined within nature by a perpetnal coniunction
of natural causes, as did the Stoiks, but we affirme
and menteine that God is Lord, moderator and Gouernor
of all things, whom we affirm to haue determined
from the beginning according to his wisdom what
he wold do, and now we say, that he doth execute according
to his power what so euer he hath determined. Whereof
we cōclude, that not onely the heauen and earth ād
creatures insensible, but also the coūseles, and the willes
of men are gouerned by his prouidence, so that they tēd
and are led to the scope and end which he hath purposed.
He procedeth further answering the obiectiō which
may be made, saing: what then, is there nothing done by
fortune and chance? I answer. That wel and godly it is
written by Basilius called the great: That fortune and
aduenture are the wordes of paynims, the signification
whereof oght in no wise to enter in to the heart of the
faithfull. For is all prosperitie be the benedictiō of God,
and aduersitie, his malediction, there remaineth no place
the fortune in such things as come to mē.Retract. lib. 1. cap. 2. And further
to the end of that section he bringeth furth the mynde
of Augustine concerning fortune, whereof parchance
we may after somwhat speake. This one sentence is sufficient
to cōuict bothe your master and you of malicious
enuie and most vniust accusation: for herein doeth not
onely Iohn Caluin, and we all with him abhorre from the
terme of Fatum called destinie, but also from that diabolicall
opinion which the Stoikes mainteined. When I
consider what should be the caus that thus maliciously
ye should burdē vs with that which so planely by word
and writing we oppugne, I am compelled to suspect, that

either ye vnderstād not the nature of the terme which ye
lay to our charge, orels that ye haue a further fetch, then
at the first sight doth appere.
               We planely do affirme, that the opinion of the Stoikes
is damnable and fals:Stoi
                        •••
                      necessitie for they did place such power in
the sterres and in their oppositious, that impossible (they
affirmed) it was to change or auoyd that which by their
constellation and influence was appointed to come. In so
much that they helde, that Iupiter him self (whom they
called the great, and supreme God) could neither alter
nor stop the operation of the sterres and the effectes that
should folow therevpō: and so they affirmed, that the mutatiōs
of kīgdomes the honors of some men, the deiectiō
of others, and finally that bothe vice and vertue were all
togither in the power of the sterres. Against this pestilent
opinion strongly and learnedly disputeth Augustin in diuerse
places,Cap. 1. 2▪ 3. 4. & 5. but chefely in his fift booke of that worke
intituled of the citie of God: affirming, that onely by the
prouidence of God are kingdoms erected, mainteined ād
changed: that sterres haue no power, neither to incline
man to vertue nor to vice: that such blasphemies oght to
be repelled from the eares of all men. Which sentences,
becaus they do most perfectly aggre with gods infallible
worde, we reuerentlye embrace, and constantly
do beleue: And so, why that ye shuld thus impudently
accuse vs of that which we neuer thoght, wise men
may wonder.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   O say, you, ye take away the worde of
Stoicall necessitie, but yet ye affirme the selfe same
thing which they affirmed. I answer: if ye can make no
difference betwext the omnipotent, moste perfect, most
iust, and immutable will of God, and the opposition of
sterres, called constellation, you haue euill profited, not
onely in Gods scoole, but also in those artes, in which 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of you wold seme to be subtill. Do we affirme, that of
necessitie it was, that Pharao after many plagues susteined,
should with his greate hoste be drowned? that
Nabuchadnezer should be trāsformed in to a brute beast?

that Cyrus should first distroy Babilon, and after proclame
libertie to the people of God (after their long and
dolorous captiuitie) because the influence of the sterres
did lead them to that end? or do we not rather most constantly
affirm, that the aeternall counsel of God, his immutable
decre, and most holie wil (which onely is the
most perfect rule of all iustice and equitie) did bring all
these thinges to passe by such meanes as he had appointed,
and by his Prophetes fore spoken? But here you storme,
crying in your accustomed furie: What is this els
but stoicall necessitie, to make Gods wil the only cause
of all thyngs, be they good or bad? How dull and ignorant
you are, if ye can not make differēce betwext Gods
will and that necessitie which the Stoikes mainteaned,
I haue before touched, and how maliciously ye impute
vnto vs, wordes and sentences, whereof ye be neuer able
to conuict vs, shall shortly God willing) be declared. But
by this I perceaue where the shoe doeth wring you. If
Gods wil, his counsel, his prouidence and decre beare rule
in the actions of mānes lief,Why the Anabap. mystlyketh the doctryn of predestination. then foresee you and feare,
that your free will shall be broght into bondage: and
so can ye not com first to the perfection of Angels, and
in processe of tyme to the iustice of Christe by the meanes
of your free will. Whether I wrongously suspect
you, and so haue erred in my iudgement, your own wordes
shall after witnes. For seing that we haue planely proued,
vt most vniustly and moste maliciously ye accuse and
traduce vs of the vane opinion of the Stoikes, I will procede
to that which ye call our first error, after that I haue
(for the better instructiō of the simple reader) declared,
what we vnderstand by Prescience, Prouidence, and praedestination,
which termes do so offend you, that ye can
not heare them named.
               When we attribute prescience to God,Presciē
                     ce. we vnderstād,
that all things haue euer bene and perpetually abyde
present before his eyes, so that to his eternall knowledge
nothing is bypast, nothing to com, but all thinges
are present, and so are they present that they are not as

conceaued imaginations or formes and figures, whereof
other innumerable thinges procede (as Plato teacheth
that of the form and exemple of one man, many thousandes
of men are fashioned) But we say, that all things
be so present before God, that he doeth contemplat and
beholde them in their veritie and perfection. And therefor
it is, that the Prophetes often tymes speak of things
being yet after to com, with such certentie, as that they
were alreadie done. And this praescience of God do we
affirm to be extended to the vniuersall compasse and circuite
of the world, yea and vnto euery particuler creature
of the same.
               Gods prouidence we call,Prouidence. that souerane empire and
supreme dominiō, which God alwayes kepeth in the gouernement
of all thinges in heauen and earth contei
                     •
                  ed.
And these two (that is, Prescience and prouidence) we so
attribute to God, that with the Apostle we fear not to affirme,
that in him we haue our being, 
                     ••
                  uing, and lief:
We feare not to affirme,Ioan. 10. that the way of man is not in his
owne power, but that his foot steppes ar directed, by the
eternall:Prouerb. 20. That the sortes and lottes (which appere most
subiect to fortune) go so furth by his prouidence: That a
Sparro falleth not vpon the ground without our heauenlie
father.Prou
                        •
                     r. 16. And this we giue not to God only praescience
by an ydle sight, and a prouidence by a general mouing
of his creatures (As not only som Philosophers,Matth. 10▪ 29. but also
mo then is to be wished in our daies do) but we attribute
vnto him such a knowledge and prouidence, as is extended
to euery one of his creatures. In which he so worketh,
that willingly they tend and incline to the end, to
which they are appointed by his. What comforte do
the sonnes of God receaue in earnest meditations hereof
this tyme will not suffer to intreate. But at one word to
finish, alas to what miserie were we exponed, if we
should be persuaded, that sathan and the wicked might
or could do any thing, otherwiese then God hath appointed:
Let the godlye consider.Predestinatiō
                  
               
               Predestination (whereof now this question is, we

call the eternall and immutable decre of God, by the
which he hath once determined with him self, what he
will haue to be done with euerie man. For he hath not
created all (as after shalbe proued) to be of one condition.
Or if we will haue the definition of Predestination more
large: we say, that it is, the most wise and most iust purpose
of God, by the which before all tyme he constantly
hath decreed to cal those whom he hath loued in Christ,
to the knowledge of him self and of his sonne Christ Iesus,
that they may be assured of their adoption by the iustification
of faith, which working in them by charitie, maketh
their workes to shyne before men to the glorie of
their father, so that they (made conforme to the image of
the sonne of God) may finally receaue that glorie, which
is prepared for the vessels of mercie. These latter partes
(to wit of vocation, iustification of faith▪ and of the effect
of the same) haue I added, for such as thīk that we imagin
it sufficient, that we be predestinate, how wickedly so
euer we liue. We constantly affirme the plane contrarie:
To wit, that none liuing wickedly, can haue the assurance,
that he is predestinate to lief euerlasting. Yea althogh
man and Angell wolde beare record with him, yet will his
own conscience condemne him, vnto such tyme as vnfeanedly
he turne from his wicked conuersation. These
termes I thoght good in the beginning to explane, to the
end that the reader may the better vnderstand our meaning
in the same, and that we be not after often cōpelled
to repete thē againe. Now to that Wc ye call the first error.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               God hathe not created all men to be saued by any manner
of meannes,The second sectiō. but before the foundation of the world he hath chosen
a certen to saluation which is but a small flocke, and the rest
which be innumerable he hath reprobate and ordeined to condemnation.
Because so it pleaseth him.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               They are not onely reputed liers ād called fals witnesses,
that boldly and planelie affirme a lie in plane and
expresse wordes, but such also as in reciting the myndes
of other men, change their meaning by altering their wordes,

by adding more then they spake, or by dyminishing
that which might explane the thinges that remained obscure
or more fully might expres the minde of the speakers.
And in all these thre vices are you criminall in this your
first accusation or witnessing laid against vs. For our wordes
ye haue altogether altered: to them ye haue added, and
from the ye haue diminished that which ye think may aggrauate
and make odious our cause. And therefore I say,
ye are detestable liers, and malicious accusers. For probation
hereof I appele to our writings, be they in latyn, frē
                  che,
Italiā, or english (in so many tōgues this mater is writtē)
if that any of you be able to brīg furth our propositiōs
in any of thē in this your forme, ād cōteining your whole
wordes, I offer to make satisfactiō vnto you, (whether ye
will be worde or writīg) y• I haue hieghly offended in callīg
you detestable liers. But if ye be neuer able to shew any
such wordes vsed by vs (as plane it is ye be not) thē yor
master Castalio ād you bothe are far from yt perfectiō (to
speake no more bitterly) wt ye pretēd.Liers are the deuilles sonnes. For ye are manifest
liers: ād whose sōnes they are called, you can not be ignorāt,
accusing mē of that they neuer mēt. For thus formeth
Castalio his first fals accusacion against Master Caluin.
God hath created to perdition the most part of the world by the
naked bare and pure pleasure of his own wil. And this same ye
affirme in mo wordes more impudently patched▪ so bothe
you and he do adde to our wordes of your own malicious
mynd. These sentences: God hath created the most parte of
the world, which is an innumerable multitude, to perdicion, onely
becaus it so pleased him, you steall from our wordes,
and suppresse that which euer we ioyne whē we make mention
of gods predestination, to witt, that he hath created
all thīges for his own glorie. That albeit the cause of gods
will be incōprehensible, secret, and hid frō vs, whē of y• same
masse he ordeyned som vesselles to honor, ād sō to destructiō,
yet it is moste iust, most holie: ād most to be reuerenced.
Now to y• further declaratiō aswel of or mynd as of
your shameles malice, I shall recite som s̄etēces of master
Caluī, as doth that godlie and learned mā Theodorus Beze
against the craftie surmyse of your master Castalio.

I say (faieth Iohn Caluin) with Augustin, that of God
they were created whom without doute he fore knew to
go to perdition: and that was so done becaus so he wold.
Why he wold, it apperteineth not to vs to inquire, who
cā not comprehend it: neither yet is it conuenient, that
the will of God shall discend and come downe to be decided
by vs. Of the which so oft as mention is made vnder
the name of it, is the supreme and most hie rule of iustice
nominated. And further we affirme, that which the
scripture clearly sheweth, to wit, that God did once by
his eternall and immutable counsel appoint, whom
somty me he should take to saluation, and also whom he
should condemne to destruction.Institut. Cap. 14. Sect. 5. We affirm those whom
he iudgeth worthie of participation of saluation to be adoptate
and chosen of his free mercie for no respect of
their own dignitie: but whom he giueth to condemnation,
to the same he shuteth vp the entres to life by his
incomprehensible iudgement. But yet by that iudgemēt,
that neither can not may be reproued. And in another
worke.De aeterna Dei praedestinatiō. If we be not ashamed saieth he of the Gospell, it
behoueth vs to confes that which therin is manifestly
taught, that is, that God of his aeternall good pleasure,
whose cause dependeth vpon none other, hath destinate
to saluation whom it pleased him, the rest being reiected
And whom he hath honored with his free adoption, those
he illuminateth by his Spirit, that they may receaue the
life offered in Christ: Others by their own will so remaning
vnfaithfull, that being destitute of the light of faith,
they continue in darknes. Also that which sainct Augustine
writeth: So is the will of God the hieghest rule of
iustice,In
                        •
                     titu. Cap. 14. Sect. 14. that what so euer he will in so far as he willeth it,
it is to be holden iust. Therefor when the questiō is why
did God so? It is to be answered: Because so he wold. But
if thow procede asking, why he wold, thow sekest a thīg
greater and more hie then Gods wil, which can not be
founde. And after saieth he: We must euer returne to the
pleasure of his will, the cause whereof is hidde within
him self. But to make this mater more euident, I will adduce

one or two places mo, and so put end to this your
forged accusacion for this tyme. In his book which he
wri
                     ••
                  th of the eternal predestination of God, thus he
saieth. Albeit that God before the derection of Adam had
determined for causes hid to vs, what he was to do, yet
in scriptures we read nothing to be condemned or him,
except sinne. And so it resteth, that he had iust causes
(but hid from vs) in reiecting a part of men: for he hateth
nor damneth nothing in man, but that which is contrarie
to his iustice.Caluin vpon Isaiah. Also writing vpon Isaie the 23. chap.
vpon these wordes: The Lord of hoostes hath decreed,
to prophane the pryde of all the noble ones &c▪ he saieth,
let vs learn of this place, that the prouidence of God is to
be considered of vs, that to him we may giue the glorie
and praise of his omnipotecie, for the wisdom and the iustice
of God are to be ioyned with his power. Therefore
as the scriptures teach vs, that God by his wisdom doth
this or that, so do they teach vs a certen end why he doth
this or that: for the imagination of the absolute power
of God which the scholemen haue inuented, is an execrable
blasphemie: for it is as much as they should say, that
God were a tyrant, that appointed things to be done not
according to equitie but according to his inordinat appetite.
With such blasphemies be the scholes replenished,The schoeles of Papistes full of blasphemies.
neither yet differ they from the Ethnicks who did
affirme, that God iested or did sporte in the maters of
men. But we are taught in the schole of Christe, that the
iustice of God shyneth in his workes what so euer they
be, yt the mouthes of all men may be stopped, and glorie
may be geuen to him alone. And therefor the Prophet
rehearseth iust causes of this destruction (meaning of
the destruction of Tyrus) that we shall not thinke that
God doth any thing without reason. Those of Tyre were
ambitious, proude, auaricious, lecherous, & dissolute.
               What is he so simple, which may not now consider
and vnderstand, what was your malice and deui
                     •
                  ish intenion▪
in patching vp this your first accusation? not the

zeale of gods glorie, as you falsly pretend: but the hatred
which ye haue conceaued against them who haue soght
your saluation. For if ye had ment any thing simply, ye
should not haue added that which ye be neuer able to shew
in our writinges: neither yet can ye laufully proue, that we
haue spoken the same in reasoning with any of you. We
(so taught by the scriptures) with reuerēce do affirme, that
God, for iust causes albeit vnknowē ād hid to vs, hath reiected
a parte of men. But you (making no mention of any
cause) affirme, that we holde, that he hath created the
most part of the world (which is innumerable) to no other
end, but to perdiction, in which shameles lie your malice
pa
                     ••
                  eth measure: For neither do we rashly define the nomber
of the one nor of the other, howbeit the scripture
in dyuers places affirmeth, Christes 
                     ••
                  ocke to be the little
flocke, the nomber to be few, that findeth the way
that leadeth to life▪ this notwihstanding (I say) we vse
not boldly, to pronounce, whether of the nobres shalbe the
greater, but wt all sobrietie we exhorte the people cōmitted
to our charge, not to folowe y• multitude to iniquitie.
For if they do, there is no multitude that can preuale against
God. And so to vs in this behalf ye are greatly iniurious.
But yet in ye secōd parte, your malice is more manifest:
for ye burdē vs, that we should affirme, that the end of
the creation of the reprobate, was none other but their eternall
perditiō. From which calumnie master Caluin clearly
purgeth vs in these wordes.Inst. cap. 14. sect. 17. All oght to know (saieth he)
that which Salomon saieth, yt God hath created all for him
self, ād the wicked also to the euill day. Cōsider ād mark,
that we (instructed by the holie Gost) do first affirme, that
the cause and end why the reprobate were created, neither
was, nor is not, their onlie perdition (as ye burden vs) but
that the glorie of God must nedes appere and shyne in all
his workes. And secondarely we teach, that their perdition
doeth so depend vpon gods predestinatiō, that the iust cause
and mater of their perditiō is found within them selues,
and that albeit the decre and coūsel of God be incomprehensible
to mens vnderstāding, yet neuertheles it is most

iust and most holie. And thus haue I so plainely and
in so few wordes as conueniently I could expound in what
pointes ye are malicious liers, what ye haue added of hatred
to our wordes, and what ye suppresse that the equitie
of our cause should not appere to men. God grant you
(if his good pleasure be) with greater modestie to write,
and with more humilitie to reason in those hieghe mysteries,
which far surmount the reatch of mannes capacitie.
But now I procede to the preface of your confutation
which thus beginneth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The confutation of the first error.
               To proue this true,The third section. they can bring furth no plane testimonie
of the worde. For there is no such saiēg in the holie scripture that
God hath reprobate man afore the world: But the sentēces which
they alledge be far set and forged, cōtrarie to the meaning of the
holie Gost, as God willing it shal planely appere. And where scripture
will not serue, they patch their tale with vnreasonable reasons
for theire hole intention is contrarie to true reason.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               In verie dede, if all were true wc ye haue heaped vp in
your vniust accusation, I for my parte, wold not ashame
to confesse, that more were affirmed then plane scriptures
do teach: but your additiōs which before we haue touched,
being remoued, and that added which of malice ye haue omitted,
I hope, that our propositiō shalbe so plane and simple,
that the reasonable man (if he be godlie,) shall neither
lacke good reason nor plane scriptures to confirm the same.
Albeit that ye are bold to affirme, that we haue neither
scripture nor good reason, and that our whole intētion is
contrarie to true reason. But now let vs forme our own
propositiōs.Two chiefe propositiōs God in his eternall and immutable counsels
hath once appointed and decreed whom he wold take to
saluatiō, ād whō also he wold leaue in ruyne ād perditiō.
Those whome he elected to saluation, he receaueth of fre
mercie without all respect had to their own merites or dignitie,
but of vndeserued loue gaue thē to his onelie son
to be his inheritāce, ād thē in tyme he calleth of purpose,
who as his shepe obey his voice, ād so do they attein to y•
                  
ioy of that kingdom which was prepared for them before
the foundations of the world wer laide. But to those
whom he hath decreed to leaue in perdition, is so
shut vp the entrie of life, that either they are left continually
corrupted in their blindnes, orels if grace be offered,
by them it is oppugned and obstinatly refused, or if
it seme to be receaued, that abideth but for a tyme onely,
ād so they returne to their blindnes ād croked nature ād
infidelitie agane, in which finally they iustly perishe.
               Becaus the hole cōtrouersie standeth in this whether
God hath chose any to lief euerlastīg before the begīnīg
of al tymes leuīg others in their iust perditiō, or not, my
purpose is first by plane scriptures to proue the affirmatiue,
and after in weying the same ād other scriptures, that
by Gods grace shalbe adduced, so planely as I cā to shew
vnto you, what horrible absurditie, ineuitably foloweth
vpon your error in which ye affirme, that God hath chosen
no man more one then an other▪ that either your
blindnes remoued, ye may turne with all humilitie to
the eternall sōne of the eternall God, against whom you
arm your selues, orels that your damnation may be the
more so dayne and iust, for your refusall of the plaine
light offered. That God hath chosen before the foundation
of the world, witnesseth the Apostle, saing: Blessed
be God the Father of our Lord Iesus Christe,Ephes. 1. who hath
blessed vs with all spirituall blessing in heauenlie things
by Christe as he hath chosen vs in him before the foundation
of the world was laid, that we should be holie and
without blame before him by loue. Here the Apostle in
expresse wordes affirmeth that God hath chosen a certeī
nombre, (for he speaketh not to the hole world,) as you
either ignorantly orels maliciously do after alledge, but
to his beloued congregation of Ephesus who with all obedience
had receaued the word of lief offered, and with
great pacience had continewed in the same euen after the
departure of their Apostle from them yea after his bōdes
and impresonnement. Such I say doeth the Apostle affirme
that God hath chosen, and that before the foundatiōs

of the world were laid: So that we haue Gods election before
all beginning planely proued. Here might I bring
furth many places but I hauing respect to breuitie stand
content with this one place. That this he hath done once
in his eternall and immutable coūsell without respect to
be had to our merites or workes (which you alledge to
be causes of Gods election) witnesseth the same Apostle
proceding as foloweth: who haeth pr
                     •
                  destinat vs, that he
should adoptat vs in children by Iesus Christe according
to the good pleasure of his will that the glorie of his grace
by the which he hath made vs deare, by that beloued
may be praised. In whom we haue redemption and by
his blood remission of sinne according to his aboundant
grace, of the which he hath plentifully poured vpon vs
all wisdom and prudence, opening to vs the secrete of
his will according to his good pleasure which he purposed
in him self to the dispēsation of the fulnes of tymes,
summarely to restore all things by Christe bothe those
that be in the heauens, and those that be in the earth, by
whom we are chosen in a portion or lott, predestinate according
to the purpose of him by whose power are all thinges
made, according to the decree of his will, that we
should be to the praise of his glorie. Here the holie Goste
as it were of set purpose, forseing mannes vnthankfulnes
vseth wordes not only moste propre, but also most
vehement, and often repeteth the same, to beat doune all
pryde and arrogancie of man presuming to arrogate any
thing to him self in the mater of his saluation. He first
saieth: God hath pr
                     •
                  destinate. And lest yt som might haue
thoght as you folowīg the Papistes, do now blasphemously
affirme that so he did in respecte of our worthines, of workes,
or faith, in one sentence he secludeth all which is without
Christe Iesus and without him self, sayeng: he hath
predestinate vs to adoptate vs in children by Christe Iesus
in him self, according to the good pleasure of his will.
If Christ Iesus, yea if God the Father, his aeternall coūsel,
his decree and purpose, be other then our worthines, our
faith, our qualitie, or our good workes, then neither for

thē nor in respect of any of them were we chosen to lyfe.
For plainly he affirmeth that by Christe in him self according
to his good pleasure which he had purposed in him
self, were we adoptate to be children yea and that according
to the purpose and decre of his will. Here haue you
the same and mo wordes then we vsed. For here are those
wordes: the purpose of his good will, that he hath purposed
in him self to predestinace and adoptate vs in childrē
                  ▪
which wordes do most liuely expresse that which we affirme.
But yet perchance ye lacke the proofe of this parte,
that God in his immutable coūsell hath once chosen. For
after, I perceaue, yt this doeth much offend you. I trust ye
will not reiect the testimonie of S. Iames, for ye seme vpō
his wordes much to leā. And he saieth, that euery good
and perfect gift is frome aboue, discending from the Father
of light, with whom there is no variablenes, neither
shaddowing by turning, he hath (saieth he) of his owne will
begotten vs by the worde of veritie. If with God, as he affirmeth,
there be no variablenes, then must his counsell
be immutable. If in him there be not, now dareknes and
now light, but that as he dwelleth in the light which is inaccessible,
so are and euer haue ben all thinges present in
his sight. Then in his eternall counsell there falleth neither
ignorance nor repentance: and so what he once decreed,
that he faithfully will perfourme to the praise of
his own glorie. But if ye will not admit my reasons, then
must I bring vnto you plain scriptures. That God hath
chosen before the foundations of the world, that he hath
predestinate, purposed, and decreed, to adoptate vs in childrē,
is befor proued. The Prophet I saiah from the fortie
chapter of his prophecie to the ēd of the same, intreateth
chefely these two argumētes, vpon the one part to cōfort
the afflicted, and dispised church (which then was sore
oppressed and after was to be led captiue to Babylon.)
Vpon the other part to threaten iust vengeance aswell
vpon the contemners of grace offered, as also vpon the

cruel ennemy. The estate of the churche was such, that
all hope of libertie, redemption, and comfort was taken
from them. They were as dead carions, buried in disperation,
against the which the Prophet continually
fighteth, calling them frome the contemplation of the
present miseries, and frome the sight of such impediments
as to them appered to stop their libertie, to the infallible
promes of God, and to his counsell, which he affirmeth
to be constant, and to his loue which is immutable.
And therefor so often doeth he repete. It is I the eternall,
who hath created the heauens, and hath laid the
foundations of the earth: It is I, It is I, that will do it for
my own names sake▪ I will establish the word of my seruāt
(he meaneth, of Isaiah and of his other Prophetes, who
in his name promised delyuerance to the people.) and
I will perfourm the counsell of my messingers.Is
                        •
                     i. 44. I say to
Ierusalem be thow inhabited, and to the walles of Zion
be you builded. By these and many other places the Prophete
traualed to lift vp the people from the pitt of desperation
in which they were to fall by reason of their greuous
calamitie and long captiuitie, and that he might
with more efficacie persuade the same, he bringeth them
to the league made with Abraham, to the remembrance
of their wonderful deliuerance out of Egipt: and
to the lenitie of God which their Fathers had found at
all tymes. But in vane had all his labour ben if gods
counsell, decre, and purpose had ben changeable. For
easily they might haue obiected: to what vse serueth
vs the promes made to Abraham, or the kyndnes
of God which our fore fathers tasted? We haue
refused God and therefor hath he refused and reiected
vs, he hath broken his league and couenant with vs.
But against all these desperate voices, and against
your blasphemous error, who affirme that gods counsell
and purpose changeth, as man doeth, 
                     •
                  ighteth
and preuailleth the Prophete, Saing: My cogitations

are not your cogitations, neither are your waies
my wayes (saieth the eternall).Isaiah 55. But like as the heauens are
hyer then the earth so do my wayes excell your waies, and
my thoghtes your thoghtes. And the word yt pas
                     •
                  eth furth
of my mouth, shall not returne voyd to me. But it shall
do what so euer I will (note and giue glorie to God) and it
shall prosper in those thinges to the which I haue sent it:
I doubt not but that the godlie reader doeth clearly se the
mynd of the Prophete to be, to rebuke the vanitie of the
Iewes beleuing that gods counselles, couenant and loue,
were subiect to such mutabilitie as they them selues were
in there counselles loue, and promises. But the Prophet
maketh so much difference betwixt the one and the
other as is betwixt the heauen and the earthe, and
doth further affirme, that as the dewe and rayne do not
fall and come downe in vane, so shall not the word
which God s
                     •
                  eaketh (which is of more excellēcie then all
creatures) lack his effect: but it shall worke the will of
God, and shall prosper as he hath appointed it, and that becaus
it is God who hath spoken that, which was purposed
in his eternall and immutable counsell before all tymes.
Vpon this ground and foundation (that is vpon Gods immutable
loue and counsell) build
                     ••
                  h the Prophet the saluation
and del
                     •
                  nerance of the churche,Isaiah. 54 as more planely he
speaketh in these wordes: For this shalbe to me as the waters
of Noah: for as I haue sworne, that the waters of Noah
shall no more ouergo the earth, so haue I sworne, that I shal
not be angrie at the neither yet rebuke thee: Rather shall
the mountanes leaue their place, and the hilles shake, then
that my goodnes shall leaue thee, or that the couenant of
my peace sh
                     •
                  ll wauer (sai
                     ••
                  h the eternall, who ha
                     •
                  h compassion
vpon 
                     •
                  hee). Which only one place is sufficient to proue
what so euer we haue affirmed, that is, that gods coūsell,
loue, and goodnes, towardes his churche, is immutable.
For the example and the similitude which he bringeth in,The constancie of Gods prom
                        •
                     s.
are most plane and euident. The waters haue neuer vniuersally
ouer flowē the earth, synce the dayes of Noah to whō
he made his couenant to the contrarie, and yet no les iniquitie

(yea greter) hath reigned in all aeges synce, then
did before. What is the the cause that the like or greater
vengeance is not taken? The certentie no doubt of his
promes, which he hath made to his churche in Christe Iesus
his onelie welbeloued. The montanes we se in all tē
                  pestes
and stormes do kepe their place, they do not flitte,
neither yet are they shaken with the v
                     •
                  hemencie of windes.
But if they should (saieth the eternall) my goodnes
shall not leaue thee (ô mercie without measure) neither
shall the couenant of my peace shake nor wauer. Thus
I suppose, that the godlie reader doth perceaue ād se, that
we lack not scripture (as ye affirme) to proue, that gods loue
and counsell towardes his elect is stable, and that because
it is grounded vpon him self and not vpon vs, as,
(to your cōdemnation, if by tymes ye repent not) ye falsly
imagin. But yet lest that ye shall complain that these
scriptures be not plane yhough, I will bring in yet one,
and so end this parte: Heare me ô house of Iacob, and all
you residue of the house of Israel,Isaia. 46. who are borne of me
frome the wombe, and borne of me from the birth: and
euen to the aege I am he (the same God) and euen to the
whyte heares I shal bear, I haue done, ād I shall bear, yea
I shall bear and deliuer. What wordes can be more vehement
and more plaine to proue, that the loue of God can
neuer change from his elect? For that is his conclusion
which he collected vpon the former partes, Saing, I shall
bear, and I shall d
                     •
                  lyuer. And why? because I haue born
you. Is this a good reason: that God shall delyuer because
that he hath once born? How so euer it seme to the Anabaptist,
it semeth good to the holie Gost. And Dauid
and Iob did with the like remembrance comforte them
selues in their greatest tribulations. The one saying,
Thow art he that hast drawen me furth of my mothers
wombe.Psal. 2
                        •
                     . In thee haue I trusted hanging vpon my mothers
breastes: vpon the was I cast from the birth: frome
my mothers wombe thow art my God. In these wordes
Dauid did arme him selfe against the horrible tentations,
which did assault him in those moste greuous persecutiōs

which vnder Saul he susteined. For so must not that Psalme
be interpreted of Christe and his passion, that Dauid
had no portiō of it: by the which when to his own iudgement
and to the iudgement of all men also, he appered to
haue ben oppressed, he gathered new strength and comfort
by ye benefits of God, which before he had receaued.
And so he concludeth here: Thow that art the author of
my life, thow that didst norish and preserue me euen in
the midest of darknes, wil
                     •
                   continue my God still and so
shalt thow deliuer me. What is the reason of this conclusion?
Dauid him self doth expres it saying: O Lord thy
mercie is euerlasting, thow shalt not leaue the workes of
thyne hādes.Isal. 138. In which wordes Dauid frome the midest of
troubles is lift vp to the contemplation of gods nature:
who as he chuseth of fre mercie and bestoweth his giftes
vpon his children, before that either they can deserue thē
or yet know them, so doth he continue the same moste
constantly to the end vnto the membres of Christes bodie,
and vpon this same ground alone stayed the faith of
Iob in his most extreme anguishe for in these wordes he
doeth as it were complayne to God. Thy handes haue made
me, and facioned me wholy round aboute and wilt
thow destroy me.Iob. 10. Remember I pray the that how hast
fashioned me as the Potter doth his clay, and wilt thou
bring me into dust againe? Hast thou not poured me oute
as milk and turned me to cruddes like chese. Thou hast
clothed me with skinne ād flesh and ioyned me together
with bones and synewes. Thou hast giuen me life and
grace and thy visitatiō hath preserued my spirite. Thogh
thou hast hid these things in thyne heart I know tha
                     ••
                  t is
so with the▪ Here it is plain, that Iob fighteth against desperation
which vehemently did assau
                     •
                  t him by reason of
his paines intollerable. And in his battell he apprehēdeth
this holde: God hath begon to shew mercie vnto me
which in many things I haue felt, and I still depend and
hang vpon the same, therefor my God may not dispyse
the workes of his handes. And so farre procedeth he in

this disputation, till that he maketh this cōclusion (which
God after did approue.) I know (saieth Iob) that my reuenger
liueth, whom I shall se, yea my n
                     •
                  cis shal se him,
and none other. Vpon what ground I say did this faith of
Iob stand? No doubt vpon this, that gods counsell is stable,
and that his loue is immutable towardes such as once
he had taken in to his sauegarde. And if ye doubt that
this is rather our collection then the plaine sentence of
the holie Gost, conferre oure proposition with the former
wordes of Isaiah, and let it be iudged by them. And
if that yet ye crye that we haue broght furth no plaine
scripture affirming that the counsell of God is immutable,
then heare what the same Prophete saieth. It is I (saieth
he (that frome the beginning shew the things that be
last and from the beginning those thinges that be not done.
It is I that do speak and my counsell is stable.Isaia. 46. and
what so euer I will, that I do. Consider and beholde
that the Prophet affirmeth the counsell of God to be stable,
yea to be so immutable, that neither could the tyranny
of the ennemies neither yet the former sinnes of
the people, neither yet their present vnthankfulnes stoppe
God from shewing his mercie. Becaus that his infinite
goodnes founde awaye euen in the midest of death
to manifest his own glorie. Such as by malice be not
altogither blinded, hauing any exercise in the scripptures
of God, may easely perceaue, that I haue wrested
no parte of the Prophetes mynde. For continually
one thing doth he beat in their eares, to witt, that
God will shew mercie, will deliuer, and will be Sauiour
vnto them for his Names sake for his promes made
to Abraham, and for the glorie of him self. But now
shortly let vs heare two or three places of the new testament
spoken to the same purpose, and so let vs put
end to this part. Our master Christ Iesus plainely affirmeth,
that all which the father gaue him, shoulde come
vnto him, pronouncing that who soeuer cometh he

                     •
                  old not cast him furth,Iohn. 6. but will rayse him vp and giue

him life. For this (saieth he) is the will of the Father that
hath sent me, that I shall lose nothing of all those which
the Father hath giuen to me, but that I might rayse them
vp in the last day. for this is the will of him that hath sent
me, that all that seeth the Sonne and beleueth in him,
may haue life euerlasting. Of those wordes of our master,
it is euident, first that the Father hath geuen some to th
                     •
                  
Sonne Christe Iesus, yea and also that some be, that are
not giuen. But of that after. And sec
                     •
                  ndarely that it behoueth
the same to come vnto him, for so he affirmeth sayīg.
All that my father gaue vnto me, shall come vnto me.
He leaueth it not in doubt, but planely affirmeth they
shall come. Thirdly the end ād fruicte of the commīg is
expressed: to witt, y• they obteine life euerlasting. Which
to them that of the father are giuen and of the Sonne receaued,
is so sure, that Christe Iesus him self pronoūceth,
yt oute of his handes is none able to plucke them awaye.
Plaine it is, that the counsell of God is stable and his loue
immutable towardes his elect, becaus (al other conditions
set aparte) Christe affirmeth, that the life euerlasting
perteineth to thē that are giuen by God, and receaued
by him in protection and sauegarde. But more planely
doth he speake in that his solemne praier:Ioan. 17. for after
that by diuers meanes he had cōforted the sorowfull heartes
of his disciples, he giueth comfort to the whole churche:
Affirming, that he did not pray onely for those that
there were present with him, but also for all those that
should after beleue (by their preaching) in him. These
wordes he added for our singuler comforte: I haue giuē
vnto them the glorie which thow hast geuen to me, that
they may be one as we are one, I in them ād thow in me,
that they may be made perfecte in one, ād that the world
may know, yt thow hast sent me ād yt thou hast loued thē
as thow hast loued me. O that oure heartes coulde wit
                  
                     ••
                  out
contradictiō embrase these wordes: for thē wt humilitie
shoulde we prostrate oure selues before oure God, ād
with vnfeined teares giue thanks for his mercie. Three
things in these wordes are to be obserued, first that the

same glorie which God the Father hath giuē to his Sonne,
the same hath he giuen to such as beleue in him: not
that either Christ Iesus had then the full glorie, as he was
man (for as yet he had not ouercome the death) neither y•
his elect at any tyme in this life can atteine to the fruition
of the same, but that the one was as assured in gods
immutable counsell as was the other. For as the head
shoulde ouercome the bitter death, and so triumphe ouer
sathan the authour thereof, so should his membres in the
tyme appoīted, as he doth further expresse, sayinge: I wil
(Father) that where, that I am, there also be those which
thou hast giuen vnto me, that they may se my glorie.
The second is that so stre
                     •
                  t and 
                     •
                  ere is the coniunction
and vnion betweixt Christ Iesus and his membres, that
they must be one, and neuer can be seperated. For so did
Christe pray, Saing: That they all may be one, as we are
one. I in them ād thow in me, that they may be made perfecte
in one. Let the coniunction be diligently marked:
for much it serueth to our com
                     •
                  ort. As the Godhead is
inseparably ioined with the humanitie in Christ Iesus our
Lord, so the one that is the God head, neither could nor
can leaue the humanitie at any tyme. how bitter that euer
the stormes appeared: so cā not Christ Iesus leaue his
dear spouse the Church, neither yet any trew membre of
the same. For that he includeth vnder the generall word
(all) for any accidēt, how horrible that euer it be, that came
to passe in their life. And albeit that this appere strā
                  ge,
and also a doctrine that may seme to giue libertie to
sinne, yet may not the children of God be defrauded of
their fode, becaus that dogges will abuse the same. But
of this we shall (God willing) after speak. The third thing
to be noted, is, that the loue of God towardes his elect giuen
to Christe is immutable. For Christ putteth it in equall
ballance with the loue by the which his Father loued
him. Not that I wold any man should so vnderstand
me, as that I placed any man in equall dignitie and glorie
with Christe Iesus touchīg his office. No that must be reserued
wholly and onely to him self: that he is the 
                     •
                  
                  lie

beloued, in whom all the rest are beloued: that he is the
head, that onely geueth life to the bodie: and that he is the
souerane prince, before whom all knee shall bowe. But I
meane, that as the loue of God the Father was euer constant
towardes his deare Sonne, so is it also towardes the
membres of his bodie, yea euen when they are ignorant,
and enemies vnto him,Rom. 6. as the apostle witnesseth Saīg: God
specially commendeth his loue towardes vs, that when we
were yet sinners, Christ died for vs: much more being iustified
now by his blood, we shall be saued by him from wrath.
For if when we were enemies we were reconciled to
God by the death of his Sonne, much more we being reconciled
shall be saued by his life. To some, these wordes
maye appere cōtrary to oure purpose, for they make mē
                  tion
of a reconciliation, which is not made, but where there
is enemitie and dissention. But if they be righteously
considered they shall most euidētly proue that, which we
affirme, which is, that God loued the membres of Christes
bodie, euen when they are ignorant, when they by
them selues are vnworthie and ennemies. For this is his
first proposition, that we being iustified by faith, haue peace
with God by our Lord Iesus Christ. Where he maketh
mention of peace, he putteth vs in mynde of the dissension
and warre which was betwext gods iustice and oure
sinnes. This enemitie (saieth he) is taken away, and we
haue obteined peace. And le
                     •
                  t that this comforte should
                     •
                  
sodenly euanish, or els that men shoulde not depely
wey it, he bringeth vs to the eternall loue of God, affirming
that God loued vs when we were weake. Where
we must obserue, that the apostle speaketh not vniuersally
of all men, but of such as were and shoulde be iustified
by faith▪ and had the loue of God poured in to their heartes
by the holie Gost which was giuen vnto them. To such
saieth he. if God did loue vs when we were weake and his
ennemies, muche more must he loue vs when we are reconciled,
and begin in faith to call him father. The Apostle
affirmeth, that oure reconciliation proceded from
gods loue: which thing sainct Iohan more planely doeth

witnes in these wordes: In this appereth the loue of God
towardes vs, that God hath sent furth his onely Sonne into
the world that we should liue by him. In this I say is loue,1. Ioan. 4.
not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and hath
sent his Sonne the propitiation for our sinnes. so that bothe
those apostles in plaine wordes do speake, that which
before I haue affirmed to witte, that God loued the membres
of Christ Iesus euen when they were enemies aswell
touching their knowledge and apprehension, as also touching
the corruption of their nature, which was not regenerate.
And so I conclude as before, that the loue of God
to vardes his electe is stable and immutable, as it which
beginneth not in tyme, neither dependeth vpon our worthines
or dignitie: which trueth is contrarie to that which
I perceaue ye holde and affirme. Thus far (I trust) we haue
sufficiently proued, and that by plain scriptures, and by
no patched vnreasonable reasons (as the author of your
booke accuseth vs.) That God hath his electe, whom in
Christ Iesus he hath chosen, and that of decreed purpose,
to giue them life. Which purpose, counsell, and loue of
God is sure stable, and immutable. Now resteth to proue,
that God hath reiected some, and also to note the absurdities
which folow vpon your doctrine, and so shall I not be
compelled after in the discourse to spende tyme and trauell
to confute your error.
               That God 
                     •
                  ath reprobated any, appereth to you
horrible. Yea, and ye affirme, God to be more cruell then
any wild beast, if so he did. For thus ye writte in your
booke as foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               God hath geuē to all his sensible creatures a naturall inclination
to loue their birthes,The fourth section. then doth God also loue his birthe as he
saith, shall I cause other to beare and shall not I also beare? Lykewise
shall God make other to loue their birthes, ād he not loue
his own birthe? Man is the birthe and child of God created to his
own image ād similitude (as the Prophet saith haue we not alone
father?Zach. 3. Hath not one God made vs? And Paul saith:Act. 17. we are the

generation of God. Wherfore God loueth his own birthe, that is
man. Then did he not reprobate, and cast away man afore he
was. For that were a profe, that he hated and abhorred his own
birthe aboue all other. Now there is no wild beast, much les any
man which wold bring furthe their birth to destruction. How
much les then becometh it the goodnes of God to make ād bring
furth like to his own image and similitude vnto perpetual
                     •
                  
confusion?
            
            
               ANSWER.
               How bolde, how shameles, and how blasphemous
thou declarest thy self (I speak to thee ād they cōpagnions
that collected these blasphemies) It shall shortly appere after
that I haue by gods grace with simple perspicuitie declared
the trueth.
               Trew it is that to the naturall man nothing appereth
more absurde, nor more repugnāt to good reason (as
men term it) then that all shall depend vpon gods will and
appointment for so think they, that God can not auoid
the suspition of iniustice, yea say they he can not be purged
nor made fre from malice and crueltie. But such as
entryng within them self do but in a parte consider what
is their own condition, what is there ignorance, and how
far they are inferiour to y• angels in iustice ād knowledge,
to his holie angels (I say) that be most obedient and
continually stand before his face, and yet neuertheles do
couer their faces, and of very reuerence neither darre
nor will rashly behold the brightnes of his glorie. If further
we shall cōsider yt as in God, his wisdom, his power,
his goodnes and mercie are infinite, so are his iudgemēts
and iustice (in the self most righteous) incomprehensible
to the dulnes of our wittes. For as his wisdom and power
far surmounte all that we can imagin, so are his iudgements
and iustice a great depe (as Dauid affirmeth, and in
the booke of Iob, is planely described) able to swallowe
vp and vtterly to cofounde all our senses. Alas, shall I,
whose corporall eie is so feble and weak, that directly it
can not behold the son which is a visible creature, but
that it shall be blīded ād dasylled: shall I, I say, direct the

eie of my mynde (corrupted by sinne) to measure and cō
                  prehēde
the brightnes of his iustice, who dwelleth in the
light inaccessible? If man coulde impose or prescribe to
God a law ād measure of wisdō, power, mercie, ād goodnes,
so yt none of thē should otherwise be in his eternall
God heade, the mā could vnderstād & approue: the some
apperance might they haue to bring his iustice (which is
no les infinite and incomprehensible then the others) vnder
the censure and examination of their iudgement and
reason. But what bolde and foolish presumption is this?
that man, who knoweth not fully what lie
                     •
                  h within his
own heart, shall without all reuerence enter to iudge the
secrete mysteries, the full knowledge whereof doeth onely
abyde in the eternall God head. That impudently
he shall pronounce: this can not be iust, becaus we do neither
se nor vnderstand the cause of the iustice. God graunt
vs greater humilitie, more reuerence and fear (which
righteously is called the beginning of wisdom) then that
so rashly and proudly we shall presume to damne that
which we vnderstand not. Lest that doing the contrarie,
that malediction pronoūced by 
                     •
                   saiah fall vpō vs, where
he saieth:Isaiah. 45 Wo be to him that reasoneth with his maker,
the vessel of claie with the potter. Doth the clay say to
the potter, what makest thow? and thy work hath no handes,
wo be to him that saieth to his father, what shalt thow
beget?
               This I thoght expedient briefly to admonishe the
godlie reader, before I did enter in to plane battell with
the aduersarie. Beseching further such as do not erre in
this article of set purpose and malice but rather of ignorance
and simplicitie, not to be offended, as thogh I did
stomack against them, if at any tyme I shall handle the
impudent writer or collector of this booke (whose nature
is better knowen vnto me then vnto many of them)
according to his malicious frowardnes: But now shortly
to the mater. The proposition and conclusion of this writer
are bothe one: to witte, God hath not reiected nor reproba
                     
                        •
                     ed
anie man. His reasons and argumentes (as the reader

may perceaue) are: for that were against the nature of God, we
                  
he thus proueth, God causeth others to beare ād therefor he beareth.
And so bringing his argumēt frō this similitude:The sayeng of a blaspphemous mouthe. 
                  God
maket
                        •
                      beastes loue their birthes: therefor 
                        •
                     eloueth his birthes: but
al men are the birthes o
                        •
                      God. For God is the father of Adame, of
whō are al mē borne. Therefor he loueth all mē. If he loueth, thē
did he roprobate none, for that shoulde declare, that he hated and
abhorred, and were more cruell then a wilde, beast. These be
thy argumēts, (blasphemous mouth) In answerīg whereto
if I shall seme to excede modestie, let the godlie cōsider,
that thy horrible blasphemies are intolerable. And first I
call the heauen and earthe, the insensible creatures, and
the iudgement of reasonable men to witnes with me, how
beastly be thy cogitations of the eternall God head: when
thou saiest. God must loue his birthes, becaus he hath giuen a naturall
inclination to all beastes to loue their birthes. If thy reason
be good, then must God forget some of his birthes
in their youth, and reiecte all care of thē. For that same
nature giueth God to som fowles, as ye book of Iob doth
witnes in these wordes (speaking of the Estrich) which
leaueth his egges in the earth and maketh them hote in
the dust,Iob. 39. ād forgetteth that the foote might scatter them
or that the wilde beast might breake them. He sheweth
him self cruell vnto his young ones as they were not his
and is withoute feare as if he traualed in vain. For God
hath depriued him of wisdome and hath geuen him no
parte of vnderstanding. If thy reason I say be good, God
must loue his birth, because he causeth all other beastes
loue their birthes. Then I say, it must also folow, God
shall forgett, and hardly intreat som, for such nature and
inclination hath he giuen to som of his creatures as is
plainely proued.What the aduersary will saye. I do mean (thow wilt say) of loue onely:
but the scripture (which either ignorantly, orels maliciously
thow corruptest) declareth the contrarie for thow
wilt make God to beare, because he causeth others to
beare. That scripture I say thow doest peruerte, as thow
doest all the rest. For what the Prophete of God applieth

to the miraculous restauration of the church whiche then
was most afflicted, that thow doest alledge to make God
haue like asrections with brute beastes. And that neither
thou nor any other shall haue occasion to reporte, that
I accuse the wrongfully.Isaia. 66. I will recite the hole wordes of
the Prophete, who thus speaketh: Before she hath traueled
of child birth she hath borne, and before that doloure
come, she broght furth a man, who hath heard the like?
or who hath sene the like vnto this? was ye earth builded
(he meaneth set in order) in one day? was there euer
a nation borne at once, and yet Zion hath traualed of
child birth, and at once hath she broght furth hir children,
he addeth the cause of this supernaturall multiplication
and felicitie, Saying: shall I bring to a strait? and
shall I not cause to bear? saveth the eternall? shall I cause
to beare ād shall) make restraīte saith thy God, They are
more then blynd which do not se, that God in these wordes
hath neither respect to the naturall inclination of
beastes, neither yet to any common loue that he beareth
to his creatures. But to that incomprehensible and
vnchangeable loue which he beareth to his churche:
the multiplication, the ioy and felicitie whereof, he
will at once bring furth in such sort that his elect shall
neuer remember to their grief that they susteined any
passion or paine: Let the indifferent reader compare
this interpretation with the plane wordes of the Prophete:
and so let thy self iudge, how irreuerently thow
doest abuse the moste confortable wordes of the holie
Gost, to establish thy error. But let it be, that thow didst
mean of loue, and of no affection els, Art thow becume
so bolde, and impudent, that thow darrest subiect
God, to the law, lymites and boundes of nature?
To speake the mater more planely. I ask of the
first if thow wilt denie the loue of God to be perfecte
except that he do for all maner of men that whiche
beastes naturally do for their birthes. Secondarely if
thow filthie earth darest burden God in his presence with

crueltie) as now thow doest in thy blind raige, if he hath
not created and made all men of equall estate condition
and dignitie. Thirdly if thow shalt stand in iudgement,
and lay iniustice to his charge, if he shew mercie to whō
he will, and also indurate ād make hard who he will. For
all these thre,The workes of God can not be subiect to our reason will I planely proue, that God doeth, first
yt he doth not for his dearest children to our iudgement,
that which beastes naturally do for their birthes, I trust
thy self will easely confes. For the Tygar, the bear, the
Lyon and others do so tender their whelpes, that euen against
the strength of man (were he neuer so valiant)
will they fight for defence of their young ones, but we do
se that God comonly doth so permit his dearest children
to the cruel appetites of the most wicked men, that for a
season he appereth to haue forgotten them, and to haue
turned his face and countenance frome them. And shall
we therefor think, that gods loue is not perfect or that
his power is diminished or his good will towardes his childrē
chāged?The reasō of Anabaptistes. God forbid. But this say you doth not offend vs,
but that God should reprobat any man whom he created to his
own image and similitude that we cā not beare, for it repugneth
to his loue and iustice. Well of your first reason which you
drawe frome nature,Answer. I suppose we haue obteined that God
is not bound in all things to folow the natural loue of his
creatures.The aduersarie falsly and vnreuerētly alledgeth this word birth. For he doeth often suffer, (and I trust ye will
not say that he is enforced so to do) his dearest children
most cruelly to be handled, which no beast willingly will
do. Now let vs wey your seconde reason. man sayeth your
book is, the birthe, and child of God created to his own image
and similitud (as the Prophet saieth) wherefor God loueth his
own birth (that is mā) Then did he not reprobate and cast away
man afore he was: for that were a proof that he hated and abhorred.
Omitting your ignorance by the whiche
ye applie generally to all men those promesses which
the Prophete Malachie spake to the people of God.Answer. Let
it be granted vnto you that as all men were created in
Adam,Malac. 2. so God som maner of way is their father: what will
or can ye thereof conclude. That God loueth all say you.

If you vnderstand and affirme that equally God loueth all
because all were created by him, the common experience
ād the diuersitie of gods giftes shall reproue your vaniti
                     •
                  
                  for
vnto one man we see greater giftes giuen then vnto other,
som we se verteouse and others giuen to nothing but
to iniquitie. If you say, he loueth them in that he offereth
vnto thē his grace which when they refuse, then beginneth
he to hate them, you haue proued nothing of your intent,
and further the plain scripture confuteth this your error.
and first I say that before ye can proue your conclusion to
be good, ye must proue that all men stode, do stand, and
be born in the same perfection that Adame was created
in. For it doth not folow, that God still loueth all men, because
he loued Adam (created to his own image and similitude.)
The reason is. Adam did fall from that image, became
rebellious inobediēt, and slaue to the deuill. And in
the same damnation wrapped all his posteritie.What we haue in Adam. So that
now from Adam we can clame nothing, but sinne, wrath,
death, and hatred, as the apostle affirmeth, that of nature
we were all the sonnes of wraeth. If ye alledge that the apostle
speaketh in that place, of man as he is corrupted in Adame,
and so iustly depriued from gods fauor, then I demand
of you (if man doth yet stād in Adame) which if ye
confesse, the holie spirit shall conuict you of alie. For by
the mouth of the Apostle he affirmed that by one mā sinne
entred in to the world ād by the meanes of sinne death
came vpon all men, so that in the first man Adame (who
fell frome his puritie, haue we neither loue, iustice, nor life,
but ye cōtraries, to wit hatred, sinne, ād dea
                     •
                  h. But God
as he had chosen his elect before all beginning in Christe
Iesus his Sonne, so hath he placed these giftes in the second
Adam alone▪ that of his fulnes we may all receaue euen
grace for grace. And thus ye may easely perceaue,
how vane be your arguments which you iudged most
strong. Your first, drawen from nature and naturall inclination,
proueth nothing, becaus that God who is alwaies
fre, can not be subiect to the lawes of nature. Albeit that
for our weaknes he some tymes vseth similitudes taken

from nature. Your second is like vaine, seing that neither
Adam him self did stand in his perfection, neither is any
of his corrupted sede as he is the sō of Adam borne in that
cōdition ād dignitie: But cōtrarie wise, we must refuse fleshe,
and blood, nature and our first Adā, if euer we shall be
partakers of life. This onely were sufficient to confute,
bothe your vnreasonable reasons. But that, here after ye
shall haue no accasion to complain of obscurite, neither
yet that we relent in any parte, I will first simply propose
what we teach and beleue, and there after by gods
grace euidently proue the same.Error of Anabaptistes. You make the loue of
God common to all men and that do we constantly deny,
and say that before all beginning God hath loued his
elect in Christ Iesus his Sonne and that frome the same
eternitie he hath reprobate others:The affirmations of the trew Christiās whom for most iust
causes in the tyme appointed to his iudgement he shall
adiuge to tormentes and fier inextinguible. Here you
stomak, and storme, here ye crie blasphemie, and here
you say, that we affirme that, which can not be proued
by gods scriptures. How sure is the probation of the former
part, let the indifferent reader iudge by that which
is all ready spoken. Let vs now come to the second.
And that ye shall not think that I shall more depend vpon
argumentes and reason then vpon scripture,Gen. 3. I will
begin with scripture, and let argumentes and reason serue
onely in stede of hande maides, which shall not command
but obey scripture pronounced by the voyce of
God. After that by rebellion man was spoiled of all graces,
and that the contrarie vices had taken place and possession
in the heartes of bothe these miserable creatures,
of Adam I mean, and of the woman. God pronoūced this
sentēce agaīst the serpēt. Because thow hast done this, cursed
art thow amōgst all the beastes of the earth. I shall establish
enemitie betwext the ād that womā, betwext thy
sede, and her sede. That sede shall break downe thy head
and thow shalt break doune his hele. As I suppose no

man wilbe so impudent, as to deny that this is the voice
of God, pronouncing and promising, that he will stablish
and put a battel, where none was appering to be: for sathan
before had obteined such victorie, and so had vanquished
bothe the woman and Adam, that they could neuer
haue resisted that seruitude by them selues. And therefor
doth he disclose the bowelles of his mercie, and
doth communicat with them that counsell which was secrete
with him selfe before all begining.Question. And if ye demande,
How can it be proued, that this was his eternall counsell?
I answer because,Answer. that he in whom there is no changeing
nor variablenes, hath now pronounced it: and whether
this reason be sufficient or not in answering to your
obiection we shall after consider. Now resteth it onely
to be obserued, whether it was the will of God or not to
make a difference betwext man and man. Plaine it is that
before his face as touching the first birth, there standeth
but one lompe, or masse (as saint Paul termeth it) and yet
from the same are two sedes appointed to spring, which
are the two churches: The elect conteined vnder the sede
of the woman, and the reprobate or malignant church
comprehended vnder the name of the serpentes sede.The churche of Christe and the serpente
                        •
                     i sede. To
the one is promised victorie, to the other is denounced
by the irreuocable sentence of God the▪ broosing of the
head, which is destruction and confusion. I think ye will
not say, that he was constreined ther to by any force exterior
as we speake, seing he is the eternall which changeth
not, euer abiding Lord ouer all creatures, who may
and doth performe what so euer he will in heauen and
in earth. Then of necessitie it must folowe, that this
battell is appointed by his will. And that do the wordes
plainely beare. For he saieth not I know that there
shall be a battell, or I will suffer and permitt [as you vse
to interprete such places] a battel to be, but he plainely
saieth, I will put and stablish the battel and enemitie,
declaring thereby, that as he was the force,
strengthe, and the conductor to the sede of the woman

so wolde he most assuredly giue victorie to the same.
Which thing S. Augustine diligently did note, and godly
admonished.De bono perseuerāt Affirming, that our condition in Christe Iesus
is now better and more sure, then before was the condition
of Adam in his own fre will. For that, that he had
non other strength, but that which might be and was ouercome.
But we haue the strength that is inuincible because
it is the power of the eternall. This one place I say doeth
most euidently proue, that God willingly maketh a difference
betwext man and man, appointing to the one sorte
victorie,Reply of the aduersary. and lief, to the other subiection and death. But
yet ye reply this can not be proued to be the eternall coū
                  sell
of God. for it is pronoūced in respect of the faith workes
and obedience of the one, and in respect of the infidelitie
vicious liuing and inobedience of the other. Your
obiection (which here I now intreat that after I be the les
troubled) hath two membres, the former will I now touche,
abiding better oportunitie for the other. Where ye
alledge, that this can not be proued to haue bene the eternall
counsell of God, becaus it was pronounced in tyme,
your reason appereth (and is) more then foolish. For what
is he that agaīst he plain scripture of God will affirme
this reason. The kingdome of heauen s
                     •
                  albe giuen in the
end of the world to the elect of God, therefor it was not
prepared to them before the beginning. Doth not (I say)
the plaine voice of Christ condemne this vaine reason:
Or if I should say: the death of Christ was four thousand
yeares after the beginning, therefore the lambe was not
killed from the begīning. Were not this most folish▪ and
contrarie to the plane scriptures? But is not the contrarie
reason most sure▪ most true and strōg? God in tyme hath
p
                     •
                  onounced, and his sentence being once pronounced,
most cōstātly doth he execute the same: Therefor it was
his e
                     •
                  ernall and immurable counsell. As our election was
purposed and decreed in gods eternall counsell before
the beginning of all tymes, ād yet from aege to aege was
the same reueled to his chosen children. Did therefor the
Apost
                     •
                  e or rather the bo
                     •
                  ie Gost lie (who doth a
                     ••
                  irme,

yt we were elected) as before is proued in Christ Iesus before
all tyme? Euen so is it in this mater, the sentence by
the which the battell came furth first to the knowledge
of man was temporall. But the stabilitie and continuance
of it plainely proueth, that is was and is the eternall purpose
and counsell of God. But yet more depely to dis
                  
                     •
                  ēde
in to the mater.Question Was it the eternall purpose and coū
                  sell
of God to create the worlde and so to make man to
his own image and similitude? I suppose that euerie reasonable
man will confesse that so it was. Then do I aske
if God was ignorant what shoulde become on all mankynd
before that any creation was? so to affirme is to deny
his eternall knowledge, wisdom, and God head: he did
know ād forsee his end▪ and yet he did creat him, then if it
was not his eternall counsell that to his glorie this differēce
and diuersitie should be in mākynd which then was
but one lompe or masse, why did he not giue vnto hym
such strength, as could not be ouercome? It shall nothing
releue nor help you, to shift with the Papistes, alledging,
that God gaue him free will and aboundāt graces by the
which he might haue resisted and ganestand all assaultes
and tentations if he wold, that we deny not But yet we aske
why did not God giue vnto him the will to resiste, or
why did he not so bridle sathan, that he might not haue
tempted him? I trust ye will not with the Manicheis affirme,
that there was a power greater then the power of the
good God, and that this wicked power did for a tyme ouercom
the power and destroy the counsell of the good
God who was creator and louer of mankinde. For that
were plainely to deny the omnipo
                     •
                  encie of our God. If
you say (as after ye write) that God did one
                     •
                  y permitt
and suffer his fall, ye haue said nothing to the purpose:
for still I demande, whe
                     •
                  her he did suffer it willingly
or vnwillingly. If ye sa
                     •
                   willing
                     •
                  y, then are ye caugh in
the snare which ye wold auoyde. If ye say it was against
his purpose ād will, thē fall ye in to t
                     •
                  at horrible blasphemie
of the manicheis, denying gods omnipotent power,
And if yet ye wold escape, imagining God to loke and

beholde the end of the mater, and yet neither willing the
one nor the other, then fall ye into the blasphemie of
Epicurus who althogh in plaine wordes he durst not deny
God yet did he affirme, that he regarded not the workes
of men, but did idly occupie the heauens. But how
far this repugneth to our faith, who beleue God to be omnipotent,
not onely becaus he may do all thinges, but also
because that it is he that created light and darknes, good
and euill, and finally that worketh all in all thinges according
to the purpose of his good pleasure: let such as be
but meanly exercised in the scriptures iudge, and so (I
say) that mans fall and the difference that came to our
knowledge by the same, was no les determined in the eternall
counsell of God then was his creation. And that in
this sentence is yet most euidently to be espied. For if
God had not purposed in him self to establish this battel
and so to make a difference perpetuall,Gods purpose was from the beginning to make a difference in mankinde. why did he not holy
restore man agane to honour to puretie, and innocencie?
Why did he not stay the fountaine of sinne in our
first father? why did he suffer his first corruption by propagation
to come to his posteritie? was it because he lacked
power? or was it not rather as the Apostle doeth teach vs,
that he wrapped all in vnbeleif, that he might haue mercie
vpon all? tha he might she 
                     •
                   mercie to whō he wold,
and harden also whom he wold? If these thinges do displease
you, remember first that they are the voices of the
holie Gost, and secondarely call to your mynd the condition
of mankynd, to witt that bothe you and we (compared
with that soueraigne maiestie) be but wormes here
creping on the earth, and therefor can we not clim vp
to the 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  uē
                  ▪ and so reason or ple
                     •
                  d wt the almightie. Call
to minde I say that question of the Apostle, calling man
to the cōsideration of him self in the same ma
                     •
                  er, Saing,
O man 
                     •
                  hat art thow that thow maest answer in cōtrarie
to God? that is, contend or plead with him? This sentence
I sa
                     •
                   ought to humble vs, and make vs rather to tremble
at the remembrance of his iudgementes then rashly, and
with proude stomockes to damne that, which we are not

able to apprehend. But let vs yet prosecute this mater further,
to the end that we may se if that this hath bene and
is the constant will of God, and that plainely declared by
his word that this former difference be kept in all aeges.
               No other difference was made then this generall,The se
                        ••••
                     de diff
                        ••
                     ē
                     ce.
till the dayes of Abraham, and then a more speciall and expreise
differēce was made, for that which before was common
to the womans sede, was then by the expressed voice
of God appoīted to Abrahā ād vnto his sede: in these wordes:
In thy sede shall all the natiōs of the earth be blessed,
I will blesse the ād multiplie thee, such as blesse ye, shall I
blesse, ād such as curse the shall I curse. In wc wordes is no
les the battell, then the benediction established. For as al
nations were pronounced to be blessed in his sede (which
as the Apostle doeth interprete was Christe) so is it pronounced,
that there shalbe some that shall curse, and therefor
shall be accursed of God. Yea it is plainely spoken
that foure hundreth yeares should his sede ād posteritie be
euill intreated in a strange cuntrey, neuertheles the p
                     •
                  ople
whom they shall serue shall I iudge (saieth the lord).
So haue we agane the difference plainely confirmed by
the voice of God. But yet God procedeth one degre further,
and in Abrahams sede he maketh difference. For in
Isaac (saieth he) shall thy sede be called, by the which voice
he did seclude bothe Ismael, and the rest of his carnall
sonnes from that honour: affirming that from none of
them should the benediction come, but onely from Isaak
which was the sonne of promes (and not of nature onely).
But that difference was most euidently declared in Isaakes
two sonnes, being yet in their mothers boson▪ before
they had done either good or bad, as the Apostle affirmeth.
It was said by the voice of God, the elder shall serue
the younger. By which voice of God reueled, did Isaak ād
Rebecca plainely vnderstand, what was the cause of the
battell which the mother felt in her bosom ād wombe: to
witt, that because from her wombe were two peoples and
nations to procede, which could not be of equall honour

and dignitie.This is the cause why all the prophetes almost do de clare gods wrath against Esan and Edome. For the one had he determined in his eternall
counsell to elect for his peculiar people, the other to
reiect, and to leaue them in the common corruption as
the other nations: as the sequel in processe of tyme did
euidently declare. For the Edomites discending of Esau
were cut of from the bodie of the church and became manifest
enemies to the posteritie of Iacob becaus that their
father was subiect to Iacob and pronounced to be his seruant,
Such as vnderstand this place of corporall seruice
and worldlie riches or dignitie onely, do nothing els but
shew their own ignorāce corrupting the meaning of the
holie Gost.Psea. 137 For sainct Paul in the 9. chapter to the Romains
after that he hath affirmed that the promes and 
                     •
                  
                  lection
of God were sure (albeit that many of the carnall
sede had refused Christe preached,Esaie. 34.) he bringeth in this
former sentence,Ier. 49. to remoue all sclāder: Saing,Obad. 1. All are not
sonnes, because they are the sede of Abraham, that is those
that be ye sōnes of the fleshe, are not therefor the sōnes
of God: but those that be the sonnes of promes are accompted
for sede. And so to proue that which before he had
affirmed, to witt, hat all were not Israelites that came of Israel,
he added these wordes. Not onely this, but also whē
Rebecca had cōceiued of one, our father Isaak, while the
children were not borne, while they had neither done
good nor cuill (that the purpose of God shoulde by de according
to electiō, not of workes, but of the caller) it was
said to her: The elder shall serue the younger. Such as be
not more then blind, may easely perceiue, that the Apole
looketh to an other end, then to worldlie dignitie.
For his purpose was not in that place to dispute and reason
who should be riche in this world and who should be
poore, who should be lordes temporall, and who shoul
                     •
                   be
seruants, but his purpose and m
                     •
                  nd was to declare t
                     •
                  
whom did that benediction promised vnto Abraham appertein,
and to whom it did not apperteine. So that the
holie Gost speaking by sainct Paule is a commentarie of
the wordes spokē to Rebecca. And I doubt not, but so she
did vnderstād them.Rom. 9. To witt, that yt promes which appered

to haue ben common with all the sede of Isaak (of whom
it was spoken) In Isaak shall thy sede be called, was
now restreined and made proper to one head, and to the
people discending of him, that is to Iacob, who after obteined
the name of Israel. So that bothe the peoples neither
were reputed, neither yet in very dede were the
Church ād chosen people of God, but the one was chosen
and the other was refused. The one by grace, and of the
caller was honored with the name and priuiledge of his
churche, The other was cast owt as strangers, vpon the
one remained the benediction, of the which the other was
depriued. In this maner, I say did bothe Isaak, Rebecca,
yea Iacob, and Esau in proces of tyme vnderstand this oracle
of God. But yet becaus this former place of the Apostle
is by many euill vnderstand,How S. Paul applieth the wordes of Moises. and by som maliciously
wrested from the simple meaning of the holie Gost: in
as few and plain wordes as I can, I purpose to declare how
aptly and properly the Apostle vseth the testimonie and
wordes of Moises. Christ beīg preached to the iewes who
were reputed the chosen people of God, to whom,Gene. 25. and for
whose comfort and deliuerance the Messiah was especially
promised: The most part of the iewes remained vnfaithfull,
refused the Sauiour, who was sent, blasphemed
him, and cruelly did persecute him and his mēbres. This
could not be withoute a greate offēse ād sclāder to many
thousandes bothe of the Iewes and gentiles. The Iewes
puffed vp with pride because they were the peculiare people,
because to them were giuen the law, promesses, ād oracles,
did brag and boast, that God could not reiect thē,
except 
                     •
                  hat he should be found a lier. For to Abraham and
to his sede had he made a promes. And the gētiles might
be troubled with the like cogitations: for they might
think, if God shall refuse his own people which so many
yeares, he tenderly had norished, what stabilitie can we
loke for, thogh we should receyue this Christ preached.
Against bothe these sortes of men most valiāt
                     •
                  y fighteth
the Apostle, and most aptly alledgeth the scriptures to the
confutatipn of the one and comfort of the other. First against

the Iew he reasoneth, that albeit they be Israelites
after the flesh, yet it may be, yt they be not the verey israelites
of God, neither yet is God endeb
                     •
                  ed vnto thē, thogh
they be discended of Abraham. The reason is, that God made
no promes to the hole sede of Abraham, but to a parte
of it, to Isaak.Promes inade to Isaak. And if they should say: but we are of
Isaak, he granting that, doeth neuertheles proue, that God
doeth not choose ye hole sede of Isaak, but in the mothers
wōbe (as said is) by his own decre, he made the differēce.
And if further they should replie, ô but we are of Iacob,
he then commeth to the proof of his first proposition, affirming,
that albeit they were of Iacob, yet did it not thereof
folow that they were all the elect people of God. for what
prerogatiue (wold he say) can Iacob, haue aboue his father
Isaak, or what can Isaak haue aboue Abraham? Abraham
who many yeres faithfully obeyed God, could not obtein
that all his posteritie (no not Ismael for whom he prayed)
should be reconed to be his sede: Neither could Isaak obtein
the same: but God appointed and did chose whom it
pleased him. And shall Iacob haue greater prerogatiue thē
had they bothe? shall he that of grace was preferred to his
brother, when neither the one had done good, neither the
other had done euill, giue that priuiledge to all his posteritie,
that without exception they shalbe the chosen people
of God? No (will the Apostle conclude) but God no
                     •
                  
after the reuelation of his dear Sonne Christ Iesus doeth
make the same difference in the posteritie of 
                     •
                  acob, that
somtymes he made in the sede of Abraham ād Isaak. That
is: he chooseth whom it pleaseth him, ād reiecteth also such
as in whom he hath no pleasure, ād that not onely amongest
the Iewes,Vessels of mercie prepared vnto glorie. but also amongest the gentiles and that to
make the riches of his glorie knowē towardes ye vessels of
mercie which he had prepared vnto glorie: whō he hath
called, euen vs not onely of the Iewes but also of the gentiles
(as the Prophet Osee saieth) ād so to the ēd of ye chapter
he establisheth the faith of the gentiles, and cōforteth
them affirming, that their vocation and election was fore
spoken by Moises and the Prophetes, and therefore that it

was not a thing that came by chāce, but was appoīted in
the eternall coūsel of God, and therefor in his cōclusion,
he assureth them, that such as beleue in Christ Iesus, shall
neuer be confounded. This simply, but truelie (I doute
not) haue I explaned the mynde of the Apostie in the former
place, which is:Gods election dependeth not vpon man. That gods election dependeth not vpon
man vpon his will, purpose, pleasure, or 
                     ••
                  gnitie, but
as it is fre proceding from grace, so is it stable in god
                     •
                   immutable
counsel, and is reueled to gods elect, at such tyme
as he knoweth most expedient. But because that of
this we must after speak more, now we recurne to our former
purpose. From the beginning we heare, that God maketh
a differēce: first by that generall diuision, seperating
and setting aparte the sede of the woman from the serpents
sede. After calling Abraham (neglecting as it were,
the rest of the whole world) in Abrahames sede he maketh
plaine difference, secluding Ismael, that he should not be
heir with Isaak: But most especially in the wombe of Rebecca,
making the difference betwext the two children
and their posteri
                     •
                  ie. Which difference did continue euen
to the dayes of Christe Iesus, in such 
                     •
                  irmitie, and stablenes,
that neither could the sinnes of the Pa
                     •
                  riarches, the
subtill cruel
                     •
                  ie of Pharao, the inobediēce and grudgeing
of the people, their apostasie and defection from God by
manifest idolatrie, nor finally their long bondage and captiuitie,
alter or change this immutable counsell of God:
that the elder should serue the yonger, that the Messiah
should cō of the tribe of Iuda, & that of the loynes of Dauid
should spring furth one to fit vpon his seat for euer.
And this difference which God by his own voice did stablish
before the cōming of his dear Sōne Christ Iesus did
the same Christ Iesus oure master (appering in flesh) ratifie
and confirme. For he plainely affirmeth, that he was
not sent but to the lost snepe of Israel and that it was not
good to take the bread of the children and giue it to dogges.
By which two sentences he maketh an expresse difference bet
                     •
                  ext the shepe and 
                     •
                  he goates, and betwext
the children and the dogges. He feareth not to

say to the faces of those that boasted them selues to be
the sonnes of Abraham, ye are not of God for, if ye were
of God,Iohn. 8. ye should loue me, but ye are of your father the
deuill ād his desires ye will obey. As this sentēce is fearfull,
so may it appere verey bold. For they might haue obcted
as they did: are we not his creatures, created to his
own image, are we not the sede of Abraham? Do we not
beare the figure of circoncision? are we not collected in
Hierusalem, and do we not frequēt the temple? yes verely,
but none of all these thinges made them to be of God,
in such sorte as Christ denied them to be of him. For
all these thinges may the reprobat haue commō with the
electe. But Christ denied them to be of God, that is, to be
the sonnes and wessels of his mercie elected in his eternall
counsel, borne of him by the spirit of regeneration,
by the which their stubborn blindnes being remoued, ād
they made obedient, durst be bolde to call him Father. In
this sense Christ denieth them to be of God. If any think
that their wickednes and willfull refusall of grace offered
was the cause that they were not of God, as I neither
excuse their manifest rebellion, neither yet deny it to be
a most iust cause of their condemnation, so vtterly deny
I that their perse
                     •
                   sinnes were the onely or the chefe caus
of their reprobation. For Christ him self feareth not to
assigne an other cause: Saing, Therefor ye do not heare,
because ye are not of God.Why the Iewes beleued not in Christe. If they had heard, that is, receaued
ād beleued Christ Iesus ād his doctrine, their sinnes
had ben purged and their blindnes remoued. But him
could they not receaue. And why because they are not of
God. But to the obiectiō, that the fore knowledge of good
workes, or of rebellion to come, should be the cause why
God doth electe, or reiecte, we shal
                     •
                   (God willing) af
                     •
                  er
ans
                     •
                  ere. Now onely I mynde to folow that which I haue
purposed, which is that Christ Iesus him self maketh a
plaine and manifest difference betwext one sorte of men
and an other. How often doth he affirme that, his shepe
do heare his voice, that he knoweth 
                     •
                  hem, and that they
know him, yt it hath pleased the Father to giue the kingdome

to the litle flock. That many are called ād few chosen.
That som there be whom Christ Iesus neuer knew,
no not enen when they wroght greatest miracles. In all
these and many places mo it is euidēt,Christe maketh a diff
                        •
                     rē
                     rence of one sort from an other. that Christ maketh
difference betwext one and an other. but one place most
notable all others I will shortly touche, and put end to this
mater. Christ Iesus in that his most solemne and most cō
                  fortable
praier (after other things) sa
                     •
                  eth, I haue manifested
they name to the men whom thow hast geuen to me of
the world. They were thyne, and thou hast giuē them vnto
me, and they haue kept thy worde. And shortly after:
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them
whom tho
                     •
                   hast giuen vnto me: Because they are thyne.Iohn. 17.
If in the hole scriptures there were no mo places to proue
that in the Eternall counsel of God there is a difference
of one sorte of mē from an other, this onely one were sufficient.
For first he maketh mention of men giuen vnto
him by the Father, who were (as he before affirmed) chosen
owt of the world, and why were they giuē vnto Christe?
he answereth, because they were the fathers. And how
they apperteined to God more then others, is before said.
He further declareth what he had done vuto them,What Christ did for his. what
they also had done. And what he did and wold do to the
end for them, he had opened vnto them the name (that is
the mercie goodnes, constant trueth and perfect iustice)
of his heauenlie father, which doctrine they had receaued
and kept, as they that were the grounde appointed to
bring furrh frui
                     •
                   in aboundance. He did pray for thē, that
they should be sanctified and confirmed in the veritie.
The vertue of wc praier is perpetuall and at al tymes obteineth
mercie in the presence of his fathers throne for
his electe. And lest that any doubte shoulde remaine as
that these graces were common to all the worlde, in plain
and expresse wordes he affirmeth,Christe praied not for the world that he prayed not for
the world but for those [saieth he] whom thow hast geuen
vnto me. If any deny a plane difference here to be made
betwext one sorte of mē and an other, I will pray to God
to open his Eies, that he (if gods good pleasure be) may se

the light that so brightly shyneth. Other places for this present
I omitte: For of these precedents I suppose it be euident,
that in the eternall counsel of God there was a difference
of mankynd euen before the creation, which by
his own voice is most plainely declared to vs in tyme.
Now to that obiection which Pighius that pestilent and
peruers Papist (and you all after him) doth make. To witt,
that God did predestinate according to the workes, and
faith which he foresawe to be in man.An answere to the papistical and pestilent obiection of Pighius ād others his like. I might obiecte to
the contrary that if Predestination procedeth from gods
purpose and will (as the Apo
                     ••
                  le affirmeth it doth) that thē
the purpose and will of God being eternall, can not be
moued by our workes, or faith which be temporall. And
that if the purpose of God be stable and sure, that then can
not our workes being vnsure, be the cause thereof. But to
auoid prolixitie and tediousnes, I will by plaine scriptures
proue, that of fre grace did God electe, that of mere
mercie doeth he call and of his onelie goodnes without
all respect had to our dignitie (as to be any cause first mouing
him) doeth he perfourme the worke of our saluatiō.
And for the proofe of the same, let vs take Abraham and
his posteritie for example. Plaine it is, that he and his sede
were preferred to all the nations of the earth, the benediction
was established to spring frome them, the promes
of the land of Canaan was made vnto them, and so were
they extolled to the honour ād dignitie of gods peculiar
people. But let vs consider what either faith or obedience
God found in them which might haue moued him thus to
preferre them to other na
                     •
                  ions. Let vs heare Moises. The
Lord they God (saieth he) hath chosen the,Deut. 7. that thow shoul
dest be a peculiare people to him aboue all the peoples
which are vpon the face of the earth: God hath not so vehemently
loued you and chosen you because you are mo
in nombre then other nations (seing ye are fewar then all
other people) but because he hath loued you, and wold kepe
the othe which he made to your fathers. And after it
foloweth: Say not in thy heart, my power, my strēgth, ād
my hand haue prepared this aboundance to me, and think

not in thy heart,Deut. 9. it is for my iustice, that the Lord hath
broght me into this land. Of these places it is plaine, that
Moises leaueth no cause neither of gods election, neither
yet of perfourmance of his promes in mā, but establisheth
it altogether vpon gods fre loue and good pleasure. The
same did Iosua in that his last and most vehement exhortation
to his people a litle before his death,Iosue. 24. in which plainely
he affirmeth, that Abraham and his father were idolaters
before they were called by God, wc place Ezechiel the
Prophete most euidently declareth rebuking the vnthākfull
defection of the Iewes from God, who of mercy had
giuē thē life, honour, and dignitie, they of all others being
the most vnworthy. For the saieth: Thus saieth the Lord
God to Ierusalē:Ezec. 16 Thy habitatiō ād they kīred is of Canaā
thy father was an amorrhean, and thy mother an Hittite.
and in thy natiuitie whē thow wast born thy nauill was not
cutt, thow was no
                     •
                   washed wi
                     •
                  h water, to soften the, thow
was not salted with salt, neither yet was thow swadled in
clowtes. By the which the Prophete signifieth that all
was imperfect, all was filthie all was corrupt and stinking
as touching their nature. he procedeth: none 
                     •
                  ie pitied
the to do, any of these vnto the, for to haue compassiō vpon
the: but thou wast cast oute in the open field to the
contempt of thy person in the day that thow wast borne.
And when I passed by the I saw the polluted in thine own
blood, ād I said vnto ye whē thou wast in thy blood (yt is in
thy filthie sinnes yu shalt liue. And this he repeteth, to the
ēd, yt he may beat it more deply in their myndes. I saieth
the Lord) said vnto the beīg in thy bloode thou shalt liue,
and so he procedeth, declaring, how that God did multiply
them, did giue vnto them beautie strēgth honour and
dignitie. These thre places do plainely witnes what perfection
God did find in this people whom thus he did
preferre to all others. And what obedience did they render
vnto him after the vocation of Abraham, the hole Histories
do witnes. for perfection and obedience was not
found in Abraham him self, yea neither in Moises nor

in Aaron, but contrarie wise, the inobedience of all we
find noted, to the same end yt Moises hath before spokē,
to witt, that none shall boast that either iustice proceding
or folowing was the cause why God did choose and elect
that people. For how shall God choose for that, which the
holie Gost plainely denieth to be in any man discending
of the corrupt sede of Adam. For Isaiah plainely doeth affirme,
that all our iustice, is as a clothe most polluted and
spotted: If our iustice be polluted as the Prophete, affirmeth
it to be, and God did predestinate vs for our iustice,
what foloweth,God did not for our workes predestinate vs. but that God did predestinate vs for that,
which was filthy and imperfecte: But God forbid yt such
cogitations shoulde take place in our heartes. God did
choose vs in his eternall purpose for his owne glorie, to
be manifested in vs, ād that he did in Christ Iesus in whō
onely is oure full perfection (as before we haue said). But
let vs yet heare som testimonies of the new testament.
sainct Paul to his disciple Timothie saieth.2. Ti. 1. Be not ashamed
of the testimonie of our Lord, neither be thow ashamed
of me who am his prisoner but be thow partaker
of the afflictions of the Euāgile, according to the power
of God, who hath made vs safe and hath called vs with an
holie vocation, not according to our workes but according
to his purpose and fre grace, which was giuen to
vs by Christe Iesus, before all tymes, but now is made patent
by the appering of our Sauiour Iesus Christe. Here
plaine it is, that neither are we called, neither yet saued
by workes, much les can we be predestinate for them, or
in respect of them. Trew it is, that God hath prepared
good workes tha
                     •
                   we should walk in them: but like trew
it is, that first must the tree be good, before it bring furth
good fruite: and good can neuer the tree be, except that
the hand of the gardiner haue planted it. To vse herein
the plaine wordes of saint Paule, he witnesseth that we are
elected in Christ, to the end that we should be holie ād
without blemishe. Now seing that good workes spring
furth of election how can any man be so foolish as to affirme,
that they are the cause of the same. Can the streame

of water flowing from the fountaine, be the cause of
the originall spring?Question. I think no man will so holde nor affirme:
euen so it is in this mater: for faith, and a godlie life
that ensueth our vocation, are the fruites proceding
from oure election but are not to the causes of the same.
And therefor the Apostle, to beat downe all pryde, asketh
what hast thow 
                     •
                   mā which thow hast not receaued?1. Cor. 4. And
if thou hast receiued it, why gloriest thow, as thogh thow
hadst not receaued it? The Apostle in that place speaketh
not of one or two graces, but what so euer is necessarie
to saluation, that he affirmeth to be receaued, and that of
fre grace, as he yet more plainely doeth witnes sayeng.
Of grace are ye saued, by faith, and that, not of your selues,
it is ye gift of God, ād not of works, lest any should glorie.
Now if man hath nothing but that which he receaueth
of grace, of fre gift, of fauour, and mercie, what odious
pryde, and horrible vnthankfulnes is this, that man
shall imagine, that for his faith and for his workes God
did electe and predestinate him to that dignitie? euen as
if two or thre beggers chosen from the nomber of many
were of the liberall mercie of a Prince promoted to honour,
should after brag and boast, that their good seruice
was the cause that the Prīce did choose them, Shuld not euerie
wise man mocke their vanitie, yea might not the
Prince iustly depriue them for their arrogant vnthankfulnes?
Might not the Prince haue left them in their wretched
estate? And what then shoulde haue become of their
seruice? Is it not euē so with mā lost in Adam? (whose fall
in gods prescience and purpose was before his creation)
of which masse or lompe God of his owne fre grace did
choose ād predestinate vessels of his mercie prepared vnto
glorie, that they should be holie (as before is said) shall
these thē that finde mercie to worke good wordes, boast,
as thogh workes were the cause thereof? God forbyd. For
if the posteritie of Abraham did not obteine the inheritā
                  ce
of the land of Canaan for any iustice that was in them?
yea if God did not choose them neither to the temporall
nor eternal felicitie, but of loue and fre grace onely, as

Moises doth witnes, how shall we thinke, that the Eternall
inheritāce, or gods election to the ioy and life euerlasting,
dependeth vpon any qualite within vs. Wonder it is, that
the Apostle sainct Paul intreating this mater of gods fre
election, was ignorant of this cause, if it be sufficient. For
by that meanes in few wordes he might haue put silence
to many dogges which then(as men do now) barked
against this doctrine. For if he had said: God hath
chosen afore all tymes to the participatiō of life a certein
nomber, because he foresaw that they should be faithfull
obedient to his commandemēts and holie in cōuersation:
and vpon the other parte he hath reiected and reprobate
others, because he foresaw that they should be vnfaithfull,
disobediēt, and vnclean of life, this I say (if those causes
had been sufficient) had ben a sensible maner of doctrine:
But the Apostle alledgeth no such reason but first beateth
doune the pryde of man (as before we haue touched)
and there after brusteth furth in this exclamation. O the
hieght of the riches of the wisdō and knowledge of God,
how incōprehensible are his iudgements, and how vnsear
cheable are his wayes? This exclamatiō (I say) had bene vaine,
if either workes or faith foresene had bene the cause
of gods electiō. S. Augustin doeth mock the sharpe sight
of mē, that in his daies begā to se more depely then did ye
holie Gost, speaking in ye Apostle. And we fear not to affirme,
that the men wc this day do attribute electiō or predestination
to any vertue, or qualitie within man, do holde
& defend (to their greate dāger) that which none inducd
with the Spirite of God hath left to vs written within the
holie scriptures, either yet that any of the chosē shal cōfes
in their greatest gloric. Let the hole Scriptures be red
and diligently marcked, and no sentence (rightly vnderstand)
shalbe founde, that affirmeth God to haue chosen
vs in respect of our workes, or because he fore sawe, that
we should be faithfull, holie and just. But to the contrarie
many places shall we finde (yea euē so many as intreat of
that mater) that plainely affirme, that we that we are frely chosen
accordīg to the purpose of his good will, ād that in Christ
Iesus. And what shall be the confession of the hole bodie

assembled when they shall receaue the promissed glorie,
is expressed in these wordes of the 24 elders,Apoca. 4. & 5. who casting
their crownes before him that sitteth vpon the throne, do
say. Worthy art thow (o Lord ād our God) to take honour
and glorie and power. For thow hast created all things,
and by thy will they are and were created. And after they
fall before the lambe ād sing a new song saying: Worthie
art thow to take the book, and to open the seales thereof:
for thow wast killed, and hast redemed vs to God by thy
bloode, and hast made vs to our God kings ād priestes ād
we shall reigne vpon the earth. No mention is here made
of any worthines of man: the creation is geuē to God, and
that all thinges are in that perfecte state which thē the chosen
shall possesse, is attributed to his will. The death of the
lambe is assigned to be the cause of the redemption, yea
of that great dignitie to which they are promoted. I am fully
persuaded, that if any cause of gods electiō, and of the
fruite proceding of the same, were or could be in mā, that
the holie Gost, who is authour of all iustice, wold not haue
defrauded man of any thing which of right did appertein
vnto him. But seing that in no place the holie Gost doeth
attribute any parte of mannes saluation to his owne merites
or worthines, I fear not to affirme, that this pestilēt opinion
is the instigation of sathan, laboring by all meanes
to obscure the glorie of Christ Iesus and to retein man in
bōdage, whom he infected with that first venom which he
made hī to drink, Saing, ye shalbe as gods. Thus far with
such plain simplicite (as it pleased God to minister vnto
me for the tyme) haue proued,A brief rehearsal what is before sufficiently proued. yt gods electiō is Eternal,
yt it is stable, yt he hath made a difference, betwext one sort
of mē, and an other, wc differēce althogh it came to know
ledge of mā in time, yet was it in gods purpose ād counsel
before all tyme no les thē his creatiō was. And last yt gods
electiō depēdeth neither vpō or workes nor vpō our faith,
but procedeth frō his Eternal wisdō, mercie, ād goodnes:
ād therefor is it īmutable ād cōstāt. Now shortly will I go
throughe (if God permi me) ye reasons of yor booke, Nothing
vpō ye one parte, ye imperfectiōs of ye same, ād vpō ye
other, yor ignorāce, orels malice in corruptīg ye scriptures.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE ADERARIE.
               To proue this similitude good and to shew how much his
loue towardes his children excedeth the loue of all creatures
towardes their birt
                     •
                  es he saieth:The fyft section. Can a woman forget the childe
of her wombe, ād not pitie the same whom she hath borne? And
thogh she do forget it,Isaia. 45. yet I will not forget the. Here he speaketh
not onely to the elect (as some say) but also to them which did for
sake and dispyse him as there.Isaia. 30. Alas for these disobedient children
(saieth the Lord) that they will take counsell without me. Here
he calleth the wicked which heape sinne vpon sinne▪ and were
disobedient, his chiidren.Matt. 7. Christ saieth, If ye when ye are euill cā
giue your children good giftes, how mmch more your heauenlie
father? After the same manner may I reason with you (carelesse by
necessitie) if none of you thogh ye be euill, wold beget a child to miserie
how much les wold God which is all good beget and creat
man his own image to perpetual paynes? Here we may se how
much this noghtie opinion is cōtrarie to nature and to reason. and
that it is cōtrarie to the worde, God willing I will proue. If God
hath ordeyned the most part of the world to be damned, then were
his wrath greater thē his mercie. But the scripture witnesseth
that his mercie is ouer all his workes,Psal. 144 and that God is slow vnto
wrath and redie vnto mercie, so that his wrath is extended onely
to the third and fourth generation, but his mercie to the thousand
generatiō wherefor thus (saieth he):Esaia. 54 A litle whil I haue forsaken
thee, but with greate mercifulnes shall I take thee vp vnto
me. Wh
                     •
                  n I was angrie I hid my face from the for a litle ceason
but throughe euerlasting mercie haue I pardoned thee. And
Dauid saieth,Psal. 29. his wrath indureth but the twinkling of an,
eie and his pleasure is in life. heuines may well endure for a
night, But ioy cometh in the morning. And so Moises called him a
mercifull and gracious God, long suffring, and keping mercie in
store for thousandes. By these scriptures and many mo, it is euident,
that gods mercie is greater then his wrath, contrarie to
their sainges.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               How blasphemous be your similitudes, your selue
may consider, if malice haue not vtterly blinded you, for
I haue all redie proued that God is not bound to the lawes

and boundes of nature, and how shamefully ye do abuse
the scriptures which ye alledge, fewe wordes shall declare.
Ye deny, that God doeth speake here to his elect in
the place of isaiah the Prophete,Isaiah. 49 but to all mē in generall:
and euen to those that had forsaken him, as ye wold seme
to proue by the wordes of the same Prophete spoken

                     •
                  efore in his thirtie chapiter.Isaiah. 30 First (I say) that those two
places do no more agree, then do those wordes of Christ
spoken after his resurrection: Go to my brethren and tell
them: I passe vp to my father, and vnto your father, and
vnto my God and vnto your God, and those which he spake
before his death, against Capernaum, Bethsaida, and
Corosaim, or vnto Ierusalem against whom he pronounced
woo and malediction, becaus they did not know the
tyme of their visitatiō. For in the former place God speaketh
to Syon which long had bene waist and to his people,
which long had bene oppressed. And to the end that
the reader may better vnderstand how deceitfully ye
withdraw and steall the wordes which explain the hole
mater, I will bring furth the wordes of the Prophete.Is
                        •
                     ia. 49 Reioise
(saieth he) 
                     •
                   heauens: and reioce thow earth 
                     •
                   you
mountanes brest you furth in gladnes, for the eternall
hath conforted his people and shall haue mercie vpon his
poore ones. Syon hath said, the Lord hath left me and my
Lord hath forgotten me, May a woman forgett her child
that she shall not haue compassion vpon the sonne of hir
bosome, but let it be that they forget (neuertheles I shall
not forget the, for lo in these my two handes haue I engrafted
the, and thy walles are for euer before me. If these
cōfortable wordes were spoken in generall to all men
(as ye affirme) let indifferent men iudge: If all men were
Sion, that long had lyen desolate, if all were his people
that lōg had bene oppressed in the captiuitie of Babylon:
If all did so complaine, that they thoght God to haue forgotten
his league and promes, which of mercie he made
with them: And finally, if all haue this promise, that their
deliuerāce is ioined with gods infinite power, thē is your
application, to be approued, but if God did make a plaine

difference betwext Israel and all nations in the earth, if he
had chosen his habitation in Syon, and if he will kepe promes
with the afflicted for his own names sake, be they neuer
so vnworthie, then are ye to bolde to giue the honor
and prerogatiue of the children and heires, to strāgers ād
bastardes. The wordes which ye alledge of the thirtie chapter
make nothīg for your purpose: for albeit he speaketh
to those that were inobediēt, yea that were treasonable traitours,
yet had they the name, the title, yea the honour ād
dignitie of gods people, and among them, were som of
gods chosen children: for whose comfort (after long affliction
susteined in Babylon) were those other wordes spoken
And so except that ye be able to proue that the people
of Israel and the citie of Ierusalem had no greater prerogatiue
euen in the time of their greatest blindnes and
vnthankfulnes (before the comming of Christ Iesus in
the fleshe) then had other nations, ye conclude nothing.
But yet wonder it is, that ye can make no difference betwext
the tymes, in which the one, wordes and the other
were spoken. The wo was pronoūced (you say alas which
the text hath not) against them, what tyme they had declined
from God, when they toke counsel of them selues when
they could not abide the admonitions of the Prophetes:
but the comfortable promes of delyuerāce was made,
after that vengeance was powred furth vpon the proude
contemners, and after that the hole bodie was sore tormē
                  ted
by great oppression and long impresonement. Do ye
not thinke that their might be great alteratiō in that people
within the space of an hundreth yeres? for so long was
it betwext the daies of the Prophete and the daies of their
last captiuitie vnder Nabucadnezer, after which tyme
also did this former promes of gods remembrance of thē
onely take place. Might not the one 
                     •
                  e spoken of those
which should be punished (yea let it be that they were the
reprobate) and the other to the people of God, to whom
by his own holines he had promised deliuerance? Do ye
thinke that because the same Prophet speaketh both
                     •
                   the
sentences, that therefor they do appertein to one estate ād

condition of people? I haue proued the contrary by Christes
plain wordes. For his mouth pronounced destruction
against Ierusalem, and yet sendeth he the ioyfull
tydings of his resurrection to his disciples with that most
singuler cōfort that God remained vnto them both God,
ād father: and euē so doeth our Prophet Isaiah: for in the
o
                     •
                  e place he speaketh to the obstinate contemners, but
in the other place he speaketh to the afflicted children.
Wey I besech you the scriptures of God with greater reuerence.
The wordes of Christ ye likewies falsifie.Matt. 7. for
he speaketh not of any common loue which he beareth
to all mē, but affirmeth,Luc. 11. that our heauēlie Father geueth
good thinges, or as Lucas affirmeth, giueth the holie Gost
to such as aske of him. Ye must proue first, that all aske in
faith, and according to his will (which be the peculiar prerogatiues
of the childrē of God) before that Christes wordes
can serue for your generall multitude, either yet that
you shall thereof be able to proue that God loueth all
men a like.
               Ye take your pleasure in reasoning with vs, whom
ye terme Careles by necessitie. I will not recompence raling
with raling, but I pray God that thow (the writer of
this book) shew hereafter greater diligence in godlynes,
then of many daies thow hast done where so euer thow
hast hanted. We vse not to subiect God to our corrupt affections,
but with reuerence and fear we leaue to his godlie
wisdom the ordering of his creatures, neither yet can
you be able to proue, that we either by word or writing
haue affirmed, that the principall end of any mānes creation
was perpetuall paine. But we affirme, as before we haue
declared, that God for him self and for the manifestation
of his own glorie hath created all thinges. But of this
we must after more largely speake.
               The finall conclusion which ye collecte of nature, is
that God hath created none to miserie nor pain.The blasphemy of Anabaptistes. For that
your master Castalio feareth not most blasphemously to
affirme, sayīg, yt if he hath so done, he is more crewell thē
any wolfe. O heauen and earth reuenge this blasphemie.
               
                  That man which here suffereth miserie and much
clamitie, yea and that also shalbe adiuged to the fyre
inextīguible, is created of God, or (as you affirme) is the
birth of God: I suppose your selues will not deny. And
that he suffereth all miseries; by gods iust iudgementes,
and by his will expressed in his worde, the scripture b
                     •
                  areth
record. For God saieth to the woman, in sorow and
dolor shalt thou beare thy children. To the man: In the
sweate of thy face shalt thow eate thy bread, and also: cursed
is the earth for thy sake.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      3. Which (and many mo places)
plainely witnes, that God hath inflicted pain vpon man
whom he hath created. You answere: That did God for
the sin of man, I confesse: But yet is your foot fast in the
snare. For after sin, man ceased not to be the creature, &
(as ye will terme him) the birth of God If thē God; be subiect
to the law of nature (as before we haue said) and now
agane repete, that your vanitie and ignorance may the
more appere, so that he is boūde to do the self same thing
to his birthes, that nature moueth vs to doto our childrē.
I ask first why did God suffer man created to his own image
to fall in to sin? assuredly no naturall father will
wittingly and willingly suffer his children to fall into apit
or dongeon to destruction. And secondarely I aske,
why did not God (who is omnipotent, hauing all wisdom
and goodnes) prouyde an other medicine for man, then
by death to ouercom so many miseries? Thirdly if God
wold that none shoulde be borne to miserie, why did he
not clearly purge the nature of Adam? why did he not
stay that venom and corruption in our first father, why
did he permitt it to infect all his posteritie? There is no
shift that here can serue you. For if you say, God was prouoked
by the sinnes of the posteritie, which he did forese
to be in them, so to do: I answer, that he foresaw nothing,
which his eternall and infinit power might not haue remoued
ād remedied, if so had pleased his godlie wisedom:
for then as now, was he the God. who alone may do
what so euer he will in heauen and in earth. And further
I say, that the foūtain being shet vp, the flowing of sin by

naturall propagation should haue ceased. To gods permission
we shall after answer. To put end to his mater,
if ye cōsider nothing els in the great varietie of gods workes
but the onely miserie of the sufferer, ād sin which (we
denie not to be a cause of the same) ye haue no better profit
                     •
                  d
in the schoole of Christ, then had the disciples, whē
seing him that was born blind, they demanded this question,
Master (say they) who hath sinned, whether this mā
or his parentes? that he should be born blind? No other
cause did they se of his miserie but sin. And to thē it was
strāge that any man could sin so greuously before he was
borne, that for the same he should be punished with perpetuall
blindnes during his life. And that he should suffer
such miserie for the offences of his Parentes, appered to
them to repugne to gods iustice, and to that sentence
which before he had pronounced by the Prophete Ezechiel
affirming, that the son should not beare the iniquitie
of the father. But Christe Iesus in correcting their error,
giueth to you a profitable lesson if ye can receaue it:
affirming, that neither he, neither yet his Parents had sinned
that so he should be borne, but that the glorie of God
should be manifested in him. If gods glorie be declared
and made manifest euen by the miseries which som creatures
sustein: Dare you therefor accuse God of creweltie?
Consider your bold foolishnes, and repent your blasphemies
before that vengeance strike.
               After that ye haue concluded as you thinke, our opinion
to be naughtie, by arguments drawen from nature,
you make a bold promes to proue the same by plain
scriptutes: And yet your first entrance is but by a reason
not well grounded vpon these scriptures which ye alledge.
Thus ye write: If God hath ordeined the most part of the
world to perdition then were his wrath greater then his mercie,
but the scripture witnesseth that his mercie is ouer all his creatures.
Ergó (will ye conclude) He hath not created the most
part of the world to perdition. To proue that gods mercie is
greater then his wrath, ye bring furth the wordes of Dauid.
Psal. 30. & 45. Isaiah. 54. and of God him self proclaming

his own name vnto Moises: for these wordes are
not the wordes of Moises (as ye alledge) but were spoken
by God him self in the eares of Moises.
               To the Maior I haue answered before, that falsly ye
burden vs, that we affirme that God hath ordeined ye most
parte of the world to perdition: for we presume not to define
what nomber God shall saue, and how many he shall
iustly condemne, but with reuerence we do referre iudgemēt
to him, who is the vniuersall creator, whose goodnes
and wisdom is such that he can do nothing but wisely, and
whose iustice is so perfect, that his workes are exēpted frō
the iudgement of all creatures. But the second part affirmyng
that if God condemne mo then he shall saue, that
then his wraith is greater then his mercie, is so irreuerēt,
so bold, and blasphemous, yt scarsly coulde I haue thoght,
yt ye deuill him self could haue imagined a more manifest
blasphemie. Who hath giuen the balance into thy hādes?
(I speak to the most blasphemous writer) to pōder ād wey
gods mercie, and wraith after thy corrupt iudgement? if
thow claimest the helpe of these former scriptures they
proue no more that which thow pretendest, then if thow
shouldest affirm that God shall saue the deuill, because his
mercie is aboue all his creatures. We do not deny but yt ye
most wicked men are participant of gods mercie in temporall
felicitie (yea and yt farre aboue his chosen childrē)
that he maketh his son to shyne vpō the good ād bad, that
with long suffering he calleth them to repentance and delaieth
their most iust cōdemnation. But what wilt thow hereof
cōclude, that God hath ordeined mo to saluatiō, thē
to perdition? orels is his wraith greater thē his mercie? Blasphemous
mouth, who hath taught the to appoint a law
to God? The day shall come (if spedelie thow repent not) yt
thow shalt fele what punishmēt is due to such as go aboute
to bring the eternal God and his incōprehensible iudgemēts
vnder ye thraldō of their corrupt reason. But leauing
thee, I return to those, whō gladly I wold īstruct, ād to thē
I say: that the wordes of Dauid and of Isaiah do speake of
that rich and inestimable mercie, which God laieth vp in
store for his chosen children: to whom althogh God somtymes

shew him self seuere and angry, yet indureth that but
for a short, space, but his mercie is euerlastīg, ād his goodnes
infinit, by the which he marieth his chosen children to
him self for euer, and whether that these wordes be onely
spoken to the elect, orels that they be generally spoken to
all, let the holie Gost decyde the controuersie.Psal. 145 After that
Dauid hath affirmed that God is liberall mercifull, patiēt
and of great gentilnes, and also that he is good to all, and
that his mercie is ouer all his workes, that the eies of all
creatures look vpon him, and that he is iust in all his workes:
by which sentences he praiseth the goodnes, the mercie,
and the prouidence of God in the regiment & gouernement
of his vniuersall creation, which goodnes ād mercie
do so abounde, that the innumerable iniquities of mā
                  kind
and his detestable ingratitude cā not vtterly hinder
the same from the creatures. After these cōmon mercies (I
say) whereof the reprobate are oftē partakers, he openeth
the treasure of his riche mercies which are kept in Christ
Iesus for his elect: Saing, the Lord is nigh to all that
vpon him, to all that call vpon him in veritie: he doeth the
will of those that fear him, and he heareth their crie, and
saueth, thē. The Lord kepeth all those that loue hī, but he
destroieth all the wicked.Note the plain difference. such as willingly delite not in
blīdnes, may clerely se, that the holie Gost maketh a plaine
differēce betwext the graces and mercies which be cō
                  mō
to all, and that soueraign mercie which is immutably
reserued to the chosen children, and further that the Lord
himself shall destroy the wicked, albeit his mercie be ouer
all his workes. And so that mercie by the which God pronoūceth
to gather his Church is euerlastīg, ād is not cōdmō
to ye reprobate, but is onely proper to ye flocke of Christ
Iesus. The wordes of God spoken vnto Moises do no more
serue your purpose then do the other.Exod. 20. For God in his
law expressedly doeth witnes to whom it is that he will
shew mercie to thousandes, to witt to those that loue him,
and kepe his commandements, and vpon whom will he
prosecute the iniquitie vnto the third and fourth generatiō
vpō those (saieth he) yt hate me. If here of ye cōclude yt
                  
his mercie towardes all is greater then his wraith ye conclude
amis. For ye confound those whom God hath separated
and deuided, he promiseth mercie to the thousand
generation of those that loue him and threatneth to punishe
the iniquitie of the fathers to the third and fourthe generation
vpon those that hate him. Hereof iustly ye can
no further cōclude, but that the mercie of God is greater
towardes those that loue him, thē his wraith against those
that hate him. And so far will we confes with you. but
if you abide in your error, concluding as you plainely
do in this your booke, that the wrathe of God must be
greater then his mercie except that he saue mo then shall
be cōdemned (as som of your sectes hath lately affirmed)
we fear not to affirme that your blasphemie is intollerable.
Or if you think (as some alledge vpon Origene that)
becaus gods mercie is infinit and extendeth vnto all his
workes, that therefor the reprobate can not but once obtein
mercie. The plain scripture cōuicteth you. For it affirmeth,
that the wraith of God abydeth vpō the vnfaithfull,
that their fyre shall not be quenched, and that their
worme shall not die. If ye shall vnderstand that the elect
hath nothing which they receaue not of mercie, and that
the punishment of the reprobate is most iustly deserued,Howgods mercy is greater then his wrath.
you shall not mesure gods mercie and his wraith by the
multitude nor by the nombre, but ye oght to consider
that where none is worthie of gods mercies by their own
merits, yet hath it continued from the beginning and shal
cōtinue vnto the end, euer extending the self to gods children
being in miserie. and so this mercie must far surmount
all wraith and iudgement: for where the wraith of
God once kindled against sinne oght to haue consumed
and deuoured all, mercie preualeth, and delyuereth those
that iustly might haue bene condemned. And in this sense
(say we) that gods mercie far surmounteth his iudgementes,
which interpretation if you admit not, we will
send you to reason with God, and to impugne the same,
if you be able by manifest scriptures. Now to the rest.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Of all sortes and Sectes of men,The six te sectiō
                   I haue iudged them to be
most abhorred which are called Athei that is to say, such as denie
that there is any God. But now me think these carelesse men 
are much more to be abhorred, my reason is because they be more
iniurious to God then the (Athey) for he is les iniurious to a man 
that beleueth that he is not, then they he which calleth him a cruel mā
a tyrant, and an vniust person, so are they les iniurious to God
which beleue that he is not, then they which say he is vnmercifull,
cruell, and an oppressor. Now what greater crueltie, tyrannie,
and oppressiō can be, then to creat the most parte of the world 
to euerlasting damnation, so that by no maner of mean they can
escaip, and auoid the cruell decre and sentence against thē. Seing 
the Philosopher Plato iudged them vnworthie to liue, and to be suffered
in any commō welth which spake euill of God, what oght
our iudgements to be of such men which haue so wicked and opinion
of God? what so euer our iudgement be of them, and what so
euer their deseruing be, let vs labore rather to win them then 
to lose them. But forasmuch as he which toucheth pitche is in danger
to be defiled there with. Therefor oght we to walk warely
with such men, that we be not defyled and infected of them. Specially
seing that now a daies this horrible doctrine doeth freate
euen as the disease of a cankar which infecte from one membre
to an other vntill it hath occupied the hole bodie without it be
cut away, euen so this error hath alredie infected from one to an
other a greate nombre. The lord grante them the true meaning
and vnderstanding of his worde, whereby they may be healed,
and the sicknes cut of, the membre being saued.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Becaus that in all this your long discourse,To the 1. ye more
shew your malice (which vniustly against vs ye haue conceaued) then yt either ye oppugne our beleif, either yet
promote your fals opinion. I will not spend the tyme to
recompence your dispite. Onely this I will offer in the
name of all may brethren,To the 2. 3. 4. & 5. that if you be able in presence
of a lawfull iudge and magistrate euidently to cōuict vs,
yt either we speak euill of God, either yet yt by our writinges,
preaching or reasoning, it iustly can be proued that

our opinion is euill, of his eternall maiestie, power, wisdom,
and goodnes, that then we refuse not to suffer the same
punishment which you by the auctoritie of Plato iudge
vs worthy of. Yea we further offer our selues willingly
to vnderlie the verey death which God by his law hath appointed
to all blasphemers prouided that you refuse not
to vnderlie the same penaltie,Deut. 19. if falsly ye accuse vs. What
is your studies to win vs,To the 6. and whether our doctrine be horrible
error or not, I do not now dispute. Thus you reason.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               God created man a verey good thing,The seuenth section. and dare you say that
God ordeined a verey good thing to destruction? Then God deliteth
in the destruction of that which is verie good. Man at his
creation was a iust and innocent creature▪ for afore the transgre
                     •
                  sion
 there was no euill neither in Adam nor in vs, and think you
that God ordeined his iust and innocent creatures to condemnation?
 what greater tyrannie and vnrighteousnes can the most
wicked man in the world, yea the deuil him self do, then to condemne
the innocent and iust person? Hereby may we se that these
careles man by more abominable then the Athei, which beleue
there is no God. But these affirme God to be as bad as the deuil
 yea and worse: for asmuch as the deuil can onely tempt a man to
death, but he can compell none to fall vnto cōdemnation, but God
may not onely tempt, but also compell 
                     •
                  y his eternall decre the
most part of the world to damnation. And hath so done (as they
say)▪ so that of necessitie and onely because it was his pleasure and
will: then must God be worse then the deuil. For the deuil onely
tempted men to fall, but God compelleth them to fall by his immutable
decre. Oh horrible blasphemie.
            
            
               ANSVVER.
               Becaus that before plainely and simply I haue declared
our iudgement of gods eternall election, and most
iust reprobation in all these your dispitefull arguments,
I will onely shew your malice,To the 1. 
                        •
                      & 3. ignorance, and proude vanitie.
This is your argument, God created man a verie
good thing therefor he did not ordein him to destructiō.
your reason is: for that is contrarie to his iustice, to ordein
a good thing to destructiō. I answere if ye be able to

proue that man stoode in the same goodnes, perfectiō and
innocētie (he ād his posteritie whome so hieghly ye praise)
in the which he was first created, then will I confesse
your argument to be good. But if man (albeit he was created
good) did yet willingly make him self euill how can it
be contrarie to the iustice of God to appoint punishmēt
for transgression, which he did not onely fore se by an idle
speculation, or yet suffre and permitt against his omnipotent,
will, but in his eternall counsell for the manifestatiō
of his own glory had decreed the same. Against which,
albeit ye cry horrible blasphemie till your braines drop
out, yet haue we Moises Exod. 9. Isaiah. 6. Salomon and
Paul to absolue vs from your cruell sentēce. For they do
affirme that God hath created all thinges for his own glorie,
and the wicked to the day of destruction, that he raised
vp Pharao that his power might be shewen furth in
him: that he blindeth the eis and hardeneth the heartes of
some, so that they can neither heare nor se that they may
conuert: That God hath prepared bothe vessels of mercie
and vessels of wraith which places albit som of them seme
not to appertein to the creation, yet if they be iustly
weyed it shall euidently appere that the hardnes of mennes
heartes,Blindnes and hardnes of hart are effectes reprobation. their blindnes and stubborn malice are not
onely punishments of sinne, but also are the effects of reprobation,
like as faith, obedience, and other vertues be
the fre giftes of God geuen in Christ Iesus to those whom
he hath elected in him. But yet to your argument, which
thus ye amplifie: do ye think that God ordeined his iust
and innocent creatures to damnation? what greater tyrannie
and vnrighteousnes can the most wicked man in the
earth, yea the deuil him self do? then to cōdemne a iust ād
an innocent person.
               I answer (as before) that your argument is nought
worthe. For you conclude more then ye be able to proue
of your two former propositiōs: which be those. God created
man a verie good thing. Trew it is, and God reprobated
mā and shall also condēne him whō he created good,
I grant also. Therefor he damned the good thing which he

created, or that thing which is verie good, I deny the conclusion.
For before demnation there cometh a change in
man, so that he of verie good, became extreme euill, and
so gods iust iudgements found nothing but that which is
euill to condemne. You forme your reason, as that God
had so created mā good, that he by no meanes after could
be made euill, which last part is fals, and so you are deceaued.
If ye cānot se iust causes why God should make that
thing verie good which after should becom exttreme euill,
accuse your own blindnes, and desire of God to repres
in you that presumption and pryde, which against
the eternall Sonne of God you haue conceaued,Why God treated mā good whō he ordeyned neuertheles to fall. and so
your eyes shalbe illuminated and you shall se first that
becaus the creator is infinitly good, that therefor it behoueth
the creatures in their original creation to be good.
And so I doute not was the deuil created good, but in the
veritie, he stood not. And secōdarely that because the iust
iudgemēts of God were no les to shyne in the damnation
of the reprobat: then his infinite mercie was to be praised
in the vessels of honor, it behoued the one and the other
to be innocent and good in their creation. For if the
original had bene euill, God iustly could not haue after
dāned that which he had made no better. but so we must
confesse that it was good that (yet willingly corrupting
the self) mā made away to the most iust executiō of gods
eternal coūsell. And last that the eternall purpose of God
might in tyme be notified vnto mā, wc was that God wold
bestow greater liberalitie, shew greater loue ād mercie in
the redēption of mā iustly damned then that he did in his
creation. Of nothing he did creat him (for his corporall
substāce was made of the dust (which somtymes was not)
to his own image and similitude, to him he gaue the dominion
of all creatures, these were documents of a true
loue. But if they be compared with that loue, which in
Christ Iesus we receiue and that of fre grace, they are no
thing. For what is the dominion of earthlie creatures in
respect, that we shall reigne with Christ Iesus for euer?

what were the pleasures and fruites of Paradise in comparison
of those heauēlie ioyes which sainct Paul affirmeth
can not enter in to the heart of man? If man had stand perpetually
in Adam, neither had the loue of God so wonderously
bene notified vnto vs, neither yet had place ben
grāted to his fre grace ād mercie, wc we receiue in Christ
Iesus. For mercy properly hath respect to miserie. But ye
cheif comfort of gods children is, that as they fell in Adam,
so are they new transferred in an other that is in
Christ Iesus, to whom they are giuen, and who (as before
we haue proued) hath so receaued them from the hand of
his Father that he shall giue lief euerlasting to so many
as the Father hath giuen him. If ye (I say) can not admitt
these reasons, why it behoued mā to be created good, and
yet after to fall in to sin and merserie, accuse your selues,
storm not against God. for he will not be subiect to your
reason & iudgements: your horrible blasphemies against
God, and your dispitefull raling against vs at this tyme
I will omitt. and how impudently ye leap from the purpose
of gods reprobation to the execution of his iudgement,
shalbe spoken, in weying this your reason which thus
foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The scripture witnesseth that we did fall in Adam.The eight section. for
damnation came of one sinne vnto condemnation: then did we all
stand afore in Adam, for none falleth but he that standeth. If
we did all stand then were we all predestinate to lief for as our
fall here is to damnation and death, so is our standing vnto saluation 
and lief. And to confirme this we haue many testimonies
in the word, which proue vs to be elected chosen, and predestinat 
to lief afore the fall, but none that proue any man to be abiected,
cast away, damned, and reprobate afore sinne by which death
entred into the world. Paul to the Ephesians saieth.Ephes. 1. God did choose
vs in Christe before the foundations of the world were laid,
and ordeined vs before through him to be heires vnto him self,
and were t
                     •
                  erunto predestinat. I pray you shew me any testimonie
of the scripture which so manifestly proueth that God hath 
                  
                   reprobate any before the foundations of the world. God hath
no respect of persons.Psal. 49. For he calleth the world from the rising vp
of the son vnto the going downe of the same.Iob. 34. he made bothe small
and great and careth for bothe a like for they be all the work of
his handes.4. Esdr. 8 And Esdras saieth, it was not gods will that man
should com to nought. but he prepared lief for them. The holie
 Gost saieth that God hath not made death neither hath he pleasure
in the destruction of the liuing. for he created all things that
they might haue their being, yea all the people of the earth hath
he made that they should haue helthe and their should be no destruction
in them and that the kingdom of hell should not be vpon
earth.Sapient. 2 what can be more plainely and more directly spoken
against this error? In an other place saieth the holie Gost: God
created man to be vndestroyed: and agane God ordeined man
that he should order the world according to equitie and righteousnes,Sapien. 9
and execute iudgement with a true hearte, doeth God ordein
 man to rule the world according to righteousnes whom he reprobated?
Do men gather grapes (as Christ saieth) of thornes and
 figges of thistles? euen so euerie good tree bringeth furthe good fruites.
But a corrupt tree bringeth furth euill fruite, a good tree
can not bring furth badd fruit, neither can a badd tre bring furth
good fruite. Matth. 7. Either make the tre good, and the fruite
good,Matth. 12 orels the tre euill and his fruite euill. Either grant man at
his creation to be righteous and good, and then I think ye will
abhorre to say that God afore the foundations of the world did
reprobate his good and righteous creature, orels grant him at his
creation to be an euill and vnrighteous creature. Could then
righteous iudgement com of such an vnrighteous tree? further if
man at his creation was an euill things then was he not the creature
of God. For God sawe al that he had made, and they were
verie good, if man at his creation or afore was reprobate, and ordeined
vnto death, then was man giltie afore the transgressiō: for
God damned none but such as be gyltie. If he was giltie afore his
transgression then was he a sinner being yet innocent and iust.
afore he euer consenteth or committed sinne. And so consequently
of this error, I may inferre many no such absurdities as should offend
any faithfull mannes eares.
            
            
               
               ANSWER.
               As no man of hole iudgement did euer denie that
in Adam we did fall, so I think you ād your sect set a part
there hath ben none that euer did affirme that in Adam we
were predestinat to lief euerlasting. True it is yt we stood
in Adam, created in his loynes, but I suppose that ye will
not hold that the children had greater priuiledge then had
the father. Adam did not so stand, but that he was subiect
to the law, the transgression where of made him dettour to
death. To speake the mater more plainely, Adam did so
stand that he might (and did) fall as the euent declared. ād
were his children so elect in him that they could not fall:
so ye appere to conclude. For thus ye reason: if we did all
stand then were we all predestinate to lief, for as our fall
here is to damnation and death, so is our stāding vnto saluatiō
and lief. Assuredly these reasons appear meruelous,
strāge to me, and principally that which ye bring furth of
falling and standing: for it hath in the self plain contradiction.
for if we fell in Adam to death, how can we stand in
him now vnto lief. If you had said as that our fall was to
damnation and death, so should our standing haue ben to
saluatiō and lief, ye might haue had som probabilitie. For
your error had onely stand in this,The ground of the Anabaptistes error. that ye do not con
                     •
                  ider
that Adam was not created to stand for euer in him
self▪ and much les his posteritie in him. But when ye say as
our fall is to death, so is or standing vnto lief, you plainely
speak, what so euer ye think, that yet either in Adā, either
in our selues we both fall and stand. But this do we vtterly
abhorre, for we fear not plainely to confesse that we haue
no assurance either of standing either yet of lief but in
Christ Iesus alone in whō we be ingrafted, and with out whō
we cā do nothing.An argument 
                        〈◊〉
                      prou
                        •
                     th that in Adam we could not stand In few wordes to repete the answer
of your former obiectiō, In Adā did no mā stand otherwise
thē he did. But he did stād wt cōdition to fall and yt euē
to death: Therefor in Adā did none stād to lief. The commō
sense of mā will approue ye first part of this my argumēt.
for who cā think that any discēding of Adam by his
meanes could haue greater libertie thē he hī self had? And
the euēt ād that which folowed declareth the veritie of the

second part. For not onelie vpon Adam saieth the Apostle
cam death. But euē from him descended death vnto all.
How then could any stand in him to lief? Let reasonable
men consider.
               To proue that all were predestinat and chosen in Adā
before the foūdatiōs of the world were laid,Answer to the scriptures shamefully abused by the aduersaries. ye brīg furth
the testimony of Paul written in the first chap. to the Ephesians,
which we before haue entreated, and therefor
here I onely will open your falshed. Wonder it is that shame
should be so far past you: that where the holie Gost
plainely affirmeth, that we were elected and; chosen in
 Christe Iesus before; the foundations of the world were
laid, that this election ye should affirm to be made in Adam.
If you obiect that you specifie not Adā: I answer that
is all a like: for of your former argumentes it easely may
be espied whom ye vnderstand. For when thus ye reason
we did all stand in Adam, erg
                     •
                   we were all predestinat to
lief, what is he that clearly may not perceaue that your
meaning is, that we were all predestinat to lief in Adam.
For els you had said nothing to proue your own purpose.
For we affirm that we were elected before the foundatiō
of the world was laid. But the controuersie standeth, in whom.
We affirme and most cōstantly beleue, that in Christe
Iesus the eternall Sonne of the eternall Father, were
we elected before all tymes. This ye can not abyde and
therefor ye seke all meanes to obscure the glorie of him
to whō the Father hath geuen all power in heauen and in
earth: somtymes ye say (as now I haue declared) that this
 election was made in Adame: But whill that this will not
serue you, ye run to an other shift alledging that the Apostle
speaketh here of a generall election of the hole
world, and a not of any certen election which should abyd
for euer, and so in shifting from one danger ye fall into
another as after in examining of that your vain reason
more euidently shall appere.
               Ye instantly require that we will shew any testimonie
of the scripture that hath reprobate any before the foū
                  dations
of the world. If it be the pleasure of God to giue

vnto you the spirite of wisdom and of reuelation by the
knowledge of hī self, that the eies of your mynd may be
illuminated that ye may know what is the hope to the
which he hath called you, and how rich is the glorie of
that inheritance, which he hath prepared for his saintes,
ye shall require no place more plaine, nor more euident
then the same, which most ignorantly, orels most maliciously
ye do abuse, for if there be any differēce betwext
the saintes, the faithfull, that be blessed with all spirituall
benedictiō, betwext those (I say) yt were elected in Christe
Iesus before all tymes, that in tyme be called, and by the
power of the holie spirite do giue obediēce to the caller,
and so are made citizens with the saintes and houshold of
God, as they that are builded vpon the foundation of the
Prophetes ād Apostles: if any differēce (I say) be betwext
these former, and these in whom the prince of this world
doeth worke all filthynes and rebelliō, whom he holdeth
captiue at his pleasure, who can not repent their detestable
liues, and therefor are reputed strangears from the
common welth of Israel. And further if ye will beleue
Christ Iesus affirming and reioising that it pleased his Father
to hyde the secretes of his kingdome from the prudent
and wife, and to reuele the same to litle ones,Matt. 11. ād that
becaus it was his pleasure: I trust ye shall confesse that
those scriptures be plaine ynough to proue that as some
were elected before the foūdatiō of the world was laid, so
likewies were there others reprobated, as the finall end of
bothe doeth witnes: But how ye wrestle against this argumēt
we shall after heare: ād how plainely I haue proued sō
to be elected and others to be reprobated, reade before ād
iudge with indifferēcie. If ye will cōclude that God hath 
no certen election, neither yet that he hath reprobated any,
becaus that he hath no respect of persones, and becaus
he calleth the world from the rising vp of the son to the
going doune of the same, becaus he made both small and
great, and careth (as ye falsly alledge) for bothe a like,
your affirmatiō may well be bolde, but I think, that your
probation shalbe sclender. But first I must except against

you, as against fals witnes. for you alledge more vpon Elihu
thē in the book of IobThe aduersarie wrasteth the scripture in Iob. he affirmeth. For he saieth not
that God careth for all a like. But saieth that his eies are
vpon the waies of man, and that he doeth se all his goinges.
And that neither you, neither any other shall haue occasion
to complain of me, that vniustly I accuse you, of
falsifying the plain text, I will recite bothe the purpose
and the wordes: Iob in vehemēcie of disputation against
his thre frendes, who constantly did affirm that God prouoked,
by his sinnes, had powred furth those sodane and
strange plagues vpon him: Iob I say in refelling this their
accusation, and in confuting their reasons, did enter into
the secretes of gods inscrutable iudgementes further thē
it became any creature to do: and did seme to burdē God
with iniustice in defending his own innocētie. At which
reasons Elihu offended after that the other three were
put to silēce takīg vpō him to reproue Iob affirmeth that
the wisdom, the power, the iustice and the iudgementes
of God were incomprehensible, that God could do nothing
vniustly how that euer it appered to mannes iudgement,
and amongest other thinges he saieth: wilt thou
say vnto a king,Iob. 34. thou art wicked, or vnto princes, ye are
vngodlie. How muche les to him that accepteth not the
persons of Princes and regardeth not the riche more then
the poore? For they be all the worke of his handes? They
shall dye sodenly, and the people shalbe trobled at midnight,
and they shall passe furth and take away the mightie
withoute hand, for his eies are vpon the wayes of man
and he seeth al his goings. Thus haue I noted partly yt none
shall think that these wordes may seme to fauor your
error, and partly that your vntruethe in wrasting such places
may more manifestly appere. Ignorance of the tongues
may be some caus in you, but in some of you I can
manifestly proue that malice blindeth knowledge, and
compelleth you to speake and write against your vnderstanding.
God touche your heartes with true repentance
and giue you his holie spirit with greater reuerence to
intreat his scriptures. But now to the scriptures that ye

alledge (God say you) hath no respect of persōs.Act. 10. Ergo wil
ye cōclude, he hath no election. Your conclusion is fals,
and my reason is, becaus that gods fre election depēdeth
not vpon the persones of men, but vpon his own promes
and good will▪ But to make this mater more sensible: I wil
make an argumēt directly against yours.An argument directly against the aduersaries argument. God respecteth
not the persons of men. But yet amongest men is found
great diuersitie bothe in vertue ād in vice. Therefor there
must be som cause from whence this diuersitie procedeth.
Of the first part I know ye doute not, and the secōd
parte is confirmed by common experience and by euidēt
scriptures. for how diuerse be the inclinatiōs of mē, none
cā be ignorāt, except such as do not obserue the same.
Such as attribute the caus of such diuersitie to the sterres
and to the influenceInfluence of the sterres. of the Planetes are more then vaine:
educationEducatiō. and vp bringing doeth somwhat bow nature
in that case: but neither of bothe is the cause of such diuersitie:
for how many haue bene norished in vertue togither,
and yet haue after fallen to moste horrible vices, and
in the same perished? And contrarie wies how many haue
bene wickedly broght vp, and yet by grace atteined to an
holie conuersation. If the cause of this diuersitie (I say) shal
be inquired and soght, it shall not be found in nature. for
thereby were and are we all borne the sonnes of wraith: if
in education and vp bringing, we se how oftē that faileth.
The cause thereof thē must be of necessitie without man.
To make the mater yet more plaine by an exēple, Paule
preached Christ Iesus, to be the onely Sauior of the world
both amongest the Iewes and gentiles, to som his preaching
was the sauour of lief, and to others it was the sauour
of death. from whence commeth this diuersitie?
from the obedience, will, and faith of the one, say you.
and frome the stubborne inobedience, and infidelitie of
the other: you say somewhat, but not all. for true it is
that faith and an obedient will, is that which we call
Causam propinquam, that is the next cause to our apprehension:
but what is the cause that the will of one
is obedient, and the will of the other stubborne,

that the one doeth beleue and the other doeth blaspheme:
How so euerye do shift,The cause is not in nature of our faethfull obediē
                     ce. the holie Gost in many places
plainely affirmeth the cause not to be in nature nor
yet to procede of man, nor of his fre will, but to be the fre
grace of the caller, as Christ Iesus doeth witnes: None can
com vnto me excepte my Father draw him: No mā can se
the kingdom of God except he be borne againe, and that
neither of blood neither of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God. who toucheth and openeth the
heartes of so many as he hath ordeined to lief, to aduerte
and beleue the thinges that be truely preached: As those
that be the shepe of Christe Iesus, who heare his voice and
know the same. These and many places mo, do most plainely
declare,What is the cause that some beleue and some remayn vnfaithfull. what is the cause that some beleue and others
beleue not: to witt, that som are born of God, and
som are left in nature, som are shepe, & som are goates.
the heartes of som are touched and opened by the finger
and Spirit of God, as it was said to Peter: flesh and bloode
hath not reueled this vnto the, but my Father which is in
the heauen, and the heartes of others left in their own
blindnes and hardnes. If ye demand how is it then, that
God respecteth not the person of man? I answer if ye did
vnderstād a right what is mēt by acceptation of persons,
or what it is to respect persons ye should not doute in
this behalf.
               Acceptatiō of persons is when an vnworthie person
is preferred to a worthie,How God respecteth not persōs. either by corrupt affection of
those that do preferre him, either yet for some qualitie or
externall beautie that appereth in man. As if to the office
of a king or of a bushope, should one be elected, that neither
hath godlynes, knowledge, wisdom, nor yet the spirit
of gouernement, because he is riche, noble of bloode,
fare and lustie: and the persons hauing giftes much more
excellent should be contemned: this is called acceptation
of persons.1. Sa. 16. As Samuel seing Eliab and considering his
beautie, and stature doeth boldly pronounce in his own
heart, assuredly before the Lord, this is his anoīted. Such
acceptation of persons is not with God. for neither looketh

he to blood, riches, nobilitie, vertue, strength nor
beautie temporall in his eternall election, but onely to
his own good will, and eternall purpose by the which he
hath elected vs in Christe Iesus. If ye shall consider the same
place depely ye shall find that none within the hole scriptures
of God more confuteth your error then it doeth.
For as God respecteth not the personThat God hath not respect of persons most euidently cō
                     futeth the error of the aduersaries of gods predestination. of mā, so respecteth
he nothing, that is or can be within man, as the chief cause
of his election. For what can God forese, consider or
know to be in man that good is which floweth not from
his fre mercie and goodnes, as it is written: we are not
sufficient of our selues to think any thing that good is
but all our sufficiencie is of God, who worketh in vs
bothe to will and performe. Then if all vertue what so
euer be in vs, be the work of God, can the work folowing,
be the cause of gods eternall purpose? If the cause
and the effectesThe cause and effect are diuerse. proceding of the same, be things diuerse,
then are our vertues and fruites not the cause of gods
election, but are the effect and fruit which of the same
procede, and spring as the Apostle doeth witnes saing: God
hath chosen vs that we should be holie, ād without blame
And Christ Iesus: saieth you haue not chosen me but I haue
chosen you, and haue appointed you to go, and to
bring furth fruite. This I am compelled oft to repete, becaus
in it most shamefully ye erre, arrogating to your seluses
that which is proper to gods onely mercie and fre grace.
If you vnderstand this former place of scripture which
affirmeth that God hath no respect of persons as your
book doeth witnes, to witt, that God careth a like for all,
that he no more loueth the one, thē the other, except that
it be for their obedience, the hole scripture of God doeth
witnes against you. Was the loue of God no greater to Abraham
and to his posteritie, then it was to the rest of the
nations? Moises and Dauid do witnesse the contrarie: Saying:
he hath not done so to any nation, and his iudgemēts
he hath not shewed to them,D
                        •
                     ut. 7. onely the, hath he chosen of
all nations and people, that be vpon the face of the earth,
that thow shouldest be vnto him a peculiar people. And

what was the cause of this their dignitie and prerogatiue
before we haue declared, to witt, no vertue, no obedience,
no good qualitie that was in them, but onely his fre loue,
fre grace, and vndeserued mercie, as he hī self doeth plainely
affirme?Rm. 9. I will haue mercie vpon whom I will haue
mercie, and saint Paule: it is neither of the willer, neither
yet of the runner, but of God that sheweth mercie to such
as pleaseth him. And thus I say you can not iustly nor rihtly
conclude, that God hath neither chosen nor reprobated
any man, becaus he hath no respect of persons. for as
before I haue said, his eternall election dependeth neither
vpon man, neither yet vpon any thing that is within
mā,Neither was nor is in vs, any thing whereby we should deserue to be elected but is purposed in him self, and established in Christ
Iesus, in whom we are elected, becaus that in our selues
there neither was neither yet could be any worthines, which
could merite or deserue such honour and dignitie.
And so God respecteth not the persons of men, their vertues,
nor qualities in their election, but finding them all
equall in creation, and corruption maketh difference
betwext them, according to his eternall purpose, respecting
Christ Iesus and not their merites. How that euer
the prowde and vngodlie storme at this, I nothing doute,
but the children of God do thereof receaue moste singular
consolation as that it is the chefest cause why that without
all trembling and feare, they stoupe before his Maiestie,
and giuing thankes for these inestimable benefits
do craue of his mercie such a puretie of lief as becometh
 his children.
               To your scriptures which ye alledge from the book
of wisdom and frome Esdras (his fourth booke),The bookes called Apocryphes. I will
shortly answere. That albeit ye will ten thousand tymes
deck ād decore them with the title of the holie Gost, I wil
not the more creditt them. Not that I deny but that in
them there be thinges conteined, profitable to edification,
but if that therefore ye will vpon any place written
within them, conclude a doctrine contrarie to the rest
of the canonicall scriptures, I will answer with the ancient
writers, that they were not written, that vpon them should

our faith be established. Lett thē serue, if so please you to
exhortation, but for confirmation of any doctrine shall
they neuer serue vnto me. Neither yet this do I say, that
I do think any of these places (rightly vnderstand) to make
any thing for your purpose, but that I will by gods grace,
giue euer that reuerence vnto the veritie of God,Reu
                        •
                     rēce vnto gods holie worde. that
the voices of men shall not with me be cōparable vnto it.
               It may be greatlie suspected what som men now a
daies do meā to ascribe that to y• holie Gost which the authors
them selues did onely ascribe to their own diligence
and trauelle, and were also compelled to ask perdon of
the readers that they could not atteine, no not euen to the
proprietie of the tōgue in the which they did write.Reade the prologue of Ecclesiasticus and the end of the last chap. of the second booke of Machab. Vseth
the holie Gost I pray you whose power lowseth the tongues
of the dombe, in that maner to be suppliāt vnto mē,
and for his imperfection to begge pardon at their handes?
Consider, and impute nothing vpon the holie Gost, which
becometh not the Maiestie of God. but lest that ye should
complain that yet your scriptures are not resolued, I will
giue you a generall answer to all, which is this. That neither
the booke of wisdom, neither yet Ecclesiasticus, neither
yet Esdras in these places that be alledged do intreat
any thing of election, or reprobation, but the writers in
all those places which ye alledge do studie to amend the
corrupt maners of their aeges, and to impose silēce to the
wicked tongues of many. of whom som accused God as
author of sinne which entred in by malice of the deuill,
who did corrupt the good creature of God created to his
own image to reule in equitie and iustice. who doeth
not se but that this writer, who so euer he was, reteineth
him self, within the reache of mannes vnderstanding, laboring
to conuict their cōscience which maliciously imputed
vnto God, that which he did not worke in them?
But that they of their own fre will did follow ād obey iniquitie,
and that therefor they should suffer their iust condemnation.
And that this my interpretation of their myndes
is true, let their own wordes witnes for thus it is writē.
               They haue said with them selues,Sap. 2. not righteously

iudgeīg our lief is troblesom ād short, neither is there any
remedie against the death of mā, neither hath he bene
knowē that hath returned from the helles, we were b
                     •
                  rn
without purpose, and we shalbe as we neuer had ben 
                     •
                  or
the spirit is but a smoke in our nosethrels &c. in pro
                     •
                  es
of tyme our name shall com to obliuion, neither yet shal
any man remember our workes. Therefor let vs vse the
present prosperitie, Let vs oppresse the poore man being
iust, let vs not spare the widowe, neither yet lett vs re
                     •
                  erence
the lōg aeged ād white heares of the ancient, but let
the strength of our power, be the law of iustice. and so far
furth he accuseth their open tyranny, and then concludeth
these thinges, they thoght and did erre, for they were
blinded by their own malice: neither haue they knowē
the mysteries of God (I wonder that ye marked not this
place) neither haue they hoped for the reward of holynes.
for God created mā to immort
                     •
                  litie (here I note your
falshode: for ye write God created man to be vndestroyed)
and made him to his own similitude. Now let the indifferent
reader iudge, whether you or I do nerer attein to
the mynd of the wryter you (I say) that do affirme, that he
denieth that God hath either elected or reprobated any
man, or I that deny that to be any parte of his mynd, but
say, he reproueth mannes malicious blasphemy and manifest
impietie.
               
                   The argument which ye gather of the nynthe chapter
of the same book, and wold seme to confirm by the
wordes of Christe spoken in the seuenth of Mathew, hath
no greater force then the former, for the writer defineth
not what God had determined in his secrete and eternall
counsell, but what he hath expressedly cōmitted to mannes
charge by his law, and by his holie Spirit speaking in
his Prophetes, and that him self doeth plainly witnesse.
For after that he hath asked wisdom righteously to iudge
the people committed to his charge he thus speaketh:
what man is he that knoweth the counsell of God or that
can comprehend in his mynd, what God wold? The cogitations
of mortall men are fearefull and our opinions

deceauable, &c. scarsly by cōiecture can we attein, to the
thīgs that be in earth, and wt trauale fynd we those things
 wt be amōgest our hādes. But who shal searche oute those
thīgs yt be in the heauēs, and who knoweth they coūsell, except
that thow shall giue wisdom and from the hiest places
shall send thy holie Spirit: for so the wayes of those
that dwell vpon earth haue bene directed, and they haue
learned those things that haue pleased the. Cry now as
pleaseth you, that because man was made lord ouer creatures
in earth (for that is the veritie of the text) to reule
the world in holynes: That therefor there was no man reprobated,
and he writer will answer for him self and will
affirme, that he searcheth not what God hath determined
in his eternall counsell, and what shall become of euerie
man, (for that confesseth he to be incomprehensible), but
he declareth what God commandeth in his law, and what
he hath expressed by his holie Prophetes. To the which
if man be found inobedient resteth no excusation (seing
that gods will is manifestly declared) as Moises saieth in
these wordes. The secretes appertein to the Eternall our
God but those things that be reueled appertein to vs and
to our children for euer,Deut. 2. that we may do all the wordes of
this law.
               Your argumentes which ye think most strong gathered 
of these wordes in the 7. ād 12. of Mathew are most
weak and vaine. For as we do not denie that man was created
iust, so do we cōstantly affirme that in iustice he stood
not, but became altogether vniust, and therefor God did
not condemne man before he was giltie, as you falsly gather
of our doctrine. Wonder it is, that ye se not degrees
and iust causes which com betwext the purpose of reprobation,
and the iust condemnation of man. This is your
argument: God purposed to reiect man before he was created.
Ergò he did damne him before he was criminall or
glitie. Your consequent is fals far no part of gods iudgements
was put in execution before man did sinne. for grace
was offered to Adā after his fall: Cayn was admonished
ād rebuked of his crueltie, his posterities ād sede had raged

in their furie, and finally all flesh had corrupted their
waies befor that gods vengeance and most iust iudgement
were poured furth and put in execution against the
rebellious and vnthankfull world. If you be able to proue
that the sentence of death was executed vpon Adam
before he offended, or that Cayn was accursed by gods
mouth before he had murthered, then hath your argumēt
som apperance. but if the iust causes of condemnation be
found in man, and so founde in man that God in vowies
can thereof be accused: then oght you to be ashamed to
burden vs with that which ye your selues most folishly
collecte. And further ye shall vnderstand that as the Apostle
putteth certen degrees and causes which are sensible
vnto vs, betwext the eternall election of gods childrē, ād
their glorification, euen so put we the contrarie degrees
and causes betwext the reprobation and the iust condemnation
of the wicked.Lyke as there be degrees betwext election and glorification: euen so there be degrees betwext reprobatiō and cōdemnation. for as those whom God hath chosen
before all tymes, in time he calleth, ād that of purpose to
Christe Iesus his sōne, ād whō thus he calleth he iustifieth
and that more and more vntill that flesh and the corrupt
affectiōs thereof being mortified, they attein to their glorie.
So by the contrarie be the reprobate, either left all
together in blindnes, neuer called to the light and knowledge
of gods fre mercie, or if they be called they either
do condēne it, orels sodanly fall from the same, and so abiding
in their corruption do still heap sinne vpon sinne
till at the last their measure being full, God executeth this
most iust iudgements against their continuall rebellion.
Inferre now as many absurdities as please you vpon our
doctrine. you procede.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               You say that God reprobated and ordeined man to damnation
the most parte of the world afore the foundatiōs of the world
were laid,The nynte section. and yet in the creation God made all mē after his own
image good and righteous, as the scripture witnesseth. for as we
were all created in one man that is Adam. So were we all created
in one estate that is after the image of God to lief, then if your
opinion be true the ordināce of God in his election afore the world
is not cōforme to his ordinance in the creation.Galat. 2. And the h
                     •
                  lie Gost

saieth: If I buyld vp agane that which I haue cast doune before
I declare my self to be a transgressor: if God created man to his
own image vnto lief whom before the creatiō he had reprobat ād
cast away, declareth he not thereby him self to be inconstant and
a trāsgressour. Ye can not escaip here with your bare solutiō, where
ye say afore the world, God hath not ordeined all but som vnto
damnation, for in our creation all were ordeined vnto lief, for so
much as we were all created after the image of God of the ordinance
of God in our electiō afore the world. The Apostle writeth 
thus. we be blessed saieth he with al maner of spirituall blessinges
in heauenlie thinges by Christe according as he hath chosen vs in
him before the foundations of the world were laid that we should 
walk in thē.Ephes. 1. Here do we learn that gods ordinance in his electiō
afore the world, and also his ordinance in the creation, is alwaies
one. For as we are chosen in Christe Iesu, so we are created in
Christe Iesu, and as we are chosen to be holie and without blame,
so are we created vnto good workes. Wherefor gods ordināce in
his holie electiō, and his mightie creatiō, is one, ād of like strēgth
and surenes. further seing we be (as the Apostle saieth) bothe elect
and created in Christe Iesu. and forasmuche as there is no damnation 
to them that are in Christe Iesu, then is there no damnation
either in the election or creation.
            
            
               ANSWERE.
               Because that aswell your forged lies as the vanitie of
your reasons haue ben declared I will not trooble the reader
with repetition of the same. And will also touche the
rest of these your argumentes so briefly as I can.
               Where ye reason that we were all created in one mā
                  
that is in Adam: So were we all created in one estate &c. If
ye vnderstād that we were all created in one estate, that is
in that estate which shortly was to change, becaus that
God had so determined in his eternal counsell, that by the
fall of one, his infinite mercie towardes his chosen, ād seuere
iudgement towardes the vessels of wraith should euidently
appere in the tyme appointed by his wisdom. If
this I say you vnderstand that we were all created in one
estate I will not contend with you. Albeit in verey
dede in that self same masse there were at once vessels

of mercy ād vessels of wraith. But because ye open yo•
minde, in the cōtrarie part saing: That we were created in
Adam after the image of God to lief, I am compelled vtterly
to dissent from you and fear not to affirme that becaus
none did stand to the end in that image, but all fell
euē to death in Adam: that therefor neither in Adam neither
yet in that image as Adam had it, was any created vnto
lief, but in Christ Iesus were all the chosen predestinate
to lief euerlasting,Ephes. 1. euen before that euer Adam was
created as the Apostle plainely doeth witnes. Where ye
go about to proue by our opinion the ordinance of God
in his election before the world,To the. 2. not to be conforme to
his ordinance in the creation and so consequently God to
be a transgressor and inconstant, ye declare your self not
onely ignorāt, vaine and foolishe, but also irreuerent and
blasphemous against gods maiestie. for ye (so far as in
you lieth) spoile him of his Godhead making him to chā
                  ge
his counsell, purpose, and ordinance euen so oft as the
creatures do chāge: where we by the cōtrarie labour to explane,
ād not to escaip any violēce of your dartes by a bare
solution (as ye alledge) but by the plaine scriptures openly
we do affirme that as our God is eternall incomprehensible,
and immutable so are his counsels constant, subiect
to no immutabilitie nor change: cōstant I say in God
him self, how so euer thinges change to our apprehensiō.
And therefor we say that neither in his election before
the world, neither in his creation of man to his own image
and similitude, was it his eternall coūsell, purpose nor
ordināce that all the posteritie of Adam should be saued.
And so can ye not proue that God destroyed any thing
which he had builded. Albeit to note one thing by the
way: Paule wold not haue bene so bold, as to haue made
him self check mate with God, he did not (I say) accuse
God of inconstancie, neither did he appoint him to be a
transgressor althogh he builded the ceremonies vnder
the Law, and destroied them againe. But to our purpose.

                     〈◊〉
                   I say destroied nothing which he had builded. True
it is that man destroied that image which God had builded,

but that building of God was but temporall, and for
a tyme onely, but the perfect building of his churche was
in Christe Iesus, builded before the foundations of the
world were laid: which building God neuer destroied nor
shall destroy, but shall cōsummate the work to the praise
of his holie name. To him be glory.
               In your hole reasoning of the wordes of the Apostle 
you do erre in this point, as before I haue noted, that ye
make cōmon to all, that which ye holie Gost maketh peculiare
to gods elect. for ye must first proue all to be saintes 
by vocation,All be not Saintes nor blessed with spiritual benediction. all to be blessed with spirituall benediction,
and to haue obeyed, and all to be builded vpon the foundatiō
of the Prophetes ād Apostles before yt ye be able to
proue that all were elected and predestinate in Christ Iesus
before all tymes. That we are created in Christe Iesus
vnto good workes, is not to be referred (as ye think) to
the common creation of all men in Adam, but to the new
and spirituall regeneration which gods children haue in
Christ Iesus: for the which Dauid did pray, saying: a cleā
heart creat in me (ô God) which is no lesse called the creation
of God, then was the first creation of man. for as man
in his creation, neither wroght, neither yet could deserue
to be created so honorable as he was, but did suffer the
power of God to worke euen as it pleased his wisdom to
perfourm the work. So in our new creation vnto good
workes the onely grace and power of God worketh not
onely the beginning,Oure regeneration to good workes is by the grace of God. but also bringeth to perfection, so
that what so euer be good, holie, or iust in vs, is gods creation
and not our worke. God open your eies that ye may
se that neither in Adam neither yet in our selues, were we
created to good workes, but in Christe Iesus alone. And
then I think ye will not so much boast of your fre will.
               Your last, as after ye do reason is a plain Paralogisme,
that is a Sophisticall and fals argument: for it stādeth
on foure termes against the vse of all good and solide reasoning.
For thus ye procede: Saing, we be elect and created
in Christe Iesus, and seing there is no condemnation
to them that be in Christe Iesus, then is there no damnation

neither in the election nor creation. Here be plainely
foure termes. for in your Maior that is in the first
part of your argument ye say not, we were elected and
created in our election, and in our creation, but we were
elected ād created in Christ Iesus. The secōd propositiō
is most trew to witt that there is no condēnation to them
that be in Christe Iesus, to such as walk not after the fleshe.
but what can ye conclude hereof, that no damnation
(say you) is in election nor in creation? I say your conclusion
is fals and vaine for you chāge your termes, putting
in the last part these two wordes: Election and creation,
where ye oght to haue rehearesed these wordes: Christ Iesus:
for thus you may well procede, we be elected ād created
to good workes in Christ Iesus, but to them (saieth the
Apostle) that be in Christ Iesus there is no cōdemnation,
Ergo to such as be elected and newly created in Christe
Iesus there is no damnation. This argument is formall
and true. but omitting your foolishnes which oftener I
am compelled to shew then gladly I wold, I go forward
with your wordes.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               If God reprobated man afore the foundation of the world,The tēth section.
then God reprobated man before he offended. And if God reprobated
and damned man afore be offended, then is death, the reward
of gods ordināce afore the world, ād not the reward of sinne.
But the Apostle teacheth vs that by sinne death entred into the
world and also that death is the reward of sinne. I pray you
doeth either gods lawe or mannes law condemne any man afore
he hath offended? I am certen ye are not able to proue it to be sothen
oght you to be ashamed to burden God with such vnrighteous
iudgement. Doeth not God rather forgiue the offence alredie
committed? Let him be your God which condemneth the innocent
afore he offend. But he shall be my God which perdoneth
and forgiueth the offence alreadie committed which in his verie
wraithe doeth think vpon mercie. And so with Iob will I conclude,
The great God casteth away no man.
            
            
               
               ANSWER.
               How ignorantly and how impudently ye confounde
the eternall purpose of gods reprobation with the iust
execution of his iudgementes I haue before declared and
therefor here onely resteth to admonishe the reader that
most vniustly ye accuse vs in that ye say: that we hold and
teache that God damned man before he offended. This
you be neuer able to shew in any of our workes. for constantly
in worde and writing we affirme that man willingly
fell from God, and made him self slaue to sathan before
that death was inflicted vpon him. and so neither make we
death the reward of gods ordinance, neither do we burden
him with vnrighteous iudgement. But say with the Apostle,
that death is the reward of sinne, and that our God is
righteous in all his workes. and therefor be ashamed and
repēt your manifest lie.To 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   That God forgiueth the sin committed,
and doeth remēber mercie euen when he appereth
in his hote displeasure to punishe his Churche, with thankes
giuing and ioy we acknowledge. But that thereof ye
cōclud▪ (as ye say wt Iob) that the great God casteth away
no man, we can not cease to admonishe bothe you and the
readers, that either ignorantly, orels maliciously ye corrupt
and depraue the minde of the speaker in that place:
Elihu saieth not as ye alledge.Iob. 36. The great God casteth away
no mā, but saieth: Behold the mightie God casteth away
none that is mightie and valiant of courage, He main
teneth not the wicked, but he giueth iudgemēt to the afflicted.
And in this behalf your master Castalio (who notwithstanding
that he vseth to take large libertie in translation,
where any thing may seme to serue his purpose) is
more circumspect and more faithfull then you be. for thus
he translateth that place. Althogh that God be excellent
yea excellent and strong of courage, yet is he not so dissolute,
yt either he will kepe ye wicked,Castalio is translation. or denie iudgemēt
to the poore. Althogh I say, yt here is a greater libertie thē
I wold wish a faithfull translater to vse, yet hath he not so
corrupted ye sense as ye haue done. Elihu reasonīg against
Iob affirmeth that albeit ye power of God be infinit, yet cā
                  
not his workes be vniust, but that they are wroght in all
perfectiō of iustice. how beit that often (as we be dull and
blinde) we do not vnderstand nor se at the first the causes
of the same, yet God giueth daily declaration of his iustice,
in that the preserueth and somtyme exalteth the verteouse,
that before were afflicted, and deiecteth from honors
the wicked and the cruell oppressors. Be iudge your
self what this serueth for your purpose.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Some other be that grant that sinne was à cause why man
is reprobate,The eleuēth section. and there with they hold that gods absolute ordinance
is also the caus, this saing conteineth cōtradiction in it self: for
if it be gods absolut ordinance. then is it not in respect of any other
thing, but as they say because it hath so pleased him, if they ment
that gods ordinance is the cause why sinners suffer death, or that
God ordeined that sinners for their sinne should suffer death, I
could agre with them. but that were contrary to that which they
haue said, that God absolutly ordeined any man afore he was,
yea afore the world to death because so it pleased him. for if death
be the reward of sinne, and for offence, and sinne we do die, then
 cometh not death by gods absolute ordinance. And if I do grant
that both gods absolute ordinance and also sinne are the causes of
damnation after your meanyng, marke well what inconuenience
foloweth thereof. first ye must grant me that gods ordinance is
the principall and chefest cause, (for it can not be inferior to any
other cause) secōdly ye will grant that the first or principale cause
called Causa Causae, is the cause of the secōd ād inferior cause called 
cause causate, so to cōclude, gods ordināce which is Causa causae,
shalbe the cause of sinne which is Causa causata. As for a familiar
exemple, the heate of the son, and the dew, cause the grounde
to be frutefull, and God also is the cause thereof for he maketh
the barren ground frutefull, but forasmuch as God is the principall
and first cause, he must be also the cause of the same which is
but the second cause. Thus it is clerely proued that if gods ordinā
                  ce
were the cause of reprobation then gods ordinance should also
 be the cause of sinne, and God should be autor of euill, contrarie to
the hole scripture, contrarie to the opinion of all godlie men, and
contrarie to our faith: But forasmuch as God willing I intend to

answer at length to this wicked opinion in the confutation of the
third error, I will speak no more hereof in this place.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               No further answer nedeth to be giuen to these your
most vniust accusatiōs,To the 1. then those which we before haue
giuen. for neither do we so vnreuerētly speake nor write,
neither yet do we vnderstād nor affirme, that gods absolute
ordinance is the principall cause of reprobation, of sinne,
and of damnation: but simplie we do teache, that God
in his etternall counsell for the manifestation of his own
glorie hath of one maste chosen vessels of honor, whom
before all tymes he hath geuē vnto Christe Iesus, that they
in him should receiue lief. And of the same masse he hath
left others in that corruption in the which they were to
fall, and so were they prepared to destruction. The cause
why the one were elected, we confesse and knowledge
not to be in mā, but to be the fre grace and the fre mercie
shewed and frely giuen to vs in Christe Iesus, who onely
is appoīted head to giue life to the bodie. Why the others
were reiected, we affirme the cause to be most iust: but yet
secrete ād hid frome vs, reserued in his eternall wisdome
to be reueled at the glorious comming of the Lord Iesus.
This one thing do we (compelled by your blasphemous
accusations) repete oftener then we wold: to the end that
indifferent men may se what doctrine it is, which you so
maliciously impugne.
               How so euer ye ioyn gods absolute ordinance and
sinne togither,To the 2. we make so far diuision betwext the purpose
and eternall counsell of God (for absolute ordinance
we vse not in that mater) and the sinne of mā, that we plainely
affirme: that mā when he sinned, did neither looke to
gods will, gods counsell, nor eternall purpose: but did altogither
consent to the will of the deuill, which did manifestly
ganesay gods reueled will. And therefor do we affirme
that neither was the purpose nor counsell of God
any cause of sinne: but we say with the Apostle that by one
man did sinne enter into the world. The cause whereof
was the malice of the deuill, and that fre consent of man

to rebelliō, whose will was neither inforced neither yet by
any violence of gods purpose compelled to consent, but
he of fre will and redie mynd left God ād ioyned with the
deuil. Conuict vs now (if ye can) that we make gods absolute
ordinance (which maner of speaking I say we abhorre)
to be the principall cause of sinne.
               
                  Albeit that ye wold be sene subtill in adding your▪
Logicall termes Causa causae, ād Causa causata, yet doeth
your similitude which ye bring furth for demonstration
of your purpose declare that either ye haue not learned
orels that ye haue forgottē the chief and principall point
of right reasoning, which all reasonable men confesse to
be, rightly to diuide. For if ye can not diuide betwext
the will of God working all thinges for his own glorie, ād
the operation of creatures, be they Son, Moone, sterres,
rayn or dew, who can work nothing but as God hath appointed,
I will not folow you as a God.
               We say not that gods ordinance is the cause of reprobation,The iust causes of reprobatiō are hid in gods eternall counsel. but the causes of death and damnatiō are euidēt in the scriptures.
but we affirme that the iust causes of reprobation
are hid in the eternall counsell of God, and knowen
to his godlie wisdō alone: but the causes of sinne, of death,
and damnation are euident and manifestly declared to vs
in the scriptures to witt, mānes fre will consenting to the
deceiuable persuasiō of the deuill, wilfull sinne, and volū
                  tarie
rebellion, by which entred death into this world,
the cōtempt of graces and gods mercies offered with the
heaping vp of sinne vpon sinne, till damnation iustly came.
These causes I say of sinne, death, and damnation, are
plainely noted vnto vs in gods holie scriptures. But why
it pleased God to shew merice to som, and deny the same
to others, becaus the iudgementes of God are a deuoring
depthe,The iudgementes of God are a deuoring depth. we enter not in reasoning with him, but with
all humilitie render thankes to his Maiestie for the grace
and mercie which we doubt not but of his fre grace we
haue receaued in Christ Iesus our onely head.
               When you shall further charge vs that we make
God autor of euill, we haue good hope plainely to conuict
your vennemous tongues of a most malicious lie.

Now to your wordes.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The Lord reasoneth with the inobedient Israelites which
did forsake him saing:The twelth section. O my people what haue I done vnto the?
or wherein haue I hurt the, giue me answer? If the Israelites had
ben so well learned as you, they might haue answered, Lord thow
hast preordinate us by thy immutable decre to fall away frome
the, so that of necessitie we must perish, in this hast thow hurt vs
with an vncurable wounde.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               How so euer we be learned if ye betimes repent not
your vnreuerēt skoffing, ād iesting at gods eternal predestination,
ye shall learn in experience, that the immutable
decre of God, is most iust by the which ye fyre which
neuer shall be quenched is prepared for the deuill and his
angels, and for all such as with trembling do not fear his
godlie Maiestie, and with sobrietie do not contemplat his
iudgementes incomprehensible. And thus I leaue your
blasphemous boldnes to be repressed by the power of
him whose iudgementes you mocke.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Now I intend with the helpe of God to answer to the arguments
which they that be intangled with this error vse to alledge
for the proof thereof,The thirtēth section. leauing such as be▪ but vaine, and ingender
rather contention then edefying, answering to such as some most
weghtie collected of certen places of the scriptures wherby it may
be thoght that they may be deceaued, beseching the gentill reader
to wey the mater with an indifferent balance, and first heare
before thow refuse, and God willing thow shalt not repent the of
thy labor. but forasmuch as the autor ād maīteners of this error do
often make mention of election, whereby they wold cloke their
absurditeis, I will first declare how election is taken in the scriptures
thre maner of waies, that is generally, specially, and most
specially of all. first we be all chosen and created in Christe Iesu
as Paule witnesseth to the Ephesians in the first and second
chapter, and conforme to this election he lightned all

                   them that cam into the world, and calleth all men to repentance
bothe greate and small,Esaia. 50 riche and poore, Iew and gētil, male and
female, of all estates, without respect of any person. And all that
 be thirstie he calleth to come to the water of lief. Secondly he commandeth
them which com at the first calling to renounce father ād
mother, wief and childe with all other earthlie thinges, yea and
them selues also. This is the secounde election where there departed
an innumerable multitude which will not forsaik such thinges
 but for their own lustes. Here departed Cayn with the monstrouse
Giātes, cruell tyrants, and bloodie hypocrites, and all persecuters
which shed innocent bloode. here departed Epicurus with
all his bellie gods: among which was the riche glotton which dispised
Lazarus, there departed Sardanapalus accompanied with
venus, and all that be drowned in the lustes of the fleshe. Among
which was Herodias. There departed Cresus with many rich
welthie persons: among which was the rich yong man of whom
we read in the Gospell, that with a sorie countenance he departed
frō Christe. There departed Tarquinius the proude with such
as be puft vp with the Pompe, glorie, of this world. Among which
 was Herode
                     •
                   of whom we read in the Actes of the Apostles, that
for his pryde he was striken of God and eaten of lyse. There departed
Demetrius the siluer smithe with such as will not forsak
                     •
                  
their filthie lucre. Amongest which were the maister and mastres
of the damsell possessed with a spirit that prophecied. There
departed a hole band of Stoikes with their destinie plaing fastor
loose, and that of necessitie, which passeth all iuglers coming. Among
them are all such as defend that of mere necessitie a few nō
                  ber
must be saued, and of mere necessitie all the rest of the world
must be condemned. Who so abideth this seconde election and calling,
Christ commandeth them to take vp their crosse and folow
him. And thus to continue to the end: this is the third and last election
of which saieth the Lord:Esaia. 48 I haue chosen the in the fire of tribulation.
here the seuentie disciples departed, for they can
 not abyde this hard saing, here doeth Iudas trudge, they which
remayn suffer greate assaultes, in so much that som tyme they
turn there backes to their enemies (as the Apostles did, when
Christ was taken) and there do worthie soldiours stagger, stumble,
and fall: as Peter when he denied his master, and swore he knew

him not, And Thomas could in no wies beleue that Christe was
risen, and had obteined victorie. yet they which at the voice of
their capteyn ryse vp, and turne againe, and fight laufully, euen
vnto the end, they are chiefly aboue all others called elect and chosen
because they continuing vnto the end obtein that whereūto they
are chosen, and they folow the lambe whether so euer he goeth: it
is a hard thing that any such be deceaued, and fall away, forasmuch
as they first are illuminated from ab
                     •
                  ue, and haue forsaken
all, yea them selues, and haue altogither submitted them selues to
the gou
                     •
                  rnance of their Lord and capitē Christe. They daily obtein 
such victorie of their ennemies, that their warfare is now becom
easie. And in hope they haue to subdue by the aid and counsell
of their Lord, all their ennemies their ioy and comfort is so great,
that they esteme all earthlie pleasure (which should draw them
back) but vane, foolishe displeasante and beast
                     •
                  lyke, happie is he
which vnderstandeth this to be true, not onely by sp
                     •
                  culation, but
also by experience. These thre kindes of election are plainelie
set surth in the historie of Gedeon, which being w
                     •
                  ll and duely
vnderstanded confyr to the world.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Before ye enter to confute our argumentes as ye
boldly promes,To the 1. ye affirme that electiō is takē in the scriptures
thre maner of waies. That is (as you say) Generally,
specially, and most especially of all, which diuision
with the probation of the same is so foolishe, so fals, ād so
far from the purpose, that onles ye should haue occasion
to calūniat, that so much of your book I passed ouer with
out answer, I wold not spend the moment of an hour in
answering the same.Ephe. 1. For how litle do the wordes of Paule
serue for your generall election in the confirmation of
your eight reason▪ and after also, I haue declared. And I leaue
to be proued of your parte by the euident testimonie
of any scripture, that God so oft electeth to lief euerlastīg
as he commandeth man to refuse him self orels as he giueth
his further grace to such as he hath called to the
knowledge of him self, and of his onely beloued Sonne
Christ Iesus. That there is a generall vocatiō by the which
the world by som maner of meanes is called to the knowledge

of God and a vocation of purpose which apperte
                     •
                  
                  neth
to gods children onely I fynd in scriptures.To the 2. But that
there is any election to lief euerlasting, except that which
is and was in Christ Iesus in the eternall counsell of God
before the foundation of the world I am assured that neither
scripture affirmeth,Iohn. 1. neither iustly can it be gathered
vpon any sentence of the same. That the true light (which
is Christ Iesus) illuminated all men commyng in to this
world we confes:To the 3. but what will ye thereof conclude. Ergò
say ye: all are elected in him to lief euerlasting: I deny
your consequence. And say that albeit man be indewed wt
the light of reason and vnderstāding which no doubt procedeth
from Christe, and is not of nature onely, yet doeth
it not therefore consequently folow that euerie man that
hath reason is elected in Christ to the lief euerlasting. if
ye ask, for what purpose then doeth their lightning and illumination
serue thē,Rom. 1. the Apostle doeth answer you, that
they may be inexcusable: wc reason, if it satisfie not your
curiositie,To the 4. quarell with the holie Gost. If you be able to
proue that all that be called, do earnestly repent, and that
all be thirstie to whom the waters of lief are offered, ye haue
said somewhat to proue a generall election. But and if
it be euident that a great nombre do rather repyne against
the trueth, nor repent their iniquitie, which it reproueth,
and that mo do either seme to haue no thirst to righteousnes,
orels do drink of the stinking pudles of mannes doctryne,
then that they will receaue those holsome waters
of lief wc Christe Iesus giueth to his Churche, then haue
you proued no part of your purpose.Isaiah. 55. And wōder it is yt in
ye wordes of ye Prophet ād in ye wordes of our master Christ
Iesus also, ye se not a plaine differēce made. for ye Prophete
calleth not al indifferently to drink of these waters, but
such as do thirst. And Christ restreineth his generalitie to
such as did trauale and were burdened wt sinne: such I say
he confesseth him self to call to repentance. But to such as
were iust and hole, he affirmeth that he was not sent. And
so yet once agane I affirme that the scriptures of God make

but mention of one Election to lief euerlasting. I am
not ignorant that Saule was elected to be king ouer Israel
and Iudas also to the office of an Apostle: but whether thereof,
you be able to conuince that they were both elected
to the lief euerlasting in Christe Iesus, before that they
did offēd (for so you affirme) I remitt you to your proofe.
I feare not to proue that by the veritie him self, Iudas is called
the deuill, long before that the holie Gost maketh any
mētion,Iohn. 6. that it entred in to his heart to betray his master.
               It may appere to some that in heaping of your exemples
and histories,To the 5. which ye adduce for your especiall
election (as ye terme it) ye rather delyte to renew your
memoire, then substancially to proue your purpose. For
if a mā should thus reason against you. The shepe of Christe
which by the eternall purpose of God,An argument against the aduersaries forged diuision of gods election. be especially elected
to lief, heare his voice and with reuerence do know
and obey the same. But these whom ye rehearse, did heare
the voice (as ye alledge) but neither did they know nor
obey it, Ergo they were not the shepe elected and especially
chosen. if thus I say any man should reason, prepare
for your answer. And farther how ye be able to proue that
Sardanapalus, Croesus and Tarquinius the proude can be
placed in this rank of your especially elected, I can se no
good reason. for except that calamitie and gods iust vengeance
did folow their insolencie, filthie lief, and pryde, I
fynd in histories no speciall message sent vnto them from
God. But this ye may vnderstand by som secrete reuelation
which ye haue receaued of late in your perfection.To the 6.
               
               That ye place vs with the hole band of the Stoikes
who with their destinie play fast or loose and that of necessitie
which as you say passeth the conning of all iuglers.
Althogh we do not greatlie feare the force of your
sentence, yet must we appeale to a more righteous and indifferente
iudge, that is to the Lord Iesus: to whom all iudgemēt
is giuē. ād in ye meā tyme we further must require
such as be indifferent in this mater to iudge betwext you
ād vs, whether yt we or ye be those yt play fast or loose in

that which ye skoffingly call destinie and stoicall necessitie,
and we call gods eternall election and purpose immutable.
We affirme that gods election in Christ Iesus is so
certen ād his eternall purpose to saue his churche is so cō
                  stant,Matth. 16
that against the faith of gods elect shall not the Portes
and gates of hell preuale in the end: that neither can
lief nor death, thinges present nor to com seperat and disseuer
vs from the loue of God which is in Christe Iesus.
That this foundation is stable the Lord knoweth his own:Rom. 8.
and therefor shall euerie one that incalleth the name of
the Lord depart from iniquirie. for we are not called to
vncleannes but vnto sanctification and holynes by the
power of that Spirit who raysed from death Iesus the great
Pastor of our soules, which holie spirit frely by faith (which
also is the gift of God) doeth so reule and reign in our
heartes, that albeit the flesh lusteth against the spirit yet are
we assured of victorie by the onely power of him, who
hath ouercom the world. This is our doctrine, faith and
professiō. But you affirme as after plainely ye write, that
none is so elected in Christ to lief euerlasting, but that he
may fall, becom a reprobate and finally be condemned,
and cōtrary waies, yt none is so reprobate in gods eternall
purpose, but that he may becom elect ād so be saued. That
in God there is neither election nor reprobation but according
to mannes disposition: so that when men haue
good motiōs, and be godly disposed God doeth elect thē,
and write their names in the book of lief, but when they
chāge and turne to iniquitie he doeth reprobate them and
blotteth out their names out of the book of lief. Let now
all creatures iudge betwext vs and you whether of the
two play fast and loose and surmounte iuglers in cūning.To the 7.
Frome the third kind of election, which ye call most especiall
how you be able to proue that the seuentie disciples
did so depart from Christe that there was no difference
betwext them and the trudging of Iudas (as ye terme his
horrible treason) be iudges your self.Iohn. 6. In the sixt of Iohn
we read that many of his disciples left him and fallīg frō
him did go with him no more. But whether these were the

hole seuentie whom he sent to preach or others who for
a time did folow him it is not expressed, neither yet doeth
the text say that all his disciples fell from him, but many
departed. further it appereth to me verie rashe iudgemēt
to pronoūce that none that departed from Christe at any
tyme in his lief before his death vpon the crosse,The fre wil mē iudge rashly. did at any
tyme after, return vnto hī, but that all such did remain
in damnation with Iudas. For I fynd that all his Apostles
did flie and leaue him, and yet we know they were called
againe. And so also do we fynd were two of the disciples
to whom Christ appering betwext Ierusalem and Emaus
did first instruct them and after reueled him self vnto thē.
This I note to giue you occasion to be more circunspect
in so weghtie maters.
               Towardes the end of this parte,To the 8. thus ye write (of those
whome you say haue subiected them selues altogither to
the gouernement of their Lord and capteyn): they daily
obtein such victorie of their ennemies that their war fare
is now becom easie, and in the hope they haue to subdue
by the aid and counsell of their Lord all their ennemies,
there ioy and comfort is so greate that they esteme all
earthlie pleasure, which should draw thē back, but vaine.
               These wordes augment in me that suspition which before
I noted to witt that ye haue a further fetch in this mater
then your rude scholers vnderstand at the first:The perfecdtiō that the aduersaries pretend in this lyfe. to witt
that euerie one of you shall becom Christes, so perfect ād
cleā, that in you euen in this lief shall rest no ennemie to
be ouercome except death onely and that this is the opiniō
of your greatest Angelles I am able to proue by sufficient
testimonie, I mean by their own hand writinges. But
how far S. Paul was from that perfection, yea euen when
he was redie to be offerred in sacrifice for the testimonie
of Christe Iesus, he eshamed not to confesse, thus writing
to the Philippians, after that he had affirmed that all iustice
which before he looked for in the law was becom to
him as domage and doung, to the end that he might winne
Christ, and be found in him not hauing his own iustice
which was of the law, but that which was by the faith of

Christ Iesus.Philip. 3. he addeth: Not as thogh I had already atteined
to the mark, (vnderstanding to that iustice which
he hoped for) either that I am alredy perfect, but I folowe
if I may comprehend that, for whoes sake I am comprehended
of Christe Iesus. Brethren I think not with my
self to haue atteined to the mark, but one thing I do forgetting
that that is behind I endeuore my self to that
which is before. here the Apostle, who had foghten
somwhat lōger thē some who now can bragge of an easie
battell, confessed, he was not yet perfect, neither yet that
he had atteined to that estate, that is to the resurrectiō of
the dead to the which he daily did contend. The other
poyson which in these your former wordes I espie, and
therefor of conscience must admonish my brethren is:
That ye be proud contemners of the fre graces of God offered
to man in Christe Iesus. for with the Pelagians and
Papistes ye are become teachers of fre will, and defenders
of your own iustice. for how coldly ye speak of
Christ Iesus and his power, these your wordes may witnes.How strōg the aduersaries wolde seme to be.
They are in hope (say you) to subdue their ennemies
by the aid & counsell of their Lord, are you becom so
strong and your warfare so easie that the coūsell of your
captein is sufficient for you to conquire your ennemies?
you sodenly did repent that ye had confessed that the aid
of your Lord was necessarie for you: and therefor to mitigate
and extenuate that, immediatly ye adde by the
coūsell of their Lord. Is this I pray you vnfeanedly to cō
                  fesse
that without Christ ye may do nothing, that of your
selues ye be not able to think one good thoght? That it is
he that beginneth and to the end performeth the work
of our saluation? God of his greate mercie and for Christe
Iesus his sonnes saik, preserue his Church from your
pestilent vēnom.To the 9. What ye mean by the historie of Gedeō
in the (which say you) well and duelly vnderstanded be
your thre kindes of Election plainelie set furth, because
ye your self do not expresse, I will not deuyne. The copie
which came to my handes was in that place imperfecte.
for after the former wordes it had onely written Confyr

to the world. And because I will not take vpon me to alter
any thing in your wordes I leaue them to be corrected by
your selues, ād your mynd further to be explaned in that
point: if so it shall seme good vnto you. Ye procede
saying.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The first argument of them which abuse gods holie predestination
is easely soluted,The fourtēth section. their argument is this. where so euer
there is election, ther is also reprobation of the same sorte. But God
elected som men afore the foundations of the world. Ergo he reprobated
som other men afore the world. The first part of this argument
is false, That wher so euer there is election, there is also
reprobatiō of the same sorte. for gods election afore the world hath
no respect vnto his cōtrarie reprobation afore the world. Yea there
is no such word nor phrase in the hole scripture but gods election
afore the world, is generall to all men, as his calling is generall
without respect of persons. This is all redie sufficiently proued,
yet som of you do grant gods calling to be generall, but not his 
election. And in this ye accuse God of hypocrisie, you wold make
him a dissembler lyke vnto your selues, which often times with
your mouth do offer and promes that which ye mind neuer to perfourme.
But God is faithfull which is willing to perfourme all
that he promiseth euen to them that refuseth him. And thogh they
attein not the promes because of their vnbeleue, yet all the tyme
of their calling be they in the generall election, as those whom the
king called to the mariage, Notwitstanding they came not, yet
were they chosen to be partakers of the mariage, and the seruant 
to whom the master forgaue all his debtes, was chosen notwithstanding
he atteined not that,Isaia. 48 wherunto he was chosen, but became
a reprobate, abusing the goodnes of his master. God is no hypocrite,
which calleth men owtwardly, and forgeueth debtes onely
with the mowth, but euē from the hearte, willing to giue sal
                  
                     •
                  ation
to all them to whom he offereth it. And the cause why such
do perish is their obstinatnes to gods grace: and as the Lord saieth
their stifneck which hath an yron vaine and their browes of
brasse which dispyse the goodnes of God, they became cast
awayes, Becaus (as saint Iohn saieth) they loue darknes

better then light, And as EsdrasEsdr. 9. saieth thei kept not that
which was sowē in them. whereof we may gather that they becom
reprobates,I
                        •
                     rem. 2. because they rather refuse the grace offered and
grafted in them, then that they are ref
                     •
                  sed. Notwithstāding both
may be conueniently spoken: for because they haue forsaken me, I
will also forsake them, saieth the Lord. And agane saieth the holie
Gost. Cometh not this vnto the, because thow hast forsaken
 the Lord thy God. further that this is vntrew, where so euer there
is election ther is also reprobation of the same kynd, it may be
easelie proued by the inconueniēce which cometh therof.Esaia. 42. & 43. Christ is
the elect and chosen of God, As then: Behold this may seruant vpon
whō I lean, my elect in whom my soule is pacified. And in an other
place.The scriptures affirme that there be many fals Christes & fals Prophetes But Iesus Christe is our onely Sauior: without whome there is no saluation. Thow art my witnes saieth the lord, and my seruant
whom I haue chosen, and wile you say therefor that there be mo
Christes which be reprobate. for ether this saying, where so euer
there is election, there is also reprobation of the same kynd is false,
orels there must be mo Christes. That were much lyke to the
saing of a Iew which when he had talked with a faithfull man
verie much concerning the temporall and worldlie dominion and
honour of Messias, the christian proued by the prophecie of Daniel,
ād also by the prophecie of Isaiah that Messias should be euill entreated
euen of the Iewes, and put to death as an offender. Here
the Iew being driuen to a narrow shift rather then he wold applie
and confesse the trueth, he rather confessed that there should com
two Messias of whom the one should be dispysed, and the other
magnified. And if ye be so mynded that rather then ye will departe
from your error, ye had leuer confesse mo Christes (of which
som be chosen, and the others reprobate) Surelie then I think it is
no faithful mans duetie to reason with you.
            
            
               ANSWERE.
               Easie it is in dede to solute those argumētes wc in our
names ye falsly forge either by adding such patches as in
our writings cā neuer be foūd,To the 1. orels by so peruerting our
mindes, yea and the minde of the holie Gost that if possible
it were, ye wold obscure the brightnes of the son, ād
take frome creatures, the benefitt of the same, to the end
that in your darknes ye might still remaine. And therefor

                     •
                   can not but complain of your deuilish malice which causeth

you to peruerte ād writhe wordes well spokē and reasons
godly and substancially made.
               Shew if ye can in any of our writings that we affirm
that where so euer there is election there is also reprobation
of the same sorte. Shew that clause I say of the same
sorte and I will confesse that ye haue red more then I haue
done, of that mater, which neuertheles I hardly can beleue.
But to the end that the simple reader may vnderstād
how we do reason of election and reprobation by the contrarie
effectes I will adduce not our reasons lately inuented,
but twentie yeres ago committed vnto writing by
that notable instrument of God Iohn Caluin,Institu. 2. Cap. 
                        •
                     ec. 78. who thus
speaketh, wonder it is saieth he that Chrisostom did not
call to mynd that it is the election of God wc maketh difference
betwext men. We feare not to grante that which
S. Paule in greate cōstancie doeth affirm. To witt that all
together are wicked and giuen to malice, but with him we
adde. That by the mercie of God it cometh to passe tha
                     •
                  
we abyde not in wickednes. Therefor seīg that naturally
we all labor wt a like sicknes. These onely receiue health
and amend to whom it hath pleased the Lord to put to his
curing hand, others whom by his iust iudgement he passeth
by, do languishe in their corruptiō, till they be consumed.
Neither yet from any where els doeth it com that
som continue to the end, and others fall in to the curse
which was begonne. for because that persuerance it self
is the gift of God, which is not commonly giuen to al:
but he frely giueth it to whom it pleaseth him. If the cause
of the difference be soght, why som constantly continue,
and why others fall away by instabilitie, none other
cause may be assigned, but that the eternall God susteineth
and strēgthneth the one sort, by his own power, that
they perishe not, and vnto the others he giueth not the
strength, that they may be documētes, and witnes of mās
incōstācie &c. Thus vse we to reason by ye diuersitie wc we
sein mē yt one sort are elect and others are reprobate and
not as ye ymagin vs to do. We say that nature hath made
vs equall as concerning corruption, and yet we se great

diuersitie amōgest men. We ask what is ye cause of this. If
ye answere education wc som Philosophers do, that will be
prouen fals, as before I haue declared: if ye say mans fre
will, we procede demanding who giueth the good will, if
ye alledge man him self, the scripture proueth you liers
saing it is God that worketh the will and the perfourmance.
if God be granted (as he can not be denied) to be the
onely author of all goodnes, then ask we, why giueth he
the good will to the one, and not to the other. If ye answer
becaus the one receaueth grace and the other doeth refuse
it, ye haue said nothing to the purpose. for we still demād,
if God may not (if so it pleased his eternall wisdom)
frame and forme the will of the one to as great obedience
as the will of the other: fret and fume as ye list: this ye
cā not denie, except that ye will be blasphemous deniers
of his omnipotent power. Now of this manifest diuersitie
which we se in mankinde, we conclude that God hath aswell
his elect whom of mercie he calleth, by faith iustifieth,
and by his holie Spirit sanctifieth, and in knowledge
of him self and of his Sonne Iesus preserueth to the
end, and so in the end shall he glorifie them: as also that
he hath his reprobate, whom for iust causes he leaueth to
them selues to lāgwish in their corruption, to passe from
iniquitie to iniquitie, till that they com to perdition, as
they that are prepared vessels of wraith. If this ye be not
able to conuince, I send you to fight with your own shadow.
for our reasons do stand as I haue shortly rehearsed
which you be neuer able to moue.De eterna Dei proedestinatione Trew it is that Iohn
Caluin thus writeth: Inter electos & reprobos mutua est
relatio, That is betwext the elect and the reprobrate (saieth
he) there is a mutuall relation, that is the one hath a
contrarie respect to the other, so that the election of the
which the Apostle speaketh, cā not stād except we should
grante that God hath set apart one sort of men whom it
pleased him from an other sorte. You heare no mētion in
these wordes of your patch, Ther is reprobation of the
same sorte, which I know either ye, orels your Master Castalio

forged. Becaus ye wold not forgett your merie tale
of your Iew,To the. 2. ye boldly denie that gods election hath
respect to his contrarie reprobation. But when ye should
come to the plaine demōstration thereof, ye are compelled
to flie to this shift: There is no such word or phrase
in the scripture. if such a reason should be made before a
reasonable man, I think it iustly might be reiected. for if
this be a good reason: Election hath no respect to his contrarie
reprobation, because the wordes nor phrase are not
in the scripture, then is this reason good also: Lot sinned
not committing incest with his daughters: for in the hole
scriptures there is neither such worde nor phrase, that in
plaine wordes affirmeth: that Lot sinned commiting incest
with his daughters. Consider the vanitie of your reasons
and be ashamed. Ye can not denie, but this word Election
is redde in the scriptures: And so oft I say can ye
not denie except that willingly ye will corrupt the mind
of the holie Gost, but that it hath respect to his contrarie
reprobation, as by the phrases which ye impudently denie
to be in the scrip
                     •
                  ures is most euident. As when Paul saieth:
hath God then reiected or refused his people? God
forbyd.Rom. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   God hath not refused his people whom he knew
before. And so alledgeing the like to haue bene in the
daies of Helias, he saieth: euen so in this tyme there were
a residue or a few nomber left according to the electiō
of grace, that is according to the fre election, and not accordīg
vnto workes. And after he saieth that which Israel
seketh, it hath not atteined vnto: but the election hath atteined
vnto it: but the rest were blinded, whether that this
phrase doeth not plainely proue that election in this place
hath respect to his contrary, reprobation, let the indifferent
reader iudge. The election (saieth saint Paule) hath
atteined (vnderstanding the illumination which God did
promise) but the rest were blīded. If ye will not suffer that
this blinded rest: whom God iustly had reiected, shall be
called reprobat, studie ye for a more gētle worde. for we
must vse such as the holie Gost hath taught vs. But
yet one phrase or two mo: I shall haue mercie, saieth

God to Moses, vpon whom I will haue mercie. And Paul
feareth not to adde his contrarie saing: and whom he will
he maketh hard hearted. And agane what if God willing to
shew his wrath and to make his power knowen hath suffered
with long patience the vessels of wrath made redie
to damnation: and that he might declare the riches of his
glorie on the vessels of mercie which he had prepared vnto
glorie. If mercy, lief, the vessels of mercie, and glorie
haue contrarie, respect to seueritie, to destruction, to the
vessels of wraith, and of dishonor, then can it not be denied
but that election, (from the which all these former
graces flow to the elect) hath contrarie respect to reprobation.
I omitte the rest of the phrases which be common in
scripture and make plaine difference betwext the elect
and reprobat, because before I haue noted diuerse and after
must be compelled to repete the same. How sufficiētly
ye haue proued your generall, speciall, and most speciall
election, let the readers iudge by that which is answered
to your eight vnreasonable reason, ād to your 13. vanitie.
               That impudent blasphemie which maliciously ye
lay to our charge shall God (without spedie repentance
sodenly reuenge vpon your own heades) blasphemous
mouth,To the 3. I write to thee whose corrupt maners, fr
                     •
                  indly ād
secretly I haue rebuked, but whose malice I now know.
Canst thow not be vnthankfull vnto man, except that also
thow powre furth thy vennom against gods Maiestie? Impudent
lier (which of vs hath promised vnto the or vnto
any of thy pestilent sect, that which he hath not perfourmed?
Examin thy conscience, and denie if thow canst, but
more hath bene perfourmed vnto the, then euer was promised,
yea euen when thow diddest deserue to haue bene
abhorred of all honest men: and yet without fear or shame
doest thow accuse vs that we should accuse God of hypocrisie
and that we wold make him a dissembler like vnto
our selues. The Lord for his great Names saik either
purge thy heart, or sodenlie represse that vennome in the
and in that pestilē
                  
                     •
                   sect, to his own glorie, and to the cō
                  fort
of his Church. Repent, repent (I say) orels shortly shal

thow fele what it is to contristate and make 
                     •
                  orowfull the
Spirit of God, be the instruments, in whom he worketh
neuer so weak.
               If of euerie Parable ād similitude ye will cōclude as largely
as ye do here to wit,To the 4. yt because in a Parable it is said
that a kinge called many to the mariage, Ergò God elected
all by his generall election. Then it shall folow that
all lords and masters shall alow and praise their stewardes
and seruants,Luk. 16 that deceaue them. for so is affirmed in a parable,
that one lord did to his steward. If we shall rather
beleue Christ Iesus then you, then we shall thus conclude:
Many are called, but few chosen. wonder it is that ye can
not se the difference betwext these wordes: The king
called many, and God chose all. I am ashamed of your ignorance.
Of gods cōstant fidelitie, of his promises of the
causes why ye reprobate are more ād more blynded, we haue
before somwhat spoken and after will haue occasion
to repete the same.
               When ye wold be sene most craftie and subtill,To the 5. then
appereth most your ignorāce and vanitie. To proue an absurditie
in our doctrine, thus ye reason: If where so euer
election be, there is also reprobation of the same kynd
(this last patch, I say, is your malicious addition, but let it
stand for a testimonie of your vntrueth) if then say you
Christ be the elect and chosen of God (as the scriptures affirme
him to be) then must it nedes folowe, that there be
mo Christes of whome 
                     •
                  ome must be reprobate: and thereupon
ye bring in your foolishe tale of your Iew.
               First I answer, you according to your merie disposition,
which I perceaue did titill you in writing this part:
That if ye can make no difference betwext election, and
elect, then I wold ye were commited agane to som quick
and sharpe Pedagoge who with sharp roddes wold let you
fele what difference there is betwext Agentem & Patientem.
Assuredly your vnreuerēt iesting in these secrete mysteries
of our redemption, and these scoffing tantes in malice
casten out against the eternall Sonne of God, and his
vndoubted veritie, deserue none other answer. but yet

partly to let your ignorance appere, and partly for the instructiō
of the simple, I will prepare my self to answer with
greater modestie then your malice deserueth. I haue said
before that this patch, vpon the which ye gather your absurditie
is none of our doctrine. for we haue neither written
nor yet taught: that where so euer is election, there
must also reprobation be. of the same kynd: but simply
we say that election hath respect to his contrarie reprobation.
But to grant you somwhat, and not to hold you so
streit, let it be that so we had written, what should rightly
thereof folowe? that there must be mo Christes, of whō
som must be reprobate, say you, becaus that Christ is
called the elect of God, I answer in this your argument,
ye vse two fallaces, that is fals and deceatfull apperances
of a trueth, which are but manifest lies. The former, you
change the termes, putting elect and reprobate in the minor
and in the conclusion, where we put election and reprobation
in the Maior, which is not lawfull in a good argument.
for where we say (as ye affirme) where so euer is
Election, there must also reprobation be ye infer, Christ
is the elect of God, Ergo there must be mo Christes, of
whom som must be reprobate. Who seeth not here the
changing of the termes. Let your argument procede in
order, and co
                     •
                  clude what ye list. Where so euer is electiō
there must also be reprobation. And add if ye list, of the
same kynd, but Christ is election (thus must you procede
if that ye kepe the forme of a good argument). Proue
your Minor and conclude what ye please. Thus doeth
your vaine and foolishe sophistrie compell me to trouble
the simple with the termes of the artes, which most vnwillingly
I do.
               The seconde falla
                     •
                   and deceat, lieth in the ambiguitie
and doubtfull vnderstanding of this patch (which ye
craftelie forge) of the same kynd, for if we had so spoken
or written, yet is our vnderstanding far other then you
imagine. That is we applie not these wordes of the same
kynd to the particularitie of persons, and of euerie especiall

man that is elect, but to the hole masse, as by saint
Paule we are taught. To make the mater more sensible I
will lay my self for exēpell, for I will not, nor dare not so

                     •
                  rreuerētly iest wt the maiestie of my God, and of his dear
son Christ Iesus as ye do. You reason against vs, as that
we did vnderstand your addition of the same kynd of euerie
particulare person a part, as thus: I Iohn knoxe do
constantly beleue, that as of mercie and fre grace it hath
pleased the goodnes of my God, in tyme to call me to his
knowledge, ād so to remoue my blyndnes and vnbeliefe
that in a part I se his fatherlie loue towardes me in
Christ Iesus his Sonne, so do I most certenlie beleue that
in the same Christ Iesus, of fre grace he did elect and
choose me to lief euerlasting before the foūdation of the
world was laid. Ergo by your vnderstanding I must also
beleue that there is another Iohn knoxe of the same
kynd, hauing the same substance with the same qualiteis,
proprieties and conditions that I haue, that was reprobated
and so must be damned. Who seeth not here your vanitie,
yea your most malicious cauilation, who labor to
impute vpon vs that which did neuer enter into our heartes.
We with all reuerēce and feare beleue and teach that
God of one masse that is of Adam, hath prepared som
vessels of mercie, honour, and glorie, and som he hath
prepared to wrathe and destruction. To the vessels of his
mercie in his eternall counsell before all tymes, he did
appoint a head to reule, and giue lief to his elect, that is
Christ Iesus our Lord, whom he wold in tyme to be made
like vnto his brethren in all thinges sinne except. Who in
respect of his humaine nature is called his seruante, the
iust sede of Dauid, and the elect in whom his soule is well
compleased. Because as I haue said, he is appointed onely
head to giue lief to the bodie, without whom there is neither
electiō, saluatiō, nor lief to man nor to Angell. And
so in respect of his humanitie frō the wc he in no wies can
be seperated he is called ye elect. Cōclude now if you cā.
there must be mo Christes of whō sō must be reprobate

I will make a more sure and more trew conclusion, then
you do, which is this: God of one masse hath elected some
men to lief in Christ Iesus, Ergò there was left of the sa
                     •
                  me
masse an other sort, vnder an other head the deuil, who
is the father of lies and of all such as continue in blasphemie
against God. Gather now what absurdities ye ca
                     •
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               An other argument gather they furth of gods prescience,The fiftenth section. but
I will first borow an argument of them concerning the prescience
of God. And then God willing I shall answere to theirs. Paul
saieth: Those which God knew before, he also ordeined them before
that they should be lyke fashioned vnto the shape of his Sonne,
that he might be the first begotten Sonne among many bretheren,The 2. argument.
but God knew all men before,Rom. 8. Ergo be ordeined all men
before,Reade the scriptures better & be ashamed of your argument. that they should be Christes brethren lyke fashioned vnt
                     •
                  
him. The first parte of my argument is Paules saing, The seconde
ye can not deny, and the conclusion is formallie inferred of bothe
the partes. Labor either to solute my argument without any
ambiguitie whereby ye may satisfie others, orels forsaik the error
which it improueth.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Because ye desire your argumēt to be soluted at your
own request I will take som paine: God grant it may profit.
Your argument conteineth in it self the fallax which
is called of Equiuocation, for this word knowledge or
this sentence: whom God did for knowe in the wordes of
Paul, which be in your Maior or first propositīon, do not
signifie the self same thing that these wordes, but God
knew all men before, which you put in your minor or second
proposition. And so because that there be foure termes
which in the schooles be called scopae dissolutae, the
argument is deceatfull and fals, althogh the forme appere
good. Thus I trust in your own cōscience you think
your argument fully and rightly soluted. but yet that neither
ve shall haue occasion to bark againe, neither yet
that the simple reader shall take paine to reade these vaine
argumentes withou
                     •
                   all frute, I will adde somwhat more,
and will plainely proue my solution to be good. In the

first proposition I say, where saint Paul saieth, whom God
for
                     •
                   knew,Rom. 9. the same he before ordeined: that the holie
Gost meaneth of that fore knowledge of God which is ioy

                     •
                  ed with his eternall loue, which before all tymes he did

                     •
                  ear to his elect, as of the wordes of Christ Iesus and of
the wordes of the same Apostle in diuers places before is
declared. And with this fore knowledge which is ioyned
with his loue by the which his elect were appointed to be
made like fashioned to their head Christ Iesus,The difference of gode fore knowledge. did neuer
God fore know nor foresee Cain, Iudas, nor none other
reprobate to appertein to him. I do not denie but that as
all thinges euer were present before the eies of his Maiestie,
so did he both foreknow, foresee, and before ordein
the ēd of all creatures: but other wies I say doeth God fore
know his elect, of whō S. Paul onely speaketh. If it doeth
offend you that I affirme that God did neuer fore know yc
reprobate as he did his elect: I haue my assurāce of Christ
Iesus, of his own plaine wordes, sayng, to the fals prophetes
I neuer knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquitie.
Note wel that Christ affirmeth that he neuer knew
the fals prophetes, no not euen when they did prophecie,
cast out deuilles, and did many wonderous thinges in the
name of Christ If he had said I know you not, ye might
haue shifted with this your accustomed cauillation, that
was by reasō of their sinnes, which after they committed,
but he leauing no doubt saieth I neuer knew you, ād therefor
I fear not to affirme that God did neuer foreknow
Iudas,Matth. 7. as that he knew Peter. Cōsider and be sober. Ye go
forward to our argument and say.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               There argument concerninge gods preascience is this.The six tenthe section. God
knoweth al things before they be don
                     •
                  , gods presciēce or forknowledge
is infallible, Ergo of necessitie all things must com to passe
as they do: which being granted, they which perish, of necessitie
they do perishe. If of necessitie then is it by gods ordinance, because
so he willeth and so he hath ordeined: This argument semeth probable
at the first blushe. But I pray the reader to mark first how
these men put no difference betwext the foreknowledge of God

and his will. for they suppose, that what so euer God foreseeth he
also willeth, but there supposition is vntrue. for god foreseeth the
death of the sinner, and yet he will not the death of the sinner, bu
                     •
                  
rather that he repent and liue. Christ did foresee the destruction
of Ierusalem, and yet did he not will it, for he wept and be waled
it, God did foresee the fall and finall destruction of the Israelites,
and yet wold he not it. As he witnesseth him self: saing wherefor
willye die,Ezech. 18 O ye howse of Israel, seing I haue no pleasure in the
death of him that dieth.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               What we do teach of gods prescience, of his prouidence
and predestination, and how that his omnipotent
will which we feare not to affirme to be the necessitie of
all thinges doeth differ from stoicall necessitie, with the
which ye burden vs, we haue before declared, and therefor
remitting the reader to the same place: I say to you.
that if ye imagine in God a prescience,Reade the first sectiō. and foreknowledge,
which is ydle and seperated from his will, that then
ye fall into the blasphemie of Epicurus: and if that you
say (as plainely ye do) that he foreseeth things to com,
which he will not, that then ye denie the omnipotenci
                     •
                  
of his power. Choose which you will, the veritie will
conuince you. To proue that he foreseeth and knoweth
many things to com, which he will not, ye adduce
the place of Ezechiel, where God affirmeth, that God will
not the death of a sinner, The weping of Christ vpon Ierusalem,
and the compleint of God against the house of Israel.
To which I shortly answer at this tyme becaus that
after we must haue to do with the same mater, that simply
(that is hauing no further respect but to punishmēt onely)
God will neither the death of the sinner, neither yet the
destruction of Ierusalem, nor of the house of Israell, but
in respect of his glorie to be shewed in their iust punishement,
and of his veritie and sentence to be approued, alwaies
stable and constant, why that God shall not will
both the death, and destruction to com vpon the stubborne

inobedient, I se nother absurditie to folow neither
scripture repugning: but after in answering to your distinction
which ye make the betwext gods will and his permission
I purpose to entreat this mater more largely. You
procede sayeng.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Secondly these men think that gods foreknowledge causeth
all things to com to passe
of necessitie,The 17. Section which is also vntrue.
for knowledge of things past, of things present, and of things 
to com dependeth of the thing that is knowen, and not the thing
of knowledge. As I know that Paule before he was called, he
was a persecuter of Christes Churche,
                     O prowde lucifer that darest compare thy knowledledge to the presciē
                     ce of God but Paule was not a persecuter
because I knew it, but I knew it because he was a
persecuter: I know that in the moneth of Iuly shall be haruest,
yet shall not haruest be, because I know so, but I know it because
it shall be. Likwese God did know that I should write this day,
but yet did he not compell me to write: for I had libertie either to
write or not to write, not becaus he knew that I should write, therefor
did I write, but becaus I was to write, therefor knew he
that I should write. Thus ye may se how they do erre which affirme
that gods foreknowledge causeth all things to com to passe 
of necessitie. for as God doeth foresee that men will do 
                     〈◊〉
                   so
doeth he also foresee that they may leaue the euill vndone, and as 
God foreseeth that men will not do well, so he foreseeth that they
be not compelled thereto, but might do well if they list. As
for example, Christ could and might haue obteined more then
twelue legions of Angels, and yet God did know that he should
not obtein them: also God did know that Christ should not pray
for twelue legions of Angels, and yet he might haue praied as he 
saieth him self. Of this it is manifest that notwithstanding the for
knowledge of God things may com to passe otherwiese then
they do. Wherefor it foloweth that Gods foreknowledge causeth
no necessitie. Pilate had power to crucifie Christ, or to let him go:
which Christ denied not, but rather affirmed it saing he had that
power srome aboue, ād althogh Pilate, did not delyuer Christ, notwithstanding

he might haue done it. Ananias solde his possession,
and yet he might haue not sold it: he broght a parte of the price
thereof to the Apostles, which he might haue reteined to him.
as Peter witnesseth that the price therof was in his own power,
Many such other exemples may I bring furth whereby it should
appere manifest that notwithstanding the fore knowledge of God,
things be done which might not be done, and things be not done,
which might be done.
            
            
               ANSWERE.
               Albeit that ye be so blinded that ye can put no difference
betwext the foreknowledge,To the 1. will, and power of God,
which all are perfect in him self, as is his eternall God
head, and the foreknowledge, will, and power of man or
creatures which he imperfect and weak by reason of mā
                  nes
corruption, yet I doubt n
                     •
                  t but that all reasonable
men shall sodanly espie your vanitie, who dare be so bold
as to affirme that because your knowledge was not the cause
that Paul was a persecutor, that therefor the foreknowledge
of God, his eternal purpose coūsell and will wc we,
neuer seperate, did no more in that mater, then did your
bare knowledge. by the same reason ye may conclude

                     •
                  
                  t God wroght no more wt Paule in preaching to the Gentiles, thē did your knowledge, for ye reasō is a lik strōg. But
he him self, will not be so vn
                     •
                  hankfull, but will confesse
that from his mothers wombe he set him a parte,Galat. 1. and called
him by his grace to the end that he might reuele his
Sonne Christ Iesus by him:1 Tim. 1 for the which he vnfeanedly
thanked the goodnes of God, who made him strong in
Christ Iesus to be faithfull in that office,God worketh both in his elect, and in the reprobate but in diu
                        •
                     rse maner. and ministerie,
I am not ignorāt that other waies doeth God worke in the
heartes of his elect, the work of their saluation, and other
waies in the reproba
                     •
                  e. for in the heartes of his elect effectually
and by the power of his spirit doeth he so worke
in them the motions that be aggreable to his holie commandments,
that they striue and contend against their natural
corruption: but iustly leauing the reprobate to them
selues and to sathā their father, they willingly folow without
all violence or compulsion of gods parte, iniquitie

and sinne: and so finally the way of perdition to the which

                     •
                  hey naturally are inclyned. But yet if any will affirme
that therefor gods fore knowledge doeth but Idly behold
that they will do, and that in his eternall purpose, counsell
and will, he will one thing, ād they will an other, so
that their will preuale against his, he shall not escap the
cryme of horrible blasphemy, as before I haue said, ād here 
after also must more largely entreat. Of your knowledge
what shall com in Iulie ād of your libertie to write
I onely answer this: that albeit God did not compell you
to write, for there to your wicked will was bēt: yet becaus
he foreknew, and also hath fore spoken that of necessitie
it was, that heresies should com, that the elect might be
tried, it was not altogither against his will, that ye should
manifest your self, ād that we should patiently suffer your
vniust accusations.
               Your wrastling and wrangling with the wordes of 
our master Christ Iesus to Peter, is so far from the purpose
of the holie Gost, that I am partly ashamed in your behalf.
Doeth Christ in that place absolutely affirme, that either
he might pray for xii legions of Angells, either yet
that his Father wold or might giue them to him then, to
deliuer him? or doeth he not rather by this interrogation:
Beleuest thow not that I may pray my Father? rebuke the
bold and foolish interprise of Peter, who rashly pretended
to defende by his sworde him whome the Father had giuē
into the hādes of his ennemies, of determined purpose to
die for our sinnes? and so did he cōclude contrarie to your
mynd; to witt, that impossible it was that either he should
pray for any Angels, to delyuer him at that tyme, either

                     •
                  et that his Father should send any for that purpose: for
becaus it was other waies determined in his eternall and
immutable counsell, as 
                     〈◊〉
                   plaine wordes he witnesseth
saing: But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled in which
it is fore spoken, that so it behoueth to be.
               In the wordes of Pilate and in Christes answer ye shew
the like ignorance as before.To the 
                        •
                     . for there vpon ye conclude
what Pilate might haue done, and yet did not the same,

where as the purpose of Christe Iesus was to reproue the
proode arrogancie of the vaine man, who did vsurpe to
him self authoritie, rendring vnto God neither honor nor
glorie, but boasting him self of his power, he thoght all
thinges lawfull, which it pleased him to do. Against which
pride and vniust vnthākfulnes, Christ absolutely denieth
that he should haue had any power ouer him, except it
had bene giuē to him frome aboue. By which wordes and
sentence he did put him in minde that he should make accomptes,
what iudgement he pronounced, not to the Emperor
onely, but to the soueraigne God who as he hath appointed
and established autoriteis, so shall he seuerely require
of their hāds an accompt, if vnder his name they vse
tirannie or pronounce fals iudgemēt. This I doubt not
is ye true ād simple meanīg of ye text, ād not as ye ignorātly
orels maliciously collect, yt Christ affirmed that Pilate
had power not to adiudge him to be crucified, but to deliuer
hī.Read the praier of the Apostles. Act. 4. The holie Gost affirmeth ye direct cōtrarie saīg: of
a trueth in this citie haue cōuened against thy holie Sōne
whome thow hast anointed, Herode ād Pōtius Pilate with
the gentiles and the people of Israel to do what so euer thy
hand and counsell haue before decreed to be done. Now
let the indifferent reader iudge which of our collections
and conclusions is most strongly proued. Ye affirme that
Pilate had power not to crucifie Christ: and I say that he
was appointed in the immutable counsell of God to be one
of the wicked instrumentes, by whome the Sonne of
God should innocently suffer the death of the crosse. But
how litle doeth this releue the wilfull sinne of Pilate shall
after be declared.
               Euē such libertie and power,What power Ananias had of his land as ye had to write these
former and subsequēt blasphemies, had Ananias of his
land, and money receiued for the same. For as you being
infected with heresie, malice, and enuie, did willingly write
and vtter your vēnom: so he being auaricious and a dissembling
hypocrite did of a fre, consenting heart reserue
a portion to him self, offering a parte to the Churche of

God, with protestatiō that it was the hole some, thinking
therebie to haue obteined the commendation and praise
which hypocrites deserue not.Act. 5. But what was gods purpose,
counsell, and will in that behalf, is euident, to witt that we
shall abhorre and auoid hypocrisie, that we shall not abuse
the simplicitie of our brethren, neither yet make protestation
of that thing before men, affirming that to be trew
which our own conscience knoweth to be fals. But now
to the rest.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Here I think it is good to answere to their obiectiōs,The eightene section. which
they collect of Peters denying of his master. If these thinges, which
God foreseeth to com to passe, say they, may be left vndone.
then notwithstanding that Christ did foresee that Peter should
denie him, Peter might yet haue not denied him. I answer that 
notwithstanding Christ did foresee that Peter should denie him
yet was not Peter compelled thereto, but might haue not denied
Christ (well say they) then should Christ haue ben a lier for he
said that Peter should denie him: I answer that notwithstanding
that Christ so said▪ yet might Peter haue not denied him
                     •
                   ād Christ
notwithstanding should haue ben no lier, the like example haue
we in the first book of Samuel, Dauid asked counsel at the Lord,1. Re. 23.
if Saul wold come to Keyla, and the Lord said he will com downe:
then said Dauid will the men of keyla delyuer me and the men
that are with me into the hands of Saul: And the Lord said they
will betray you. Then Dauid with his men departed from key
la, which when Saul heard he left of from his interprise and com
not to Keyla. Here we se that neither gods foreknowledge which
is also conforme to his saing, neither yet his prophecyeing did take
libertie frome Saul, from the men of keyla, neither from Dauid
and his m
                     •
                  , nother did Saul come to keyla, neither the men of
keyla betraied Dauid as the Lord had spoken, And Dauid had
libertie with his men to auoid the danger notwithstanding God
had spoken, it should come to passe, so all they had libertie
yea euen after God had pronounced what shoulde be done.
In so much that their doings were plaine contrarie to the
prophecie of God, And yet was God true. for he did foresee

that if Dauid did not departe frome keyla, vsing such libertie as
God had giuen him, he with his men should be betrayed into the
hands of Saule,Whence haue ye your assurance. and I pray you might not Peter like wise vsing his
libertie auoyd the bushopps howse, and so neuer bene tempted to
denie Christe? Yes I am sure as well as Dauid auoided Keyla.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               If you be able to proue that Dauid stoode in also hote a
contention against God,To the 1. 2. & 3. as Peter did against his master
Christ Iesus: that Dauid affirmed the expressed contrarie
to that which God had pronounced, and that God had appointed
the certen time aswell when Saule should come
as when the men of keyla should betrey him, then might
ye haue had som coulor to haue compared and matched
the deniall of Peter with the fliēg of Dauid. But if Peters
deniall was with a dooble affirmation pronounced by the
mowth of Christe Iesus: and if the sentence of God bothe
touching the comming of Saule and touching the vnthankfulnes
of the men of keyla, was conditionall, ye be
more the
                     •
                   bold that take vpo
                     •
                   you to ioyn togither things
so diuerse. Christes wordes to Peter were neither spoken
nor ment vnder any condition, but were pronounced as
foloweth.Matt. 26. Verelie, verelie I say vnto the, that the cock shal
not crowe till thow shall denie me thrise.Iohn. 13. Which wordes
leaue neither libertie, fredome nor power to Peter to prouide
for him self, that this sentēce should not be true, but
the wordes and answers spoken to Dauid were according
to his questions, which were first, if that brute of Saules
cōming was true, ād if the men of keyla, to whom he had
shewen such thankfulnes of late before, should becom so
ingrate that they should betrey him into the hādes of Saule
                     •
                  
And God did answere that Saule should come downe,
and that the citezens of keyla should betray him. But I
trust ye will not be so impudent as to denie, but that both
these affirmations were spoken conditionally to assure
Dauid of his doub
                     •
                  es, and to giue him aduertisment that
neither he shoulde abyde the hasard of Saules comming,
neither yet co
                     •
                  mit him self and his mē of warre to the fidelitie
of those that were in keyla. Be iudges now your selues

how far different be the wordes spokē to Peter, and the
wordes spoken to Dauid. Ye procede.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               But now to returne to our purpose.The nyntēth section. if I shall grante that all
thinges of mere necessitie must come to passe according to the prescience
and fore knowledge of God, then had Adam afore the tra
                     •
                  sg
                     ••
                  ssion
no fre will, but of mere necessitie did he offend, forasmuch
as God did foresee his fall. Then had Christ no fre will: for God 
did foresee all that Christ was to do, then is God bound him self ād
hath no libertie to do nor leaue vndone that which he doeth, forasmuch 
as he foreseeth all his own workes. This belike you will
make a goodlie wise God. God saue vs frome such dangerous ād
horrible errors, and giue vs stedfast and perfect faith to beleue 
not onely that he is but also that he is an omnipotent God. Which
frely after his own good pleasure doeth and may do, or leaue vndone
what so euer pleaseth him.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Before I answer to the absurdities,To the 1. which of our doctrine
ye collect, I must in few wordes put you in
minde, that verie foolishely ye ioyn the fre will of Adame
with the free will of Christe Iesus,Difference betwext the libertie of Chri
                        •
                     tes will, and the fredō of Adams will. and with the
libertie of God. for Adams will was neuer so free but
that it might (as that it did) cō to thraldom, which weaknes
you be neuer able to proue at any tyme to haue bene
in Christes will. further the will of Adam was alwaies vnder
the impire and threatning of a law, to which subiectiō
I thi
                     •
                  k ye wil not bring God. But now to your absurdities.
               If (say you) I shall grante that all thinges of mere necessitie
must com to passe according to the prescience and
foreknowledge of God, then had Adam afore his transgression
no fre will, your illation, or consequence is fals.
for the fore knowledge and prescience of God did neither
take away fre will from Adam, neither yet did compell it
by any violence, but did vse it as an ordinarie mean, by
the which his eternall counsell and purpose should take effect.
but for the better vnderstanding hereof, we must aduerte
and note that which before we haue towched, and
promised after more largely to entreat the same. to witt

that gods prescience and foreknowledge is not to be seperated
from his will and decre,Gods prescience is not to be seperated from his will. For none otherwies doeth
God foresee things to com to passe but according as he
him self hath in his eternall counsell decreed the
                     •
                   same
                     •
                  
for as it apperteineth to his wisdome to foreknow and foresee
all things that are to come, so doeth it appertein to
his power to moderate and reule all things according to
his own will: neither yet herefor doeth it folow, that his
fore knowledge prescie
                     •
                  ce, will or power, doeth take away
the fre will of his creatures, but in all wisdom and iustice,
(how euer the contrarie appere to our corrupted iudgements)
he vseth them, as best it pleaseth his wisdom to
bring to passe in time, that which before all tyme he had
decreed. To the which purpose and end, they (I mean the
creatures and their willes) what so euer they purpose to
the contrarie, or how ignorantly that euer they worke it
neuertheles do volontarely, and as it were of a naturall
motion incline and bow to that end to the which they are
created. To make the mater more plaine, let vs take the
creation and fall of Adam with the creatures that serued
in the same, for example. For what cheif end did God create
all thinges (of Salomon and Paule we haue before declared)
to witt for his own glorie to be shewed: the glorie I
say of the riches of his mercie towardes the vessels of
mercie,Rom. 9. and the glorie of his iustice and most iust iudgements
towardes the vessels of wraith.Prouer. 16. And that this eternall
counsell of God should take effect as he had purposed,
mā was created righteous, wise, iust and good, hauing
fre will, nother subiect to the thraldom of sinne, nor of
sathan at the first creatiō: but sodanly cometh sathan ennemie
to God, and to mā, his good creature, and first powred
in vennom into the heart of the woman, which afterward
she powreth into the heart of Adame: to the which bothe
the one and the other, without all violēce vsed of gods
part, doeth willingly consent: and so conspiring with the
serpent do accuse God of a lie, do fully consent to vendicat

or challenge to them selues the power of the God head
of minde a
                     •
                  nd purpose (so far as in them lay) to thrust downe,
and depose him from his eternall throne. Here we se
how the creatures and their willes without compulsion, do
serue gods purpose and counsell. for sathan was neither
sent nor commanded of God to tempt man: but of malice
and hatred did most willingly and gredely runne to the
same: the will of man being fre before, was not by God
violently compelled to obey sathan: but man of fre will
did consent to sathan and conspire against God. And yet
was the fall of man not onely foresene and fore knowen
of God, but also before decreed for the manifestation of
his glorie. Let vs yet take an other exemple that the mater
may be more euident. The death of Christe Iesus for
mans redemption, was decreed in the eternall counsell
of God before the foundations of the world were laid as
we were elected in him, and as he was the lambe killed
from the beginning, which death also was decreed in the
same counsell of God to be in a certein time appointed:
And that so certenly that neither could the malice of any
creature preuent the houre appointed of God thereto: neither
yet could any policie or chance impede or transferre
the same to any other tyme. For how oft Christ was afore
assaulted, the Euangelistes do witnes: But alwaies his
answere was: my houre is not yet come. And what impedimentes
did occure immediatly before his death, is also
euidēt. The feast of Easter was instant, the fame of Christ
was great, the fauor of the people, with publick voices was
declared, and the counsels of the hie priestes and seniors
had decreed that to auoid sedition his death should be delayed,
till after that feast: But all these were shortly ouerthrowen,
and Christ did suffer in the verey tyme appointed
as he before had forespoken. But now to the instrumentes
which serue in this mater, and whether they were
compelled by God or not. Iudas we know was not one
of the least: and what moued him, the holie Gost doeth

witnes, to witt his auariciousnes. The scribes, Phariseis,
Priestes and Seniors and people, led, som of malice and
enuie, some to gratifie their ruelers, and altogether of set
purpose to crucifie Christ, do consent with Iudas. Pilate
albeit he long refused and by diuers meanes studied to
delyuer Christ, yet in the end for fear of displeasure, as

                     •
                  well of the priestes and people, as of the Emperor, he willingly
without all compulsion of gods part, pronounced
an vniust sentence of deathe against Christ Iesus which
his soldiours also most willīgly did execute. This I say we
se that the creatures and their willes without all compulsion
do serue gods counsell and purpose. Here I know
that ye thīk that either I write against my self orels that I
conclude a great absurditie. for if I say that God did nothing
but foresee these thinges and so permitted them
(as after you speak) to folow their own train, that he worketh
no more, but as a simple beholder of a tragedie, then
do I aggre with you and if I do say (as in verey dede I do
vnderstand and affirme) that the eternall counsell and purpose
of God did so reule in all these thinges, that rather
they did serue to gods purpose and most iust will, then
fulfill their most wicked willes: then will you cry blasphemie,
and say that I deliuer the deuill, Adam, and all the
wicked frome sinne, of the which I make God to be author.
To the first I haue answered before, that as I seperate
not gods foreknowledge from his counsell, so do I affirme
that he worketh all in all thinges according to the
purpose of the same his good will: and yet that he vseth
no violence, neither in compelling his creatures, neither
constreining their willes by any externall force, neither
yet taking their willes from them: but in all wisdom and
iustice, vsing them as he knoweth most expedient for the
manifestation of his glorie, without any violence I say
done to their willes.When violence is dō to the will of a creature. For violence is done to the will of
a creature, when it willeth one thing, and yet by force, by
tyranny or by a greater power it is compelled to do the
thinges which it wold not: as if a pudique ād honest matron
or chaste virgine should be deprehended alone by

a wicked and filthie man, who with violence and force
(thoghe the will of the woman did plainely repine) did
deflowre and corrupte her. This is violence done to will
and she of necessitie was compelled to suffer that ignominie
and shame, which neuertheles she most abhorred. Do
we say that God did (or doeth) any such violence to his
creatures? Did he compell sathan to tempt the woman when
his will was contrarie thereto? Did the will of Adame
resist the temptation of the woman and did he so hate and
abhorre to eate of that fruite, that it behoued God to compell
his will repugni
                     •
                  g thereto, to eat of it, and so to break
his commandements? or did he not rather willingly hear
and obey the voice of his wyfe? Cōsider I besech you how
plainely we put difference betwext violence, which you
call mere necessitie, and gods secrete coūsell and eternall
purpose. But yet ye crie, wherein thē did mā offend? who
can resist the will of God? why doeth he complein:The grud geing of the reprobat. seing
that his counsell and purpose by such meanes is broght to
passe? Do ye not vnderstand that these were the furious
cries of those to whom saint Paul imposeth silence, with
this sentence:Rom. 9. O man what art thow that darest reason agaīst
God &c. But lest that ye complein (as your commō
custom is) of our obscur
                     •
                  tie and dark speaking, I will euē
in one or two wordes declare why the creatures offend euen
when they serue most effectually to gods purpose.Why creatures offēd whe
                        •
                      they most serue gods coūs
                        •
                     l To
witt becaus that they neither haue the glorie of God in
their actions before their eies, neither yet mynd they to
serue, nor obey gods purpose and wil. Sathan in tempting
man studied nothing to promote gods glorie: Man in obeyīg
the tēptatiō looked not to ye coūsell of God: Iudas,
Ananias, Pilate, the soldiours, and the rest had nothing les
in mind then mannes redemption to be perfourmed by
their coūsells, and wicked workes. And therefor, of gods
iustice were they euerie one reputed sinners, yea and som
of them reprobated for euer. if these reasons do not satisfie
you, yet shall they be a test
                     •
                  monie what is our doctrin:
and as I trust shall also be a reasonable contentation
to the godlie and simple reader. More wold I haue spoke
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
in the same mater, and so to haue put end vnto it at
once: but becaus that after, by the reason of your most
vniust accusations, I wilbe compelled to haue to do
with you againe, I abyde opportunitie. Now to your
reasons: Mannes will I say in the self remained fre, notwithstanding
that God in his eternall counsell had decreed
his fall, and that becaus no violēce, as before is declared,
was done vnto it. The will of our master and Sauiour
Christ Iesus, notwithstanding the immutable decre
of his death, appointed to be at a certein time, was so fre
that albeit, the power of nature might haue giuen vnto
him mo yeares of lief: and also that the humaine nature
did abhorre the cruell and ignominious death, yet did he
subiect bothe his will and the power of nature, vnto the
will of his heauenlie Father, as he doeth witnes, saing: Not
that I will (father) but let that be done which thow willest.Luk. 22.
               
               Wonder it is that ye can not se how gods will can
remaine in libertie, except that he abyde in suspence or
dowte, and so daily and hourely change his purpose and
counsell,Gods will is fre althogh it chāge not as occasion is offered by mens doings. as occasion is offered vnto him, by men and by
their actions. If this be to make God bounde and to take
frome him libertie, to affirme that as he is infinit in wisdom,
infinit in goodnes, infinit in iustice, and infinit in
power: so doeth he most constantly, most frely, most iustlie
and most wisly bring that to passe, which in his eternall
coūsell he hath determined. If this (I say) be to take from
God fredom, wisdome and libertie, as ye do rayle, I must
confes my self a transgressor. But if your cogitatiōs and
foolishe conclusions of his eternal God head be (as alas to
manifestly ye declare your selues) so prophane, so carnal,
and so wicked, that long you abiding in the same, can not
escaip gods iust vengeance. Repent before that in his anger
he arrest ād declare that your iustice, 
                     •
                  wher of so much
ye bragge, is manifest blasphemie against his dear Sonne
Christ Iesus. God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ preserue
his small flock, from your pestilēt vennom, ād most
dangerous heresies, and stoppe your blasphemous mowthes,
that thus dare ieaste vpon God, as if he were one of

your companiōs sayeng, Then is he a goodly wyse God,
Then is God bounde him self &c.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The thirde argument gather they vpon that which is written
to the Romanes the ninthe chapter afore the children were
borne that the purpose of God by election nught 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,The 20 Section it was said,
the elder shall serue the yonger
                     •
                   as it is written,Rom. 9. Iacob haue I loued,
but Esau haue I hated for the true vnderstanding of this scripture,
we must know first that these wordes, The elder shall s
                     •
                  rue 
the yonger, are not spoken of Iacob and Esau (for as concerning
the flesh, Esau did neuer serue Iacob) but they are spoken of two
nations which were to com of them, as the Lord said to R
                     •
                  becca,
Not two men but two nations are in thy bellie: and these words
afore the children were born, are not to be referred to the sentence
which foloweth, Iacob haue I loued, but Esau haue I 
                     •
                  ated. for there 
was no such thing spoken afore their birthe (as thow may plainely
se in Genesis) but that was spoken many yeres after by the
Prophete Malachie, Not of Iacob and Esau, but of two nations, of
the Israelites ād Edomites, as the Prophete MalachieMalach. 
                        •
                     
                   expou
                     •
                  deth,
which we may well vnderstand of the true Church and of the
maligna
                     •
                  t churche: if that had bene spoken afore their birthe, then
had the Lord not said, Iacob I haue loued and Esau I haue hated
in the preterit tence, but Iacob shall I loue and Esau shall I hate,
in the future tence. As in the other sentence he saieth, the elder
shall serue the yonger, and not the elder hath serued the yonger.
Now the Lord loued Iacob of his own bountefull goodnes and fregrace,
Esau he hated because of his wickednes, for the Lord abhorred
al wicked doers. As Moses saieth it is not for thy righteousnes
sake, or for thy right heart that thow goest to possesse their land,
but for the wickednes of these nations, the Lord thy God doet
                     •
                  
cast them owt before the, euen to perfourm the word which the
Lord thy God swore vnto thy fathers Abraham Isaak and Iacob.
Here we se how that the Isra
                     •
                  lites receaue the la
                     •
                  d of p
                     •
                  omes,
not for their own righteousnes saik, but onely by the bountesull
goodnes of God. Againe the Cananites are cast owt of the same
lād not becaus it was gods pleasure, or that he delyted in their fall
but for their abominatiōs which they co
                     •
                  mitted agaīst God, so that
yt Iacob is belo
                     •
                  ed, it cometh of the fre grace, and goodnes of Go
                     •
                  
                  
and that Esau is hated, it cometh of his own euill deseruing, conforme
to the saing of the Lord, Thy destruction O Israell is of
thy self, and thy health cometh of me.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Your colde and vnsauerie exposition which
                     •
                  
                  To the 1. ye
(folowing the prophane subtilitie of Castalio) make vpon
the wordes of the Apostle written in the nynth chapter
to the Rom. is neither able to iustifie your error, neither
yet to improue the doctrine, which vpo
                     •
                   the same we
collect and gather, which is this: That as God by his fre
benediction seperated the people of Israel from all nations
of the earth, so did his fre election make difference
betwext the men of the same people of whom he did frely
choose som to saluation,Themynd of the Apostle in the 9. c
                        •
                     apit. to the Romains concerning Iacob and Esaw. and did appoint others, to eternal
condemnation. Secondarely, that of this his fre Election
there is none other cause, nor foundation, but his mere
goodnes, as also his mercie, which after the fall of Adame
doeth without all respect, had to their workes receaue and
embrasse whom it pleaseth him. Thirdly that God in this
his fre election is bound to no necessitie to offer the same
to all indifferently, but contrarie wies he passed by such
as it pleaseth him, and whō it pleaseth him he receaueth.
These propositions (I say) are so euident in Paules wordes
that they neuer can be moued by your malicious and ignorant
wresting of the text: for in euerie one of Paules
sentences, he striueth directly against your error. for where
he saieth: Rebecca conceaued of one, that is of our father
Isaak, he secludeth al cause that might haue bene by
accidentes, which come in tyme, either in the father or in
the mother: and in these wordes when the chidlren were
not yet born, and had neither done good nor euill, he secludeth
al respects that cā be alledged to haue bene in the
children. But where he saieth, that the purpose of God
might abide according to election, not of workes, but of
the caller &c, is plainely denied merites, dignitie, or workes
to com, to be any caus of gods fre election. For if he
wold haue persuaded men to haue beleued that God had

elected som in respect of their good workes to com, and
had reiected others for their euill workes onely, which
he foresaw that they should do: Paul had not so vehe
                     •
                  ētly
vrged these termes and sentences: That the purpose of
God might abyde according to election, not of workes
&c. but he should simply haue said. God hath chosen som
in respect of their good workes, which he foresaw they
should do, which therefor he wold reward first with his election,
and after with his kingdome. But the plaine contrarie
way to this, we se the Apostle vseth, pulling man altogither
from contemplation of him self, to God, to his fre
mercie, to his fre grace, and eternall purpose, and also to
his most depe and profounde iudgements. Imagin what
shift so euer ye can, ye shall neuer be able to auoid this
plaine simplicitie of the Apostle.
               With what face can ye denie,To the 
                        •
                     . that these wordes, the
elder shall serue the yonger, are not spoken of Iacob and
Esau, seing that the Apostle in plaine wordes doeth affirm
that they were spoken and ment of the two children, before
they were born? He saieth not before the two natiōs were
born, but before the childrē were born. Your reason is
becaus as concerning the fleshe Esau did neuer serue Iacob,
I answer neither yet did God say: the elder shall serue
the yonget in the fleshe: but simply did pronounce: The
elder shall serue the yonger. But well do ye declare what
is your vnderstāding of dominion and seruitude, be it in
fleshe, or be it in spirit.
               Was it no kinde of seruitude I pray you yea euen
in the fl
                     •
                  she,Esaw som maner of way serued Iacob in the fleshe. that Esau was compelled to begge po
                     •
                  age at
Iacob, and for the same to sell all title of his birthright?
was it no thraldome, that with crying owling, ād furious
rores, he was compelled to begge the benediction, which
Iacob had gotten, and yet could not obtein it? Did not his
heart fele subiection when he seeth his father so constant
in preferring Iacob to him, that by no meanes he wold retreat
or call back one worde. We do not denie but the diuersitie
was also established betwext the two nations: but
that the heades should be secluded, that are ye neuer able

to proue. But rather the battell, which did beginne in the
mothers wombe, was established, and confirmed by the oracle
of God to continue betwext the posterities of those
two heades. Did Rebecca, and Isaak after he did se gods
prouidence and will to be contrarie to that which he had
purposed (which was to giue the benediction to Esau) did
they, I say, vnderstand that Iacob had no parte in that promes
touching his own person? The wordes of Isaak do
witnes the contrarie: for he saieth,Gen. 27. I haue established him
lord ouer the &c. By the same reason which ye make I
may proue that these wordes were not spoken of their posterities,
for during longer time, then either did Iacob or
Esau liue, the Edomites did not serue the Israelites in the
fleshe: which did onely beginne in the latter dayes of Dauid,
and did continue,2. Reg. 8. to the daies of Ioram (son of losaphat)
when they departed from that obedience: neither yet
were they euer after that, broght into subiection againe.
but be therefore
                     •
                   the oracles, and promises of God vaine?
Yea had they not their effect, bothe in the one people, ād
in the other, euen when the one was in moste miserable
bondage: first in Egypt, and after in Babylon: and whē the
other was in greatest felicitie to mannes apperance? yet
before God, was that sentence true: The elder shall serue
the yonger. For he had further respect, then the present estate,
as the Apostle doeth declare, that all the faithfull Patriarkes
had. Iacob wold not haue interchanged the comfort,
which he receaued in his first iourney, f
                     •
                  ō his fathers
house, for all the worldlie ioy, Y• Esau possessed: for in se
                     •
                  g
that scale or ladder, God fitting vpon the head of it, the
foote of it touching the earthe, vpon the which did Angelles
ascēd and come downe: ād in hearing that most ioy
full and comfortable voice: I am the God of Abraham
thy father & of Isaak: the lād whereupō thow slepest, I will
giue to the,Gen. 28. and to thy sede &c. and lo I am with the and
will kepe the whether so ener thow goest, ād will bring the
againe into this land. In seing and hearing these thinges.
I say, did Iacob vnderstand, that the benediction of God

extended further then to temporall thinges, yea that rather
it did extend to that vnion & coniunction, which
was betwext God and man in that blessed sede promised,
then to the possession, of the land of Canaan. for the one
did neither Abraham, Isaak, nor Iacob possesse in their
liues, neither yet their posteritie many yeares after: but
the ioy of the other, did all the elect fele, and see and did
reioyce as Christ Iesus doeth witnes, of our father
Abraham.
               That these wordes Iacob haue I loued, but Esau haue 
I hated are not written in Genesis, neither yet are spokē
of God vnto Rebecca none of vs denieth: but that which
ye thereof inferre, to witt that therefor they are not
to be referred to that sentence, which Paul alledgeth, before
the childrē were borne, and yer they did either good
or badd, procedeth either of your blind ignorāce, orels of
your malicious despite, which agai
                     •
                  st the fre grace of God,
ye haue conceaued, for establishing of your own iustice.
               Trew it is, these wordes were spoken by Malachie
the Prophete, after the reduction of the people frome the
captiuitie of Babylon. But when we haue a litle considered
the scope and purpose of the Prophete, then shall we first
consider whether he did vnsterstand the loue of God, and
his hatered, to appertein to the two peoples onely, and not
also to the two original heades. And after we shall see whether
the mynd and plaine wordes of Paul will suffer and
bear your interpretation or not.
               Shortly after, that the people of Israel, I mean, the tribes
of Iuda, Beniamin,The place of the Prophete Malachie and I 
                     •
                  eui, were by the miraculous
work of God, after the bondage of 70. yeres set at libertie
and broght againe to Ierusalem, in which they did
reedifie the temple, repaire the walles, ād beginne to multiplie,
and so to grow to som strēgth within the citie, and
land: they fall to their old nature, I mean to be vngrate
and vnthankfull vnto God. the people were slothfull:
and the priestes, who should haue prouoked the people
to the remembrance of those great benefites, were become
euen like to the rest. The Lord therefor did raise vp

his Prophete Malachie (who was the last before Christ)
sharply to rebuke and plainely to cōuict this horrible ingratitude
of that vnthankfull nation, who so shamefully
had forgotten those so great benefits recently bestowed
vpon them. And thus beginneth he his prophecie: I haue
loued you (saieth the Lord) in which wordes he speaketh
not of a common loue which in preseruing and feding all
creatures, is commo
                     •
                   to the reprobate. but of that loue by
the which he had sanctified and seperated them from the
rest of nations to haue his glorie manifested. But becaus
they (as all vngrate persons do) did not consider wherin
this his loue towardes them more then towardes others
did stand: he bringeth them to the fountein, demanding
this question: was not Esau brother to Iacob (saieth the
Lord) and neuertheles Iacob haue I loued and Esau I haue
hated, and this he proueth not onely by the diuersitie
of the two coūtreis, which were giue
                     •
                   to their posterities,
but also by that that God cōtinually shewed hī self loui
                     •
                  g
to Iacob and to his posteritie, reducing them againe after
long captiuitie, declaring him self as it were ennemy to
Edom, whose desolation he wold neuer restore, but wold
distroy, that which they shoulde go about to build. Let
now the godlie reader iudge whether that the mynd of the
Prophete was to seclude Iacob, in his person from the loue
of God, and Esau from his hatered: or that it was not rather
to rebuke the vnthankfulnes of the people, who did
not consider that vndeserued loue, which God did shew
to their first father, whiles he was yet in his mothers bosome.
for where he saieth, was not Esau brother to Iacob, he
wold put them in mynd that Iacob had no prerogatiue aboue
Esau, yea that the was inferior to him as co
                     •
                  cerning
the law of nature, and therefor that he oght to haue bene
subiect vnto him: but God of fre grace did preferre the
yonger to the elder, which loue and preferment he constantly
did kepe to his sede after him.
               This I am assured can no godlie man denie to be
the verey meaning of the Prophete. Trew it is that he
doeth include both the peoples, the one loued, and the other

hated. But what reason is it that the heades shall be
secluded? seing that the begīning of the diuersitie did first
appere in them, and the Prophete plainely saieth: Iacob
haue I loued, and Esau haue I hated. Now to the mind of
the Apostle you say that these wordes: afore the children
were born, are not to be referred to the sentence which followeth:
Iacob haue I loued, Esau haue I hated: and the cause
ye add as we before haue declared. I answer that the
most iust iudgementes of God are fearefull, and your
blindnes oght to admonishe all men to examin them selues
with what consciēce they go to intreate gods secrete
mysteries. If that sentence, before the children were born
oght not to be referred to these wordes: Iacob haue I lo
                     •
                  ued,
and Esau haue I hated, I pray you to what wordes oght
they to be referred? Did the Apostle speak thē at all aduenture,
without respect to any thing folowing? I trust ye
will grant asmuch as God spak, to witt that before the children
wer born God said, The elder shal serue the yonger.
and then I pray you answer whether ye think, that the preferment
of Iacob to Esau proceded frome loue or frome
hatred? or if the subiectiō of Esau to his brother was not a
declaration of gods hatred? If you denie, yet will the Prophete
condemne you, as before we haue proued, ye can
not escaip with the solution which a writer defending fre
will giueth, which is this: That there mention is made onely
of temporall and carnal benedictiō, ment vnder the
name of loue, and of pouertie with barrennes of grounde
vnderstand by the name of hatred, which solution is so colde,
that it perisheth in the self for I think no man to be so
blynd, but that he seeth the mynd of the Apostle to be bēt
vpon the spirituall benediction, as in his hole disputation
is euident. But let it be that the corporall benediction (which
we vtterly exclude not, be there vnderstād and mēt,
yet that neither helpeth him nor you. for where so euer
gods establyshed loue is, there is lief, where so euer his established
hatred is, there is death: but vpon Iacob and vpon
his sede (spiritual I mean) was established the loue of
God, as the Prophete affirmeth, and our Apostle most pro

foundely alledgeth: and vpon Esau, and vpon his posteritie
was established and confirmed the hatred: Ergo
                     •
                   vpon
him and them remained death. Cōsider now how that the
Apostle after these wordes: The elder shall serue the yonger,
ioyneth this sentēce: as it is written, Iacob haue I loued,
but Esau I haue hated. In which wordes the holie
Gost agreeth together the wordes of the Prophete, and
the wordes of God spoken to Rebecca, and maketh the
one to interprete the other. for where God saieth, the elder
shall serue, that expōdeth the Prophete, God hated Esau:
and where he pronounceth dominion to the yonger,
that the Prophete explaneth saīg: Iacob haue I loued. And
when did God thus loue the one, and hate the other, pronouncing
the one to be Lord and the other to be seruant?
While they were yet (saieth he) in their mothers wombe,
and before they had either done good or bad. Denie now if
ye can, that the former wordes oght not to be referred to
the subsequentes. your malicious myndes compell me
often to repete one thing.
               
                   Your reasoning of the preterit and future tence, is
so foolishe, that it nedeth no confutation. For we confesse
that God spake not those wordes to Rebecca, but that the
Prophete,Why the Apostle maketh neither me
                        •
                     tion of Abraham nor of Isaak, but of Iacob, and of Iacob being in his mothers wombe. as is declared, spake them after: by the which he
sendeth them to the ancient loue of God. which begā before
that euer their father could know or serue God. In
which is to be noted, that he maketh neither mētiō of A
                  
                     •
                  raham
nor of Isaak, but of Iacob, and of Iacob in his mothers
wombe, to pull doune this pryde, which ye with the
Pelagians and Papistes haue conceaued of your workes,
going before, and foresene by God to folow in you. But
the Prophete of God did so daūton the stowt heartes of
that his people (were they in other thinges neuer so wicked)
that they did not alledge, that any cause was either in
their father, or in them, why that they, or he should be preferred
to other nations, and specially to the Edomites, who
discended from Esau in all thinges like to Iacob, gods
onely grace excepted.
               
                   I praise God that so far ye will confes of gods eternall

trueth, that it was not for their righteousnes, that Israel
receaued the inheritance, but onely becaus God frely
loued their fathers. But why so sodanly ye slyde frome
the principall purpose, leauing Esau and his posteritie, a
                     •
                  d
do enter to speak, why ye Cananites were cast furth,
                     •
                   se no
iust cause. for neither doeth Moses, in the first oracle of
God, neither the Prophete Malachie, in explaning the same,
neither yet our Apostle in applying boeth those places
to the spirituall benediction, lay the sede of Iacob against
the Cananires, but Iacob is set against Esau, and the
people discending frome the one, against the people that
discended from the other. The question there might iustly
haue bene demanded: what prerogatiue hath Iacob aboue
Esau? Moises the Prophete and the Apostle do answer,The grace of God onelie, made the difference betwext Iacob and Esau.
assuredly none, except onely grace, which made difrence
betwext them, whom nature in all thinges had made
equall. for bothe were come of Abraham, bothe of one
father, both of one mother, both conceaued at once, both
fostered vnder one climate, region influence of sterres,
and yet it was said. The elder shall serue the yonger.
               We know that the Cananites came of a cursed father,
whom if Paule should haue compared with the Israelites,
they should haue complained of iniurie done vnto
them
                     •
                   And his reasons had bene easely dissolued. for if he
had said, ye electiō of God is fre, ād hath respect to no workes,
and had broght in the sede of Abraham elected, and
the sede of Cham reiected and accursed, for probation
of the same, they sodanly should and iustly might
haue replied, Cham mocked his father, and therefor
was he and his posteritie accursed, and so had God respect
to workes: But the Apostle loketh more circumspectly
to so graue a mater, and therefor did choose such an
example, as wherin, the witt nor reason of man can find no
cause of inequalitie. Of this I thoght good to put you and
the readers in mind lest perchance ye should imagin, that
as greate cause of reprobation was found in Esau before
he was born, as Moses laieth to the charge of the Cananites.
And so I perceaue in a part ye do. for in the end

and after ye haue affirmed that the cananites were cast
owt of the land by reason of their wickednes, ye return to
Esau (repenting your selues I trust that so imprudentlie
ye had slipped frō one linage to an other). And these wordes
ye affirme, That Esau is hated, it commeth of his own
euill deseruing conforme to the saying of the Lord: Thy
destruction (
                     •
                   Israell) is of thy self, and thy health cometh
of me.
               In which affirmation,An answer. and pretensed probation of the
same I fynd no les negligence in you, then before I haue
shewē ād prouē: for as most impudētly before ye cōfounded
ye sede of Abraham, who by gods own mowth was blessed,
with the sede of Cham, who in expressed wordes was
accursed: so here ye confound Israel elected of God to be
his people in Iacob, with Edom reiected from that honor
in their father Esau, before that either the one did
good or the other did euill. The wordes of the Prophete
which ye bring to proue,The place of Hoseas by the Anabaptistes wrested is restored to the natural meanyng. that Esau was hated for his euill
deseruing, were neither spoken to him nor to his posteritie,
but they were spoken to that people whom God had
preferred to all nations of the earthe, to whom he had shewen
his manifold graces, and to whom he had bene saluation
and help, euen in their most desperate calamitie. But
then fore their defection from him and for their Idolatrie
committed, were become most afflicted and miserable,
dailie tēding to further destructiō. To these I say, ād
not to Esau nor yet to his posteritie did God say: ô Israell
thow hast destroied thy self, or ô Israell it hath destroyed
the, for so is the hebrew text, for in me is thy health. In wc
wordes he repressed the grudgeing ād ye murmurīg of the
people, who in their miserie did rather accuse God of crueltie
thē repēt or acknowledge their sinnes, and Idolatrie
to be the cause of their ruyne: as in Ezechiel well may be
sene. to such God saieth, Israel thow art in moste extreme
miserie, thy honor is decayed, and the glorie of thy former
aige is now turned to ignominie and shame. What is
the cause? it lieth not in me. for as I am eternall and immutable,

so is not my hand shortned this day, neither yet my
power diminished, more then when I did deliuer the frome
the bondage of Egipt. In me is thy health now, as, it
was then, yf that thy sinnes did not make seperation betwext
the and me. Plaine it is first that here no mention is
made of Esau, nor Edom, but of Israel onely, and secondarely
that God speaketh nothi
                     •
                  g in this place, why he did
first elect Iacob, and reiect Esau, but why it was that Israel
which some tymes was honorable, ād feared of all nations,
was then becom most miserable, and afflicted on all
sides. Except that you be able to proue that Esau committed
as manifest Idolatrie before he was borne, and before
that Iacob was preferred vnto him, as Israel did before
they came to destruction, y
                     •
                   haue proued nothīg of your
affirmation. further I say that if Esau was hated for his
euill deseruing, then must it nedes follow that Iacob was
loued for his well deseruing by the argument folowing
of the nature of the contraries.
               But that directly repugneth to the wordes of Moises,Qui
                        •
                      contrariorum eadem e
                        ••
                      ratio.
to the interpretation of all the Prophetes and to the
mind and strong reasons of the Apostle, who plainely denie
workes by past or to cum, to be any cause of gods fre
election. Trew it is we be elected in Christ Iesus to be holie,
and to walk in good workes, which God hath prepared.
But euerie reasonable man knoweth, what difference
there is betwext the cause and the effect. Election (in which
I include the fre grace and fauor of God) is the fountaine
frome which springeth faith, and faith is the mother
of all good workes. But what foolishnes were it therefor
to reason: My workes are the cause of my faith; and my
faith is the cause of my election. Thus gently I put you
in mynd with greater reuerēce and circūspection to interpret
ād applie the sacred word of God. Thus ye procede
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Their fourth argument,The twētie one section. Hath not the potter power ouer
the clay euen of the same lompe to make one vessel vnto honor
ād an other vnto di
                     •
                  honor of this they inferre that God hath ordeined
and made som to saluation and som to destruction and damnation 
                  
But for the more perfect vnderstanding of this place afore
thow go any further reade the xviii chapter of leremie, and
thows
                     •
                  alt perceaue this to be the meanīg. As the Potter hath the
clay in his hand, so hath God all men in his power: and as the potter
breaketh the vessell, wherin is found an incurable faulte, so
God destroieth the man in whom there is found obstinate wickednes
 which can not be amended. It is not the meaning of this place
that God without any iust cause doeth make any man to destruction.
for as the Potter maketh no vessel to breake, yet not withstanding
he may, but he will not lose both his clay and his labor,
 but onely breaketh such as will not frame to be good, notwithstā
                  ding
he made them to be good. As euerie good artificer wold his
work were good, so God created no man to lose him, but onely loseth
them which will not be good whom he created to be good: as
 the Lord saieth, I planted the a noble vyne ā
                  
                     •
                   a good roote, whose
sede is all faithfull.Rom. 9. how art thow then turned into bitter, vnfrutefull,
and strange grapes? God wold all men were good, and
that all men should be saued, forasmuch as he is good himself, and
all that he maketh is good, But as the Potter maketh of the same
clay, som vessels to serue at the table, som in the kitchen or in the
 priuey: so God hath som men to be in the bodie of Christ, as eies,
eares, and hands, as Princes, Prophetes, Apostles, som to be as
fete and other secrete partes as laborers, and other of the inferior
sorte, for whom he hath not bes
                     •
                  towed so many and so excellent
 gyftes: yet mus
                     •
                  t thow vnderstand that it is not all one thing to be
made to be broken, and to be made to vnhonestvses, Euerie vessel
which is e
                     •
                  ill is broken, whether it be made to honest or dishonest
vses: yea thogh it were made of gold. And as it appereth plainely
in Ieremie where the Lord saieth so, thogh Conias the son of
Ioacim King of I
                     •
                  da were the signet of my right hand, yet will
I pluk him of. ād therafter this mā Conias 
                     •
                  halbe lyke an image
robbed and torne in peces: hath a mā any thi
                     •
                  g appointed for a more
honest vse, the
                     •
                   his signet? yet seest thow that if it becom noght,
 it shall be broken & distroied. Againe euerie good vessell whether
it be made to honest or di
                     •
                  honest vses it is kept and not broken.
As
                     •
                  e the Potter and he shall answer the, ihat he will be
lothe to break any vessell, but if any chance to be naught, he sheweth

his power in breaking of it. Ask the husbond man, and he
shall answere the that he planted no frute tre to be barren, but
if it chance to be barren, he cutteth it doune, and plāteth an other
in stede of it. Ask the Magistrate, ād be shall answer the, that it
is not his will to kill any of his subiectes, for he wold that they
were all good, but if any becom a theif and murtherer, he sheweth
his power euē ouer him in killing him, Euen so saieth God, I will
not the death of the sinner, but rather that he conuerte and liue, I
will not that any man be euill, and therefor I forbyd all euil, but 
if any man contrarie to my commandement and will, of his own
fre chose and mynd refufe the good which he might haue accepted,
and doeth the euill which he might haue left vndone, then do
I shewe my power ouer him, in that I ca
                     •
                  t him away like the shardes
of a naughtie Pott which serue
                     •
                  h to no good vse.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Why for the more perfect vnderstanding of Paules
mynd, any man should rather read the wordes of Ieremie
writrē in the xviii. chapter of his prophecie then the
wordes written in xlviii. chapter of the Prophete Isaiah, I
se no iust cause. for plaine it is that the Prophete Ieremi
                     •
                  
in that place hath no respect to gods eternall Election. he
disputeth not why God hath appointed in his eternall coū
                  sell

                     •
                  om to lief, and some to death, but reteineth him self
within the limites and boundes of the mater,The p
                        ••
                     
                     ce of 
                        •••
                     
                     ren
                        ••
                     . which the
                     •
                   he
intreated. Which was to assure the Iewes that God wold eie
                     ••
                  
them from that same land, which to Abraham he had
promised and had giuen to his posteritie, and yet wold he
preserue the
                     •
                   to be a people such as he thoght good. This
doctrin was strange, and to many incredible. for it appereth
to repugne to gods promes, who had pronoūced that
to Abraha
                     •
                  , ād his sede he wold giue yt lād for euer. Much
trooble ad cōtradiction (as may be sene) did ye Prophet suffer
for the teaching and affirming this former doctrine.
And therefor it pleased the mercie and wisdom of God by
dyuers meanes to strengthen and confirme him in the same.
Amōgest wc this was one, Vt cōmanding hī to go downe
to a potters house, he promised to speak wt him there.
That is, to giue vnto hī further knowledge and reuelatiō
                  
of his will, who when he cam, found the potter as is writē
making a clay pott vpon his rote
                     •
                   and turning whele. which
Pot in his presence did break, but the Potter immediatly
gathering vp the Pot sherdes, did fashion and for
me it a new, and made it a nother vessell, euen as best pleased
him: And thē came the worde of ye Lord vpō ye Prophete
saing, may I not do vnto you ô house of Israel, euen as
this Potter doeth. Behold ye are in my hand, ô house of
Israel
                     •
                   euen 
                     •
                  as the clay 
                     •
                  is in the hand of the Potter. By
which fact sene, and wordes after heard, was the Prophet
more confirmed in that, which before he had taught. To
witt, that God for iust causes wold destroy ad break downe
the estate and policie of that common welthe, and
yet neuertheles wold repair and build it vp againe to such
an estate, as best pleased his wisdome, as the sequele did
declare, for that great multitude corrupt with sin, he hrak
downe dispersing and scattering them amongest diuerse
nations, and yet after he did collect, & gather them togither,
and so made them a people of whome, the head of all
iustice, Christ Iesus did spring.
               But what hath this to do with the eternall election
of God by the which he hath elected som to lief euerlastīg,To proue this may be adduced the 31. Chap. of Ieremie. whom our Apostle calleth vessels of mercie, and hath
left others in their own corruption and perpetuall condemnation.
And so I say because that Ieremie intreateth
one thing, that is a temporall punishment and the mutatiō
which shortly should folowe in Ierusalem, a
                     •
                  d the Apostle
intreath an other as before is said, the one can be no exposition
to the other. but rather the Apostle hath respect,
or at least alludeth to the saing of Isaiah, which thus speaketh:
Wo to be to him that striueth with his maker, the
vessel of clay with the Potter of clay,Isaiah. 45 Shall the clay say to
his potter: what makest thow: In which wordes (as before
we haue more largely spoken) the Prophete, and the
Apostle folowing his phrase, represseth the pryde of man,
who compared to God is much more inferior to his
maiestie, thē clay compared to the Potter. For God hath
created and made man when he was not, which thing the

Potter did not to the clay, of which he maketh the diuersitie
of pottes. and therefor of right hath God more power
ouer man, then hath the potter ouer clay. This I doubt
not to be the mynd of the holie Gost, in bothe the places.
In which similitude, is further to be considered, that as
the Potter doeth no iniurie to the clay, what forme soeuer
he giueth it (for the matter and substance of it,God doeth̄ Wrong to none of his creatures, how soeuer he maketh them. he
doeth not change) so doeth not God wrong to the verey
reprobate, whom he prepareth to be vessels of wrath. for
that are they of nature. Where that ye say, that it is not
the meaning of this place, that God without all iust causes
doeth make anie man to destruction: none of vs doeth
hold the contrarie for we affirme that the causes of reprobation
are most iust, but yet we say, that they are incomprehensible
to man.
               That ye giue to God no greater power nor none other 
will, then to your good artificer, consider with your self,
how vndiscretely ye matche his eternal God heade (whose
power is infinite, and whose determined will, no creature
can resist) with creatures that be but impotent, vnwise, a
                     •
                  d
oftē dissapointed of their purpose and will. Trew it is that
no artificer, willingly, wold lose his clay ād labore, but is
compelled to break those that be faultie. But this procedeth
partly frome his ignorāce, who did not before know
and se the fault which was in the mater, and partly of his
impotencie, who can not, at his will otherwies, remedie
the faultie vessell, but onely by breaking the same. But dare
ye, or will ye impute vpon God those imperfections? so
ve seme to do, for this ye write: So God created no man to 
lose him, but onely loseth them, that wold not be good,
whom he created to be good, as the lord saieth: I planted
the a noble vyne.
               The cheif end of mannes creation,Answer. we haue before
declared to be the glorie of God, which if you can not se
sh
                     •
                  ne in the iust condemnation of the reprobate, accuse
your blīdnes. That God created the reprobate, to the day
of destruction, Salomon affirmeth, as often before is said.
But that he was created, to be good, that will not the wordes

of the Prophete,Another place of Ieremy explained. wc ye adduce proue. for in yt place, there
is no me
                     •
                  tio
                     •
                   made of creatio
                     •
                   but of plātatiō, wc is a th
                     •
                  g
far differēt frome creatiō. The substance wc was before is
plāted, yt by manuring, ād trauale of the plāter, it may be
better, but creatiō importeth the being of the substāce, wc
before was not. And so the Prophete in this place, wc ye alledge
to proue that God created all men to be good, meaneth
no such thīg, but onely rebuketh the Israelites, who
lōg after their creatiō were pla
                     •
                  ted by the hād of God a
                     •
                  d
were cōtinualy watered by his Prophetes, ād yet did they
bri
                     •
                  g furth no better frute. How that God wold all mē were
good, ād also that al me should be saued, we shal God willīg
after speak. How that God remaining good for euer,
ma his creature fel frome his original goodnes, I haue before
spokē, a
                     •
                  d therefor will not now trooble the reader wt
                   the repetitio
                     •
                   of the same. In the differece wc ye make betwext
the vessels wc ye potter mak
                     •
                  th, some to serue ye table
and some ye kitchi
                     •
                  g, or priuie, of wc he breaketh none, but
such as be faultie, ye vtterly dissagre frō the mīd ād plaine
wordes of the holie Gost. for S. Paul calleth not the vesselles
of honor, prīces, or prophetes, and Apostles, and the
vessels of dishonour, the laborers ād inferior sort of mē,
but the one he calleth ye vessels of mercie, ād the other he
calleth ye vessels of wrath.What S. Paul meaneth by vessels of honor and dishonor. The one he feareth not to affirme
to be prepared ād ordeined to destructiō, yt the seuere
iudgemēt of God agaīst sinne may appere in thē: the other
to be prepared to glorie, yt the riches of his mercie may be
praised for euer. This plaine simplicitie will not the Apostle
recāt, neither yet thereof (God assisting vs) wil we be
ashamed, how so euer ye raige ād blaspheme the veritie.
And this I say that your differēce betwext honest ād vnhonest
vessels, ād betwext those that shalbe brokē, ād not be
broken, is altogether besides the purpose of the Apostle.
And so of Conyas son of loacī ye cā proue no more but yt
God wold depriue hī frome his kingdome, ād frome yt seat
of Dauid, in wc vnworthelie he did reigne. If he was the reprobate,
thē althogh he was kīg, yet was he the vessell of
dishonor for these wordes, althogh he were ye signet in my
right hād, are not spokē to declare yt in verey dede he was

the signet in the hād of God, but are spokē agaīst the foolish
presūptiō of hi
                     •
                  , a
                     •
                  d of the Iewes, wc liuig most wickedly,
did yet neuertheles brag, ād boast that God could not
leaue the seat of Dauid voide: but yt one of his sede must
for euer sit on it. And this is euidēt, if the text be wel marked.
for where he saieth althogh he were the signet, he sufficietly
declareth, yt so he was not, ād so I say yt those wordes
proue nothīg of yor purpose. for first must ye proue yt
because he was a king, therefor he was a vessell of honor,
in such sēse, as S. Paul speaketh. And secōdarely, ye must 
proue yt he was elected to the lief euerlasting because it is
said, that albeit he were a signet, in ye right hād of God, yet
should he be plucked of: w
                     •
                  e by plaine scriptures to do, will
be more then hard for you, how so euer that ye brag, that
ye will proue all your purpose by scriptures. Where
ye sēd vs to ask of ye potter, of ye husbād mā, ād of ye Magistrate,
if any of thē wold willīgly break his vessell, plāte a
tre to be barren, or kil any of his subiects, we send you,
as befor to ask coūsel at the plaine scriptures whether 
                     •
                  in
God there is not a greater knowledge, greater power, ād a
iustice more perfect althogh it be incōprehēsible to or dulsēses,
thē yt their is in ye potter, husbōd mā, or Magistrate.
               How that God wil not the death of the sinner, but rather
that he may conuerte and liue, we shall shortlie God wilīg
after speak. And therefor omitting that which indigestly
you heape togither, I procede to that which foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Where ye replie wt that it lieth not in mānes will or ronning,The 22 section.
but in the mercie of God, I answer, by the same sentēce yt we may
both will ād rōne, which is cōtrarie to your hole purpose ād doctrine,
ād yet saieth the Apostle, our saluatiō depēdeth of the mercie of
God, for it is his fre gift. The Gētiles wc for their, wickednes wer
reiect of God, in vaine should they either wil or ronne wtout God
extēded his mercie towardes thē, as he doeth now presētly, Lyke
as on the other side the Iewes which for their sinnes be now abiect,
in vaine should they either wil or rōne without it pleased God
to extend his mercie ouer thē, as he shal do after that the fulnes of
the Gētiles become in, as witnesseth Paul▪
                  Rom. 11. for there we must vnder
stād that whē it pleased God to offer vs his mercie, yet without we

                   both will and ronne, we shall not obtein the reward, notwithstanding
neither for our willing or ronning, are we worthie to receaue
saluation. for it is the fre gift of God, which he giueth to vs onely
 for his own mercies saik. God offered saluation to Ierusalem
not for the deseruing, but of his m
                     •
                  rcie, yet obteined they not saluation,
because they wold neither will nor ronne. As Christ saieth,
how often wold I haue gathered thy children, as the hendoeth
her chekens, and thow woldest not, so the scribes and the
 Phariseis made the counsell of God towardes them of none effect,
for they dispised it. Gods will was to saue them, but they wold
 neither will nor ronne, but kepe still their old passe
                     •
                   so they perished.
Wherefor vnto our saluation is required chiefly the mercie
of God,God continew you i
                        •
                      this confession. as the onely sufficient, and the efficient cause thereof, wherby
we being vnworthie and his ennemies, be reconciled and
receaued vnto the feloship of the saintes. Secondly is required that
we both will and ronne not as the cause, but rather as the effect
an
                     •
                   frute of our reconcilia
                     •
                  ion, declaring our selues to be thankfull
for the benefits which we haue frely without our merits receaued,
otherwies the kingdo
                     •
                   shalbe 
                     •
                  aken from vs againe,
and geuen to such as shall bo
                     •
                  h will and ronne, bringing furth
the fruts thereof.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Your ancient father Pelagius, coniured ennemie to
the fre grace of God, did bragge and boast, as you do, that
in man there was a will, and a ronning. But the probation
of bothe is one, that is to say, your affirmation must
suffice for auctoritie. You boldly write, that of those wordes
of the Apostle, neither it is of him that willeth, neith
                     •
                  r
yet of him that ronneth, but of God hauing mercie, it is
plaine that we bothe will and ronne. But how is this proued?
your long discourse (in which it semeth that ye haue
forgotten your self) proueth no part of your purpose. for
the question is not, what either the Iew, or ye gētill doeth (Imeā)
after they haue receaued the grace of God. For thē
we confesse that they haue (yet not of thē selues) a will ād
studie to walk in godlines: but the question is whether
this wil ād studie which now by grace, they haue receaued

was anie cause of their election: the contrarie whereof we
haue before proued.To the. 2. We do not imagine the faithfull mē
                  bres
of Christes bodie to be stockes or stones insensible
without will or studie of godlines▪ but we affirme that it
is God that worketh in vs the good will, and the good
thoght. for of our selues we are not sufficient to think one
good thoght. We further affirme,To the. 3▪
                   that except with all
humilitie, the fre grace offered with thankes giuing be receaued,
that they serue nothing to the saluation of the cō
                  temners.
But therewith we adde, that it is God onely, who
taketh away the stonie and stubborne heart,Ezec. 11. 4 and giueth to
vs a fleshie heart. In which he by the power of his holie
Spirit writeth his law, maketh vs to walk in his wayes,
draweth vs to his Sonne Christ Iesus, giueth vs into his
protection. I mean as faith assureth vs in our conscience
ād so we acknowledge God alone by Christ Iesus his sonne
to be the beginning,To the 5. the middes, and the end of our sanctification,
godlie lief, and saluation. I for my part do yet
againe praise God that his veritie is of that strength, that
somtymes it will compell the verie ennemies, to bear testimonie
to it. And I pray God to retein you in that
mynd, that vnfeanedly, you may beleue ād cōfes, that what
vertues or good motions that euer be in you, be the
onely effects or fruites as ye call them of your reconciliation,
and neither cause of your election, nor yet of your
iustification.
               That Ierusalem and the scribes refused grace, and
therefor iustly were condemned, we consent with you.
but that euer it was the eternall coūsell ād will of God to
giue them life euerlasting, that we constantly deny. Our
reasons we haue before alledged, and after will haue occasion
to repete som againe. And therefor we procede. Thus
ye write.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Here with great vehemencie ye alledge these wordes of
Paule,The 23▪ section. who hath ben able to resist his wil, of which saying, ye inferre 
that God without any cause knowen to vs hath reprobated,
and damned many, against which wil, no man can resist. These

wordes did Paule write because he did foresee, that of his former
sainges som deuelish disposed persons wold take occasion to
 burden God with vnrighteousnes, as ye do, making him the author
of euill: for ye say that God hath a secrete will whereby he
willeth the most parte of the world to be condemned, which will,
because it can not be resisted, therefor of mere necessitie by the immutable
decre of God, so many do perish. further ye this affirming
 God to be the cause of damnation onely, because it so hath
pleased him, ye cause many other to burst owt and say: Sithe his
will and pleasure no man is able to resist: let him lay it on him
self. and not to vs, if any sinne be committed, and surely for my
parte were it not I abhorre your horrible doctrine, wherwith ye
cruelly affirme gods ordināce to be the cause of damnation. I wold
not medle further in this mater, but with reuerēce behold the workes
of God. forasmuch as I se thankes be to God no work of God,
wherī his mercie doeth not clerely shyne. But if your saying were
 true then were his workes full of crueltie, miserie, damnation and
destruction, Now as touching this saying, who is able to resist his
will, we must learne what is gods will, If you ask the Lord he
will answer you, it is not my will that any man sinne, neither is
 it my will that the sinner die, but rather that he amend and liue,
but if he will not amend but continew in sinne, him wil I punishe,
and him may I also punishe hauing power aboue all men, as the
potter ouer the clay. Wherefor when any man suffereth iustly for
his trespasse, he oght not to accuse God and say who can resist his
will▪ as God wold absolutely the destruction of his creatures, as ye
teach. God will all men to repent and amend, and also that the
                     •
                  
                   who will not repent and amend, be punished. this his will is iust
and full of mercie. against which will is no man able to resist.
for either must they repent and amend orels they must suffer. As
 the potter wold gladly make of his clay a good vessell, but if it
will not frame he breaketh it and casteth it away, and as the
king wold all his subiects to be obedient vnto his lawes: yet the
vnworthiest slaue in his dominion hath power to break the kinges
lawes. Notwithstanding whē he suffereth for his offence the
kinges will is fulfilled, euē so thogh God both wille hand cōman
 deth vs to obserue his law, yet haue we power to offend against
the former parte of his will, otherwies we should all obserue 
                     •
                  he

will of God, and be saued, and so should there be no reprobate. But
when for our disobedience, we be punished, the will of God is fulfilled,
which will is both good and iust, and therefor oght no man
to accuse it ād say who is able to resist his wil. No more thē clay,
when it framed not to be a good vessell, doeth accuse the potter
of breaking it.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Ye be not able to proue, that in any vehemencie we 
alledge those wordes of the Apostle in other sentence, thē
he wrote thē, for all praise ād glorie be vnto God the mercifull
giuer, we haue not so litle profited in the schoole of 
Christ Iesus, that we wold wrest the wordes of the holie
Gost to a cōtrarie sense. We are not ignorant that the Apostle
pronoūceth these wordes in the person of carnall mē,
who hearing that God hath mercie vpon those that he wil,
and that also he maketh hard hearted such as he will, do
storm and furiously crye, wherefor thē doeth he cōplein,
who is able to resist his wil. These wordes I say do we not 
vrge to proue our doctrine. for where we affirme, that the
onely will of God, is the perfect reule of all thīges, which
be done, ād are to be done in heauē and in earth, we build
our doctrine vpon euidēt testimonies of the scriptures, ād
vpon the cheif principalles of our religiō and faith. Dauid
and Isaiah do both aggre, that our God who dwelleth in heauen
doeth what so euer he will in heauē and in earthe, that
he formeth light and doeth creat darknes, that is, giueth
aswel prosperitie as aduersitie. Daniel affirmeth that the supreme
God distributeth kingdomes as best semeth to his
wisdom, and Salomon doeth witnes that against the Lord
there is no counsell can preuale. The necessarie principalles
of or faith do teach vs, that as in God there falleth no ignorance,
so in him there is no impotencie. He doeth not
as it were in suspēse ād doubt, behold the euēt ād chāce of
thīges, ronning after to seke remedie: but that in wisdom
hath he disposed all thīges: willing nothing which he may
not, and doeth not bring to passe in time, according to his
eternall purpose: and working, nothing which is not
most iust, howbeit the causes thereof be hidde frome vs.
Of these and many mo scriptures and necessarie principalles

of our faith do we grounde our doctrine, and not vpon
that one place, spoken in the rebuke of the stubborn
and rebellious disputers with God. ye burden vs that we
 accuse and make God to be the author of euill, ād the cause
of damnation. That we cause many brest owt and say,
 since his will and pleasure no man is able to resist, let him
lay it on him self ād not to vs, if any sinne be committed.
 And last ye affirme that if our sainges be true, that then are
gods works full of crueltie, miserie, damnatiō, and destructiō, and so of two thinges, ye accuse vs, and the thirde
ye affirme ineuitably to folow of our doctrine if it be
true.
               Here after I will not greatlie labour to confute thy
argumētes which is a thing most easie euen to any godlie
man,Answer. how beit he had neuer sene arte nor studied the same.
But seing that thow and thy most pestilēt sect, be not content
maliciously to sclander those that in such a case be
most innocēt, but that also with most impudent mowthes
ye vomite furth your horrible blasphemies against gods
maiestie, I will most earnestlie and most vnfeanedlie require
of all reulers, Princes, Magistrates, and gouernors
who in the fear of God do ruele, aboue their subiects, that
as they will answer in the presence of the Lord Iesus, for
the administration of iustice committed to their charge,
that indifferently they iudge betwext you and vs. To witt
that if we can euidently be cōuicted, of those crymes which
ye most maliciously, and most vniustly lay to our
charge, that then iudgement without mercie be executed
against vs. But and if ye fail in your probation, and also if
ye can not proue crueltie to be in gods workes, supposing
that our doctrin remaine (as that it is) trew ād stable, that
then such order may be takē, for repressing of your vennemous
tongues, that neither ye be permitted thus openly
to blaspheme gods Maiestie, neither thus maliciously
to sclander innocentes, and to offend ye eares of all godlie
hearers. And to the end that mē shall not think, that being
at this time accused, we beginne to deuise new defenses or
excuses of our selues, I will faithfully and simply bring

furth of the workes (as som what I haue done before) of
that singulare instrument of Christ Iesus in the glone of
his Gospell, Iohn Caluin such sentences as shall make plaine
to all men, what our opinion is of God, of the fall of
man, of the wōderous work of our redemption, and of the
most iust reiection and damnation of the reprobat.
               Thus saieth he, dependeth the perdition of the reprobate,Libr. de aeterna Dei praede stinatione
vpō the predestination of God, that the cause and
the mater is altogither found in them, the first man fell,
because the eternall iudged it expedient, why he iudged
it, we know not, yet certē it is that he so iudged it not, but
that he saw the glory of his name thereby, to be illustrate.
when that thow doest heare the mention of gods glorie,
there also remembre thow iustice to be: for of necessitie
it is, that iust must yt be, which deserueth praise. Mā therefor
falleth (gods prouidence so ordeining) but yet he falleth
by his own fault. for God of short time before had
pronoūced that all, which he had made were verey good.
frome, whēce thē came such wickednes to mā, yt he so traterously
declyned frō his God? Lest that it might haue bene,
through that, that it proceded frome the creation, God
approued by his own commendation, wha
                     •
                   so euer he had
made. Therefor did man corrupt by his own malice, that
pure and clean nature, which from God he had receaued.
ād by his fall he drew his hole posteritie to perditiō. Therefor
let vs rather behold the euident cause of damnatiō
in the corrupt nature of mankind: then that we shall pretend
to searche it being his and vtterly incomprehēsible
in the predestination of God. neither yet let vs be ashamed,
so far to subiect the capacitie of our vnderstanding
to the incomprehensible wisdom of God, that in manie
of his mysteries we acknowledge and confesse our selues
to be ignorant. for learned and blessed is the ignorante
of those thinges, which to vnderstād and know is neither
lawfull neither yet possible in this life. The apperance
of knowledge in such thīges, is a kynd of madnes. These
be the wordes of this most godlie writer. frome whose
iudgement none of vs doeth dissent in this mater. For frō
                  
him we must confesse, except that we wold in concealing
the trueth declare our selues to be vnthankfull, that we
all haue receaued comfort, light and erudition, as from
gods good instrument. who yet thus further procedeth
There be thre thinges (saeth he) in this mater to be considered,
first that the eternall predestination of God by the
which he had decreed what should becom of all mākynd,
(yea and of euerie man) euen befor that Adam fell, was
sure and appointed: Secondly, that Adame for his defection
was iustly adiudged to death, and last that in the
personne of him that then was lost, was damned his hole
posteritie. ād yet neuertheles God did frely choose of the
same such as vpon whom it pleased him to bestow the 
                     •
                  onor
of adoption, and yet after in the same place he saieth
when we speak of predestination, I haue constantly
taught and this day do teach, that frome thence we oght
to begin, that iustly are all reprobat left in death, who were
dead and damned in Adame, that iustly they perishe who
by nature are the sonnes of wrath. And therefor that none
hath cause to complein of gods rigorous seueritie,
seing that all do bear the cause of damnation within them
selues. for if we shall com to the first man we shall find
that willingly he fell, and so by his one faule, he broght
perdition to all his posteritie. And albeit that Adam fell
not, but that God both knew and ordeined thesame, yet
serueth that nothing, nether to extenuat and excuse his
crime, nether yet to wrap God in societie of the same: for
alwaes must we looke to this, that he spoiled him self
of the righteousnes which he receaued from God, that willingly
he made him selfe seruant to sinne and to sathan,
that without compulsion he cast him self headlong in to
destruction and death. yet resteth one excuse, to witt
that he could not auoid nor flie that which was decreed
by God: but his voluntarie transgression is sufficient to
his condemnation, nether yet is the secrete counselle of
God the proper and naturall cause of sinne, but the fre
and plaine will of man. And there for seing that man findeth

in him self the cause of his miserie, what shall it profitt
him to seke it in the heauen. And after albeit that
men by long compassing about, purpose to delude them
selues, yet can they neuer make them selues so brutishe
and dull but they shall fele the sense of sinne grauen
in their heartes. Therefor in vaine is it, that vngodlines
goeth about to absolue man, whom his own conscience
damneth. In so far as God willing and knowing
permitted man to fall, the▪ cause may be secrete and hid,
but vniust it can not be. And yet he further writeth, this
saieth he is to be holden without all controuersie, that
sinne was euer hatefull to God, for most rightely doth this
commendation, wherewith of Dauid he is commended
aggre to him: that he is a God that wold not iniquitie, but
rather in ordeining the fall of mā, his ēd and purpose was
good and most right,The purpose of god in mannes fall. frome the which the name of sinne
abhorreth. howbeit I say that so he hath ordeined the
fall of man that I vtterly denie him to be the author of sinne.
Let the indifferent reader iudge with equitie: if iustly
we be accused of that blasphemie, which so openlie we
abhorre. but yet in the same book he bringeh furth a testimonie
of Augustine who thus writeth, These be the
great workes of God (saieth Augustine) broght to passe
in all his willes,Enchi. ad Lauren. cap. 1 and so wisely broght to passe that whill
the nature of Angell and man had sinned, that is, had done
not that which he that is God wold, but that which the
self (meaning the creature) wold: yet not the les by the
same will of the creature, by the which that was done,
which the creator wold not, did he fulfill that which he
wold, he being infinitely good, vsing well those thīges that
were euil, to the damnation of them, whom he iustly had
appointed to paine, and to the saluation of those
whom mercifully he had predestinate to grace. In so far
as to them perteined they did the thing which God
wo
                     •
                  d not: but as apperteining to gods omnipotencie
they might by no meanes haue done that, for euen
in that, that they did against the will of God, the will
of God was done in them, and therefor great are the

workes of the Lord (broght to passe in all his willes) that
by a wōderous and vnspeakable maner, that thing should
not be done without his will, that yet is don agaīst his will.
fo
                     •
                   it should not be done if he did not suffer it. And of a
trueth he suffered it not vnwilingly, but willingly. And
a litil before saint Augustin saieth, it is not to be doubted,
but that God doeth well, permitting those thinges to be
done which are euil. for he suffered not this, but in his iust
iudgement. Albeit therefor that these thinges which be
euill in so far as they ar euill, are not good, yet neuertheles
it is good, that not onely good thinges, but also that euill
thinges be. for if that this were not good that euil thinges
should be, by no meanes should they be permited to
be by the omnipotēt good, to whom no doubt, it is a like
easie not to suffer the thing which he will not to be, as to
do that thing which he will: except we beleue this, the beginning
of our faith is indangered, by the which we professe
our selues to beleue in God the father almighti
                     •
                   &c.
               And in the end to answer to these calumnies which
ye haue taken furth of Pighius that papist, Iohn Caluin
concludeth, if euer I had said that it came to passe by the
instruction or motion of the spirit of God, that the first
man did alienat him self frome God, and not that rather
I haue in al places defended, that man was pricked thereto
by instigation of the deuill and by the motion of his
own heart, thē meritably might Pighius and his cōplices
haue railed agaīst me. But seing that I remouing frō God
the verey cause of the actiō, do also remoue from him all
crime, so that man onely is subiect aswell to the crime as
to the punishment: wickedly and maliciously is this laid
to my charge that I should say that mannes defection and
fall is one of gods workes. But yet lest yt one thing should
appere to lacke of our full doctrine, I will recite his wordes,
which he writeth against the libertines in the 14 chapter
of that worke, we do not deny (saieth he) but that all
thinges are done by the will of God. In so much that whē
we declare wherefor he is called omnipotent, we geue to
him an effectuall power in all his creatures, and we teach

that as once he created the vniuersall world, so also that
he gouerneth the same. And that his hād is alwaies at the
work, that he might kepe all thinges in their estate, and
dispose them after his will. And to the end that I may expre
                     ••
                  e
the same more easely, I say, that God is to be considered
thre maner of waies to work in the administration
or his creature.Thre maner wayes doeth God work in his creatures. first there is an vniuersall operation by
the which he directeth all creatures according to the conditiō
and proprietie which he gaue to euerie one, when he
formed them and this gouernemēt is nothing els but that
which we call the order of nature. for albeit the vnfaithfull
know nothing in the disposition of the world, but that which
they se with their eies. And therefor they make nature
as she were a goddesse to haue impire and dominion
ouer all: yet is this praise to be giuen to the will of God
                     •
                  
that it onely doeth moderat ād gouern all thinges. Wherefor
when we se the son, the moon, and the sterres fulfill
their course, Let vs vnderstand that they obey God, that
they execu
                     •
                  e his commandement, yea and that they are
guided by the hand of God. And also when we se the course
of earthlie thīges, all thinges are to be ascribed to God.
The creatures are to be estemed but as instruments in his
hād which he applieth to the work, euen as pleaseth him.
The scripture doeth often make mention of this vniuersall
prouidence, that we may learn in all his workes to giue
glorie vnto God. But chiefly in vs doeth God commēd
this his power, that we shall know it in our selues, to the
end that we may be purged of arrogancie, which sodanly
vseth to arise in vs, how son we forgett our selues to be in
his hādes. Hereunto apperteineth that, which Paul said to
those of Athenes: It is he in whom we liue, are moued, and
haue our being. By the which he wold admonish vs, that except
God vp hold vs by his hand that vnable it is for vs to
stand the least moment of time. for euen as the soule
dispersing her strēgthe throughe the hole bodie, moueth
the mēbres, so are we qwickened of God, form whome onely
we obtein what so euer strength or power we haue.
But this vniuersall operation of God impedeth not, but

that euery 
                     •
                  reature in heauen and in earth retein their own
nature and qualitie, and also do folow their own inclination.
The second maner by the which God worketh in
his creatures is that he appointeth them in obedience of
his goodnes, iustice, and iudgement, somtymes to help
his seruantes somtymes to punishe the wicked, and somtimes
to examin the pacience of his seruantes, or to correct
 and chasten them with a fatherly affect
                     •
                  on: as when
he will giue vs aboundance of frutes he giueth rain in his
time, he sendeth heat by the son, and bright and clear
daies, as also he vseth all other naturall meanes as instruments
of his liberalitie. But when he pulleth back his
hand, the heauen is made like brasse, the ea
                     •
                  th is yron,
and so it is he that sendeth thonder, frost, hale: and also it
is he that is the cause of sterilitie and barennes. Therefor
what so euer the Ethnicks and ignorant did attribute
to fortune, we assigne to the prouidēce of God. Not onely
to that vniuersall operation, of the which we haue before
spoken: but to his especiall ordinance by the which he gouerneth
all, as he knoweth it to be most expediēt and profitable:
and this he teacheth when by his Ptophetes he saieth
that he created darknes ād light, that he sendeth death
and lief, that neither good nor euill can chāce but frō his
hād. In so much that he saieth that he doeth gouern ād direct
the lottes: Yea if that any mā by chāce and not of set
purpose be slain, he auoweth him self to be the cause of
his death, and that so he had appointed that we shall iudge
nothing to com of fortune, but that all cometh by the
determination of his counsell. And further it displeaseth
him whē we esteme any thing to procede from any other.
so that we do not behold him, and know him not onely
the principall cause of all thinges, but also as the author
appointing all thinges to the one part or the other by
his counsell.
               Thus let vs then conclude that prosperitie and
aduersitie, rayn, wyndes, hale, frost, fare wether,
aboundance, hunger, warre, or peace, to be the workes

of God, and that the creatures which be the inferior
causes, are onelie instrume
                     •
                  tes which he hath in redines
to execute his will, which he so vseth at his pleasure,
that he leadeth and moueth them to bring to passe what
so euer he hath appointed. Moreouer it is to be noted that
not onlie he thus vseth his insensible creatures, that by
them he worketh his will, but also men them selues, yea
and also deuilles, insomuch that sathan and wicked men
are executers of gods will: as he vsed the Egyp
                     •
                  ians, to
punishe his people, and a litle after, he raised vp the Assyrians
and other such to reuenge the sinnes of his people
we se that he vsed the deuil in tormenting Saul, and in
deceauing Achab. which thinges when the libertines doheare,
rashely and without iudgement beholding no further
they conclude, That now the creatures do no more
work, and so horribly do they confound all things nether
do they onelie mingle and mixt the heauens with the
earth, but also they ioyn God with the deuil. ād that chanceth
vnto them becaus they do not obserue two most necessarie
exceptions. The former is that Sathan and the
wicked are not so the instrumentes of God, but that they
also do theire own partes. Nether must we imagin that
God so worketh by wicked men, as by a stock or a stone,
but as by a creature participant of reason, &c. When we
say thē that God worketh by creatures, this impedeth not
but that the wicked work also vpō theire part. which thing
the scripture most euidently declareth, for as it pronounceth
that God will whissill, ād blow as it were the trūpet
to call ād bring furth to battell the vnfaithfull, so ceaseth
it not to make mētiō of theire own coūsell, ād ascribeth to
thē both a will ād a work, which they did execute vnder the
decre of God. The other exception of the which these vnhappie
libertines take no head, is, that there is a greate differēce
betwext thework of God, ād thework of the wicked
whē that God vseth him in stede of ā instrumēt. The wicked
mā is prouoked to iniquitie ether by auarice, ābitiō,
enuie, or crueltie nether yet looketh he to any other end

or purpose, and therefor the worke taketh the qualitie
from the roote, from the which it springeth, that is frome
the wicked affectiō of the mynd, and the mischeuous end
which he looketh vnto: and therefor iustly is it iudged euill.
but God altogither hath a contrarie respect: to witt,
that he may exercise his iustice, to the conseruation of the
good to vse his fauor and gentilnes towardes the faithfull,
and that he may punish such as haue deserued. Consider
how we must make difference betwext God and man,
that vpon the one parte we shall behold his iustice, his
goodnes, and his iudgements: and vpon the other part we
shall consider in the self same work the malice and enuie
of the deuill and of the wicked. Let vs take a bright and
clear glasse in the which we may behold these thīges. When
the message of the losse of all his goodes came to Iob,An exā
                     ple takē by Iob.
the sodan death of his sonnes, and so manie calamities, which
all at once fell vpō him. He doeth acknowledge that
he was visited by God saing: The Lord gaue all these thinges,
and it is he that hath taken them away, and no doubt
so it was. But in the mean time, do we not know, that the
deuil procured all these thinges? and did not he vnderstād
by narration of his seruants that escaped, that the chaldeis
had driuen away his bestiall and flockes? Did he commēd
those brigandes and spoilers? or oght we to excuse the deuill?
becaus that all these calamities proceded from God.
Not so, for bothe we and he do, and did vnderstand that
there was a great difference betwext their purposes: And
therefor he (yet damning the euill) said the Name of the
Lord be blessed. The same may we say of Dauid: but at
this tyme it sufficeth, that God so worketh by his creatures,
and so doeth vse them to his prouidēce, that the instrument,
by the which he worketh, ceaseth not to be euill.
And albeit that he conuert the malice of the deuill and of
wicked men to good, yet they therefor are neither excusable,
neither yet clean from sinne: and their workes are
wicked, and to be damned. for all workes take their qualitie
of the purpose and the will of the author. Who so euer
maketh no distinction betwext these thinges, maketh an

horrible confusion. And such be the libertines, who as before
is said, do not onely ioyn the deuill, in societie with
God, but also, do transforme him in to God: iudgeing his
workes worthie of praise, vnder this coulor, that he doeth
nothing, but that which is appointed by God: But contrarie
wies we oght to obserue, that the creatures do wo
                     •
                  k
their own workes in this earthe: which workes according
as they were directed to this or that end, so are they to be
iudged either good or euill: and yet God gouerneth
and doeth moderat all things, and guideth them also
to a right end. He turneth the euill into good: or at least
God working by the goodnes of his nature, draweth as
it were by violence som good, furth of that which in the
self is euill. So doeth he vse the deuil that he doeth not
mixe him self with him, neither to be in felowshipe
with him, neither yet with his wicked fact, neither that
his iustice shal put away the nature of the deuil. for as the
son sending furth his beames,A similitude of the son. and heat to the carion, and
so ingendreth in it som corruption, draweth to it self neither
corruptiō neither yet any filthines: neither yet doeth
the son by his puretie ād birghtnes, so purge the cariō, but
that it remaineth stincking and corrupt: so doeth God so
work by the wicked, that the iustice, which is in hī doeth
not iustifie thē, neither yet is he defyled by their wickednes
and corruptiō. The third kinde of gods operation cō
                  sisteth
in the gouernāce of the faithful, in whom he liueth 
ād reigneth by his spirit. In so far as we are corrupt by original
sinne, we be lyke to the drie and barren grounde, which
produceth no good frute. for our iudgement is corrupt,
our will rebellious, euer redie to euill: and finally
our hole nature is nothing elles but a lompe of sinne. And
therefor not onely can we not applie our selues to any
good action, but we are not able,20 Cor. 3▪ Philip. 2 nor sufficien
                     •
                   to conceaue
one good thoght (as Paul doeth witnes) but if we be able
to an
                     •
                   thing of necessitie that must procede frō God.
It is he therefor that worketh in vs both to wil and to performe:
he doeth illuminate vs, and lead vs to the knowledge
of him self, he draweth vs to him self, and by softening

our heartes, he formeth new heartes in vs. further it
is he who moueth in vs a desire of prayīg, he giueth power
and strength to resist all the tentations of sathan, and
maketh that we do walk in his commandements. But yet
we must consider, that of nature, we haue both will, and election:
but because they are both depraued, by sinne, the
Lord reformeth thē, ād of euill maketh them good. That
we therefor be apt to discerne, that we haue a will, that we
do this or that, this is a naturall gift: but that we can chouse,
desyre, or do nothing but that which is euil, that cometh
of the corruption of sinne: that we thirst to do good, that
we haue som power to execute the same, this procedeth
from the supernaturall grace, by the which we are regenerat,Except we be regenerat by supernaturall grace we cā neither thīk will, nor do any thing that good is.
and newly born to a better and more godlie life. Behold
then what God worketh in his children: first putting
away their peruerse nature, he cōducteth ād guy deth thē
by his holie spirit, in obedience of his wil. But these dronken
or rather furious libertines crying, that al things are
wroght by God, do make him author of euil. And further
euen as the nature of the euill were changed, when it is cloked
vnder the couerture of gods name, they affirme it to
be good. in the which they do greater iniurie, and cōtume
lie vnto God,The libertines. then that they should transfer his power and
iustice to an other. For seīg there is nothing more proper
vnto God, thē is his goodnes: it behoueth first y• he should
vtterly denie him self, before that he can work euill: which
thing, these blynd libertines attribute vnto him. And
assuredly the God of these men is an Idole, which oght
to be more execrable, then all the idoles of the Gentiles.
And so furth to the end of that chapter he proueth that
God committeth no sinne in none of the wicked of the
earthe &c. Thus far haue I recited the mynd and most
part of the wordes of that godlie writer, written by him
now twelue yeres ago, agaīst the libertines. By the which
the indifferent reader may iudge whether that iustly you
accuse him and vs, that we make God author of sinne. In
the name of God, and of his deare Son Christ Iesus (whose

glorie ye studie vtterly to suppresse) I require as before
of all those that be placed in auctoritie by his worde,An earnest request that the magistrate wol de trie the accusation of the aduersarie. whose
handes he hath armed with the sword of iustice, that
earnestly as they will answer before his fearefull throne
of iudgement, they take triall in this mater, that if we be
found either in life, either yet in doctrine, as we be accused,
that God may be glorified in our iust punishments:
but if we can not be cōuicted (as we fear neither triall nor
iudgement) that then our accusers may acknowledge
their offence.
               The second thing which is laid to our charge,The secō
                     de accusation. is
that we cause many other to brest owt and say. Sithe his wil
and pleasure no man is able to resist, let him lay it on him self ād
not vpon vs, if any sinne be committed.
               
               If the blasphemies of the vngodlie should be laid to
our charge,Answer 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 2. acc
                        •
                     
                     sation. becaus that we teach a doctrin most true, and
most comfortable to the childrē of God: then can not the
Apostle saint Paul be excused, for the same blasphemies
were vomited first against him,What h
                        •
                     rrible bl
                        •
                     sphemies were also vomited against S. Paules doctrine. ād the doctrine which he
taught: Som crying, let vs do euill, that good may com of
it: others, let vs abyde in sinne, that grace may abound:
& sō furiously roring (as ye do) did dispitefully cry, wherefor
doeth he cōplean, who cā resist his will? But was the
doctrine therefor damnable? or was the Apostle criminal,
for teaching the same? I suppose ye will be more fauorable
in this cause, then so rashly to condemne him, whom God
hath absolued. If then our doctrine can not be impugned
by the plaine scriptures of God, why should we sustein
the blame of other mennes blasphemies? Howbeit in verie
dede the blasphemies of none come so plainely to our
eares,How impudēt bla
                        •
                     
                     ph
                        •
                     mers the adue
                        •
                     
                     saries be▪
                   as yours do▪ for the verey Papistes, and the insolent
of the world are yet ashamed, so impudentlie to lie vpō
vs. Who althogh they will not folow the puretie of the
doctrine taught by vs, yet either are they put to silence,
by the power of 
                     •
                  he holie Spirit, orels they in
                     •
                  ent som
coulorable lies, and do abstein from such open blasphemies,
as you cast owt against God, and vs.
               
                  We lay to your charge (say you) none other thing then ye
your selues do conf
                     •
                  sse,The reply of the Aduersarie for ye affirme that God worketh all things
according to his will and pleasure.
               We answer that maliciously and deuilishly ye wrest
our wordes contrarie to our mynd.Answer to the replie of the aduersarie. for alwayes we make
a most plaine difference betwext the will of God, and the
will of the wicked, and betwext the purpose counsell and
end of God and betwext the purpose and end of man. as
in all this hole processe before intreated the indifferent
reader may well consider.
               If ye continue in your blyndnes and furiously cry:
But ye af
                        •
                     irme that without his will and against it, nothing is done,
therefor that men think, that euen when they sinne, they
obey gods will. I answer by the wordes of the same writer
whō before I haue alledged: Touching the workes which
we committ, the will of God is to be considered, as he
him self hath declared it: for in vaine hath he not giuen
his law, by the which he hath discerned good from euill.
As for exemple when he commandeth no man to be hurt,
no man to be iniuried, but that equitie and iustice be indifferently
kept to all, that no man steal, defraude his brother,
that none committ adulterie, fornicatiō or filthynes,
but that euerie man kepe his own vessell in sanctification
and honor. Here is the will of God euident and plaine.
What further pleaseth him, in these cases oght no mā to
inquire. for we know, that if we do these, and other thinges
that be cōmanded, and do abstein from all things that
be forbidden,Aboue that which we are cō
                     manded by God we oght not to enquyre. that then we obey the will of God. And if
we do not that, we can not be acceptable to him. If that any
man shall steall, or committ adulterie, and shall say
that he hath done nothing against the will of God, he
lieth most impudētly. for in so far as he hath transgressed
the commandement of God, by the which he was taught
what was gods will, he hath done against his will. Let all
men now iudge, if that we giue occasion to man, to flatter
him self in sinne, and to think, that when they committe
iniquitie against the expresse commandement of
God, that then they obey his holie will. If any demand,

whether that any thing can be done against gods will:
that is, if God may not, if he wold stay and impede the
sinne of man: before I haue answered by the mowth of
Augustine, and now again by Iohn Caluine that nothing
is, nor can be done, which he may not impede, if so it
please his wisdom, yea vtterlye we must eschew, that we
inquire not of his prouidence,Whē the question is of our duetie no man may be inquisitiue of gods secrete prouidence. which is hid frome vs,
when that the question is of our duetie. His word declareth
vnto vs what he approueth, and what he condemneth,
with that we oght to stand content, and by the same,
oght we to reule our liues, leauing the secretes to
God, as by Moises we are taught. To make the mater
more plaine, the case supposed, that I be tempted with
concupiscence, and lust a nother mans wife, in the which
I long striue, and in the end▪ fathan obiecteth to me this
cogitation, follow thy purpose, for by that meanes, thow
maest perchance be further humbled, ād after thow maest
taste more aboundantly the mercie, and the grace of
God. Should I therefor louse the bridle to my wicked
affections? should I declyn from the plain precept, and
enter into the secrete prouidence of God? God forbid. for
that besides the violating, or breaking of his commandement
were horrible temptation of his godlie maiestie,
and so in one fact, were cōmitted dooble impietie. The
sinnes I know of gods derest children are greuous▪ and
many, and wonderous is the prouidēce of God, working
in his saintes, but neuer, or seldom it is, that such perilouse
cogitations preuale against them: for the spirit of
God so rewleth in them, tha
                     •
                   commonly this sentence of
Salomō is before their eies: such as vnreuerently search
out gods Maiestie, sha
                     •
                  be oppressed by the glorie of the
same. And so must it nedes com to passe, as Iohn Caluin
affirmeth, that the pryde of such must be punis
                     •
                  ed, and
that with an horrible punishement, the pryde of those I
say, shalle punished, who not content with the will of
God reueled (to the which they will not be obedien
                     •
                  )
delite to mounte and flie aboue the skyes, there to seke

the secrete will of God. With what faces can ye now lay
to our charges, that we giue occasion to men to flatter
them selues in sinne, or yet to think that in committing
iniquitie, they obey gods will? Ye alledge perchance that
the common people read not our writings, and therefor
they can not vnderstand our iudgement in this case. I answer,
the more impudent and blasphemous are you, who so
defame vs in the eares of the vnlearned multitude, that to
them ye make both vs and our doctrine odious, before
that euer it be knowen or examined. But yet for further
discharge of our selues against your most vniust accusations,
and for the better instruction of the simple, I will adduce
an other testimonie from the writing of the same
faithfull seruant of Christ Iesus, Iohn Caluin, and so put
end to this your second calumnie. In his commentarie vpō
the actes of the Apostles the 2. chap. writing vpō these
wordes of Peter, affirming that by the determinat counsell
and prescience o
                     •
                   God, was Iesu
                     •
                   betraied and crucified,
by the handes of wicked men, because (saieth he) Peter
appereth to mean, that wicked men obeyed God, whereof
of two absurdities, one must nedes folow: to wit, that
either God is the author of euill, or that men committing
all kynd of iniquitie do not sinne, becaus they seme to obey
God. I a
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  er, that wicked men do not obey God how
so euer it be that they put in execution those things, which
God hath with him self appointed. for obedience procedeth
frome a voluntarie affection, which earnestly thirs
                     •
                  eth
to please God, bu
                     •
                   we know yt the wicked haue a far
other purpose. moreouer no man obeieth God, but such
as hath his will knowen. Obedience then dependeth vpon
the knowledge of gods will. And so as the will of God is
reueled in his law, so likewise it is euident, that who so euer
transgresseth against his will reueled, hath his conscience
to witnes against him, that neither he doeth the will
of God. neither yet that he obeyeth him. To the second

                     •
                  e sayeth, I constantly denie that God is author of eui
                     •
                  l:
for in this word euill there is the notation and proprie
                     •
                  ie

of a wicked affection, which neuer falleth nor can fall in
God. The euill work oght to be iudged by the purpose
and ēd, to the which euerie man tēdeth in his actiō. When
men committ theft, or murther, therefor
                     •
                   they sinne, because
they are theues and murtherers. In the theft ād murther,
there is wicked counsell, which neuer tendeth to
please God, but to saciate their inordinate appetites. But
God who vseth their malice, is to be placed in glorie aboue
them. for he looketh to an other end: for the one he wil
punishe, and the patiēce of the other he wil exercise. And
so he neuer declineth, nor boweth frō his own nature, yt is
frome a most perfect righteousnes. So that Christ was betrayed
ād crucified, by ye hāds of ye wicked, it was done by
ye ordināce of God. But the treason ād the slaughter, wc by
them selues were most odious and wicked, oght not to be
iudged nor accompted the work of God. Let men whose
myndes, the deuil hath not inflambed in hatred ād malice
against God, against his simple trueth, and against the
professors of the same, now iudge whether that we affirme
God to be author of sinne, or if we giue any iust occasion
that man should glorie in wickednes, either yet that they
shall burden God wt the same. And I appele to thy own cōscience
(thow vnthankfull vnto men and open traitor to
the veritie, which once thow professed) whether that thow
oftener then once hast heard with thine eares, and that in
open audience of many: That if any should take boldnes
to sinne in hope of mercie, that the cuppe, which they
should drink, should be most bitter.
               
               Now to that which ye affirme,The affirmation of Anabaptistes. and we most constātly denie. You affirme that if our sayinges be true, that
then are the workes of God, full of crueltie, miserie, damnation
and destruction.
               As before I haue noted somwhat,Answer. which maliciously
ye sclander vs, so will I plainely and simply in short and
seuera
                     •
                  l propositions, set furth the some of that doctrine,
which we teach and professe, and that you so blasphemously
oppugne, to the end, that Ruelers and godlie
magistrates, and you your selues also may clerely se,

what we beleue and affirm. which being considred and
compared with gods scriptures, if your affirmation be
found true, then refuse we not punishement worthie for
blasphemers. But if ye of malice against gods trueth spewing
furth the corruptiō of your stinking stomockes infected
with pryde, and with contempt of g
                     •
                  ace, haue affirmed
that, which ye be not able to proue: our earnest
request is, as befor that your vennom may be repre
                     •
                  sed
betymes.
               These propositiōs following haue I trāslated furth
of the work writte by that learned ād godlie man Theodorus
Besa.Theodore Eeza is propositiōs against Castalio. against the calūnies of your capteyn Castalio.
               The first proposition, God effectually worketh and
bringeth to passe all thinges, according to the counsell
of his own will.
               
                   This counsell doeth God execute in certen momē
                  tes
of tyme: neuertheles the counsell it self is eternall, ād
passeth before all thinges, not onely in tyme (as it that is
before all tyme) but also 
                     •
                  n ordre. for otherwies the will
of God should not be the principall and first reule of gods
counsell, but rather the qualities of things foresene, and
foreknowen, and mouing God to take this counsell, or
that, should prescribe a reule to 
                     •
                  he will of God.
               
                   This coūsell ma
                     •
                   not be sepera
                     •
                  ed from the will of
God, oneles of neces
                     •
                  itie we spoi
                     •
                  e God of his God head.
               This counsell is not put in moderation and in direction
 of chance, or fortune, but it hath an effectuall
and working strength in all thinges, as Paul speaketh.
               
                   This strēgth ād efficacie is attributed to God working,
but it is not sa
                     •
                  d to be of God. therefore by this worde
efficacie, or streng
                     •
                  h is not declared any nature and
power giuen by God the creator to the thinges that be
created, that they should do this or ha
                     •
                  , but thereby is
vnderstand the power of God, which he hath in him self
to do all thinges.
               
                   This vniuersall particle, all in the wordes of Paul,
can by no maner of excep
                     •
                  ion, be restreinend but that
God in that part, shall be iudged ydle, as Epicurus did falsly

affirme. And if we shall say that any thing is done,
which God may notimpede, the shall he be spo
                     ••
                  ed of his
infinit powere. So that the cōclusiō is sithec
                     •
                   that God 
him selfe, euen as it hath pleased him, to determyn all
thinges to com from eternitie, euen so he workth by his
own power, that the same thinges come to pa
                     ••
                  e in their
tyme, as he willeth. Of these thīgs not withstāding none 
of those blaspemies doth followe, were with we be burdened:
to wit, that God is the author of sinne ether that
he deliteth or willeth iniquitie: ether that sathan or men
doing wickedly, do obey God: ether in so far as they do
euil, that they do the thing that God will, and therefor are
blameles. Let such blasphemies be far not onely from
our mow
                     •
                  hes, but also from our cogitations ād thoghtes.
               That none of these blaspemies necessarely may 
be concluded of ouredoctryn, may thus be proued.
               God put
                     •
                  eth in execution the counselles of his 
will by second causes and mid instrumentes, not as boūd
vnto them, as the Sto
                     •
                  kes did affirme but, frely and potētly
making, mouing, and directing them, as it pleaseth
his wisdom.
               Of those instrumētes there are two principall kindes.
The one hath lief and mouing, the other be without
lief, which ra
                     •
                  her be moued, by the force of others, then
moue thē selues. There be two sortes of those that haue
lief, the one be i
                     •
                  dued with reason and iudgement, the other
be without reason and are onely caried by the blynd
force of nature.
               Those that be without lief, and those also that 
haue lief, but lack reason can nether be said to do well
nor euil, but those that vse them as instrumentes may be
said ether to do well or euil.
               Those that haue lief endued with reason are 
ether Angelles or mē. The angelles be of two sortes, som
good som bad. but as for men all by nature are euil: But
by grace they are so seperated, that som are vtterly euil,
som partly good: to witt, in so far as the Spirit of God
hath sanctified them.
               Such as in any action are moued by their own 
                  
inward motion, iustly may be said to work, and therefor
in that kynd of instrumentes falleth the differēce of good
and of euill workes, nether yet properly, in that respect
may they be called instrumentes, but the causes efficiēt.
               
                   An euill action I call that which hath not the reueled
will of God for the assurance and ēd, and by the cōtrarie,
the work is good, when the worker looketh to obey gods
expresse commandement.
               
                   These same althogh they be causes, in so far as they
work by their own proper motiō, yet are they in an other
respect called instrumentes, in so far as they are moued
by an other. As when the hangman by the commandement
of the magistrate killeth a man, or when by instigation
of the deuil, mē hurt others, or whē at the commandement
of any, we do ether good or euill to any mā.
               
                   In this kynd of actions, it is euident, that one work is
attributed to two, to the one, as to him that worketh by
an instrument, and to the other as to the worker by motion
or commandement: such workers are instrumentes
not simply as the hāmer or axe is in the hand of the smithe
or hewer, but they are such instrumentes, as also moue
by their own inward motion.
               
                   And for this double respect, a double worke appereth
som tymes to be done: In somuch that the one may be
lawdable, and the other wicked. As if the magistrate shall
committ an offender worthie of death to the executor of
iustice. This worke is praise worthie of all good men.
But if the lictor inflābed rather with enuie, auarice, or any
other wicked affection, then looking to the commandemēt
of the iudge, shall kill the same offender, most certen
it is, that before God he can not auoid the cryme of murther.
               
                   Now let us applie these thīges to God, whose efficacie
before we haue proued to worke in all thinges without
exceptiō, ād so that by those thīges, which he hath made
as by instrumen
                     •
                  es, he executeth in tyme what so euer he
hath decreed frome eternitie.
               
                   What so euer God worketh is good: seing from him

who is infinitlie good, no euil thing can procede: but he
worketh a
                     •
                  l thinges, therefor all thinges be good, inso far
as they ar done by God. And that difference of good and
euil hath onely place in the instrumentes, ād in those of
whom we haue spoken in the 14. proposition.
               For if those instrumentes be good, and if their actions 
look to the reueled will of God, they do well, and God
also doth well by thē. wherefor that work is alwaies good.
as when the good angelles execute that which God cō
                  mandeth,
and holie men do follow God calling them.
               Euil instrumentes (euill I say) not by creation but by 
corruption, in so far as they work alwais, they do euill,
and therefor iustly do they incurre the wrath of God.
But in so far as God worketh by thē, they ether by ignorance,
orels against their purposes serue to the good work
of God. But God him self, by what so euer instrumentes
he worketh, worketh at all tymes well.
               And so he worketh by those instrumētes that not onely 
he permitteth and suffereth them to work, nether doth
he onely moderate the euēt or chance: but also he raiseth
them vp, he moueth, he directeth, and that which is most
of all, he also createth, to the end that by them he shall
work that, which he hath appointed. Which thinges God
doth righteously and without any iniustice.
               For whē the wicked man sinneth, ether against him self 
ether against any wicked person, God without any sinne,
doth, ād bringeth to passe, that the wicked man shall take
vengeance vpon him self, or that euill men shall take vē
                  geance
vpon other wicked men, who haue deserued punishement.
And this one and other work of God is most iust,
and by such exemples of his iudgementes, God erecteth
and comforteth his afflicted.
               How oft that euill men hurt good men, the wicked mē
                  
sinne, ād in the end they suffer iust punishement: and yet
by them, neuertheles doth God chasten, instruct and
confirme his own: and by the manifest ennemies of his
Church doth God make glorious his Church.
               Yet can it not be said, that those euill instrumentes 
do obey God. For albeit that God worketh his

work by them, yet they so far as in them lieth, and as cō
                  cerning
their own counsell and will, do not the work of
God, but their own work: for the which meritably they are
punished. Albeit what so euer God worketh by the
wicked is good, yet what so euer the wicked men work is
euel.
               
                   Nether is the consequent good, God worketh all
thinges, Ergo he worketh sinne, for the name of sinne is
not but in the vicious ād faultie qualitie, which is altogither
in the instrument that worketh.
               
                   By reason of this corrupted qualitie, the work
which in the self is one, som maner of way is double, and
may be diuided: Insomuth that the one, that is the iust
work of God, derectly fighteth and repugneth against the
vniust work of man.
               
                   God neuertheles far other waies worketh by his good
instrumētes, thē he doth by his euil instrumētes. for besides
that by his good instrumētes he worketh his work, the
good instrumentes also do their work, by that strength
and efficacie, which the Lord ministereth vnto them. And
God also worketh his work by them, and in them he
worketh to will and to perfourme. but by the euil as by
sathan and wicked mē, in so far as they are not regenerat
as oft as God doth execute the iust counselles and decreis
of his eternall will, he declareth his own strength, and
efficacie, in his work by them, which they do ether ignorātly,
orels against their purpose. And yet in so far as they
worke, God worketh not in thē, but he louseth the bridle
to sathan: to whom by his iust iudgement he giueth them
ouer, to be moued and possessed forwarde to all iniquitie,
that they may be caried to perdition, euen by the instigation
of the deuil and by their own propre will.
               Thus haue you briefly the som of our doctrin in
this mater, which if ye be able by manifest scriptures, or
yet by good argumētes from the same deduced, to improue:
thē cā we not refuse to make satisfactiō, as the Church
of Christ Iesus shall require of vs. But if that vniustly
ye haue accused vs, and haue further imputed crueltie vpon

God, by reason that his iudgemētes most iust in them
selues, are to your senses incomprehēsible, thē can we not
of conscience cease to require of you a greater modestie,
ād also of the lawfull Magistrate an ordre to be takē that
your malice ād vennon may be repressed: assuring them,
that if by tymes your interprises be not impeded that they
shall shortly fele what confusion, ye haue of long fostered
in your breastes. your poison is more pestilent, thē that of
the papistrie was in the beginning. God for his mercies
saik preserue his Churche, and purge your heartes to his
glorie.
               Towching the secrete will of God,Answer to the. 7. & 8. which so oft ye
lay to our charge we shall after speak, as also how God will
that all repent, and that all be saued. Before I haue declared
that this difference must we make betwext God and
man, be he neuer so potēt, that God hath such power ouer
his creatures, that he reuleth them at his pleasure: and is
not a simple law giuer, which onely can deuise good lawes
and giue commandement, that they may be kept, but can
not, thogh he wold, frame the heartes of his subiectes to
obedience. Such imperfection (I say) can we not admitt
in our God, who doth ād hath done what so euer he will in
heauen and in earth.Psalm. 135 And so your similitude of the king
commāding, and of the poorest sclaue offending, halteth
ād is imperfect. for God hath greater power ouer all creatures,
yea euen ouer the king him self, thē the king hath
ouer his sclaue. for the sclaue, when he hath offended, by
som meanes he may escaip the kinges handes, and so the
punishemēt of his lawes: But so can not the king, the handes
of God. Consider the inequalitie betwext God and
mā, I say, and then I trust your iudgemēt shall ether be reformed,
or els ye cōstreined to deuise more solide reasōs.
               I haue not learned in the scriptures to call the
corruption of our nature, by the which we rebell against
gods commandement power, but rather impotentie, and
thraldome. But ceasing to contend or striue for termes,
I wonder, what ye meā, by your conditional, which thus ye
forme: otherwies that is, if we had no power to offend against

gods will we should all obserue the will of God,
and be saued: and so do you conclude, there should be no
reprobation, I will not commonly scoffe at you (as your
foolishnes deserueth) but here I must say, that this your
reason is no better then if I shuld affirme that there is no
difference betwext fowles of the ayr, and the rest of the
creatures of the earth, because that if all creatures had
winges, and lyke agilitie, that then all creatures shuld flie
aswell as the fowles, and so should there in that case be
no difference. Your reason hath no greater strengthe: for
it standeth onely vpon conditionalles whereof ye iustly
can conclude nothing. Proue if ye can, that it was, and is
the immutable coūsel of God that all should be saued ād
thē ye may proue that there shalbe none reprobate. But
now we followe, as ye procede.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               As for the sentence of Paule:The twētie & foure Section. God willing to shew his wrathe,
to make his power knowen suffered with long pacience, the vesselles
of wrath ordeined to damnation, &c. it is direct contrarie
to your error not withstanding ye abuse it to maintein the same.
For seing as Paul saieth, God suffered them with greate paciēce,
he is sorie for them: if he be sorie, thē hath he no pleasure in their
destructiō:The seuēth argument. ād that wherein he hath no pleasure, he willeth it not
and that wc he willeth not, he doth not ordein it. Wherefor seing
God suffered thē with greate paciēce to fall, he hath not ordeined
 thē to fall: yn dispisest, saieth S. Paule, ye riches of gods goodnes ād
patiēce ādlōg sufferāce, not knowing that ye kindnes of God leadeth
the to repētāce. behold here the cause why God suffered with
 long pacience, is that we should repent and amend. If they had
ben absolutely ordeined to damnation afore the foundation of the
world▪ then God knew they should neuer repent, and amend. to
 what purpose then suffered he them with lōg pacience? Notwith
standing this is plaine ynowgh▪ ād conform to the word▪ yet ye dispising
what so euer is contrarie to your mynd, ye stik fast to the
literall sense of th
                     •
                  se wordes, ordeined to damnation, which wordes
be spoken after the common maner of speaking, as they be
called after the common phrase of speach, ordeined to damnatiō,
whose end is damnation, we vse to say of a man that is cast to

be hanged, this man was born to be hanged, not with standing it
was not his mothers mynd to beare him to be hāged. Such phrases
haue we verey many in the scriptures, as Exod. 11 Pharao
harkened not vnto you that many wonders may be done in the
land of Egipt.Exod. 11. forasmuch as the wonders done in Egipt were
greuous to Pharao, he did not disobey the intent that mo wonders
which were plagues should com vpon him,None of these phrasis be lyke if they bewayed. but this was the issue
of his obstinat inobedienco. Exod. the XIX who so euer giueth
his sede vnto Moloch, let him be slayn, because he hath geuen of
his sede vnto Moloch to defyle my Sanctuarie and to pollute my
holie Name. The Israelites did not sacrifice their children to
Moloch to defyle the lordes sanctuarie and to dishonor the Name
of God, but to worship Moloch, notwithstanding that was
the issue and end of their sacrifice vnto Moloch, that the Lordes
sanctuarie was defiled and his Name dishonored. Thereby Ieroboam
made the two golden claues wherby he made Israel sinne
to anger the Lord God of Israel. The cause why Ieroboam made
the two golden claues and his intention was not to anger God:
but he thoght that if the people should go vp ād do sacrifice in the
howse of the Lorde at Ierusalē there heartes shulde return to Roboam
king of Iuda wherefor he made two golden calues to make
the people sacrifice at Bethel,Osee. 8 wherupon followed the wrath of
God. Of their siluer and gold haue they made them images to
bring themselues to destruction, The Israelites made them images
thinking thereby to be saued and not destroied: yet their destruction
followed thereof. Ieremie saieth Omy mother, alas that
euer thow diddest beare me to be a brawler,Ierem. 13 ād a rebuker of the
hole land. Ieremies mother did not bear him to that intent, but
yet this was the end. And in the new Testament, if any man
hunger, lett him eat at home, that ye com not togither to condēnation:
the Corinthians came not togither to the intent to purchesse
thereby condemnatio
                     •
                  , but of their abuses in comming togither
followed their condemnation. By these places and many others,
we may vnderstand the phrase of scriptures: That they be ordeined
to damnation whose end is condemnation, which they
receaue not by the will of God, which wold all men to be saued,
but as a iust reward for their sinnes. As the traitor which
suffereth oght not to impute his death to the sentence which the

iudge iustly hath giuen against him, but to his own offence and
treason, so when we for our sinnes be ordeined to punishement,
we oght not to impute it to gods fore ordināce which is both good
and full of mercie,Ierem. 15. 9 but to our own offences. And seing (as S. Paul
saieth, God suffered them with greate pacience, their damnation
cometh not by the counsell and will of God, for which he is sorie
as he saieth by the prophete Ieremie. I haue bene sorie for the so
long that I am werie. will ye say that God werieth him self, suffering
ād sorowing for them, whom he had reprobated afore the
world surelie I think that thoghe ye hitherto haue vnaduisedly
said so ye will from hence furthe say so no more, which God grāte
in tyme that ye werie not the lord also with sorowing for you.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               As your cogitatiōs of God be grosse and carnall,
so be your iudgemētes in this place of scripture deceuable
and most erroneouse. Esteme it no iniurie, that I affirm
your cogitations of God to be carnall ād grosse. For
I can euidently proue, that som of you affirm and maintein,
that God hath eies, fete, handes, armes, and finally
all proportion of man: that he slepeth and doth againe
awake, that he forgetteth and after doth remember, that
he is mutable, and doth in verie dede repent.
               If these cogitations of the e
                     •
                  ernall God be not carnall:
yea if they be not wicked, ād deuelish, let the godly
indifferent reader iudge,
               In this your long gradation,Answer 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . which ye make vpon
the wordes of Paule, ye cōclud contradiction to the holie
Gost, and to the plaine wordes of the Apostle. For the
Apostle meaneth and plainely speaketh: that albeit God
doth long suffer and delay the iudgement of the reprobate
yet cease they not to be vesse
                     •
                  les of wrath, as they
that are ordeined to perdi
                     •
                  ion. But you conclude the cō
                  trarie
affirming, that he hath not ordeined them to fal.
And so because you conclude directly against the holie
Gost, I can not cease to say, that your collectiō is erroneouse.
But to giue an answer more full and large, in examining
the partes of your gradatiō, I will shew your error
ād the cause thereof. first you say: seing God suffered

them with greate paciēce, he is sorie for them. here I say
in your first foundation lieth your error, and the cause
thereof is, that altogether ye are ignorāt of gods nature,
in whom nether falleth such sufferance,Painfull passions fall not in God. such paciēce, nor
such sorow, as you grosly imagin. God is omnipotent,
and is compelled to suffer nothing, which he hath not appointed
in his eternall counsell, he is a Spirit, ād fre from
all such passions, as creatures be subiect vnto. for in his
eternall Godhead, there is nether pacience subiect to
paine, nether yet sorowe annexed with angwishe and
grief. But when such passions be attributed vnto God,
it is for the weaknes of our vnderstanding, that the holie
Gost doth subiect him self in langage, and tongue to
our capacitie.
               Ye take libertie to your self in dyuers other phrases,
to explaine them as you please, yea euen against the
plaine scripture. And why will ye not permitt, that such
phrases be so vnderstand, as nothing be iudged vpon
gods Maiestie, which doth not aggre, with his godlie nature?
ye do far abuse the mynd of the Apostle: for he
doth not inferre as you foolishly and wickedly do, that
becaus God did suffer with great pacience, therefor he
was sorie, but saieth, he did suffer the vesselles ordeined
to destruction, that vpon the one sort his wrath and
power, and vpon the other (that is, vpon the elect) the
riches of his glorie might be knowen. This were sufficient
to put silence to your folie. But yet somwhat to
instruct the simple, I will som what trauale to make these
wordes of the Apostle sensible and plane.
               He had before concluded: that God wold haue
mercie vpon whom he wold haue mercie, and whom it
pleased him, those did he harden. As this sentence far
surmounted mannes capacitie,The place of Paul explaned. so might it engender som
doubtes, in the heartes of the verey godlie. For they
might haue reasoned if that God will finally destroy all
the reprobate, to what purpose are they now permitted
to triumphe, and to trooble the elect of God? In answering

to which doubt, the Apostle assigneth three reasons,
why God with great pacience,Thre causes why God suffereth the wicked reprobate. suffereth the vesselles of
wrath. To witt that his power, his wrath, and the riches
of the glorie of his mercie more euidently may appere &
be knowen. For if God should sodanly from the bellies
of their mothers, take away the reprobat, or if he should
in the beginning of their malice so break downe their
pryde, that they could not procede against him, nether
should his power appere so great, nether yet his wrathe so
iust and so holie. But when he doth suffer them, as he did
Pharao, from one mischief to procede to an other, often
remouing his plagues, and so declaring him self easie to
be entreated, euen vnto such tyme, as their malice and
raige do carie them, as it were openly to dispyse God, and
his power, when then, I say, in one moment God potently
doth ouer throwe the force & strēgth of his ennemies,Exod. 14 Isaiah. 37 Daniel. 5.
as yt he did of Pharao, Senacherib, Balsasar, and of others.
then is his godlie power, and most iust wrathe more euidently
knowen, then that he should ether haue repressed
them in the beginning, ether yet haue taken them away,
before their malice began to budde. For hereby doth he
not onely admonish others of the certen destruction
of all those that continue in crueltie, but also giueth to
his Churche most singulare comfort, letting them se that
his prouidence, and power watcheth for them, euen when
the raige of the ennemie appereth to deuore al. And so do
they se what is gods mercie towardes them. Further whē
the elect aduisedlye do consider what be gods seuere
iudgementes against the inobedient, and do consider how
prone and redie they them selues be of nature to rebelliō
against God, except they were cōducted by his spirit, they
com to a more liuelie feling of gods fre mercie & grace:
by the which onely they are exempte frome the rank and
societie of the reprobate. Albeit that these endes & causes
of gods long suffering, of the vesselles of wrath, do not
satisfie you, yet I doubt not but gods afflicted childrē wil,
and do take comfort of the same. you thus procede in

your sophisticall Sorites. If he be sorie (say you) then hath
he no pleasure in their destruction. And that where in he hath
no pleasure he willeth it not, and that which he willeth not, he
doth not ordein it. wherefor seing God suffereth them to fall with
greate pacience, he hath not ordeined them to fall.
               
               Your foundation being fals, your hole building
falleth by ye own weight.Answere. Before ye procede any further,
ye must proue, yt God did suffer in the vesselles of wrath,
that which he nether could nor might remedie, and therefor
that he fell in greif and sorow, that his power was no
greater and his wisdom no perfiter. Wo be to your blasphemies,
for they cōpell me to write, that which I gladly
wold not.
               I haue before said that God nether hath pleasure in
destructiō,Answer to the 2. & 3. nether yet that he will the death of the sinner
absolutely, yt is hauing none other respect, but to their
torment and pain onely. But albeit pryde and malice will
not suffer you to grante, that God hath created all thinges
for his own glorie: yet will not he be suppliante vnto
you, that ye shall suffer him to vse his creatures, at his
own good pleasure.
               Where vpon these wordes of the Apostle: doest thow
dispyse the riches of gods goodnes, not knowing that
the kyndnes of God leadeth the to repentance, ye
inferre, that the cause why God suffereth with long pacience
is that we should repent and amend. If you vnderstand
that God suffered his elect, euen in the tyme of
their blyndnes, yea and after their horrible falles and
offenses with great lenitie and gentlenes, to the end that
afterward they may repent, I do aggre with you. for
so he did with Dauid, Manasses, Paule, and many others,
who after their conuersion did not dispyse gods
lenitie, but did magnifie and praise the same, as in
all their confessions may be red. But if you vnderstand
Paules wordes so, that God hath none other end in
that his long suffering, but that the reprobate shal repent

and amend their wickednes, because the holie Gost assigneth
other causes (as before we haue declared) I must
preferre his iudgement and sentence to yours. To your
vnreuerent bolde and furious question, in which ye a
                     •
                  k
to what purpose did God suffer them with lōg pacience,Answer to the furious question of the aduersarie.
whom before he knew shoulde neuer repent nor amend,
I can answer none other wies, then I haue done before,
except that this I adde: that if ye be not contēt that gods
iust wrath and greate power shall aswell be manifested,
both in this world, and in the life to com, vpon the vesselles
of wrath, as that his mercie, & the riches of his glorie
shall be praised and extolled in the vesselles of mercie,
that experience (which the common prouerbe calleth
maistres to fooles) shall teach you, that it nothing
profited the Gyantes, of whom the poetes do speak, to
heap vp mountane vpon moūtane, of purpose to besiege
Iupiter in the heauens. To vse the wordes of scripture,
if be tymes ye cease not, so vnreuerently to questiō with
God, you shall fele for euer, what torment is prepared, for
such as with humilitie, can not be subiect to his iudgementes
incōprehēsible, for if ye shall constrein his Maiestie
to giue you a reason, which ye may vnderstand
and apprehend, what do you elles thē go aboute to spoile
him of his Godhead?
               We stick none other wies to the literall sense of
these former wordes of the Apostle then the rest of scriptures
permitt and do teach vs.Answer to the. 4. But how proper be your
phrase and common maner of speaking, by the which ye
labor to obscure the plaine wordes of ye Apostle, we briefly
shall examin. Ordeined to damnation (say you) after
the common maner of speach, doth signifie no more, but
whose end is damnation. To grant you som what, I wold
know of you, who hath ordeined damnation, to be the ēd
of the reprobat: I perceaue by your exemple, that ye dare
not say, God: for thus ye say, we vse to say of a man,
that is cast to be hanged, this mā was born to be hanged,
notwithstanding that was not his mothers mynd to bear
him to be hanged.
               
                  Besides the foolishe rudenes of this exemple, I wonder
at your madnes, that you can neuer make difference
betwext God and earthly creatures. Dare you say, that
God hath no greater power, nor foreknowledge in directing
and appointing his creatures to their endes, then
the mother hath to direct, forse, and appoint the end of
her child? after that she hath born him, she knoweth not
what shalbe his naturall inclination: althogh she instruct
and correct him, yet can she not bow ād expell his crooked
nature: when he is absent from her presence, she seeth
not his conuersation. If he be deprehended in theft
or murther: and so cast to be hanged, she can not (althogh
she wold) delyuer him from the handes of the iudge.
But is there any of these imperfections in God? Consider
yet, and let reason at length put silence vnto your foolishenes.
               Where of the wordes of Moises, of Hoseas, Ieremie,
and Paul,Answer to the 5. & 6 ād of the fact of Ieroboam, ye go about to proue,
that phrase in that sense, wc ye adduce, to be common
in scriptures. I, am in dowt whether that first I shall lamēt
yor blynd ignorāce, or abhorre & detest yot abhominable
lies, & horrible prophanatiō of gods most holie worde.
               It is impossible 
                     •
                  
                  t ignorāce hath so blynded you all, yt
none of you cā se ye diuersitie betwext tho semaner of speaches:
God hath suffered ye vesselles of wrath ordeined to
destruction,Ezod. 11 Leuit. 18 & 20 & these, Pharao shall not heare you, yt many
wōders may be wroght, &c. Giue not of thy sede to be offered
to Moloch, &c. I will set my face agaīst such ā mā, &
I will rout him out, from the midest of his people, because
that he hath giuen of his sede to Moloch, that he might
defyle my Sanctuarie, & prophain my holie Name. And
so furth of all the rest. for onelie the place of the Apostle
after the english phrase and speach may be rightly translated,The anabaptistes do plainly corrupt ye scriptures of God.
to condemnation, I appeall to thy conscience thow
manifest corruptor of gods scriptures, if in all the places,
by the alledged there be not this particle, Vt, which is a
causal, and not the preposition, In, which is in the wordes
of. S. Paul. And hath malice so bereft the of knowledge

that thow canst make no difference, betwext those two
dictions or wordes. The Lord of his mercie preserue his
Churche frō so bolde & so deceatfull teachers. If altogither
thou haddest bene ignorant, with sorow of heart, I
could haue lamēted thy foolishenes: but pererauing ye of
set purpose and malice, willingly to corrupt gods plaine
scriptures, that thow may blynd the more easely, the eies
of the simple, with grief, ād dolor, I say, that better it had
bene for the, neuer to haue bene born, thē thus obstinatly
to fight agaīst gods plaine trueth. And that in such furie,
that where from the scriptures, thou canst haue none assurance
for thy error, yet so thow darest wrest them, yt they
may seme to serue thy purpose. Where so euer thou cāst
wrest any place, that it may be translated by this englishe,
To, there thow ashamest not to affirm, yt it is the self same
phrase, with this of S. Paule, vesselles of wrathe prepared
or ordeined to destruction. This is sufficient to shew to
the learned, yea euen to such, as do but vnderstand the
firstprinciples of their grammer, thy infidelitie ād craftie
deceat, in this mater. But because such as vnderstand nothing
in the latin tongue, can not hastely espie thy craft,
I will trauale to make it so sensible as I can.
               If I should say, I am appointed to death, to fele the
punyshement of sinne, and so to make sinne to cease: will
thow therefor say, that this particle, To, in the former
place, where I say I am appointed to death, and in the second
place where I say, to sele the punishement of sinne,
and to make sinne to cease, are all one phrase, and oght a
like to be resolued? I suppose thow wilt not. for in the first
place, it cā be none other wies resolued but thus, I am appointed
to death that is, I must nedes die: but in the secōd
place, two causes of death be assigned: for where I say,
to fele the punishemen
                     •
                   of sinne, I vnderstand, that one
cause of death is, that I and all mē may fele, how horrible
is sinne before God: and in this last I vnderstād that death
so putteth an ēd to sinne, that after it may not trooble the
elect of God. The phrase of S. Paule is much more different

from all that thow adducest, then be these phrases
before alledged, one differen
                     •
                   frome an other. for where
he saieth, vesselles of wrath ordeined to destruction, he
signifieth the final end of the vessels of wrath, to be ordeined,
and before determined in gods eternall counsell.
And in all these places: to prouoke the Lord, to anger, to
defyle my Sanctuarie, to kyndle gods wrath against Israel:
to make Israel sinne, and such like, are their actions
signified to be the causes of gods anger,Ierem. 15 gods wrath,
and why he reputed his Sanctuarie polluted. Thus thy
frowardnes causeth me to trooble the simple reader. The
place of leremie tho v maliciously doest peruerte, for it
cā be in nowies so trāslated. But what tōgue so euer thow
doest follow thow must say wo be to me, O my mother
that thus hast born me, a man that am a brawler, and a
man of contention in the hole land
               The place of Paule,Answert
                        •
                      the. 6 1. Cor. 11. serueth nothing for
thy purpose. for albeit there be a preposition, ad, which
truely may be translated, To, yet that speach is far differente,
from the former speach of the Apostle for where
he saieth: Eat at home that ye come not togither to condemnation,
he doth admonish them of the danger, which
they know not, wc was that such inordinat, and riatouse
banqueting ioyned with the cōtēpt of the poore, without
repentance must bring condemnation. if thow list replie
& alledge that thow stickest not somuch to the termes, as
to the mater▪ for in all these former speaches, man pretē
                  ded
one thing but an other thing ensued. What cāst thow
thereof conclude? but that gods purpose, sentence, and
mynd, is not subiect to mannes purpose and intention.
True it is, that nether Pharao did resist Moises of purpose
to be plagued, nether did Ieroboam erect the calues that
Israel should be destroied, but yet becaus God had so before
pronounced ineuitably plagues and destruction did
follow their inobedience. If hereof ye will conclude,
as ye seme to do, that those whose end is condemnatiō,
receaue not that by ye will of God, because ye cōclude

that which neither ye haue proued, neither yet go about
in this place to proue, I will not trouble my self, with answering
for this present. But whē ye shal go about to proue
that God will all men to be saued (as ye affirme) I hope
by gods grace,Answer to the 8. to answer sufficiently. For as we doubt not
but gods iudgemētes are holie, and most iust, so we know
that the conscience of the wicked shall fele in them selues,
and no where elles, the causes of their condemnation.
Neither yet did any of vs euer hold, beleue or affirme,
that any reprobate, shall haue that libertie in the hell to
quarell with God, of the secrete causes of his condemnatiō:
for the bookes shall be opened, and the secretes of all
heartes shall be reueled.
               To the suffering,To the 9. pacience, and sorowing of God, I
haue before answered, in the beginning of this your last
confused gradation, and so I will not trouble the reader,
with the repetition of the same. The wordes of Ieremie which
ye alledge, can haue no such sentence, as ye do gather.
for he doeth not speak of any passion, that was in
God, as touching his eternall Godhead: but onely doeth
appeall to the conscience of the people, how oft God had
not onely rebuked, but also from time to time corrected
them, euer calling them to repētance, and suspēding their
last punishment,The first chap. of Isaiah declareth the place of Ieremie wrested by the aduersaries. how beit that they continually from euil
fell backward vnto worse. And so at length was God werie
oftener to repent: that is to say, at once he wold powre
furth his iust vēgeāce, which before so oft he had threatned.
Let the first chapter of Isaiah be commentarie to this
place, and I trust the sentence shall be plaine. For there he
affirmeth, that in that people there was no hole part, that is
all order and policie was almost confounded, Ierusalem
was in a maner left desolate, by the manifest plagues which
had apprehended it. but yet there was no trew conuersion
vnto God. And here he saieth, thow hast left me
(saieth the Lord) and I haue therefor lifted vp myn hād vpon
the,Ierem. 15. and haue scattered the. I am werie in repenting,
that is, that I haue spared the so long. I shall scatter them
with the fan, euen vnto the gates of the earth (that is to the

vttermost parte) I haue made my people desolate, and I haue
destroyed them: neuertheles they haue not turned frō
their waies. I trust yt euerie reasonable man will cōsider, yt
those wordes be rather spoken, to admonish the people,
how God by all meanes had prouoked them to repentance,
then to declare vnto vs, what nature or passions God
hath in him self, as ye do. For so appereth in this your question.
Wil ye say, that God werieth him self suffering and sorowing
for them, whom he had reprobated before the world? Surlie I
think, that thogh ye hitherto haue vnaduisedly said so, ye will
from hence furth say so no more. And so ye end this portion
with a prayer. To the which we answere in few wordes,
that albeit we will not take vpon vs, to define, what after
this shal your cogitations be, yet will we not cease to pray
to God, that your heartes beīg humbled with greater reuerence,
ye may not onely think, but also speak of gods hie
Maiestie, of his iudgements most holie, most iust, and vtterlie
in this life in comprehensible to our dull senses. But
now we go forward to that which foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Now must we declare the saing of S. Luke so many as
were ordeined vnto life did beleue,The 25. section. The eight argument where we must vnderstand,
that as they that will not obey the trueth, are called in the scriptures
ordeined to damnation, as is sufficiently proued before, so they
which willingly receaue the trueth, and coople the word with
faith, working by charitie are called, ordeined to life. Where ye 
do replie so: predestination is without any condition, I grant predestination
to lief, is the verie fre gift of God, without any condition.
Notwithstanding, we can not com to life, but by the way
which leadeth vnto life. As he which receaued the one talent of
his master, receaued it of a fre gifte without his deseruing, but because 
he did not walk in the way appointed by his master, his
talent was taken from him againe. And as afore by the fre benefitt 
of his master he was chosen vnto life, so now because he did
not walk in the way, which leadeth vnto life he is ordeined to

                     •
                  damnation. The prodigall sonne is receaued of his father, not for

                     •
                  his deseruing, but of the fre goodnes and beneuolence of his father,

                     •
                  et is it required of him, that he walk hereafter as an obedient

sonne which if he did not, the latter fall should be worse then the
first. Predestination therefor is the mere gifte of God, afore the
 foundation of the world, at the which time nothing could be commanded
vnto vs, yea afore we either haue faith, or
                     •
                  ls by hearing
of the worde we may haue faith, no spiritual comandemēt is giuē
vs but whē by hearing we may receiue faith thē is the way of saluatiō
opened vnto vs, in wc we must walk, if we wilbe saued. And
yet foloweth it not, we must walk in the way which leadeth
vnto saluation, Ergo for walking the way of saluation, we are
 chosen and accepted. for S. Paul saieth, I am giltie to my selfe in
nothing, but therefor I am not iustified. If a learned Phisician
seing one in danger of death, whom he can and may helpe, offereth
Phisick to the pacient, able to restore him to his healthe, and
therwith prescribed the pacient a diet, now that the phisicion giueth
phisick to the pacient, it cometh onely of his owne goodnes,
But if the pacient do not order him self according to the prescript
of the Phisition, the phisick shall not help him. And thoghe he
obserue good diet, yet oght he not to repute the receauing of his
healthe to him self, but to the Phisicion. for thogh it lieth in the
pacientes power to hinder his healthe, yet it is not in his power to
giue him selfe healthe. So Christ our Phisition offereth healthfull
phisick to vs all, and there with prescribeth our diet, which if we
do not obserue the Phisick shall not auale vs. And thoghe we obserue
it, yet oght we not to attribute our healthe to our selues: but
to the liberalitie of our Phisition Christ, which of his mere mercie
hath made vs hole, wherefor to return to our argument, they
are ordeined vnto life so many as will gladly walk in the way
which leadeth vnto life, that is true obedience, and they do beleue
as S. Luke saieth.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               The place of saint Luke which ye studie to corrupt,
is written in the 13.The place of S. Luke in the actes. 13. chap. chapter of the Actes of the Apostles.
The light whereof is so clere, that you be neuer able to obscure
the same. And therefor I will not spend much tyme
in cōfutation of your vanitie. for the simple trueth of the
historie shall disclose the same. Paule comming to Antioche
in Pisidia did vpō the Sabboth ēter in to the Sinagoge
of the Iewes, ād therein preached a sermō most profound▪
most effectuall, and most comfortable. In the which

by plaine scriptures he proued that the same Iesus which
was crucified at Ierusalem, was the Messias promised, and
the onely Sauior of the world. At which doctrine many
of the Iewes being offended, and yet som embrasing the
same, Paule the next Sabboth preached to the hole multitude
of the Iewes and Gentiles assembled together: But when
plaine contradiction was made by the Iewes, who did
blaspheme Christ Iesus, Paule and Barnabas taking boldnes
said to the Iewes: first it behoued to speake to you the
word of God, but becaus ye reiect it, and iudge your selues
vnworthie of the life euerlastīg, behold we are turned
vnto the Gentiles. for so hath the Lord commanded vs.
At which wordes the Gentiles reioysed, and glorified the
word of the Lord, and did beleue (saieth the text) so many
as were ordeined to the life euerlastīg. Who is be so blynd
that doeth not se, that in these wordes the holie Gost assigneth
the plaine cause, why some do beleue, and others do
blaspheme, and remaine vnfaithfull? The cause why som
beleue is, becaus they are ordeined to the life euerlasting,
as they that are the shepe of Christ Iesus:Iohn. 10. therefor they heare,
and beleue his voice, the others as they are left in the
power of the deuīll (as they that are neuer giuen to Christ,
to the ēd, that they may receaue life) remaine in blyndnes,
and so by contradiction and blasphemies, declare them
selues, whose chilren and generation they are. None of
vs do, nor yet euer did deny, but that the elect of God do
willingly receaue and obey the trueth, and that the spirit
of God so worketh in their heartes, that not onely they
beleue, but that also they are made frutefull, yea and that
frome iustice, they procede to iustice. But as the hole praise
of this we giue to God, arrogatīg no part of it to our selues,
so we constantly affirme that nether faith, neither
workes, neither yet any qualitie that is, or that God forsaw,
to be in vs, is the caus of our predestination or electiō
to life euerlasting, as before we haue sufficiently proued.
               Ye are so inconstāt,To the 2. now granting predestination to
be the fre and mere gift of God, without any condition of
our workes: and immediatly after ascribing it to our obedience

and walking in the way, that leadeth to life. In this
your inconstancie, say, I can not tell how to handle you
One thing I se, to my great comfort, that the glorie of
Christ Iesus, is so manifest, and the power of his trueth so
inuincible, that he will reigne, in the midest of his ennemies.
The deuilles them selues must acknowledge and openly
confesse, that he is Lord, and the onely Son of the
liuing father: and the aduersaries of his trueth, euen when
they fight most outrageously against the same, are cōpelled,
to giue testimonie to it, as you do here in diuers places:
as whē ye say, it foloweth not, yt because we must walke
in ye way, that leadeth to life, that therefor, for walking
in the way of saluation, we are chosen (and as you write) accepted.
But because (I say) that your inconstancie doeth
streight carie you to denial of this, I cā the les credit, that
this be a trew confession proceding from an vnfeined
heart: but rather that it is the mightie power of the veritie,
which (will ye nill ye) compelleth your mowthes, to
giue witnessing vpon her part, against your selues. God
grant I may be deceaued, in this my iudgement. for him I
take to record, that I am no otherwies ennemie to any of
you, then in so far, as ye declare your selues manifest ennemies
to ye fre grace of God, ād to the glorie of ye eternal
Sōne of ye eternal father of Christ Iesus our Lord ād onely
Sauiour.To the 3 Becaus there is nothing in this your last part, wc I
haue not before at large declared in diuerse places, I wil onely
note those thīges in the wc we do not aggre with you.
First we vse not to call predestinatiō the fre gift of God,
but we call it the eternall and immutable coūsell of God,
in which he hath purposed to choose to lief euerlasting,
such as pleased his wisdom in Christ Iesus his Son.
               Secondly we say, that ye are neuer able to proue by
the parable of the talentes, that any reprobate was chosen
in Christ, to life euerlasting.
               Thirdly that we fynd neither contract neither condition
betwext the louing Father,To the 4 and the prodigall son
in his admission to his former dignitie, neither do we so
vnderstand the parable, as that the said son newly receaued

to mercie, wold after, of stubbornes, vnthākfully depart
from his father. But rather we think, that as he had
felt what miserie he susteined, by folowing his own counselles,
he wold in tymes comming with all diligence attend
the counselles of his father.
               Your mynd is dark to vs and your writing obscure,
where that ye say before we haue faith, or by hearing of
the worde, can haue faith, no spirituall commandement is
giuen vnto vs. and also the wordes of saint Paule, appere
not to be well applied: for there he entreateth no thing of
election, but onely affirmeth, that in the dispensation of
that ministerie committed to his charge, he knew him self
giltie in nothing &c. but because these be of small importance,
I onely put you in remembrance of them.
               Last your similitude betwext your Phisitiō offering 
medicin, and prescribing diet to the patient, who may receaue
and kepe it, at his pleasure, and so recouer healthe,
and preserue his life, orels reiect and break it, and so procure
his own destruction: and betwext Christ Iesus who
(say you) being our Phisition, offereth healthfull phisike
vnto vs all, and therewith prescribeth our diett, which if
we do not obserue, the phisike shall not auale vs &c. This
similitude in one respect doeth altogither mislyke vs. For
it taketh from our soueraign Lord, his chief glorie and honor.
for in no wies can we abyde, that his mightie power,
and operation, by his holie spirit, shalbe compared to the
power of any creature. We say not, we teach not, nor beleue
not, that Christ Iesus doeth onely offer medicin, and
prescribe a diet, as a common Phisition, leauing the vsing
and obseruation of it, to our will and power. But we affirme
that in the heartes of his elect, he worketh faith, he openeth
their eies, he cureth their leprosie, he remoueth, and
ouercometh their inobedience, yea by violence he pulleth
thē furth of the bondage of Sathan, and so sanctifieth
them by the power of his holie Spirit, that they abyde in
his veritie, according as he hath praied for them, and so
continue they vessels of his glorie, for euer. And herein
we dissēt frō you as afterward more plainely shal appere

in discussing of this which you thus terme.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The second error of the careles by necessitie.
               The elect thogh they sinne greuously▪ yet are they neuer owt of
the fau
                     •
                  r and electiō of God,The 26 section. neither cā they by any meanes finally
perishe. So that Adam when he transgressed, and Dauid committing
adulterie and homicide were fauored euen then and beloued
of God,Reade the answer to the 27. Section. ād neuer owt of election nether could they be. Againe the
reprobate as Saul and Iudas were neuer in the fauor and election
of God, neither could they nor none other reprobate attein vnto
saluation.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               The trueth of this proposition doeth nothing excuse
your malice, and hatered: for albeit there be no sentēce
in it conteined, we beīg rightly vnderstād, is not aggreable
to gods worde, yet of what purpose and mynd ye haue gathered
these sentences, leauing those that should explaine
the same, it easely may appere, by that vennom which ye
spew furth against vs, to make vs odious to all the world
as here foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The confutation of the second error.
               Here you se,The 27 section. how they deuide all men into two sortes, one
elected or chosen which by no meanes can perishe, and the other
reiected or reprobate before the world, so that by no meanes, can
they be saued. What can the deuill wishe his membres to teach more
for the aduancement of his Kingdom, then this? What can be inuented to prouoke men to liue a careles, and libertyne life, more
 then if they be persuaded that neither well doing auaileth or pleaseth
God nor euill doing doeth hinder vnto saluatiō. this is asmuch
as if one should counsell the pacient to refuse all healthfull Phisick
and good diet and so wilfully to be the occasion of his own death.
for if they be (say they) of the elect sorte, thogh they do commit
theft, fornicatiō, adulterie, murther or any other sinne, yet be they
still so beloued and fauored of God, that they can not finally perish.
And if they be of the reprobate sorte (say they) neither repetance,
amendement of life, absteining frome euill, neither fasting praier
Almes nor other good dede can auale. for they be so hated of God
before the world, that by no meanes they can obtein his fauor, but
of mere necessitie, do what they can they must perish, seing it is so
saieth the naturall mā let vs set the cock on hoope ād let the world
slyde, let vs eate and drinke, for to morow shall we die. so the people

sit downe to eat and drink, and then ryse vp to play, why masters 
haue ye no conscience thus to cause the people of God to sinne,
se ye not how ye be led with the same spirit that Balaam was led
withall when he counselled to giue occasion of sinne to the people, I 
know ye wil answer, that I mean not so. Mean what ye list, and
do what ye can, yet this is the issue and frute of your doctrine,
and who so euer is thus corrupt by you, without he repent he
shall die the death, but God shall require his bloode of your hāds.
Marke well your disciples how many of them endeuore thē selues
to bring furth the frutes of repentance, how many of thē seke for
power to crucifie the flesh with the lusts and cōcupiscence thereof.
How many of thē cā we perceaue by their conuersatiō, that they
haue cast of the old mā, ād put on the new mā, walking sincerely
in their vocation ād the true feare of God. but if they accustom to
frequent your congregations, as the papistes do the masse, thē be
they faithfull brethren, I hold my peace, of that ye vse to haue respect 
of persons preferring the welthie, which if they be liberal, thoghe
they be drowned in many vices, you vse to help vp such sores
with this saying: There is none during this life that cā be knowē
to be in the election, be he neuer so vertuous, nor any owt of the electiō
be he neuer so vnrighteous, after this maner ye do heall thē
vp, so that they nede not to indeuor them selues to bring furth the
frutes of liuelie faith, for the surest tokē of their electiō they think
to be, that they be of your congregation. but Christ saieth in that 
shall al mē know that ye are my disciples if you do what so euer I
cōmād you, ād againe ye shal know thē by their frutes. for a good
mā owt of ye treasure of his heart bringeth furth good things yet
ye say no mā cā be knowē to be either in the election or owt of the
election during this life, and for proofe hereof ye alledge the saying 
of Paul▪ the deuil doeth transforme him self into an Angel of
light. to which I breifly answer, that God doeth neuer trāsforme
hī self into an Angell of darknes, wherefor so long as ye walk in
darknes ye be not of God. But thus ye take the most shameful mē
by the had flatterīg thē, so that they cā not return frō their wickednes
whereby it appereth, that ye be not sent frō God. for ye by your
doctrine giue occasiō to the people to sinne. And the Lord saieth, if
they had bene in my coūsell they had turned my people, frome their
euill waies ād wicked imaginations, but such lippes, such letuce,
such disciples, such masters. of your chief Apollos be persecutors

on whō the bloode of Seruetus crieth a vēgeāce. so doeth the blood
of others mo whom I coulde name. but forasmuch as God hath
partly alredie reuenged their bloode and serued som of their persecuters,
with the same measure where with they measured to others,
I will make no mention of them at this tyme. And to declare
their wickednes, not to haue proceded of ignorance and humane
infirmitie but of indured malice, they haue for a perpetuall
memorie of their crueltie sett furth bookes affirming it to be
lawfull to persecute, and put to death such as dissent from them in
controuersies of religiō, whome they cal blasphemers of God. notwithstanding
they, afore they came to autoritie, they were of an
other iudgement, and did bothe say and write, that no man oght
to be persecuted for his conscience saik. but now they are not onely
becom persecuters, but also they haue giuen, as far as lieth in
them, the sword into the handes of bloodie tyrantes. Be these I
 pray you the shepe whom Christ sent furth in the middest of wolues?
can the shepe persecute the wolf? doth Abel kil Cayn
                     •
                  doeth
Dauid (thogh he might) kill Saul? shortly doeth he, which is born
of the spirit kill him which is born after the fleshe? Mark how
ye be fallen in to most abhominable tyranny, and yet ye se it not.
 Thus I am constreined euen of conscience to write. That if it shal
please God to awaik you owt of your dreā, that ye may perceaue
how me error haeth drowned you in mo errors, and hath broght
you to a sleping securitie, that when ye walk euē after the lustes
of your heartes thirsting after bloode and persecuting poore men
for their conscience saik, ye be blynded, and se not your selues, but
say tushe, we be predestinat what so euer we do, we are certē we
cā not fall owt of gods fauor. A wake therefor and looke what dā
                  ger
ye be in, and how by your poisoned doctrine ye infect the
people of God, and draw them to a secure, ydle, and careles life.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               The crimes laid to our charge in this mater be haynous.
For first we are accused that we prouoke men to a careles
ād libertine life. So that by vs the people do nothīg,

                     •
                  uteate and drink and ryse vp to play.
               That we haue no conscience, but being led with the
spirit of Balaam giue occasion of sinne to the people.
               That none other frute doeth ensue our doctrine,

                  
                     •
                  ut libertie to sinne, for our disciples are cruel murthe
                  
                     •
                  ers,
subiect to all iniquitie, respecting persones, and
flattering sinners.
               And last, yt by our poisoned docttrine, we infect the
people,answer to the first. and bring thē to a secure, ydle, and careles life.
               Because I wil omit no notable part of your booke
to ouerslippe without some reasonable answer, I wil folowe
youre ordre, althogh it be confused. If you be able
by plaine scriptures, to proue a thirde sort of mē, which
nether be elect, nether yet reprobat, then shal we learne
of you, other wise to deuide. But if God by his first voice
pronounced in this mater, made menciō but of two
sedes. and if Christ Iesus whē he shal come shall set one
army on the right hand, and an other vpon the left
hand, without mencion made of anie third sort of
men, we can not repent, nor yet call back the trueth of
our doctrine, albeit that ye in despite and furie cry.
               what can the deuil wishe his membres to teach more for the aduancement
of his kingdome then this? what can be inuented more to prouoke
men to liue a careles and libertine life, more then if they be persuaded
that nether wel doing auaileth or pleaseth God, nor euil doing hindreth vnto
saluacion. and so forthe ye procede in youre first accusacion.
               
               Before I haue required, and yet againe do require
of Gods faithful lieutenants in earth, I meane of lawful
Magistrates, who rule in gods feare, whome ye vtterly
studie to abolish, and depriue, of them I saie, I haue
required iustice to be ministred betwext vs, and you,
without respect of persones.
               Let the heauen and earth (if men wil not) yea
let God and his holie Angelles, in whose presence we
walke, beare recorde and witnes how vniustely and maciously
ye accuse vs, that we prouoke the people to a
careles & libertine life. If euer it can be proued, by our
doctrine, or writing, that we affirme, that there is no
difference betwext vertue and vice, that the one nether
pleaseth God, nether yet the other doeth displease him,

let vs without mercie die the death. But and if the
hole scope of oure doctrine tend to the cōtrarie, yea if
our liues & conuersacion (how so euer the deuil doeth
blynde your eyes) be such, as they onely may conuict
your blasphemie. And last, if the order of that citie
where this doctrine is taught, be such in punishment of
iniquitie, and that without respect of persone, that the
like iustice hath neuer bene executed against open offē
                  ders
sithence the daies of the Apostles, in any christian
comen welth. Then can we not cease to desire that this
your former blasphemie may be reuenged vpon your
owne heades.
               We do not denie but this is one part of our doctrine,
that as Gods counsel is immutable, so is his election
sure and stable, insomuche that the elect can not finally
be reprobated, nether yet that the reprobat can euer
become elect nomore then the wheat can become darnell
or darnel become wheat, but do we adde no more
then this?The doctrine of th
                        •
                     se that defend Gods ete
                        •
                     nall Predesti
                     
                        •
                     ation. do we teache men to set cock on hoope, and
so to let the worlde slide as scoffingly ye write? or do
we not rather continually affirme, that as God of his
great mercie, hath called vs to the dignitie of his children,
so hathe he sanctified vs, and appointed vs, to walk
in purenesse and holines all the daies of our life, that
we shall continually fight against the lustes and inordinat
affections, that remaine in this our corrupt nature,
that if we finde not the spirit of Christ working in vs
that then we can neuer be assured of our election? for
the conscience of all such as with out bridle folowe iniquitie,
can neuer be assured of Gods present fauour during
the time that they delite in sinne, finally none of
your anabaptistical sort, require greater obediēce to be
giuen vnto God, and vnto his lawe, then we do, except
that ye put your scollers in vaine esperance, that by the
power of their owne free wil, they may at length come
to such perfection as no sinne shal stire in them. But we
by the contrarie attributing all to the free grace of

God do affirme that continually in this life, we must
confesse, that sinne so remaineth in vs, that except that
God, for Christ Iesus saik did pardō the same, his wrath
iustly shoulde be kindled against vs. Let all our writings
and the hole some of our doctrine beare recorde whether
thus we teache or not. And are not the liues and
honest conuersation of many thousands (we praise God
of his great mercie) professing the same doctrine,The god lie life & death of a great nomber in our daies proueth the aduersaeries to be most impudent liers. To the 
                        •
                     
                   able
to conuince your malicious impudencie. how many
haue left their countries possessions and lands, and for
libertie of their cōsciēce onely, do liue a sober and contētible
lief? how many haue giuē, & daily do giue their
liues, & blood, for the testimonie of Christes trueth, and
for that they wil not defile them selues with idolatrie?
               And yet thou ashamest not to ask how many of
thē can we perceiue by their conuersacion, that they haue
cast of the olde man, and put on the new man walking
sincerely in their vocacion. shal not the great multitude
of Christes deare martyres, of late in England
(thou wilt not say, that they were all anabaptistes) the
long pacience of our bretheren in France,The aduersaries make no consci+̄ce to be presen
                        •
                      at the masse and that cruel
persecution of late risen in Italy, Naples, and Spaine
for Christes trueth onely, put thy venemous tongue
to silence?
               If I shoulde demande of thee which of the two
did moste mortifie the flesh, he that for conscience sake
leaueth countrie friends, riches and honours, or he that
to gape for worldly promotions,Anabaptist
                        •
                     s wold haue all things comone. or yet for any other
purpose doeth couer him self with Esaus clothes (I vse
your owne termes) and so denying what he is, wil sweare,
if nede be, that he is not Iaakob, which of these
two Isay, doest thou think to haue come nerest to the
forsaking of him self? Or yet another, whither doth
he walke most sincerely in his vocacion, that liuing
vpon his iust labors is redy to communicate, according
to his habilitie to the necessitie of his poor
bretheren? or he who loitring in one place or trotting

from countrie to countrie wolde haue all things
in common contrary to the ordre of nature and policie?
or yet the third, which of the two, doeth most crucifie
the lustes and concupiscences of the flesh, he that
laieth downe his necke euen vnder the axe of a cruell
and vniust Magistrate, and that also when he suffereth
vnrighteously: or he that wolde abolish and destroie
the good ordinance of God, all lawful Magistrates
and distinction in policies. That you be the one,
and we be the other of these two sortes of men it is euident
ynough. And vpon whome the crime cleaueth
and iustely may be laied, further examination shal declare.
Nowe come I to the ordre of that Citie, in the
which this doctrine is taught, receiued, and mainteined.
What maketh ye poore citie of Geneua, poore I say,
in mans eyes, but riche before God, by the plentifull aboundāce
of his heauenlie graces, what maketh it, I say,
so odious to the carnal mē of this worlde? assuredly not
this doctrine, where with ye charge vs. for that coulde
wel please the carnal mā,What maketh the citie of Geneua odious to the world. to let him liue at his pleasure,
without all punishment. Is it not the iust rigor of iustice,
and the seueritie of discipline executed therein, in
such sort, that no manifest offender, where so euer he
hathe comitted his offence, doeth there escaip punishment?
Is not this it, that so doeth offend, not onely the
licencious of the worlde? but euen you dissembling
hypocrites, can not abide, that the sworde of Gods vengeance
shal strike the murtherer, the blasphemer, and
such others, as God by his worde commandeth to die.
not so by yor iudgementes, he must liue, he may repent.
And those comon welthes, do ye highlie praise, where
men may liue as thei list, be subiect to no lawe nor ordre,
yea where ye drunkard and such others abhominable
persons are permitted,Anabap
                        •
                     istes w
                        •
                     ld han
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      punished▪
                   to liue quietly & finde fauor
to escape punishmēt & shame. But because in ye stretes of
Geneua dare no notable malefactor more shew his face
(all praise and glorie be vnto God) then dare the owle

in the bright sunne therefor is it hated. Therefore it is
called blood thirstie, and thus blasphemously traduced,
as after ye write.
               Thou saiest yt amongest vs there is respect of persōs,To the 
                        •
                     
                  
That we preferre the welthie, which if they be liberal,
althogh they be drowned in many vices, yet we vse to
heale vp their sores, &c.
               I am assured yt thy owne conscience doeth conuict
thee of a malicious lie, in thus writing. for thou canst
not be ignorant, what the citie of Geneua hathe of late
yeres susteined, for rooting out those pestilent persons,
who labored to destroy the Lords vineyard planted in
the same. And what was ye cause yt so they were coniured
against the libertie of Christes Euangil. The hatered
wilt thou and they say, which they did beare against
strangears. I answer, but no mostrangears were then
in Geneua then were before, when ye chief captaines of
that faction were most earnest professors of the Euangile
(in mouth I meane). And in verie dede, if they wolde
haue labored, to haue expelled the strangears, they
had bene enemies to their owne comoditie. for by the
multitude of strāgears, their comon welth doth florish.
and none did receaue such benefite of strāgears, as those
that required Christes doctrine to be ouerthrowen.
               They were papistes (thou wilt say) and therefore
hated ye religion. I answere in their defence,Geneua was sore vexed because they wold not suffer sin unpunished. yt in mouth
and external profession they were not, but alwaies they
protested, yt they wolde neuer reuolt to papistrie again.
But in few wo
                     •
                  ds, I wil open the cause of their conspiracie.
Thei were corrupt in manners, filthie of life, peruerters
of iustice, and such finally, as by whome, the blessed
worde of God, was sclandered and euil spoken by.
The preachers called for reformaciō of manners. They
boldely and sharply rebuked, euen those that were in
highest auctoritie. One of ye chiefest of yt band was excō
                  municated,
and so did remaine mo yeres then one. The
consistoire called for iustice to be executed, and for penalties

to be apointed. for the inobedient & open contēners.
But no thing coulde preuaile, the multitude of
the wicked was so great, yt in votes and voices they did
preuaile. And so was ye iniquitie of ye wicked maīteined
for a lōg ceason. Which beīg considered, ye godlie aswel
yt were natiue borne, as also the strāgers, consulted vpon
the next & surest remedie, and that after that not onely
the moste parte of strangers were determined to depart,
but yt also, yt faithfull seruant of Christ Iesus, had in publike
sermō cōmended his flock, with the weping eyes
of many to the protection, and prouidence of God, and
had publikely pronoūced, yt he wolde be no minister in
yt church where vice coulde not be punished, according
to gods worde, where the wicked shoulde tryuphe and
make lawes at their pleasure. After this consultacion
it was concluded, that a resonable nombre of strangears
whose fidelitie & honest conuersacion had long bene
tried and wel knowen, shoulde be made burgesses, and
free to haue voice in counsell, & in making▪ ciuil statutes.
which being vnderstand the wicked began more manifestly
to vtter thēselues, they opponed thē selues to
the Magistrates, they plainely 
                     •
                   denied yt any strangers
shoulde be free, they appeled to the greater counsel, wc
being gathered, did iustifie the decree of the Sindiques
(so be the chief magistrates called). Shortly after did ye
hole vennom burst out: for after feasting, and banqueting
of all sortes of villanes, was the conspiracie concluded
and put in execution. for with one consent they
inuade vpon the night one of the chief Magistrates,
they cried victoire, and triumphe. but God sodanly repressed
that furie, so assisting with out the arme of mā
his seruant and lieutenant for that time appointed, in
that citie, that first he recouered the ensigne of his iust
and lawfull office againe, & there after so put to flight,
that rebillious and great multitude, that some being
apprehended and cōmitted to prison, the rest were dispersed
by the onely power of God. for that is a thing

euident and plaine, that the nombre of the one, did in
twentie degrees, surmount the other. This do I write, to
let the simple reader vnderstand, althogh thou be blynded,
what was the original of the trouble, which Geneua
did after suffer. What did the strangears, I pray the
gaine by their libertie? as touching the worlde, I say
nothing, for no kynd of comoditie they lacked before
which after they did obteine, onely this excepted, that
in counsel, they shoulde haue voices▪ and place to speake,
which thing also did onelie offend those oppressors
of iustice and mainteiners of iniquitie. for thereby
did they perceiue, that their interprises shoulde be broken,
and that statutes shoulde be made, to reforme their
insolencie. To procede iustice being executed without
respect of person, vpon those that were apprehēded
the rest who did escape to great nōbre, were pronounced
rebelles. Then began skirmyshes vpon euerie side of
Geneua, victualles were commanded to be cut of, great
threatnings were blowen in the eares of al ye godlie, and
when these coulde not preuaile. then were deuised practise
after practise, treason was conspired, and the ennemies
hoped for possession of the citie. But this being reueled
and ye practisers punished, 
                     •
                  atha
                     •
                   reaturneth to his
owne nature again. for after that no intreatmēt coulde
preuaile, open ware was denounced against. them, a daie
was sett that they shoulde be restored, ād that with great
sommes of money to be deliuered vnto thē, by reason
of their former losses & iniuries susteined. and this sentence
was pronounced not, by ye rebelles onely, but by a
potent comon welth, and their ancient friendes. Hereupon
were made, by the rebelles fyres of ioye, Defiance
was sent, the daie was appointed, that the siege shoulde
beginne, and victuales shoulde be cut of, esperance nor
comfort rested none to vs, but God and the messingers
of his worde, which then sounded the tr
                     •
                  pet most boldly
and most clearly, promising euē in our greatest desperation,
the same glorious deliuerance, which shortly

after followed. for God by his power, did mittigat that
rage, and conuerted the hearts of our auncient alliance,
to remembre their dueties toward God, and his seruāts,
and so to enter with the citie of Geneua into a newe societie
and league. Nowe to returne to thee malicious
sclanderer, if we were such as thou doest accuse vs, to wit,
that we put no difference betwext vice and vertue,The aduersaries are malicious sclā
                     derers of the tru
                     
                        •
                     th. that
we suffre the people in a dissolute life, that we respect ye
persones of the rich, and heale their sores, with vnprofitable
plaisters, that we onely desire, that all men frequēt
our congregation: and that we esteme that to be the surest
signe of their election. If these I saie, were true, to
what purpose, did all the preachers endanger their liues
(and that continually by the space of thre yeres) for obteining
of discipline? why shoulde many godlie strangears
haue rather chosen to haue left that comon welth
in the which they were, with quietnes permitted to
liue, as best semed to them, rather then that they wolde
abide the sight of iniquities yt dail
                     •
                   did increase? And
why did the godlie with in that citie so hasard libertie
and life, that rather they had determined to die in defence
of a iust cause, then that euer any manifest ennemie
to God, and vertue shoulde be admitted to beare
rule in that comon welthe? If we had bene of that opinion,
which most vilanously thou laiest to our charge,
nether vertue pleaseth God, nether yet yt vice displeaset
him, had we not bene most foolish, and most miserabl
of all other creatures? Plaine it is yt our power to mān
                     •
                  iudgemēt was nothing cōparable to ye power of or aduesaries:
place of refuge was none left to ye godlie their asēbled.
And yet let ye ennemies thē selues witnes again▪
vs, if in the least one iote, their request was granted. ye
let the place of execution w
                     •
                  tnes, if when we lok
                     •
                  
for nothing, but for the extremitie to be attempted,
more fauor were shewed to the offenders apprehende
                     •
                  
then if no suche trouble had bene feared, or apperin.
If thou repliest, that greater offences are ouer sene

such as fauor our doctrine. I answer all those in mouth,
did fauor ye same Euāgil, which we professe. The cause of
the strife did onely arise, for the puritie of life which
oght inseperably to be ioyned with y• externall proffession.
I coulde recite mo thē one of those, that semed to
be then pillers in Geneua, as touching riches, worlde lie
estimation, and liberalitie towards the poor, being also
of ye nōbre of the strāgears, who for suspicion of offences
were, & remaine to this daie, some exiled som condēned
to perpetuall preson. for whose deliuerance, and receauing
to the Church againe, there hath bene offered
greater sommes, then perchance might intise an anabaptist
to go the masse (I wil not say to be a Papist) and
yet haue they obteined nothing.
               Now briefly to recite that which I haue laid against
thy first accusatiō, if yu be nether able to proue by or doctrine,
nor writings, nether by our owne liues, and cōuersations,
nether yet by the lacke of iustice, in that citie
in which this doctrine is taught, receaued and mainteined,
with what face canst thou affirme, that we teach the
people a careles, and libertine life? Hathe euer any
man more strongly, and more earnestly confuted those
pestilent opinions of the libertines, then hath that mā
whome most ye accuse for this doctrine? Let his notable
worke writen against the libertines, twelue yeres ago,
be a testimonie against your man
                     •
                  fest malice.
               Thus haue I in answering to your first accusation,
answered some what to other crimes conteined in all
the foure. Now in answering to your second, I wil labor
to touche, and put ende to that which resteth in the
other
               Ye accuse vs, that we haue no conscience,answer to the 
                        •
                      accusation. to deceaue
the people of God. for thus ye demand, why masters. (I
know this phrase of olde) haue ye no cōscience, thus to cause the
people of God to sinne, Se ye not that ye be led with the same spirit, that Balaam
was led with all, how he counselled, to giue occasion of sinne to the
people of God, and so aftre that ye haue taken all excuse, as

ye think from vs, ye boldely pronounce your sentence
that the blood of such as perish, shalbe required of our
handes.
               I heare the accusation verey vehemently intended▪
but when I seke for the probation, of euery part, I find
none, but accusation followeth accusation. for still ye accuse
vs, that we are flatterers of sinners, that we take
wicked men by the hand, that we heale them with this
saing: there is none during this worlde, yt can be knowen
to be in the election, be he neuer so vertuous, nor any
out of the election, be he neuer so vnrighteous. after
this maner (say you) do we heale them vp, so that they
nede not to endeuor them selues to bring furth the frutes
of liuelie faith.answer to the 3. 4. 5. & 6 These I say, be your accusations, the
probation whereof, ye delay so long, that after ye neuer
remember it. And so must your auctorite stand in force
bothe to accuse, and be admitted for witnes. But we
must except against you, for two causes most resonable,
first because ye are our accusers, and our partie aduersarie.
Secondarely becaus ye are venemous liers,
persons defamed, and blasphemers of God. That ye are
vennemous and malicious liers, I haue in diuers places
before sufficētly proued, how ye falsifie, and peruerte
the plaine Scriptures, how ye adde to our wordes, and
diminish from them, at your pleasure: and finally how
that ye inuent, and lay crymes to our charge, wihich ye
be neuer able to proue, as here in this place, ye shame
not to affirm, that we heale vp the sores of those that
be drowned in vices, with such wordes, as ye write. We
haue had offenders in dede amongest vs, (I mean in the
cōgregations which ye accuse) of diuerse sortes and diuerse
estates. Let any cōuict vs yt ether in exhorting, admonishing,
or in executing iudgemēt, we ha
                     •
                  e vsed any
such persuasion, or wordes to ye offenders. But if the offender
was to be admonished or exhorted, if we haue not
in gods name, exhorted thē to walk as it became ye sonnes
of light: and if iudgemēt was to be executed against

thē; if we haue not vsed the ruele of gods word, iudgeing
of the tree, not after the secrete election of God, but according
to the manifest frutes, pronoucing that membre
vnworthie to abyde in the bodie, whose corruption
was able to infect the rest of the mēbres, If this ordre
I say, be so streitlie kept amongest vs that neuer sithēce
the daies of ye Apostles, was it more vprightly kept in
any congregation. with what faces can ye say so that we
take wicked men by the hand? that we teach them, that
they nede not to brīg furthe the frute of a liuely faith?
ye alledge that Christ affirmed, that a good man from
the good treasure of his heart bringeth furth good
things. And so do we and do no lesse affirme, then ye
do, althogh in an other vnderstanding (as I before haue
declared) that we must obserue the commandement
of Christ, if we will be knowen to appertein to him. We
think it no assured nor certen signe of election, to be
ioyned with this, or that cōgregation. We kuow that satan
was once ioyned with ye Angelles, Iudas with Christ
Iesus, and many fals brethren, with the company of the
best reformed churches and chiefest Apostles. but wōder
it is, that ye burden vs with yt, in this one case, wc is your
plaine doctrine, which with toothe and nale ye defend.
Do ye not plainely write that no man is so elected in
Christ Iesus, but that he may fall & vtterly become a reprobate?
and none is so reprobated, but by repētance he
may be elected. The plaine contrarie whereof we teache.
and mainteine. O say you, ye mean of the signes, that
they are neuer certen. I answer that in verie dede somtymes
the elect, as touching mannes iudgement, is lyke
in estate with the reprobate. And againe that sometimes
the reprobate do beautifully shyne in the eyes of
men for a space, as exemples be euident. But yet I am sure,
that you be neuer able to proue that we affirme, that
in this life, no difference may be knowen betwext the
two. The end of our doctrine, tēdeth to this but chiefly
to proue, yt from election cometh faith, from a liuelie

faith do good workes spring, in wc the elect continuing
and going forward, not onely make they their own election,
sure, as. S. Peter doeth teache, but also giue a testimonie
of it to others, before whom their good workes
do shyne. And so by ye cōtrarie signes and effectes, we affirme
that the reprobate do manifest and vtter them
selues. And so I saie that wonder it is, that ye burthen vs
as that we shoulde affirme, that no man can be knowen
ether to be in the election, or out of the election, during
this life. But more wōder it is that ye affirme vs to
adduce these wordes of S. Paul: The deuil doeth transforme
him selfe in to an angel of light, for probatiō of
our purpose. for I, for my owne part do protest before ye
Lord Iesus, that I neuer did so vnderstand that place of
ye Apostle, nether yet thinke I that any of you be able
to shewe, in any of our writings, those wordes adduced
for probation of that purpose.
               Trewe it is that I haue long vnderstand, and to this
houre do vnderstand, that by those wordes, wolde the Apostle
admonish the Corinthiās, and all others that sodēly
they should not receaue, and beleue euerie person,
& doctrine that offereth it selfe, vnder ye cloke of iustice,
and of trueth: but that diligently we shoulde trie the
spirites from whence they are & whether they come, frō
God, or not. for if the deuil the great angel of darkenes
enemie to mankind, and father to all fals prophetes,
can yet so transforme him self, that for a time his purpose
and intent are not sene, but that vnder the cloke
of amitie and loue, he seketh or destruction as in tempting
the woman, doeth plainly appere, how much more
can his seruāts and soldiors, being deceitful workers
transforme them in to ye Apostles of Christ, pretending
at the first entre, nothing but loue and iustice, nothing
but gods glorie, nothing but mortification of the flesh,
and such like, most beautiful pretences, although that
yet these thīgs be most farre frome their heartes. Thus
I say do I, and with me, I am assured who so euer depely

do wey the purpose of the Apostle, in that place, vnderstand
that sentēce, and do not as ye falsly write, alledge it
to proue, that no man can be knowen to be ether in the
election, or out of the election during this life. It may
be, that we haue saied and writen, (as the trueth is) that
no man coulde haue knowē, by the good workes of that
happie thief hanged with Christ, that he had bene gods
elect, before that in that anguissie, so instātly he began
to defend Christes innocencie, so sharpely to rebuke ye
other being a blasphemer: and humbly to submit himself,
and praie, that Christ wolde remembre him,Luke 23 when
that he came in to his kingdome: And contrarie wise
that none coulde haue defined by the euil workes of Iudas,
before his tresonable defection, from Christ Iesus,
which was but fewe daies before his death, that he had
bene ye reprobate. And what serueth this for your purpose?To the 6
howe can ye hereby proue, that we are the sonnes
of darkenes, that we take the most shameful men by the
hand, flattering them so, that they can not returne from
their wickednes, and so by our doctrine giue occasion
of sinne to ye people, declaring our selues thereby, not
to besent of God, &c.
               Are ye able to proue, that we teache the people, not to
conuert from their sinnes, and wicked imaginations, to
to ye last houre of their departure? do we promise to all
theues and murtherers the same grace and fauor, yt Dauid,
Peter, and this thief founde? I trust thy own cōscience
knoweth the contrarie.To the 7 Permit or suffer we (be they
neuer so hie) manifest offenders to liue amōgest vs, after
their owne appetites? And yet ashamest thou not impudently
thus to writ: But such lippes such letouse such disciples
such masters for your chief Appollos be persecuters, on whom the blood
of Seruetus crieth a vengeance, So doeth the blood of others mo, whome
I could name. But for asmuch as God hath partely alredie reuenged their
blood and serued some of their persecuters with the same measure where
with they measured to others I wil make no mēcion of them at this time.
               
               Blessed be God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ
who so reueleth the things, that lie in secret, that hypocrites

at length, how soeuer they dissemble for a time
are compelled to notifie, & bewray them selues. Before
to some it might haue appeared, that the zeale of
gods glorie, the loue of vertue, the hatered of vice, and
the saluation of the people, whom by vs, ye iudged to
be blinded and deceiued, had caried you hedlonges into
such vehemēcie (as ye be mē zelous & feruent) yt no
kynd of accusation was thoght by you sufficēit, to make
vs odious, vnto ye people, lies against vs imagined, were
not onely tolerable, but also laudable & holie, scriptures▪
by you willingly, and wittingly corrupted, did serue
to defend gods iustice, and his glorie, wt we by our doctrine
oppugne & improue. But these your last wordes do
bewrey the mater, that in what soeuer faces you lift trāsforme
your selues, your grief wil appere to procede
from another fountaine,This impr
                        •
                     ueth the opinion of that sect that say that they for their pure lyfe are heard w
                        ••
                     n soeuer they praye. then from any of these which
ye pretende, and I before haue rehearsed.
               O the death of Seruetus your deare brother for whose
deliuerāce your chāpion Castalio solēnely did praie,
with whom, if once ye coulde haue spoken, that kingdome,
which ye hope for, had begonne to be enlarged,
his blood I saie, with the blood of others, I thinke ye
meane of your prophetesse Ione of kent, do crie a vengeance
in your eares, & heartes, that none other cause
do you se of ye shedding of ye blood of those most cōstāt
martyres of Christ Iesus, Thomas Crammer, Nicholas
Redley Hugh latimer, Iohn Hooper, Iohn Rogers, Iohn
Bradfurth, and of others mo, But that God hathe partly
reuenged their blood,The aduersarie iustifieth the cruell murthering of Thom. Crāmer Nicolas Ridley, &c▪
                   yt is of your great prophet and
prophetesse, vpon their persecuters, and hath serued thē with
the same measure, with the which they serued others,
I appeale to the iudgement, of all those that fear
God, what is thy iudgement, and the iudgement of thy
faction, of that glorious Gospel of Christ Iesus, which
of late, hath bene suppressed in Englod, what is thy iudgement
of those most valiāt soldiars and most happie
martyres of Christ Iesus, vpon whom, ô blasphemous

mouth thou saiest, God hathe taken vengeance, which
is an horrible blasphemie in the eares of all the godlie,
I wil not now somuch labor to confute by thy pen,
as that my ful purpose is to lay the same to thy charge
if I shal apprehend the in any comon welth where iustice
against blesphemers may be ministred, as gods word
requireth. And hereof I giue the warning, lest that after
thou shalt complein, that vnder the cloke of friendship,
I haue deceiued the. Thy manifest defection from
God, and this thy open blasphemie, spoken against his
eternall trueth and against such as most constantly did
suffer, for testimonie of the same, haue so broken and
desolued all familiaritie, which hathe bene betwext vs,
that althogh thou were my natural brother I durst not
conceale thy iniquitie, in this case.
               But now to the mater. I haue before proued you malicious,
and vennemous liers, & therefor vnworthie to
bear testimonie against vs. Now resteth to be proued,
that ye are blasphemers of God, and persones defamed▪
Salomon affirmeth, that,Pro. 17 he that iustifieth the wicked
and he that condemneth the innocent, are alike abomible
before God. Which sentence is not to be vnderstād
of iudges onelie, but is to be referred to euerie man: for
of euerie one doth God require, that he hate, and in his
heart and mouth condemne, that which God him self
hath cōdemned: and also that he allow, and iustifie, that
which God pronoūceth iust, lawfull, and holie. And if
the contrarie be founde euen in a multitude, God doth
not onelie punishe the chief offenders, but also vpon
their fauorers, mainteiners, and iustifiers, doth he comonly
powre the same plagues and vengeance. And hereof
is that rare,Num. 16 and fearefull punishment taken vpon
Dathan and Abiram, sufficient proofe, for they ioyned
with Corah, were the authors of the conspiracie raised
against Moises and Aaron. But did they alone sustein
the vēgeance? No but their housholds, children, wyues,
tentes, and substance in the same conteined, did the

earth in a moment deuore, and swallow vp. And why? because
they did iustifie the cause of those wicked, and in
so far in as in them lay did maintein the same. No
man I trust will deny, but that he who killeth an innocēt
mā, is a murtherer, althogh it be vnder the cloke of
iustice. But that he, who hauing lawfull auctoritie to
kill, and yet suffereth the murtherer to liue, is a murtherer,
in this perchance som men may doubt. But if the
law of God be diligently searched, this doubt shall easely
be resolued. For it will witnes, that no les oght the
murtherer, the blasphemer, and such other to suffer the
death, then that the meke and the fearer of God should
be defended. And also that such as maintein and defend
the one, are no les criminal before God, then those that
oppresse the others. One example I will adduce for all,
God gaue in to the handes of Achab,1. King, 23. Benhadad king of
Syria, who was great enemie to Israel, whom he vpon certen
cōditions of amitie sent home to his countrie. But
what sentence was prononunced aginst Achab? Thus saieth
y• eternall, becaus thow hast let go oute of thy handes
a man, whom I appointed to die, thy soule (that is
thy lief, shalbe in the place of his life, and thy people in
y• place of his people. Now to you iustifiers of Seruetus.
Seruetus was an abominable blasphemer against God,An argument that proueth th
                        •
                      aduersaries to be like blasphemers as was Seruetus. and you are iustifiers of Seruetus. Therefor ye are blasphemers
before God, like abominable as he was. The
maior I intend shortly to proue, so far as shalbe sufficiēt
at this tyme. The minor ye do not denie for some
by appologies, som by bookes, and all by your tōgues,
do iustifie his cause, and the conclusion is infallibly gathered
of the former wordes of the holie Gost.
               Ye will not easely admitt that Seruetus be conuicted
of blasphemie. for if so be, ye must be cōpelled to confesse
(except that ye will refuse God) that the sentence
of death executed against him, was not crueltie, nether
yet that the iudges, who iustly pronounced that sentence,
were murtherers nor persecuters: but that this death

was th
                     •
                   execution of gods iudgement, and they the true
and faithfull seruantes of God, who when no other remedie
was foūde, did take away iniquitie from amongest
them. That God hath appointed death by his law
without mercie to be executed vpon the blasphemers,
is euident, by that which is written Leuiticus 24.Leu. 24. But
what blasphemie is, may some perchance dout. If righteously
we shal consider & wey the scriptures, we shal fynd
yt to speak basphemie or to blaspheme God, is not onely
to denie, that there is a God, but that also it is, lightly to
esteme the power of the eternal God, to haue, or to sparse
abrode, of his maiestie such opinions as may make
his God head to be douted of. To depart frō ye true honoring,
& religion of God, to the imagination of mans
inuentions. Obstinatly to maintein, and defend doctrine 
& diabolicall opinions, plainely repugning to Gods
trueth. To iudge those thinges, which God iudgeth 
necessarie for our saluation, not to be necessarie. And finaly 
to persecute the trueth of God, and the membres
of Christes bodie.
               Of the first and second sort, both was Sennacherib,
and proud Rabsases, who comparing God with the Idoles
of the Gentiles, did not onely lightly esteme his
godly power, but also so, far as in thē was, studied to take
out of the heartes of the Israelites, all right and perfect
opinion of God. At whom the Prophet in the person of
God, demandeth this questiō, whom hast yu blasphemed?
               Of the third sort were bothe Israél and Iuda, declining
to idolatrie against Gods expresse commandmēt
whom the Prophetes so often do affirme to blaspheme
the holy one of Israel. Because, saieth Isaiah they haue
repudiated, the Lawe of the Lord of hostes, and the worde
of the holie one of Israel, contumeliously haue they
blasphemed. And Ezechiel, after that he hath most sharply
rebuked the Israelites for their idolatrie, he addeth:
yet in this your fathers haue blasphemed me, thogh
they had before grieuously transgressed against me for

when I had broght them into the land, for the which 
                     •
                  
lifted vp my hād to giue it thē, they sawe euery hie hill
and all the thicke trees, and they offered there their sacrifices,
and there they presented their offering, &c.
               Of the fourth sort were Hymeneus, and Alexander,
whom Paul gaue to the deuil, that they shoulde learne
not to blaspheme,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               Of the 
                     •
                  ift sort, were the multitude of the Iewes, who
iudged, and to this day do iudge the death of Christ
Iesus, his blessed ordinance, the publike preaching of
his Euangil, and the administration of his Sacrements,
to be nothing necessarie to our saluation.
               And of the last, doeth not Paul denie him self, to
haue bene a blasphemer,1. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and a persecuter before his cō
                  uersion.
               Now, if I shal plainely proue the most parte, yea all
these (except, ye will say, he shed no mans blood) to haue
bene in your great prophete Seruet 
                     •
                  , yea yet to be in
you all of the Anabaptisticall sort, haue I not sufficiently
proued both him, and you blasphemers?
               Albeit I be more nere of his, and your counsel, thē
any of you doeth knowe or suspect, yet wil I not vtter,
at this present, all that I can, but wil abide till such oportunitie,
as God shal offer vnto me, to notifie his, and
your poison to the Church of God, that of the same,
the godlie may be ware.
               For this present, I say first, that Seruetus, whom you iustifie,
did maintein, and by worde and writing, dispersed,
abrode wicked, and most deuilishe opinions of God,
which might not onely make his Godhead to be dispised,
but also called in doubt, and question. He iudged
those things nothing necessarie to saluation, wc Christ
hathe commanded and ordeined. And last, that impugning
the true religiō,The blasphem
                        •
                     us 
                        •
                     rrors of Serue 
                        〈◊〉
                     . he did most obstinatly maintein
his diabolical erros, & did resist the plaine trueth to ye
death. His erroneous opiniōs of God & of his eternal
Godhead were these. Whosoeuer beleueth any triniti
                     •
                  
                  
in the essence of God, hath not ye perfect God, but goddes
imagined, and elusion of deuils.
               That Christ is the Sonne of God, onely in so far as 
he is be gotten of God, in the wombe of the virgin, and
that not onely by the power of the holy Spirit, but because
that God begat him of his owne substance.
               
               That ye worde of God descending from the heauen,These be the detestable errors o
                        •
                      Ioha
                        •
                      of Ken
                        •
                     .
is now the flesh of Christ, so yt the flesh of Christ, is from
the heauen▪ further that y• bodie of Christ is the bodie
of the Godhead, the flesh of God, godlie, and heauenlie
as it that is begotten of the substance of God.
               That the soule of Christ is God, and that the flesh 
of Christ is God, and that aswel the flesh as the soule were
in the verie substance of the Godhead from all eternitie.
That God is the father of the holie Gost.
That Christ hauing the participation of the Godhead 
or of God, and participacion of man, may not be
called a creature, but one that doth participat with creatures.
               
               As the worde descended into the flesh of Christ,The adu
                        •
                     rs
                        •
                     ri
                        ••
                      looke also 
                        •
                     o be Christes at l
                        •
                     
                     ̄gth. so
did the holie Gost descend in to the soules of the Apostles.
               That Christ so long as he was conuersant in the
flesh receaued not the new spirit, which he was to receaue
after his resurrection.
               
               That in all men from the beginning, is ingrafted 
the spirit of the Godhead, euen by the breath of God,& 
yet may the spirit, by the which we be illuminated,The pr
                        •
                     
                     s
                        •
                     n
                        •
                      err
                        •
                     r of the Anabaptistes
               
               That the substanciall Godhead is in all creatures. That
the soule of man, althogh it be not God, it is made God
by the spirit, which is God him self.
               That the soule is made mortall by sinne, euen as 
the flesh is mortal, not that the soule returneth to nothīg,
as nether doth the flesh, but that it dyeth, whē that
it is depriued of liuelie actions. And that it is holden 
in hel languishing, as that it should neuer after liue

but these that be regenerated haue another soule, then
that they had before: because of the substance which is
renewed, & for the godhead which is ioyned.
               
                   That a like it is to baptise an infant as to baptise a
                     •
                  
asse or a stone,
               
                   That there is no mortale sinne committed, before
the age of twentie yeares.
               These I haue thoght sufficient to produce at this present,
to let the reader vnderstand, that it is not without
cause, that I say, that Seruetus, whom ye iustifie is a blasphemer.
I haue omitted things more horrible, & grieuous,
to auoid the offence of godlie readers. which sodā
                  ly,
I am not minded to manifest, except yt I shal vnderstād
that your vennemous tongues be not stayed by these.
I appeale to the cōsciēce of Castalio him self, if in euerie
one of these former propositions, which concerne ye
Godhead, there be not conteined horrible blasphemie.
For what is more blasphemous, then to affirme, that
such as beleue in the Godhead, three distinct persons,
haue no true God, but the illusion of the deuilles. That
Christ Iesus, is not the eternal son, of the eternal father,
that there is no distinction betwext the father and the
Sonne, but in imagination onely. That Christ hath no
participation of mans nature, but that his flesh is from
heauen, yea that it is the flesh of the Godhead. That in
Stockes, stones and all creatures, is the substantiall Godhead.
If these (I sa
                     •
                  e) be not blasphemies worthie of ten
thousand deathes, especially being obstinatly mainteined
against all holsom admonition? let all those that
feare God iudge: yea euen you your selues, how furious
that euer ye be, iudge in the mater, euē as ye wil answer
before the throne of ye Lord Iesus. That cōtempteously
he spake of baptising of the childrē, of ye publyke preaching
of the Euangill, and of the administration of the
Lordes supper, that haue you common wt him. for this
is your glorie, and persuasion to all your scolers, that
these things be nothing necessarie to saluation, yea

most streitly ye inhibit all of your sect to frequent any
cōgregatiō, but your own. And whether this be blasphemie
of your parte, or not, to affirme those thīgs nothīg
necessarie, which Christ Iesus hath established, and commanded
to be vsed in remembrance of him, to his againe
comming, I am content that iudgement be referred
euen to those that be most indifferent betwext vs
and you.
               To supersede the rest of your blasphemies I return
to your booke, because that after I purpose to speake of
your holie conuersation, and of the great perfection, yt
is founde in you.To tha
                        •
                      which resteth in the 7
               
               Ye accuse vs that we haue written bookes in a perpetuall
memorie, of our crueltie, affirming it to be
lawful to put to death such as dissent from vs in religion.
Notwith standing, that some of vs were of an other
mynd before they came to auctoritie▪ and further
that we haue giuen the sworde in to the hādes of bloodie
tyrannes.
               Trew it is that bookes are written, bothe by you &
by vs. for your master Bellius affirmeth, that lawfull it
is not, to the ciuil magistrat, to vse the sworde against
heretikes. To whome that godlie learned mā Theodorus
Beza hath answered. In which if you or your master
thinke not your selues fully answered, ye may put pen
to the paper, when you list, looking to receaue answer
with conuenient expidicion. Iohn Caluin hath besides
committed to writing, the examination of Seruetus,
and the cause of his miserable death, which bookes
albeit to you, they be a perpetual memorie of crueltie,
yet I haue good hope, that to our posteritie, they shalbe
profitable (as now to vs, be the godlie labors of those,
that before vs haue foghten the same battel against
the obstinate heretikes) And further seing bothe
you, and we, must abyde the sentence of one iudge,
we can not greatlye feare the preiudice of your faction.
               
                  Where ye aske if these be ye shepe, which Christ sent
furth in the middes of wolues. And if the shepe can per
secute the wolues,To the 6 question answered by a question. and I demand for answer whether Moses
was a shepe or a wolf, & wether that fearefull slaughter
executed vpon idolaters without respect of persons
was not as great a persecution, as the burning of Seruetus,
and Ioan of kent. To me it appereth greater. for to
them was granted no place of repentance, no admonition
was giuen vnto them, but with out further delay or
question,Le
                        •
                     . 32 was the brother commanded to kill the brother,
yea the father not to spare the sonne. I think verely
that if iudgement shoulde be referred vnto you, yt
that then shoulde Moises and the tribe of Leui be iudged
wolues, sent to d
                     •
                  uore innocent shepe. But because
we knowe what God hath allowed, we ye les feare ye iudgemēt
of man. If ye claime any priuiledge b
                     •
                   the cōming
of the Lord Iesus, him self wil answer that he is not come
to break nor destroy the Law of his heauēlie father.
               Where further ye ask if Abel did kill Cayn or Dauid
Saul, or he which is born of the spirit, did kill him
which is borne of the flesh? I answer, if your question be
of Abel, Dauid and Isaak, in their proper persons, that
none of them did kill any of these fore named. But if
thereof ye inferre no more, is it law
                     •
                  ul for any of gods
elect,How anabaptist 
                        ••
                     sabuse the name of cō
                     science. to kill any man, for his conscience sake. I answer,
that if vnder the name of conscience ye include what
soeuer semeth good in your owne eyes, that then ye affirme
a great absurditie, manifestly repugning aswel to
gods lawe, as to the examples of those, whom God hath
hieghly praised, in his holie Scriptures. But because cō
                  tinually
ye claime to your conscience, to remoue from
you that vaine couerture. I ask if the murtherer, adulterer,
or any other malefactor, shoulde be exempted from
punishmēt of ye law, althogh he alledge, that he did all
thīg of cōsciēce? I trust ye wil cōfesse, that he oght to be
mocked, yt wil claime the patrocinie of cōscience, when
that he doth plainely offend against gods wil reueled.

And why will ye not grant asmuch in this mater, which
now standeth in contrauersie? because (say you) externall
crimes haue no affinitie with maters of religion.
for ye conscience of euerie man is not a like persuaded
in ye seruice and honoring of God,Shifting of anabaptistes. nether yet in such cō
                  trouersies
as gods worde hath not plainely decided. but
I ask if that be a iust excuse, why pernicious errors shall
be obstinatly defended, ether yet that gods established
religion shall be contempteously dispised? To make ye
mater more plaine, Israel and Iudah were not bothe of
one minde, in the honoring of God, after yt the tenne
Tribes departed frō the housholde of Dauid, yea Iuda
in the self was often corrupted, with pestilent idolatrie.
in somuch that the fathers did offer their children to
Moloch. which I am assured they did not without some
zeale, wc they thoght tobe good cōscience. But not withstanding
those controuersies, diuers opiniōs, and forged
consciences at their own appetites, Helias did kill the
priestes of Baal.A
                        •
                     swe
                        •
                      to th
                        •
                      shifting & was
                     •
                   he borne I pray you of ye flesh? or
was he not rather regenerated by gods holie spirit? Io
                  
                     •
                  ias
did kill all ye priestes of the hie places, & did burne
mēs bones vpō their altars, and was he I besech you brother
to Cayn,2. King 2
                        •
                     . or rather fellow heire of the Kingdom
promised with Abel. But that he was gods most faithful
King, after Dauid, I trust ye wil not denie, except that ye
wil say as before, boldly ye haue affirmed of other, that
God reuenged blood with blood, in that he suffered
him to fal in battel. But ye Spirit of God speaking in the
prophet Ieremie, is more mylde of iudgement, for he
absolueth him, and doeth affirme that he was taken
away for
                     •
                   the sinnes of the people. Cōsider these things,
and conuict vs, if ye can by scriptures.
               We say the man is not persecuted, for his conscience,
that declining from God, blaspheming his
Maiestie, and cōtemning his religion obstinatly defendeth
erroneous & fals doctrine. This mā I say lawfully

                     •
                  onuicted, if he suffer the death, pronounced by a lawful

Magistrate, is not persecuted (as in y• name of Seruetus
ye furiously complein). but he su
                     ••
                  ereth punishement
according to gods cōmandement pronounced in Deutronomie,
the XIII. chapiter.D
                        ••
                     . 13.
               
               To put end to these your calumnies for this time,
two things I wolde require of you.To t
                        •
                     e. 6 First, that thus
foolishly ye abuse not the name of conscience,Consci
                        ••
                     
                     ce must 
                        •
                     estayed vpō god
                        •
                      word
                        •
                     . which
you say constreineth you to write, to the ende that ye
might awake vs out of our dreames. Conscience for assurance
of the self, in weldoing, must haue a testimonie
of gods plaine wil reueled. which ye shal not fynd to
be your assurance, that so odiously ye may accuse vs of
those crimes, whereof ye be neuer able to conuict vs.
               The second is, that by plaine scriptures, and sollid
reasons ye studie to confute our doctrine, and not
by raging wordes spoken as it were, by men in a frennesie.
you shal neuer be able to proue, ether that our doctrine
is poysoned, ether yet that we drawe the people to
a secure ydle, and careles lief. Blessed be God ye father
of our Lord Iesus Christ who of his mere mercie hath
caused our doctrine, somwhat to fructifie, our good hope
is, that with vs, and his afflicted Church, he wil continue
his father lie fauor, in such sorte, that from tyme
to tyme, he wil leaue documentes, to y• aeges following,
yt his heauēly doctrine is not sent in vaine. To him be
glorie foreuer. Now to yt that followeth in your booke.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE▪
               
               Now to that which ye say,The 28. section. Malac. 2. that Adam, and Dauid euen in committing
of Idolatrie, homicide, all kind of wickednes, they be st
                     •
                  l in gods fauor.
mark▪ I pray you how the saying of the prophet Zacharie is verified
in you. In this saith he, ye gri
                     ••
                  e the Lord that ye say, They tha
                     •
                   d
                     •
                   euil
are good in the sight of God, and such please him, can there be any
thing more manifes
                     •
                  ly sp
                     •
                  ken against your error▪ and truelye it semeth
 to me, that ye wold intyce the people by this do
                     •
                  trine to sinne, for if the
 elect lose not the fa
                     •
                  or of God by sinne nether the repobate forasmuch,
 a
                     •
                   y
                     •
                   say, neuer were nor can be in h
                     •
                   fa
                     •
                  or▪ so that they can not lose
that which they haue not▪ who nedeth to feare then to lose the
 fauor of God by sinne. It is no matter then what we do▪ but con
                  
                     •
                  rarie

to your doctrine, we be taught by the hol
                     •
                  e Gost in the worde that
God hateth all workes of iniquitie, and he that committeth sinne is o
                     •
                   the
deuil And doeth God fauor them that be membres of the deuil. Paul
saeth no unclean person hathe any inheritance in the kingdome of Christ 
and God, thē was Adā whē he transgressed not of the Kingdome of god
for he was an unclean person defiled with sinne. If he was n
                     •
                  t of the kingdom
                     •
                  
                  
of God, thē was he of the kingdō of the deuil, & so was he out of the
election. euen as Adam did sayth the Lord,Ose 
                        •
                     
                   so haue they broken my couenant
and set me at naught. If Adam in breking the Lordes couenant,
setting God at naught, was stil beloued of God, then may we say with the 
wicked as it is written. It is but lost labor to serue the Lord what profit
haue we for keping his commandements▪ Therefore may we
                     •
                   say that the
proude are happie, a
                     •
                  d that they which deale with vngodlines are set vp
Such a sp
                     •
                  rit haue ye car
                     •
                  les libertins, as your doctrine wel declareth. did 
not God threaten Adam, that in what daye so euer he shoulde eat of the
frute, he shoulde dye the death. not onely corporall but also eternall. They
which forsake the commandements of God forsake God him self, as the Prophetes
saye th they are not the Lords for they haue vnfaithfully forsaken
him, Wherefore Adam when he forsoke God was not the Lords but the
seruant of death and sinne, to whom soeuer ye commit your selues as seruants
to obeye, saieth Paul his seruants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether 
it be of sinne vnto death, or obedience vnto righteousnes. And againe if
any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, and n
                     •
                  ther
Adā nor Dauid were led by the spirit of Christ, when they sinned for the
spirit of Christ dwelleth not insuch as forsake him, & obey the deuil & except 
Christ saith the Apostel dwel in you ye are cast away, then Adā &
Dauid were cast àwaies that is reprobates whē they sinned for nether were
they in Christ nor Christ in thē in whō the electiō of God was & is but to
what purpose shoulde I thus contēd with you that Adā did f
                     •
                  lle out of the
electiō seing in this ye agre not your selues. for your cōgregatiō which is a
                     •
                  
Gen
                     •
                  ua in the confession of their faith, say that of the lost sonnes of Adā
                  
God elected som to life and the rest he refused. E
                     •
                  her improue their be
                     •
                  efe
or els conf
                     •
                  sse with them that all the children of Adam were lost by trāsgression.
If they were lost▪ then were they out of the ele
                     •
                  tion with their father▪
Adam from th
                     •
                   transgression vnto the prom
                     •
                  s was made Therefore
saieth Paul damnatio
                     •
                   came of one sinne vnto condemnatiō & in an other
place like as by Adam all dye. euen so by Christ▪ shal all be made aliue,
Here doeth the Apostles witnes pla
                     •
                  nely▪ that we all by Adam do dye S.
Iohn saieth h
                     •
                   that beleueth not is alredie condemnedand the wrath of 
God abideth on him. Then were Adam and Dauid, and all such workers
of i
                     ••
                  quitie for that tym that they si
                     ••
                  ed alredie condemned being
void, of faith And coulde they be in the 
                     ••
                  ate of cond
                     •
                  mnation & election
both together▪ Harken what followeth, and▪ the wrath of God abideth on

                     〈◊〉
                   as Adam from the tra
                     •
                  sgression v
                     •
                  to th
                     •
                   promes felt the force of the

wrath of God, Thus we 
                     〈◊〉
                  , tha
                     •
                   Adam and Dauid and all other 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                   they sinned 
                     •
                  hey be out of the lou
                     •
                   and fau
                     •
                  r and election of God, vnto
they repen
                     •
                  , and be b
                     •
                  rn
                     •
                   a n
                     •
                  w. for otherwis
                     •
                   can they neuer enter int
                     •
                  
                   the kingdome of heauen. Again, S Iohn saith, ye knowe that no mansl
                     •
                  y
                     •
                   are
hath, et
                     •
                  rn
                     •
                  l lie
                     •
                   abiding in him, Dauid was a man kill
                     •
                  r, wherefore 
he had not eter
                     •
                  al lief abiding in him. Bu
                     •
                   during the tim
                     •
                   of his wicked
                  
                     •
                  es
he was the childe of death, as the Prophet Nathan shew
                     •
                  d him, Dauid
 g
                     •
                  uing iudgement against him self▪ without faith it can not b
                     •
                  
that any man should
                     •
                   please God, Adam, and Dauid when they sinned
they were without faith, then pleas
                     •
                  d they not God. If they pleased him
not, they displeased him so that they were fallen from the loue, and f
                     •
                  uor
of God.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Albeit that I perceaue yt ether ignorāce doeth so impede
you, orels that malice doeth so blynd you, yt nether
ye wil nor can vnderstand yt, which in ye self is most
sensible & plaine, I wil neuer theles yet once againe repete,
that wc before I haue said to the ēd, that we may giue
testimonie, asw
                     •
                  ll, to those yt now liue, as vnto ye posteritie
to com, what doctrine it is, wc ye so furiously impugne.
If ignorance be the cause why thus ye rage against
vs, ye may be taught, if ye list to bestowe your eares
to heare, your eyes to read, & heartes to vnderstand. for
o• doctrine is not as som of you do complein, darke nor
obscure, except yt it be, to those to whom ye Apostle affirmed,
yt his Euāgill was hid. But if that malice wc ye haue
cōceaued agaīst the eternal trueth of God,Answer. to the 
                        •
                     . 2. 3. doth so blynd
you that ye wil not se ye bright son in ye midday, there
resteth no more to vs, but to desire of God ether to remoue
this your deuelish malice (I write as knoweth God euen
frō ye grief of heart): orels so to stay & brydle it, y• it
trooble not his afflicted Church. Ye accuse vs, as yt we
made no differēce betwext vice & vertue, sinne, and iustice,
nether yet betwext Adā, and Dauid, as they were elected
in Christ Iesus before ye foūdacions of the worlde
were laid, and betwext Adam transgressing, and Dauid
committing adulterie, and murthe
                     •
                  .
               Ye further seme to charge vs as we should affirme,
that God hated not sinne, nether yet that he respected

vice. If our short, plaine, and vnfeined cōfessiō, be able to
satisfie you in these thre dowtes I haue good hope yt after
this ye shall haue no occasion to suspect vs in such
causes.Our confession touhing sinne. first before God, before his holie Angelles in heauē,
& before his cōgregatiō in earthe, we protest & acknowledge,
yt sinne, vice, and all kind of iniquiti
                     •
                  , is, and
euer hath bene so odious, in ye presence of God, yt he neuer
suffered ye same vnpunished, in any of his elect childrē.
That for ye same not onelie death, but also cōmō calamities
hath apprehēded all man kynd euē sithēce the
first trasgression. That vertue,T
                        ••
                     
                     ching v
                        •
                     rtue and iustice 
                        ••
                     
                     uil. iustice, and ciuil honestie
(besydes the iustice of the regenerat children)
hath so pleased God▪ that for loue of the same, he hath
mainteined and to this day doth maintein cōmon welthes,
albeit that many grieuous crymes be commited
in the same. As God (we say and affirme) loueth equitie,
iustice, chastitie, trueth, mercie, and tēperāce, so doth he
in som sort hieghly reward the same, and hateth vnrighteousnes,
filthie life deceat, excesse, crueltie, and ria
                  
                     •
                  ous
liuing, which often he punisheth euen in manne
                     •
                  
eyes. And this difference, we say God maketh euen amongest
those, that be not regenerate, nether were euer
called to ye true knowledge of saluation. And this much
briefly for the first secōd and 3. This difference we make
betwext Adam and Dauid elected, in Christ Iesus, and
Adam and Dauid transgressing gods holie commādemēt,
and wil reueled▪ Adam and Dau
                     •
                  d elected, in Christ
Iesus before the foundations of the worlde were laid,
were so loued in the same Lord Iesus their head, that
when they had most horribly fallen and offended, yet
did God seke Adam, call vpon him gently reason with
him and at length conuicting his conscience of his offence,
did make vnto him, that most ioyfull promes of
recōciliation: of the same loue (we say it proceded) that
God did send the Prophete Nathā to Dauid, the offender,
that by the fiction of an other person, he letteth
him se the horror of his sinne, that he did first terrifie,
and beate downe his conscience: and after most tenderly

did erect, and lift it vp from the pitt of desperation.
All these graces (say we) proceded frome gods immutable
loue which did remaine cōstant,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      and i
                        •
                      whom God loueth sin
                     
                        •
                     ers euē when 
                        •
                     hey haue off
                        •
                     n
                     
                        •
                     ed. both towardes the
one and towardes the other, euen in the tyme of their
greatest vnthank fulnes. And that because they nether
were beloued, nor elected in them selues, but in Christ
Iesus their head, who nether did transgresse nor offend
in any iote, against the wil of his heauenlie father.
               But Adam and Dauid transgressing and horribly falling
from God, were so hated in them selues, and for
their sinnes, that first behoued the innocent Sonne of
God, by his death to make a satisfaction▪ for their sinnes▪
as also for the sinnes of all gods children. And secondarely
we say, preache write, and maintein, that the
sinne was so odious before God, that his iustice could
do none other, but inflict vpon Adam, and his posteritie
                     •
                  
The penaltie of death corporall,How 
                        •
                     
                     dious is sin in g
                        •
                     ds pr
                        •
                     
                     sence. the punishemētes, and
plagues, which daily we do se apprehend gods children.
that vpon Dauid, he did execute his iust iudgement,
which in these wordes he pronounced. Now therefor ye
sworde shall neuer departe from thyne house, because,
thow hast despysed me, and taken the wife of vriah the
Hittite, to be thy wife. Thus saieth the lord: behold I
wil raise vp euill against the oute of thyne own house,
and I shall take thy wiues before thyne eyes and giue
them vnto thy neighbour and he shall lye with thy wyues
in the sight of sunne. for yu didest it secretely, but I
shall do this thing before all Israel, and before y• sunne.
This sentence,
                     
                        •
                     . Sam. 12 I say, most iustly pronounced, was after
most sharply, and yet most iustly) for sinne commited)
put in▪ execution. And so do we affirm that none of gods
children be they neuer so deare, shall escaip punishement,
if contempteously they transgresse.
               I suppose yt this our confession nothing doth offend
you, except in this one thing yt we affirme that God still
loued Adā and Dauid after their sinne, before yt his holie
Sprit wroght in their heartes any true repentance. And

yet I wonder why this should offend you, seing yt we assigne
the cause, not to be them selues, nether any vertue
with in them selues, but Christ Iesus, in whom they were
elected and chosen. The signes of gods loue, we haue euidētly
proued, and y• end and issue did witnes yt gods loue
was not mutable. If you require scriptures, for the probatiō
of ye same. Behold they are redie. if whē we were enemies
we were recōciled
vnto God, by the death of his
sone, much more we being recōciled shalbe saued by his
life.Rom. 5▪
                   And a little before in the same chapter. Whē we were
sinners Christ died for vs, &c. And ye Apostle Iohn: herein
appereth the loue of God towardes vs, y• his onelie begotten
sonne hath he sent in to the world, that we may
liue by hym: herein is loue, not that we loued God, but
that he loued vs. And hath sent his Sonne in the mercieseat▪
for our sinnes. These are verey plaine, and we
think that no reasonable man wil denie to Adam and
to Dauid, that which the holie Gost maketh common
to all gods elect children, to witt, to be beloued of God▪
euen when they were ennemies, dead in sinne, drowned
in idolatrie, and polluted with all filthines, as witnesseth
the Apostle in these wordes: And you when ye were
dead by sinne,Ephe. 
                        •
                     
                   in the which ye somtymes walked, according
to this worlde, accordīg to y• prince, to whom power
is the ayre, which is the spirit now working in the
rebellious children,The vnspea
                        •
                     kable lo
                        ••
                      of God towardes his elect. amongest whom we all had somtymes
conuersation, in the lust
                     •
                  s of our flesh, doing those
thinges, which pleased the fleshe, and the mynd, and were
of nature the sonnes of wrathe like as others. But
God who is riche in mercie, for his own great loue, by
the which he loued vs, euen when we were dead by sinnes
(marke, and if ye be offended, complein vpon the holie
Gost) hath qwickened vs togither with Christ (by grace
ye are saued) and hath raised vs vp togither with him,
and to gither with him, hath caused vs to sit amongest y•
heauenlie, by Christ Iesus, to shew in ye ages to com, his
most rich grace in his liberalitie, by Christ Iesus. God

open your eyes that you may se the light, and mollifie
your heartes, that ye may magnifie with gods children
his superaboundant loue and mercie bestowed euen vpon
the most vnworthie.
               If ye think yt this loue hath onelie place before that
man offend, you se the holie Gost plainely repugneth
to your sentēce, for he speaketh to them that had bene
polluted & defiled with all sinnes.
                     
                        •
                     epli
                        •
                     
                   If yet ye replie, but
that was during the tyme of their ignorāce and not after
they were illuminated by grace, ye haue said nothīg
against our confession. for we affirme that God loueth
sinners being wrapped in death and damnatiō by sinne.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
and yt we haue plainely proued. But yet for your satisfactiō,
and instructiō (for I take to record the Lord Iesus y•
I wold bestow my own life, to ioyne you fully to Christ
Iesue) I will procede a litle further with you▪ Do ye think
that the sinne of Dauid touching the nature and qualitie
of ye sinne it self, was more horrible and odious be
fore God, then were all the sinnes committed in Ephesus,
by those, to whom the Apostle writeth? yea then the

                     •
                  innes which were done amongest ye hole Gētiles? I trust
ye will not think it. and we clerely see that God loued y•
elect in Ephesus and amongest the Gentiles when they
were drouned in all kynd of iniquitie. If still ye replie
Dauid was vnthankfull who after so many benefites receaued,
so traterously declined frome God, followīg his
own appetites, and of purposed coūsell, murthering his
innocent seruant, and y• with great ignominie of God.
This nether do, nether yet euer did we denie. but yet as
y• question is other, so is not our cōfe
                     ••
                  ion proued fals,
Albeit Dauid was vnthankfull (yea and after Adā most
vnthankfull, of any of gods children to his daies). for
herein standeth the doubt, whether y• the vnthankfulnes
of gods childrē, after they haue once receaued mercie,
grace, and large benefites from gods hands, doth so
alienat the mynd of God, from them, that he beareth to
them no maner of loue, till they turn to him by repentance

The contrarie hereof, we hold, and affirme, not fearing
to auowe, that repentance,Faith &
repentā
                     ce are the eff
                        •
                     
                     ct
                        •
                     s of gods lo
                        •
                     e which he beare
                        •
                     h to his elect in Chri
                        ••
                      lesus. as it is ioyned with faith
which is the fre gift of God, so is it the effect of gods
cōstant loue toward them, and no cause of the same. And
for the more ample declaration hereof, let vs compare
the deniall of Peter, and ye defection of all the Apostles,
with the sinne of Dauid. Albeit Peter was not called to be
a wordlie prīce, as Dauid was, yet I thīk ye wil not denie,
but to be called to the office of an Apostle, to be Christes
scoller the space of thre yeres, to be so familiare
with Christ, yt he alone with other two did se Christ their
master trāsfigured, did heare y• ioyfull voice frome heauen▪
did se Moises and Helias speak with him, my trust
is, I say,Dauids offence cōpared with Peters d
                        •
                     niall of Christ yt ye will not denie, but that those were graces no
thing inferior to Dauids kingdom temporall: and yet
how horribly yt Petet did denie Christ Iesus, ye are not
ignorante. Yea but say ye, Peter wept, and soght grace
with repētance. But I ask when? the holie Gost doth answere,
y• it was after the cocke had crowen, and that Christ
Iesus had looked vnto him. Proceded yt looke I besech
you from loue, or hatered? It should seme in dede, by
the effect, that it came from loue. for then it is said that
Peter remembered the wordes of his master and so wēt
furth and wept bitterly. By all liklihode, then were his
masters vordes before qwyte blotted oute of his memorie.
But God be praised, we nede not to depend vpon vncerten
coniectures. The fall and deniall of Peter (as in
an other place we haue declared) came not by chance,
as a thīg, whereof Christ Iesus was ignorāt. He did forese
it, and before speaketh it. And what cōfort gaue Christ
Iesus vnto him▪ before he pronounced that sharp sentence,
before ye cock crowe thow shalt denie me thries. This
comfort I say, which oght of all faithfull most to be ex
                  
                     •
                  olled:
Simon, Simō, beholde Satā hath desired you, that
he may sift you as wheat, but I haue prayed for the,Luk 
                        •
                     2 that
thy faith faile not: and thow being conuerted confirme
thy bretheren. Did Christ pray for Peter, knowing

that he should denie him? so he affirmeth. Doth the
praier of Christ Iesus and the effect thereof vanish in
a moment? God for bid, that such impietie take place
īn our heartes. The Apostle doth witnes that as his
sacrifice is euer recent before God, so is his praier effectuall
euer for his elect. Doth God vtterly hate detest,
and abhorre such, as for whom Christ Iesus praieth?
yea commendeth to his mercie, before they fall i
                     •
                  n to
danger? my hope is that the godlie will not so iudge.
The same I might proue by the stowte denial of Thomas
(besides the defection of all the rest) who after
that the glad tydings of Christes resurrection,God can not hate such as Christ praieth for. was confirmed
by the testimonie of many, did obstinatly say,
except that I put my fingers in the holes, &c. I wil not
beleue. Here ye se was no repentance of his former
infidelitie, but rather an augmentation, and increase of
the same. And did it procede frome loue, or from hatered,
that Christ cometh vnto him, and doth offer to satisfie
his curiositie, in all thinges, willing him to be
faithfull and not to remaine an infidele?
               Consider now how simply and plainely, we haue opened
our myndes vnto you, God grāt you his holie Spirit
rightly to vnderstand, and charitably to interprete
the thinges that be spoken, &c.
               Now will I briefly go throughe these scriptures
which ye abuse, and violently wrest against vs not making
so long discourse to amend your iudgemēt, as I haue
done to fore. For if things alredie spoken shall not
profit, I must confesse my self destitute of counsell, for
this tyme. The wordes of the prophete (where necgligently
ye name Zacharie for Malachie),Mala. 2. nether serue
your purpose, nether yet are verefied in vs. for we be not
as the priestes, who in those daies permitted plaine iniquitie,
and contempt of God, and of his statutes, vniuersaly
to be done by the people, and yet they did not oppone
them selues to the same. Read the Prophete and
con
                     •
                  ict vs of those thinges if ye can.
               
                  We are sorie, that ye haue no better opinion of vs,To the 3 then
that our hole studie should be to entyse the people to
sinne. Not that we do muche feare, that by your wordes,
ye can persuade any, except your own faction▪ (and hardly
those) to credit you in that behalf. for all praise be
to God, our liues, doctryn, and correctiō of vice, do witnesse
the contrarie. but our greatest sorow is, for your
condemnation, which doubtles must ensue suche wicked
iudgement, if hastely ye repent not.
               As the Sunne is not to be blamed,To the 4 Th
                        •
                      sunne is not blamed becaus the carion stinketh albeit the carion
by the heate thereof, be more and more corrupted: so
is not our doctrine, althogh that carnall men, thereof
take carnal libertie. for that ye knowe did ensue the
doctrine of S. Paule.
               We do no les affirme both in worde and writing thē
here you do affirme, to wit: That he who committeh
sinne, is of the deuil. but herein I suppose standeth the
difference, that you and we vnderstand not that phrase
alike. we vnderstand that the man cōmitteh sinne,Rom. 6 To the 5▪ 
                     
                        •
                     . I
                        •
                     a. 
                        •
                      What it is to committ sinne. whose
hole studie, mynd, and purpose frome tyme, to tyme, is
bent vpon iniquitie: and suche do we affirme to be of
the deuil, who sinneth from the beginning. If you vnderstand,
that euerie action committed against the law
of God, maketh a man the sonne of the deuil, we must
liberally speak that so we do not vnderstand the mynd
of the Apostle. for plaine it is that he meaneth not of
actiōs particulare, be they neuer so grieuous, whereof a
man after repenteth, ād from the same desisteth: but of
a continual exercise, delite, and studie, whiche man hath
in sinne. And this is plaine I say,The meaning of the place alleged 1. Iohn 3 by the wordes which
immediatly procede and go before, he that exerciseth
iustice (saieth he) is iust euē as he is iust: he yt cōmitteth
sinne is of the deuil. for frome the beginning the deuil
sinneth. Here is the exercise of iustice put in contrarietie
to the committing of sinne. An exercise we know
requireh a continual studie and practyse. I think ye will
not say, that one iust worke maketh a man iust, and so

consequently the son of God, except he procede frome
iustice to iustice. The same say we must be vnderstand
of the committing of sinne: for nether Adame,To the. 5. nor Dauid
did any longer committ their former sinnes, then
by grace they began to repent. And so did they not remaine
vnclean persons, nor in bondage of the deuil.
Neither yet can it be proued, that euer they were membres
of the deuil, nor of his kingdom, albeit willingly
they made them selues slaues to him: whom Christ Iesus
notwithstanding did vendicate to him self,To the. 6. and delyuer
from that thraldome. Because of the fre gift of
God his father, they did appertein to his kingdome: nether
euer be you able to proue by any of these sentences,
that euer they were out of the election, as before is
declared.
               The place of the prophete Oseas is of you euill vnderstād▪
                  Os
                        •
                      6.
the lacke of the hebrew tongue may be the cause
of your error. And albeit your great, and perfect angell
Castalio pretēd great knowledge in that tongue, yet
in that, as in many other places a childe may espie his
negligence. Trewe it is that in the hebrew, this word Adam
is in that place. But if we shall vnderstand that word
wheresoeuer it is founde in the scripture, for the person
of Adam our first father, we shall make a mad translatiō,
and a sense more mad. Suche as haue, but mean vnderstanding
in that tongue do know, that that worde is oftē common
for any man, as in the prophetes is most euident.
               The veritie of the text is this, they haue transgressed
the couenante,How 
                        •
                     his worde Adā in 6. cha. of 
                        •
                     seas ogh
                        •
                      to be vnderstand. as the couenante of a man, they haue rebelled
against me &c. God compleineth vpon Ephraim
and Iuda, that they had no further respect, reuerence nor
regard to that most excellent couenante and league,
whiche God had made with them, to wit, that he wold
be their God, and they should be his people. for God
had preferred them to all nations of the earth, and had
set them a part from others, to serue and honor him in

holynes of lief, and to offer vnto him rather spiritual
thē carnall sacrifice. But they serued him at their pleasure:
yea, and in that land which they had receaued of
gods most liberal benediction, they did decline to Idolatrie.
for that he meaneth, where that he saieth: there
haue they rebelled, that is, where that they most oght
to be obedient. This I doubt not shall euerie man, who
diligently marketh the scope of the prophete perceaue
to be his verie meaning.
               Otherwies,To the
                        •
                     
                   and more sharply I might haue answered
your ignorance, who can se no difference betwext
Adam once sinning, and yet shortly after by grace called
to a new, and more sure league with God (whiche
with all gladnes and thankfulnes he did receaue) and
the manifest contemners of God, which do nothing
els, but delyte in sinne. forme the whiche albeit, that ten
thousand tymes they be called, yet contemning all societie
with God, their pleasure is, to remaine in vanitie,
and so finally in death. This difference, I say ye
oght to haue obserued, and then I doute not, but that ye
wold haue exempted Adam, from the rancke of suche
as contempteously crie, it is but labor lost to serue God.
If diligently ye shall consider what is writen in Iob,Iob 21 Mal
                        ••
                     . 3 and
in Malachie the third cha. ye shall easely vnderstād that
the prophete there deuideth ye hole multitude, in these
two sortes of men, to wit, in those that be proud obstinate
contēners, and in them yt feared the Lord, whō he calleth
his peculiare people, whom he promised to spare, as
a man spareth his son that serueth him. And one of
this last sorte vnderstand we Adam to haue bene all his
daies, after his fall, and recōciliation by grace. The lord
purge your heartes (if his good pleasure be) from yt venom,
which so oft moueth you to spew furth your own
shame, sometymes crying: that we be led with the spirit
of Balaam: and now affirming▪ that we be careles libertynes.
To wc blasphemies because I can nether answere
without ye sorow & grief of heart, nether without som

offence of godlie eares, I will remit iudgement to him,
to whō as he hath frome the beginning, opened thinges
that for a tyme lay hid in darknes, so I dout not, but
that he will, yea and that shortly reuele vnto the world
with what spirites both you and we be led. when more
occasiō shall be offered, I purpose, if so it please the mercie
of my God to assist me, to notifie with what spirites
you and your sect haue bene led here to fore.
               What soeuer ye gather of the wordes of the Apostle
it is altogither out of ye purpose. for in none of all those
places doth he define & determin what Adam,To the 8 9. & 
                        •
                     0 and Dauid
were, whan they had sinned, but plainely he declareth,
what tryall oght euerie mā to take of him self▪ whē
Christ Iesus is preached vnto him, affirming that if any
haue not the spirit of Christ Iesus, that he is not of his.
but ye spirit of Christ remaineth not in vnclean and prophane
persons, say you. but yet I affirme that Adam and
Dauid oght not to be nōbred in that band. for althogh
they sinned, and that most horribly, yet did they not
abyde in that estate. And albeit they were not led with
the spirit of Christ, whē they sinned, yet they were both
led, drawen, and gouerned by his omnipotent spirit,
when they repented. And so can ye neuer be able to
proue them to be reprobates,How Adā and Dauid wer
                        •
                      neuer repr
                        •
                     bates no not euen when they
sinned: except that ye be able to proue, that they finally
perished in sinne. for this principall do I still hold, that
true faith and true repentance (which the reprobate 
                     ••
                  
                  uer
haue) be the frutes of Election. The place of the
Apostle written in the 13. chapter of the second Epistle
to the Corinthians, is neither well marked, nor rightly
applied by you, neither yet will it suffer any suche conclusion
as ye gather of it. The mynd of the Apostle is
this: After the departing of Paule from Corinthus, where
after many stormes susteined, he had established
the forme of a Churche, did enter in fals Prophetes,
whose chief studie was to eleuate the auctorite of Paule
and so to deface his hole labor, affirming that he was

not worthie to be called an Apostle. for he was neuer in
the companie of Christ, others were of greater estimatiō
and faour then he was.
               And as a multitude is euer more redie to receaue poyson
thē holsom medicine, agreate nōber began to giue
eare vnto them: and so began litle to esteme, what so euer
Paul had labored amongest them. Against which
vnthankfulnes▪ the Apostle very sharpley writeth, as in
bothe his epistles doth appere. And amongest other
his argumentes, which he vseth to proue that he was an
Apostle, nothing inferior to the greatest, he adduceth
thē selues for a testimonie, saing: Trie your selues if ye
be in the faith,2. Cor▪ 1
                        •
                     
                   proue your selues. know ye not your
selues, that Iesus Christ is in you, except yt ye be reprobates?
By these wordes most sharp, and most vehement
he laboreth to conuict their conscience, that he was an
Apostle, and that the prooffe of his Apostleship (as in an
other place he doth affirme) was declared in them, as
he should say: your fals Apostles aff
                     •
                  rme, that I am not
worthie of the name of an Apostle. but if the office of
an Apostle be to preach Christ Iesus, and if the true signe,The pl
                        •
                     
                     ce of th
                        •
                      13. chap. 2. Corin. declared
that decerneth the true Apostle from the fals be,
that Christ so potently worketh by his ministerie, that
Christ Iesus taketh possession in the heartes of the hearers
by the true preaching of his word, then be iudges
your selues whether I be an Apostle or not. Call your
cōscience to examination, in what estate I did find you.
were ye not drowned in all sortes of iniquite? did ye
not walk in darkenes, without any true light of God?
And in what estate did I leaue you? Trie and examin
your selues in what estate ye do yet stand, you can not
be vnsensible, you can not be so ignorant, but ye must
know, whether that Christ dwelleth in you or no. If you
will acknowledge, and cō
                  
                     •
                  es that Christ dwelleth in you,
then must ye nedes confes, that I am an Apostle. For
by my labors and preaching did you receaue Christ
Iesus. And if to deface my labors, and to defraud me of

that honor, which God, of his mercie hath giuē vnto me
ye list deny, that ether ye receaued Christ Iesus, ether
yet that he remaineth in you, then do ye confes your
selues reprobates.
               Paule doth not absolutely define that they were reprobates,
but putteth in to their choise, whether they
wold confes, that Christ Iesus did remaine in them
by faith, which they had receaued by the preaching of
Paule, and so wold admitt him to be an Apostle: or to
grante, that they had nothing to do with Christ, and so
to confes them selues reprobates. Now let the indifferent
reader iudge whether that ether faithfully ye cyte
the text, ether that righteously ye conclude vpon the
same. The Apostle saieth not, except that Christ dwell
in you, yow are reprobates, but saieth, as before I haue
alledged, do ye not know your selues that Christ Iesus
is in you? except that in som what ye be reprobates. And
albeit that the wordes were such, as ye recite, how can
you therof conclude, Dauid, and Adam were reprobates,
when they sinned? seing that Paule in that place maketh
mencion of no other sinne, except of the denial
of Christ, to remain in them, of their ingratitude towardes
him, whom God had appointed preacher vnto them
and of giuing eare & credite to fals Apostles, sclāderers
of Christes true messingers▪ how iustly I might turn Paules
wordes vpō your heades, you easely may espie: but all
such reasoning I do from my heart abhorre. If ye can
be able to proue that Adam refused the grace offered,
or that Dauid did storme against Nathan, ether affirming
or suspecting him to be a fals prophete, then had
your argument som probabilitie. for onely of such, and
to suche speaketh the Apostle in that place. Thus doth

                     •
                  ther your ignorance, or malice wresting the scriptures
against their natiue sense, compell me to trouble the
reader muche more then I wold, if any sinceritie were
found in you.
               We do constantly affirme,To the 11 that by the sinne of one

man did death enter in to the world. for Adam did not
onely lose him self, but also did with him self wrap all
his posteritie in sin, death and damnation, so that Adam
and all his sonnes were in him lost. But thereof it
doth not follow (as ye affirme) that therefor they were
out of the election, from the transgression vnto the promes.
for as before we haue plainely proued, they were elected
in Christ Iesus before the foundaciōs of y• world
were laied, in whom they did stand elected, and beloued
euen whē they fell in Adā at which time ye electiō which
from all eternitie was kept in the counsell of God, began
to be notified, and manifested to mannes knowledge.
The fall and sinne of man was the way and meanes,
by the which gods election did appere, but was not the
cause,It beh
                        •
                     
                     ued all men to dye in Adam. why that it was destroied. And so if with reuerēce
ye coulde consider the mysterie of our redemption
in Christ Iesus, ye shoulde plainely se, that it behoued
all to die in Adam, that the elect might receaue life in
Christ Iesus alone.
               The wordes of Christ Iesus our master,To the 12. rehearsed
by the Euangelist S. Iohn,Iohn: ye do shamefully abuse for in
that place he intreateth not, whether a sinner durīg the
time of his blindnes and sinne, is appointed to damnation
or not, nether yet whether such as before haue had
knowledge, as Adam and Dauid had, be altogether void
of faith, by reason of sinne after committed. None of
these two poi
                     •
                  tes I say doth our Master in that place intreat.
But vnto Nichodemus he plainely declareth, that
the cause of life is faith, and the cause of condemnation
is incredulitie and vnbe leif. Not that Christ Iesus
affirmeth, that euerie man that is vnfaithfull at any
tyme is or shalbe condemned. for God hath wrapped all
vnder vnbelief. yt he may haue mercie vpō all, as S. Paul
confesseth him self to haue bene a persecuter, and vnfaithfull.
But the true meaning of Christ is yt such as dispyse
ye light offered, & remaine invnbelief to ye ēd, haue

their condemnation alredie appointed, as contrary wise
who so euer with full obedience do steadfastly beleue
the same shall haue the life euerlasting, not withstanding
the manifest tran sgressions of the law.
               The rest of this part is be fore answered and therefor
                     •
                  
I will not with repeticion trouble the reader. for ye be
neuer able to proue,To the, 13▪ 14. 15 &. 16. that Adame and Dauid were so, out
of the loue of God, that he did not loue them in Christ
his Sonne, in whom they were elected. Dauid was no
suche mankiller as was Cayn, of whom, Saint Iohn
speaketh, who delited in blood to the end. Nether did
Nathā shew, nor Dauid pronounce any suche iudgemēt
against him self, as ye imagin, but being conuicted in
in his own conscience, how horribly he had offended, he
did heare not withstanding that ioyfull sentence: The
Lord hath taken a way thy sinne, thow shalt not die &c.
Which sentence no doubt proceded frome that immutable
loue, wc was reserued to him in Christ Iesus,
euen when he was fardest declined from God. It will
be hard for you to proue by euident scriptures, that Dauid
was altogither void of faith. but granting, that he,
as concerning his own sense, and feling, was vtterly
dead, yet doth it not thereof follow, that so he displeased
God, that he fell from the loue and fauor of God, as
touching his electiō. for the Apostle (vpon whose wordes
ye seme to grounde your reason) meaneth not, that
the lack of faith,The lacke of faith in all persōs d
                        ••
                     th not so displease God that he vtterly reie
                     
                        •
                     teth thē
                   in all persons, at all tymes, and in all
respectes, doth so displease God, that he hateth them,
and reiecteth them to death euerlasting. For childrē for
a tyme lacke faith, and yet Crist pronounceth that
their Angelles do se the face of his father, and that the
kingdō of heauen apperteineth to such. Thomas was vnfaithfull
euen after Christes resurrectiō. And yet did he
not so displease his maister, as before we heaue touched,
but that he did seke
                     •
                   him, and did remoue his incredulitie.
And Christ Iesus did rebuke the vnbelief of
his disciples, and the hardnes of their heartes. but

yet did he not vtterly dispyse them. But now to the
rest.
            
         
         
            
               ADVERSARIE.
               But if the scripures will not satis
                     •
                  ie you, then must you be beaten 
with your own r
                     •
                  d. for if I grante you that all men did not fall out of
gods holie election unto cōdennation by Adams trāsgress
                     •
                  on, it followeth
therupon that the cōming of Christ his procious death and passio
                     •
                   is superfluous,
vaine and of none effecte So by your peruers d
                     •
                  ctryne 
                     •
                  e will infect
Christianite with the chief error wherewith the Iewes be delud
                     •
                  d,The 29. section. That

                     〈◊〉
                   they esteme it a great madnes, to say that Christ should suffer death for
the offence cōmitted by Adam, euen so may I collect of your error-for what
nedeth Christ to die for them, whom nether Adams transgression▪ nether
their own could make them fall from gods election. but now I will
more largely dilate this argument, Election was afore the world when
there was no sinne, and the promes of Christ, was made sithēse the world
was created, because of sinne for had not sinne bene we neded no new promes
being alredie iust and holie images of God. Now if the elect did not 
fall out of the election, by Adās trāsgress
                     •
                  on, then nede they no redemer, being
alredie safe by reason of the electiō, in which they were afore sinne, ād
remaine still in the same. Because as you say the elect nether did, nor can
fall out of the election. Then seing the elect be safe and hole they nede no
phisition, nether came Christ to call the righteous, but 
                     •
                  inn
                     •
                  rs. wherfor 
the death of Christ, as concerning them is in vain, they being safe alredie
by election. The like argument vseth Paul to the Galathya
                     •
                  s, if righteousnes
cometh by the Law, then Christ died in vaine, if the elect▪ be st
                     •
                  ll in
the fauor of God what nede they of Christ, to reconcile them to the father,
in whose fauore they are alredie Now as touching the other sorte, whom
ye call reprobates you say they cā by no maner of meanes be saued. yea & 
that Christ died not for them, then was Chistes death altogither in Vaine▪
for his death you say belongeth not to the reprobate, and the elect haue no
nede of it. Is not this godlie gere:
            
            
               ANSWER.
               In dilating your argument by the which ye go about
to proue yt Christes preciouse death was surperfluouse
and vaine,To the 1. & 2 if the elect did not fall from their election,
this reason ye vse.
               Election was afore the world whē there was no sinne, and the promes of
Christ was made sithence the world was created, becaus of sinne for
had not sinne bene we ned
                     •
                  d no newe promes being alredie iust and holie

                     •
                  mages of God. Now if the elect say you, did not fall out of the election
by Adams transgression, then nede they no r
                     •
                  demer, being alredie saue by
reason of the election in the which they were afore sinne and remaine still
in the same. &c▪
               
               
                  In this argument ye commit two fowle faultes.
The first, ye take that for a thing true, ād cōfessed, which
is fals. and therefore by vs alwaies denied. for thus ye
reason: man was elected before the worlde was created,
but man sinned aftre the world was created, Ergo man
fel from his election. we still denie the conclusion, and
do affirme, that as we were elected in Christ Iesus before
all times, so did the elect euer remain
                     •
                   in Christ.
and therfore after that they had sinned, it behoued that
the promes shoulde be declared, that by the same the
elect might receaue comfort, and be assured of their election.
               Your second fault, more declareth youre grosse
ignorance in the mysterie of our redemption. for from
election ye streight waies leap to glorificacion and saluation,
obseruing nether middes nor meanes, which
gods wisdome hath appointed, and determined to go
betwext Trew it is, God hath elected in Christ to
life euerlasting his chosen childrē. But how? Sainct Paul
yea the hole scriptures, wheresoeuer mention is made
of our election, ioyneth therewith the death and blood
of Christ. for none otherwies were we elected in him, but
that he shoulde sustein the punishement for our transgression.
And that we shoulde receaue life, which we had
lost in Adam and in our selues, by the meanes of his
death and resurrection. therefore where ye reason, if the
elect did not fall oute of the Election, by Adams transgressiō,
thē nede they no redemer, being alredie saued,
by reason of their election, the cōclusion is fals, and the
reason vaine. for the elect haue nede of a redemer,Why the elect haue nede of a redemer not
because that they did fal out of election but by reason
that they did fal from iustice to sinne, & frō obediēce to
dissobediēce & therefore nede they a redemer, a phisicion,
ād one to giue thē life. because yt they being elect in
gods eternal counsel are yet fallen into bondage into
mortal sicknes, & death, by their own trāsgression. If ye
can proue yt the elect did not sinne, & that they are no
                     •
                  
                  
sicke, then might ye haue concluded, that they neded
no redemer nor phisition.To the 3 And so ye might haue proceded
in your argument vpon the wordes of the Apostle
saing: that if righteousnes cometh by the law, then
Christ died in vaine, but seing that all gods childrē are
fallen in to sinne, the bondage and miserie wherof, they
in this lief cōtinually fele, how iustly ye may conclude,
that becaus they remained in gods election, and so consequently
in his fauor by Christ, that therefor they neded
no redemer, let the indifferent reader iudge.
               If it seme strāge to you, that God loued sinners in Christ
besides the places that are afore alledged for probation
of that part, heare what the veritie it self pronounceth:
So God loued the world (saieth our master) that his onelie
begotten Sonne hath he giuen. whom soeuer ye shall
vnderstand vnder the name of the world, ye can not s
                     •
                  
                  clude
sinners from it. where ye most vnreuerently ask,
what then nede they of Christ to recōcile them, I answer
(with greater feare and reuerence then alas you declare)
euen such nede they haue of Christ as the bodie hath
of the soule, or yet the liuing mā of holsome nuriture,
yea much more. for albeit the bodie haue lief, by
the meanes of meat and drink, yet haue the elect nether
lief nor reconciliation, but by Christ Iesus, yea
and that by the meanes of his deathe, and passion, by
the which, iust payment and satisfaction is made to
gods iustice, for their sinnes. And so are they reconciled,
who by nature are the enemies to God.
               We do not denie but that Christes death is sufficient
for to redeme the sinnes of the hole world.To the 4 but because
all do not receaue it with faith, which is the fre gift of
God giuen to the chosen children, therefor abyde th
                     •
                  
vnfaithfull in iust condemnation. God remitt vnto you
(if his good pleasure be) aswell your vnreuerent conclusion
as your most vniust accusation, in which
ye burden vs, that we will infect the Christianitie
with the chief error, with the which the Iewes are

infected, who esteme it a great madnes, to say that Christ
should suffer death for the sinnes and offences committed
by Adam. Assuredly I do more then wōder that such
impietie shalbe found in any creature indewed with reason,
but I remitt iudgemēt to God. Thus you procede.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               
                   The Apostle saieth, God hath frome the begining chosē you to saluatiō
through sanctifiyng of the the spirit and through beleuing the trueth here
we do learn that they which be chosen to saluatiō they be sanctified by
the spirit and beleue the trueth,The 30. section. and that such may fall it appereth by tha
                     •
                  
which is writen in the Epistle to the Hebrues,Hebr. 1
                        •
                     
                   how much more suppose
you shall he be punished which treadeth vnder fete the Sonne of God, and
 counteth the blood of the testament, wherewith he was sanctified as an
vnholie th
                     •
                  ng and doth dishonor the spirit
                     •
                  of grace, also he exhorteth them▪
not t
                     •
                   cast away their confidence and not to withdraw them selues vnto
damnation, h
                     •
                   which withdraweth him self vnto damnation
was a fore in the state of saluation as he that withdraweth him self
vnto saluation was afore in the state of damnation. of this change
 speaketh Paule to the Ephesians: remember that ye being in tymes past
without Christ being aliens and strangers from the testament of promes
hauing no ho
                     •
                  e and being without God in this world. but now by the
meanes of Christ Iesu y
                     •
                   which som tyme were far of, are made nie by
the bloode of Christ. And againe now therefor ye are no strangers and
foroners, but Citezens with the Sainctes of the houshold of God.
               
                   Here doth Paule write to the elect, whom he affirmeth in tymes past
to haue bene without Christ: and we are sure that without Christ there
is no election: he saieth also that they were without the testament of promes;
and all they which be elect pertein to the promes but now (saieth he)
ye be citezens with the saintes and of the houshold of God, This is a change
frome death vnto lief, frome the bondage of the deuil to libertie in
Christ Iesu, frome the wrath of God to the fauor and exceding loue of
God, frome the infernall preson to the the hauenlie Ierusalē. of the cōtrarie
exchange and m
                     •
                  tation,He
                        •
                     r. 6 it is writen to the Hebr. where it is declared,
 how they which were once lightened and had tasted of the heauēlie gi
                  
                     •
                  te,
and were bec
                     •
                  
                  ̄ partakers of the holie Gost and had tasted of the good
will of God, and of the power of the world to com, that they may fall away,
and crucifie the sonne of God a fr
                     •
                  she and make a mock of him.
I can not tell what cā be more plainely spoken cōtrarie to you, which affirme
that they which be once elect can neuer fall out of the same election,
vnt
                     •
                   condemnation. for if these wordes were not wr
                     •
                  tten in the scriptures,
 if I or any other should speak thē, ye wold say they were fals and we liers
And yet I am sure rather thē ye will submit your self to the trueth ye had
rather seke an narrow bore to crepe out at, what will ye say, if ye deni
                     •
                  
                  
such one as receaued all these cheif benefites, that any man can receaue
i
                     •
                   this world yea no mā can be participāt of no greater giftes during this
lief if ye denie such one I say to be elect, surely ye are of a peruerse repro
                  
                     •
                  ate 
mynd, for asmuch as ye plainely resist the holie Gost, think you that
God giueth these his chief talētes which he such as no creature can receaue
any greater in this world. think you I say, that God did bestow thē mea
                  
                     •
                  ing,
to receaue no frute of them? but to bestow thē in vaine & if God did
bestow them vpon hym whom he reprobated afore the fundation of the 
world. whom he knew that of necess
                     •
                  tie he should perishe then did he intend
bestowe them in vain which is fals for asmuche as the holie Gost
willeth and exhorteth vs not to receaue the grace of God in vaine, we
may abusing his grace receaue it in vain otherwise in vain did
Paule exhort us not to receaue the grace of God in vaine.2. Cor. 6 of suche doth
also Peter speak▪ that after they were cleane escaped frome the filthy
                  
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  
of the worlde,2. Per. 2 throughe the knoledge of our Lord and Sauior Iesus
Christ are yet tangled againe therin and ouercome whose latter end
                     •
                   is
wors then the beginning. And suche one is compared to a dogge which returneth 
to his own vomite againe, And to a sow which wa
                     •
                   washed, and
now returneth and walloweth in the mire. I praye you whether were
these elected or repro
                     •
                  ate, of whom Peter speaketh If you say reprobate 
yt were they clean escaped from the filthines of the world through the
knowledge of the trueth, and had vomited their poyson, & were washed
clean If you say they were elect, then marke how they be tāgled againe,
returned to their vomite, & to the filthie myre, but you will say they cā not
yet finally perishe▪ Peter knew what he wolde say, and therfore maketh
you answere afore hand saing. their latter end is worse thē the beginning
Brethren saith S. Iames if any of you do erre frome the trueth,Iacob 5 & a nother
cōuerte him, let the same know that he which conuerteth the sinner from
going astray out of his way shall saue asoule frō death. what be they whō
Iames saieth, they do erre frō the trueth? If ye say reprobate, consider how
they be conuerted to the trueth, and saued from death. If you say they be 
elect you se how that they (being in error) were ord
                     •
                  inied to death Otherwise
how can they be saued from death which nether be dead nor yet cā
                  die.
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 
                        •
                     
                   Paul willeth Timothie to informe with all meaknes them which resist
the trueth, if God at any tyme will giue them repentace for to know
the trueth and that they may com to them selues againe out of the snare
which are holden captiue of him at his will. If thou say that these be elect 
to whom Paule writeth, se you not how they by s
                     •
                  ared of the deuil yea

                     •
                  nd are holden captiue of the deuil at his will. If you say they be reprobates
thē marke well how they by repētance may escaip the snare of the de
                  
                     •
                  il.
but what should I speak of repentāce▪ if your opinion be true thē the
preaching of repentance is vaine. for asmuche as the elect can not finally 
perish, nether fall owt of the electiō & fauor of God. what nede haue they
then of repenta
                     •
                  ce, And the reprobate cā by no meanes attein vnto saluation

for what purpose should they repent? Then this is no sounde doctrine,
which ye t
                     •
                  ach. The lord planted his v
                     ••
                  yard hedged it and
walled it and planted it with goodlie grapes,Iesa. 5 lere. 
                        •
                     
                   If they were goodlie grapes
and of a good roote, as we read in Ieremie, then were they no repr
                     •
                  ba
                     •
                  es.
for there the lord witnesseth that there could no more be done
for his vineyarde then he had done, then had he not preordina
                     •
                  e them
to destruction. But (as he saieth) I made the o
                     •
                   Israel that thow might
serue me ye
                     •
                   became they reprobates, and perished by this we se that the
elect and ch
                     •
                  sen become reprobates through their noughtines and wikednes.
The lord will be mer
                     •
                  ifull vnto Iacob▪
                  Isa. 14 and will yet ch
                     •
                  se
Israel againe, and set them in their own land, Seing the lord doth chose
them againe, then were they fall
                     •
                  n out of their former election when
Israel was yong I loued him and called my sonne owt of the land of Egypt,
forasmuch as Israel was the sonne of God, and that also beloued insomuch
that the lordled them with cordes of friendship, and bondes of loue they
must nedes, be 
                     •
                  he elect of God, yea because they prouoked the lord through
their abominations, they are cast away▪ and the lord rewarde
                     •
                  h them
according to their desertes.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               If I should labor to the end of this your most confused
worke, to reduce euerie scripture by you wrested
and abused to the true meaning and vnderstanding of
the holie Gost as hitherto I haue done in the most parte
of them, which ye haue alledged, my trauale should
be great ād the work should excede a iust measure. Therefor
seing that sufficiently, by the plaine scriptures of
God, I haue confirmed the doctrin, which we teach, beleue,
and maintein: ād by the same trueth of gods worde
I haue confuted your error, from hencefurth I intēd,
onely to to
                     •
                  che the proposition, which ye maintein:
and by confuting the same, briefly ether by scripture,
orels by exemple to shew in what sorte ye wrongfully
apply the sc
                     •
                  iptures, to maintein your error offring yet
to satisfie, to my power, such as charitably shall ask of
me, by word or writing further explanation of any scripture
by you alledged, & by me at this tyme not fully
resolued.
               The chief propositiō which ye maītein to ye end of this
your book, is that the elect may fall frō their election
To the which I answer, that if ye vnderstand, that those

whom God the father hath elected in his eternall counsel,
to lief euerlasting in Christ Iesus,The anabaptistes holde that the elect may fall from their election. Iohn 6 Iohn 10 may so fall from
their election, that finally they perish, if this (I say) be
your vnderstanding, then I feare not to affirme, that
proposition to be vtterlie fals, erroneous, and dānable, as
it that doeth expressedly repugne to gods plaine scriptures.
for Christ Iesus doeth affirme that so many as his
father hath giuen to him, shal come vnto him, And to
such as do come, he promiseth life euerlasting which
he hath in him self, for the saluatiō of his flock, whereof
none shal perish, for furth of his hands, can none be
pulled away.
               But because this before is largely intreated I come
shortly to the scriptures which ye abuse.To the 1 2 & 3
               
               First ye proue, that those which be elected, be sanctified
by the spirit,2. The 2 He
                        •
                     r. 10. and through beleuing of the trueth
which we confesse to be most true. Thereafter ye alledge
that such, as be sanctified, may after dishonor the spirit
of grace tredde doune the blood of the testament, &
so drawe to damnation. I answer, the cause of your
error is, that ye make no difference betwext the sanctification,
and liuely faith, which is proper onelie to the
sonnes of God, which once begonne, is perpetuall, and
that sanctification, and faith, which is common to the
reprobate, and therefore it is but temporall.
               If this distinctiō displeaseth you, quarel with ye holie
Gost, and not with vs: for of his plaine workes, & wordes
euidēt, haue we receaued it. for all Israel were sanctified
to be ye kinglie priesthode, all were circūcised, yea & did
drink of yt spirituall drink: and yet were they not all inwardly
sāctified vnto saluatiō & life euerlasting. The hole
tribe of Leuie were sāctified to y• seruice of ye Lord, in
his tabernacle, but how many of thē did stil remaine prophane
persōs, y• scripture cōcealeth not. Euē so all yt great
multitude, whō Christ fed in ye wildernes, yea all those yt
adhered for a time to his doctrine, were after som maner
sanctified, that is seperated, & deuided frō ye rest of ye
                  
world. But that sanctification was but temporall, like
as also was their faith. we do not denie but that the reprobate
haue som maner of faith, ād som sort of sanctification
for a time, that is, that they are compelled euē
by the impire of the Spirit of God, to confesse and acknowledge
that all thinges spokē in gods sciptures, are
true. And yt therefor their conscience in afeare, and terror
do seke som meanes to please God for the auoiding
of his vēgeāce. For as this is nother the true faith iustifying
neither yet the perfect sanctification of the Spirit
of God which reneweth ye elect, in the inwarde man:
so doth nether of both long cō
                  
                     •
                  inue, for they returning
to their natural prophanation and darknes, do leaue the
waye of light and life and drawe them selues to death
and damnation. But hereof without the contumelie of
the Sōne of God and without abnegation of his plaine
veritie, ye can not conclude that the elect membres of
his bodie,It is impossible that christe should lese any of the mēbr
                        ••
                      of his bodie. can be rest out of his hands, that those for whom
solēnely he hath prayed, that they shoulde be sanctified
in the veritie, and that they should be one with
him, as he is one with his father, may come to finall
prophanation, and so to perditiō. we feare not to affirm
that to be a thing no les impossible, then that it is, that
Christ Iesus shall cease to be head of his Churche, and
the sauiour of his bodie.
               In the wordes of the Apostle writē in the second chapter
to the Ephesians,To the 4 5 & 6 ye seme not to vnderstand his meaning,
where he saieth: ye were sōtimes without Christ,

                     •
                  for saye you) we are sure, that without Christ there is
no election. In which wordes, thow that writest, plaiest
with the simple ignorant reader,The aduersarie plai
                        •
                     th the fol
                        •
                     sh 
                        •••
                     hister. the vile sophister, confounding
by the inglishe word, without, that whiche in
latine is moste euidently distincted. Doth Paule say?
Eratis aliquando extra Christū? or saieth he not? Eratis
sine Christo? To make the mater sensible to you (my
deare brethren) be you neuer so simple, where he saieth
without Christ, there is no election, that proposition is

                  
                     •
                  rue, if it be vnderstand, that man was neuer elected to
lief euerlasting, but in Christ Iesus onlie. But if he will
affirme that none are elected in Christ Iesus, without
Christ, that is to say, before that they come to the true,
and perfect knowledge of gods mercies in Christ, that
proposition is most fals and doth repugne (as plainely
ye may se) to the mynde and wordes of the Apostle. for
he affirmeth, that we were elected in Christ Iesus, before
the fundation of ye world was laid, yea whē we were dead
by sinne, ignorant of him, strangers from the testament
of his promes which S. Paule calleth to be without
Christ, without God in this world, & without the league
of the testament. And by these wordes doth the Apostle
magnifie the superaboundāt mercies of God shewed to
the world in Christ Iesus. By the which he receaued not
onely the Iewes who long had continued in league with
God, but also the Gentiles to the participation of his
glorie: albeit that from the daies of Abrahā, they had
liued as dispised & reiected of God. Let the reader now
iudge how strongly ye conclude. To the place of the
A
                     •
                  postle, touching the illumination of such, as after vtterly
fall back, I haue before answered, ye vniustly accuse
vs, yt we seke shiftes and narrow bores, to the end yt
we shall not be subiect to the trueth. For this is our
plaine confession, which we simply and boldly do affirme,
that this is a stable and immutable foundation: the
Lord knoweth his own, that no creature is able to seperat
his elect frome his loue,Rom. 
                        •
                     . which in Christ Iesus, he
beareth to them.
               Where boldly ye affirme vs to be of a peruers and
reprobat mynd,To the 7 8. 9. & 10. if we deny them to be elect, who haue
receaued from God such graces, as man in this life can
receaue no greater. It may seme that because ye delyte
to speak what ye please, ye take libertie to lay to our
charge what soeuer semeth good to you.
               I trust ye be neuer able to proue that any of vs, hath affirmed
that he who had receaued of the fre gift of God

a true vnfeined and liuelie faith, is not the elect of God,
and that faith we knowe do gods children, which cum to
aige and discretion receaue in this life, as Peter did:
against the which, did Christ pronounce, that the gates
and portes of hell should not preuaile. But it appereth
to me that your doubt, is ether to witt, whether God bestoweth
his great and riche talentes vpon the reprobate.
for if so he should do, ye asffirme yt he bestoweth them
in vaine, meaning, to receaue no frute of them. That
God bestoweth great talentes vpon the verie reprobate,
the scriptures manifestly do witnes, to speake nothing
of lief, reason, corporall health, richesse, and honors,
which the reprobate in greatest abundance do possesse,
doth not Christ witnes; that many shall cry, Lord in thy
name we haue prophecied, we haue cast owt deuils,
and in thy name haue we done many wonderous workes?
And yet shall Christ answer I neuer knew you. Doth
not Paule affirme that albeit he knew all mysteries, had
all prophecie, and knowledge, and all faith (suche he
meaneth, as by the which miracles are wroght) yet without
he had charitie he were nothing? But yet I pray
you, do prophecie, knowledge, the gift of tōgues and of
miracles cease to be the good and riche talētes of God?
ye crie yet are they bestowed without hope of frute to
be receaued, & in vaine, if they be bestowed vpon the reprobate.
That of you is boldly and most blasphemously
affirmed. for God knoweth the frute which his Churche
shall receaue, not onely of those spiritual talentes
how wicked that euer they be (to whose dispensation,
they are committed) but also of the corporall and temporall
benefit, yea of very tyranny, doth his wisedom
and goodnes cause a frute and commoditie com, and
spring out to his Churche. By the tyranny of Nabuchadnezer,
he punished the proude contemners, and
tried, and partly purged his children, who before were
slothfull, and negligent. by that great conquest and
victorie, whiche he gaue to Cyrus, he procured the dedeliuerāce

of his people from bondage. By the great abundāce
of victuales, giuen in the daies of Pharao, were
Iacob and his children susteined. And think you
that with out frute and all togither in vaine, were these
and the like benefites bestowed? althogh that the most
part of these were idolatrers, cruel murtherers, and reprobate,
to whose custodie, these talētes were cōmitted.
ye are to bolde thus to controle God. for his wisdome
will not in all thinges be subiect to your foolishnes.
The diuersitie of creatures here beneth in earth, may
teach you more sobrietie. How many cratures I pray
you appere to our iudgement to be supernuouse and
vainely created, not onelie because they profitt not
man, but becaus they are vnprofitable to them selues?
but shall we therfore accuse gods wisdom, by whom
they are cre
                     •
                  ted? God forbidde. for besides the omnipotencie
of his power, and wisdom manifested in their
creation, he alone knoweth their vse, profitt and commoditie,
which euery creature receaue of an other,
how dull so euer our senses be. And the same oght you
to considre, in all talentes, and giftes committed to
m
                     •
                  
                  ̄, how wicked so euer they be, to whom they are committed.
for not onely therin is gods goodnes to be praised
wc extēdeth ye self, in some cases euē to his enemies,
but also som profitt doth euer arise to his Church, by
his graces, how so euer they be abused, by the reprobat.Gods t
                        •
                     
                     lentes in the very repr
                        •
                     bate do profit g
                        ••
                     s Church.
The pregnāt witt and subtill ingin of Iulian the apostatate,
serued the Churche, in stede of aspurre in his tyme,
and caused the godlie learned more diligently to searche
the scriptures of God, then before they had done.
And the same doth your peruerse iniquite this day towarde
vs: Where ye say, that it is fals, th
                        ••
                      God did intend to best
                        •
                     w
his talē
                     
                        •
                     es in v
                        •
                     ine▪ for asmuch as the holie G
                        •
                     st willeth and exhort
                        •
                     th vs
not t
                        •
                      receaue the grace of God in vaine, yet not withstāding God willeth
not vs to rec
                        •
                     aue his grace in vaine, we may abusing his grace▪ receaue it
in vaine other wies in vaine did Paule exh
                        •
                     rte vs, n
                        •
                     t t
                        •
                      receaue his graece
in vaine. These be yor wordes & this is your reason wc I
leaue to be iudged vpō, by y• godlie reader for we do not

say that God bestoweh his giftes in vaine (albeit the
reprobate be participant thereof) but it is you yt affirm
that in vaine and without frute they are bestowed, except
that all be elect to life euerlasting yt receaue them▪
which doctrine is so strange to vs, that we doubt not to
affirme, with the hasard of our liues, that by gods scriptures,2. Cor. 6
it can not be mainteined. The wordes of the Apostle
in the place by you alledged, nether affirmeth what
man may do, nether yet what he may not do: but he
declareth how diligently & carefully not onely by preaching,
but also by exhortation and praier he trauailed,
that his labors myght be frutefull amongest them, and
so that they should not receaue ye grace of God in vain.
But admitting that he had said, I commande you not
to receaue the grace of God in vaine, could ye thereof
conclude any more then ye may do of these wordes,
be you holie, for I am holie, saieth the lord? There
is a precept geuen, but in whom standeth power to perfourme
the same? If it stand not in man, say you, in vain
is the precept giuen. how you be able to proue that, I remitt
to your better aduisemēt. To me is nothing vaine
that God speaketh or commandeth. for I am assured yt
ether by gods will reueled are the elect instructed, how
they oght to walke, or els are the reprobate in their
consciences cōuict,The pla
                     
                        ••
                      of the 2. chap. of Peter 
                        •
                     
                   that knowing gods holie will, obstinatly
they rebell against the same: and so are they witnesses
to their own iust damnation.
               The place of Peter doth manifestly fight against you:
for how soeuer the dogge hath vomited the corruption
of his stinking stomocke: and how so euer the sow hath
appered to haue bene clensed: yet nether of both chāge
theire owne nature. But ye dogge remaineth the dogge,
and therfor can do none other thing, but to returne to
his vomite, and the sow remaining the sow, must nedes
returne to wallowe in the myre. But (say you) Peter
affirmeth, that they were verely escaped. I answer, as touching
the trueth and nature of the doctryne which they

professed, so they were▪ for it was the verye true knowledge
of God, which was offered vnto them, and whiche
apperantly they had receaued. In wc if they had cōtinued,
they should verely haue bene fre frome all bondage, according
to Christes promes. But becaus they were none
of his chosen shepe, nor peculiar flocke, they did decline
frō ye holie cōmandemēt, and so were their last wors then
their first. because yt the seruant knowing the will of the
master and not doing the same is worthie many stripes.
All this I know doth please you, except, yt I affirme that
they were neuer of Christes chosen nōbre, no not euē whē
they professed most boldly, whē they liued most streitly,
and when most they appered to haue bene purged. I will
not bynd you to beleue myn affirmation, except that I
bring ye witnessing of the holie Gost,1. I
                        ••
                     n 2. S. Iohn saieth, they
haue passed out frō vs (he speaketh of antichristes) but
they were not of vs, for if they had bene of vs, of a trueth
they should haue remained wt vs &c. These wordes nede
no cōmētarie: for saieth he, they haue passed out frome
vs. And why? because they were not of vs, no not euē whē
they professed most earnestly &c: Shut vp your own eyes
as ye li
                     •
                  t, this light shall ye neuer be able to obscure,
much lesse to extinguish.To the 11. 12. & 13 The place of S. Iames, and of ye
Apostle Paule to Timothe. 2. Timoth. 2. do teach not
onely the ministers of ye word, but also euerie faithfull
man, how carefully one should procure the saluation of
an other. And to make all mē more diligent, in doing
their duetie, he declareth in what extreme danger stand
such, as do erre frō the trueth, or that remaine in bondage
of Satā, as also, what acceptable seruice vnto God,
do such, as by whom God calleth others from the way
of damnation.
               That this is the simple meaning of both the Apostles, I
trust euerie godlie man, yt diligently will read the text,
shall confesse with me. your foolish questions demanding,
whether they were elect or reprobate, ofwhom the
Apostle speaketh, and your academical reasons grounded

vpō your own fantasies, I omitt as vnworthie to be
answered: for ye Apostle speaketh to no one particulare
sort, but proposeth a cōmō and general doctrine, for the
endes which I haue rehearsed before. And albeit ye feare
not now to affirme, that the preaching of repentance
is in vaine, if our opinion be true, the day shall com,
when ye shall know, that nether was the sharp preaching
of Iohn, nether yet the glad tydinges and amiable
voice of Christ Iesus, blowen to the worlde in vaine,
albeit that the Scribes and Pharesies remained still
the generation of vipers, and that they could nether
feare nor beleue the promes of saluation, because they
were not of God, but of the deuil, whose children they
were.
               The places of Isaiah and Ieremie,Isaiah 5 I haue before declared,
& therefor in few wordes I will touche ye purpose of
the holie Gost, which was not to instruct that people
whom, when, or how many God had elected to lief euerlasting
in Christ Iesus his Sonne, or whom for iust
causes, he had reprobated, but to conuict them of their
manifest, and most vnthankfull defection, and to take
from them, all excuses, both the prophetes do declare,
how gently God had entreated them, yea how beneficial
he had bene to their fathers, whom he called from
ignorance, whom he norished in 
                     •
                  is own knowledge,
and at length planted, and hedged them about with all
munition and necessarie defence. So that now the children
declining to Idolatrie could haue no excuse. for
their fathers Abraham, Isaak, Iacob, and Dauid, whom
he calleth the faithfull sede, gaue vnto them no
such example.Ierem. 2 But how saieth he, art thow now changed,
to be vnto me a degenerate vineyard? what maketh
this, I praye you, for your purpose, or for to proue,
that these, that be elected in Christ Iesus, to lief
euerlasting, may becom reprobates? If I should answere,
that the stocke which was planted faithfull, remained
faithfull, but that it produced many rotten,

and vnfrutefull branches, which therefor, must nedes
be cut of, none of your sect were able to confute me.
for I should haue the Apostle for my warrant. But I
delyte in nothing somuche, as in the simple and natiue
meaning of the scriptures, as they be alledged in
their own places by the holie Gost.To the 14 The places of
the prophetes Isaiah, and Hoseas, haue not both one
end. for Isaiah in the 14 chapter doth promes in the
person of God, that he wold shew mercie to Iacob, and
that he wold choose Israel againe: yea that he wold
destroy Babylon, for their saik, and so wold choose
his people to him self againe, whom for a tyme, he
appered to haue reiected, so that other lordes then he,
did beare rule ouer them.Hoseas 11 But Hoseas in the contrarie
sense affirmeth, that because they had abused the
long pacience of God, and had not righteously considered,
howtenderly he had intreated them, that therefor
should the sword r
                     •
                  sh
                     •
                   in into the citie, that it
should destroy, and deuore, so that none should be
found to releue them. This I dout not, is the meaning
of both the prophetes. O but you crie, here is
mention made, that God will choose his people againe
therefor he had once reiected, whom before he had chosen.
I trust ye 
                     ••
                  ll not, that gods Maiestie shalbe subiect
to periurie, for the establishement of your error.
he had before solemnely sworn not onely to Abraham
but also to Dauid, that he wold for euer, be the God
of that people, and that of the frute of his loynes should
one fitt vpon his seate, and that for euer▪ If he had so
reiected his people, that no election had remained, nether
yet that he had made any differēce betwext them,
and the prophane natiōs, before the cōming of Christ
Iesus, where was the stabilitie of this former promes? we
know, yt the giftes, and vocation of God, are without repentāce
in him self, yt he casteth not away such, as he be
foreknew to be his own, but that in ye greatest extremitie,
his promes abideth stable, as in this people he most

euidently declared. for he did not so disperse them, so
reiect them, and as it were in his anger cast them of,
and giue them ouer to the appetites of theire ennemies,
but that still he did knowe, and auowe them to
be his people, yea euen in their greatest calamitie. As in
these wordes he doth witnes, saying, when they shalbe
in the land of theire ennemies I will not refuse them,
nether yet will I dispyse them, so that I will vtterly destroy
them, or make my couenante with them, to be of
none effect, for I am the lord their God. for then I shall
remembre myne old couenant, which I made with thē
when I led them furth of the land of Egypt, in the presence
of the Gentiles, that I might be their God, I the
eternall. And in the same prophete, in many places
mo, the same is most euident. for thus he writeth foreseing
their captiuitie:Isai. 44 Yet now heare ô Iacob my seruāt
and Israel, whō I haue chosen, thus saieth the Lord that
made the, and formed the, from the wombe: he will help
thee, feare not ô Iacob my seruant (aduerte that yet he
doth acknowledge Iacob to be his seruant, euen in his
greatest miserie) and thow righteous whom I haue
chosen, for I shall powre owt waters vpon the thirstie, &
floodes vpon the drie grounde: I shall powre furth
my spirit vpon thy sede, and my blessing vpon thy
buddes. And in the same Chapter, after that he hath
reproued the vanitie of idolaters, he saieth: Remembre
these (ô Iacob and Israel) for thou art my seruant, I
haue formed thee to this purpose, that thou shouldest
be my seruant:Isaiab 48. ô Israel forget me not &c. For my
names saike will I differ my wrath, and for my praise
will I refrein it frome the, that I cut the not of &c.
Lift vp your eyes to the heauens,Isaiab 51. and beholde the
earth beneth, for the heauens shall vanish away like
smoke, and the earth shall wax olde like a garment,
and they that dwell therein shall perish in like maner,
but my saluation shalbe for euer (he meaneth the
deliuerance, which he had promised to that people)

and my righteousnes shal not be abolished &c.Isai. 54. For a litle
whyle haue I forsaken thee, but with great compassion
shal I gather thee &c. And the sonnes of strangers
shall buyld vp thy walles,Isaia. 60 and their kinges shall serue
thee. for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my mercie
I had compassion on thee &c. For Zions sake I wil
not hold my tongue,Isa. 62 and for Ierusalems sake I wil
not rest, vntill the righteousnes thereof breake furth,
as the light,Isaia. 61 and the saluacion thereof, as a burning
lamp &c. And their sede shalbe knowen amongest the
Gentiles, and their buddes among the people: All
that se them shall know them, that they are the sede,
which the Lord hath blessed. These and many places
mo, do manifestly witnesse, that God did neuer before
the comming of Christ Iesus in the flesh vtterly reiect
and refuse that people (as that they did not appertein
vnto him) but that he did auowe them to be his
chosen, his peculiar people and his inheritance, euen
whē they were in greatest miserie. Yea further God had
continually of the sede of Abraham, during the tyme
of the Law, and the prophetes, som nombre openly to
glorifie his name in the eyes of the world. And therefore
consider with your self, how iustly ye gather vpon
these wordes of the prophet, God shal yet againe choose
Israel, that therefore God had vtterly reiected all Israel,
yea euen from the life euerlasting. for except that so ye
conclude, ye haue proued nothing of your purpose, for
the controuersie standeth not betwext vs and you, whether
that God doth somtymes choose, and promote a
man, or a people to honor and dignitie in this life, &
thereafter iustly depriue him or them from the same.
for this did we neuer denie. But the hole controuersie
consisteth in this point, whether that such as God in his
eternall counsel, hath elected in Christ Iesus to life euerlasting,
can after be reprobated, and so finally perish
and that shal ye neuer be able to proue. That the simple
reader may the better vnderstand the meaning of y•
                  
prophete, this I adde The people in the captiuitie of Babylon
were so oppressed, and so destitute of all hope euer
to be restored to any dignitie or libertie againe.
That to them it appered a like possible to raise the
dead carkases of such, as were buried in their graues,
as to deliuer them, from the handes of the proud, and
pu
                     •
                  sant Babylonians. And therefore doth not onlie
Isaiah, who long afore saw their bondage, & the redemption
from the same, but also Ieremiah & Ezechiel, who
did se it with their eyes, with great boldnes & cōstācie affirme,
that they shoulde be deliuered from that bōdage,
yt they shoulde be maried wt God & so shoulde be chosen
againe, as or Prophet here speaketh, wc is not to be referred
to y• part of God,How God di
                        •
                      choose Israel again. but to the apprehension of the people
who thoght them selues vtterly forsaken and reiected
of God. Against this temtatiō, ye prophet saith: God
shall choose Israel againe, that is shal restore them to ye
former dignitie, yea to a greater. And yt shoulde he do
in such sort, yt they should know yt he was God merciful
cōstant, and immutable of his promes. And so the renouatiō
of the league in such sort, that the worlde might
se that God fauored Israel, is called the new election, &
new mariage, not that God had euer in him self decreed
and purposed, that the Messias and blessed sede shoulde
descend of any other nation, but of the sede of Abrahā
and house of Dauid, but that the people, in the tyme
of their affliction, had receaued such a wounde, by reason
of their grieuous plagues, and former offences that
they thoght yt God had vtterly reiected them, let ye prophetes
be redde with indifferent iudgement. And this I
dowbte not shall appere most true. Now to the rest of
your scriptures.
            
         
         
            
               ADVERSARIE.
               Christ commandeth Iohn to preache vn
                     •
                  o the seuen Congregations
Among whome were bothe elect & reproba
                     •
                  e to whom he vs
                     •
                  th no such
maner of doctrine,The 31 secti
                        •
                     . as ye teach. 
                     •
                  ha
                     •
                   the elect coulde not fall from
their election but warneth them to take hede that they lose n
                     •
                  t that
which they had g
                     •
                  ten but labore to increase threatning them with
destruction if 
                     •
                  hey forsake 
                     •
                  he grace, whereof they were made par
                  
                     •
                  akers

nether discouraged be the most wicked of them, as ye do, saying,
that by the preordinance of God, they of necessitie must perish, but willeth
them to repent and amend, and they shoulde liue yes knew he bothe
who were elect and who were reprobate▪ To the congregation of Ephesus,
he saith that she was fallen from her first loue,Apocal. 2 and without she remembred
from
                     •
                   whence she was fallen, repented, and did her first workes,
the Lord wold shortly come and remoue her candilstick out of her
place. The congregation of Smirna he commandeth so be faithfull vnto
the death and so shoulde she receaue the crowne of life. If Christ had bene
of your opinion, he had not vsed such maner of doctrine. In vaine shoulde 
he exhorte the reprobate to be faithfull, whom he had cast away. and
superfluous were it, to exhort the elect, whō he knew, to be predestinate
so that they coulde not fall. In the congregation of Pergamus were two 
most detestable sectes, that is Balaamites, and Nicholattains. whom the
Lord did hate, then were they not beloued, and so consequently were they
not elect after your opinion yet willeth he them to be conuerted, and to
receaue a new name written in whi
                     •
                  e stone. In the cōgregation of Thiatyra
was the fals prophetesse Iesabell to whom he gaue space to repent▪
and (as Peter saieth),2. Pet. 3. the long suffering of the Lord is saluation, then
might she haue repented not withstanding she did not repent, then was she
reprobate, likwise vnto them which committed fornication with her,
that is idola
                     •
                  rie is repentance granted. The congregation of Sardis thogh
in name she did liue,Apo. 3 yet in dede she was dead. And that of her which
was yet a liue was in danger of death. wherefore he willeth her to call
to remembrance,Apoc. 7 what she had heard and what grace she had receaued
and to repent her of her imperfect workes, and watch, lest the Lord
shoulde like a thief come vpon her Vnwares. If the congregation of Sardis 
was elect, then in vaine doth the Lord threaten her after your opinion,
and if she was reprobate, what auaileth it to watche and repente.
The congregation of Philadelphia, he commandeth to holde fast
that which she hath that no man take away her crowne (as Peter saith
Beware lest ye with▪
                  2. Pet. 3 other men be also plucked away through the err
                     •
                  r
of the wicked, & fall from your owne 
                     〈◊〉
                   what shoulde they feare 
the losse of that which (as you say) they can not lose. The congregation
of Laodicia which was n
                     ••
                  her hote nor colde, but wretch
                     •
                  ed miserable,
and poore and blynd and naked, if ye say it was elect yet the Lord threatned
it that he wolde spew it out of his mouth. if you say that they were 
reprobate, yet might, they bene saued, gr
                     •
                  we 
                     •
                  eruent and repent. And
where they were poore they might haue boght of Christ tried gold in
the fier to make them rich and where they were naked they might be clothed
with whyte raym
                     •
                  nt 
                     •
                  f right
                     •••
                  snes to couer their filthie nakednes
Moreouer they might haue gotten the salue of true kn
                     •
                  wledge, by the
spirit of God to an
                     ••
                  t their blynd eyes, b
                     •
                  re we se, how that there is none 
of these cōgregatiōs so elect, but they might fall, & therefore haue nede of 
exhortations to be consiant vnto the 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Le
                     •
                  t perchance as Paul the elect

vessel of God, feareth him self they shoulde become cast aways & reprobates,
& againe there be none so reprobate, but they be here cōforted, space of
repētance granted thē to turne frō their wickednes, & liue. So wolde I exhort
you to repent, and turne from your errors, and to seke for this salue of
 true knowledge to anoint your blind ignorant eyes▪ that ye might porc
                     ••
                  
                  ue,
how ye be partakers of all the f
                     •
                  ltes which were found among the seuen
congregations, by that ye are infected with this poysoned error of mere
necessi
                     ••
                  e, and stoicall destinie, more then they. God grant that ye may be
also partakers of the mercie and grace offred to the said congregations:
first ye participate with the congregation of Ephesus in that there is of
you which call them selues Apostles, & are liers. with the cōgregation of
Smirna in that there be among you which call them selues Iewes. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
spirituall Israelites, and are of the congregation of Sathan. with the congregation
of Pergamus in that Sathan dwelleth among you. and ye are
become persecuters of Antipas, that is of the faithfull: and in that ye
 mainteine the doctryn of Balaam giuing the people occasion of sinne, with
the congregation of Thiatira in that ye haue the spirit of the prophetesse
Iesabell, teaching a careles, and liberti
                     •
                   life: with the congregation of Sardis,
in that ye haue a name that ye liue, and yet are dead, and in that your
workes are not perfect: for ye teache that by no meanes can they be perfect
 in this world
                     •
                  . with the cōgregation of Philadelphia in that as is afore
said, ye are become the cōgregatiō of sathā, where as ye wold be estemed
faithfull lewes of Christes cōgregatiō with the cōgregatiō of Laodici
                     •
                  , in
that ye are wretched, miserable, blynd, naked, and nether hote nor colde: for
ye thogh ye exhort your disciples to do wel, yet to pull all earnest feruentnes
 from them, ye say they can neuer at
                     •
                  eine to any perfectiō during this world.
Take hede therefore that Christ spew you not out of his mouth. Behold
I stād, saieth the Lord, at the doore & knocke: if any mā heare my voice &
opē the doore I wil come in to him & wil suppe with him & he with me.
Open the doore in time: refuse him not which calieth by his voice. And so
you shalbe certein of your election: but if you shut your doore and refuse him
which calleth, and if you do not obey his voice then are ye cast awayes
without ye repent in time. Thus it becometh vs all to talke reueren
                     ••
                  y of
gods election so far onely as we fele by experi
                     •
                  nce the spirit of God worke
 in vs: So that when we fele the spirit of God increase in vs. we may be
assured that we are in his fauor, but when we be led away frō one vice
to an other as Dauid was in abusing Bear seba & killing Vrias, letvs not
presume then to be beloued of him which hated all workes of iniquitie.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               When I did first read this your blasphemous rayling,
I did wonder to what purpose, ye wolde rehearse the aduertisementes,
admonitions, and exhortations giuen to
the seuen Churches in Asia, & vnto all other churches
in their names and conditions, seing that nothing in

the same can serue your purpose, yea altogether the holie
Gost through yt hole worke, doth manifestly fight
against your pestilent errors. and therefore I say at the
first sight, I did wonder, to what purpose ye wolde trauail,
where ye were assured tolose your labor. But when I
came to your cōclusion, which ye make in maner of exhortation
to vs, I did perceaue, that easie it is to fynd a
staf (as the prouerbe saith) to beat the dogge, which mā wolde
haue killed.To the 1. But to the matter. Ye boldely
affirme (how so euer ye be able to proue) that the Apostle
vseth no such maner of doctrine, as we teach, &c.
If ye vnderstand, that because he teacheth not in those
seuen epistles, or letters, in expresse and plaine wordes,
that from the beginning som be elected to life euerlasting,
& others be reprobate, that therefore he teacheth
it in no place,quid v
                        •
                      let locus ex parte negans. ye are not ignorāt of ye answer, and therefore
I omitt it. But I aske, if you do not think that the
Apostle doth dedicat this his hole worke to those seuen
congregations, so doeth him self witnes (as in the first
chapter is euident) then what so euer is conteined in
this hole vision, apperteineth to the instruction, exhortation,
admonition, comfort, and before aduertisement
of those cōgregations, no les then that, which is conteined
in these words by you rehearsed.Apoc. 7. Then let vs heare
what is writen and spoken by him in this mater, I sawe
(saith he) foure Angelles standing vpon the foure corners
of the earth holding the foure windes of the earth
that the windes shoulde not blow vpon the earth &c.
And I saw an other angell ascending from the vprising
of the sonne. &c. And he cryed with a loude voice
to the foure Angelles, to whom power was giuen to hurt
the earth & the sea (saying), hurt not the earth nether
the sea, nether yet the trees, vntil we haue sealled the
seruantes of our God in their foreheades. I pray you,
why were these, who were to be marked in the foreheades,
more called the seruantes of God, by the voice
of the Angell. then others? I knowe you will answer, because

of their good workes, and godlie intentions.
But from whence I praie you did it procede, that ye workes,
and intention of the one sort were good, and of the
other wicked? If you say, from their own fre wil, and
power. the holie Gost doth proue you liers, as before I
haue declared, and our Apostle assigneth also an other
cause,Apocal. 13 saing, And power was giuen to the beast vpon all
tribes, tongues and natiōs, and all those that dwelt vpon
the earth, did worship him, whose names are not writen
in the book of life, of the lambe, who was killed
from the beginning of the worlde. Here it is plaine
that our Apostle against your affirmation, teacheth
that some do worship the beast and so do finally perish:
and other do not worship him, and attein to life▪ & that
because the names of the one are written in the booke
of life, and the names of the others are not written, and
that more plainely he speaketh in these wordes:Apocal. 14 Then
I loked, and lo a lambe standing on the mount Zion, &
wt him a hundreth, fortie & foure thousand hauing his
fathers name written in their foreheades &c. and they
sang as it were a newe songe, before ye throne, and before the foure beastes & the elders, & none coulde learne
the song except those hundreth fortie and foure thousand,
which were boght from the earth &c. and aftre in
the 17 chapt.Apocal. 17 is mencioned of these inhabitantes of the
earth, who shall wonder vpon the beastwhose names are
not written in the book of life, from ye creation of the
worlde. if in these places I say ye Apostle maketh no differēce
betwext one sort of men & an other, let ye reader
iudge. if there be differēce betwext boght & not boght,
writtē in ye book of life, & not writtē, to learn ye newe 
                     •
                  og
& not to learne ye same, thē no dowt or Apostle putteth
as plaine a differēce, as we do, yea ye hole scope of his reuelatiō
is to declare, yt there is a nōbre of y• elect called ye
spouse of ye lābe, whō it behoueth to be cōplete before
y• cōsumatiō of all thīgs com, & before yt ye īnocēt blood
that hath bene shed, be reuēged vpō those yt dwell vpon

the earth. and therefore aduise with your selues how ye
be able to proue, that S. Iohn taught no such doctrine as
we teach. But admitting that he had neuer spoken, nether
yet of any nombre chosen, that can not fall vtterly
from their election, nether yet of any nombre
reprobate, who must nedes be apprehended with the
beast, and with him be cast into the lake of fyre. Is
it therefore a good argument, that all those that teach
such maner of doctryne be fals teachers? or that no
such doctryne is conteined in the holie Scriptures? I
wil make the like reason: Nether Moises, nether Iohn
the Baptist in any expressed wordes, haue left to vs written▪
that Christ Iesus shoulde be born of a virgin, that
he shoulde suffer in Ierusalem▪ that his disciples should
all be sclādered, and flee from him, that he shoulde rise
againe, and ascending into the heauen, shoulde send the
holie Gost visibly vpon his Apostles. nether Moises I
say nether yet Iohn, who were excellent teachers, haue
taught in expressed wordes any such doctrine, Ergo the
teachers of it be fals teachers, & it is not written in gods
scriptures. your argument is no better, admitting that
the Apostle had neuer made mētion of any sort elected.
               But now shortly to answer to all which without purpose
ye heape to gether in this place,To the 2. 3. 4. 5 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. I say first, ye oght
to haue made a difference betwext those seuen congregations
where Christ Iesus had bene preached, and receaued.
and the rest of the worlde wc thē remained, or after
was to remaine in blindenes,how exhortatiō threatnings cō
                     solations and the doctrine of r
                        •
                     pentance oght to be vsed. & error. for to those yt haue
by publicke profession receaued Christ Iesus, be they
elect, or be they reprobate do appertein exhortations
threatning, ye doctrine of repētāce, consolatiō propheciīg
.& reuelatiō of thīgs to com, but to those yt yet remaine
manifest enemies of the trueth, apperteine onelie ye
cōmon calling to ēbrace the trueth, with the threatnīg
of destructiō, if they contiune vnfaithfull. And therefore
becaus these former cōgregatiōs (as said is) had professed
them selues to be of gods housholde they were
intreated as his domestical seruantes.
               
                  
If any aske the cause why are som so amiably, and
others so strangely intreated, I answer, no other cause
can be assigned, but that it pleased gods infinit wisdome
and goodnes to make that plaine, and euident difference,
betwext those that once be receaued in his houshold
(be it by externall profession onely) and those that remaine
in blindenes, that the one he commonly doth
visit, but the other he doth as it were neglect, and destroy.
for what other cause can we assigne, that God so
louingly did often call to repentāce the people of Israel
so often offending from the daies of Moises vnto ye
comming of Christ Iesus, that he sent vnto them Prophetes
to exhort, to rebuke, and to declare the estate of
things to come: and in this mean ceason, the space of
two thousand yeres, permitted the Gentiles to walke in
their own waies? And now after the reiection of the Iewes,
what cause can we assigne, that among vs Gentiles,
God vseth to stirre vp, now one countrie, now an other
to receaue the trueth, to detest and abhorre our former
superstition, Idolatrie, and wickednes, and of so long cō
                  tinuāce,
hath left bothe ye Iewes, & turkes drowned still
in their blindnes, & damnable errors? we shall find none
other cause, I suppose, then did the Apostle se when
that he said,Act. 15 to God are knowen all his workes, euen frō
the beginning, and that he will reuele his secretes
to such as please him. ye do not heare in all this reuelation
of Iohn, that Babilon is exhorted to repētance yt
the blasphemous beast is rebuked, ether of his tyranny,
ether of his blasphemie, with any promes made to him,
that if he will conuert, he shall be receaued to mercie
and fauor. No the sentence irreuocable is pronounced
by the Angel, that he shall come to destruction.
               But Ephesus, Smyrna, Theatira, and the rest of the
congregations, which before had professed Christ Iesus▪
and yet were become not manifest ennemies, but were
fallē som in decay of life, some in corruption of manners,
and som in heresies, were exhorted to returne to

repent, and to be feruent, to continue, with sharp threatning,
if they did the cōtrarie. And why this? because that
God before had planted among them his trueth, which
yet vtterly they had not refused, and therefore doth he
honor them as his domesticall seruantes, but in vaine
(say you) for if they be of the elect,An obiection of the Anabaptiste they cannot perish:
if they be of the reprobate sorte, they can not be saued.
This is of you vnreuerently reasoned, wil ye not suffer
God to order his houshold, as best pleaseth his wisdom?
This order hath he appointed that the trompet of his
worde to exhort, to rebuke, to encourage, to offer mercie
to the penitent, and to threaten death, to such as do
declyne, shall clerely sound in his Church, so long as
he doth acknowledge it to be his. Not that by the word
preached, he that was reprobate in gods eternall counsel,
may be the elect, and so changed: but that the worde
preached, and often repeted, maketh a difference betwext
the elect, and the reprobate, euen before man.
               Albeit to you it appere superfluous, that God
shall fede his children by his own word, which because
the reprobate do refuse, therefore do they beare a testimonie
of their own iust condemnation in their owne
conscience. Albeit I say, this appeare superfluous, yet
God hath commanded and established the same, as
a thing most necessarie and expedient, for the establishing
of his children, and for the manifestation of his
owne glorie.
               I wōder that ye wil not affirme that superfluous it is
for a man to till and manure the ground,A
                        •
                     bread is necessary to the bodie, so is gods worde to the soule. to prepare for
victuales, to eat and drinke, & to do such other things
as be necessarie for the conseruation of the life corporall,
seing that God hath appointed the daies of man
which he cannot excede, and also that our heauenlie father
wil prouide for his childrē, seing he prouideth far
the birdes of the ayre. Assuredly the one ye may cōclude
aswel as the other. But herein, I saie, appereth your
foolish blyndnes. first that ye make no difference betwext

the houshold seruantes, & those that be without.
and secondarely, that ye vnderstand not the vse, the profit,
and the effect of gods word preached. Is not ye kingdom
of heauen compared to a nett casten into the sea
gathering together all sortes of fishes? whereof albeit
that the seperation can not perfectly be made, till the
nett be drawen to the drie lād vpon the last day: yet daily
by the worde by exhortacion, by rebuking & threatning,
do many things com to light, which before lay
hid. how many do followe Christ, for a time, and fall
back from him, albeit, that to the end he cryeth, that
they shoulde continue. S. Paul affirmeth that he did
write his sharpe epistle to the Corinthians for a trial of
them,1 Cor. 2. if they wolde in all things be obedient. if they
as true shepe wolde heare the voice of their true pastor,
acknowledge, & follow it, which he witnesseth that
they did.2 Cor. 7. And there for he saith, now do I reioyce, not
that ye did sorow, but that ye did sorowe to repentance.
By the which was not onely the Apostle comforted
as he him self doth confes, but also were they newly
confirmed, that the Spirit of God, was not vtterly extinguished
before.The elect haue great profit by the preaching of gods worde. How the aduersaries abuse Gods word in making fals conclusions vpon many places thereof And so albeit, ye can se no frute
nor necessitie of gods worde preached, except that
the nature of the reprobate be changed, yet do gods
children fele in experience, how comfortable it is to
haue their dull spirites stirred vp by frequent exhortacions:
yea how necessarie it is, that their dulnes
and vnthankfulnes be sharply rebuked.
               The third thing, in which I perceaue you horribly
to erre in all this youre long discourse of the
seuen Churches, is that where so euer there is precept
or commandement giuen to repent, and to continue
in faith, or to liue a godlie life, or where so euer mention
is made, that space and time is granted to repent,
there streight waies ye conclude, then may men kepe

the commandementes: then may they repent, and so
be saued, althogh before they were reprobate. For
this ye affirme of Iesabel, she might (say you) haue
repented, and haue bene saued, and likwise vnto
them that committed fornication with her, is repentance
granted. But how vaine is this conclusion,
God commandeth that which is righteous, Ergo man
may do all that is commanded. God giueth place of
repentance to all men, Ergo all men do, or may repent.
How vaine I say be these conclusions, such
as be not infected with the pestilent opinion of their
own power, fre will, and iustice, may easely espie.
when ye haue proued that God commandeth
nothing, which man may not do by his own power
fre, will, and strength, and that repentance so procedeth
from, man that in him self, it lieth ether to repent,
or not to repent, then may ye sing this song, which so
o
                     •
                  t ye repete: God commandeth, God giueth space
of repentance, God offereth mercie to all, Ergo
of their own power, they may repent. But and if we be
not sufficient of our own selues to think one good
thoght, if repentance be the fre gift of God, and if to
receaue mercie procedeth of his own fre gift also, then
harp so long as ye list vpon that one string, I will answer
that except ye make it better aggre with gods scriptures,
I must nedes say, that he is worthie to be mocked
that continually harpeth vpon a discording string.
                     To the 11. 12. 13 14. & 15.
               
               As we do not contemne your exhortacion, if
we coulde be persuaded, that it did procede from the
spirit of lenitie, so can we not acknowledge our selues
to be infected with the poysoned error of mere
necessiti
                     •
                  , and Stoicall destinie, nether yet that
we teache a careles, and libertine life, nether that
we giue occasion of sinne to the people. finally that
we can not confes that we teache, and mainteine idolatrie
(as most vniustly ye accuse vs) without any further

probation. for that any such crymes reigne and are permitted
amongest vs without punishement, ye be neuer
able to proue. We do not denie, but that among vs haue
bene men infected with all crimes, which ye lay to our
charge. for som of you were once of our nombre, so far
as man coulde iudge: but as you haue made your selues
manifest, so haue others also. But yet it semeth far
repugnant to equitie and charitie, that the treason of
Iudas should be laid to the charge of the faithfull Apostles.
If I list to take my pleasure in examining your
liues, and applying the offences of those churches to
your faction, I doubt not to bring better testimonie
for my affirmations then ye haue broght against vs.
But that I omit to better opportunitie, willing you in
the mean ceason to remēbre that he which speaketh alwaie
what he listeth, is compelled some tymes to heare
that which he wolde not. At one worde to answer to
your sclanderours, and malicious accusations, we appele
from your sentence vnto him, whose trueth we maintein,
not that we feare, but that with your confusion we
coulde reiect your vennom, in your own stomockes againe,
but that we are determined not to cōtēd with you
in dispitesull railing, and vniust accusations, which is
your purpose in this hole book in wc ye thus procede.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               Often times ye vse this saying,The 32 section. Gods election was afore the fundācion
of the worlde without any condicion: wherefore they which are elect,
they be elect without any condicion by the immutable decree
of Gods goodnes, so that they can neuer fall out of the said election:
 other wise gods election were not certeyne: to the which I answer
that Gods h
                     •
                  lie election is without any condicion, sure and certe
                     •
                  ne in
Christ Iesu, without whome there is ne
                     •
                  her election nor saluacion. further
man is made sure in the election by the promes of God in Christ Iesu,
of which promes, when he is made partak
                     •
                  r, he entereth in couenant
with God, but when he breaketh the couenant, he for sake
                     •
                  h 
                     •
                  he promes, &
when he 
                     •
                  orsaketh the promes, he refuseth Christ, in refusing Christ,
he falle
                     •
                  h out of the 
                     •
                  lection: not withstanding the election abideth
 sure in Christ: election ha
                     •
                  h no promes without faith, true faith

is gods worke by his grace, and is also partly mans work, by consenting thereto.
wherfor Paul calleth the righteous ioint workers with God, because
they worke together with him: now if man for his parte according
to his nature be inconstant in his saith, then is he out of promes,
wherby he was made sure of his election, yet gods election remaineth sure
and stable in Christ Iesu, Adam and all men in him before the transgression
might fall from God by sinne, not withstanding the election. why 
may not thē the most righteouse of vs all fall now by sinne from the election?
is our election surer now after transgression, then it was afore
transgression? The holy Gost saieth, yet Cain went away in his wrath
from wisdom, but a man can not go awaye from that which he nether
hathe nore can haue. further God gaue him warning afore, whiche was
sufficiēt, to withdrawe him frō his euill intētion. To Cain said the Lord.
why art thow wrothe▪ & why is thy countenāce abated? If thow do well,
shall there not be a promotion? And if thou doest not well, lyeth not thy
sinne in the dores? vnto thee also perteineth the lust thereof, and thow shalt
haue dominion ouer it. If Cain was a reprobate afore the fundacion of
the world, then had he no dominion ouer his lustes, to choose the good, & leaue 
the bad, for then might he ha
                     •
                  e liued: yet God saieth, Thow shalt haue
dominion ouer it. wherfore it is plaine that Cain was no reprobate,
when the lord spake these wordes to him. further if god gaue not Cain dominiō
and power to subdue his lust, who was then the author of his sinne▪ 
                  
whether is the sworde whiche killethe, hauing no power ouer it self, more
to be blamed, or he whiche hath it in his hand? if God gaue not Cain
power to ouercome his lust, and grace wherby he might be saued, who is
the cause of his damnation? God is faithful (saieth Paul) which shall not
suffer you to be tempted aboue your strength, but shall in the middest of 
temptation make away that ye may be able to beare. likwiese did God
with Cain in his temptatiō warning that if he did well, he shoulde be rewarded:
if he did euill, he should be punished: for there 
                     •
                  ncoraging to do
well, and that he should not saint, God shewed him how he should haue dominion
ouer his lust to rule it. This notwithstanding he went away in
wrathe from wisdom and forseke the counsell of God whiche mercifully
called him to li
                     •
                  f. After the stoode, Ham was blessed of God as his father 
Noah and his brethren Sem and Iaphet, and with the same blessing
where with they were blessed: yet fell he from righteousnes, reioysing in
euill. And then 
                     •
                  o became he accursed and not afore: but all reprobates be
vnder the wra
                     •
                  h and curse of God. So Ham when he was blessed of God.
he was not reprobate. for then should he haue bene both blessed and cursed▪
loued and hated all at once. The Israelites which were deliuered from
the oppression of the Egyptians, were chosen and called of God to go and 
possess
                     •
                   the land of Canaan Vnder the conduct of Mo
                     •
                  ses, yet nether Moses
for his offence, nether any of them because of their inobedience obt
                     •
                  ined
that whereunto they were ordeined and chosen of God, ex
                     •
                  ept two persons 
                  
Iosua and Caleb. Morouer the same Israelites were in gods holie election
and called of God from their sinnes, and chosen in Christ to lief and
health as Paule witnesseth,1, 
                        •
                     or. 10 saing, oure fathers were all vnder the cloode
and all passed throughe the sea, and were all baptised vnder Moises in
the cloode, and in the sea, and did all eat of one spirituall meat and did all
drink of one maner of spirituall drink, and they drank of that spirituall
Rocke that follwed them, which Rock was Christ, behold how Paule so
 often rehearsed this word, all, to declare their choosing and calling to be generall,
yet there after (saieth he) in many of them had God no delite. for by
sinne they fell from Christe and out of their election and so perished. And
there doth also Paule teach vs how those thinges chanced them, for examples,
to put vs in remembrance that we do not likwise by sinne fall from
that wherunto we are chosen and called of God. Let him therefor which
 thinketh he standeth, take head lest he fall. But you say, that he which
standeth may well stomble, but he can not fall, wherfor your doctryne
being contrarie to the sayng of the holie Gost must be fals, as for them
which ye say were reprobates before the world in Vaine should they take
 hede of any fall seing afore they were, they had so sore a falle that they
could neuer ryse againe, and so depe a fall euen to damnation that
they can fall no further. Balaam was filled with the spirit of God,
the spirit of tr
                     •
                  uth, the spirit of power and the sprit of grace so largely
 that whom so euer he blessed, he was blessed, and whom so euer
he curssed he was cursed, but the blessing of the vngodly reprobate
 is verie cursing, so that whom so euer they curse, God blesseth and who
so euer they blesse God curseth. wherfor Balaam during the tyme that
he him self was so blessed of God, he was no reprobate, but the chosen, of
God and might haue continued in the grace and fauor of God. And
 thereto was exhorted of God, saying, go not thow with them, nether
curse the people, for they are blessed. where that it is to be noted t
                     •
                  at
this people was blessed and not withstanding by idolatrie and carnall
lustes they fell frome the fauor of God. And in stede of blessing gods
curse fell on them, as it appereth in Numeri. Likewise Balaam
through couetousnes, louiug filthie rewarde and continuyng in sinne, he
fell from righteousnes and forsook the trueth, and perished with the
cursed vngodlie. Saul and his house was elect and chosen of God to be
 king and rewlers ouer Israel, and that for euer as Samuel witness
                     •
                  th
saying at this tyme wold the lord haue established thy kingdom vpon
Israel, but 
                     ••
                  ow thy kingdom shall not continue. Here you se how
Saul the elect anointed of God doth fall from that wherunto God
had chosen and ordeined him. And therafter in the fifetenth chapter,
because thow hast cast away the word of the lord, therefor hath
 the lord cast away the also from being king, wherof we learn that
Saule
                     •
                   fall was not by the fore ordinance of God, seing he ordeyned

the contrarie, but through his inobedience to gods word, whervnto
he might haue obeyed if he wold. Salomon receaued grace
and wisedome of God aboue all other, which was a lyuelie figure 
of Christ, of whom God saieth so: Salomon I haue chosen to be
my sonne and I will be his father, I will establish his kingdome for
euer, yet did he fall from this grace, and wroght wickednes in the
sight of the Lord, lusting after strange fleshe and committing idolatrie,
and where as God choose him to be his sonne, he turned his
heart from God, and followed Ascaoth the god of the Sidons, and Melcom
the abomination of the Amonites, he buylded an hie place for
Chamos the abomination of Moab, and vnto Moloch the abomination
of the children of Ammon, and lykewies for all his 
                     •
                  owtlandish
wyues, which were a greate nombre that brent 
                     •
                  ncense, and 
                     •
                  ffered
vnto their goddes, Here haue we a notable example of
Salomon the elect sonne of God, whose k
                     •
                  ndom God had promised to establish 
for euer. Yet the became he childe of the deuil turnyng his
heart from God, And giuing him self ouer to the lustes of the flesh, and
most vile abominable idolatrie. Ieroboam was chosen of God and anointed
by the prophete Ahia, king ouer the 10 tribes of Israell, to whō God 
made a couenant that he wold be with him, and buyld him a sure house
that should continue euen as he had promised afore to his seruant Dauid a
man after gods own heart. Yet did Ieroboam, not withstanding the election
and fore ordinance of God fall from the fauor of God, set vp two
golden calues, one in Bethel and the other in Dan, and made Israle sinne
against God to his own and their vtter subuersion. Iudas was elect of 
God to be the salt of the earth not vnsauerie for that serueth for no thing
but he became vnsauerie salt throgh his own wickednes, Christ chose
him to be the the light of the world, wh
                     •
                  oh should so shyne before all men
that they might glorifie by him God the father, but he cause he loued darknes
better then light his candelstik was remoued and his light quenched.
Christ chose him to be one of the twelue, whiche shuld sit on the twelue se
                  
                     •
                  tes
iudgeing the twelue tribes of Israel. but because he made not his election
and calling sure by good workes as Peter speaketh his name was
wiped out of the book of lief. Christ loseth none of them whom the father
gaue him except Iudas, whiche by transgress
                     •
                  on (as Peter saieth) did fall
& was found vnworthie of his election. Here might the terrible and greuous
fall of Ioas with diuers others be alledged, which for prolixitie I passe
ouer, All these aboue reheresed and many m
                     •
                  , receaued the grace of God
in vaine, And therefor did God cast them away whom afore he had chosen
euen as he did Ierusalem, of whom it is so written, I will cast of
this 
                     〈◊〉
                   Ierusalem which I haue chosen, and the house, of whiche I said,
my Name shall be there, for thogh God of has mere mercie hath chosen vs in

Christ Iesu, to be heires of eternall lief, yet if we refuse him, he will refuse
vs, & if we denie him, he wil denie vs And so as the Prophets saieth,
our own wickednes shall reprouevs,2. King. 23 and our turning away shall condemne
vs: and therefor saieth the lord by his prophete Ezechiel, if the righteous
turn away from his righteousnes, and do iniquitie, all the righteousnes
that he hath done:Ierem. 2 Ezec. 18 shall not be thoght vpon, but in the faut that he hath offended
withall, and in he sinne that he hath done, he shall die.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               The same proposition whiche before I haue proued
most fals and deceauable,To the 1 ye yet labor by multiplying
of examples, nothing apperteining to that purpose, to
defend and mainteine.
               Your proposition is that albeit the election is sure
and made without all condition in Christ Iesus, yet is
there none so elected in him to lief euerlasting, but that
he may fall to perdition, and becom a reprobate. And
for the probation hereof before ye enter to your exemples,
yet vse two reasones. The former, without Christe
(say you) there is nether electiō, nor saluation: and this
we confesse and most stedfastly do beleue, adding that
election and saluation are so sure in him, that so many
as be elected in him to lief euerlasting, shal by grace attein
to y• same. Ye procede in yor raison, further man is made
sure in the election by the promes of God in Christ Iesu, of which promes
whē he is made par
                        •
                     aker, he entreth in couenāt with God▪ but whē he
breaketh the couenant, he forsaketh the promes, and when he forsaketh the
promes, be refuseth Christ, in refusing Christ, he falleth out of the election, notwithstanding
the Election abydeth sure in Christ. This is your first
reason. To the wc I shortly & plainely answere, yt because
ye suppose an impossibilitie to be possible, therefor
ye conclude a greate absurditie. for ye suppose, that the
membres of Christes bodie elected in him to life euerlasting,
may so forsake ye promes, so refuse Christ their
head, and so breake the couenant, that to ye end of their
liues they contemne and despyse it, which is a thing impossible,
as before I haue proued, and therefor your conclusion
auaileth nothing. when ye shal proue yt Christes

shepe, committed to his charge by his heauenly father,
can becom wolues or dogges to bark against their pastor,
and that so they continue to the ende, I wil study to
answer you other wise: but vnto such time as you learne
to proue your purpos more substācially, I must say that
because there is no membre of your reason which hath
a sure ground, that therefor I will not greatly study to
confute the same: for man is not made sure in the election
by any promes of God, but ye electiō which before
was secrete in gods eternall counsell, is by the promes
and worde of grace notified vnto mā, so that tollerably
it may be spoken, man is assured of his election by the
promes, which he willingly embraseth, but to be sure in
the election by the promes, is not the phrase of the holie
Gost: further of this we shal examine in your seconde
reason which is this,
               Election hath no promes without faith: trew faith is gods worke by his
grace,To the 2 & 3. and is also mannes worke partely by consenting thereto: wherefor
Paul calleth the righteous 
                     •
                  oynt workers with god because they worke to
gether with him. Now say you, if ma
                     •
                   for his part, according to his nature,
be inconstant in his faith, then is he out of the promes whereby he was
made sure of his election, yet Gods election remaineth sure and stable in
Christ Iesus.
               The first membre of your reason is darcke, and obscure,
and the manner of speaking so strange, that in the
scriptures I am assured it is neuer to be founde. In one
of two senses is election taken in the scriptures.Answere. The
former:Election is in one of two sortes taken in the scriptures. for the elect them selues, as when Paul saieth
the electiō did obteine it, that is, the elect of God obteined
mercie. And in the same sense is Paule called
the vessell of election, that is, an elect vessel: and if in
this sense ye affirme yt electiō, that is to say the elect haue
no promes without faith,Rom. 9. albeit I wil not greatly contend
in that behalf, yet by manifest scriptures I may
proue the contrarie. for the posteritie of Abraham by
gods fre election had this promes, that he shoulde be
their God. And sainct Paul affirmeth that the children

of the faithfull were holie and yet all coulde not haue
faith when the promes was made, for then had Abrahā
no sede at all, but of this I say I will not contend. Otherwies
election is taken in the scriptures, for the
eternall counsell of God, by the which he hath appointed
life euerlasting, to such as he hath giuen to his
Sonne before all worldes,Rom. 9. & 11 as Paul saith: For yer
the children were borne, when they had neither donne
good nether bad, that the purpose of God, which is by
his election, that is not by workes but by him that calleth
might stand sure, it was said vnto her the elder shal
serue the yonger, &c. And after, euen so at this time is
there a remnant left through the election of grace and
so furth in diuers other places. and in this sense, if ye
vnderstād that election hath no promes without faith
I answere, that gods free election in Christ Iesu nedeth
nether promes nor faith, as touching the parte of God.
for he in his election respecteth nether of bothe, but
his own good pleasure in Christ his sonne, & so I wold
haue wished greater plaines in the first part of your reason
then there is. but I perceaue the ground of your error
by that which followeth: Trew faith (say you) is
gods worke by grace, and it is also partlie mans worke
by consenting thereto,faith is altog
                        •
                     
                     ther 
                        •
                     he work of God and no part of mans worke 1. Petr. 1. which secōd part of this secōde
membre is vtterly fals. for faith is no parte of mannes
work no more then the childe begotten of the father
and conceaued of the mother is the worke of the self.
but faith is altogether ye worke of God. for as he begetteth
vs by the worde of veritie, and by the power of his

                     •
                  olie spirit maketh our heartes to conceaue and retein
the sede of life: so by his power are we kept by faith to
saluatiō, wc is prepared to this end, yt it shalbe manifested
in ye last time & therefor (saith ye Apostle) through grace
are ye saued by faith & yt not of your selues. ye must
compel the holie Gost to recāt, wc I thinke he wil not do
for your threatning, before ye be able to proue yt faith
is any part of mannes work.
               
                  
The wordes of the Apostle,1. cor. 3 you shame fully abuse:
for in that place he intreateth onely, how God vseth
the ministers of his worde, and blessed Euangil to be
helpers with God, in so far as they are the embassaders
of reconciliation, as in an other place he calleth them,
he meaneth nothing nether what man doeth in the
worke of his own saluation by his own faith, or by his
owne workes. And therefor althogh ye (as a blinde
man) go forwarde to your own perdition saying, now if
man for his part according to his nature be inconstant in his faith, then
is he out of the promes &c. yet must we pull you backe and
say that because faithe is no part of mannes worke,
therefore doth nether his faith nor his election depend
vpon the inconstancie of his own nature,Nether
                        ••
                      faith n
                        •
                     
                     ther electiō groū
                     ded vpō man nor vpon his constācie but God
of his soueraign bountie ouercomming what imperfectiōs
soeuer be in his chosē childrē hath groūded their
electiō in him self & in Christ Iesus his Sone. an other
error I se in this your reason, wc because I haue sufficiently
confuted, I wil here touch it onely. Ye make faith
the ēbrasing of ye promes, & our obedience, to be causes
of gods election, whē in verie dede they be but the effectes
of our electiō. for nether faith nor obediēce make
vs to be gods elect, but because we were elected in
Christ Iesus, therefore are we called, made faith full, obedient
and sanctified by his fre grace.
               To admonish you yet of one thing & so to put end to
yor vnresonable reasons: Wōder it is yt ye will attribute
to electiō that wc ye denie to ye elect. you affirme yt electiō
is sure in Christ, but not ye elect say you, be like ye
imagin electiō to be a certen speculatiō or imaganation
without any certen substāce, to the wc it must be referred.
but S. Paul teacheth vs y• cōtrarie saing, he hath cho
sēvs in Christ, he saith not yt electiō was in Christ, but
we were elected in Christ Iesus before yt fundaciōs of the
worlde were laid. This gētly I put you in mind to groūd
your reasons more substācially, if yt by them ye entēd to
proue any thing. A short answer I might giue you to all

your examples, to witt that, we speake not of election
to offi
                     •
                  es, or to possession temporall, but of election to
life euerlasting, from the which ye are neuer able to
proue any to haue bene finally secluded, that in Christ
Iesus was thereto elected before the fundacion of the
worlde was laied. But yet to gratifie you some what, I
wil passe through your examples, and cōmunicat with
you my iudgement: God grant you heartes to vnderstand.
               It is a thing most certen that albeit Adam and all
men in him might and did fall from God by sinne,To 
                        •
                     he 4 Christes power is of greater vertue to saue his elect then Adams 
                        •
                     mpotencie was to bring damnation vpon al
                        •
                     . yet
can not the elect of God who be elected to life euerlasting
in Christ Iesus, so fall from their election that
finally they perishe. the reason is, that as Christ Iesus,
the brightnes of the glorie of his father, & the expressed
image of his substance, is greater then euer was Adam,
so is his power of greater vertue to saue the elect
then Adams impotencie was to bring damnation vpon
all.
               Where ye ask if our election be surer now after the
transgression then afore the transgression. I answere the
assurance and firmitie of our election was alwaies, and
at all times one. For when we stode in Adam (as ye alledge)
yet were we elected in Christ▪ and when we fel in
Adam, then did our election burst for the and appere.
               Ye be neuer able to proue that Cain was elected
to life euerlasting in Christ Iesus:To the 5. & 6 for God loked not to
Cain, nor yet to his sacrifice, as that he did to Abel.
And why?The aduersarie is conuicted by his own reaso
                        •
                     s. because, as the Apostle affirmeth, the one
offered in faith and the other without faith. Remembre,
I pray you, your former reason: there is none (say
you) elected without faith, but Cain was without faith
euen before he did kil or hate his brother, therefor by
your owne reason, he was not in ye election, no not euen
before he hated. I do not approue this argument: but
yet your former reason standing true, it is inuincible.
Moises saieth not that God promised dominion to

Cain ouer his lustes,The place of Moises cōcerning but saieth, vnto thee shal his appetites
or lustes be, & thow shall beare dominion ouer him:
which is not spoken of sinne, but of Abel, who as he
was the yōger, so was he appoīted to be subiect to Cain,Cain.
and to serue him, and therefor most vniustly did he hate
him. It is the same phrase that before was spoken
of the woman concerning her subiection to man. Such
as haue but mean knowledge in the hebrew text, know
well that bothe these articles be of the masculin gendre,
& the substātiue which signifieth sinne in that place,
is of ye feminin gēdre & therefor wil not yt proprietie of
the tongue suffer, yt dominion promised, be referred to
sinne. where blasphemously ye aske if god gaue Cain no
power to subdue his lust, who was thē ye author of his sinne?
I answer Cain him self: for he was not lyke to a dead
and vnsensible sworde, as ye adduce the similitude, but
he was a reasonable instrumēt infected by the venom of
Satā, from the whiche he not being purged could do nothing
but serue the deuil and his owne lustes, against
gods expressed will and commandement. I haue before,
proued taht God is the cause of no mās damnation but
sinne in which they are fallen, is the very cause which
all reprobates do find in them selues.
               Touching the fidelitie of God who suffereth none of
his to be tempted aboue their strength,To the 7 it is onely true
of Gods elect,1. Cor. 10 to whom it is plaine that Paul there speaketh.
for albeit that amonges the Corinthians there
were many reprobates, yet doth Paul addresse his style
as it were to the elect Church of God, calling them his
beloued, willing them to flie from idolatrie, and speaking
to them, as vnto men indued with wisdome &c.
And therefore must ye first proue, that Cain had as
great testimonie of God that he was his elect, as the Corinthians
had of Paule yt they were beloued and elected
in Christ, before that ye can make this place to serue
for him. for albeit he did aduertise him what was his
duetie to do, yet doth it not thereof follow, that he gaue

him power to obey his will reueled, nether yet power
to resist all tentation. To Pharao he did no les make
manifest his will then that he did to Cain, and yet of
him he did before pronounce that he should not heare
nor obey the voice of Moises, I do not denie but that he
stubbornly foresooke the counsell of God, whiche mercifully
called him. But why did he, and do all reprobate
forsaik it, we haue oft before declared, to witt: because
the sede of God abideth not in them.
               What was the benediction giuen after the floode vnto
Noah and to his sonnes,To the 8 Genese 9 the holie Gost doth not conceale,
to witt multiplication, preseruation, and the restitutiō
of all thinges, as touching the order of nature, like
as they were before that vastation, (by reason of the
waters which had so long continued). In that place is no
mention made of election to life euerlasting in Christ
Iesus, and therefor your connexion, that Ham was not
reprobat, when he was blessed of God, is foolishe. for albeit
that none can be both blessed and cursed, loued and
hated all at once, in that degre of loue or of hatered wc
God frely beareth in Christ to his elect, and most iustlie
hateth the reprobate, for the causes knowen to his
visdom, yet in an other sort, it is no repugnancie to say
that God both blesseth, and loueth in bestowing tempoall
benedictions, vpon such as in his eternall counsell
he hath reiected, and therefor hateth. As it is no repugnancie
to say that God bothe blesseth and loueth his
elect children, euen when most seruerely he doth chasten
and punishe them.
               To all yt which ye adduce of the Israelites,To the 9 10 11. 12 & 13. my former
answers may suffice, for you be neuer able to proue, that
any of thē, which was chosen to lief euerlasting did fall
into death eternall. It nothing hurt y• saluation of Moises
albeit his bodie fell in the wildernes.1 Cor. 10 That place of
Paule proueth not that all the Israelites, which was called
from Egypt, were within gods holie election to
lief euerlasting in Christ Iesus, but doth proue yt they

were all externally called and yt they did all cōmunicat
with those externall signes and sacremēts, wc did signifie,
& represent spirituall thinges, but he doth not affirm
yt all did receaue ye spiritual and inward graces of the holie
Gost. The mynd of the Apostle is plaine ynough in
yt place to such as willingly list not blynd them selues.
For he exhorteth the Corinthians not to think it sufficient
that they did commuicat with the sacramentes of
Christ Iesus, except that a godlie lief & vnfeined obediē
                  ce
to gods will reueled should be ioyned with the same:
for otherwise the same should happen vnto them, that
happened to the Israelites. And therefor he saieth let
him that standeth take hede, lest he fall, which is nothīg
contrarie to our doctryne nether yet is our doctrine in
any iote repugnant to ye holie Gost. for we did neuer denie
but yt many who before mē had a faire glister of holynes,
yea which thoght thē selues sure in their own fantasie
hath taken horrible falles, bothe of one sort & of
ye other. And vnto all mē we cry no les then you do, that
they tēpt them selues, & yt they take hede lest by slothfulnes
they fall. but yt any yt standeth in Christ Iesus, and
in the eternall counsale of God can so fall that finally
he perishe, that we cōstantly denie. Behold how smothly
God conducteth our tossed bote through the raiging
waues of your furious argumentes.To the 14. 15 & 16.
               
               The fall of the reprobate we remit to gods iudgement
Albeit that Balaam had bene indued with greater graces,
then in scriptures, we read that he had, yet doth it
not thereof follow, that he had receaued ye spirit of sanctification
by true faith, which is giuen to ye elect onely.
for we fynd the power giuen to some to expell deuilles,
whom Christ affirmeth, that he neuer knew. And
therefor willeth he his disciples, not to reioyse in that
that spirites were subiect vnto them, but that their names
were written in the booke of lief. But yet I wonder
where ye haue found that Balaam was so filled with
the spirit of God, the spirit of trueth, the spirit

of power and the spirit of grace (as ye write) that whom)
soeuer he blessed, was blessed, and whom he cursed, he
was cursed. I fynd no such thing witnessed of him by y•
holie Gost. Trew it is that Balack gaue vnto him that
praise and cōmendation that he was assured, that whō he
blessed should be happie, & whō he cursed should be cursed
But whether that it was the purpose of ye holie Gost
to teach and assure vs therby that in very dede such
graces were in him,Nom. 23 I greatly doubt. yea I doubt nothīg
to affirm the contrarie, to witt that he nether had power
spirit, nor grace of God to blesse those whom God hath
curssed, nerher yet to curse those whom God hath blessed.
for so doth he him self confes. And for that end is
the historie written. If ye vnderstand that the benediction
remained vpon Iacob becaus that Balaam did so
pronounce and speak, you are more blynd then Balaam
was. for he assigneth an nother cause, saying, how shall
I cursse where God hath not cursed, or how shall I detest
where the Lord hath not detested. God is not as man
that he shoulde lie, nether as the sonne of man, that
he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do
it? and hathe he spoken, and shall he not accōplish it?
Behold, I haue receaued commandement to blesse: for
hehath blessed, and I can not alter it. He seeth none
iniquitie in Iacob, nor seeth no transgression in Israel:
the Lord his God, is with him, and the ioyfull showte of
a king is amongest them.
               In these wordes,why Balaam blessed Israel & could not curs them. I say, Balaam assigneth the cause why
he was compelled to blesse Israel, because, saith he, God
hath blessed them. And why also he could not change
his blessing, because in God there is no mutabilitie, nor
chāge, like as there is in mā. And therefor as hehad once
blessed that people, by his plaine word and promes
spoken, and reueled to Abrahā, so shoulde he most constantly
perfourme it. If malice did not blynd you, you
should clerely se, that the holie Gost meaneth nothing
les then to teach that Balam was blessed of God, and

therefor was not at that tyme a reprobate: But that Israel
was so elected, sosanctified, and blessed of God, that
their very ennemis, and suche as were hyred to curse
them, were compelled to giue testimonie against them
selues, that gods people was blessed. But this doeth no
more make Balaam to be gods elect, then did that confession,
which the wicked spirites gaue to Christ, (confessing
him to be the Sonne of the liuing God) change
their nature.
               If you be able to proue that hole Israel so fell frō gods
fauor, that to none of Abrahams posteritie did he perfourm
the promes made to him, and to his sede, then
haue ye proued somwhat of your purpose, to witt, that
God may make a promes, & that with an oth, & yet perfourm
no part of it. But if it be manifest that notwithstanding
their grudging, their rebellion, their carnall
lustes, their idolatrie, and abominations, gods promes
remained so sure, that the same was perfourmed (after
many tēptations) in full perfection: Consider what may
be cōcluded against you, in applying examples by similitude,
& equalitie. I wold wish in you greater wisdom,
then to compare Balaam one particulare person, a fals
prophete accursed of God, and so perishing amongest
the vngodlie, and hole israell gods elect and chosen
people, so blessed of God, yt not onely they were preserued
in all stormes,To the 17 & 18. but also of them, according to the
flesh, came that blessed sede, the messias promised.
               To Saul and to his kingdom I haue before answered,
to witt, that one thing it is to be appointed to a temporall
office, and an other to be elected in Christ Iesus to
lief euerlasting. But yet I will adde somwhat more,
which is this Propo
                     •
                  ition directlie fighting against
yours:A prop
                        •
                     
                     sition Saul nor his house was neuer chosen in gods eternall
counsel to be kings and Reulars ouer Israel for euer.
If ye cry, then did the holie Gost, speaking in Samuel,
lie. for he affirmed, that God had prepared
the reigne and kingdom of Saul vpon Israel for euer,

I answer Samuel speaketh not in that place, what God
had determined in his eternall counsel,1 Sam. 13 but what he
him self thoght that God had determined and appointed.
And therefore ye may not conclude that the holie
Gost doth lie, except the kingdom of Saul was once
appointed to haue remained ouer Israel for euer. Nay,
so can ye not conclude. But ye may say, yt except that so
it was, ye prophet was deceaued. And so no doubt he was
for a ceason, and did speake those wordes according to
the apprehension & iudgement which he had conceaued
by reason of his vnction and lawfull election to his office.
If it appere hard to you, that ye prophetes be deceaued
in any thing, consider I praie you what chanced
vnto him after. did he not at the sight of Eliab pronounce
with an affirmation, that before the eternall,
                     
                        •
                     . King. 16 he
was his anointed? did the holie Gost lie because that
Eliab was refused, and Dauid chosen, or was not rather
Samuel ignorant and in an error? the same might
I proue by Nathan, & others, who being gods true prophetes
were yet for a ceason left in error & did both
speak and giue counsel otherwies than God had determined
in his eternal counsel. But now shortlie to
proue my proposition, I say, that gods eternall purpose
and counsel concerning the chief rewler and gouernor
ouer Israel was long before pronounced, by Iacob
in his last testament,Gen. 49 who did appoint the crown,
and Sceptre royall to an other tribe then to Beniamin.
for thus he saieth, Thou Iudah thy bretheren shall praise
thee: thine hand shalbe in the the necke of thine
ennemies: thy fathers sonnes shall bowe downe vnto
thee, &c. The Sceptre shall not depart frō Iudah, nether
the law giuer from betwext his fete vntil Shiloh come
and the people shalbe gathered to him, &c. here I say it
is plaine that many yeres before the election of Saul
was the Kinglie dignitie appointed to Iuda, which sentence
was neuer after retracted. And therefor my proposition

affirming yt Saul was neuer elected in ye eternall
counsel of God to reign for euer ouer Israel, stādeth sure
and sufficientlie proued. If any ask to what purpose was
Saul then elected king? I answer, because so it pleased
gods wisdom to tempt his people,why Saul was elected
                        ••
                      the king dō which was appointed to an 
                        •
                     ther tribs. to tempt the tribe of
Iudah, yea and all the faithfull, that then were a liue, to
tempt them I say, whether they wolde still depend vpon
gods promes, & look for their felicitie, euen by the same
meanes, that God had foresopken: how so euer thinges
appered to the contrarie for a ceason. The hole
people no doubt, yea and Samuel him self, were partlie
criminall in that point, that they looked for saluation,
and for delyuerance from all their ennemies by the hā
                  des
of any other, then by one of the tribe of Iuda: considering
that the former prophecie was so plaine. But yt
error he did first correct in his prophet, shewing vnto
him iust causes why Saul was vnworthie of that great
honor, and after he did correct the same in the people
mouing their hartes to elect Dauid, whom the prophet
had before anointed. And so did God retein y• firmitie
of his counsel, and did perfourme the same, when all
things appered, Plainelie to repugne to his promes, yea
when men had receaued an other to be their king, then
God by his former promes had appointed.
                     To the 18. 19. & 20. We nether
denie the supernaturall wisdom and manifold graces
giuen to Salomon, nether yet his most horrible fall, to
be a document, and a memoriall for euer, of his abominable
idolatries, and most vnthankfull defection from
God. which onelie one example we affirme oght to
admonish euery man most carefully to examin him
felf, with what simplicitie he walketh before gods
Maiestie. But whether that Salomon so became the
sonne of ye deuil, that after he did neuer returne to God
but yt finally he did perish, we dare not be bolde to pronoūce
sentēce. And yt because to vs it appereth, yt God
did make vnto him a promes of mercie, his greuous

offence not withstanding.2. Sam. 7 for this did God speak by Nathan
of him: when thy daies shalbe fulfilled, thou shalt
slepe with thy fathers, and I will sett vp thy sede after
the which shal procede out of thy body, and wil stablish
his kingdome, he shall buyld an house for my name, &
I wil stablish the throne of his kingdome for euer: I will
be his father and he shalbe my sonne: and if he sinne, I
wil chasten him with the rodde of men, and with the
plagues of the children of men. But my mercy shal not
departe away from him, as I toke it frō Saul, whome I
haue put away before thee, &c. howsoeuer ye list to vnderstand
this fre mercy promised to abide after in iquitie
committed, you cānot denie, but that a plaine difference
is made betwext Salomō, & Saul. And if ye think,
that nothing spoken in that place, did appertein to Salomō,
who was born before that Dauid had finished his
daies & did slepe with his fathers, but that all is performed
in Christ, who many yeares after did spring of him
ye do not rightly mark the wordes of God nether yet ye
mynd of the holie Gost, he saith not, that the childe who
shoulde builde a house to the name of God, and whose
kingdome he wolde establish, shoulde be borne after his
death, but that God shoulde raise one who shoulde sprīg
of his own loynes, whom he wolde so honor after his
death, that he wolde become his father, whom he wolde
so intreate: that albeit he shoulde offend, yet shoulde he
not be reiected frō regiment in Israel, as Saul was, and so
was the kingdome established not onelie to Dauid, but
also to his posteritie after him. The perfection no
doubt was reserued to Christ Iesus, but so was the veritie
in him, that the figure passed before in Salomō. Moreouer
somwhat is spokē in this promes, which in no wise
can be referred to Christ Iesus. for how shal any be able
to proue that ye iust sede of Dauid in whose mouth was
no deceat founde, did in any sort wickedly in his owne
person, so that he had nede of mercy, & to be corrected
with the rodde of the children. This I note, to giue you

occasion to take hede what sentence ye pronounce in
things so farre remoued frō the reache of your vnderstanding.To the 21
In the historie of Ieroboam, ye do not obserue
that whatsoeuer is promised vnto him, except the
first 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the tenne tribes, is cōdicionall. for thus saith
the Prophet vnto him.3 K
                        •
                     g, 11 And if thou harken vnto al that
I command thee, and wilt walk in my waies, & do right
in my sight as did Dauid my seruant, then wil I be, with
thee, and build thee asure house, as I buylt vnto Dauid
& wil giue Israel vnto thee, &c. I pray you what can ye
hereof conclude? That Ieroboam say you not withstanding
gods election and fre ordinance did fall from the
fauor of God. But how be you able to proue, that he was
elected and before ordeined to stand in gods fauor for
euer? These saings, if thou walke before me in righteousnes,
if thou kepe my preceptes, and such others, will
not proue it. I can euidently proue that Ieroboam, and
all the kings in Israel after him were giuen to the people
in gods anger, and were taken away in his hote displeasure,
for so doth the Prophet Oseas witnes. Now if
you can proue, that such reulers, as be giuen in gods
wrath, and taken awaie in his iust furie, were elected and
before ordeined to stand in his fauor for euer, aduise wt
your counsellers, and produce your witnes against the
next time.To the 22. 23. That Iudas was neuer elected to life euerlasting,
I haue before declared and therfore at this present
I onely say, that no more did Christ mean of Iudas
that he shoulde be the salt of the earth, the light of the
worlde, nether that he shoulde sit vpō any seat to iudge
any tribe in Israel, then that he ment of Peter, yt he was
the deuil, that he shoulde betraie him, or that better it
it had bene for him neuer to haue bene borne. for as
Christ in pronoūcing ye wordes, you twelue haue I chosē
but one of you is the deuil, one of you shal betraie me
in expresse wordes he did nether appoint ye person of Iudas
to that fact, nether yet did exempt and make fre any
of the rest, from suspition of that cryme, in expres wordes

(I say) So like wise in saing, ye are the salt of ye earth
and you shall sitt vpon twelue seates, &c. he nether ment
of the hole nomber of the twelue, nether yet of thē onely.
for as for Iudas, I doubte not to affirme, but yt according,
as it was written in the book of Psalmes, That his
habitacion shoulde be desolate, & that an other should
receaue ye honor of his bushoprike: yt so euē in ye tyme,
whē he stood in the ministerie most sure to mānes iudgemēt,
that yet in gods eternall coūsel, he was appointed
to that treason, and most feareful end. and I suppose
that none wil be so peruerse of iudgement, as to denie,
that none other was appointed to be the salt of ye earth,
and the light of the worlde, except those twelue. I verilie
beleue that Paule is nothing inferior to any of the
chiefest Apostles in that case. And so yet I affirme, that
nether were those wordes spokē of all the twelue, nether
yet of thē onely. If this can not satisfie your curiositie,
labor you to proue that Iudas was elected to life euerlasting
in Christ Iesus before the fundacions of the world
were laid. I haue before proued that the elect can not finally
refuse nor deny Christ Iesus their head, and therefor
I will not trouble the reader with the repetition.
               The place of EzechiellEz
                        ••
                      18. serueth nothing your purpose.
for there doth he onely intreat of such righteous
men, as in the beginning of the same chapter vsed this
prouerbe: The fathers haue eaten soure grapes and the
childrens teeth are set on edge, signifying thereby (as
before we haue declared) that they were iust and innocēt
and that yet they did suffer punishement, for the offenses
of their fathers. Against whom ye Prophet speaketh
most sharpely affirming that the soule which did sinne
shoulde die: in this praising gods iustice, that he wolde
suffer sinne vnpunished in none of his creatures, supposing
that some for a time, had a shew of righteousnes.
The prophet doeth further accuse, and conuict their
consciences, for they knew them selues criminall in all
crimes, which the prophet there recited. And therefore

to prouoke them to repentāce wt this exhortacion: Cast
away from you (saieth he) all your transgressiōs whereby
ye haue transgressed, and make you a new heart, and
a new spirit, for why wil you die ô house of Israel, for I
desire not the death of him yt dieth (saith the Lord God)
Cause therefore one another to returne, and liue ye.
               Of this co
                     •
                  clusiō (I say) it easely may appere of what
sort of righteous men ye Prophet speaketh: not of such
as being ingrafted in Christes bodie, by the true sanctification
of his spirit, do daylie studie to mortifie their affections:
but of such as hauing an outward appearance or
shew of holines, did notwithstāding lowse ye bridle to all
impietie. In very dede God can not remēbre ye iustice of
any such (wc is not) but their sinnes must craue iust vengeance,
& yt the rather because by thē ye name of God is
blasphemed. Now to ye rest of yt wc foloweth in yor book.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               This say you,The 33 sectio with many other manifest testimonies of the Scriptures, ye

                     •
                  osse, and turne vpside doun
                     •
                   seking shiftes to maintein your errors, where
by you declare your self to be of the nombre of them, of whom it is written
in the same place, which do say tush the way of the Lord is not indifferent 
ye will not that the Lord iudge according to this way set. furth in his word
but of necessitie by an immutable 
                     〈◊〉
                   saue a certē, & of necess
                     •
                  tie to cō
                  dēne
all the rest, ye must not so read gods word studying rather to teache
the holy Gost, then to learne your duetie of him, seking meanes rather to cō
                  firme
your preconceaued error, then to auoid it. what true
                     ••
                   can he learne 
at the word of God, which worshippeth the idoll of his own phantasie, and
hath alredie forsaken the mynd of the trueth. Remēbre that the first less
                     •
                  
                  ̄
of wisdom, is to be willing to learne wisdom▪ Cast away therefor the

                     •
                  doles of your heartes, which made you st
                     •
                  mble in your wayes, submit your
selues to the word, as humble and meke lābes. for the lambe onelie was 
found worthie to open the seales of the book. Trust not your error to be thebetter
because it hath many fauorers specially of thē, which haue the name
of learning for such haue bene alwaies in all ages, ennemies to the trueth 
inuenters of sectes & errors, such like as Iannes and 
                     •
                  ambres resisted
Moises so do they the trueth, as the learned scribes & Pharise
                     •
                  s blasphem
                     •
                  d
the word of God and persecuted Christ the trueth it selfe, so do they yet in
hu membres. And euen as the pharesies said, do any of the reulers or of the
phareseis beleue in him, this comō people which know not the law is cursed,
so say they nowdo any of our learned doctors teach so these vnlearned felowes
are cursed, for they cā not vnderstād gods word they vnderstād onely the english
tōgue, & yet wil they medle with 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as thogh the gifte 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
& the giftes of prophecying were so boūd together, that God coulde not minister
the one without the other. but this is no new
                     •
                   thing, for this was laid
to Christ, & his Apostles charge▪ that they were vnlearned▪ But the holie
Gost wille
                     •
                   vs not to iudge so. marke saith Paul, your calling how that
not many wyse mē after the fleshe not many migthie not many of hieght
degre are called but God ha
                     •
                  h chosen the weake things of the worlde the
vile things of the worlde, & thinges which are despised, & of 
                     〈◊〉
                   reputaciō
to confound the mightie, & to bring to naught things of reputaciō, how cā
such great mē beleue, seing they seke tobe praised one of an other and to be
 preferred for their knowledge in the tongues, & for the multitude of their
bookes which they writ, such learned mē are more mete to be in Herodes
hall, thē in Christes stable, the dore is to lowe & 
                     •
                  hey 
                     〈◊〉
                   stout, they may
not stowpe so lowe for the disgracing of their graui
                     •
                  ie, onely poore shepherds
which are accustomed to stables are foūd mete to haue Christ reueled to them, not that I disp
                     •
                  se learning or learned men. for I knowe
that learning is the good gift of God: ye
                     •
                   as S Paul saith knowledge maketh
a man to swel, and many in our tyme as in all ages paste do abuse
 this good gift of God, yet not all, God forbid, for som I know, I prayse God
to whom it hath pleased God to reuele the trueth of this mater, which
in perfect knowledge of the sōg
                     •
                  es, are to be compared with any of your
Rabbes. Be not deceaued therefore with vaine 
                     〈◊〉
                   of learning, or of
worldlie wisdome ifye seke Christ, seke him where he is in the poore
stable, and not in Annas and Caiphas pallasses, wi
                     •
                  hout ye will se and
heare Christ accused, to such a banket peraduenture Christ may be called
of the learned. If you wil haue Christ, ye must not go to seke him in

                     •
                  he vniuersities where you may be praised for your sharp wittes and eloquent
tongues, but you must go forth vnto him out of the tentes and suffer
rebuke with him▪ knowe ye not that the learned phareseis and lawers
coueted to talke somtime with Christ, not to learne but to dispute, and
trap him, in his sayinges and so did the learned Philosophers of Grecia
with Paul. Awake therefore in time, be no longer deceaued with he
                     •
                  r
auctoritie examyn your selues examyn your selues I say how much ye haue
increased in Christ by his doctrine, what perfection it hath wroght in
 you, & how much Christ is facioned in you by it. If you wil forsake this error,
& embrase the trueth, where by ye are taugh
                     •
                   that God will all men
to be saued, ye shall God willing perceaue more increase in godlynes, &
that shortly, then euer ye could or durst loke for continuing in your error.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Whether yt you or we peruert the meaning of ye holie
Gost speaking in hisholie scriptures,To the 1 we chiefly remitte
iudgement to him, who shall iudge the worlde with equitie,
not refusing also in the mean season the iudgement
of indifferent readers. To your vniust accusatiōs,
cauillations, and malitious reportes, I will answer no

thing, till the ende of this worke. And then I purpose
to lay before your eyes suche thinges,To the 1. 2. 3. 4 as ye can not denie,
to the end that the simple may iudge, which of
vs do worship the Idoll of our own fantasies, and haue
forsaken ye mynd of the trueth.To the 5 Albeit that ye, and your
capteyn Castalio beginne now to dispyse learning, yet
be ye neuer able to proue that we haue dispised godlines
in the most simple of our brethren. howbeit we can
not conceale the trueth, affirming, that he who hath
faithfully traualed in the tongues, and in the writings
of godlie men is, more able to auoid error, and also
more apt to teach the trueth and to confute the aduersarie,
then he which is altogither ignorant, except in
his naturall tongue. for we know that miracles, and the
visible giftes of the holie Gost, giuen in the dayes of
the Apostles are now ceassed. Therefor I say, we are not
so proude, that we dispyse learning, nether yet so malicious,
that we contemne the meanest gift that God hath
giuen to any of our brethren.To the 
                        •
                     
                   If any be that boast or
bragge of their knowledge in the tongues, or of ye multitude
of ye bookes, wc they write I will cōfesse them worthie
of most sharpe rebuke. But as for suche as be principal
instrumētes of Christ Iesus, how much they haue
profited the Church of God, and how litle praise, or cō
                  mendation
they haue soght or do seke of man, the day
when the secretes of all heartes shalbe reueled, will declare
and men, who be most familiarly acquainted with
them partly can witnes.
               As we do not enuie ye perfect knowledge in tongues of
such as you praise,T
                        •
                      the 7 so do we vnfeinedly desire God, so to
gouerne their heartes, if his good pleasure be, that rather
they studie to edifie Christes afflicted Churche, thē
to accuse, sclander, and traduce suche, as in the vineyard
of the Lord, haue labored, and daily do labor much
more then they do.To the 
                        •
                     
                   That ye will vs to turn from that
we ye call our error promising vs (if so we will do) more
perfection shortly, then euer we durst haue loked for
we must be first taught that our doctryne is erroneous,

and after, for the assurance of our hope, we must haue
more then the promes of men. Thus ye procede
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               To proue that they whiche be once elect can neuer,The 2. argumēt fall they alledge this
saying of Christ: There shall arrise fals Christes & fals prophetes, and shall
shew great miracles,The 34. section. & wōders in so much, that if it were possible the verie
elect should be deceaued▪ of this they gather, that it is not possible, that
the elect should be deceaued, & this cōditionall, if it were possible, &c. affirmeth
nothing. But admitting i
                     •
                   be so, we must vnderstand, that the thing
which is verie hard & difficile to be done is called vnp
                     •
                  ssible in the scripture
as in that place,Luc 18. it is easier for acamele, to go throughe the eye of an 
                     •
                  ed
                     •
                  e,
then for the riche to enter in to the kingdō of God. This is called impossible▪
because it is verie hard, & difficile to be d
                     •
                  ne. yet be there rich mē, which
inherite the kingdom of heauen. how can you beleue saieth Christ which,
receaue honor one of an other▪
                  Iohn. 5. this semeth vnpossible by Christes wordes
yet many such were conuerted to Christ. And the same spirit of vaine glorie
was among
                     •
                  st the elect Apostles of Christ, after they had continued a
long time with him▪
                  Esai. 49 for they contended who should be superior among
them selues. can a woman forget the childe of her wombe, and not piti
                     •
                  
                   the same whom she hath born whiche thogh it seme vnpossible for as much
as it is contrarie to nature, yet do women destroy and deuore their own
 birthes▪ May a mā of Inde change his skinne, and the cate of the moūtane
her spottes,Iere. 13 no more may ye that be exercised in euill do good. suche we
be of our selues, notwithstanding by the power of God we be regenerat,
we leaue of from our euill exercises, and do that which is good. Thus we
se it is called imposs
                     •
                  ble in the scriptures, which is contrarie to nature which
excedeth our strenght & therefor is difficile and hard to be done, 
                     •
                  uē so
it is impossible. That it is a very hard thing that the elect which follow
the lā
                  
                     ••
                   whether so euer he g
                     •
                  eth, should be deceaued, yet not withstāding
 it may come to passe,
                     
                        •
                     . C
                        •
                     r. 11 as Eua was the elect of God, and not withstanding
the Apostle w
                     •••
                  esseth that she was begyled and deceaued by the Serpent,
Therefor warne
                     •
                   Christ the elect Apostles saing, take hede that
no man deceaue you.Mat. 24 If Christ had bene of your opinion, that the elect
 could not be deceaued to what purpose should he bid his chosen take
hede lest any man should deceaue them.2, The. 2 Let no man deceaue you saieth
Paule to the Thessaloniens, to whom he bare witnes that they were
worthy of the kingdom of heauen, yet was he carefull, left they
should be deceaued and mou
                     •
                  d from their good mynd ether by spirit,
or by wordes, or by letter which should some to come from him
And to the Ephesians,Ephes▪ 5 Let no man deceaue you with vain wordes
for because of suche thinges commeth the wrath of God vpon the
ch
                     •
                  ldren of desobedience And likewise▪ warneth he the Romanes, to

marke and auoide such as with swe
                     •
                  e and flattering wordes decaued 
the heartes of the innocent. As the old prophete which dwelled in Bethel
deceaued the man of God, whiche came from Iuda, and propeh
                     ••
                  ed against
the alter which Ieroboam buylded, I am a prophete (said he) also
as well as thow, and an angell spake vnto me in the name of the
Lord saing, bring him againe with the into thyne own house, that he
may eate breade and drink water, and he lied and deceaued the man
of God. Such lying prophetes be now a daies, wihch say, they be sent 
from God, and call the people to their congregations, without which
they say, there is no saluation. for they condemne all others, which
be not of their sect. And when they haue allured the people with fals
err
                     •
                  neous doctryne, they prouoke them to a careles libertyne lief, apt
to allure any man. Be ware friendes that ye go not with them, lest a
                     •
                  
                  
the man of God for his going back, was killed of a lyon, so ye be slayne
by errors and deuored of the deuil, which as a roring Lyon goeth about,
seking whom he may deuore, of the testimonies a boue reci
                     •
                  ed
it appereth that the elect may be deceaued. And yet i
                     •
                   is the phrase of
the scripture to call it impossible whiche is verey hard and difficile
to be done. There be also many elect wihiche full away, not because 
they are deceaued but willingly and purposely, as Iudas was not
deceaued but wilfully refused the grace of God. Also Ach
                     ••
                  ophel
being a notable witt
                     •
                  e man, was not deceaued by any mannes persuasion
but wilfully refused his master Dauid▪ and played the tra
                     •
                  or.
Balaam was not deceaued. for he knew well the will aud the mynd
of God. Salom
                     •
                  n was not deceaued in whom grace and will abounded
aboue all others: and yet forsook he God. S
                     •
                   the elect thogh they be not 
deceaued, yet be they at libertie and may refuse the grace of God, if they
will. And think you that Adam or any other can be sa
                     •
                  ed by g
                     •
                  ds
ordinance. if they wilfully forsake it? can any maune be saued by
Christ, which doth forsake him? they which be once lightned, and haue
tasted of the heauenlie giftes, & are becom partakers of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   G
                     •
                  st,
and haue taisted of the good worde of God, and of the power of the
world to come, I can not tel, how they should be deceaued: ye
                     •
                   may
they fall away, and crucifie the Sonne of God afresh, aud make a
m
                     •
                  k of him, Lykewise they which be sanctified by the spirit of God,
and sprinkling of bloode of the testament, they may tredde the Sonne of
God vnder foote.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               If it had pelased you ether diligently to haue red out
writinges, ether faithfully to haue recited the testimonies,
which we vse for confirmation of our doctrine, ye
should haue found mo, and such as be som
                     •
                  hat more

plaine then any of those that ye take vpon you to confute.
But praised be God who giueth such maieste, euen
to those places, which ye your self appoint, that when
ye haue said all, yet doth ye veritie remaine inuincible.
               That this condicionall, If, in these wordes,To the 
                        •
                     , 2 & 3. if it were
possible, the elect should be drawen into error, affirmeth
nothing, I am content, so that the same reason
be a law against you in all other places. But that this
word impossible shalbe interpreted in all places of Scripture
by this phrase, a thing hard to be done, I can
not admitte, without testimonies more euident, then
yet ye haue adduced, for the most part of those plainely
deny that interpretation. For as it is impossible for a
Camel (or Cable, that is a greate rope of a ship) remaining
in the own quantitie, to go through an nedils
eye (remaining in the own streitnes) so is it lyke
impossible for a rich mā remaining in his own natural
pryde, coue
                     •
                  ousnes, and corruption, to enter in to the
kingdom of God. and therefor▪ when those which
heard, were offended, asking, And who may then attein
to saluation? Christ answered, thinges that be impossible
before man, are possible with God. marke well
that Christ called the humiliation of the rich man, impossible
vnto man, but possible vnto God. And the
same I say is true of those that seke glorie and praise
of men. for impossible it is vnto such abiding in yt corruption
vnfeanedly to beleue in Christ Iesus. for albeit
the spirit of vaine glorie did now and then burst out
and appere amonges the disciples, yet was it alwaies repressed
and corrected by the seuere obiurgation of
their master, and in the end, by the power of the holie
spirit, it was remoued. God doth not affirm that it is
impossible to a woman to forgett the childe of her bosom,
but laying his perfect loue against her natural
loue corrupted, he saieth, if she may, yet, cā not I forgett
thē that trust in me: and so he preferreth his loue towardes
his childrē, to the loue of any creature, whiche they

can beare towardes others.
               The examples of the man of Inde, and of the Cat
of the mounteine, can in no wise receaue your interpretation.
for the impossibilitie of the one, and of the other,
experience of long continuance hath taught vs. for
we se that althogh the Moorian change the regiō where
he was born, yet kepeth he his naturall blacknes: nether
yet can any art vtterly remoue the spottes of that
beast, which the Prophete in that place calleth the 
                     ••
                  opard.
how impossible it is that they be changed, none
can be ignorant, except such as haue not sene or do not
know the beast, nor her nature. And therefor vpon these
two thinges to nature impossible did the Prophete
conclude, that no more could the citezeins of Ierusalē,
being excercised in all iniquitie leaue the same, and so
was it impossible, impossible I say to them selues and
to their own power. for what the Spirit of God worketh
in the conuersion of sinners, oght not to be attributed
vnto mans power.
               And thus I say that those thinges, which the holie
Gost pronounced to be impossible, remain impossible.
And therefor it is not onely ahard and a difficile thing
that the elect of God, who follow the lambe where euer
he goeth, be so deceaued that finally they perishe,
but also it is impossible: and that becaus the true pastor
cōducteth them, leadeth them furth to the holsom pastures,
and waters of lief, illuminateth thē by ye presence
of his light: and finally doth sanctifie and confirme
thē in his eternall veritie by ye power of his holie Spirit
               Vpon those wordes of the Apostle I feare lest that
your senses be corrupted from the simplicitie,To the 4. & 
                        •
                     . which
is in Christ euen as the serpent deceaued Eua, ye labor
to proue that the elect shal be deceaued for she, say you
was the elect of God, and yet she was deceaued. In few
wordes I answer that becaus she was the 
                     •
                  lect of God, she
remained not in that error. we do not denie, but that
the simple shepe do somtimes erre, and go astray from

their pastor, that they heare to their great danger the
owling of wolues, & do credit, and receaue lies for veritie,
yea & further that somtimes with knowledge, they
cōmitte iniquitie. But that they are permitted in ye same
finally, and without redemption to perish, that we
cōstātly denie. for imposible it is that the liuely members
shal lack participation with the head. Imposible it
is that Christes death shal lack his effect, which is the life
of those that of his father are committed to his charge,
of whō impossible it is, that any shal perish. for the
nombre of our bretheren must be complete, nether yet
doth it hereof follow, that exhortaciōs & admonitions
be superfluous, & vaine. for they are the meanes which
the wisdom of God knoweth to be most necessarie to
stirre vp our dul senses, which alwaies be redie to ly in a
certen securitie, And therefor the wordes of our master
spoken to his disciples and the admonition of Paul to
the Churches in his daies doth much profit, comfort,
and confirme vs: for by the same we are so armed against
offences and sclanders, which daily do chance,
that albeit we se that frō amongest our selues arise such
as bring in damnable sectes. which lead many to perdition,
yet we do not therefor detest nor ahbore Christs
simple veritie but being prouoked by that fall & deiection
of others, with great solicitude and care, we call
for the assistance of gods holie spirit en those most miserable
and most wicked daies.To the 7 That ye affirme vs to be
lieng prophetes not sēt of God but such as runne of
our selues, calling to our cōgregation the people, whom
after we prouoke to a careles & libertine life, we answer
not to you but to our God. Iudge vs (ô Lord) in this cause
according to our innocencie, & according to the puretie,
which thy spirit hath formed in our heartes, destroy
all lyeng lippes, and confound thou those, that
of malice trouble thy afflicted flock.
               Let your friēdes,To the 8 enemies to gods eternall trueth, proude

boasters of their own iustice, and suppressers to their
power of Christes glorie, giue eare, if they list, to your
admonition, absenting them selues from all well reformed
congregations. We will not cease to exhort all the
faithfull to frequent and hant the places wher Christes
Euangil is truely and openly preached, his holie sacrementes
rightely ministered according to his own ordinance
and institution: And also where disciplyne is put
in practise according to that ordre which he him self
hath commanded. Nether yet will we cease to affirme
that your priuie assemblies, and all those that in dispyte
of Christes blessed ordinance, do frequent ye same are
accursed of God.
               We do not deny,To the 9 but that Iudas, Achitophell, Balaā,
and many mo willingly and of determined purpose
did wickedly & most vnthankfully offend, but what is
this to your mater, It resteth alwaies, to be proued that
they were elected in Christ Iesus by the eternal counsel
of God.To the 10 Your foolish question demanding if Adam
or any other mā can be saued by Christ. which doth forsaik
him, I haue before answered, plainely prouing, that
the elect children can not finally forsaik and contēne
the ordinance of their father. Nether yet can the membres,
refuse the lief whiche they receaue frō their head.
And that because the Spirit of God, drawing them to
Christ, maketh them to fele their necessitie, which they
haue of him.The elect of God can not forsake Christe. And therefor with al thank fulnes and ioy
do they receaue him who is made to vs from God, wisedom,
iustice, satisfaction, redēption, and lief. To me it
appereth a very foolish questi
                     •
                  , if any should demand if
a man perfect in witt, memorie and reason, feling him
elf so pressed which honger or thirst, that of necessitie
he must perish, except nature were supported, to ask, (I
say) if such a man willingly and obstinatly wold refuse
holsom meat, and drink, appereth foolish, and vaine.
And such is your question, for the elect children do fele

their own miserie, honger thirst and pouertie, yea
they labor vnder the burden of their sinnes, which they
hate, of the which they wold be releued. And therefor
they can not refuse the iustice, lief and assured redemption,
which is offered to thē in Christ Iesus. To whom
be all praise glorie and honor for euer. The place of the
Apostle I haue before answered and therfor I shortlie
com to that wich ye call.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The third error of the careles by necessitie
               God hath two maner of willes,The 35. sec
                        ••
                     on. one reueled will, and a secret will
which is onely knowen 
                     •
                  o him self▪ by g
                     •
                  ds re
                     ••
                  led will men should not
com to nought, but they which por
                     •
                  sh, 
                     〈◊〉
                   perishe by his secrete will, in
respect of gods commandement. It was n
                     •
                  t gods will, that Adam should
sinn
                     •
                  , but in respect of gods secrete will God wold Adam to fall.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               How maliciously ye peruerte our wordes, and how
impudently ye forge vpon vs a form of doctryne, which
did neuer enter into our thogthes shall appere God willing
bv answering to that, which ye call the confutacion
of our third error, which thus beginneth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The authors of this wicked opinion,The 36. section. when they could not sufficiently
confirme their errors, by the auctoiite of gods word, they inuented a
new shift to approue it by gods secrete will. for say they: Thogh God by
his reueled will, will all men to be saued, yet by hi
                     •
                   secrete will, he willeth
many to be damned, by his reueled will, he will no wick
                     •
                  dnes, but by
his secrete will he will Pharao to be hard hearted, S
                     •
                  m
                     ••
                   to curs Dauid
the patriarkes to sell their brother Ioseph &c. by his reueled will he wold

                     〈◊〉
                   that, Adam should full, but by his s
                     •
                  cret will be willeth Adam
to ful I maruel much where ye haue founde out this maner of doctrine
for n
                     •
                  ther, Moses and the prophetes. nether Christ and his Apostles
vse any such maner of doctrine. further what profit do yeto the
pe
                     •
                  ple wi
                     •
                  h this d
                     ••
                  trine? Sure I am that 
                     〈◊〉
                   cause many to conceaue an
euill opiniō of God hereby. But now for asmuch, as the secrete will of God, 
                     ••
                  k
                     •
                  owe
                     •
                  
to none but 
                     •
                  o him self alone, who hath r
                     ••
                  eled it to you? how can
ye s
                     •
                  y this is god
                     •
                   secrete will? 
                     •
                  f it was gods sec
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                   will 
                     •
                  hat Ad
                     •
                   should
fall and you 
                     〈◊〉
                   it then it is both secrete and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , both reueled and

unreueled, both knowen, & unknowen. what greate absurditie is this? can
a mā call that which he knoweth vnknowen? or that which is secret reueled.
so may a mā say,Eccle. 3▪
                   hearing is not hearing, light 
                     •
                  s no light. By this strā
                  ge 
doctrine, you wolde be counted wyse but you are so much from the
right way,Oh that you could looke vpon that alwayes. that you are become foolish, you can not content your self
with such thinges as it hath pleased God to reuele in his word for our
comfort, but will nedes knowe gods secret will. Search not saith Sirach
out the ground of things as are to mightie for the but looke what God
hath commanded the, and looke vpon that alwaies, and be not curious
in many of his workes, for it is not nedefull for the to se with thine eyes
thinges that are secret. the medling with such thinges hath beguyled
many a man and tangled their wits in vanitie.Prouer, 28 And in the Prou
                     •
                  rbe
                     •
                  :
Eyke as it is not good to eate to much honie, euen so he that will searche
out hiegh thinges, it shalbe to heauie for him. wo be vnto them (saith the
Lord) that are wyse in their own sight,Esaie 5. and think them selues to haue
vnderstanding. for he that presumeth to know the secret will of God, and
thereby will confirme his error, he can not be reformed by gods reueled
will,Rom. 12 which is the worde. Be not wise saieth Paul, in your own opinions.
And the holie Gost: be not wise in your own conceat; but f
                     •
                  are the Lord
and depart from euill,Prou. 3 so shall thy nauel be hole and thy bones strong▪ And
I
                     •
                   but is not we that can fynde out the almightie.Iob 37 for in power, equitie,
and righteousnes he is hiegher, then can be expressed. Let men therefor
feare him. for there shall no man se him that is wise in his own conceat,
we must not 
                     •
                  eke out the, s
                     •
                  cretes of God, for we shall not preuaile,
but bring our selues to consufion. If we go about to establishe our opinions
by gods secret will, we must nedes f
                     •
                  ll in horrible darcknes and errors. for
who can know what the will of God is, we must submitt our selues with
all humilitie to the word, and there with great reuerence search out such
things as are written for our comfort and edification. which we can not 
duelie vnderstand without the spirit of God to teache vs, as it is written,
oh Lord who can haue knowledge of thy vnderstanding and meaning, except
th
                     •
                  w giue him wisdom, and send thy holy Gost from aboue?Sap. 9 But if
we prepare our selues with r
                     •
                  uerence to read the word of God to the
intent to vnderstand it to our consolation, and with humilitie subm
                     •
                  t
our selues to do it, God will open to vs so much as is ether necessarie or profitable
for vs.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               What confirmation our doctrine hath by the inuincible,To the 1. 2. 3. 4
and most euident testimonies of gods holie scriptures,
I will not now dispute: onely I must cōpleine, that
maliciously, and most impudently ye wrest our wordes,
and peruert our myndes. And for the probatiō thereof

I say that ye are neuer able to shew in any of our writings
the wordes and sentences, which in this place ye
affirme vs to say. ye be neuer able (I say) to proue that
we haue written or taught: that God by his reueled will, will all
men to be saued, and yet by his secrete will, he willeth many to be damned.
That by his reu
                        •
                     led will he willeth no wickednes, but by his secret will, he
will Pharao to be hard hearted, Semei to curse Dauid, the Patriarkes to
sell their brother Ioseph, that by his reueled will, he wolde not that Adam
shoulde f
                        •
                     ll, but by his secret will he willeth Adam to fall.
               
               These propositions I say, you be neuer able to shew
in our writinges, nether yet to proue that our doctrine
did or doth tend to that end. for we constantly affirme
that God reueled vnto vs his most holie and most iust
wil in his plaine and holie scriptures, which do assure
vs, that a separation shalbe made betwext the goates,
and the lambes, that the one shal receaue the kingdom
propared vnto them before all beginning, and that the
other shalbe adiudged to the fyre which neuer shalbe
quenched. That God stirred and raised vp Pharao, that
his power might be declared in him, that these wordes
God plainely spoke to Moises: I know that Pharao shal
not permitte the people to depart, therefore haue I hardened
his heart,Eu
                        •
                     . 9. that I may multiplie my wōders vpon
him: that Dauid did represse the furie of Abisai, and
of his seruantes who wolde haue killed Semei,2 King. 16. saying:
suffre him to curse, for the Lord hath commanded him
the Lord perchance shal behold my affliction, and shal
reward me with good for his cursing this day. That Ioseph
said to his bretheren,Gen
                        •
                     . 45 be you not moued with sorow,
y• ye haue solde me, for the Lord hath sent me for
conseruation of a great multitude, it is not therefore
you that haue sent me hither, but God, who hath made
me father to Pharao, and Lord ouer his hole house. None
of all these I say do we cast vpon gods secrete will,
as ye falsly accuse vs: but we do constantly affirme that
his will, is so plainely reueled in these maters that
such as shall denie any of them to haue bene gods wil,
can not escape abnegation of his eternall veritie. And

further we say that the fall of man, is plainely reueled
vnto vs, not onely by experience, but euen by that same
law which was imposed to him shortly after his creation,
the transgression whereof made Adam and all his posteritie
criminall and giltie to gods iustice: & that nether
against gods wil reueled, nether yet against his secrete
wil. for by his will reueled can no man further conclude,
but this, that in what day soeuer Adā should eate of
the frute forbiddē, that he should die the death. But Adam
against gods command ement did eat: and therefor
did he iustly vnderly the sentence of death. And thus do
we referre to gods will manifestly reueled, what soeuer
ye imagin, that we ascribe to his secret will. Nether yet
nede you to maruell, if ye list to take such paines, as to
read our writīges, where that we finde the doctryne that
we teach (your surmised lie, we cast vpon your selues) seing
that Moises, the prophetes, Christ Iesus, and his Apostles
in all writings do affirme the same. But yet lest
that ye should think that we attribute nothing to gods
secret wil,To the 5 I will in few wordes confesse what we teach
maintein and beleue, in that case. And that the rather
because you gather agreate absurditie, not of our doctryne,
but of that which ye falsely imput vpon vs, in this
maner. for asmuch (you say) as the secrete will of God is knowen to
none but to him self alone, Who hath reueled it to you? how can you say
this is gods secret will? if it was gods secret will that Adam should fall
and you knew it▪ then it is both secret and vnsecret, both reueled and vnreueled,
both knowen and vnknowen. What greate absurditie is this?
               
               To the which I answere according to your impudēt
foolishnes, that because you fight with your owne shadowe,
these yor dartes do hurt vs nothing, for we do not
affirme, that we do knowe the fall of man by gods secret
will, but by his will manifestly reueled vnto vs by
his holie scriptures. Or more plainly to answer yor reasons,
which you think inuincible: we say, that that wil
which was secret in God before all time, was reueled to
man in time by his owne word, and that from time to
to time the same became more manifest, as sainct Paul

witnesseth in these wordes:
                     
                        •
                     phes. 3. To me the least of all saintes
is giuen this fauor (or grace) that I should preach
amōgest the Gētiles the vnsearchable riches of Christe,
That I should bring forth to light before all mē, what is
ye cōmunion of the mysterie wc was hid from all ages in
God, who hath made all things by Christ Iesus, that the
manifest wisdome of God may nowe be notified to principates,
and powers in heauenlie things by the Church,
according to the fore appointment of the ages which
he hath made in Christ Iesus our lorde. so that we are
now bold to say, that albeit no creature did knowe before
all time what ordre God should kepe in the creation
and disposition of all thinges in time: yet may we
nowe I say be bolde to affirme that the secrete was hidde
in the eternall connsell of God. That first he wold
create the heauen the earth, the masse being rude, hauing
darknes vpon the great depthe, thereafter that he
wold make light putting diuision betwene the light &
the darknes, and so forth as Moises hath declared the
ordre obserued in the creatiō. And as those things were
somtime secret, but now are manifest, reueled and
knowen so likewies was the falle of mā, and the redemption
which commeth by Christ Iesus somtime secrete
in the eternall counsell of God, but nowe is most manifestly
preached and declared by Christ Iesus, and by
his holie Apostles. for nowe we know that God so loued
the world, that his onelie beloued Sonne hath he
giuen, that so many as do beleue in him, shall haue the
life euerlasting. Which life was euen before all times
in Christ Iesus, euen as we were elected in him before
the foundations of the world were laid. And therefor I
doubt not to affirme, but that the fall of mā and the remedie
for ye same, was not onelie forsene but also before
determined, and the frute which of the same should
ensue cōcluded and appointed in gods eternall counsell
before that euer Adam was created. the reason and probation

hereof we haue before declared to be the issue
of all things, as we are taugh by gods manifest word, yea
by most euident experience. for who nedeth nowe to
doubt, that it was gods eternall counsell, that man
should fall from that perfecte image in which he was
created and so become subiect to the death, to the end
that the faithfull might receaue perfection, iustice and
life in Christ Iesus alone, seing that scripture so manifestly
affirmeth that we were elected in Christ Iesus before
the foundations of the worlde were laid that God
hath wrapped all nations in disobediēce that he might
haue mercie vpon all,Rom. 11 vpon all I say which refuse not
the remedie, frō all begining prepared, which is Christe
Iesus, as ye Apostle witnesseth, saying: in him & by him, areal
things created, & he is before al things,Colo. 1. & al things
consist or abide by him, and he is the head of the bodie
of the Churche, who is the beginning, the first begotten
of the dead, that in all things he may hold the preeminēce.
for it hath pleased the father that all fulnes should
dwell in him▪ and to reconcile, by him al things to him
self. This counsell I say was not temporal, as taken and
deuised after the fall of man, but it was eternall, as the
same Apostle witnesseth in these words:Ti
                        ••
                     . 2 God hath called
vs by an holie vocation, not according to our works
but according to his purpose and grace, which was giuen
to vs by Iesus Christ before eternall times, but is
nowe made manifest by the appering of our sauiour
Iesus Christ. But mark well that the Apostle saieth that
grace was giuen to the faithfull by Christ Iesus from
the eternitie of times which thus to Titus he doth confirme
saying,Tit. 1. Paule the seruant of God, and an Apostl
                     •
                  
of Iesus Christ according to the faith of gods electe,
and the knowledge of the veritie, which is according
to godlines in the hope of eternall life, which he hath
promised, which is God that cā not lie, before the world
began, and hath opened his worde at ye tyme appointed

through preaching &c. And the same saieth Peter speaking
of our redemption by Christes pretious blood,1. Pet. 1.
who certeinly was preordinate, sayeth he, before that ye
world was made, but was manifested in the last times.
Hauing these I say most euidēt scriptures to assure our
conscience that redemption, remission of our sinnes,
grace, and recōciliation, were appointed for vs, yea and
were giuen vnto vs before all times, what nede we to
doubt, what was the counsell of God in mans creation,
or what was his secret will in giuing to him the commādement
of not eating the frute, and therefor you do
not onely folishly, but also iniuriously in thus raling
vpon vs, what strange and monsterous doctrine is this? to say things
be secrete, and vnsecret, knowen, and vnknowene, reueled and vnreueled,
as man should say hearing? is not hearing and light is not light.
No such absurditie cā iustly be gathered vpō our doctrine,
for simply we say yt thīgs somtimes kepte secrete in
ye counsell of God, and vnknowen to the sonnes of mē,
were after disclosed. and made manifest to the world, in
so much, that light expelled darcknes from the heartes
of the sonnes of light, and knowledge remoued ignorance
from those, that were appointed to life. If these
things do not satisfie you, yet my good hope is, that ye
godlie reader shall perceaue, that most vniustly you accuse
vs, as if in our doctrine were plaine contradiction.
And yet as touching the secrete will of God we moreouer
affirme, that our eternal election, in Christ Iesus,
our temporall falling in Adam, our restitution to life,
by the promes made, are not secret, but manifestly reueled.
But why that so it pleased his infinite wisdome,
and goodnes to dispose, and before ordeine the mysterie
of our saluation: that first we should beare the image
of the earthlie and carnall Adam, before that we
should beare the image of the heauenlie and spirituall:
that first we shuld be all wrapped in sinne, and by reason
thereof in miserie & death, before that we should be
perfecte iust, and come to felicitie, and life euerlasting,

ād finally why yt it pleased his Maiestie to choose some:
ād of this same masse to reiecte others, we say is not reueled,
neither yet shalbe reueled before yt Christ Iesus
appere in his glorie, whē the bookes shalbe opened and
all secretes shalbe disclosed. To speake the mater so simply
as I can, that ye haue no occasion to complein of
obscuritie, I say that gods will in these subsequētes and
in many others his wōderous workes is secret. first why
did not God more, sodēly creat ye world? why gaue he to
Adam no greater strenght? why did he permitt him to
falle? why he did not prouide mannes redemption by
some other meanes, thē by the cruell and ignominious
death of his owne sonne? why did he choose the sede
of Abraham to be his people, refusing and reiecting as
it were the rest of the world? And finally why that God
wold that his dear sonne should die in Ierusalem, called
his owne Citie, by reason of the temple and sacrifices
appointed? why (I say) that God by the figures of the
law, and by his Prophetes had before spoken, that the
Messias should suffer in that citie, ād that the builders,
who then onely in earthe were reputed & knowen to be
the Church of God, should reiect and refuse the chief
corner stone Christ Iesus? In these and others the wonderous
workes of God (which so far excede the reach of
our vnderstanding,To the 6. 7. 8. that more able they are to quenche
and swallow vp all light which remaineth in vs, then is
ye great depth of the sea to deuoure our frayle bodies)
do we hold the secrete will of God for a ruele of all equitie,
perfection and sufficiencie, teaching and affirming
that if any man of vaine curiositie or of deuelish
pride, presume to define or determine vpon these or others
his inscrutable secretes, the causes whereof (other
then his secret, but most iust will) is not, neither
shalbe reueled, till the full glory of the sonnes of God
be manyfested, when the wisdome, goodnes, iustice and
mercie of God shall so euidently appere to the full contentation
of his electe, & to the most iust conuicting

of the consciēces of the very reprobate, to whome shall
be left no place of excuse, but in their owne consciences
they shall receaue the iust sentence of their most
iust condemnation. and so shall they in tormentes
glorifie the most iust & most seuere iudgement of
God, and his vnspeakable hatered against sinne conceaued.
We teach and affirme (I say) that if any man
in this life trauale to searche out other causes of these
foresaid works of God (then his secrete will) that the same
man hedlongs casteth him selfe in to horrible cōfusion,
which he can not eskape without spedie repentance.
And against such men are al the scriptures by you alledged,
spoken and written, and not against vs, who as we
affirme nothing which gods worde doeth not plainely
teache vs, so do we cease curiously to inquire any cause
of his workes, other thē it hath pleased his godlie wisedome,
and mercie to reuele vnto vs by his holie spirit
plainely speaking in his holie scriptures. And therefor
to you it shalbe most profitable to trye and examine
this mater with greater indifferēcie, then hitherto you
haue done, and to ponder, and wey whether it be ye or
we that be wise in our owne conceate, sight or opinion,
or that go about to finde out the almightie,Rom. 12 that is to
subiecte his Maiestie,Iob. 37
                        •
                     
                   and wisdome to the iudgemēt of
our corrupt reason, You (I say) who vpon his words plainely
spoken by the holie Gost, and vpō his works which
he neither fearerh nor eshameth to attribute and clame
to him selfe, dare make these blasphemous conclusiōs:
Then is he more cruel then a wolf, then is he a dissembler,
                  The saings of Castalio against Iohn. Cal
                     
                        •
                     in. 
                  then beareth
he hōny in his mouthe & gaule in his breast, then is he author of sinne, &
him self thē is he vniust & cōtrarious to him self, or we yt cōmīg but
onely to the sight of gods incōprehensible iudgements,
with all trēblīg & reuerēce fall done before his Maiestie
& wt the Apostle do crye, Oh ye depnes of ye riches & wisdome
and knowledge of God, howe inscrutable are his
iudgementes and vnsearcheable are his waies, who hath
knowen ye minde of the Lord or who hath bene of his counsell,

or who hath giuen vnto him first, that he should
recompence him? for of him, and by him and in him
are all things. to him be glorie for euer, Amen. Be
you your selues iudges I say whether you or we do
search out thinges that be aboue the reache of our capacities,
and by that meanes studie to bring God as it
were in bōdage to our reasons. but now that which foloweth
in these wordes.
            
         
         
            
               ADVERSARIE.
               Thy worde sayeth Dauid is a lanterne to my fete and a light vnto
my steppes.The 37. section when thy worde goeth forth it giueth light and vnderstanding
euen Vnto babes:Psal 119 all the wordes of the Lord are pure and cleane it is a
shilde to them that put their trust in it. And the Prophet Esaya: if any mā
lacke light 
                     •
                  et him looke vpon the lawe, and the testimonie. we must
not leaue the word and seke to establish our phantasies, ether by reason
or gods secret will. for we are commanded that we turne not from the
word nether to the right hand, nor to the left, that thou maiest saye
                     •
                  h th
                     •
                  
holye Gost haue vnderstanding in all that thou takest in hand. This
is sufficient for vs and this we oght for to do. But we knowe say you
euen by the worde, that God hath a secret will, whereby he worketh
all that pleaseth him verie well and can you proue thereby that God
hath two willes?Pro. 30. God hath reueled so much of his will as is profitable 
for vs to vs to knowe.Esa, 8. the rest which is nether necessarie nor mete for vs
to know he hath not reueled. Is it therefore an other will? or is 
that which is not reueled contrarie to that which is reueled? then shal
there be contrarieti
                     •
                  , in God, which is fals. if God in respect of his reueled
will, wold not that Adam shoulde fall but in respect of his secret 
will,Rom. 12 he wold Adam should fall then did God will two contraries
which is impossible.Iob 37 was there euer any such monsterous doctrine taught
God abhorreth a double heart which speaketh one thing and thinketh
and other. and yet abhorre you not to charge God with that which 
he cannot abide in his creatures that is that he should speak one thing, as
that Adam should not haue fallen, and think and will the contrar
                     •
                  e that
Adam should haue fallen
            
            
               ANSWER.
               The wil of God plainely reueled, in his holie scriptures
we do not onely followe as a bright lanterne shining
before vs,To the 
                        •
                     
                   for the directing of our pathes walking
in the darknes of this mortalitie but also we affirme it
to be of such sufficiencie, that if an Angell frō the heauen
with wonders, signes and miracles wolde declare

to vs a will repugning to that which is alredie reueled
persuading vs vpon that, to ground our faith, or by that
to rule the actions of our liues, we wold hold him accursed,
and in no wise to be heard. and therefore yet
once againe I cā not cease to exhort you, if by late reuelations
ye (I mean some of your faction) hath receaued
any newe knowledge of gods will, by the which you
persuade others, that man in this life shalbe pure, and
clean, with out sinne, that God shall expell it, not onely
in the resurrection, but euen while we walk compassed
with this corruptible flesh, euen as the bright sunne
chaseth away the darck cloudes, that the children of
God shal so beare dominion ouer the wicked in this
earth, that all the proud tyrannes, and oppressors shall
be come slaues to the godlie, and that shalbe their hell
and punishment, as the earthlie reigning of the others,
shalbe their heauen and ioye promised. Examin I say
your selues, if that any of you be infected with these,
and others mo grosse and foolish fantasies, which by
gods reueled will, you be neuer able to proue. But as
for vs we haue proued and offer to proue at all times by
the reueled will of God, what so euer we teach, affirme
or beleue,To the 2 of gods eternal electiō, or of his most iust reprobatiō
for we cōfesse euen the self same thing which
you alledge vs to say, which is that by the word of God
we knowe, that God hath a secret, will whereby he worketh
all that pleaseth him in heauen and in earth, and
that also he hath reueled vnto vs so much as is profitable
for vs to knowe, ether yet necessarie for our saluacion.
for the which we praise his eternal goodnes and
infinit wisdom & do affirme further (as before we haue
said) that such as stād not content with that which is reueled,
but arrogātly list to moūt vp to search the secretes
of gods counsel, shalbe beatē downe againe by the
brightnes of his glorie to eternal confusion, in a iust
recompence of their presumpteous boldnes. And thus
much with you we wil willingly cōfesse. but where vpon

certen questions, you make such conclusions as pleaseth
you, we cannot but accuse in yon that vnreuerent
yea deuelish boldenes and pride, which in all men we
condemne. But let vs heare your own wordes.
               Can you proue thereby that God hath two willes, or is that which
is not reueled contrarie to that which is reueled then shoulde there be cō
                  trarietie
in God which is false. if God in respect of his reueled will,
wold not that Adam should fall but in respect of his secret will he wolde
Adam shoulde fall. Then did God will two contraries which is impossible.
               These be your wordes and seuerall reasons most
blasphemously spoken,To the 3. 4. 5. not against vs but against gods
eternall wisdome. against vs (I say) ye cannot speak
them for no such doctrine haue we euer taught, for we
most constantly affirme that the secret wil of God
and his will reueled, is alwaies one, which is the manifestation
and declaratiō of his own glorie, althogh it seme
diuers in ye instrumentes as before I haue most manifestly
dec
                     •
                  ared. and thus most iustly might I send you
to debate your cause with him whose iustice, & wisdom
cannot be subiect to the vanitie of your reason. But yet
because no small part of this cōtrouersie betwext you &
vs consisteth in this: that you can admit no will in God
the reason and cause whereof, ye cannot see, perceaue
nor vnderstand, and affirming the contrarie say, that of
gods secret will, can nether man nor Angell perceaue
assigne, or vnderstand any other reason, or cause,
but his holie will onelie: and therefore with all reuerence
do they stoupe, and couering their eyes, crie iust
and righteous art thou oh, Lord in all thy workes, holie,
holie, holie Lord God of armies. The vniuersall
earth is replenished with the glorie of his Maiestie.Esay. 
                        •
                     .
Because I say a great part of our controuersie standeth
in this point, I wil go through your questions, and seuerally
answer to euerie one. first you aske if God haue
two willes by reason that he hath a secret will and a reueled

wil. I answere, that as God in his eternal God head
is simple and one, so is his will in respecte of him selfe
from all beginning simple and one, which is the declaration
of his owne glorie. But because the instrumentes
(in which gods glorie is and must be for euer manifested
and knowen) be diuers, therefor hath gods will wc
in him selfe is one, diuers considerations, effectes, & endes,
in respect of the diuers instrumentes. for example
God will the vessels of his mercies to be extolled to the
glorie of the kingdome with Christ Iesus,Mat. 25 but he will
the vesselles of wrath to be adiudged to the fire inquenchable
prepared for the deuill & all his Angelles. Who
doth not see, but in respecte of these diuers instrumēts
the will of God hath diuers respectes, and diuers endes,
and iustly may be called two willes or a dooble will? for
it is one will to saue, and an other will to condemne, as
touching the instrumentes & creatures saued or condemned.
But in respecte of God the wil is one and simple,
which is as before is said the manifestation of his
glorie, which no lesse shyneth in the iust punishmēt of
the one sort, then in the mercifull deliuerance of the
other. And this much for the first. Secōdly ye ask, if yt
wc is not reueled be cōtrary to that wc is reueled. To the
wc I answere as before, that in respecte of God there is
no cōtrarietie betwext ye will reueled and the will vnreueled.
But yet may the creatures to whome God, doeth
notifie his will by commandement, rebuke or exhortation,
apprehend & vnderstand one thing, and yet it
may be that God in his eternall counsell hath determined
the expresse contrarie. if this to you at the first
sight seme strange, yet my good hope is that examples
in the scriptures proposed shall make the mater sensible
ynough to the godlie and sobre reader.To 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   What do
we think that Dauid did apprehend of that most sharp
and vehement rebuke giuen vnto him by Nathan thē
Prophete in the name of God? No dowt that he was the

sonne of death, that God wold break the league and
couenant with him, as he had done to Saule his predicessor.
But was it therfor the eternall purpose of God
that so it should be? The end and issue declareth the
contrarie. Ezechias receaued the very sentence of present
death from the mouthe of the Prophet Isaiah, who
no doute came not with message at all aduenture, but at
the expresse commandement of God, for so he affirmeth
sayinge: Thus saieth the lord put ordre to thy
house for thou shalt die and shalt not liue.Isa. 38. But was not
therefor the cōtrarie (to witt that he should afterward liue
fiftene yeres) determined in the immutable coūsell
of God. The same might I declare by many other exhortations
&commandementes, but with one I wil stād
contented, which shall adde light to the former. Abraham
was commanded by God, to take his sonne Isaak
whome he loued, his onelie sonne, in whome the promes
stode, and to go to the mounteine which God wold
appoint, & there to offer him in sacrifice. What will of
God did Abraham apprehend in this commandement
during the iourney of thre dayes? God him selfe beareth
recorde, that Abraham did so vnderstand gods
will, that his owne hād was stretched out to kill his sonne,
yea that in his heart he had killed him. for so saith
the Angell: because thou hast donne this, and hast not
spared thy onelie sonne, I shall blesse the. but whether
had God in his eternall counsell de
                     •
                  ermined, that Abrahā
should kill his sonne, as Abraham did vnderstand by
his will reueled? who so euer dare so affirme maketh
God subiecte to mutabilitie, and denieth him to be
God, whose wisdome, knowledge, purpose and coūselles
be stable and appointed from all eternitie. if with reuerēce
the causes hereof be searched & inquired, ye holie
Gost will answer yt good it was to Dauid thus to be humbled.
that profitable it was not onely to Ezechias, but also
to the hole Church of God after him, to cōme to the
knowledge of his infirmitie, and of the agonye & battel

which he susteined, fighting as it were agaīst gods iudge
mētes. That by Abrahams, great obediēce, be we all instructed
to obey God in all things which he cōmādeth,
and to subiecte not onely our lustes and affections to
his will reueled, but also our reason (appeare it neuer so
probable.) With the which if we stand not satisfied, but
quarreling with God, will or dare in a blynd fury ask, to
what purpose commandeth, and speaketh he one thing,
& meaneth the contrary? That deuelishe presumption
shall fall down from the clouds, and break downe for euer
the frantick heads of such vile slaues of proud lucifer.
And therefor be ye warned, for vengeance is prepared
for all such vnreuerent reasoners in gods perfect
(but yet profound) iudgementes as ye declare your selues
to be, in this which foleweth.
               If God (say you) in respect of his reueled will, wold not that Adam
should falle, but in respecte of his secrete will, he wold Adam should fall
                     •
                  
then did God will two contraries, which is impossible.
               Answere. Impossible we confesse it to be that
contrarietie should be in that will, which in it self
is simple and one. But how shall you be able to proue
that God in reueling his will to Adam, had none other
purpose nor will but onely that Adam, should not
falle? (because say you) he said thou shalt not eate, I answer,
& so said he to Abrahā thou shalt take ād offer thy
sonne in sacrifice. And yet we knowe that the contrarie
had he determined. O (crye you) God abhorreth a double heart
which speaketh one thing and thinketh an other,
                  To y• 5 
                  and yet ye abhorre nes
to charge God with that which he can not abide in his creatures, that is
that he should speak one thing, as that Adā should not offēd, & will the cotrarie,
as that Adā should offend. Answer, God if his good pleasure
be, towch your heartes with such vnfeined repētance
that you may vnderstand howe horrible be these blasphemies,
which thus in your furious blindnes you spew
forth against gods supreme Maiestie, for before I haue
said they are not spoken against vs. for no such doctrine
do we teach nor affirme, as that of which you gather

these blasphemies, ād albeit we did, yet it were as easie
for vs to dissolue ād vnlouse such deuelish knottes, as
by instructiō of your father, you knit to trippe ye soules
of the simple, & as it is for ye fote of the valiant & strong
mā to burst a sondre the spiders webbes which ye venemous
spider maketh to catch the impotēt flies and feble
gnattes. And now left y• you should glorie as thogh
yor reasons yet stoode sure. Let vs trie ād examine euery
membre aparte. God abhorreth (say you) a dooble heart
which speaketh one thing and thinketh an other, I answer:
That as God is a spirit and hath neither heart nor
bodie like as man hath, so must not his words, cogitations,
and thoghtes be compared to ours: for as we
be corrupte liers and vaine, so where we do speak one
thing, and think an other, we do meane deceate, fraud,
and destruction to our brother, to whome we promise
trueth, fidelitie, & conseruation to our power. But God
according to the puritie and perfection of his godlie
nature in speaking to his creatures, and in creating of
them must not absolutely haue respect to thē, but also
to his owne glory. for what reason is it that God of nothīg
shall make that c
                     •
                  eature by whome his glory shall
not be manyfested? and therefor in speaking to Adam,
and in giuing a lawe to him, God had respecte to his eternall
counsell & purpose, as before we haue spoken,
and hereafter shall rehears. But still crye you, that yet we
burden God wt that which he cānot abyde in his creatures
that is, that he should speak one thīg, as that Adam
should not haue fallen, and that he ment the contrarie.
for answer I ask of you, if ye will binde God to that lawe
which he hath imposed to his creatures? And if ye will
leaue none other libertie to God his soueraigne maiestie,
then his lawe hath permitted to men subiecte to
the same: and if ye dare promise to your selues that authoritie
ouer God, girde your loines, and play the strōg
champions: prepare your seates, appoint your iudges,
cite, and adiourne him to appeare at a fixed day, to rendre

a reason,The aduersari
                        •
                     s iudge of gods maiestie according to their blind reas
                        •
                     n. & a make an accōpte before you of his vniuersall
regiment, in which (no doubt) ye shall finde many
things more repugnant to your reason then this. You
think I mock you in that I wil you to cite and call God
to an accōpt, in very dede I do. for as your blasphemie
& pride is vtterlie to be abhorred, so is your vanitie
more worthie to be mocked, then your simplicitie in
that case to be instructed. for what was he euer yet amongest
the most ignorant ethnicks so foolishe or so
presumpteous, but that he did confesse that the workes
and wonders of the supreme God, were exempted from
all lawe, and censure of mans iudgement. But in your
presence, God shall haue no libertie to command, or
forbid any thing to any of his creatures, but that he
must nedes absolutely will the same, and for no cause or
respecte may he will the contrarie, but that he shall haue
a dooble heart, he shalbe a dissēbler (cursed be your
blasphemie that causeth me thus to write) and in him
there shalbe cōtrarietie. this is the reuerence which ye
beare to gods infinite wisdome in all his workes, to the
ground whereof ye can not atteine by your corrupt reason,
that you burst forth in scoffing, mocking, and blasphemie.
But yet to come more nye to the mater, I denie
that iustly you can conclude any contrarietie to be
in God, albeit that to Adam he said thou shall not eate,
and yet in his eternall counsell he had determined
that Adam shoulde eate, neither yet (I say) cā you be able
to proue, that he spoke one thing & willed the contrarie,
because he pronounced this sentence: in what so
euer day thow shalt eate of this tree, thou shalt dye the
death, but rather we maye most assuredly conclude, that
both the precept, & the penaltie threatned to ensue the
violation of it, was a plaine and manifest declaration what
before was concluded in gods eternall counsell, as
also that they were the meanes, by the which the secret
will and good purpose of God toke effecte amongest
men & was notified vnto the world. for if God had not

before appointed the falle and the remedie for the same,
he had not imposed vpon him a lawe, the transgression
whereof, should bring death, but should haue suffered
him to liue without such feare and bondage, as we
shall do when victorie shalbe giuen ouer death, which
is the sting of sinne, & ouer sinne also which had his
power by the lawe. And therefor I say that gods commandement
forbidding Adam to eate, and the punishment
of death denounced, if he did eate, were nothing
contrary to his secret will: but were the very wayes appointed
by his infinite wisdome, by the which he had
determined that his secrete will concerning the mysterie
of mās redemption should be notified & put in execution.
And albeit that such as in gods eternall election
finde no swetenes nor comfort, fret, fume, storme,
and rage at the onelie mention of it: yet neither dare
we nor can we cōceale and suppres gods eternall trueth,
infinite loue, and incomprehensible liberalitie towardes
vs: neither eshame we to confesse our owne wretched
pouertie, and iust condemnation, into the which
oure father Adam willingly wrapped him self and vs.
And therefor we constantly affirme that as we were elected
in Christ Iesus before all tymes, so it behoued vs
in time to fall in Adam, to the end that the bright glorie
of God, might after shyne & appere before men &
Angels. Proue nowe if you can contrarietie betwext
gods will reueled, & his secrete will. How vaine is the
difference, which you put betwene his will & his permissiō
we shall shortly examin in this which foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The reason where with you go aboute to persuade this to be of trueth
is very meane,The 1▪ argument. if a man (say you) could do any thing cōtrary to gods will,
then were not God omnipotent,38. Section. wherefor what so euer 
                     〈◊〉
                   dōne, it must
nedes be donne by the will of God, whose will no man ca
                     •
                   resist. I answere
that God is goodnes it self, his will is alwayes good, yet man apt 
to do & may do euill contrary to gods will, no
                     •
                   withstanding God remaineth
omnipotent, suffering m
                     •
                  n to do euill whome he might destroy
before he did the euill, if so it pleased him. Phara
                     •
                   obstinatly refused 
                  
to obey the will of God, yet was God omnipotent, for if God had list
he might haue destroied Phara
                     •
                   at the first, and the arrogāt tyrān
                     •
                   was
well worthie to be destroyed, yet God vsed towards him, by littel and litell
 such encreasse of punishemēt as he might therwith haue ben am
                     •
                  
                  ̄ded
had not his malice ben and impedimēt. Christ as he witnesseth hī self w
                     •
                  ld
haue gathered the Ier
                     •
                  solim
                     •
                  tans together, as the hē her chickēs, yet w
                     •
                  ld
they not, God wold that the Israelites should entre into the land of Cana
                     •
                  
and they wold not, wherefor they were caried back again through the
wildernes where they perished. Againe when God wold not that they
should entre, they wold nedes entre, and were put to flight of the Cananites.
Thus we se plainely that many things be donne cōtrary to the will of
God, which shalbe more largely declared hereaf
                     •
                  er, where we shal shewe
howe God often suffered many things which he wold not yet to maintein
this vntrueth ye alledge that which is written in Exodus th
                     •
                   9. the Lord
 hardened the heart of Phar
                     •
                  o. To the which I answere that which is writtē
all most in the ēd of the same chapter, Phara
                     •
                   hardened his heart, he
and his seruants: and that which is written in the chapter of 
                     •
                  he first b
                     •
                  
                  ke
of the kinges. wherefor should you harden your heartes a
                     •
                   the Aegyptians
and Pharao hardened their heartes. by these places I may prou
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
well that Pharao hardened his ow
                     •
                  e hearte, as you cā proue, that God m
                     •
                  
                  de
him hard he arted, by that other text▪ wherefor t
                     •
                   vnderstād howe these
 places do aggr
                     •
                  , we must note first, that al the children of Adam haue
a hard & wicked heart,Iere. 17. vntill they be mollified by the grace of God, as I
                     •
                  remie
witnesseth saying: Amōgest al things liu
                     •••
                   not, mā hath the most deceafull
& stubborn heart & the lord saieth that he will take the stonie heart
frō thē,Eze. 36. and gi
                     ••
                   thē a heart of flesh▪ without they had a sto
                     •
                  e heart, he
could not take it 
                     〈◊〉
                   thē If Phara
                     •
                   had a stonye heart, as it doeth well appere,
 in that he 
                     〈◊〉
                   oppressed the people, afore Moyses spak vnto
him, thē coulde it not be hardened more thē a stone, afore it had bene millified,
which was not dōne. for he refused to knowe the Lorde, & se
                     •
                   n
                     •
                  t his
heart to gods miracles, but at the first meting with Moises said, I knowe
not the Lord▪ therfor Pharao willing
                     •
                  y & wittingly, did indure & retaine
his hard sti
                     •
                  e heart, notwithstāding he ād his sorc
                     •
                  rers were 
                     •
                  ōuict to grāt
the miracles to be dōne by God, in so much that he desired Moises & Aaro
to pray for him, cōfessing his office▪ but yet after that he was deliuered
frō the present pl
                     •
                  gue, he indured his heart both he ād his s
                     •
                  rua
                     •
                  s so tha
                     •
                   as
 the Apostle saieth, whē they k
                     •
                  ewe God they glorified him not as God, neither
were they thākful, wherfor they were le
                     •
                  t to their owne lewd mi
                     •
                  des
which is the cause of hard
                     •
                  ing▪ for mā being left of God, is nothing els, but
a hard obsti
                     •
                  ate wicked creature, and cōforme to this meaning do the ancient
 doctors interprete this place, God hardened Pharaos heart, that is to
say, God suffered Pharaos heart to be hardened, as this, leade vs not into tōp
taciō
                  ▪
                  Iob 
                        •
                     9. that is suffer vs not to be ledde into rēptacion. So Iob saieth▪ God hath
take
                     ••
                   wis
                     •
                  dim from the Estriche, that is as it 
                     〈◊〉
                   there God hath
 not
                     •
                   giuen her vnderstanding. And of his f
                     •
                  iends Iob saieth. Thou hast

wi
                     •
                  hholden their hearts frō vnderstanding that is thou hast not giuē thē
vnderstāding:I
                        •
                     b 17. And thus mā
                  
                     •
                  er of speaking is cōmon in the scriptures not onely
of God, but also of mā as these,I
                        •
                     sue, 22 nowe you haue 
                     •
                  idd the childrē of Israel
out of the hād of the Lorde, that is you haue not caused th
                     •
                   to 
                     〈◊〉
                   in
                  
                     ••
                  
the hād of the lorde. The phrase of the scripture being this truely vnderstāded▪ 
                  
the ma
                     •
                  er shalbe the easier for seing that God (as Iames saie
                     •
                  h) 
                     〈◊〉
                  
no mā
                  ▪ that is to si
                     •
                  ne, then did God neither hardē the heart of Pharao,
not 
                     〈◊〉
                   him to do wickedly, but suffered him & gaue him ouer to the obstinate
hard heart which he had already ād this is the greatest plague that
chanced to man, to be
                     •
                  est to his owne lewd mynd as Saul because hē wold
not obey the Lorde, he was le
                     •
                  t of gods good spirit & taken with an euill
spirit, & thē from thence forth he became worse. and w
                     •
                  rse likwyes I
                     •
                  as
king of Iuda, because he wold not heare 
                     •
                  he voice of Zachari
                     •
                   the Prophet
he was lest of God, slaine in his owne bed with his owne seruants & 
foūd vnworthie to be buried in the sepul
                     •
                  hars of the kings. & his sonne Amasias,
because be refused to heare the Prophet of the lord, and soght c
                     •
                  ūsel
of the Ed
                     •
                  mites goddes, he as l
                     ••
                  e of God, ouer cōme by the king of Israel,
& afterwards by treas
                     ••
                  , his subiectes cōspired against him & killed him.
Thus we see that there cā be 
                     〈◊〉
                   gre
                     •
                  ter plague, then to beleft to our selues
& to be destitute of the grace of God. A
                     •
                   the yearth can be 
                     •
                  o more
gryueously punished, thē to lack the sunne & dewe. So the lord doeth punish 
his vineya
                     •
                  d not wasting 
                     〈◊〉
                   him self▪ but taketh the hedge and raine from
it▪ & suffereth it to be was
                     •
                  ed and ouertrode by others,Esa. 5. So Iob was plagued
of God onely by suffering him to be plagued notwithstanding Iob say
                     •
                  th,
the Lord hath giuen ād the Lord hath taken, which is not to be vnders
                     •
                  ād
that the Lord did take his goods, but o
                     •
                  ely, suffere
                     •
                   the deuil to take them.
So the Lord punished his people, not that he touched them, but I will hide,
my face from them & will see what their end shalbe saieth the Lord. After
the same maner oght that place, God hardened the heart of Pharao 
                     〈◊〉
                  
be vnderstand, that it God suffered the heart of Phara
                     •
                   to be hardened, or
left him in the hardnes of his heart, which appereth to be so of that wh
                     •
                  ch
is wri
                     •
                  ten. Exo
                     •••
                  e 10. chapter, how long refusest thou to submit thy self 
vnto me, to let my people goe? by this we see, that the will of God was, that
Pharao should let the people g
                     •
                  o. Secondly that Pharao 
                     •
                  id not subrnit
himself to God, that his 
                     •
                  ind was not conforme to gods mynd. Thirdly▪ in 
that he refused to let the people go, it was his owne dede and act
                     •
                   & not 
gods for if I should gra
                     •
                  t, that it was gods will, that he should r
                     •
                  fuse to let
the people goo, then did h
                     •
                   subr
                     •
                  yt him selfe to 
                     •
                  he will of the Lord, which
is cōtrarie to the word, thē should God ād he haue bene both of one mynd,
And the will of God is all wayes good and iust▪ wh
                     •
                  ch you can not deny
then Phara
                     •
                   refusing to let the people go. did well & 
                     •
                  ustly, forasmuch▪
as it was gods will he should so do
                     •
                  , wherfor Pharao oght not t
                     •
                   be punished
for this good & iust dede. These & such like 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  skape, affirming Pharaos heart to haue been actually indured of God.
            
            
               
               ANSWER.
               How meane that euer our reasons be, yet great cause
we haue to giue thanks vnto God, that ye in laboring wt
all your wittes to oppugne & obscure them, are yet compelled
by the inuincible grace of gods mercie to iustifie
and illustrate the same. which shall plainely appere by
this your first answere, which you make concerning the
omnipotencie of God. forasmuch (say you) as God is
goodnes it self, his wil is alawayes good, yet mā is apte
to do, and may do euill, contrary to gods will, notwithstanding
God remaineth omnipotent suffering man to
do euill, whome he might destroy afore he did euill, if
so pleased him: and so ye bring forth ye example of Pharao.
I will not take in all points that aduātage of you wc I
think you wold take of vs most gladly, if you had vs in
such a streit as you haue here cōcluded your selues. for
if mā may do euil contrary to gods will: so that God for
no respect, for no end nor purpose wold that such wickednes
should be donne (for thus you must applie your
words, orels ye say nothīg against vs) and yet that it pleaseth
God not to destroy the wicked doer, but to suffer
him to do euill, whome he might haue destroied before
the iniquitie cōmitted. What shall, I pray you ensue?
but that either there shalbe in God two contrary willes,
one that willeth no wickednes in no wyes to be donne,
and an other that suffereth wickednes, yea and that is
pleased to suffre & not to destroye the wicked mā
                  
                     •
                   orels
that there is a power aboue gods wil, which compelleth
him to suffer that which he wold not: one of these two
can you not auoyd. But I wil dealle more fauorably with
you. Ye grant that God suffereth the euill,To ye 1. & 2. and that he
might destroy the wicked mā before iniquitie be committed,
if so pleased his godlie maiestie and wisdome.
Do ye not cōsider that in this your confession, is no les

                     •
                  onteined then any of vs hath either written or spoken
in this mater. for if gods omnipotencie remaineth as
no doubt it doth, so perfecte and hole that he may not
impede onely wicked men of their interprises, but also

yt he may destroy euē Sathā him self, if so pleased his eternal
wisedō, what can be cōcluded, but yt God willingly
for causes knowē to his wisedome alone, permitteth &
suffereth things to be dōne wc a
                     •
                  ter he will most iustly punish?
And thus (I say) doth you own answer & confessiō
iustifie or doctrine. for we do not teach yt wickednes pleaseth
God, in so farre as it is wickednes: neither yet that
God will sinfull actes to be donne, in so farre as they are
sinfull, without any other further respecte. But we say
that as the actiōs & cogitatiōs of the godly please God
in Christ Iesus, because they are wroght ād inspired by ye
power of his holie spirit: so yt the good workes, as patiē
                  ce,
iustice, chastitie, & suche lik, God will to be dōne, euē
because the works be good & agreable to his owne nature:
so say we that God will, yea and hath determined the
works that be most wicked to be donne for y• purposes
& causes cōcluded in his eternal coūsel. Which thing if
we be able to proue by the euidēt scriptures of God thē
oght you not to be offended althogh we preferre God
to mā, and his plaine trueth, to your sophisticall euasiōs
& colde interpretations of such places. for the auoiding
the prolixitie of many, I will choose but two at y• most,
plaine and most euident. Is it not a great & horrible sinne
that a fals prophete shall come and deceause the people?
Yea is it not likwyes sin, to deceaue ye Prophet? and
yet God feareth not to attrib
                     •
                  t to him self bothe the
one and the other. for no fals prophete dothe arrise, whō
God for one of two purposes doth not stirre vp, to witt,
ether to trie and examin the cōstancie & fidelitie of his
seruātes, orels, to execute ād blind those, who delite not
in the veritie. For Moises witnesseth in these words, if
in the middest of the, there arrise a Prophet, and he shal
giue vnto the a signe, and yet should say let vs go and
serue strāge goddes heare him not, for ye Lord your God
tempteth you, whether that ye wil loue your Lord, your
God with all your heart, & in all your fowle. if it be the
propre office of God to trye, tempt and examin ye heartes
of his people & of his chosen children as the holie

Gost affirmeth it to be. Then must you confes that the
fals prophetes be gods instrumentes appointed for that
purpose. And that God deceaueth the fals Prophet, Ezechiel
in plaine wordes doeth witnes saying, ād if the Prophet
deceaued speak the word, I the Lord haue deceaued
that Prophet,Eze. 14 and I will extend my hand against him
and I will roote him out from the midest of my people
Israel. And the same doeth yet God hī self more plainly
vendicate to him self in that solemned proclamatiō
made in the eares of the prophet Micheas ād boldly by
him pronounced in audience of two kings Achas & Iosaphat,3. Reg. 22.
as foloweth: who shall deceaue Achas to vs? or
who shall persuade him that he may passe vp, and fall
in Ramath galaad, and there passed out a certen spirit &
standing before ye lorde he said I shall deceaue or persuade
him. And the lord said wherunto? & he said I shall
passe out & be alieng Prophet in the mouthes of all his
Prophetes: he said therfor thou shal deceaue him & thou
shalt br
                     •
                  g it to passe: goo forth therfor & do euē so. And
lo God hath giuē a liēg spirit in the mouthes of al these
Prophetes & the lord hath spoken euill vpō the. If to
make a publique proclamation to call for one to deceaue,
to send him forth & to giue him power to do the same.
be onely a simple permission, & a thing which God
suffereth against his will, lett the indifferent man iudge.
I think that no mā will deny the incest of Absalome
openly committed, not onely to be sinne, but also to be
so execrable & detestable a facte that nature it self (be it
neuer so corrupt) must nedes abhorre it and yet I pray
you what saith God that he wil do in that be half, let the
Prophet witnes. Thus sayeth the Lord God (saieth Nathā)
behold I shall rayse euill against the, forthe of thine
own howse, and I shall take thy wyues and giue thē to thy
neighbour, who shal slepe with them in the sunne. Thou
did est yt facte secretely but I shall do this thīg opēly before
all Israel, let ye vehemēcie of ye words wc here be spoken,
be noted & be iudges your selues whether your interpretation
be tollerable, he saieth not I shal suffer euil

to come vpon the, but plainly he saieth I shal raise vp euil
against the. And therwith not content, he saieth I
shall take thy wyues, and to put the mater out of all controuersie
he addeth, ād I shal giue thē to thy neighbour
yea and that will I do openly. If to raise vp, to giue, & to
do, be to permitt onely the thing which he will not, we
must confesse our selues ignorant of the phrases of the
holie Gost. this same might I proue by Iob, by Nabuchadnezer,
by Salmanasar, by Syrus ād diuers others which
for breuities saik I passe ouer. one I will recite wc I
trust shalbe so plaine that the deuill him self by no subtilitie
shalbe able to obscure the light of ye trueth. Was
there euer any facte since the begining more wicked, if
the instrumētes shalbe cōsidered, as was the cruell and ignominiouse
death of the Sonne of God? And yet what
doeth the holie Gost attribut to God in that case? him
saieth Peter (beīg crucified) did you kill after that you
had taken him by the hādes of ye wicked men being giuen
by the appointed coūsell & fore knowledge of God.Act. 2.
And after,Act. 4. they haue verely cōuened agaīst thy holie Sō
                  ne
Iesus, whō, thou hast anointed, Herode together & Pō
                  tius
Pilate, wt ye Gentiles together & ye people of Israell
to do what so euer thy hand & thy cousell haue decreed
to be dōne. Aduise well what ye wil answer, ye wordes are
plaine, & so plaine yt you cā not auoide the. for he that
sayeth the wicked mē did what so euer God did foresee
& before dotermined, yea what his hand▪ yt is his power,
and coūsell, yt he had before decreed to be donne, meaneth
a thing of more greater importāce thē he yt saieth
they did what God permitted and suffered to be donne.
Consider forther yt you haue not to do wt men, as wt Augustine,
Caluine and vs whome you call careles libertines,
but wt the holie Gost speaking in Peter & in the hole
Church of Ierusalem, yea speaking in the hole scripptures.
for if not to spare his Sonne, but to giue him to
ye deathe for vs, to cause our sinnes to make warre agaīst
him, to punishe hī for ye same, in suche sorte yt of al men

he was most contemptible for a season. if I say to giue
to death to strike, to wound & punish, be actions, then
did not God onely suffer his Sonne to die to be woūded
to be smytten & to be punished without any will, that any
such thing should come to passe, but he in his eternall
counsell appointed the time, the place & the persons,
whē, where, and by whome he should suffer ye same.
for of loue he gaue him to suffer the trewe death: that
we by him might receaue life. the time could not be
changed & the cuppe which the father had giuen him
he must nedes drinck, as in the figures was foreshad owed
and by his own people, and gētiles, as the Prophetes, and
Dauid, had before spokē. If in gods counsell gods gift,
gods hand, and eternall purpose, before decreinge all
things to come to passe, in the deathe of his Sonne, ye
can se nothing, but a bare & simple permission, I can
not cease to affirme, that as by falsifying such plaine
scriptures, you labor to take from the Churche of God
their most singuler cōfort left to vs in Christes death,
so do you walk in darknes, & in y• same ye shall perishe
except spedely you repēt. Howe one, & the same work,
in so far as it procedeth from God, is most iust, most profitable
& most mercifull: and yet as it procedeth from ye
instruments most profane most wicked, damnable to thē
selues, & most cruell, I haue aboūdantly declared, and after
as occasion shalbe offered, shall touch by gods grace,
so much as may instructe the sobre mynd, if it be ignorant:
and also to put silēce to your venemous mouthes,
be they neuer so impudēt. Because the scriptures which
you heape together be either plainely repugning to
your error, orels make nothing for probation of the same,
I will so shortly as I cā go through them, onely noting
wherin you abuse the wordes and mynd of the holie
Gost.To the 
                        •
                     
                   The wordes of our master spokē in the 24, chapter
of Mathewes Gospell serue nothing for your purpose.
for in that place our Sauiour Christ Iesus speaketh
as he that is the messinger of his heauēlie father, ād declareth
that the Iewes obstinatly euen from their original

had resisted God speakīg by his patriarks, prophets
of old, & now last by his Sonne. he neither speaketh nor
meaneth what wil, God had to saue his elect, neither yet
yt will wc he had to gather & seperate thē frō v• world, but
onely (as Moises and Elias had before spoke) declareth
what fidelitie & diligence God had vsed in the generall
election & vocation of that people, from time to time:
and yet what had bene their obstinate rebellion & vnthankfull
defection from him: by the which they killed
the Prophetes, ād should kill his Sonne sent of God
to call them from iniquitie. What hath this to do I say
with that will, by the which God, in his eternall counsel
hath made diuisiō, betwext the electe & the reprobate?
If ye dare say that Christe in that place meaneth, in that
he wold haue gathered those murtherers, and sonnes of
murtherers as he doth witnes, he doth gather his
chosen flock, him self wil cōuicte you of a lie. for he affirmeth
the same to the scribes & pharisies, to whome
principally he spake, in that place that they were not of
his shepe & that therfor they could not be gathered to
his folde, that they were not of God, & therfor that they
could not heare his voice, yt he did not pray for y• world,
and therefor they could neuer be vnited to God. You
must declare howe yt God wold yt those Israelites whose
carcases fell in ye wildernes should entre into ye land promised.
If you say by any other will thē by his generall
precepte giuē, yt they should go & possesse it, 
                     •
                  e shall lack
the testimony of the holie Gost. I haue decl
                     •
                  red causes
most iust and most sufficient why God shall command,
that which is iust right & laudable, albeit that man neither
can perfourme his commandementes: neither yet
that it was gods eternall will & counsell that all men
should so do. And forther I haue declared iust causes, why
God doth call many to repentance and felicitie, and
yet that he choseth a certē to attein therto & entre the
same. And so I say ye must proue yt God did other wayes
will, them to entre into the lād, thē by his general commādement,
before you be able to proue that any thing

is done against the eternal and immutable will of God.
I can proue that gods will was so plaine reueled that none
of them should entre into the lād promised, yt it behoued
ye hole armye to be receaued frome place to place
til they were al cōsumed. Yea further I cā proue yt Moises
him self could not obteine yt priuiledge to entre in
nor the people, albeit that in prayer moste earnestly he
required the same▪ proue if you can, that euer God reueled
his will to any particulare persons (Iosua & Caleb
onely excepted) yt they should entre in it. And thē may
you say that either God did chāge his wil & purpose, orels
that some thing was dōne against his will,
                     To the 4. 5. 6 & 7. which he
did permitte, but not will. I will answer there is no better
argument to proue that God hardened the heart of
Pharao, then that same wc you adduce to proue that Pharao
did harden his owne heart, and yt God doeth suffer
it to be hardened, but doeth not will it. This ye write.
All the children of Adam haue a hard and wicked hear
                        ••
                      vntill they
be mollified by the grace of God as leremis witnesseth saying.
                  Iere▪ 47. 
                  Amōgest
all things liuing man hath the most deceatfull & stubb
                        •
                     rne heart
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
your libertie or ignorance in citing the Prophetes
wordes passe measure,Eze
                        •
                     . 36 
                  And the Lord saieth that he will take away
the stony hearte from them, and giue them a hearte of fl
                        •
                     sh.
no stronger argument nor reason I require to confute
your error then the same, which you alledge for the establishment
thereof for if by nature all be equall, and
that onely grace maketh the difference, then we demād
& ask whether that grace be giuen to some, and denied
to others & yt by permission & sufferance, as you speak,
or if it be the determined will of God that his grace ād
mercie by Christ Iesus shalbe frelie cōmunicated with
some, and that the same shall most iustlie be denied to
others, albeit the causes to vs do not appere, during the
time of this our martalitie. If you dare say that gods
will in taking away the stonie hearte and in giuing the
fleshie hearte, be nothing elles but onely a permission
& sufferance without the operation and will of his Spirit,
then may you reason that in the hardening of Pharao

and of the rest of the reprobat there is nothing elles
but a bare permission without any efficacie of gods spirit.
But if it be God that worketh in vs the good will and
perfourmance of the same, and that he hath mercie vpon
whome he listeth. thē is it likwies, that God hardeneth
whome he will. Mark & note y• wordes of the Apostle:
He saieth not, he hardeneth whome he permitteth
and doth suffer to be hardened, but palinely he saieth
yt he hardeneth whome he will. The Apostle sawe none
other cause why mercie was shewed to some and others
were left in induratiōs, but gods will. Trew it is yt the reprobat
of nature haue and frō their mothers wōbe doth
tary with them, the mater of their induration. But the
question is. What is the cause, that yt pestilēt mater is remoued
from some, and why? dothe it remaine with others?
If you answere because som receaue grace offered,
and som refuse it. Ye haue said nothing, as more plainely
I haue before declared▪ for alwayes we ask the cause
why is the will of the one obedient to God, and why
is the will of the other rebellious, considering that all
by nature are equall. Althogh that you trauell to confounde
the heauen and the earth yet shall ye be broght
to this principall: that God hath mercie vpon whome
he will, and whome he will he maketh hard hearted.
And therefor as of his mercie and free grace, God worketh
willingly in the one with his Spirit, softnes, & y• feling
of mercy, so doth his iust iudgementes, & iust wrath
against sinne couceaued by the spirit of sathan, work in
the others hardnes obstinacie, & ye sense of his wrath.
You reason affirming that Pharao had a stonie heart
before that Moises spake vnto him, thē could not it be
heardened more thē a stone a fore yt it was mollified▪ this
yor reason I say is more then foolish▪ for I suppose yt you
be not so brutishe, yt you wil affirme yt the heart of any
tyrāne at any tyme, in naturall hardnes I meane to grope
& fele, is cōperable to ye hardnes of a stone, but yt is a figuratiue
speach by ye wt is declared ye vnchangeable hardnes

of mans heart as touching ye naturall power of the same.
foras the stone by it self can neuer com to any softnes of
fleshe, so can neuer mā by any gift, which nature hath of
it self, come to that humilitie and obedience, wc is acceptable
before God. But doth it therof insue that one
man is not, nor can not be more cruell then an other,
yea that one and the same may not procede frome euil
to wors, and by contempt of grace, make him self more
hard and more hard: althogh his heart was neuer fully
mollified. I think you will not affirme the contrarie. for
the holie Gost giuing this exhortatiō: This daye if you
heare his voice harden not your heartes,Psal. 95 doth confirme
my affirmacion, which is, that men procede from hardnes
to hardnes, yea from one sinne to an other, till their
sinnes be becomme inexcusable, and so finally irremissible,
because that obstinately they refuse grace offer
                     •
                  d.
as Christ doth wittnes in these wordes, if I had not com,
and spoken vnto them, they should not haue sinne, but
now haue they nothing to cloke their sinne, for they haue
sene, and hated not onelie me, but also my father. No
man wilbe so fond, as to affirme, that the Iewes before
Christs preaching and miracles, were cleane without sinne:
but the cōtempt of grace did so augment and increase
their sinne, that it became inexcusable. euen so say
I that Pharao did harden his owne heart frome time
to time becomming more vnthankfull vnto God and
more cruell to his people. And ye foūteine of this induration
and hardnes I confesse to haue bene borne with
him, and that to raige against gods people he neded no
impulsion of gods parte, but rather a brydle to impede
his fury. But yet the question is not resolued as before
I haue noted. for still we ask why was not that fountein
shutte vp? why was not the naturall venim purged and
his heart mollified? searche where you list, ye shall fynd
none other reason nor cause, for the which the subsequent
induration of Pharao did principallie procede
but yt God in his eternall counsell for causes knowen to

his wisedom alone had most iustly denyed to communicate
his graces effectually with him, but had raysed
him vp to haue his power shewed forth in him. And so
God did hardē Pharaos hearte, not by permission onely
but willingly withdrew his Spirit frō him as before is
said.To the 8. 9 10 Wonder it is that amongest the ancient doctors ye
will seke patrocinie or defense in this mater: seing it is
a statute amōgest you, that ye will beleue nor admit the
wordes nor authoritie of no writer, in any mater of con
trouersie, but all things you will haue decided by the
plaine scripture. And truly I am not contrary to your
mynd in that case, so that you vnderstand, that ye will
not admitt the authoritie of man against gods plaine
trueth, nether yet that you will beleue mā any furtherthen
that he prouethe his sentence by gods euidēt scriptures.
If you had produced any doctor who had confirmed
his interpretation by the plaine worde of God,
of reason, I oght to haue answered, ether by the same,
or by some other doctor of equall authoritie, orels to haue
improued his interpretatiō by the plaine scriptures.
but seing that ye produce none, ye leaue me at greater
libertie. and yet I will shewe you the mynd of one doctor
cōparable to any that euer wrote before him, ether
in the latin or in the greke Churche, I meane of Augustine,Lib. 3. contra lul. ca. 5
who writing against Iulian the appostate, and
against Manacheus who did affirme the self same thing
that you do, to witte that God was a passiue God, that
is, he did suffer all euill, and that against his will, but he
did work none. Against him (I say) he thus writeth: wilt
thou say (saieth Augustine to Iulian) that the wicked
that be giuen ouer to their owne desires, are to be vnderstand
onely left by gods suffering, but not compelled
to sinnes by power, as thogh that the Apostle had not
ioyned the suffering and power of God to gether, where
that he saieth: if God willing to shewe wrath, and to declare
his power, fuffered in great patience the vesselles
of wrath prepared to destruction, wt of these two saiest

thou, is written? And also, if the prophet do erre and
shall speak, I the lord haue deceaued him, is this suffering
or is it power? And after adducing the same wc we
before haue alledged of Achas he addeth, did God these
things ignorantly, or doth he any thing, iudgeing or
doing rashly or vniustly? God forbid. it is not without
cause that it is said: Thy iudgemētes are a great deapth
it is not vaine that the Apostle crieth out: Oh the
hieght a
                     •
                  d depenes of gods iudgementes. And after in
the same place expounding these wordes: & lead vs not
into temptation, after that he hath affirmed that God
giueth ouer some for iust causes to their owne lustes
and blyndnes as he gaue ouer Roboam to beleue,
the fals and foolishe counsell of the young men (he
saith) all these things doth God worke by wonderous
and vnspeakable meanes, who knoweth howe to worke
his iust iudgementes, not onelie in the bodies, but also
in the heartes of men, he who maketh not the willes euill,
but yet he vseth them as he will, seing that he can
will nothing vniustly. Thus far haue I alleged vnto
you the m
                     •
                  nd of one doctor in this our controuersie▪
when 
                     •
                  e shall bring forth the mynd of any so well
grounded vpon scriptures as he dothe this his sentence▪
I promyse to answer if I can. I am not ignorant that
diuers of the doctors (yea and Augustine him self)
in some places may seme to fauor your opinion at the
first sight. But if their wordes in one place be compared
with their plaine mynd and with the scope of their
disputation in other places, it shall plainely appere that
none that liue this day do more plainely speak against
your error, then some of them haue written. The places
of Iob manifestly and in plaine wordes,I
                        •
                     b 39 fight against
you.I
                        •
                     b 17 for it is said in the one place thou hast excluded
their heart from wisedome, and therfore this mater
shall not be to their praise. and in the other: God hath
taken wisdom from the Estrich, and hath not giuen
vnderstanding vnto her, dare you affirme that in these

wordes, there is nothing but a bare permission of gods
parte? is there no difference betwext away taking and
suffering to be taken away. if any difference be betwext
these two maner of speakings, God giueth wisdome
and God taketh away wisdome, then is your interpretation
foolishe and absurd, nether yet is there any
phrase of scripture, vnderstand it as you please, that can
make God to call back that sentence which he hath
pronounced,To the 10 to witt that he hath raysed vp Pharao to
be an example to all generations folowing, what shall
be the ende of those that obstinatly resist God. Who albeit
he tempt no man to sinne by the power of his spirit
yet as before I haue proued, he iustly giueth them
ouer to the inordinat lustes of their own corruption
yea he giueth them ouer into the hands & power of sathan
to be pricked and stirred forward to all iniquitie
that their damnation may be iust, and also that his vengeāce
iustly deserued may the more sodenly falle vpon
them. The mynd of saint Iames is onely to bring men
to the right examination and triall of them selues lest
that by flattery they beginne to seke ye originall cause
of their sinne in an other, then in them selues. And yet
doth that nothing impede, but that God in his maner
(which alwayes is iust) doth hardē the heartes of those
whome before he had reprobated.To the 11. 12. 13 14. 15 We confesse that no
greater plague can chance vnto man▪ then that he be
left to his own lewde mynd▪ for thē of him can procede
no good nor permanent frute. But as the earth lacking
rayne dewe and moisture must nedes be barren, and so
at length subiect to malediction, so must men destitute
of gods grace, with Saul, Achab, & others procede from
euil to wors, till finalie they come to cōfusion. But were
it not yt it is your cōmone custome to belie y• holy Gost,
I wold wōder how yt you coulde be so impudent, as to affirme,
that ye lorde doth punishe his vineyarde, not waisting
it him self, but taketh the hedge and rayne from
it and suffereth it to be wasted and troden of others.

And that Iob was plagued of God onely in suffering
him to be plagued. Assuredly this your affirmation declareth
in you ether a most brutall ignorance orels an
impudencie more then manifest. Ye will not deny that
Israel & Iuda were ye pleasant vineyard somtymes planted
by gods own hand: So doth he him self affirme,Isa. 5 and
doth God no more in their destructiō but onely looke
vpon thē as an ydle and vnwilling sufferer vpon the tragedie
and myserable calamitie? he him self doth witnes
ye contrary. for he saith I will plainely declare vnto you
what I will do to my vineyard, I shall take away ye hedge
of it. I shall break downe the wall that it may be troden
vpon, I shall make it waste and shall also so forbid the
clowdes yt they shall nether send doune rayn nor moistur
vpon it. Note and mark well I besech you, god here
speaketh nothing of permission, but all together of
working, to witt of taking away and of breaking downe.
And how I pray you came yt fearfull destruction to passe?
the lord God of hostes (saieth the Prophet Isaiah)
will take away from Ierusalem and from Iudath the stay
and the strength,Isa. 3 euen all the stay of bread, and all the
stay of water, the strong man and the man of warre the
iudge and the Prophete, the prudent and the aged, the
captaine of fiftie and the honorable and the counseller,
and the conning artificer, and the eloquent man, and I
will appoint children (note well what God speaketh) to
be their pinces and babes shall rule ouer them &c. And
after the Lord shall bring vpon the, vpon thy people
and vpō thy fathers howse the dayes that haue not com
from the day that Ephraim departed from Iuda, euen
the king of Asshur &c.Isa. 7 In that day shall the Lord shaue
the with a rafer that is hyred &c. The Lord him self
doth further cōfe
                     ••
                  e,Isa. 10 that the king of Asshur is the rodd
of his fury and the axe in his hād, he sayeth to an hypocriticall
nation will he send him: and I giue him commandemente
against that people which hath, deserued
my indignation I will giue him charge to take away, to

riue and to part the spoile. And further in the same
place God doth acknowleged the greuous punishment
and myserable destruction of Ierusalem to be his owne
work. for thus speaketh the Prophet: But when the Lord
hath accomplished all his work vpon mount Zion and
Ierusalem, I will visit the frute of the proude heart of
the king of Asshur, and his glorious and proude lookes
&c.
               If these wordes may be attributed to him, who onely
suffereth and doth not him self effectualy work, let indifferent
m
                     •
                  n iudge. And yet speaking more plainely
he saieth: I am the lord and there is none other,Isa. 45 I forme
the light and creat darknes: I make peace and creat
euill (that is punishement and plagues for sinne) I the
eternall do all these thinges▪
                  Am os to whom the Prophet Amos
dothe aggre vsing these same wordes: or shall
there be euill in a citie (sayeth he) and the lord hath not
donne it? The lord speaking by his Prophetes Ieremie
and Ezechiel saieth: I shall send, and take all the nations
of the north, and Nabuchadnezer my seruant the king
of Babylon,Iere. 25 and I shall bring them vpon this land: I shall
kindle the fire, augment and multiplie the flame,Ezec. 
                        •
                     4 and
I shall prophane (that is I shall make commone) my Sanctuary.
If he that gathereth his warryers, that leadeth,
and conducteth them, yea that giueth them strength
agilitie and good succes, that putteth the sweard of his
vengeance into their hand, that commandeth them
to strike, and to spare none, doth nothing elles but suffre,
I must confesse my self nether to know nor to vnderstand
what it is to do, or what it is to work. Your bold
impudencie affirming, that Iob was plagued of God, onely
by suffering him to be plagued, is intollerable.
Doth not God prouoke as it were sathan to trye his seruant
Iob? saying hast thow not considered my seruant
Iob,Iob 1 how none is lyke vnto him in the earth, an vpright
and iust man, one that feareth God and escheweth euill.
And after that sathan, vpon that occasion had defaced

the integritie and iusticie of Iob, affirming▪ that easye
it was to feare and serue God, seing that all thinges were
prosperous and fortunate in his house and familie. God
first by expresse wordes giueth to him power ouer all yt
perteined vnto him: and thereafter he giueth ouer the
body of Iob to the tyrannye of sathan, his life onely
beīg reserued. Was this I pray you onely, to plague Iob,
by suffering him to be plagued? Doth the father which
commādeth his childe to be beaten in his presence, and
commādeth how many stripes he shall receaue, nothing
elles but suffer his childe to be beaten? or is he not
rather the chief cause, as that he is the chief commander
why his child is punished? O say you but God did not
take his goods,
                  To the 13 
                  but onely suffered the deuill to take them, and so God did not
punishe his people. for he touched them not, but hid his face from them, to
see their end. Albeit your vanitie trouble me a littell, yet
must it nedes returne vpon your owne heades to your
shame. This is a good reasonly, God by him self tooke
not Iobs goods from him, therefor he did nothing
but suffer them to be taken: and gods owne hand did
not touch Israell nor Iuda, therefor was he but onely
a sufferer, and no worker of their punishment. I will
make the like reason and argument. God by him self
gaue no goodes to Iob, therfore did he nothing but
suffer Iob to be enriched. An other, no visible hand was
sene to touch Elimas the sorcerer,Act. 13 therefor did God onely
suffer him to be blinded. If ye will affirme the
former, to witt, that God did nothing but suffer Iob
to be enriched: not onely shall Iob him self testifie against
you, but euen sathan, althogh he be a lier, and
the father of lies: yet in that case shall he conuince
you of a most impudent lie. for he sayeth: Hast thow
not made an hedge aboute him, and aboute his house
and a boute all that he hath on euery syde? thou hast
blessed the work of his handes, and his substance is encreased
in the land. But stretche oute now thy hand and

touche all that he hath to see if he will not blaspheme
the to thy face. And if ye will say that God did onely
suffer Elimas to be blynded: then shall the holie Gost
speaking in sainct Paule conuict you. for he saieth behold
the hand of the Lord is vpon the and thou shalt be
blynd and shall not see the Sunne for a tyme. And thus
shall you haue God, man, and the deuill to rebuke
your vanitie. Be ashamed, repent, and giue glory vnto
God, who feareth not to confesse that all instrumentes
in heauen earth or in hell, be his roddes, his sword,
and his hand, by the which he correcteth, he punisheth,
he triethe, deliuereth, and saueth according to his eternal
counsell and purpose.To the 16 To proue absurdities and
inconueniences (as ye terme them) to folow our doctrine:
thus you reason: If I should grant that it was gods will
that he should refuse, to let the people goo, then did he submit him self
to the will of the Lord. then, should God and he haue bene both of one
mynd. and the will of God is alwayes good and iust. then Pharao refusing
to let the people go, did well and iustly, forasmuch as it was gods
will that he should so do. wherfore Pharao oght not to haue bene punished
for this good and iust dede. And thus in conclusion, ye affirme
that these inconueniences we can not eskape. I
haue before sufficiently declared howe that no wicked
man committing iniquitie hath any respecte or
mynd to obey gods holie will, ether secrete, ether yet
reueled, but folowing their owne rage and inordinate,
lustes doth make as it were plaine resis
                     •
                  ance
to God. and, therefore, how so euer they be compelled
to to serue gods eternall purpose: yet do they neuer
obey him in their owne heartes: but obstinatly
they do rebell against his blessed will reueled. And therefor,
as there is no conformitie nor aggremēt betwext
the holy will of God, & their peruers & malicious will,
so are they subiect to iust damnatiō, for their rebellion
and disobediēce. And thus taking from you the ground
& foundation wher vpon you think your selues moste

assuredly to stand, I might suffer your vain building to
fall into confusion But partly for the instruction of the
simple reader, and partly to wōne some of you (if so please
God) frō these horrible blasphemies, I purpose in this
place to declare the difference betwext the holie will of
God, and the wicked will of men, and why it is, that the
worke of God is moste iust, and the worke of the instrumentes,
vniust, and euill, reseruing the rest to better
opportunitie.
               The will of God must not be restreined to those thinges
which externally we see donne or hear to haue bene
dōne.The cause and endes of things that be wroght. But gods will must be extended to to those endes,
for the which God worketh, and causeth to be wroght,
all thinges from the beginning to witt, for the manifestacion
of his owne glory, for the profit and saluation
of his electe children, and for the execution of his iust
iudgemētes, ether for a tyme to correct his chosen, orels
for euer to punishe the stubborne and disobediēt, of the
reprohate sorte. Becaus yt I suspect no man so foolish as
that he will deny the will of God working to these endes
to be most iust most holy, and most perfecte in it self: I
wil labor for no probation of that parte. But because the
instrumentes by whome God worketh,Who obey God, who obey not God. be diuers, we must
first inquire and knowe what instrumentes they be that
obey gods will, and therefor by him are reputed iust
workers, and what they are that obey not his will, and so
what so euer they do, are reputed inobediente. Onely
those instrumentes do obey gods will, who hauing his
will clearly reueled vnto them, do studie and indeuer
them selues to obey, accomplish, and fulfill the same,
and that of very loue, fre mynd, and zeale to obey
his godlie Maiestie. the frutes and workes of these instrumentes,
howe soeuer man doth iudge of them, doth
God approue, yea euen albeit they appere to repugne
to mercy, or to his lawe written. for the Israelites were
deliuered frome theft by gods will reueled: albeit
they spoyled and robbed (vnder the cloke of borowing)

the Egyptiens of their substance. The maryners and the
shipmasters being with Ionas, in that soden storme and
tempest raised by God, were fre from murther and sheding
of innocent bloode by gods will plainely reueled
by ye mouth of the Prophet. Iehu was not onely iustified
from all the suspition of treason, which men might
haue gathered of his facte, but also from crueltie, in
killing those idolaters, who manifestly declared them
selues friendes to Baal: by that, that God did first reuele
his will vnto him, sending his Prophet to anoynte
him, and after approued his zeale, which he rewarded
wt temporall promise of the kingdom to continue in
his posteritie to the fourth of his sede. Thus I say doth
God iustifie the workes of these instrumentes which obey
his will reueled. And so I say yt they onely obey God
that knowing his will do studie to obey the same. But
contrary wyes, who soeuer doth any thing, ignorant of
gods will not knowing the will of God reueled, repugneth
or doth cōtrary to the same (howsoeuer he serueth
gods eternall purpose) doth nether obey God, nether cā
he be excusable before gods iustice. And that because
in his work & fact he looketh nothing to gods will, nether
yet to the end and purpose which God respecteth.
And hereof springeth and artiseth the differēce betwext
the workes of God, & the workes of mā, yea betwext the
workes of the godlie, and the workes of the vngodlie.
God worketh all his workes, to manifest his glorie, his
wisedome, his power, his mercie, goodnes & iustice. The
godlie moued by the holie Spirit, worke their workes
to giue obediēce vnto God, to support their bretherē in
their necessities at his cōmandemēt, and to punish vice
according to his lawe. But the vngodly caried hedlonges
by their own lustes, and by the fury of sathan, to
whose power they are committed, work all their workes
to reuenge them selues, to destroye such as they hate,
and to promote their own entreprises without any respect
had to God, to his will, ordinance or counsell.
               
                  
One or two examples shall make this mater more sensible.
The will purpose and coūsell of God in punishing
Iob was to trye his patience, and of the same to leaue an
example to all them that truely feare God to the end.
And who dare deny this to be most reasonable, and
most iust, that God examining sharply one of his childrē
shall make him a scolmaster to all the rest? But what was
ye will and purpose of sathan, and of the Caldeās, by whome
Iob was punished? The will and purpose of sathan is
plainely reueled to haue bene, that by those afflictions
he fully purposed to withdrawe Iob from gods feare, and
to cause him curse God to his face.The will of the Caldeās against Iob. The will of the Chaldeans is euident ynough, by the manifest malice of all
such oppressers, who look to nothīg but to satisfie their
own couetous myndes by the possessiōs of others, wc tyrannously
and vniustly they by violēce spoyle. And thus
doth ye diuersitie of the myndes of the workers, make ye
plaine differēce betwext their vorkes. An other: God in
expelling Dauid from his kingdom, in giuing his wiues
with great ignominie to be defiled by his own sonne
Absalom, and in commanding Semei to curse him, had
respecte to his owne iustice, which can not suffer sinne
vnpunished. euen in his derest children, thereby leauing
exāple to all ages folowing, yt such as willingly wold not
suffre gods greuous plagues, shall auoid manifest contempt
of his holy commandementes. And this I think
will all men confesse to be a work (in so farre as it is
wroght by God) most iust,Of Dauids trooble Absal
                        ••
                      Semei and Achitophel and most equall. for as God
doth honor thē who do honor him, so must they be contemned,
who cōtemne him. But what was the mynd of
Achitophell counseller, of Absalom the incestuous adulterer,
and of Semei the blasphemous curser? The
one studied to make such hatred betwext the father
and the sonne, as after should neuer be reconciled.
               The vnnaturall & monsterous sonne declaring him self
mortall ennemie to his father according to the wicked
counsell, thoght to bind vnto him the heartes of the
people. And Semei willing to make Dauid odious to all

mē,Of the diuersitie inthe worke of the death of Christe. and to haue broght him, if possible had bene to vttermost
desperation, powred forth ye vennym which before
lurked in his hidde corrupte & stinking stomock.
The same might I shewe in the precious death of the innocent
Sonne of God. in which the great and vnsearcheable
loue of God towardes vs doeth shyne, so that Christes
death in so farre as it was the work of God, proceded
from loue, from mercie & iustice. but touching the instrumentes,
whome God vsed in execution of the same,
as in an other place I haue said, they looked nothīg to
gods counsell, but were altogether caried to iniquitie:
some by auarice, some by pride, and by ambition, some,
by malice hatered and enuie. so that amōgest them all,
none was found that studied to obey God, nor his holy
will reueled. And thus it is euident▪ why the work of
God in such cases, is iust ād good, as it that is wroght in
wisedom mercie and iustice: and that for most iust cau
                  
                     •
                  es,
purpose & ende. And why the workes of wicked men
(supposing yt God in some respect will thē) are yet vniust
and repugning to his will, neuer dōne to obey him,
ād therefore are they and their workers subiecte to malediction,
vēgeance & damnation, pronounced by God
in his lawe against the workers of iniquitie. Nowe let vs
examine your reasons. If it was gods will (say you that phara
                        •
                     
should refuse to let the people go, then did he submit him self to the
word of the lord, I deny ye cōsequent. for neither did Pharao
knowe ye holiewil of God, neither did he submit him self
to yt wc was cōmanded & reueled vnto him. The will of
God was, in yt people to giue an exāple & testimonie to ye
world, yt ye onely benedictiō of God, was sufficiēt to giue
multiplication & encrease to his Church, euen against
the determined fury of sathan, and of all wicked, that he
wold giue vnto his Church being afflicted most ioyful,
and most wonderous deliuerance: and finally that
no obstinate enemie of gods people (how so euer they
seme to rage and triumphe) shal in the end esca
                     •
                  p iudgement
and vengeance iustly deserued. Do you think

that Pharao either knew this will of God either yet that
he reteined ye people in bondage for any of these endes?
I think not. then did he not submitt him self to gods
will▪ but obstinatly did resist, so farre of gods will, as was
reueled vnto him. And therfor I say, that God and Pharao
were of most contrary willes, and most contrary
mindes. God willīg his Name, his power ād his wisedome,
to be preached and praised to the ēd, for the deliuerance
of his afflicted people. But Pharao willing to reteine
in perpetuall bōdage the people, (whom God commanded
him to set at fredome & libertie) to serue him,
as he should commād. And therefor albeit that wicked
Pharao was an instrument, by whom those things were
broght to passe, yet were his workes neither well nor iustly
donne, but tyrannously: and most obstinatly did he
fight against God. And therefor in the end, most iustly
was he punished. Behold your spyder webbes with les labor
dissolued & burst (then I am assured) you and your
great captaine Castalio did spinne knit & veaue the same
to your great shame & perpetuall condemnation, except
that spedely you repent. Now to the rest, which foloweth
in these words.
            
         
         
            
               ADVERSARIE,
               As for the sentēce which ye alledge God maketh hard hearted, whom
he will, and of whom he will he hath mercie,The 3. Argument. this place hath bene
very vnresonably wrested of some of you,The 39 section. so that therby you haue burdened
God to be the cause of condemnation, who at his pleasure receaueth or
resiseth such as haue either of paine or pleasure deserued nothing at all.
 God forbid that any man should conceaue such a phantasie of God, but we
must first learne how God lightened all men that cam into this world
 which light who so refuseth, him the Lord by long sufferance, with bountifull
benefites and fatherly corrections doeth call to repentance. But if we
louing darknes better then light, will vtterly refuse light, or after we haue
bene by the goodnes of God partakers of gods grace, do forsaik the couenant
of the Lord, then hath he mercie on whom he will, and that for
 his own saik, and others he maketh hard hearted, that is he giueth them ouer
to their own hearts lustes, So that the cause of their induration, is not
the will and pleasure of God which doeth nothing without a iust cause,
but their obstinate wickednes which will not be reformed. These suffer
iustly and the other receaue grace by the mercy fo God which may when

he will, haue mercie, on whom he will, and that besides his couenant.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Because that nothing resteth to the end of this y or
book (your blasphemies and raling excepted) which is
not sufficiently before answered, I intēd onely to touch
those things which you vniustly lay to our charges,To ye 1 and
frākly cōfesse in what pointes you and we do manifestly
dissent in opinion, and doctrine. and first I say that most
vniustly you accuse vs, laying to our charge that we burden
God, to be the cause of cōdemnation, the which we
all with one cōsent impute to mā, to sinne, and to ye deuil
the first soliciter to sinne. And therfor, except that ye
can note, and euidently conuict some one (or mo) of vs,
that so hath written or affirmed of God, ye can not be
purged from the horrible crime of vniust accusatiō, ād
detestable sclāder. We vtterly dissent from you that God
lighteneth euery man, that commeth into this world, in
such sort as you affirme, that is, hat he calleth all to repentance
& offereth light of saluatiō to all, so that God
refuseth none, except such as vtterly refuse light, or
such as haue bene partakers of gods grace, and do forsaik
the couenant of the Lord. for besides the euident
testimonies of the scriptures, the common experience
frō the begīning doeth witnes, that God in that maner
hath not illuminated euery man. for how many do perish
in their mothers bellies? how many sodenly die before
their reason can iudge of good and euill? how many
are depriued of natural reason & vnderstanding? Yea
how many remaine wylde & brutishe, liuīg like beastes
and eating one another? how many do continewe all
their life without any other knowledge of God, thē the
visible creatures of God do teach them? which I think
ye will not affirme to be sufficiēt illuminatiō to prouoke
them to repentance or to atteine to life. I pray you
what light had Esau refused when God pronounced this
sentence: the elder shal serue the yonger. vpō the which
the Apostle as before we haue declared doeth conclude

that yer the children had donne either good or badde,
the one was loued, & the other was hated.
               That God doeth nothing without a iust cause,To ye 3 most
willingly we cōfesse. But that there is no iustice in God,
to the groud whereof, your blind reason doeth not pearse,
we constantly deny. And therfor we must nedes affirme,
that to seke an other cause of gods workes, then his
holy will, is more thē impietie. for the causes be knowen
to his wisedom alone, why some he hath chosen to life
euerlasting in Christe Iesus his Sōne. and why that others
are left in perdition the cause may be secrete (as
Augustine speaketh) but vniust can it not be. because it
procedeth from gods will, which is the perfecte rule of
al iustice and equitie. If that ye crye till that the mountaines
resound againe: the obstinat iniquitie of the reprobate will
not be reformed, and 
                        •
                     hat is he cause of their induration: in fewe and
sobre wordes we āswere: That in mā there is no wickednes
which God may not reforme, if so be his godlie wil
and good pleasure.TO t
                           •
                        e 4. Albeit of these your wordes: God may
haue mercie when he will, on whome he will, and that besides his couenante.
some suspition may arise, that greatly you do not
esteme that inestimable benefite granted vnto vs in
Christe Iesus his onely Sōne. yet will I so fauorably interprete
your wordes as I can. If ye vnderstand that such
as this day be ignorant of God, ennemies to his trueth,
& persecuters of his saintes, may sodenly or after this,
be called to the trew knowledge of yt communiō which
is betwext God and man, by Christ Iesus, I do fully agre
with you. for so was Abraham, so was Paule, and so were
the Gentiles: who long did liue without trew, knowledge
of God, and without (as touching their owne apprehension)
the assurance of his couenant and league. But
if you vnderstād that God can or will receaue to mercie
at any time such as he hath not elected to life euerlasting
in Christ Iesus his Sonne before all times, we vtterly
abhorre that error, as a pestilence most perniciouse.
Now to that which foloweth.
            
         
         
            
               
               ADVERSARIE.
               That place of the booke of 
                     •
                  he kinges.The 
                        •
                     . argu
                     
                        •
                     ent. The Lord commandeth Semei
to curse Dauid, I vnderstād so forasmuch as God is the author of all goodnes▪
ād of no euill, he gaue not a wicked mynd to Semei. But willing to exercis
                     •
                  
his seruant Dauid, vnder the cr
                     •
                  sse,The 40. section. and fin
                     •
                  ing Semei a naughtie
and euill mynded man specially towards Dauid, he gaue him the bridell,
which being left of God, he by the intisement of the deuill, which was alredie
in his heart, did curse Dauid▪ and Dauid being gouerned by the spirite 
of God did paciciently suffer the wicked to curse him, h
                     •
                  ping that
God, wolde turne his cursing into blessing▪ for this did Dauid knowe. that
without the permission and suffering of God Semei coulde no more curse
him then Balaam might curse the Israelites, it foloweth not therfor, that 
God did effectually m
                     •
                  ue Semei to do the wicked dede, but onely s
                     •
                  ffered

                     〈◊〉
                  , yet if ye will seke to the litterall sense of this place and a
                     •••
                  rm that
G
                     •
                  d did effectually command Semei to curse Dauid, then I must go this 
way to work with you: all that the Lord commandeth, is iust, if 
                     〈◊〉
                   be iust
to 
                     ••
                  mmand to curse, It is iust to obey to curse. for the righ
                     ••
                  ousnes of the
dede, is knowen by the righteousnes of the commandemēt: as it is uniust to
obey an vniust cōmandemēt, so is it iust to obey a iust cōmandemēt wherefor
Semei obeing the cōmandement of God, which is iust, did iustly, you wil
say tha
                     •
                   Semei did not obedien
                     •
                  ly, tha
                     •
                   is to obey God, but of an euill mynd
cursed Dauid. I answer you after your own
                     •
                   saying, that this was also the
w
                     •
                  ll of God that Semei should haue an euill mynd and not to please God
cursed Dauid▪ for you say that God gaue him an euill mynd to curse Dauid,
wherfor in tha
                     •
                   he of a disobedient mynd cursed Dauid he was obedient
to God. and a
                     •
                   we haue said to obey God it is iust. I pray you then
why commandeth Dauid,Iob. 17 his sone Salomon to punishe Semei for this iust
acte, they which feare 
                     •
                  hey hore frost, saie
                     •
                  h Iob, the snowe shall fall vpon
them, likwies so long as you stick to your error, when you think to auoyd
one danger, you shall fall into a greater.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               You do euer decline from the principall scope and so
mak ye a fals conclusion,
                     To the 1. & 2 for we do not deny but God
finding in Semei at that time a wicked mynd towardes
Dauid did lowse the bridle to his corrupted affections.
but in two things do you and we differre. The first is
that whether he found any wickednes in him which
his godly power might not haue remoued, if so he
had determined to haue donne from the beginning?
And secondarily if so he gaue him the bridle,
that he might not haue impeded the s
                     •
                  me, if such
had bene his godly will: and therefore where you

affirme that God did effectually moue Semei to that
wicked dede. if you vnderstand that in so farre as the dede
was wicked, the Spirit of God, I meane the holy Gost
did not moue him therunto, I subscribe with you. for
so outrageously to curse Dauid, in the day of his great
calamitie, he was moued by that venime which lōg had
lurked in his breast, and by the instigatiō of the deuill.
But if thereupon you conclude, as that you seme to do
by your manifest wordes, that God did nothīg elles but
onely suffer him. Because I say that such ydle permissiō
can neither agre with gods power, nor with his iustice,
we must nedes affirme, that when God giueth ouer the
wicked into a lewd, ād reprobate mynde, that thē as iustly
he punisheth sinne by sinne, so doeth he more thē onely
suffer.To ye 3. & 4. There is more required that a fact be iust ād
iustly and obediently donne, thē a iust commandemēt.
to witt: That he doer haue gods expresse commandement
for his assurance. And secondarely that he looke,
and haue respect to the same endes, which God hath vttered
in his word. and last that he do it onely to obey
God. Nowe proue any of these to haue bene in Semei,
and I will confesse that ye haue once triumphed. I finde
that Dauid did acknowledge gods commandement and
coūsell, and therfor at that time wold he not arme him
self nor his seruantes to take vengeance. But what commandemēt
of God I pray you did Semei either acknowledge
or confesse. I finde no mention that he excuseth
him self, no not by any commandement that he had receaued
of God, when after he submitteth him self to Dauid
in the day whē he returned and came ouer Iordane.
But I finde him plainely to confesse his offence saying:
Let not my Lorde impute wickednes vnto me,2. Re. 
                        •
                     . nor remembre
the thing that thy seruant did wickedly, when
my Lorde the king departed oute of Ierusalem, that the
king shoulde take it to his heart. for thy seruant doeth
knowe that I haue donne amisse. If Semei had either
knowen any commandement of God, or if he had looked

to the same end to the which God looked, he might
haue had plausible reasons to haue persuaded Dauid,
to haue shewed fauor and mercie vnto him. first he
might haue said, Oh Dauid althogh thow was kīg, and
that I did curse the, thow oghtest no more to be offended
against me, then thow wast against the Prophet Nathan.
for as he had gods commandemēt plainely to reuele
thy sinne, ād sharply to rebuke the same, to the ēd
that thou mightest be more effectually moued to repentance,
so had I gods commandement bitterly to curse
thee, to the end that thou mightest humble thy self before
thy God, whom so highly thou hast offended.
               These I say I had bene plausible reasons to haue moued
Dauid to mercie. But the canckered conscience of Semei
did witnes against him, self yt he to his knowledge
had neither commandement of God, neither yet that
he looked to any purpose or counsell of God: but onely
to Dauids, vtter confusion & destructiō, which he maliciously
soght. And so I say albeit that gods commandement
in the self was iust. for the purpose and end which
he had appointed, yet was this commandement hid to
Semei, and gods purpose also vnknowen to him: & therfore
was his fact neither iustly nor obediently donne.
for a iust fact (as I haue before said) requireth a good wil
to obey a iust commandement: and obediēce requireth
knowledge of the will, which neither of bothe was
in Semei. Nowe proue if you cā either iniustice in God
who thus doeth vse this wicked instrumēt, or yet in Dauid
his sernant, who in his testament commanded the
dissembled hypocrisie to be punished. The rest of your
vaine sophisterie, which of Castalio you haue begged,
doeth nothing profit you. for albeit we should confesse
that it was the will of God in some respecte, that Semei
should haue an euill and inobedient minde: how shall
you be able to proue, that therfor he did obey God? Is
it not the will of God, that sathan, and the wicked world,
of a wicked and malicious mynde, trooble and tempt

his children in this earthe? Doeth it therfor folowe that
Sathan and the wicked obey God? or doeth it not most
iustly folowe, that because God will that our pacience
should be knowen, & that the wicked from tyme to tyme
procede in their impietie till the measure be full,
that therfor they cā neuer obey God. And in this our affirmation
we feare not so much the frost nor snowe, as
that we lament your vncomelye iesting in gods scriptures.
Thus you procede.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               An argumēt you make in that place of Genesis where I
                     •
                  seph saieth
vnto his brethren,The 5 argument. God sent me hither, for your liues saik, and thereafter,
it was not you that sent me hither, but God which hath made me a father
vnto Pharao: of this do you gather, that the wicked dede which Iosephes
brethern did in selling him,The 
                        〈◊〉
                      section. was the Lords dede, and secret will: But
for so much as the patriarckes here committed double sinne, first, greued
their father, and secondly, they did committe the greatest kinde of these,
that is, to sell a mans child from him, which by the lawe 
                     •
                  ght to be punished
 by death. therfor may we see that this dede was not donne by gods
will for 
                     〈◊〉
                   was centrarie to this commandementes, neither wil he any wickednes.
but according to his nature which is euer good, he turned their
wicked dede to a good end, for his seruantes Abrahā Isaack, and Iac
                     •
                  bes
sake
                     •
                   for he sheweth mercie to the thousand genera
                     •
                  ion of them that loue
him. this to be so, it is plainely proued by the latter chapter where Ioseph
 saieth vnto his brethren, you thoght▪ euill ouer me. but God ha
                     •
                  h turned it
vnto good, to do as it is come to passe this day. marke well what is here ascribed
vnto Iosephes brethern and what vnto God. They thoght euill
and God turned it to good. Then their minds and gods mynde were
not all one, wherfor it was not gods wil that they should thus do wickedly,
notwithstanding that this place of the last of Geneses is so manifest
 and directe against your error, as can be, yet will you not agree
to the trueth, but flie to your shamefull shift of gods secret will. for
 here you say that it was gods secret will, that this should so come to passe
so that the patriarkes thoghtes were moued to do this by God. Thus you attribut
to God that which is propre to the deuill, by the testimonie of the
 word: Wherby we be taught that the deuill moved mē with euill thoghtes.
God commandeth vs to resist euill thoghtes which if they come of him
then commandeth he vs to resist him self. Iames saieth, that no man is
tempted of God. But to moue with euill thoghtes is to tempt, all is good
which comme
                     •
                  h from the father of light wherfor if euill thoghts come
 from him they must be good, then was Iosephes saying vntrewe, you thoght
euill over me, but you grant euill th
                     •
                  ghtes to be euill, and yet you

say, that they came from God, then may we call God the f
                     •
                  ther 
                     •
                  f dar
                     •
                  knes:
because from him came euill thoghts which are darknes. And wher
you say
                     •
                  , that God doeth hose things for his owne glory I a
                     •
                  swer that saying 
is but vaine▪ for we glorifie him whē we iudge him worthie to be glorified,
as Nabuchadnez or being chāged into a brutishe nature hauing experience
of the iustice & power of God he gaue glory to God for as much
as he did see & iudged God to be iust, God wilbe gl
                     •
                  rified of all nations,
then must gods works be such as all nations may knowe 
                     •
                  hem and praise
them, yet is 
                     •
                  here no nation which at any tyme shall acknowledge God to
be iust, for because he punished a man for the offence, wherunto he him
self did prouoke him. The Philistians priestes and so
                     •
                  h sayers gaue glory to
God & iudged him to be iust in that he plagued Phara
                     •
                   in that he hardened
his heart against God, desiring their ruler▪ by the same example not 
to hardē the
                     •
                  r heartes against God, but to send away the Ark of the Lord,
lest he likwies plague them. But if the Philistians soth sayers had knowē
(as ye presume to do) that God did harden Phara
                     •
                  s heart, what 
                     〈◊〉
                  
coulde they attribut to God for punishing Pharao for that thing wher
                     •
                  of
he was the author him self, mouing and forcing Pharao therun
                     •
                  o, seing as
you haue said, no man is able to resist his secrete will, what iustice had it
bene to punishe Semei for that o
                     •
                  fence, where of God was the author commanding
him to do it: Dauid Saieth, thus the Lord is knowen to execute
true iudgement, when the vngodlie is trapped in the workes of his 
                     •
                  wne 
handes, not when he punished for the offence wherunto he moued men him
self. If God should punish a man because he hath a beard, should any glory
redound to God thereof, seing he hath giuen vs beards him self▪ But here
you be very religious, and say we oght not to speake so vnreuerently of 
the wo
                     •
                  k
                     •
                   of God, for this is the secret iudgement of God vnknowen to vs
I answere there be some secretes of God vnknowen to vs. But the iudgement
of God is knowen & made manifest to vs in the word, and after this
word (as saint Paul teacheth) not after your secret iudgement shall God
iudge the world, & so shal God be glorified of all godlie & vngodlie forasmuch
as all shall iudge is to be iust, & they which haue not obeyed the
trueth (not your vnknowene trueth) but that which is knowen, that is 
                     •
                  he
word, shalbe punished ād they which haue obeyed to the 
                     •
                  rue
                     •
                  h, not secr
                     •
                  t 
as yours but reueled in gods word, shall receaue their rewarde. Moreouer
if this be the secret iudgemēt of God, who reu
                     •
                  led it 
                     •
                  hē to you H
                     •
                  we
do you knowe it to be secret, is it secre
                     •
                  e which you knowe and teach
                     •
                  n 
dede I thīk it to heso, for it is so secret, that I cā not cache no holde of it. But
herin I de perceaue, not the secret, but 
                     •
                  he manifest iudgemēt of God. which
suffereth you to erre thus because you with holde the trueth is vnrighteousnes,Roma. 1
ād according to your knowledge you haue not glorified God, neither
haue you bene thankfull, but wax
                     •
                  d full of vanities in your owned imaginations.
wherfore my counsell is that you 
                     •
                  urn
                     •
                   again
                     •
                   from 
                     •
                  hat infi
                     ••
                  
                  
                  
                     ••
                  tie
wherin you haue drowned your selues, beleue 
                     •
                  he worde & s
                     •
                  k
                     •
                   no
forther for it is the power of God to salutation to euery one that beleu
                     ••
                  h.
            
            
               
               ANSWERER.
               As your most pestilent sect,To ye 1. & 2. euen from the first originall
of it, hath with all malicious craft labored to subuert
and confound gods most perfect ordinance, so do
you in this mater confound those things, which we most
plainely ād most destinctly set a parte, and deuide them
the one from the other. for first you are neuer able to
proue that any of vs hath alledged, or yet doeth alledge
the word or fact of Ioseph and his brethren, for any proof
of gods eternall election, or most iust reprobation.
but to declare that such is gods prouidēce towardes his
chosen childrē, and towardes their saluation, & preseruation
of his church, that what so euer sathan and wicked
men imagine to the destruction of gods elect, that same
doeth his infinit goodnes conuert to their profit,
comfort and ioye. And so this is the first, that impudētly
ye confounde, to witt his prouidence which extēdeth
to all his creatures, with his election which perteineth
onely to his children. The second is, no man hath euer
put more plaine difference betwext the wicked will of
Sathan, the corrupt and malicious will of man, and the
holie ād most iust will of God, thē we do in all or doctrine
ād writings. And yet ye accuse vs, that we attribut to
God that which is propre to the deuill, that is to moue
the thoght of men to do euill. Howe far that impietie
is from all our cogitations, as God one day shall manifestly
reuele to your eternall confusion (except that spedely
you repent) so may all godlie men who either haue
heard our voices or redde our writings, beare record
how iustly you accuse vs. we constantly affirme that God
neither moued by his holie spirit, the heartes of the
patriarkes to enuie ād hatred, neither vet of Pharao to
crueltie, neither yet to iniquitie. for that is naturally
borne with all men, and nedeth the power of the potent
Spirit of God to extinguish and quēch it, but not to inflābe
and kindle it. But yet we say that God who out of
darknes produced or broght forth light, had in yt most

detestable facte of the patriarckes, both his will and
his counsell, farre cōtrarie to their myndes and purpose:
euen as h
                     •
                   had in the cruell and most vniust death
(as cōcerning the instrumētes that were the executers)
of his deare sonne Christ Iesus. nether yet doth it ther
of folowe, yt euill thoghtes, whereunto we are comanded
to resist, are moued by him, or yet come from him. for
the fountaine thereof doth euerie wicked man so fynd
within him self that his owne conscience shall conuict
him that no where elles is the cause of his iniquitie (&
of the seuere punishment, which for the same he shall
susteine) to be soght but onely within him self, and as
proceding of him self by instigation of the deuill: into
whose power he is deliuered (as was Saul and others) by
the inscrutable and incomprehēsible (but yet most iust)
iudgemētes of God. If in you were ether modestie or discretiō,To the 6. 7. 8. 9. 10
to iudge of those thinges yt be well, & godly spoken,
or yet docilitie to be taught in those thinges wher
of vterly ye declare your selues ignorant, ye coulde
not thus as in a furious rage spewe forth your venim against
gods supreme Maiestie. for your horrible blasphemies
are not so much spoken against vs, as against
God. As for vs, they do no more obscure the manifest
light of our doctrine, then if in your despyte, ye should
spitt against the bright sunne to impede the brightnes
therof. for in none of our writinges be you able to shewe
any of these sentences, which maliciously & without
shame you laye to our charge:
               Euill thoghtes come▪ from God. God punisheth mā for the offences wherof
he is author, and wher vnto he prouoketh him. God moued and forced
Phara
                     •
                   to pnuishe the people.
               These I say and others your horrible blasphemies
(which we so detest, that we affirme, the first authors of
them to be worthie of most sharp punishment) you be
neuer albe to shewe in any of our writinges. And this
might serue for a sufficient answered to all your dispitefull
raling. But lest you should still glory in your iniquite
and grosse ignorance, I will discouer the same

folowing your answer, in the wordes of S. Iames saying
God tēpteth no man. if ye affirme yt God nether tēpteth
ye obeidiēce of his seruātes, nether yet sendeth false prophetes
to tempt his people, his plaine scriptures will rebuke
your vanitie. for God tempted Abraham, he tempted
his people fortie yeres in the wildernes, he tempteth
also by sending fals prophetes, as Moises doth witnes.
And therefor ye must be compelled to grant, that
this word tempting or to tempt is diuersly taken in the
scriptures: somtimes to trye and examyn, somtimes to
bring to light and knowledge thinges that be secret in
mans heart, sometymes to seke by experience a certentie
of thinges spokē, pronounced, or affirmed, and somtymes
moue, or to prouoke to iniquitie: & in this last
signification we confesse that God tempteh no man. for
as the mater of all iniquitie lieth within man, so is he
prouoked, moued, and stirred therunto by his owne lustes,
and instigation of the deuill onely. And thus albeit
we grant that to moue euill thoghtes, is to tempt,
yet we denye ye cōuersion. which is this, Ergo to tēpt is
to moue euill thoghtes. But let vs heare forther of your
profound vanitie: all is good say you that commeth
from the father of light (God grant that in your heartes
ye were assuredly so persuaded) if euill thoghtes come
from him they must be good. and so you conclude,
that then was Iosephes wordes fals, and that God may
be called the father of darknes (O execrable is your
blasphemie) because from him come euill thoghtes
which are darknes. Answer. If any of vs haue so written
or spokē, let vs be stoned to death as execrable blasphemers.
And if that ye in your blind fury do therewith
vniustly burden vs, althogh ye may eskape the handes
of man, yet shall you not esskape gods seuere and
soden vengeance. It is malice that will not suffer
you to vnderstand howe that these euilles whiche men
willingly comitt; in so farre as they com from God are
iust, profitable and good. for we most constantly affirme

that the damnation of the deuill, the induration of
Pharao, the deceauing of Achab, and other such, in
so farre as they proceded from God, are his iust and
good workes, because they are the punishment of sinne,
the excecution of his iust iudgementes, and a declaration
of his iustice. which iustely is armed against
the obstinate rebellion of Angelles, and men. but thereof
to conclude, ergo their euill thoghtes, their malicious
myndes, their hatered and crueltie came immediatly
from God, is more then a blasphemie. for all
these be, and are found within the offenders, which God
doth vse not by an ydle permission (for that is a thing
most contrarious to his iustice) but effectually as his
wisedome best knoweth, they shall serue to his glory,
& yt for vtilitie of his chosen children. I say it is a thing
most contrarious to gods iustice & power, ydly to suffer
iniquititie to be done, if he had no further respect
then to the facte, as it is committed. for as a man can
not be excused, who may impede murther and doth it
not, so can not gods iustice be excused by your ydle permission,
if he had no further respect, but to thinges as
they be dōne by man. And so is gods iustice rather accused
then mainteined by the foolishness of your curious
braynes, saying God permitteth many thinges which
he wold not. what vanitie is this? Is it not a thing
confessed amongest all, that gods power is omnipotent?
who then cā compelle him to suffer, that which he wold
not? And why doth he willingly suffer thinges, which
in his law, he hath forbidden? I answer, for the manifestation
of his own glory which is more precious then
the heauen and ye earth, and all the creatures in ye same
conteined. And thus doth vanitie cause you to fear that
gods iustice shall fall into decay, except it be vndersett
& vpholdē wt your foolishe distinctiō, betwext his will &
his permission. but we feare not to affirme yt he permitteth
nothing, which in some respect he will not. for as he
is omnipotēt & a most louing father so should he suffer

no calamitie to come nor crueltie to be vsed against his
children▪ except he did before see, yea and before determyn
their cofort & his glory to arrise of the same. And
will you say yt gods glory the cōfort and y• preseruation
of his Church is an euill work? because that wicked men
are instrumentes, by whome gods eternal counsell is
broght to passe. Was the exaltatiō of Iosephe to honor,
the preseruation of Egypte, and of other nations from
famine, yea and the feding of Iacob and his familie, an
euill work? because that, Iosephes brethren of malice
and enuie did sell him to the Ismaelites, and they
for lucre did seli him againe to Putiphare, whose wyfe
of malice did moste vniustly accuse him, & so being in
prison at length he was broght to the knowledge of Phirao,
and so was promoted for his reuelation, and wisedome
to honor and dignitie. O say you it is not this
that we do lay to your charge, but you affirme that God
was author of the malice, and of the wicked thoghtes of Iosephes brethren.
You do belie vs most maliciously. for we constantly
denye that God ether powred in them any malice, o
                     •
                  
did moue by his holie Spirit any wicked thoght into
them. for those we say they had of nature, in so farre as
it is corru
                     •
                  ted. But we say that God vsed their wicked
thoghtes and malice to his glory, and to the full comfort
of him whose destruction they soght, and that he
did not ydly permitting them, but effectually working
by such instrumentes and meanes as his wisedome had
before appoīted. Rage now as you list. for albeit to you
this saing is vaine yt God worketh all thinges for his owne
glory, yet will not God haue his glory measured by
ye vanitie of your braine. We gl
                        •
                     rifie God say you, when we
iudge him w
                        •
                     rthie to be glori
                        •
                     ied. Answer if you vnderstād that
then onely, and at none other time elles do mē glorify
God, but when they confesse him worthie of glory, you
are ignorant, foolishe, and manifest liers. for your argument
is no better, then if I should say: man slepeth in
the night season, therfor no man may or can slepe at

any other time. If your master Castalio had considered
that an argument made, a specie ad genus, negatiue
is vaine and foolishe, he had not heaped to gether so
many sophisticall reasons: by the which you and others
are abused. To make this mater some what more plaine:
If ye glorie of God cōsist in the manifestation of his mercie,
of his trueth, of his power, of his wisedome and of
his moste iust iudgementes, then do all creatures glorifie,
God, whether they iudge him worthie or vnworthie
of the same. for Dauid affirmeth that the heauens declare
the glory of God, and yet haue they nether iudgement
nor vnderstāding: the heauen and the earth saieth
Isaiah are replenished with his glorye.Isa. 6 And in an other
place the beastes of the field shall preach my glorye the
dragons and the birdes of eastriches, and Achan also
was cōmāded to giue glory vnto God. The earth, shalbe
compelled saieth Habacuc to knowledge the glory of
God. Zacharie also the Prophet saieth for his glory
hath he sent vnto the nations which haue spoyled you.
finally shall not sathan and the reprobate in their iust
condemnation giue glory vnto God? and do ye think
that all these creatures, iudge God to be worthie of glory
in such sort as they acknowledge his power, his wisedome
his iustice, & frō their hole heart submitte them
selues to his holy will? I trust you do not. for we knowe
that sathan is a spirit confirmed in malice, and rebellious
against God, & yet is he cōpelled euen in tormentes
to giue glory vnto God, in so farre, as in his iust dā
                  nation
he declareth gods power and iust iudgementes.
And therefor I say that you restreine the glory of God
with in to streit & narrowe limites, when yt you will that
it shall extend no forther, then to suche as from their
heart iudge God worthie of glory, ye wc perteineth to his
chosen children onely and can neuer be giuē by the reprobate.
for such glory must procede frō faith, wc is not
cōmone vnto all, but is the speciall gift giuē to gods elect:
& yet neuertheles by other meanes God declareth

his glory, euen in the vesselles of his wrath, as is before
declared.
               Of the example of Nabuchadnezer ye can make but
a particular cōclusion in this for me, Nabuchadnezer after
he had felt the iust punishement of his pride and arrogācie,
gaue glory vnto God: Ergo some man after punishmēt
giueth glory vnto God. If you make your cōclusion
extend any further, it is fals. for if you say that all
men after punishment giue glory vnto God, wt the same
confession that he gaue, many examples may be showen
to the cōtary. if you saye that none other giueth glory
vnto God, except such as so be punished: that will be proued
likewies fals. And if you say yt gods glory doth shine
in none, except in those that acknowledge & confesse
God to be mercifull and iust, that is most vaine of all,
and thus I say your conclusion must be but particulare.
               The reasons & the cōclusion, which you make vpon
these wordes of Dauid: Praise God all you natiōs, are so
foolish, on the one parre, and so filthie and execrablevpon
the other, that amongest all nations ye oght not onely
to he mocked, but also to be had in horror and detestation.
first you say. If God must be praised amongest all nations,
then must gods workes be such as all nations may knowe them
and prais
                        •
                      them. I answer, euen so they are, and such amongest
all natiōs as haue ye eyes of their myndes illuminated
by gods holie spiri
                     •
                  , do see iust caus why yt they oght
to praise gods wisedome, euen in all his workes. But
you procede saying there is no nation which at any tyme shall acknowledge
God to be iust, for that be punishe
                        ••
                      ma
                        •
                     , for that whervnto
he him self did prouoke him, and so after the example of the
priestes of the Philistines, ye ask this questiō: If God should
punishe man because he hath a beard, should any glory redound 
                        〈◊〉
                      God
there of, seing he hath giuen vs beardes his self, And so you skoffe &
iest at vs, saying yt we be very religiouse: because we say
that none oght to speak so vnreuerently of gods workes.
God is witnes that I write notwithou
                     •
                   some grief of
heart, nether yet yt I affirme this, which I am to speak.
for priuie hatered, wc I bear against the persone of any

man. But in gods presence I say, that rather then such
horrible blasphemies should haue bene fostered in my
heart, deuised in my braine, written by my pen, and pronounced
by my mouth and tongue, that rather I wold
my carcasse should haue suffered most cruell and vile
death. yea and further I say, that better it had bene, for
you neuer to haue bene borne, then thus blasphemously
to expose gods great Maiestie to opprobrie ād mockage.
for I appele to the iudgement of the heauen and
the earth, and of all creatures in the same conteined, if
euer that Iulian the appostate spake more disdainfully
of God, then here you write. But for the instruction of
the simple reader, to answere you more reasonably, thē
your vnreuerent skoffing deserueth, I say first, that the
mynde of Dauid was not to teach vs what euerie nation
and euery particulare man amongest the Gentiles shall
do,The place of Dauid. but what was the duetie of euerie nation, euery people
and euerie man to do, when gods mercies should be
offered vnto them. And therfor if you conclude all natiōs
do praise God, in such sorte as Dauid meaneth, because
that the holie Gost by his mouth commādeth all
nations to praife God, you make no better an argument,
then if ye should affirme, that euery man loueth
God with all his heart, with all his mynd, & with all his
strength, because that God so commandeth. This is one
portion of your ignorance. The second foloweth, gods
workes, say you, must be such as all nations may knowe
them and praise them. I answer, if you vnderstand that al
that praise God vnfeinedly from their heartes must haue
some knowledge of his mercies, goodnes, iust iudgemētes
and wōderous workes we distent not from you.
But if you say (as by your proces is euident, that you
do), that except all nations perceaue and vnderstand
the very grounde of gods iustice, that God amongest
them shall haue no glory. then as we lament your foolishnes,
so we detest your error▪ for albeit that the

                     •
                  aturall man can neuer atteine to the knowledge

of those things which God purposeth, yet shal not God
be defrauded of his golry, no not in the most carnal and
wretched man. Christe Iesus was sent into the world, and
came to that people which was called his own: and his
glory did so shine to the eyes of some,Iob. 1. that they did acknowledge
it to be the glory of the onely Sōne of God▪
But did the princes of the priestes and the hole nation
of the Iewes see the same glory, and so confesse him as
did the electe? Saīt Paul witnesseth the cōtrarie. saying,
if they had knowen, they had not crucified the king of
glory. Paul was appointed a preacher to the Gentiles, amongest
whome he most faithfully and moste boldely
did open the treasures of gods great mercies, and of the
glory of his Sonne Christ Iesus: but did euery citie, realme,
nation or man, to whome these treasures were opened
so receaue, vnderstand and imbrace them, that for
the same they glorified God? the contrarie is euident.
But was God therfore defrauded of his glory, euen in ye
midest of a wicked generatiō? God forbid. for as the eyes
of some were lightned, and so did glorifie the word of
the Lord, so such as remained obstinate did (and shall)
glorifie God, in so farre as his iust iudgemētes were, and
shalbe executed against thē. If you feare no punishemēt
rage as you list. To your blasphemies I haue before answered.
for none of vs doeth impute vpō God that he punisheth
any man, for thing that he prouoketh him
to do. for iniquitie commeth not of gods prouocation,
motion, nor holy Spirit, as that before we haue declared.
ād therfor as God hath reueled to vs a more assured
knowledge in his holy scriptures, then the Philistians
priestes had, so are we bold to affirme that which was hid
from thē, & which also you can not abide, to witt, that al
creatures are compelled to serue to gods glory in such
sorte as his wisedom hath appointetd them: and yet that
the willes of men are neither violently moued nor enforced
by God to committe iniquitie, to the which all 
men are redy bent of naturall corruption. Amongest
many foolishe and moste disagreing similitudes which

your captaine Castalio vseth for probation of his purposes
(for in such doeth stand the chief groūd of his diuinitie)
none cā be more foolish, nor further repugnīg
to that which he and you wold proue, then is this.
If God should punish a man: because he hath a beard, should any glory
redound to God there of▪ seing he hath giuen vs beards him seis: Here of
you wil inferre, that if God punishe sinne which he hath
willed or appointed to be, then can he not be iust. But
let vs examine, if your Simile doeth agree euen in the
chief pointes, in the which if it proue any thing it must
agre. first we knowe that the beard of mā was created by
God. But who amōgest vs did yet euer affirme that sinne
and iniquitie was made or created by God? Sinne we
cōfesse was forsene, yea and ordeined in the incomprehensible
counsell of God, and that for the most iust and
the most righteous end and purpose. But that it was made
or created by God, that are ye not able to proue by
our doctrine. Thus doeth your similitiude halt in the
chief membre. for they must be both a like gods creatures
and creation, if God shal be bound no more to punishe
man, for hauing of the one, then for hauing of the
other. moreouer the beard of mā so springeth groweth,
and abideth of a mere natural motion, yt albeit men slepe,
eate, drink, do or what so euer actiōs pleaseth them,
(not taking care or solicitude of their beard) it cometh
neuertheles to that state and perfection that nature will
suffer. But hath man sinne none otherwayes then thus?
Doeth ma sinne I say, hauing neither will, mynd, nor appetite
to sinne? or doeth not sinne procede from so volū
                  tary
and corrupt motiō, that the will, the iudgemēt, the
vnderstanding, and appetites, yea the hole man, and all
his cogitations are subiecte to sinne, and bent vpon in iquitie
at all tymes▪ Be iudges your selues how well do ye
partes of your similitudes agree. Thus with greater modestie
haue I answered your foolishnes, thē your scoffing
scurrilitie deserueth.
               Where you affirmethat albeit there be some secretes
of God vnknowen to vs,To ye 11. 12 13 yet is the iudgement of

God knowen, ād made manifest to vs in the word, I wold
ask of you, if ye cā by ye plaine word assigne causes of all
gods iudgementes from the beginning, and of those
iudgements which that day shalbe put in execution whē
ye secretes of al heartes shalbe reueled. And if you be
able so to do, yeshould be profitably occupied (as I thīk)
if by your plaine and simple writing, ye wold studie to
put end to this controuersie. the chief point where of stā
                  deth
in this, that we affirme, that causes able to satisfie
the curiositie of man, cā not be assigned from gods plaine
scriptures, why God permitted a great nombr
                     •
                   of
his Angels to fal, of whome he hath redemed none, but
reseru
                     •
                  th them to iudgement? why God did suffer man
to fall,Iudgemētes of God in which mās reason can not be satisfied. and yet of one masse, elected som vesseles of mercie
to honor, and appointed others for sinne to damnation?
And finally as before I haue said, why God deferred
the sending of his Sōne so long, and why also that his
againe comming is so long delayed? If ye will answer yt
these two last, are resolued by the scriptures, the one to
be as the Apostle writeth,Heb. 11. lest that the fathers should haue
bene made perfect with out vs, and the other that the
nomber of gods elect children might be fully complete▪
which we cōfesse to be a reasone most strong, and sufficient
for all gods children: neither yet do we require
any other. but yet the curious braine will not so be quieted,
but it wil still demād, may not God in one momēt
if so it please him, fulfill the nōbre of his chosen children,
as well as he of nothing did creat the heauen and
the earth, and shortly in the space of six naturall dayes
set all things in perfect ordre. Consider with your selues
what you do take in hād, if ye wil affirme that all gods
iudgemēts be so knowen, that a sufficient reason of euery
one may be assigned from the word. ād if you say
there be some things secrete. The consider, I beseche
you that the holie Gost hath neuer made mention of
any greater secret, then that which lieth hid in gods

most iust iudgemētes, which Paule affirmeth to be incō
                  prehensible,
and Dauid saieth they are depe and so profoūd,
that neither can the vnderstanding of man, nor of
Angell reach to the bottom of the same.
               Why ye should accuse vs that we should affirme,To ye 12.
that God shall iudge the world, not according to Christes
Euangell plainely reueled, but according to some
other secret will, I see neither cause, nor reason. for no
men do more constantly abyde by that which is written
and reueled, no men do lesse care, to seke for newe
reuelations or vncerten authorities, then we do. Oure
continuall doctrine is, that God shall absolue from
damnation such as by true faith embrase his dear
Sonne Christe Iesus, and shall condemne to fire inextinguible
all infideles, and such as delyte in manifest impietie
and wickednes: and this iudgement do we beleue
that God shall pronounce by his Sonne Christe Iesus to
whom all iudgement is giuen. And for none other secrete
will in that mater do we search. But if I lust, I
coulde lay to some of your charges, that which none
of you can be able to deny, to witt that some of
you haue written (besides your priuie informations)
that there is a doctrine more perfect then euer
Saint Paule committed to writing, yea and further
that some of you haue called the hole scriptures of
God in doubte: and some do affirme that none is able
by the word written to decide the controuersies that
this day be in religion. And therefor that we must
haue new Prophetes, and newe reuelations from heauen,
before that any publicke and generall reformatiō
shalbe made if any of you think that these thi
                     •
                  gs
are but imagined by me, let him vnder his o
                     •
                  ne
name impugne them, and I shall shewe witnesses which
at this time, for diuers causes I omitte. Your
iesting at vs, your bold iudgement and condemnation
by you pronounced against vs, we remitt to him
who shortly shall declare which of the two sortes be

drowned in infidelitie, and leauing gods plaine scriptures,
haue folowed the vanities of their owne imaginations.
Now shortlie to that wc foloweth in these wordes.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIES.
               An other proofbring you of that which is written. 2. Reg. 24. God
moued Dauid to nombre Israell & Iuda. To which I answer,The 6. Argument. that which
is write 1. Parali xi. Sathan stood vp against Israel & prouoked Dauid
to nombre the people,The 42 section. I am certen that if it were not for this manifest scripture
you wold attribute, the wicked prouocatiō of the deuil to God. but here
 we may see agreat light to vnderstād many other places of the scriptures,
which seme
                     •
                  h to affirm God to be the author of any euill, for by these
two places we may see that God is called to be the author of the thing which
 he suffered. as because he suffered the obstinat resisting of Pharao he is
called the author thereof. So because he left Semei to the lewdnes of his owne
mynd & suffered him to curse Dauid, God is called the author of his cursing,
so the partriarkes being left of God did sell their brother, ād here now
 Dauid being left of God to nōbre the people by the prouocation of the deuil,
whereūto he was no more moued by God, thē whē he killed Vrias. to this you
say: that we do but flatter God, whē we do assigne any difference betwene
his w
                     •
                  l & his permissiō or his sufferāce, for God permitteth nothing (say you)
 but that which he will, if ye mēt so that God permitteth nothing, but that
which he will permits, I would them holde your saying true. But for as much
as you declare you meaning to be this, that what so euer God permitteth,
he willethe it absoutly this is an erron
                     •
                  ouse saying▪ for God permitteth &
suffereth all the wickednes which is donne vpon the earths: and will you
say, that God willeth absolutly all such wickednes? God for bid the people
 of God should be so persuaded to beleue such abomination. I say you are the
Prop
                     •
                  etes of the deuill, which teache such filthie doctrine, and ye say ye be
the prophetes of God, nowe of necesitie one of vs lieth, for if you be the Pr
                     •
                  
                  phets
of God, then I lie, and if you be the Prophetes of the deuill, they do ye
lie, and if God will vs to say the trueth, he will not that we lie, for then he
should will two contraries, which is impossible, yet one of vs doeth lie which
must be by the permissiō and suffring of God, & not by his will. wherof
it foloweth, that there is difference betwext the suffering and the will
of God. The Lord was angry with the careles heathen, because when God
was a little angry with the Israelites, they did their best to destroye them.
 Then suffered God the heathan thus to punish his people more greuously, thē
he willed them to do. wherfor there must be difference betwene the will of
God and his suffering. Obed the Prophet
                     •
                  reproued the Israelites because

                     〈◊〉
                   afflicted Iuda more greuously then God wold they should haue donne▪
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   must the Israeli
                     •
                  es haue donne this by the permission of God & n
                     •
                  .

                     •
                  his will. The prodigall sonne wasted all his goods riatously if you say

that so was his fathers will,Luk 
                        •
                      15. i
                     •
                   should be a great absurditie, wherfor it
must nedes folowe that the father suffered that which he willed not. The
fa
                     •
                  her willed both his sōnes to go ād, labor in his vineyarde ye
                     •
                   not bo
                     •
                  h but
one of them did his fathers will, so the father sufferred the other which wēt
not, against his will. Thus we may see a great difference betwene the will
and the permission of God. a notable saying we haue in the prophecie of Ieremi
                     •
                  
                  
against this error which teache
                     •
                  h 
                     •
                  ha
                     •
                   sinne is cōmitted not onely by
the permission of God, but also against his will, they haue (saieth he) builded▪
                  Iere, 32.
high places for Baal to vowe their sonnes & daughters vnto Molo
                     •
                  h
which I neuer commāded 
                     •
                  hem, neither came it euer in my 
                     •
                  hoght to make
Iuda sinne with such abomination. Here we se that Iuda committed
that which was contrarie to gods reueled will. for I neuer commanded
thē (saieth he) and against his secrete w
                     •
                  ll for i
                     •
                   came neuer in my thoght
(saiteh h
                     •
                  ). Thē did they sinne by the permissiō of God against his wil. Thy
wayes & thy, thoghtes broght the to 
                     •
                  his saieth the Lord. If it was the lord
                     •
                  s
secrete wil that the Israelites should sinne. and it was also the Israelites
thoghtes & will to sinne, thē were they bothe of one mynd. And as he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
out wardly by the word willeth thē not to do euil, so they out wardl
                     •
                  e did
promise to kepe gods law & wourshipped him with their lippes. By 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
semed that both in wardlie ād out wardly they were cōforme to God af
                     •
                  er
your opinō. wherfor he oght not to hau
                     •
                   bene offēded with thē. I am ashamed 
to write the abominable absurditeis which may be gathered of your
poisoned doctr
                     •
                  ne. The lord shall raise vp the spirit of the king of the Medes
which hath alredie a desire to destroy Babilō by what meanes 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
lord stirre him vp to do any thing which alredie is bent to do it▪ but by su
                     •
                  
                  fering 
him.Iere. 51. And yet is the Lord called the doer therof. And 
                     •
                  here for it is written.
Let one decea
                     •
                  full offender com against ano
                     •
                  her, and one destr
                     •
                  yer 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
me against an other▪ for what neded God to moue the wickd 
                     •
                  o do 
                     〈◊〉
                  
kindly which being giuen ouer of God, do imagine nothing bu
                     •
                   w
                     •
                  ck
                     •
                  dnesand
his master the deuill stepeth neuer,Esai. 21, but is alwayes with him te
                     •
                  pting
him with euill thoghtes, and promoking him to perfourm his w
                     •
                  ck
                     •
                  d
imaginations.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               The more nie ye draw to the end, the lesse ye proue
your purpose, but the more ye vtter your malice ād venim.
No iust caus se we,To the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. why that ye place of the bookes
of the kings shall be explained by that which is written
in the chronicles in such sorte as you require,2. Reg. 24. to wit,
that nothing be left to God in that greuous offence of
Dauid except an ydle and onely permission. for the holie
Gost feareth not to say:2. pa. 21 The wrath of the Lord God

was yet moued against Israell, and stirred vp Dauid against
them, that he said go and nombre Israell and Iuda.
Here plain it is that the eternall God who was angrie
against Israell dad stirre or moue Dauid to nombre
them, not by an ydle permission, as you alledge, but by
such motiō, as nothing repugneth to his iustice. Where
ye say, the other place explaineth this: for it affirmeth
that the deuil stood vp against Israel, and prouoked
Dauid to nomber Israell, I answer as the one place
repugneth nothing to the other, so doeth it not explaine
the other in such sēse, as ye adduce for it repugneth
not to say, that God, man, ād the deuil work in one fact
& actiō, as in the histories of Iob, Achab, Semei, and Pharao
is manifest. God for iust causes giueth his commandement
and power to sathan (as to his instrumēt) be he
neuer so wicked, to do what in his eternal cousel, was before
decreed, Sathan of a wicked and rebellious mynd
chooseth such instrumentes, and vseth such meanes as
God likwies hath appointed. Men in al wicked actions,
of their fre and voluntarie. motion, do folow their corrupt,
and wicked affections in declaring their pride, vanitie,
malice, or crueltie, which wicked affections in so
farre as they are wicked, we confesse that God will not:
for he can will no iniquitie. but yet that his eternal, &
almightie power shall be iudged so ydle, that it doeth
nothing in such actions but onely suffer, we can not admitte
for such reasons as we haue before alledged, wher
that we did examine the differēce betwext gods wil, and
his permission.
               You retein your old nature (and iustly I might say
the nature of the deuill) most maliciously affirming vs,To the 4.
to say that what so euer God permitteth he willeth it absolute
                        ••
                     , and so
that absolutely he willeth all wickd
                        ••
                     ces. Which saying as ye be
neuer able to proue vpon vs, so do we cōfesse, it not onely
erroneous, but also so blasphemous, that who so euer
dare pronounce or affirme the same, deserueth death.
for we most constantly in word and writing affirme,

absolutley God willeth no iniquitie. for all his workes
in so far as they procede frome his wisedom: ād infinite
goodnes are holie and iust, and therfor do we make God
author of no sinne, which onely procedeth frome the
fountaines that be corrupted, that is, from the deuil and
frome man, as in diuers places, most euidently we haue
declared.
               Because I do perceaue that greatly ye delyte in your
prignāt wittes (I will not say foolish vanitie)To ye 5 I will recicite
your hole wordes by the which ye wold seme to proue
contrarietie in God, except that we wold grante a difference
betwext gods will and his permission. I say
saieth the author of your book to vs, that ye are the Prophetes
if the deuill, which teach such fil
                        •
                     hie doctrine and ye say, be the Prophetes
of God. Now of necessitie one of vs lieth. for if ye be the Prophe
                        •
                     es
of God I lie. And if ye be the Prophetes of the deuil ye lie. And if God
will vs to say the trueth he will not that we lie, for then he should will
two contraries which is impossible, yet one of vs lie, which must be by permission
and suffering of God and not by his will. whereof it folowe
                        •
                     h that
there is difference betwext the suffering and the will of God.
               
               It appereth that in this description of persons in which
ye oppose your selues to vs,answer. ye wold more declare
what is your iudgement and opinion of vs, and what ye
wold that we should be estemed of others, then that ye
greatly do trauale to proue any contrarietie in gods wil
by the same. for his eternall wisedom seeth the meanes
how that his commandement, and his will are not contrarious
the one to the other: albeit that he command
one thing, and yet for iust causes, will wicked men to do
the contrary. which kinde of cōtrarietie, and repugnance
doeth so blind your eyes, that you can not se how
God cā cōmand all men to speak trueth, and yet for iust
causes before sene and determined in his counsell, that
he wil ye deuil, ād his slaues to delite in lies. Albeit I say
that the apperance of this contrarietie blinde you, yet
will not gods trueth cease of be trueth, neither
will the libertie of his eternall Godhead, be broght

into bondage to your corrupt iudgement. His commandement,
and his will, do nether debate, nether fight betwext
them selues: but do agree in all thinges, euen as
do his mercie his iustice, his wisedom, and his power,
albeit oftener it is, that his iustice doth punish such, as
vpon whom he hath determined to haue mercie. Euen
so he commandeth men to obeye his commandementes,
whom he not onely foresaw, to be disobediēt, but for
most iust causes willeth his glory to appere euen in
their vnrighteousnes, & lies. And this he doth without
all contrarietie in his godly will, to the full knowledge
wherof albeit ye can not atteine, yet more profitable it
were for you to be ignorant of such thinges, as God reserueth
to be reueled in the time appointed in his eternall
counsell, then thus without all reuerence, and feare
to trouble your foolish braines, in deuising such absurdities,
as may seme to oppugne gods eternall veritie,
which in the ende w
                     •
                  l triumphe to your destruction▪
shame, and confusion, if obstinatly you procede as you
haue begonne. For albeit that he loueth trueth, and hateth
lies, and albeit that he commandeth man to speak
the trueth, and forbiddeth man to beare fals witnes, yet
feareth he not to giue a commandement to that wicked
spirite, to go forth & to be a lieng spiritte, in the mouthes
of all Achabes fals prophetes. Yea forther he gaue
him power to worke that in the fals prophetes, which
he forbiddeth all men to do. For he commandeth that
no man shall deceaue an other, and yet giueth he power
to the deuill to be a lieng spiritte in the mouthes of
the fals prophetes, and to them he giueth power to deceaue
Achab. If ye list to lay contraritie to the charge
of God, prepare your winges, and with Nabuchadnezer
of Babylon,Isa. 14 saye, we will passe vp to the heauens, and
shall establish our seates aboue the sterres of God, we
shall passe vp vpō the hight of the clowdes, and we shall
be like to the most highest, yea if thus ye will call his
secrete counsels to examination, and triall, ye must be

iudges and superiors to him. Thus iustly I might illude
ād skoffe y or reasōs, as vanities most vnworthie to be answered.
But yet hauīg respecte to the simple, I wil gather
your argument, and forme it as strongly as your selues
can, and I will answere so much of the same, as ye think
nable to be answered, your argument is this.
               God can not will two contraries, but to speake the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,The aduersaries argument. Answer. ād to lie
are contraries. Therfor he can not will them both. But he permitteth men
to lie, and willeth them to speake the trueth. There is therfor a difference
betwene the will, and the permission.
               God can not will two cōtraries, True it is in him selfe,
in one respecte, and for one purpose, he who is author
of cōcord, can not will contrarietie: but in consideration
of his creatures, for diuers respectes, and sundrie purposes,
thīges be not cōtraries, the one to ye other, which to
our iudgementes, haue apperance of contrarietie. If you
be so wel sene in your artes, as some of you pretēd ye cā
not but vnderstand this answere to be sufficiet, to dissolue
what so euer ye haue vnreuerently collected. But yet
to make it more sēsible to the simple, I say yt in this proposition,
God can not wil two contraries, and in the conclusion
which you make vpon the same, you oght to haue
made a distinction betwene those thinges wc God simply
(or as ye spake before, absolutely) will, and betwene
those thinges, which he will for a certein end and purpose,
which doeth not appere in the external actiōs. For
certen thinges there be (as in an other place I haue entreated)
which God will, euen for them selues, such as be
mercie, iustice, temperance chastitie, and all other vertues,
which he wil, haue to shyne in his elect and please
him in Christ Iesus his Sonne. And yet neuertheles he
also will crueltie, iniustice, excesse, filthie life, blindnes, &
induration to be in others, as iust punishmētes of their
sinnes, and causes of their condēnation. The last (I say)
will God to be in the reprobate, not for the wicked actes
sake, which do euer displease his Maiestie, but for
such endes as his wisedom hath appointed. Let this be

explained by examples, some natural, and some takē frō
gods scriptures. There is no mā (except he be of a most
cruel nature) that considering the incōmodities of warre,
and of battell, doeth will it, for the selfe. And yet a
godly prince persewed by externall ennemies, doeth not
onely will his soldiours to fight, and to mainteine the
warre, but also he prouoketh, he encourageth, and exhorteth
his subiectes to the same. And why is it? because yt
warre or battell pleaseth him in the self, or for the self?
No, but because with out such trauaill, such danger, and
hasard, his subiectes can not lyue in quietnes, and the estate
of his commō wealth can not be preserued. The same
may I say of godlie magistrates punishing murtherers,
adulterers, and blasphemers wt death, and yet nether
willing the death of any mā, neither yet deliting in the
sheding of their blood. In these similitudes I grāt somwhat
to be vnlike: for gods power is not subiect to such
incōmodities vnwillingly, as be the powers of men. But
yet these similitudes suffice to explaine the chief purpose,
wc is yt man may will two contraries, for diuers respectes,
without any contrarietie in him self. For peace, and
warre are cōtraries, to kill, & to saue the life, are likewise
cōtraries, and yet one man, euen at one time may will
both the one, and the other, for diuers respectes, and diuers
endes. He may will peace, for the cōfortable quietnes,
and felicitie yt ther of springeth, and at the same instāt
without all cōtrarietie in him self, he may wil warre,
to withstād the furie of the ennemie, yt wold oppresse his
subiectes. And may not these thinges, wc we perceaue to
be in creatures, be in God in greater perfectiō, althogh
we perceaue not the causes? Let vs trie the answere, both
by the examples of gods seruātes, and last by the exāple
of God him self: Lot, no doubte did agree with gods wil
in that he loued chastitie, sobrietie and temperāce, and
hated filthie life riotous chere, and excesse. For the holy
Gost boareth him this record, that he was pure, and cleane
both in eares, and eyes. But what will had he when he

did offer his two daughters to be defloured, and abused
by those vilanous persons? was it cōtrarie to his formar
will? Did he now beginne to delyte in that execrable filthines?
assured I am he did not. But being oppressed
with the present necessitie, reteining the same loue, wil,
and minde to chastitie, and honest conuersation, soght
ye next remedie that to him appered able to haue staied
the rage of that furious multitude (vpon God I grāt falleth
no such necessitie). But let the chief scope be obserued,
and we shall vnderstand (that for diuers respectes) to
will two thinges, wherof the one, is contrarie to the other,
is not to will contrarietie. But let vs come to God
him self. God willeth mercy, iustice, & all other vertues
as before we haue said, and these, he will at all times, and
before all times. But is it not possible therfor, that he
can will crueltie oppression, blood sheding, murther,
and death? Who then sent Nabuchadnezer, to destroy
not onely the Iewes, but also the Moabites, and other nations?
Who pronounced this sentence: Cursed be he that
doeth the Lordes worke negligently, and he that withdraweth
his swerd from blood?Zae. 
                        ••
                     
                   Who did create the smithes,
with their hammers to break downe the hornes which
had dispersed Israel? And finally, who gaue his owne
sonne to the cruell death? Who hath subiected the
deare spouse of Christe Iesus to afflictions, and temporall
calamities? Dare you denie, but that it was and is,
the eternall God, by whose good will all these thinges
were appointed: and decreed, or were any of them, done
agaīst his almightie will? I think you wil not so affirme.
For the scripture witnesseth, that God gaue his Sonne
to the world, euē of determined purpose, that he should
dye, orels who could haue compelled his Maiestie therunto,
if his will had bene repugnant? Peter affirmeth
that blessed are we that suffre for ye name of Christe, adding
this comfortable sentēce: By them (yt is by the persecuters)
is ye name of God blasphemed, but by you it is
glorified.1. Pet. 1. And therfor, let such saith he, as be afflicted

by ye will of God, lay doune their soules in well doīg, as
in the handes of a faithfull keper.Rom. 8. Paul witnesseth yt those
whom God hath elected in Christe Iesu, he hath also
predestinate, and before appointed, to be like fashioned
to the image of his owne Sonne. Of which testimonies,
it is plaine that the greuous destruction, the aboundance
of the bloodshed amōg diuers natiōs, the cruell death
of Christ Iesus, and the most fearefull afflictions of his
dearely beloued Church, did procede from gods will, in
so much as he did not onely suffer them, but also, for
most iust causes, respectes, and endes, which often before
I haue recited, he did will and appoint them: and yet in
God was there no contrarietie. For in the destruction of
Ierusalem, ād of others, he had not respect simply to the
ruine, and vastatiō of those places, but to his iust iudgementes,
which were prouoked to take vengeance vpon
the multitude of their sinnes, which lōg he had suffered.
When our Master Christe Iesus did suffre, he had no
delite in the crueltie of those enraged dogges, who
did crucifie him, which as he hated, so after he did most
seuerely punish: but his pleasure ād delite was in the redēption
of man, which by none other sacrifice could haue
bene perfited. And this day, and from the beginning
he hath had no pleasure in the blood which is shed, neither
in the tyrānie which is vsed against his simple, and
smal flock, but because he wil haue the members like ye
head he doeth a strāge worke, that he may do his owne
worke, that is: he trieth ād purgeth by fyre our faith frō
all drosse, and corruption of earthlie affections. But in
none of all these is there any contrarietie, neither in
God, neither in his will, neither in his counsell. for all
thinges be disposed in such ordre, such consent and so
conueniently, that his glorie, and the perpetual cōfort
of his electe, doth finally, and assuredly folowe. And euē
so it is in the apperant contrarietie betwene you, and vs,
God, no doubt, will the one of vs to affirme lies, to raile
to blaspheme, ād most vniustly to accuse ye other: he will

ye other to susteine ye cause of the trueth paciētly, to beare
opprobrious wordes, and sclāderous reportes, referrīg
iudgement vnto him, who righteously, and in equitie
shall iudge. Is there therefor any cōtrarietie in gods wil?
none at al. For the diuers respectes, and endes being considered,
the same consent shall now be found in this apperant
contrarietie, which hath remained frō the encrease
of gods Church. For in all ages hath God willed his
true Prophetes with all boldnes, and cōstancie, to susteine
the cause of his simple veritie, how odious that euer
it was vnto the world. And in their cōtrarie, he hath raised
fals prophetes to whom he hath giuen the efficacie
of errors (for contrarie purposes I grant) to witt that his
people may be tried, his faithfull seruantes exercised,
and humbled, and finally that such as delyte not in veritie,
may be giuen ouer to beleue lies. Go to now and
proue contrarieties.
               In the wordes of Zacharie you shew your ignorāce,
& in collecting the minde of Oded,To Ye 6. you plainely declare
your accustomed falshode in farther stretching the
minde of the Prophete, thē his wordes will beare. Which
thing I will first shew by reciting the plaine wordes, and
so returne to the Prophete Zacharie. There was in Samaria
a Prophet of the Lordes (saith the historie) whose name
was Oded, and he went oute before the hoste that came
to Samaria, and said vnto them:2. Pe
                        •
                     . 2
                        •
                     
                   Behold becaus the
Lorde God of your fathers is wroth with Iuda, he hath
deliuered them into your hādes, and ye haue slaine thē
in a rage that reacheth vp to heauen. And now ye purpose
to kepe vnder the children of Iudah and Ierusalem, as
seruants and had maides vnto you: But are not you such
that sinnes are wt you before ye Lord your God? These be
his wordes in that mater, by the which if you be able to
proue, that the Israelites did more, then God in his eternall
counsell had appointed yt they should do against Iuda,
and Ierusalam, we will patiently heare your probatiō,
and reasons. If you say the Prophete reproued them of

their crueltie, therfor they did more then God wold: y•
doth not folow, for the iust will of God must not be
measured, by the crueltie of their facte, but by his owne
word, which doeth affirme, that God gaue ouer Iudah
into, the handes of the king of Syria, & into the handes
of the king of Israell, who did strike them with a great
slaughter, and that for the sinnes, and abominable idolatrie,
which they, & Achas their king, had committed.
We heare, and see affirmed by the holy Gost, that God
gaue them ouer into the handes of their ennemies, which
thing he did willingly, and not by permission as
you writte. Now to the place of Zachariah in which I
say, you shew grosse, and wicked ignorance. For if your
interpretation shoulde be receaued, thē of necessitie it
should folow, yt in God their lacked power to impede, ād
staye the furie of those cruell mē, who in their victorie
did so insolētly rage. For if God wold onely haue had ye
Iewes gently corrected, & not to haue bene so seuerely,
and rigorously destroyed: and yet, yt against al maner, &
sorte of his wil, they were so cruelly entreated, it can not
be denied, but yt the crueltie, and rage of the Babyloniās
was greater, then God coulde impede or staye, how blasphemous,
and fals this is, the godlie doeth vnderstād. O
(say you) but so do the wordes of the text soūd, for they
say: I am greatly angrie against the careles heathē. For I
was but a litle angrie against Sion, but they haue helped
forwarde the afflictiō. I answer, yt if ye were not more malicious
then ignorant, ye might easily perceaue, yt those
wordes were spokē, not to proue yt any thing was dōne against
Israel, and Iudah, wc God had not appoīted, ād commanded,
but to instruct the Prophete, yt the will, and cousell
of God, in punishing of his people, was farre other,
then was the wil, & connsell of those yt did destroy them:
and yt their lōg bondage should haue an other end then
either they thē selues, or their ennemies did vnderstād.
That nothīg was dōne against yt people, wc the Lord had
not appointed, yea and commanded, the same Prophete
doeth affirme, saying: my wordes & my statutes (he meaneth

the threatnings, & punishmentes) wc I haue cōmanded
my seruātes the Prophetes, haue they not, apprehended
y or fathers: in so much that they haue cōuerted, and
said: Euen as the Lord of Hostes hath determined, & appointed
to do vnto vs, accordīg to or wayes, and accordig
to or imaginatiōs, so hath he donne to vs. Except yt you
will belie the holy Gost, you must cōfesse, yt God had cō
                  māded,
God had appointed, & determined so to punish
his people. Yea Amos the Prophete feareth not to say:
Shall there be euill in a citie (that is any punishment or
plague) ād the Lord hath not dōne it? Why is he thē offended
(say you) against the proud, and carelesse heathē?
I answer. Because they neither had respect to gods will,
counsell; nor cōmandement, but to their own priuat cō
                  moditie,
ād to the satisfying of their cruel appetites. For
they did not destroye Ierusalē, willing, or minding to punish
the offēses of the people cōmitted agaīst God: Neither
yet did they carie thē to Babylon of purpose yt God
might be glorified in their deliuerāce. No, they had determined
the plaine contrary. To wit, yt Ierusalē should
remaine desolate for euer: That Iudah should be y• inheritance
of strange nations, ād so should gods promise be
fals, ād vaine. And in very dede the Iewes them selues, in
the extremitie of their trouble, yea, and when the tēple
begā to be reedified, were not free from these tēptatios,
and therfore doeth God assure his Prophetes, yt his loue
was great towares Siō: That he wold destroy, that natiō,
wc intended their destruction: that he wold deliuer his
people: that the warfare of Ierusalē was at an end, yt her
iniquitie was remitted:Isa. 40. that she had receiued double punishment
for all her sinnes, from the hand of the Lord,
and yt therfore he wold take the dolourous cuppe of anguish,
ād sorow out of her hād, and wold giue it into the
handes of those, that did trouble her. By which (and many
mo promises, and threatninges, God doeth not meane
that any thing was done in Ierusalem, which he had
not appointed. But by the one he did somwhat comfort

the troubled heartes of his afflicted people: and by
the other, he did shew the cause, why he wold punish those
cruell murtherers, whose seruice before he did vse in
punishing his people.Isa. 47. And this doeth God most plainely
witnes in these wordes: I was wrath (saith ye Lord) with
my people I haue polluted myn inheritance, and giuen
them into thy hand (he speaketh vnto Babylon) thou
didest shewe thē no mercie, but didest lay thy very heauie
yoke vpon the anciēt: and thou saidest, I shalbe a Ladie
for euer, so yt thou didest not set thy mynd to these
thinges neither didest thou remēbre the latter end thereof.
Therfor now heare thou that art giuē to pleasures
and dwellest careles, She saith in her heart▪ I am ād none
els: I shall not sitt as a widdow neither shall know the losse
of children. Here of I say it is plaine, yt the punishmēt
of gods people (as before I haue proued) is his owne appointement,
and will. But because the punishers loke to
another end, therfor are they criminall before gods iustice.
In adducing both these exāples, that is, of Israel punishing
Iuda, and of the Babylonians destroying Ierusalē,
I finde you in another most grosse error, besides this
wc I haue confuted. For you seme to affirme, that if y• Israelites,
and Babyloniās had kept a measure, ād had not
exceded the boundes, wc God had appointed, and cōmanded,
they had not sinned. For (say you) he willed the one,
but permitted the other. Thē in so farre as they did his
will they sinned not, but in so far as they exceded his
wil, and did more wc he wold not, but onely did suffre it,
they sinned. This is your profound diuinitie, ād godlie
meditatiōs of God, of his iustice, iudgemētes, ād workes
incomprehensible to mās reason. Are you able to proue
that Nabuchadnezer came to Ierusalē, or that therin he
spilt, or his captaines, and cruell souldioures, one droppe
of blood which God (in his eternall coūsell) had not
appointed, and willed. The testimonies of all Prophetes
rebuke your vanitie.
                     
                        •
                     lle. 
                        •
                     1. Ezechiel saith: Thus saith the Lorde.
Beholde I come against thee and will draw my swerd
oute of his sheath, and cut of frome thee both the righteous,

and the wicked. Seing then yt I will cut of frome
y• bothe ye righteous and wicked, therfor shall my swerd
go oute of his sheath against all fleshe from the South
(meaning throw all the lād) to ye north, that al slesh may
know, that I the Lorde haue drawē my swerd oute of his
sheath, and it shall not return any more. Mark and consider
how God attributeth all to him self, as after yet the
Prophet more plainely speaketh sayīg: And he hath giuen
it to be fourbished that he may handle it: this swerde
is sharp, ād is fourbished yt he may giue it into ye hād
of the slayer &c. And I wil powre oute myne indignatiō
vpō the in the fyre of my wrath, and deliuer ye into the
hand of beastly mē, and skilful to destroy. Thou shalt be
in ye fyre to be deuoured thy blood shalbe in ye middes
of the lād, ād thou shalt be no more remēbred, for I the
Lorde haue spokē it. If these be the wordes of him yt onely
suffereth, and willeth not thinges to be done, let ye
indifferent reader iudge. Why they did sinne notwithstā
                  ding
yt God in his coūsell had willed, and appointed this
seuere punishment against his people, I haue before declared.
To witte, because yt neither knew they gods will,
coūsell, nor cōmandement, neither yet had they any respect
to obey God, or to fulfill his will. That Nabuchadnezar
was ignorāt of gods will, ād coūsell, is euidēt by yt
wc is writtē in ye same Prophet, in ye place aboue expressed.
For after he was come forth of his coūtrie, ād was wt
his armye farre proceded in his iourney, he was vncerten
whether he should go against Rabbath, y• strōg Citie
of ye sonnes of Ammon, or against Ierusalē, and so cō
                  mitting
the mater to his sorcerers, ād diuines (ye lottes
being cast) he taketh his iourneye, agaīst Iuda, ād Ierusalē.
Wherof it is plaine yt he neither knew, nor vnderstode
by ye motiō of gods holy spirite, his holy wil, neither
yet cōmandemēt. And in destroieng the Citie, and punishing
the people, who will say yt he or his seruātes hated
sinne, Pride, Crueltie, Idololatrie and abommations wt ye
wc he, and his hole realmes were replenished? And ye same
do I say of ye Israelites, who did not onely sinne, because

they exceded measure in punishing Iuda, but because
yt against gods law, & expresse cōmandement, they
made vniust warre against their brethern. They nether
loked, neither yet oght they to haue loked to gods
secrete coūsell, but to his plaine law, wc cōmanded thē to
loue their brethern, not to murther, not to spoile, not
to couet &c. Against the wc because they did offend, euē
in ye first motiō, & purpose of their warr
                     •
                   in gods presence
they were murtherers, theues oppressours, & couetous
persons, before yt euer they set their foote forth of
their houses. And so euen yt wc he in his eternall counsel
willed thē to do, did no les displease hī, as touchīg their
wicked mindes, thē did yt, wc you affirme he suffered. For
euery transgression of his law, is before his iustice odious,
and sinfull. If this can not correct your iudgement,
yet I am assured yt it shall declare your vanitie, who dare
cōclude yt if the Israelites, & Babyloniās had kept measure
in punishīg Iudah, yt thē they had not sinned. But the
contrarie I affirm
                     •
                   and say, yt the first thoght, and purpose
mouīg thē to make warre, was sinne before God. Touching
ye permission of the father towardes his prodigal
sonne, & touchīg ye
                  
                     •
                   sonne, wc promised to go, ād to labor
in his fathers vineyarde, & wēt not, I haue before answered,
yt similitudes oght not further to be stretched, thē ye
minde of the holie Gost is to teach in the same. And in
these places it is euidēt, yt Christe teacheth not, how God
is cōpelled to suffer many thinges wc he wil not, nether
yet was it his mīde in those similitudes, to teach vs what
differēce there is betwene gods wil, & his permissiō, but
in y• one he teacheth, yt in God there is mercie towardes
the sinner, yea & towardes such a sinner, as vnthāckfully,
and inobediētly hath departed from God, and yt there be
some proude childrē, who by reasō of their cōtinuāce in
their fathers house, become disdan
                     •
                  ful yt others shoulde
de be preferred, or cōpared vnto them. And therfor they
grudge, they murmurre, ād they enuie the liberalitie of
their father & his mercy shewed to the sonne, yt before
appered l
                     •
                  st. To whom this might be applied, besides

the Iewes, and the Gentiles, ye are not ignorant. The other
similitude doth teach vs, that many in mouth say
Lord, Lord, I go, I go, whose heart did neuer fele what is
the reuerence, and true obedience due to gods Maiestie.
               We cōfesse no les then Ieremie doth write:To the 7. 8. 9 for we say,
that God nether cōmanded such abhominations, as his
people cōmitted, nether yet yt euer they did enter in to
his heart, that is they did neuer delyte, nor please him
nether yet did he euer will them for the actions them
selues. But when you shalbe able to proue that it did not
apperteine to his iust iudgementes to punishe those
idolaters with such blindnes, that they became more
cruel then brute beastes: then shall ye be more able to
proue, that in no wise did God will that crueltie. God
willed not those abhominations for the murther committed
and blood that was shedde, for that he hated: &
did punish: But he willed yt a testimonie should be left to
the world in what blindnes man falleth, when he declineth
from God, and from his true honor, of which fearfull
example, you, and your sect oght to take hede.
               The Israelites in killing their childrē,Ironia
                        •
                     
                   no doubte did
euen agre with gods will and were of one mynde with
his iust iudgementes, as you declare your selues to be,
in spewing forth these horrible blasphemies, agaīst his
supreme Maiestie. For as they leauing the plaine will
of God, declared in his law concerning their oblations,
and making of sacrifice, in a blinde zeale to honor God
as they pretended with sacrifices more precious, and acceptable,
(because their children to them were more
deare thē oxen, or bullockes) as they, I say in so doing
leaue to vs a fearefull example of gods iudgementes. So
do you by these your horrible blasphemies, wc in furie
iesting, & skoffing ye vomit furth against God, his eternall
trueth, & against, the true professors of the same,
and thus farre I cōfesse was gods most iust will fulfilled
in thē, as also it is (& here after shalbe) fulfilled in you.
That because they in ye vanitie of their imaginatiōs, d
                     •
                  
                  clined

frō gods will reueled, God of his iustice wolde make
thē spectacles to all ages folowing, what were his
                     •
                  iudgementes
(as I haue said) against idolaters. Euē so ye neither
content yt God shal vse his creatures, as best serueth
for his glory, nether yet that any iustice be in his eternall
God head to the which your reason can not atteine,
are giuen ouer by gods will into reprobate myndes,
thus horribly to blaspheme his Maiestie: to admonish
the generation present, and to come, that with greater
sobrietie, more feare, and reuerēce they speake, ād thinke
of those mysteries, that be incōprehensible vnto mā.
               I haue before declared that no man leauing the will
of God reueled in his worde, doth ether obey him, ether
yet please him, and so can he neuer be of one mynd wt
God that committeth thinges forbiden by his word.
But why that God forbiddeth iniquitie to all (which also
in all men he hateth) and yet that betwext his vessels
of mercie, and the vessels of wrath he maketh such
difference, that to the one he giueth medicine and purgation
against the natural venom, so effectually that
it worketh their saluation in the ende: and to the other
he denieth that grace,Rom. 9 he will not make you, nor any of
your faction, further of counsell, then he hath expressed
in these wordes: He hath mercie on whom he will haue
mecie, and whom he will, him he maketh hard hearted.
               That sathan hath so enraged you that vpon that doctrine
which the holy Gost most euidently doth teach,To the 9
ye dare gather this abhominable absurditie, that God
and whicked idolaters are both of one mynde, that they
both inwardly and owtwardly do obey him, ye haue
iust cause not onely to be ashamed, but also to quake,
tremble, and feare, for that horrible blindnes wherinto
you are fallen, and for those iust vēgeances, which your
pride doth craue of gods iustice. Iust art thou o• Lord
in all thy workes.To the IO Isa. 45 To your question, asking by what
meanes should the Lord stirre vp the mynde of the king
of the Medes to destroy Babylon, who had before a desyre

ready bent to do the same, but by suffering, and
permitting him. To this question (I say) doth 
                     •
                  sai the
Prophe
                     •
                   answer.Is
                        •
                     . 47 saying: Thus saith the Lord vnto Cyrus
his anointed, whose right hand I haue holden,
to subdue nations before him: therefor will I weaken
the loynes of kings, and open the doores before
him, & the gates shall not be shut. I will go before thee
and make the crooked streight, I will breake the brasen
doores, and burst ye y
                     •
                  one barres. And I will giue ye treasures
of darknes, and the thinges hidde in secrete places
&c. If there be in you ether modestie or aptnes to learn,
this is sufficient to instruct you, how God raysed vp his
spirite, which before was redy bent to destroy Babylon,
to witte, in giuing vnto him so prosperous succes, that
no impedimēt was able to resist, or withstād him. which
thing God did not by and ydle permission, or sufferance
as ye imagine, but by his power which did effectually
worke in all that his iourney, as the Prophet here, & in
many other places doth witnes. Which thing doth Cyrus
him selfe also confesse,Ezra. 1 in these wordes. The Lord
God of heauen, hath giuē me all the kingdomes of the
earth, & he hath commanded me to build him an house
in Ierusalem, which is in Iudah. And the holy Gost affirmeth,
that ye Lord did stirre vp ye spirit of Cyrus king
of Persia to cause this proclamation to be made. Dare
you say that to giue all the kindomes of ye earth to one
man, is nothing els but to suffre him to ryue, and posses
them at his appetites?Dan. 2 Daniel affirmeth the cōtrary
saying: The name of God be praised for euer and 
                     •
                  uer:
for wisedome and strength are his. And he changeth
the tymes and seasons: he taketh away kings: he setteth
vp kinges: he giueth wisedome to the wise, and vnderstanding
to those that vnderstand &c. And Dauid also
saith. he that raiseth the nedie oute of the dust and lifteth
vp ye poore out of the dung, that he may sette him
with the princes, euen with the princes of his people.
And therefore, because the holy Gost giueth to gods

prudence, and working power, that which you most wickedly
attribute to his permission, or ydle sufferance, I
feare not to say, that as God stirred vp Cyrus spirite effectualy
mouing it to giue libertie, and commandement
to his people to returne to Ierusalem, and to restore the
temple, so did he also stirre vp his spirit in enterprising
his first iourney against Babylon, in taking frō him all
feare indewing him with an heroicall,Isa. 45 and bold spirite,
(as God him selfe saith: I girded the thogh thou hast
not knowen me) and giuing to him so fortunate succes,
that all was subiecte to his empire. And therefor albeit,
tenne thousand times ye will aske: What nedeth God to mou
                        •
                     
the wicked to do wickedly, which, being giuen ouer of God, imagineth
nothing but wickednes, & his master the deuill sl
                        •
                     peth neuer? Yet will
I answere, that as to destroye Babylon, in so farre as it
was gods worke, it was no wicked dede, but his most iust
iudgement. So albeit Cyrus had neuer bene so much
enraged against Chaldea, ether by his owne pride, ether
yet by sathan, that nether of both could haue broght any
thing to passe, except that the Lord had decreed to
perfourme his worke in Babylon,I
                        •
                     r. 51 as he him selfe did
threaten, saying: Behold, I come vnto the o• thou destroying
mountaine, saith the Lord, which destroyest
all the earth, I will stretche oute myn hand vpon thee
and rolle the downe from the rockes, and will make
the a burnt mountaine. They shall not take of the a
stone for a corner, nor a stone for fundations, but thou
shalt be destroyed for euer, saith the Lord &c. If you
see nothing in these and other such threateninges of
God, but a permission onely, I can not cease to say that
you are more then blinde. But now to that which folo
weth in these wordes.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               To that which ye alledge of the Prophet Isai:The
                        ••
                      argumen
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   harden the heartes of
this people &c.The 43. section. for the better vnderstanding of tha
                     •
                   place. we must
note that which is written in the chapter going afore: howe the Lord
had chosen this people and planted them as a vineyarde and called

all Israel to be iudge betwext him and his v
                     •
                  neyard, what more could
haue bene donne for it, then he had donne, and yet when he looked, for
frute of equitie and right
                     •
                  ousnes, to there was wrong, and mys
                     •
                  rie, where
vpon followed their indura
                     •
                  s
                     •
                  , for they were hardened of the lord, that is,
as afo
                     •
                   is sade, God gaue them ouer, to their own heartes lust
                     •
                  s. Further
where he saieth to the Prophet, hard
                     •
                   their heartes, we must alwaies consider
that their heartes were alredye hardened. which their wickednes
did plainely declare. yet hath he cōmanded the Prophet to do his office, not
to make their heartes hard. for that belongeth 
                     •
                  nelie to God
                     •
                   who giuing 
them 
                     •
                  uer to their heartes lustes hath alredy ha
                     •
                  dnede them, but the
office of a Prophe
                     •
                  e was to
                     •
                   shew them the hardnes of their har
                     •
                  es so
when he saiethe harden their heartes, it i
                     •
                   as muche, as shew and declare
vnto them the hardnes of their heartes.Leui. 13 The like phrase of spea
                     •
                  che
haue we in Le
                     •
                  it. 13. If the priest see that the scab is growne abr
                     •
                  
                  de
in the ski
                     •
                  me, the priest shall make him vncleane. how should
the priest make him vncleane, who is alredye vncleane, and whose
fleshe he durst not touche, but by declaring him to be vncleane. So how 
should the Prophet harden their heartes whose heartes were hardened alredy,
and whose heartes he could not touche, but by declaring 
                     •
                  hem to be
hard hear
                     •
                  ed. So saieth the Lord to Ieremie, driue this people away,
that they may go oute of my sight, s
                     •
                  m to death, som to the swerd, some
to hunger some to captiu
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  e, this was not the office of the Prophet, which
the Caldes executed, but the Prophet was here commanded,Iere. 15 to shew
that for their wickednes, they should be driuen away some to death, some
to the swerd, some to hunger and some to captiuitie. So Ieremie tooke the 
cuppe out of the lordes hand, and made all people drinke thereof 
                     •
                  nto
whom the Lord sent him, where there be m
                     •
                   nations rec
                     •
                  ned, then euer
Ieremi
                     •
                   did see with his corp
                     •
                  rall eyes: this place therefore must be
vnderstand, as the others conforme to the office of the Prophe
                     •
                  , which
was to shewe them that for their wickednes they should drink of the
cupp
                     •
                   of the 
                     •
                  ordes wrathe which appereth more plainely, by that which
followeth, where he sayeth if they will not receaus the cuppe of thy hand 
and dr
                     •
                  nck it, that is if they will not take warning by the &c. This interpretation
is conforme to the phrase of the scripture, nether is it contrary
to any part of the word. but if any man hath a better vnderstanding,
lett him vse is t
                     •
                   the glory of God. Of these thinges alredy spoken

                     •
                  t is sufficiently proued, that God hath reprobat, and cast away no 
man before the foundation of the world, but as he hath crea
                     •
                  ed man like
vnto his own image, so he will the deathe of none, but that all should be
saued, nether is he 
                     •
                  he author or mouer to any euill, which with long pacience
suffereth wickednes, to drawe men to repentance, nether willeth he 
any thing contrary, to that which is expressed in his word. for at God is
constant and immutable, of this his holy will he ha
                     •
                  he vttered and declared
vnto man to knowe, the rest reserued he vnto him se
                     •
                  f, for as much as

no man is able to c
                     •
                  prehēd the pr
                     •
                  funditie and depth thereof, therefor oght
no man to go about to proue or improue any thing by that which is vnknowen
to him, wherefor they which affirme, and teache that 
                     •
                  od ha
                     •
                  h
 orde
                     •
                  ned men a fore the fundation of the world to be damned so that by no
meanes they can be saued, for suche is his secr
                     •
                  te will, not with standing
be declareth the cōtrary in h
                     •
                  s word, they must nedes haue an euill opinion
of God, and therefore oght all men of duetie to abho
                     •
                  re their deuilishe doctrine.
 And because I haue said that they haue an euill opinion of God, I
haue added here a discription of 
                     •
                  hose careles libertines 
                     ••
                  d conforme to
their doctrine in all pointes, and a discription of the true God, wherby it
may appere euen vnto the simple howe abhominable their doctrine and opinion
in this mater is.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               What soeuer shalbe redde in the hole scriptures,To the 
                        •
                     
                   you
shall neuer be able to proue that in these wordes of Isaie,
(Go, and harden the heartes of this people) is nothing
els meant, but that the Prophete was onely commanded
to declare vnto them their blindnes, and hardnes
of heart. for wher soeuer mention is made of the
difference betwext the elect, and the reprobate, this vertue
is attributed to the word, that it doth illuminate the
eyes, and mollifie the heartes of the one, by the power
of the holy Gost: and by the contrarie that it doth excecate,
and more harden the other by reason of their corrupt
nature, to the which they are iustly left. The Euangelist
saint Iohn making mention, that the Iewes did
not beleue in Christ Iesus, albeit that they had sene his
wonderous workes, addeth this cause: therefore (saith
                     •
                  
he) they could not beleue,Iohn 12 because Isaiah had said: He
hath blinded their eyes, & hardened their heartes, that
they should not see with their eyes, nor vnderstand in
their heartes, and be conuerted, that I may heale them.
Here doth the Euangelist attribute to the Prophet, not
onely that he declared their blindnes, but that God by
him did in verydede iustly blind their eyes, and harden
their heartes. But this shall more plainly appere in examining
the reasons, and scriptures which ye alledge for
proofe of your interpretation.
               First say you, their heartes 
                        •
                     ere alredy hardened which their

wickednes did plainely declare, yet hath he commanded the Prophet to
do his office not to make their heartes hard, for that bel
                        •
                     ngeth onely to
God who giuing them ouer to their heartes lustes he alredy hardened
them. And so ye conclude that the Prophet did onely declare
vnto them the hardenes of their heartes.Answer We do
not deny but that their heartes were hardened before,
and that iustly for their iniquities sake they were giuen
ouer to their heartes lustes. But whether they were so
hardened before the preaching of the Prophet, that after
they could be not harder, I greately doubte. Yea I nothing
doubte to affirme, but that euen as the claye by
the heate of the Sunne, becometh more hard, and more
hard, or as the branch cutte of the natural stock doth
more & more wither, vntill that no kinde of sappe, nor
moisture doth remaine, euen so I say do the reprobate
from time, to time become more obstinate, more blinde,
more hard, and more cruell, and that by the word, wc
doth plainely rebuke their iniquitie, and euidenly declare
whose children their are. Exāples in scripture hereof
are manifest: Some lenitie, and gētlenes appered in
Pharao, toward the people of Israel before that Moses,
at gods commandement required their libertie. But
that will, and word of God commanding him to let his
people go and serue God in the wildernes, did so quicklye
worke in the heart of that reprobate,Exo. 5. 
                        •
                     
                   that the greater
hardnes of his heart, was sodenlye felt by the Israelites,
to their greate grief and grudging disconfort.
               In the people of Israel, in their elders, Priestes, and
counsell, appered some face of iustice, when Stephan was
accused, before that he pronounced these wordes: ye stiffenecked,
and vncircumcised in heart, and eares, you
haue euer resisted, the holy Gost, euē as your fathers haue
resisted,Act. 7 so do you: whom of the Prophetes haue not
your fathers persecuted? and they haue slayn them, whiche
shewed before of the cōming of yt iust, whom ye
haue now betraied, & murthered. Before this sentence (I
say) there appered some face of iustice, but what ensued

the holy Gost doth witnes, saying: whē they heard these
thinges their heartes brast for anger and they gnashed
at him with their tethe. And after also that he gaue
a more plaine confession of Christe Iesus, of his exaltation,
glory, power, and Maiestie, they cried out wt a great
voyce, they stopped their eares, they as wolues enraged
russhed vpon him, wt one consent, and so without all ordre
of iustice, did stone him to death. If ye cōfesse not yt
the word of God, proceding frō the mouth of Stephen,
did not more harden them, who no doubte were hardened
before, you deny a trueth that is more then euidēt.
Diuers places more I might adduce for the same purpose, but (hauing respect to breuitie) I stand content with
th
                     •
                  se two, which I doubte nothing, are sufficient to proue,
that men, that be alredy hardened, yet by the comming
of the plaine word, which rebuketh their iniquitie,
they become more hard. As the owle being blind, euen
when she appereth to see best in the night season,
but yet in ye day time, she is more blinded, bacause that
the weaknes of her eyes, can not abide the bright beames
of the sunne. And euē so it is wt the reprobate, they
are alwaies blind, and hard heared, but whē the light of
God doth most plainely shine before thē or when they
are called frō iniquititie to vertue, then becometh the
word of glad tidinges to thē, a verie sauor of death, by
the wc, they are both more blinded, and more hardened.
And so in your first reason we dissent frō you in yt, that
you seme to affirme, that because ye reprobate are once
hardened, therefore they cā be no more hardened. Your
second reason is, that because it belōgeth to God onely to make hard
their heartes, th
                        •
                     t therefor there resteth nothing to the Prophetes, but to
shew vnto them the hardnes of their hartes. I am glad that once
ye will cōfesse yt it is nothing repugning to gods good
nature,Answer for iust causes, to harden the heart, and to make
blind ye eyes of the reprobate. But yt therfore nothing
resteth to ye Prophetes or Apostles, but onely to declare
vnto mē their hardnes I cā not admitte. For we do find yt
God doth so cōmunicate his power wt his true messingers,

and embassadours, that what soeuer they lowse in
earth, he doth lowse in ye heauē, & what soeuer they bynd
in earth, he bindeth in heauē, whose sinnes they remitte,
they are remitted, & whose sinnes they reteine, they
are reteined. The Lord him selfe saith vnto Ieremie:I
                        •
                     re. 
                        •
                     
                  
Behold I haue put my wordes in thy mouth, and I haue
ordeined thee aboue nations, and kindomes, that thou
maiest roote out, destroy, & scatter, and that yu maist also
build vp, and plant. And vnto Paul it was said: And now I
shall deliuer the from the natiōs, to ye which I send thee
that thou maist open the eyes of those that be blind,
that they may conuert from darknes vnto light, and
from the power of fathan vnto God. These wordes do
witnes that the effectuall power of God doth work with
the word, which he putteth in the mouthes of his true
messingers, in so much that ether it doth edifie, lighten,
or mollifie to saluation, or els it doth destroy, darken,
and hardē. For the word of God is of ye nature of Christe
Iesus, & he is not onely come to illuminate, and to raise
vp, but also to make blind, and to beate downe, as he
him selfe doth witnes, saying, I am come to iudgement
into this world, yt those that see not shall see & that those
that see shalbe blind. And Simeon saith:Luke. Ma
                        •
                     . 21 Behold this
is he yt is put in resurrection, & in ruine of many in Israel.
In so much, that vpon whō that stone of offense falleth,
it shall burste him to powder. And therefore we can
not admitte that the ministerie of his blessed word preached,
or published by his faithfull messingers, be nothing
els but a simple declaration what men be. No, we
know that it is the power of God to saluatiō of all those
y• beleue, that the message of reconciliation is put in
their mouthes, that the word wc they preach, hath such
efficacie, & strength that it deuideth asunder y• ioyntes,
& sinewes, ye bones frō the marye, that ye weapons of their
warrefare are not carnall,1. Co. 1
                        •
                     . but are power in God to the
beating downe of all strōg holdes, by the which, the true
messingers beat down all counselles, & all height which

is raysed vp against the knowledge of God, by the which
also they lead into bondage all cogitatiōs to obey
Christe. we know further that they haue vēgeāce in readynes
against all inobedience.Apo. 10 That fire passeth forth
of their mouthes which deuoureth their enemies, that
they haue power to shutte the heauen that rayne descend
not in the daies of their prophecie. That gods
power both in the one sort, and in the other, is cōteined
with his word euen preached, pronounced, and fore spoken
by his messingers, do all exāples in gods scriptures
witnes. At the praier,3. King. 18 and prophecie of Elias was the heeauen
both shut, and opened: fire descended frō heauen,
& cōsumed those vngodly souldiours wt their captaines.
               At the curse of Eliseus did beares deuoure 
                     〈◊〉
                   childrē
that mocked him.4. Kin. 1 The wordes of Isai, Ieremy, and Ezechiel,
albeit (for the time that they spake) they were contemned,
yet had they such force, and effect, yt no strēgth
was able to gainestād that, which they had pronounced.
At Peters word, Ananias, and Saphira did sodainlye dye.
Paule by his sentēce made Elimas the sorcerer blinde,
and so forth, the exāples be almost without nōbre, that
declare yt gods power is ioyned wt his worde, not onely
in sauing (wc I thinck you will admitte) but also in punishing
& destroying. If you thinke it fearefull yt gods
holy word shall haue this power, and effect, to kill, to
blind, and to harden. Remembre first, the seuere iudgemētes
of God against sinne, and often call to minde that
the fault, nor chiefe cause is not in the word, but in the
subiect, and person, in whom it falleth. The word falling
in to ye heart of the elect, doth mollifie, & illuminate, as
before is said, but falling in to the heart of the reprobate,
it doth harden & more excecate the same, by reason
of the qualitie, and incurable corruption of the persone
               And thus in your second reason, we do vtterly dissent
from you
                     •
                   & feare not to affirme, yt gods true Prophetes,
& messingets, do not onely declare what mē be
                     •
                   but yt by
the word, which is cōmitted to their charge, effectually

they worke ether lyght,To the 2. 3. 4. or darknes, life, or death, yea saluation,
or damnation. The text of Leuiticus serueth you
nothing, and ye text of Ieremie is expressely against you.
For the hiegh Priest is not commaded to go to a mā, in
whom no leprosie appered, and to pronounce, what after
shall become of him: but the man in whom there is apperant
signes of lepro
                     •
                  ie, is cōmanded to be ledde to the
Priestes, who are commāded to pronounce according to
the signes wc they see. Cōsidre I besech you, the difference
betwene the office of the one, & the office of y• other
                     •
                  
the sentence of the one, and the sentēce of the other, the
one (yt is the Priestes) go not, nether are they sent, to seke
those yt haue apperance, or suspicion of leprosie. But
the Prophet is sent by God, to thē that then was called
the people of God, in whō no man could haue suspected
such blindnes, such hardnes of heart, & such rebellion as
the Prophet is cōmāded to threatē. The Priestes did not
nor might not pronoūce sentēce against a mā, in whom
manifest signes of leprosie appered not, yea triall must
be taken, whether it be leprosie, or not: But the Prophet
is cōmanded to go to that people, who held them selues
cleane, and before all triall, to pronounce that sharp sentence,
you shall heare wt your eares, and shall not vnderstand,
you shall plainely see, and yet shall not perceaue,
the heart of this people is hardened. Was there anysuch
cōmandemēt or charge giuen to ye priestes? Might any
of them haue said, to any man yt appered to be cleane, &c
whole, thou shalt be leprous, I pronounce the sentence
which thou shalt not escape? I trust not. Then for the diuersitie
as well of their offices, as of the sentēces which
they pronounced the phrases must be diuers.
               Where ye affirme that ye Prophet could not touch their
heartes, but by declaring thē to be hard hearted, ye seme
not to vnderstand what is the vertue and power of gods
word pronounced euē by the mouth of man, wc (as before
we haue declared) pearceth to ye depest secret that lieth
within the heart. Yea and worketh that thing, wc the Pro

phete pronounceth, and speaketh, how vnapperāt that euer
it be to mans reason, or how stowtly and stubburnly
that euer the wicked resist. Did not the wordes of Elias
spoken vnto Achab aftre ye murtherīg of Naboth, touch
his heart? yes, the very hypocrite him selfe had some
sense and feling of gods iust wrath. And both he and his
posteritie, for all his princely pompe, did after fele the
veritie of them. To witte dogges did licke his blood,
the flesh of Iesabell was eaten by dogges, his children,
and hole posteritie were rooted out of Israell. And thus
did the wordes of the Prophete touch his heart (in the
time when they were spokē) with a certeine feare, stupiditie,
and trembling. which wordes were after of such
power, strength, and veritie, that no male children were
left aliue to Achab in Israel. And the same is true of Ieremies
wordes
                     •
                   & sentence spoken against diuers natiōs,
whose faces albeit he neuer saw, yet did he so potently
touch their heartes, that how soeuer they despised his
threateninges, yet was no word vainely spoken, but in
effect was euery thing complete, as he pronounced. And
wonder it is that ye are ignorant in this vertue of gods
word, seing that ye confesse that Ieremie toke the cuppe
from the Lordes hand,lere. 25 which he was commanded to giue
to all nations, yt they might drinke the cuppe of the
Lordes wrath, saing vnto them: Drincke, & be drucken,
and spew, and fall, and rise no more, becaus of the swerd
wc I will send among you. Was this I praye you a simple
declaration
                     •
                   or was it not rather a sentence & decree so
effectuall, that albeit nether Babylon, nether any other
proud and whicked nation wold for that time beleue it,
yet came it most effectually to passe? And I say yt these
wordes of Ieremie do manifestly repugne to your interpretation,
& do sufficiētly proue yt those wordes spoken
to Isai, are otherwise to be vnderstād, then yt he was commanded
onely to declare what the people were. For as
the wordes of Ieremie had this effect, yt according as he
spake, so came ye destruction vpon those proud natiōs,
so lykewise had the wordes of God spoken to Isai, the

same effect, which he pronounced. To the one he said,
thou shalt giue vnto them the cuppe of my wrath, that
they may drinke it. The Prophet without feare did obey
his commandement, and God did faithfully performe,
what so euer his messinger had pronounced. Euen
so did God command Isai to blind, and harden, that stubborn,
and rebellious generation of the Iewes, by the preaching
of his Law, and by rebuking of their manifest impietie.
And so he did, God working all to his glory, according
to his eternall purpose. And this because your 
interpretation is not sufficiētly confirmed by any phrase
of the scripture, which ye haue alledged ād also because
it repugneth to the scriptures which before I haue adduced,To ye 
                     
                        •
                      6. 7. 8.
we can not admitte it. Against your complexion
or Epilogue, which is nothing but a superfluous repetition
of those thinges, which sufficiently ye haue not
proued (althogh you so bragge) we say, that as God by
his eternal word, and power infinite, hath created al thinges,
so hath he by his wisedom incomprehensible so disposed
all thinges
                     •
                  , yt as nothing was created for the self,
so was nothing the appointer of the self to serue God, as
his glory required. But he in his eternal counsel appointed
the end to euery creature, to the which they shal once
atteine, by such meanes, as he most iustly hath appointed.
And therfor seing his glorie doth no lesse require
his iust iudgemētes, then his superaboūdant mercie
to be knowen, he hath in his eternal counsel elected,
some, and reiected others, euē before ye foundatiōs of ye
world. And albeit he created man after his own image,
yet did God neuer determine yt mankind should stād in
Adam, but his iust coūsell and purpose was that all men
should fall in Adam, that the elect might know the price
of their saluation Christe Iesus, in whō they were elected,
before yt in Adam actualy they did fall, or were created.
And so God willing to make his glorie to shine in
al, hath prepared some vessels of mercie, and some of wrath.
to ye one he hath frely giuē life euerlastīg in Christ

Iesus his sonne. The other he hath for iust causes so reiected,
that albeit with long pacience, he suffereth their
manifest rebellion, yet in the finall iudgement he shall
commād them to go to the fire that neuer shalbe quenched.
And this will and counsel of God is neither secret,
nor hidde from his Church, but is in his word most manifestly
reueled: ād therfor of it we feare not to affirme,
that euen in the first promise, and euer since hath God
made a plaine distinction betwext the elect, and the reprobate,
so that the purpose and counsell, which before
was hidde in God, was in time manifested vnto man. Which
will and counsell of God (becaus it is constant and
immutable, like as God him selfe is) must of necessitie
take effect, and therfor I boldly affirme, that neither can
any whom God in his eternal purpose hath reprobated,
become the elect, and so be saued, neither yet can any of
Christes elect nombre to life euerlasting, be reprobated,
and so come to finall perdition. We further saye, that albeit
gods will in the selfe, be one, to witte, the manifestation
of his own glorie, yet as touching his creatures it
hath diuers respectes, for God will the saluation of some,
and he also will the iust 
                     •
                  ondemnation of others.
And the contrarie of this doth God neuer declare in his
word, but rather doth most plainely reuele it. And therfore
this his godlie will is not called secrete, as that it is
not expressed in his word: but because that in his word
there is no cause assigned (gods good will onely excepted)
why he hath chosen some, and reiected others. And
this knowledge is so necessarie to a Christian, that without
the same, ca the heart of man neuer be sufficiētly
subiected vnto God, nether can he rendre vnto him due
praise and honor, except that he acknowledge, and confesse.
yt God him selfe hath made differēce, betwext him,
& others. To your odious termes, & dispitefull railing,
I briefely say at this time:To the 8. THE LORD shall iudge.
To my knowledge there resteth no notable scripture, which
ye haue alledged (or rather abused) for confirmatiō
                  
of your error which is not sufficiētly answered, two places
excepted. The one is of Ezechiel, affirmig that God
will not the death of a sinner, the other conteineth the
wordes of Paul saying: God will all men to be saued, which
places because you recite them here in the description
of him, whom you call the true God I thoght it expedient
to delay til this opportunitie, to ye end that h
                     •
                  
                  uing
to fight (as it were face, to face) with the deuil him
self, I might haue some cōfort of my God in entreating
some place of his holie scriptures. Thus you procede
with a mouth most execrable, and blasphemous.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE,
               The properties of the God of the careles by necessitie.The 44. section Their gods wrath
exced
                     •
                  th all his workes for he hath reprobate the most part of the
world, afore the foundation of the world. be is slowe vnto mercy and ready
to wr
                     •
                  the, for he will not be intreated to saue any of them whom he
bath reprobate afore, but of necessitie do, what they can, they must be damned,
ne
                     •
                  ther is he omnip
                     •
                  tont, which may do, and leaue vndone▪ what pleaseth
him, for he is bound 
                     •
                  y 
                     •
                  is 
                     •
                  wn absolut ordinance and infallible foresight 
to do onely all things as they be donne, and becaus 
                     〈◊〉
                   so pleased him to 
she we his power & strength he styrred up Pharao & many mo to do wickedly

                     •
                  e giueth wicked commandement, and euill thoghtes to Semei, and
many other. And therafter plagued them for their labor, onely because
they were wicked instruments to work his will for he made them naughtie
vesselles 
                     〈◊〉
                   commit all abomination, neither could they choose but work
wickedly being 
                     •
                  is vesseles of wrath: he hathe two willes, 
                     •
                  ne contrary
to an other, for he saieth one thing and thinke
                     •
                  h another. he is worse the
                     •
                  
the deuill, for not onely tempteth 
                     •
                  e to do euill, but compellet
                     •
                   by immutable
fore ordinance and secret wil without which, no thing can be do
                     ••
                  e.
he is the prince of darknes, for frome him com
                     •
                   euill thoghtes, which are
darknes.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               Because that now I haue to do not onely with a
blasphemer, but euē (as it were) with a deuill incarnate,
my first and chief defence, is to say, the Lord putte silēce
to the 
                     •
                   Sathan. The Lord confound thy dispiteful counselles
by the which thou studiest to peruert the righteous
way of the eternall God.
               But now of thee,To ye 1 ô blasphemous mouth, I aske, if
thou be able to forge to the, and to thy pestilent facti
                     •
                  ,

an other God, then that God who most iustly did drowne,
and destroy by water, all liuing creatures in earth,
except so many, as were preserued in the arke with Noah
who also did destroye by fire from heauen Sodom, and
Gomorra, with the cities 
                     •
                  diacent, and the hole inhabitantes
of the same (Lot and his two daughters onely
reserued
                     •
                  ) who further by the space of four thousand
yeres, did suffre all nations to walk in their owne wayes,
reueling onely his good will, and the light of his word,
to the sede of Abraham (to those that descended of Iacob
I meane) Canst thow I say forge to thy self another
God, then this eternall maiestie of our God whom we
do reuerence, in whom we trust, and most stedfastly beleue,
whose Sonne Christ Iesus we preach to be the onely
sauiour of his Church, and whose eternall veritie we
mainteine, not onely against Iewe, Turke, and Papist,
but also against you enraged anabaptistes, who can admitte
in God no iustice, which is not subiect to the
reach of your reason? Darest thou, and thy conspiracie
stand vp, and accuse God of crueltie, because that in these
his workes, thou canst not deny, but that mo were punished,
then were preserued, mo were left in darknes,
then were called to the true light? Shall not his mercie
excede all his workes, except that he saue the Deuill, ād
those that iustely be reprobated as he is? Stoupe Sathan
vnder the empire of our Soueraigne God,To ye 2. whose will is
so free, that nothing is able to constreigne, or binde it.
For that is onely libertie, that is not subiect to mutabilitie,
to the inconstancie or appetites of others,What is 
                        〈◊〉
                     . as
most blasphemously you wold imagin God to be in his
election and most iust reprobation: by the which in despite
of Sathā,To ye 3 of thee his slaue, and sonne, and of all thy
sect, he will declare his glorie, as well in punishing
with tormentes for euer such blasphemers, as you be,
as in shewing the riches of his glorie to the members
of his deare Sonne, who onely depend vpon Christe Iesus,
and vpon his iustice.
               
                  
To purge my God from that iniustice,To ye 4. 5. or from
those absurdities, which thou woldest impute vpon his
eternall maiestie, I will 
                     •
                  ot labor, lest that ether I should
seme to doubte of our owne cause, ether yet to be sollicite,
for the defense of our eternall God. And therfor
seing that ye declare your selues not men ignorant, willing
to Iearne, but deuilles enraged against God, against
his eternall, and infinite iustice, as I began, so do I finish.
The Lord confound thee Sathan. The Lord confound
you enraged dogges, which so impudently dare barcke,
against the most iust iudgementes of God. And thus
leauing you to the handes of him, who sodanely shall
reuenge his iustice from your blasphemies. For the cause
of the Simple I say, First, that most maliciously ye accuse
vs, as that we should affirme God to be slow to mercy,
and readie to wrath, which blasphemy we protest before
God, before his holy Angelles in heauen; and before
his Church here in earth, did neuer enter into our
heart. For the contrarie thereof we daily see, and perceaue,
not onely in our selues, to whom most mercifully
he remitteth the multitude of our sinnes, but also in
the most cruell ennemies of his Church.
               We do not define, what nombre God hath elected
to life, nether yet what nombre presently God hath reprobated.
Onely we stand content, with that, which the
holy Gost hath reueled openly, to witte that their be
both elect, and reprobate.
               That the elect can not finally perish, nether yet that
the reprobate can euer be saued, we constantly affirme.
But we adde the causes, to wit that because the one sort
is giuen to Christ Iesus by ye free gift of God his father,
before all times: therfor in time they come vnto hī, by
power of whose spirit, they are regenerate, their darkenes
is expelled, and from vertue, they procede to vertue,
till finally they attein to the glory promised. As ye other
sorte is left in their own corruption, so can they do nothi
                     •
                  g
but obey their father ye deuil, in whose bōdage they

iustely are left. And so where ye burden vs, that we say,
let the reprobate do what they can, yet they must be dā
                  ned,
ye do most shamefully belie vs. For we saye, and
teach, that who so euer declineth from euill, and constantly
to the end doth good, shall most certenly be saued.
But our doctrine is thi
                     •
                  , that because the reprobate
haue not the spirite of regeneration, therfor they can
not do those workes that be acceptable before God.
               How God is almightie, and omnipotēt, we haue before
confessed, to witt, that as he in his eternall wisedom
foreseeth, and appointeth all thinges, so doth his power
put all thinges in execution, how, and when it best pleaseth
him. Neither can his wisedom, will, nor counsels
be subiect to any mutabilitie, vnstablenes, or chāge. For
if it so were then his godly wil and counsels, did not depend
vpon him self, but vpon his creatures, which is more
then absurd.
               Nether to Pharao, neither to Semei, neither yet to
any other reprobate, did, or doth God giue, either wicked
commandement or euill thoght. But those wicked
thoghtes, and euill motions, which be in them of their
euill nature, and are stirred vp by the instigation of the
deuill, as he doeth, not purge them, so doth his wisedom
vse them well to his owne glorie, to the exercise
of his children, and to the comfort of his Church.
In so much that the verie tyranny of Pharao, the
cursing of Semei, and the incest of Absalom in so farre
as they were gods workes, they were iust, and holy,
because they were iust punishmentes of their sinnes,
an exercise for his children, and some part also of his
fatherly correction for their offenses. To the rest of
your vanitie, I will not answere, not because I feare your
sophisticall subtilitie, but because I will not (except that
yet I be further prouoked) nether by tongue, nether yet
by penne once name or expresse your horrible blasphe
mies. Which manifestly do witnes and declare, that you
(as dogges enraged) without all reuerence, do barke against

God, because his workes do surmount your capacitie.
The Lord speadely call you to repētance, or els so
bridle your venemous tongues, that they be not able
further to infect. Now to the rest.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               The properties of the true God,The 45. section. God his mercie exceadeth all his workes
he hath made man like to h
                     ••
                   own image in Christe Iesus, in whom
is no dam
                     •
                  ation, he is sl
                     •
                  we vnto wrathe and readie to foregiue, he wilbe
intreated of all so that 
                     •
                  e biddeth all men euerie where to rep
                     •
                  nt, and

                     •
                  ffereth faith to all men he is omnipotent and may do, and leaue vndone, what 
so euer shalbe his good pleasure, 
                     •
                  ether is it his pleasure & wil, t
                     •
                  at eiher
Phara
                     •
                  , Semei, or any other do sinne and come to destruction, for he 
willeth the deathe of no creature, but willeth all men to be saued and to
come to the knowledge of the trueth, he hath but one will which is euer 
onely good, reueled in his word to them that feare him and kepe his commandementes,
nether hath he any secret will contray to this, but will performe 
what so euer goeth out
                     •
                   of his mouth
                     •
                  , he tempte
                     •
                  th no man to sinne
he is the fu
                     •
                  her of lig
                     •
                  t, and cometh to destroye the workes of the careles
libertynes God, for be abhorreth all wickednes, ād al wicked d
                     •••
                  s.
               
            
            
               ANSWERE.
               In this description of your God (whom you do terme
the true God) I do wōder of three thinges. First that
in this your description ye dissent from your greate
angel Castalio. Secondely how it is that ye haue forgotten
your selues: And last why ye omitte these properties,
which the scriptures do no lesse attribute to God,
then any that you alledge. Your master, and chief champion
Castalio (now left for your comfort) in the description
of his God thus writeth. But that God whom both
nature, and reason, and the scriptures do teach, is ready
to mercie, and slow to wrath, who hath created man, of whom
all men are borne, to his owne image, lyke to him
selfe, that he shoulde place him in Paradise, and giue to
him the blessed life. This God will that all men be saued,
and that none perish, and therfore he hath sent his
Sonne into the earth, that iustice might superabound,
wher so euer sinne hath abounded, the light of whose iustice,
doth illuminate euery mā, that cometh in to this
worlde. Wonder it is I say that ye who so
                     •
                  cōstantly haue

folowed your master in all this your worke, haue dissented
frō him, or at least omitted his wordes, in these two
poītes, wc in this case be prīcipall. For, first by his description
he will that nature, and reason, shal no les teach you
and your faction, God, then shall the scriptures. So yt he,
whose workes you be not able to cōprehend by nature,
and reason, shall not be to you the true God. And secondarily,
that except he wil all to be saued: and yt the light
of his sonnes iustice do so illuminate all men cōming
into this world, that where so euer sinne hath abounded,
there must iustice superabound, yt to you lykewise he be
no God. These be two chief pointes in this cōtrouersie.
               For we cōstantly affirme, that ye brightnes of our God
doth so blind nature, and reason (as now they be corrupted)
that the naturall mā cā neuer atteine to those thinges,
wc apperteine to God, to the knowledge of his will,
nether yet to his true honor. For we know that ye world
hath not knowen God, by wisedom, but thinking themselues
most wise, haue becomen most vaine, in so much
that they haue worshipped the creatures, more then the
Creator. And thus beleue we that nature, and reason, are
not onely vnable to leade vs to the true knowledge of
God, by the which we may atteine to life euerlasti
                     •
                  g, but
also we affirme, that they haue bene maistresses of all errors,
and idolatrie. And therfor say we that nature, and
reason, do leade men from ye true God, but are neuer able
to teach vs, nether to expresse to vs the eternall, the
trew, and euerliuing God the father of our Lord Iesus
Christe. Further we doubte not to embrase, to beleue, to
reuerēce and to honor ye maiestie of our God, who hath
made diuision, betwext one sort of men, and an other, as
plainely before we haue proued. These being two chief
pointes, in this controuersie, greate wonder it is, yt of thē
ye make no expresse mention (as Castalio doth) in this
your descriptiō. Is it because you are ashamed that such
darkenes, and such grosse ignorance should be in your
greate angell of light? Iust cause no doubte haue both
you, and he to be ashamed of your foolish imaginatiōs.

But yet I feare an other thing more, which is this. That
sodenly you will not committe the greate, and secrete
mysteries of your profession to your rude scholers. For
it might perchance offend them, if at the first ye should
affirme (as in your writinges I can shew) that saint Paul
taught a more perfect way to his scholers in secrete,The secrete doctrine of An
                        •
                     
                     baptistes thē
that wc he committed to writing, that Christ is not the
eternall Sonne of the eternal God, that the Godhead of
the holy Gost is but mannes imaginations, that Christes
kingdome shall so florish, that wicked men shal vtterly
be suppressed euen in this life, that Christes iustice
aualeth nothing▪ except man haue a personall, & perfect
iustice within him self, that man may fulfill and obey
gods holy Law, and that Christe hath no prerogatiue
aboue his brethern, except this, that he is called the first
begotten: I omitte thinges much more absurd, because I
will not offend the eares of the godly. These thinges I
say you do not sodēl
                     •
                   open to your scholers, but in the
beginning with pleasant persuasiōs of good life, of mortification,
of ye power of the spirite (wc rightly placed is a
doctrine most necessarie) ye inflābe their heartes with a
a vaine cōfidence, of their owne power, strēgth, ād iustice.
And therafter ye dissuade them frō all exercises, wc may
put them in minde of sinne, and imperfectiō, which remaineth
in mā. For nether will ye yt they frequēt the publike
preaching of ye word, neither yet ye administration
of Christes sacramentes. For such thinges to yor perfect
mē are nothing necessarie. But to be short, in the end ye
brīg thē to ye plaine contēpt of gods free graces offered,
& giuē to his elect in Christ Iesus. For in ye end these be
yor blasphemous voices openly affirmed, in your priuie
assēblies: what is our ioye? but yt we fele no sinne abidi
                     •
                  g
in vs: what is our cōfort, but that we be able to fulfil the
law? and what is our reioising? but that we haue a iustice
perfect in our selues. And thus seking to establish your
own iustice, nether cā you, nor your scholers be subiect
to ye iustice of God. But (omittig this) I returne to your
deceitfull craft, ye dare not in expres wordes affirme the

vaine description of your masters God, but yet couertly
ye say as much (as after shall appere): in which thing, as
ye declare your selues ingrate and vnthāckfull, that will
not support your reuerend master in this his battell, wt
your open patrocini
                     •
                   and plaine defense, so do ye shew
yor selues most vnworthye of credit amongest gods children.
For who can credit those teachers, that in ye beginning
and for their foundation, & principalles ioyne together
darkenes, and light, lies, and veritie, yea that begin
with a manifest vntrueth (as doth your Master Castalio)
affirming, that nature, and reason, do teach ye true
God vnto vs, wc is a manifest lie, as before we haue proued.
If ye say, he addeth also that the scriptures do teach
God vnto vs: I answer that the more is his impudencie,
and more dangerous is his venom. For what impudencie
is it, to preferre corrupt nature, and blind reason to
gods scriptures, in such manifestation of God, as our saluation
requireth? Did Moses, Isai, or Christe Iesus wil
the ignorant to search nature, or to consult with reason
who should be the Messias promised? or did they not
alwayes send such as lacked light to the word which was
reueled, to the law, and to the Prophetes, ād to the scriptures,
which did beare record of Christ Iesus, who is the
onely way, by the which men come to the true knowledge
of the Father? True it is that the Gentiles by contemplation
of the creatures, atteined to that knowledge,
that there was a God: but how litle this knowledge
serued for their saluation the Apostle doth witnes. And
therfore I say that your Master is more then impudēt, vt
dare preferre nature, and reason, to gods scriptures. And
further his venom (in so saing) is more dāgerous, then
if plainely he had affirmed, that nature, & reasone alone
had bene sufficient to haue instructed man in al thinges
apperteining to saluation. For so declaring him self
the simple should haue auoyded that error, as a pestilēce
most pernicious. But now in ioining together those
thinges which God hath so manifestly deuided, as

he hath deuided light from darcknes, he doth nothing
els, but as a traiterous murtherer mixe, and mingle poison,
with swete lyquore. For in ioining nature, and reason,
with gods scriptures, in the manifestatiō of God to
mans saluation, he doth plainely witnes, that the naturall
man may boldly pronounce that those workes be
none of gods, wherof reason can not see a iust cause, why
so they should be wroght. For the fall of Adam say you,
and, the induration of Pharao, the deceauing of Achab,
and such others, were none of gods workes. But they came
by his permission and why so? Because the naturall
man can not see how such workes can agree, with gods
goodnes, and iustice. And thus ye deny him to be the
true God, who doth not laye before the blindnes of yor
reason all his workes, that they by her iudgement, may
be iustified, or condemned. O blasphemous mouthes,
dare ye denie him to be the true God, of whom Moses,
Iob, Dauid and Paule affirme: that his secretes do apperteine
to him self? that he will not make accompte to
man of all his workes. That his counsels are incomprehensible,
his iudgementes a greate depth, and his wayes
vnsearchable. Thus much for that which ye omitte of
yor masters wordes in his description, which I now admonish,
lest after ye should trouble the simple, with these
your vanities, which from time, to time, ye foster, and
spred abrode. Now to the second, which I will but onely
touch, to put you in minde, that in doctrine, ye are not
constant: for before ye haue affirmed,In the 
                        •
                     . sectiō, 1. argument. that we did all stād
in Adam, before that we did fall. For none (say you) falleth,
but he that standeth: If we did all stand, then were
we all predestinate to life. And after: As we were all created
in one man, that is in Adam,In the 9 sectiō 1. argument. so were we all created
in one estate, that is after the image of God. Of which
places it is plaine, that ye vnderstand, that in Adam we
were created to gods image, in Adam we were elected,
and in Adam we were placed in paradise, which you call
the blessed life. But here you change your tune, and say:

He hath made man like to his owne image in Christe
Iesu, in whom is no damnation. What should be the cause
of this your sodein recantation, and alteration of
your sentēce, I can not well coniecture, except it be this:
That because experience doth conuict you, that by Adam
we are all wounded to death, that therfor you wolde
al should receaue life by Christe Iesus. And that doth
your master affirme in bold, and euident wordes, saing:
This God will all men to be saued, and that none shall
perish: and therfor hath he sent his Sōne, into the earth
whose iustice should superabound, where so euer sinne
hath abounded. This doth your master boldly affirme
(because he wrote to his practised souldiours) yt which
ye do in darcke wordes persuade. But how vaine be both
your persuasions, shall shortly appere, by examining the
scriptures by you both alledged. He groundeth his error
vpon the wordes of Paule plainely falsified, and of
Iohn the Euangelist, whom he applieth not rightly. If
you thinke me bolde that thus do accuse your master, &
great angell, of falsifying gods scriptures, heare my profe,
and then iudge. He saith whersoeuer sinne hath abounded
there hath grace super abounded. Which wordes
the Apostle doth not speake, but saith: where sinne
hath abounded: there hath grace more abounded, which
proposition is most true, as it is most comfortable. For
in Adam, Dauid, Peter, and in all other gods elect children
did, and doth sinne abound, as the Apostle proueth
all to haue sinned, and to haue nede of gods glorie. But
in them did grace more abound, by the which they were
deliuered from the multitude of sinnes. But as your proposition
is not expressed by the Apostle, so it is most
fals, which is most easie to be proued. For in Cain, Pharao,
Iudas, Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, Herode, and many other
did sinne abound, but in them did grace neuer so
abound, that they were absolued from that damnation,
which is pronounced against all vnfaithfull, in these
wordes: Who so euer shall not beleue, shalbe condemned.

And therfor I say, that your masters vniuersall proposition
is most fals, and he not onely a falsisier of the
plaine scriptures, but also a mainteiner of all impietie,
of all idolatrie, and wicked religion. For if it shalbe admitted
that where so euer sinne hath abounded there
shall grace more abound: then shall there be no differē
                  ce
betwene the condition of those that beleue in Christe,
and those that be despisers of his Euangile offered.
Let the indifferēt reader iudge, whether that you, or we
do now more smel of a careles, and a libertines life. But
this after.
               The wordes of the Euangelist are plainely wrested.
For he affirmeth not, that euery man is illuminated
to saluation, nether yet that Christe is offered (as ye
wold shift) to euery man. But speaking of the excellēcie
of Christ Iesus, in whom was life, and by whom all thinges
were created, he saith: this was the true light, which
doth illuminate all men, that come into this world. In
which wordes he speaketh nothing of mannes redemption
nether yet of any light, which man receaueth necessarie
for the same: But onely of that light which was
gi
                     •
                  ē to man in his creatiō, a part whereof (how small so
euer it be) doth yet remaine in man▪ and that not by his
own power, but by the free gift of God, in whom we liue,
are moued, and haue our being. And that the Euange
list speaketh nothing of the light of our redemption, is
euident by his owne wordes. For, before, and after he
doth witnes, that the light did shine in darckenes, but
darckenes did not apprehēd it, that is receaue, & aknowledge
it: That he came amongest his owne, but his owne
did not receaue him, that such as did receaue him were
nether borne of blood, of the will of the flesh, nether yet
of the will of man, but of God. By which wordes it is manifest,
that the Euangelist most euidently declareth, that
the light of saluation is not cōmon vnto all, but yt it is
propre to those onely, yt are borne of God. He doth further
teach, that all reason, and naturall vnderstanding

which man hath by his first birth, is so choked, so blinded,
and extinguished, that man must nedes be borne againe,
before he can see the kingdome of God, that
Christ Iesus must nedes illuminate those, that be borne
blinde, orels (without remedy) they shall perish in their
blindnes. And thus I say the one text your master doth
falsely, and the other most violētly wrest. But now to yor
wordes. God is slowe, (say you) to wrath, and ready to forgiue. He
will be intreated of all,Answer so that he biddeth all mē euerie where to repent,
and offereth faith vnto all men.
                  To ye 2 I will not question with you at
this time, why in this description of your true God, ye
make no mention of the Sonne, which is the eternall
word, and wisedom, of the eternall father, nether of the
holye Gost, who proceding from the father, is equall
with the eternall Sonne. But this is the one thing of which
I did wonder in reading this your description, yt ye
omitte these properties, which God attributeth to himself.
You do continually repete that God is slow to wrath,
ready to forgiue, that he willeth all mē to be saued,
that he wilbe intreated of all men, that he willeth the
death of no creature. Which properties in God we confesse,
and wc sentences we acknowledge to be most true,
if they be rightely vnderstand. But why do ye not likewise
teach your scholers, that God is zelous, that he is a
consuming fire, that he punisheth the iniquitie of the
fathers, vpon the sonnes, vnto the third, and fourth generation:
and that his iustice can not suffer sinne to eskape
punishment, no not euen in his most derest children.
Ye haue accused vs, that we deceaue the people,
teaching them a careles, and libertine life. And therfore
here againe, I require the indifferent reader, to consider
which of our doctrines giueth most libertie: whether
you that affirme, that your true God wilbe intreated
of all, or we that constantly mainteine, that God
heareth no sinners, or that such as delite in iniquitie, are
so odious in his presence, that althogh they crie, and
howle in their calamities, yet will he not heare thē. But

now let vs examine your scriptures apart. God is slowe
to wrath (say you) true it is, but yet he recompēseth the
flownes of punishment, with the seueritie of his iudgementes,
which hath bene, and shalbe executed against
such as heape to them selues gods wrath, by abusing his
long sufferinges. He is readye to forgiue: we acknowledge
this to be the voice of our God. But we feare not
to affirme, that the remissi
                     •
                  n of sinnes, is the free gift
of God, giuen to his Church by Christe Iesus, like as are
faith, and life euer lasting which are not commō to al
men in generall, but particularly do apperteine to gods
children. He will be intreated of all (say you) so that he
biddeth all men euery where repent, and offereth faith
to all men.
               Your first proposition is vtterly fals,Answer neither yet is
there any such sentence conteined in the hole scriptures.Psal. 17.
True it is that God is mercifull gentle liberall, protector,
Refuge, and Life to all. But to wc all? To such as
hate iniquitie, loue vertue, lament for their sinnes past,
call vpon his Name in veritie, and do vnfainedly seke 
for his helpe, in the day of their trouble Of all these no 
doubte, he will be intreated, how wicked, and vnthanckfull
so euer they haue ben before. But by the contrarie
he will destroy all that speake lies.Psal. 5. He hateth all that
worke iniquitie: nether will he shew him self mercifull
to such as maliciously do offend.Psal. 75. But all the sinners of ye
earth shall drinck the dregges of that cuppe which the
eternall holdeth in his hande. For he will destroy all
those that traiterously decline frō him.Psal. 18. They shal crie,
but he will not heare He shall answere vnto thē, let your
louers, whom ye haue preferred to me
                     •
                   deliuer you.
Such as withdraw their eares frō ye crie of the poore, shal
crye, but shal not be heard, yea albeit the blood thirst
                     •
                  e
wil multiplie praiers and streatch forth their hādes, yet
will not God heare thē. For his coūtenance is bēt agaīst
all yt cōmitte wickednes. And thus I say you
                     •
                   shall neuer
be able to proue yt God wilbe intreated of al, except you

can confute the holy Gost, and make him, to recāt these,
and innumerable other places. As mercy is promised
to his children (for they onely call in veritie, they onely
hate sinne, and folow vertue) So is seuere iudgement
pronounced against the wicked of ye world. None of these
sentences: God biddeth all men euery where to repēt,
and offereth faith to all men, are founde in that sense,
and meaning that ye do vnderstād thē, in the hole scriptures.
True it is that Isai the Prophet, and Christe Iesus
him self with his Apostles do call vpon all to come
to repētance: But that generalitie, is restrained by their
own wordes, to those that thirst, that hunger, that mourne,
that are laden with sinne, as before we haue taught.
That place of the Actes ye ether vnderstand not,Act. 17. or els
willingly ye abuse it. For Paule saith not that God offereth
faith to al, but saith: that he hath perfourmed to al,
yt promes wc he made to man, wc was to send a Sauiour for
mās redemption, by whome also he wil iudge the world.
Consider the text, and you shall vnderstand the meaning
of the Apostle to be such. you procede.
               He is omnip
                     •
                  tent, and may do, and leaue vndone, What so euer shall
be his good pleasure.
               The omnipotēcie of God,Answer & fredō of his wil we most
constantly mainteine, but we cā not admitte yt our God
be variable, vnconstant, subiect to ignorance: nether yet
yt his godly wil depēd vpon ye wil, and disposition of mā.
For that were not to leaue gods will at fredome but to
bring it vnder ye bondage of his creatures. Further, these
wordes, God may do, and leaue vndone, what so euer
shalbe his pleasure, do smell somwhat of one of your articles
offered vnto vs in this churche, wherein some of
your sect do affirme, yt God may be fully purposed this
day to do one thing, and yt to morow he may repent, and
be purposed to do the contrarie. Which cogitations of
of God are most blasphemous, & wicked. For if his coū
                  sels
be mutable, and inconstant, then ceaseth he to be ye
God, who nether is, nor can be changed. If you had said
because yt God is omnipotēt, therfor he may do, and leaue

vndone, what so euer his good pleasure is, you had
said well, vnderstanding, yt the purpose of God is infinite,
yt therfor of his good will, he so mollifieth ye heartes
of some men, yt of most cruell, and enraged ennemies, against
his trueth, and poore seruantes, he maketh them
and yt sodeinly preachers of his Gospell, and protectors
to his Church. But when ye say, he may do what so euer
is his good pleasure, ye offer occasion to the captious to
suspecte yt you wold affirme, yt gods good wil, & pleasure
may change, and yt is to deny his Godhead. But I will
burden you no further, then ye shall plainely confesse, I
onely put you in minde,To the 3 that ye holy Gost vseth no such
phrase. You procede saing.Answer 
                  Nether is it his pleasure, ād will, that
ether phara
                        •
                     , Semei, or any other should sinne, and come to destruction.
               
               Before we haue confessed yt iniquitie, and sinne is so odious
before God, yt in it can his goodnes neuer delyte,
nether yet can he haue pleasure in the destruction of any
creature, hauing respect to ye punishment onely. But
seing yt gods glorie must nedes shyne in all his creatures,
yea euen in ye perpetuall damnation of sathan, & torment
of the reprobate, why shal not he wil, and take pleasure,
yt so it come to passe. Albeit your phrenetique braines
can not comprehend ye brightnes therof, yet wil he
one day declare yt al his workes are wroght in iustice, wisedom,
and equitie. I thinke you will not deny, but that
pharao, Semei, Iudas and others, came to destruction, like
as in the end shall all reprobate do. Then do I aske, if
God at no time, for no purpose, respect, nor end did so
will, how then came their destruction to passe? By sinne,
say you, that we denie not. but yet the questiō is not answered.
For continually we demand, if in God there was
not power, ether to haue impeded their sinne, or yet after
their sinne to haue called them to repentance, if it
had so pleased his eternal wisedom, and goodnes Consider
your foly, and giue glorie to God, who doth what so
euer he will in heauen and in earth. But now to that which
foloweth.
               
                  
For he will the death of no creature but will all men to be saued, and to
come to the knowledge of the trueth.
               How violētly you wrest the wordes of the Prophet,Answer
and of the Apostle shall shortly appere, after I haue reasoned
a litle with you, how these your propositions do
agree with that which goeth before. Ye haue affirmed
that God is ready to mercie, and slow to wrath, in which
wordes you 
                     •
                  hew: and cofesse, that in the God head there
is readines to 
                     •
                  hew mercy, and also that there is a iustice,
wc must execute wrath vpō the disobedient. And so
in the nature of ye God head ye cofesse mercy ad iustice.
But here you say that God will the death of no creature,
but that he will all men to be saued. which last wordes
being vnderstand as ye do vrge them, must destroy
the former nature of God, & take awaye his iustice. For
if he absolutely will the death of no creature, then will
he no punishment to folowe sinne. And if he will no punishmēt,
then willeth he his iustice to cease, and so cōsequently
must one of the properties of his godlie nature
cease. Studie for an answere, to make your former wordes,
and latter wordes better agree, orels ye wilbe compelled
to cōfesse, that God for som respect willeth both
death and damnation to come vpon some creatures.
Further if God willeth all men to be saued, and to come
to the knowledge of the trueth, and yet many do per
                     •
                  sh
in ignorāce, and shalbe condemned as Christ Iesus doth
pronounce: then must it ether folow that gods will is
mutable, and so he vnconstant, and not at all times like
to him self, or els that he is not omnipotent. For if God
at the first creation of man, wold all men to be saued (as
ye alledge) then wold I know, when this will was changed.
After that man had offended, say you. Then yet haue
I obteined, that in gods will there was mutabilitie.
For after sinne he wold, and by his sentence pronounced,
that Adam, and his posteritie should suffer the corporall
death, yea and that the sede of the serpent should
haue the head broken downe, by the which is ment the

spirituall death, which nether of both (as you affirme)
did God will before. If you reply gods will towardes the
saluation of all mankind, did remaine the same after
sinne, which was before: for a generall promes of deliuerance
was made, by the womans sede that was promised.
               I haue before plainely proued,Answer that difference most
manifest betwext y• two sedes was made in that promes.
But admitting that the promes had bene generall, & so
that the will of God this day remaineth the same which
ye alledge it to be: to witt, that he willeth ye death
of no sinner, but that he willeth al men to be saued. Can
you deny, but that a separation, and diuision of the shepe,
from the goates, of the elect from the reprobate,
shalbe made at the glorious commīg of ye Lord Iesus?
Shall not these most ioyfull wordes be said vnto thē yt
shall stand vpon the right hand: Come ye the blessed of
my father, possesse the kingdome which was prepared
for you from the beginning? And shall not this most
fearefull sentence be pronounced, and executed against
the other? Depart ye cursed, go to the fire prepared for
the deuill, and for his angels? Shall the Sonne of God in
pronouncing sentēce, do any thing that day repugning
to the will of his heauenly Father? I think you will not
so affirme. Then if gods will in the day of iudgement
shalbe that many shalbe adiudged to tormēt perpetual,
and his will in the creation of man was, and this day yet
remaineth, that all men shalbe saued, then of necessitie
it doth folow that gods will shall change. If you say that
death, and damnation cometh not by gods will, but by
the sinne, and vnbelief of man, you haue releued your
self nothing. for if death be one thing, and life be an other,
damnation one thing, and saluation an other. Thē
if God this day will all men to be saued, and so to haue
life, and yet that day he shall will many to be damned
to torment perpetuall (what causes so euer you alledge)
I shall obteine one of two, to witte, that ether gods will
is, and may be mutable, orels that there is a power superior

to his maiestie, and godly will. For if willingly
he shall damne those, whom before he wold, and had determined
to saue, then is his will, and determination
changed. And if he shall damne those vnwillingly, whō
willingly he wold haue saued, then is he not omnipotent.
Consider now vpon whom falleth the snowe, and
who do cast them selues in greatest absurdities. Now it
resteth to declare how violently ye wrest the wordes of
the Prophet, & of the Apostle. The Prophete speaking
in the personne of God, saith, I will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he conuert, and liue. And the Apostle
affirmeth that God will all men to be saued and
to come to the knowledge of the trueth. Hereupon ye
conclude, God will the death of no creature, this is your
first violence, which you do to the text. For the Prophet
saith not: I will the death of no creature, but saith▪
I will not the death of a sinner. Ye are not ignorant
                     •
                  
suppose, what difference there is betwext an vniuer sa
                     ••
                  
negatiue, & an indefinite, or particulare. Where ye saye
God willeth the death of no creature, ye speake generally,
and vniuersally excepting none. But so doth not
the Prophet, for he saith not, I will the death of no creature,
nether yet I will the death of no sinner, but simply
saith: I will not the death of a sinner. I wonder that ye
consider not, that as there is difference betwext creatures,
and creature, so that also there is difference betwe
                     ••
                  
sinners, and sinner. Some creatures are appointed 
                     〈◊〉
                  
death, for the vse, and sustentation of mā. And dare yo
                     •
                  
say, that this is done against gods will? we be taught
the contrarie by his owne mouth. If you correcting
your generalitie shall say, that you meane onely that
God will the death of no man. And I feare not yet to
ioyne with you, and against you to affirme: that God
hath willed, doth will, and shall will the death of some
men. The holy Gost speaking of the sonnes of Heli
the high Priest,1. Reg. 2 saith: But they did not heare the voice
of their Father, because the Lord wold kil them. And

Moises saith, Sihon king of Hesbon wold not suffer vs
to passe through his cuntrie,Deu. 2 for the Lord thy God did
harden his minde, and strengthen his heart, yt he shoule
giue him into thy handes. How often doth Moses, & Iosua
declare vnto the people, that God wolde kill, roote
oute and destroye those wicked nations from besore the
face of his people? And were all those kinges, whom Iosua
did kill, killed against gods will? The holy Gost affirmeth
the contrarie: For it is written, the Lord did
trouble them before Israel, and he did strike them with
a great slaughter. And while that they did flee before
the Israelites, and were in the descense of Bethoron,
the Lord cast downe vpon them from heauen greate
stones, and many more perished by the haile stones, thē
were slaine with the swerd of the children of Israel. If
the destruction, slaughter, & death of these wicked men,
and of the greate host of Senacherib was not the will of
God, I can not tell how man shalbe assured of his will.
For the plaine word did before promise, that the Lord
should destroye them, and the fact doth witnes the constācie,
and perfourmance of his will. and the same thing
doth God this day, & shall do to the ende of the world,
when he shall adiudge the reprobate, (as before is said)
to the death perpetuall: and that not against his will,
but willingly, for the manifestation of his iust iudgementes,
and declaration of his owne glorie. And therefore
I say that your prosition (saying, God willeth the
death of no creature) is manifestly fals, as it that repugneth
to gods iustice,
                     
                        ••
                     e. 18 and to his euidēt scriptures. The
minde of the Prophetes was to stirre such as had declined
from God, to returne vnto him by true repentance.
And because their iniquities were so many, & offenses
so greate, that iustly they might haue despaired of remission,
mercie, and grace: therefor doth the Prophet
for the better assurance of those that should repent, affirme,
that God deliteth not, nether willeth the death
of the wicked. But of which wicked? of him no doub
                     •
                  e

that truely shoulde repent, in his death did not, nor neuer
shal God delyte. But he deliteth to be knowē a God,
that sheweth mercye grace, and fauor to such, as vnfeinedly
call for the same, how greuous so euer their former
offenses haue bene. But such as continue obstinate
in their impietie, haue no portion of these promises.
For them will God kill, them will he destroye, and them
will he thrust by ye power of his word in to the firewhich
neuer shalbe quenched. The Apostle in these wordes:
God willeth all mē to be saued, & to come to the knowledge
of the trueth speaketh not of euery man, and of
euery particulare persone. But of all men in generall,
that is to say, of men of all estates, all conditions, all
realmes, and all ages. For as in Christe Iesus there is nether
Iew, nor Gentile, nether man, nor woman, free man
                     •
                  
nor seruant, but all are one in him, so can no estate, no
condition of man, no realme, nor no age be proued so
wicked, and so corrupt, but out of the like hath God called
some to the participation of his light, and to saluation,
and life by Christe Iesus. and that this is the very
naturall meaning of the holy Gost, the tex
                     •
                  e it selfe
doth witnes. For the Apostle immediatly before willeth
praiers, and supplications to be made for all men,
for Kinges, and for all that were placed in authoritie.
And because that the Church was chiefely oppressed by
such, this doubte might haue risen: Are we then bound
to pray for those that are expresse, and coniured ennemies
against God? You are, saith the Apostle: for that is
good, and acceptable before God our Sauior, who will all
men to be saued. That is, God willeth you to pray for
your persecuters, that their eyes may be opened, and
they conuerted to the liuing God: who no doubt will
saue some of all estates, of all conditiōs and vocatiōs of
men. For the natiōs are giuen to Christe Iesus by inheritance:
Kinges shalbe the feders of the Church: Quenes
shalbe nurses: And in his holy temple, shall all sing
praise. If this interpretation (which we doubt not to be

the verie meaning of the holy Gost, cā not satisfie you.
Then will I aske of you. If God will men otherwise to
be saued then by Christe Iesus? or as the Apostle speaketh,
by comming to the knowledge of the veritie?
Plaine it is, that by the wordes of the Apostle ye cā conclude
none otherwise. For as he saith God will all men
to be saued, so doth he adde, and willeth all men to come
to the knowledge of the veritie. Which word (willeth)
albeit it be not expressedly repeted in the second
mēbre, yet of necessitie, it must be vnderstand, as those
that be but meanly sene in the greke, or latine tongue
do euidently see. Then if I shall sufficiently proue,
that God willeth not all men, to come to the knowledge
of the veritie, in such sort, as the Apostle meaneth,
shall it not infallablye folow, that God will not all men
to be saued, in such sense as you vnderstand. That God
willeth not all men to come to the knowledge of that
veritie, by the which man is verely made free from the
bōdage of sathan, is euidēt, not onely by those whom we
do see walke in darknes, and ignorance, but also by the
manifest srriptures of God. who called Abraham, making
to him, and to his sede the promes, of saluation,
saying: I will be thy God, and the God of thy sede after
thee which promes he kept secrete many ages from the
rest of the world. Whē he did notifie his law vnto Israel,
and when Moses did repete the same, he said: Behold I
haue laid before you this day life,Deu. 30 and death, benediction,
and execration, chose therefore life, that thou, and
thy sede may liue. If God wold that all men, and all nations
indifferētly should come to the same knowledge,
why were not the lawes, statutes, and iudgemētes of God
made manifest to others, as they were to Israel? And if
you answer that so they were. the holy Gost shall cōuict
you of a li
                     •
                  . For he affirmeth, that God had not done so
to all nations, and that his iudgemētes he had not reueled,
nor made knowen vnto them. But if that plaine diuision
made by God him selfe betwext Iew, and Gētile,

during the time of the law, doth not fully satisfie you.
Heare yet the sentence of our Master Christ Iesus, who
saith to his disciples: To you it is giuen to vnderstand
the secretes of the kingdom, but vnto others in parables,
that hauing eyes they should not see. And yt most
plainely in that his solemned th
                     •
                  
                  ̄ckes giuing, he saith:
I praise the ô father for yu hast hidde these thinges from
the prudent, and from the wise, but yu hast reueled them
to litle ones. If God wold haue had the true knowledge
of him selfe, and of his Sonne Christ Iesus common to
all, why should Christ him selfe affirme yt to some it was
giuen, & to others it was not giuen? to some it was reue
                  
                     •
                  ed,
& frō others it was hidde? And therefore seing it is
plaine yt God will not giue his true knowledge to all
(yea to some he doth neuer offer it) ye shall neuer be able
to proue that God will all men to be saued. For the
onely meanes to atteine to saluation, and to life, is to
know, and embrace God to be our mer
                     •
                  ifull father in
Christe Iesus, to wc knowledge who so euer doth not atteine
(I meane of those yt come to ye yeares & age of discretion)
can haue no assurāce to be saued. This were sufficient
to cōuict you, euen in your owne cōscience. For
albeit malice will not suffer you to giue place to ye plaine
veritie, yet shall the weight therof so oppresse your
pride that when you do open your mouth against it, ye
                     •
                  
shall ye be witnesses euen against yor selues. But yet for
the cause of my simple brethere
                     •
                   I will adde two thinges
first, how all such places, as ether make a general promes
of saluation to all, or yet that do pronounce gods wrath
against all, must be vnderstand. Secondarely, what sinners
they are, wose death God will not. For the first I say, that
who so euer doth denie that from the beginning there
hath bene, this day are, and to ye end
                     •
                   shall remaine two
armies, bandes, or companies of men, whom God in his
eternall counsell hath so deuided, that betwext thē there
cōtinueth a batt
                     •
                  ll, wc neuer shalbe reconciled, vntill
the Lord Iesus put a finall ende to the miseries of his

Church: who doth not vnderstand the trueth of this (I
say) doth nether know God, nether his Sonne Christ Iesus:
nether yet do such, beleue his word, in wc, both ye one
sort, & ye other, are most manifestly expressed. The one
of these Armies, is called the Church of God the elect
Spouse of Christe Iesus, ye shepe appointed to slaughter,
the kingly priesthode, the sonnes of God, and the people
redemed. by ancient writtets it is termed the citie
of God. The other is called the sinagoge of satan, the
church malignant, cruell, deceat full, and bloodthirstie
wolues, Progenie of vipers, sonnes of the deuill, workers
of iniquitie, and such as worship the beast, and his
image. And according to the diuers natures, cōditions,
and endes of these two companies, doth the scripture
pronounce generall sentences, and vniuersall propositions,
which not withstāding must be restreined to those
of whom the holy Gost meaneth. For nether iustly
may those sentences spoken of gods elect, be referred
to the reprobate, nether yet such as be spoken of the reprobate
sorte, be rightly applied to the elect, except it
be for terrifying of their conscience, and that onely for
a ceason. as Christ Iesus called Peter sathanas: and Nathan
called Dauid the Sonne of death, I will adduce examples
of the one sort, and of the other
                     •
                   that the mater
may be more euident. The Prophet Isai (which place
also our Master alledgeth) speaking of gods elect childrē,Esa. 54
saith:Iohn 6 They shall all be taught of God, and they shall
know me frō the least to the greatest.Iocl. I shall powre forth
of my spirite,Act. on all flesh. All flesh shall see the saluation
of God. The Lord raiseth vp all that fall. All
the inhabitantes of the earth shall learne iustice.Psal. All
men shall come out of Saba.Isa. 
                        •
                     6 All thy people shable
iust. I shall comfort all that mourne.Isa. 6
                        •
                     
                   You be all the
Sonnes of God ye be all the Sonnes of light. These,
and many mo places,Gala. 3 which be vniuersally spoken, must
be restreyned to gods children onely, who be elected
in Christe Iesus.1. Thes. 5
                        •
                     
                   For those that be with out his body,

are nether taught of God, nether yet know they God, in
such sort as the Prophet there meaneth. Into them is
neuer powred the spirite of sanctification: They giue
neuer vnto God true honor, and glorie: They nether
learne iustice, nether yet are they iust: They are not the
sonnnes of God by adoption, nether yet the sonnes of
light, whose workes shine before men to the praise of
our heauenly father. But remaine ignorant, prophane,
idolaters, filthie persones, replenished with darckenes,
as the sonnes of the deuill. And therefore can not these
former sentences, which apperteine to gods children
onely, be rightly spoken, or pronounced of the reprobate.Psal. 21
Of the other sort, it is said: All that see me haue
mocked me, they put furth their tōgues, they shake
their heades. These wordes spake Dauid in the persone
of Christe, and yet God forbid, that we should think
that all (without exception) did so mocke, and iest at
Christe, no, not euen in his greatest extremitie. For some,
we reade, stode beside his crosse with sorowfull heartes.
Some returned, giuing open confession that he was
the Sonne of God. And the thefe began to be a preacher,
euē when others did most dispitefully rayle. And therefore
where it is said: all that saw me, did mocke me, that
generalitie must be restreined to those enraged dogges,
the Priestes, Scribes, wicked souldiours, and most vnthākfull
people, who of verye malice did deny, and crucifie
their Lord, and Messias, that was promised▪ Isai, and
Ieremie, speaking of the destruction of Ierusalem, and
of the causes of the same,Isa: 31 say: I shall consume you all at
once, and ye shall all be ashamed, by a people that shall
not profit you,Isa. 56 They haue all folowed their owne waies.
Euery man gapeth for bribes. Why will ye contend with
me, ye haue all declined from me.Iere. 1 From the least to
the most,Iere. 6 euerie one is bent vpon auarice they are all
traitours, they are all (I say) traitours, euery brother
deceaueth another. All men contemne me, all men hold
me in execration.Iere. 15 If these, and other lyke places shalbe

vnderstand so vniuersaly, as they appere to be spoken,
then must we be compelled to say, that no true fearer of
God remayned in Ierusalem, when the Prophetes did
preach, but that all were blood thirstie, all auaricious, all
idolaters, and all dumme dogges: the contrarie wherof
is euidently declared. For Isai had the children whom
the Lord had giuen vnto him, who albeit they were
holden as monsters amonge men yet, did they patientlye
abide the Lord. Ieremie had Baruch his faithfull,
scribe not withstāding his weakenes, and infirmitie. Abedmelech
feared the Lord, was fauourable to the Prophete,
and therefore saued he his soule for a praye, and
was deliuered from that day of vengeance. And therefore
these vniuersall sentences must also be restreyned,
and kept within their own boundes,2. Ti. 4 like as these:
All haue left me, all seke the thinges, that apperteine
vnto them selues, and not those thinges that be of God.
Which sentēces (except they be restreined) we shall condemne
the dearest children of God, who in Paules daies
did valiātly fight against the prince of this world. These
examples of the one sorte, & of the other I haue adduced,
to lette the simple vnderstand, that such generall
sentences of necessitie, must be so restreined, that difference
may be kept betwext the elect, and the reprobate.
For els we shall do nothing in explaning scriptures, but
confound light, with darcknes. For if the wordes of our
Master Christe Iesus saying:The wicked be not taught of God. All shalbe taught of God,
shalbe so generally vnderstād, that no exception be admitted,
then of necessitie it is, that all men, and euery
persone shall come to the true knowledge of Christe
Iesus▪ for of that knowledge doth he speake in that place.
But the contrarie thereof is moste euident, euen by
Christe Iesus his owne wordes,God will not the death of a sinner explaned, who putteth a plaine difference
betwext them, that be giuen to him by his father,
and betwext them, that be not giuen. But now let vs
briefly consider, what sinners, they are whose death God
will not, but rather hat they conuert & lyue. Sainct Ihon

in his Epistle saith: If we say,1. Iohn. 1 we haue no sinne we deceaue
our selues, & the veritie is not in vs. If we cōfesse our
sinnes,1. Iohn 3 he is faithfull & iust, to remitte to vs our sinnes,
and to clense vs from all vnrighteousnes &c. And after:
Who soeuer commiteth sinne transgresseth also y• law,
for sinne is the transgression of the law. And ye know
yt he is reueled to take away our sinnes, and in him is no
sinne. As many as byde in him (yt is in Chriiste Iesus) sin
not: who soeuer sinneth hath not sene him nether hath
knowē him &c. He yt cōmitteth sinne is of the deuill, for
the deuil sinneth frō ye beginning &c. who soeuer is borne
of God committeh not sinne, for his sede abideth in
him nether can he sinne, because he is borne of God. Of
wc wordes it is euidēt, yt there be two sortes of sinners, the
one be they who mourne, lamēt, and bewaile their owne
wretchednes, and miserie vnfainedly before God, cōfessing
not onely that their hole nature is sinfull, and corrupt,
but also yt dailie they so offend ye Maiestie of their
God, yt most iustly they deserue the tormentes of hell, if
Christes iustice, & Christes mediation (wc by faith they
embrase) should not deliuer them from the wrath to come.
To these is not sinne imputed. for ye blood of Christe
purgeth them from all sinne, his aduocation, and intercession,
maketh to thē an enterance to the throne of
their fathers grace. To thē is giuen the spirit of sanctification,
wc from time, to time, as it reueleth their sinnes
so doth it mortifie, & purge the same. Not that euer in
this life gods elect hath bene, are, or shalbe so cleane
purged from sinne, yt the flesh lusteth not against the spirit,
as some times affirmed the Pellagians, & those that
then were called Cathari, that is cleane purged, and now
also do the Anabaptistes renew the same most pestilent
error: by the which Christ Iesus his iustice, his office,
and perpetuall mediation, is vtterly destroyed: in such
sort I saye are not gods childrē purged in this life, that
nether they fele sinne, nether yet the motiōs, & entisemētes
of the same. But they are so purged y• sinne raigneth

not in their mortall bodies. for the sede of God,
which is the vertue power, efficacie, and operation of his
holie spirite suffereth them not to delyte in sinne: but
as they are first called from darcknes to light & frō the
bondage of sathan, to the libertie of gods children, so
when they sinne (as there is none that sinneth not) they
are called againe by true repentance to their former societie
and felowship with Christe Iesus. The death of
such sinners did God neuer will, nether yet can he will.
for from all eternitie they were his elect childrē, whom
he gaue to his deare Sonne, to be his enheritāce, whom
the Sonne receaued into his protection, and sauegard,
to whome he hath manifested, and to the ende, shall manifest
him selfe, and the louing kindes of his heauenlie
father: In whose heartes he writeth the law of God,
and maketh them to walke in his commandementes, 
                     •
                  
                  uer
thirsting to a further, and more perfect iustice then
they find within them selues by reason of their corruption.
The death I say of those sinners God will not, but
he will that they repent, and liue. The Apostle saint Peter
saith:2. Pet. 3 The Lord that hath promised, is not slow, but
he is long suffering toward vs, while that he will none
to perish, but will receaue all to repentāce. The Apostle
here meaneth not, yt al, without exception, shalbe receaued
to life by true repentance, but yt the cause why God
so long deferreth (as it were) ye extreme iudgement, is, y•
the electnomber of gods children may be complete, (as
answere was giuen to those y• cried vnder the aulter to
be reuenged vpon the tyrannes that dwell on the earth)
of these his elect children, God will none to perish, as
before is said. But there is an nother sort of sinners farre
different from these. For nether are they displeased
wt thē selues, nether yet hate they iniquitie, but against
gods expresse cōmandementes furiously they runne wt
Cain to murther the innocent, with Pharao to oppresse
the people of God, with Iudas to betray the knowen,
and professed veritie: and finally so delyte they in all filthines,

& impietie, that they can not repent. The eyes of
such be blinded, their heartes are hardened, they are giuen
ouer in to a reprobate minde. And for thē doth not
Christe Iesus pray, and therefore they can do nothing
but headlonges runne from euill to worse, as the deuill
(to whose tyranny they are committed) doth driue
them, till finally they come to perdition: which ende
was appointed vnto them not against gods will, but by
his will 
                     •
                  mmutable in his eternall counsell. For no lesse
will he, that the seueritie of his iudgementes be sene
in the vessels of wrath, thē that the riches of his grace
be praised in the vessels of mercie. Storme, and rage,
spew furth your venom, and blaspheme till ye prouoke
gods vengeance at once to be powred forth vpon
your owne heades, this sentence will he neuer retracte:
He will haue mercie, vpon whom he will haue mercy,
and whom he will,To the. 6 he maketh hard hearted. That God
in him selfe hath but one will, which is holy, iust, and
permanent, that in him there is no contraritie: that he
is faithfull; and doth perfourme what soeuer he doth
promise. What we vnderstand by gods secrete will, and
how he tempteh no man, I haue before sufficiently declared.
And therefore, I will not truble the reader with
the repetitiō of the same. Now let vs heare what is your
iudgement of vs, and how ye extolle your selues.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE.
               As these goddes be of contrarie nature so do they begette children of a
contrarie nature,The 46. section. the fals God begetteh vnmercifull proud ambicrouse,
and enuifull children, bloody persecutors of others for their conscience saik,
euill speakers 
                     •
                  mpacient, contenciouse and seditious children. And they
 be like vnto their father in that they speake one thing with their mouth
 and think an other with their heart. They can neuer be without filthy
 th
                     •
                  ghtes & wicked 
                     〈◊〉
                  . for such poyson do they receaue of their father.
               The trew God begetteth mercifull, humble, lowlye, and louing children,
 abhorring from blood, persecuting no man, good speakers patient, &
 detesting all 
                     〈◊〉
                  , chiding and brawling, and they be like vnto their
 father, in that what soeuer they speak with their m
                     •
                  uth, they think with
 their heart. they be alwaies moued with good thoghtes and g
                     •
                  dly reuelations,
for such grace receaue they 
                     〈…〉
                   of their father.
            
            
               
               ANSWER.
               It may seme by the description of these your two
goddes (for nether of both, as ye describe them, is the
true liuing, & eternall God) that ye studie to renew the
dānable error of the Manichies, who imagined two beginners, the one of all goodnes, and of all good creatures,
the other of all iniquitie, and of wicked creatures:
affirming further that the good, and the mercifull God
was ouercome for a time, by him that was wicked, and euill.
And because that the plaine scriptures did confute
these blasphem
                     •
                  es, therefor did they denie the authoritie
of Moises, and the certentie of all other scriptures
that made any thing against their error. If manifestly
ye did take vpon you the defense of those your fathers,
as that ye do of Pellagius, of Donatus, and of the
Papistes (for of all these adulterous fathers, ye be adulterous
children) then wolde I from Augustine (whom
God stirred vp no doubte in the daies of darckenes
most learnedly, and most plainely by infallible scriptures
to cofute those heresies) from him, I say I might take
artilerie all ready prepared, able inough to ouerthrow
your buildinges, and munitions, appere they neuer
so strong. But because (as before I haue said) my purpose
is not to burden you further, then you do confesse:
I onely admonish the reader to be ware of such pestilences,
as beginne to call the trueth of God reueled in
his holy word, in doubt, and do persuade men to credite
dreames, and reuelations, how soeuer they appere to
repugne to that which is reueled in the word. Of such
men I say▪ oght Christes flock to take hede, as also of
those who make of eguall authoritie such bookes, as
yet the holy Gost hath neuer cōmended to the Church
of Christe, with these that are written by Moises, the
Prophetes, the Euangelistes, and Apostles, and that by
inspiration of the holy Gost. That some of you be infected
with this most pestilent poison, I am able to proue
by mo argumentes then one. Being at London the

the winter before the death of king Edward, one▪ of
your faction required secrete communication of me,
in which after that earnestly he had required of me closenes,
and fidelitie, because that the maters that he had
to communicate with me, were so weightie, and of such
importance, as sythence the daies of the Apostles, the
like was neuer opened vnto man. In the ende, after many
wordes (which I nether gladly heard, nether yet will
now write) he gaue me a boke, written (as he said) by
God, euen as well as was any of the Euāgelistes. This his
booke he adiured me (as it were) to reade, and required
to haue my iudgement of it. My answer was, that at his
request I wold reade it, so that he wold be cōtent to reason
with me of the chiefe pointes in the same conteined,
but to pronounce sentence, or iudgement, that
could I not vsurpe, being but one man farre inferior to
many of my brethern, ye preachers of gods word in that
realme. Alwaies he vrged me to reade his booke. And I
wōdering what mysteries it should cōteine, called to me
a faithfull brother, who then (as pleased God) was present
with me, named Hēry Farrour marchāt, to whom I opened
the mater by whose counsell, and in whose presence
I beganne to reade his boke. The first proposition wherof
was: God made not the world, nether yet the wicked
creatures, in the same conteined, but they had their beginning
from a nother, that is from the deuill, who is
called the Prince of the world. which proposition plainly
repugning, to gods word, I did impugne, and begāne
to declare vnto him, for what cause Sathan had that title,
to be called the Prince of ye world. But he vtterly denying
ether to reasō, and dispute, ether yet to be reformed
in any point that there was written, commānded me
to reade forward, & to beleue, howbeit I did not vnderstand.
To whom, when I had gentilly said: Can any reasonable
man will me to beleue thinges directly fighting
against gods veritie, and plaine word reueled? Tusch

said he, for your written word, we haue as good, and as
sure a word, and veritie, that teacheth vs this doctrine,
as ye haue for you, and your opiniō. And thē I did more
sharpely answere saing: ye deserue the death, as a blasphemous
person, and denier of God, if ye preferre any
word to that which the holy Gost hath vttered in his
plaine scriptures. At which wordes he toke pepper in
nose, and snatching his boke furth of my hand departed
after he had thus spoken: I will goo to the ende of
the world, but I will haue my boke confirmed, and subscribed
with better learned men then you be. In me I cō
                  fesse
there was greate negligēce, that nether did reteine
his boke, nether yet did present him to the Magistrate.
But yet this argument I haue, that your faction is not
altogether cleane from the heresie of the Manichies. I
could name, and point forth others, who labour in the
same disease: but so long as their venom doth remaine
secrete, within them selues, I am purposed to spare thē.
But now yt you accuse vs to be vnmercifull, proud, ambicious,
and enuious children, bloody persecuters of others
for their conscience sake, euil speakers, impatiēt,
contentious, and seditious children, that we speake one
thing with our mouthes, and thinke another in our 
                     •
                  eartes.
And that ye extolle your selues, that ye are mercifull,
humble, & louing children, abhorring frō blood,
persecuting noman, good speakers, pacient, and detesting
all contention: That you be all waies moued with
good thoghtes, and godly reuelatiōs, for such grace receaue
you plenteonsly of your father. To the which I
briefely answere, that because we haue a iust iudge, who
shall reuele the secretes of all heartes, we will rather susteine
to be of you, vniustly accused, then become
proud braggers of our owne iustice, as you be, wc sinne is
so odious in gods presence yt he hath neuer suffered it
vnpunished, euē before men. Fortie yeres & more hath
ye Euāgile of Christe Iesus bene preached in Germanie,

in Heluetia, and now of latter yeres in Geneua. and so
long hath this doctrine bene taught of some, and hath
bene beleued of many, but what crueltie, what murther
or what sedition, can iustly be laid to the charge of those,
that most constantly haue taught and mainteined ye
same? let the world conuict them. And how farre their
life abhorreth from pride, ambition, and filthines hath
God witnessed, and to this daye doth witnes, how so euer
Sathan doth blinde your eyes. But sone after that God
had sowen his good sede, began the deuill to sowe the
cockell, and darnell, I meane the pestilent secte of anabaptistes,
whose frutes did sodeinly appere to the great
slander of Christes Euangill, and to the grief of many
godly heartes. Bragge what ye list of your iustice, of yor
mercie, of your godly reuelations, and other such, ye are
the brethern, mainteiners, and children of those in whom
the contrarie was plainely found: your doctrine
and theirs, are both one. and therfor of you can we looke
for none other frute (vnles that God restrein your
furie) thē your fathers haue once produced before you.
And that the readers shall not be ignorant, what it was, I
haue added this Historie, written by that most faithful,
and notable witnes of thinges done in maters of religion,
sithence the beginning of the Empire of Charles
the fifte vntill the yere of 1556, which Historie I adde
(as God, I take to record) of no priuate malice, which I
beare against any personne, but onely that the worlde
may see, what was your originall, how vniustly ye accuse
vs of such crimes, as impudently you lay to our charge,
and how iustly all men oght to feare that confusion
which ye intend, if God be times ouerthrow not your
enterprises. The HistorieHistoria Sle
                        •
                     dani libro 5. and your originall is this.
               There is a towne named Alstet, in the borders of
Turingia, vnder the dominion of the Duke of Saxō Elector,
to the which towne came one Thomas Muncer,
who began first to teach not onely against the Pope, but
also against Luther, affirming both their doctrines to

be corrupted, and vnpure: that the Pope bound mennes
consciences with to streit lawes, and bandes: againe, that
Luther lowsed those bandes, but yet finned on the contrarie
parte, in giuīg to much libertie, and in preaching
those thīges, that were not of the spirite. He taught also
that it was lawfull to despise the popes decrees, because
they were of no force to bring vs to saluation, which to
atteine vnto (said he) most chiefly yt we should auoyde
all manifest iniquities, as murther, adulterie, & blaspheming
of the name of God, that the bodie should be chastised
and broght low with fasting, and simple clothing,
that men oght to fashion their countenance to looke
sadly,The hypocrisi
                        •
                      of the Anabaptistas. and grauely, that they should speake but seldom,
and that they oght to norish their beardes. These thinges
and such like, he called the crosse, the mortification
of the flesh, & discipline. After they are thus furnished,
and prepared (said he) they oght to haunt solitarie
places, out of mennes compagnie, and often to thinke
of God, what manner a one he is, whether he haue any care
of vs or no, If Christe suffered for vs, If our religion
were not to be preferred to the Turkes religion. And
that we should aske a signe of God to assure vs that he taketh
care for vs, and that we stand in the trew religion.
If he shew not some signe immediatly, yt we should neuertheles
go forward, praying instātly, yea & vehemētly
quarreling with God, as if he did vs not right. That
seing it is his will, as the scripture teacheth vs, to giue
to those that aske, he doth iniurie in not giuing a signe
to him that desireth the true knowledge of him. This
kinde of 
                     ••
                  iding, and anger he said, to be verie acceptable
vnto God. because that by it he might perceaue the
feruēt inclination of our mindes. And that he wold vndoubtedly
(if in this m
                     •
                  ner we did solicite him) declare
him self by some manifest signe, that he wold quench
the thirst of our mīdes. And deale with vs, as he did in
times past, with our fathers. This also he taught, yt God
reueled his will by dreames, and that he laid in them

the foundation of his purpose. And if it chanced that
any mans dreame might be interpreted, him he highly
extolled openly before the assemblie. And when by
this meanes he had gotten many on his side, by litle,
and litle, he came to the same, which he went about alitle
before: and in the forenamed towne he began to regester
their names which (being of his cōfideracie) were
sworne to ayde him, in slaying the wicked Princes,
& magistrates, and in placing new in their rowmes. For
he said that he had receaued that commandement of
God, to take them away & to constitute new. So long as
he spake but of dreames, & such other lyke thinges, Friderike
duke of Saxō did beare with him, especially because
Luther by leters required him so to do. but whē he
began to preach sediciously, he was banished, who (after
he had lurked in corners certen monethes) came to Noriberge,
and being also thrust from thēce, alitle after he
came to Milhusium a towne of Turingia. For when he
was at Alstet he had entised to him some of the citizēs
by whose helpe he obteined the office of teaching. And
because the magistrates lyked him not, he raised a tumult
amongest the people, wherby new magistrates were
created. This was ye beginning of trouble. after these
thinges the townesmen cast out the monkes, and inuaded
their houses, wherof the chiefest and richest fell to
Muncers lotte, who now played both the preacher, and
the magistrate. For iudgement (said he) should be giue
by the reuelation of God, and of the scripture. And o
                     •
                  
all other thinges he gaue sentēce, as it pleased him: for
whatsoeuer he said, it semed to them most holy. That
their goodes should be in common, he said, was most agreable
to humanitie. That all oght to be equall in dignitie,
all men should be free, and that all their goodes
should be vsed indifferently, as well of one, as of an other.
Wherby the common people began to leaue of labor,
and to be ydle, ād what thīg soeuer any lacked, that
yt they toke by violēce frō other yt aboūded. These maners

he vsed for a space & whē the cōmon people, & husbād
men were in armour through Sueuia, & Franconia
to the number of fortie thousand, & had destroied the
greatest part of their nobilitie, & had pulled downe, and
burned many Castels, & towres: thē putte he to his hād
also thinking that ye most cōuenient time to bring his
purpose to passe. And making inginnes of warre in the
gray friers church, the greater part of the people he
broght furth of ye cūtrie, in hope of a praye, & of more
welth. He had a cōpanion of meruelous audacitie who
was of all his counsell, whose name was Phifer. this man
attributed much to dreames, & visions of the night: and
amongest other thinges he chanced to boast, that he saw
in his slepe in a certē stable a meruelous great multitude
of mise & that he did driue them all away. By which
dreame he vnderstode, that God commanded him to take
his armour, and go furth with an armie to destroy
all the nobilitie. But Muncer althugh he preached vehemently
to the people, yet was he some what colder,
nether listed he to aduenture the prosperous estate, that
he was in alredy, before al they that were about him were
in armour. And to bring the mater more easilie to
passe, he sent leters to the workeme that digged for metalles
in the cūtrie of Mansfeld, earnestly admonishing
them to fall vpon the Princes, without doubting of the
mater, for it should come to passe that they which were
in a readines in Franconia shall come nerer to Turingia.
In the meane time Phifer that loued not to linger
long in any mater, went out with his men, and destroied
the cuntrie of Isfeld adiacent vnto them, he spoiled the
Castels and temples, destroyed many of the nobles,
and toke certen of them prisoners, whom he bound in
chaines. After he returned home with a greate praye. Whose
prosperous successe encouraged greatly the heartes
of the common people, especially because the countreis
also about them were vp, and had inuaded the cuntrie
of Mansfeld. So Muncer (thinking now that all
mens heartes had failed them on 
                     〈…〉
                  ) came with

300. men to Mulhusium, and ioined him self to the Frā
                  cusians.
At that same time died Friderike Duke of Saxon
without issue (for he liued a sole life) whose successor
was Ihon his brother germane. While these thinges
were in doing, Albert the countie of Mansfeld gathered
(with all expedition) a company of horsemen, and violently
comming vpon them, he slew 300, wherwith they
being feared, durst procede no further, but fled to Francusium,
where they taried waiting for a greater armie.
wherby onely their assaute was deferred. In the time of
this delay the Princes that were there about, gathered
horsemen, to the number of a fiftene hundred, but no
greate multitude of footemen. These were the Princes
of Saxon, Ihon Elector, George his cosin germane, Philippe
Lantgraue of Hesse, and Henri Duke of Brunswicke.
The bowres (that is husband men) remained vpon a
hill not farre from Francusium, who had gathered their
cartes, and sette them so nigh together, to fence them
withall, that with much difficultie, could they be come
vnto. But they were nether well furnished with harnes,
nether yet with ordināce, and they were all for the most
part vnexpert in the feates of warre, wherwith the Princes
were so moued to compassiō, that they sent messingers
to exhort them to deliuer the authors of the sedition,
to lay awaye their weapo
                     •
                  s, & to depart home without
hurte. But Muncer,Mūcers fa
                        •
                     s & ora
                        •
                     tie 
                        •
                     ration. considering his owne danger,
came furth into the assemblie, & with graue coutenance,
said: Ye brethern, & felow souldiours do see tyrānes
not farre from you, who althogh they haue conspired
against vs to take away our liues, yet are they of so smal
a courage, that they dare entreprise nothing against vs.
They offer foolish, and fond conditions to the intent
to spoile you of yor armour. And now, it is manifest to
you all, that I began this dede, but not of any priuate authoritie
of my own (nether did I euer go about such a
thing) but by the commandement of God, which thing
being so, it becometh both me, and you to obey, & not

once to moue out of this place, wherin God hīself hath
sette vs, who in times past commanded Abraham to offer
his sonne, whose precept without resistance Abraham
obeied, albeit he was ignorant what should come of it.
And therfor did God both preserue his sonne, and also
highly rewarded his faith. in like maner oght we (which
are in the same state) to perseuere, committīg the issue
vnto God. for withoute doubt, all thinges shalbe euen as
we wold haue it. Ye your selues shall behold the manifest
helpe of God, and who so euer is our ennemie, him
shall we suppresse on euery side. Nether is it in one place
of the scripture onely, where God promiseth succour
to the afflicted, & to destroye the wicked. This promes
most assuredly apperteineth vnto vs. for we are poore,
and in miserie, & because we desire to reteine and publish
the knowledge of God, there is no doubte, but that
we shall ouercome, and be conquerors. On the other side
lette vs consider the condition of our ennemies, I cō
                  fesse
they are called Prīces, but in dede they be tyrānes,
nether haue they any care of you at all, but deuoure all
mēs goodes, and spend them most wickedly. In that people
which sometime God chose peculiarly vnto him
self, he ordeined that kinges should not spend any time
in waste, yea he commāded that they should loke diligently
in the boke of the lawes, which he had giuen
them. But what do our tyrannes? or how are they occupied?
They think the common welth is no part of their
charge: they know nothing of poore mens causes, they
care not for iustice, they suffer the wayes to be besette
with theues, they punish not robbers, nether any other
vice, they helpe not the widdow, nether yet the fatherles.
They loke not to the good education of youth. As
for the honoring of gods Name, they do not onely thē
selues neglect it, but also they hinder it Thus onely
they applie to draw all mens goodes to them selues:
and therfore do they euery day deuise new wayes to
gette money by extortiō. Nether sette they their mindes

vpon defending or mainteining of peace, but that
(being enriched aboue measure) they may abound in al
kinde of riotte, and pride. It is to manifest how greate tumultes,
and warres they raise for very light, and foolish
causes: whereby all that remaineth to the poore people
is lost, and destroied. Behold these are the excellent
vertues, and policies of your noble princes, wherin they
exercise them selues. Therfor let none think, that God
will suffer those thinges any longer, but rather persuade
him self assuredly, that as God did once destroye the
Cananites, so will he now also these. For thogh all these
thinges, which I haue recited before, were tollerable,
thinck you that they shall escape vnpunished for defending,
and mainteining that most execrable impietie of
the popish preachers? Who is ignorant how greate iniquitie
is in the bying, & selling of Masses? I will say nothing
of the rest. Surely as Christ draue out the byers, &
sellers, out of the church, so shall he now also roote out
the priestes, with their patrones, and companions: be
strong therfor, and to grati
                     •
                  ie God, slay all this vnprofitable
multitude. To make peace with them I can see no
waye honest, safe or sure inough: for they will nether
leaue of their purpose, nether restore vs to libertie, nether
permitte the true worshipping of God. and it were
better for vs to die▪ then to alowe their iniquitie, and to
suffer our selues to be spoiled of the doctrine of ye Gospell.
I promise you assuredly that God shall prosper vs▪
and that the victorie shalbe ours. For he him self promised
me to my face, euen he I say that can not deceaue,
nor lie, commanded me to beginne this worke on
this maner, by punishing the Magistrates, and in ded
                     •
                  
the power of God, herein appereth most excellent, when
a greate multitude of ennemies is slayne by a smal hād.
To lette many other thinges passe, ye know what Gedeon
broght to passe with a f
                     •
                  aw: what Ionathas did accompanied
with one poore seruant onely: what Dauid
did when he fought alone against that monster Golias
of huge stature, who for his height was euen terrible to

loke on. There is no doubte, but this day in like maner
shalbe notable, and had in remembrance of all posterities
for the like spectacle. For althogh we seme not to
be well fournished with weapons, nor fensed as it apperteineth,
yet shall we haue the victorie. And this workemanship
of heauen, and earth shall rather be changed,
then that we shalbe forsaken of God. for so in times past
was the nature of the sea changed, that the Israelites
might escape danger, when of Pharao they were pursewed:
let not the iudgement of your owne reason moue
you, nether let any apperance of shadow of danger trouble
you, but valiantly inuade the wicked, and vngodly
ennemie, neuer let their eng
                     ••
                  es of w
                     •
                  rre make you afraid,
for I will receiue in the l
                     •
                  ppe of my garment al ye
gunstones. Behold se you not h
                     •
                  w mercifull God is
vnto vs▪ Loke vp I besech you, and marke wel the signe,
and testimonie of his perpetuall loue toward vs: Lift vp
your eyes, and see me the bowe of heauen, by the which
image shewed vs from aboue, God signifieth to vs most
manifestly, that he will assist vs in this battell: for as
much as we haue the same bow painted in our enseigne,
& he sheweth also by the very same, death, and destruction
to our tyrannes. Therfor fall vpon your ennemies
with a lustie courage, hauing an assured hope that
God will helpe you. For God will not that ye should make
peace with the wicked aduersaries. Whē he had made
an ēd of exhorting his souldiours, who neuertheles (for
the most part) trembled for the greatenes of the present
dāger. But all thinges were done in a hurley burley, without
any certen rule, or order. Moreouer there were
some of a desperate audacitie, readie to put to their handes
to euery mischeuous acte: these of their owne nature
enclining to worke meschief, were thē more sette on
fire by his oration. but chieflly they were moued by the
rainebow, which stode in the element (as it is said before)
and that toke they for a most sure signe of victorie,
And this also helped them, that they were a great number,
about eight thousand men, and that the place was

fitte for to defend them. So these men that were so boldened,
with a lowde voice admonished all men to take
their weapōs, and to go furth against the ennemie with
a good courage: and they had also a song wherein they
asked the assistance of gods holy spiritte. But before
this a certen yong man of noble birth was sent vnto
them whom Muncer (contrary to the law of armes, and
to the custom of any nation) slew: wherwith the Princes
were so prouoked,The An
                        •
                     b
                        •
                     ptis
                        •
                     s greate 
                        •
                     ercie. that they blew their trompettes to batell,
and sette their men in araye. At that time, there
was there Philippe Prince of Hesse, who althogh he was
the yongest of all, yet rode he to, and fro, exhorting the
souldiours to be strong. which exhortation being ended,
they inuaded their enemies, beginning first to shote
of their ordinance. And then the miserable men (as
all amased, or▪ besides them selues) nether defended thē
selues, nor yet fled to saue their liues, but song still that
song to the holy Gost to helpe them. And the most part
of them put such confidence in M
                     •
                  cers faire promises,
that they looked for helpe from heauen. Whē they had
shot of their ordinance, and began to assaute their holdes,
and that many of them were on euery side slayne,
then were they put to flight, and went to Francusium,
but some of them wēt to the other side of the hil, where
they kept out for a while a few horsemen, and slew one,
or two of them. But when they were al for the most part
fledde, the horsemen (scattered, and dispersed) wandred
to, & fro, without order, so that whither so euer boures
fled they were pursewed. But some of their mē (as I said
before being slaine, the residue all kindled with fury &
desire of reuēge, were more violēt, and were slayn to the
nūber of 5000▪ streight waye Francusiū was takē 
                  
                     •
                  y batell,
and 300 in it, which were beheaded. Muncer fledde
into the towne, and hid him self in a house not farre frō
the gate. Into the which it happened that a certen
gētil man entered, whose seruant going vp into the vpper
parte of the house, of purpose to vewe the dwelling.

he found a certaine man lying vpon a bedde, of whom
he demanded, what he was, and, whether he were one
of the rebelles, which fled out of the tumult: That he denied,
saing: That euen then he was sicke of an agew.Here 
                        〈◊〉
                      the tr
                        •
                     wt
                        •
                      of Anabaptist
                        •
                     s It
happened that besides the bedde there laye a purse, which
the other snatched vp, hoping to gette 
                     •
                  ome pray
in it. After he had opened it, he found therin a letter, wherin
Albert Mansfeld admonished Muncer, to leaue
of his entreprise and not to stirre the people to seditiō.
when he had redde these leters, he asked if they were written
to him, but when he denied it, he forced him so
that he confessed him self to be Muncer, and intreated
him. Then (being taken) he was broght to George ye Duke
of Saxon,How G
                        •
                     d re
                        •
                     eieth thinges. and to the Lantgraue, who asked him, why
he had so deceiued poore men. he answered, that he had
done nothing but his duetie: and that the Magistrates,
who wold not abid
                     •
                   ye doctrine of the Gosp
                     •
                  ll, oght on
that maner to be handeled. But after that by ye Princes
he was put to silence, he cried out for very anguish. Thē
said George the Duke of Saxō vnto him: Now art thou
vexed Muncer, but thinke also in thy self, of the death
of those miserable men, which (being wickedly deceaued,
by this thy craft) haue this day perished. The he (wt
greate laughter) answered, so wold they. After he was
broght to Helderung a towne of Mansfeld, where he was
streitly examined what he purposed to do, and who were
of his conspiracie, he told them all. Then came
the Princes of Mulhusium to Helderung, and beheaded
some of the rebelles, among whome Phipher
(of whom I spake before) was one.The cō
                     fort of the Anaba 
                        •
                     n aduersitie. Thither also shortly
after was Muncer broght, who in those troubles was excedingly
vexed, and troubled in him self. Nether was
he able to rendre an accompt of his faith, as the maner
was then. So that (to help him with) Henry Duke of Brū
swick said it before him. And when he was at the point
to die, he acknowledged his fault, and error, and that he
confessed it openly. And being compassed about wi
                     •
                  h

soldiours, he exhorted the Princes to haue more pitie
on poore men, and so, they should not nede to feare the
like dāger after. He exhorted them also to read diligētly
the bokes of the kinges in the scriptures. whē he had
spokē these thinges, he was striken wt a swerd, and for an
example, his head was fastened vpō aspeare, and sette vp
in y• field. And thus did he ēd, & suffer for his offense which
(as said is) he did openly confesse. But yet alas his
error,Historia Sleidan
                        •
                      libro deci
                     
                        ••
                     . and pestilent doctrine did not end. For from him
came forth a kinde of men which for their doing, & doctrine,
are called Anabaptistes. for they forbidde ye baptising
of children, and are them selues rebaptised, and so
affirme they, that all others oght to be, and they take awaye
all the vertue of ye first baptisme.The doctrine of Anabaptistes. They shew forth
a certen kinde of holines. They teach that it is not lawfull
for Christen men to go to law together. Not to requier
or take an othe, althogh by the magistrate it were
required. Not to haue any thing in propre, but all thinges
to be common vnto all. These be their first principles.
But furthermore, they adde yet much more greuous
errors, as afterward I shall declare. And when they
encreased through all Germanie, both farre, and wide.
Luther and many other learned men, earnestly with stode
them, the magistrates also did so punish them that
they could hardely encrease to any greater number. At
the last in the chief towne of Westphalie, named Monasterium,
or Monster (which is well fensed, they placed
them selues, which happened after this maner: There is
not farre from the towne of Monster a temple of Sainct
Maurice, in the which, one named Bernard Rotman did
preach the Gospell in the yeare of our saluation. 1532. to
a greate audience of the Citizens: And when they were
purposed to bring him into the towne, the prelates (purposing
to lette their deuise) gaue him a litle somme of
money, that he might go exercise him self in some other
place. and so he did. But after he had bene in diuers

places where he thoght to do some good, and profi
                     •
                  e
his spirite, he returned after certen monethes. But they
(to whom his returne was greuous) determined to let
his preaching, but it was in vaine, the people bare him
such fauour. Shortly after it came to passe, that certeine
of the chief citezens receaued him into the towne, and
when the church dores were shutte against him, they
made him a pulpet in the church porch. And because
the number of the citizens, and other hearers encreased
daily, they desired of the Papistes▪ that one of the
temples might be opened vnto him, which if they
wold not grant, they wold make away in by violence.
Not long after (by the counsell of the chiefest of the
people, he sent letters to the cuntrie of Hesse, which was
ioyning by, and vnder the gouernement of the Lantgraue,
desiring that certeine good, and lerned men,
might be sent vnto him, which might with him preache
the Gospell. And when there were sixe of them, whereof
two were sent from Marpurge, they deuised among
them selues, how they might first ouercome the
clergie, by the which meanes the Gospell might with
more frute be taught. And to bring this to passe, this
waye was thoght most conuenient. They wrote out the
errors of the Papistes in thirtie articles, and deliuered
them to the counsell, offering them selues to suffer any
kind of punishment, if they were not able to proue
by the holy sc
                     •
                  iptures, that they were all contrarie
to the word of God. The Magistrates sent for the Papistes
to come before them, and they shewed vnto them,
those chief pointes of their errors. And when continually
they alledged for them selues their doctrine to
be pure, and agreable to the word of God, and the
preachers denied the same, and that they wold proue,
vnder the paine of losing their heades: It was asked of
them, whether that they wold by the word of God, confute
those articles that were put forth against them:

when after this maner it was asked of them, they seing
also that the rulers were earnest in the mater, in fea
                     •
                  
wordes they answered: That they had nothing to defend
them selues with all: and wher as vntill that time, they
had said that their ordinances, and maners were good,
and lawfull, they confessed their so saing to be but by
by opinion and ignorance. Thē the Senate seing them
to be conuict, of fals doctrine, and errors, hauing nothing
to alledge for them selues, and confessing their
naughtines, they commanded them, that from thence
forward they should absteine from ye office of teachi
                     •
                  g,
and that they should giue place in all their temples, to
those new teachers, which had disclosed their trumperie,
and de
                     •
                  cate. Afterward by the consent of the senate,
and the people, there was appointed to euery one of the
preachers a seuerall temple, to preache in. The Papistes
were greued therwith, but specially the canons of the
Cathedrall church, which for the most part, were gentile
men borne: they when they saw that they could not
remedy the mater, they departed in a fume, and went to
the bishop of that Citie. And after that they had counseled
with him, they determined to stoppe all the waies,
& passages, that there should no victualles be caried to
the towne. Shortly after they had thus stopped ye waies,
the Bishope with the canons afore named, came to Telget,
to counsell more fully of the mater, for that was 
                     •
                  
litle towne but a mile from the Citie. From thēce the
                     •
                  
sent a messinger with leters to the counsell in thes
                     •
                  
wordes: That they should giue ouer their enterprise
and restore all thinges to their formare state: if not tha
                     •
                  
they wold take them from thence furth as ennemie
                     •
                  .
The Bishop was a countie, and called Francis valdock▪
and his predecessor was named Friderick, brother to
the Arch bishop of Collen. This Bishop (ether because
he could not haue his health in those places, or that he
smelled some what in the mater) departed thēce a litle
before of his owne accord, and being cōtent with a priuate

life, he went into his owne countrey. The people of
Monster coun
                     •
                  eling vpon this mater, kept the messinger.
And vpon Christimas euen in the night, they went
forth, to the number of 900, and comming vpon them
vnwares they toke the towne, and setting kepers at the
gates (lest any should escape) they apprehended all. The
b
                     •
                  shope (as it happened) was gone from thence the day
before. They broght all the captiues into the Citie, amongest
whom were the chief prelates, and diuers of ye
nobilitie. Of these the Magistrates asked, what their intent
was, and whither they were minded to hinder the
preaching of the Gospell any more: They frely answered,
that they wold do their diligence, that the Gospell
might florish. And by the occasion of this answer there
was a pactiō made betwene them. The copie wherof, the
magistrates sent to the Lantgraue, desiring him, that he
wold assist them, in the maintenance of the Gospell, and
their common welth, Then sent he vnto them, certen
of his seruantes, through whose comming vnto them▪ y•
peace was made, and being reconciled, and the grief troden
vnder foote, they liued in peace togethers: That the
Gopsell might be preached in sixe churches, and that y•
impieties, and superstitions, wc were in religion might
be taken awaye: That in the cathedrall church, nothing
should be changed, and that the citizens should not thinke
that to apperteine any thing at all vnto them. This
forme of peace in writing was signed by the Lātgraue,
by the Bishop, and his adherentes, with the noble men,
and all the people the 14. of Februarie the yere of our
saluation. 1533. After this maner, thinges being appeased
there came vnto Monster a botcher of garmētes, named
Iohn Leiden borne in Holland, which was a vehement
anabaptist. This man after he was entered into familiaritie
with y• preachers, he priuely asked of them, whether
they thoght, that it were mete to baptise children or no:
and when they answered yea, he as one vtterly of the
contrary iudgement, began to laugh, and dispise their

iudgement, wc thing, when 
                     •••
                  nard Rotmā of whom we
spake before perceiued, he exhorted ye people in his preaching
to cal vpō God that he wold giue them grace to
stand, and continew in the trueth, and that he wolde kepe
them from being corrupt with heresies, and chiefly
from the opinion of the Anabaptistes, which now priuely
do crepe in among them, and gather them selues together.
For (said he) if their opinion gette the vpper
hand, the state, not on
                     •
                  ly of the common welth, but also
of religion wilbe very miserable, and poore. At the same
time came to the towne one Hermā Stapred, which
being made companion with Rotman did publikely
inuey against the baptisme of infantes. He was scolar
vnto one Henry of Rolle,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Anabatistes 
                        •
                     rept in who a litle before was put
to death at Traiectine, for anabaptistry. And this was as
it were an other steppe forward in this new kinde of doctrine.
This came to pas that the Anabaptistes taught
through all the Citie, althogh it were in priuate houses,
& secretely, and none was receaued of them, except they,
that were of their secte. Further more there was none y•
made them selues knowen to be the authors of this opinion,
nor they did not teach but by night, and when others
were at their rest: which time they wroght their
mysteries but the thing being knowen, and diuers of
the citizens being greued at it, saying that it was a great
shame that such new doctrine should be sowē in secret,
and by night. It came to passe that by the commandement
of the rulers the captaines of them were commanded
to auoyde the Citie, which going out at one gate,
they came in againe at an other, saying, that they
had a commandement from God, that they should remaine
there, and applie their maters. This thing moued
the rulers not a litle, and caused no smal wonder in
the towne. Therfor for the auoiding of greater tumult,
and danger, the magistrates gaue in commandement,
as well to the anabaptistes, as to the preachers of the

Gospell, that they should appere before them in the
coūsell house, with certen other lerned mē. Then Rotman
bewrayed his iudgemēt, which vntill that time he
had concealed, and condemned the baptisme of infantes,
as a thing wicked, and abominable. But one named
Herman Bushe (chiefly) so defended the contrarie parte,
that the Anabaptistes were commanded to departe out
of the Citie, out of hand. And when they did all edge for
them selues that they should not quietly passe through
the Bishoppes land, the Senate obteined for them a safe
conduite, and gaue them wherwith all to bear their
charges. But they hauing long before determined not
to depart from thēce, to any other place (secretly returning
to their companions) kept them selues closely for
a time. The magistrates in the meane ceason, before
that they came forthe of their corners againe, caused all
the churche dores to be shut, one onely excepted. For
it was to be feared, lest that the Anabaptistes, (who daily
increased accompanied with their teachers) should driue
the preachers of the Gospell out of their temples. After
this in the moneth of Nouember the Lantgraue at
the request of the Rulers of the Citie sent two preachers
vnto them, Theoderik Fabritius, and Iohn Melsinger
                     •
                  
but Melsinger seing the trouble, and fearing the danger,
returned home againe. The other with great diligence, exhorted the citizens, that they should beware
of the doctrine of the Anabaptistes, in this wise he ceased
not to do his indeuour, vntill that the Anabaptistes,
getting the vpperhand, did driue the other out of the
Citie, as afterward shalbe declared. And to make all sure,
he wrote in a brief somme the effect of the trew doctrine,
and ecclesiasticall administration, the counsell and
people appointing the same. Then by the counsel of
the magistrates one Peter wirtā began againe to preach,
but he had not preached long, yer the Anabaptistes

stirred vp by Rotman, droue him away. who being more
fierce then before, prouoked Fabritius, and others
to disputation, the senate agreing thereunto, but vnder
this condition that the disputation shoulde be grounded
vpon the word of God, and other writings agreable
vnto the same. in the presence of some godly learned
men, which should be as it were arbitrers, who hearing,
and trying the sentences, and argumentes indifferently
on bothe sides, might giue iudgement: and looke what
iudgemēt they should giue. yt it should be agreed vnto
of all. By which meanes discorde being taken away, the
peace of the Church might be restored. This Codition
Rotman, and his companiōs did refuse. when they craftely
auoyded to be bewrayed, they beganne openly to
be contemned of the common people. But to wipe
awaye this foule blotte, they finde out an other way,
much more compendious. One of them (as if he were
inspired with the holy Gost) 
                     •
                  anne through the stretes
of the citie, crieng, 
                     •
                  epent you, and be b
                     •
                  ptised againe,
orels the wrath of God shall consume you. By this meanes
there was a common tumult, and as many, as were
rebaptised, cried after the same maner, as did the first:
many fearing the wrath of God, which they so threatened
to fall vpon them (deceaued of verie simplicitie,
which otherwise were good men) obeied them, and others
did the same for sauing of their goods. For after
that the Anabaptistes had gotten the vpper had of their
aduersaries, they dispossessed the of their go
                     •
                  des. This
was about the end of december, and now came they againe
furth of their secret corners, of which we spake
before. And being gathered to gether in the market place,
they made a gre
                     •
                  t shout, commanding all yt were not
rebaptised to be 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as paganes, and wicked persones
After this they toke the artilerie, and munition of the
citie, and also the towne house, not without doing violence
vnto many. The others on the other part, for s
                     •
                  
                  uing
of them, & theirs from iniuries, got them selu
                     •
                  s

vnto a nother certen place of the citie, that euer was
wel fensed, and toke manie of y• Anabaptistes. This conflict
against the Anabaptistes, which enioyed ye market
place, and 
                     •
                  ad fortified it round, about cōtinued so long,
while pledges being deliuered on both parties,This was a 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   they came
to a composition, wherin was agreed, that euerie one
should holde his religiō to him selfe as him lyked▪
and returne to his house in peace. In the meane ceaso
                     •
                  
Rotma, & Bernard Knipperdoling, which was the chiefe
author of this faction, althogh they semed to haue alowed
this composition, yet notwithstanding they priuely
sent leters to villages about, willing all those that
were of the
                     ••
                   secte, yt leauing their goods behind them
they should with all spede repaire to the citie to them,
promising yt what soeuer they should lose, should be restored
vnto thē tēne fold againe many entised through
these greate, and plentifull promises, came vnto Monster,
both men, and wemen with an assured hope to obteine
no small benefite, but chiefly they of small substā
                  ce,
which were not 
                     •
                  ble to kepe their houses. The citizens,
and chiefly those that were of some reputation,
when they saw that the citie beganne to be filled with
strangers they with drew them selues as well as they
could, leauing behind them the Anabaptistes with the
mingled people. This was in februarie about shroftide
1534. Thus one partie growing weake by their
departing, the Anabaptistes chose new Magistrates, suche
as were of their owne opinion: They made counselers
also, amōg whome was Knipperdoling. Not long after
they inuaded the temple of sainct Maurice in the
suburbes, and they burnt it withall the houses about it
they spoiled all the temples about it also, and defaced
the great church within. This done, they began
to runne on heapes about the citie, in the stretes, crying,
first: Repent: and immediatly after they cryed,
Hie you hence, ye wicked persones, except ye list to
aduēture your liues. At the same time they ranne about

the Citie in harnes, and chased out of the Citie all such
as were not of their secte, without any regard of age, or
kinde, after such a sorte that in this turmoil, and hastie
flight, many women were deliuered before their time,
and immediatly they toke the goods of those whome
they had chased out. And althogh that this chanced
the day before the bishope laide siege to the Citie, yet
notwithstāding when certaine of the companie of those
that fled, fell into the handes of the bishop, they were
taken as ennemies, of which companie some were put
to death, among whome were takē one or two preachers
of the Gospell. And when Peter wirtam, of whome we
spake before, was in danger of his life, he was saued
through the sute of the Lantgraue. Now the residue of
the townes men moued thereby, which were good men,
beholding present dānger to fal vpon them, thogh they
wold forsake the Citie, ful fore against their willes (and
as it were constrained) they taried still. At yt time their
chief Prophet (for that name they vsurped) named Iohn
Mathew commanded, that euery one which had any
gold, siluer, or mouable goods, they should bring it forthe
to be in common, vnder paine of heading. And to
this vse there was a publike house ordeined. The people
was greatly astonished with this sharpe commandement
yet notwitstāding they obeid it. And it was not
best for anie to vse deceat in this thing, or to kepe any
part backe for they had two prophesying maidēs, wc declared,
if any deceat was vsed. And they were not onely
content thus to do with their owne goods, but also they
vsed the gods of others whome they had driuen out, after
the like maner. After this the same Prophet gaue in
commandement, that none should haue, or kepe to him
self any boke, sauing the Bible, and that all other should
be broght forthe, to be rased, and destro
                     •
                  ed: This commandement,
he said, was giuen him from aboue vpon
this a greate nomber of bokes were broght forthe, and

burned. It chanced, in that time, that a handye
craftes man named H
                     •
                  bart Turteline, had spoken in
mockage against those that called them selues prophetes.
This being knowen, they called the multitude
together, and commanded them to come in harnes
and streight way they accused the man, and cōdemned
him to death. With this the people was greuously
moued, and striken with feare. The chief prophet (a fore
named) toke the poore man, which being downe on
the groūde, he stroke him with a speare, without giuing
him his deathes wounde, althogh he ranne vpon him
with a greate violence. Then he commanded him to
be caried into an other place, and taking a yong mans
halfe hake that stode by him, he shotte him through,
lying on the ground. And because that yet he died not
out of hand, he said, that it was shewed to him frō heauen,
that the time of his death was not yet come, and
that God wold pardon him of his offense. But the poore
man within feaw dayes after dyed. When the prophe
                     •
                  
heard of his death, he toke a long speare, and ran with
it about the Citie, crying that God the father had commanded
him to driue the enemie out of the Citie. And
whē he came neare vnto the campe, a certeine soldiour
slew him▪ And notwithstanding that this was the seconde
time of bewraying of their falshode, yet the residue
of his felow prophetes had so bewitched the people,
and they so set out the mater vnto them, that the common
people toke the mater verie heauily, and said, that
surely some greate plague should fall vpon them, for
the taking away of so notable a man. But the next prophe
                     •
                  e
after him, named Iohn Leyden, willed them al
                     •
                   to
be of a good courage: for (said he) it was lōg before shewed
me that he shoulde dye after that maner, and that
I should take his wife in mariage. Two dayes before
Ester they ranne into the temples, and rang all the belles
at once. Within few dayes after Knipperdoling prophesied,
yt those which were set aloft should be broght

downe, and the other should be exalted, from a vile, and
base estate. After that he commanded that all the temples
should be cast downe, affirming with muche grauitie,
that commandement to haue come from God. Immediatly
the thing was obeied, and that commandement
celestial (as he termed it) with all dilige
                     •
                  ce put
in executiō. About the same time, the fore named Iohn
Leiden toke the sworde that serued for the heading of
the offenders, and gaue it to Knipperdoling, and made
him hangman, for so (said he) it was determined of
God, that he which was one of the chiefe Ruelars before,
and of the counsel should now be in the lowest place,
and be made hangman. Knipperdoling was nothing offended
with the mater, but toke the office thankfully
vpon him. Now when the bishoppe had certaine monethes
borne all ye charge of the siege him selfe alone,
Hermannus the Archbishop of Collen, and Iohn Duke
of Cleue sent him for ayde, money, and gunnes with a
certeine companie of horsemen, and footemen. The
Archbishop of Collen him selfe came also to the campe,
to sit in counsel with them, and not long after, the
citie was besieged, in sondrie places. And when there
was no hope to winne it by force, they made 7. rampers
about the citie, to kepe it from victuales, furnishing
them with footemen, and horsemen, which should remaine
there all winter. The bishop of Monster (for the
maintenannce of the siege, and warre against the towne)
required ayde of the Princes about the Rhine, as the
next neighbours, and to whome the mater also did be
long: for which cause they gathered them selues together
at a citie Called Confluence, the 13 of December.
1534. After this vnprofitable beseging of the citie: Iohn
Leiden fell into a slepe, and dreamed the space of thre
daies, and when he awaked, he spake neuer a worde, but
onely required, paper to be brought vnto him, in
which he wrote 12. mennes names, among whome were
certeine of noble birth, which 12 should rule as chiefe

heades, as it was among the Israelites: this he said, was
the will of the heanenlie father. When as by these
twelue there was a way made for him to be king, he put
forthe certeine articles vnto the preachers, and wil led
them, that if they could, they should confute them by
Gods worde, or els he wolde publish them vnto the multitude,
and so of them they shoudle be alowed, and established.
The somme of them was this, that a man was
not bounde to one wife onely, and it was lawful for any
man to haue as many wiues as he wolde. But when the
preachers withstode this sentence, he called thē into the
co
                     •
                  sell house, and with thē the 12 reulers. And whē they
were all come thither, he put of his cloke, and threw it
on the ground, and with it the new testament: by those
(as it were) signes, he testified, and sware, that article
which he had put forthe was reueled to him from heanen,
and therfore with terrible wordes he threatened
them as that God wold not be merciful vnto them,A sufficient assuran
                        •
                     e for anabab. vnlesse
they wold alow them. At the length, they agreed,
and the preachers for thre daies togethers, preached onely
of matrimonie: Streight waye Iohn Leiden maried.
3. wiues, whereof one was she of whome we spake
before, the wife of the greate prophet Iohn Mathew.
With this example, others did folow, so that it was counted
laudable to marie o
                     •
                  ten. But diuers of the citizens,
that liked not their doings (asigne being giuē through
the Citie) they called all the louers of the Gospel into
the market place. Then toke they the prophet, and Knipperdoling,
with all the preachers. which thing when the
commonn people heard of, they armed them selues,
and reskewed those, that were taken, killing with
great torment, to the number of fiftie persones: for they
tied them to trees, and postes, and so shot them through.
For the greate prophet cried, that all those that wold
do acceptable seruice to God: should throw the first dart
others were killed after another maner. The 24. of Iune
there arose a new prophet, which by his occupation wa
                     •
                  
                  
a goldsmith. This prophet called the people into the
market place, ād there he said vnto them, that it was the
commandement, and will of the heauenly father that
Iohn Leide should be the Emperour of the whole earth,
and that he going forthe with a mighty armie, should
kill all the Princes, and kinges of the earth, shewing
mercie onely to the common people (that is to saye, all
those that loue righteousnes) and that he should posses
the seate of his father Dauid, vntil the father should require
the kingdō of him. For, said he, the wicked being
put downe, the godly shal here reigne in this life. And
when he had published these things openly, by and by,
Iohn Leiden fell vpon his knees, and holding vp his hā
                  des
vnto heauen, said, It was manie daies ago (my brethern)
that I did know of this, but I wolde not declare
it, and now God hath vttered it vnto an other, that ye
might the better credite it. This man obteining the
kingdome by this craft, immediatly he put out of office
the forenamed 12. And after the maner of kings, he
chose vnto him noble men, and commanded that there
should be 2. crow
                     •
                  es of fine gold made for him, a scepter,
a skabbard, and chaine of golde with other such lyke
ornamētes. Furthermore he appointed certeine dayes,
in the which he wold openly heare all mennes maters,
that had any thing to put forthe vnto him. So often
as he came abrode, he was accompanied with his officers,
and noblemen of his court, next vnto him folowed
2. yong mē on horse backe, and he on the right hand bare
a crown, and the bible, the other on the left hand, a
drawen sworde. The pompe of his chiefe wife (for he
had mo at that time) was after the same maner. In the
market place there was an high throne made for him,
couered with cloth of gold. The actions and complaintes
that were brought before him, for the most part were
of mariages, and diuorcementes, which then were most
frequent, and after such, a maner, that not a few
which had before liued togethers a long time, were

then diuorsed. It came to passe, that on a certeine day as
the people were in the market place verie thicke, and
thronging together to heare, Behold, Knipperdoling,
leaped vp, and creping vpon the heades of the people
with his handes, and fete (for they stode so thicke) he
breathed in the mouth of euerie one of thē, saying to
one, after another, The father hathe sanctified thee, receaue
the holy spirit. An other daye he leading the dance
before the king, said, thus was I wont to do with my
harlot, but now the father hathe commanded that I
should do the same before the king. But because he
did it so often, and neuer ended, the king being offended
went his way. Then hastily he went into the throne,
and behaued him selfe like a king. But the king cō
                  ming
in the meane while, thrust him out, and caused
him to be kept in prisōne three dayes. During the siege
they set out a boke, naming it ye restitutiō, in which
boke besides other things, they say: The kingdome of
Christe to be suche afore the iudgement daye, that the
elect, and godly shal reigne, but the wicked, that they
should be destroyed euerie where. Also that it is lawful
for the people, to put downe the ciuile powers: and that
althogh the Apostles had no commandement to take
iurisdiction vpō them, yet notwith standing, the ministers
of the church now, oght to take the sworde into
their handes, and by violence to set vp a new common
wealth. Also that none oght to be suffered in the
common wealth, that is not a true Christian: that none
can be saued, vnlesse he put all his goods in common,
without possessing any thing proper vnto him selfe:
that Luther, and the Pope be false prophetes, and of the
two Luther to be the worse: ād that the mariage of those
which are not illuminated by the true fayth, is polluted,
and impure, ād oght to be takē for adulterie, and for
nicatiō rather thē mariage. Amōg other mē Melanctō,
Iustus Ionas, & Vrbanus Rhegius, withstode their doctrine,
as it appered by their plētiful, and excellēt writings

Within feaw wekes after the new prophet, of whome w
                     •
                  
spake before, blew a trompet in all the stretes and commanded
yt all the people should come in to the church
yarde of the great tēple all harnesed: for the wicked were
to be driue forthe of the citie. When they were come
thither, they fon
                     •
                  d a supper prepared, and by commandement
they sate downe at the table to the nomber of
4000. After they had supped those yt kept the watch aboute
1000. supped also. The king, and the Quene, with
their household serued, the supper being almost 
                     •
                  nded,
the king gaue bread to euerie one, saying: Take,
ād eate, shew forthe the death of the Lord. And the Quene
giuing them the cuppe, said: Drinke, and shew forth
the death of the Lord. This being done, the new prophet
(of whome we spake before) went vp into the pulpet,
and asked of them all, whether they wold obey the
word of God or no. Whereunto when they had all said,
yea, he said: The commandement of the father is, that
there be sent forth 28. preachers which shal go into the
foure quarters of the world, and preach the doctrine that
is published in this citie. And then by order he named
thē, and the places, to which they should euerie one go,
Syxe were sent to Osembirge: as many to warendorfe:
eyght to Sufat, as many to Cos
                     •
                  eld. The king, and the
Quene supped afterwarde with the seruitours, that had
serued at the table, and with them that were ordeined to
go forthe. When supper was in doing, the king rose, saying,
that he had a busines to do, commannded him of
the father, and by chance there was a souldioure taken
whome the king accused to be a traitoure as Iudas was,
and with his owhe hand he stroke of his head. This done,
he retur
                     •
                  ed to supper, and tolde merely of his goodly
acte that he had done. After supper, those 28. preachers
were sent forthe alitle before night. And besides for the
finding of them, there was giuen to each of them a piece
of golde, with a charge, that wheresoeuer their doctrine
was not receaued, they should leaue those pieces, in a

witnes against thē of their destruction, and euerlasting
damnatiō, because they had refused peace, and a doctrine
so wholesome. When they came to the places appointed
vnto them, they cried in the townes that men should
repent, orels they should perish out of hand. They
spred their garmētes vpon the ground, before, the Rulers,
and cast vpon them their pieces of golde, which
they had receaued, affirming, that they were sent of the
father to bring them peace, which if they wold receaue,
then they willed them to put all their goods in common:
and if they refused, then, by this signe, and (as it
were) a marke, they wold witnes their euil dede, and vnthankfulnes.
For behold the time (said they) spoken of
before by the prophetes, in the which God will that righteousnes
shall reigne vpon the whole earth, is come.
And when the king shall haue fulfilled his office, that
iustice doeth rule in euerie place, then shal it come to
passe, that Christe shall giue vp the kingdome to the father.
They speaking after this maner, were takē, and (in
ye beginning by gentlnes, and afterwith tormentes) they
being asked of their doctrine, & life, & of ye strength of ye
citie, answered, that they onely had the true doctrine,
which they wold mainteine with the perill of their
liues. For (said they) from the time of the Apostles, the
trueth hathe not bene truely preached, nor any iustice
vsed: also that there were 4. prophetes, two iust, Dauid,
and Iohn Leiden, and two vniust, the Bishop of Rome,
and Luther, who was the worst of bothe. They being asked,
why cōtrarie to their promise they had driuē ye innocentes
out of their Citie, occupying their goodes wiues
and children, & by what place of the scripture they
wolde proue that their fact to be well, and iustly done?
they answered, that the time was come, which Christe
spake of,Anabaptistes are as make as waspes that the meke should posses the earth, and that
in lyke case God did giue the goods of the Aegyptians
to the Israelites. Afterward they tolde of the munition,
and victualles, that were in the citie, and the multitude:

and also that many in it had aboue fiue wiues a
pece, adding this, that they loked for armies of mē out
of Friseland and Holand, which when they were once come,
the king wold set forth with all his host, to bring
the whole worlde vnder his power, and subiection, after
that he had killed all the kings therof, for not ministring
iustice. When they had bene reasoned withall
after this maner,The 
                        •
                     bstinacie of Anabaptistes and they continued in their purpose,
and wolde acknowledge none other magistrate, then
their king, they were all put to death, sauing one that
escaped. The Citie was so hardly, and so straitly beseged
that none could ether go in, or out. Wherefore the citizens
fearing famishment, and seing the danger that
they were in, they thoght to haue taken the king, and to
deliuer him to the Bishop bound, but he getting knowledge,
therof, chose 12. out of all the multitude, suche as
he thoght to be most faithful vnto him, and called
them captaines, and to eche of them he appointed certeine
quarters of the Citie to defend, and garisons of
men to kepe the people from rising. More ouer he promised
to all the multitude, that by Ester the siege
should be remoued, and that they should be deliuered
from the necessitie that they were in. But vnto them
which he had chosen to be captaines, he promised
much more largely, that they should be lordes, and gouernours
ouer many things, naming the Towres and
land that he wold giue to eche of them. Also he said,
that only the Lantgraue should be pardoned, because he
hoped that he wold take his part. We spake before of
the Conuention (appointed at Confluence) of the noble
men, in the prouince of the Rhine, in the moneth of
Decēber. Vnto which companie (of his owne good will)
the Duke of Saxon Elector Iohn Frederick ioyned him
selfe. In this Session, it was concluded, that for the present
ayding of the Bishop, there should be appointed
furth 300. horsemen, and 3000. foote men, for sixe monethes.
The Coūtie of Oberstē named Vlrik was made general

captaine ouer this armye▪ and of the whole warres.
It was also there ordeined, that the whole estates of
the Empire should be desired to ayde in this mater▪
and because the Emperour was in Spaine, that Ferdinā
                  dus
the king should be desired, for this mater to appoint
a cōuention in ye moneth of Aprile. And also they sent
leters vnto the Citie besieged, willing them to giue oner
their entreprise, being so vnhonest, and wicked, as
nothing could be more: which thing if they wold not,
nether submit them selues againe vnder their lawfull
magistrates, they should be sure that the Bishoppe
which now kept the siege, should haue the whole helpe
of the Empire against them. This was about the end of
December. They gaue answere the 13. of Ianuarie, in the
yere of our Lord 1535. with manie wordes, but nothing
to the purpose, yet so, that they praysed, and defended
their entreprise: and as touching, that which was laid to
cheir charge, for their creating of a king, they made no
answere at all, but in priuate leters written to the Lantgraue
they laboured to excuse them selues, speaking
many wordes of the slawghter, and destruction of the
wicked, and of the deliuerance and reigne of the godly
in this life: with these letters they sent also vnto him
the boke, wherof we spake before, called the restitution,
and aduertised him to repent, and not to make warre
(as did the other wicked Princes) against them, which
were innocent men, and the people of God. The Lantgraue
when he had red their leters, & their boke, he noted
those pointes that were not alowable in the same,
and gaue charge to certen of his learned men, that
they should answere them. And because they (in feaw
wordes, and verie darkely) affirmed their king to be
more chosen of God, then by them, he asked them, why
they shewed not ye places of scripture, wc made thē think
it lawfully done, & why they cōfirmed it not before by
some miracles, & signes aboue nature. For said he, God

shewed by all the prophetes long before, of the comming
of Christe, so that it was not onely euidēt, of what
house, and linage he should come, but also in what time,
and where he should be borne. They did also desire
that their cause might come in question. Vnto ye which
the Lantgraue answered, that it was to late, seing yt they
had taken the power of the sworde into their handes,
and had bene the authors of so great calamitie. For, said
he, all men may plainly see, what is their meaning, to
wit, the ruine of all lawes, and common wealthes: and as
their beginning is wicked, & cursed, so also is the desiring
of their mater to come in question, nothing but
feined, and dissembled: also that he had sent vnto them
faithful Ministres, by whome they were wel, and godly
instructed. but seing they had refused their doctrine,
giuing ouer obedience to Magistrates, possessing other
mens goods, hauing manie wiues, chosing vnto them
a new king, denying Christe to haue taken the nature of
man of the virgin Marie, affirming man to haue fre wil,
forcing men to put their goods in common, denying
pardon to those hat sinne: all these opiniōs to be vtterly
repugnant both to the law of God, and of mā. After they
had receiued this answere, they answered againe in writing,
& withall they sent a boke, set forthe in the dutch
tōgue, of the mysteries of the scripture. In their Epistle
they published their cause againe anew, and defended
their doctrine to be good in their forsaid hoke. They
deuided the whole course, and ages of the world into 3.
partes, and the first age, as from Adam, vntill Noach to
haue perished with the flood, the seconde, in which now
we be, to perish with fyre: the third they saye shalbe new,
in the which righteousnes shal reigne. But before that
the last age shalbe reueled, this that now is, must be
purged with fire. But that (say they) shal not come to
passe before Antichrist be disclosed, and his power be
vtterly put downe: Then shal the ruined seate of Dauid
be erec
                     •
                  ed againe, and Christe shall reigne vpon the

earth and all the writings of the Prophetes, shalbe fulfilled:
And as touching this present age, it is like to the
time of the which Isai speaketh. For iustice is put to
silence in it, and the godly are afflicted. But now the
time of libertie, and deliuerance from so many, and
great calamities is come, as it came vnto the Israelites,
being in the captiuitie of Babylon, and the wicked shal
receaue the full reward of their wickednes, as it is prophecied
in the Apocalypse: but this restitution to go be
fore the world to come, to the end that all the wicked
being oppressed, the seat of iustice might be prepared.
When the Lantgraue had redde ouer their boke, hegaue
charge to certen Ministers, of his Church to answere
vnto it.
               In Februarie the famine was so great in ye Citie, that
diuers perished with hunger. One of the kinges wiues,
being striken with pitie towardes the people, spake by
chance vnto the other womē, and said, that she thoght it
was not the wil of God, that the people should so dye for
lacke of sustenance, The king, which had good prouision
in the house, not onely, to serue his necessitie, but
also to waste superfluously, knowing of this, he broght
her into the market place, with all the residue of his
wiues, and there commanded her to knele downe vpon
her knees, and then he cutt of her head from her shoulders:
and yet not so content, after her death he defamed
her with whoredome. This being done, his other wiues
beganne to sing, and to giue praises to the heauenly father.
Then dansed they, and the king led the dance,
& he exhorted the people also (which had no other victualles
left, saue onely bread, and salt, that they should
dance, and be of good chere. Now when the day of Ester
was come, and that there appered no signe of deliuerance,
the king, which had made them so many goodly,
and large promises, that he might finde some meanes
to excuse him selfe with all, he feined him selfe to
be sicke, sixe daies togethers▪ which dayes being ended,

he came furth vnto the market place, and said vnto
the people that he had ridden vpon a blinde asse, and
that the father had put vpon him the sinnes of all
the multitude,The simplicitie of the Anabaptistes. so that they were all made cleane, and
purged from their sinnes, and that this was the deliuerance
promised by him, with the which they oght
to be content. Among other things that Luthere
caused to be printed, in that time speaking of those
that were besieged in Monstere he said thus: Oh what
shall I say, or how shall I bewaile this vnhappie people:
ye thing it self doth declare, that they be possessed with
many deuilles, but we oght to giue praise to the merciful
goodnes of God for althogh, that Germanie hath
deserued for the contemning of the Gospel, hatred of
Gods Name, and shedding of innocent blood, to be grieuously
punished by the hād of God, yet notwithstanding
he hath brideled ye force and violence of Sathan hither
to, not suffering him to rage at his pleasure: but hath
mercifully warned vs: ād by this foolish tragidie of Mō
                  stere
called vs to amendement of life. for except that
God did brydle hym and drawe hym backe, I dout not,
but that most subtile and craftie spirit wold haue hādeled
this mater farre otherwise. But now when as God hathe
thus restreyned hym he is not able to do so muche
as he wolde and as he desireth, but so farre as God permitteth
him, he fretteth & rageth. For the deuil which
desireth to destroy the Christian faith, goeth not this
way to worke to giue libertie, for men to haue many
wiues at once. for he knoweth well that men do abhorre
it, it is so open, detestable, and filthie a thing in all
mennes eyes, The Politick and ciuil gouernement may
this way be troubled: but to inuade the kingdome of
Christe withall, there must be other maner of weapons
and enginnes vsed. for he that wil go about to flatter ye
people by fraude and deceat, he must not be desirous to
reigne, not to declare him self a tyrāne (for all ye world
reproueth that, and seeth to what end such enterprises

do tend) but he must come by some priuie meanes:
as by holie speakings, his garmēts homelie, and not lyke
vnto others, a graue countenāce his head hanging toward
the ground, in abstinēce not touching money, not
eating flesh, refusing mariage, esteming ciuile gouernment,
and bearing of autoritie to be a prophane thing,
to refuse to beare rule, and to professe hym self to be of
a singulare and lowlie spirite: this (I say) is ye readie way
or meanes which may deceaue euen the verie wise, and
all by simulation and subtilitie to aspire to the highest
reigne vpon earth. But to vsurpe autoritie wt vnshamefast
extremitie, and for filthie desire to take as manie
wiues as he list, this is not the craft of any practised deuil,
but of some rude and late sprong vp spirit, or at least
if he be of any experience, yet God hathe now so tyed
hym in chaynes that he can no more subtely deceaue:
which thing the Lord doeth to the end that
we should reuerence his Maiestie, and that we should
be first stirred vp to repentance, be fore he let lose
the bridle of some more expert deuil,Let Germanie adue
                        ••
                      for their Pr
                        •
                     ph
                        ••
                      speaketh which surely
shall assault and besiege vs much more sharply and with
greater furie. For if this litle master deuil can stirre vp
suche a troulbe, what shall ye great doctor deuil of bothe
ye lawes dowhen he shall come and practise all his power
against vs? Wherfore this homelie deuil that is of so
small experience, is not of vs greatly to be feared. And
I do also think, that all the inhabitantes of Monster do
not allow their toying folie, but that diuerse of them
do greatly sorow, wihch (not without many sighes
and teares) do look for deliuerance at gods hand, as it
hath bene sene afore in the seditions of the bowres.
And I wolde to God there were no deuil in the worlde
of geater craft then this deuil of Monstere is,
prouided that God take not his worde from vs.
               For I suppose there be but verie few, that wil giue
credence to this so grosse and vnlearned a master.
               
                  
But in dede when God is angrie or displeased, there is
no error so folish, vnlikely or out of order which Satan
shal not persuade some to beleue, as we se to be broght
to passe in ye doctrine of Mahomet. For thogh all their
teaching is fond, yet not withstāding the light of Gods
worde being quenched, it toke strength, & hathe spred
furth it self so large and mightie, as we se it this day,
and the like had come to passe in Germanie, if God
had not put doune the enterprise and counsel of Muncere.
For with the least sparke that is, Satan can make a
great flamb (if God do suffer him) and a better way to
quench it withall there is not, then with the worde of
God. for when the weapons of the ennemie are all together
spiritual, he can not be ouercome with a multitude
of horses, or any enginnes of warre. But our Princes
and Bishoppes worke otherwise. for they hinder the doctrine
of the Gospell, which is the onely way, wherby ye
myndes and heartes of men may be healed. And in the
mean tyme they violently tormēt them to plucke the
bodie from the deuil, leauing to him the principal part
of man, wc is his heart and soule, vsing the mater as the
Iewes did, which thoght to extinguish and put doune
Christe by the punishment of the crosse. But now as touching
the common brute and writings that go of Monster,
I haue no doubt, but that it is so as it is reported:
and that which they them selues haue written of late,
maketh me fully to beleue it, in which they paint out
liuely their owne furie and madnes. first of al they teach
of the faith verie foolish and absurde things, and of
Christ as thogh he tooke not flesh of the virgine Marie
and yet they confesse him to be of the sede of Dauid.
But they vtter not their myndes fully: and without
doubt Satan doeth nourish some monstre which
may easily be perceaued by this which they say,
the sede or the flesh of Marie can not deliuer vs.
But in vaine is their trauaile, for the Scripture witnesseth

Christe to be borne of ye virgine Marie. Which
saying in all langages is referred to the frute, which
being conceaued and fashioned of the flesh and blood
of his mother, is borne into the worlde. Also they shewe
furth their ignorance, in that they condemne the first
baptisme, as a profane thing, esteming it not as the institution
of God, but of man. But if it be so that all maner
of things oght to be cōdemned and put away, that ether
the wicked haue or do giue, then do I meruell that
they cast not away the gold and the siluer with the other
goods, that they took from the wicked, and deuise some
other meanes to liue by. for as these things be the creatures,
and worke of God, so is Baptisme also. when the
wicked man sweareth he abuseth the true name of God:
and if the name of God be not true to him, then he offendeth
not, he that killeth, robbeth or spoileth, he trasgresseth
the commandement of God, but if the commā
                  dement
of God be not true vnto him, he sinneth not.
Euen so if the first baptisme be nothing, then the receauers
of it haue not offended. Wherefor then do they so
much detest the first baptisme, as a wicked thing, where
as notwithstanding they affirme it to be nothing? Also
if the mariages in times past oght to be takē as whoredom
and adulterie, as they say, because they were contracted
of them that wanted faith, I pray you, do they
not cōfesse, them selues to be the children of harlottes?
Now if they be bastardes and vnlawfully begotten, how
cometh it to passe that they inioye their Citie and the
possession of their fore fathers? It were mete therefore▪
seīg they be such that, they should haue no enteres into
y• heritages of their ancesters, but that in this new kīde
of mariage, that they are entred into, they should gett
vnto them selues new goods and richesse, which might
beare a more honest title. for it is vncomelie for these
holie and religious men that they should liue with the
goods of harlottes, and miscreantes, or that they should
winne them to them selues frome others by violence,

and robberie. And as touching their kingdome, wc is to
be laughed at, there is so much wickednes in it, and so
manifest, that we shall not nede to make many wordes
of it. And truely for those things, whereof we haue spoken,
as we haue treated more then inough, so also more
then nede, considering that it hathe bene so plentifully
and largely set furth by others. Now when they in the
Citie were come into this case, that diuerse of thē daily
died for hunger, and that many also departed from
thence, and came out so weake and feble that the ennemies
had pitie vpon them, the captaine sent worde to ye
townes mē that if they wolde deliuer to them the king
& certen others, they them selues should be perdoned.
The citezins, althogh they had good will so to do, yet
durst they not go about it, the crueltie of the king was
so great, and the watch was kept so streitly: for the king
was so obstinate, that as long as there remained any
thing for him to eate and a few others, he was fully bent
not to yelde. for which cause the captaines sent word againe
and commāded them that from thēce furth, they
should not send any furthe of their citie, not so much
as children or women. This was in the calēdes of Iune,
the day folowing they made vniuste compleining that
their cause might not lawfully be heard, and that they
were wrōgfully afflicted aboue measure, also profering
them selues to submission, if any could shew them wherein
they offended: fu
                     •
                  ther more they expounded a
certen place of Daniel, as of the fourth beast much more
cruel then the others, the conclusion of their leters
was this: That God aiding them they wold stand to the
trueth which they had confessed, but all this was written
at the kings commādement. Now when all things were
come to the extremitie in ye Citie, there were two that
fled from thence, of which one was taken of the soldiours,
the other came to the Bishope vnder safe conducte,
both these shewed, how the Citie might be taken.
The Bishope & the general captain hearing the words
of these two fugitiues, and weying the mater, the xxii

of Iune they talked with them of the Citie, aduertising
them to yelde them selues into their hands, and to saue
the multitude, which perished with hunger. Answer was
made in the presence of the king, by Roteman, that in
no wise, they wold giue ouer frome that wc they had begonne.
Two daies after about the
                     •
                   xi houre in the night
the armie came nere to the Citie without making any
noise: by the aduice of the two fugitiues, certen chosen
soldiours passed the di
                     •
                  ch, and came to the trench, killing
the watchemē: other folowed after these, which founde
a litle gate open through which they entred into
the Citie to the nōbre of fiue hundreth with certein
capteines and standerds. Thē they of the Citie came rū
                  ning
vnto that place, and with great paine kept they ye
residue of the armie out which wolde haue entered, and
shutting the gate, they fel vpō them that were come in
wt a great rage, and killed many of thē. And when the cō
                  flict
betwene them had indured two houres, verie sharp
and furious, the soldiours that were inclosed, did bur
                     •
                  t
open the next gate which was not kept with any great
strength▪ and so made they an entres in for their felowes,
which streight way entered in by a great cōpany.
The citizens resisted them a litle at the first brunt, but
they gathered thē selues together in ye market place: &
being in dispaire of any victorie (many of them being
slayn at ye first bursting in) they desired and intreated for
mercie, wc was grāted vnto thē. The king and knipperdolin
were taken the same tyme: Roteman disparing
of his life, ranne amōg ye heape of ye ennemies, & was so
thrust through, rather thē he wolde fall a liue into their
hādes. Whē ye Citie was takē, ye Bishope tooke to hī self
half ye spoile & ye ordināce: afterward he discharged ye armies,
reseruing onely to hī self two ensignes for defēce
Thē was there an other cōuētion of the Empire at Wormes
y• fiftenth of Iulie, wherein king Ferdinādus by his
embassador proposed & demāded, whether any thīg els
were to be done concerning y• rooting out of y• Anabaptistes,
seing ye towne was alreadie takē: he also aduertised

them that the Princes oght to aske coūsel of the Bishope
of Rome: wherunto they answered that it was alredie
prouided by certen edictes, what was best to be done to
the Anabaptistes, and that the Emperour had asked coū
                  sell
of the Bishop ofter then once, nether could he do any
more in the mater. In the same conuention the Bishop
of Monstere desired his charges & losses to be recompēsed,
compleining that the money promised was
not payd. but when no thing els could be determined,
few of the nobles being present, an other conuention
was called in the same place, the first of Nouembre, wherein
the things concerning the warre and the charges
thereof might be knowen, wherein also it might be decreed
what forme of common welth were after to be established
at Monstere. When the day was come, the Embassadour
of king Ferdinādus briefly repeted the causes
of that present conuention, to witt, that amōg other
things it might also be deliberated, how ye Citie newly
conquered, might from thence forthe continue in the
olde religion. After these things the Bishoppes legate
sheweth what great charges he was at, al the warre tyme,
how greatly he was indebted, & how it was necessarie (ye
Citie being now takē) for the auoiding of tumultes and
other dangers, to build two Castles in the Citie, with
strong holdes▪ al which thinges he desired to be considered.
To these thīgs answer was made, yt ye Bishoppe had
taken the greater parte of the spoile with all the ordinance
and goods of the citizens which wholie apparteined
to the commō welthe of the Empire, therefore that
it was reason, the value should be counted and communicated
with the charges, & what other things were necessarie
besides, should also be considered. After it was
determined, that the Bishoprike of Monstere should be
vnder the Empire, after the ancient custome, and that al
the nobilitie should be restored, and the citizens also which
had departed to other places, so they were not Anabaptistes:
that the Bishoppe should set forthe the religion

according to the decre of the Empire: that in the
beginning of the next spring the embassadours of the
Princes should go to Monstere to know the state of the
citizens and to kepe them in sauegard, to pull doune all
the forteresses, which the Anabaptistes had erected, and
& that the Bishop also should pul doune the Castles which
he had builded in the citie, & that he should without
delay put to death the king with knipperdoling, &
Crechting, ye prisoners without reteining them any lō
                  ger.
As for that which we said was determined of religion,
the duke of Saxone, the Lātegraue, Wirtemberg
and Anhold, testified openly that they wold not cōsent,
to it: the citezins also professed the same, nether wold
they haue the old forteresses of the towne distroied, but
they consented to the pulling downe of the new. The
king and his two felow captiues were caried hither &
thither to the Princes to be gased and laughed at, by which
occasiō the preachers of the Lantgraue talked and
disputed with the king, chiefly of these pointes, of the
the kingdome of Christe, of Magistrates, of iustificatiō,
of Baptisme, of ye supper of the Lord, of the incarnation
of Christe, & of Mariage, and they preuailed so muche
by the testimonie of the Scriptures, that althogh they
did not altogither conuert him, yet they so bowed and
confounded him (notwithstanding his repugnance, and
defending his opiniōs) that at the last he granted to the
most part of al: which neuertheles, is thoght that he did
but to saue his life. for when they came to him the seconde
tyme, he promised, so he might be pardoned to
bring to passe that all the Anabaptistes which were in
great nombre through all Holand Braband, England,
and Friseland, should kepe silence, and in all thinges obey
the Magistrates. Those same men also disputed wt
the kinges felowes bothe by communication and writing,
of mortificatiō, of the Baptisme of infantes, of the
communion of their goods, and of the kingdome of
Christe. When they were come to Telgate, the Bishoppe

asked the king by what auctoritie he arrogated to him
self such libertie ouer his Citie & people? who asked
him againe,An equall vocation of the▪
                   who gaue hī auctoritie & power in yt Citie
and whē the Bishopp answered that he obteined that iurisdiction
by the consent of the congregation and people,
euen so,A
                        •
                     abaptist and Papist. saith he, was I called thereunto of God. Thē
were they caried backe againe to Monstere the twentie
of Ianuary, where eche of them were put in a seuerall
prison. The same day came the Bishop thither with the
archbishop of Collē, and the embassadours of the Duke
of Cleaue with him, two daies after they were exhorted
by godlie admonitions to conuert from their errors.
And in dede the king aknowledged his sinne, and made
his recourse to Christe by praier, the other two wold
not confesse that they had offended at all, but obstinatly
defended their fals opiniōs: the next day after, the king
was brought forth into an high place, and bound to a poste,
where were present two executioners with fyrie tongues
to torment them with all, the king at the thre first
pyntches of the tongues held his peace, afterward crying
to God incessantly for mercie. When he had bene
torne on this maner for the space of an houre and more,
he was thrust through the breast with a sharp sword
and died. The same punishment also had his felowes, which
being all dead, they were eche of them bound in
yron cofers, and hōg vp in the toppe of the towre of the
Citie, the king in the middest higher then his fellowe
                     •
                  
by the stature of a man. This fearefull tragedie, in which
gods most iust iudgemētes are declared doth teach
vnto vs two things. The former, what may the innocēt,
and the godlie looke for, if ye may bring your enterprises
to passe: and secondarely what doeth the worlde
& the rulers now in earth for the most part deserue. As
touching you, how so euer for a time ye cloke your
crueltie, what simplicitie so euer ye declare in your externall
gesture, what so euer ye speake of charitie and loue,

and how so euer ye seme to be zealous ouer the
trueth, yet shall you in the end produce no other frute
then these yours fathers haue done before you. If yt I liste
to note particular exāples, I might shew in your sect
and amongest you to haue bene so horrible enormities
as more horrible were neuer from the beginning: but
lest I might seme to take any pleasure in accusing particular
persōs, I wil not at this presēt write al that I know.
Onely (I say) that the Church of God may looke for no
other thing at your hand, but for confusion of all gods
ordinances, and for more cruel persecution then euer
yet it did susteine since the daies of the Apostles. for what
your fathers began in Monster in their purpose,
you do performe and finish: and to that end do you write
your bookes, some calling all the Scriptures of God
in doubt, some affirming that there is a more perfect
knowledge, then that which is cōteined, or expressed in
the worde, some plainely denying the God heade of
Christ Iesus, and of the holy Gost, some claiming liberbertie,
that no man should be troubled for his conscience,
cloking vnder that title all blasphemie, and diabolicall
doctrine. And you now last in accusing vs of these
most odious crimes, whereof we be most innocent,
ye, and your brethern, I say, in teaching this your
pestilent doctrine, and accusing vs who gainstand your
deuilish errors, do plainely declare, what ye haue already
intended, if God by his great power bridle not
your furie. And assuredly the world and the Rulers of
the earth (for the most part) most iustly deserue so to be
entreated. As for ye Church of God, it must be subiect to
the crosse, euen vntill the comming of the Lord Iesus
from the heauens. But the world I say, and the Princes
of the earth (which is the
                     •
                   seconde point, which
we haue to marke in this former historie) most
iustly deserue to be punished with suche confusion
as ye intend. For the one, and the other (I meane

the Princes, and the people, cōspired to this day against
God, against his sonne Christe Iesus, ād against his eternal
veritie. They mainteine impietie, superstition, and
idololatrie, they cruelly murther the Saintes of God,
and so do they reioyse in all kinde of tyrannie, yt Gods
iust iudgementes can not long delaye punishment. And
therfore leauing you Anabaptistes into the handes of
him whose power ye can not escape, I am compelled in
feaw wordes to admonish you aswell the people, as the
princes, yt spedely ye retourne to the liuing God, whose
veritie so long ye haue oppugned, whose religion ye
gainstand, and true messingers, ye persecute, or els persuade
your selues that vengeance is prepared. He will
not entreate you, as he hath done his afflicted Church,
and deare childrē: that is, he will not call you to repentance
by a fatherlye correction, the end wherof shal turne
to your cōfort. Not so, not so, but as ye haue still rebelled, and dishonored him, so will he powre forthe contempt
vpon you, in the which ye shal perish bothe t
                     •
                  mporally,
and for euer. And by whom doeth it most appere,
that temporally ye shalbe punished, of vs, whome ye
banish, whome ye spoile, and robbe, whome cruelly▪ ye
persecute, and whose blood ye dayly shed? There is no
dout, but as the victorie wc ouercometh the worlde is
our faith, so it behoueth vs to posses our soules in our
pacience: we nether priuely, nor openly denie the power
of the ciuile magistrate: we do not claime the cōmunaltie
of all things in this life: the pluralitie of wiues
we do abhorre: we wold not destroye gods ordinances,
and Pollicie, by him established, in common welthes,
but we hate, & detest all such confusion. Onely we desire
the people, and the Rulers to be subiect vnto God, and
vnto his holy will plainly reueled in his most sacred
worde. And therfore of vs, I saye, ye are and maye be without
all feare. But what ye may loke for, if the Anabaptistes
shal atteine to their purpose: the confusion, and tyrannie
vsed by those of whome we haue spoken, is▪ and

may be a glasse, wherein ye may se your iudgement, &
end most fearfull, vnlesse that vnfeinedly ye repent. Flatter
not your selues, that ye be able at all times to preuaile
in battel by stregth, because that in nomber ye be
manie, or because those Prices of Germanie preuailed
against that most miserable, & most wicked sort of enraged
Anabaptistes. Consider, consider depely in your
hearts, that when God will punish, no multitude can resist.
At that time God gaue victorie to the Princes, and
did suppres the furie of those wicked men, not because
the Princes were iust, and had deserued suche a benefite
at gods hand, No, the most part were wicked, as their
factes since haue plainely declared. But God had respect
to his owne glorie, and honour. He did admonish his elect
by their examples to beware of such poison, and did
also by such confusion, call you to repentance. Of late
yeres before was the Euāgile of Christ Iesus reuiued in
Germanie, the haruest of the Lord was not come to ripenes,
& therfor for his owne names sake he wold not suffer
that pestilēce so sodainly to preuaile. But now seing
that of so long cōtinuance from wickednes ye procede
to open contempt of God, and of his true religion, shall
he suffer you to rage without punishment? No, his iustice
can not. And what instrumentes can God, (I say) finde
in this life, more apte to punish you, then those that hate,
and detest all lawfull powers, and do thirst nothing
more, then such confusion as before ye haue heard? God
will not vse his saintes, and chosen children to punish
you. For with them is alawaies mercie, yea, euē althogh
God haue pronounced a curse, and maledictiō, as in the
Historie of Iosua is plaine But as ye haue pronoūced wrong
and cruel iudgement without mercie, so will he
punish you by suche as in whome there is no mercie.
Tremble therfor, and cōuert vnto God, if that ye think
to escape v
                     •
                  ngeance, confusion, and shame, bothe temporal,
and for euer. Now to the conclusion of your boke.
Thus ye finish.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE ADVERSARIE▪
               
               Iudge now gentill reader vprightly,The 47. section. and here I commit thee to
God, beseching him to opē the eies of thy minde, that thou maiest know the
trueth, in this, and in all other matters neces
                     •
                  arie to thy saluation.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               As you will all men to reade, and to iudge with indifferencie,
euen so do we, requiring of God not onely yt
so the eyes of mē maye be lightened that clearely they
may se things apperteining to saluation, but also that
by the mightie operatiō of gods holie spirit they may
be cōfirmed, and so sanctified in his eternall veritie, that
to the end they may continue in the simplicitie of his
holy worde and further, that all men may se to what confusion
your doctrine tēdeth, the ground wherof is your
owne vaine imagination, and the end (as before we haue
said) not onely the destruction of all gods ordinances,
necessarie for this present lyfe, but also the treading vnder
foote of the bright glorie of Christe Iesus. For the
more that ye extoll fre will, and the vertues of man, the
more do ye obscure the iustice of faith, which onely is
acceptable in the presence of God, and the lesse do ye attribute
to Christe Iesus his death and passion. Yea, some
of you are not ashamed in your enuenomed doc
                     •
                  rine,
wherein secretly ye traine your scholars, to affirme:
That we that now liue after Christes death, haue no
other benefite, ether by him, or by his death, but onely
an exāple to suffer as he did, O sede of the serpēt thy father
Pelagius was neuer so impudent, nether yet did euer
the deuil finde anie of his instrumētes (before thee)
so bolde, as that against the holy scriptures of God he
durst affirme that horrible blasphemie. Darest thou denie,
but that the death of Christe Iesus shall to the consumation
of all thinges haue the same efficacie, that it
hathe had frō the beginning? Did not Christe suffer for
our sinnes, not for our ex
                     •
                  ple onely
                     •
                   but because we were
not able to satisfie the iustice of God which we had al

offended, that therefor the punishment of our offenses
was laid vpon him? Haue we any more power now, then
had his disciples to whome he said, without me ye can
do nothing? Doeth not he remaine a soueraigne Priest
for euer, after the order of Melchisedech? Is it not he, who
by one sacrifice made perfect for euer, such as ether
haue bene, are, or shalbe sanctified of that polluted sede,
of Adam? Finally is it not he alone, who giueth libertie,
saluation, and lyfe to his bodye which is the Church,
not in one age, but from the beginning to the end? Satan
him self is compelled thus farre to co
                     •
                  fesse, and therefor
be thou shamed (o thou blasphemous mouth).
What other monsters ye norish, and fede in the stincking
denne of your enuenomed heartes, time wil reuele.
And if it shall please God to assist my weakenes, I will
not spare labors to communicate with my brethern,
what pestilence lurketh in your enuenomed doctrine,
to the end that all the faithful may auoyde the same.
You fearing to forget any thing of your master Castalios

                     •
                  currilitie, do thus conclude.
            
         
         
            
               THE ADVERSARIE
               And as for you (Careles m
                     •
                  n) you oght to take it in good worth,The 48. section. what
so euer I haue said▪ first because it is trueth. Secondly because, ye holde
that all things, 
                     •
                  e do
                     •
                  e of mere necessi
                     •
                  ie, then haue I written this of necessitie.
            
            
               ANSWER.
               To the which I answere, that if the deuill were not a
lier, and the father, not of lyes onely, but also of all
deceatful lyers, it were not possible, that you who in so
manie thinges haue declared your selues horrible lyers
should vainly bragge that ye haue writtē the trueth. For
besides those odious crimes, which most impudently,
and most falsely you lay to our charge, amongest al the
scriptures by you alledged, their are not three which ye
do not abuse, yea and in some ye do so openly belye
the holy Gost that you conclude contrarie to his expressed

wordes. But when I cōsider, that your Master & father
Satan him self, eshamed not in the presence of Christe
Iesus, to boast, and to bragge, that all the power, and
glorie of the earth was giuen vnto him, and that he gaue
it to such as best pleased him, whē yet in very dede he
had no power to giue to his felow angelles, and companions
of darkenes licence to enter into the bellies of
swine, till that he, ād they were faine to begge that pleasant
palace, of him, to whom all power is giuen in heauen,
and in earth. When this I saye, I do considre, I do
more lament your miserable blindnes, then that I can
stomake against your vanitie, except in so farre, as to
the ende, I must saye, that such as obstinatelye denie the
plaine trewth of God, are lyers, and the sonnes of that
lier, who first deceaued man, and powred into his hart
the same venome, and error which this day ye teach,
and mainteine. For he was bold to affirme that wisdom
and lyfe was to be found by other meanes then God had
determined, yea where God had pronounced death, and
damnation, he promised saluatiō, and life, and so do
you. For God hath apointed life to none of his elect,
but in Christe Iesus onely, ād that by such meanes, as in
his holy word expressed, which are trew faith, continuall
repentance, abnegation of our selues, of owr owne iustice,
and wisdom, ād finally by receauing (of free grace)
in Christe Iesus, whatsoeuer we haue lost in Adam. But
ye ashame not to affirme, that the iustice of Christe sufficeth
vs not, except that we haue a personall iustice of
our owne. How coldely ye speake, or write of his death,
of his resurrection of his mediation, and perpetuall
intercession, is euident. Your bragging and prowd boasting
of your owne iustice, and of your greate perfectiō,
are euident tokens how you do agree with Christe Iesus
the trueth, and veritie it self, who commandeth vs to
saye (not for the fashiō, but from vnfeined heartes) we
are vnprofitable seruantes. But some of you in your

iesting eshame not to saye▪ that ye are not two thousand
passes, distant from the fulnes of perfection.
               But this your vanitie (your blasphemies excepted)
doth not greately offend vs. For a small pricke of
of a pinne, or of a nelde shalbe sufficiēt to declare that
bladders (be they neuer so streitly blowen) conteine
in them selues nothing but wind. That by necessitie
you haue written your railing blasphemies, and most
impudent lies we easily confesse. For seing that ye
are the sede of the serpent (I meane such as in your
error shall continue to the end) what thing can you els
do, but of necessitie spew forthe vēnom, whē the weight
of gods eternall veritie beginneth a litle to presse downe
your head (for so doeth the serpent whensoeuer she
is touched) But why do ye not considre (seing ye be reasonable
serpentes) that like as prowdly ye lift your selues
against the glorie of the eternall Sonne of God, and
as ye cease not maliciousely to slander suche instrumē
                  tes
as in his Church be most profitable, and most wort
hie of prayse in the eyes of all godly, that likewise of
necessitie it is, that ye come to ruine, that your pride
be repressed, and your blasphemous tongues be cōfounded
for euer? seing that God, who hatch all iniquitie,
must nedes resist the proude, destroy the lying lippes,
and remoue from his societie suche as declare them selues
enemies to his eternall veritie, the knowledge wherof
we confesse with Iob commeth onely by inspiration
of the holy Gost, and doth not procede from flesh, or
blood, from studie, care, or wordly wisdome, but is the
free gift of God reueled to the lytle ones, and comonly
hid from the wisest of the world. Which sentence
wold God that depely ye could wey: for then I doubt
not, but y• ye should clearely se, that to come to Christe
Iesus, is nether of the runner▪ nether yet of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
but of God, who sheweth mercie to such as pleas
                     •••
                  
him, whose counselles eternal, and iudgementes, m
                     •
                  st

profound, can no creature apprehend and compasse, and
ther
                     •
                  fore oght all the true seruantes of God with reuerence,
and with trembling saye, O how incomprehensible
are thy iudgementes ô Lord, and how vnsearchable
are thy wayes: for of thee, by thee, and for thee are all
things. To thee be glorie for euer, and euer. So be it.
            
            
               
                  Isaiah. 54.
                  EVERIE TONGVE THAT SHAL CONTEND
WITH THEE IN IVDGEMENT, THE SAME
SHALT THOV MOST RIGHTLY CONDEMNE.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Fautes escaped in the printing.
            In the 24. page the 19. line not for nor. In the 33. page,
the 4. line Curthe for Church. In the 95. page. the 17. line
displease for displeasure. In the 117. page, in the margent
gode for gods. In the 153. page the 21. line through for
thoght. In the 193. page, the 32. line maciously for maliciously.
In the 165. page, the 6. line yea for yet. In ye 204.
page, the 3. line thy penne for my penne. In the 263. page
line 3. A scaoth for Asteroth. In the same page, the 16.
line, yet the became, for yet he became. In the 199. page,
the 24. line, and affirming for and we affirming. In the
312. page, the 34. line 24. for 23. In the 321, page, the last line,
defaced
                  •
                for defaced to his vttermost. In the 322. page,
the 18. line good reasonly, for goodly reason. In the 435.
page, the 18 line cheir for their.
         
      
   