
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  THE
RESOLVED
Gentleman.
                  Translated out of
Spanishe into
Englyshe, by
Lewes Lewkenor
Esquier.
                  Nel piu bel vedere, Cieco.
                  Imprinted at London, by
Richarde Watkins.
1594.
                  
                  OMNE ◆ BONV̄ ◆ SVPERNE
               
            
         
         
            
            
            Maur. Kyffin to the Reader.
            
               SEe, heere, layd open to thy sight and sence,
               Th' Error, and Terror, of this wretched Life:
               Thy many Foes, the meanes for thy Defence;
               The glorious End, succeeding all this strife.
            
            
               Learn to redeeme the precious Time heere lent thee:
               Shunne false allurements, and Courts subtilitie:
               Resolue herein: Of thine amisse repent thee;
               So maist thou vanquish Chance and Debilitie.
            
            
               This Allegorie, shaped first in French,
               And thence transferd into Castilian verse,
               Conteining Rules our follies to retrench,
               
                  Lewknor, by Metaphrase, doth heere reherse.
               Him vertue, Armes, and Languages adorn;
               Hatefull reproouers he may iustly scorn.
            
            
               Le Temps s'en va.
            
         
         
            
               
INforced cause vnfayned Loue, proue both constaints in mee,
            To raise my Muse (Oh worthlesse Muse) to sing the worth of thee:
            But what I sing, is that I see, what I assured euer,
            Hopes of your freends are springing stil, sweete Lewes do stil perseuer.
            And though nor Armes (oh losse of Arme) nor Muses now are minded,
            Dispayre not freend, men worthy know, that now the time is blinded.
            And as this perfect subiect shewes, the subiect of thy minde:
            So this pretends, vnto thy frends, more resteth yet behinde.
            Thou leaust the Warres (so wills thy freends) leaue not the Muses name.
            All is not lost, though now likd least, what left is vnto fame.
            And rest not heere, but still run on, we longing are for more.
            Great are thy guiftes, yet geue vs still, thou lesnests not thy store.
            
               Rob. Dillington.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST HONORABLE
AND VERTVOVS
LADY, THE LADY
ANNE, COVNTESSE OF
WARWYCKE.
            
               GReat Alexander (excellent Lady)
in nothyng more delyghted,
then in the reading of warlyke
discourses, especially and aboue
the rest, with greatest affection he
embraced the Iliades of Homer,
beholdyng therein, as in a cleere looking glasse, lyuely
set foorth and deciphred in the person of Achilles,
the excellent vertues of his owne inuincible minde.
            
               Traian lykewyse founde nothyng that so much
pleased him, as the morall preceptes, and phylosophicall
discourses of Plinie.
            
            Neither is this affection peculiar onely to Princes,
but in a maner to the most part of men, chiefly to delight
in those discourses, that to the qualitie of their
humors are best agreeing.
            In which regarde, consideryng the sympathie betweene
the noble vertues of your worthy minde,
and the most pure intentions of the Authour, expressed
in this Treatise, I thought I coulde not to any
more worthyly offer the patronage of this my poore
translation, entreating of a minde vertuously resolued,
then to your Ladyship, whose pietie, zeale, religion,
and vertue, haue placed you in that high seate

of the worldes opinion, that there is nothyng among
all degrees, sortes, and sexes, more honored, nothyng
more admired, nothyng more applauded.
            Accept therefore, good Madame, with your
wonted fauour this poore Translation, the greatest
part of whose best substance is your owne, as lyuely,
though vnder the shadowe of other names, representyng
the innated vertues of your owne noble minde.
            I owe you many other dueties, aswell in regarde of
your many honorable fauours, and continuall redinesse
to do me good in Court, since my first commyng
to her Maiesties seruice, as also of the infinite obligations,
which not onely I, but also my Father, and sundry
of my frendes, do owe vnto the memory of your
noble deceassed Husbande, and his most worthy and
euer memorable Brother, which I wyll rather endeuour
alwayes to witnesse, with an euer duetifull and
obsequious remembrance, then to endeere with any
vayne circumstances of enforcing wordes.
            And thus, good Madame, wyshing you happines
and honor, to the full measure of your vertues: and
mee (to my wyll) occasion and ablenesse to do you seruice,
I take in all humblenesse my leaue.
            
               Your Ladyships euer most
faythfully at commaundement,
Lewes Lewkenor.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               THis Treatise was first written
in French by an ancient Knight
of Burgundy,
               Philip de Comines, in the first chapter of his commentaries, maketh mention of Olyuer de La Marche, to haue been a great cause of the warres betweene king Lewes the .xi. and the Count of Charoloys, afterwardes called Charles the hardy, which sheweth that he was a man of no small honour and dignitie. called Olyuer de La
Marche, a man, that both in matter
of warre and peace, bare great sway
with Philip Duke of Burgundy,
and after him lykewise with Duke
Charles, his sonne, whom in all his warres he neuer
abandoned, and was lastly with him at the vnfortunate
battayle of Nancy in the yeere. 1476. where, by
the Duke of Lorayne and the Swyssers, he was ouerthrowen
and slayne. After this, he had great charge and
authoritie vnder his daughter, the Lady Mary, sole
inheritrix of all the Dukes great estates and Prouinces,
who maryed Maximilian Archduke of Austria,
afterwardes elected Emperour: to whom, leauing two
chyldren, a sonne and a daughter, she dyed shortly after,
some say of the fall from a Horse: But this Authour,
who bestought to know the trueth, sayth, that
it was through the inwarde conceyte of an excessiue
sorow: But once, such was the greefe that he conceyued
of her death, and of the two other before named
Princes, vnder whom he had been brought vp, that
he retyred himselfe from administration of great
matters, to a quiet lyfe: and in his solitarinesse composed
this Treatise. It hath been since translated into
sundry Languages, and among the rest, by Don Hernando
de Acunia into Spanysh verse, and dedicated vnto
the Emperour Charles the fifth: whose translation
I do here folow, because I coulde neuer yet lyght on
any of the French originals.
            It seemeth that the Spanyarde in some places much

altered the Authors meaning, adding & taking away,
according to his owne fancy, and fitnes of the tyme in
which he translated it, as both by the sequele of this
discourse appeareth, as also by his Epistle to the
Emperour, which I haue here prefixed.
            Some perchaunce may blame me, of hauing done
the Author whom I folow wrong, by translating into
an vneloquent barren Prose, his excellent conceyte,
expressed in such heroicall Verse, and beautified
with so many fayre Tables & purtraictes, marueylously
delighting with the varietie of the one, and
the sweetnesse of the other, both the eare and the eye
of the reader. To this I answere, with the confession
of my fault, that it is true, and withall, that this matter
being for the most part allegoricall, had in deede been
farre better to haue been handled in verse. Neuerthelesse,
I doubt not, but those that do more esteeme
substance then shadowes, wyll lyke neuer the worse
of the matter, for being delyuered in a playne speach:
Neyther had mine Authour, yf he were alyue, any
great cause to be angry with me, seeing I haue bestowed
an Englysh habite vpon him, such as it is, though
it be no way comparable to the beautie of that, wherewith
he was in his owne countrey language attyred.
            As for new fangled & fickle conceyted heads, that
whensoeuer they reade any thing, neuer go farther
then the rynde, my sliking of euery thing, how vertuous
matter soeuer it conteyne, that thundreth not
into their eares with a lofty tempest of words, I would
earnestly request them, and that more in regarde of
their owne reputation, then in defence of this poore
Treatise (whose harmlesse innocencie shalbe a sufficient
shielde agaynst whatsoeuer calumniation) to

forbeare to censure amysse thereof: for though perchaunce
the basenesse of the style, & the shallownesse
of the inuention, yeelde no harmonie to delight their
delicate eares, yet it woulde be moderately iudged of,
in regarde that it conteyneth nothing but most effectual
and moouing examples of great pietie, laying
open to our eyes the vaine and deceitfull instabilitie
of this most wretched and miserable worlde: and finally
teacheth nothyng more, then how to lyue vertuously,
and dye blessedly. Besides, it maketh honorable
mention of sundy excellent Princes: some of
which, though long agon deceassed, yet such was their
noblenesse, and pietie, that their names are styll entertayned
of the worlde in all honor and reuerence.
Others yet lyuing, who through the inestimable blessing,
wherewith God and nature hath adorned them,
are of all the worlde most worthyly honored with
admirable applause. As for me (lyke a well mounted
Cowarde in a skyrmish, that relyeth more vpon the
goodnes of his Horse, then his owne valour: So) I
hope the worthynesse of my Author, and the zelous
integritie of his discourse, shall, how faynt soeuer I
finde myne owne desert, be able to free me from the
reprehension of those that are wyse and well iudgeing,
whom I chiefly desire to please, and to whose
censure I wyllyngly submit my selfe, and this poore
Pamphlet.
            
               L. Lewk.
            
         
         
            
            To the sacred, Catholique, and
Imperiall Maiestie of great Caesar.
            
               
                  I know not whether be greater
the hardinesse of the Resolued Gentleman
(of whom this booke entreats)
in his combates, or my presumption, in
dedicating it vnto your Maiestie, for
so small a seruice, caryeth with it so
great a disproportion, that I feare, my
good intention shalbe accompted rashnesse, in presenting so
meane a trauayle, to so high a greatnesse.
            But two thinges did chiefly encourage mee to publish it vnder
the glorious name of your Maiestie: The one, in respect
of the conformitie of the discourse vnto your Maiesties vertues,
in whom aboue all the Princes of your tyme, the profession
and practise of true Christian and militar discipline
chiefly florisheth: The other, of communicating vnto those
of my nation these my poore paynes, in translation of this
Treatise, which though it be lytle, yet yf they do attentiuely
reade and marke it, they shall therein finde an excellent hydden
treasure, shewing in deede the very marke, whereto the
perfection of all vertue tendeth.
            It was first written in French by a Gentleman of great
worthynesse, noble aswell in letters, as in armes: His intention
was, to discourse of the dangerous warres made vnto vs by
our Senses, touchyng diuers passages of age, thorow which we
runne, or rather to speake more properly, are by disorders violently
caried. And so vnder the figure of bodily combates,
he layeth the spirituall so lyuely before our eyes, as cannot but

draw the well-iudging Reader, to great consideration of our
frayle estate. The translation hath not been altogeather without
some hardnesse, for that as the tongues are dyuers, so is
their style and maner of phrase exceedingly different. I haue
left out some thynges expressed by the Authour, as being hystories
peculiarly concernyng himselfe and his Countrey, vtterly
vnknowen, and vnnecessary to vs: and in their place,
haue inserted others of more moment, and more famously
knowen, not onely to our owne nation, but to all the worlde besides,
which I haue not done onely by myne owne aucthoritie,
but ioyntly by aduise of men of good iudgement, and great
skilfulnesse in eyther tongue. But my intention being rather
to prayse the Booke, then to endeere the translation: I say, that
it is such, that both in myne, and other mens iudgementes,
it deserueth your Maiestes protection. And so with all humblenesse.
I kisse your Imperiall handes.
            
               Your Maiesties humble
seruant and subiect,
Don Hernando de Acun̄a.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE RESOLVED
GENTLEMAN.
            
               IN the declining
season both of the
yeere and of my
age, trauailing farre
from my natiue
home & countrie,
solitarie & sorowfull
all alone, my
thoughtfulnes did
of a sodayne waken
& reuiue my slumbring
memorie, by renewing vnto her the time
and historie of my passed youth, and, quickning
my senses with a fresh and vnusuall vigor,
forcibly recalling my mynde to the consideration
of my presente state, by suggesting therevnto,
infinite and confused discourses of my
many variable and dangerous forepassed fortunes,
did begin at length to argue with mee in
this sort,
            First, quoth she, Whosoeuer is forgetfull, or
carelesse of himselfe and his estate,Nothing so miserable as the man that lyueth careles of his estate. flyeth not
the pitch of true honor, neyther shall at any
tyme see hymselfe beautified with the glorious
bryghtnesse of her perfection: in which miserable
lethargie yf he perseuere, then is his case
most lamentable, and vtterly desperate, as not

onely depriued of this worldes honor, but also
of that euerlasting glorie and eternall health,
to which, blessed myndes with the winges of a
vertuous industrie do aspire. Seest thou not,
quoth she, how miserable a face of thinges, the
now passed and gon sweete Sommer season
hath left vnto vs? The earth is now dispoyled of
all her beautifull raymentes, and glyttering ornamentes,
her greene and fruitefull florishing
hearbes, her so fayrely colored flowers, and
sweete odoriferous smelles are gone: Both
playnes and mountaynes are now depriued of
all their passed pleasures, hauing nothyng left
them to delyght the beholders eyes, but a bare
and naked barrennesse. The high stately Trees,
that lately so aloft florished (all vigor and pleasing
greennesse being lost) haue now neyther
fruite nor shadow, hauing yeelded all their glorie
to the nipping rigor of the colde, that hath
bereaued them of their fragrant humour: Such
as this of theirs, is thy estate, who hauing now
ouergon the sundry degrees and seasons, as the
Spring, Sommer, and Autumne of thy age, rest
assured, that thy Winter is at hande: onely this
is the difference, that thou canst not be agayne
renewed in this worlde, as are these vegetatiue
creatures: for so is it by the eternall wisedome
enacted, that there is no going backe from that

degree of age, whereunto a man is once ariued.
            It behoueth thee therefore well and wysely
to ponderate with thy selfe, that thou now drawest
on towarde the exceeding dangerous
horror of an ineuitable passage, kept by an
euer victorious enemie, called DEATH,The passage of death kept by two Champions, Accident, and Debilitie. who entertayneth
in his dayly wages, two myghtie and
puissant Champions, the one called Accident,
the other Debilitie: the cumbate with one of
which, thou canst not by any meanes auoyde.
These two vnuanquished Champions do keepe
the great forrest of Atropos, agaynst all aduenturers:
the passage of which, as it is most dangerous,
so is it full of horror and amazement.
For such is the nature of their chalenges, that
they neuer desist fyght, tyll they see him whom
they haue vndertaken conquered and dead,
them selues being free from death, and carelesse
of repose. The elder of them, and most terrible,
is Accident, who with variable and vncertayne
kindes of fight, bereaueth, for the most
part, the liues of braue and lustie youthes, in the
prime & strength of their vnmellowed yeeres:
yea, and sometimes he sporteth himselfe in the
death of olde men, women, and chyldren. But
hydeous Debilitie, with inuisible blowes, killeth
onely those that are weake, and languishyng.
They are so nusled in blood, that their dayly

exercise and practise, is nothing but to murder
and destroy mankinde, neyther is their puissance
by any pollicie to be deluded, nor by any
agilitie, or stratageme to be auoyded.
            This being so, iudge then with thy selfe, in
how great degree, these myghtie foes are to be
feared. Thou hast been long agone summoned
to this battayle, by Excesse, their heralde at
Armes, and therefore the fyght being so full of
perill, and the matter of such importaunce, I
cannot but much maruell at this thy carelesse
vnreadinesse, especially seeing at thy very birthday
thou wert waged therunto. Thou doest not
exceede Sampson in inuincible strength, Hercules
in valorous courage, Salomon in profound wysedom,
Tullie in powerful perswading eloquence,
Diomedes in vigorous vnderstanding, nor Absolon
in delicious beautie: yet no one of these
was able to resist these death-bringing Champions,
that euen now attende thee in the lystes.
The farther that the vncertayne race of thy miserable
lyfe lyngreth on, the nearer approcheth
the houre of thy ineuitable conflict, to which
attende no other trumpet, then the dolefull
knowlling of a deadly Bell. Therefore with all
instance I aduise thee, to looke well about, and
to call well all thy wittes tegeather, that thou
mayst be the better prepared, agaynst the hard

brunt of so terrible a reckoning.
            Herewith my thoughtfulnesse ending,Author. I awaked,
as it were out of a drowsie traunce or
dreame, thanking her in the highest degree for
these her carefull admonitions, and withal tolde
her, that for mine owne part, I was redy to performe
as much as to a true resolued Gentleman
did appertaine: and therewithall, presently
without delay put on my armour, and lyke a
Knight aduenturous, passed foorth onward on
my way. My horses name was Desire, my harnesse
tempred in the water of Puissance, my
shielde, of Hope, my launce, of Aduenture, and
my sworde, of Courage.
            In this equipage, I entred into the quest of
my so much renowned aduersaries; at the ende
of two dayes trauaile, in which I had not found
any aduenture worthy the wryting, I came into
a very greene and florishing Medowe, the
name whereof was Worldly pleasure:The fayre feeldes of worldly pleasure. The outwarde
shew whereof presented vnto my senses
such pleasure and delyght, that rauished with
contentment, forgetfull of my iourney and
vndertaken enterprise, I euen determined to remayne
there: But sodainely I myght espie a
galant Ruffler, that came fiercely coursing along
the Medow, bidding me defende my selfe, for
without farther delay, he meant to iust with me.

I was much moued with the roughnesse of his
speach and iesture, as also that he had interrupted
me in the sweetenesse of those delyghtes
wherein my senses were lulled a sleepe. I askt
hym yf he were a Gentleman? and withall, of
what name and Countrey? My name, quoth
he (in an ill tuned harsh and queasy voyce) is
Ill Diet:
               Yll Diet, his propertie and parentage. My office is to put all out of order
where I come. My linage is noble: for Gluttonie
is my mother, and I am her eldest sonne: I
am maynteyned with ryches, norished in delices,
and hyghly esteemed in the court of
Princes.
            Are you then, quoth I, eyther of these warriours
that do with such vnuanquished puissance,
keepe the forest of vnmercifull Atropos?
Neyther of them, quoth he, but yet their great
familiar friende, and lyue by the same chase
which they do: which is, by persecutyng of lyfe.
And therewithall,Yll diet encountreth the author in the playne of w
                     •
                  rldly pleasure. he gaue me such a blow with
his launce of lytle witte, vpon the bosse of my
guylded target, that I do yet full well feele the
weight of his encounter: neuerthelesse, pullyng
my spirites vnto me, with an eagre desire of reuenge,
with a full carrere, I brake my Lance on
his bosome: and foorthwith we both layde
handes on our swordes,The maner of their fight. with which, being tempered
in folly, we gaue one an other mightie

blowes of banquettes, bathings, quaffings,
watchings, wantonnesse, and such lyke:
wherein Time, the treasure of life is consumed,
and nothing hoorded vp, but griefe and repentance.
When he had almost weeried me with
these kindes of blowes, then he let driue at me
a freshe with many disorderly strokes, of dauncyng,
running, leaping, playing at tennis, immoderate
exercise, sweatyng, sodayne colde takyng,
and other such lyke, so deadly and dangerous
greetings, that without all doubt he had
then made an ende of my daies, had not a Lady,The author is foyled by Yll diet, and succoured by Reliquia Iuuentutis.
called Reliquia iuuentutis, commen to my succour,
who though in a maner tyred with often
helpyng me in such lyke combates, yet did in
defence of my health, put foorth the vttermost
of her force and vertue, requestyng my aduersarie
to leaue the fyght, and to geue me respit,
to see yet somewhat farther on in the worlde.
I am contented, quoth he, for the farther he
runneth on in the worlde, and the more trust
he putteth in his owne forces, the more certaine
is his destruction: yet before he depart, because
he hath behaued himselfe so stoutely with me,
I wyll bestow a Cappe vpon him,Yll diet presenteth him with a cappe. dyed in my
colours, of such operation and vertue, that it
shall distyll a fountayne of rhewmes and humors,
into his eyes, legges, thyghes, armes, and

ioynts, so that in one part or other of his bodie,
while he liues, go where he will, he shall haue
cause to remember my acquantance. In geuing
me which present, he departed with exceeding
haste, leauing me extreamely turmoyled, and
sore in my bones with the weerinesse of this
combate. But my greatest griefe was, that wheras
in this last conflict, I had beene relieued
through the helpe of that litle youth that was
remaining in me,Reliquia iuuentutis doth abandon him. the same also being my chiefest
comfort, did now of a sodaine abandon
me, bidding me hereafter gouerne my selfe
well, for of her I neyther coulde nor shoulde receiue
any farther assistance.
            Being thus forsaken, I folowed on my way,
desolate and comfortlesse, not knowyng whither:
Onely my thoughtfulnesse still suggested
vertue and valour vnto my minde, animating
me to perseuere on in this important voyage.
            But as my mynde doubtfully wauered in
sundry and diuers thoughts amidde this vncertaine
way, the night drawing on, I might
espie an aged fatherly Hermite,The author amidds his wandring, lighteth vpon the mantion of vnderstanding. not farre off,
standing before the doore of his Cell, whose
graue and courteous aspect, encouraged me to
acquaint him with my wandering vncertaine
voyage, and in frendly sort to entreate him of
harbour for that nyght. The good Hermite

bade me from his hart welcome, and by his
countenance & worde assured me, that I should
finde him a most freendlie and comfortable
Hoste. He himselfe disarmed me, and bringing
me into the inwarde part of his lodging, did
cast a warme mantle about my shoulders.
            Me thought I did neuer beholde a man of
more pleasing behauiour, nor one whose conuersation
did more delight me. After that he
had called for water to refresh me, he led me into
a litle Chappel, exceedinglie full of beautie,
and euen with the very sight moouing to deuotion;
in which, kneeling downe at my prayers,
I saw sundry workes of pietie and repentance,
curiously wrought and garnished round about
with sundry examples of Reformed life, all set
foorth in so comelie a sort, and in so liuely colours,
that I was euen in a maner rauished with
the sight thereof, if the good Hermite, considering
my passed trauaile, and the latenesse of
the nyght, had not by calling me to supper,
withdrawen my minde from the infinitenesse
of contemplation, whereunto the rare vertue of
these glorious sightes had mooued it.
            As we sate at the table, I coulde not withdraw
mine eyes from beholding his face. His
age was not lothsome, but florishyng in vertue,
and himselfe wise, though not according to our

common worldly conceyte, yet in the deapth
of that wisedome, that leadeth the soule to saluation.
I coulde not refrayne from asking his
name, and withall the cause that did mooue
him, being so notable a man, to liue retired in so
solitarie a place.
            To satisfie your demaunde, quoth he, You
shall vnderstande, that I do well know both you
and your estate, which did the more moue me
to geue you entertainement. As for me, I am
called, Vnderstanding, a name in the worlde well
worthie of honour, though it be of the most
part wrested, turned, and misdeemed. I haue retired
my selfe vnto this place, to the ende, that
by Gods grace and goodnesse, I might leaue the
wyde way of the worlde, that leadeth to euerlasting
perdition. The bread I feede vpon is
seasoned with sobrietie, and the wine I drinke
is watred with the pure liquor of sincere liuing:
That which suffiseth;Reason, the seate or mantion of vnderstanding. susteyneth me. No passion,
enuie, or dissention, hath entrance into this
house of mine, which is called Reason. Here I
hope to leade the rest of my life, and to ende
my dayes,The ende of true wisedome and vnderstanding whereto directed. in flying the allurementes of the
fleshe and the worlde, and seeking with my
soule, him that did with his blood redeeme it.
            Onely the thought of sinne, is bitter and
greeuous vnto me, from occasion of the

which, as I do now liue sequestred, so I beseech
the guyder of the heauens to encrease in me
perseuerance in this life, which I haue vndertaken.
As for your estate, linage, name, and condition,
I am thereof well informed: likewise of
the aduenturous enquest, which in this dangerous
voyage of yours, you haue vndertaken.
Neither am I ignorant of your natiue countrie,
the marches of Burgundie, in the miserable affliction
of which, with warre, desolation, and
bloodshed, vnweeried fortune seemeth to take
such pleasure. As for your selfe, seeing, like a
valiant Martire, you haue determined to bestow
your life vpon these two tyrannizing Champions,
whose cruell handes neuer any of your
foregoers that contended with them (how famous
or warlike soeuer) coulde escape, without
bodily death and dissolution, I will geue you
the best and most expedient aduice I can.
            First you must know, that Accident is alwayes,Accident, alwayes ready to entrappe and bereaue life.
and at all houres redy mounted and armed,
attended vpon with all sortes of mischiefe, and
pernitious engines, to bereaue mortall men of
their liues. Debilitie helpeth him, as neede requireth:
so that betweene them, they suffer none
to escape. But notwithstanding all this, the
greatnesse of your enimies puissance, and your
danger, yet such is the condition of mankinde,

and such the course and poynt whereunto you
are now arriued, that flie backe or retire, by any
meanes you may not. Therefore proceede on
a Gods name with a resolued courage: for as
the danger is great, so great wilbe your glorie,
if you do but withstande Accident alone: yea
so much, that you may aduance your armes,
and set foorth your trophees equally with the
most famous conquerour that euer was.
            And insomuch therefore that heedefulnesse,
and warie circumspection, is the chiefest meane
to the accomplishment of great thinges, I will
bestow vpon you a Lance, so surely steeled
with a head of good gouernement,Good gouernment a sure defence against all casualties. that if you
vse it rightly, and make therewith resistance at
any time when Accident shall distresse you, he
shalbe able to do you but litle greeuance. But
the surest preseruatiue I can geue you, is, euery
day in the morning when you rise, to commende
your selfe deuoutely and zelously vnto
almighty God,The surest preseruatiue against the violence of Accident. desiring him to be a stedfast
guide to your vncertaine steppes, in the transitorie
course of this your wandring mortalitie:
and forget not to be thankefull vnto him, for
the many benefites, which for his part so plenteously,
without any desart of yours, he hath bestowed
vpon you.
            With these, & such like speache, we brought

supper to an ende, where, after hauing giuen
thankes vnto God, he brought mee to my chamber:
the bed he appointed me was of Quiet securitie,
euen such, as I my selfe would haue desired,
wherin I was no soner laied, but that I fell
into a sound sweetnesse of sleepe,The sleepes of true vnderstanding are secure. and so continued
till the next morning, being awaked with
the sound of a litle bell, that roung vnto diuine
seruice: hearing of which I arose quicklie, and
comming downe, did finde the Alter called Perfection,
couered with the Ornamentes of Trueth,
and a chapleine whose name was Humilitie, reuested
in a Pure surples of perfect charitie, beginning
the holie seruice, which after he had ended,
and my Hoast finished his orizons, he saluted
me, and demaunded what rest I had taken?
to which I answered, as I had cause, that I
neuer in my life had receiued the like contentment
& quiet repose. With that, he seeming wel
appaide that I had so well liked of my lodging,
opened a back doore, which to my seeming was
of Remorse, the lock a cleere Loking glasse, and the
key Desire of knowledge: within the same was a
cloyster or gallerie full of strange emblemes, pictures,
and engines: to marke & vnderstand the
particularitie and meaning of whose diuers maners
& formes, I was with great wonder verie
heedfull and attentiue: which the gentle Hermite

perceyuing, did of himselfe offer to explane
them vnto me,Vnderstanding doth here represent vnto the author, the infinite wayes and weapons, wherwith Accident assayleth mankind, and to make him haue the more apprehension therof, doth lay before him the calamitous ends of sundry worthy personages, perishing in diuers sortes, & sheweth him the wepons wherwith Accident bereaued them of their liues. Cain the first manslear. Sampson, Deianeira & Hercules. to the end that he might make me
the better acqueinted with the seueral kindes
of death-bringing instrumentes, that my aduersarie
Accident doth accustomablie vse.
            First quoth he, see here this culter of a plowe:
with this did enuious Cain, guided by Accident,
murther his innocent brother Abel. He was the
first that did till and delue the ground: likewise
the first that in the world did commit the cruell
deede of mans-slaughter.
            See here the statelie Marble pillars, which mightie
Sampson pulld downe, and therwith the fundation
of the Philistian pallace, dying himselfe
contented, because with his ruine did also perish
those his malicious enemies that had before
so insolentlie triumphed at his miserable calamitie.
This did hee through a noble indignation,
and Accident was the onely contriuer of so great
a mischefe.
            See here the burning shirt, the deadlie gift of a
traiterous Centaure, with which Deianeira, pore
deceaued Ladie, thinking to procure wholly
vnto her selfe the loue of Hercules her famous
husband, was occasion both to him and her selfe
of direfull and violent deathes, and Accident
hereof the onely executioner.
            See heere the cruel poniardes, wherewith in the

heigth of his greatnesse,Iulius Caesar stabbed with daggers. most glorious Caesar, hauing
vanquished all publique enemies, was by a
priuate conspiracie of his dissembled freendes,
stabbed & murthered in the senate house, Accident
did strangely bring him to this tragical end,
as most plainely the Romane histories do make
manifest.
            See heere the fatall Box, wherein faithlesse
Antipater kept the virulent poison,Alexander the great poysoned by Antipater. wherwith he
murthered admirable Alexander king of Macedone,
and conquerour of the worlde.
            See heere the great and mightie trunchon of
that deathfull speare, wherewith fierce Achilles
slew magnanimous Hector,
               Hector slaine with a speare by Achilles. bulwarke of Troy
and terror of the Grecians.
            
            This was againe the fatall bow and stedie directed
arrow,Achilles slaine by Par is with an arrow. wherewith effeminate Paris, the
firebrand of his country, vnmanfullie reuenging
the death of his noble brother, traitorously
to death wounded the glorie of the Grecian
armie, when full of ragefull loue, he nothing
lesse then death suspected.
            This was the vnhappie sworde,Pompey beheaded by the commandement of young Ptolomee. wherewith
the honorable head of great Pompey was cut off,
by the vniust commaundement of the periured
Egiptian traitor, staining therewith his owne
glorie, and ouerthrowing the piller wherevpon
Romes greatnesse was propped.
            
               
See heere the enuenomed ring,Hannibal poysoned out of a ring. out of which
fearelesse Hanniball tooke his last draught of
deadly poyson: the greatnesse of his inuincible
minde, choosing by his owne handes rather to
die, then to yeld to any the least thought of captiuitie,
cursing, as he died, the head and kingdome
of the disloial Bithinian Prince, for hauing
violated the lawes of hospitalitie.
            See heere the bloodie Iaueline wherewith
great king Agamemnon,
               Agamemnon murthered by Aegistus by his wiues consent. by the wicked consent of
his detestable wife, was trecherouslie slaine by
Aegistus. Ten yeeres had he warred in Asia, commaunding
all the vnited forces of the Grekish
princes, and lastly hauing burnt and razed Troy,
returning victoriously home, in steede of glorious
reposefull happinesse, with hope of which
he flattered him selfe, was thus by Accident requited.
            See here the well sharpned Cimitarre,Holofernes slaine by Iudith with a Cimitarre. which
guyded by the delicate hande of faire Iudith,
did deuide the brisled head of sleeping Holofernes
from his huge giantlie carkas. Great was
the ioy of this deede vnto the Israelites, and
great was herein the successe of Accident.
            
            This is the Hammer,Syzara slaine by Iabel with a nayle. and therewith ioyntly
the Nayle, wherewith vertuous Iabel ended the
vnworthie life of wicked Syzara, geuing therewith
ioy to the people, and glorie to the greatnesse

of Accident.
            
            These were the fatall Lances of the two
young Theban Princes,Etheocles and Polinices slaine with mutuall woundes of eithers Lance. 
               Polinices and Etheocles;
either of which, through ambitious desire to
raigne, did bereaue the other both of life and
raigne; whose bodyes, as while they liued did
harbour deuided and disagreeing soules, so did
their flames after death, when with pompous
solemnitie they were to be burned, refuse to
ioyne.
            This was the sharpe piercing dagger, wherewith
dissembling Ioab mortallie to death wounded
credulous Abner,
               Abner stabbed by Ioab. while he helde him in
his armes, embraced with a cheerefull disguysed
shew of gladnesse.
            This was the well directed Stone, and this
the farre reaching Sling,Golyas slaine by Dauid with a sling and a stone. out of which the feeble
hande of young Dauid guyded it, to the fall
and death of great and puissant Golyas, who alone
was a terrour to the whole Israelites.
            
            This was the well imployed Halter, wherein
proude Aman was strangled,Aman strangled with a halter. for endeuoring
with damnable entent to murther and destroy
the chosen and beloued people of God,
whereby the vertuous Queene Hester procured
great honor to Mardocheus, and executed in
Aman the mighty power of Accident.
            
            We had not visited the fourth part of this

place, so many, so strange, and so diuerse, were
the instrumentes that Accident vsed to surprise
mens liues withall, when the good Hermite
withdrew me from thence, willing me not to
forget, but mindfully to consider of those his
reliques which I had seene.
            Being thence departed, when I began with
perfect iudgement to consider of the thinges
which I had viewed, though the strangenesse
and varietie of them were somewhat delightful:
yet coulde I not but feele a great tendernesse
and perplexitie in my minde, to consider that so
many great and excellent men, had been by
Accident so cruelly murthered and made away;
some, euen at such instantes, as the vayne frailtie
of this deceauing worlde did promise vnto
them a stable and firme estate in all glorie, happinesse,
and contentment: withall it was a griefe
vnto me, that I had not seene the rest which remayned,
the which in apparance was ten thousande
millions of times more, then that which I
had seene.
            But withall I wondred much, that among so
many remarkable trophees of Accidents victories,
I had not seene any of his companion Debilitie:
which my freendly Hoast perceiuing,
tolde me, that if I did at my returne repaire vnto
him, he woulde likewise satisfie mee therein,

and make me acquainted with the wonderous
puissance of Debilitie: As for now, he chieflie
desired to prepare me against the violence of
Accident, as being of the two the more cruel and
sodaine; and then he discoursed vnto me of many
great and mighty Princes, that he had at
vnawares surprised and murthered, some tasting
of delicious meates, some riding and managing
of proude horses, some geuing audience
to sutors,Sundrie princes bereaued of their liues, euen in the middest of their sweetest pleasures. some riding in triumph to the capitoll,
some by sea, some by lande, some by fire, some
by fall of houses, some by thunder, some by
earthquakes, some in dauncing, some in singing,
yea and some fast embraced in the armes of
their beloued mystres, euen in the pleasingest
action of their Loue.
            Herewith the aged Father, being loth to retaine
me any longer from my intended voyage,
with tearefull eyes embracing me, recommended
me vnto God, willing me not to be vnmindfull
of his counsails, and withall requested
me at my returne, if I did escape with life, to
come visite him: which promising him to do,
I presently put on my armour, and taking the
Lance of Good gouernment which he had geuen
me, I leapt a horsebacke, and went foorth on my
iorney.
            I had not long trauailed, when I entred into

a vallie, that did directly leade me to a plaine,
which in appearance seemed to be aboue measure
great and spatious.
            This plaine I speake of,The playne of tyme. is called Time, which
though it be large & farre extended, yet scarcely
doth the passenger come vnto it, when he is alredie
beyonde it; and the nature thereof is such,The nature thereof.
that pleasure & contentment do passe through
it so vnconstantly, and with such swiftnesse, that
they leaue in celeritie the winds behinde them.
            I was no sooner come thither, but my Horse,Desire hardly restrayned.
whose name (as before I tolde you) was Desire,
tooke so strongly the head, that do what I could,
I was not able to stay him, till he had brought
me farre beyonde the middle of the playne:
where, striuing to restraine his course, I might
espie before me a fierce Champion, that seemed
in guyse of skilfull warriour to bid me battaill.
            His armour was of Trauaile, the courser that
he bestradde was called Payne, his shielde resembled
the Sunne, in which were figured
exercise and slouth, drousie slumber, and watchfull
diligence. His coatarmour was of Constant suffring;
and by his outwarde shew, it seemed that
he had been in many broyles, and newly escaped
out of a great battaill. He thought I could
haue stayed a great while to beholde him and
his demeanoure; but that the sharpenesse of his

salutation gaue me no such leysure:Heere the Author encountreth age, and striueth mightyly to keepe him off, but neuerthelesse in the end he is constrained to yeelde quietly vnto him. for without
delay, putting spurres to his enraged Courser,
he furiously made towardes me with his Lance
enrested: on the other side, I was not behinde
hand to requite his kindenesse, but putting my
Horse to the vtmost of his carrere, met him with
so rude an encounter, that though he ouerthrew
me to the grounde, yet I made him totter
in his saddle: at which, growing impatient,
he laide hande on his sworde, and let driue at
me with all his force, wherewith he had then
without doubt geuen me a mortall wounde,
had not I kept him off,Age striketh him with his sworde of many yeeres. and defended my
selfe with my Lance of Good gouernment. Neuerthelesse
he ceassed not to encroch still nearer
and nearer in vpon me, lending me so manie
sturdie strokes, with his sworde of Many yeeres,
that I waxed (in a maner) vnable to helpe my
selfe any farther, against the heauie neuer-ceassing
blowes of his vnresistable arme; and at
length, to make my miserie the greater, my lance
of Good gouernment flew in peeces: wherewith,
and thorow the thumps which he had geuen
me, my head began to be giddie, my legges to
faint, and my eyes to dazle; wherewith, vpon
my entreatie (he likewise, being in a maner
breathlesse) we agreed to take a litle pause.
            After I had a while refreshed my selfe, and recouered

breath, casting mine eye vpon my aduersarie,
and in my secrete iudgement, much
commending the grauitie of his looke, and the
brauenesse of his behauiour, I requested him in
kindnesse, to tell me his name and condition.
To which answering me in very courteous language,
like a man of good iudgement and setled
sense: My discent and linage, quoth he, is of
great antiquitie; my proper name is, Age, true
register of euery mans time, in which I do neuer
deceiue any, neither do I geue my consent to
falsenesse. None can passe through the plaine
of Time, without comming vnder my handes;
and whosoeuer otherwise doth thinke, is farre
deceiued, and in errour. For vnder this condition
were borne all those that euer enioyed the
faire light of this worlde, or euer at any time shal:
of which, if any escape my handes, then can he
not wander farre in this feelde of Time, but
must of necessitie die in the vnfortunate vnripenesse
of his youth: and to this necessitie are subiect,
as wel Princes, as priuate men, the faire, rich,
noble, and fortunate, as those of contrarie condition.
Therefore, seeing you are now so farre
trauailed in this plaine, that you are come within
the compas of my power, either without farther
resistance, yeelde your selfe quietly vnto
me, or you shall too late repent, with manie a

groning sigh, that euer you striued with me.
            But I, not being yet so throughly quayled as
to yeeld vnto his perswasion, setled my selfe to
resistance: so that defying me a fresh, he let
driue at me a new with as great fiercenesse as
euer he had done before, laying with his sword,
which as I tolde you was of Many yeeres, so heauie
lode vppon me, that all my limmes began
to shake with a feint and trembling numnesse:
My trustie Lance of Gouernment was broken before,
& now also comming to the cloze, he forcibly
pulled from me my shield of Hope: finding
my selfe in which miserable estate, my weapons
taken a way, my forces declining, and my bodie
weake and decaied, like a man forelorne, I began
to feint in my resistance, which my aduersarie
perceyuing, with a noble magnanimitie also slacked
his fight: so that at length,He yeeldeth vnwillingly to Age. finding no other
remedie, though much against my will, I was
content to render my selfe vnto him, giuing him
my faith and promise to remaine his true prisoner,
and to pay him any reasonable raunsome
that he should demaund: who, as a great Lord
doth his humbled seruant, so receyued he me
with signes of loue, taking from me my right
gauntlet, in token of his conquest, telling me
how behouefull and honorable a thing it was
for a prisoner to manteine inuiolably his worde

and faith, especially being a gentleman: as for
his parte, he would vse me well, and graunt me
my libertie: but it behoued me, on peine of periurie
and dotage,Age enioyneth the authour to the accomplishment of some thinges vppon peine of periurie and dotage. to promise him the accomplishment
of some such things, as for mine own
honor and good he would enioyne me to. To
which, when I had with all willingnesse agreed,
First, quoth he, you shall flie from the territorie
of Loue, whose Lorde is an abusing flatterer,
whose pleasure is a secret baite, conteining vnder
it nothing but gall and bitternesse, and finallie,
whose sequell is nothing but sorow and repentance,Loue.
hauing nothing in it that is true, but
deceipt onely: so that it becommeth not a man
of honor, beeing once receyued into my acqueintance,
to applie himself to any such follies,
of which he cannot expect any other fruict, then
griefe of time misspent, burden of conscience,
vaine expence, and derision of the worlde; besides
a thousande other inconueniences.
            Besides,Mariage. there is a vallie called Mariage, which
take heede by any meanes you enter not into,
for there are perilles and troubles without number:
with which I woulde not haue him, whom
I haue taken in protection, not so much as in
thought incumbred.
            I woulde haue you also leaue on the left hand,Amorous dssportes.
seeing they are thinges to vs impertinent and yll

beseeming, al wanton conuersations, dauncings,
singings, and such like other amorous disportes,
as the schoole of idlenesse bringeth foorth.
            But aboue all I admonish you, that you keepe
your selfe sequestred and free from the courtes
of great Princes,Courtly life. where the vncertaine good and
honor ambitiously pursued, though obteined
(which vnlesse you haue a better spokesman
then Vertue, seldome happeneth) yet neuer
lightly counteruaileth the certaine losses and
assured dangers, that folowe the ficklenesse of
that subiected life.
            Thither repaire many gallant floorishing
youths, pursuing Loue and Honor, with sumptuous
attire, high lookes, proude wordes, and disdainefull
thoughts: but in the ende, foyled and
ouerthrowen with Ouer-riotous expence, reape
nothing in their fall and pouertie, but laughter,
mockerie, and contempt, vnlesse it be, that
perchaunce against their will, they learne to be
humble.
            But many there are of my acquaintance, who
hauing ouergon, and spent the poasting yeeres
of vnmistrustfull youth, either in the vniuersities
at home, or in trauayles, or the warres
abrode, and by long and paynefull diligence
obteined such vertues and qualities as to the
seruice of their Prince & Countrey are fitting,

do come at length to make shew of themselues,
in this most fayre and magnificent market of
the worlde, the Court, flattering themselues
with great hope of rewarde, honor, and aduancement:
and that the rather, because they see
there ietting vp and downe, a number of vnprofitable
peacockes, that haue no worthy thing
els in the worlde to vaunt on, then onely the
colour of their plumes. But great is herein their
error, and as rare their preferment, as the sight
of a blacke Swanne. I do not denie, but sometimes
such a miracle may happen: yet for the
most part, Princes are not caried away with a
sodaine shew of vertue, neither is it requisite
they shoulde: neither do they alwayes dispense
their fauours and disgraces, according to the
worth and worthlesnesse of each one, but accordingly,
as they are by great personages that
possesse neere places about them enformed,
who either through foretaken conceite, or by
enuious Sycophants wrongly perswaded, or
some other occasion, do often speake the worst,
or els being by many experiences warned and
taught, in such cases to be warie & circumspect,
least the following behauiour of the partie
commended, may be such, as shall geue no credite
to his commender, wilbe altogeather silent,
so that the chiefest labour must be, to winne the

stedfast fauour of one of these great men: which
who so vndertaketh, good God, with what a sea
of miseries shall he finde him selfe inuironed.
For though he misse the almost ineuitable danger
of factions and partialities, wherin many
haue made shipwracke of their estate, in being
by the one sharpely persecuted, & by the other
but weakely defended: yet such is the number of
malitious parasites, that waite vpon the fortune
of great Lords; such the multitude of flatterers,
deceiuers, supplanters, vnderminers, espialles,
and such like vermine, that attende vpon their
court and table, all couering their villanous pretences,
vnder the maske of vertue, fidelitie, and
officious duetie: that being often betrayed, and
abused, howsoeuer their outwarde shew be honorable
and courteous, they will, and can not in
wisedome otherwise choose, but beware whom
they admit into such degree of fauour; as, that
they will for his preferment aduenture their
credit: So that the new-come Courtier, yea,
though he encline to such humors, as a minde
well framed can hardly endure to embrace,
shall either as worthlesse be reiected, or els so
feintlie fauoured, that he shall not at the
yeeres ende be the better two chippes for it,
but perchaunce much the worse.
            If in the meane time he Court it out among

the Gallants in braue apparell,The miserable estate of him that pursueth in court. gaming, and liberall
expence, he shalbe condemned as ambititious,
of light behauiour, and vnstayed: if otherwise,
disgraced with all the titles of basenesse, as
vnsuted to the royalties of a Princes court. If he
speake, talke, or write; yea, or but studie matter
of estate, he lookes into the state, and is dangerous:
if he do neither, he is argued to be ignorant,
and of no experience. If he haue trauailed
strange Countries, seene the courtes of foreine
Princes, liued in their Pallaces, or serued in
their warres, thereby the better to learne and
obserue their maner, custome, discipline, and
language, suspition shall attende vpon all his
actions, the offer of his seruice suspected, and
his shew of zealous fidelitie misconstrued. If he
haue none of these ornamentes to set foorth
him selfe withall, then shall he be (and not vnworthely)
deemed vncapable of employment
in his Princes seruice. So miserable is his estate,
who pursueth in Court, that his imperfections
are hated, his vertues suspected, and either of
both a like able to barre him from preferment.Nothing more rife in the court of Princes, then veruous men, honorlesse and vnregarded.
            
            And thus much assure your selfe, if my experience
(which what it is, my name declareth)
be any whit to be eredited, that I haue not marked
any thing more rife in the courtes of Princes
(yea though them selues exceedingly vertuous)

then vertuous men honorlesse and vnreregarded,
which happeneth not alwaies thorow
their default, being by enuie & information of
others mis-led, but rather by a malignitie of fortune,
which still striueth to depresse Vertue, or
rather of a direct antipathie betweene them.
            Sundry excellent Princes haue, by diuers
their ingenious conceyts, made manifest, that
the complaynt of olde decayed Courtiers against
their ingratitude, is often times vniust,
and not they, but the vnthriuing Courtiers fortune
to be blamed.
            Besides we see, that the great and all-ruling
King of the vniuersal pallace of this faire world,
doth not, in the distribution of his temporall
rewardes and punishments, alwayes respect
the good or yll desertes of him, whom he honoreth
with the one, or afflicteth with the other.
            Seeing therefore the fauour and firme affection
of great men so hard to be obteined, and
hopes of courtly aduancement so vncertaine,
and depending vppon such long merits, that
the small remainder of your life shall be tired
out and ended, before you shall by long painfull
seruice be able to procure in your princes
minde a full perswasion of your vertue, loialtie,
and faith: If you will follow my counsell, leaue
off the Court to men of great happinesse, and

bende your minde wholly to the obteining of
that celestial honor and preferment, which neuer
faileth them that doe vnfeinedly secke it.
            Let this then suffize as touching the Courtly
life, whose philosophie being a point beyonde
either morall or naturall: as the ioyes thereof are
exceeding cheerefull & gladsome,The vertuous man desireth aduancement, onely thereby to be able to do his prince and countrie seruice. to those that
are beautified with the rayes and sunshine of
their princes fauour, so great must needes be the
griefe and discomfort to those, whose vertues
and industries are depressed, and they for lacke
of due fauour and encouragement, made vnable
to do their Prince and Country seruice; especially,
hauing wholly dedicated thereunto them
selues, and the fruictes of their experience.
            But hauing herein been somewhat long, I
will briefly conclude with the rest of such precepts,
as in respect of your honor and welfare
I charge you to obserue.
            Seeke not to finde Feast or Pleasure in the
wildernes of lost Time, for neuer did any yet in
the highest degree possesse it, that did not in
th'ende, with many losses, and greeuous paines,
repent it. Apart your selfe therfore from thence,
and while you haue leysure, vse vertuously the
precious, but not long to be enioyed, iewell of
Time.
            
            Iustes, turneis, triumphes, wearing of Ladies

liueries, and other the like, enterteined by
greene and flourishing yeeres, take heede that
by any meanes you imbrace not.
            Take the better way, reseruing your bodyly
strength, to the combat of those valorous
Champions that attende you and your soule to
your God and maker.
            These my counsailes, I do aduise you to obserue,
not so much in respect of my commandement;
as of the hurt and damage that may ensue
vnto you in transgressing them. To which
I constantly made answere, that I woulde assuredly
performe as much as I had promised, and
he enioyned, especially seeing the not performance
of them woulde turne to the greatest
harme of my selfe.
            Well, sayd he, I leaue it to your owne choyce
and libertie, to do as best you liketh: but for the
present, because it waxeth late, I woulde haue
you directly to take your iorney towardes the
barren desert of Olde Age, so playne and discouered
a way by the course of Nature, that you cannot
misse it; and there you shall assuredly finde,
and perchance sooner then you expect, the aduenture
you seeke: As for your Horse and armour,
I do frankly returne them vnto you againe,
with free libertie to depart; and withall,
in token of my acquaintance, I will bestow vppon

you this present (deliuering me therewith
a fayre siluer Gorget of Mayle) the propertie
of which is such,Age presents the author with a siluer Gorget of maile. that the longer you liue, the
more shall it conforme the colour of your
heare and beard in sutablenesse to the same.
Which guift of his, when I had receiued, he
tooke his leaue, putting his Courser to so swift
a pace, that I did scarcely heare or see the motion
of his feete. And as for me, I departed on
my way, straight as a line, towardes the desart of
Olde Age: in which sort, trauayling vpon the vtmost
confines of Time, I came to a high Mountaine,
whose discent was a steepe and speedie
Downefall, so that I was in much shorter space
at the foote, then I had been in clyming to the
height thereof. From thence, I galloped apace
towardes the desart to which I was directed.
But I had not long trauailed, when of a sodaine
I was in a crosse way wanderingly lost, my memorie
distracted, and my minde vtterly forgetful
of al those good aduices lately deliuered me
by Age,
               He entrethinto the pathe of deceite. in so much, that I entred into a wrong
path, called, Deceit, whose issue is neuer other
then losse and repentance, though the going in,
being a litle glazed ouer with a fayre dissembled
shew of True pleasure, do beguile the eye of our
iudgement.
            Within it, was great verdure and freshnesse,

and though the season of the yeere were faded
and past, yet was the ground diuersified and enamelled
with an infinite varietie of sweete smelling
flowers, so that it represented vnto my
soone-yeelding senses, an extremitie of pleasure
and delight: For Deceit, who in exterior shew
suggesteth a worlde of pleasures, did now represent
vnto me all the delices, comfortes,
and well sauouring ioyes, that euer in my youth
I had tasted.
            Then againe began I to acquaint my selfe
with Carelesse vanitie, obliuious altogether of
my former yeelding, and of my vowed promise
and acquaintance with Age: I respected nothing
but the present pleasure of my senses, finding
my selfe, by a strange metamorphosis,
freshly inueygled with that error, which I
thought I had long agoe lost and left behinde
me.
            My passed pleasures of hauking, hunting,
armes, loue, and Ladies, al returned with the verie
selfe same sweetenesse, and pleasing delightfulnesse,
as when they first possessed my gay,
youthfull, and flourishyng yeeres. Withall, in
came Vayne Conceit, buylding towers in the
ayre, suggesting vnto me False courage, to vndertake
things vnpossible, and Credulous lightnesse,
to beleeue things vtterly improbable, without

reason or foundation.
            My Horse went on amaine with a full carrere,
fearing neither bridle nor bit, Plaines & Mountaines
were to him alike: as for me, he saw me
such a stranger to my selfe, that he neither knew
me, nor obeyed me.
            And all this confused perturbation of my
senses, was so cunningly contriued by Well coloured
Deceit, that quite forgetfull of my way,
without finding any error at all in my steppes,
I was led to the most sense-pleasing and delightfull
place, that I coulde possibly haue imagined.
            Within the same stoode a gorgious & stately
royal pallace, whose exterior pompous and delectable
shewe, made me verily perswade myselfe,
that neuer death, or any of his champions,
could be able to approach vnto a place so beautifull
and delitious. The walles seemed to be of
cleere refined siluer, the windowes of bright
transparent christal, the pinacles of pure wel burnisht
golde, that glistered like the Sun-beames,
and the couerings and roofes of radiant Amber,
whose goodly fayrenesse and splendor was
such, that with amazement it dazeled the beholders
eyes. Many beautifull Ladyes were at the
windowes, richly adorned with pompous habites,
strange attires, rare deuices, and most alluring
sweete behauiours. Many braue youthfull

Gallants were among them, enterteining them
with courtly gestures, and amorous well vttered
speaches. There was besides, a most delicious
musique of many well consorted Instruments;
to which, some were listening, some
daunsing, some discoursing: in fine, all was amorous,
and moouing vnto loue.
            
               Deceipt was now become so quiet, and absolute
a lorde and ruler of my fancie, that I adiudged
my selfe most fortunate and happie, in
being arriued at such a Paradice, so voyde of
griefe, and so repleate with all sortes of pleasures,
as this seemed to be: Whereupon, going
to the Porter, whose name was Abusion, I freendlie
intreated him,Abusion the porter of loues pallace. to tell me what myght be the
name of this sumptuous edifice, wherein was
assembled such a noble company of Gentlemen
and Ladyes, with such magnificent varietie of
pleasures and delightes: who briefly answered
me,The pallace of Loue. that he was called the Pallace of Louc. At
which very name of Loue, I started backe, as
at a thing altogeather disproportionable to my
yeeres and profession. When Desire, suggesting
againe vnto my senses a worlde of delightes
and pleasures, the more I withdrew my mynde,
the more did enflame it forwarde. But straight,
Remembrance stept in, recording vnto me the
historie of things passed, and crying out aloude,

that I committed periurie, and withall did for
euer purchase mine owne ruine and perdition,
shewing me therewith a cleere christall glasse,
wherein, besides many of my passed matters, I
saw Auncient Age noting vp all my steppes, as
one that ment to call me in question for transgressing
his counsells. And likewise I might
therein perceiue my beard to be all mingled
with siluer hayres, and my head to be ouercast
with snow: The sight of which, did worke in
me a marueilous amazement. Desire neuerthelesse,
with many sweete allurementes, employed
his greatest force to bring me vnder Loues subiection.
But Remembrance did so liuely shew
vnto me the yll agreeing deformitie thereof;
perswading me, to let that passe, which was alredie
passed, rather then of new to harbour any
such troublesome tirannicall guest, within
the weakned mansion of my aged senses: That
howsoeuer vehemently swaied by Desiers temptations,
yet when I had recalled my minde to ful
consideration thereof, I thought good to apart
me from his counsel, as beeing both dangerous
and dishonorable, fully resoluing, not to
be at any time so ouertaken againe: so that
all Desires endeuours prouing vaine, Remembrance
taking me by the hand, guided me from
that counterfeit path of Deceit, into the true

way of Goodaduice, with right direction where
my iourney lay: And there I tooke my farewell
of Loue, and withall of her, for whose sake (while
I was Loues enthralled subiect) the paynes and
tormentes I endured, seemed to be but pleasures
and comfortes. Who so is desirous to know
her, let him content him selfe with this much,
that she is one, whom Nature hath more richly
beautified with grace, comlinesse, and perfection,
then my worthlesse and vneloquent penne
can any way expresse. But the Euer-liuing righteousnesse,
whose wisedome is infinite, and whose
iudgement impenetrable, knowing the ende of
my pretences, was pleased to assist me with his
gracious goodnesse, so that I went on the right
way, to accomplish my faith and promise, which
I had geuen vnto Age: and such was the haste I
made to be at my iourneys end, that I found my
selfe arriued in the Countrey of Feeble olde Age,
               The desert of olde Age.
before I my selfe knew how. There the earth
trembled▪ and euery thing seemed to be a quagmire.
The ayre was darke and mistie, the smelles
noysome, the grounde barren, yeelding miseries
in steede of fruite, and the rentes that there
were gathered, was griefe and anguish.
            There groweth not any tree, that beareth either
fruite or flower; all is full of barren briers,
and withered thornes. There is not any meate

of good taste, nor herbe yeelding iuise: in fine,
it is a destroyed parte, dry, fruitlesse, and consumed:
in the which, there is not any nouriture,
or verie litle, and that, mingled with care and
sorow. The fountaines there are of sufferance,
& the brokes of bitternesse. The Moones brightnesse,
and the Sunnes glistering, is there obscured
with darkenesse and fogs. The sweetest
songs accustomably vsed in this barren desert,
are sorowfull complaintes of time misspent, and
for good things passed, that can not be recouered.
The longer a man lingreth there, the lesse
repose he findeth: euerie thing yeeldeth griefe,
and Infirmitie is there enthronized as princesse,
and regent of the whole territorie. Health
hath no entrie, but is thence perpetually banished:
comfortable mirth appeareth not, being
suppressed by fretting Melancholy, one of the
cheefest Lordes of this desert.
            A small iourney from thence,The Ilande of Decrepitude. lieth an Iland of
diseased infirmitie, whose proper name is Decrepitude,
where health died, making griefe and
sorow his executors, bequeathing vnto them
all his rightes and possessions. I haue not as yet
bin there, but I am comen so neere, that the verie
ayre thereof maketh al the ioyntes and members
of my body to shake and tremble: Iudge
then what effect it will worke in him, that shalbe

therein landed and ariued?
            Thence, being once entred, there is no departing,
till the soule doe free it selfe from out
the encombred bodies prison, aspiring to a better
habitation.
            But which of all is strangest, such is the miraculous
working and vigor thereof, that from
the extremitie of Olde Age, it constreineth men
againe to returne vnto the verie extremities of
Childehood; then the which, what wonder can
be greater. Feeblenesse is there so strong, that it
taketh from Strength, absolutely his beeing.
            The eyes brightnesse, being of mans life the
chiefest comfort, is there in such sort turned
to obscuritie and dimnesse, that it scarcely seeth
any thing at al: and yet that litle is in such imperfect
dazeling maner, that all the things discerned,
seeme to be but images of death.
            No benefit is so great that it can yeeld soundnesse
of health or comfort, and euerie litle euill
is so efficient, that it easily becommeth mortall:
each litle griefe offendeth deadly without resistance,
as in a rendred ouerthrowen Countrey,
where life hath nothing, but onely the name
and apparance.
            I know this Decrepite estate to be a thing fearefull
vnto fleshe: yet surely it is a great benefite of
God, by whose goodnesse the vertuous and patient

bearing thereof, may be a great meane to
our saluation, which of his endlesse mercie, I
beseech him, that we may all obteine.
            But to come backe to my discourse, being
once in this vnpleasant desert of Olde Age, I
coulde not finde any path, gate, way, or issue, to
get out, vnlesse I woulde enter into that of Decrepitude,
and therefore I enterteined my selfe,
the best that I could, in that health lesse prouince:
in which, after I had a litle romed vp and downe,
I espied sundry people both men and women,Sundry abusers of Age, & deceyuers of them selues.
that did busie them selues in the practise of
strange and cosening sleightes: some to hide and
dissemble their yeeres, filled vp the wrinkled
furrowes of their face with payntinges, some
died their heades and beards with waters of
their owne mingling, some pulled quite out the
gray heares that appeared in them, thinking so
to rid them selues of those hatefull messengers
of decaying life. But Olde Age, would not consent
vnto such falsenesse, protesting against
them, that they laboured in vayne, for there is
no possibilitie of turning backe one iot from
that degree of his acquaintance, and subiection
whereto they are once arriued. Being once withered
and decayed with Age, to florishe and
waxe greene againe, is not graunted to any mortal
creature. The ende of such deuices and endeuours,

tendeth in fine to nothing, but to filling
of the Churchyardes.
            But leauing this discourse, because it breedeth
melancholie. Olde Age, as I tell you, had so entangled
me, that though I woulde feine haue
gotten out of his iurisdiction, yet coulde I not
by any meanes finde any way or passage, which
at the first mooued me to be very heauie and
sorowfull, and that the rather, because I saw my
youth vnrecouerable, and my griefe remedilesse.
But euen as the poore seely birde, newly inclosed
within the prison of his Cage, doth for a
time at the first, sullenly lament the losse of his
abridged libertie, till at last, seeing the bootelesnesse
of his sorow, he beginneth to comfort
him selfe, with thinking of his sweete for passed
pleasures, as of the delightfull trees, and sweetely
smelling bryers, wherein he had harboured the
pleasant chirping of his litle louely companions
with whom he had conuersed, and such his
other recreations and pastimes, whilest he enioyed
the freedome of the fieldes, and euen with
those thoughts of comfort, forgetteth his melancholy,
and falleth sweetely a singing: so fareth
it with me, who, though my present estate
mooued me to heauinesse and sorow, yet considering
the necessitie thereof, and with all my
many passed youthfull pleasures, I framed my

minde to a contentment, and so began to trauayle
and searche each part and coast of the
countrie through, to see yf I coulde finde any
part or corner therof, exempted from the generall
barrennesse of the rest, to th'ende, I myght
there passe away my time with lesse griefe.
            Hauing trauayled awhile, I happened of a sodayne
to espie therein a place, so full of goodlinesse
and riches, that I could not refraine from
wonder in beholding it. Within the same was a
lodging of inestimable worth called Good aduenture.
               Good Aduenture.
            
            Then first began I to perceyue the falsenesse
of the worldes common opinion, which is,
that there is not in Olde age any pleasure: whereas
surely there is a thing called Studie, in whose
vertuous exercise a vicelesse Youth passed ouer,
doth manifest the contrary.
            But you must vnderstand,I take it, that by this studie he meaneth Contemplation. that I meane not
the fond studie of vaine worldly trifles, but rather
that which teacheth vs to scorne and contemne
the brickle (and howsoeuer faire guilded)
yet soone defaced alurementes of this
world, and so to liue and die, that our soule
once freed from the mortall bandes of our
heere-soone perishing body, may through the
merits of our Sauiour, attaine to euerlasting
blessednesse and rest.
            
               
This I speake of, consisteth in fruitfully reading
the sacred volume of the holy Scriptures,
& the precious workes of those godly Doctors
& Fathers, whose blessed pennes haue diuinely
prescribed vnto vs, the way of perfect repentance,
and vertuous perfection, teaching vs nothing
but that, which still we ought to contemplate
with the eyes of our mynde; that is, to
lyue and die well. For there is not any thing
vnder heauen so happelesse, heauie, and miserable,
as for a soule sleeping carelesly in sinne, to
approch the dolorous passage of Death. Of this
desirable place I speake off, the walles were all
round about trimmed with Delight.
               The Pallace of contemplation. The Portal
at which you entred, figured foorth nothing
but Pleasure. The Dytches were secure, deepe,
and well trenched, curiously wrought in great
conformitie by Good exercise. The Chappel was
of Zeale, the Windowes of Charitable Loue, the
Gate, wherein was the entrance and going
foorth, of Heedefulnesse, and the Bridge of Industrious
Trauaile. The Vanes and Streamers of
the house were of Pleasure, which glystering
aloft, shewed all the passers by, that there was
the schoole and practise of Vertue and Learning.
No Idlenesse dared to approch this blessed Mansion:
for Diligence was the Porter. Onely Emulation
is suffered to enter, who there serueth as a

spurre to Vertuous operation.
            
            In fine, the time there bestowed, is in the onely
learning and exercise of that heauenly philosophie,
whereto whosoeuer arriueth, may well
be accounted happie and blessed.
            That I was desirous to enter into this blisfull
place, no man needeth to doubt: but in the
end, seeing the gates did not of themselues open
vnto me, I was bould to goe vnto the porter,
with earnest entreatie, that I might, by his fauour
& meanes, be suffered to enter. To which
he answered: this house, said he, which is the
very Perfection of studie and enemy of ignorance, is
not to be dallied withall, or to be entred with
sportfulnesse and scorne. For within it is enclosed
the Treasure of life, and the Riches of the
Worldes wisedome: it is kept and gouerned by a
beautifull Princesse, whom it hath pleased the
highest to blesse with a Happy euer-during youth:
shee neuer changeth estate, liuing free from
deaths subiection: her proper name is Memorie,
               Memorie Ladie of the pallace, of Contemplation
of all the worlde highly honored and esteemed.
From her are deriued all the chiefe pleasures
wherewith Olde age is honored, whom
through wisedome and experience shee ennobleth
with regard and worship.
            Where shee is enterteined, shee neuer breedeth
weerinesse, making him blessed with

whom shee pleaseth to harbour. Some there
are, whom shee flieth, though they labour neuer
so earnestly to be acquainted with her: for
in her operations, is so great & strange a secret of
nature, that neither Socrates, nor Plato, noral the
deepe pearcing wits of the passed Philosophers,
haue bin able to define whence, or how this
corruptible body of ours, is beautified with so
pure and excellent an ornament, as this of Memorie.
But for my part, I do verily beleeue,
without any doubt or question, that this being
so singular a good, procedeth onely from
the miraculous working of God, and not from
any setled habite or ingrafted guift of nature: for
as the soule hath by God her habitation & domicile
appointed her in the body, so hath Memorie
hers in the soule it selfe, whence she springeth,Memorie, is a thing celestiall and diuine, deriued onely from God, without hauing any relation to nature.
vsing her qualities and operations. And seeing
the soule is an inuisible peculiar frame and
workmanship of God, as a sparke of his diuinitie:
It foloweth then also, that my Ladie and
Mistresse, must needes be a seuered work of God
alone, without hauing any relation to Nature.

                  〈…〉
                Her excellence, nobilitie, and byrth, considered,
and withall, the notable comforts, and
sweete sauouring vertues that she in her selfe
conteyneth, she hath euer bin of all wise men
honored in high degree, as one of the chiefest

beauties and ornaments of lyfe.
            Since I first came acquainted with her seruice,
I haue bin in stead of her seruant, as it were
her gardian:Diligence the porter of Memorie. My name is Diligence, and I continually
accompanie her, in respect of the vehement
loue I beare vnto vertuous studie, whose
true perfection without her helpe is not to be
obteyned. The onely way to see her perfectly,
is through Vertuous industrie, first by exercising
our mindes to learne and know, and then fastly
to reteine that which we haue once learned and
knowen.
            But because I see you are arriued to this vncomfortable
soyle of Olde Age, taking compassion
of your weakened forces, I will accomplish
your desire, hoping somewhat therewith to refresh
and comfort the languishing of your spirites.
            Whereupon being by this industrious Porter
brought to the presence of Memorie, I was
of her saluted with a most pleasing and gentle
behauiour.
            Her attire was sumptuous and rich,The attyre of Memorie. embrodered
in meruailous art by Cogitation rounde
about, strangely presenting vnto my view, a
large course and historie of Time, both past and
present. And withall, the more to subtilize my
remembrance, she made me smell to a Garlande

of Knowledge, which she ware, whose excellent
and delicious odour, did so refresh the vigour
of my senses, that me thought I was not halfe so
earthly as before.
            After some few conferences, I requested her to
fauour me with the sight of her librarie, which I
imagined could not be but rare & magnificent.
But she briefly answered me, that whosoeuer determined
to studie there, may not vse any other
bookes or lessons, then such as Remembrance
yeeldeth him: for it were labour lost, and meere
vanitie, for old men to begin first then to studie.
Their exercise ought rather to be in well keeping
and reteyning that, which before time they
had seene and learned, and therewith in shewing
the fruites of their wysedome to recreate
them selues, and to counsell others.
            But now tell me, sayd she, what is the thing
that you do demaunde of me, & you shall finde
me redy to yeelde you satisfaction?
            Being comforted with her courteous and
gentle language, I did without delay acquaint
her with the circumstances of my aduenturous
enquest, telling her, how that my thought-fulnesse
had instantly mooued me to visite the
forest of Atropos: which voyage I had now resolued,
and withall, to enter in single combat
with eyther of the two famous Champions,

               Debilitie or Accident, to whose garde the place is
committed, beseeching her earnestly to tell me,
if she had heard, read, or founde, in any ancient
bookes, writinges, or recordes, hidden figures,
or long remembrance of times, that any of these
Champions had bin put to the foyle, by any
of those worthy men that at sundry ages haue
liued so puissant and conquering in their times:
For yf any one had at any time, or in any age
vanquished them, I woulde not doubt, but by
Gods assistance, to goe as farre, as he that had
gon farthest. But in fine, howsoeuer the matter
shoulde goe, I tolde her, that I was resolued to
winne eyther glorie with my sworde, or with
my body death.
            
               Memorie, hauing with attention heard my
speaches: I will not, sayd she smilingly, enterteine
you with long discourses, but geuing you
the best aduise I may, let you with your eyes
beholde the certaine euent of this most dangerous
enterprise, in which you are engaged.
And opening therewith a Posterne gate, she
placed me in a great immense and spatious
playne, called the Vniuersal Sepulcher of mankind,
               The vniuersal sepulchre of mankinde,
open and discouered on euery side, without
eyther Rocke or Mountaine, so that there was
no limit nor restraint to the eye, but that it might
boldly and frankly throw his view so farre, as

the sharpenesse thereof coulde pearce or discerne:
and as the playne was infinite, so was the
number of Graues & Monumentes: vpon most
of the which of those of the right side, were
Epitaphes, and famous Figures of the name and
being of humane creatures, whom Death had
swallowed and deuoured.
            Marke now there, sayd she, yf you can, and
note vp the number of those enterred bodies,
who sometimes florished with such applause of
the worlde in great pompe & honorable estate.
But yf your wittes be not able to comprehende
them, nor no wysedome, learning, or retentiue,
able to register them, then rest assured, that the
force of your aduersaries are mightie, and to be
feared: for they are all the spoyles of Debilitie
and Accident.
               The Churchyarde of Memorie. See there the Churchyarde of
Memorie, wherein you shall finde buried al those
whose names are in the sacred historie of the
Bible mentioned (Enoch and Elyas only excepted,
of whom it pleased the heauenly wisedome
otherwyse to dispose.) There shall you finde all
those, whose names Homers heroicall verse, or
Liuies maiesticall prose, hath made glorious to
the worlde. Those that Valerius and Orosius
spake off, lie here all in a reckoning. Olde, young,
rich, poore, fayre and foule, lie heere altogeather
encoffined. The great warriours of Babylon, the

learned Philosophers of Athens, the vanquishing
Graecians, and the ouercome Troyans, the
Amazonian Viragos, and the Romane Matrons,
being summoned by DEATH, haue all accomplished
her commandement, & heere their carkases
do rest.
            I saw there, of Queenes and Princesses, Ladyes
and Gentlewomen, of high degree, such a
number, that it passed imagination: of which,
though some had bin glorified with regall diademes,
some shined with admirable beautie,
some adorned with infinite wysedome and incomparable
vertue, yet had no one of them all
bin able to defende her selfe against the Neuermissing
Dart of Liues enemie.
            
            There were Popes and parish Clarkes, Cardinals
and Carters,All degrees alike to death. Bishops and Beggers, Patriarkes
and Pedlers, though before time in degree
vnequall,Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat. yet now to the woormes alike, who
found no difference in their flesh. Their bones,
being confusedly put togeather, of such likenes,
that one was not to be knowen from another.
Emperours and slaues, Kinges and Ploughmen,
Lordes and vacabondes, Law-giuers & Louts,
were there all vnder Deaths clapnet. None of
them escaped, nor euer shall thence bring newes
to the worlde, of the good or euyll enterteinment
he there receiued. Retyred Virgins, new

professed Nunnes, and aged Abbesses, vertuous
Matrones, and wanton Curtizanes, all had there
yeelded vp their lyues to Deaths commandement.
            In fine, such was the infinitnesse of the number,
that my eyes were weeried with viewing,
and my spirits dulled with meditating vpon
them.
            Of all those whose carkases I there behelde,
I woulde gladliest, yf I knew which way, entreate
of those of this present age of ours. But
though it shoulde please God to graunt vnto
me the lyfe of Mathusalaem, and I shoulde in all
that time do nothing els but write, yet should I
want space to reckon vp the number of the dead
inhabitantes, that this playne possessed. Cruell
Accident woundeth, Debilitie ouerthroweth,
and Atropos in her forest geueth them free
campe, and there all humane creatures do ende
their lyues. For so victorious is the violent
hand of Consuming Death, that whatsoeuer Nature
buyldeth and maketh, he breaketh and dissolueth;
and from this lot, no mortall creature
is free.
            Herewith Memorie seeing me at these tragical
sightes oppressed with exceeding sadnesse, with
a chearefull countenance bad me not be dismayed:
For, Feare, quoth she, befitteth not a noble

minde: but yf you will folow my aduise,Feare befitteth not a noble minde.
take with you a magnanimious resolution, to
die constantly, and with patience, and so to order
your soule, that it may not be subiect to a
seconde death, but rather be receyued into that
euerlasting ioy, where it shall liue eternally in
glorious rest. And therewith leading me into
an inner mansion, and enterteining me still
with good and vertuous counsell, I tolde her,
that though my cause of Feare were greater
then any hope of Comfort, yet in fine, come
what woulde, I was resolued to proue the vnauoydable
aduenture, let lyfe or death ensue, as
vnto the diuine Almightinesse should be most
pleasing. Of which my so resolued courage, she
did conceiue such liking, that she offered her
selfe to be my guyde; which I thankfully accepted,
and without delay, she tooke her Palfrie,
and bad me follow her.
            Such was the speede we made, that of a sodaine,
before I was well aware, we were arriued
neere the fatall place, where the cruell dreadfull
combat, to which I hasted, was to be ended and
determined.
            At our verie arriuall, I heard a great noyse and
clattering of men and armour, as though it had
bin of some well fought Turney, or warlike
iusting: but the sounde thereof seemed rather

plaintfull and discomfortable, then signifiyng
any pleasant triumph.
            Approching neerer, I might see certaine
great letters of Golde,Letters of gold engrauen in afaire table at the entry of the forest of Atropos. ingraued in a fayre register
or table of Stone, conteyning these following
wordes. Heere all vayne worldly deuises, and
the life of all humane Creatures maketh an ende.
This is the dolorous passage, where the strength,
beautie, wysedome, puissance, and valour of
mankinde is vanquished and ouerthrowen.
Atropos is Ladie of this place, who mainteyneth
heere in garrizons two mightie Champions,
whose incomparable valour hath bereaued
of lyfe all those that euer liued in the worlde
heretofore, and shall do the like with those that
liue at this present. Accident commonly beginneth
the fight, against whose sundry stratagems,
and strange kindes of fight, no worldly
strength preuayleth: but yf at any time he
chaunce to misse, then commeth the Prince of
sorow, called Debilitie, whose heauie comfortlesse
blow, no Armour of proofe withstandeth:
So that heere in fine all humane flesh endeth,
leauing to the worlde their possessions, vanities,
pursuites, and fonde desires, wherein while
they lyued they did set such pleasure, flattering
them selues with a foolish conceipt of longer
enioying them.
            
               
But hearing a great rumor & noyse within the
Steccada, I stayed no longer heere, but got me
to the listes, where I found a great number of
people assembled to beholde a strange & dreadfull
combat, that was there to be tryed, so that
there was a great whispering and confused
noyse of voyces.
            
               Atropos beholding all,The maner and attyre of Atropos. sate aloft in a stately
skaffolde, queintly clothed with a garment embrodered
rounde about with Putrified earth and
Wormes. Her gesture full of Ire and threatning,
and in her hande a Death-bringing Dart, with
which she first defieth them that least thinke of
it: Cruelty is the marshall of her field. Her K.
at armes, Wilfulnesse: his coate armour of Vnrespect:
her chauncelor, Instability: and his diuine,
Let no man trust.
            
            The lystes are of Sorowes, enclosed with Heauinesse:
her pauilion of Clamours, her banners
and streamers there wauing, all of Plaints and
Wailings, her neerest attendants, are Bitternesse,
Despite, and Villanie.
            
            On the defendants side was his pauilion, embrodered
round about with Heroicall bounty &
High valour, and beautified with infinite streaming
banerolls and flags of Honor: his King at
armes was Welbeloued: the paynting of his bawdricke
and coate armour, was all garnished with

               Vertuous prowesse, & crowned with True Nobility.
Wilfulnesse in his Ladies name proclamed Silence,
cōmanding vpon peine of great penalties,
that none should with any good or euill signe,
or with any other meanes, assist either of the
combatters, And after proclamation, seeing generall
silence, commaunded the champions to
begin the fight, and to shew their force.Debilitie entreth the listes 
               Debilitie
first entred, bringing with him two mightie &
sharply steeled weapons, the one of Persecution,
the other of a Remedilesse consumption. His vpper
garment or coate-armour had figured in it the
Carkas of a dead Man, miserably pined away,
bare, and without flesh, hanging only togeather
by the bones, yeelding a sight full of
ghastfulnesse and horror: On the other side
came foorth a most honorable Defendant, beautified
with the glorious armes of Burgundie:
Honour both wayted vpon him and was his
guyde. This was the most excellent Prince of
great and famous memorie, so highly for his
vertues honored and loued.Philip, surnamed the good: Duke of Burgundie. 
               Philip of Burgundie,
of all our Westerne worlde the greatest Duke:
his right hande was armed with a Lance of
Stayed aduice. The fayre enameled bosse of his
guylded Target, represented the Great prayse,
the many Freendes, and powerfull dominions, that
he possessed. Nothing was about him, but witnessed

               Trueth, Bounty, Constancie, and Courage:
And finally, his Mace was of Firmenesse against
all aduersities.
            
               Debilitie was neuer at any time fuller of feare,
then now, at the constant behauiour of this gallant
enemie, and therefore threw at him a farre
off a dart, headed with so Manie troubles, that it
had bin able to haue daunted and ouerthrowen
the greatest courage liuing. But the gentle
Duke opposed him selfe with so Quiet & Vnblemished
a minde, that it made in him no breach at
all; rather did he with his Lance, of whose temper
I tolde you before, geue his enemie so vertuous
an encounter, that he made him to stagger.
            Each of them shewed the vttermost of his
valour, striuing in this hard and cruel combat
whether of them should be superior.
            
               Debilitie let flie at the Duke with his Pollax
of Persecution: the Duke betoke him selfe to his
Mace of Firmenesse, and so auoyded the blow.
So that as the fight was fierce and vehement,
so was it in a maner doubtfull betweene them.
Memorie seemed to hope, that the Duke should
escape victorious: But the Destinies were against
it, and the Eternall ordinance of the Almightie:
For in the ende, Debilitie thrust the noble Duke
into the Lungs with a deadly Consumption,
assayling him besides with many a fierce blow

of other infirmities, so that though he were him
selfe exceedingly weeried and foyled, yet farre
greater was the Defendants extremitie: of
whom, to make a finall ende, gathering togeather
all his force, he strake with so violent a Catarre,
that downe fell the magnanimous Duke
breathlesse, and with him the glorie of our age.
            
               Atropos in so heauie a case (all the hartes of
the beholders els throbbing, and their eyes weeping)
made no other reckoning, then as it were
a Maygame, ful of laughter and scorne, no whit
at all respecting his great honor, estate, and alliance,
nor the worldes generall sorow for the
losse of so excellent a Prince.
            The Heralds at armes laide ouer the dead bodie
a rich embrodered Herse, garnished rounde
about with workes of Glorie, and thence conueyed
the same vnto the noble Mansion of Memorie:
where, with sacred Obits, and sumptuous
Funeralls, it was most solemnly enterred: as for
his blessed soule, I trust in Gods mercie, that it
is now glorified with celestiall ioyes, free from
hauing hence foorth any more to do eyther
with Debilitie, or Accident.
            
            Scarce were these mournefull Obsequies ended,Accedent presenteth him selfe armed.
when we might heare a new rumor and
noyse of two freshly arriued Champions. The
first was Accident, who in terrible gesture presented

himselfe armed and fierce on horsebacke
in the fielde. His Horse was caparasoned with
Arrogance neuer tempered, his Lance of Vnhappinesse,
his Harnesse of Ire, his Sword, with which
he hath ouerthrowen millions of men, of Ouerweening
boldnesse, and his Mace, with which he
vsually ouerturns those that are in best liking
with themselues, of Fortune.
            
            Out comes against him, like Mars or Hercules
enraged,Charles Duke of Burgundie surnamed the hardie. great Charles of Burgundie, the most feared,
& aduenturous Prince that liued in his age,
who alwayes made Reason attende vpon his Wil,
(which yet neuer was vnuertuous, though to
him selfe some times domageable.) His Courser
was Fiersenesse, euerie peece of his Armour
tempered in True courage, his Lance of High
endeuour, his Sworde of Mindes greatnesse, and
his Dagger of Incredible munificense; And surely,
yf we will rightly iudge of this worthy Prince,
there was not any vertue that he had not in perfection,
neither was there any vice, with which
the nobilitie of his minde was spotted, vnlesse
selfewill, and ouer-greatnesse of courage, be to
be called vice.
            Where this feelde was fought, was neither
tent nor pauilion, but only shrubbes & brushes.
The encounter began with great clashing and
noyse of armour. Great was the furie of either

Champion, and great the fiersenesse of their first
onset, either of them deadly and despitefully desiring
the destruction of the other.
            
               Accident like a tempest or whirlewinde,The Duke three times ouerthrowen by the D. of Lorayne and Swyssers, and lastly slaine at the battaile of Naneie in the yeere. 1476. with
such vnresistable puissance so encountred the
Duke three times, that he ouerthrew him to the
ground, and yet vndid him not; for still in his
greatest disgrace, vndismayed, he made head
againe, with greater and more reuengefull resolution
then before. Yet such was the hurt of
these vnfortunate encounters, that not only the
Duke, but his whole house, estate, & countrey,
was thereby greatly weakoned.
            But now was the fight growen to that heate
of furie betweene them,Campobache an Italian Counte, chiefe leader of the D. horse, and of especial credite about him, had agreed with the D. of Loraine to betray his maister, which most Iudas-lyke he performed at this battell before Nancie. that it amazed the beholders.
The Duke being full of magnanimous
wrath, & resolued to die, or to be victorious,
spared no meanes or wayes he might to
greeue his aduersarie, who strake him a mightie
blow with his Pollax of Conspiracie, geuen
him by Fortune, therewith to ende the lyfe of
him, whom manly and equall vertue neuer
coulde haue vanquished: Yet still the fearelesse
Duke mainteined valiantly the place, though
Fortune, and all the worlde els, had forsaken
him, till at last, Accident with vnworthy handes,
doubling a downright blow vpon him, bare
him, for whom the earth while he liued was too

litle, slaine and sencelesse to the earth: who as all
his life time he had bin great and incomparable,
so was his valorous ending, euen to his hatefullest
enemies, admirable. God I hope of his
infinite goodnesse, will there graunt rest and
quietnesse to his soule, which heere his body so
much abhorred.
            If warre be to be praised as an honorable exercise,
then great ought your sorow to be, ò
souldiors, for the losse of such a prince, whose
like in that profession neuer liued any: yet notwithstanding
al this incomparable losse, it doth
not a little comfort me, in that it is to the whole
worlde notorious, that he was not ouercome by
any that were worthy of such a conquest, but
onely through the diuine power & permission,
by which fortune holdeth in her handes, and
handleth at her pleasure, all humane woorkes.
            For the sentence, permission, decree, and secret
iudgment of the heauens, farre exceedeth
our science, deceyueth our knowledge, and
maketh vaine our wisedome.
            If a man liue in this world fortunately,The vayne instabilitie of the worldes iudgemne. and
possesse what so his hart desireth, then the common
opinion is, that he is an happy man, & was
borne in a good houre: but if by aduerse fortune
he afterwardes chaunce to become poore, and
afflicted with aduersities, miseries, or losse of

honor, then euery one crieth out, that he is vnhappy,
& that it is pitie that euer he was borne.
            To auoyde therefore these inconueniences,
and vncertainties of the worlde,The surest anker is to trust onely in God. let euery mortall
creature turne him selfe with a pure and penitent
minde vnto the eternall creatour of all
things, to whom both heauen and earth are
obedient, and then shall he be assured, that
there shalbe no errour in his course; neither,
being ankered vppon so sure a rocke, shall he
neede to depende on the vaine fleeting blastes
of worldly so soone deceyued opinions.
            In fine, though Accident victoriously triumphed
ouer this famous Prince, yet neuer in any
age shall the glorie and valorous endeuours of
great Charles be forgotten, whose vncomparable
valour and magnanimitie, all nations and
histories haue beautified with the surname of
Hardie.
            
            But now, though with tearefull eyes, yet shal
my penne proceede and leaue the wofull storie
of this worthy Duke vnto some happier writer,
whose muse may be glorified with so great a
subiect. Accident presently thirsting after a new
pray, put on his armour of deepe-pirceing Dispaire,
and with a sharp grounded Iauelin of
Misfortune, leapt out into the high way, putting
to his side a Sword of Sodaine griefe, which only

hath shortened the life of many worldly creatures:
but to make the matter more speedy, his
Dagger was of Secret melancholy, which being
ioyned to Sickenesse, were able to consume a
marble.
            With this there began a musique so well accorded,
so variable, sweete, and delicious, that
it rauished with delight the hearers. To-wardes
the which, as the people ioyfully flocked, to
know whence, or from what cause the same did
proceede, they might beholde a Litter that approched,
supported by two milke-white Vnicornes,
of which the one was Perfect bountie, and
the other Sweete demeanour. The riches, ornament,
and sumptuousnesse of this Litter, was
such, that it exceeded all estimation. The Vnicornes
were guyded by foure Princes: the first,
good Fame, the seconde, Flower of Youth, the
thirde, Noblenesse of Hart, and the fourth,
Disdayne against villanie, and all foure linked
togeather by Reason.
            
            Straight folowed a great troupe of Cauallerie,
and withal a companie of so choyce, fayre,
and beautifull Ladies, as though each one had
bin selected and chosen out of the greatest
Courtes of the worlde.
            But now it is time to say somewhat of that
royall personage that came within this sumptuous

Litter, though to touch rightly her perfections,
be farre beyond the compasse of mine,
or any mortall penne.
            It was a glorious young Princesse, armed at
all peeces, and resolued there in that passage, to
shew her power where she had receyued her
griefe. In her seeming one woulde haue deemed
her to be a very Penthesilea, that came to reuenge
the death of Troyan Hector. But cruell
and vnhappie Destinie, had conspired her ouerthrow.
            Her Harnesse was of Contentment, her head
was armed with Vertuous Thought, therwith the
better to defende her selfe in this dangerous
conflict. Her Sworde was Desire to do well, sharpe
and well poynted, wherewith she came determined
to reuenge the wronges that had bin offered
her: Her Dart was of Debonairnesse, and
her Shielde of Faythfull vnspotted Loue, neuer to
be altered.Mary, onely daughter and heire to Charles D. of burgundy, and wise to the Archduke Maximilian who was afterwardes Emperour. Her vpper garment was wrought,
and rounde about adorned with thousandes of
vertues, who finding her pure soule free from all
euilles, had therein made their quiet and blessed
mansion.
            This excellent Ladie, as Loyaltie her Heralde
at armes in loude speeches proclaymed, was
Marie, the great and puissant Archduchesse of
Austria, worthie of the worldes gouernment.

               Accident stoode all this while trembling, to see
so imcomparable a beautie, ioyned with so vertuous
a courage, woondring that those many
excellent rare partes and vertues, shoulde be all
so viuely vnited in a young Princesse of three
and twentie yeeres, whereas they are rare and
scarce to be founde in the many setled yeeres of
longer ages. But Furie, his trustie Counsayler,
seeing his amazement, bade him be of good
courage, for the victorie shoulde assuredly be
his, if so be he would folow his counsell: which
was, that he shoulde not assay her with any other
weapon or stroke, then onely of a deepe
Hart-Sorow, which the gentle temper of her wel
framed minde not enduring, he was assured,
would soone ouerthrow her.
            
               Accident folowed his aduise, and ashamed
of his former fayntnesse, with a cruell Vnkindnesse,
gaue her so deepe a Sorowes-wounde, and
thereupon a feruent Ague, that the gentle Princesse
loosing by degrees the perfection of her
beauties, though she apposed her vertues in resistance,
was finally vanquished and taken out
of this vnworthy worlde, in prime of her yeeres
and beautie; leauing behinde to vs, nothing but
griefe, heauinesse, and compassion, though
God wot, bootelesse sorow, and weeping teares,
be of small effect and moment, to equall so

great an occasion.
            Thus now hath cruell Accident taken from vs
our rarest iewell, that precious Palladium, which
while Burgundie enioyed, it reigned in all prosperitie
and happinesse: But now alas, the name
of that noble house is finished, and Death hath
taken away this excellent Lady, whose glorie
shall yet liue heere eternally, and her soule there
I hope in endelesse blisse.
            This was shee that refreshed our languishing
spirites, and comforted our former distresfull
calamities, as Troilus did, who with vertue
and courage bare vppon his shoulders the
burden of besieged Troy, when Hector fayled.
And if heauen would haue graunted vs so
much happinesse, as to haue left vs onely her
aliue, we should haue bin able to haue suffered
and endured whatsoeuer els could haue hapned.
But what I might thinke, and what griefe
might be mine, let the compasionate Reader
iudge, seeing in so short a space, three Princes
dead, whom I serued, and had such cause to loue
and honour. I was brought vp young, and nourished
in their court. They were alwayes my
shelters against all tempestes, stormes, and aduersities:
But alas, there is none now lefte to
shelter me from sorow.
            But returning to my discourse, at the ende

of the combat, when I had seene the death of
these three my so dearly honored soueraignes,
my eyes being drowned with teares, and my
soule with sorow, vnwilling to ouer-liue so
great a desastre, I pulled downe my beuer, and
dreadlesse and carelesse what might happen,
nor looking nor fearing who came against me, I
rushed into the listes, defying my aduersaries,
to come both, or one, or how they listed, or
dared. Memorie seeing me thus altred, feared
least I had bin troubled with some passion of
Despaire,
               The Author offereth combat to the champion of Atropos. and therefore willed me to recommende
my selfe vnto God; which I did, and
constantly attended the comming of my aduersaries.
But by and by came vnto me a felow like
a Heralde, of litle stature, with a blazon of prolongation,
his name was, Sommons. Great Atropos,
saith he,The messenger or poursuiuant of Atropos called Sommons. that heere gouerneth, hath commaunded
me to tell thee, that thy houre is not
yet come, and therefore willeth thee to stay, till
thou be called; which shall not be long first.
In the meane time rest contented, for there are
now many other combats to be determined
of greater worth, and among the rest, especially
of fiue famous aduenturers:The combats of fiue famous aduenturers. whose names
and particularities, I desiring him to recount
vnto me, though, sayd he, some of these be
things to come, and the secretes of the destinies

are not to be reuealed, yet for this once I
will satisfie thy request.
            Know then, that these fiue dismall conflictes
I speake off heere to be tryed, are such, that the
onely thinking of them breedeth an astonishing
terrour both to Atropos and her Champions;
who hearing of the victorious conquestes
that are, and shalbe, by these excellent aduenturers
atchiued, are fore-possessed with an incredible
feare and amazement. I will therefore tell
thee first, what each of the aduenturers is, and
then how prepared and armed they will come
to this the last combat that euer they shall
make. And do not thinke that I do fable with
thee, in telling thee of things to come:
for I doe certeinly assure thee, that the euent
shalbe as I doe tell thee: for Atropos is well acquainted
with the Destinies, who haue discouered
the whole vnto her. But because it greeueth
me exceedingly to see thee so sorowful and sad,
I would yeeld willingly some comfort to thy
perplexed minde. And this assure thy selfe, the
heauens doe neuer denie consolation to the
comfortlesse and distressed. As for the three
ended princes, whose vntimely deaths haue
brought thee to such excessiue and immoderate
sorow, and these other, with the particularitie of
whose combats I haue promised to acquaint

thee, they shall leaue behind them such and so
noble a succession, that their losse shalbe to the
whole worlde restored. But especially the great
English Monarch,
               Sommons doth reueale vnto the Author the Secrets of the Destinies, wonderfully among the rest foretelling the greatnesse of Queene Elizabeths glorie who among the rest of his
royal issue, shal leaue one so excellent a daughter,
& so highly of the heauens blessed, that besides
the glorifying of the frozen poles, and the fiery
equinoctials with the trophes of her inuincible
armes, such shalbe the worldes wonder, and admiration
of her vertue, that the greatest kings,
princes, and estates of the worlde, shall thinke it
the greatest happinesse that may befall them, to
be shrowded vnder the faire spreading wings
of her Imperious gouernment, some of them
falling downe at her sacred feete, and flying into
her realme for refuge, as to an vnblemished
Azyle and inuiolable sanctuarie.
            But now to enterteine thee no longer with
circumstances,The Lady Isabell sister to Henrie the 4. of Castile, and wife to Ferdinand of Aragon, granmother to Charles the fifth. know that the first which in these
listes is by Atropos so fearefully expected, is the
great and mighty princes Dōna Isabella Queene
and enheritrix of Castile: Her am I ere long time
ouerpasse to sommon to the aduenture of this
passage, to which as euery mortall creature is subiect,
so shall shee not be disobedient, but presently
come into the field armed and accompanied
as followeth.
            Shee shalbe mounted vppon a triumphall,

Chariot, accompanied with innumerable vertues,
contending betweene them selues,In what sorte shee shal come to combat with death. which
of them shoulde haue the chiefe possession and
presidence within the royall harbour of her
thoughts. They shall attende on eache side of
her Chariot, singing in her honour immortall
prayses. Fayth and pure Zeale shalbe her Chariots
guyde. Foure Horses, exceeding the snow
in whitenesse (therein denoting her puritie)
shall draw the same, their names, Wisedome, Religion,
Hope, and Charitie, all being blessings,
and especiall graces of the highest: her armour
shalbe of Magnanimitie, her Helmet of good
Counsayle, assisting her in gouernment. The
Sworde she shalbe gyrt withall, shalbe of an
accustomed vertue of hers called Natural Pitie,
the which she shall employ & put in vre against
Crueltie: Her Speare shalbe of good Desart, steeled
with a head of hating Errour, all her workes
and cogitations being thereunto incessantly
bent and directed: her Shielde of Honestie, and
her Coat-armour of Aucthoritie, before which,
vayne Pleasure, and worldly Vanitie, neuer dare
appeare. Vpon her arriuall, her King at armes,
called Gouernment, shall proclayme all the particularities
of her estate, name, condition, and
cause of coming. Presently will weerilesse
Accident come foorth, armed with a new and

fryghtfull Harnesse of Amazement, his Shielde
of Dispayre, therewith to bereaue the defendant
of all hope to escape, his Dart of Crueliie, his
battle Axe of Impossibilitie, whose blow no
soundnesse of health, nor vigorousnesse of force
shalbe able to withstande: his Sworde shalbe of
Passion, & his Dagger of Sorow. And thus furnished,
shall he begin the combat, halfe dismayed
at the vertue, fame, and estate, of so great an enemie,
onely encouraged by the perswasion of
Furie, that still incenseth him forwarde.
            The gentle Princesse seeing him come, shall
presently dismount off her Chariot, and with a
well resolued constancie attende him, opposing
against his fiercenesse her Speare of good Desart.
But inexorable Accident, no whit at all
thereof esteeming, shall in such sort vexe and
pursue this noble Ladie, that notwithstanding
all the defence of her infinite vertues, he shall in
the ende depriue her of lyfe, and the worlde of
his chiefe ornament. So that heere shall be seene
the ende of the mightie and puissant Queene,
the very thought whereof forepossesseth my
minde with griefe. But so firme and vnuanquished
shall her vertue be, that it shall perpetually
retayne her name and memorie in lyfe, in despite
of Atropos that gaue her death. Fame and Glorie
shall geue her Sepulture: and though her body

be by death vanquished, yet with a farre more
worthy conquest, shall her ioyfull freed soule, by
the grace of Gods goodnesse, winne eternall
rest in the heauens.
            At the ende of this wofull conflict,Philip sonne to Maximilian the Emperour and father to Charles the fifth. shall a noble
and heroyicall aduenturer present him selfe
in the lystes, by name great Philip, heyre to
Austria & Burgundie: to which by mariage with
Donna Iohanna, daughter to Ferdinande, and the
late remembred Q. Isabelle, he shall adioyne the
riche and mightie kingdome of Spayne, Sicily,
Arragon, and Naples.
            
            
               Accident vnderstanding the arriuall of this
matchlesse Prince, shall presently mount vpon a
fresh Courser, called Outrage, his Armour shalbe
of cruell Chaunce, of a hard and vnpenetrable
temper, hammered and forged by Vnpitifulnesse,
against which no bountie or valour is able to
preuayle. His Shielde shalbe of Griefe, his Mace
of Discomfort, his Sworde of Furie, and his
Lance of the greatest Sorow that euer might
happen to the worlde: in this terrible furniture
shall he come to encounter the fearelesse
youthfull Defendant.
            The vertuous Austrian Prince shal come royally
accompanied vnto this dolorous passage,
though greatly out of season, in the very florishing
spring of his age and honour. And surely

though I must needes accomplish the commandement
of Atropos my Ladie and Mistres,
in citing and summoning vnto this feared passage
all humane creatures, yet can I not dispossesse
my thoughts of an infinitenesse of sorowe,
in that I must be constrained to be a meane of so
soone shortening the life of this exellent Prince,
depriuing his people and subiectes of such a
treasure, as they shall neuer be able to recouer.
            He shall enter the listes armed onely with his
owne excellent giftes, which ouer the world shal
make him so renowmed and glorious. But disdainefull
Fortune, enuiyng the worldes happinesse,
shall take him away in the sweetest time of
his life, shewing vs thereby a faire example of
the vnsecure estate, ficklenesse, and instabiltie, of
all vaine worldly prosperitie.
            His horse shalbe Frankenesse,
               His vertues. his corslet Soueraine
bountie, his Lance True fortitude, his helmet
Assabilitie, his sworde Mercy, yet tempered
in meete proportiō of Iustice, his targuet of High
cogitation, substancially by Reason forged & perfected.
His heralde at armes, cald Beloued of all,
shall with loud proclamation bidde giue place
vnto this notable prince, whose like for louelinesse
was neuer in the worlde, no not Titus Vespasian,
though he were called the Delices of mankinde.
Fierce shalbe the first encountre of these

two puissant warriors. But Accident fearing the
daunger of Delay, considering the vndaunted
valour of his aduersarie, shall employ euen at
one instant the very vttermost of his force, and
therewith shal so mortally wound him, with the
feruent blow of a Continuall burning feuer, that
not able to resist so great a violence, this incomparable
prince, shall yeeld the spoile of a glorious
youth, to the crueltie of victorious Death,
whose dayes did worthyly deserue to be without
number, so shall the worlde with the shining
of his rare vertues be adorned. But mercilesse
Atropos, therby to encrease the terror of her
name, shall cut a sunder his threed, when it was
not a quarter wouen, filling the world with such
a sorow, as it neuer before had tasted.
            But now Accident, toiled with the greatnesse
of these his former conquestes, shal quit for this
time the place, and ordeine Debilitie in his steed
to manteine the field, telling him of a mightie
arriuing King, with whom he must encounter,
willing him by any meanes to looke wel to himselfe,
and to the surenesse of his armour, in respect
that the enemie, with whom he shall haue
to do, shalbe second to none of the worlde in
glorie of warre & peace. With these admonishments
shal Debilitie presently come forth, mounted
on a horse, named Helplesse, giuing thereby

to vnderstand, that all hope of succour is vaine:
his armour shalbe of Griefe, and his mace, which
vsually he accustometh to beare, of languishing
Weakenesse, wherewith he hath subdued
many millions of people: his Lance shalbe continuall
Ill-rest, his Sworde of paynefull Disease,
his Target obscurely enamiled with sundry infirmities
and greeuous paynes, and many other
sorowfull signes of increasing Sicknesse and decaying
health: his Coat-armour shalbe all ouer
embrodered with Crownes of Kings that he hath
slayne, as likewyse he shall do to him that now
commeth. Dreadlesse of force or pollicie he
shall stande brauing at the entrie of the passage,Ferdinande K. of Spayne, Aragon, Naples, and Sicilie.
when straight shall appeare great Ferdinande
the king Catholique of Spayne: with whom
shall come a thousande memories of his great
and glorius victories obscuring & darkening
those that in ancient histories were before accounted
famous. His Horse shalbe great Valour,
his Vamplate Felicitie, eyther of both being
able to keepe Aduersitie at the bay: his Lance
shalbe of great Gouernment, firme and constant
in euery change either of time or occasion: his
helmet of Discretion, making the effects of all
his actions prosperous: his sword Magnanimous
conquest, winning him throughout the
world both feare and honor: his shield of great

               Power, such as fortune with all her exorbitant excesse
shall not be able to diminish: his Coat-armour
of Prosperous euent, and his K. at armes, Inuincible,
who shall vppon his entrie within the
listes, proclaime his titles, kingdomes, estate, and
name, ennobled with so many triumphes & victories.
But at the very first meeting, Debilitie
shall with his Lance giue him such an encounter
of Il-rest, that the K. shall presently finde an
alteration in his health and quiet; which aduantage
Debilitie perceyuing, shall so double vpon
him fierse blowes of Encreasing sicknesse and languishing
feintnesse, that in fine, notwithstanding
his most constant, godly, and vertuous resolution
in that dismall combat, he shalbe depriued of
life, and his enemie honoured with the victory
of one that neuer in this world before was vanquished.
But Fame shall wayte vpon his funeralls,
and with his golden Trumpet blow about
the worlde his Innumerable victories and vertues.
            
            
               Debilitie swelling in the pride of so great an atchiued
conquest, lifting vp his sight, shal presently
espie an other excellent prince, roally accompanied,
directing his steppes towardes this passage
of Terror,
               Maximilian of Austria Emperour of the Romanes. by name Maximilian of Austria,
Emperour of the Occident, who shall come
with a secure countenance, and princely resolued
gesture to the fielde, mounted and armed as

the other fore named princes, with infinite guifts
of his owne naturall vertues, honoured besides
with many warlike Ensignes and Standardes,
taken from the powerfull Venecians, fierce Bohemians,
and warlike Frenchmen. But pitilesse
Debilitie, armed with rageful Crueltie, shall soone
with a dispiteous blow of remedilesse Sicknesse,
dimme the worldes lyght, by taking away this
honorable Prince, whose zeale, iustice, and magnanimitie,
made him inferiour to none of the
passed Emperours in greatnesse of true glorie,
neuer in any perpetuitie of time to be razed out
of the registers of memorie.
            The funeralles of this great Emperour (who
while he lyued,Great Henry king of England commeth to encounter the Champions of Atropos. as he did surmount al the rest of
the worlde in degree, so did he equall the best
in vertue) shalbe no sooner solemnized, when
of a sodayne the ayre shalbe broken with so terrible
and martiall a noyse of Drummes, Trumpetts,
and Fifes, that the whole forest of Atropos
shall seeme therewith to tremble and shake, and
Debilitie that standeth glorifiyng him selfe in the
fortunate euents of these his late conflictes,
shalbe sodaynely astonished with a colde and
chyllish feare, forecasting I know not what ensuing
dangers in his minde. But when the heroicall
warres musique shall approch neare,
and the wauing Stremers of banerolles appeare

glittering aloft richly guylded and embrodered
with Lions and Flourdelices of golde, then shal
he first begin to be so fully possessed with an
vnacquainted amazement and feare, that presently
quitting the place, he shal with haste repayre
vnto the Pauilion of Atropos, laying before
her, with a wylde and affrighted gesture, the
great danger of her selfe and her estate, yf presently
she did not take better order for the resistance
of this puissant arriuing enemie. As for
me, shal he say, I am not able to beare the stroke
of so vnresistable a force: for how can I alone
but feare him, whom so many mightie Kings
vnited, and the most warlike nations of the
worlde, did so dreadfully redoubt. This is he of
whom the Destenies haue so often tolde you, that
with such an ouergreatnesse should commaund
the worlde.
            Great Maximilian Emperour of the Romane
Monarchie shoulde serue him in his warres, and
to do him both honour and homage, shoulde
with the Englysh Rose, adorne his Imperial diademe.
            
               Iames, the most puissant & valourous King of
warlike Scotlande, should with the ouerthrow of
his royal assembled Armie, the slaughter of his
innumerable Subiectes, the death of his greatest
Peeres, the losse of al his honorable Enseignes,

Artillarie, and Munitions, and finally, with his
owne liues losse, yeelding him at Floddon a most
famous and memorable victorie, satisfie his royall
indignation,Paulus Giouius. so iustly conceyued, at the disloyaltie
of so neare a beloued kinsman & freend.
            The inuading French, should with the feareful
noyse of his onely approching name, drowne
them selues in the Southerne Seas.
            Great Frauncis, whom French hystoriographers,
and not vnworthely, shoulde cal their
Achilles, should so feare the fortune of this inuincible
Prince, that he shoulde suffer him to range
with his Armie ouer his Countrey vnfought
withal, to put sundry of his Townes to the sacke,
and lastly to returne victoriously vncontrolled.
            
               Charles the fifth (then whom since Charlemayne
there neuer lyued a more worthy and
heroycall Emperour) though highly offended
with him for his Auntes diuorsment, yet should
be so farre from daring to reuenge it, notwithstanding
the greatnesse of his Empire and many
Kingdomes, that he shoulde at length instantly
desire his freendshyp, yea and sue for it with
mighty presents, and great pensions, to such
great Lordes as shoulde in those dayes beare
sway about him.
            
               Charles of Burbon should receyue his wages,
by whose meanes the French King shoulde be

taken at Pauia,
               Martin de Bellay in his commentari
                     •
                  s writeth, that K. Henrie the eight gaue the French K. towards his ransome. 500000. crownes, whiche the Emperour did owe him, for not marying the Lady Marie accorning to couenantes betweene them, and withall a Fleuredelice of golde: vpon which, Henrie the .7. had lent to Philip father to Charls the .5. 50000. crownes at his being in Englande. Moreouer, whereas he had lent Charles. 400000. crownes, for which he should haue had the townes of Ayr & S. Homer in gage, he gaue vnto the French K. al those writings: for it was one article of his fidelitie, that he should pay al these sums vnto K. Henrie the. 8. and afterwards agayne by the
meanes and vnspeakable liberalitie of this redoubted
Monarch, mooued with a royall compassion
should be set at libertie, and restored to
his regall Crowne and dignitie.
            
               Pope Clement, being prisoner to the Imperiallistes
(though afterwardes vnthankfully requiting
so great a benefite) should be by his meanes
set at libertie, and once againe enthronized.
            But what shoulde I stande repeating these
things vnto you, which you your selfe so well
remember were long agon by the Destinies in
maner of prophecie to you vnfolded; you see
your selfe what he hath accomplyshed: what
now remayneth for him, hauing by admirable
Vertues, and inuincible Armes, drawen the
worldes loue vnto him, but aspiring to immortalitie
to conquer death, and to make him selfe
Lorde of this Forest. As for my selfe, I know
mine owne power, and finde the same farre too
weake to resist so great a puissance. Therefore
I pray you, yf you be not vtterly carelesse of my
safetie, and your owne seruice, let Accident be
commaunded to ioyne with mee, and withall,
the vttermost of your other forces to be assembled
to succour vs, if neede require.
            
               
               Atropos hereupon shall call for Accident, encharging
him to assist Debilitie, comforting
them both with this assurance, that though this
were the greatest and most redoubted enemie
that euer they encountred, yet they shoulde not
feare: for, being mortall, the high neuer-faylyng
decree of Heauen, had ordeyned him to death:
neuerthelesse she shall aduise them to arme them
selues with all possible Heedefulnesse, and to be
circumspect in their maner of fight.
            Heerewith being somwhat encouraged,
they shall arme them selues at all peeces with
the surest tempered armours, and the sharpest
deadly weapons, that the shorehouse or armorie
of Atropos can yeelde them, and so march into
the listes, though terrified in themselues, yet terrible
to al the world els, saue onely to the dreadlesse
Prince that shal encounter them.
            And now, euen like the roring Ocean against
a tempest, so shall the cloud-breaking noyse of
his warrlike instruments approch with an vnspeakable
terror, when presently, like the Sunne
out of a cloude, so gloriously from out the
louing presse of his enuironing subiectes, shall appeare
the excellent heire of the two long diuided
houses Lancaster and Yorke, great Henry the
eyght of England, with an vnmooued Maiestie,
and sure resolued looke, though he see all deaths

forces bent vnto his ruine.
            His Courser shalbe inuincible Courage, sure
footed, and neuer once stumbling in this dangerous
carreere, but bearing him smoothly thorough,
without euer starting, fearing, or blemishing,
at the furious encoūter of his forcible enemie.
His Corslet shalbe of Fortitude, gorgiously
glistring in the pure brightnesse of true Nobilitie,
as being of excellent proofe against al outward
violence, so of singuler vertue in defending his
royall minde from all thoughts of dishonour.
His Lance, well iudging Foresight, surely fastened
to his rest of great Experience, neuer therewith
vnskilfully failing or vnknightly breaking
a crosse, but with a faire encounter, still striking
the honorable marke, whereunto it is by his
worthy minde directed. His Sworde of cleere
vnspotted Iustice, firmely hilted in Wisdome, and
ensheathed in a faire scabbard of Mercie, out
of which he shall neuer draw it, but when he
shalbe by forcible necessitie therto constreined:
His Target of Trust onely in God, vpon which
he shal beare the blowes of all earthly violence:
His fierie crested Headpeece of high Cogitation,
lyned with prosperous Effect, and adorned with
a fayre beautiful penache of immortal Fame:
His Coat-armour of such and so great Renowne,
as neuer more coulde happen to any mortal

creature: His Heralde at armes shalbe vnspeakable
Liberalitie, which shal set such a grace vpon
his other vertues, and that in so loude a voyce,
that all the worlde shal heare him. Thus honored,
thus armed, thus adorned, shal this great
King enter within the compasse of the fatal
lystes, Vertue leading him, and Glorie folowing
him. The eyes and hartes of al the worlde being
fixed, and attentiuely bent, vpon the sequel
of this admirable combat.
            In fine, the Heraldes hauing commaunded silence,
& the Trumpets sounded the cruel notes
of warte, Accident not daring approche the rayes
of so great a brightnesse, shal begin the fight a
farre off, thinking to terrifie him with forayne
Leagues and Inuasions; But the King betaking
him selfe to his trustie fore-remembred Lance,
shal with a thundring carrere, so represse the violence
therof, that the blow in steede of harming
him, shal erect new Trophees to his honour.
Then shal he throw at the fearelesse Prince his
dartes of Treason and secret Conspiracies: but he
vnsheathing his excellent Sworde, shall turne
the danger thereof aside, and make frustrate the
force thereof, so that the smart and peryll shall
returne to his enemies.
            But then twise wounded Accident enraged,
and betweene feare and furie desperate, shall

strike the triumphant King so cruel a blow with
his Sworde of Distemperature, that though styll
remayning in courage inuicible, yet shall he
in his health and strength, finde him selfe greatly
impayred: Neuerthelesse, drawing the weakenesse
of his body vp to the worthynesse of his
mynde, he shall enforce him selfe styll to mainteyne
the fight, tyll traytor Debilitie, mercilesse
like a preuayling cowarde, shall while the King
contendeth with Accident, powre downe vpon
him with all his violence so vnreliueable a blow
of remedilesse Sicknesse, that the neuer-before
yeelding Prince, shall now, seeing such he knoweth
to be the diuine pleasure (with a quiet, yet
magnanimous resolution, couering him selfe
with his Target) enrich the earth with the noble
burden of his fallyng body, and the heauens
with his freed soule, empouerishing onely the
worlde; whose griefe for his losse shalbe such, as
though, the greatest pyller thereof being gone,
it coulde not but attende a speedie ensuing
downefal and ruine.
            But herewith as Sommons woulde haue proceeded
in his wofull hystorie, I feeling my very
soule ouerburdened with an insupportable
greatnesse of sorow, entreated him to spare my
alredie enough miserable eares, and not to afflict
them with hearing of further tragedies, but

yf euer he would do me pleasure, then to shorten
the time of my prolonged combat.
            For alas, what shoulde I, miserable wretch
that I am, desire to lyue, or wherein should life
be sweete vnto me, seeing the glorious lights of
the worlde so soone extinguished: no vertue, no
wysedome, no loue, no honour, no beautie, no
conquest, no nobilitie, no goodlinesse, no scepter,
no force, no prayer, being able to stay the
stryking hand of vnmercifull DEATH.
            Whereunto Sommons replying, I had thought
fayd he, to haue reuealed vnto you two future
Combats more, of two great and Princely aduenturers:
The one, of the most valourous and
towardly young Prince of the worlde,King Edward the. 6. eldest
sonne and successor to this great Englysh King:
The beames of whose sayre rising Sunne, shall
no sooner begin to glimmer in our Orizon, but
they shall warme the whole worlde with his
loue.Queene Marie. The other of his eldest daughter, lykewise
succeding him in the royall Diademe, who
wereby Accident both soone depriued of their
lyues, and dispossessed of their thrones. But
seeing thee alredie of apprehensiue of forow,
and afflicted with such extremitie of passion, I
will forbeare to perplex thy eares with any
farther griefe: yet woulde not I haue thee to
repine at the diuine ordinance. For though the

Almightie in his secrete iudgement shall thinke
good to depriue the worlde of these most excellent
Princes: yet shal he not leaue it altogeather
desconsolate and abandoned: For he shal
blesse the perished Princes with successors of
such worthinesse, that lyke true heyres, as wel of
the Vertues, as Crownes of their predecessours,
they shal afresh brighten the worldes obscured
face, and with the goodly shyning of their wel
deserued glorie, returne the estate thereof into
the former blisfulnesse. But aboue all the rest,
so shall he ennoble the memorie of the late
Englysh Monarch, with so excellent and glorious
a DAVGHTER, that in her alone shalbe seene
vnited all the seuerally dispersed Vertues that
made so glorious the forenamed Princes, in so
much that all the worlde with one agreeing
consent, shal proclayme her to be the most admirable
Princesse that euer lyued. And,The prophesie of the Destenies cōcerning Elizabeth the Queene of England. which
is a thing not of the lightest consideration, but
perchaunce one of the greatest wonders that
euer any age hath seene, In her onely shal not
Fortune contende with Vertue, but, contrarie to
her nature, lyke a submisse and willing Handmayde,
attende vpon her noble desires, constantly
effecting them, yea, sometimes in things
most rare and marueylous. Likewise, there shalbe
so sweete a consent, & so fit a proportion betweene

the great richesse of her minde, and the
fayre ornaments of her body; that as the one
shal atteine to the height and perfection of fortitude,
wisedome, temperance, iustice, and all
other diuine vertues wherewith a royall minde
should be garnished, so shall the other in goodly
lyneamentes, and beautifull features, so without
all degree of comparison surmount the rest of
her sex, that the worldes eye shal neuer more beholde
a sweeter and more louely obiect, as being
in deede Delitiae humani Generis, singular in
her selfe, and excellent beyonde al comparison.
            And to make vp the full poynt of her happinesse,
as she shal both in rules of gouernment,
and vertue of gouerning, serue to all Christian
Princes as an excellent Paterne and example,
preseruing her Subiectes in a quiet estate, full of
reposefull blessednesse, when round about her,
some through the tyranous exactions of their
Prince, and some through the vnskilful gouernment
of their Prince, and some through his negligent
and contemptible loosenesse, shall murther
them selues with mutuall woundes, and be
torne within them selues to peeces: As she, I
say, shall by her princely care, and prudent foresight,
maynteine her Subiectes in this calme securitie
of vntroubled peace; so shal they againe,
with so quiet and unmurmuring a course of

faythful obedience,Neuer Prince more blessed in her subiects. Neuer subiects more blessed in their Prince. loue and honour her, that
she, if euer any Prince, shalbe blessed in her Subiectes,
and they, yf euer any Subiectes, blessed in
their Prince.
            But which is strangest, comming to the royal
Diademe, in the fayre youthful spring of her
virgins yeeres, she shall finde the estate of her
Realme diuided in faction, differing in religion,
and through the troubles of the late preceeding
gouernement, exceedingly discontented: All
which incōueniences, being by the vnfortunate
successe of the former gouernment (wherein
the Sworde was more employed then the Scepter)
styrred vp, and in apparance tending to
some feareful and dangerous issue, she shal with
the sweete breathing gale of her well tempered
Mildnesse, so pacifie, alay, and vtterly extinguish,
that she shal reduce her Subiectes from the deepest
degree of constreyned feare, to the highest
pytch of faythful loue, and duetiful obedience,
that euer Prince was honored withal.
            Neither shall her inuincible armes in iustly
vndertaken Warres abrode, be lesse glorious
vnto her, then this her admirable Peace and
iustice in ciuill gouernment at home. Neyther
shall be most warlike nations of Europe onely,
as Spayne, Portugall, France, Scotlande, and Irelande,
but euen the remotest regions, and concealed

partes of either Tropique, the frozen Poles,
and the middle burning Zone, be constreyned
to bow vnto the victorious Englishe Enseignes:
nothing being more rife in the mouthes of
men, yea as well of the farthest Indians, and sauage
people, as of the proude neighbouring nations,
then the name of great ELIZABETH, written
in the blood of those that resist, and the
pardoned lyues of those that yeelde, of all victories
the fayrest register, and best enduring monument.
            To recount vnto you the seuerall egregious
victories that shee shall giue, both by sea and
land, to the most fierce and warlike nations that
then shall possesse the world, were fitter for the
large relation of a Chronicle, then this my short
discourse: But this I assure you, they shalbe
such, as I know not whether any antiquitie can
bring forth the like.
            In fine, her Kingdome shalbe the secure Hauē
of Afflicted Princes, her Purse the royall maintenance
of Distressed Kings, and her powerfull
Armes, the yoking bridle of Ambitious Tirants.
            
            As for the Princely magnificence of her
Court, her well expressed iudgement in the
election of graue and honorable Counseylors, her
well employed rewardes on those that shalbe
Vertuous and of merite, her bountifull liberalitie,

and gratious enterteinment of Strangers, her
learning, languages, and skilfulnesse in royall
knowledge of such artes and secrets as to her
estate are fitting, so vnable is my feeble speeche
to aspire vnto the heigth of their worthynesse,
that forbearing to speake of things so farre aboue
my reach, I know no better way then to couer
them vnder the vaile of silence, leauing the
large campe of her prayses, to the excellent writers
of that age wherein shee shall floorish, her
rarenesse being such, that she shall with the
highnesse of her vertue, drawevp (as the heate
of the Sunne doth vapours from the earth) the
excellent wittes of her time to so high a pitch,
that the following ages among millions of other
noble workes penned in her praise, shall as
much admire the writer, but farre more the subiect
of the fairie Queene, as euer former ages
did Homer and his Achilles, or Virgill and his
Aeneas, such worthy, rare, and excellent matter,
shall her matchlesse and incomparable vertue
yeelde them to ennoble their pennes, & to immortalize
their fames.
            As for me, hauing now made you acquainted
with the former Combats, of which I made
you promise, though I haue in their recital perchaunce
seemed somewhat prolixe, yet yf you
wil consider the perticularitie of the mentioned

Princes, I feare you shall rather haue occasion
to blame my breuitie. Hauing now, as I say, satisfied
your desire, and that truely without abusion
or deceipt, I wil now take my leaue of you,
because Atropos standeth in neede of my seruice.
As for your Combat, neuer trouble your selfe
with vrging it farther, for I wil, doubt you not,
sommon you thereunto in time, and therefore
I would wish you euen now to make yourselfe
redie, seeing the houre thereof cannot be but at
hande. At the ende of these speeches, he tooke
his leaue of mee, and departed, leauing mee in a
strange confusiō, betweene sorow of that which
was past, & wonder of that which was to come,
my onely comfort being to thinke of that fortunate
and golden age, wherein the branches of
these deceassed Princes shal liue, especially that
excellent & matchlesse Empresse of the Ocean.
            Herewith Memorie, that had all this while attentiuely
listened vnto these passed tragicall
discourses, seeing me still perseuer in my pensiuenesse,
vsed her best endeuours to comfort
me, and requested me, seeing I had such prolongation
and respite of time graunted me, to returne,
and to take my lodging with her, whyther
she would cause the olde hermite Vnderstanding
to be sent for, of whom I might take good and
firme counsayle against the doubtfull issue of

this dangerous Combat, which now of necessitie
was shortly to betide me. I willingly accepted
her gentle offered enterteinement, and turning
my Horse, was contented to folow her.
            By the way, she perceiuing my minde to
be ouer-pressed with heauie and melancholy
thoughtes, endeuoured to remooue me from
those sorowfull apprehensions, by recording
vnto me many passed pleasing Histories and allegories,He returneth to the mansiō of Memorie.
moralizing them all vnto my good and
comfort: So that passing on the way without
tediousnesse, we were soone arriued at her
mansion: whither Vnderstanding the good Hermite
was sent for;He is there visited by Vnderstanding. who redie, and duetifull at
her commandement, was in my Chamber at
my bedside so soone as the dawning of the next
morning appeared.
            I exceedingly reioyced at his comming, because
I knew him to be a counsayler voyde of
al fraude, and ful of vertuous consolation, graue
in his iudgement, and sounde in his aduise:
God be thanked for his goodnesse, that gaue me
happinesse to haue his acquaintance, and grace
to bende my minde to folow the direction of
his counsayles. After many mutuall congratulations
betweene vs, he began to instruct me
with many lessons, all teaching the way how to
liue and die well: in which two onely poynts

consisteth all the height and excellence of wisedome.Wherein consisteth the height of wisedome.
            
            First quoth he, who so euer he be that is to
combat either within List, Barrier, or Steccada,
he ought well to consider as well the qualitie of
his owne forces, as of those of his enemie, and
according thereunto to make his prouision of
furniture and defence.
            For rashly to enter vnprouided vnto so great
an enterprise, as it coulde not be but to the body
dangerous, so it woulde be to the soule doubtfull:
of which, whosoeuer maketh a carelesse accompt,
may well be tearmed miserable and vnhappie.
            And although that whosoeuer is honorably
chalenged to single combat, may make choyce
of his weapons, besides certaine other priuiledges
that he hath both of time and place: yet
such is the necessitie and streight limitted condition
of this your fight,Death often striketh without warning. and Atropos your aduersarie
so full of dishonorable aduantages, that
he will not geue you so much as warning when,
or where he meaneth to assayle you, whether
by water or by land, whether in desart or in
playnes,Nothing so vncertaine as the houre of a mans death. whether in your bed or vppon your
horse, but perchaunce euen surprise you of a sodaine,
when you shalbe prouided neither of
weapon, nor defence able to auaile you.
            
               
Considering therfore the neere approching
time of your combat,And therfore nothing so behouefull as to be alwayes in a redinesse. and withall the entrapping
stratagems and cautelous wily aduantages
of your aduersarie, I would wishe you in
time to make prouision accordingly, and that
with such warie and heedefull circumspection,
that no sodainnesse be able to ouertake you;
which if you will follow these my instructions,
I doubt not, but you shall easily performe with
your endlesse honor and welfare.
            First let al your Harnesse be tempered in true
Repentance,
               What Armes are fit to encounter death withall. so fastly forged, and beaten with the
hammer, that no deadly sinne be able to teint
them, nor ougly vice haue power to pierce thē.
Let your Vamplate be firmely steeled with a
firme resolued purpose to perseuer in Well-dooing,
seeking in all your actions, with a true religious
zeale the seruice and glorie of God. Let
your Vambraces be of Vertuous Magnanimitie,
in not yeelding to fraile worldly pleasures: and
your Gantelets of perfect Charitie, shewing the
liuelinesse of your faith, in the operation of your
workes. Aboue all, let your Headpeece be of
Temperance; which though it be in the worlde a
vertue rarely founde, and litle set by, yet it is a
iewell most pretious, and will in this enterprise
highly stande you in steede. Let your Cuisses
be of patient Suffering, your Poldrones of

               Diligence, and your Greues of labour to do
Well. In this maner armed, and all the peeces of
your Armour combined togeather in Fayth,
such and so sure wilbe your foundation, bearing
the blessed signe of the sacrament of Baptisme
in your forhead, that your speede cannot
be but good and glorious. But now seeing you
wel prouided of armes defensiue, I thinke it not
amisse to prouide you likewise of such as may
hurt, offende, and terrifie your enemie.
            Ordinarily whosoeuer is chalenged, may
choose to fight a foote or a horsebacke, as he
shal for his aduantage finde fittest. But so diffrent
is this your fight, from the nature of other Combats,
that it is to be fought by your selfe alone,
and that on foote: neither, if it were otherwise,
would I haue you trust to your Horse, or to any
other helpe: But euen that you do, do it of your
selfe: I meane, in doing workes of Charitie, and
bestowing Almes for your soules health,Good workes done by others after a mans death, nothing at al auailable while
your selfe is liuing: for when you are dead,
small auaile will the good workes done by your
heires yeelde you; neither, as the worlde goeth,
will they be greatly carefull of any such performance.
            Alwayes prouided, that for the securer passage
to the place appoynted, you take Baptisme,
whom at your birth you vowed neuer to denie,

for your Padrine.Padrino in Spanish signifieth him that goeth with his freende into the feelde, or doth accompany him vnto a iust or torney, with meaning to defende him from wrong. It signifieth also a Godfather. He will yeelde you valoure,
courage, and contentment, and to your enemie
terrour, sadnesse, and amazement, such and so
preheminent is the force of this excellent Sacrament.
Let your Casting-dart be surely steeled
with a head of feruent Deuotion: your Speare
Remembrance of his Death, that with his Blood
redeemed you: your Dagger with a sharpe and
wel pearcing point, of a pure, vigorous, and true
catholique Faith: and your Targuet of vertuous
Example, witnessed by good Workes.
            
            And seeing you want now nothing but a
Sworde, let the same be of Iustice, keene and wel
edged, doing vnto others, as you woulde be
done vnto your selfe. But especially, and aboue
all, looke as I said, that these your Harnesse and
Weapons, be without delay, yea, without the
losse of one moment, tempered by true and wel
grounded Repentance, who for such a conflict,
is of all others an armourer most excellent.
            Stande not vpon Inconueniences, nor be not
pulled backe with Worldly lets, nor terrified with
Charges, but be diligent, and looke well about
you: it is no matter of mine, it concerneth
yourselfe; neither is there any freende or kinsman
in the worlde, how deere soeuer vnto
you, that will, or may, fight this Combat for
you.
            
            AVTHOR.
            Good father, quoth I, I hartely thanke you,
for these your so louing and zelous aduertisments,
which haue alredy taken so deepe an
impression in my minde, that I hope, through
Gods goodnesse, I shalbe able in some part to
execute and performe them.
            Yet because there must be a preparation; and
meane while, betweene this & the time of my
Combat, I pray you tell me how I shoulde behaue
and exercise my selfe, to be the better able
to withstande the dreadfull approche of my
Death-bringing enemie. Nay quoth he, whether
there shalbe any meane while, or time of
preparation giuen you, that onely knoweth the
Diuine prouidence: For, you may chaunce to
be sommoned, euen while you are now speaking.
Therefore, I wish you not to be vnresolute,
or long in preparing, but to put your selfe
presently in redinesse, seeing the thing, that by
delay you do put in hazarde, is no lesse then
the eternall weale, or woe of your soule: which
is, either to be glorified with blisfull and
euer-during ioyes, or els to be condemned to
the ragefull neuer-ceasing tormentes of hell
fire. Woebe vnto them, that making hereof but
a skoffe and iest, do hazarde so great a treasure as
their soule, vpon so hard a iumpe, as to delay

preparation in so important a matter, especially
the time and sodainnesse thereof being so vncertaine.
            Yet if it so fall out, that there be any space of
preparation or amendement (which the goodnesse
of the heauens graunt you) I would haue
you to spende the same in vertuous exercise and
practise of your fore-described weapons.
            Adioyne vnto them the often vse of feruent
Prayer,
               How a man should exercise himselfe afore he commeth to the combat. not onely with an outward wagging of
your lippes, but also with an inwarde weeping
of your hart. Rise earely in the morning, least
the nights darknesse at vnawares ouertake you.
Stop, as neare as you can, your fiue sensual powers,
from hearing, seeing, touching, tasting, or
consenting, to any Wickednesse, fraile sensualitie,
or blasphemous impietie. Slumber not
drowsilie in Sinne, but watchfully arise by true
Contrition, and vnfeigned Repentance. As your
appetite, so let your tongue be temperately vsed.
            Besides, for the better enabling of your body
against the endurance of fight, I woulde haue
you still be wrestling and skirmishing against
such Champions as haue the chiefest fame for
strength and power: such are Pride, Enuie, Gluttonie,
Couetousnesse, Slouth, Anger, and Sensualitie:
which doing, and keeping your body cleane in
breath, with the sober diet of a vertuous and

harmeles Life, doubt not, but cheerefully go on
to the Combat; for by Gods grace, howsoeuer
if fareth with your bodily life, your better part
shall triumph in glorious victorie, and in despite
of raging Lucifer, and all his adherents,
purchase eternall saluation.
            If there be any warde,Who are the best maisters of Fence, to instruct him that prepareth to fight this combat. or poynt of defence,
that you doubt off, repaire vnto some godly
Father & reuerend Priest of Christ his Church,
and he will sufficiently aduise you: for such are
the Maisters of Fence, whose counsayle in these
cases you must vse.
            AVTHOR.
            Good Father, quoth I, I finde great consolation
in your speeches: but now you haue tolde
me what maner of Armes I must vse, and what
exercise I shoulde enterteine my selfe withall
till the time of my Combat, I pray you tell me
yet a litle more, how I shall behaue my selfe
when I come to the paynefull poynt within the
List or Barrier.
            You haue not made this demaunde,The miserable estate of a man dying. quoth
he, without great cause and reason: for in deede,
such shalbe in that perilous conflict the trouble
of your senses, and terrour of your enemie, conspiring
all his wilinesse and force to your ouerthrow,
that it wilbe hard for you to retayne a
constant behauiour, especially seeing your selfe

frustrated of all worldly helpe. No one of your
tendrest harted frendes will excuse you, nor
helpe to fight on your side, yea, perchance your
parentes, children, and neerest freendes, shall
not (at such disaduantage may you be taken) be
present to be vnto you witnesses of combat, or
meanes of comfort.
            Therefore, reposing no trust or confidence
in any other helpe or assistance, flie onely vnto
GOD with a fast and feruent Fayth, imploring
his grace, through the precious death and blessed
merites of his onely Sonne our Sauiour:
with the contemplatiue meditation of whose
holy crosse and bitter passion, yf you do fortifie
your hart and senses, be assured, that you shall
therewith easily daunt and confounde your
enemie. Alwayes desire of God to geue you
firme stablenesse in Fayth, whose assistance, being
ioyned with mine, I trust that in strength
we shalbe able to vpholde you.
            But withall, for your greater securitie and
repose, I woulde haue you take with you a resting
seate of Satisfaction, which is, in making
Restitution, and doing Right to whom so euer
you haue wronged, forgeeuing, and desiring of
all the worlde forgiuenesse.
            When you come to take your Othe,The vertuous Champions othe. sweare
that you receiued Baptisme, by vertue whereof

you are a Christian, in which Fayth you determine
to liue and die, and which quarell you do
most willingly offer your present body to mainteyne
against your aduersarie: who not satisfied
with the desolution of your body, will also with
tempting, and frightfull suggestion, seeke the
destruction of your soule.
            Presently will your aduersarie come foorth,The othe of the aduersary.
and sweare, full of hopefull assurance, that you
are the childe of Adam, and subiected vnto
Death: Which ransome, for the remedie of original
sinne, it pleased Christ the sonne of God,
by taking on him our humanitie, him selfe to
pay. And as the warie Champion, when he beginneth
to fight, will, as neare as he can, take his
aduantage of the Sunne: so likewise be you circumspect,
so to appeare within the Listes, that
you be no way offensiue to the glistering of the
diuine goodnesse,
            The Iudge of this your Combat,Iudge of the combat. shalbe the
euerliuing Righteousnesse; and therefore looke
that you be vnto him fearefully Obedient, firmlie
and constantlie Beleeuing in him with a true
Worship and adoration of his sacred name: That
shalbe vnto you a strong Shielde of defence
against all whatsoeuer inconuenience; and with
such a securitie any feeblenesse is strong and
forcible
            
               
If you finde your selfe ouertaken with any
sodaine faintnesse, confusion, or amazement of
your senses, flie presently to the blessed refuge
of his infinite and endlesse Mercy, wherein assure
yourselfe, you shall finde all refreshing contentment,
and quiet consolation of your vnrestfull
senses: for who so, in that passage of Terror
forgeteth not, but remembreth, with due honor
and reuerence, his maker and redeemer, can neuer
be ouerthrowen or vanquished: such is his
owne promise, witnessed in the holy Scriptures,
which we must firmely and stedfastly beleeue:
And withall note this, that the first steppe to
true Life, is a godly Death.
            Be not rashe in your fight, but mooue yourselfe
with a wel aduised and leisurely Resolution.
See that you employ well your blowes, & strike
not any of them vainely at the winde: and then
though your breath chaunce to faile you, feare
not: for if you obserue these precepts of mine, I
assure you the Glory of the day shalbe yours.
            But first, for a sure safe conduct and protection
against all mischieues, I would haue you reuerently
to receyue the blessed Sacrament of
Christ his supper,The blessed Sacrament of Christ his supper. and so shall you be assured to
conquer your enemie, at whose sight be not terrified
or amazed, but with a patient magnanimitie
obey your good Angell, whom God hath

appointed for your garde.
            I haue now no more to say, but if you do beleeue,
& effectually follow these my counsells,
you shalbe eternally safe; if not, you will incurre
the daunger of a double death both in bodie
and soule.
            AVTHOR.
            Thus did the reuerend Hermite, with zealous
instructions, teach me the way to euerlasting
life, when yet in my minde did arise a new
doubt and question, which but for feare to
haue bin accōpted ouer-curious, I would haue
entreated him to explane vnto me, which hee
perceyuing, willed me not to be dismayed, but
boldly and freely to vtter my conceipt.
            Whereuppon, I earnestly entreated him to
tell me, if there were not any certaine signes or
tokens to foreknow the time that Atropos should
appoint for triall of this combat. Debilitie, sayd
he, will shortly send you warning hereof by his
messengers, and Accident likewise by his: But
as I tolde you before,The best is to be euer redie. there is in this no certentie,
for they perchance will take you so short,
and so of a sodaine,The first vant-currors or messengers that sommon vs to this combat. that you shall haue no leysure
to put on your armour. The best therefore
is to haue a watchfull eye, and to be euer redy.
            The first Vant-currors, that commonly will
bring you tidings hereof, wilbe your eyes, when

you must be fayne to supply their decayed
sight with Spectacles. For nothing more euidently
foresheweth the nights approching darknesse,
then the dayes decreasing cleernesse.
            Your eares likewise when they must be furred
and stopt with cotten, may serue in steede
of an Alarum bell or Trumpet, to sommon you
to present your selfe vnto the fielde.
            Your head also and your handes, like trustie
seruants, will by their feeblenesse and trembling,
giue you warning of your approaching danger.
            Neither will your legs, once so well proportioned,
and with such delicate streightnesse
supporting the stately burthen of your so much
beloued body, be behind hereof to giue you aduertisement,
when they must craue the assistance
of a staffe to performe their office.
            The decaying of these limmes, senses, and
members, is an assured token, that you cannot
long holde out. Therefore, still I aduise you, as
neere as you can, to seeke with your soule those
ioyes that will neuer faile nor corrupt;The ende of the bodie is corruption. as for the
body, the ende thereof is corruption, and the
truest repose the graue. Besides these rehearsed
messengers, there are thousands of griefes, sickenesses,
woundes, mischances, and infirmities,
that will serue for heralds to sommon and chalenge
you to this deadly point and sorowful passage

you speake of.
            Herewith the aged father ending his discourse,
tooke his leaue of me, and departed, leauing
me, though greatly comforted with his encouragements
& instructions, yet sorowfull and
heauie for his departure.
            But seeing there was no other remedie, gathering
together in my memory all these passed
discourses, I arose and determined to write, truely
and sincerely, the passages and aduentures of
my life, euen as I had felt and passed them: and
thereuppon I made this litle treatise, which I
hope will finde gentle acceptance, (though the
stile be barren) especially of all those that beare
vertuous mindes, and are according to the title
of this litle booke, true Resolued Gentlemen. To
them I offer it in charitable loue, hoping that
the vertue of my honest meaning, shall ennoble
the poorenesse of my guift.
            Heauie thoughtes, and most iustly conceaued
griefe, moued me first to beginne it: now it
is ended, I beseeche the almightie, that comfort,
profite, and contentment, may betide those that
shall reade it. I haue, and in my iudgement not
without some reason, adorned it with the title
of the true Resolued Gentleman, whose aduentures
I beseech you well to note, that do vouchsafe
the reading heereof: for euen such wilbee

the course of your encountres, & such the ende,
as heere, vnder the name of an other, you see represented:
For in fine, all worldly pompe,
Beautie, magnificence, and what els soeuer the
world hath goodly or admirable, turneth to
rottennesse and corruption: and Death, enemie
to nature, equalleth scepters with mattocks, and
king with beggers.
            Once againe I beseeche you accept this litle
Treatise in good parte, if not for the worth
thereof, yet for his sake
            
               Qui taunt ha suffert.The Author alwayes vsed this Posie.
               
               Who so much hath suffred.
            
            
               La Marche.
            
            This Tretise was first written in French,
by Sir Olyuer de la Marche, 
               in the yeere
of our Lord. 1483.
            
         
         
            
            
            A briefe explanation of some Histories
but obscurely touched by the Author
in this Treatise, which I thought fitte to annex
for the greater delight of those that shall reade it,
especially Gentlewomen, and those that are vnacquainted
with such historicall discourses. There
are some sacred Histories, which I do but brieflie
touch, referring the Reader (for the better vnderstanding
them) to the holy Bible, whence they are
taken, imagining that they are, or at least ought
to be, familiarly knowen to all.
            
               CAIN through enuie that the offering of
his brother Abel was more pleasing and
acceptable vnto God then his,Cain. Genesis. Chap. 4. murdered
him, and was the first that embrewed his handes
with humane blood.
            
               Sampson being by Delilah entreated to tell
him wherein the greatnes of his strength consisted,Sampson. Iudges. Cap. 16.
discouered it vnto her, and was by her
betrayed vnto the Philistians, who tooke him
and put out his eyes, brought him downe to
Azzah, bound him with fetters, and made him
to grinde in the prison house, and when they
were merrie in a banket, they called him one day
foorth in derision, and set him betweene two
Pillars: which, grasping in his armes, he pulled
downe, and together with the same the Pallace,
burying vnder the ruines thereof, himselfe, and

an innumerable number of the Philistians.
            
            
               Hercules the famous Grecian,
               Ouid. Seneca. begotten by Iupiter
vpon Alcumena wife of Amphitrion, extreamely
louing the beautifull virgin Deianira,
daughter to Oeneus King of Calidonia, comming
to her fathers Court to demaunde her in mariage,
with the terrour of his presence, caused
sundrie youthful Princes, that pursued her loue,
to desist their suite: Onely K. Achelaus, preferring
his loue to the delicious Princesse before all
death and danger whatsoeuer,Centaures, were young men in the time of Ixyon K. of Thessalia, who being the first that tamed horses, did vpon their backes many great exployts to the wonder of the bordering people, who iudged them & their horses to haue bin all of one peece, & thervpō grew this fiction. refused to yeelde
his clayme and interest to youthfull Hercules,
but after scornefull wordes, vpbrayding him
of bastardie, came to ioyne with him in Armes:
but being wounded & ouerthrowen, was constreined
to yeelde, and to leaue the young
Ladie as a rewarde to the victorie of Hercules:
who, rauished with extreamnesse of ioy, returning
with his beloued pray to his fathers Kingdome,
was retarded by the ouerflowing of the
Riuer Euenus: about the shoares of which, as he
walked to see if he coulde finde any Foorde or
passage, he met with Nessus, a Centaure, who
bearing from the girdle vpwarde the shape of a
Man, and thence downwarde of an Horse, was
exceedingly enflamed with the loue of Deianira,
and with an humble dissembled looke, offered,
so Hercules coulde make shift to swimme,

or passe the riuer himselfe, that he would vppon
his backe safely transport his Lady. Hercules
thankfully accepted his offer, committing vnto
him his fearfully trembling Lady, and throwing
off his quiuer and bowe to the farther side of
the riuer, betooke himselfe vnto the streame;
which hauing past, and taken vp againe his bow
and arrowes, he heard his Lady in lamentable
accent cry for helpe, with whom the trayterous
Centaure ran away with all possible speede: but
Hercules taking heedfully his leuell, pursued him
in such sort with an Arrow, that he strake him in
the chine of the backe a mortall wound, which
Nessus feeling, & in the instant of death meditating
reuēge, gaue vnto Deianeira the shirt which
he ware, bestained and infected with his owne
blood, which issued out of his body mingled
with poyson, because the arrow with which he
was wounded, had bin by Hercules dipped in
the contagious blood of the serpent Hydra,
which shirte, he tould her, that if she should at any
time send vnto her husband, when he should
be in loue with any other Lady, would reclame
his loue from the other to her alone. The Lady
receiued it, and with secrecie many yeeres did
keepe it as a iewell of rare and singular price. It
happened after, that Hercules amid his great victories,
with fame of which he filled the world,

chaunced to beholde the admirable Iole, the fairest
and most goodly virgin that the world in
that age affoorded: Her he honored and loued,
and at length obteined. The greefe of which, so
deeply wounded the gentle hart of Deianeira,
that neuer poore Lady liued more abandoned
ouer to sorow. One day it chaunced, that her
husbande, being to doe sacrifice to Iupiter vpon
the mountaine Ceneus, sent vnto her his faithfull
and trusty seruant Licas for certaine rich and sacred
garments, that of purpose he kept to were
at such times as he did sacrifice vnto the gods.
The innocent Lady sent him those superstitious
ornaments which he required, and withall, bethinking
herselfe of the dying Centaurs gift,
sent him by Licas the enuenomed shirt, beseeching
him for her sake to weare it: which he had no
sooner put on, but the venom so ragingly pearsed
euen to his very intrals, that thinking to teare
it of, he pulled therewith away great gobbets of
his owne flesh: and so furiously laying handes
vpon guiltlesse Licas, and tearing him to peeces,
bequeathing to his deare freend Philoctetes his
bowe and fatall arrowes, he threw himselfe into
a fire, which he had made vpon the mountaine
Oeta, and there sacrificed him selfe, which Deianeira
hearing, after many detestations, and maledictions
of her selfe, concluded with a violent

and desperat death, her miserable and hated
life.
            
               Iulius Caesar, hauing victoriously brought vnder
the yoke of the Romane empire Germanie,
               Plutarcb. Appian. Lucan.
               Fraunce, England, Scotland, and Spaine, and filled
the whole circuit of the world with the greatnes
of his renowne, demaunded by letters the Consulship,
suborning and brybing with money in
that behalfe sundry great personages in Rome:
but so formidable grew the report of his ambitious
greatnes to the Romaine senate, that they sent
him worde, that if he would leaue his forces behinde,
and come vnarmed and peaceable to the
citie, they would graunt that or any other his
lawful request: but perticularly they commaunded
him not to passe the riuer of Rubicon with
his armie, threatning him, if he should otherwise
do, to holde him as an enemie to his countrie:
but he scornefully disdaining this commaundement
of theirs, and exceedingly enuying the
greatnesse of Pompeis glory, who bare the greatest
sway and gouernment at Rome, passed the Riuer
with his armie, and came still conquering
vp into Italy: the terror of whose approche
wrought such astonishment in Rome, that Pompie,
with the greatest part of the Senatours and
nobilitie fledde, whom Caesar, after hauing taken
possession of Rome, pursued, and finally ouerthrew

at the battaile of Pharsalia, and thence
passed conquering into Fgipt, where he subdued
young Potolome the K. that rose in armes against
him: he placed faire Cleopatra in the royall
seate; with whom he liued a while in amorous
delights, and had by her a sonne called Casario,
who was afterwardes murdered by Octauian:
thence, hauing taken order with matters of the
Orient, he returned in triumph to Rome, where
he vsed incredible liberalities to the people, pardoning
his greatest enemies, and those that had
been sharpest in warre against him, yea, and
some of them he honored with great dignities:
as among others, Cassius and Brutus, who were
both made Pretors. But so vnsure is the seat of
honor, especially being wrongfully vsurped,
that no folowing vertue can promise securitie to
him that therein sitteth: for, Caesar in the heigth
of his glory, when he knew no enemie to feare,
was of a sodaine ouertaken by a secret conspiracie
of his freendes, among which were also
Brutus and Cassius; the first of which he loued so
well, that he had in his testament ordeined him
to be one of his heires; in fine, he was by them
inhumanely murdered in the senate house, directly
vnder a piller whereuppon stoode the
statue of Pompie: he had receyued many aduertisements
of this conspiracie, but would not beleeue

any, nor yet regarde the pitifull teares of
his wife Calphurnia; who the night before the
murder, dreamed that he was slaine and murdered
in her armes: and therfore with al humblenesse
on her knees besought him to stay at
home that day: which if he had done, the conspiracie
had been discouered, and hee deliuered
of danger. To those that had warned him
hereof, he made answere, that he had rather once
aduenture all, then still to stande in feare, vsing
this Latine sentence, Satius est subire semel, quam
semper cauere.
            
            When his bodie was, according to the Romaine
rites, to be burned, M. Antonius made
his funerall oration, which he mingled with so
many passionate and pitifull speeches, and at
the conclusion therof, with weeping eyes shewing
his bloody shirt vnto the people, did so
stirre their mindes to so high a degree of commiseration,
that filling the ayre with lamentable
outcries, they tooke the flaming brands, and
ranne about the towne, setting fire on the conspirators
houses: who fearing the furie of the enraged
multitude, betooke themselues to flight,
but few of them, or none, escaped punishment
by one violent death or other.
            Much more might bee saide of this worthie
Prince, but his story is so common, that I feare

me this which is alredy done, will rather breede
tediousnesse then delight.
            
               Antipater beeing by Alexander the great left
in Macedon with the Queene Olympias in maner
as vizroy and gouernour of the kingdome,Alexander. Quintus Curtius. Plutarch. Appianus de rebus gestis Alexandri. behaued
himselfe with such insolence & seueritie,
that sundry cōplaints were brought to Alexander
of him: of which Antipater hearing, sent his
sonne Cassander into Asia to make his excuses,
who vpō his first arriual, seeing certaine Persians
prostrating themselues at the feete of Alexander,
& adoring him as a god, fel into an extremitie of
laughter, being himselfe nourished in the strict
discipline of Greece, and vtterly vnacquainted
with the Persian ceremonie in honoring their
kinges: at which Alexander (who now accompted
his country maner vnciuill and barbarous,
and delighted exceedingly in the honors done
him by the Persians) was kindled with so great a
fury, that taking Cassander in his armes, he did
beate his head against the walles, rebuking him
with many bitter & taunting checkes, & did not
admit the excuses which he alleaged in his fathers
behalfe; and withall grew into a great diffidence
and dislike both of Antipater and his two
sonnes Yolas and this Cassander: which Antipater
hearing, and therefore mortally fearing the returne
of Alexander, prepared a poyson of such

deadly violence, that it could not in any thing
els be conteined then in the hoofe of an Asse.
At length Alexander after his innumerable
victories in Asia and India, hauing vtterly ouerthrowen
the Persian Empire, vpon his returne,
allured with the delicacies of Babylon, betooke
himselfe there to quaffing and banqueting, and
to al maner of voluptuousnesse, geuing thereby
oportunitie to Yolas, to present him with the
deadly potion which his father had prepared:
which he had no sooner receiued, but that he
felt him-selfe seazed ouer his whole body with
an intollerable torment: yet such was the constant
greatnes & vertuous courage of his minde,
that he neuer so much as once complained or
groned, but with an incredible courage, suppressing
the rage of his inward horrible panges,
died, as he had alwayes liued, with a magnanimitie,
amazing the beholders in the verie pride
of his youth.
            
               Yolas was afterwardes taken by Olympias the
mother of Alexander, and put to death by exquisite
tormentes.
            Young Paris, sonne to Priamus K. of Troy,
               Homer. Dares. Ouid. Hector.
being by his father sent as Ambassadour to the
Grecian Princes, about the restitution of his
Ant Hesione, was by the way enterteined at the
Court of Menelaus K. of. Sparta, where, fixing

his eyes vpon the marueilous beautie of Helena
the new maried Queene, grew so farre surprised
with her loue, that forgetting the lawes of
hospitalitie, alluring her aboorde his Shipp, he
hoysed vp sayles, and caried her thence to Troy:
Which indignitie the Greekish Princes not enduring,
ioyning their forces togeather, and making
Agamemnon K. of Micene, brother to Menelaus,
their generall, sayled towardes Troy, and
among the rest young Achilles, Prince of the
Myrmidons and Epirots, who by the way surprized
the Townes of Tenedos, Lesbos, Chryse, and
Lyrnessus, taking therein, among other Captiues,
two young Maidens of excellent and singular
beautie; the one called Briseis, and the other
Chriseida, daughter to Chriseis the Priest of
Apollo: Her he deliuered to Agamemnon, reseruing
Briseis to him selfe. But presently there ensued
a great and miserable mortalitie in the
Armie, which, as Calcas the Prophet assured
them, should neuer ceasse, till the daughter of
Apollos Priest should be restored. To which deliuerie
of so faire and so beloued a pray, Agamemnon
would not by any meanes consent, vnles
Achilles in her steede woulde yeelde Briseis
vp vnto him. But so vnpatiently did Achilles
brooke that vnprincely and discourteous demaunde,
that with his sworde he woulde presently

haue slaine Agamemnon, had not he bin
by the other Greekish Peeres restrained: who,
what with sweete perswasions, and other practises,
at length so much with him preuayled, that,
though extreamely against his will, they made
him deliuer his faire and dearely beloued Briseis
to the pleasure of the Greekish Emperour. But
when she was once gon, then began her absence
to strike and wounde his hart with so excessiue
a sorow, and deadly a discontentment, that full
of irefull melancholy, he retired him-selfe into
his Tent, refusing to come abrode to weare
Armes as he was accustomed, though euery day
he saw fierce Hector come murdering and chasing
the Grecians, euen to their Tentes. Manie
meanes were made by the Greekish Lordes, to
remoue him from this setled and obstinate determination.
Agamemnon offered to returne
Briseis vntouched, with the interest of many
other rich presentes, but nothing preuailed: till
one day, as Hector came victoriously beating
downe the Greekish Quadrons, his deare freende
Patroclus thinking with the dissembled presence
of Achilles, to terrifie the Troian troupes, armed
him-selfe in the rich and gorgious Armour of
Achilles: but so cruell were his destinies, that at
his first entrie into the battayle, he was by Hector
encountred and slaine. Which cruell tidinges

had no sooner touched the eares of sorowfull
Achilles, but awaked with reuenge, forgetting all
other passions, he called for his Armour, and
like an enraged Lion, rushed into the thickest
of the Troians presse: in which verie instant, the
valiant Hector, disteyned in blood, and bathing
in swet, was with his immoderate toyle welnigh
sweltred in his Armour, so that he withdrew
him selfe out of the battayle, and by the Riuers
side disarmed him selfe, to refresh his spirites,
and to take a litle ayre: which Achilles perceyuing,
folowed him, and at vnawares, cruelly and
dishonorably ran him thorow with his Lance;
and not yet therewith satisfied, caused his body
with thonges to be tied to a Horse tayle, and so
in derision to be thrise trayned about the walles
of Troy.
            
            Shortly after it fell out, that either side being
weerie with the dayly turmoyles of Warres,
agreed vpon certaine dayes of truice, in which
meane time,Achilles. it might be lawfull for the Troians
to come into the Greekish Tents, and the Greekes
likewise to enter into Troy. Among the rest,
Achilles entring the Towne, chaunced one day
to espie young Polixene, daughter to K. Priam:
the sight of whose admirable beautie, did so
astonish him, that laying all hostilitie apart, from
thence forwarde meditated on nothing but

loue: which Priamus and Hecuba the Parentes
of the Virgin perceyuing, enterteined him with
hope, to the end that they might with the more
securitie entrap him, to which his often repayre
thither, drawen with the violence of loue,
yeelded easie occasion: So that one day among
the rest, Paris still watching his steppes, slue
him with an Arrow in the Temple of Apollo.
In reuenge of which trecherous and vnnoble
acte, afterwardes when Troy was taken and rased,
his sonne young Pyrrhus slue Priamus with his
owne handes, and sacrificed Polixene vpon his
fathers Tombe.
            Great Pompey,
               Pompey the great. Plutarch. Appian. Lucan. after the vnfortunate battayle
of Pharsalia, wherein he was ouerthrowen by
Caesar, seeing all abandoned and lost, fled out
of his Campe comfortlesse, and slenderly accompanied,
and disguysed with garments conuenable
to his fortune, went first to the Isle of
Lesbos, to see his faire and deare Cornelia: who,
seeing her L. and Husbande, that was wont to
be wayted on when he went by Sea with. 500.
Sayle, arriuing in a poore Barke, and that not
his owne, altogeather sorowfull and vnhonored,
coulde not bridle the extremitie of her passion,
but fallyng downe at his feete, with most
pittifull and passionate lamentations, imputing
this great aduersitie of her noble Husbande, to

his vnhappie mariage with her, did so intenerat
the manly hart of Pompey, that requesting her
not to increase his miseries with her sorow; he
coulde not refrayne his eyes from bursting out
into a riuer of vnused teares. But seeing the
speedie pursuite of his preuayling enemie gaue
him no leysure long to determine, he presently
departed thence, with his constant and most
vertuous Cornelia, and bended his course towardes
Egipt, no whit doubting but that young
Ptolome the K. woulde receyue him, with all
courteous enterteynment and gentlenesse, in
regarde of the infinite fauours which he had
done vnto his father. Comming neare the shore,
he aduertised the King of his approch, who was
then in Pelusium with his Armie, making warres
against his sister Cleopatra. The king was young,
and wholly gouerned by one Pothinus, and Theodotus
a Rhetorician, who tolde him, that the
receipt of Pompey coulde not but be dangerous,
and that there was not any way more expedient
to winne the good grace of Caesar, then
by bereauing Pompey of life. To which vilanous
and dishonorable counsell, the youthfull
abused King yeelded his consent, and Achillas
and one Septimius that had sometime serued vnder
Pompey in the warres, were sent to put in execution
this dishonorable and bloodie decree.
            
               
They came vnto the galley wherein Pompey
lay at ancher, and pretending the coast to be full
of flats and sandes, and not to haue water inough
for his galley, they prayed him to come into
their litle boat; to which Pompey agreed, though
much in his minde amazed at this slender and
honorles enterteinment. Discending out of the
galley, he tooke leaue of his louing Cornelia,
with speech and gesture as it were presaging his
ensuing desaster, who with eyes full of teares,
and handes vp to heauen, pursued him with
her lookes, till at length they were encountred
with so dismall and horrible an obiect, that if she
had not been by the Mariners restreined, she
had throwen her selfe into the sea: for when the
boat euen now touched the brinke of the shore,
as Pompey reached out his hande to his seruant
Philippus to helpe him to rise, Septimius thrust
him through the backe with a sword, and then
Achillas strake of his head (which nowe whyte
heares had made venerable) throwing his body
into the sea. Soone after, Caesar arriuing in Egipt,
was presented with this pitiful spectacle of Pompeys
head: But merciful & magnanimous Caesar,
not enduring to beholde a sight of so great crueltie
and horror, turned with a wofull gesture his
face, watring his eyes with an infinite aboundance
of teares, shewing that he did abhorre

both the vnnoblenesse of the deede, and the barbarousnesse
of the doers: Achillas and Pothinus
he caused presently to be slaine, Theodotus
fledde, but fell afterwardes into the handes of
M. Brutus, who caused him to be put to a most
cruell death, and Ptolome himselfe shortly after
was ouerthrowen in a battayle, and slayne by
the riuer of Nilus.
            
            
               Anniball of Carthage,
               Anniball. Plutarch. Appian. Titus Liuius. the sonne of Amilcar,
noble in birth, and great in puissance, in his infancie
was by his father made sweare vpon an altar,
whereon he was doing sacrifice, that while
he liued he should be a mortall enemie to the
Romanes, which he failed not to performe; for
after his fathers death, beeing in Spaine created
Captaine generall of the Carthaginian armie, in
the xxvi. yeere of his age, hee presently drewe
downe his armie into Italy, passing the Alpes
with exceeding difficultie, where he maintained
warres. xvi. yeeres with the Romanes, euen in
the bowells of Italy, taking from them all the
plaine countrie, and chasing them some times
euen to the gates of Rome. Besides many conflictes
of lesse moment, he ouerthrew them in
foure famous battails, at Ticine, Trebia, Thrasimene,
and Cannas, sending to Carthage, besides
many other rich despoiles, three whole bushels
of rings taken frō the fingers of slaine Senatours

and Romane knights (For it was not lawfull
for any els to weare them of gold.) But being in
the ende called backe by the Senate of Carthage,
to the defence of his owne countrie: he that was
in Italy inuincible, was in Africa, fighting euen
in the sight of his citie, vanquished and ouerthrowen
by Scipio.
            
            Which brought him into such disgrace
with his vnthankefull citizens (who were now
constrained to bow vnto the Romans yoke) that
fearing farther inconuenience, he was constreined
to flie vnto Antiochus king of Siria: who
newly entering into warre with the Romanes,
exceedingly reioyced at the happy arriuall of
this famous and renowned Captaine, wholy for
a while vsing his aduise and counsell in all matters
of greatest weight: till at length, abused
with Romane practises, and incensedby priuie
whisperings of his Sirian nobilitie, (who grew
exceedingly enuious at the familiar greatnesse
of Annibal with their king) he first began to
distrust him, and then publiquely to discountenance
him: so that poore Annibal, hauing all
his life time liued in the fulnesse of glorie, was
now in the extremitie of his age constreined to
tast of miserie, and became a wanderer. Thence
he fledde into Bithinia to Prusias the king, who
receiued him with gladnesse, promising him

with oth, safe abode and securitie within his
Realme: and by his aduise and conduct, gayned
a famous victorie by sea against Eumenes king of
Persama. But shortly after Q. Flaminius was sent
by the Romanes to make an attonement between
him and Eumenes; or at least, that cause was pretended:
who seeing Annibal in his Court, requested
him in the Senats name to deliuer him
into his handes, for the hated him deadly, aswell
publiquely for the cause of his countrie, as priuatly
for the death of his father, who was by him
slaine at the battaile of Cannas.
            
            To which the K. either corrupted with
gifts, or els not daring displease the Romane embassadour,
dishonorably condiscended, causing
presently the doores of Annibals lodging to bee
enuironed with his guardes. Which Annibal
perceiuing, and disdayning to honor any other
then himselfe with the glorie of Annibals
death, after hauing with exceeding passion bitterly
inueyed against the Romane crueltie, and
with horrible execrations cursed the head of
Prusias and his kingdom, he tooke with a fearlesse
resolution a draught of deadly poyson,
which for such an extremitie he had alwayes
kept in store within the hollownesse of a Ring;
the violence of which was such, that it streight
bereaued him of life: His body was entombed

hard by Libissa, in a Sepulchre of stone, with
these wordes onely engraued, Heere lyeth ANNIBALL.
            
               Clytemnestra Queene of Micene,
               Clytemnestra & Agamemnon. Quid. and wife to
Agamemnon, who was Captaine generall, and
Emperour, of the Grecian forces in the warres of
Asia, hearing that her Husband liued before the
walles of Troy, wholly abandoned to daliance
and loue of the beautifull Briseis: whether to reuenge
his disloyaltie, or els therunto moued by
the frailtie of her owne incontinent desires, she
allured to her loue a young Grecian Lorde called
Egisthus, making him pertaker of her Husbandes
bedde, by abandoning vnto his lustfull
pleasure the vse of her faire and delicate bodie;
neither cared she to couer it with any great respect:
so much did the long absence of her Husbande
embolden her. But when Troy was taken
and destroyed, Priam slaine, and Agamemnon returning
homwarde with triumph and victorie,
then began she to feare least this dissolutenesse
of hers should not long escape vnpunished, and
therefore hauing made him a riche and costly
Garment (but out of which there was no issue,
neither for his head nor armes) at his returne
she prayed him to proue it: with which, while
he was strugling, Agisthus lying in ambush behinde
the hangings, stepped foorth and slue

him with a Iauelin or Borespeare: In reuenge
of which cruel part, Clytemnestra was afterwards
slayne by her owne sonne Orestes.
            
            
               Laius King of Thebes,
               Eteocles and Polinices, Princes of Thebes. Sophocles. Statius. being tolde by the
Oracle that he shoulde be slayne by his owne
Sonne; so soone as his Queene Iocasta was deliuered
of a Boy, he commaunded a seruant of
his to take the same, and to murder it in the
Wooddes: who, either through pittie mooued,
or els through the childes destinie forced, hanging
the same by the feete to the boughes of a
Tree, did leaue it in the Forest behinde him.
It happened that a Shepheard passing that way,
hearing the childe crie, tooke it downe, and cariing
it home, gaue it to his wyfe to be norished:
who hearing that the Queene of Corinth, wyfe
to Polibus, greatly lamented her barrennesse and
want of Children, presented her with this litle
Babe: which, receyuing with merueilous ioy,
she nourished as her owne: and that the rather,
because the Boy, besides the beautifull and faire
proportion of his limmes, in his lookes and
gesture discouered a great Nobilitie. But when
young Oedipus (for so they named him) grew
into yeeres, and was certainly assured that Polibus
was not his father, he departed from Corinth,
with intention to seeke out his Father and
Kinred. Comming to Phocides, and vnderstanding

that the King of Thebes was there in armes
about the appeasing of cruell Warres, ioyning
himselfe to the contrarie part, it was his happe
to kill Laius the King his father: whence, led
by the vneuitable force of his miserable Destinie,
he came to Thebes, and maried Iocasta the
Queene his mother,The two daughters were Antigone and Ismene. by whom he had two
Sonnes & two Daughters. But at length, when
the horror of his owne misfortunes, and the
misterie of this monstrous mariage was disclosed
vnto him, he grew into such a detestation
of him selfe, that he tare his owne eyes out of
his head, condemning him selfe as vnworthy
to beholde the light. But to the ende he should
not be but euery way miserable in extremitie,
his two sonnes Eteocles and Polinices adiudged
him to a perpetuall Prison in a darke and obscure
dungion: which vnkindly crueltie of
theirs, added to the terror of his tormented
conscience such greeuous and vnspekable rage,
that he did nothing day nor night but powre
downe curses and execrations vppon them,
wyshing nothing to be betweene them but
miserie, mischiefe, and discorde. But they, to
auoyde this their Fathers heauie malediction,
to the ende there shoulde be no occasion of debate
or strife betweene them, fell to this agreement,
The one of them to absent him selfe, leauing

the royall Scepter and gouernment of
Thebes solely to the other for the space of one
full yeere, which being expired, he then to deliuer
the Regall chayre and ornamentes vp to
his Brother, and to depart the Citie till his next
yeere of gouernment shoulde returne: And
this order to be betweene them inuiolable,
whyle they shoulde lyue ioyntly togeather.
The lot of the first yeeres gouernment befell
Eteocles, who, sweetned with the dilicious pleasures
of a Crowne, when the yeere expired, vtterly
excluded his brother both frō his Crowne
and Countrie: Of which infidelitie, Polinices
crying to the Gods for vengeance, fledde in desolate
and distresful estate to the Court of Adrastus
King Argos, who so much regarded his
valour and noblenes of behauiour, that he gaue
him one of his Daughters in mariage: and leuying
a royall Armie, marched with the same
in demaunde of his right to the walles of Thebes.
In fine, this quarrell concerning none but
the two princely brothers, they in their owne
persons agreed to decide it: which comming
to performe, so cruell were vnto them their destinies,
that each of them dyed vpon the others
Speare. Whose bodyes, when they were taken
vp, and with magnificent and royall pompe
brought to the fyre wherein they were to be

burned, the fyre diuided it selfe, each Carkas
casting out his flame apart.
            
               Holofernes, being entred into Israel with a
mightie puissance,Holofernes. Iudith. Chap. 12 13. and encamped before Bethulia,
had brought the same to such famine and
extremitie, that the Israelites, dispayring of all
hope, determined to yeede the Towne vnto
him. But Iudith the Widow of Manasses, decking
her selfe in rich garmentes, secretly issued
foorth of the Towne into Holofernes Tent, who
allured with her beautie (for she was exceeding
faire) gaue himselfe to mirth and much drinking,
so that through drunkennesse falling into
a deadly sleepe, Iudith being left with him
in the Tent alone, strengthned therein by the
hand of God, cut of his head with his owne
Fawchion, returning the same to Bethulia, which
thereby she deliuered from seruitude.
            
               Sisera was Captaine general to Iabin,
               Sisera. Iudges. Cap. 4. the great
king of Canaan, and twentie yeeres together had
vexed the children of Israell verie sore, for he
had with him 900. Charets of Iron; at length,
being ouerthrowen by Barak the sonne of Abinoam,
he fledde into the house of Heber the Kenite;
whose wife Iaell, taking a Naile of the Tent,
and a Hammer in her hand, did smite the same
into his temples and slue him.
            After the death of Saule,
               Abner. 2. Sam. cap. 3. 
               Dauid was annoynted

King in Hebron: but Abner, that was Captaine
of Saules hoste, tooke Isbosheth the sonne of
Saule, and made him king ouer Israell. Soone after
Abner was ouer-throwen by Ioab, & the seruantes
of Dauid, who being in his flight pursued
by Asahell the brother of Ioab, turned backe
and slew him: For which occasion, when Abner
came afterwardes to reconcile himself with Dauid,
Ioab tooke him aside to the gate, to speake
with him peaceably, and smote him vnto the
hart with his dagger, so that he died.
            
               Goliath was a Giant in the Philistian armie,Goliath. 1. Samuel. Cap. 17. of
meruailous hugenesse, and his weapons with
which he was armed of vnspeakable terror: in
so much that there was no one in the armie of the
Israelits that dared answere the prowd defiances
and chalenges that he dayly made: till at length
young Dauid, comming from the keeping of his
Sheepe, strengthned thereunto by the mightie
hande of God, encountred him with his Sling
only, into which putting a Stone which he pulled
out of his bagge, he smote the Giant therewith
full in the forehead, and ouerthrowing
him with the blow, stepped to him, and with
the Giants owne sword cut of his head.
            
               Haman the Agagite, standing highly in the fauour
of great King Ahashuerus,
               Haman. Ester. Cap. 3. because Mardocheus
the Iew did not reuerence vnto him when

he passed by the Kings gate, obteined of the
King, that all the Iewes through the Kings
Prouinces might be put to death. Which Ester
the Queene vnderstanding, made a banquet to
the King, inuiting Haman thereunto: in which,
she pleased so the King with her behauiour and
speeches, that the King sent letters throughout
all his Prouinces, to reuoke the sentence
which he had passed against the Iewes, and caused
Haman to be hanged vpon a paire of gallowes
which he had made for Mardocheus the
Iewe.
            
               A short discourse of the Princes of Burgundie,
and some other, in honour of whom this Treatise
was first written by the Author, who bewayleth
their Deaths, but speaketh litle of
their liues.
               
                  IOHN, first of that name K. of France,
                  Chronic. de Nicol. Gallis. who
was taken prisoner at the battaile of Poictiers
by the Prince of Wales, in the yeere. 1356. had
by his wife Bona, daughter to the K. of Boheme,
                  Michael Eisinger.
foure sonnes and three daughters: Charles,
which was King after him, and fifth of that
name, Lewes Duke of Aniow, Iohn Duke of Berrie,
and Philippe, who being caried prisoner with
him into England, vpon his deliuerie & returne
thence, he created Duke of Burgundie.
               
               
                  
This Philippe maried Margaret daughter and
heire to Malanus Earle of Flaunders and Arthois,
by whom he had three sonnes, Iohn that succeeded
him, Anthony afterwardes Duke of Brabant,
and Philippe Earle of Neuers and Estamies;
which two younger were both slaine at the battaile
of Agincourt, by the Englishmen. Duke
Philippe died in the yeere 1404.
               
                  Iohn succeded his father, and maried Margaret
daughter to Albert Duke of Bauiere, and
Earle of Hollande and Zeland, by whom he had
a sonne called Philippe, which was he whom this
Author serued. This Iohn Duke of Burgundy, caused
Lewes Duke of Orleance to be murthered in
Paris, who was brother to Charles the sixth then
K. of France. In reuenge of which he was afterwarde
slaine disloylly by the Dolphin of France,
at a solemne meeting appointed betwene them,This was that Duke Philip whom the author serued, and of whom he speaketh in this Treatise. Chron. de Nicol. Gallis. Philipp de Comines. Michael Eisinger.
after othes and assurances taken of both sides,
at Montereau in the yeere. 1419.
               
                  Philippe (surnamed the good) Duke of Burgundy,
had three wiues, the first was Michelet,
daughter to Charles the sixt king of France, the
second Bona, daughter to Philippe of Arthois, the
thirde Isabelle daughter to Iohn first king of Portingale,
whom he maried at Bruges in the yeere
1429. and had by her Charles, surnamed the
Hardie. The verie selfe same yeere of his mariage,

he instituted the noble order of knighthood
of the golden Fleese, which the king of Spaine his
successor maynteineth yet in great reputation &
honour. At this frst comming to the Dukedome,
which was about the latter end of the raigne of
K. Henry the fifth, he was a great fauourer and
maynteiner of the English partie in France, and
did many notable seruices to the Crowne of
England. When the Duke of Bedford, Vncle to
king Henry the sixt, was sent ouer to be Regent
of France, he met him in great loue at Amiens,
and hauing with him his two sisters, he gaue the
one of them in marriage to the Duke of Bedford.
But afterwards, at the siege of Orleance, they of
the citie desired him to be a meane for them, vnto
the Duke of Bedford, that the siege might be
raised, in regarde of the long emprisonment of
their Lord the Duke of Orleance, to whom the
counsaile of England had promised in the meane
time, to leaue all and euerie part of his landes
and townes vndisquieted: whether it were so or
no, once Duke Philip dealt earnestly with the
D. of Bedforde his brother in law in that behalfe:
but being therein absolutely refused, he commaunded
by a Heralde, all the Gentlemen of
his Countrey, that were with the English men
at that siege, to depart thence, & from that time
forwarde declined by litle and litle in affection,

and at length declared him selfe absolutely
French. He was a vertuous Prince, and gouerned
his Subiectes in great peace and quietnesse;
and finally, in the extremitie of his age dyed in
the yeere. 1466. and was with great magnificence
buried at Bruges in Flaunders.
               
               
                  Charles, surnamed the Hardy, sonne to Philip
the good,Charles the hardie. Philip de Comines. Michael Eisinger. Nicol. Gallis. was borne at Dyion in the yeere 1433.
he had likewise three wiues, Katherine, daughter
to Charles the seuenth king of France: Isabell,
daughter to Charles Duke of Burbon, by whom
he had the Lady Marie that inherited his dominions:
and lastly Margaret, sister to Edward
the fourth, king of England. He was a Prince
that hated rest, and was altogether enclined to
vnquietnesse and warres. His father yet liuing,
he ouerthrew in a bloody & cruel fought feelde
Lewes the. 11. king of France, at the battaile of
Montelhery in the yeere. 1465. with whom
making afterwards peace, he warred vpon those
of Lyege that had chased out of the towne their
Prince and Bishoppe being his kinseman, spoyling
their countrie, and taking their townes, and
bringing them to such extremitie, that they
were constreined to receiue their Bishoppe againe;
& withal to appease the Duke with great
summes of Money. Comming thence, there
fell out new occasion of warres betweene him

and the French king; for pacification of which
differentes; it was agreed, that the king▪, and he
should meete at Peronne, there to expostulat their
greefes in freendly sort one with another. And
that he should geue vnto the king a letter of assurance
vnder his hand and seale: which he did.
But the conclusion hereof was, that the Duke,
being aduertised how the King had by his Embassadours
secretly practised with those of Lyege
to rebell, tooke him prisoner, and led him with
him to the Citie of Lyege: which being by
streight confederation allyed to the King, he
caused, after all maner of rigorous crueltie executed
vpon the inhabitantes, to be saccaged and
burnt, and then vpon new agreementes, to his
owne aduantage, he dismissed the King.
               In the yeere. 1474. the olde Duke of Guilders,
being vilanously and vnnaturally taken by his
Sonne Adolph, and imprisoned in a dungion,
mooued sundry Christian Princes to compassion:
among the rest, D. Charles, who earnestly
laboured to make an attonmēt betweene them:
but his sonne arrogantly refusing to heare of pacification,
was by the D. of Burgundie retayned
in prison: whose father shortly after dying, gaue
his Dukedome by Testament to Duke Charles,
who tooke thereof vnder this title forcible possession,
and those which are discended of him

do yet enioy it.
               Sweetned with this Dutchie, and aspiring to
greater matters in Germanie, he went & besieged
the citie of Nuz, which was succoured by the
Germans and Swissers vnder the conduct of Frederike
the Emperour, so that he was constrained
to raise his siege: In despite of which assistance
geuen by the Swissers, he entred their Countrey
with his Armie, but was by them ouerthrowen
and vanquished at a place called Granson.
               
               This day was the first of the Dukes misfortunes,
with which euen vntill his dying day he
was perpetually pursued. Encouraged with
which victorie, on euerie side new forces came
out of Germanie to the Armie of the Swissers, &
the D. of Lorayne him selfe in person. Yet all this
dismayed not the D. of Burgundie, who hauing
refreshed his Armie, set vpon them the seconde
time at a place called Morat, but was as before
vanquished againe, and was constreyned to flie,
with the losse of. 8000. of his men slayne in the
Feelde. Presently the Duke of Lorayne marched
in all expedition to Nansie, that helde for the
Duke of Burgundie: which rendred vnto him
vpon composition. Within two dayes after
the D. Charles arriued, with an vndismayed
courage and full resolution to attempt Fortune
agayne. Among the rest that had credite about

him, was one Campobache,
                  The horrible treason of Campobache. an Italian Counte,
at home in his countrey poore, and of no reuenew,
but by the D. aduaunced to great commaundement
in his Armie, and made Captaine
of. 400. men at armes: who seeing the cruel misfortunes
befallen to his Maister, began presently
to enter into practise with the D. of Lorayne,
about the merchandize of his Maisters lyfe; the
price of which he made. 20000. Crownes, and
an Earldome: this he promised, and the same
being accepted, he did as villanously performe
it. For this battayle of Nansie was no sooner began,
but he with his. 400. Italian Horsemen fled
to the other side: the amazement of which, did
so terrifie the Duke of Burgundies Armie, being
twise alredie beaten and discouraged, that they
presently fledde, and the Duke him selfe was
found in the feeld slaine, & mangled with many
woundes: for the villaine Campobache had hired
14. or. 15. of his cutthrote traytors to watch the
Duke at an inch,Marie, daughter and heyre to Charles duke of Burgundy. Philip de Comines. 1578. Eisinger. to the ende that he would be
sure he should not escape.
               
                  Mary his onely daughter and heire, succeding
her father in the Dukedomes of Burgundie
and Brabant, and the Earledomes of Flaunders,
Henault, Artois, Holland, Zeland, Frizland, &c. was
by the consent of her Subiectes, especially those
of Gaunt, in whose hands since her fathers death

she had remained, maried to young Maximilian
Archduke of Austria, and sonne to Frederike
the Emperour, of that name the third; to whom
hauing borne three children, Philippe, Margaret,
& Francis,
                  1482. who in his infancie deceassed, she died
in the fairest springing blossom of her youth,
being not aboue .xxiij. yeeres of age, & lies buried
at Bruges. Some do attribute her death to the
fal of an Horse; true it is she fell, but the Author,
who was of great authoritie about her, doth rather
attribute it to some greeuous impression of
sorow. Philippe de Comines likewise seemeth to
doubt whether she died of that fall, or no.
               
                  Don Iohn,
                  Isabell and Ferdenand. Chronic. de Espania. Fray Gonçalo de Yllescas. Philip de Comines. second of that name, king of Castile,
had in first mariage Mary daughter to Ferdinand
K. of Arragon, by her he had a sonne called Henrie,
that succeded him, and a daughter, that died
young. His wife dying, he tooke in second marriage
Isabell, daughter to Don Iohn, infant of Portingale,
by whom he had a sonne called Alonso,
that died young, and a daughter called Isabell:
and then dying in the yeere. 1454. was by his
sonne Henrie the. 4. succeeded in the royaltie,
who maried Iane daughter to Edward King of
Portingale, who bare vnto him a daughter likewise
called Iane: who, though she proued a Princesse
of much wisedome, great beautie, and
many other excellent partes, yet through a rumour

of the Kinges impotencie in matter of generation,
Isabel sister to the king was by her faction
proclaimed Heire apparant to the Crowne,
& the young Princesse declared to be a bastard,
begotten vpon the Queene by Don Beltran D.
of Abuquerque, and by and by a mariage motioned
betweene young Ferdinand Prince of Arragon
and the Lady Isabell: which was effected
priuately in Duenas. These matters were greeuous
vnto the king, but remedie it he could not.
In the ende he died, and Ferdinand and Isabell
were without contradiction obeyed in Castile:
which reprochfull iniurie the poore Princesse
bearing with exceeding patience, though many
great mariages were offered her, refused them
all, and betooke herselfe to a Monastery, wherin
she ended peaceably her dayes. They began
their reigne in the yeere. 1474. and continued
the same many yeeres in great glorie, both of
warre and peace. They expelled the Moores out
of Spaine, and subdued the kingdome of Naples,
deliuering thereof a quiet possession to their successors,
which yet do enioy it. They had betweene
them a sonne, whose name was Iohn, a
Prince of exceeding towardnes, or rather singular
perfection. They maried him to Margaret,
daughter to Maximilian of Austria by the
Lady Mary the before remembred Dutchesse of

                  Burgundy, but soone after the marriage he dyed:
for whom there was made such exceeding lamentation,
as by report of sundry Authors, the
like in the worlde was neuer heard of: for besids
the dolefull mourning of the Nobilitie & Gentlemen,
so generall a greefe was ouer the whole
Realme, that the very mechanical people, abandoned
ouer to sorow, ceassed their trades for the
space of fourtie dayes, filling the ayre with pittifull
cries and lamentations. They had also foure
daughters, Isabel, Ione, Mary, and Katherine: Isabel
died yong, Ione was married to Philippe, brother
to the foresayd Lady Margaret, and Katherine to
Arthur prince of Wales, eldest sonne to Henry the
seuenth of England.
               
               Queene Isabel, after that by many noble and
heroicall deedes, she had ouer the whole world
won vnto her selfe a reputation to bee one of
the most vertuous and excellent princesses that
euer liued, in the fiue & fiftieth yeere of her age
ended her dayes at Medina del campo, the .xxiiij.
of Nouember, in the yeere. 1504. Twelue yeeres
after died Ferdinand her Husband, at a litle Vilage
named Madrigalecio,
                  Philip of Austria. Fray Gonçalo de Illescas. 1506. hard by Gaudalupe: A
Prince, as of singular integritie and vertue, so of
a rare and wonderfull felicitie and happines in
whatsoeuer he did vndertake.
               
                  Philip, sonne to Maximilian and Mary, being in

                  Flaunders,
                  Chronic. de Espania. Michael Eisinger. Surìus. hearing of the death of Isabel Queene
of Castile, whose eldest daughter he had maried,
departed presently thence towards Spayne with
his wyfe the Ladie Ione, to take possession of
the Crowne and Royaltie: which at their arriuall
was willingly by olde Ferdinand to them
resigned. Philip being now but .xxiiii. yeeres
of age, was with a firme constitution of body
wel proportioned and beautiful, and especially,
aboue the rest, so courteous and affable in his
speeches and behauiour, that what with his
beautie and his vertue, he drue the eyes and
loues of all men to him, in so much that the
Spanish Nobilitie and Courtiers, forsaking Ferdinand,
who thirtie yeeres had been their King,
all folowed the rising sonne of young Philip,
so that the Court of Ferdinand was altogeather
solitarie and vnfrequented, no one of the Nobilitie
keeping him companie, saue onely the
Duke of Alua (who neuer did abandon him:)
with which inconstancie of theirs, he growing
into an exceeding dislike, and with all not pleased
with his Sonne-in-lawes behauiour, which
by reason of whisperers, that went betweene,
was not so kinde, louing, and reuerent, as he
expected, taking with him his approued seruant
the Duke of Alua, he went without delay
to Arragon, and thence to Naples.
               
               
                  
But scarsely was his backe turned, when
young Philip, liuing in as great delitiousnesse,
honor, and triumph, as either the delight of a
Crowne, the pleasure of that Countrey, or the
dutifull loue of his Subiectes, could yeelde him,
fell extreamely sicke of a violent hot burning
Feuer: of which, notwithstanding the lustinesse
and strength of his young floorishing yeeres, he
died at Burgos the .xxv. day of September, in
the verie yeere of his entry into Spaine.
                  1506. Neuer
Prince left behinde him a nobler issue: for he
had by his wife the Lady Ione, two sonnes, and
foure daughters, of which the least was adorned
with a royall Diademe, viz. Charles, who besides
his great succession of many Kingdomes
and Prouinces, was elected Emperour of the
Romans. 2. Ferdinande, who after his brothers
death, succeeded him in the Empire,
and was besides created King of Hungarie. 3.
Leonore, maried first to Emanuel King of Portugale,
and after in seconde mariage to Francis
the French King. 4. Marie, maried to Lewes
King of Hungarie,
                  1526. who in a battaile against the
Turkes, died young and without issue. 5. Katherine,
maried to Iohn the thirde King of Portugale:
and lastly Isabel, maried to Christerne King
of Denmarke.
               
               
                  Maximilian, sonne to Fredericke the Emperour,

thirde of that name,Maximilian Surius. Gonçalo de Yllescas. Michael Eisinger. and Leonore daughter
to Edwarde king of Portugale, was in his fathers
time made king of the Romanes, and after his deceasse,
Emperour. He was a Prince exceedingly
well learned, iust in gouernment at home,
and fortunate in Warre abrode. He had sundry
victories against Mathias Corunis King of Hungarie,
from whom he recouered Vienna, and
many other of the Prouinces of the lower Austria.
Likewise he recouered from the French
King the Earldome of Artoys, and many townes
of Burgundie, and ouerthrew a great Armie of
his at Guignet, whereby he recouered Cambray.
He ouerthrew harde by Regensberg, in a memorable
battaile, a great Armie of the Bohemians,
that came to make warre vpon his brother in
lawe Albert Duke of Bauaria.
               
               He was with K. Henrie the. 8. at the siege of
Terowan, and receyued his wages: during
which siege, he him selfe in honor of England
ware the Rose, and his men the S. Georges crosse.
He was an exceeding scourge vnto the Venetiās;
from whom, when they were in the fulnesse of
their glory, he tooke Padwa, Verona, Vincentia,
and the greatest parte of Foro Iulio; and lastly,
ouerthrew them in a notable battaile by Vincentia,
where he slue of them. 5000. Taking. 24.
great Cannons, and all their Enseignes and

Standards from them. In seconde mariage he
tooke Blanca, daughter to the Duke of Milan.
Finally, in the. 59. yeere of his age he died in Austria,
some say by taking (or rather mistaking) a
wrong Potion, to preuent a sickenesse which he
feared. He lieth buried at Newstad in Austria. 8.
leagues from Vienna. He left behinde him. 2.
children, Philip, whose historie you heard before,
and Margaret, who beeing by her first husband
Iohn prince of Castile left a widow, was afterward
maried to Philibert Duke of Sauoy.
               
               It is written of Maximilian, that in his sickenesse
he would not suffer those that were about
him to honor him with any title of dignitie, but
to call him simply by his name Maximilian, protesting
himselfe to be but a vile peece of Earth
and Clay, made of no better mettall then the
poorest begger.
               The last combat spoken of in this treatise, is of
Henrie the eyght,Henrie the eight. of famous memory: Whose
noble and heroicall deeds, being so fresh in the
remembrance of all men, I thinke it needlesse
to make repetition of them, neither if I woulde
vndertake it, were the labour of so high a taske
in any proportion conuenient to the feeblenesse
of my slender force: Much lesse to speake of
her Maiestie,Queene Elizabeth. whose Princely name is lastly
therein mentioned, but will leaue the glorious

storie of her happie reigne, to those golden
pennes, that being dipped in the licour of the
Muses, may like Ariosto his siluer Swannes,
with a cleere flight beare vp her sacred name,
and in dispite of Time, fasten the same to the
faire pillars of Eternitie, in the highest turret
of the house of Fame. That which I can do, is
to pray vnto the euerliuing Righteousnesse, that
as he hath, with admirable goodlinesse, made
her shine in giftes both of body and minde,
aboue all the Princes of her time, so he will
preserue her vnto vs many, long, and flowrishing
yeeres: For so long as wee shall enioy
this our precious and sacred Palladium, we shall
neede to feare neither the force of fierce threatning
Agamemnon, nor the wiles offals vndermining
Sinon.
               
               FINIS.
               I haue in the margent of euerie Historie,
noted the names of those Authors which
herein I do chiefly folow.
            
         
      
   