
      
         
            
            
            A
¶Fort for the afflicted.
Wherin are ministred many
notable & excellent remedies
against the stormes of
tribulation.
            Written chiefly for the comforte
of Christes little flocke,
which is the smal number
of the Faithfull, by
Iohn Knoxe.
            
               Iohn. 16. 33
In the vvorlde yee shall haue affliction,
but be of good comfort: I haue ouercome
the vvorld.
            Imprinted at London
at the three Cranes in
the Vintree, by Thomas
Dawson, 1580.
         
         
            
            
            To the Religious
Reader.
            
               WHo art thou (O Christian)
that beeing sicke in
soule, and desirest to be
sound? Sorowfull in spirit,
& crauest comfort?
vnquiet in minde, & seekest
to be at rest? wounded in conscience
and wouldest be in safetie? tormented in
thought, and longest for reliefe? Who art
thou (I say) that hauing offēded thy God,
and art therfore punished? tried with tribulation,
and criest out to bee refreshed?
visited with affliction, and faine wouldest
be deliuered? Get thee to Gods woorde,
and there learne thy lesson: heare his holy
Gospell preached, and thereby receiue
instruction: peruse and ponder, examine
and consider, meditate and exercise thy
selfe in the good bookes of Gods faithful
seruants, and they shall teach thee wisedome.
            And among all bookes tending to this

               
                  〈…〉
               
Christian
                  •
                to bee imbraced and followed,
this notable exposition of that zealous
man of God, Maister Iohn Knoxe vppon
the sixt Psalme, contayning sundry comfortable
and excellent doctrines, in number
many, in matter weightie, vnder
the person of that Princely Prophet Dauid,
and after his example and patterne
too bee applied vnto all suche as are touched
eyther in minde or bodie, with any
kind of crosse or calamitie, to direct them
to the path of patience, and to shew them
by a president, vnto whom they must run
for refuge in the time of their visitation,
if they desire eyther partly too haue theyr
miseries mitigated, or themselues wholly
from troubles to be deliuered.
            The benefite of this Booke belongeth
to euery particular member of Christes
Mysticall bodie, and they onelie haue
the grace to vse this and the like at conuenient
seasons. Moreouer, the manifolde
comfortes of this woorthy Authors

most fruitefull Epistle, written for the
consolation of Christes afflicted flocke,
are of no lesse force and vertue, in cases
of calamitie, then his other treatise:
the one, commodious, the
other necessary, both
beneficiall.
            
               Thine to doe thee
good, Abraham
Flemming.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To his beloued Mother, I. K. sendeth
greeting in the Lorde.
            
               THE desire that I haue to
heare of your continuāce,
which Christ Iesus in the
day of this his battell
which shortly shall end to
the confusion of his proud
enimies, neither by tong,
neither yet by penne can I expresse, beloued
Mother. Assuredly it is such that it vanquisheth,
and ouercommeth all remembrance &
solicitude, which the fleshe vseth to take for
feeding and defence of herselfe. For in euery
realme and nation God wil stirre vp some one
or other to minister those thinges that appertaine
to this wretched life, and if men wil
ceasse to doe their office, yet will hee sende his
rauens: so that in euery place, percha
                  •
               ce I
may finde some fethers to my body. But alas
where I shal finde children to be begotten vnto
God by the worde of life, that can I not presently
consider. And therfore the spiritual life
of such as somtime boldly professed Christ (god
knoweth) is to my hearte more deare then all
the glory, riches, and honour in the earth. And
the falling backe of such men, as I heare dayly

to turne backe to that idol againe, is to mee
more dolorous, then I trust the corporal death
shalbe, when euer it shal come at God his appointment.
Some wil aske then, why did I flie?
assuredly I cannot tel. But of one thing I am
sure that the feare of death was not the chiefest
cause of my flying, I trust that one cause
hath beene to let mee see with my corporall
eies, that al had not a true heart vnto Christ,
that in the day of rest and peace, bare a faire
face. But my flying is no matter, by God his
grace I may come to battel, before al the conflict
be ended. And haste the time O Lord, at
thy good pleasure, that once againe my tongue
may praise thy holy name before the congregation,
if it were but euen in the very hour
                  •
               
of death.
            I haue writtē a large treatise touching the
plagues that assuredly shall apprehende obstinate
Idolaters and those also that dissembling
with them, deny Christ, in obeying to idolatrie,
which I woulde you should reade diligently.
If it come not to you from the South,
I shal prouide that it shal come to you by some
other meanes. Touching your continual trouble
giuen vnto you by God, for better purpose
then wee can presently espie: I haue begunne

vnto you the exposition of the sixth Psalme.
And as God shal graunt vnto me opportunitie
and health of body (which now is very weake,
I purpose to absolue the same.
            
               
                  The Argument.
                  IT appeareth that Dauid after his offēce
fel into some great & dangerous sicknes,
in the which he was sore tormented,
not so much by corporal infirmities, as by
susteining & drinking some large portion
of the cup of God his wrath: and albeit
that he was deliuered (as then) from the
corporal death, yet it appeareth that long
after (yea and I verily beleeue that all his
life) he had some sense and remembrance
of the horrible feare which before he suffered
in the time of his sicknes. And therfore
the holy Ghost speaking in him, sheweth
vnto vs what be the complaintes of
God his elect vnder such crosse howe diuersly
they are tormented, how that they
appeare to haue no sure holde of GOD,

but to be abiect from him: and yet what
are the signes, that they are Gods elect.
And so doeth the holy Ghost to teach vs
to seeke helpe of God, euen when hee is
punishing, and appeareth to bee angrie
with vs.
               
               The sixth Psalme.
               
                  1 O Lorde, rebuke mee not in thine anger,
nor chastice mee in thy hot displeasure.
               
               
                  DAuid sore troubled both
in body and spirite, lamentably
praieth vnto God:
which that you may more
surely vnderstande, I will
attempt to expres in moe
woordes. Dauid speaketh
vnto God, as hee would speake vnto a man:
in this manner.
               O Lorde,The dolorous cō
                     plaint of Dauid in his trouble. I feele what is the waight and
strength of thy displeasure, I haue experience
howe intollerable is the heauinesse of thine
hande, which I most wretched man haue prouoked
against my selfe, by my horrible sinnes.

Thou whippest me and scourgest mee bitterly,
yea, thou so vexest mee, that vnlesse thou withdrawe
thine hande, and remit thy displeasure,
ther resteth nothing vnto mee, but vtterly to
bee confounded. I beseeche thee O Lorde,His praier.
rage not, neither bee commoued against mee
aboue measure, remit and take away thy heauieHis confession.
displeasure, which by mine iniquitie I
haue prouoked against my selfe.
               This appeareth to haue beene the meaning
of Dauid in his first woordes, whereby he
declareth him selfe to haue felt the gre
                     •
                  uous
wrath of God before that hee burst foorth to
these wordes. In which first is to bee noted
                     •
                  
that the Prophet doeth acknowledge all troubles,
that hee susteined as well in body as in
spirite, to bee sent of God, and not to happen
vnto him by chaunce: for heerein peculiarly
differ the sonnes of God, frō the reprobate,
that the sonnes of God knowe both prosperitie
and aduersitie, to bee the giftes of GOD
onely, as Iob doeth witnesse. And therfore
in prosperitie commonly they are not insolent,
nor proude, but euen in the day of ioy and rest
they looke for trouble and sorrowe. Neither
yet in the time of aduersitie, are they altogether
lefte without comforte, but by one

meane or other God sheweth vnto them that
the trouble shal haue ende. Where contrarywise
the reprobate taking all thinges of
chance, or els making an idol of their owne
wisdom, in prosperitie are so puft vp, that they
forget God, without any care that trouble
shoulde followe: And in aduersitie they are
so deiect, that they looke for nothing bu
                     •
                  
Hell.
               Here must I put you in minde (dearely beloued)
howe often you and I haue talked together
of these present dayes, till neither of vs
both coulde refraine teares, when no such apparance
there was seene by man. How often
haue I saide vnto you, that I looked dayly for
trouble, and that I wondred at it, that so long
I did escape it? What mooued me to refuse,
and that with displeasure of al men, euen of
those that best loued mee, those high promotions
that were offered by him, whō God hath
takē frō vs for our offēces? Assuredly the foresight
of troubles to come. How oft haue I said
vnto you that the time woulde not bee long,
that England woulde giue mee bread? Aduise
with the last letter, that I wrote vnto your brother
in lawe, & consider, what is therein conteined.
               
                  While I had this trouble, you had the greater,
sent (I doubt not) to vs both of God: that
in that great rest, and (as we cal it) whē the gospel
triumphed, we should not bee so carelesse
and so insolent, as others were. Who albeit
they professed Christe in mouth, yet sought
they nothing but the worlde with hand, with
foote, with counsel and wisedome. And albeit
at this present our comfort appeareth not,
yet before all the plagues be powred foorth, it
shalbe known that there is a God, who taketh
care for his owne. Secondarily is to be noted,God his very elect sometimes accuse God.
that the nature and ingenie of the very sonnes
of God in the time of their trouble, is, to impute
vnto God som other affection, then there
is or can be in him towardes his children. And
sometime to complaine vpon God, as that he
did those things that in very deede hee cannot
doe, to his elect. Dauid & Iob often complaine
that God hath left them, was become their enimie,
regarded not their praiers, & tooke no
heede to deliuer them. And yet vnpossible it
is, that God either shal leaue his chosen, or
that hee shal despise the humble petitions of
suche, as doe call vpon his support. But suche
complaints are the voices of the flesh, wherwith
God is not offended, to the forsaking &

reiection of his elect, but pardoneth them among
other innumerable infirmities & sinnes.
And therefore (dearely beloued) dispaire you
not, albeit the fleshe sometime burst out
into heauie complaints, as it were accusing
God: you are not more perfect then was Dauid
and Iob. And you cannot bee so perfect
as Christ himselfe was, who vppon the crosse
cried: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me? Consider, deare mother, how lamentable
and horrible were these wordes, to the
onely sonne of God. And Dauid in the 88. Psal.
(which for better vnderstanding, I desire you
reade) cōplaineth vpon God, that night & day
he had cried, and that yet he was not deliuered
But (saith he) my soule is replenished with dolour,
I am as a man without strength. I am like
vnto those that are gone downe into the pit,
of whom thou hast no more minde, like vnto
those that are cut of by thy hande: Thou hast
put mee in a deepe dungeon, al thy wrath lieth
vpon mee: Why leauest thou me, Lorde? why
hydest thou thy face from me? thou hast remoued
al my freendes from mee, thou hast made
mee odious vntoo them. And thus hee endeth
his Psalme and complainte without
mention of any comfort at al receiued. And

Iob in diuers places of his booke maketh
euen the like complaintes, sometime saying,
that God was his enimie, and had set him as it
were a marke to shoote at, and therefore that
his soule desired the very destruction.
               These things I recite vnto you, deerely beloued,
vnderstanding what haue beene your
troubles heeretofore: and knowing that Sathan
wil not cease nowe to perswade to your
tender conscience, that none of God his elect
hath beene in like case as you are, but by these
presidentes and many other places, which now
to collect I haue no opportunitie, it plainely
doth appeare that God his chosen vessels haue
suffered the like temptations. I remember that
ofte you haue complained vpon the grudging
and murmuring that you founde, which in
your selfe fearing that it prouoked God to
more displeasure: Beholde and consider deere
mother, what God hath borne with his saintes
before: wil hee not beare the same with you,
beeing most sorie for your imperfections? Hee
cannot other wise do
                     •
                  . But as his wisedome
hath made vs al of one masse and nature, earth
and earthly: and as hee hath redeemed vs with
one price, the blood of his only sonne, so hee
according to his promise like mercifully pardoneth

doneth the offences of al those that cal vpon
the name of the Lorde Iesus,Rom. 10. of those I
meane that refuse all other Iustice but his alone.
               But to our matter of these presidents,
plaine it is that God his elect, before you haue
suffered the like crosse, as presentlie you suffer,
that they haue complained as you complaine,
that they haue thought themselues abiect,
as you haue thought, and yet may thinke
your selfe: and yet neuerthelesse they were
sure in GOD his fauour. Hope deare mother
and looke you for the same, hope I say against
hope.
               Howe horrible the paine is to suffer that
crosse, can none expresse, except such as haue
prooued it: feareful it is for the very payne it
selfe: but most feareful it is, for that the godlie
so tormented, iudge God to bee angrie, in furor
and in rage against them, as is before expressed.
Seeing wee haue founde this crosse
to appertaine to God his children, profitable
it shalbe, and necessarie to searche out the causes
of the same. Plaine it is that not only God
worketh al to the profite of his elect, but also
that hee woorketh it of such loue towardes

them and with such wisedome, that otherwise
thinges coulde not bee: and this to vnderstande,
is very profitable, partly to satisfie the
grudging complaintes of the fleshe, which in
trouble commonly doeth question, Why doth
God this or that? And albeeit the fleshe in
this earth can neuer bee fully satisfied: but euen
as hunger and thirst from time to time
assaulteth it, so doe others more grosse imperfections,
yet the inwarde man which sobbeth
vnto God (knowing the causes why the
very iust are so troubled and torm
                     •
                  nted in bodie
and spirite in this life) receiueth some comforte
and getteth some stay of God his mercie,
by knowing the causes of the trouble. Al causes
may I not heere recite: but twoo or three
of the principal wil I touche.
               The first is to prouoke in God his elect an
ha
                     ••
                  ed of sinne, and vnfainedly repentance of
the same 
                     〈◊〉
                   the which cause if it were rightly
considered, were sufficient to make all spirit
                     •
                  all
and co
                     •
                  porall troubles tollerable vnto
vs. For seeing it is so that without repentance
no man doeth attaine to GOD his
mercie (for it is now appointed by him whose
wisedome is infinite, I meane of those
that are conuerted to the feeling of sinne)

and that without mercie no man can come to
ioy: is not that which causeth vs to vnderstand
what repentance is, gladly to bee receiued and
imbraced? Repentance conteineth within it a
knowledge of sinne, a dolour for it, and a hatred
of it togither with hope of mercy.
               It is very euident that God his owne children
haue not at al times the right knowledge
of sinne: that is to say, how odious it is before
God: Much lesse haue they the dolour of it, &
hatred of it. Which if they had, as they could
not sinne, so coulde they neuer be able, hauing
that same very sense of God his wrath against
sinne, to delight in any thing that appertaineth
to the fleshe, more then the woman whome
God hath appointed by the helpe of man, to
produce mankind, coulde euer delight in man,
if at al times shee felt the same pangues of dolour
and paine, that she doeth in her childebyrth.
And therefore doeth God for such purposes
as are knowne to himselfe, sometime
suspend from his owne children, this fore saide
sense and feeling of his wrath against sinne.
As no doubte, heere hee did with Dauid, not
onely before his sinne, but also sometime after.
               
                  But least the sonnes of God shoulde become
altogither insolent like the children of
the world, he sendeth vnto them some portion
of this foresaide cuppe: in drinking whereof
they come to such knowledge as they neuer
had before. For first they feele the wrath of
God working against sinne: whereby they
learne the iustice of God, to bee euen such as
he himselfe pronounceth that he may suffer no
sinne vnpunished. And thus begin they as well
to morne for their offences, as also to hate the
same, which otherwise they coulde neuer doe:
for nothing is so pleasing to the corrupt nature
of man, as is sinne: and things pleasing to
nature, cannot nature of it selfe hate.
               But in this conflict, as God his childr̄ feele
torments, and those most grieuous, as they
mourne, and by God his holie spirite begin to
hate sinne: so come they also to a more high
knowledge: that is, that man cannot bee sauiour
to himselfe, for how shal hee saue himselfe
from hel, that cannot saue himselfe from anguish
and trouble heere in the flesh, while hee
yet hath strength, wit, reason, and vnderstanding:
and therefore must hee bee compelled in
his heart, to acknowledge, that there is another
mediatour betweene God his iustice and

mankind, then any that euer descended of the
corrupt state of Adam, yea then any creature,
that onlie is a creature: and by the knowledge
of this mediatour at the last, the afflicted
commeth by some sense and liuely feeling of
God his great mercie declared vnto mankinde,
albeeit they bee not so sensible as is the paine:
and albeeit that torment by this knowledge is
not hastily remoued, yet hath the patient some
hope, that al dolour shal haue ende: and that
is the cause why hee sobbeth and gro
                     •
                  eth, for
an ende of paine, why also he blasphemeth not
God, but cryeth for his health euen in the
midst of his anguishe. Howe profitable this is
to the children of God, and what it worketh
in them as the plaine scripture teacheth, so experience
letteth vs vnderstande.
               Verilie euen so profitable as it is to mourne
for sinne, to hate the same, to knowe the mediatour
betwixt God and man, and finally to
knowe his louing mercie towardes them: So
necessarie is it to drinke this foresaide cuppe.
What it worketh in them, none knoweth but
such as taste it.
               In Dauid it is plaine, that it wrought humilitie
and abiection of himselfe.
               It tooke from him the great trust hee had

in himselfe. It made him dayly to feare and
earnestly to pray, that after he shoulde not offend
in like manner, or bee left in his owne
handes. It made him lowlie, although hee was
a king: it made him merciful, when hee might
haue beene rigorous: Yea and it made him
to mourne for Absolon his wicked sonne. But
to the rest of the causes.
               The second cause why God permitteth his
elect to taste of this bitter cuppe, is to raise vp
our hearts from these transitorie vanitles: for
so foolish and forgetful of nature, and so addict
are wee to the things that are present, that vnlesse
wee haue another schoolemaister then
manly reason, and some other spurre, and perpetual
remembrance, then any which wee can
choose or deuise our selues: Wee neither can
desire, nor yet rightly remember, the departure
from this vaine and wicked worlde, to
the kingdome that is prepared.
               Wee are commanded dayly to praye, Thy
kingdome come: which petition asketh that
sinne may cease, that death may be deuoured,
that transitorie troubles may haue an ende,
that Sathan may bee troden vnder foote, that
the whole body of Christ, may bee restored to
life, libertie, and ioy, that the powers and

kingdomes of this earth may bee resolued and
destroyed. And that God the father may be all
in al thinges after that his sonne Christ Iesus
our Sauiour hath rendred vp the kingdom for
euer.
               These thinges are wee al commaunded to
pray for: but which of vs in the time when al
abundeth with vs (when neither body not spirite
hath trouble) from our heart, and without
dissimulation can wishe these thinges? verily
none. With our mouth wee may speake the
wordes, but the heart cannot thirst the thinges
to come, except we be in such state that worldly
things be vnsauerie vnto vs. And so can they
neuer be but vnder the Crosse. Neither yet vnder
al kind of Crosses as are worldly things vnpleasant:
for in pouertie riches do greately delight
many. For although they lacke them, yet
desire they to haue them: and so are they neither
vnsauerie nor vnpleasant. For things that
wee earnestly couet, are not vnpleasant vnto
vs. But when things appertaining to the flesh,
are sufficiently ministred vnto vs, and yet none
of them can molifie our anguishe nor paine:
then sobbeth the heart vnto God, and vnfaynedly
wisheth an ende of miserie. And therefore
our heauenly father of his infinite wisedome,

to holde vs in continual remembrance,
that in this wretched worlde there is no rest,
permitteth and suffereth vs to bee tempted
and tryed with this crosse, that with an vnfained
hart we may desire not only an end of our
troubles (for that shal come to vs by death) but
also of al the troubles of the churche of God,
which shal not bee before the comming again
of the Lorde Iesus.
               The thirde cause I collect of Moses wordes 
to the Israelites, saying, The Lorde thy God
shal cast out these nations by little and little
before thee. Hee wil not cast them out all at
once, lest perchaunce the wilde beasts be multiplied
against thee: And also when thou shalt
enter into that lande, and shalt dwell in the
houses, that thou neuer buildest, and that thou
shalt eate and bee filled: giue thankes vnto the
Lorde thy God, and beware that thou forget
him not, and that thou say not in thy hearte:
The strength of mine own hand hath brought
these great riches vnto mee.
               In these woordes are twoo thinges appertaining
vnto our matter most worthie to bee
noted. First that Moses saieth that the Lorde
will not at once, but by little and little destroy
those nations, adding the cause, least

perchaunce (saith hee) the wilde beastes bee
multiplied, and make vp
                     •
                  o are against thee. The
seconde that when they had abundance that
then they shoulde declare themselues mindeful
of God his benefites, and that they should
not thinke that their owne power, wisedome,
nor prouision was any cause that they had the
fruition of those commodities.
               By these Presidents the holy Ghost teacheth
them, that like as they did not possesse, nor obtaine
the first interest of that lande by their
owne strength, but that the Lorde God did
freelie giue it to them, so likewise were they
not able to brooke nor enioy the same, by any
power of themselues.
               For albeeit that God shoulde haue in one
moment destroied al their enemies: yet if hee
shoulde not haue beene their perpetual safegarde,
the wilde beastes, shoulde haue troubled
them. And if they had demaunded the question,
why wilt thou not destroy the wild beasts
also? he answereth, least thou forget the Lorde
thy God, and say in thy heart, my strength hath
obtained this quietnesse to my selfe.
               Consider, deerely beloued, that such things
as the spirite of God foresawe dangerous and
damnable vnto them, the same things are to be

feared in vs: for al things happened vnto them
in figures. They were in Egypt corporally punished
by a cruel tyrant: wee were in spirituall
bondage of the Deuil, by sinne and incredulitie.
God gaue to them a land that flowed with
milke and hony, for which they neuer laboured:
God hath opened to vs, the knowledge of
Christ Iesus which we neuer deserued, nor yet
hoped for the same. They were not able to defende
the land, after they were possessed in it:
wee are not able, to retaine our selues, in the
true knowledge of Christ, but by his grace
onelie. Some enimies were left to exercise thē.
Sinne is left in vs, that we may learne to fight.
If enemies had not beene, wilde beasts should
haue multiplied amongest them. If such
beastes as wee thinke most doe trouble vs,
were not permitted so to doe, worse beastes
shoulde haue dominion ouer vs, that is to
wit: Trust in our selfe, arrogancie, obliuion, &
forgetfulnes of that estate from which GOD
hath deliuered vs, togither with a light estimation
of all Christes merites, which sinnes are
the beastes that (alas do deuour no smal nūber
of mē. Neither yet let any mā thinke, that if al
kinde of crosses were taken from vs, during

the time that wee beare the earthly Image of
Adam, that wee shoulde bee more perfect in
vsing the spiritual giftes of God: to wit, the
remission of sinnes, his free grace, and Christ
his iustice, for which wee neuer laboured:
than that people shoulde haue beene, in vsing
of those corporall giftes. And Moyses
saith vnto them, Beware that thou forget not
the Lorde thy God. Hee who knoweth the
secretes of heartes, giueth not his preceptes
in vaine: if man his hearte had not beene
prone and readie to forget God, and to glorie
in his owne strength, God had not giuen this
precept, and repeated it so diligently. For hee
neither doeth nor speaketh in vaine, but
knowing what thinges be most able to blinde
and deceiue man, the wisedome of God by
his contrarie preceptes, giueth him warning
of the same. Experience hath taught vs
howe such beastes haue troubled the churche
of God: to speake nothing of the time of the
Prophetes, of the Apostles, or of the primitiue
church.
               What trouble made Pelagius by his heresie?
affirming that man by natural power
and free wil, might fulfil the lawe of GOD,

and deserue for himselfe remission and grace.
And to come a little neere to our owne age,
hath it not beene openly preached and affirmed
in schooles, and set out by writings, that
onelie faith doeth not iustifie, but that workes
doe also iustifie? Hath it not beene taught, that
good workes may goe before faith, and may
prouoke God to giue his graces? What hath
beene taught of man his merites, and of the
workes of supererogation: some openly affirming
that some men haue wrought more
good woorkes, then were necessarie to their
owne saluation? I pray you consider if these
men saide not: our hande and our strength
hath giuen these thinges vnto vs. What were
these Diuelishe heresies, and others that haue
infected the whole Papistrie? Assuredly they
were cruel and rauenous beastes, able to deuour
the soules of al those vpon whome they
get the vpper hande: but the mercifull prouidence
of our God, willing our saluation, wil
not suffer vs, to come to that vnthankefulnesse
and obliuion. And therefore heere hee
permitteth vs, of our enemies, with his Apostle
Paule to be suffered, to the ende that wee
may mourne for sinne, and hate the same, that

we may knowe the onelie mediatour, and the
dignitie of his office, that we may vnfaynedly
thirst the comming of the Lorde Iesus, and
that wee neither bee presumptuous, lightly esteeming
Christ his death: neither yet vnmindful
of out former estate and miseries. And so
this cuppe is as it were a medicine prepared by
the wisedome of our eternal Phisition, who
onelie knoweth the remedies of our corrupt
nature. Aduerte and marke, deere mother, that
al commeth to vs, for our most singular profite.
It is a medicine, and therefore presently it
cannot bee pleasing. But howe gladly woulde
wee vse, and receiue, when the bodies were
sicke, how vnpleasant & bitter soeuer it were,
to drinke, that medicine which would remoue
sicknesse, & restore health? But Oh how much
more ought wee, with patience and thanksgiuing,
to receiue this medicine of our fathers
handes, that from our soule remoueth many
mortal diseases, his holy Ghost so working by
the same: such as is pride, presumption, contempt
of grace, and vnthankefulnesse? which
bee the very mortal diseases, that by vnbeliefe
doe kil the soule: And doeth restore vnto vs
lowlinesse, feare, inuocation of God his name,

remembrance of our owne weakenesse, and
of God his infinite benefite by Christ receiued.
Which bee the very euident signes, that
Iesus Christ liueth in vs: 
                     〈◊〉
                   signes and tokens
of those presidents haue appeared in you,
and in others that bee in your companie, sithens
your first profession of Christ, it needeth
me not to rehearse. God graunt that the
eyes of men be not blinded to their own perdition.
But to our purpose, deerely beloued, accept
this cuppe from the handes of our heauenly
father, and albeit your paines bee almost
intollerable, yet cast your selfe, because you
haue none other refuge, before the throne of
God his mercie, and with the Prophet Dauid
being in like trouble, say vnto him:
               2 Haue mercie vpon me, O Lorde, for I
am weake, O Lord, heare me, for al
my bones are vexed.
               Nowe procedeth Dauid in his prayer, adding
certaine causes, why he should bee heard,
and obtaine his petitions: but first wee wil
speake of his prayers as they bee in order
through this whole Psalme. Dauid in summ
                     •
                  
desireth 4. things, in this his vehem̄t trouble:

in the first verse hee asketh that God-punishe
him not in his heauie displeasure and wrath.
               In the seconde verse hee asketh that GOD
should haue mercie vpon him: and in the third
verse he desireth that he should heale him: and
in the fourth verse he asketh that God should
returne vnto him, and that he should saue his
soule: euerie one of these things, were so necessarie
vnto Dauid, that lacking any one of
them, hee iudgeth himselfe vnfortunate. Hee
felt the wrath of God, and therefore desired
the same to be remoued, he had offended and
therefore desired mercie, hee was falne in
most dangerous sicknesse, and therefore he cryed,
for corporal health: God appeared to be departed
from him, and therfore desired hee that
the comfort of the holy Ghost should returne
vnto him. And thus was Dauid, not as commonlie
are the most parte of men in their praiers,
who of a custome, oftentimes doe aske
with their mouths such things, as their hearts
doe not greatly desire to obtaine. But let vs
marke principally, what things are to bee noted
in these his praiers: which he with earnest
minde powred forth before God. Euident it
is, that Dauid in these his prayers susteined
and felt the very sense of God his wrath:

And also that hee vnderstoode clearely that it
was God only, that troubled him, and that had
laide that sore scourge vpon him. And yet no
where els but at God alone (who appeared to
bee angrie with him) seeketh hee support or
aide: this is easie to bee spoken, and the most
part of men wil iudge it but a light matter too
flie to God in their troubles.
               I confesse in deed that if our troubles come
by man his tyranny, that then the most sure, &
most easie way is, to runne to God, for defēce
and aide.Let this bee vvel noted. But let God appeare to bee our enimie,
to be angrie with vs, and to haue left vs:
howe harde and difficil is it then to cal for his
grace and for his assistance? None knoweth, except
such as haue learned it in experience, neither
yet can any man so doe, except the elect
children of God:Enimies driue vs from God vnder this crosse. for so strong are the enimies,
that with great violence inuade the troubled
conscience, in that trouble some battel, that vnlesse
the hid seede of God shoulde make them
hope against hope, they coulde neuer looke for
any deliuerance or comfort. The fleshe lacketh
not reasons and perswasions, to bring vs
from God. The Diuel by him selfe, and by
his messengers, dare boldly say, and affirme:
that we haue nothing to doe with God. And a

weake faith, is oft compelled to confesse both
the accusations, and reasons to be most true.
In time of trouble the fleshe doeth reason. O
wretched man, perceiuest thou not that God
is angrie with thee? Hee plagueth thee in his
hot displeasure, therefore it is in vaine for thee
to cal vpon him. The Diuel by his suggestion,
or by his ministers doeth amplifie and aggrauate
these presidents, affirming & beating into
the conscience of the sore afflicted, in this maner:
God plagueth thee for thine iniquitie,
thou hast offended his holy lawe, therefore it
is labour lost to crie for mercy or reliefe, for
his iustice must needes take vengeance vpon al
inobedient offendours. In this meane season
a weake faith is compelled to confesse and
acknowledge the accusations to be most true,
for who can deny that hee hath not deserued
God his punishments. The fleshe feeleth the
torments, and our owne weakenesse crieth all
is true, and no point can be denied. The vehemencie
of this battel in the sicknesse of Ezechias,
and in the historie of Iob, plainely may
bee espied.Esay. 38. Exechias after that with lamentable
teares, hee had complained that his life
was taken away, and cut of before his time,
that violence was doone vnto him, and that

God had bruised al his bones like a Lion: At
last hee saith, Be thou suretie for me, O Lord:
but immediately vpon these woordes, as it
were correcting himselfe, hee saith: What shal
I say, it is he that hath done it. As who would
say, to what purpose complaine I to him? If he
had any pleasure in mee, hee woulde not haue
entreated mee on this manner. It is hee himselfe,
whome I thought shoulde haue been my
suretie and defender, that hath wrapped me in
al this wretched miserie: Hee cannot bee angrie,
and merciful at once (so iudgeth the flesh)
for in him there is no contrarietie, I feele
him to bee angrie with mee, and therefore it is
in vaine, that I complain or cal vpon him. This
also may bee espied in Iob, who after that hee
was accused by his freendes, as one that had
deserued the plague of God, and after that his
wise had willed him to refuse al iustice, and to
curse God,Iob. 9. and so to die: after his most greeuous
complaintes, hee saith. When I called vpon
him, and hee hath answered, yet beleeue I
not that hee hath hearde my voice: As if Iob
woulde say, So terrible are my tormentes, so
vehemement is my paine, and anguishe, that
albeit verily GOD had hearde my humble

petitions, yet feele I not that he wil graunt me
my request. Heere is a strong battel, when perfectly
they vnderstande that remedie is none▪
but in God onely, and yet from Gods hande
they looke for no support, as might appeare to
mens iudgements: for he that saith, that God
punisheth him, and therefore cannot bee merciful,
and hee doubteth whether God heare
him or not, appeareth to haue cast away all
hope of Gods deliuerance. These thinges put
I you in minde of, beloued mother, that albeit
your paines sometime bee so horrible, that no
release nor comfort you find, neither in spirite,
nor body: yet if the heart can onely sobbe vnto
God, dispaire not, you shal obteine your
heartes desire: And destitute yee are not of
faith. For at such time as the flesh, natural reason,
the lawe of God, the present torment, and
the Diuel at once doeth crie: God is angrie,
and therefore is there neither helpe nor remedie
too bee hoped for at his handes: at suche
time I say, to sobbe vnto God, is the demonstration
of the secrete seede of God, which is
hid in Gods elect children, and that only sobbe
is vnto God a more acceptable sacrifice, than
without this crosse to giue our bodies to bee
burned, euen for the truethes sake. For if God

bee present by assistance of his holy spirite, so
that no doubt is in our conscience, but that assuredly
we stande in Gods fauour, what can
corporal trouble hurt the soule or mind, seeing
the bitter frostie wind cannot hurt the body it
selfe, which is most warmely couered, and clad
from violence of the colde. But when the spirite
of God appeareth to bee absent, yea when
God himselfe appeareth to be our enimie, then
to say, Oh (to thinke with Iob in his trouble)
albeit he should destroy or kill mee, yet will I
trust in him: or what is the strength and vehemencie
of the faith, which so looketh for mercy,
when the whole man feeleth nothing but
dolours on euery side. Assuredly that hope
shal neuer bee confounded, for so it is promised
by him, who cannot repent of his mercy &
goodnesse: Reioyce Mother, and fight to the
end, for sure I am that ye are not vtterly destitute
of that spirite, who taught Dauid & Iob.
What obedience I haue hearde you giue vnto
God in your most strong torment, it needeth
mee not to write, only I desire (which is a portion
of my dayly prayer,) God for our Iesus
Christe his sonnes sake, that in al your trouble
you may continue, as I haue left you, and that
with Dauid yee may sobbe. Albeit the mouth

may not speak, yet let the heart grone and say,
Haue mercy vpon mee O Lorde, and heale me,
and then I nothing doubt, your greeuous torment
shal not molest you for euer, but shortly
shal haue an ende to your euerlasting consolation
and comfort. Yee thinke peraduenture,
that ye would gladly cal and pray for mercy,
but the knowledge of your sinnes doe hinder
you. Consider, dearely beloued, that al Phisick
or medicine serueth onely for the patient: so
doeth mercy onely for the sinner, yea for the
wretched and most miserable sinner. Did not
Dauid vnderstande himselfe to bee a sinner,Obiection of the fleshe. &
an adulterer,Ansvvere by a similitude. and a shedder of innocent blood?
Yea, knewe hee not also that he was punished
for his sinnes? Yes verily, he did, and therfore
he called for mercy: which hee that knoweth
not the heauines and multitude of sinnes can
in no wise doe, but most commonly doth despise
mercy when it is offered, or at the least the
mā that feeleth not the burdē of sin, lightly regardeth
mercy, because he feeleth not how necessary
it is vnto him, as betwixt Christ & the
proude Pharisees, in many places of the newe
Testament, it is to be seen. And therfore, deare
mother, if your aduersary trouble you, either
with your sinnes past or present, obiecting, the

mercy apperteineth not vnto you by reason of
your sinnes: answer, to him as you are taught
by Christ, That the whole needeth no Phisi
                     •
                  iō,
neither yet the iust, mercy & pardon. But that
Christ is come to giue light to the blind, & to
cal sinners to repentāce: of whō you acknowledge
your selues to be the greatest, & yet that
ye doubt nothing to obteine mercy, because it
was neuer denied to none that asketh the same
in faith. And thus no doubt yee shal obteine
victorie by Christ Iesus, to whom be praise for
euer and euer, Amen.
               
                  In the rest of Dauids praiers, now will we
bee shorter, that wee may come to the
groundes of the same.
               
               After the desiring of mercy, nowe desireth
Dauid a corporal benefite, saying, Heale mee,
Lorde. Heereof is to bee noted, that bodily
health being the gift of God, may bee asked of
him without sinne, albeit that wee vnderstand
our selues to bee punished for our offences.
Neither yet in so praying, are wee contrary to
Gods will: for his prouidence hath planted in
the nature of man, a desire of health, & a desire
that it may be conserued, & therfore is he not

offended that we aske health of body, when we
lacke it, neither yet that we seeke preseruation
of our health by such ordinary meanes as hee
hath appointed: Prouided alwaies, that God
himselfe be first sought, and that we desire neither
life, neither health, to the hinderance of
Gods glory nor to the hurt or destruction of
others our brethren, but rather that by vs
Gods glory may bee promoted, & that others
our brethren by our strength, health, and life,
may bee comforted and defended. These presidents
nowe rightly obserued, it is no sinne
earnestly to aske at God health of body, albeit
wee knowe our sicknesse to bee the very hand
of God, punishing or correcting our former
euil life. This I write because some are so seuere,
that they would not that we should aske
bodily helth of God, because the sicknes is sent
to vs by him: but such men doe not righteously
vnderstande, neither yet consider that
sicknes is a trouble to the body and that God
commandeth vs to cal for his help in our troubles.
Surely our submission and praiers in
such extremitie, is the greatest glory that wee
can giue vnto God: for so doing wee thinke
that his mercy aboundeth aboue his iudgemēt
and so wee are bold to pray for the withdrawing

of his scourge,Ier. 18. Marke vve
                        •
                     . which petition no doubt
hee must graunt, for so he promiseth by Ieremy
his Prophet, saying: If I haue spokē against
any nation or Citie, saying that I wil destroy
it, and if it turne from iniquitie and repent, it
shal repent me also of the plagues, that I haue
spoken against it. God promiseth to shewe
mercie to a whole Citie or nation if it repent,
& wil he not doe the same to a particular person,
if in his sicknesse he cal for grace? He hath
shewed vnto vs that hee wil, by diuers examples,
and specially by the leprosie of Mary the
sister of Moses and Aaron, which shee receiued
at the Lordes hande, punishing her high and
hautie minde: and againe, vpon her submission,
and at the prayer of Moses, shee shortly
was restored to health. But to proceed, Dauid
moreouer prayeth: Turne againe O Lord.
It appeareth vnto Dauid, beeing in the extremitie
of his paine, that God was altogether
departed from him: for so alwaies iudgeth the
flesh (yea the whole man) when trouble worketh
by any continuance of time. Dauid had
sustained trouble many dayes, hee had prayed
and yet was not deliuered. And therefore iudgeth
he that God being offended for his sinnes
had left him. And yet plain it is that God was

with him, working in his hart by his holy spirite,
repentance▪ expressing forth those sobbes
and grones: as also the desire he had to be restored
to that comfort and consolation, which
somtimes he had felt by the familiaritie, which
he had with God. Al these motiōs, I say, were
the operations of Gods holie spirite: and yet
Dauid could perceiue no cōsort nor presence
of God, in that his trouble, but lamentably
complaineth, as before you haue heard. Heereof
it is plaine, that the verie elect sometimes
are without al feeling of consolation: and that
they thinke themselues altogether destitute, as
may be seene in Dauid. But it is chiefly to be
noted, that Dauid in this his anguish remembreth,
that God sometimes had bene familiar
with him: for he saieth, Turne again, O Lord,
signifying thereby, that before he had felt the
sweetenesse of Gods presence, but now he was
left to him selfe without feeling of comfort or
consolation. For thus appereth Dauid to complaine:
Hast thou not bene familiar with mee
O Lorde, thy vnprofitable seruaunt? Diddest
thou not cal me from keeping sheepe, to be annointed
King ouer thy people Israel?In trouble Dauid remebreth vvhat God sometimes bad vvrought by him. Diddest
thou not so incourage my minde, that I feared
not the fresh strēgth of the cruel Lion, neither
yet the deuouring teeth of the hungry Beare?

frō whose iawes I deliuered my sheepe? Didst
not thou once inflame my hart with the zeale
of thy holie name? that when al Israel were so
afraid, that none durst incoūter with that mō
                  ster
Goliah, yet thy spirit made me so bold and
so valiant, that without harnesse or weapons
(except my slingstaffe & stones) I durst enterprise
singular battel against him: was it not thy
strength that gaue me victorie, not only at that
time, but also of al other my enimies, that haue
sought my life since? Hast not thou made mee
so glad by the multitude of thy mercies, & thy
most gracious fauor which thou from time to
time most abūdantly hast powred vpō me, that
both soule & body hath reioyced through the
galdnes of thy countenāce? hast thou not bin
so effectually with me present in troubles and
dangers, that my very enemies haue known &
cōfessed that thy power was alwaies with me,
and that thou diddest take my defence vppon
thy selfe? and wilt thou now so leaue the habitation
which thou hast chosen? Shal it bee left
desolate for euer? can thy mercies haue an end?
and shal thy fatherly pitie neuer appeare more
vnto me? Shalt thou leaue me for euer thus to
be tormēted, whō thou hast afore so abundātly
comforted? O Lorde, I am sure thy mercies
wil not so entreat me, and therfore turn again

O Lorde, and make mee glad with thy countenaunce,
whome of long time thou hast left
voide of consolation & comfort. Aduert and
consider, dearely beloued, in what estate was
Dauid, when that he had none other comfort,
except the only remembrāce of Gods former
benefits shewed vnto him. And therfore meruel
ye not, nor yet dispaire ye: albeit that you
find your self in the same case that Dauid was.
Sure I am, that your owne heart must confesse
that ye haue receiued like benefits at the hand
of God, as Dauid did. He hath called you from
a more vile office, then from the keeping of
sheepe, to as great a dignitie (touching the euerlasting
inheritance) as hee did Dauid. For
from the seruice of the Deuil and sin, hee hath
annointed vs Priestes and Kings, by the blood
of his onely Sonne Iesus: hee hath giuen
you courage and boldnesse to fight against
more cruel, more suttle▪ more dangerous, and
against enemies that be more nigh vnto you,
then either was the Lyon, the Beare or Goliah
to Dauid: against the Deuil I meane, and
his assaultes, against your owne fleshe, and
most inwarde affections, against the multitude▪
of them that were (and yet remaine) enemies
to Christes religion: yea, against some of

your natural friendes, which appeare to professe
Christ with you, and in that part the battel
is the more vehement. What boldnesse I
haue seene with you, in al suche conflictes, it
needeth not me to rehearse. I write this, to the
praise of God, I haue wondred at that bolde
constancie, which I haue found in you at such
time as mine owne heart was fainte. Sure I
am, that fleshe and blood coulde neuer haue
persuaded you, to haue contemned and set at
naught those thinges that the worlde most esteemeth:
you haue tasted and felte of Gods
goodnes and mercies in suche measure, that
not onely ye are able to reason and speake, but
also by the spirite of God working in you, to
giue comfort and consolation to such as were
in trouble: and therefore most deare mother,
thinke not that God wil leaue his own mansion
for euer. No, impossible it is, that the Deuil
shal occupie Gods inheritance: or yet that God
shal so leaue and forsake his holie Temple that
hee wil not sanctific the same. Againe, God
sometimes suspendeth his own presence from
his elected, as heere by Dauid may be espied:
And verie often suffer
                     •
                  th he his elect to tast of
bitternesse & griefe, for such causes as are before
expres
                     •
                  ed, but to suffer thē to bee at rest

out of his hands, he neither wil nor may permit,
for so were he a mutable God: & gaue his
glorie to another, if he permitted himself to be
ouercome of his aduersarie: which is as like
impossible, as it is that God shal cease to bee
God. Now lastly Dauid prayeth: Deliuer my
soule & saue me. In this praier no dout, Dauid
desired to bee deliuered from the verie corporal
death at that time, & his soule to be saued
frō those present plagues & grieuous tormēts
that he susteined. In which it might appeare to
some, that he was more addict to this present
life, & that he loued more the quietnes of the
flesh then it became a spiritual man to do.The most spiritual man desireth rest. But
as before is said, God hath naturally ingraffed
and planted in man this loue of life, tranquilitie
and rest, & the most spiritual man oft time
desireth them, because they are seales & witnesses
of that league and felowship that is betweene
God and his elect. And albeit that troble
doth most commonly folow the friends of
God, yet is he nothing assured, that earnestly
we aske our quietnes, neither is that our desire
any declaration of carnalitie or of inordinate
loue, that we haue to the world▪ considering
that the final cause, wherfore we desire to
liue, is not for inioying of worldly pleasures
(for many times in the midst of those we grāt

and cōfesse, that better it is to be absent from
the body) but the chi
                     •
                  fe cause why Gods elect
do desire life, or to haue rest in earth, is for the
maintenance of Gods glory, & that other may
see that God taketh a care ouer his elected. But
now to the grounds & foundatiōs of Dauids
praiers, & wherupon his praiers do stand. The
first is taken from the vehement troble which
he sustained, & from the long continuance of
the same. The second is takē from the goodnes
of God. And the third from Gods glorie, and
from the insolent rage of his enemies. Here is
to be obserued & noted, that neither is trouble,
neither long continuance of the same, neither
yet the proud & hautie mindes of wicked
men, the chiefe mouing cause, why God heareth
our praiers, & declareth himselfe merciful
vnto vs: and therfore they may not be the sure
and sound foundations of our praiers. But only
Gods infinit goodnes is the fountaine of al
mercy & grace, which springeth & commeth
vnto vs by Christ Iesus his sonne. But they are
causes by operation of the holy Ghost, helping
our weaknes, to beleeue & to trust that God,
who is the father of mercies, wil not be angry
for euer at the sore afflicted, neither yet that
hee wil punishe without mercy, suche as cal
for his helpe and comforte: as also that
GOD, who hath alwaye declared him selfe

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
enemie to pride, wil not suffer the proude and
obstinate cōtemners of his poore Saintes long
to blaspheme his lenitie & gentlenes, but that
he wil powre foorth his plagues vppon them,
according to his threatninges, and so are our
troubles and the tyrannie of our enemies in
that behalfe fundaments, wherupon our pray
                  
                     •
                  rs
may stande, as here appeareth. Dauid describeth
his dolour, and the continuance therof,
in these wordes.
               I am consumed away with sicknesse, al my
bones are vexed, & my soule is in horrible
feare: But how long lord wilt thou
thus intreat me? I am weeried for sobbing:
I water my bed with my teares.
               Let vs imagine that Dauid thus speaketh:
O Lord, maiest thou who euer hast taken care
for me from my mothers wombe, nowe forget
mee, the woorke manship of thine owne
hands? Maiest thou, that hast declared thy selfe
so merciful vnto me in al my tribulatiōs, nowe
in the ende, take thy mercies cleane from me?
Hast thou no pitie, O Lord
                     •
                  ? Doest thou not
beholde that I am pined and consumed by this

greeuous torment? wherein is not onely my
tender flesh, but also my verie bones (the strō
                  gest
parte of my bodie) so vexed, that neither
is there beautie nor strength left vnto mee. If
thy anguishes occupied the bodie onely, yet
were the paine almost intollerable: but O
Lord, so horriblie is my soule tormented, that
albeit it be immortal, yet it so quaketh and trē
                  bleth,
as verie death should deuour it. And
thus doe I sustaine most grieuous tormentes,
both in bodie & soule, of so long continuance,
that it appeareth vnto me, thou hast forgotten
to be merciful. O Lorde, howe long wilt thou
intreate me in this maner? Hast thou forgotten
thy louing mercies? Or hast thou lost thy
fatherly pitie? I haue no lōger strength to cry:
yea, and for sobbes and grones I am so weery,
that my breath faileth me: the teares of mine
eyes 
                     •
                   herewith nightly I haue wette my bed,
haue borne witnesse of my vnfained dolour:
but nowe my eyes are waxen dimme, and my
whole strength is dried vp. In al these lamentable
complaintes, Dauid speaketh vnto God,
as he would speake vnto a man that were ignorant,
what an other man suffered, whereof
it may bee vnderstood, howe the most prudent,
and the most spiritual man iudgeth of

God in the time of troble: assuredly he thoght
that God taketh no care for him, and therfore
doeth hee, as it were, accuse God of vnmindfulnesse,
& that he loketh not vpon him with
the eyes of his accustomed mercie, as clearely
by these worodes may be espied. And yet are
Dauids troubles the first ground & cause why
he maketh his praiers & claimeth to be heard,
not that troubles (as before is noted) are sufficient
by them selues for Gods deliueraunce,
but in recounting his dolour, Dauid hath a secret
accesse to Gods mercie, which chalengeth
& clameth of dutie to appertein to al his, who
in the time of trouble cal for his support, help,
& aide.Mercie appertaineth to al the creatures of God that cal for the same vnfainedly. Iob. 9. And it is the same ground that Iob taketh,
where he saith: is it profitable vnto thee,
that thou violently oppresse me? wilt thou despise
the worke of thine own hands? thou hast
formed & made me altogether: and wilt thou
now deuour me? Remēber I beseech thee, that
thou hast fashioned me as a moulde, and that
thou shalt bring me to dust: thou hast couered
me with skin & flesh, with sinowes & bones
hast thou ioyned me, with life & gētlenes hast
thou beautified me, & thy prudence hath kept
my spirit. Here may be espied vpō what groūd
these two stood in this most grieuous paynes.

Their trouble mooued them to complain, and
to appeale to the great mercie of God, which
as they alledge, euen so is it most sure, he may
deny to none that aske it: for as the troubles
of his creatures is none aduantage vnto God,
so to denie mercie when it is asked, were to
deny himself, & herein, dearely beloued, I hartily
wish you to reioyce. For I can be witnesse
howe constantly yee haue called for grace in
your anguishes, and your owne conscience
must testifie, that oftētimes ye haue found release
and comfort in suche measure, that you
haue bin bold to triumph against your aduersaries
in Christ Iesus our sauior. Be nothing afraid
albeit presently ye feele not your accustomed
consolation: that shal hurt you no more
then the trobles of Dauid & Iob did hurt thē,
who in the time that they spake these former
words, found no more consolation then you
do now in the most extremitie of your troble.
Neither yet did they hastily obtain cōfort: for
Dauid saith, O Lord, howe long wilt thou so
cruelly punish me? And yet we know most assuredly
that they were heard, & that they obtained
their own harts desire, as no dout euery
man shal, that in time of troble (be it spiritual
or corporal) appeareth only to Gods mercie.

The second ground and foundation wherupon
the prayers of Dauid doe stande, is the infinite
goodnesse of God, for thus hee saieth:
Saue me O God, for thy goodnesse. Dauid before
had asked mercie, and declared his complaintes,
but now searching & reasoning with
him selfe secretly in his conscience, after this
maner: Why should God shewe mercie vnto
him, that so hainously had offended, and that
iustly was tormented by Gods hande, for his
transgression & sin? No other grounde that is
alwayes sure & permanent findeth he: except
Gods infinite goodnesse, which he espieth to
bee onely the staie, which neither tempest of
windes,The eye of faith. neither floodes of water are able to ouerthrow,
nor vndermind. And, oh how pearcing
are the eyes of Faith, that in so deepe a
dungeon of desperation, can yet espie in the
midst of those troublesome darknesse, goodnes
to remaine in God▪ yea, and such goodnesse as
is sufficient and able to ouercome, deuour and
swalow vp al the iniquities of his elect, so that
none of them are able to gainstande or hinder
Gods infinite goodnesse, to shewe his mercie
to his troubled childrē. Hereby are we taught,
beloued mother, in the extremitie of our trobles,
to run to Gods only goodnesse, there to

seeke comfort by Iesus Christ, and no where
els. I feare nothing the blasphemous voices of
such, nor their raging against God and against
his onely eternal veritie, that are not ashamed
to affirme that this kinde of doctrine maketh
men negligent to doe good workes, against
whom no otherwise wil I contend, then doth
the Apostle, saying: their damnation is iust.
For my purpose and minde is, to edifie those
whō God hath called from darknesse to light,
whose eyes it hath pleased his mercie so to open,
that euidētly they feele the fl
                     •
                  sh to rebel
against the spirit, euen in the howre of their
greatest perfection: in such maner,The most pure vvorkes that ma
                        ••
                      can do, are in the sight of God v
                        •
                     
                     cleane. that al power,
al iustice, and al vertue proceeding from
vs, is so contaminate and defiled, that the very
workes which wee doe, must be purged by an
other, and that therefore can none of them be
infallible groundes of our praier, neither
yet a sufficient cause why we should be heard.
But the goodnesse of God, as it is infinite, so
can it not bee defiled by our iniquitie: but
it pearceth through the same, and wil shewe
it selfe to our consolation, euen as the
beames of the bright Sun, pearce through the
mystie and thicke cloudes, and bring downe

his natural heate, to comforte and quicken
suche hearbes and creatures, as through violence
of colde were almost falne into deadly
decaie. And thus the onely goodnesse of God
remaineth in al stormes, the sure foundation
to the afflicted. Against which the Deuil is neuer
able to preuaile. The knowledge of this
is so necessarie to the afflicted conscience, that
without the same, it is verie harde to withstande
the assaultes of the aduersarie: for as
he is a spirite most suttle and vigilant, to trouble
the children of God, so is it easie to him to
de
                     •
                  ace and vndermine al the groundes and
causes that be within man, & especially when
wee are in trouble: yea, he can persuade that
we lacke those thinges, which most assuredly
we haue by Gods free gift and grace. As for
example: if wee desire to bee deliuered from
trouble and anguishe of conscience with Dauid
and Iob, sodeinely can the Deuil obiect,
what appertaineth their example vnto thee,
they had many notable and singular vertues,
which thou lackest: if wee desire remission
of sinnes with Magdalen, with Peter, or
with any other offenders he hath these dartes
readie to shoote, they had Fayth, but thou

hast none, they had true repentance, tho
                     •
                  
ar
                     •
                  e but an hypocrite, they hated sinne and
continued in good woorkes, but thou reioycest
in sinne, and dooest no good at al. By
these meanes can hee, who is the accuser of
vs and of our brethren, 
                     •
                  uer finde out some
craftie accusation, to trouble the weake conscience
of the afflicted, so long as it resteth
vppon any thing that is within it selfe: and
til by operation of the holie Ghost wee are
ranished and refte vp to the contemplation
of our GOD, so that our mindes are
fixed onely vppon Gods infinite goodnesse,
clayming by the same to receiue mercie, as
Iob doeth in his former woordes, the sense
and meaning whereof, is this: O Lord thou
madest mee, when yet I was not, thou gauest
mee soule and bodie, when I neither
knewe nor vnderstoode what thy power was,
thou seddest and nourishedst mee, when I
coulde doe nothing but weepe and mourne.
And thy mercifull prouidence vnto this day,
hath preserued my life,Oh most faithf
                        ••
                      confession. and yet neither I
nor my woorkes coulde profite thee: for
thou (whose habitation is in heauen) needest
not the helpe of man.
               
                  And as for my woorkes, such as the fountaine
is, such must the water be: my heart is corrupted,
how then can any thing that is cleene proceede
from the same? And so what euer I haue
receiued, that either was, is, or hereafter shalbe
within my corrupt nature, al proceedeth frō
thine infinite goodnesse, which begunnest to
shew thy mercie before that I knew thee: cāst
thou then leaue mee thus in my extremitie? I
graunt and confesse that I haue offended: but
is there any creature cleane and perfect in such
perfection, that without mercie he may abide
the trial of thy iustice? or is there any iniquitie
now in me, which thy wisedom did not know
before? And thus I appeale to thy mercy which
springeth from thy infinite goodnes. O deere
mother, when thy afflicted soule can thus forsake
and refuse what euer is in man, & can stay
it self (how litle soeuer it be) vpō Gods infinite
goodnes: thē are al the firie darts of the Deuil
quenched, & he is repulsed as a cōfounded spirit.
It shal hurt nothing, albeeit the stormie tē
                  pest
cease not sodainely. It is sufficient that
this anker be cast out, which assuredly shal preserue
your ship, that shee violently runne not
vpon the forelande of desperatiō. This I write
beloued in the Lorde, knowing what hath

beene your complaintes heeretofore, in that
you found your faith faint, that you could not
repent your former euil life, chat yee found no
disposition nor readinesse to good workes, but
were rather carried away of sinne & wickednesse.
If al this had beene true, yet had yee
beene in no worse case, then was the Apostle
Paule, when hee cried: O wretched and vnhappie
man that I am! who shal deliuer mee
from this body of sinne? But I assuredly know
that the chiefe part of your trouble proceedeth
from malice & enuie of the Diuel, who would
perswade to your hearte, that yee delighted in
those things, which to you were most displeasing.
For howe oft haue ye complained vpon
the weakenes of your faith? How oft haue
yee lamented the imperfection of your fleshe?
The teares of your eies haue wi
                     •
                  nessed before
God, that yee delighted not in such thinges, as
your aduersary falsly layeth to your charge. For
who vseth continually too mourne in those
thinges that are pleasing to his hearte, if they
bee present with him at al times? Or who wil
desire thinges pleasing: to bee remoued from
him? yee haue mourned for your weakenesse,
and haue desired your imperfection to bee remoued,
and yee haue detested all sortes of idolatry.

How then can yee think that yee can
take any pleasure in the same? Desp
                     •
                  ire not, although
that al remembrance of Gods goodnesse
or worthinesse bee remoued from your
minde▪ yee haue Dauid, Iob, Daniel, and al other
the Saints of God, in equal sorte with
you▪ of Dauid and Iob, yee haue hearde, and
Esay making his heauie complainte for the
plagues of the people of Israel openly confesseth
that al had sinned, that their right eousnes
was nothing but filthinesse, that none sought
God, that none called vpon his name. And
Daniel in his prayer like wise confesseth, that al
had wrought wickedly, that al had declined
from God, yea and that none had submitted
them selues to GOD, nor yet had made
supplication vnto him, albeit hee had punished
their former inobedience: and therefore saith
hee, that they did not alledge their owne iustice
in their prayers. Consider, deare Mother,
that no mention is made of any righteousness
                     •
                  
that was within them selues, neither yet doe
they glory of any workes or vertues, that they
had wrought before, for they vnderstood that
God was authour of all goodnesse. And
therefore to him only apperteineth the praise.
But as for their sinnes, they vnderstood them

to bee the infirmities of their owne fleshe,
and therfore boldly called they for mercy. And
that by Gods infinite goodnesse, which is no
lesse free vnto you, then vnto thē, according to
the riches of his liberal graces, which plentifully
he powreth foorth vpon al them that cal on
the name of the Lord Iesus. The third and last
grounde of Dauids praiers, was the glory and
and praise of Gods name to be shewed and vttered
in his life, as in these wordes hee declareth.
               For there is no remembrance of the
                     •
                  
in death: who landeth thee in the
pitte?
               As Dauid woulde say: O Lorde, howe
shal I pray and declare thy goodnesse, when
I am dead and gone downe in to the graue? I
is not thy ordinary course, to haue thy myracles
and wonderous works preached vnto men
by those, that are buried, and gone downe into
the pit: those that are dead make no mention
of thee in the earth. And therefore, O Lorde,
spare thy seruant, that yee for a time I may
shewe and witnesse thy wonderous woorkes
vnto mankinde.
               
                  These most godly affections in Dauid did ingender
in him a vehement horror and feare of
death, besides that which is natural and common
to al men, bicause he perfectly vnderstood
that by death hee shoulde be letted any further
to aduance the glory of God. Of this same he
complaineth most vehemently in the 88. Psalm,
where apparauntly hee taketh from the dead,
sense, remembrance, feeling▪ and vnderstanding,
aledging that God worketh no miracles
by the dead, that the goodnes of God cannot
be preached in the graue, nor his faith by
perdition, and that his meruellous workes, are
not knowne in darkenesse. By which speache
we may not vnderstand, that Dauid taketh all
sense and feeling from the dead, 
                     •
                  either yet
that they which are dead in Christ, are in such
estate, that by God they haue not consolation
and life: no, Christ him selfe doth witnesse the
contrary: but Dauid so vehemently expresseth
their estate and condition, because that after
death they are depriued from al ordinatie ministration
in the Church of God. None of
those that are departed are appointed to bee
preachers of Gods glory vnto mankinde. But
after death they ceasse any more 
                     •
                  o aduannce
Gods holy name, heere amongest the liuing

on earth, and so shall euen they in that behalfe
be vnprofitable to the congregation, as touching
any thing that they can do, either in body
or soule after death. And therefore most
earnestly Dauid desired to▪ liue in Israel, for the
further manifestation of Gods glory. Heere is
to bee obserued a short, but yet a most necessary
note, which is this, what the thinges bee
which wee ought principally to seeke in this
transitorie life: Not those for the which
the blinde world contendeth and striueth, but
God and his louing kindnes to ward mankind,
his amiable promises, and true religion to be
aduanced and preached vnto others our brethren
that be ignorant. For if we doe not, we
may rather bee counted beastes then men,
dead stocks, not liuing creatures, yea rather
thinges that bee not at al, then substance, hauing
either being, or life. Seeing that the heauens
declare the glory of God, the earth with
the whole contentes thereof, what euer they
bee, doe geue praise to his holy name, the Sea,
floods and fountaines, with the wonders conteined
in the same, do not ceasse to make manifest
the wisedome, the power, and the prouidence
of their creator, what then shalbe saide
of man, that neither seeketh, neither regardeth

Gods glory? Yea what shal bee
iudged of those, that not onely hinder Gods
glory, but also declare them selues enimies to
such, as woulde promote it? I must speake my
conscience with a sorowful heart, they are not
onely dead, but they are also of the nature of
him by whose malice and enuie, death entred
into the worlde, that is, of the Diuel. But them
I omit at this present because their accusation
doeth not muche apperteine to this our matter,
whereof nowe I must make an ende,
somewhat contrary to my minde. For so I am
compelled by some present troubles as wel of
body, as of Spirite. The fourth part of this
Psalm I omit til more opportunitie: for it doth
not much appertaine to the spiritual crosse, but
it is as it were a Prophesie spoken against all
such, as reioyce at the troubles of Gods elect,
who assuredly shalbe confounded and sodenly
brought to shame, when the Lord shal heare
the voices of the sore afflicted.
               Now, dearely beloued in our Sauiour
Christe Iesus, seeing that the spiritual crosse is
proper to the children of God, seeing that it is
geuen to vs as a most effectual medicine, aswel
to remome diseases, as to plant in our soules

most notable vertues, such as is humilitie, mercy,
contempt of our selues, and continual remembrance
of our owne weakenesse and imperfection.
And seeing that you haue had most
euident signes, that this same medicine hath
wrought in you a part of al the promises, receiue
it thankfully of your fathers hand, what
trouble soeuer it bring with it: and albeit that
the fleshe grudge, yet let the spirite reioyce,
stedfastly looking for deliuerance, & assuredly
yee shall obteine according to the goodwil &
promise of him who cannot deceiue, to whom
bee glory for euer and euer before his congregation.
Amen.
               Now seeing it is vncertaine, beloued mother,
if euer we shal meete in this corporal life:
which wordes I wil not that yee take in any
displeasure: for if God continue you in life, &
me in health, I shal attempt to speake with you
face to face, within lesse time thē is passed since
the one of vs last saw the other. And be ye assured,
beloued mother, that neither shal it be the
feare of death, nor the rage of the Diuel, that
shal let me: & therfore I beseech you take not
my wordes in that part, as though I were not
minded to visite you againe: no I assure you,

that onely Gods hande shal withholde mee.
               But because our life doeth vanish as the smoke
before the blast of wind, my conscience moueth
me to write vnto you, as though I should 
                     ••
                  ke
from you my last good night in earth. The
summe whereof is this, to exhort and admonish
you, euen as that yee wil haue par
                     •
                   with
Christ Iesus, to co
                     •
                  tine we in the doctrine, to
the ende, which before the world ye ha
                     •
                  e professed.
For before God, before Christ Iesus his
so
                     •
                  ne, and before his holy angelles, neither
shame I 
                     •
                  o confesse, neither doubt I to affirme
that the doctrine which you and others haue
hard not only of my mouth, but also faithfully
taught by the mouthes of many others, of
whom some are ex
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  d, some cruelly cast into
prison, and the rest commanded to silence, is
the onely worde of life, and that al doctrine repugning
to the same, is diabolical & erronius,
which assuredly shal bring death, and perpetual
condemnation, to al those which shal therto
condiscend and agree. And therefore, Mother,
be not moued with any winde, but sticke
to Christe in the day of this his battel, & also I
admonish you too auoide that abhomination
which oft yee haue heard by me affirmed to be
damnable idolatrie: & God I take to record in

my conscience, that neither then, neither now,
I spake, nor doe speake, for pleasure or hatred
of any liuing creature in erth, whatsoeuer that
it be, but as my coscience was certified by the
infallible and plain word of God, from which
I praise my most merciful father I am not this
day one iote remoued. Neither 
                     〈◊〉
                   I of that
my blessed and most happie societie with the
trueth of Christes Gospel, vnto which it hath
pleased God 
                     •
                  o 
                     •
                  alme, the most wretched of others:
neither fore think I that God hath made
me an open, and manifest enemie to Papistrie,
superstition, and to al that 
                     •
                  ilthie idolatrie,
which newly is erected in Gods hotte displeasure:
neither yet would I recāt (as they terme
it) one sentence of my former doctrine, for al
the glory, riches, & rest that is in earth. And in
conclusion, I would not bowe my 
                     •
                  nee before
that most abhominable idol, for al the tormēts
that earthly tyrantes can deuise, God so assisting
me, as his holie spri
                     ••
                   presently moueth
me to write vnfainedly. And albei
                     •
                   that I haue
in the beginning of this battel appered to play
the fainte Hearted and feeble so
                     •••
                  our (the
cause I remit to God) yet my prayer is, that I
may be restored to the battel againe. And blessed
bee God the Father of our Lorde Iesus

Christ, I am not left so bare without cōforte,
but my hope is to obtaine such mercie, that if
a sodaine ende be not made of all my miseries
by final death, which to mee were no smal aduantage:
that yet by him, who neuer despised
the sobbes of the sore afflicted, I shalbe so incouraged
to fight, that England and Scotlande
shal both knowe, that I am readie to suffer
more, thē either pouertie or exile: for the profession
of the doctrine and that heauenly religion,
whereof it hath pleased his merciful prouidence,
to make me amongst others a simple
souldiour, and witnesse bearer vnto men. And
therfore, mother, let no feare enter into your
hearte, as that I escaping the furious rage of
those rauening wolues, (that for our vnthankfulnes
are lately loosed from their bondes) doe
repent any thing of my former feruencie: no,
mother, for a fewe Sermons by me to be made
within England, my heart at this houre coulde
bee content to suffer more then nature were
able to sustaine, as by the grace of the most
mightie and most merciful God, who onelie is
God of comfort and consolation, through Iesus
Christ one day shalbe knowē. In the meane
season yet once again as it were my final good
night, and last testament in this earth, in the

bowels of Christ Iesus, I exhort and admonish
you constantly to contine we with the veritie,
which yet shal triumph & obtaine victorie in
despite of Sa
                     ••
                  an and of his malice. And auoid
ydolatrie, the 
                     •
                  aintainers & obeyers where of
shal not escape the sodaine vengeance of God,
which shalbe powred sorth vpon them, according
to the ripenesse of their iniquitie. And
when they shal cry, quietnes & peace, (which
neuer remained of any continuance with the
vngodly) then shal their sodaine destruction
come vpon them without prouision. The God
of peace and consolation, who of his power
infinite and inuincible, hath called from death
the true and great bishop of our soules, and in
him hath placed our flesh aboue principalities
& powers, of what preheminence soeuer they
bee, in heauen or in earth, assist you with his
holie spirite in such constancie and strength,
that Sathan and his assaultes bee confounded,
now and euer, in you and in the congregation
by Christ Iesus our Lord. To whome with the
Father & with the 
                     •
                  oly Ghost, be al praise and
honour eternally. Amen.
               
                  Yours with sorowful heart. I. K.
Watche and pray.
            
         
         
            
               
               The Argument of
the Epistle.
               A comfortable Epistle sent to the afflicted
Churche of Christ, exhorting them to
beare his crosse with patience, looking euery
houre for his comming againe, to the greate
comforte and consolation of his chosen, with
a prophecie of the destruction of the wicked.
Whereunto i
                     •
                   ioyned a most wholesome counsel,
howe to he haue our selues in the middest
of this wicked generation, touching the dayly
exercise of Gods most holy and sacred
word▪ Written by the man of God, I. K.
               
            
            
            Eze. 9.
            
               Passe through the citie, and put a signe on
the foreheads of those that mourne
for the abhominations that are committed.
            
            
               WHen I ponder with my
self (beloued in the Lord)
what the state was of
Christes true Churche,The care of God is alvvaies one o
                     •
                  er his chosen.
immediately after his
death and passion, and
what were the changes &
great mutations in the common wealth of Iudea,
before the final desolation of the same: as
I cannot but feare that like Plagues for like offences
shal strike the Realme of England, and
in fearing, God knoweth, I lament & morne:
so can I not but reioice, knowing that Gods
most merciful prouidence is no lesse careful
this day ouer his weake and feeble seruants, in
the Realme of Englande, than it was that day
ouer his weake and sore oppressed flocke in
Iurie. What was the state of Christes churche
betweene his death and resurrection: & from
his resurrection to the sending of the holy
Ghost vppon his disciples: and from that time

also to the finall destruction of Hierusalem?
The plaine Scripture doeth witnesse, that it
was most afflicted without al comforte and
worldly consolation, and that it was so persecuted,
that hauock was made ouer the church
of God. And what were the mutations and
troubles in Iudea and Hierusalem before the
destruction of the same, such as are expressed
in histories, and principally in Iosephus and
Egesippus,Egesip. lib. 1. cap, 44. can not bee ignorant. For they witnesse
that ouer that vnthankeful people were
pe
                  •
               mitted to reigne, cruel, tyran
                  •
               ous and most
vngodly magistrates, by whome the people
were oppressed and spoyled of their liberties:
by which occasion, was stirred vp sedition, and
therevpon followed so cruel tyrannie, that vnder
the name of iustice no smal number of the
people were burned quicke. After which crueltie
followed such murder vniuersallie in the
citie and in the fieldes, that the fathers feared
their sonnes▪ and the brethren their brethren.
Which vnquietnesse ceased not, vntil Gods
seuere vengeance was once powred forth vppon
such, as obsti
                  •
               ately refused and persecuted
Christ Iesus and his doctrine. But to returne
to the entreatement and preseruation of
Christes church at this time, it is euident, that

most sharply it was persecuted, and yet dayly
did it increase and multiply.Actes 12. It was compelled
to flye from citie to citie, from Realme
to Realme, and from one Nation to another:
and yet so wonderful was it preserued, that a
greate number of those whome the wicked
Priestes, by their blooddie tyranny exiled and
banished from Hierusalem, were kept aliue,
til Gods vengeance was powred forth vppon
that most wicked generation. The remembrance
of this, beloued in the Lorde, is vnto
my hearte such comforte and consolation, that
neither can my tongue nor penne expresse
the same. For this assuredlie is my hope
and expectation, that like as Christ Iesus appeared
to his Disciples, when there was nothing
in their heartes but angu
                  •
               she and desperation:
and like as hee preferred and multiplyed
their number vnder the most extreeme
persecution: so shal hee doe to his afflicted
flocke within the Realme of Englande this
day. First I say this is my hope that a iust
vengeance shalbee taken vppon those blood-thirstie
tyrantes,As God did to his afflicted Church in Iudea, so sha
                     •
                   be doe the same in England. by whome Christes Iesus in
his members is nowe crucified amongst you.
And after that his veritie shall so appeare to
the cōfort of those, that now do mourne, that

they shall heare and know the voice of their
owne Pastour. And this shal our merciful God
doe vnto vs, to let vs knowe, and in practi
                  •
               e
vnderstand, that his promises are infallible, and
that hee wil not intreate vs, according to the
weakenesse of our corrupt nature, which alwaies
is readie to fal from God, to distrust his
promises, and to forget that euer wee haue receiued
benefite or comforte from Gods hand,
when trouble lieth vpon vs, or when extreeme
danger doeth appeare. And therefore, beloued
in the Lord,Our imperfection may not hinder God to be merciful. albeit you finde your harts sometimes
assaulted with dolour, with grudging or
with some kinde of desperation: yet dispaire
not vtterlie, neither be ye troubled aboue measure,
as that Christ Iesus shoulde neuer visite
you againe. Not so, deere brethren, not so, for
such imperfections rested with Christes owne
Apostles of a long time: and yet did they not
hinder his comming againe vnto them. No
more shal our weakenesse and imperfections
hinder or let the brightnesse of his countenance,
and the comfort of his worde yet once
againe to shine before vs. Prouided alwaies,
that Iudas his obstinacie, his impenitencie &
traiterous hearte bee absent from vs. As I
doubte not, but it is from al the members of

Christes bodie, who are permitted sometime
to fal, so that of the most feruent professors,
they become fearefull denyers of the most
knowen trueth:Gods elect are permit
                     •
                  ed sometimes 
                     •
                  orribly to fal. but they are not permitted
of any continuance to blaspheme, neither to
remaine in vnbeliefe and desperation to the
ende, as in Christes Apostles plainely may be
seene. And that more cleerely wee may vnderstande,
our time and estate within the
Realme of Englande, this day, to agree with
the time and estate of Christes disciples, immediately
after his death: let vs consider what
chaunced to them before and after the same.
Before Christes passion as they were instructed
by Christes owne mouth of many things,
appertaining to that kingdome of God, which
they neither perfectly vnderstoode, neither
worthily then regarded: so were they aduertised
and ofte admonished,The state of Christes Church▪ before & shortly after his death. that Christ their
Maister shoulde suffer a cruel death, that they
shoulde bee ashamed, slandered and offended
in him, that they shoulde flye from him: And
finally that persecution and trouble from time
to time should apprehende them. With these
most dolorous tydinges, hee also promised,
that hee shoulde rise vppon the thirde day,

that he shoulde rise for them againe to their
comfo
                  •
               ce and consolation,Note. and that he shoulde
mightily deliuer them from al troubles and aduersities.
But what auailed al these admo
                  ••
               tions
to Christes 
                  〈◊〉
               , before his death, or
in that extremi
                  •
               ie of their anguishes shortly
after the same? did they feare, and verily looke
for trouble before it came? Or did they looke
for any comforte, when the forespoken
trouble was come? It is most euident that no
such thing did enter into their heartes. For
before Christes death their greatest minde
was vppon worldly honour, for which sometimes
they debated and contended amongest
themselues:
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 22. yea, euen when Christe was
most earnestly preaching of his crosse. And
after his death they were so oppressed with
anguishe, with care, with dolour and desperation,
that neither coulde the witnessing of
the women, affirming that they had seene
Christ, neither the graue left emptie & voide,
neither the Angels, who did appeare to certifie
his resurrection, neither yet the very voice
and presence of Christ Iesus himselfe, remoue
al doubtes from their afflicted heartes: but
from time to time their mindes wa
                  •
               ered and

fully coulde not be established that their Lord
and Maister was verily risen to their comforte,
according to his former promises.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                In
this case consider I the true professours of
Christes holie Euangelie to be this day in
the Realme of Englande. For these dayes
of our present dolour and tribulation haue
beene before spoken and blowen in our eares
long time before they came. Our weakenesse
and fraile infirmitie was also painted foorth
before our eyes: but who woulde haue beleeued
that those dayes of our trouble had
beene so nigh? Or that so shorte a tempest
shoulde haue ouerthrowen so greate a multitude?
I thinke no man within the whole
Realme: for al men appeared to liue in such
carelesse securitie, as that the immutable sentence
of God pronouncing, that whosoeuer
wil liue godly in Christ Iesus,2. Ti
                     •
                  . 1. shal suffer persecution,
had nothing appertained to our age.
And such a bolde confidence (or rather a
vaine persuasion) had a greate number
of their owne strength, that if they had
continued without any backe slyding, they
might haue beene iudged rather Angels then
men.
            
               
But (beloued in the Lorde) the sworde of
anguishe and of dolour hath nowe pearced
the tender hearte of Christes mother (that is,Luke. 2. 
                     •
                  . Cor. 3.
of his very church
                  •
               ) that the cogitations of
many heartes are sufficiently reuealed. The
fire is come, which as it hath burnt awaye
with a blast, the stubble, Haye and Wood:
so in trying the golde, siluer, and precious
stones, it hath founde such drosse and duste,
that the whole masse may appeare to bee confused.
For who nowe calleth to minde that
the same voice, which forespake our dolours,
forespake also our euerlasting comforte with
Christ Iesus? Who delighted nowe in his amiable
promises? Who reioiceth vnder the
crosse? yea, who rather doeth not feare, tremble,
grudge, and lament, as that there were
no helpe in God, or as that hee regardeth not
the trouble which wee suffer? These are
the imperfections, that continually remaine
in this our corrupt nature: the knowledge
whereof ought to moue vs earnestly to crye:
O Lorde increase our fayth,The 
                     •
                  ause of 
                     ••
                  mforte. bee merciful vnto
vs, and let vs not drowne in the deepe for
euer. Which if we doe with vnfained hearts,

                  •
               hen yet shall Christ Iesus appeare to our

comforte: his power shalbee knowne to the
praise and glorie of his owne name, in despite
of al his coniured enemies▪ And this
is the chiefe and principal cause of my comforte
and consolation in these most dolorous
dayes, that neither can our infirmities nor
dayly desperation hinder or let Christ Iesus to
returne to vs againe.
            The other cause of my comforte and
consolation is,VVby God should sodainely strike the Papist
                     •
                   in England. that I am assured that the
iudgement of these Tyrantes, that nowe oppresse
vs, shall not slippe, but the vengeance
shal fal vppon them without prouision. For
they haue sufficiently declared the malice of
their mindes. They haue violated the lawe,
and holy ordinances of the Lorde our God.
They haue opened their mouthes against
his eternal veritie. They haue exiled his
trueth and established their owne lyes. They
dayly persecute the innocentes, and stoutly
maintaine open murthers: their heartes
are obdurate, and their faces are become
shamelesse like harlottes: so that no hope of
repentance nor amendement is to bee had of
them. And therefore destruction shal sodainly
fal vppon them. But with what kinde of

plagues they shalbee stricken in this life,VVhat vvee ought to auoid in extreeme trouble.
and whome GOD shall appoint to execute
his 
                  〈◊〉
                vppon them, that I remit
to his good pleasure and further reuelation.
            But their manifest inquitie, is vnto mee
an assured assurance, that long they cannot
escape the 
                  〈◊〉
                of them most iustly deserued.
But in the meane season, beloued
brethren, two
                  •
                thinges yee must auoide: the
former, that yee presume not to bee reuengers
of your owne cause, but that yee resigne
ouer vengeance vnto him, who onely is able
to requite them▪ according to their malicious
mindes.
            Secondly,Mat. 5. that yee hate not with any

                  •
               arnal hatred, these blinde, cruel, and malicious
tyrantes, but that yee learne of Christ, to pray
for your persecutors, lamenting and bewayling
that the Deuil shoulde so preuaile against
them, that headlong they shoulde runne body
and soule to perpetual perdition. And note
wel, that I say wee may not hate them with a
carnal hatred, that is to say, onely because they
trouble our bodies.Psalm. 119. For there is a spiritual hatred,
which Dauid 
                  〈◊〉
                a perfect hatred

which the holy Ghost engendreth in the 
                  〈◊〉
               
of Gods elect against the rebellious contemners
of his holy statues.Perfect and godly hatred. And it is when 
                  〈◊〉
               
more lament that Gods glorie is suppressed,
and that Chris
                  •
               es flocke is defrauded of their
wholesome foode, thē that our bodies are persecuted.

                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                With this hatred was Ieremie inflamed
when he praied: let me see thy vengeance
taken vpon thine enemies, O Lorde. With this
hatred may we hate tyrants, and earnestly may
we pray for their destruction, be they kings or
Queenes, Princes or Prelates. And further yee
shal note that the praiers, made in the feruencie
of this hatred, are before God so acceptable,
that often times he that praieth, obtaineth
the selfesame thing, that the external words of
his praier doe meane: as Dauid, Ieremie, and
other of the Prophetes sawe with their corporal
eies: the whote vengeance of God powred
forth vpon the cruel tyrants of their age: &
I am assured that some, which this day do 
                  •
               ob
& grone vnder your tyrānous bishops shall see
the like vpon the Pestile
                  •
               t Papistes within the
Realme of England.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                This my affirmation proceedeth
not frō any coniecture of mans phantasie,
but frō the ordinary cause of gods iudgements

against manifest contemners of his
preceptes, from the beginning which is
this.
            First to rebuke and notifie by his messengers
such sinnes, as before the worlde are not
knowen to bee sinne. Secondly, to prouoke
them to repentance.
            Thirdly to suffer the reprobate to declare
their owne impenitencie before the worlde:
and last to powre vpon them so manifest vengeance,
Exo. 7. 8. 14. 
                     •
                  . Kings. 15. 3. Kings. 13. that his churche may bee instructed
aswel of his power, as of his seuere iudgementes
against inobedience. This was the
order of his iudgement against Pharao, against
Saule, against Ieroboam, against Herode,
against the Scribes and Pharisees, and
against the whole citie of Ierusalem. Our
eares haue hearde, and our eyes haue seene,
the first three diettes of the Lordes iudgement,
executed against the Pestilent Papistes
within the Realme of Englande. For wee haue
hearde their summoning and citation duelie
executed by the Messengers of Gods
woorde.Papistes haue bin summoned. Wee haue hearde them accused
and conuicted before their owne faces of
theft and murther,Papistes haue bin ac
                     •
                  used and con
                  
                     •
                  icted. of blasphemie against

God, of idolatrie, and finally, of al abhominations,
which crimes being laide to their charge
in their owne presence,Time of repentance hath beene graunted vnto Papistes. they were not able to
deny, so potent, so plaine & euident was gods
worde, whereby their secrete botches & olde
festered sores were discouered & reuealed. We
knowe that long processe of time hath beene
graunted by Gods lenitie to their conuersion
and repentance. And howe litle the same hath
auailed, these present dayes may testifie.The due execution approcheth. For
who nowe doeth not espie their malice to encrease,
& their obstinacie to bee such, as none
can be greater? Shal wee then thinke, that God
wil giue ouer his cause, as that he were not able
to preualie against Tyrants? Not so (deare
brethrē) not so. But euē so assuredly as our god
liueth, by whose spirite was stirred vp some of
his elect: first, to espie the great abhominatiōs
of those tyrantes in this our age: which his
messengers in despite of their tyranny God
preserued to proclaime & notifie, before their
owne faces, such sinnes, as the worlde knewe
not to bee sinne: and assuredly as we haue espied
thē still to continue in malice against God,
against his eternal veritie, and against the messengers
of the same: so assuredly shal wee see
Gods extreme plagues powred foorth vppon

them euen in this corporal life: That some 
                  〈◊〉
               
vs may witnesse to the generation that shal folowe
the wonderous workes that the Lorde
hath wrought, and will worke in this our age.
Neither shal the
                  •
               e plagues (more then the
worde of God which passed before) worke in
them any true repentance, but stil in a blinde

                  〈◊〉
                they shall rebel against the Maies
                  ••
               e of
God.Papists shal 
                     〈◊〉
                   against God to the end. For the deadly venome of that malicious
serpent their father the Diuel, can 
                  •
               euer bee
purged from their cankered heartes. And therfore
after these plagues of whome some wee
haue hearde and seene, for what a Plague was
it to the false Bishop of Doresme,To
                     •
                  stal conuicted of murther and theft to his face, at Bervvicke. The last plague of the Papists. before his
face to bee called murtherer and theefe, and of
the same to be conuict, that neither could him
selfe deny it neither any of his proctours or
diuine doctours, being present with him durst
enterprise to speake one worde in defence of
his cause? After these plagues (I say) of whom
some wee haue seene, and the rest wee shortly
looke for, res
                  •
               eth the last, the vnq
                  •
               ēchable fire
which is prepared for their portion. And therfore
yet again, dearely beloued in our Sauiour
Iesus Christe, hope you against hope, and against al
worldly appearance. For assuredly

as God is immutable: so, assuredly shal he stirre
vp one Iehu or other, to execute his vengeāce
vpon those blood thirstie tyrants, and obstinate
idolaters. And therefore, abide yee patiently
the time that is appointed to our correction,
and to the ful ripenesse of their malicious
mindes. Bee not discouraged, although
the Bishops haue gotten the victorie. So did
the Beniamites (naturall brethren to our Bishops)
defenders of who
                  •
               edom & of al abhohominable
adulterie, twice preuaile against the
Israelites, who fought at Gods commaundement:
Yee shall consider, (beloued brethren)
that the counsels of God are profounde and
inscrutable. The most iust man is innocent in
his sight. There may be secrete causes, why
God sometimes wil permit the most wicked to
preuaile & triumph in the most vniust action▪
but yet wil hee not long delay to execute his
his wrath, and iustly deserued vengeance vpon
such as bee proude murtherers, obs
                  •
               inate idolaters,
and impenitent malefactours. And
the
                  •
               fore haue they not great cause to reioyce.
For albeit they haue once preuailed against
fleshe, yet shall GOD shortely bring
them to vtter confusion, and great shame

for euer. Let Winchester and his cruel counsel
deuise, and studie till his wits faile, howe the
kingdom of his father, the Antichrist of Rome,
may prosper: And let him and them drinke
the blood of Gods Saintes, til they be drunke,
and their bellies burst, yet shal they neuer preuaile
long in their attemptes. Their connsels
and determinations, shalbe like the dreame of
a hūgrie & thirstie mā, who in his sleepe dreameth
that he is eating or drinking, but after he
is awaked, his paine continueth, and his soule
is vnpatient and nothing eased.Iob. 5 Euen so shal
these tyrants after their profound counselles,
long deuises, and assured determinations, vnderstande
and knowe that the hope of hypocrites
shalbe frustrate, and that a kingdome begunne
with tyranny and blood, can neither be
stable nor permanent: but that the glory, the
riches, and mainteiners of the same, shalbe as
strawe in the flame of fire: altogether with a
blast they shalbe consumed,Iob. 15. in such sort, that
their places shalbe an heape of stones, their
congregation shalbe desolate, and such as doe
depende vpon their helpe,Esay. 12 shal fal into destruction
and ignominie with them.
            And therefore (beloued brethren in our
Sauiour Iesus Christ) seeing that neither can

our imperfection, nor fraile weakenes, hinde
                  •
               
Christe Iesus, to returne to vs by the presence
of his worde, neither that tyranny of these
blood thirstie wolues, may so deuour Christes
small flocke. But that a great number shal bee
preserued to the praise of Gods glory: neither
that these most cruel tyrants can long escape
Gods vengeance: let vs in comfort, lift vp our
heads, and constantly looke for the Lordes deliuerance
with hearte and voice, saying to our
God: O Lorde, albeit other lordes then thou,
haue power ouer our bodies, yet let vs onely
remember thee, and thy holy name, to whome
bee praise for euer and euer, Amen. God the
father of our Lorde Iesus Christe, by his omnipotent
spirite, guide and rule your heartes in
his true feare to the ende, Amen.
            
               Written at Deepe, 
                  the last day of May. 1554.
               
            
         
         
            
            The comforte of the holy Ghost, &c.
For salutation.
            
               NOt so muche to instruct
you, as for to leaue with
you (dearely beloued brethren)
some testimonie of
my loue: I haue thought
good too communicate
with you in these fewe
lines my weake counsel, how I woulde yee
should behaue your selues in the middes of
this wicked generation, touching the exercise
of Gods most sacred and holy worde, without
which, neither shal knowledge encrease, godlines
appeare, not feruencie continue amongst
you. For as the worde of God is the beginning
of spiritual life, without which all flesh is
dead in God's presence: And the Lanterne to
our feete, without the brightnesse whereof al
the posteritie of Adam doeth walke in darknesse:
And as it is the foundation of faith,
without which no man vnderstandeth the
good wi
                  •
                of God: So it is also the onely organ
and instrument, which God vseth too

strengthen the 
                  〈◊〉
               , to comfort the afflicted
to reduce to 
                  〈◊〉
                by repentāce, such as haue

                  〈◊〉
               : and finally, to preserue & keep the very
life of the soule, in al assaultes: and temp
               
                  •
               ations.
            And thereof if that yee desire your
knowledge to bee increased, your faith to bee
confirmed your conscience to be 
                  〈◊〉
                and
comforted, or finally your soule to bee preserued
in life: let your exercise be frequent in the
lawe of the Lorde God. Despise not the precepts
which Moses (who by his owne expe
                  •
               ieuce
had learned what comforte lyeth hid
within the worde of God) gaue to the Israelites
in these words: These wordes which I
commande thee this day, Sow in thine heart,
and thou shalt exercise thy children in them.
Thou shalt talke of them when thou a
                  •
               t at
home in thy house, and as thou walked by the
way, and when thou lyest downe, and when
thou risest vp, and thou shalt binde them for
a figne vpon thine hande, and they shalbe papers
of remembrance betweene thine e
                  •
               es,
and thou shalt write them vppon the postes
of thy house, and vpon thy gates. And Moses
in another place commaundeth them

to remember the lawe of the Lorde God to do
it, that i
                  •
                may bee well with them and with
their children in the lande which the Lorde
their God should giue them, meaning that like
as frequent memory & repetitō of Gods precepts,
is the meanes wherby the feare of God
which is the beginning of al wisdome and felicitie,
is kept recent in mind: so is negligence
and obliuion of Gods benefites receiued, the
first degree of defection from God.
            Now if the lawe, which by reason of our
weakenesse can worke nothing but wrath and
auger, was so effectual, that remembred & rehearsed
of purpose to doe it, it brought to the
people a corporal benediction: what shal wee
say the glorious Gospel of Christ Iesus doeth
worke, so that with reuerence it be entreated?
Saint Paule calleth it the sweete odor of life to
those that shal receiue life, boro wing his similitude
of odoriferous hearbs, or precious ointments,
whose nature is, the more that they be
touched or moued, to send foorth their odour
more pleasant and delectable. Euen such deare
brethren, is the blessed Euangelie of our Lorde
Iesus: for the more that it be entreated, 
                  •
               he
more comfortable and puisant is it to suche as
doe heare, reade, or exercise the same. I am not

ignorant, that as the Israelites lothed the manna,
because that euerie day they saw and eate
but one thing, so some there bee nowe adayes
(who wil not be holden of the worst sort) that
after once reading some parcelles of the scriptures,
doe commit them selues altogether to
prophane authours, and humane lectures, because
that the varietie of matters therein conteined,
doeth bring with it dayly delectation:
where contrariwise, within the simple scriptu
                  •
               es
of God, the perpetual repetition of one
thing, is fashions, & weerisome. This temptatiō
I
                  •
               confesse, may enter into Gods very elect
for a time, but impossible it is, that therin they
continue to the end: for Gods election besides
other ouident signes hath this euer ioyned
with it, that Gods elect are called from ignorance
(I speake of those that are come to the
yeares of knowledge) to some tast and feeling
of Gods mercie, of the which they are neuer
so satisfied in this life, but from time to time
they hunger and they thirst, to ea
                  •
               e the bread
that descended from heauen, and to drink the
water that springeth to life euerlasting: which
they cannot doe but by the meanes of Fayth,
and Fayth looketh euer to the wil of God, reuealed
by the worde, so that Fayth hath both
her beginning and continuance by the worde

of God. And so I say, that impossible it is that
Gods chosen children can despise or reiect the
worde of their saluation of any long continuance,
neither yet loath it to the ende. Often it
is, that Gods elect are holden in such bondage
and thraldom, that they cannot haue the bread
of life broken vnto them, neither yet free libertie
to exercise them selues in Gods holie
word: but then doe not Gods children loath,
but most gladly doe they couet the foode of
their soules: Then do they accuse their former
negligence, then lament they the miserable affliction
of their brethren, and then crye & cal
they in their heartes (and openly where they
dare) for free passage of the Gospel. This hunger
and thirst doeth prooue the life of their
soules. But of suche men, as hauing libertie to
reade, and exercise them selues in Gods holie
scriptures, & yet begin to be wery, because frō
time to time they reade but one thing: I aske,
why are not they weary, euerie day to eate
bread, to drink wine, to behold the brightnesse
of the Sun, & to vse the rest of gods creatures,
which euery day do keepe their own substāce,
course and nature? They shal answere (I trust)
Because such creatures haue a strength to preserue
the life. O miserable creatures, who dare
attribute more power & strength to the corruptible
creatures in nourishing & preseruing

the mortal carkas, then to the eternal woorde
of God in the nourishment of the soule, which
is immortal! To reason with their damnable
vnthankfulnesse at this present, is not my purpose:
But to you, my deare brethren, I wryte
my knowledge, and do speake my conscience,
That so necessarie, as the vse of meate & drink
is to the preseruation of corporal life, and so
neces
                  •
               arie as the heate and brightnesse of the
Sunne is to the quickening of the hearbes, and
to expel darknesse: So necessarie is also to the
life euerlasting, and to the illumination and
light of the soule, the perpetual meditation,
exercise & vse of Gods holie word. And therfore,
deere brethren, if that yee looke for a life
to come, of necessitie it is, that yee exercise
your selues in the booke of the Lorde your
God. Let 
                  •
               o day slip or want some comfort receiued
from the mouth of God: open your
eares, and he wil speake euen pleasant thinges
to your heart: close not your eyes, but diligently
let them beholde, what portion of substance
is left to you within your fathers Testament.
Let your tongues learne to praise the
gracious goodnesse of him, whose meere mercie
hath called you from darkenesse to light,
and from death to life. Neither yet may ye do
this so quietly, that ye wil admit no witnesse:

no brethren, yee are ordained of God to rule
your owne houses in his true feate, & according
to his word. Within your houses, I say,
in some cases ye are Bishops and Kinges: your
wife, children, seruantes, and family, are your
Bishopprike and charge: of your it shalbe required
howe carefully and diligently ye haue
alwayes instructed them in Gods knowledge,
how that ye haue studied in them to plant vertue,
and suppresse vice. And therefore I say, ye
must make them partakers, in reading, exhorting
and in making common praiers, which I
woulde in euerie house were vsed once a day
at least: but aboue al thinges, deare brethren,
studie to practise in life, that which the worde
of God commandeth, and then be yee assured,
that yee shal neuer heare nor reade the same
without fruite. And thus much for the exercise
within your houses. Considering that S.
Paule calleth the congregation, the bodie of
Christ, whe
                  •
               eof euerie one of vs is a member,
teaching vs therby, that no member is of sufficiencie,
to susteine and feede it selfe, without
the helpe and support of an other: I thinke it
necessarie, for the conference of scriptures, assemblies
of brethren be had. The order therein
to be obserued, is 
                  •
               xpressed by S. Paule, and
therefore neede not I to vse many woordes in

that behalfe: only willing that when the conuent
are come together, which I woulde were
once a weeke, that your beginning shoulde be
from confession of your offences, and inuocation
of the spirite of the Lorde Iesus Christ to
assist you, in al your godly enterprises. And thē
let some place of scripture bee plainely and distinctly
redde, so much as shal be thought sufficient
for one day or time: which ended, if any
brother haue exhortation, questiō or dout,
let him not feare to speake or moue the same,
so that he doe it with moderation, either to
edifie, or to be edified. And hereof I dout not,
but great profite shal shortly ensue: For first by
hearing, reading, and conferring the scriptures
in the assemblie, the whole bodie of the scriptures
of God shal become familiar: The iudgements
and spirites of men shalbee tried. Their
patience and modestie shalbee knowne, and
finally their giftes and vtterance shal appeare.
Multiplication of wordes, prolixe interpretations,
and wilfulnesse in reasoning, is to be auoided
at al times, and in al places, but chiefly
in the congregation: where nothing ought to
be respected, except the glorie of God, & comfort
or edification of brethren. If any thing
occurre within the text, or els arise in reasoning,
which your iudgements can not resolue,

or capacities comprehend: let the same be noted
and put in writing before yee dismisse the
congregation, that when God shal offer vnto
you any interpretor, your dout beeing noted
and knowne, may haue the more expedite resolution,
or els that when ye shal haue occasion
to write to such, as with whō ye wold communicate
your iudgementes, your letters may
signifie and declare the vnceasing desire that
ye haue of God, and of his true religion. And
they I dout not, according to their talents, wil
endeuour and bestow their faithful labours to
satisfie your godly petitions. Of my selfe, I wil
speake as I thinke, I wil more gladly spend ten
houres in communicating my iudgement with
you in explayning, as God pleaseth to open to
me, any place of scripture, then halfe an houre
in any matter beside. Further, I would in reading
the scriptures ye should ioine some bokes
of the olde, and some of the newe Testament
together, as Genesis and one of the Euangelistes,
Exodus with an other, & so forth, euer
ending suche bookes as yee begin, as the time
wil suffer. For it shal greatly comforte you, to
heare that harmonie & wel tuned song, of the
holie spirite, speaking in our fathers, from the
beginning. It shal confirme you in these dangerous
and perillous dayes, to behold the face

of Christ Iesus his louing spouse and Church,
from Abel to him selfe, and from him selfe to
this day, in al ages to be one. Be frequent in the
Prophets, and in the Epistles of S. Paul: for the
multitude of matters most comfortably therin
contained, requireth exercise & good memorie.
Like as your assemblies ought to beginne
with confession & in
                  •
               ocation of God his holie
spirite: So woulde I that they were finished
with thanksgiuing, & commō praiers for princes,
Rulers & Magistrates, for the libertie and
free passage of Christ his Euangelie, for the cō
               fort
and deliuerance of our afflicted brethren,
in al places now persecuted, but most cruelly
within the realmes of Fraunce and Englande:
and for such other thinges, as the spirit of the
Lord Iesus shal teach vnto you to bee profitable,
either to your selues or to your brethren,
whersoeuer they be. If thus (or better) I shal
heare that yee exercise your selues, deare brethren,
then wil I praise God for your great obedience,
as for them, that not onely haue receiued
the word of grace with gladnesse, but
that also with care and diligence do keepe the
same, as a treasure and iewel most precious.
And because I can not suspect that ye wil doe
the cōtrarie at this present, I wil vse no threatnings:
for my good hope is, that ye shal walk,

As the sonnes of light, in the middest of this
wicked 
                  〈◊〉
               
               ▪ That Ye 
                  •
               hal be a
                  •
                Starre
                  •
               
in the night 
                  •
               eason, who yet a
                  •
               e not chaunged
into 
                  〈◊〉
                That ye shal be wheat amongst
the 
                  〈◊〉
               , and yet that yee shal not chaunge
your nature, which ye haue receiued by grace,
through the 
                  •
               elowship and par
                  •
               icipatiō which
we haue with the Lord Iesus in his bodie and
blood. And finally that ye shalbe of the number
of the prudent vi
                  •
               gins, dayly renuing your

                  〈◊〉
                with oyle, as you that patiently doe
abide the glorious apparition and comming of
the Lord Iesus: whose omnipotent spirit 
                  •
               ule
and instruct, illuminate and comforte your

                  〈◊〉
                and mindes
                  •
                in al assaules,

                  〈◊〉
                and euermore,
Amen.
            The grace of our Lord Iesus, rest with you. I.K.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the Vintree. 1580.
            
         
      
   