
      
         
            
            
            THE APPELLATION
OF
IOHN KNOXE FROM
the cruell and most iniust sentence
pronounced against him by the
false bishoppes and clergie of Scotland,
with his supplication and exhortation
to the nobilitie, estates,
and cōmunaltie
of the same realme.
            Printed at GENEVA,
M.D.LVIII.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TO THE NOBILITIE
AND ESTAtes
of Scotlād Iohn Knoxe wisheth grace, mercie,
and peace from God the father of our
Lord Iesus Christ with the
spirit of righteous
iudgement.
            
               IT is not only the loue of life
temporall (right honorable)
neither yet the fear of corporall
death, that moueth me at
this present to expone vnto
you the iniuries done against me, and to
craue of you, as of laufull powers by God
appointed, redresse of the same, but partly
it procedeth from that reuerence whiche
euerie man oweth to Godds eternal trueth,Euery mā oght to confesse and reuerēce goddes trueth.
and partly from a loue which I beare to
your saluation, and to the saluation of my
brethren abused in that realme by such, as
haue no fear of God before their eyes. It
hath pleased God of his infinite mercie,
not onlie so to illuminate the eyes of my
minde, and so to tuche my dull hart, that
clearly I se, and by his grace vnfeanedly
beleue, that their is no other name geuen
to men vnder the heauen,Act. 4. in whiche saluation
consisteth, saue the name of Iesus alone,
            
               Who by that sacrifice which he
did once offer vpon the crosse,Hebr. 10. hath
sanctified for euer those that shall
enherite the kingdom promised:
but also it hath pleased him of his superaboundant
grace, to make and appointe
me most wretched of many thousandes
a witnes, minister and preacher of the
same doctrine: the somme whereof I did
not spare to communicate withe my brethren
being with them in the realme of
Scotland in the yeare 1556,1 Cor. 3. because I
know my selfe to be a steward and that accompts
of the talēt cōmitted to my charge
shalbe required by him who will admit no
vaine excuse which fearfull men pretend.Mat. 25.
I did therefore (as God did minister) during
the tyme I was conuersant with them
(God is record and witnesse) truely and
syncerly according to the gift grāted vnto
me, deuide the worde of saluation, teachinge
all men to hate Syn, whiche before
God was and is so odious that none other
sacrifice coulde satisfie his iustice except
the death of his onlie sonne, and to magnifie
the greate mercies of our heuenlie Father,Iohn 3.
who did not spare the substāce of his
own glorie but did giue hym to the world
to suffer the ignominious and cruell death
of the crosse,Rom. 5, 8. 2. Cor. 5. by that meanes to reconcile

his chosen children to hym selfe: teaching
further what is the duetie of such as
do beleue them selues purged by such a price
from their former filthines.Rom. 6. To wit,Ephe. 4. 5 that
they are bound to walke in the newnes of
life fighting against the lustes of the fleshe
and studyinge at all tymes to glorifie GodEphe. 2.
by such good woorkes as he hath prepared
his children to walke in.
            In doctrine I did further affirme, so
taught by my master Christ Iesus,Mat. 10. that
whosoeuer denieth hym, yea or is ashamed
of hym before this wicked generation,
hym shall Christ Iesus denie, and of hym
shall he be ashame whē he shall appeare in
his maiestie. And therefore I feared not to
affirme that of necessitie it is, that suche as
hope for life euerlasting auoide all superstition,
vaine religion, and idolatrie.Vaine religion or idolatrie. Vaine
religion and idolatrie I call, what soeuer
is done in Goddes seruice or honour
without the expresse commaundement of
his own worde.
            This doctrine did I beleue to be so cō
               formable
to Goddes holie scriptures that
I thoght, no creature could haue bene so
impudent as to haue dāned any point or
article of the same. Yet neuerthelesse me,
as an heritike, and this doctrine as heriticall,
haue your fals bishoppes and vngodlie
clergie damned,A sentēce pronūced. pronouncing against

me a sentence of death, in testification
wherof they haue burned a picture.Appellation from the same. From
which fals and cruell sentence, and from
all iudgement of that wicked generation
I make it knowen to your honours, that I
appeal to a laufull and generall counsil,
to suche I mean, as the most auncient lawes
and canones do approue to be holden, by
suche as whose manifest impietie is not to
be reformed in the same:The request of Iohn Knoxe. most humbly requiring
of your honours, that, as God hath
appointed you princes in that people, and
by reason therof requireth of your handes
the defence of innocētes troubled in your
dominion, in the meane tyme, and till
the controuersies, that this day be in religion,
be laufully decided, ye receaue
me and suche others, as most vniustlie by
those cruell beastes are persecuted, in your
defence and protection.
            Your honours are not ignorāt that it is
not I alone, who doth sustain this cause against
the pestilēt generation of Papistes,
but that the most part of Germanie,The petition of Protestantes. the
countrie of Heluetia, the kinge of Denmarke,
the nobilitie of Polonia, togither
with many other Cities and Churches refromed,
appeall from the tyrannie of that
Antichrist, and most earnestly do call for a
laufull and general coūsil, wherin may all
cōtrouersies in religion be decided by the

auctoritie of Goddes most sacred worde.
And vnto this same, as said is, do I appeal
yet once againe, requirīg of your honours
to hold my simple and playn appellation
of no lesse value nor effect, then if it had
bene made with greater circunstāce, solemnitie,
and ceremonie, and that ye receaue
me calinge vnto you, as to the powers of
God ordained, in your protection and defence
against the rage of tyrantes, not to
mentaine me in any iniquitie, errour, or
fals opinion, but to let me haue such equitie,
as God by his worde, auncient lawes,
and determinations of most Godlie counsils,
graunte to men accused or infamed.
            The word of God will that no man
shall die except he be found criminall and
worthie of death for offence committed,Deut. 17.
of the whiche he must be manifestly conuicted
by two or three witnesses. Ancient
lawes do permitt iust defences to such as
be accused (be their crimes neuer so horrible)
and godlie counsilles will that nether
Byshopp nor Person ecclesiasticall
whatsoeuer accused of any crime shall sit
in iudgement, consultation, or counsil,
where the cause of such men, as do accuse
them,The petitions of Iohn Knoxe. is to be tried.
            These thinges require I of your honours
to be graunted vnto me: to wit,
That the doctrine which our aduersaries

condemn for haeresie may be tried by the
simple and playn word of God, that iust
defenses be admitted to vs that sustain the
battaile against this pestilent generation
of Antichrist, and that they be remoued
from iudgement in our cause, seinge that
our accusation is not intended against any
one particular persō, but against that hole
kingdome whiche we doubt not to proue
to be a power vsurped against God,Note well. against
his cōmaundement and against the ordenance
of Christ Iesus established in his
Church by his chefe Apostles: Yea we
doubt not to proue the kingdome of the
Pope to be the king dome and power of Antichrist.
And therefore my Lordes I can
not cease in the name of Christ Iesus to
require of you that the matter may cōme
in examination, and that ye the estates of
the realme by your auctoritie compell
such as will be called bishoppes, not only
to desist from their cruell murthering of
such as do studie to promote goddes glorie
in detecting and disclosing the damnable
impietie of that man of syn the Romane
Antechrist, but also that ye cōpell
them to answer to suche crimes as shall be
laid to their charge for not righteously
instructing the flock committed to their
cares.
            
               Answer But here I know two thinges shalbe

doubted. The former:1. to obiections. whether that my
appellation is lawfull and to be admitted
seing that I am damned as an heritike:
and secondarely whether your honours
be bound to defēd such as call for your support
in that case,2 seing that your bishoppes
(who in matters of religion claime all
auctoritie to appertaine to them) haue by
their sentence allredy condemned me.
            The one and the other I nothing doubt
most clerely to proue. Fyrst that my appellation
is most Lawfull and iust: and
secondarely that your honours can not
refuse to defend me thus calling for your
aid,NOTE. but that in so doing ye declare your
selues rebellious to God, mentainers of
murtherers and shedders of innocent
blood.
            How iust cause I haue by the ciuile law
(as for their canon it is accursed of God)The appellation is iust and lawfull.
to appeale from their vniust sentence my
purpose is not to make long discourse.
Onlie I will touche the poyntes which all
men confesse to be iust causes of appellation.
Fyrst laufully could I not be sommoned
by them being for that tyme absent
from their iurisdiction, charged with
the preachīg of Christes Euāgill in a free
citie not subiect to their tyrannie.
            Secondarely to me was no intimation made
of their sommondes, but so secrete was

their surmised malice that the copie of the
sommondes being required was denyed.
            Thirdlie to the realme of Scotland
could I haue had no free nor sure accesse
being before exiled frō the same by their
vniust tyrannie. And last to me they nether
could nor can be competent and indifferent
iudges, for that, before any
sommondes were raised against me, I had
accused them by my lrēs published to
the quene dowagier, and had intended
against them all crimes, offring my selfe
with hasard of life to proue the same, for
the which they are not onlie vnworthie of
ecclesiasticall auctoritie, but also of any sufferance
within a commune welthe professing
Christ. This my accusatiō preceding
their sōmōdes, neither by the law of God,
neither yet by the law of man can they be
to me competent iudges till place be grā
               ted
vnto me opēlie to proue my accusatiō
intended against them, and they be compelled
to make answer as criminalls. For I
will plainelie proue that not onlie bishoppes,
but also Popes haue bene remoued frō
all auctoritie and pronouncing of iudgement
till they haue purged them selues of
accusations layd against them. Yea further
I will proue that bishoppes and Popes
most iustly haue bene depriued frō all
honours and administration for smaller

crimes then I haue to charge the hole rable
of your bishoppes.
            But because this is not my chefe grounde
I wil stand cōtent for this present to shew,Goddes m
                     •
                  ssin may appeall from uniust sentences, and ciuile powers are bound to admit them.
that lawfull it is to Goddes Prophetes and
to preachers of Christ Iesus to appeall frō
the sentence and iudgement of the visible
churche to the knolledge of the temporall
Magistrate, who by Goddes law is bound
to hear their causes, and to defend them
from tyrannie.
            The Prophete Ieremie was cōmmā
               ded
by God to stand in the courte of the
house of the Lord and to preach this sermon
in effect.Ier. 26. That Ierusalem should be
distroyed and be exponed in opprobrie
to all nations of the earth, and that also
that famous tēple of God should be made
desolate like vnto Sylo, because the preestes,
the Prophetes, and the people did not
walk in the Law, which God had ꝓposed
vnto thē, neither wold they obey the voyces
of the Prophetes, whome God sent to
call them to repentance.
            For this sermon was Ieremie apprehended
and a sentence of death was pronounced
against hym and that by the preestes,
by the Prophetes, and by the people,
which thinges being bruted in the eares
of the Princes of Iuda they passed vp frō
the kinges house to the tēple of the Lord,

and sat down in iudgement for further
knowledge of the cause. But the preestes
and Prophetes continued in theyre cruell
sentēce, which before they had pronoūced
saying, This man is worthie of the death:
for he hath prophesied against this citie
as your eares haue hard. But Ieremy so
moued by the holie Ghost, began his defence
against that their tyrannous sentence
in these wordes. The Lord (saieth he)
hath sent me to prophetie against this
house, and against this citie all the wordes
which you haue hard. Now therefore
make good your wayes, ād hear the voyce
of the Lord your God, and then shall he
repent of the euill whiche he hath spoken
against you. As for me behold I am in
your handes (so doth he speak to the Princes)
do to me as you think good and righteous.Aduert.
Neuertheles know you this most
assuredly, that if ye murther or sley me, ye
shall make your selues, this citie, and the
inhabitants of the same criminall and
gyltie of innocent blood. For of a trueth
the Lord hath sent me to speak in your
eares all those wordes.The princes did absolue the Prophet whome the preests had condēned.
            
            Then the princes and the people (saieth
the text) said, this man is not worthie of
death, for he hath spoken to vs in the name
of the Lord our God. And so after somme
cōtention was the Prophete deliuered frō
               
that dāger. This fact and historie manefestly
proueth whatsoeuer before I haue affirmed.
To wit, that it is Laufull for the seruantes
of God to call for the help of the
ciuile magistrate agaīst the sētēce of death
if it be vniust, by whome soeuer it be ꝓnounced
ād also that the ciuile sword hath power
to represse the furie of the preests and
to absolue whome thei haue cōdēned. For
the prophete of God was damned by those
who then only in earthe were knowē to be
the visible churche, to wit preestes & prophetes who
thē were in Ierusalē the successours
of Aarō to whome was geuē a charge
to speak to the people in the name of God,Deute. 17
ād a precept geuē to the people to heare the
lawe frō their mouthes, to the which if any
should be rebellious or īobediēt he should
die the death without mercie. These men I
say thus auctorised by God, first did excō
               municat
Ierimie for that he did preache other
wise then did the cōmune sort of prophetes
in Ierusalem, and last apprehended
him, as you haue hard, ꝓnouncing against
hym this sētēce afore writen frō the which
neuertheles the prophete appealed, that is
sought help and defence against the same
and that most earnestly did he craue of
the princes. For albeit he saieth, I am in
your handes do with me as ye think righteous,
he doth not contemne nor neglect

his life as thoghe he regarded not, what
should become of hym, but ī those his wordes
most vehementlie did he admonishe
the princes, and rulers of the people geuing
them to vnderstād what God should
require of thē.The meanyng of these wordes I amin your handes, &c. As he should say, You princes
of Iuda, and rulers of the people, to
whom appertaineth in differentlie to iudge
betwixt partie and partie, to iustifie the
iust man and to cōdemne the malefactour,
you haue hard à sentence of death pronounced
against me by those, whose lippes
oght to speak no decept, because they are
sanctified and appointed by God hym selfe
to speake his law and to pronounce iudgement
with equitie,Deut. 17. but as they haue left
the liuing God,Ierem. 1. and haue taught the people
to follow vanitie,Deu. 1. 10 so are they becōmed
mortall ennemies to all Gods true seruantes,
of whom I am one rebuking theire iniquitie,
apostasie and defection from God
which is the onlie cause they seke my life.
But a thing most contrarie to all equitie,
law ād iustice it is, that I a mā sent of God
to call them, this people, and you againe
to the true seruice of God, from the which
you are all declined, shall suffer the death
because that my ennemies do so pronounce
sentence. I stād in your presēce, whome
God hath made princes, your power is aboue
their tyrannie, before you do I expone

my cause I am in your handes aud can
not resist to suffer what ye think iust. But
lest that my lenitie and patiēce should either
make you negligent in the defence of
me in my iust cause appealīg to your iudgemēt,
either yet encorrage my ennemies
in seakinge my blood, this one thinge I
dar not consile: That if you murther me,
(which thing ye do if ye defēd me not) ye
make not only my ennemies gyltie of my
blood, but also your selues and this hole citie.
By these wordes I say, it is euident, that
the prophete of God beīg dāned to death
by the preestes ād by the prophetes of the
visible Churche, did seke aid support and
defence at the princes and temporall magistrates,
threatnyng his blood to be required
of theyre handes, if they by theyre auctorite
did not defend hym from the furie
of his ennemies: alledging also iust causes
of his appellation, and why he oght
to haue bene defended: to wit, that he was
sent of God to rebuke theire vices and defection
from God:The causes of his appellation and why he oght to haue bene defended. that he taught no doctrine
which God before had not pronounced
in his Law: that he desired theyre conuersion
to God, continuallie calling vpon
them to walk in the wayes which God had
approued and therefore doth he boldlie
craue of the princes, as of Goddes lieutenā
               tes
to be defended from the blynd rage &

tyrannie of the preests, notwithstanding
that they claimed to themselues auctoritie
to iudge in all matters of religion. And
the same did he what tyme he was cast in
pryson and thereafter was brought to the
presēce of king Zedechias, after I say that
he had defended his innocētie, affirmyng
that he neither had offended against the
king, against his seruantes nor against the
people, at last he made intercession to the
king for his life, saying,
            But now my lord the king take
hede,Ierem. 38. I beseche thee let my prayer
fall in to thy presence commaund
me not to be caried againe in to
the house of Ionathan the scribe,
that I dye not there.
            And the text witnesseth that the king
commaunded the place of his imprysonment
to be chaunged. Whereof it is euident,
that the prophet did ofter then once
seke help at the ciuile power and that fyrst
the princes, and thereafter the king did acknowledge,
that it appertained to their
office to deliuer him from the iniust sentence,
which was pronounced against him.
yf any thinke that Ieremie did not appeall
becaus he onely declared the wronge
done vnto him, and did but craue defence

according to his innocencie let the same
man vnderstand, that none otherwise do I
appeale from that fals and cruell sentence,Iust cause of appellation.
which your Byshoppes haue pronounced
against me. Neither yet can there be any
other iust cause of appellation but innocēcie
hurt, or suspected to be hurt, whether
it be by ignorance of a iudge, or by malice
and corruption of those, who vnder the
title of iustice do exercise tyrānie. if I were
a thefe, murtherer, blasphemer, open adulterer,
or any offender whome Gods
worde commaundeth to suffer for a crime
committed, my appellation were vaine
and to be reiected: but I being innocēt, yea
the doctrine which your Byshoppes haue
condemned in me, being Gods eternall
veritie, haue no lesse libertie to craue your
defence against that crueltie, then had the
Prophet Ieremie to seke the ayde of the
Princes and King of Iuda. But this shall
more plainly appear in the facte of sainct
Paule, who after that he was apprehended
in Ierusalem,Act. 22. 
                     〈…〉
                   & 25. did fyrst claime to the
libertie of Romayne citezēs for auoiding
tormēt, what tyme that the captayn would
haue examined hym by questions: there after
in the coūcile, where no rightious iudgement
was to be hoped for, he affirmed
that he was a Pharisie, and that he was accused
of the resurrection of the dead, and

last in the presence of Festus he appealed
from all knowledge and iudgement of the
Preestes at Ierusalem to the Emperour: of
which last point, because it doth chefelie
appertaine to this my cause, I will somwhat
speak.
            After that Paule had diuerse tymes
bene accused, as in the Actes of the apostles
is manifest, at the last the chefe Preestes
and theyre faction came to Cesarea
with Festus the presidēt, who presented to
them Paule in iudgement, whome they accused
of horrible crimes: which neuertheles
they could not proue, the Apostle defending
that he had not offended neither
agaīnst the Law, neither against the Temple,
neither yet against the Emperour.
            But Festus willing to gratifie the
Iewes,Act. 25. said to Paule: Wilt thou
go vp to Ierusalem, ād there be iudged
of these thinges in my presence?
But Paule said: I stand at the iustice
seat of the Emperour, where
it behoueth me to be iudged, I haue
done no iniurie to the Iewes as
thou better knowest. Yf I haue done
any thing iniustly, or yet committed
crime worthie of death, I

refuse not to die. But if there be
nothing of these thinges true, where
of they accuse me, no man may
geue me to them: I appeall to
Cesar.
            It may appear at the first sight that Paule
did great iniurie to Festus the iudge, and
to the hole order of the preesthode, who
did hope greater equitie in a cruell tyrant
then in all that session and learned companie.
Which thinge no dout Festus did vnderstād,
pronouncing these wordes: Hast
thou appealed to Cesar? thou shalt go to
Cesar. As he would say, I as a man willing
to vnderstād the truth before I ꝓnoūce sē
               tence,
haue required of thee to go to Ierusalem,
where the learned of thyne owne nation
may heare thy cause and decerne in
the same. The controuersie standith in
matters of religion. Thou art accused as
an apostatat from the Law, as a violator
of the temple, and transgressor of the traditiōs
of theyre fathers: in which matters
I am ignorant, and therefore desire information
by those, that be learned in the
same religion, wherof the question is.
And yet doest thou refuse so many godly
fathers to hear thy cause, and doestappeale to the Emperour: preferring hym to all

our iudgements, of no purpose belike, but
to delay tyme. Thus I say it myght haue
appeared that Paule did not only iniurie
to the iudge and to the Preestes, but also
that his cause was greatly to be suspected:
partly for that he did refuse the iudgement
of those that had moste knowledge
(as all men supposed) of Gods will and religion:
and partly because he appealed to
the Emperour, who then was at Rome farr
absent from Ierusalem, a man also ignorāt
of God and ennemie to all vertue. But the
Apostle cōsidering the nature of his ennemies,
and what thinges they had intended
against hym, euen from the fyrst day that
he began freelie to speak in the name of
Christ,why Paule wold admytt none of the Leuiticall ordre to iudge in his cause. did not fear to appeale from them,
and from the iudge that would haue gratified
them. They had professed thē selues
plain ennemies to Christ Iesus and to his
blessed Euangill, and had soght the death
of Paule, yea euen by factiōs and treasonable
cōspiracie: and therefore by no meanes
would he admit them either iudges in
his cause, either auditours of the same as
Festus required:Vpō what reasons the appellation of Paule was grounded. but grounding him selfe
vpon strong reasons, to wit, that he had
not offēded the Iewes, neither yet the Law,
but that he was innocēt, and therefore that
no iudge oght to geue hym in the hādes of
his ennemies: grounding I say his appellation

vpon these reasons, he neither regarded
the displeasure of Festus, neither
yet the brute of the ignorāt multitude, but
boldely did appeal from all cognition of
them to the iudgement of the Emperour,
as said is. By these two examples I dout
not but your honours do vnderstand, that
lawfull it is to the seruantes of God oppressed
by tyrānie to seke remedie against
the same, be it by appellation from theire
sentēce, or by imploring the helpe of ciuile
Magistrates. For what God hath approued
in Ieremie and Paul, he can condemne
in none that likewise be e
                  ••
               reated. I might
alledge some histories of the primatiue
Church seruing to the same purpose: as of
Ambrose and Athanasius, of whom the one
would not be iudged but at Millan, where
that is doctrine was hard of all his Church
and receaued and approu
                  •
               d by many: and
the other would in no wise geue place to
those coūciles, where he knew that mē conspired
against the trueth of God should
sit in iudgement and cōsultatione. But because
the Scriptures of God are my only
fundation and assurance in all matters of
weight and importāce, I haue thoght the
two former testimonies sufficient, aswell
to proue my appellation reasonable and
iust, as to declare to your honours that
with safe conscience ye can not refuse to

admit the same. Yf any thinke it arrogācie
or foolishnes in me to compare my selfe
with Ieremie and Paule, let the same man
vnderstād that as God is immutable, so is
the veritie of his glorious Euangill of aequall
dignitie,The cause is to be regarded and not the person. whensoeuer it is impugned,
be the membres suffering neuer so
weak. What I think touching myne owne
person, God shall reueale when the secrets
of all hartes shall be disclosed, and such
as with whome I haue bene conuersant,
can partly witnesse, what arrogācie or pryde
they espie in me. But touching the doctrine
and cause which that adulterous ād
pestilent generatiō of Antichrists seruāts
(who wilbe called Byshoppes amongst
you) haue condened in me, I neither fear
nor shame to cōfesse and auow before man
and Angell to be the aeternall trueth of the
aeternall God. And in that case I dout not
to cōpare my selfe with any menbre in whome
the trueth hath bene impugned sēce
the begynnyng. For as it was the trueth which
Ieremie did preach in these wordes,
            The Preestes haue not knowen
me (saieth the Lord) but the pastors
haue traiterously declined
and fallen back from me.Ierem. 2. The Prophetes
haue prophesied in Baal,Ierem. 1.
               
and haue gone after those things,
which can not helpe. My people
haue left the fontaine of liuing
waters, and haue digged to them
selues pits, which can containe
no water:
            As it was a trueth that the pastors and
watchmen in the daies of Isaie were becomed
dōme dogs blynd, ignorāt,Esa. 56. proud
and auaricious And finally as it was a
trueth, that the Princes and the Preestes
were murtherers of Christ Iesus,Act. 3. & 4. ād cruell
persecutors of his Apostles: so likewyse it
is a trueth (and that moste infallible)
that those that haue condemned me (the
hole rable of the papisticall clergie) haue
declyned from the true faith,Tim. 4. haue geuen
eare to deceauable spirits and to doctrine
of deuils, are the sterres fallen from the
heauen to the earth,Iude 1. are fontaines without
water:2. Pet. 2. and finally are ennemies to Christ
Iesus, deniers of his vertue, and horrible
blasphemours of his death and passiō. And
further as that visible Churche had no crime,
where of iustly they could accuse either
the Prophetes, either the Apostles, except
theyr doctrine only: so haue not such
as seke my blood other crime to lay to my
charge, except that I affirm, as alwais I offer

to proue,Let the cause be noted. that the religion, which now
is maintained by fier and sword, is no lesse
contrarious to the true religion taught
and established by the Apostles, then is
darknes to light, or the Deuill to God: and
also that such as now do claime the title
and name of the Churche ar no more the
elect spouse of Christ Iesus, then was the
Synagoge of the Iewes the true Church
of God what tyme it crucified Christ Iesꝰ,
damned his doctrine and persecuted his Apostles.
And therefore seing that my battail
is against the proude and cruell hypocrites
of this age, as that battaill of
those most excellent instrumentes was against
the fals Prophetes and malignant
Church of theyr ages: neither ought any
man think it strange that I cōpare my self
with them, with whome I sustaine a cōmon
cause, neither ought you my Lordes iudge
your selues lesse addetted and bound to
me calling for your support, then did the
Princes of Iuda think thē selues boūde to
Ieremie, whome for that tyme they deliue
red notwithstāding the sētēce of death ꝓnoūced
against him by the visible Church.
And thus much for the right of my appellatiō,
which in the bowelles of Christ Iesus
I requier your honours not to esteme as a
thing superfluous ād vaine, but that ye admitt
it, ād also accept me in your ꝓtection

ād defence, that by you assured I may haue
accesse to my natiue coūtrie, which I neuer
offēded to the end: that freely and opēly in
the presēce of the hole realme I may geue
my confession of all such pointes as this
day be in controuersie, and also that you
by your auctoritie which ye haue of God,
compell such, as of long tyme haue blynded
and deceaued both your selues and
the people,Answer to an obiection or dout. to answer to such thinges as
shalbe laide to theire charge. But lest that
somme dout remayne, that I require more
of you then you of conscience ar bound
to graunt, in few wordes I hope to proue
my petitiō to be such, as without Gods heauy
displeasure ye can not deny.The petitiō of Iohn Knoxe. My petition
is, that ye, whome God hath apointed
heades in your cōmune welth, with single
eye do studie to promote the glorie of
God, to prouide that your subiectes be
rightly instructed in his true religiō, that
they be defended from all oppression and
tirannie, that true teachers may be maintained,
and such as blynde and deceaue the
people, togyther also with all idle bellies
which do robbe and oppresse the flock,
may be remoued and punished as Gods
Law prescribeth. And to the perfurmance
of euery one of these, do your offices and
Names. The honours and benefites, which
ye receue, the Law of God vniuersally geuen

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
to all men, and the examples of moste
godlie Princes bynde and oblish you.
            My purpose is not greatly to labour to
proue, that your hole studie oght to be to
promote the glorie of God, neither yet
will I studie to alledge all reasons that
iustly may be broght to proue that ye are
not exalted to reigne aboue your brethrē
as men without care and solicitude. For
these be principals so grafted in nature,
that verie Ethnicks haue confessed the
same.The singular honours which Magistrats receaue of God oght to moue them with all diligēce to promote his religiō. For seing that God only hath placed
you in his chaire, hath appointed you
to be his lieutenantes, and by his owne
seall hath marked you to be Magistrats,
and to rule aboue your brethren, to whom
nature neuertheles hath made you lyke in
all points (for in conception, birth, life,
and death ye differ nothing from the
commune sort of men, but God only, as
said is, hath promoted you, and of his
especial fauour hath geuen vnto you
this prerogatiue to be called Gods:)
how horrible ingratitude were it then,
that you should be founde vnfaithful to
hym, that thus hath honored you? And
further what a monster were it that you
should be proued vnmerciful to them,
aboue whome ye are appointed to reigne
as fathers aboue theyre children? because
I say that verie Ethnicks haue graunted,

that the cheefe and fyrst care of Prīces, ād
of such as be appointed to rule aboue
others, oght to be to promote the glorie
and honour of theyr goddes, and to maintaine
that religion, whiche they supposed
to haue bene true. And that theyre secōd
care was to maintaine and defend the
subiects committed to theyre charge in
all aequitie and iustice. I will not labour
to shew vnto you what oght to be your
studie in maītainyng Gods true honour:
lest that in so doing I should seme to
make you lesse careful ouer Gods true
religion, then were the Ethnickes ouer
theire idolatrie. But because other petitions
may appere more hard and difficile
to be graunted, I purpose brefely,The dueties of Magistrats. but yet
freely, to speak what God by his worde
doth assure me to be true. To wit▪ fyrst
that in conscience you are bounde to punysh
malefactors, and to defende innocents
imploringe your helpe: secondarely
that God requireth of you to prouide
that your subiects be rightly instructed in
his true religion, and that the same by you
be reformed whensoeuer abuses do crepe
in by malice of Satan and negligence of
men: and laste that ye are bounde to remoue
from honour, and to punish with death
(if the crime so require) such as deceaue
the people, or defraude them of that foode

of theyre soules, I meane Gods liuely
worde. The fyrst and seconde are moste
playne by the wordes of S. Paule thus
speaking of lawfull powers.Rom. 13.
            
            Let euerie soule (saieth he) submit
hym selfe vnto the hygher powers.
for there is no power but of
god. The powers that be, are ordained
of God. Whosoeuer therefore
resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance
of God, and they that resist
shall receaue to them selues damnation.
For rulers ar not to be feared
of those that do well, but of those
that do euill. Wilt thou then be
without fear of the power? do that
which is good, and so shalt thou
be praised of the same. For he is
the minister of God for thy welth.
But if thou do that which is euil,
fear. For he beareth not the sworde
for noght: for he is the minister
of God to take vengance on them
that do euil.
            As the Apostle in these wordes moste
straytly commaundeth obedience to be

geuen to lawfull powers, pronouncing
Gods wrathe and vengance against such
as shall resist the ordonaunce of God, so
dothe he assigne to the powers theyre offices,
which to be take vengance vpon euil
doers, to maintaine the well doers, and so
to ministre and rule in theyre office, that
the subiectes by them may haue a benefite
and be praised in well doing. Now if you
be powers ordeined by God (and that I
hope all men will graunte) then by the
plaine wordes of the Apostle is the sworde
geuen vnto you by God for maintenance
of the innocent, and for punyshement of
malefactors. But I and my brethren with
me accused, do offre not only to proue our
selues innocents in all thinges laid to our
charge, but also we offre most euidently to
proue your Byshoppes to be the verie pestilence,
who haue infected all christianitie.
And therefore by the plaine doctrine
of the Apostle you ar boūde to maintaine
vs, and to punysh the other being euidently
cōuict and proued criminall.In what pointes be Powers bounde to theyre subiestes. Moreouer
the former words of the Apostle do teach,
how far hie powers be bounde to theyre
subiectes: to wit, that because they are
Gods ministers by hym ordained for the
profitt and vtilitie of others, moste diligently
oght they to intēd vpon the same.
For that cause assigneth the holie Ghost

commaunding subiectes to obey, and to
pay tribute: saing,
            For this do you pay tribute and
tole.Rom. 13.
            
            That is because they are Gods ministers,
bearing the sworde for your vtilitie.
Wherof it is plaine, that there is no honour
without a charge annexed. And this
one point I wishe your wisdomes dipely
to consider: that God hath not placed
you aboue your brethren to reigne as tyrantes
without respect of theyre profitt
and commoditie. You heare the holie
Ghost witnesse the contrarie, affirmyng
that all lawfull powers be Gods ministers
ordened for the welth, profitt and saluatiō
of their subiectes, and not for theyre
destructiō. Could it be said (I besech you)
that Magistrates,Let the similitude be noted. inclosing theyre subiects
in a citie without all victuales, or geuing
vnto them no other victuales but such as
were poisoned, did rule for the profitt of
theyr subiet
                  •
               es? I trust that none would
be so foolishe as so to affirme: but that rather
euerie discrete person would boldly
affirme, that such as so did, were tyrantes
vnworthie of all regiment. Yf we
will not deny that, whiche Christ Iesus affirmeth
to be a trueth infallible, to wit,
That the soule is greater and more pretious,

then is the bodie: then shall we easely
espye how vnworthie of auctoritie be
those, that this day debarre theyre subiectes
from the hearing of Gods worde,
and by fier and sworde compell them to
feede vpon the verie poison of theyre soules,
the damnable doctrine of Antichrist.
And therefore in this poīt I say, I can not
cease to admonish your honours diligently
to take heede ouer your charge,
which is greater then the most parte of
men suppose. It is not ynough that you
abstaine from violēte wrong, and oppression
which vngodlie men exercise against
theyr subiectes:It is not inough that rulars oppresse not theyre subiects. but ye are further boūde,
to witt, that ye rule aboue them for theyre
welth. Which ye can not do, if that ye either
by negligence not prouiding true
pastors, or yet by your maintainance of
such as be rauening wolues, suffer theyre
soules to sterue and perishe for lack of the
true foode, which is Christes Euangill
syncerely preached. It wil not excuse you
in his presence, who will require accompte
of euerie talent committed to your
charge, to say that ye supposed that the
charge of the soules had bene committed
to your Byshoppes. No no, my Lordes,
so ye can not escape Gods iudgement. For
if your Byshoppes be proued to be no
Byshoppes, but deceauable theues and

rauenyng wolues (which I offer my selfe
to proue by Gods word,The offer of Iohn knoxe and his accusation intended against the papisticall Bysshoppes. by law, and coū
               cils,
yea by the iudgement of all the godly
learned frō the primatiue Church to this
day) then shall your permission and defence
of them be reputed before God a
participation with theyr thefte and murther.
For thus accused the Prophete Esaie
the Princes of Ierusalem.
            Thy prīces, saieth he, ar apostatats:Esaie 1.
that is obstinat refusers of God, and they
ar companions of theues.
            This greuous accusation was laid against
them, albeit that they ruled in that
citie which sometyme was called holy, where
then were the temple, rites and ordonances
of God: because that not onlie
they were wicked them selues, but chefely
because they maintained wiked men
theyr Preestes ād fals ꝓphetes in honours
and auctoritie yf they did not escape this
accusatiō of the holie Ghost ī that age, looke
ye neither to escape the accusation nor
the iudgemēt which is pronoūced against
the maītainers of whicked men: to with that
the one and the other shall drinck the cuppe
of Gods wrathe and vengance togither.Ierem. 23. & 27.
and lest ye should deceaue your selues,Ezech. 13.
               Hosa 4.
esteming your Byshoppes to be vertuous

and godlie, this do I affirme and offer
my selfe to proue the same, that more
wicked men, then be the hole rabble of
your clergie, were neuer from the begynning
vniuersally knowen in any age, yea
Sodome and Gomorra may be iustified in
theyre respect. For they permitted iust
Lot, to dwell amongest them without any
violēce done to his bodie, which that pestilent
generation of your shauensort doth
not, but moste cruelly persecute by fier
and sworde the true membres of Christes
bodie for no other cause, but for the true
seruice ād honoring of God. And therefore
I fear not to affirme that, which God
shall one day iustifie: That by your offices
ye be bound, not only to represse theyr
tyrānie, but also to punishe them, as theues
and murtherers, as idolators and blasphemers
of God,NOTE. ād in their roumes ye are boū
               de
to place true preachers of Christs Euā
               gile
for the instruction, comfort,Yf powers prouide not for instructiō of theyre subiects, they do neuer rule aboue them for theyre profit. and saluation
of your subiectes, aboue whome els
shall neuer the holy Ghost acknolledge,
that you rule in iustice for their proffit. Yf
yee pretēd to possesse the kingdome with
Christ Iesus, yee may not take exāple neither
by the ignorāt multitude of Princes,
neither by the vngodly aud cruell rulers
of the earth, of whome sōme passe theyre
tyme in slouth, insolētie, and ryote without

respect had to goddes honour or to the
saluatiō of theyre brethrē: and other moste
cruelly oppresse with proude Nīrod such
as be subiect to them. But your pattern and
example must be the practise of those, whome
God hath approued by the testimonie
of his worde as after shalbe declared.
            Of the premisses it is euident that to
lawfull powers is geuen the sworde for
punyshement of malefactors, for maintenance
of innocents, and for the profitt
and vtilitie of theyr subiects. Now let vs
consider, whether the reformation of religion
fallen in decay, and punyshement of
false teachers do appertaine to the ciuile
Magistrate and nobilitie of any realme.
I am not ignorant that Satan of old
tyme for mentainance of his darknes hath
obtained of the blynd world two chefe
points.what Satan hath obtained of the blind world. Former, he hath persuaded to Princes,
rulers, and magistrates, that the feeding
of Christes flock appertaineth nothing
to theyre charge, but that it is reiected
vpon the Byshoppes, and estate ecclesiasticall:
and secondarelie that the reformation
of religion, be it neuer so corrupt
and the punishement of such, as be
sworne souldiers in theyre king dome, are
exempted from all ciuile power and are
reserued to them selues, and to theyre own
cognition. But that no offender can iustly

be exempted from punyshement, and that
the ordering and reformation of religion
with the instruction of subiects, doth especially
appertaine to the ciuile Magistrate,
shall goddes perfect ordenaunce,
his plaine worde, and the factes and examples
of those that of God are highly praised,
moste euidently declare.
            When God did establish his Law,The matters and reformatiō of religion appertaine to the care of the ciuile power Exod. 21. 24. 25, &c. statutes
and ceremonies in the middest of Israel,
he did not exempt the matters of religion
from the power of Moses, but as he
gaue hym charge ouer the ciuile politie,
so he put in his mouth and in his hand:
That is, he fyrst reuealed to hym, and thereafter
commaunded to put in practise whatsoeuer
was to be taught or done in matters
of religiō. Nothing did God reueale
particularely to Aaron, but altogither
was he commaunded to depend from the
mouth of Moses: Yea nothing was he permitted
to do to hym self or to his children
either in his or theyr inauguration and
sanctification to the preesthode,Note. but all
was committed to the care of Moses, and
therefore were these wordes so frequētly
repeted to Moses,
            Thou shalt seperate Aaron and
his sonnes from the middest of the
people of Israel,Exod. 28. that they may

execute the office of the Preesthode,
thou shalt make vnto them garments,
thou shalt annoynte them,
thou shalt wash thē, thou shalt fill
theyr handes with the sacrifice.
            And so furth of euerie rite and ceremonie,
that was to be done vnto thē, especiall
commaundement was geuen vnto Moses,
that he should do it. Now if Aarō and his
sonnes were so subiect to Moses, that they
did nothing but at his commaundement,
who dar be so bold as to affirme that the
ciuile Magistrate hath nothing to do in
matters of religiō? For seing that thē God
did so straytly require, that euen those,
who did beare the figure of Christ, should
receaue from the ciuile power as it were
theyre sanctification, and entrāce to theyr
office, and seing also that Moses was so
far preferred to Aaron, that the one commaunded
and the other did obey, who dar
esteme that the ciuile power is now becomed
so prophane in Gods eyes, that it is
sequestred from all intromission with the
matters of religion. The holie ghost in
diuers places declarethe the contrarie.
            For one of the chefe praecepts commaunded
to the king, when that he should be
placed in his throne, was to write the example

of the boke of the Lordes law, that
it should be with hym, that he might
read in it all the daies of his life, that he
might learn to fear the Lord his God, and
to kepe all the wordes of his law, and
his statutes to do them. This praecept requireth
not onlye, that the king should
hym selfe fear God, kepe his Law, and statutes,
but that also he as the chefe ruler,
should prouide that goddes true religion
should be kept inuiolated of the people
and flock, which by God was committed
to his charge. And this did not onlie Dauid
and Salomon perfectly vnderstād, but
also somme godlie kinges in Iuda after
the apostasie and idolatrie,The factes of Godlie kings are an interpretation of the law and declaration of theyre power. that infected
Israel by the meanes of Ieroboam, did practise
theyre vnderstanding and execute
theyre power in somme notable reformations.
For Asa and Iosaphat kinges in Iuda,
fynding the religion altogither corrupt,
did applie theyre hearts (saieth the
holie ghost) to serue the Lord, and to walk
in his waies: and thereafter doth witnes
that Asa remoued from honours his mother,
somme say grādmother, because shee
had committed and laboured to mentaine
horrible idolatrie.2. Paral. 14. & 17. And Iosaphat did
not only refuse strange goddes hym selfe,
but also distroying the chefe monuments
of idolatrie, did send furth the.Note. Leuites

to instruct the people, whereof it is playne
that the one and the other did vnderstand
suche reformations to appertaine to theire
dueties. But the factes of Ezechias, and of
Iosias do more clerely proue the power
and duetie of the ciuile Magistrate in the
reformation of religion. Before the reign
of Ezechias so corrupt was the religion
that the dores of the house of the Lord
were shut vpp,2. Paralip 29. the lampes were extinguished,
no sacrifice was orderly made, but
in the first yeare of his reigne the first
moneth of the same, did the king open
the dores of the temple, bring in the Preestes
and Leuites and assembling them togither
did speak vnto them as folloeth.Aduert that the kinge taketh vpon him to cō
                  mand the preestes.
Hear me o yce Leuites and be sanctified
now, and sanctifie also the house of the
Lord God of your fathers and carie furth
from the sanctuarie all filthynes (he meaneth
all monumēts and vesselles of idolatrie)
for our fathers haue transgressed and
haue committed wickednes in thee eyes of
the eternall our God, they haue left hym
and haue turned theyre faces from the tabernacle
of the Lord▪ and therefore is the
wrath of the Lord cōmed vpon Iuda and
Ierusalem. Behold our fathers haue fallen
by the sworde, our sonnes, daughters ād
wifes are led in captiuitie, but now haue
I purposed in my heart to make a couenante

with the Lord God of Israel, that he
may turne the wrath of his furie from vs.
And therefore my sonnes (he swetely exhorteth)
be not faint, for the Lord hath chosen
you to stand in his presence and to serue
hym. Such as be not more then blynd
clerely may perceaue that the king dothe
aknolledge, that it appertained to his charge
to reforme the religion, to appoint the
Leuites to theyre charges and to admonish
thē of theyre duetie and office, which
thing he more euidently declareth, writing
his lettres to all Israel, to Ephrtaim,
an Manasses, and sent the same by the handes
of messingers hauing this tenour.
            You sonnes of Israel return to
the Lord God of Abraham Isaac,2. Pa. 30.
ād Israel, and he shall return to the
residue that resteth from the handes
of Assur. Be not as your fathers
and as your brethren were who
haue trāsgressed against the Lord
God of theyre fathers, who hath
made them desolate as you see.
Holde not your heart therefore,
but giue your hand vnto the Lord,
return vnto his sanctuarie, serue

hym and he shall shew mercie vnto
you, to your sonnes, and doughters
that be in bondage, for he is
pitifull and easie to be intreated.
            Thus far did Ezechias by lettres and
messingers prouoke the people, declined
from God to repentance, not only in Iuda,
where he reigned laufull king,NOTE. but also in
Israel, subiect then to an other king. And
albeit that by somme wicked men his messingers
were mocked, yet as they lacked
not theyre iust punishmēt (for within sixe
yeares after Samaria was destroyed and Israel led
captiue by Salmanazar) so did not
the zelous king Ezechias desist to prosecute
his duetie in restoring the religion to
Gods perfecte ordenance, remouing all
abominations.
            The same is to be red of Iosias, who did
not only restore the religion, but did further
distroy all monumentes of idolatrie,2. par. 34.
which of lōg tyme had remained. For it is
written of him, that after that the boke of
the law was found, and that he had asked
counsil at the prophetesse Hulda, he sente
ād gathered all the elders of iuda and Ierusalem,
and standing in the temple of the
Lord he made a conuenant,2. Reg. 23. that all the people
frō the great to the small should walk
after the Lord, should obserue his law, statutes

and testimonies with all theyre heart,
and all theyre soule, and that they should
ratifie and confirme,The king commaunded the preestes. what soeuer was written
in the boke of God. He further cōmaunded
Helkias the hic preest, and the preestes
of the inferiour order, that they should carie
furth of the temple of the Lord all the
vessels, that were made to Baal, which he
burnt and did carie theire pouder to Bethel.
He did further distroy all monuments
of idolatrie, yea euen those that had remained
frō the dayes of Salomō. He did burn
them, stampe them to powder, whereof one
part he scattered in the broke Kidron and
the other vpon the sepulcres and graues
of the idolaters, whose bones he did burn
vpō the altars, where before they made sacrifice
not only in Iuda, but also in Bethel,
where Ieroboam had erected his idolatrie:
yea he further proceded, and did kyll
the preestes of the hie places, who were
idolaters, and had deceaued the people: he
did kyll them, I say, and did burn theyre
bones vpon theyre owne altars, and so returned
to Ierusalem. This reformatiō made
Iosias, and for the same obtained this testimonie
of the holie Ghost, that neither
before hym neither after hym was there
any suche kīg, who returned to God with
his hole soule, and with all his strengthe
according to all the law of Moses.
            
               Of which histories it is euident that
the reformation of religion in all points,
togither with the punishement of false
teachers doth appertaine to the power of
the ciuile Magistrate. For what God required
of them, his iustice must require of
others hauing the like charge and auctoritie:
what he did approue in them, he can
not but approue in all others, who with
like zeale and synceritie do interprise to
purge the Lordes temple and sanctuarie.
what God required of them, it is before
declared, to wit: that most diligently they
should obserue his Law, statutes and ceremonies.
And how acceptable were theyre
factes to God, doth he him selfe witnesse.
For to somme he gaue most notable victories
without the hande of man,2. Par. 32. and in
theyre most desperat daungers did declare
his especiall fauours towerdes them by
signes supernaturall: to other he so established
the kingdome, that theyre ennemies
were compelled to stoupe vnder
theyre feete. And the names of all he hath
regestred not only in the boke of life, but
also in the blessed remembrance of all posterities
sence theyre daies, which also
shall continue till the commyng of the
Lord Iesus, who shall rewarde with the
crowne of immortalitie not only thē, but
also such, as vnfaynedly studie to do the

will and to promote the glorie of his heuenlie
father in the middest of this corrupted
generation. In cōsideration whereof
ought you, my Lordes, all delay set apart,
to prouide for the reformation of religion
in your dominions and boundes,
which now is so corrupt that no part of
Christes institution remaineth in the
original puritie, and therefore of necessitie
it is, that spedely ye prouide for reformatione
or els ye declare your selues,
not only voyde of loue to werdes your
subiectes, but also to liue without care of
your owne saluation, yea without all
feare and true reuerence of God. Two
thinges perchance may moue you to esteme
these histories before briuely tuched
to appertaine nothing to you. Fyrst because
you are no Iewes but Gentiles: and
secondarely because you are no kinges,The factes of the godlie kings in Iuda do appertain to the powers among the gentiles professing Christ
but nobiles in your realm. But be not
deceaued. For neither of both can excuse
you in goddes presence from doing
your duetie, for it is a thing more then
certein, that whatso euer God required
of the ciuile Magistrate in Israel or Iuda
concernyng the obseruation of true religion
during the tyme of the Law, the
same doth he require of lawfull Magistrates
professing Christ Iesus in the tyme of
the Gospell, as the holie Ghost hath

taught vs by the mouth of Dauid, saying
Psal. 2.
            Be learned you that iudge the
earth, kysse the sonne, lest that the
Lord waxe angrie, ād that yee perish
from the way.
            This admonition did not extend to
the iudges vnder the law only, but doth
also include all such as be promoted to
honours in the tyme of the Gospell, when
Christ Iesus doth reigne ād feight in his
spirituall kyngdome, whose ennemies in
that psalme be fyrst most sharply taxed,
theyr furie expressed, and vanitie mocked:
& then are kings and iudges, who think
them selues free from all law and obediē
               ce,
commaunded to repent theyre former
blynd rage, and iudges are charged to be
learned: and last are all cōmaunded to serue
the eternall in feare, to reioyce before
hym in tremblyng, to kysse the sonne,
that is, to geue vnto hym most humble obedience,
whereof it is euident that the
rulers, Magistrats and iudges now in
Christes kingdome are no lesse bound to
obediēce vnto God, thē were those vnder
the Law. And how is it possible that any
shall be obediēt, who dispise his religion,
in which standeth the chefe glorie, that
man can geue to God, and is a seruice,

which God especially requireth of kings
and rulers?Epist. 50. Which thing saint Augustine
plainely did note, writing to one Bonifacius
a man of warr, according to the same
argument and purpose, which I labour
to persuade your Honours. For after that
he hath in that his epistle declared the difference
betwixt the heresie of the Donatists
and Arrians, and hath somwhat spoken
of theyr crueltie, he sheweth the way
how theyr furie should and oght to be
repressed, and that it is lawfull for the iniustly
afflicted to seke support and defence
at godlie Magistrates. For thus he
writeth:
            Either must the veritie be kept
close,Aduert. or els must theyr crueltie be
susteaned.
            But if the veritie should be concealed,
not only should none be saued nor delyuered
by suchsilēce, but also shoulde many
be lost through theyr decept. But if by
preaching of the veritie theyr furie should
be prouoked more to rage, and by that
meanes yet somme were delyuered, and
made stronge, yet should feare hinder many
weaklīgs to folowe the veritie, if theyr
rage be not stayed. In these fyrst wordes
Augustine sheweth three reasons, why the
afflicted Church in those daies called for

the help of the Emperour and of godlie
Magistrates against the furie of the persecuters.
The fyrst,
            The veritie must be spoken orNote well.
ells mankind shall perish in errour.
            The second, the veritie being plainlie
spoken prouoketh the aduersaries to rage.
And because that sōme did alledge that rather
we oght to suffer all iniurie, then to
seke support by man, he addeth the third
reason: to witt that many weakones be
not able to suffer persecution and death
for the truethes sake, to whome not the lesse
respect oght to be had, that they may
be won from errour and so be brought to
grater strength.
            O that the rulers of this age should
ponder and wey the reasons of this godly
writer, and prouid the remedie, which
he requyreth in these wordes foloīg, Now
when the Church was thus afflicted yf any
think that rather they should haue sustayned
all calamitie,Augustines words. then that the helpe of
God should haue bene asked by Christian
Emperours, he doth not well aduert, that
of such negligence no good cōptes or reason
could be geuen. For where such, as
would that no iust lawes should be made against
theyre impietie, alledge that the Apostles
soght no such thīges of the kinges

of the earth, they do not consider that then
the tyme was other then it is now, and
that all thinges are done in theyr owne
tyme. What Emperour then beleued in
Christ, that should serue hym in making
lawes for godlines against impietie?
            whill yet that saying of the ꝓphet was cō
               plete,
why hath nations raged, and people
haue imagined vanitie? The kinges of the
earth haue stand vp, & princes haue conuented
together against the Lord, and against
his annoynted. That which is after
said in the same psalme, was not yet
comme to passe. And now vnderstand, o
you kinges, be learned you that iudge the
earth, serue the Lord▪ in fear, and reioyce
to hym with tremlinge.Aduert the mynd of Augustine. How do kings
serue the Lord in fear? but in punishing
and by a godlie seueritie forbidding
those thinges which are done against
the commaundement of the Lord. For
otherwise doth he serue in so far as he
is man, other wise in so far as he is king.
            In so far as he is man,In two sortes oght kinges to serue God he serueth hym
by liuing faithfully, but because he is
also king he serueth establishing lawes,
that commaund the thinges that be iust,
and that with a conuenient rigour forbyd
thinges contrarie. As Ezechias serued
distroying the groues, the temples
of idols and the places, which were buylded

against goddes commaundement. So
serued also Iosias doing the same: so serued
the king of Niniuites compelling the
hole citie to mitigate the Lord: so serued
Darius geuing in the power of Daniel the
idol to be broken, and his ennemies to be
cast to the lions: so serued Nabucadnezer,
by a terrible law forbidding all, that were
in his realme, to blaspheme God. Herein
therefore do kinges serue the Lord in so
far as they are kings, when they do those
things to serue hym, which none except
kings be able to do. He further procedeth
and cōcludeth, that as, when wicked kings
do reign, impietie can not be brideled by
lawes, but rather is tyrannie exercised vnder
the title of the same,O that the worlde should vnderstand. so is it a thing without
all reason, that kinges professing
the knolledge and honour of God, should
not regard nor care, who did defend, nor
who did oppugne the Church of God in
theyr dominions. By these wordes of this
aunciēt and godlie writer your Honours
may perceaue, what I require of you,
to wit, to represse the tyrannie of your Byshoppes,
and to defend the innocents professing
the trueth. He did require of the
Emperour and kings of his daies professing
Christ, and manifestly concludeth,
that they can not serue Christ, except that
so they do. Let not your Byshoppes thinke

that Augustine speaketh for them, because
he nameth the Church. Let them read
and vnderstand, that Augustine writeth
for that Church, which professeth the
trueth and doth suffer persecution for the
defēce of the same, which your byshoppes
do not, but rather with the Donatistes and
Arrians do cruelly persecute all such, as
boldly speak Christes eternall veritie to
manifest theyre impietie and abomination.
But thus much we haue of Augustine,
that it appertaineth to the obedience
and seruice,NOTE. which kinges owe to
God aswel now in the tyme of the Gospell,
as before vnder the Law, to defende
the afflicted for matters of religion, and to
represse the furie of the persecuters by
the rigour and seueritie of godlie lawes.
For which cause no doubt doth EsaieEsaie 49. the
prophete say, that kinges should be norishers
to the Church of God, that they
should abbase their heades, and louingly
embrase the children of God. And thus I
say your Honours may euidently see, that
the same obedience doth God require of
rulers and princes in the tyme of the Gospell,
that he required in the tyme of the
Law.An answer to the second obiection.
            
            Yf you do think, that the reformation
of religion and defence of the afflicted
doth not appertaine to you, because you

are no kings, but nobils ād estates of a real
me, in two thinges you are deceaued: former,
in that you do not aduert, that Dauid
requireth aswell, that the princes and iudges
of the earth be learned and that they
serue and fear God, as that he requireth,
that the kings repent. Yf you therefore be
iudges and princes, as no man can deny
you to be, then by the playn words of Dauid
you are charged to be learned, to serue
and fear God, which ye can not do, if
you despise the reformation of his religion.
And thys is your fyrst errour. The
secōd is, that ye neither know your duetie,
which ye owe to God, neither yet your auctoritie,
which of hym ye haue receaued, yf
ye for pleasure or fear of any earthlie man
despise goddes true religion, and contēne
your brethrē, that in his name cal for your
support. Your dutie is to hear the voyce of
the Eternal your God, and unfainedly to
studie to folow his preceptes: who, as is before
said, of especiall mercie hath promoted
you to honours and dignitie. His chefe
and principall precept is, that with reuerence
ye receaue and embrace his onlie
beloued sonne Iesus: that ye promote
to the vttermost of your powers his true
religion: ād that ye defend your brethren
and subiectes, whome he hath putt vnder
your charge ād care. Now if your king be

a man ignorāt of God, ennemie to his true
religion, blinded by superstition, and a
persecuter of Christes membres, shall yee
be excused, if with silence yee passe ouer
his iniquitie? Be not deceaued my Lordes,
ye are placed in auctoritie for an other
purpose then to flatter your king in
his folie and blind rage: to witt, that as
with your bodies, strength, riches, and
wisdome ye are bound to assist and defend
him in all things, which by your aduise he
shall take in hand for Gods glorie and
for the preseruation of his commune wealth
and subiectes, so by your grauities,
counsil and admonition yee are bound to
correct and represse whatsoeuer ye know
him to attempt expressedly repugning to
Goddes word, honour, and glorie, or
what ye shall espie him to do, be it by ignorance
or be it by malice, against his subiectes
great, or small. Of which last part of
your obediēce yf ye defraud your king, ye
cōmit against him no lesse treason, then yf
ye did extract frō him your due and ꝓmised
support, what time by his ennemies iniustly
he wer pursued. But this part of their
duetie I fear do a small nomber of the nobilitie
of this age rightly consider: neither
yet will they vnderstand, that for that
purpose hath God ꝓmoted them. For now
the cōmune song of al men is, We must obey

our kinges be they good, or be they
bad, for God hath so cōmaunded. But horrible
shall the vengeance be, that shalbe
powred furth vpon such blasphemers of
God his holie name, and ordinaunce. For
it is no lesse blasphemie to say, that God
hath commaunded kinges to be obeyed,
when they cōmaund impietie, then to say,
that God by his precept is auctour ād mentainer
of all iniquitie. True it is, God hath
cōmaunded kinges to be obeyed, but like
true it is, that in things, which they cōmit
against his glorie, or when cruelly without
cause they rage agaīst theire brethrē
the members of Christes body, he hath cō
               maunded
no obediēce, but rather he hath
approued, yea and greatlie rewarded such
as haue opponed them selues to theyre vngodly
commaundementes and blind rage:
as in the exampls of the three children, of
Daniel, and Abdemelech it is euident. The
three children wold nether bowe nor stoupe
before the golden image at the cōmaundement
of the great king Nabuchadnezar.
Daniel did opēly pray, his windoes being
open, against the established law of Darius
and of his counsil: and Abdemelech feared
not to enter in before the presence of
Zedechias ād boldly to defēd the cause ād
innocētie of Ieremie the prophet,Ieremie 38 whome
the king and his counsil had cōdemned to

deth. Euerie one of these factes should this
day be iudged foolishe by such, as will not
vnderstād what cōfession God doth require
of his children, when his veritie is oppugned,
or his glorie called in doubt: suche
men, I say, as prefer man to God, and thinges
present to the heauenlie inheritaunce,
should haue iudged euerie one of these factes
stubburn inobedience, foolishe presumption
and singularitie, or elles bold
cōtrolinge of the king and his wise counsil.
But how acceptable in Gods presence
was this resistance to the vngodlie commaundementes
and determinations of
theyr king the ēd did witnes. For the three
children were deliuered from the fornace
of fyer, and Daniel from the den of liōs to
the confusion of their ennemies, to the
better instruction of the ignorant kinges,
and to the perpetuall comfort of goddes
afflicted children. And Abdemelech in
the day of the Lordes visitation, when the
kinge and his counsil did drink the bitter
cupp of goddes vengeance,Ierem. 39 did fynde his
life for a praye, and did not fall in the
edge of the sword, when manie thousandes
did perishe. And this was signified
vnto him by the prophet him self at the
cōmaundemēt of God before that Ierusalem
was destroyed. The promesse and cause
were recited vnto him in these wordes,

I will bring my wordes vpon this citie vnto
euill and not vnto good: but most assuredly
I shal deliuer thee because thou hast
trusted in me, sayeth the Lord. The
trust ād hope, which Abdemelech had in
God, made him bold to oppone him selfe,
being but a man, to the king and to his hole
coūsill, who had cōdemned to death the
Prophet, whome his cōscience did acknolledge
to be innocent. For this did he speak
in the presence of the king sitting in the
port of Beniamī: My Lord the kinge, saith
Abdemelech, these men do wickedly in all
thinges, that they haue done to Ieremie
the Prophet. Aduert and take hede my
Lordes, that the men, who had condemned
the Prophet, were the king, his prīces, and
counsill, and yet did one man accuse them
all of iniquitie, ād did boldly speak in the
defēse of hī of whose innocētie he was persuaded.
And the same, I say, is the duetie of
euery man in his vocation, but chefely of
the nobilitie, which is ioyned with theyr
kinges to bridel and represse that folie
and blind rage. Which thing if the nobilitie
do not, neither yet labour to do, as they
are traitours to their kings, so do they prouoke
the wrath of God agaīst them selues
and against the realme, in which they abuse
the auctoritie, which they haue receaued
of God to mentaine vertue and to represse
vice. For hereof I would your Honours

were most certainly persuaded, that
God will neither excuse nobilitie nor people,
but the nobilitie least of al, that obey
ād folow theyr kinges in manifest iniquitie,
but with the same vengeāce will God
punishe the Prince, people, and nobilitie
conspiring togither against him and his
holie ordenances: as in the punishment
taken vpon Pharao, Israel, Iuda and Babylon
is euidently to be sene. For Pharao was
not drowned alone, but his captayns, charetes,
and greate armie drank the same
cup with him. The kinges of Israel, and
Iuda were not punished whitout cōpagny,
but with them were murthered the counsilers,
theyre Princes imprisoned and theire
people ledd captiue. And why? because
none was found so faithful to God, that he
durst enterprise to resist nor against and
the manifest impietie of theyr Princes.
And therefore was Gods wrath powred
furth vpon the one and the other. But the
more ample discource of this argument I
differ to better opportunitie: onely at this
tyme I thoght expediēt to admonysh you,
that before God it shall not excuse you to
alledge, We are no kinges and therefore
neither can we reforme religion, nor yet
defend such as be persecuted. Consider
my Lordes that yee are powers ordened
by God (as before is declared) ād therefore

doth the reformation of religion, and the
defense of such, as iniusty are oppressed,
appertaine to your charge and care, which
thinge shall the law of God, vniuersally
geuen to be kept of all men, most euidently
declare: which is my last and most assured
reason,Deut. 12. why I say yee oght to remoue
from honours and to punish with death
such as God hath condemned by his owne
mouth. After that Moses had declared
what was true religiō, to wit, to honor God
as he commaunded, adding nothing to his
worde, neither yet diminishinge any thīg
from it, and after also that vehemently he
had exhorted the same law to be obserued,
he denounceth the punishment against the
trāsgressours in these wordes, Yf thy brother,
sonne, doghter wife or neghbour,
whome thou louest as thyne own life, solicitate
thee secretly, saying, Let vs go serue
other goddes,Deut. 23. & 27. whome neither thou, nor
thy fathers haue knowen, consent not to
hym, hear hym not, let not thyne eye spare
hym, shew hym no indulgentie or
fauour, hide him not, but vtterly kill hym,
let thy hād be the first vpon hym, that he
may be slaine, and after the hāde of the hole
people. Of these wordes of Moses are-two
things, apperteanīg to our purpose, to
be noted. Former, that such, as solicitate only
to idolatrie oght to be punished to death

without fauour or respect of person.Idolatrie oght to be punished without respect of person. For
he that will not suffer mā to spare his sōne,
his daughter, nor his wife, but straitly commaundeth
punishmēt to be taken vpon the
idolatours (haue they neuer so nie cōiunction
with vs) will not wink at the idolatrie
of others, of what estate or condition so euer
they be.
            It is not vnknowen,If anie estate might haue claimed priuiledge, it was the prophetes. that the prophetes
had reuelations of God, which were not
commune to the people, as Samuel had the
reuelation, that Eli and his posteritie
should be destroyed, that Saul should first
be king and thereafter that he should be reiected,
that Dauid should reign for him.
Micheas vnderstode by vision that Achab
should be killed in battaile against the Sirians.
Elias saw that dogges should eat
Iesabel ī the fortres of Iesrael.1. Sam. 3. Eliaesus did
see hunger come vpon Israel by the space
of seuen yeares.1. Sam. 9. 15. Ieremie did foresee
the destruction of Ierusalem and the tyme
of their captiuitie,1. Reg. 22 and so diuerse other
prophetes had diuerse reuelations of God,1. Reg. 21.
which the people did not otherwise vnderstād,2. Reg. 8.
but by their affirmatiō, and therefore
in those dayes were the prophetes named
Seears, because that God did opē vnto thē
that, which was hid from the multitude.
Now if anie man might haue claimed anie

priuiledge from the rigour of the Law,
or might haue iustified his fact, it should
haue bene the Prophete. For he might
haue alledged for hym selfe his singular
prerogatiue, that he had aboue other men
to haue goddes will reuealed vnto hym
by visiō or by dream, or that God had declared
particularely vnto hym, that his
pleasure was to be honoured ī that maner,
in such a place, ād by such meanes. But all
such excuses doth God remoue, cōmaūdīg
that the Prophete, that shall solicitate the
people to serue strange goddes, shall die
the death, notwithstanding that he alledge
for hym selfe dream, vision, or reuelation.
Yea althogh he promisse miracles,
and also that such thinges as he promiseth
come to passe, yet I say commaundeth
God, that no credit be geuen to hym,
but that he die the death, because he teacheth
apostasie, ād defection frō God. Hereof
your Honours may easely espie, that
none prouoking the people to idolatrie
oght to be exempted from the punishmēt
of death. For if neither that inseparable cō
               iunction,
which God hym selfe hath sanctified
betwixt man and wife, neither that
vnspeakable loue grafted in nature, which
is betwixt the father and the sonne, neither
yet that reuerence, which goddes
people oght to bear to the Prophetes, can

excuse anie man to spare the offendour or
to conceale his offense, what excuse can
man pretend, which God will accept? Euident
it is that no estate, condition nor
honour can exempt the idolatour from
the handes of God, when he shal call him
to accomptes, or shall inflict punishment
vpō him for his offence: how shall it then
excuse the people, that they according to
goddes cōmaundemēt punish not to death
such, as shal solicitate or violētly draw the
people to idolatrie? And this is the fyrst,
which I would your Honours should note
of the former wordes. To witt, that no person
is exēpted frō punishmēt, if he can be
manifestly cōuicted to haue prouoked or
led the people to idolatrie: ād this is most
euidently declared in that solemned othe
and cōuenante, which Asa made with the
people to serue God ād to mētaine his religiō,
adding this penaltie to the trāsgressours
of it: To wit, that whosoeuer should
not seke the Lord God of Israel,2. Par. 15. should
be kylled, were he greate or were he small,
were it man or were it woman. And of this
oth was the Lorde cōpleased, he was foūd
of thē ād gaue thē rest on euerie parte, because
they soght hī with their hole heart,
ād did swear to punishe the offēders according
to the precept of his Law without
respect of persons. And this is it, which

I say I would your Honours should note
for the fyrst, that no idolatour can be exempted
frō punishement by goddes Law.
The seconde is, that the punishment of
such crimes as are idolatrie, blasphemie,
ād others, that tuche the maiestie of God,
dothe not appertaine to kinges and chefe
rulers only, but also to the hole bodie of
that people, and to euerie membre of the
same accordīg to the vocatiō of euerie mā,
and according to that possibilitie and occasion,
which God doth minister to reuenge
the iniurie done against his glorie,
what time that impietie is manifestly knowen.
And that doth Moses more plainely
speak in these wordes,
            Yf in anie of thy cities,Deut. 13. saieth he,
which the Lord thy God geueth
vnto the to dwell in them, thou
shalt hear this brute, There are sō
               me
men the sonnes of Belial passed
furthe from thee, ād haue solicited
the citizens of theyr cities
by these wordes, Let vs go ād serue
strange goddes, which you haue
not knowen, search and inquire
diligently, and if it be true, that
such abomination is done in the

middest of thee, thou shalt vtterly
stryke the inhabitants of that citie
with the sworde, thou shalt
destroy it and whatsoeuer is within
it, thou shalt gather the
spoile of it in the middest of the
marketplace, thou shalt burne that
citie with fier, and the spoile of it
to the Lord thy God, that it may
be a heap of stones for euer, neither
shall it be any more buylded.
Let nothing of that execration
cleaue to thy hand, that the Lord
may turne from the furie of his
wrath, ād be moued to werdes thee
with inward affection.
            Plaine it is that Moses speaketh nor
geueth not charge to kinges rulers and
iudges only, but he commaūdeth the hole
bodie of the people,why euerie man in Israel was bo
                     •••
                  d to obey goddes co
                     •
                  
                  maundement. yea and euerie membre
of the same according to their possibilitie:
and who darbe so impudent as to denie
this to be most reasonable and iust?
            For seing that God had delyuered the hole
bodie from bondage, and to the hole
multitude had geuen his law, and to the
twelue tribes had he so distributed the inheritance

of the land of Canaan, that no
familie could complaine, that it was neglected.
Was not the hole ād euerie membre
addetted to cōfesse ād acknolledge the
benefites of God? yea had it not bene the
part of euerie man to haue studied to kepe
the possession, which he had receaued? which
thīg God did plainely ꝓnoūce they
should not do,Deut. 28. and 30. except that in their heartes
they did sanctifie the lord God, that they
embrased, and inuiolably kept his religiō
established: and finally except they did
cutt oute iniquitie from amongest them,
declaring them selues earnest ennemies to
those abominations, which God declared
hym selfe so vehemently to hate, that fyrst
he commaunded the hole inhabitants of
that countree to be distroyed and all monuments
of their idolatrie to be broken
doune,Deut. 7. and thereafter he also streatly commaūdeth,
that a citie declininge to idolatrie
should fall in the edge of the sworde,
ād that the hole spoile of the same,Godds iudgements to the carnall man appear rigorous. should
be burned, no portiō of it reserued. To the
carnal man this may appeare a rigorous
and seuere iudgement, yea it may rather
seme to be pronounced in a rage, then in
wisdome. For what citie was euer yet, in
which to mannes iudgement were not to
be found manie innocent persons, as infants,
children, and somme simple and ignorāt

soules, who neither did nor could
consent to such impietie? And yet we fynd
no exception, but all are appointed to
the cruel death. And as concernyng the
citie and the spoile of the same, mannes
reason can not think, but that it might
haue bene better bestowed, then to be consumed
with fier, and so to profitt no man.
But in such cases will God that all creatures
stoupe, couer their faces, and desist
from reasonyng, when commaundement
is geuen to execute his iudgement. Albeit
I could adduce diuerse causes of such
seueritie, yet will I search none other
then the holie Ghost hath assigned. Fyrst,
that all Israel hearing the iudgement
should fear to commit the like abomination:
and secondarely, that the Lord
might turn from the furie of his anger,
might be moued towerds the people with
inward affection, be mercifull vnto them,
and multiplie them according to his oth
made vnto theire fathers. Which reasons
as they are sufficient in goddes children
to correct the murmuring of the
grudging fleshe, so oght they to prouoke
euerie man, as before I haue said, to declare
hym selfe ennemie to that, which so
highly prouoketh the wrath of God against
the hole people. For where Moses
saieth,
            
               Let the citie be burned, and let
no part of the spoile cleaue to thy
hand, that the Lord may return
from the furie of his wrath, &c.
            He plainely doth signifie,For the idolatrie of a smale number is goddes wrath kindled against the multitude not punishing the offēdours. that by the
defection and idolatrie of a few goddes
wrath is kyndled against the hole, which
is neuer quenched till such punishement
be taken vpon the offenders: that what
soeuer serued them in their idolatrie, be
broght to destruction, because that it is
execrable and accursed before God. And
therefore he will not, that it be reserued
for anie vse of his people. I am not ignorant
that this law was not put in execution
as God commaunded. But what did
thereof insue and folow histories declare:
to witt, plage after plage till Israel, and
Iuda were led in captiuitie, as the bokes
of kings do witnesse. The consideration
whereof maketh me more bold to affirm,
that it is the duetie of euerie man, that
list to escape the plage and punishement
of God, to declare hym selfe ennemie to
idolatrie not only in heart, hating the
same, but also in externall gesture, declaring
that he lamenteth, yf he can do
no more,EZech. 9. for such abominations. Which
thing was shewed to the ꝓphete Ezechiel,
what tyme he gaue hym to vnderstād, why

he would destroy Iuda with Israel, ād that
he would remoue his glorie from the temple
and place, that he had chosen,Ezech. 8. and 9. ād so powerfurth
his wrathe and indignation vpon
the citie, that was full of blood and apostasie,
which became so impudent, that
it durst be bold to say, the Lord hath left
the earth, and seeth not. At this tyme, I say,
the Lord reuealed in vision to his prophete,
who they were, that should fynd fauour
in that miserable destruction. To witt,
those that did murne and lament for all
the abominations done in the citie, in
whose foreheades did God commaund to
print and seal Tau, to the end that the destroyer,
who was commaunded to stryke
the rest without mercie, should not hurt
them, in whome that signe was found. Of
these premisses I suppose it be euident,
that the punishment of idolatrie doth not
appertaine to kinges only, but also to the
hole people, yea to euerie membre of the
same according to his possibilitie. For
that is a thing most assured, that no man
can murne, lament, and bewaile for those
thinges, which he will not remoue to the
vttermost of his power.NOTE. Yf this be required
of the hole people, and of euerie man
in his vocation, what shall be required of
you, my Lordes, whome God hath raised
vpp to be Princes and rulers aboue your

brethren, whose handes he hath armed
with the sword of his iustice? yea whome
he hath appointed to be as bridels to represse
the rage and insolencie of your
kinges, when soeuer they pretend manifestly
to transgresse goddes blessed ordenance?
An answer to an obiection. Yf any think that this my affirmation,
tuchinge the punishmēt of idolaters,
be contrarie to the practise of the Apostles,
who fynding the Gentiles in idolatrie
did call them to repentance, requiring
no such punishmēt, lett the same man
vnderstand,why no law was executed against the Gentiles being Idolaters. that the Gentiles, before the
preaching of Christ, liued, as the Apostle
speaketh, without God in the world, drowned
in idolatrie, according to the blindnes
ād ignorāce, in which then they were
holden as a prophane natiō, whome God
had neuer opēly auowed to be his people,
had neuer receaued ī his houshold, neither
geuen vnto them lawes to be kept in religion
nor politie: and therefore did not
his holie Ghost, calling them to repentance,
require of them anie corporall punishment
according to the rigour of the law,
vnto the which they were neuer subiects,
as they that were strangers from the commune
welth of Israel.Ephe. 2. But if anie think,
that, after that the Gentiles were called
from theyr vaine conuersation, and by
embrasing Christ Iesus were receaued ī the

nombre of Abrahams children, and so made
one people with the Iewes beleuing,
yf ani think, I say, that then they were not
bounde to the same obedience, which
God required of his people Israel, what
tyme he confirmed his leage and conuenante
with them, the same man appeareth
to make Christ inferiour to Moses,
and contrarious to the law of his heauenlie
father. For if the contempt or transgression
of Moses law was worthie of
death, what should we iudge the contempt
of Christes ordenance to be? (I mean after
they be once receaued.) And if Christ be
not commed to dissolue, but to fulfill the
law of his heauenlie Father, shall the libertie
of his Gospell be an occasion, that
the especiall glorie of his Father be troden
vnder foote and regarded of no man? God
forbid. The especial glorie of God is,The especiall honour, which God requireth of his people. that
such, as professe them to be his people,
should harken to his voice, and amongest
all the voices of God reuealed to the
worlde, tuching punishement of vices, is
none more euident neither more seuere,
then is that, which is pronounced against
idolatrie, the teachers and mentainers of
the same.1. Sam. 15. And therefore I fear not to affirm,
that the Gentiles (I mean euerie citie,
realme, prouince, or nation amongest
the Gentiles, embrasing Christ Iesus

and his true religiō) be bound to the same
leage and cōuenant, that God made with
his people Israel, what tyme he promised
to roote owt the nations before them in
these wordes.
            Beware that thou make anie cōuenante
with the inhabitantes of
the land,Exod. 34. to the which thou commest,
leste perchāce that this comme
in ruin, that is, be destruction
to the: but thou shalt destroy theyr
altars, break their idols and cutt
doune their groues. Fear no strange
goddes, worship them not, neither
yet make you sacrifice to
them. But the Lord, who in his
great power, and owtstretched
arme hath broght you owt of the
land of Egypt, shall you fear, hym
shall you honour, hym shall you
worship, to hym shall you make
sacrifice, his statutes, iudgements,
Lawes, and commaundementes
you shall kepe and obserue. This
is the conuenante, which I haue

made with you, saieth the Eternall,
forget it not, neither yet fear ye other
goddes: but fear you the Lord
your God, and he shall deliuer you
frō the hādes of all your ennemies.
            To this same Law, I say, and cōuenante
are the Gētiles no lesse bounde, then somtyme
were the Iewes, when soeuer God
doth illuminate the eyes of anie multitude,
prouince, people or citie, and putteth
the sworde in their own hand to remoue
such enormities from amongest them, as
before God they know to be abominable.
Then, I say, are they no lesse boūd to purge
theyr dominions,▪ cities and countries
from idolatrie, then were the Israelites,
what tyme they receaued the possession of
the land of Canaan. And moreouer I say,
if any go about to erect and set vp idolatrie
or to teach defection from God, after
that the veritie hath bene receaued and
approued, that thē not only the Magistrates,
to whome the sword is cōmittet, but also the people are boūd by that oth, which
they haue made to God, to reuenge to the
vttermost of their power the iniurie done
against his Maiestie. In vniuersal defections,
and in a general reuolt, such as was
in Israel after Ieroboam, there is a diuerse
consideration. For then because the hole

people were togither cōspired agaīst God,
there could none be foūd, that woulde execute
the punishement, which God had cō
               maunded,
till God raised vpp Iehu, whom
he had appoīted for that purpose. And the
same is to be cōsidered in all other general
defectiōs, suche as this day be in the papistrie,
where all are blinded, and all are declined
from God and that of lōge cōtinuance,
so that no ordinarie iustice cā be executed,
but the punishmēt must be reserued
to God ād vnto such meanes, as he shall appoint.
But I do speak of such a nōbre, as after
they haue receaued goddes perfect religiō,
do boldly professe the same, notwithstādīg
that sōme or the most part fal back:
(as of late daies was ī Englād) vnto such a
nōbre, I say, it is Laufull to punish the idolatours
with death, if by anie meanes God
geue them the power. For so did Iosua and
Israel determine to haue done against the
childrē of Rubē, Gad ād Manasses for their
suspected apostasie ād defectiō from God.
And the hole tribes did in verie dede execute
that sharpe iudgemēt agaīst the tribe
of Bēiamin for a lesse offēce then for idolatrie.
And the same oght to be done whersoeuer
Christ Iesus ād his Euāgill is so receaued
ī any realme, ꝓuince, or citie, that
the Magistrates ād people haue solemnely
auowed ād promised to defēd the same, as

vnder king Edward of late dayes was done
in Englād. In such places, I say, it is not only
lawful to punish to the death such, as labour
to subuert the true religiō, but the magistrates
ād people are boūd so to do, onles
they wil prouoke the wrath of God agaīst
thē selues. And therfor I fear not to affirm,
that it had bene the duetie of the nobilitie,
iudges, rulers, ād people of Englād not only
to haue resisted and againstanded Marie
that Iesabel, whome they call their quene,
but also to haue punished her to the death
with all the sort of her idolatrous Preestes,
together with all such, as should haue
assisted her, what tyme that shee and they
openly began to suppresse Christes Euangil,
to shedd the blood of the saīcts of God,
ad to erect that most diuellish idolatrie, the
papistical abominatiōs, ād his vsurped tyrannie,
which ones most iustly by cōmune
oth was banished from that realme. But becaus
I cā not at this present discusse this argument,
as it appertaineth, I am cōpelled
to omitt it to better opportunitie, and so
returning to your Honours, I say, that if
ye confesse your selues baptised in the
Lord Iesus, of necessitie ye must confesse,
that the care of his religion doth appertaine
to your charge. And if ye know that
in your hādes God hath put the sworde for
the causes aboue expressed, thē cā ye not denie,

but that the punishement of obstinate
and malepert idolatours (such as all your
bishoppes be) doth appertaine to your office,
yf after admonition they cōtinew obstinat.
I am not ignorāt, what be the vaine
defēses of your proude prelates. They claime
first a prerogatiue and priuiledge, that
they are exempted, and that by consent of
Councils and Emperours from all iurisdiction
of the temporaltie. And secōdarely,
when they are cōuicted of manifest impieties,
abuses, and enormities aswell in their
maners as in religion, neither fear, nor shame
they to affirme, that thinges so longe
established can not suddenly be reformed,
althogh they be corrupted, but with processe
of tyme they promisse to take order.
But in few wordes I answer, that no priuiledge,
graunted against the ordenance and
statutes of God, is to be obserued althogh
all Councils and men in the earth haue appointed
the same. But against goddes ordenance
it is, that idolatours, murtherours,
fals teachers, and blasphemers shall be exē
               pted
from punishement, as before is declared,
and therefore in vaine it is, that they
claym for priuiledge, when that God sayeth:
The murtherer shalt thou riue from
my alter, that he may die the death. And
as to the order and reformatiō, which they
promisse, that is to be loked or hoped for,

when Satan, whose children and slaues
they are, can chāge his nature. This answer
I doubt not shall suffice the sober ād godlie
reader. But yet to the end that they may
further see their own confusion, and that
your Honours may better vnderstād, what
ye oght to do in so manifest a corruption
and defectiō from God, I aske of them selues,
what assurance they haue for this their
immunitie, exemption, or priuiledge? who
is the auctour of it? and what frute it hath
produced?God is not auctour of anie priuiledge graunted to papistical bishoppes, that they be exempted from the power of the ciuile sword. And fyrst I say that of God
they haue no assurance, neither yet can he
be proued to be auctour of anie suche
priuiledge. But the contrarie is easie to be
seen. For God in establishing his orders
in Israel did so subiect Aaron (in his preesthode
being the figure of Christ) to Moses,
that he feared not to call him in iudgement,
and to constrain hym to giue accomptes
of his wicked dede in consenting
to idolatrie, as the historie doth plainely
witnesse. For thus it is written,
            Then Moses toke the calf,Exod. 32. which
they had made, and burned it with
fier, and did grind it to powder,
and scattering it in the water, gaue
it to drink to the children of Israel▪
declaring herebie the vanitie of their

idol and the abomination of the same, and
thereafter Moses said to Aaron, what
hath this people done to the, that
thou shouldest bring vpon it so
great a syn?
            Thus, I say, doth Moses call and accuse
Aaron of the destruction of the hole people,
and yet he perfectly vnderstode, that
God had appointed hym to be the high
Preest, that he should bear vpon his shoulders
ād vpō his breast the names of the 12.
tribes of Israel, for whome he was appointed
to make sacrifice, praiers, ād supplications.
He knew his dignitie was so great,The dignitie of Aarō did not exempt him from iudgemēt.
that only he might entre within the most
holie place: but neither could his office
nor dignitie exempt hym from iudgemēt,
when he had offended. Yf any obiect, Aaron
at that tyme was not anointed ād therefore
was he subiect to Moses, I haue answered,
that Moses, being taught by the
mouth of God, did perfectly vnderstād, to
what dignitie Aarō was appointed, and yet
he feared not to call hym in iudgement,
and to cōpell hym to make answer for his
wicked fact. But if this answer doth not suffice,
yet shall the holie Ghost witnesse further
in the matter. Salomō remoued from
honour Abiathar being the high preeste,
and cōmaunded him to cease from all function,

and to liue as a priuate man. Now if
the vnction did exempt the preest from
Iurisdiction of the ciuile Magistrate, Salomon
did offend, and iniured Abiathar.
For he was anoynted, and had caried
the ark before Dauid. But God doth not
reproue the fact of Salomon, neither yet
doth Abiathar claime anie prerogatiue
by the reason of his office, but rather doth
the holie Ghost approue the fact of Salomon,
sayinge,
            Salomō eiected furth Abiathar,1. Regū 2.
that he should not be the Preest of
the Lord,1 Sam. 3. that the word of the
Lord might be perfurmed, which
he spake vpon the house of Eli.
            And Abiathar did think that he obtained
great fauour, in that he did escape the
present death, which by his conspiracie
he had deserued. Yf anie yet reason, that
Abiathar was no otherwise subiect to the
iudgement of the king, but as he was appointed
to be the executour of that sentence,
which God before had pronounced,Note well.
as I will not greatly denie that reason,
so require I that euerie man consider,
that the same God, who pronounced
sentence against Eli, and his house,
hath pronounced also, that idolaters,Gal. 4. hooremongers,
murtherers,1. Tim. 3. and blasphemers

shall neither haue portion in the kingdome
of God, neither oght to be permitted
to bear anie rule in his Church
and congregation. Now if the vnction
and office saued not Abiathar, because
that goddes sentence must nedes be perfurmed,
can anie priuiledge graunted
by man be a buckler to malefactours, that
they shall not be subiect to the punishmentes
pronounced by God? I think no
man will be so foolishe as so to affirm. For
a thing more then euident it is, that the
hole preesthode in the tyme of the Law
was bound to giue obedience to the ciuile
powers. And if anie membre of the same
was foūde criminal, the same was subiect
to the punishement of the sworde, which
God had put in the hand of the Magistrate.
And this ordenance of his father did
not Christ disanul,Mat. 17. but rather did cōfirme
the same, cōmaunding tribute to be payed
for hym selfe and for Peter. Who perfectly
knowing the mynd of his maister,
thus writeth in his epistle,
            Submit your selues to all maner
ordenance of man,1. Pet. 2. (he excepteth such
as be expressely repugnyng to goddes
commaundement) for the Lordes
sake,Act. 4. and 5. whether it be to king as to
the chefe head, or vnto rulers as

vnto them, that are sent by hym
for punishement of euill doers,
and for the praise of them, that do
well.
            The same doth the apostle saint Paule
most plainely commaund in these wordes,
            Let euerie soule be subiect to
the superiour powers.Rom. 13.
            
            Which places make euident that neither
Christ neither his Apostles hath geuen
any assurāce of this immunitie ād priuiledge,
which men of Church (as they
wil be termed) do this day claime. Yea it
was a thing vnknowen to the primitiue
Churche many yeares after the daies of
the Apostles. For Chrysostome,Chrysostome vpō the 13. to the Rom. who serued
in the Churche at Constantinople
foure hundreth years after Christes ascension,
and after that corruptiō was greatlie
increased, doth yet thus write vpon the
forsayd wordes of the Apostle,
            This precept,Let Papistes answer Chrysostome. saieth he, doth not
appertaine to such as be called seculars
onlie, but euē to those, that
be Preestes and religious men.
            And after he addeth: Whether thou be
Apostle, Euangelist, Prophete, or
whosoeuer thou be, thou cāst not

be exempted from this subiection.
            Hereof it is playn that Chrysostome
did not vnderstand that God had exēpted
any person from obedience and subiectiō
of the ciuile power, neither yet that he
was auctour of such exemptiō and priuiledge,
as Papistes do this day claime. And
the same was the iudgemēt and vniforme
doctrine of the primatiue Church many
yeares after Christe. Your Honours do
wōder, I doubt not, frō what fōtaine then
did this theyr immunitie, as they terme it,
ād singular priuiledge sprīg. I shall shortly
tuch that, which is euident in their own
law and histories. When the Byshoppes
of Rome, the verie Antichrists had partly
by fraud, and partly by violence vsurped
the superioritie of some places in Italie,
and most iniustly had spoiled the Emperours
of their rētes and  possessiōs,Lett theyr owne histories witnesse. and had
also murthered somme of their officers, as
histories do witnesse, the began Pope after
Pope to practise and deuise, how they
should be exempted from iudgement of
Princes and from the equitie of lawes,
and in this poynt they were most vigilant,
till at length iniquitie did so preuaile
in theyr handes, according as Daniel
had before prophesied of them, that this
sentence was pronounced,
            
               Neither by the Emperour,The mouthe of the beast speakinge great thinges. neither
by the clergie, neither yet by
the people shall the iudge be iudged.
God will, saieth Symmachus, that
the causes of others be determined
by men,Distin. 9. quest. 3. but without all question
he hath reserued the Byshop
of this seat, vnderstanding Rome,Theyre lawes do witnesse. to
his own iudgement.
            And here of diuerse Popes, and expositours
of their lawes would seme to geue
reasons. For saieth Agatho,Dist. 19.
            
            All the preceptes of the apostolik
seat are assured, as by the
voice of God him self.
            The auctour of the glose vpō their canon
affirmeth, that if all the world should
pronounce sentence against the Pope, yet
should his sentēce preuaile. For saieth he,Cap. de translatione titul. 7.
            
            The Pope hath a heauēlie will,
ād therefore he may chaūge the nature
of thinges, he may apply the
substāce of one thing to an other,
and of nothing he may make somwhat,
and that sentēce, which was
nothing (that is) by his mynd fals

and iniuste, he may make somewhat
that is true ād iust. For, saieth he,
in all thinges, that please hym, his
will is for reason. Neither is there
any man, that may aske of hym,
why doest thou so. For he may
dispens aboue the Law, and of
iniustice he may make iustice. For
he hath the fulnes of all power.
            And manie other most blasphemous
sētēces did they pronoūce euery one after
other, which for shortnessake I omitt, till
at the end they obtained this most horrible
decrie: that albeit in life and conuersation
they were so wicked,Distinct. 40. and detestable,
that not only they cōdemned them
selues, but that also they drew to hell and
perdition manie thousandes with them,Note the equitie of this commaundement.
yet that none should presume to reprehēd
or rebuke thē. This being established
for the head (albeit not without somme
contradiction, for somme Emperours did
require due obedience of them, as goddes
word commaunded, and aunciēt Byshoppes
had geuen before to Emperours, and
to their lawes, but Satan so preuailed in
his suete before the blynd world, that the
former sentences were confirmed, which

power being graunted to the head) then
began prouision to be made for the rest
of the membres in all realmes and contries,
where they made residence. The
frute whereof we see to be this, that
none of that pestilent generation (I mean
the vermine of the Papistical order) will
be subiect to anie ciuile Magistrate, how enormious
that euer his crime be, but will
be reserued to their own ordenarie, as they
terme it. And what frutes haue hereof
ensued, be the world neuer so blynd, it
can not but witnesse. For how their head
that Romane Antichrist hath bene occupied
euer sēce the graūting of such priuiledges,
histories do witnesse, and of late
the most part of Europa subiect to the
plage of God, to fier and sworde, by his
procurement hath felt and this day doth
fele. The pride, ambition, enuie, excesse,
fraude, spoile, oppression, murther, filthie
life, and incest, that is vsed and mentained
amongest that rabble of Preestes,
freers, monkes, channons, byshoppes and
Cardinalles, can not be expressed. I fear
not to affirme, neither doubt I to proue,
that the papisticall Church is further degenerate
from the puretie of Christes
doctrine,The matter is more then euident. from the footesteppes of the Apostles
and from the maners of the primatiue
Church, thē was the Church of the

Iewes from goddes holie statutes, what time
it did crucifie Christ Iesus the onlie
Messias, and most cruelly persecute his Apostles.
And yet will our Papistes claime
theyr priuiledges and auncient liberties,
which if you graunt vnto thē, my Lords,
ye shall assuredly drink the cupp of goddes
vengeance with them,whosoeuer mētaineth the priuiledges of Papists, shall drīk the cupp of gods vē
                  geance with them and shalbe reputed
before his presence compagnions
of theues and mētainers of murtherers, as
is before declared. For theyr immunitie ād
priuiledge, whereof so greatly they bost,
is nothing els, but as if theues, murtherers
or briggandes should conspire amongest
them selues, that they would neuer answer
in iudgement before anie laufull Magistrate,
to the end that their theft and murther
should not be punished, euen such I
say is their wicked priuiledge, which neither
they haue of God the father, neither
of Christ Iesus, who hathe reuealed his
fathers will to the world, neither yet of
the Apostles nor primatiue Churche, as
before is declared. But it is a thinge
conspired amongest them selues, to the
end that their iniquitie, detestable life,
and tyrannie shall neither be repressed
nor reformed. And if they obiect, that
godlie Emperours did graunt and confirme
the same, I answer that the godlines
of no man is, or can be of sufficient

auctoritie to iustifie a foolishe and vngodlie
fact, such I mean, as God hath not
alowed by his worde. For Abraham was
a godlie man, but the deniall of his wife
was such a fact, as no godlie man oght to
imitate. The same might I shew of Dauid,
Ezechias and Iosias, vnto whom I
think no man of iudgement will prefer
anie Emperour sence Christ, in holines ād
wisdome, and yet are not all theyr factes,
no euen such, as they appeared to haue
done for good causes, to be approued nor
folowed. And therefore, I say, as errour
and ignorance remayn all waies with the
most perfect man in this life, so must their
workes be examined by an other rule, thē
by their own holines, if they shall be approued.
But if this answer doth not suffice,
then will I answer more shortly, that no
godlie Emperour sence Christes ascensiō
hath graunted anie such priuiledge to anie
such Churche or person, as they (the
hole generatiō of Papistes) be at this day.
I am not ignorāt, that sōme Emperours of
a certaine zeale and for sōme cōsideratiōs
graunted liberties to the true Church afflicted
for theyr mentainance against tyrants,
but what serueth this for the defence
of theyr tyrannie? Yf the law must be
vnderstāded accordīg to the mynd of the
lawgeuer, then must they fyrst proue thē
               
selues Christes true ād afflicted Churche,
before they can claime anie priuiledge
to appertaine to them. For only to that
Churche were the priuiledges graunted.
It will not be their glorious titles, neither
yet the longe possession of the name,
that can preuaile in this so weghtie a cause.
For all those had the Churche of Ierusalem,
which did crucifie Christ, and
did condemne his doctrine. We offer to
proue by theyr frutes and tyrannie, by the
Prophetes, and playn scriptures of God,
what trees and generation they be, to witt
vnfrutefull and rotten, apt for nothing,
but to be cutt and cast in hell fier, yea
that they are the very kingdome of Antichrist,
of whome we are cōmaunded to beware.
And therefore, my Lordes, to return
to you, seing that God hath armed your
handes with the sworde of iustice, seing
that his Law most streatly commaundeth
idolaters and fals prophetes to be punisshed
with death, and that you be placed
aboue your subiects to reigne as fathers
ouer theyr children: and further seing
that not only I, but with me manie thousand
famous, godlie and learned persons,
accuse your Byshoppes ād the hole rabble
of the Papistical clergie of idolatrie, of
murther and of blasphemie against God
committed: it appertaineth to your Honours

to be vigilant and carefull in so
weghtie a matter? The question is not of
earthly substāce, but of the glorie of God,
and of the saluation of your selues, and of
your brethren subiect to your charge, in
which if you after this playne admonitiō
be negligent, there resteth no excuse by
reason of ignorance. For in the name of
God I require of you, that the cause of religiō
may be tried in your presēce by the
playne ād simple worde of God: that your
Byshoppes be compelled to desist from
theyr tyrannie: that they be compelled to
make answer for the neglecting of their
office, for the substāce of the poore, which
vniustly they vsurpe and prodigally they
do spend, but principally for the fals and
deceauable doctrine, which is taught and
defended by theyr fals prophetes, flattering
freers, and other such venemous locustes.
Which thing if with single eyes
ye do (preferring goddes glorie and the
saluation of your brethren to all worldlie
commoditie) then shall the same God,
who solemnely doth pronounce to honour
those, that do honour hym, power
his benedictions plentifully vpon you,
he shall be your buckler, protection and
captayne, and shall represse by his strength
and wisdome, whatsoeuer Satan by
his suppostes shall imagine against you.

I am not ignorant, that great troubles
shall ensue your enterprise. For Satan
will not be expelled from the possession
of his vsurped kingdome without resistance.
But if you, as is said, preferring goddes
glorie to your own liues, vnfeanedly
seke and studie to obey his blessed
will, then shall your deliuerance be such,
as euidently it shall be knowen, that the
angels of the eternall do watche, make
warr, and feght for those, that vnfeynedly
fear the Lorde. But if you refuse this
my most reasonable and iust petition,
what defēce that euer you appeare to haue
before men, then shall God (whome in
me you contemne) refuse you. He shall
pourefurthe contempt vpon you,Deu. 28. and
vpon your posteritie after you.Leuit. 26. The spirit
of boldnes and wisdome shall be taken
from you, your ennemies shall reign,
and you shall die in bondage, yea God
shall cutt doune the vnfrutefull trees,
when they do appeare most beautifully
to florish,Esa. 27. & 30. and shall so burn the roote, that
after of you shall neither twigge, nor
branch againe spring to glorie. Hereof
I nede not to adduce vnto you examples
from the former ages, and auncient histories.
For your brethren the nobilitie
of England are a mirrour and glasse, in
the which ye may beholde goddes iust

punishment. For as they haue refused him,
and his Euāgil, which ones in mouth they
did professe, so hath he refused them, and
hath taken from them the spirit of wisdome,
boldenes, and of counsil. They see
and fele theyr owne miserie, and yet they
haue no grace to auoid it. They hate the
bondage of strangers, the pride of preestes,
and the mōstriferous empire of a wicked
womā, and yet are they cōpelled to bowe
their neckes to the yock of the Deuill,
to obey what soeuer the proude Spaniards,
and wicked Iesabel list to commaund, and
finally to stand like slaues with capp in
hand till the seruantes of Satan the shauen
sort call them to counsil. This frute do
they reape ād gather of their former rebellion,
and vnfaithfulnes towardes God.
They are left cōfused in their owne counsils.
He, whome in his mēbres for the pleasure
of a wicked woman they haue exiled,
persecuted ād blasphemed, doth now laugh
them to skorn, suffereth thē to be pyned in
bondage of most wicked men, ād finally
shall adiudge thē to the fier euerlastīg, except
that spedely, ād opēly they repēt theyr
horrible treasō, which against God, agaīst
his sonne Christ Iesus, and against the libertie
of their owne natiue realme they
haue cōmitted. The same plages shall fall
vpon you, be you assured, if ye refuse the

defence of his seruantes, that call for your
support. My words are sharpe, but cōsider,
my Lords, that they are not mine, but that
they are the threatnynges of the omnipotent,
who assuredly will perfurme the voices
of his Prophetes, how that euer carnall
men despise his admonitions.Lett Englād and Scotland both aduert. The
sworde of Goddes wrath is alredie drawē,
which of necessitie must nedes stryke,
when grace offred is obstinatly refused.
You haue bene long in bondage of the Deuil,
blyndnes, errour and idolatrie, preuailing
against the simple trueth of God in
that your realme, in which God hath made
you princes and rulers. But now doth
God of his great mercie call you to repentance,
before he power furth the vttermost
of his vengeance:God calleth to repentance before he strike in his hote displeasure. he crieth to your eares,
that your religiō is nothing but idolatrie.
he accuseth you of the blood of his saincts,
which hath bene shed by your permission,
assistance, and powers. For the tyrannie of
those raging beastes should haue no force,
if by your strength they were not mentained.Papistes had no force, yf Princes did not mentain them.
Of those horrible crimes doth now
God accuse you, not of purpose to condemne
you, but mercifully to absolue, and
pardō you, as somtyme he did those, whom
Peter accused to haue killed the sonne
of God,Act. 2. so that ye be not of mind nor purpose
to iustifie your former iniquitie.
            
               Iniquitie I call not only the crimes and
offenses, which haue bene and yet remaine
in your maners and liues, but that also,
which appeareth before men most holie,
with hassard of my life I offre to proue abomination
before God:No true seruant of God may communicate with the papistical religion. that is, your hole
religion to be so corrupt and vaine, that
no true seruante of God can communicate
with it, because that in so doing he should
manifestly denie Christ Iesus and his eternal
veritie. I know that your byshoppes
accompained with the swarme of the papistical
vermine shal crie, A damned heretik
oght not to be hard.An answer to the old obiection, that an heretik oght not to be hard. But remembre, my
Lords, what in the beginning I haue protested,
vpō which groūnd I cōtinually stād,
to witt, that I am no heretike nor deceauable
teacher, but the seruante of Christ Iesus,
a preacher of his īfallible veritie, innocent
in all that they can lay to my charge
cōcerning my doctrine, and that therefore
by them, being ennemies to Christ, I
am iniustly damned. From which cruell
sentence I haue appealed and do appeal,
as before mention is made: in the mean tyme
most hūbly requiring your Honours
to take me in your protection, to be auditours
of my iust defēses, graūting vnto me
the same libertie, which Achab a wicked
king and Israel at that tyme a blynded people,
grāted to Helias in the like case. That

is, that your byshoppes, and the hole rabble
of your clergie may be called before
you and before that people,1. Reg. 18. whome they
haue deceaued: that I be not condemned
by multitude, by custome, by auctoritie
or law diuised by man, but that God hym
self may be iudge betwixt me and my
aduersaries. Let God, I say, speak by his
law, by his prophetes, by Christ Iesus
or by his Apostles, and so let hym pronounce,
what religion he approueth, and
then be my ennemies neuer so manie, and
appeare they neuer so stronge and so learned,
no more do I feare victorie, then did
Helias, being but one man against the multitude
of Baales preestes. And if they
think to haue aduantage by theyre councils
and doctours,Tuching councils and doctours. this I further offer, to
admitt the one and the other, as witnesses
in all matters debateable, three thinges
(which iustly can not be denied)
being granted vnto me. First, that the most
auncient Councils nighest to the primitiue
Church, in which the learned and
godlie fathers did examine all matters
by goddes word, may be holden of most
auctoritie. Secondarely, that no determination
of Councils nor man be admitted
against the plaine veritie of goddes
word, nor against the determination
of those foure chefe Councils, whose auctoritie

hath bene and is holden by them
equal with the auctoritie of the foure Euangelistes.
And last, that to no doctour be
geuen greater auctoritie, then Augustine
requireth to be geuen to his writinges:In prologo Retract.
to witt, if he plainely proue not his
affirmation by Gods infallible worde,
that then his sentence be reiected and imputed
to the errour of a mā. These thinges
graunted and admitted, I shall no more refuse
the testimonies of Councils and doctours,
then shall my aduersaries. But and
if they will iustifie those Councils, which
mentaine theyr pride, ād vsurped auctoritie,
and will reiect those, which plainly
haue condemned all such tyrannie, negligence,
and wicked life, as byshoppes now
do vse: and if further they will snatche a
doubtfull sentence of a doctour, and refuse
his mynd, when he speaketh plainly,
then will I say, that all man is a lyer, that
credit oght not to be geuen to an vnconstant
witnes, and that no Coūcils oght to
preuaile, nor be admitted against the sentence,
which God hath pronounced. And
thus, my Lordes, in few wordes to cōclude
I haue offred vnto you a triall of mie innocencie:
I haue declared vnto you, what
God requireth of you, being placed aboue
his people, as rulers and princes: I haue
offred vnto you, and to the inhabitātes

of the realme, the veritie of Christ Iesus,
and with the hasard of my life I presently
offer to proue the religion, which amongest
you is mentained by fier and sworde,
to be fals, dānable and diabolicall. Which
thinges if ye refuse, defending tyrantes in
their tyrānie, then dar I not flatter, but as it
was commaunded to Ezechiel boldly to
proclaime,Eze. 33. so must I crie to you, that you
shall perishe in your iniquitie, that the
Lord Iesus shall refuse so manie of you, as
maliciously withstand his eternall veritie,
and in the day of his apparition,Mat. 24 & 26. when all
flesh shall appear before hym, that he shall
repell you from his compagnie and shall
commaund you to the fier, whiche neuer
shalbe quēched,Dani. 12 and then neither shall the
multitude be able to resist,Mat. 25. neither yet the
counsils of man be able to preuaile against
that sentence, which he shall pronounce.
            God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ
by the power of his holie spirit so rule and
dispose your hearts, that with simplicitie
ye may cōsider the thinges, that be offred,
ād that ye may take such order in the same,
as God in you may be glorified, and Christes
flock by you may be edified and comforted
to the praise ād glorie of our Lord
Iesus Christ, whose omnipotent spirit rule
your hearts in his true feare to the end.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            TO HIS BELOVED
BRETHREN THE
communaltie of Scotland Iohn Knoxe
wisheth grace, mercie and peace
with the spirit of
righteous iudgement.
            
               VVhat I haue required of the
Quene Regēt, estates ād nobilitie
as of the chife heades
(for this present) of the realme,
I can not cease to require
of you dearli beloued Brethrē, which
be the cōmunaltie and bodie of the same.
To wit, that it (notwithstanding that fals
and cruel sentence, which your disgised
byshoppes haue pronounced against me)
would please you to be so fauorable vnto
me, as to be indifferēt auditours of my iust
purgation. Which to do if God earnestly
moue your heartes, as I nothīg doubt, but
that your entreprise shall redounde to the
praise of his holie name, so am I assured,
that ye and your posteritie shall by that
meanes receaue most singular comfort, edificatiō,
ād profit. For when ye shall heare
the matter debated, ye shall easelie perceaue
and vnderstand, vpon what grounde ād
foundation is builded that religion, which

amongest you is this day defended by fier
and sword. As for my own conscience I am
most assuredly persuaded, that, what soeuer
is vsed in the papistical Churche is al togither
repugning to Christes blessed ordināce,
and is nothing but mortal venem, of
which whosoeuer drinketh, I am assuredly
persuaded, that therewith he drīketh death
and damnation, except by true conuersion
vnto God he be purged from the same. But
because that long silence of goddes worde
hath begotten ignorance almost in al sortes
of men, and ignorance, ioyned with
long custome, hath cōfirmed superstition
in the heartes of many, I therefore in the
name of the Lord Iesus desire audience aswell
of you the communaltie, my Brethrē,
as of the estates and nobilitie of the realme,Petition.
that in publike preaching I may haue
place amongest you at large to vtter my
mind in all matters of cōtrouersie this day
in religion. And further I desire, that ye cō
               curring
with your nobilitie would compell
your byshoppes and clergie to cease
their tyrannie, and also that, for the better
assurance and instruction of your consciēce,
ye would compell your said bishoppes
and fals teachers to answer by the scriptures
of God to such obiectiōs ād crimes,
as shalbe laid against their vaine religion,
fals doctrine, wicked life, and sclanderous

conuersation. Here I know, that it
shalbe obiected, that I require of you a
thing most vnreasonable. To witt, that ye
should call your religion in doubt, which
hath bene approued and established by so
long continuance, and by the consent of so
manie men before you.Answer to an obiection. But I shortly answer,
that neither is the lōg processe of tyme,
neither yet the multitude of men a sufficiēt
approbation,Lactanti. which God will alow
for our religiō.Firmian. For as somme of the most
aunncient writers do witnesse,Tertuliā. neither can
long processe of tyme iustifie an errour,Cyprian.
neither can the multitude of such, as folow
it, chaūg the nature of the same. But if it
was an errour in the begynnyng, so is it in
the end, and the longer that it be folowed,
and the mo that do receaue it, it is the
more pestilent, and more to be auoided.
For if antiquitie or multitude of mē could
iustifie any religion, then was the idolatrie
of the Gentiles, and now is the abomination
of the Turkes good religiō. For
antiquitie approued the one, and a multitude
hath receaued and doth defende
the other. But otherwise to answer, godlie
men may wonder, from what fontaine
such a sentēce doth flow, that no man oght
to trie his faith and religion by goddes
worde, but that he safely may beleue and
folow euerie thing, which antiquitie

and a multitude haue approued. The spirit
of God doth otherwise teach vs.Iohn 5. & 7. For
the wisdone of God Christ Iesus hym selfe
remitted his aduersaries to Moses, and
the scriptures, to trie by them, whether his
doctrine was of God or not. The Apostles
Paule and Peter commaunde men to trie
the religion,Actes 17. which they professe, by goddes
plaine scriptures,2. Pet. 1. and do praise men
for so doing.1. Iohn 4. S. Iohn straytly commaundeth,
that we beleue not euerie spirit, but
willeth vs to trie the spirits, whether they
be of God or not. Now seyng that these
euident testimonies of the holie Ghoste
will vs to trie our faith and religion by
the plaine worde of God, wonder it is, that
the papistes will not be content, that theyr
religion and doctrine comme vnder the
triall of the same. If this sentēce of Christ
be true (as it is most true, seing it springeth
from the veritie it self) who so euill
doeth, hateth the light,Iohn 3. neither will he
cōme to the light lest that his euill workes
be manifested and rebuked, then do our
papistes by their own sentence condemne
them selues and theyr religion. For in so
far as they refuse examination and trial,
they declare, that they know somme fault,
which the light will vtter: which is a cause
of theyr feare▪ ād why they claime to that
priuiledge, that no man dispute of theyr

religion. The veritie and trueth, being of
the nature of fyne purified gold,why Papistes will not dispute of the ground of theyr religion. doth not
fear the trial of the fornace, but the stuble
and chaf of mannes inuentions (such
is theyr religion) may not abyde the
flame of the fier. True it is, that Mahomet
pronounced this sentence, that no
man should in paine of death dispute or
reason of the grounde of his religion.Mahomet and the Pope do agree.
Which law to this day by the art of Satā is
yet obserued amōgest the Turkes to theyr
mortal blindnes and horrible blasphemyng
of Christ Iesus, and of his true religion.
And from Mahomet (or rather from
Satan father of all lies) hath the Pope
and his rabble learned this former lesson.
To witt, that theyr religion should not be
disputed vpon, but what the fathers haue
beleued, that oght and must the childrē
approue. And in so diuising Satan lacked
not his foresight. For no one thing
hath more established the kingdome of
that Romane Antichrist, then this most
wicked decrie. To witt, that no man was
permitted to reason of his power, or to call
his lawes in doubt. This thing is most assured,
that whensoeuer the papisticall religion
shall comme to examination, it
shalbe founde to haue no other grounde,
then hath the religion of Mahomet. To
witt mannes inuention, deuise and dreames

ouershadowed with somme colour of
goddes worde. And therefore Brethren
seing that the religion is, as the stomake
to the bodie, which, if it be corrupted, doth
infect the hole membres, it is necessarie
that the same be examined, and if it be founde
replenished with pestilent humors
(I mean with the fantasies of men) then of
necessitie it is, that those be purged, els shal
your bodies and soules perishe for euer.NOTE.
For of this I would ye were most certaīly
persuaded, that a corrupt religion defileth
the hole life of man, appear it neuer so holie.Reformation of religion belongeth to all, that hope for life euerlastinge.
Neither would I that ye should esteme
the reformation and care of religion lesse
to appertaī to you, because ye are no kinges,
rulers, iudges, nobils, nor in auctoritie.
Beloued Brethren, ye are goddes creatures,
created and formed to his own image
and similitude, for whose redemption
was shed the most pretious blood of the
onlie beloued sonne of God, to whome he
hath commaunded his Ghospell and gladtidinges
to be preached, ād for whome he
hath prepared the heauenlie inheritance,
so that ye will not obstinately refuse, and
disdainefully cōtemne the meanes, which
he hath appointed to obtaine the same: to
witt, his blessed Euangile, which now he
offereth vnto you, to the end that ye may
be saued. For the Ghospell and gladtidinges

of the kīgdome truelie preached is the
power of God to the saluation of euerie
beleuer,Rom. 1. which to credit and receaue you
the communaltie are no lesse addetted,
then be your rulers and princes.The subiect is no lesse boūd to beleue in Christ, then is the kinge. For albeit
God hath put and ordened distinction ād
differēce betwixt the king and subiectes,
betwixt the rulers and the commune people
in the regiment and administration of
ciuile policies, yet in the hope of the life
to comme he hath made all equall. For
as in Christ Iesus the Iew hath no greater
prerogatiue,Galat. 3. then hath the Gentile, the
man, then hath the woman, the learned,
then the vnlearned, the Lord, then
the seruante, but all are one in him, so is
there but one way and meanes to attaine
to the participation of his benefites and
spirituall graces, which is a liuelie faith
wurking by charitie. And therefore I say
that it doth no lesse appertaine to you,
beloued Brethren, to be assured that your
faith and religion be grounded and established
vpon the true and vndoubted worde
of God, then to your princes, or rulers.
For as your bodies can not escape corporal
death, if with your princes ye eat
or drink deadlie poison (althoghe it be by
ignorance or negligence) so shall ye not
escape the death euerlasting, if with them
ye professe a corrupt religion. Yea except

in heart ye beleue, and with mouth ye confesse
the Lord Iesus to be the onlie Saluiour
of the world (which ye can not do,
except ye embrace his Euangile offered)
ye can not escape death and damnatiō.Abac. 2. For
as the iust liueth by his own faith,Marc. 16. so doth
the vnfaithfull perishe by his infidelitie.Iohn. 3.
And as true faith is engendred, norished,
and mentained in the heartes of goddes elect
by Christes Euāgile truelie preached,
so is infidelitie and vnbelefe fostered by
concealing and repressing the same. And
thus if ye loke for the life euerlasting, ye
must trie if ye stand in faith, and if ye
would be assured of a true ād liuelie faith,
ye must nedes haue Christ Iesus truely
preached vnto you. And this is the cause
(dear Brethren) that so oft I repeat, and
so constantly I affirm, that to you it doth
no lesse appertaine, then to your kinge or
princes▪ to prouide that Christ Iesus be
truely preached amongest you, seing that
without his true knolledge can neither of
you both attaine to saluation. And this
is the poynt, wherein, I say, al man is a equal,
            That as all be descended from
Adam,Wherin all man is equal. by whose syn and inobedience
did death enter into the
world,Rom. 5. so it behoued all, that shall

obtaine life, to be ingrafted in one,
that is,Isa. 53. in the Lord Iesus, who
being the iust seruant, doth by his
knolledge iustifie many:Iohn 3. & 5. to wit, all
that vnfeanedly beleue in hym.
            Of this equalitie, and that God requireth
no lesse of the subiect, be he neuer so
poore, then of the prince and riche man in
matters of religion, he hath geuen an euident
declaration in the law of Moses. For
when the tabernacle was buy lded, erected,
and set in order, God did prouide, how it,
and the thinges appertaining to the same,
should be sustained, so that they should
not fall in decay. And this prouision (albeit
heauē ād earth obey his empire) would
he not take from the secrete and hid treasures,
which lie dispersed ī the vaines of the
earthe,Exod. 30. neither yet would he take it frō the
riche and potent of his people, but he did
commaund, that euerie man of the sonnes
of Israel (were he rich or were he poore)
that came in compt from twentie yeares
and vpward, should yearely pay half a sicle
for an oblation to the Lorde in the
remembrance of their redemption, and
for an expiation or clensing to their soules,
which money God cōmaunded should
be bestowed vpon the ornamentes and

necessaries of the tabernacle of testimonie.
He furthermore added a precept, that the
riche should giue no more for that vse,
and in that behalf, then should the poore,
neither yet that the poore should giue any
lesse, then should the riche in that consideration.
This law to mannes reason and
iudgement may appear verie vnreasonable.
For somme riche man might haue
geuen a thousand sicles with lesse hurt of
his substāce, then sōme poore man might
haue payed the half sicle. And yet God
maketh all equall, and will that the one
shall pay no more then the other, neither
yet the poore any lesse then the riche.
This law I say may appeare verie
vnequall. But if the cause, which God addeth,
be obserued, we shall fynde in the same
the great mercie and inestimable wisdome
of God to appear, which cause is expressed
in these wordes,
            This money receaued from the
children of Israel thou shalt geue
in the seruice of the tabernacle,Exod. 30.
that it may be to the children of Israel
for a remembrance before the
Lord, that he may be mercifull to
your soules.
            This cause, I say, doth euidently declare,

that as the hole multitude was deliuered
from the bondage of Egypt by the mightie
power of God alone, so was euerie
mēbre of the same without respect of person
sāctified by his grace, the riche in that
behalf nothing preferred to the poorest.
For by no merit, nor worthynes of mā was
he moued to chose, ād to establishe his habitation
and dwellinge amongest them.
But their felicitie, prerogatiue ād honour,
which they had aboue all other natiōs, proceded
only frō the fontaine of his eternal
goodnes, who loued thē freely, as that he
freely had chosen them to be his preestlie
kingdome ād holie people from all natiōs
of the earth.Exod. 19. Thus to honour them, that he
would dwell in the middest of them, he
neither was moued (I say) by the wisdome
of the wise, by the riches of the potent, neither
yet by the vertue and holynes of any
estate amongest them, but of mere goodnes
did he loue them, and with his presence
did he honour that hole people, ād therefore
to paynt owt the same his cōmune
loue to the hole multitude, and to cutt
of occasions of contention,The presence of God represented in the tabernacle. and doubtes
of conscience, he would receaue no more
from the riche, then from the poore, for
the maintenāce of that his tabernacle, by
the which was represented his presence,
and habitation amongest them. Yf the riche

had bene preferred to the poore,The presence of God represented in the taber nacle. then
as the one should haue bene puffed vp with
pride, as that he had bene more acceptable
to God by reason of his greater gift, so
should the cōscience of the other haue bene
troubled and woūded, thinking that his
pouertie was an impedimēt, that he could
not stand in so perfecte fauour with God,
as did the other, because he was not able to
geue somuch, as did the rich, to the mentenance
of his tabernacle. But he, who of
mercie (as said is) did chose his habitation
amongest them, and also that best
knoweth, what lieth within man, did prouide
the remedie for the one, and for the
other, making them equal in that behalfe,
who in other thinges were most vnequal.
Yf the poore should haue founde hym
selfe greued by reason of that taxe, and
that asmuch was imposed vpon hym, as vpon
the riche, yet had he no small cause of
ioy, that God him selfe would please to cō
               pare
hym, and to make hym equal in the
mentenāce of his tabernacle to the most riche
and potent in Israel. Yf this equalitie
was commaunded by God for mentenāce
of that transitorie tabernacle, which was
but a shadoe of a better to cōme,Hebr. 9. is not the
same required of vs, who now hath the veritie,
which is Christ Iesus? who being clad
with our nature is made Immanuel, that

is, God with vs.
            Whose natural bodie albeit it
be receaued in the heauens,Isaie 8. where
he must abyde till all be complete,Act. 3.
that is forespoken by the Prophetes,Mat. 28.
yet hath he promised to be presēt
with vs to the ēd of the world.
            And for that purpose, and for the more assurance
of his promisse he hath erected amongest
vs here in earthe the signes of his
owne presence with vs, his spiritual tabernacle,
the true preaching of his worde,
and right administration of his sacramentes.
To the mentenance whereof is
no lesse bounde the subiect,The spiritual tabernacle and signes of Christes presence with vs. then the prince,
the poore, then the riche. For as the price,
which was geuē for mannes redēption,
is one, so requireth God of all, that shalbe
partakers of the benefites of the same, a
like duetie, which is a plaine confession,
that by Christ Iesus alone we haue receaued,
what soeuer was lost in Adam. Of
the prince doth God require, that he refuse
hym selfe, and that he folow Christ
Iesus: of the subiect he requireth the same.
Of the kinges and iudges it is required,
that they kysse the sonne, that is, giue
honour, subiection, and obedience to hym.
And from such reuerēce doth not God exempt
the subiect, that shalbe saued. And

this is that aequalitie, which is betwixt the
kinges and subiectes, the most riche or
noble, and betwixt the poorest, and men
of lowest estate: to wit, that as the one is
oblished to beleue in heart, and with
mouth to cōfesse the Lord Iesus to be the
onlie sauiour of the world, so also is the other.
Neither is there anie of goddes childrē
(who hath attained to the yeares of discretion)
so poore, but that he hath thus
much to bestow vpon the ornamentes,NOTE. and
maintenance of their spiritual tabernacle,
when necessitie requireth: neither yet is
there anie so riche, of whose hande God
requireth any more. For albeit that Dauid
gathered greate substāce for the buylding
of the temple:1 Par. 29. that Salomon with earnest
diligence and incredible expenses erected
and finished the same:2. Para. 3. 4. & 5. that Ezechias
and Iosias purged the religion,2. Para. 29. 30. & 35. which before
was corrupted, yet to them was God
no further dettour in that respect, then
he was to the most simple of the faithfull
posteritie of faithfull Abraham. For theyr
diligence, zeal, and workes gaue rather
testimonie and confession before men,
what honour they did bear to God, what
loue to his worde, and reuerēce to his religiō,
then that any worke proceading from
them did either establishe, or yet encrease
goddes fauoure towardes thē, who freely

did loue thē in Christ his sonne before
the foundation of the world was laied. So
that these forenamed by theyr notable
workes gaue testimonie of theyr vnfained
faith, and the same doth the poorest, that
vnfeanedly and openly professeth Christ
Iesus, that doth embrase his gladtydinges
offred, that doth abhorre superstition, and
flie from idolatrie. The poorest; I say,
and most simple, that this day in earth in
the daies of this cruel persecution fermely
beleueth in Christ, and boldly doth
confesse hym before this wicked generation,
is no lesse acceptable before God,
neither is iudged in his presence to haue
done any lesse in promoting Christ his
cause, then is the king, that by the sworde
and power, which he hath receaued of
God, wrooteth owt idolatrie, and so aduanceth
Christes glorie. But to return
to our former purpose, it is no lesse required,
I say, of the subiect to beleu
                  •
                in
Christ, and to professe his true religion,
then of the prince and king. And therefore
I affirme, that in goddes presence
it shall not excuse you to alledge, that
ye were no chefe rulers, and therefore
that the care and reformation of religion
did not appertaine vnto you.
            Ye dear Brethren (as before is said) are
the creatures of God created to his owne

image and similitude: to whome it is commaunded
to hear the voyce of your heauenlie
Father,Mat. 17. to embrase his sonne Christ
Iesus, to flie from all doctrine and religion,
which he hath not approued by his
own will reuealed to vs in his moste blessed
worde. To which preceptes and charges
if ye be founde inobedient, ye shall
perish in your iniquitie as rebelles and
stubborn seruantes, that haue no pleasure
to obey the good will of their soueraigne
Lord, who most louingly doth call for
your obedience. And therefore, Brethren,
in this behalf it is your part to be carefull
and diligent.Note. For the question is not of
thinges temporall, which allthoghe they
be endaungered, yet by diligēce and processe
of tyme may after be redressed, but it
is of the dānation of your bodies and soules
and of the losse of the life euerlasting,
which once lost can neuer be recouered.
            And therefore, I say, that it behoueth you
to be careful and diligēt in this so weghtie
a matter, lest that ye, contemnyng this occasion,
which God now offereth, fynd not
the like, althoghe that after with gronyng
and sobbes ye lāguyshe for the same.The offer of Iohn Knoxe to his natiue realme. And
that ye be not ignorant of what occasion
I mean, in few words I shall expresse it.
            Not only I, but with me also diuers other
godlie and learned men do offer

vnto you our labours faithfully to instruct
you in the waies of the Eternal our God,
and in the synceritie of Christes Euangil,
which this day by the pestilent generatiō
of Antichrist (I mean by the pope, and by
his most vngodlie clergie) are almost hyd
from the eies of men. We offer to ieopard
our liues for the saluation of your soules,
and by manifest scriptures to proue that
religion, which amongest you is mentained
by fier and sworde, to be vaine, fals ād
diabolical. We require nothing of you,
but that paciently ye will heare our doctrine,
which is not oures, but is the doctrine
of saluation reuealed to the world
by the onlie sonne of God:what he requireth. ād that ye will
examine our reasons, by the which we offer
to proue the papistical religion to be
abominable before God. And last we require,
that by your power the tyrannie of
those cruel beastes (I mean of preests and
freers) may be brideled till we haue vttered
our mindes in all matters this day debateable
in religion. Yf these thinges in
the fear of God ye graunt to me, and vnto
others, that vnfeanedly for your saluation,
and for goddes glorie require the same,
I am assured, that of God ye shall be blessed,
whatsoeuer Satan shall deuise against
you. But and if ye contēne or refuse God,
who thus louingly offereth vnto you saluation

and life, ye shall neither escape
plages temporall, whiche shortly shall
apprehend you, neither yet the torment
prepared for the deuil, and for his angels,
except by spedie repentance ye returne
to the Lord, whome now ye refuse,
if that ye refuse the messingers of his
worde.
            But yet I think ye doubt,An answer to two questions. what ye
oght, and may do in this so weghtie a
matter. In few wordes I will declare my
conscience in the one and in the other. Ye
oght to prefer the glorie of God, the promoting
of Christ his Euangil, and the
saluation of your soules to all thinges,
that be in earth: and ye, althoghe ye be but
subiectes, may lawfully require of your
superiours, be it of your king, be it of your
lordes, rulers and powers, that they prouide
for you true preachers,Subiectes may lawfully require true preachers of theyr rulers. and that they
expell such, as vnder the names of pastours
deuoure and destroy the flock, not
feeding the same as Christ Iesus hath commaunded. And if in this point your superiour
be negligent, or yet pretend to
maitaine tyrantes in their tyrannie, most
iustly ye may prouide true teachers for
your selues, be it in your cities, townes
or villages: them ye may maitaine
and defend against all, that shall persecute
them, and by that meanes shall labour

to defraude you of that most confortable
foode of your soules, Christes Euangil
truely preached. Ye may moreouer
withhold the frutes, and profetts, which
your fals Byshoppes and clergie most iniustly
receyue of you, vnto such tyme as
they be compelled faithfully to do theyr
charge and dueties, which is to preach vnto
you Christ Iesus truely, ryghtly to minister
his sacramentes according to his
own institution, and so to watche for the
saluation of your soules, as is commaunded
by Christ Iesus hym selfe and by his
apostles Paule,Ioan. 21. and Peter.Act. 20. Yf God shall
moue your heartes in his true fear to begynne
to practise these thīges, and to demaund
and craue the same of your superiours,
which most lawfully ye may do, thē
I doubt not, but of his greate mercie, and
free grace he shall illuminate the eyes of
your myndes, that his vndoubted veritie
shalbe a lantern to your feete to guyde ād
lead you in all the wayes, which his godlie
wisdome doth approue.Thinges, that may draw men back from the synceritie of Christes euangil. He shall make
your ennemies tremble before your faces,
he shall establish his blessed Euāgil amō
               gest
you to the saluation and perpetual cō
               fort
of your selues, and of your posteritie
after you. But and if (as God forbyd) the
loue of frendes, the fear of your princes,
and the wisdome of the world draw you

back from God, and from his sōne Christ
Iesus, be ye certainly persuaded, that ye
shall drink the cupp of his vengeance, so
many I mean as shall contemne and dispise
this louing calling of your heauenlie
father. It wil not excuse you (dear Brethren)
in the presence of God, neither yet
will it auaile you in the day of his visitation,
to say, We were but simple subiects,
we could not redresse the faultes and crimes
of our rulers, Byshoppes, and clergie:
we called for reformation, and wished for
the same, but Lords brethrē were Byshoppes,
theyr sonnes were abbottes, and the
frendes of greate men had the possession
of the Churche, and so were we compelled
to giue obedience to all, that they demaunded.
These vaine excuses, I say, will
nothing auaile you in the presence of
God, who requireth no lesse of the subiectes,
then of the rulers, that they decline
from euil, ād that they do good, that they
abstaine from idolatrie, superstition, blasphemie,
murther and other such horrible
crimes, which his law forbiddeth, and yet
nottheles are openly committed and maliciously
defended in that miserable realme.
And if ye think that ye are innocent
because ye are not the chefe auctours of
such iniquitie, ye are vtterly deceaued.
            For God doth not only punishe the chefe

offenders, but with them doth he damne
the consenters to iniquitie:Rom. 1. and all are
iudged to consent, that knowing impietie
committed giue no testimonie, that the
same displeaseth them.Note. To speak this
matter more playne, as your princes and
rulers are criminal with your Byshoppes
of all idolatrie committed,Princes, and Byshoppes are a lyke criminal. and of all the
innocent blood, that is shed for the testimonie
of Christes trueth, and that because
they maintaine them in theyr tyrannie, so
are you (I mean so many of you, as giue
no playn confession to the contrarie) criminal
and gyltie with your princes and
rulers of the same crimes, becaus ye assist
ād maintaine your prīces in theyr blynde
rage, and giue no declaration, that theyr
tyrannie displeaseth you.How subiectes offend with theyr Princes. This doctrine
I know is strange to the blynde world,
but the veritie of it hath bene declared in
all notable punishments from the begynnyng.
When the original world perished
by water,Gen. 7. & 19. whē Sodom ād Gomorrha were
consumed by fier, and finally when Ierusalem
was horribly destroyed,Iosephus. Aegesippus. doth any
man think, that all were a lyke wicked before
the world? Euidēt it is, that they were
not, if they shall be iudged according to
theyr external factes. For somme were
yonge, and ould not be oppressours, neiher
yet could defile them selues with vnnatural

and beastlie lustes: sōme were pitiful
and gentle of nature, ād did not thrist
for the blood of Christ, nor of his Apostles.
But did any escape the plages and
vengeance, which did apprehend the multitude?
Let the scriptures witnesse and the
histories be considered▪ which plainely do
testifie, that by the waters all fleshe in
earth at that tyme did perishe, (Noah and
his familie reserued) that none escaped in
Sodom and in the other cities adiacent,
except Lot and his two daughters. And
euident it is, that in that famous citie Ierusalem
in that last and horrible destruction
of the same none escaped goddes
vengeance, except so many as before were
dispersed. And what is the cause of this seueritie,
seing that all were not a like offenders?
Let fleshe cease to dispute with God;
and let all man by these examples learne
betymes to flie and auoid the societie and
compagnie of the proude contemners
of God, if that they list not to be partakers
of theyr plages. The cause is euident:
if we can be subiect without grudging
to goddes iudgementes,why all perished in the flood, in Sodom, and Gomorrha. which in
them selues are most holie and iust. For in
the original world none was founde, that
either did resist tyrannie and oppression,
that vniuersally was vsed, either yet that
earnestly reprehended the same. In Sodom

was none founde, that did against ād
that furious and beastlie multitude, that
did compasse about and besiege the house
of Lot. None would beleue Lot, that the
citie should be destroyed. And finally in
Ierusalem was none found, that studied to
represse the tyrannie of the Preestes, who
were coniured against Christ and his Euangil,
but all fainted, (I except euer
such, as gaue witnesse with theyr blood,
or theyr flying, that such impietie displeased
them) all kept silence, by the which all
approued iniquitie, and ioyned hāds with
the tyrātes, and so were all arrayed and set,
as it had bene in one battayle against the
omnipotent, and against his sonne Christ
Iesus. For whosoeuer gathereth not with
Christ in the day of his haruest, is iudged
to scatter. And therefore of one vēgeāce tē
               poral
were they all partakers. Which thīg
as before I haue touched, oght to moue
you to the depe cōsideratiō of your duties
in these last and most perilous tymes. The
iniquitie of your Byshoppes is more then
manifest: theyr filthie liues infect the aier,
the innocēt blood, which they shed, crieth
vēgeāce in the eares of our God: the idolatrie
and abominatiō, which opēly they cō
               mit,
ād without punishmēt maītaine, doth
corrupt ād defyle the hole lād: and none amongest
you doth vnfainedly studie for

any redresse of such enormities. Wil God
in this behalf hold you as innocentes? Be
not deceaued dear Brethren. God hath punished
not only the proude tyrantes, filthie
persōs, and cruel murtherers, but also
such, as with them did draw the yoke of
iniquitie,what subiectes shall God punishe with theyre Princes. was it by flattering theyr offenses,
obeying theyr iniust cōmaundemētes,
or in wynking at theyr manifest iniquitie.
All such, I say, hath God once punished
with the chefe offēders. Be ye assured, Brethren,
that as he is immutable of nature, so
will he not pardon in you that, which so
seuerely he hath punished in others, and
now the lesse, because he hath plainely admonished
you of the daungers to come,
and hath offred you his mercie before he
pourefurth his wrath and displeasure vpō
the inobediēt. God the father of our Lord
Iesus Christ, who is father of glorie, and
God of all consolation, geue you the spirit
of wisdome, and open vnto you the
knolledge of hym self by the meanes of
his dear sonne, by the which ye may attaine
to the esperance and hope, that after
the trubles of this trāsitorious life ye may
be partakers of the riches of that glorious
inheritance, which is prepared for such, as
refuse them selues, and feght vnder the
bāner of Christ Iesus in the day of this his
battaile: that in depe consideration of the

same ye may learn to prefer the inuisible
and eternal ioyes to the vaine pleasures,
that are present. God further graunt you
his holie spirit, righteously to consider,
what I in his name haue required of your
nobilitie, and of you the subiects, and moue
you all togither so to answer, that my
petition be not a testimonie of your iust
condemnation, when the Lord Iesus shal
appear to reuenge the blood of his sainctes,
and the contempt of his most holie
worde. Amen.
            Sleap not in syn, for vengeance
is prepared against all inobediēt.
Flie from Babylon, if ye will not
be partakers of her plages.
            Be witnesse to my appellation. Grace be with you.
From Geneua The 14. of Iuly, 1558.
               
               Your brother to commaunde in godlines IOHN KNOXE.
            
         
         
            
            AN ADMONITION
TO ENGLAND AND
Scotland to call them to repentance,
written by Antoni
Gilby.
            
               VVhere as many haue writtē
many profitable admonitiōs
to you twaine, (O England
and Scotlād, both makinge
one Iland most happie,
if you could know your own happines)
somme against the regimēt of womē,
wherewith ye are bothe plaged, somme
against vnlauful obediēce, and the admitting
of strangers to be your kinges, somme
declaring the vile nature of the Spaniards,
whome thou, o Englād, to thy destructiō
mainteinest, somme the pryde of
the Frenchmen, whome thou, o Scotland,
to thy ruine receauest: and many hundrethes
with penne, with tonge, with worde,
with writing, with ieopardie and losse of
landes, goods, and lyues, haue admonished
you bothe twaine of that cākred poyson
of papistrie, that ye foster and pamper
to your own perdition, and vtter destruction
of soules and bodies, of your selues
ād yours for now and euer. I thoght it my
duetie (seing your destructiō to mans iudgemēt

to draw so neare) how much or litle
so euer they haue preuailed, yet once againe
to admonishe you both, to giue testimonie
to that trueth, which my brethren haue
writtē, ād specially to stirre your hearts
to repentance, or at the least to offre my
selfe a witnesse against you: for the iustice
of God and his righteous iudgementes,
which doubtles (if your hearts be hardned)
against you both are at hand to be vttered.
Thus by our writīgs, whome it pleaseth
God to styrre vp of your nations, all
men, that now liue, and that shall comme
after vs, shall haue cause also to praise the
mercie of God, that so oft admonisheth before he do stryke, and to cōsider his iust punyshment,
when he shall pourefurth his
vengeance. Giue eare therefore betymes,
O Britanie (for of that name both reioyseth)
whiles the Lord calleth, exhorteth, ād
admonisheth, that is the acceptable tyme,
when he will be founde. Yf ye refuse the
tyme offred, ye can not haue it afterward
thogh with teares (as did Esau) ye do seme
to seke it. Yet once againe in goddes
behalfe I do offre you the verie meanes,
which if God of his mercies graunte you
grace to folow, I doubt nothing but that of
al your ennemies spedely ye shallbe deliuered.
Ye reioyce at this word, I am sure, if ye
haue ani hope of the perfourmāce. Thē harkē
to the matter, which I do write vnto you

not furth of mennes dreames nor fables,
not furth of prophane histories painted
with mannes wisdome, vaine eloquence, or
subtile reasons, but furth of the infallible
trueth of goddes worde, and by such plaine
demonstrations, as shall be able to conuince
euerie one of your owne consciences,
be he neuer so obstinate. I will aske no
further iudges. Is not this goddes curse,
and threatninge amongest many other pronounced
against the sinfull land and disobedient
people?
            That strangers should deuoure
the frute of thy lād,Deu. 28. that the stranger
should clyme aboue the, and
thou should comme downe and be
his inferiour, he shall be the head
and thou the taile. The Lord shall
bring vpon the a people farr of,
whose tongue thou canste not vnderstand,
thy strong wales, wherin
thou trusted, shall be destroied &c.
            And doth not Esaie reckē this also as the
extremitie of all plages for the wickednes
of the people to haue womē raised
vp to rule ouer you?Esa. 3. But what saieth
the same ꝓphete in the begynnyng of his
prophesie for a remedie against these and

all other euilles?
            Your handes are full of blood,
saieth he, O you princes of Sodom,
and you people of Gomorrha, but
washe you, make you cleane, take
away your wicked thoghts furth
of my sight. Cease to do euil, learn
to do well, seke iudgemēt, help the
oppressed &c. Then will I turn my
hand to the, and trie owt all thy
drosse, and take away thy tynne, ād
I will restore thy iudges, as afore
tyme, and counsilours, as of old.
            And Moses said before in the place alledged.
            That if thou wilt heare the voice
of the Lorde thy God,Deut. 28, and do his
commaundementes, thou shalt be
blessed in the towne, and blessed
in the feelde. The Lord shall cause
thyne ennemies, that rise vp against
the, to fall before the. &c.
Lo the way in few wordes, O Britanie, to
winne goddes fauour, and therefore to ouercome
thyne ennemies. But to prynt
this more deeply into your heartes, o ye

princes and people of that Iland, whome
God hath begōne to punishe, seke I warne
you no shifting holes to excuse your faultes,
no political practises to resist goddes
vengeance. And first I speak to you (ô Rulers
and Princes of both the realmes) repēt
your treason, and bewaile your vnthankfulnes.
For by no other meanes can you escape
goddes iudgementes. You stomack I
know to be called traitours, but what shall
it auaile to spare the name, where the facts
are more then euident. You hath God erected
amōgest your brethrē, to the end that
by your wisdome and godlie regiment
your subiectes should be kept aswell from
domestical oppression, as from bondage
and slauerie of strangers. But ye alas declininge
from God are made the instrumētes
to betray and sell the libertie of those, for
whome ye oght to haue spent your liues.
For your consent and assistance is the cause,
that strangers now oppresse ād deuoure
the poore within your realmes: who shortly,
if God call you not to repētance, shall
recompence you, as ye haue deserued. For
the cupp, which your brethren do now
drink, shall be put in your handes, and you
shall drink the dreggs of yt to your destruction.
And wōder it is if ye be becōme
so foolishe ād so blynd, that ye think your
selues able long to continue, and to be safe,
when your brethren rounde about you

shall perishe: that you can pack your matters
well enough with the princes, that
ye can make you stronge with mariages,
with flateries, and other fonde practises,
or that with your multitude or strengthe
ye can escape the daies of vengeance, or
that you can hide your selues in holes or
corners. Nay thoghe you should hyde you
in the hels, God can drawe you thence, if
you had the egles wynges to flie beyōde
the east seas, you cannot auoid goddes presence.
Submitt your selues therefore vnto
hym, which holdeth your breath in your
nostrels, who with one blast of his mouth
cā destroy all his ennemies. Embrase his sō
               ne
Christ, lest ye perishe, ād for your obstinacie
agaīst hym ād his worde repent betymes,
as we all do admonishe. Repent for
your crueltie against his seruants and the
contempt of his worde so plainely offred,
as it was neuer sence the begynnyng of the
world. Repent we cry repent. For repentance
is the onlie way of your redresse and
deliuerance. Did God euer longe spare
any people, whome he hath taught by his
Prophetes, without somme euident repentance?
or vseth any father to pardon
his childe, whome he hathe begonne to
chastice, without somme token of repentance?
Consider how the Lord hath intreated
Israel and Iuda his owne people: how
oft they trespassed, and how he gaue them

ower into the hand of their ennemies. But
whensoeuer they repented and turned againe
to God vnfeanedly, he sent them
iudges and deliuerers, kinges ād Sauiours.
This way then of repentance and vnfeaned
turning to God by obedience is the
onlie way before God accepted and alowed.
Therefore was Noah sent to the old
world to bring this doctrine of repentance,
and all the old prophetes, as Elias, Elisaeus,
Esaias, Ieremias and Malachias, and
he, who excelled all the prophetes, Iohn
Baptist. Any of whose stiles, and sharpe rebukes
of synners if I should now vse, it
would be thoght full strange and hardely
would be suffered: yet were any of their
lessons, wherebie they called to repentance,
most mete for our tyme and age, and nothinge
disagreinge from this my present
purpose. For the same spirit still striueth
against the malice of our tymes, thoghe in
diuerse instrumētes and sundrie sortes and
fashions. Noah pronounceth, that within
an hundreth and twentie yeares all fleshe
should be destroyed. We haue many Nohaes,
that so crieth in our tymes, yet no
mā repēteth. All the tyme, that Noah was
preparing for the arke to auoide goddes
vengeance, the multitude derided this holie
prophete, as the multitude of you two
realmes doth at this day deride all them,

that by obedience to goddes worde seke
the meanes appointed to auoid gods iudgementes.
Then the people would not repent,
but as they should liue for euer, they
maried, they banketed, they builded, they
planted, deriding gods messēger. Do not
you the like? I appeale to your own consciences.
You marie, but not in God, but to
betray your countries, you bāket and builde
with the blood of the poore.
            The Lorde calleth to fasting
(saieth the prophete Esaie) to mortifie thē
selues, and to kill their lustes, but they
kill shepe and bullockes. Ieremie
crieth for teares and lamentation, they
laughe and mock. Malachie crieth to the
people of his tyme, Turne vnto me ād
I will turne to you, saieth the Lorde
of hostes, and they proudly answer,
wherein shall we returne? Are ye not
suche? Do not ye aske wherein shall we returne,
when ye will not know your sinnes?
when ye can not confesse, nor acknolledge
your faultes, thoghe ye go a hooringe in
euerie street, towne and village with your
idols? thoghe the blood of the oppressed
crie euerie where against you for vengeance?
So that seyng no token of repentance I
can not crie vnto you with Iohn Baptist,
Qye generatiō of vipers who hath

taught you to flie from the wrathe
to comme?
            O that I might see so good tokens, that
ye would fear goddes wrathe and vengeance.
But this must I say to you bothe to
your confusion, and shame, that ye are such
vipers and serpentes, vntil I see better tokens.
You do what ye can to destroy your
parentes, you cast of God your heauenlie
father, ye will not fear hym calling you to
repentance, you destroy and banishe your
spiritual fathers, which once had begotten
you as spiritual children by the worde
of trueth, you consume your countree,
which hath geuen you corporal life, you
stīge with tounges ād tayles all, that would
draw you from your wickednes. Finally
man, womā, and childe are either venemed
with your poysons or stingged with your
tayles. In you are fulfilled the wordes of
Dauid.
            Their throte is an open sepulchre,
with theyr toūges they haue
deceiued, the poyson of aspis is vnder
their lippes, their mouthes are
full of curse ād bitternes, their fete
are swift to shedd blood, destruction
and wretchednes are in their
wayes, and the way of peace they

haue not knowen, the feare of God
is not before there eyes, &c.
            I do know your tendre eares, you can
not be grated with such sharpe sentēces of
condēnation, that thus prick you to the hearts:
howbeit thus it behoueth, that ye be
taught to iudge your selues, that in the end
ye be not dāned with the wicked world. But
I will wounde you no more with the words
of the Prophetes, with the sayinges of Dauid,
or of this holy sainct of God Iohn the
Baptist, but with our sauiour Christs two
most swete parables of the two sonnes and
of the tilme, to whome he set his vineyard,
I will labour to set before your eyes your
rebellion, hypocrisie, and crueltie, if so I cā
bring any of you to repentance. Our sauiour
Christe putteth furth this parable,
            A certaine man had two sonnes,
ād he came to the first, and said sō
               ne
go ād worke to day in my vineyard.
Who answered, I will not, but
afterward repēted and went. Then
came he to the second, and said likewise,
and he answered, I will syr,
but went not.
            Wherein a wonderful comforte first is
to be cōsidered, how the Lord our God maker
of heauē ād earth doth hūble him selfe

not only to be called a mā, a husbād man, a
housholder, ād such like, but he abaseth hī
               selfe
of mercie to vs vile earth and asshes,
that his sonne becometh mā to make mankynd
glorious in his sight, to make all those,
that do not refuse his grace offred, of the
slaues of Satan his sonnes by adoption.
You are his sonnes, you are his vineyard,
you are as dear vnto hym, as the apple of
his eye, as Moses speaketh, if you can beleue
it: he sweareth that you shall be his
inheritāce, and he will be yours, if ye will
only receiue his grace and beleue hym,
when he sweareth. Will ye call his trueth
into doubt? his glorie into shame by your
misbelefe? Better it were, that all creatures
should perish, heauen, man and angels,
then that God should not haue credit, or
that his glorie in the least iote should be
diminished. He hath called you by his
worde now many a tyme to worke in his
vineyard, I aske what you haue answered:
your conscience can witnesse and all the
world seeth it. Sōme of you haue said plaine
lyke rebellious childrē, that ye would
not do it, that ye would not worke in your
fathers vineyarde. Shall I applie this part
to Scotland? I may right well do it, and also
to a greate parte in England. But Scotland
in dede called most plainely and euidently
through the mercies of God both

by their own faithfull countrie men, and
also by earnest trauail of our English nation
to comme to the Lords vineyard in
the tyme of king Edward, hath to the domage
of both cōtinually refused, as the cō
               science
of many this day beareth witnesse.
That tyme, as ye know, the vineyarde in
Englād by the children of God was not all
togither neglected, and thē most earnestly
were ye (O Brethren of Scotland) required
to ioyne hādes with vs ī the Lords worke,
but Satan alas would not suffer it. His old
fostred malice, and Antichrist his sonne
could not abyde, that Christ should grow
so strong by ioynynge that ile togither in
perfect religiō, whome God hath so many
waies coupled ād strēgthended by his worke
in nature: the papistes practised all theyr
fyne craftes in England, Scotland, and in
France, that the Ghospellers should not
with so strong walles be defensed, lest this
one iland should becōme a safe sanctuarie,
as it began to be, to all the persecuted in
all places. They moue sturdie stomackes,
they dispens with periuries, they worke by
theyr craftie cōfessions, they raise vp warre
in the end, whereby ye (deare Brethren
of Scotland) were sore plaged. Of all these
traiterouse sleghtes ye can not be ignorant.
For yet it is not passed the memorie
of man, that your king made promisse

to haue mett king Hērie the eght att Yorke▪
whose purpose (albeit in other things I do
not alow him) in that case was most godlie
and praise worthie. For it was to make
an end of that vngodlie warre, and cruell
murther, which lōge had cōtinued betwixt
the two realms. Your king, I say, made promisse
to mete him: the breche whereof as
it was the occasion of much trouble, so is
it euidently knowen, that your Cardinal,
and his clergie laboured and procured the
same. For it is not vnknowen to somme amongest
you, how many thousand crownes
the churchmen did promisse for maintenance
of the warre,I suppose they payed litle. which king Henrie
did denoūce by the reason of that breche.
Superfluous it were to me, to recite all the
causes mouing your pestilent preestes to
solicitat your king to that infidelitie. But
this is moste euident, that they feared nothing,
but the fall of their glorie, and the
trouble of their kingdome, which then in
England beganne to be shaken by suppressing
of the abbaies. This moued your preestes
ernestly to labour, that your kinge
should falsly breake his promisse. But
what affliction ye sustained by that and other
their practises, your selues can witnesse.
For your borderrs were destroyed, your
nobilitie for the most parte were takē prisoners,
and your king for sorowe sodenly

died. But these your miseries did nothing
moue your preestes to repentance, but rather
did inflame them against God, and against
the ꝓpfit of their natiue realme. For
when againe after the death of your kīge,
your frēdship and fauours were soght, first
by king Hērie, and after his death by king
Edward his sonne, ād by him, who thē was
chosen Protectour, how craftely, I say, did
thē your preestes vndermine all, ye are not
ignorāt. When your Gouernoure with the
consent of the most part of the nobilitie
had solēnely sworne ī the abbay of Haliroode
house, syr Raphe Sadler thē being embassadour
for Englād to perfurm the mariage
cōtracted betwixt king Edward and
your yonge quene, and faithfully to stand
to euerie point cōcluded and agreed 
                  〈◊〉
               
perfurmāce of that vniō, when seales were
interchanged, and the embassadour dimissed,
what sturr, tumult, and sedition raised
your Cardinal in that your realme, it is
not vnknowen. To witt, how that by his
craft and malice the realme was deuided,
the Gouernour compelled to seke his fauour,
to violate his oth, and so to becomme
īfamous for euer. And finally by the pride
of the papistes was that leage broken. But
what did thereof ensue? Edinburgh, Leith,
Dūdie, yea the most part of the realme did
fele. Your shippes were stayed, your gooddes

were lost, your chefe townes were burned,
and at the end the beautie of your real
me did fall in the edge of the sworde, the
hand of God manifestly feghting against
you, because against your solemne oth ye
did feght against them, who soght your
fauours by that godlie cōiunction, which
before was promised. But still proceaded
your ennemies the clergie, and theire adherētes
in theyr purposed malice. Wōder
not that I terme them your ennemies. For
albeit they be your countrie men, yet because
they seke nothing more, then the
maītaināce of their owne kīgdome, which
is the power of darckns, ād the king dome
of Antichrist, they are becomme cōiured
ennemies to euerie citie, nation or man,
that labour to comme to the knolledge of
the trueth. That pestilent generation, I
say, did not cease, till they obteined their
purpose, by deliueringe your yonge quene
to the handes of the French king, assuredly
mindinge by that meanes to cutt for
euer the knot of the frendship, that might
haue ensued betwixte England and Scotland
by that godlie coniunction. What
the papistes feared is manifest. For then
Christe Iesus being more purely preached
in England, then at any tyme before,
would shortly haue suppressed their pride
and vaine glorie: and therefore they raged,

that he should not reigne aboue them
also. But what is like to apprehend you, for
because ye did not betymes withstād their
most wicked coūsils, wise men do cōsider.
How heauie and vnpleasant shall the burthen
and yock of a Frenchman be to your
shoulders ād necks, God graunt that experience
do not teach you. But to returne to
my former purpose, by all those means rehersed,
by his messēgers, by the blood of
his saincts shed amōgest you, by fauours ād
frendship, by warre and the sword, yea by
famin, ād pestilēce, ād all other meās, hath
God your mercifull father called you to
labour in his vineyard, but to this day, alas,
we heare not of your hūble obedience, but
stil ye say with stubburn faces, we will not
labour, we will not be boūde to such thraldome,
to abide the burthens of the vineyard.
Ye think perchāce I am to sharpe, and
that I accuse you more then you deserue.
For amōgest you many do know the will
of your father, and many make profession
of his Ghospel, but cōsider, Brethrē, that it
is not enoug he to know the cōmaūdemēt,
and to ꝓfesse the same in mouthe, but it is
necessarie, that ye refuse your selues, your
owne pleasures, appetites, and your owne
wisdome, if ye shall be iudged faithfull labourers
in the Lordes vineyard, ād that ye
beare the burthens togiter with your brethren,

and suffre heate, and sweate, before
ye taste the frutes with them. God will
not stand content, that ye loke ouer the
hedge, and beholde the labours of your
brethrē, but he requireth, that ye put your
hādes also to your labours, that ye trauail
continually to pluck vpp all vnprofitable
wedes, albeit in so doing the thornes
pricke you to the hard bones: that ye assist
your brethrē in theyr labours, thoghe
it be with the icopardie of your lifes, the
losse of your substance, and displeasure of
the hole earthe. Except that thus ye be
minded to labour, the Lord of the vineyarde
wil not acknolledge you for his faith
full seruantes. And because this matter is
of weight and greate importance, I will
speake sōwhat more plainely for your instruction.
It is bruted (to the greate comfort
of all godlie, that heare it) that somme
of you (deare Brethren of Scotland)
do desire Christ Iesus to be faithfully preached
amōgest you, which thing if frō the
heart you desyre and with godlie wisdome
and stowt courrage folow your purpose
and enterprise, ye shall be blessed of the
Lord for euer. But in the begynnyng ye
must beware that ye folow not the exāple
of your brethrē of Englād, in whose handes
albeit the worke of the Lord appeared
to prosper for a time, yet because the eye
was not single, we see to our grief the ouer

throw of the same. They began to plante
Christ Iesus in the heartes of the people,
ād to bānish that Romish Antichrist, they
did driue owt the fylthie swyne frō theyr
dennes and holes (I mean the monkes and
other such papisticall vermin from their
cloisters ād abbayes). This was a good be
ginning, but alas in the one and the other
there was great faulte. For the banishīg of
that Romish Antichrist was rather by the
feare of the lawes pronoūced against him
by actes of parlamēt, thē by the liuelie preachīg
of Christ Iesus, ād by the discouerīg
of his abominatiōs. And the suppressiō of
the abbaies did rather smell of auarice, thē
of true religiō. Those venemous locustes,
which before were holdē within their cloisters,
were then set abrode to destroy all
good ād grene herbes. For superstitious freers,
ignorāt mōks, ād idle abots were made
archbishoppes, bishoppes, persons, vicars,
ād such as oght to fede the soules of men▪
who thus set at libertie did cōtinually wrootup
the Lords vineyard. And one crafty
Gardener, whose name was Stephen, hauīg
wolflik cōditiōs, did maītaī many a wolfe,
did sow wicked seed in the gardē, ād cherished
many weedes to deface the vineyard.
And his maid Marie, who after was his mastres,
now maried to Philip, wātīg no wil to
wickednes whē she was at the weakest norsto

make to do euill, when she gatt the mastrie
did cherishe many weedes. Those two I say
haue so broken the hedges of the same vineyarde,
(God so punishing the sinnes of
those, that oght to haue made better prouision
for the same) that the husbandmen
are hanged vp, the diggars, dressours, and
planters are banished, prisoned and burned.
Such hauock is made, that al wilde beastes
haue power to pollute the sanctuarie
of the Lorde. O heauens beholde her crueltie,
o earthe cry for vengeance, o seas,
and deserte mountains witnesses of her
wickednes, break furthe against this monster
of England. But whether do I runne
by the bitternes of my grefe? I must nedes
leaue the o Scotland, after that I haue aduertised
the of this, that thou folow not
the example, as I haue said, of Englād: but
in the bowels of Christ Iesus I exhorte
the, that if thou pretēdest any reformatiō
in religion, which is the chefe labour of
the vineyarde, that thou do it at the first
with a single eye, and all simplicitie, that
from yeare to yeare thou be not compelled
to change, as was England, but let thy
reformation be full and plaine, according
to goddes holie will and worde without
addition. Let all the plātes, which thy heauenly
father hath not planted, be rooted
owt at once, let not auarice blind the, neither
yet wordlie wisdome discourage thy

hearte, let none beare the name of a teacher,
that is knowen to be a fosterer of superstitiō,
or any kynde of wickednes. And
thou so doing shalt moue God of his greate
mercie to send vnto the faithfull worke
men in abundāce, to blesse the worke, that
thou pretēdest in the vineyarde, ād to preserue
the to the glorie of his own name,
and to thy euerlasting comforte. Thus
must thou Scotland repent thy former inobedience, if that thou wilt be approued of
the Lord. And now do I return to the (O
Englād) I do liken the to the secōde sonne
in the parable which answered his father
with flattering wordes, saying,I go father, but yet he went not
at all.For sence the time, that I had any remembrance,
our heauēlie father of his great
mercies hath not ceased to call the in to
his vineyard, and to these late daies thou
hast said alwayes, that thou woldest enter
and be obedient. In the tyme of king Henrie
the eght, when by Tyndale, Frith, Bylnay,
and other his faithfull seruantes God
called Englād to dresse his vineyard, many
promised full faire, whome I could name.
But what frute folowed? nothing but bitter
grapes, yea breeres and brambles, the
wormewood of auarice, the gall of crueltie,
the poisō of filthie fornicatiō, flowing
from head to foote, the contempt of God

and open defense of the Cake Idol by opē
proclamatiō to be red in the Churches
in the stead of goddes scriptures. Thus was
there no reformation, but a deformation
in the tyme of that tyrant and lecherous
mōster. The bore I grāte was busie wrooting
ād digging in the earth, ād all his pigges,
that folowed hym. But they soght only
for the pleasāt frutes, that they winded
with their longe snowtes. And for their
own bellies sake they wrooted vp many
weeds, but they turned the groūde so, mīgling good ād badd togither,Kinge Henry his boke against Luther is noted. swete and so
wre, medecine, ād poyson, they made, Isay,
such cōfusiō of religiō and lawes, that
no good thing could grow, but by great
miracle, vnder such Gardners. And no meruail,
if it be rightly cōsidered: for this bore
raged against God, against Deuill, against
Christ and against Antichrist, as the fome
that he cast owt against Luther, the racing
furth of the name of the Pope, and yet alowīg
his laws, ād his murther of many Christian
souldiours, and of many papistes, do
clearly ād euidētly testifie vnto vs. Especially
the burnīg of Barnes, Ierome, ād Garrat
three faithful preachers of the trueth, &
hāgīg the same day for maintaināce of the
Pope Powel, Abel, and Fetherstone, doth
clearly paynt his beastlynes, that he cared
for no maner of religiō. This mōstrous bore
for al this must nedes be called the head

of the Churche in paine of treason, displacing
Christ our onlie head, who oght
alone to haue this title. Wherefore in this
pointe (o England) ye were no better then
the Romishe Antichrist, who by the same
title maketh hym selfe a God, sitteth in
mēnes cōsciences, bānysheth the worde of
God, as did your king Hērie, whome ye so
magnifie. For in his best time nothing was
hard, but the kings booke, ād the kings ꝓcedings,
the kinges homelies in the Churches,
where goddes word should onely haue
bene preached. So made you your kīg a
God beleuing nothīg, but that the alowed.
But how he died, I will not write for shame.
I will not name how he turned to his
vomet. I will not write your other wickednes
of those times, your murthers without
measure, adulteries and incestes of your
kinge, his Lordes, aud cōmunes. It greueth
me to write those euils of my coūtrie, saue
onlie that I must nedes declare, what frutes
were foūde in the vineyarde after you
promised to worke therin, to moue you to
repentance, and to iustifie Godds iudgements,
how greuously so euer he shall plage
you hereafter. Wherefore I desire you
to call to remēbrance your best state vnder
king Edward, when all men with generall
cōs̄t promised to worke in the vineyarde,
and ye shall haue cause I doubte not to lamēt
your wickednes, that so contēned the

voice of God for your owne lustes, for
your crueltie, for your couetousnes, that
the name of God was by your vanities euill
spoken of in other nations. I will name
no particulare thinges, becaus I reuerence
those tymes, saue only the killing
of both the kinges vncles, and the prisonnement
of Hoper for popishe garments.
            God graunt you all repentant heartes, for
no order nor state did any part of his duetie
in those dayes. But to speak of the best,
whereof ye vse to boast, your religion
was but an English matyns, patched furthe
of the popes portesse, many thinges
were in your great booke supersticious ād
foolishe, all were driuen to a prescripte
seruice lyke the papistes, that they should
thinke theyr dueties discharged, if the nō
               bre
were said of psalmes and chapters. Finally
there could no discipline be broght
into the Churche, nor correction of maners.
I will touche no further abuses, yet
willing and desiering you to consider thē
in your heartes, that knowing your negligence
ye may bring furth frutes of repentance.
For this I admonishe you (o ye people
of England) wheresoeuer you be scattered
or placed, that onles ye do right spedely
repent of your former negligence, it
is not the Spanyardes only, that ye haue
to feare, as roddes of goddes wrath, but all

other nations, France, Turkie, and Denmarke,
yea all creatures shall be armed against
you for the contempt of those tymes,
when your heauenlie father so mercifullie
called you. To what contempt was
goddes worde and the admonition of his
prophetes comme in all estates, before
God did stryke, somme men are not ignorant.
The preachers them selues for the
most part could fynd no fault in religion,
but that the Churche was poore and lacked
liuing. Trueth it is, that the abbay lā
               des
and other such reuenues, as afore appertained
to the papistical Churche, were
most wickedly and vngodly spent, but yet
many thinges would haue bene reformed,
before that the kitching had bene better
ꝓuided for to our prelates in England. It
was moste euidēt, that many of you vnder
the cloke of religion serued your own bellies:
somme were so busie to heap benefice
vpon benefice, sōme to labour in parlamēt
for purchesing of lands, that the tyme was
small, which coulde be founde for the reformation
of abuses, and very litle, which
was spent vpon the feeding of your flockes.
I nede not now to examine particular
crimes of preachers. Only I say, that the
Ghospell was so lightly estemed, that the
most part of men thoght rather, that God
should bow and obey to theyr appetites,

then that they should be subiect to his holie
commaundementes. For the communes
did continew in malice, and rebellion,
in craft and subtiltie, notwithstanding all
lawes, that could be deuised for reformation
of abuses. The merchants had their
own soules to sell for gaines, the gentlemen
were becomme Nērods and Gyants,
and the nobilitie and coūsile would suffer
no rebukes of Gods messēgers thogh theyr
offenses were neuer so manifest. Let those,
that preached in the court, the lent before
king Edward deceased, speak theyr
conscience, and accuse me, if I lie, yea let
a writing written by that miserable man,
then duke of Northumberland to master
Harlow for that time Byshoppe of Harford,
be broght to lighte, and it shall testifie,
that he ashamed not to say, that the libertie
of the preachers tonges would
cause the counsile and nobilitie to ryse
vppe against them: for they could not suffer
so to be intreated. These were the frutes
euen in the tyme of haruest a litle before
the winter came. And of the tyme of
Marie what should I write? England is
now so miserable, that no penne can paynt
it. It ceaseth to be in the nomber of children,
because it openly dispiteth God the
father. It hath cast of the trueth knowen
and confessed, and foloweth lies and errours,

which once it detested. It buyldeth
the buylding, which it once destroyed▪ it
raiseth vp the idols, which once were there
confounded: it murthereth the sainctes,
it mainteineth Baals prophetes by the cō
               maundement
of Iesabel. Such are the euil
husbandes, that now haunte the vineyard,
so that this is true, that our Sauiour Christ,
saieth:
            The Lord hym selfe hath planted
a faire vineyard, he hedged it
round about, and buylded a toure,
&c. And when the tyme of the
frute drew nere, he sent his seruants
to the tilmen to receyue the
frutes thereof, but they caught
his seruantes, they bett one, they
killed an other, and stoned others.
Againe he sent other seruantes
mo, and they serued them
like wise.
            What nede any exposition to applie
this vnto England? All is fulfilled,
that is spoken in that parable, onles they
do waite for the sonne hym selfe, for to
comme, that they may handle hym lykewise,
as they haue done his seruantes. But
all is one, saieth our Sauiour Christ.
            
               That, which ye do to one of these
litle ons,Mat. 25. the same ye do to me,
be it good or bad. Why doest thou persecute
me, saieth Christ to Saul, when
he was, as he now is, at the right hand of
God his father in the heauens. Therefore
they persecute, they banishe, they burne
Christ the sonne of God in his membres.
The iudgement therefore now remaineth,
which the wicked then gaue against
them selues,
            That the Lord of the vineyarde
will cruelly destroy those euill
persons, and will let furth his vineyarde
vnto other husbandes.
            And the confirmation of the same by
the sentence of the chefe iudge, that
            The kingdome of God shall be
taken from such, and geuen to a
people, that shall bringe furth
the frutes thereof.
            The which iudgement is begonne in
Englande, and shortly alas will be fully
executed and finished without right spedie
repentance. Somme hope is in Scotland,
which hath not shewed furth any
such crueltie, and hath not contemned the
knowen treasures: but lyke wanton children

haue contemned the commaundement
of theyr father, partely of frailtie,
partely of ignorance. But Englād the seruante,
that knew the will of his Lord and
maister, which was once lightened with
most clere beames, which hath tasted of
the swetenes of the worde of God, and of
the ioyes of the worlde to comme, which
hath abiured Antichrist, and all idolatrie,
which hath boasted to professe Christ
with greate boldnes before all the worlde,
must be beaten with many stripes, it
can not be auoided.
            But to be shorte this only remaineth
for bothe these nations, that they repent
and returne into the vineyarde with the
fyrst sonne. For neither shall ignorance
excuse any land or nation, as is playn in
the fyrst to the Romanes, neither can any
people be receyued without the frutes of
repentance, as Iohn Baptist proclaimeth.
            The frutes of repentance I call not only
to know your synnes, and to lament them,
but to amend your liues, and to make
streght the Lordes pathes by resisting Satan
and synne, and obeying God in doing
the workes of righteousnes, and executing
goddes praecepts, and iudgementes, so
longe amongest you contemned.
            For euen now is the axe put toMat. 3.
               
the roote of the tree, so that euerie
tree, that bringeth not furthe
goode frute, shalbe hewē downe,
and cast into the fier. The Lord
hath now his fanne in his hande,
and will purge his flore, ād gather
the wheate into his garner, but
will burne the chaffe with vnquē
               chable
fier.
            Repent therefore, whiles ye haue tyme,
before ye be fanned, hewē downe and
fiered. When I do behold both your two
realmes, I see the fanne, I see the axe. But
this I am suer is the begynnyng of your
ruine, that ye do mary with strangers, and
giue your power to forraine nations, such
as feare not God, but are open idolaters,
blasphemers, persecuters of the saincts of
God, that careth neither for heauen nor
hell, God nor deuill, so that they may
wynne landes, townes and countries. God
shall hew you downe by thē therefore, as
he hath done other nations by like meanes
and causes, and they shall fanne you
furthe of your own huskes and homes, to
make you vagaboundes and beggars, and
after possesse your landes and goods, as
God threatned by Moses, as was before

alledged. Trust not to thy strengthe afterwarde,
when thy ennemy is setled, if
thou haue no strengthe to resist his begynnynges,
no more thē thou canst ouercome
a canker, that hath ouerrunne many membres.
That God would not haue you to
truste to your force of men, townes, or castels,
there is enough exāples, that you bothe
haue felt to your grefe. And I can not
write without murnyng. For how litle auayled
the multitude, and stowt courrage
of you (dear Brethrē of Scotlād) att Musselburgh,
or Pinkefield, the carcases alas of
many thousands, who that day fell in the
edge of the sworde, may teach you. And
how vaine be all strengthes, (be they iudged
neuer so stronge, or inexpugnable)
lett Calice lately taken admonish you.
            But I do leaue such exāples to your considerations
to teache you to call to the liuinge
Lord, who offereth hym selfe, as a
mercifull father vnto you, still calling
you to repentance by wordes, by writinges,
and most gentle corrections, if ye
will not be harde harted.
            Yet here haue we to lamēt the miserable
state of mākynde, which is so seduced
by the subtile serpēt, that he can not know
his miserie, when he is admonished, nor
perceaue his perdition, when it draweth
so nere. When the seruantes of God set

furthe his trueth, they are charged to trouble
realmes, and countries, as was Elias:
when they warne men not to ioyne handes
with wicked kinges and princes, they
are counted traitours, as was Esaias and
Ieremias. Such is mannes malice. But
if there be a God, that is fyrst of all to be
soght, and without whome nothing can
be profitable vnto vs, but without hym all
thinges are vnhappie and accursed: if
the kingdome of God and the righteousnes
thereof must fyrst be soght, and then
all thinges shall be ministred: if our heauenlie
kinge must before man be obeyed,
then all such doctrine, as calleth vs from
man to God, is easie to be perceaued, and
oght not to be resisted. Wherefore I do
admonish and exhorte you bothe in the
name of the liuinge God, that how so euer
you haue hitherto shewed your selues the
seruants of men to beare and to flatter
with the worlde, that now ye learne in
goddes cause to despise the faces of men,
to bend your selues against this wicked
world, neither regarding the visars of
honours, vaine titles nor dignities any
further, then they seke God his onelie glorie.
For his glorie will he not suffer to
be contemned for any cause. No he will
powre contempt on those princes, that
striue against his trueth: but those, that

glorifie hym, will he glorifie. And what
king dome, realme or nation so euer it be,
that will not seke to sanctifie his name,
they shall in the day of goddes greuous
visitation, which is now at hand, be vtterly
cōfounded, theyr strēgth shalbe straw,
theyr honours shall be shame, and all their
idolatrous preestes, in whose lies they
delyte, togither with their idols, with
whome they are bewitched, shall be stubble
and brymstone to burne togither, whē
the wrathe of the Lorde of hostes shall set
them on fier. The preestes shall not saue
theyr goddes, nor the goddes their worshippers,
but both alike accursed shall thē
perish for euer. And thoghe our mercifull
father hathe longe suffred heretofore in
the tyme of ignorāce, yet now in the ende
of the world he calleth all people so plainely
by his worde to repentance, that he
must nedes take spedie vengeance, if his
callinge be contemned: especially because
the day can not longe be delayed, wherein
he hath determined to iudge all people
and nations of the whole world, and
to put an end to wickednes.
            Wherefore to conclude, behold, your
onlie remedie remaineth to repent your
tyme of ignorāce, of stubburnnes, of crueltie,
of idolatrie, wherein ye haue so long
continued. And now with all diligence

to seke for knolledge of the worde of
God, and opēly to professe the Ghospell,
which is the power of God, whereof ye
oght not to be ashamed. Cease at the last
from your olde stubburnnes, wherbie ye
haue deserued vengeance, and labour in
the vineyarde with all mekenes, that ye
may receaue mercie and grace: cease from
your crueltie against Christes membres,
and learne to suffer for Christes sake, if
ye will be true Christians: banishe all idolatrie
and popishe superstition from amongest
you, els can ye haue no parte in
Christes kingdome, no more then Christ
can be partaker with Antichrist. Pray to
the Lorde of hostes and armies to giue
you the courrage, strengthe, and meanes.
The Lords arme is not shortened now, no
more then of olde. Be stronge therefore in
the Lord for the defence of the trueth,
thogh all the worlde ryse agaīst itt. Now
when the battaile is fierce against the liuinge
God for dead idols, (euen for the
vile wafercake, the most vaine idol, that
euer was) against the Ghospel of Christe
for the inuentions of Antichrist, against
Christes mēbres for Popishe ceremonies,
can any of you, that wilbe compted gods
children, styll halt of bothe handes? If that
cake baked in yron tonges, not able to abyde
a blast of winde, be the aeternal God,

folow it: but if he only be God, that hath
created the heauens, abhorre suche vile idols,
that haue no force to saue thē selues:
if Christes Ghospel and doctrine be sufficient
to saluation, and by receauing of it
ye are called Christians, away with all Antichristes
inuentions broght into your Romish
churches: if you hope to haue any
parte with Christ, cherishe his mēbres and
maintaine thē against theire ennemies the
papistes, ād the bishoppe of Rome the verie
Antichriste. What strengthe, what force,
what power, what coūsil so euer ye haue of
God, bende all to this ende and purpose, as
ye wyll make answere to your heauēly kīg
for the talent receaued. If you haue no regarde
of those prīcipal pointes, which only,
or chiefly should be before your eyes,
go to with your forraine mariages, ioyne
Frāce to Scotlād, and Spayne to England,
if it be possible, yet shall ye all be confounded.
The Lord shall plage you one with
an other, vntill you be consumed, your
strēgth, wherein ye trust, shall be shakē to
naught, your courrage shalbe cowardise,
your wisdom shall be folie, ād the Lord of
hostes by your ruine ād destructiō will be
renowmed ād praised, ād his iust iudgemēts
through owt the earth shalbe honoured ād
feared. Where of the contrarie if you will
maintaine Gods trueth in the earthe, he

will receaue you as his children into the
heauens, if you confesse his Christe before
this wicked generation, Christ shall confesse
you before his father in the heauens,
in the presēce of his angels. But if you persiste
stubburnly to banishe goddes worde,
and his sonne Christ in his membres furth
of your earthlie kyngdomes, how cā ye loke
for any parte in his heauēlie king dome?
muche more if ye continue to murther his
messīgers, what cā ye loke for emōgst your
selues, but that ye shoulde digge one ī anothers
bellie to be your own murtherers? So
that if ye wil stil remaine after all these admonitiōs
in your murthers and idolatries,
be suer, that in this worlde ye shall haue
enoghe of your idolatries, and you shalbe
filled with blooddy murthers aud in the
end ye shall be iudged without the
gates of the heuenlie Ierusalem amongest
the dogges,Reuel. 21. enchaunters,
hooremōgers and murtherers and
idolaters with all those, that loueth
lies. But he, that ouercommeth
all these, shall inherit all thinges,
and I will be his God, saieth
the Lord, and he shall be my sonne.
Where as the fearefull in gods

cause, the vnbeleuing, the abominable,
the murtherers, hooremongers,
sorcerers and idolaters shall
haue their parte in the lake, that
burneth with fier and brymstone.
            Lo here is the choise of life and deathe, of
miserie and welthe offred vnto you by
gods mercies, and the meanes how yow
may winne goddes fauour opened, wherebie
onely ye may preuaile against your ennemies.
God graūte you heartes to answer
as the people did to Iosua offering the lyke
choyse.Iosu. 24. God forbyd (say they)
that we shoulde forsake God, we
will serue the Lorde our God and
obey his voice, for he his our God.
            And we your banished brethren by the
power of God to prouoke you forward,
will thus pronounce with Iosua.
            That we and our families will
serue the Lorde God, thoghe all
natiōs runne to Idols, thoghe all people
do persecute vs. We knowe that Satan
hathe but a shorte tyme to rage, and that
Christe our captaine right spedely will
crowne his souldiours, to whome, as he is
the eternal God with his father, be all honour
and glorie for euer and euer. So be it.
         
         
            
            IOHN KNOXE TO THE
READER.
            
               BEcause many are offended
at the first blast of the trompett,
in whiche I affirme, that to promote
a woman to beare rule, or empire aboue
any realme, nation or citie, is repugnant
to nature, contumelie to God, and a
thing moste contrariouse to his reuealed
and approued ordenāce: and because also,
that somme hath pomised (as I vnderstād)
a confutation of the same, I haue delayed
the second blast, till suche tyme as their
reasons appere, by the which I either may
be reformed in opinion, or els shall haue
further occasion more simply and plainly
to vtter my iudgement. Yet in the meane
tyme for the discharge of my conscience,
and for auoyding suspitiō, whiche might
be ingendred by reason of my silence, I
could not cease to notifie these subsequent
propositiōs, which by Gods grace I purpose
to entreate in the secōd blast promised.
            1 It is not birth onely nor propin
quitie of blood, that maketh a kīge lawfully
to reign aboue a people professing
Christe Iesus, and his eternall veritie, but
in his election must the ordenance, which
God hath established, in the election of

inferiour iudges be obserued.
            2 No manifest idolater nor notoriouse
transgressor of gods holie preceptes
oght to be promoted to any publike regimēt,
honour or dignitie in any realme, prouince
or citie, that hath subiected the self
to Christe Iesus and to his blessed Euāgil.
            3 Neither can othe nor promesse
bynd any such people to obey and maintein
tyrantes against God and against his
trueth knowen.
            4 But if either rashely they haue
promoted any manifest wicked personne,
or yet ignorantly haue chosen suche a one,
as after declareth hī self vnworthie of regiment
aboue the people of God (and suche
be all idolaters and cruel persecuters) moste
iustely may the same men depose and
punishe hī, that vnaduysedly before they
did nominate, appoint and electe.
            
               
                  MATTH. VI.
               
If the eye be single, the whole
body shalbe clere.
         
         
            
            PSALME OF DAVID
XCIIII, turned in to metre,
by W. Kethe.
            
               O Lorde sith vengeance doth to thee,
               and to none els belonge:
               Now showe thy self (o Lorde oure God)
               with spede reuenge oure wronge.
            
            
               Arise thow great iudge of the worlde,
               and haue at length regarde,
               That as the prowde deserue and do,
               thow wilt them so rewarde.
            
            
               How longe (o Lorde) shall wicked men
               triumphe thy flock to slea?
               Yea Lorde, how longe? For they triumphe
               as thog he, who now but they.
            
            
               How longe shall wicked doers speake?
               their great disdaine we se,
               Whose boastīg prowd doth seem to threat
               no speach but theirs to be.
            
            
               O Lorde they smite thy people downe,
               not sparinge yonge or olde:
               Thine heritage they so torment,
               as strange is to beholde.
            
            
               The widdowe and the stranger both
               they murther cruelly:
               The father lesse they put to death
               and cause they know none why.
            
            
               
               And yet saye they: tushe, tushe, the Lorde
               shall not beholde this dede,
               Ne yet will Iacobs God reuolue
               the thinges by vs decreed.
            
            
               But now take hede ye men vnwise,
               amonge the folke that dwell:
               Ye fooles (Lsaye) when will ye waye
               or vnderstand this well?
            
            
               He that the eare did plante and place,
               shall he be slowe to heare?
               Or he that made the eye to see,
               shall he not see most clere?
            
            
               Or he that whipte the hethen folke,
               and knolledge teacheth men,
               To nurture such, as went astraye,
               shall he not punishe then?
            
            
               The Lorde oure God, who mā did frame,
               his very thoghts doth knowe,
               And that they are but vile and vaine,
               to him is knowne also.
            
            
               But blessed is that man (o Lorde)
               whom thou doest bringe in awe,
               And teacheste him by this thy rodd
               to loue and feare thy lawe.
            
            
               That patience thou mayste him geue
               in tyme of troubles great,
               Vntill the pitt be digged vp
               th'ungodly for to eate.
            
            
               
               For why, the Lorde will neuer fayle
               his people, whiche him loue:
               Ne yet forsake his heritaunce,
               whiche he doth still approue,
            
            
               Till righteousnes to iudgement turne,
               as it must be in dede,
               And such as be full true in hearte
               to folowe it with spede.
            
            
               Who now will vp and rise with me
               against this wycked bande?
               Or who against these workers ill
               on my parte stowte will stande?
            
            
               Yf that the Lorde had not me holpt,
               Dowtelesse it had bene done,
               To witt, my soule in silence broght,
               and so my foes had wonne.
            
            
               But thogh my foote did swiftly slide,
               Yet when I did it tell,
               Thy mercie (Lorde) so helde me vp,
               that I therewith not fell.
            
            
               For in the heapes of sorrowes sharpe,
               that did my hearte oppresse,
               Thy comfortes were to me so greate,
               they did my soule refreshe.
            
            
               Wilte thow (vaine man) haue ought to do
               with that most wicked chaire,
               That museth mischief as a lawe
               with out remorse or feare?
            
            
               
               Against the soules of righteous men
               they all with spede conuent,
               And there the giltlesse blood condemne,
               with one most vile consent.
            
            
               But my refuge is to the Lorde
               in all these daungers deepe,
               And God the strength is of my truste,
               who allwaies dothe me keepe.
            
            
               He shall rewarde their wickednesse,
               and in their wrathe them kill,
               Yea, them destroye shall God oure Lorde,
               for he bothe can and will.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   