
      
         
            
            
            THE METHODE OF PHISICKE, CONTEYNING THE CAVSES, SIGNES, AND CVRES OF INVVARD diſeaſes in mans body from the head to the foote.
            VVhereunto is added, the forme and rule of making remedies and medicines, which our Phiſitians commonly vſe at this day, with the proportion, quantitie, & names of ech medicine.
            By Philip Barrough.
            
               ANCHORA SPEI.
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautroullier dwelling in the Blacke-friers by Lud-gate. 1583.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD AND MAISTER THE LORD BVRGHLEY, HIGH TREASVRER OF ENGLAND KNIGHT OF THE MOST NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER and one of the Queenes Maieſties moſt honorable priuie counſell. P. B. vvisheth all health, vvith long life and encreaſe of honour.
            
               THE chiefeſt thing (Right Honorable and my ſingular good Lord) that emboldneth men to dedicate, their labours vnto any perſonage, is the affinitie betweene the matter of the worke, which they offer, and the minde of him to whom it is preſented. And as the auncient comicall Poetes were wōt to pen ſuch Enterludes, as they thought would be plauſibly heard of their auditory: ſoe our common writers doe faſhion and ſhape the ſubiect of which they entreat, according to the affection of him, whoſe patronage they require in countenaū
               cing their writings: this (I ſay) though it be practiſed of all writers now a daies, and migt haue ſerued as a fitte preſident for me to haue followed: yet haue I ſwarued and digreſſed from ſo generall a cuſtome, in preferring this labour of mine to the vewe of your Honor (the matter ſo far diſſenting from your Honors diſpoſitions) ſo that as it may perhaps not without ſom colour be obiected, that I might haue prouided far better (had I bene any way ſufficient) both for the acceptation of my labour, & alſo for the fit anſwering of your Honors affectiō, if I had treated of the politick gouernment of our contry, & of the weilding of a commonwealth: to the neceſſity of which calling, not Fortune the Queene of the old Philoſophers, but God himſelfe hath called, or rather enforced you if that opiniō of Plato be true, that euery good Magiſtrate taketh vpon him his office vnwillingly. But that obiection will ſone be taken away, if we cōſider how fooliſh a thing it were to inſtruct

him with his imaginarie precepts, whom (beſides a great light of nature) moſt happie experience hath made a perfect & abſolute gouernour. Plato that moſt graue and wiſe deemer of the ſtate tyrannicall, was ſo many times conuicted of follie, howe often he aduentured in the preſence of kinges to diſcourſe of the regiment of a common wealth. Dionyſius (of whom it was doubted, whether he did more harme by his extreame crueltie, or good by his prouident wiſedome which both he left alike to his ſucceſſours to imitate) called that notable Philoſopher (whom I euen now named) in Scicilia of purpoſe to heare him, and with great patience liſtened to him, as he diſputed of mannes felicitie and admired him as he handled thoſe morall vertues, which Socrates his maiſter was feigned to haue brought from heauen, and as he treated of the frame & machine of the world: but on a time (taking aduauntage by the kinges attention) when he had ſtolne into the diſcourſe of pollicie, Dionyſius felt himſelfe ſo moued, that he had exerciſed his tyrannie againſt him alſo, if Dio and Ariſtomanes had not recouered him out of his iawes, and ſo ridde him out of the land, by ſelling him to Polis the Lacedemonian marchaunt. And this was the verdict, that the wiſe king (when his furie was ſomewhat calmed) gaue of that moſt learned Philoſopher for his holeſome counſell (as he thought) namely, that his diſcourſes ſeemed vnto him to be the prattles of idle olde men: ſo much experience diſdaineth to be controlled by arte, and ſo impatient is he of inſtitution, whoſe knowledg is acquired Vſu & Memoria, (the two auncient parentes of wiſedom.) VVhat a great argument of follie therefore ſhall he giue, that ſhall go about to lay a plot for your Honor, from whence you may deriue an example of gouernment, who haue ſo many yeares in ſo troubleſome a common wealth, and to the moſt wiſe & vertuous Princeſſe in the world ben reteined as a moſt honorable and graue counſellour? I will not ſay, as Zopyrus vnto Darius, or as Cineas vnto his Pyrrhus, or as Creſus vnto his Cyrus, the one of which by pollicie aduiſed his king to circumuent his enemies, the other allured them to his ſubiection by his eloquence, & the third by his own vnfortunat experience directed him howe to conuey any daungerous enterpriſe. All which ſerued their Princes to none other vſe, but to helpe them to purchaſe the worſt part of glorie by bloudie oppreſſion: but rather as a Neſtor vnto his Agamemnon, as a Zenophon vnto his Cyrus, & as a Plutarch

vnto his Traian, which thought it not ſo glorious to tie their enemies to them by forced feare, as their friends and neighbours by peaceable amitie, the ſtrongeſt gard that Princes can truſt vnto. I muſt needes confeſſe that theſe cōpariſons do faile in repreſenting ſo much as I do conceiue, for that I may not feare the ſuſpitiō of flatterie in ſo manifeſt a truth, can the whole Scene of mans life ſo gorgeouſlie & ſtately ſet forth by the hiſtoriās of ſeueral ages, ſhew vs at one time, on one ſtage two ſuch notable actors (namely) ſo redoubted, ſo pereleſſe, & ſo vertuous a Princeſſe holding the ſcepter, ſo graue, ſo wiſe, & ſo prouident a counſeller ſuſteyning the perſon of Eubolus? I would I might (my credit ſaued with your Honor) perſue your prayſes yet further, but I know very well, that you (who with an vnwearied affectiō do not ceaſe continually to cōmit ſuch vertuous deedes as deſerue to be eternized for euer, are ſone tired, when you heare them remembred by another. And truely I would not haue ſpoken ſo much for feare of offence, but that I know for a certainety, that you aſcribe the being of your vertues to God the giuer of al good things, befor whō to extenuat our graces, I know not whither it be more blame worthy, thē ſhameleſly to aſſume vnto our ſelues, whatſoeuer is wrōgfully attributed vnto vs by our flattering friēds. But to what end (will you ſaie) are all theſe words? namely to this: to excuſe my ſelfe, in that I haue not laboured to fit your affection in the preſentmēt of this my labour, which is ſo impoſſible, in reſpect of your ſingular knowledg in al kind of good lerning, that there is no mā ſo ſelfwiſe or loftie, which feareth not to come vnder your learned cenſure. VVhich excellēcie of yours when I had loked into, & had found my ſelfe altogether vnable to anſwere: I purpoſed (as I thought) more politicklie to aſſaie your humanitie, which (in deed) graceth all the reſt of your vertues, which (I thought) I might ſone abuſe in offering ſuch a ſubiect, in which ſome ſtudy, & induſtrie (beſides many yeares had made me in part able to iudge, & ſuch a one, as the earneſt affaires of the Common wealth, in which you are alwayes buſied, togeather with the inconuenient vneaſines of the ſtudie hath kepte your Honor from being acquainted with. VVhich bold attempt of mine, your wiſedome ſhall ſo much the eaſier be brought to pardon, by how much the more erneſtly your rare clemencie encouraged me to enterpriſe it: for I do plainely confeſſe, that I haue not thought this Booke of mine worthy to be peruſed of your Honor, aſwell becauſe of mine owne vnability,

who am altogeither inſufficient to performe any thing that your Honor may like of, as alſo in reſpect of thoſe manifold graces, wherewith the Lord hath filled you: by the vertue of which you could in a tongue (farre more eloquent then this of ours) diſcerne and know the ſecrets of phiſicke which I haue now in part reuealed: If the common weale of vs all did not rather cary you away, then that delight which is otherwiſe reaped by priuate ſtudy. And yet neuertheleſſe, when I conſider with my ſelfe, that it was not the affectation of any popular praiſe, but an honeſt zeale to benefite my countrimen, which begotte in me this deſire to publiſh this worke, and alſo (yf I may without the ſuſpect of vaine glorie ſeeme to diuine of the iſſue of my laboures) perceiuing that they might bring ſome commodity vnto the more ignorant ſorte of our common Practicioners & Aemperiques (if they were with diligence peruſed:) and thirdly, when I perceiued in my ſelfe a certaine earneſt willingnes which I haue alwayes had (though of late it hath bene more vehemently inflamed) to commend ſome peece of ſeruice vnto your Honor: (I ſay) theſe cauſes meeting thus together did eſpecially adduce me (though many doubtes ſtept afore me in mine enterpriſe, offring to reenforce my ouer preſumptuous determinatiō) with ſuch a bold confidency as it were to ruſh into your preſence, and to demaund without any ſhew of merite your Honors moſt fauorable Protection, that this booke of mine (vnable of it ſelfe) may run vnder your Patronage, which as it were Gorgon his buckler, I will obuert and turne againſt all the venemous bitinges of ſclanderous tongues. The Lord God, (who hath made you a notable inſtrument to worke the aduauncement of his glorie, the furtheraunce and propagation of good learning) lengthen & protract your life beyond your fatall period, and giue you a will to liue, a deſire ſtill to beare vp that burthen, which her Maieſtie hath laid vpon your ſhoulders, & with theſe, all good ſucceſſe in this world, and eternall happines in his kingdom.
            
               Your Honours moſt humble ſeruaunt, PHILLIP BARROVGH.
               
            
         
         
            
            The preface to the Reader.
            
               
                  WHEN God had perfited that vvonderfull vvork of his (meane the frame of the vvorld) & had aſcribed to euery part therof his eſpecial duty▪ namely to the vvater to harbour fishes, to the aire to vphold all feathered foules, to the earth to foſter beaſtes, & to produce & bring forth good & holſome herbes & trees: & ouer all theſe, as regent & gouernour, had appointed man his laſt & nobleſt creature: he demaunded of his Angelles vvho vvere preſent vvith him at this vvorke vvhat might be deſired in this ſo rare and ſtraung a vvorkemanſhip: vvho aunſvvered, nothing but a tongue to vnfolde the ſecretes of his labovvres, to talke & commune of them, vvith the vvhich alſo, he, as the vvorkeman of all, might be extolled & magnified, vvho partly moued vvith this ſuggeſtion, perceiuing it to be a notable meanes to aduaunce his glorie, as before he had infuſed into man a conceaueable minde, apt to vnderſtand and his miſteries: ſo novv he gaue him a tongue, able to vtter the ſundrie conceptions of the harte vvhatſoeuer it imagined. This fable proceeding (I knovv not from vvhat braine) is remembred of Philo the levv, in his treatiſe of the vvorld vvhich ſeemeth to implie thus much, that as there is nothing vvithin this mortall circuite, that God hath, as it vvere kept to himſelfe, and not made ſubiect to the induſtrious capacitie of man: ſo there is no meanes by vvhich a man can approch neerer vnto the perfection of that nature vvhich he firſt enioyed, and then loſt by his fall, then by the painfull indagation of the ſecretes of nature, or anie vvaie, vvhereby he may more truely glorifie his maker, then in his life time vvith his tongue to communicate that knovvledge vvhich he hath by his induſtrie atcheiued, and to haue a care alſo, that it may be faithfully commended to his poſteritie. And doubtleſſe this vvas the conſideration, that moued the vviſe king Solomon to vvade ſo far in the ſearching of the cauſes of thinges, vvho abandoning all thoſe gliſtering shevves vvhich his riches and kingdome profered him, applied his minde to the ſtudie of nature, & compiled a great volume, vvherin he larglie diſcourſed not onely of birdes and beaſtes, but of all herbes and trees, euen from the cedar in Libanon, to Hiſop that ſpringeth out of the vvall. And the ſelfe ſame opinion of the excellēcie of that kinde of life hath from time to time inuaded the mindes of many kings & noble perſonages, vovving to them ſelues vvithout any light of their forefathers, to go through the cloudie darkneſſe of nature. And althoug they ſomtime ſtumbled, yet are they to be pardoned, if vve conſider both the obſcuritie and the length of the vvaie they vvent in. Zoroaſtes the reputed ſonne of Noie vvas the firſt, that of manie confuſed experiments, began to fashion out & as it vvere to delineat the beginning of an art by ſetting dovvn cartaine preceptes of the ſame, & after him Oſiris the king of AEgypt, and Zeſoſtris alſo king of the ſame contry (though rudlie) laid the foundatiō of Aſtronomie by demonſtration of the courſe of the heauens, & of phiſicke by opening the nature of manie herbes, and alſo of the ſecretes of their vvater of Nilus. To the vvorthines of vvhich ſecrete, Plato that great philoſopher did vvillingly ſubſcribe, vvhen falling into a grieuous maladie in AEgypt, and beng not able by his ovvne experimentes (though he had aſſaied many) to cure him ſelfe, he vvas preſerued by the Prieſtes of that countrie, vvho taught him the vertue of their vvater, vvhereas after, in remembraunce of this benefitte, he vvrote this verſe, rehearſed by Laertius: Mare vniuerſa proluit hominum mala: the ſea doth vvaſhe avvaie all the infirmities of man. So that by this vve may ſee, that this noble and learned Philoſopher

had neuer brought vs nevves out of AEgypt, either of ther pollicie & gouernment of their countrie, or of the rare and exquiſite knovvledge in Aſtronomie, if he had not taſted of the benefit, vvhich the Phyſicke of that time affoorded him. But vve vvill remember ſome of thoſe kinges, vvho had an eſpeciall fantſie to this art, vvhoſe names are de
                  •
               olded and brought vnto vs by the ſucceſsion of ages, though their vvorkes haue not eſcaped the vvracke, but haue perished in the Sea gulfe of antiquitie, vvhich hath ſvvallovved the doings of many men. And Mithridates the king of Pontus shall be the firſt, vvho at one time vndertoke tvvo mighty battels the one vvith the Remaines, the other vvith nature. In the laſt of vvhich the more daungerous he preuailed like a cō
               querour, and in the firſt he dealt ſo valiantly, that the glorie of his forepaſſed victories ſuppreſſed & killed the remembraunce of his laſt ouerthrovv. The vvhich (as Plinie remembreth) vvas a like profitable to the common vvealth and to mans life: for in his mannour vvhere he lay, there vvere founde many bookes vvritten by his ovvne handes, both of the vertues of herbes and of the conſtitution of mans bodie, vvith remedies of many infirmities of the ſame. Euax alſo the king of Arabia vvrot a booke of the effectes of ſimples, vvhich he dedicated to Nero the Emperour. But vvhat should I recken perticularly the names of euerie one, vvhen in former ages there vvas no king, either of AEthiopia, AEgypt, or Arabia, vvho did not himſelfe either vvrite ſomevvhat concerning this art of Phyſicke, or elſe by his liberalitie encouraged others to emploie their times in the ſame? vvhich may make much (no doubt) to the credite of the arte, vvhen as kinges haue appropriated it to themſelues, and haue thought themſelues honoured by the profeſsion of the ſame. And as many argumentes do induce me to beleeue beſides the vvitneſſe of the Hiſtorians, that Phyſicke is the arte, vvherein many kings haue trauailed and delighted: ſo nothing more ſtrongly then this, that vvhereas other gods vvere tyed to their ſeuerall places, as Iupiter to Elis, Diana to Epheſus, Apollo to Delos, and ſo forth. AEſculapius the ſonne of Apollo by the daughter of Phlegias made a god for his cunning in Phyſicke, hath his temple and altars euerie vvhere in Corinth, in Lacedemon, in Athens, in Thebes, in Epidaure, in Arcadia, Meſſenia, and in many other countries (as Pauſanias remembreth) all vvhich honours vvhich vvere done to him (no doubt) vvere inſtituted by the kings and rulers of thoſe countries, vho eſpecially fauored that arte, thinking it great reaſon, that he vvho inuented an arte ſo generally auailable for mankinde, should be generally honoured of all men. And (I pray you) hovv much inferiour vvas the reno
                  ••
               ne of Hippocrates, vvho deſcended of his lyne, ſauing that the one vvas placed amongeſt the gods in heauen, and the other reuerenced as a mortall god vpon earth? Did not he make Coos, the place vvhere he vvas borne, of an inglorious Iland, a famous contrie, onely by the acceſſe of other nations, vvho vvere brought thither by the report of his vvonderfull skill in Phiſicke? vvhat familiaritie had he vvith kinges? vvhat eſtimation among the Philoſophers of that time as Democrites and other? and to conclude, hovv vvas his fame ſpread vniuerſally throughout all Greece? I vvill not tarie vpon the recitall of the famous Phyſitions, vvho haue lyued before vs in ſeuerall ages, as Dioſcorides, Galen, Paulus AEtius, AEgineta and others. For it vvill eaſily appeare of vvhat credit this noble ſcience of phiſicke vvas in times paſt, if you conſider the inſolencitie and pride of auncient Phyſitions, vvherof many of them diſdained the fellovvshippe of kinges, and ſome of them emboldned onely by the credit of their ſcience purchaſed amongeſt men, grevv to ſuch impudencie, that they vvould haue ceremonies and rightes performed vnto them as vnto godes. One ſuch vvas Themiſon Ciprius the daintie of Antiochus, another vvas Theſſalus

vvhom Galen maketh menſion of, vvho vvent about to innouate and chaunge the methode of phyſicke ſet dovvne by Hippocrates and others. But the moſt famous of all vvas Menecrates the Syracuſan, vvho foolishly vſurped the name of Iupiter, oftentimes boaſting, that by his arte he coulde breath life into mortall men after the manner of Iupiter, vvhich arrogant title the people neuer vvent about to derogate from him, but rather ſuppoſed that it vvas deſerued on his parte, becauſe he cured many of the falling euill, vvhich diſeaſe eſpecially raigned in his time. This Menecrates in a certaine epiſtle vvhich he vvrot to Phillip the king of Macedon vſeth theſe vvords: Thou art king of Macedon, and I of Phyſicke it lyeth in thy povver at thy pleaſure, to deſtroy men vvhich enioy their health, and in mine to preſerue ſickemen, and reſtore dead men to life, and to keepe the health of men vnſpotted euen vnto their olde age, if they vvill obey me. Vnreaſonable ſurely and monſtruous vvas the pride of this man, and it vvas ſo fed vvith the applauſe and approbation of his citizens vvho vvondred at his rare cunning, that he marched in the citie vvith a trayne of gods after him: one in the habite of Hercules, another in the shape of Mercurie, another tooke vpon him the form of Apollo, & he himſelfe ſupereminent in the midſt reſembling Iupiter, vvore a purple robe, and a crovvne of gold vpon his head, & held in his hand a mightie ſcepter. The opinion of this ſcience did ſo poſſeſſe the mindes of the people in thoſe dayes, that they imagined the profeſſour of the ſame to be ſent immediatlie from heauen, for the commoditie of the vvhole countrie, and for the preſeruation of mankinde: vvhich made them not to doubt to doe vnto them all ſuperſtitious reuerence that might be, vvhereof grevv this exceſsiue pride, vvhich hath areſted as it vvere the mindes of many Phyſitions. I vvould not vvish that the Phyſitions of our time shoulde dravv this vnto an example, but rather vvith all lovvlynes to viſit euen the pooreſt, vvhen their helpe is required: for ſeeing that the life of the moſt miſerable vaſſall is as deare in the ſight of God, as the life of the moſt renoumed Monarch, shall not the Phyſitiō looke to haue a shrevvd check at Gods hand, if either he hath proudly denied his help to the poore, or negligently viſited them? I vvill not diſcend into this common place, though (to ſpeake the truth) the arrogancie of many of our Phyſitions might giue me ſufficient occaſion, vvishing them to leaue of to imitate the ſvvelling inſolencie of Mencerates, and the reſt, and to tracke, rather in the ſtepes of Hippocrates and Galen, of vvhom it is thus vvritten, that they neuer diſdayned to shroude them ſelues vnder the ſimpleſt roofe in their countrie, to doe the pooreſt man good. And as they themſelues ſaide (beſides the glorie that they purchaſed by their curteous benignitie) they added alvvayes to their cunning, and by experience confirmed their arte and knovvledge, vvhich might vvell ſtagger, if you reſpect the infinite varietie of diſeaſes, and the ſtraunge diuerſities of mens diſpoſitions. And truely if nothing elſe, yet the enriching of their knovvledge vvhich is gathered eſpecially by long experience, might be cauſe good enough to attract and dravv them to laie holde of anye occaſion to goe to the diſeaſed perſon. And in mine opinion, the neglecting of this, vvhich proceedeth either from couetouſnes or pride, hath bene the onely cauſe, that euen from the beginning, there haue bene reckened ſo fevv good Phyſitians: For (exempt onely Hippocrates, Galen, Auricen, AEginet
                  •
               , Aetius, and Soranus, though the number of common Phyſitians hath bene great) you shall not finde anie that haue climed vp to the perfection of their ſcience, nay farre from that vvhich might chaleng the fift or ſixte place. VVhich although ſome men vvill aſcribe to the laborious difficultie and confuſed vaſtenes of this arte eſpecially: yet I dare boldly affirme, that there hath not bene nor is, any ſuch blocke or ſtay, vvhich hath impeached ſo much their

endeauors, as the defect of experience. And truely I cannot more fitly compare our ampiriques and practiſioners, then to him that pupoſeth to be a ſeaman & trauailer, vvho though he ſtudiouſlie ſtriueth to attaine to the perfection of his arte, though he carefully buſieth about the coſmographicall mappes, though he induſtruouſly peruſeth the bookes of nauigation, naie (that vvhich is more) though he diligently conferreth vvith verie expert ſaylers: yet vvhen he hath forſaken the quiet hauen, and launched out into the rough ſeas, and hath taken vpon him the gouernment of the ship, vvhen he shall behold ſo manie horrible mountaines of vvater, the roaring of ſo many huge vvaues, and the outraging ſurges of the diſquieted monſtre, he vvill then confeſſe that he onely dreamed before, vvhen he imagined of the courſe of the ſeas, that his bookes vvere lame ſcholemaiſters, that the tales of his companions vvere a great deale leſſe then the things thē
               ſelues: vvhen he shall caſt vp his eyes and thinke that euerie ſtarre vvhich he had hoped to haue vſed as guides and directions, had threatened his ruine & deſtruction, vvhē he shall looke dovvne and tremble at the riſing of euerie vvaue, vvhen he shall turne him about, & vvith great feare ſeeke to eſchue thoſe rockes, vvhich he had read vvere c
                  •
               uched in that part of the ſea, & to cōclude, vvhen he shall conſider the hugenes of the ocian ſea, & the ſmalnes of his barke, he vvill thinke ſure the leaſt pirrie or gale vvere of force to ouervvhelme him, not vvithſtanding his great cunning he had thought he had gained one the land: Euen ſo fareth it vvith our common phyſitians, vvho, vvhile ther containe them ſelues vvithin the compaſſe of their litle ſtudie, vvhere they doe as it vvere, è tabula pictos ediſcere mundos, vvhere they perceiue their ſcience redicted into a methode, vvhere they ſee Galen reaching his hand to them to lead them throughout the vvhole bodie of phiſicke, by vvhom they are taught the conſtitution of the body, the diuer ſitie of temperature, the varietie of diſeaſes, the cauſes, ſignes, and ſimptomates of the ſame, they ſtraightvvaie imagine, that they haue runne the race, and that they haue acquired as much knovvledge as becommeth an AEmpirique. But after that, vvhen they shall go into the commō vvealth to practiſe, vvhen th
                  •
               y shall meete vvith diſeaſes, vvhich Galen neuer dreamed of, vvhen they shall veivv the maruelous and ſecret affections and proprieties of mens bodies, the ſodaine and momentanie changes of the ſame (vvhich a man can ſcarcelie follovv vvith his minde) vvhen they shall perceiue, that in reſpect of the ſtraung temperature of the bodie, and the violent alteration of the ſame, they ſcarcelie can arme at the diſeaſe, vvhen they shall ſtrike vpon ſo many rockes, beſides their great paines and vvatchfull induſtrie: vill it not (thinke vve) amaſe them? vvill they not confeſſe then, that their arte is vnperfect? vvill they not acknovvledge (thinke you) that as experience vvas the auntient beginner of phiſicke: ſo, that novv it is the true and ſincere accomplisher of the perfection of the ſame? Since therefore the caſe ſo ſtandeth that art is vveake vvithout practiſe, and that (as Galen ſaith) experience is gotten longo rerum vſu: let the Phiſition (if he doth not prefer lying fame and vile lucre before true and abſolute knovvledge) let him (I ſaie) that his minde may be enriched, not leaue the pooreſt houſe vnfrequented. But to ſaie the truth, there is nothing derogateth ſo much from the excelling in their ſcience, as doth the opinion of perfection, vvhich is eſpecially gotten by the iudgement of the multitude, the peruerſe determiner of thinges. For vvhen a man knovveth his name to ſlie amongſt thē, he ſitteth ſtill, and admireth himſelfe, thinking then, that he hath ſtudied enough both for him ſelfe and his countrie, vvhen he hath gotten his name enrolled amongeſt the number of excellent Phiſitians by that ignoraunt and vnaduiſed regiſter. I haue ſpoken this by the vvay, and the interiection of theſe fevv lines hath not made me to forget

(good Reader) that I before diſcourſed of the glorie of this ſcience, and hovv it hath bene accounted of in times paſt: the dignitie vvherof, though it be ſomthing leſſened & empayred (vvhich vvhether it hath happened by the ignoraunce of our Phyſitians, or by the ſiniſter opinion of the vvorld I vvill not novv diſcuſſe) yet if vve vvill vprightly vvaigh vvith our ſelues, vve may perceiue that the iudgmēt of men hath not any vvhit detracted from the true dignitie of the thing it ſelfe. For truly vvhat can be more noble thē to preſerue the body of mā in a good eſtate, vvhich of the philoſophers is termed a litle vvorld, in reſpect of the varietie of his ſeuerall functions? vvhat can be more excellent then to be able to maintaine & kepe in order that beſt vvorkmanship of God, & (that vvhich is more) to correct, reforme & amēd it, & as it vvere a cūning Pylot to gouerne & rule it as a litle veſſell caſt out into the great ocean, ſubiect (I do not knovv) to hovv many rockes & dangers, if it be not vprightly vveilded? And ſeeing there is nothing giuen vnto vs of God, more acceptable then the health of the bodie, hovve honorablie muſt vve thinke of the meanes, by vvhich it is continued and reſtored if it be loſt? Pirrhus the king of Epir did ſacrifice vnto no other god or goddeſſe, but onely vnto health, to vvhom he erected a famous temple in his ovvne countrie, calling it Templum ſanitatis. He contemned or at the leaſt neglected all oracles vvhich other princes buſilie ſought after, as predictions of the euentes and ſucceſſes of the battailes vvhich they attempted, or any other the like enterpriſe. He craued nothing at the handes of the gods, but onely the fruition of his health, thinking that induſtrie & diligence, meeting vvith the health of the bodie, vvere able to atchiue anie thing, vvere it beſet vith neuer ſo many daungers. And in mine opinion (as the Hiſtorian verie grauelie diſcourſeth) men do folishlie erre, vvhen they complaine of nature, for lymiting the age of man vvithin the compaſſe of ſo fevv yeares, as three or foure ſcore: vvhenas truely, if the matter vvere vvell expended, vve vvould confeſſe, Induſtriam potius quam tempus deeſſe (as he ſaith) and that there is no arte or ſcience, be it neuer ſo difficult, but might be perfectlie knovven vvithin that short precinct, if the greater parte of our life did not paſſe and vanish avvaie in darkneſſe (ſlouth and ignoraunce drovvning and ouervvhelming in vs all light of nature) or if the courſe thereof vvere not interrupted and cut of by vntimely death, vvhich is haſtened on our partes by our inordinate and heedeleſſe lyuing. The youg man flourishing as it vvere in the Aprill of his age, cockereth in himſelfe a foolis imaginatiō of his ovvn luſtineſſe, & reputeth it as a diſcredit to him to ſeeme to feare the approache of any diſeaſe, leauing the prouident gouernmēt of the bodie to decrepite and vvythered olde age. In the meane time he layeth the reyne vpon his affections, and expoſeth himſelfe to anie inconuenience: either he vveltreth in idleneſſe, or is tyred vvith immoderate exerciſe, or (that vvhich is incident ſpeciallie to that part of our age) he admitteth vnſeaſonable vvatchinges, ſurfetting bankets, & the vnſatiate execution of the follies of Venus, thinking in deede that there is nothing leſſe agreeing vnto youth and adoleſcencie, then to be pliant and obedient to anie commendable and holſome method of life: yea many of them are of this minde, that the time of their youth is infamouſly ouerſlipped, vvhen they doe not rush in their voluptuous and inordinate demeanour at vvhat time the luſtie prime of their age doe ſomevvhat enable and ſupport them: & if at any time they be ouertaken vvith anie infirmitie (vvhich often happeneth) as vnvvilling to be beholding to the ſcience of Phiſicke, they leaue it to be vvorne avvay by rhe ſtrength of their bodie, vvhich in deede I confeſſe hideth many diſeaſes, and for the time taketh avvaie the ſence of them, but it neuer vtterlie extinguisheth anie: for although in the infancie of the infirmitie, in reſpect of the

vveakenes of it, is be eaſily depreſſed & ouermaiſtred by the valure of the bodie (vvhich in youth is ſomething puiſſaunt and forcible) yet vvhen age comming one vvith his ſtealing ſteppes, or elſe reckleſſe life doth detract from the force of the one, and maketh vvay for the other to ſpreade & gather povver, the diſeaſe being as it vvere the ſuruiuour poſſeſſeth the vvhole bodie, and at the laſt procureth his vtter ſubuerſion. And manie times it happeneth that a diſeaſe breaketh out in old age, the cauſe vhereof perhaps vvas giuen in our youth. And it fareth vvith vs, as it doth vvith them vvhich are bitten vith that little ſerpēt of Arabia, vvhich ſtriketh a man, but ſo ſecretly, that he neuer feeleth it, neither doth he knovv it but by the vvound vvhich shevveth it ſelfe a long time, after the foundation thereof vvas laid. The opinion that the auncient Phyſitions had of the effect of ſnovv vvater is of force to perſvvade this, vvho haue vvrittē, that if ſnovv reſolued into vvater be dronkē of a yong childe, it vvill as it vvere maintaine vvarre againſt naturall heat, and that vvith ſuch continuance, as it vvill not shevve his effect, vntill he hath attained vnto extreame old age. I doe not altogeather beleeue this, although the great colde vvhich is naturally in that vvater, may lead me to think, that it is of a mightie operation. But there is nothing more certaine then this, that many men, repoſing to much truſt in the ſtrength of their bodies, & ſo being careleſſe in gaine-ſtanding and reſiſting the beginninges of many maladies (vvhich their diſſolute order of life hath begotten and engendred) haue ben yoked by old age before the courſe of their yeares did require it, and haue brought it ſo to paſſe that their bodies haue bene nothing elſe, but ſtorehouſes and manſions of diſeaſes. VVhich kinde of men I may vvell compare to an euill & negligēt tenaūt, vvho being ſetled in a faire dvvelling houſe by his Landlord, ſuffereth it to ruinate and in the end to fall vpon his ovvnt head for vvant of repayring: ſo they, vvhen God hath beſtovved their bodies vpon them as gorgeous pallaces or manſion houſes, vvherein the minde may dvvell vvith pleaſure and delight, do firſt by their euill demeanour shake, and diſcraſe them, and then being altogeather careles of repairing them, do ſuffer them to run to deſtruction, or elſe vvhile they go about to late to vnderprop them declining to ruine, (as he that is lodged in an old cabbin feareth, leaſt vvith euerie puffe of vvind it shoulbe ouerturned) ſo they quake at the leaſt alteration of their bodie, and at euerie little paine, doe expect a finall diſſolution: then vvill they confeſſe vnto you, that vvhile they ryoted vnaduiſedlie in their youth they did but build matter for repentaunce in age. And vvhat do they elſe but by their examples giue vs to learne, that as the interception and praeſciſion of diſeaſes is very auaileable, vvhich carieth a man throughout his race vvith pleaſure and delight, ſo that nothing commeth more neere vnto the goodnes thereof, then (if by chaunce vvhen vve be plunged into any diſeaſe) carefully to prouide that the beginning therof may be impeached: the vvhich that thou maieſt the better do, I haue (good Reader) for thy benefit, collected out of ſundrie authours, as it vvere a breuiarie or abridgement of phiſicke, and togeather vvith thoſe diductions, I haue interlaced experimentes of mine ovvne, vvhich by long vſe and practiſe I haue obſerued to be true. Throughout the vvhole booke I haue bene more curious in preſcribing the ſundrie curations and vvaies to helpe the diſeaſes, then in explaning the nature of them, my reaſon vvas, becauſe if my bookes should come to the handes of the vnlearned a little vvould ſuffice (the former being more neceſſarie.) Againe I knevv, that the learned vvould not be contented or ſatisfied vvith it, though it had bene neuer ſo great: and yet I haue not omitted anie neceſſarie ſigne, that the diſeaſe may appeare eaſily to any capable braine. I shall ſeeme boldly to haue aduentured the edition of this labour, ſeeing that I shall run into the babble of our countrie phiſitians,

vvho thinke their art to be diſcredited, vvhen it is published in ſo baſe a tongue▪ and againe, are loath to haue the ſecretes of their ſcience reuealed to euerie man. In deede I knovv that vnder ſome colour they may obiect ſomevvhat, but yet they may vnderſtād, that I haue follovved the example of many learned Phiſitians both of our Englishmen & other countrie men alſo, vvho published their practiſes in their mother tongue, & in other countries eſpecially it is ſo rife & commō, that in Italie & Fraūce you shall not find any learned Phiſitian, that hath not vvritten as much, (nay rather more) in his ovvne countrie language, then in Latine: yea vve haue many bookes in phiſick, that haue firſt bene ſet out in French and Italian, and aftervvard for the commoditie of other nations, haue bene tranſlated into latine, and ſo made generall, vvhich before the vvriter had as it vvere bequeathed to his countrimen. And no doubt they vvere all touched vvith an eſpeciall care to profit their ovvne countre, being vvilling that all men (as in deede it concerneth all) should reape the commodities of their labours. For I cannot ſee hovv that ſaying of Quintilian can be verified in this one arte (vvhich is this) that then all artes should be truely happie, vvhen the profeſſours of the ſame should only iudge of thē, but I haue alvvaies bene of this minde, that it behoueth euerie man to be cunning in his ovvn conſtitution, & to knovv ſo much as may ſerue to foreſtall the cōming of many ordinarie diſeaſes, vvhich commonly light vpon the ignoraunt: yea & ſometime to be able to chaſe avvay a maladie vvhen it hath alreadie caught hold of the bodie: my reaſon is, both becauſe euerie man may iudge beſt of his ovvne bodie, and perceiue the declininges and alterations of the ſame, And againe vve knovv, hovv many haue died, and do die continuallie for vvant of helpe, (the Phiſitian being not alvvaies at their elbovve) vvhereas in the beginning of their ſickneſſe, a litle knovvledge might haue ſtopped the paſſage of the infirmitie. In the old time vvhen phiſicke vvas brought vnder no forme, but conſiſted onely of a fevv experimentes vvhich paſſed from hand to hand, yong children together vvith other artes did receiue certaine preceptes and rules, hovv to order and gouerne the bodie, and learned alſo preſeruatiues againſt poiſons, and the receipt of ſalues to cure any greene vvound, and the meanes to helpe certaine ordinarie diſeaſes, vvhich (in deede) vvere but fevv (the age of man being thē far more ſtrong.) VVe read hovv Linus, vvho vvas ſcholemaiſter to Hercules vvhen he had inſtructed him in the arte of vvreſtling, (vvhich then vvas honoured eſpecially) and in Muſicke, that he gaue him the receipt of a certaine balme, vvhich he often vſed in many of his aduentures. And vvhat vvas it, that gaue matter to the fable of Achilles, hovv his mother Thetis had made his bodie impenetrable, but that knovvledge of his vvhich he had learned of his maister Chyron the centaure, vvho taught him the vertue of an herbe, vvhich to this daie bereth his name, by vvhich he healed all his vvounds he receiued in battaile? VVhat an honorable menſion doth Homer make of Machao and Podalirius the ſonnes of Aeſculapius, in that they could cure themſeues, vvhen they vvere at anie time hurt of the enemie? This cunning alſo had Mithridates, and Fabricius the Romaine he that vanquished Pirrhus, and alſo Marcus Curius and many other vvho are recorded by Hiſtories, vvhoſe names I vvould remember, if I did not ſee the enlarging of this common place by examples to be altogether vnneceſſarie, vvhen there is no man vvhich ſo farre ſvvarueth from common ſenſe, that vvill not confeſſe it to be verie expedient & needefull for all to knovv the eſtate of their ovvne bodies. I vvill therfore foreſake the prouing of ſo manifeſt a thing, and returne vnto thee (good Reader) vvhom I haue alreadie offended in exceeding the iuſt length of a Preface, like vnto that vvaiefaring man, vvho vvhen he had purpoſed to vndertake a long iourney, ſtumbled euen in the verie

threſshold of his doore. But if it be an offence, I did voluntarilie run into it, chooſing rather to be carped at of the Rethorician for vſing too many vvordes, then to be vvorthely reprehended of the readers for being to ſparing in vttering the reaſons, vvhereby I vvas firſt adduced to publish this my labour. For I knovv not hovv it commeth to paſſe, yet vve ſee it dailie, that ridiculous t
                  •
               res and abſurde pamphlettes being put f
                  •
               rth vvithout any colour, be neuertheleſſe plauſiblie and pleaſingly accepted: vvhereas a mā 
               
                  〈…〉
               ed vvith an honeſt care to profit his countrie, being vvilling to leaue a teſtimonie of the ſame behinde him, vvhen he offreth to publish any vvorke, if it hath not a delectable ſubiect, it behoueth him to shevv many graue and ſubſtantiall reaſons of his doings, or elſe they vvill not yeld their hoped for benefit, vvhich is to be benignelie conſtrued and peruſed vvith humanitie, ſo that if a man couet to haue his bookes fauorablie accepted and read, he muſt behaue himſelfe ſo in vvriting, as Solon did in framing his lavves, vvho (as Plutarch ſaith) did not fashion them according to the true line of equitie, but ſet dovvne ſuch as he thought the people vvould vvillingly obſerue: euen ſo the iniquitie of the time hath brought to paſſe, that thoſe bookes vvhich are generally peruſed and read throughout, muſt not ſerue the time, but muſt ſatisfie the opinions of mē. A man may eaſely diſcourſe of this, but the fantaſies of man are to variant to preuaile a vvhit in diſſuading them. For mine ovvne parte (that I may novv ende) I haue not ſought or hunted after any vaine glorie by the edition of this my labour, but onely I haue endeuoured by this meanes (being vnable any vvaie elſe) to do ſome good to my countrymen, vvhich deſire of mine shall ſufficiently comfort me, though I vvant the outvvard approbation of the vvorld. And yet this one thing I vvoulde craue at the handes of the learned, that If by chaunce my bookes come vnder their cenſure, they vvill either giue them their good vvord, or elſe ſuffer themſelues to be iudged of by perfourming the like labour. And as Martiall pretilie ſung.

                  Cum tua non edas, carpis mea carmina Leli,
                  Carpere vel noli noſtra, vel ede tua.
               
though in deede this ſupplication of mine may rather more fitly be preferred vnto the vnlearned, vvho thinke they haue gotten a goodly meanes to purchaſe their ovvne credit, vvhen they can vnder ſome colour maligne the doings of any man, as though others vvell doinges vvere as impeachmentes to their eſtimations, or the errours of other men the ſubiect and matter of their praiſes. Thoſe kinde of ſerpentes (I ſay) vvhich doe nothing elſe but picke quarrelles vvith authours, I vvould aduiſe either to ſpeake themſelues, or (if their ignoraunce vvill not let them) to lay their finger on their mouth till other men tell their tale, and not to make their harueſt of other mens offences vnvvillingly committed, vvhiles they themſelues reſt vnable to doe any vvhit of good. And thus (good Reader) I vvill abruptly ende, expecting thy fauorable acceptation of theſe my laboures, vvhich expectation of mine (if it be not deluded) I shalbe further encouraged to conſecrate the reſidue of my ſtudies to thy commoditie.
            
               Phillip Barrough.
            
         
         
            
            An INDEX OR TABLE OF ALL THE EVILS AND diſeaſes vvith their cauſes, ſignes, iudgementes, and cures, vniuerſally conteyned in the fiue bookes folloving.
            
               
                  A
                  Of the Apoplexy. 25
                  Of the Aſthma. 64
                  Of Abhorring of meate. 85
                  Of a doglike Appetite. 86
                  Of the cure of Abſceſſions. 216
                  Of a tumor called Aquoſum Apoſtema. 253
                  Of the ſwelling caled Apoſt. 299
               
            
            
               
                  B
                  Of blearednes of the eyes. 44
                  Of blacke & blew markes. 45
                  Of bleeding at the noſe. 51
                  Of the ſtone in the bladder. 133
                  Of bloud broken out of the bladder or crudded in it. 133
                  Of vlcers of the bladder, and his necke. 135
                  Of the remedie againſt Barraines. 157
               
            
            
               
                  C
                  Of Carus or Subeth. 22
                  Of Congelation or taking 23
                  Of the Crampe. 32
                  Of a Cataracte. 39
                  Of the Inflamation of the Columella. 58
                  Of a looſe Columella. 59
                  Of the Coughe. 63
                  Of Choler. 93
                  Of the Colicke. 101
                  Of Cachexia, or euil ſtate of the bodie 121
                  Of the loſſe of carnall copulation. 142
                  Of ſore trauail in childbirth. 159
                  Of the Carbuncle, the Cancre & the euill called Sphaſelus. 226
                  Of the cure of a Carbuncle. 227
                  Of a cancrous tumor called Cancer Apoſtematoſus. 273
               
            
            
               
                  D
                  Of Dead ſleepe. 24
                  Of Deafnes & ſlow hearing. 49
                  Of diſtilatiō, reume & horenes. 53
                  Of euill Digeſtion. 88
                  Of the Dropſie. 121
                  Of the Dropſie Anaſarcha. 123
                  Of the Dropſie Aſcites. 124
                  Of the Dropſie Tympanites. 125
               
            
            
               
                  E
                  Of Exulceration of the priuy mē
                     bres. 140
                  Of Exulcerat. of the wombe. 150
                  Of a feuer Ethicke. 189
                  Of the generall method of curing the abſceſſiōs called Exiturae. 212
                  Of Eryſipelas and other tumours cauſed of choler. 233
                  Of the ſignes and tokens of a true Eryſipelas. 235
                  Of the cure of Eryſipelas. 236
               
            
            
               
                  F
                  Of the Freniſie. 17
                  Of the Falling ſicknes. 31
                  Of great Famine. 87
                  Of the Fluxe Diarrhaea. 94
                  Of the Fluxe Lienteria. 96
                  Of the Fuxe Dyſenteria. 97
                  Of the clefts of the fundamēt. 109
                  Of womens Fluxe. 149
                  An expoſition of Feauers. 168
                  The table of Feuers. 170
                  Of one dayes Feuer. 171
                  Of a diary Feuer laſting mo daies 175
                  Of a rotten Feuer called Synochus, 186
                  Of a continuall Feuer. 178
                  Of a burning Feuer. 180
                  Of the euils called Formicae. 243
               
            
            
               
                  G
                  Of the gout in the feet and ioynctes. 164
                  Of the euil called Gangraena and Sphacelus. 230
                  Of the cure of Gang. & Spha. 231
                  Of the diſeaſes called Glandulae, Nodi, and Strumae. 255
               
            
            
               
                  H
                  Of Headach. 1
                  Of Headach cauſed of heat. 2
                  Of Headach cauſed of cold. 4
                  Of Headach cauſed by drines, or moyſture. 5
                  Of Headach cauſed of bloud. 6
                  Of Headach cauſed of choler. 7
                  Of Headach cauſed of fleame. 8
                  Of headach cauſed of windines. 9
                  Of Headache cauſed of the ſtomach. 10
                  Of Hedach cauſed by drōknes. 11
                  O Headach cauſed by feuers. 11
                  Of inueterate Headach. 12
                  Of the Haemorrhoides. 107
                  Of an Haemitryce feuer. 197
                  Of herpes both miliaris & exedēs which do aſſociat Eryſipelas. 239
               
            
            
               
                  I
                  Of Impoſtumes breeding in the eares. 50
                  Of Inflammation of the tōſils. 59
                  Of Inflammatiō of the loūges. 67
                  Of Inflāmation of the pappes. 79
                  Of Inflāmatiō of the ſtomach. 84
                  Of the Iliaca Paſſio. 103
                  Of Inflammatiō of the liuer. 113
                  Of Inflāmation of the ſplene. 116
                  Of the laundyſe. 113
                  Of Inflāmation of the reines. 126
                  Of Inflāmatiō of the bladder. 134
                  Of Inflāmation of the womb. 154
                  Of tumours aboue nature called Inflationes. 250
               
            
            
               
                  L
                  Of the Lithargie. 19
                  Of the weaknes of the Liuer. 11
                        •
                     
                  
                  Of obſtruction of the Liuer. 112
               
            
            
               
                  M
                  Of the Mygrime. 1
                        •
                     
                  
                  Of Memorie loſt. 2
                        •
                     
                  
                  Of the Maare. 34
                  Of Madnes. 34
                  Of Melancholie. 35
                  Of lack of Milcke. 76
                  Of aboundance of Milke. 77
                  Of Milke that is curded. 78
                  Of ſtopping of Menſtruys. 145
                  Of flowing of Menſtruis. 148
                  Of the Mole in the Matryce. 153
                  Of ſtraitnes of the Matryce. 150
               
            
            
               
                  O
                  Of Oedema, and other phlegmatick and flatuous tumors. 145
                  Of the cure Oedema. 247
               
            
            
               
                  P
                  Of the Palſey. 26
                  Of Panicles. 42
                  Of the Palſey in one membre. 30
                  Of Puſtules or bladders in the eyes. 44
                  Of Payne in the eares. 84
                  Of Payne in the teeth. 54
                  Of the Pluriſie. 65
                  Of the Ptiſicke. 71
                  Of Panting of the hart. 73
                  
                     Of vnmeaſurable piſſing. 130
                  Of difficultie of Piſſing. 138
                  Of the Peſtilence. 192
                  Of a true Phlegmone, & of other tumors engēdred of bloud. 218
                  Of the cauſes, ſignes, and iudgementes of Phlegmone. 219
                  Of the order of curing of Phlegmone. 221
               
            
            
               
                  Q
                  Of a Quartaine feauer. 185
                  Of a Quodian feuer. 188
               
            
            
               
                  R
                  Of Reines that ſend fo
                        ••
                     h bloudy vrine. 125
                  Of the ſtone in the Reynes. 128
                  Againſt vlcers of the Reynes. 131
                  Of burſting or Ruptures. 143
               
            
            
               
                  S
                  Of skin growing in the eyes. 43
                  Of ſound or noiſe in the eares. 49
                  Of a ſtincking mouth. 56
                  Of the Squinancie. 61
                  Of Spitting of blould. 68
                  Of Spitting of matter. 60
                  Of Sounding. 74
                  Of the Syncope. 110
                  Of weaknes of the Stomach. 79
                  Of paine of the Stomach. 83
                  Of windines of the Stomach 90
                  Of diſtempure of the Splene. 115
                  Of hardnes of the Splene. 117
                  Of obſtruction of the Splene. 118
                  Of the ſtrangurie. 137
                  Of ſheading of Sperme. 147
                  Of the Sciatica. 162
               
            
            
               
                  T
                  Of trembling and ſhaking. 37
                  Of teeth that be black & loſe. 55
                  Of malignant vlcers of the Tonſills. 60
                  Of immoderate Thyrſt. 82
                  Of Tenaſmus. 100
                  Of the faling out of the Tuel. 109
                  Of a pure intermitting Tertiā. 180
                  Of a baſtardly Tertian. 184
                  Of the differences of thoſe Tumours which chaunce beſides nature. 200
                  Of the cauſes of Tumors aboue nature. 206
                  Of the ſignes of Tumors beſides nature. 209
                  Of hard and Scirrhus Tumors ingendred of melancholie. 267
               
            
            
               
                  V
                  Of Vertigo and ſweaming of the head. 15
                  Of Vlcers in the noſe. 51
                  Of Vlcers in the mouth. 55
                  Of ſtopping of the Vrine. 138
                  Of the iudgementes and cure of the euils Verrucae. 144
               
            
            
               
                  W
                  Of a Webbe or Cataract. 39
                  Of Wormes. 105
                  Of ſtrangling of the Womb. 150
                  Of falling out of the Womb. 151
                  Of windines in the Wombe. 155
               
            
            
               
                  Y
                  Of Yelking and vomiting. 81
                  Of Yelking or hicket. 91
                  Of the continuall ſtanding of the Yearde. 140
               
            
            FINIS TABVLAE.
         
         
            Of Ʋ
               Ʋeightes. A briefe declaration of the notes of all thoſe kindes of weightes, which are generally vſed and contayned throughout this whole booke, and of the quantitie of them.
            FOraſmuch as the true & perfect knowledge in compounding of medicines cannot be attained vnto without the knowledge of the quantitie of the weightes, which are at this preſent day moſt commonly vſed in making of medicines: I will therfore here briefly declare the vſe of them: for ſeeing that the weight of ſome medicines be ſo iuſtly & certainely ordeyned & made (that if any man do chaunce raſhly to erre in the true quā
               titie thereof, he doth much hurt to the bodie, and many times putteth the life in ieoperdie: you muſt therefore diligently endeuour and apply your minde to ſtudie and conſider of the medicines, that ſo you may haue the more full and perfect knowledge thereof. The notes which I (following the order of other Phyſitians) haue vſed in this my booke in writing of weightes be theſe, as followeth.
            
               
                  1. Grana. haue this note. G.
               
                  2. Scrupuli. haue this note. ℈.
               
                  3. Drachmae. haue this note. ʒ.
               
                  4. Vnciz. haue this note. ℥.
               
                  5. Quar. haue this note. qr.
               
                  6. Librae. haue this note. lb.
               
               
                  7. Semiſ. haue this note. ſs.
               
                  8. Manipuli. haue this note. M.
               
                  9. Pugilli. haue this note. p.
               
                  10. Ana. haue this note. ana.
            
            A graine is a barely corne taken in the midſt of the eare
            A ſcruple is twentie barely cornes.
            Three ſcruples containe a drachme.
            Eight drachmes containe an ounce.
            Quart. ſignifieth a quarte of any thing.
            Libra is a pound.
            Semiſſ. is the halfe of euerie weight.
            Manipulus. is a great handfull.
            Pugillus. is a ſmall handfull.
            Ana. ſignifieth of euerie one alike much.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE METHOD OF PHISICK OF PHILIP BARROVGH CONTEINING THE CAVSES, SIGNES AND Cures of inward diſeaſes in mans body, from the head to the foote. THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
               The first Chapter, Of headache.
               
                  GALEN the Prince of Phiſitions, affirmeth,
                     Differences of paine in the head 3. that there are onely three ſundrie paines in the head: whereof the one is called of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Cephalalgiae, and of the Latines Capitis dolor, the barbarous ſort of Phiſitions call it Soda. In Engliſh it is called commonly  the headach. The ſecond kind is called of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and  in Latine likewiſe it is called ſo Cephalaea. In Engliſh it may be called a long continuing or inueterate headach. The thirde is called of the  Greekes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Hemicrania alſo is the Latine name for it. Engliſh it is called the migrime. Of the two laſt kindes ſhall mention be made hereafter, for now we will entreate of the firſt kind, declaring onely in this chapter, what it is and what be the generall cauſes thereof, and then in the chapters next following, ſhal the ſignes and cures of ech cauſe be declared. Vnderſtand therefor firſt,
                     VVhat Cephalalgia or S
                           •
                        
                        da is.
                   that Cephalgia is no thing elſe but a laboriouſe and painefull ſenſe, and feeling newly begonne in the whole head, through ſome great mutation thereof, this word newly is added to make it differ from Cephalaea, which is an old paine that hath long continued: and the whole head is added to make it differ from Hemicrania, which occupieth but the one half of the head. Note alſo that by the head we meane ſo much as is couered with heare, wherin paine is engendred,
                     The diuerſity of places that paine is in.
                   ſometime without the ſcull and ſometime within, ſometime in all the outward partes, and ſometime in all the inward partes, ſometime not in all, but in one parte, as in the Arteries onely, or the vaines, or ſinewes, or the filmes, or the skin, or in the braine it ſelfe, but theſe differences,
                     VVhether the headache be with in the ſkull or without it.
                   as Galen teſtifieth, be very hard to know. But this may eaſily be knowen whether the paine be within the ſcull or without it, if you conſider well the headach: for if the paine be extended to the rootes and bottome of the eyes, the paine is within the ſcull, for vnto the eyes are certain branches deriued from the braine, and from the filmes, and other veſſels that are about it: ſo that the paine will quickly come from them to the rootes of the eyes, but if the paine that is felt, do not extend to the eye rootes, then is the ache without the ſcull.
                     Cauſes of headache generall.
                   This paine of the head generally (as alſo all other paines) is cauſed of an vnequall diſtempure comming with humors, or without, eſpecially when it is hote or cold, or it is cauſed by ſolution of partes coherent, or of both. But as for particular and ſpeciall cauſes of the head,
                     Cauſes of headache ſpeciall.
                   there be very many. For ſometime it commeth only of a ſimple diſtempur without any humours, and ſometime it commeth thorough the euill quality of humors, ſometime it commeth through

great aboundance of humours, ſometime through humoures, that ſtoppe the paſſage of the vapoures and moiſture in the head: ſometime through windines engendred in ſome parte of the head, being weake. Alſo ſometime headache is cauſed of ſome diſeaſe in the ſtomacke: ſometime of an outward cauſe as of heate of the Sunne, of great colde, of dronkennes, or of ſome ſtripe, or wound. Hereby it appeareth that the headach is engēdred of ſeuen ſundrie cauſes, which are to be knowen by ther proper ſignes, wherof we will ſpeake more at large in the chapters following, for in this chapter they ſhalbe but brieflie touched. Note therfor that the headach,
                     Signes of eche cauſe of headache generally.
                   which is cauſed of a ſimple diſtēpure without humours, is not eaſie to be knowen, except a man be well excerciſed in Phiſicke, and by muche and diligent looking of the griefe: but that paine of the head is moſt vehemēt, which is cauſed of a ſimple diſtempure being hote or colde. The headache, that is cauſed of drineſſe, is moderate. As for a moiſt diſtempure alone doeth cauſe noe headach, except it be ioyned with heate or colde, or with aboundance of humours, or ſharpnes of thē. Yf paine of the head doth come through aboundance of humours, contained in one parte of the head, or in two, or in all partes, the paine is more vehement, that commeth of hote humours, or of colde, that which commeth of drie thinges is more moderate, yf ther be not manifeſt heat or colde ioyned with them, as for moyſt thinges touching ther qualitie, doe cauſe noe paine at all, but with ther quātity they maie fill the paſſages and ſoe cauſe paine. If aboundance of all foure humours equaly, or of bloud alone doe cauſe headache without obſtruction and ſtopping of the paſſages, it maketh the head heauie and full, as it were ſtretched out and ſwolne, but if the multitude of humours be with obſtruction, it cauſeth moderate paine if the obſtruction be but little, but if the obſtruction be great, ther ſhall be very great paine. Alſo if the multitude of humours haue a ſharpe and byting qualitie, according to that qualitie the paine will be pricking and ſhooting, if with the heauines or ſtretching of the head therbe beating, and as it were a pulſe, it betokeneth inflammacion in the head. But if the ſtretching be preſent without heauineſſe or pulſe, it declareth aboundance of windye Spirits, and in this kind of headach, there wilbe noiſe in the eares. Thoſe, that haue headach comming of an externall cauſe, as of heate of the Sunne, cold of the ayre, dronckenneſſe, ſtripes, or of any hote ſauours, can eaſily tell them ſelfes the cauſe therofe. Seeke for ſignes more particular in the Chapters next following.
            
            
               CAP. II. Of headache cauſed of heat.
               
                  VNderſtande, that by heat, in this chapter, is ment, a hoate diſtempure without any kind of humour.
                     Cauſes.
                   It is engendred for the moſt parte of the burning heat of the Sunne in Sommer, when any body hath taried long in it. Alſo it is ſomtime cauſed of immoderate mouing or by hoate bathes, or by being long nigh the flame of the fier, or through anger, or furiouſnes, or laſt of all through hoate dyſeaſes, or hoate ſauours of outward things. The ſignes which declare headach by burning heate of the Sunne,
                     Signes.
                   are that beſydes vehement paine, you ſhall feele their head hoate aſſone as you touche it, and ther ſkinne drier then it was wonte to be, ther eyes doe looke redde, and they are delyghted with the ſprinckling, or annoynting of colde things, and doe feele great eaſe by them. As for the other cauſes, they maie be knowen by relation of the ſicke.
                     Diet.
                   For the cure of this kinde of headache you muſt firſt prouide, that the ayer and the chamber wherin the ſicke abydeth,
                     Ayer.
                   be very cold of nature, or els it muſt be made ſo by your diligence, as by ſtrowing in the houſe, flowers, and braunches of cold thynges (as roſes, violettes, water lillie flowers, and vyne leaues, bryer bowes, willowe and ſuche lyke.) Alſo it will coole the ayre well to ſprinckle cold water in the houſe, or to poure it out of one veſſell into another.
                     Sleepe.
                   Great reſpect muſt be had to his ſleeping, for he muſt ſleepe longer then he wonte to doe, he muſt altogether eſchew long watchinge, and keepe him ſelfe quiet: he muſt not retaine his excremētes but auoyd them by and by after ſleepe if he can, or let natur be helped to expell them by a lenityue cliſter, for ther retention encreaſe paine in the head.

Let him eſchewe carnall copulation, excercyſes, and bathes. Let hym eſchewe all perturbations of the minde, eſpecially anger and furye. Let him haue but little meate,
                     Meate.
                   of good digeſtion, and let it be colde in operatiō, as is bread dipped in cold water, iuice of plyſan, letuſe, endiue, purſelaine, fleſhe of chickens, hennes or pigeons, with veriuyce made of grapes. Fyſhes are good that come out of ſtony riuers, and that are tender. Alſo almōd milke, pomegarnettes, raiſons and rype peares may be gyuen to him. He muſt abſtaine from milke, and meates, that fume into the head, or that be hard of digeſtion. For his drinke,
                     Drinke.
                   let hym vſe water altogether, if his ſtomacke will beare it, if not, ſeathe a litle Cynamon in it, or Coriander ſead preparate, or mixe with the water iuyce of ſower pomegarnettes, or ſyrupe of Endyue, or Syrupus acetoſus ſimplex, or oxy ſaccharum: or yf they cannot abide that, you may giue them ſmall wyne well alayed with water. The payne of the head cauſed of heat, is cured with ſuch thinges as doe coole, without manifeſt reſtriction,
                     Cure.
                   eſpeciallie yf they be of thinne and percing ſubſtance. Therefore in the beginning nothing is better then to poure vpon the head good oyle of roſes, made of vnrype oyle,
                     Oyle of roſes.
                   and yf a little vineger be added to it, it will pearce the faſter and the deeper. The places that you muſt poure or annoynt it on, is the fore part of the head wher the ſeame goeth ouerthwart, for it is the thinneſt place of the ſkull, and the ſeames haue pores in them, alſo you muſt vſe it on the toppe of the forhead, wher the heare leaueth growing, and on the ſydes of the temples, where the heare groweth towardes the eares. The beſt thinge next oyle of roſes is oyle of cammomill to be vſed in likewyſe, eſpecially in thoſe bodyes,
                     Oyle of commomill.
                   that we would not coole to muche, as weomens, eunuches, children and other that haue ſofte fleſhe, and are whyte in colour. If there be need of greater cooling, you may adde to the oyle of roſes iuyce of houſelike, or purſelaine, or knotgraſſe, or of vnrype grapes, or night ſhade, or ſorrell, or pſillium, or ſuche lyke. Vſe not iuyce of poppye, or of mandrage in this cauſe, for they doe hurte: you maye make medicynes of the former thinges, or ſuche lyke in this ſorte. ℞. oyle of roſes. ℥.ij. roſewater. ℥.j. ſtrong vineger. ℥.ſs. or iuyce of houſelike, or purſelaine, or lettuſe. ℥.j. and ſo commixt them. Or thus, ℞ diſtilled water of houſelyke, lettuſe, and night ſhade. ana. ℥.ij. water of cammomill. ℥.j.ſs. vineger. ℥.j. commixt them, and dippe a clothe in it, and laye it all ouer the forhead, and the temples where the heare groweth not. But let not this medicyne touche the hynder parte of the head, for that parte cannot ſuffer cooling without hurte, becauſe the marrowe of the back bone beginneth there. Thoſe medicines which you will vſe for cooling, eſpecially in Sommer, muſt ſtand a whyle in very cold water. This alſoe is good for aboundaunce or humours, and vapoures, that be lifted vp into the head. In like māner alſo you may vſe other oyles that haue vertue to coole as oyles of quinces, violettes, water lillies, and gourdes. Nether will it be vnprofitable to vſe a liniment made in this ſorte. ℞. Of the mucilage of the ſeades of quinces,
                     Alyni
                           ••
                        ens.
                   and great mallowes, or of pſillium. ana. ʒ.iij. iuyce of purſlaine. ʒ.j.ſs. iuyce of night ſhade. ʒ.ſs. Oyle of roſes. ℥.j. commixt them and make a linimēt: or by putting to waxe and other medicines make an oyntment in this ſort. ℞. Vnguentipopuleon. 
                  ʒ.j. oiles of violettes and roſes of eche. ʒ.iij. drie flowers of whyte water lillies and of redd roſes. ana. ℈.j. waxe as muche as is ſufficient,
                     Vnguent
                           •••
                        .
                   and make an ointment, and annoynt it vpon the forhead and the temples. Yt profitteth alſo to vſe embrocations (that is decoctions made of certaine things to poure vpon anye member by litle and litle, or to let it droppe downe) they maie be made of roſes, violettes,
                     Embrochae.
                   
                  
                     S
                           •••
                        efaci
                           •
                        tis.
                   floures of water lillies, willowe leaues, vyne leaues, purcelaine, barley and ſuch lyke. You muſt not applye ſtupefactiue thinges to the greefe, becauſe they coole not without hurt, and therfore opin, iuyce of poppye, and mandragora are to be eſchewed. Iuyce of night ſhade alſo becauſe of his ſtupefaction is not to be vſed at all, or very litle of it at once, as we doe vſe in the liniment afore ſayd. Alſo thoſe thinges, that haue manifeſt aſtriction and binding with ther cooling are to be refuſed, except neceſſitie require it, and therfor the iuices of ſweete pomgarnettes, quinces, and meddlars are to be auoyded, but iuice of ſower pomgarnettes is good becauſe it cooleth more.
                     No
                           •
                        e.
                   Hytherto we haue declared what medicines are to be vſed in the beginning of this greefe. Afterward you may vſe to mixe with the medicynes that doe coole and dryue backe, ſuche thinges as doe mitygate and digeſt. Make therefore an embrocation after this ſorte. ℞. Floures of roſes and violettes. ana. M.ſs. leaues of willowe,
                     Embrocha.
                  
                  
cammomil, and melilote. ana. M.j. ſeades of mallowes. ʒ.iij. barley huſked. ℥.j. ſeeth theſe in two pound of water, till the thyrde parte be conſumed, and make an embrocation. Or thus, ℞. mallowe leaues,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   vyolets, roſes. ana. pug. ſs. the floures of water lillies. ʒ.iij. vyne leaues, or the wreathes, that they wind about things which all, purcelaine, or houſelyke of eche. M.j. cammomil, melilote, and fenngreke. ana. ʒ.ij. ſeath them as ys aboue ſayd, and make an embrocha, adding to a litle vineger, eſpeciallie if the paine be within the ſkull. Laſt of all you maie vſe moſt of the diſcuſſiue medicines, withdrawing the aforſaid repelling things, ſuche be Althaea, dill, ſothernwood, butter, cammomill, barley meale, fenngreke, lyneſead, lupines. &c. Of theſe and ſuche lyke things you maie make quiltes, or embrocations, or oyntmentes,
                     Inwarde 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   as you liſte. For inward medicines (eſpecially if the headach be cauſed of excercyſe, anger or ſuche lyke) miniſter nilep of violetts or roſes, or ther conſerues, or manus Chriſti, or giue the ſicke ij. or .iij. houres before meate in the morning. ℥.j. and ſs. of ſyrupe of infuſion of roſes,
                     Odours.
                   or of ſyrupe of water lillies with. ℥.ij. or .iij. of water of borage, or cichorye. Yt is good for the ſicke to ſmell roſe water, mixed with a little vineger, alſo it is good to ſnuffe it vp in to the noſe.
            
            
               CAP. III. Of headache cauſed of colde.
               
                  BY colde is ment in this Chapter, a cold diſtempure ſimplie without the fluxe of any cold humour.
                     Cauſae.
                   This paine in the head is cauſed of outward cold as when the ayer is very cold, eſpecially when any body tarrieth in it long time bare headed, as alſoe it maie be cauſed by the ſodaine applying of any cold thing to the head.
                     Signae.
                   The ſignes of headache cauſed or colde, are contrary to thoſe ſignes that are cauſed of hote diſtempure. For in this, though the paine be vehement, yet the head when it is felt, is not hoate, nor the face and eyes doe not loke redde, nor ther face is not drye and ſhruncke but contrarywyſe full and pale,
                     Victus ratio.
                   and ther eyes are ſwollen and ſwart. Alſo they neither deſire cold things, nor doe feele eaſe by them. Concerning the diett of thoſe, that haue this kind of headache, they muſt eſchewe cold ayer, and abide alltogether in hote ayer. They muſt ſleepe moderately, but not longer then they were wonte. They muſt vſe mouing of the whole body, eſpecially walking and ryding. Let ther bodies be ſoluble, rather then coſtiue, ſo that they may eche day haue a ſiege either by nature, or by arte, as by a ſuppoſitary or a cliſter. Let them eſchew ſaddnes, and deepe cogitations, and other immoderat affections of the minde. Let them eſchewe all meates and drinkes that be cold in operation as milke, fiſhe and ſuche lyke. Let them eate reare egges, and fleſhe of hennes, chicken, partriche, and feaſaunts and ſuche like. For ther drincke let him vſe wine that is thinne of ſubſtaunce, for that doth moderatlie extenuate and heate. For the ſame cauſe alſo hote bathes are to be vſed, and generally for the cure hereof you muſt vſe things that be hote in operatiō.
                     Cur
                           •
                        .
                   But yet in applying medicines to the head you muſt diligently conſider the naturall temperature of the braine, for it is ſuch a thing, as cannot ſuffer medicines vehement hote, nor it vehement colde. Therfor (as Galen affirmeth) if oyle of rewe be poured hote vpon the fore parte of the head, it healeth the patient perfittlie. But if ther be neede of greater heating, you maie put pepper, or euphorbium into the oyle, or you may mixe ſome oyle of pepper, or oyle of euphorbium with the oyle of rewe, or in ſteede of oyle of rewe, you maie vſe oyles of laurell, yreos, dill, or cammomill, of ſpikenarde, ſerpillum, marioram, and ſuch lyke. Herewith you maie annoynt the forhead alſo, and the noſthriles and the holes of the eares. Of the afore ſaid medicines you may make an ointment after this ſorte.
                     Vnguentum.
                   ℞. Oyles of yreos, and rewe. ana. ℥.ſs. mariorame, betony, pepper. ana. ℈.j. of Euphorbium. gra. v. waxe as muche as is ſufficient, and make an oyntement, and annoynt therwith the forehead,
                     Aliud.
                   and the noſethrills. Or make an ointement thus. ℞. of oyle of rewe, cammomill, and nardinum. ana. ℥.j. hyſope, lauender, and flowers of ſtaechas. ana. ʒ.ſs. maſticke and frankenſence of eche. ʒ.j. waxe a litle, and make an oyntment. You may ſometime adde to it,
                     Embrochae.
                   if you will, Caſtoreum. ℈.j. Alſo embrocations profit muche,

if they be made of flowers, of melitote, and cammomil, marioram, origan, betony, ſage, laurell leaues, ſtaechas, and ſuche lyke, ſodden in water. It is good for the ſicke to drawe vp the vapours of ſuche decoctions by his noſethrills. Alſoe a quilt made in this ſorte profiteth much. ℞. leaues of laurell, ſerpillum, and marioram. ana. M.ſs. floures of roſemary. M.j. Rew. M.ſs. cloues & ſtaechas. ana. ʒ.j. peniroyall and calamint. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. beate theſe to powder▪ and ſew them in ſilke, or fine linnen clothe, and make a quilte,
                     Sacculus.
                   which muſt be laid to the head warme, and firſt ſprinckled with vineger. It is good alſo to vſe a pomander,
                     Pomum odoriferum.
                   made in this ſorte. ℞. of ſtorax calamitae. ʒ.ij. cloues, maces, wood of aloes. ana. ʒ.ſs. lauender. ʒ.ij. gallia moſchata. ʒ.j.ſs. of muſk and amber. ana. gra. iij. pouder them and ſerce them, and with water of marioram, and ſtorax liquida, as much as ſhall ſuffiſe, make pomanders.
            
            
               CAP. IIII. Of headache cauſed by drynes or moiſture.
               
                  BY drynes is ment in this place a drie diſtempure of the qualitie alone, and by moiſture, a moiſt diſtempure of the bare qualitie. Nether of theſe qualities alone, except heat or colde be ioyned with them, doe cauſe any headache at all (as Galen teacheth in the 5. Chap. of his firſt booke de ſymptomatum cauſis.) Therfore we doe not make mention here of theſe diſtempures, as though headach might be cauſed of them alone, but that the ſtudious in phiſick might haue ſtore of medicines, when headache cometh of heat and drines, or moiſture with heat, or when cold mixed with drynes, or moiſture cauſeth headache.
                     Cauſae.
                   Headache through drynes is cauſed through drines of the ayer, or by drye medicines, by honger, excercyſe, lechery and perturbatiōs of the mind. And headach of moiſture is cauſed by moiſtnes of the aire, or by moiſtening medicines, by bathes, hote waters, and other thinges that moiſten ouermuch. Drynes is knowen by theſe ſignes, if ther come fewe excrementes,
                     Signa.
                   or none at all out of the noſe, if the eyes be hollowe, and the patient haue watched muche before. Theſe be ſignes of headache of drynes, alſo in it the ſkinne of the head is dryer when it is felt, then it is wonted to be, and ſome drye diet hath ben vſed. Alſoe in this kind dry medicines doe not eaſe the paine, but rather encreaſe it. Moiſtnes is knowen by theſe ſignes, muche filth cometh out at the noſe, the eyes be puffed vp and ſwolne, and the patient ſleapeth muche: but of this diſtempure alone ther doeth noe headache enſue.
                     Victus.
                   Thoſe that haue headache cauſed of drynes, let them remaine in a moiſt ayer, and let them eat meates, that doe moiſtē, and that be of good iuice, as the yolkes of egges, cockes ſtones, and the brothes of them, pheſants, partriche, and ſuche like thinges, that doe nouriſhe muche and moiſten. Let them drinke thinne wine alayed with water. Let them ſleepe largely. Let them eſchewe motion of the body and excercyſe, and vſe quyetnes and reſte. Let them eſchewe carnall copulation, hunger, thirſt, and all thinges that doe drye. Let hem vſe bathes of ſweete waters that are warme. Let them be mery, and eſchewe all other perturbations of the mind. If headache be cauſed of moiſture, you muſt vſe the contrary diet to this that is before praeſcribed (that is, al ſuche thinges as doe drye, which you may eaſily knowe by that, which hathe beene ſaid before.) For paine of the head cauſed of drynes,
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt annoint the former ſeame of the head with oyle of ſweete almondes, or with oyle of gourdes, or with oyles of vyolettes, and cammomill mixed together. It is alſoe good to droppe ſome of theſe oyles into the noſethrills. You may alſoe mixe very well with the ſaid oyles gooſe greaſe, hennes greaſe, calues greaſe, or freſh butter after this ſorte. ℞. oyles of vyolets, and water lillies of eche. ʒ.iij. calues ſuit, hennes greaſe,
                     Lini
                           •
                        en
                           •
                        um.
                   and freſhe butter. ana. ʒ.ij. commixe them and make a linymēt and ther with annoynt the head. Furthermore embrocations profit not a litle, yf they be made of vyolettes, mallowes, and other herbes that haue vertue to moiſten. Againſt headache cauſed of moiſture you muſt vſe medicines cleane contrary to the afore named, which muſt differ according to the heat or colde whiche is ioyned to the moyſture. You maye find ſufficient ſtore of ſuche remedies out of the former chapters.
            
            
               
               CAP. V. Of headache cauſed of bloud.
               
                  HITHERTO we haue ſpoken of the Cure of headache, with cometh through alteration and diſtempure of the bare qualitie. But nowe we will ſpeake of that which is cauſed of fullnes,
                     VVhat is 
                           〈◊〉
                         by plemiend
                           •
                        
                      
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and aboundance of bloud, we call plenitude in this place that which the Greeks call in ther tongue plethora, it chaunceth when all the foure humours be encreaſed in ther proportion, or when bloud alone doth abound.
                     Cauſae.
                   This kind of headache is cauſed of all ſuche things as do engendre great aboundance of humours in the bodye, as meates and drinckes of great nouriſhment being plentifully taken, as alſo the neglecting and omitting of excercyſes, bathes, ſweetings, and other naturall and artificiall vacuations be cauſes of the ſaid plenitude. The ſignes be theſe.
                     Signa.
                   The face and the eyes be ruddie, the vaines are ſwolne, ſo that the leaſt, and ſmall eſt maye eaſily be ſeene, the pulſe is great and vehemēt, the vrine reddiſhe and thicke, the vaines of the temples beate,
                     Victus ratio.
                   the paine in the head is a heauines. Concerning diet, let the ſicke be in a cold and dry ayer. Let him eſchew fleſhe, reare egges, and ſuche things as nouriſhe plentifully. Let him vſe ptiſan made of Barlie, or alica made of barley, let him vſe cold herbes, as endyue, ſcarioll, purcelaine, lettuce and ſuch lyke. Let him eſchewe wyne, and let him drinke water, wherin a litle Cinnamon or barley hath been ſodden. Let him vſe meane excercyſe. Let him be rubbed, let him alſo vſe bathing often, but ſo that his body be firſt emptied and the patient free from a feuer. Let his ſleepe be meane. Let him be mery and ioyfull,
                     Curatio.
                   and let him abſtaine from all other perturbations of the mind. The cure muſt be begonn whith bloudlettinge aſſone as can be. You muſt open the vttermoſt vaine, which in the arme is called humeralis,
                  
                     Ve
                           ••
                         ſectio.
                   or Cephalica, it muſt be on the arme whiche is of that ſide, that the greefe is moſt vehemēt. For this vaine is ſo annexed to the head, that not only by it, you ſhall pull backe bloud into a contrary parte, but alſo you ſhall emptye out that bloud by it. As Hippocrates, and after him Galien, and Rhaſes doe teache. But if age or weaknes doe prohibyte bloudletting,
                     Cucurbitae. Ventoſe. Loca
                           •
                        a.
                   you muſt vſe boxing, not to the head it ſelfe, but to the partes adioyning as the ſhoulders and breaſt, to the intent to pull backe the bloud. Theſe being done, you muſt apply to the head, medicines that be cold and aſtringent, whereof we haue made mention before ſufficiently in the ſecond chapitre, ſo that they need not here to be repeated. Furthermore the Phiſition muſt haue ſpeciall regard in this caſe, that the patient be kept ſoluble.
                     Decoctum purge
                           •
                        s.
                   Therfore if the patient be any thing coſtyue, you may miniſter this decoction or ſome ſuche lyke. ℞. floures of bugloſſe, borage, roſes, and violettes. ana. M.ſs. the foure great cold ſeades huſked. ana. ʒ.ij. ſebeſten, damaſke, proines, of eche in number 12. great raiſons, tamarindes. ana. ℥.j. barkes of mirabolanes, citrinorum, indorum, chebulorum, emblicorum, belliricorum. ana. ʒ.iij. liquoryce. ℥.j. fumitory, maiden heare. ana. M.j. tamariſcus, hartiſtonge. ana. ʒ.iij. ſene, and polipodie of eche. ℥.ſs. agarick choſen. ʒ.ij.ſs. ginger. ʒ.ſs. Seathe all theſe in a ſufficient quantity of water, vntill halfe be conſumed, then ſtrayne it and preſſe it hard. Adde to that decoction ſuger ſufficient to make it ſweete, purifie it whith the white of egges, and make a potion, whereof the patient ſhall drincke eche morning. ℥.iiij. faſting. And if ſoe be that the pacientes coſtyuenes require a ſtronger medicine, then you may adde to foure ounces of the afore ſayd decoction. ʒ.j.ſs. of fine reubarbe beaten to pouder, and ſpycknard. ʒ.ſs. or you maye diſſolue in it caſia fiſtula. ℥.j.ſs. newly drawen. or. ℥.j. of manna, or of diaphenicon. ʒ.iij. for the ſame purpoſe alſoe it is good to miniſter vnto the patient ſyrupe of vyolettes, and acetoſus ſimplex. After this you muſt applie ſuche medicines to the head, as be able to diſperſe the remnaunt of the paine and diſeaſe. As is ſeades of mallowes,
                     Diſcutientia.
                   fenngreke, chammomil, and melilote flowers. Alſo oyles of cammomill, dill, and ſuche lyke, wherof the Phiſition may at his choiſe make lynementes, oyntments, or emplaiſters in māner aforeſaid. Note here further that if muche bloud aboūd after you haue let bloud of the Cephalica: you maie alſoe ſtryke the vaine in the forhead, as alſoe for that purpoſe it is good to vſe clyſters ſometime very ſtronge, and you maye vſe frictions and bindinges of the nether partes to pull backe the humours. Moreouer gargaryſing, and

ſneſing maye be vſed in time conuenient, and boxing in the hinder parte of the head with ſcarification at the diſcretion of the Phiſition, as occaſion and time ſhall ſerue.
            
            
               CAP. VI. Of headache cauſed of choler.
               
                  HEADACHE comming of cholerike humours is cauſed of all ſuch things as do heat and dry the whole body and eſpecially the head vnnaturally, that is,
                     Cauſae.
                   ſuch things as do engender choller: (to witte, care, angre, paine, labour, excerciſe, watching, abſtinence, famine, and eating of meates that be cholericke, as garlicke, oynions, and ſuch like.) The ſignes be theſe the paine is like thers,
                     Signa.
                   that haue headach cauſed of burning heat of the Sūne, but they haue a more ſharp and pricking paine, there head is moderately hote, there face is pale and wane. Sometime there followeth bitterneſſe of the mouth, drines of the eyes, noſe and toung. Moreouer this euill chaunceth moſt of all to flouriſhing years, a hote complexion, and to them that take ouermuch buſineſſe in hand and ſuch lyke. Let the patient abide in a colde and moiſt aire,
                     Victus ratio.
                   which may be the rather procured by arte as is taught before in the ſecond chap. by ſprinkling the floure of the chamber continually with water, or by ſtrewing about of floures and branches that are cold and moiſt in operation. Let his whole dyet be moiſt, let him eat moiſt meats that be of good iuice, geue him lettuce, and purcelain, and ſmall fiſhes of freſh waters. Let his drinke be water alone, or water wherin a little Cynamon hath been ſodden. Let him alltogether abſteine from wine. Let him be quyete, and vſe long ſleepes: bathes that be temperate, vnctions are good for him, let him be mery, and refraine frō all perturbatiōs of the mind. The cure muſt be begunne with purging of the cholerick humour ſtraigt way,
                     Curatio.
                   becauſe choler is thinne and moueable, and therefore will eaſily purge out. But if it chaunce, that the cholerick humour doth reſt quyetly in ſome part of the bodie, and ſo dothe waxe hote, and burn that parte, and by that meanes doth prohibite hote medicins (as purging things be) thē before the purgatiō, you muſt miniſter ſuch things as doe quenche & concoct the heate and burning of choler, that is ſuch thinges as doe alter it. For digeſtiō that we ſpeak of now is no thing els but an alteration of the humour that cauſeth the diſeaſe. Therefor ſuch medicines muſt be miniſtred eche morning faſting before you do purge vntill good cōcoctiō appear in the vrine: For by this meanes choler being cōcoct, & as it were tamed & made myld is made ſo obediēt vnto nature, that it will ſoone without any greefe be drawen of the purging medecin to cōueniēt places, that it ſhould auoid by.
                     Zul
                           •
                        pium.
                   You ſhall therfor for a preparatiue vſe this or ſuch like medicines. ℞. Syrupe of Violettes. ℥.j. ſyrupe of water Lillies. ℥.ſs. diſtilled waters of Endyue, ſuccory and Roſes. ana. ℥.j. commixe them, and let that be dronke in the morning faſting. For this purpoſe alſo you may miniſter Iulep of Roſes and Violettes, or Syrupus acetoſus, or the decoction of ſeades of Cucumbers, Gourdes, Purcelayne, Endyue, rootes alſo of Endyue and Succorye, Roſes, Violettes, water Lillies, Lettuce, Damaske, Proynes, Sebeſten, Iniubes and ſuche like.
                     Purgatio.
                   You may purge the cholerike humour either by infuſion of wormewood, or of Aloes, or with Hierapicra miniſtred alone, or a litle ſcāmony mixed with it, or with Pilles made of Aloes. Or you ſhall not doe amiſſe to take of the purging decoction preſcribed in the former chapter. ℥.iiij. and to diſſolue therein. ʒ.iij. of Electuarium de ſucco Roſarum, or as muche of Electuarium de Pſillio, and ſo miniſter it. It is good alſo to miniſter infuſion of rewbarbe made after this ſort.
                     Dilutum Rhabarbari.
                   ℞. fyne Rewbarbe. ʒ.ij. Spickenard. ℈.j. cut them ſmall, and infuſe them in diſtilled waters of endyue, doddir, and bugloſſe. ana. ℥.j. pure wine. ℥.ſs. the ſpace of 12 houres, then ſtraine it hard, and put thereto of Electuaries de ſucco Roſarum and Pſillio. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. commixe them and make a purging potion. Alſo you may vſe Pilula aurea, and Alephanginae, or Pilles of Rewbarbe, or of Hiera ſimplex and ſuch like, or els Diacatholicon, or Diaprunes ſolutine. For them that are delicate, you may vſe this bole. ℞. of Diagridium. ℈.ſs. of Maces, Cynnamon,
                     Bolus purgās.
                   and Maſticke. ana. gr. 2. conſerue of Violettes and water Lillies. ana. ʒ.j. Suger as muche as ſufficeth, and make a bole. Further it profiteth nowe and then to vſe clyſters made in this or lyke ſort. ℞. Mallowes,
                     Clyſter.
                  
                  
Althea, Endyue, Succorye, Violettes, ana. M.ſs. whole Barley. ℥.j. the four common ſmall cold ſeades (that is) Lettuce, Purcelayne, Endyue, and Scaryoll. ana. ʒ.iij. Seath all theſe in running water to the thirde part, ſtraine them, take of that decoction. lb.j. of the pulpe of Caſſia fiſtula. ℥.j. of Hierapicra. ℥.ſs. of oyle of Violettes. ℥.iij. of mel roſarum. ℥.j. of ſalt. ʒ.j.ſs. commixt all together and make a cliſter.
                     Loca
                           •
                        ia.
                   After purging of the cholerike humour you muſt apply medicines outwardlie, which can coole and ſtrengthen the head, whereof you ſhall find ſtore in the ſecond chapitre.
                     Sleepe.
                   Yf the ſicke can not ſleepe, anoint the fore part of the head with oyle of water lillies, and oyle of poppye: to them you may for a neede adde a little opium, that ſlepe thereby may be prouoked. Note, that boxing without ſcarification and frictions of the armes and legges maye be well vſed in times conuenient.
            
            
               CAP. VII. Of headache cauſed of fleume.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  HEADACHE comming of fleume, is cauſed of all ſuche thinges as engendre fleume in the head, as a cold and moiſt ayre, meates, that be colde and moiſt, as fyſhes, milke, rawe herbes, fruite, idlenes, and ſleeping vpon a full ſtomake and ſuch otherlyke.
                     Signa.
                   The ſignes hereof be fullnes and heauynes of the head, whitenes, and moiſtnes of the face, moreouer the ſicke will eaſily fall aſleepe, he is ſlowe, his ſences are dull, and his head aboundeth whith excrementes, as alſoe the ſignes declared in the .3. Chap. agree with this kind of headache.
                     Victus r
                           •
                        ti
                           •
                        .
                   Let the ſicke remaine in an ayer that is hote and drye by nature, or if that cannot be had, let the ayer be made ſuche by certaine odoriferous thinges, as with Cynamon, frankinſcence, cloues, wood of Aloes, and ſuche lyke. Let his meate that he eateth for the moſt parte be roſted, and let him eate ſpyces with it. For his drinke let him vſe thinne and ſmall wyne, let his excercyſe be meane, to be ſhorte, let him vſe ſuche diet as is praeſcribed in the third chap. of this booke. The Cure muſt be begonn whith extenuation and digeſtion of the flegmaticke humour.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   Therfore you muſt miniſter ſuche medicines as are able to extenuate, make thinne, cut, and deuy de humours, ſuche be mel roſarum, oximel ſimplex and compoſitum and ſcilliticum, ſyrupe of ſlechades, diſtilled waters of hyſope, betony, mariorame, ſage and ſuch like, miniſter therfore vnto him a medicine made on this ſorte.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   ℞. Of oximel ſcylliticum. ℥.j. of ſyrupe of ſleehades. ℥.ſs. of diſtilled waters of hyſope, percely and marioram. ana. ℥.j. commixe them and make a potion. Or if the vſeing of ſyrupes and diſtilled waters doe not lyke you, you may miniſter this or ſuche lyke decoction.
                     Decoctum exser
                           ••••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   ℞. of the rootes of fenell, percely, and aſparagus. ana. ℥.j. rootes of piony. ʒ.ij. ſeades of anniſe, fennell, ſiler mōtanum. ana. ʒ.iij. ſtichados, origan, ſerpillū, maioram, calamint, betony, ſage. ana. M.ſs. fyne Cynamon, macis. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Seathe all theſe in ſufficient quantity of water vntill halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine it, and adde ſugar ſufficient to make it ſweet, clarify it with the whytes of egges, then put thertoe ſyrupe of hyſope, and oximel ſimplex. ana. ℥.iij. commixte them all together and make a poi
                     •
                  on. When the humours are extenuate, and made thinne and prepared to be purged, then muſt ſuche medicines be miniſtred,
                     Purgatio.
                   as are able to purge fleume, for the which cauſe let the ſicke haue theſe pilles miniſtred vnto him.
                     Pilula.
                   ℞. pilularum co
                        •
                     luarum. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. pilularum è hiera compoſita. 
                  ʒ.j. pil. alephanginarum. 
                  ʒ.ſs. agarike made into trochiſtes. ℈.ij. Mirabonalorum, chebulorum. ℈.j. fyne turbith. ℈.ſs. ſtichados and ginger. ana. gr. v. maſtycke. gr. vij. ſeades of piony in number .iij. Caſtorei. g.iiij. with lauender water make pilles. It is good for them, that are thus affected to be purged not once only, but twyſe or thryſe, bycauſe the groſſe and clammy humours will not ſtraight followe a ſodaine purgation, but they muſt be drawen out by litle and litle with often purging. Alſoe cliſters are good, not only becauſe they empty out ſuch things as are contained in the inteſtines, but alſo for that they pull back ſuche humours and vapours as aſcend to the head.
                     Clyſter.
                   For clyſters therfore the decoction before preſcribed is good if you take thereof. ℥.xij. and diſſolue therin benedictae laxatinae. ℥.ſs. Electuarij indi maioris. ʒ.iij. diaphaenicon. ʒ.ij. mel roſarum. ℥.j. oyles of laurell and rewe. ana. ℥.j.ſs. ſal. gennie. ʒ.j. commixt them together and make a cliſter. After the whole

body is purged, you muſt miniſter ſuch medicynes as can purge the head, as be Gargaryſes made in this ſorte. ℞ long pepper and nuttmegs. ana. ʒ.ſs. ſead of ſtauiſacre,
                     Gargariſe.
                   pelitory. ana. ℈.ij. muſtard ſeade, origan. ana. ℈.j. beate them to powder, and put therof in a linnen clothe, and chewe it, or with maſticke or honye make trochiſkes lyke lupines, and let the ſicke chewe one of them almoſt halfe an howre. Alſoe the head may be purged by iuyce of maiorame, blitum, coleworts, and ſuche lyke. You may alſo for this purpoſe miniſter gagaryſes made of the diſtilled waters of hyſope, betony, origan, with hierapicra, and oximel compoſitum, or in this ſorte. ℞. pellitorye,
                     Gargariſmus.
                   long pepper of eche. ʒ.j.ſs. ſead of ſtauiſacre. ʒ.ſs. maiorā, peniroyall, hyſope, origan, betony. ana. M.ſs. ſeath all theſe in ſufficient quantity of water vnto the third parte, ſtraine it and adde to the licour mel roſarum. ℥.j.ſs. oximell ſcilliticum. ℥.ſs. cōmixe all and make a gargariſe. Alſo medicines to prouoke ſneaſing are good in this caſe.
                     S
                           •
                        ernutamentum.
                   You may make them after this ſorte. ℞. maiorā. ʒ.j. nigella. ʒ.ſs cloues, white pepper, cubebes. ana. ℈.j. nutmegges, graines, caſtoreū, heleborus albus. ana. ℈.ſs. beate them into very fine pouder, and prouoke, ſneſing therwith. For them which are riche you may adde muſke and amber. ana. g.ij. It profiteth alſo to hold hote and ſweet odours to the noſe of the patiēt, or a pomāder artificially made, ſuch a one as we praeſcribed in the end of the third Chapter. Further you may take naſalia (as they call them) things to put into the noſe ſharpe at one end and great at the other like a ſteeple after this ſorte. ℞. ſtauiſacre,
                  
                     Naſa
                           •
                        a.
                   pelitory, and whit pepper. ana. ʒ.ſs. nigelle, nutmegges. ana. ℈.ij. heleborus albus. ℈.ſs. powder them and with roſin and waxe make naſales. After the purging of the head you maye vſe oyntmentes, embrocations, drye quiltes,
                     Loca
                           •
                        a.
                   and ſuche like other medicines to diſperſe the remnaunt of the humour remaining in the head, wherof ther be examples ſufficient in the third Chapter before. You may commodiouſly miniſter inwardly cubebes, condite, or diambra, diamoſcha, aromaticum roſaceum, diacuminum, dianthos, theriaca, mithridarum, diacorum, conſerue of maioram, roſemary, betony, with ſyrupe of ſtaechados.
                     Lo
                           ••
                        nges.
                   Or miniſter theſe lozenges which are ſpecially good. ℞. pouder of Electuarium de gemmis, dianthos. ana. ℈.j. cubebes, maces of eche. ʒ.ſs. woodes of Aloes, cloues, and fennell ſead. ana. ℈.ſs. fine Cynamon. ℈.ij. ſtaechados. ℈.ſs. with ſuger molten in the diſtilled waters of piony flowers and lauender make lozenges. And thus muche for the cure of headache cauſed of flegmaticke humours. But if ſoe be that headache be cauſed of a melancholye humour,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   then you muſt preſcribe ſuche diet, and vſe ſuche cure as ſhalbe declared in the chaptre of melancholy, or maddnes. And therfor it ſhould be ſuperfluous to entreate hereofe in this place, repayer therfore for cure of headache comming of melancholy vnto the Chapter in this booke followinge.
            
            
               CAP. VIII. Of headache cauſed of windynes.
               
                  IF headach be cauſed of windines,
                     Cauſae.
                   the diet vſed before was ſuch as did engendre wind beſydes the nature of the body, and other circunſtāces were ſuch as were apte to engēdre wind. The ſignes be theſe,
                     Signa.
                   if ther be felt diſcention and ſtretching in the head without heauines & beating, and if ther be a ſound & noyſe in the eares, then doth it betoken windynes in the head.
                     Victus ratio. Cura.
                   The diet of the patient muſt altogether be ſuche as doeth not engender windynes. For the cure, if the windynes be not only bredd in the head, but doeth aſcend from ſome parte beneath: firſt of all you muſt vſe ſuche medicines, as doe repell and dryue backe, ſuch be vineger, pomgarnet rindes and flowers, wormewood, melilote, mintes, plantaine, walwort, burſa paſtoris, nutmegges, purcelaine, houſlike, laurell leaues and ſuch lyke. Which being moderatly vſed a whyle, you muſt then adde to thoſe repulſyue thinges, ſome ſuch medicines as doe mitigate concoct and digeſt, as be fenngreke, lyneſead, cammomil, yolkes of egges, ſaffron, hennes greaſe, gooſe greaſe. &c. Laſte of all adde diſcuſſyue medicynes oyles of dill, and rewe, barley meale, lupines, lillie rootes, nigella, &c. It is good therfor firſt of all to empty the bealy with a ſtrong cliſter, but that muſt be made of a decoction that doth diſſolue windines, by ſeathing in water anyſe ſeades, and caraway ſeades, fennell ſead, comyn, dry figges,
                     C
                           ••
                        fier.
                   branne and ſuche lyke: herein you muſt diſſolue benedicta laxatina. 
                  ʒ.iiij. or Electu
                        •
                     trium

                     
                        •
                     idum in like quantity, or Diaphenicon. 
                  ʒ.iiij. or Diacatholicon. or hierepicre. 
                  ʒ.vij. Suche kinde of clyſters doe not only purge the inteſtynes, and the partes about the lyuer, but doe alſoe pull back ſuche thinges as aſcend to the head. Afterward you muſt ſtrengthen the affected member, that it doe engender wind noe more, whither it be the ſtomake, the lyuer, the ſplene, the inteſtynes, or any other member: which being done, if heat abound in the head together with the windines then apply oyle of roſes, wich is both repulſiue, digeſtiue, and diſcuſſiue,
                     Localia.
                   and add to it vineger which is both repulſyue and diſcuſſyue alſoe, and doth extenuate beſydes. Alſoe roſe water or iuyce of purcelaine, knotgraſſe, or nightſhade may be vſed & applyed whith a litle vineger. If ther be cold in the head with the wyndines, then vſe oyles of cammomill or dill, mixed with a litle vineger, or if the greyſe encreaſe apply the iuyce of rewe with vineger and oyle mixed together, or apply the iuice of the roote of floure de luce whith vinegre, or iuyce of laurell bearyes and rewe mixed with vineger is good to be applied. Likewyſe bitter almondes beaten whith vineger and oyle, and applyed to the forhead in a linnen clothe, are very good, when the greyſe doth firſt beginne to encreaſe. And if you had rather vſe drye quiltes, you may make them at the firſt of milium, roſes, willowe leaues, knotgraſſe, nightſhade, and purcelaine, and ſoe apply them to the forhead, and fore part of the head. Afterward you may adde to the afore ſaid maiorame, ſerpillū, hyſope, rewe, tender leaues of laurell, ciperns and ſuch like. It is good alſo to vſe odours and ſmelles, as Caſtoreum, muſke, amber, and ſuche like. To prouoke ſneaſing, and to miniſter inwardly to the ſicke is good, eyther Diacuminum, or Dianiſum. 
                  ʒ.j. or as muche triacle, or Mithridatum proffiteth. But if the wyndines be cauſed through imbecillitye of ſome partes of the head it ſelfe, then you ſhall not neede to vſe repulſyue medicines, but rather concoctiue and diſcuſſiue medicines ſuche as are before declared. As for inwarde medicines they auaile or profit litle in this caſe.
            
            
               CAP. IX. Of headache cauſed of the ſtomake.
               
                  HITHERTO we haue declared the cauſes, ſignes, and Cures of headache cauſed principally in it ſelfe, nowe it remaineth that we intreate of paine in the head, which cometh by conſent. And firſt of that headache whiche cometh through euill affection of the ſtomacke.
                     Cauſae.
                   And that is cauſed moſt commōly when ſome ſharpe humour aboduneth in the ſtomake eſpecially in the mouthe of it, from whence corrupt vapours aryſing doe aſcend to the head. It may be knowen by the gnawing and byting paine that they feele which haue that headache,
                     Signa.
                   and by the deſire to vomit, that the patient hath. Eſpecially if the mouthe of the ſtomake be affected. Moreouer in this kinde of headache, if the ſicke faſte, and ſuffer hunger long, the paine is more vehement, for through long abſtinence the malyce of the humuor encreaſeth.
                     Curatio.
                   You muſt Cure thoſe, that are thus grieued, not by applying remedies to the head, but to the humours in the ſtomake, which rayſe vp vapours to trouble the head. Therfore you muſt with ſpeed purge the noiſome humours that are in the mouth of the ſtomake. They may be purged out by drinking of warme water, if ſo be the patient can eaſily vomit, if not, he muſt thruſt his finger or a fether into his throte, and ſo prouoke the ſtomake to vomit. Note that yelowe, or pale choler, bycauſe of his naturall lightneſſe, doeth readily aſcend to the mouth of the ſtomake. But the humours that be flegmatique, or ſoure, or ſalt, doe rather remaine in the middeſt of the ſtomake, then in the mouth of it. It is beſt when ſuche humours are in the bottome of the ſtomake, for then they will eaſily auoyd the ſtomake and paſſe into the guttes. It is worſt of all when noiſome humours doe cleaue ſoe faſt to the filmes and runicles of the ſtomake, and dothe ſo furre them, that they can ſcarcely be ſcoured out.
                     Hierapicra.
                   Therfore if any humour doth furre the tunicles of the ſtomake, miniſter Hierapicra, which is a ſoueraigne medicine therfore. And after purging let the patient haue good meates eaſy of digeſtion, and holeſome for the ſtomake. And foraſmuche as lacke of good digeſtion, and weaknes of the mouth of the ſtomake, be the greateſt cauſes of encreaſe of noyſome humours in the Stomake, it muſt be prouided that good digeſtion be procured, and

that the mouthe of the ſtomake may be ſtrengthened by ſuche medicynes, as be aſtrictiue, and haue vertue to ſtrengthen. Wherof you ſhall find plenty herafter in the third Booke, and therfore it were ſuperfluous to recyte them here.
                     Note.
                   As we haue in this Chap. ſpoken of headache cauſed of the ſtomake, and referred the cure to the third booke, ſo vnderſtand lykwyſe if headach be cauſed of the diſeaſe of the lyuer or ſplene, or any other membre: for the affectes of thoſe membres being cured ceaſeth the headache.
            
            
               CAP. X. Of headache cauſed by dronkenneſſe.
               
                  THE cauſes and ſignes of dronkenneſſe are euident inough, chiefly hote wynes,
                     Cauſae.
                   and ſtrong drinckes are cauſes therof, for that they fill the braine with vapours, and that ſo much the more (as Galen ſaid) if the braine be hote by nature, ſometime alſo hote humours aſcending to the head doe cauſe dronkennes. The cure of dronkennes generally conſiſteth in two pointes: that is,
                     Curatio.
                   in euacuation, and refrigeration. Therfore if the wyne be yet vndigeſt, and doe flowe in the ſtomake, cauſe him that hath the headache to vomite by drinking of hote water.
                     VVarme water, and 
                           〈…〉
                         ace
                           •••
                        e cōm
                           ••
                        ed cauſeth 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   But and if the headach doe remaine after digeſtion, you muſt vſe medicynes, that doe refrigerate, and dryue back vapours which aſcend to the head. As is oyle of roſes alone, or mixed with vineger, or with iuyce of iuyce, or colewortes. Alſo the leaues of Colewortes ſteyped in warme water, and bound about the head doe naturally reſiſte dronkennes. Moreouer the brothe of Colewortes being eaten, is good for that purpoſe.
                     Praeſeruatio.
                   To preſerue one from dronkennes (as Aetius ſaith) let him eate v. or vij. bitter almondes faſting, or let him drinke wormewood wyne firſt of all. But to take awaye drunkennes, that is preſent, giue the decoction of centory the leſſe, to drink, or hartes horne, or the ſeade of veruaine boiled in water. You muſt haue a ſpeciall regard and procure that the patient doe ſleepe, and reſt, which being done all day at night bathe him in a bathe of ſweete water, and when thou haſt waſhed him, let him eate meates of good iuyce, but not ouer hote. Let therfore his food be ptiſan brothe,
                     Victus ratio.
                   ſouppings made of alica, bread dipped in water, reare egges and ſuche like. For pot hearbes lettuce is of good iuyce and cooleth, and colewortes drieth vp vapours. For drinke let him vſe water only, if he hath been accuſtomed thertoe, and can well bear it, otherwyſe giue him ſmall drinke, or a litle ſmall whit wine. After his meate giue vnto him of a pomegarnet, or a peare, or a quince, or raiſons. To conclud let all his diet be meates of good iuice, pleaſaunt to the ſtomake, and that dryue away vapours. Let him abſtaine from dates, for ther property is to cauſe headache. And if it chaunce that of the vapours and humours aſcending to the head,
                     Dates.
                   ther remaine parte of them impact and ſtuffed in the thinne pores, and ſo doe cauſe headach after two or three dayes: then leaue oyle of roſes, and vſe firſt in ſtead of it oyle of cāmomill moderatelye warme. Afterward apply oyle of yreos. After that if nead require,
                     Iriu
                           •
                        . Nardi
                           •••
                        .
                   you may apply thinges, that heate more, cōmixing with the oyle of ireos, oyle of narde, or oleum coſtinum: or other oyles and ointmentes of that ſorte.
            
            
               CAP XI. Of headache cauſed by feuers.
               
                  IF headach doe moleſt thoſe that haue a feuer: you muſt diligently examyne and conſyder, whyther the ſame began at the firſte beginning of the feauer,
                     Cauſae.
                   or whither it ſprong the feauer encreſing, for if the headache began not with the firſt fit of the feauer, but afterward▪ whyle the feauer encreaſed, and came nighe to the Criſis: then ſeeke not to remedy it, for it portendeth and fortelleth that vomit, or a decretory fluxe of bloud at the noſe will followe ſhortly, as Hippocrates declareth in his booke of predictions, and Gale
                        •
                     
                   in his third booke De Criſibus, and in his firſt booke ad Glauconem Cap. vltimo: yf the headach begon at the firſt whith the feauer, it

cometh of vapours or humours diſperſed abroad through the greatnes of the feuer, and as it were boyling hote eleuate vp to the head and partly alſo through weaknes of the braine. Therfore if the paine doe come of aboundāce of humours,
                     Cura.
                   you muſt let him bloud after the firſt or ſecond fit (if nothing prohibite it) eſpeciallye in luſty bodyes, and in ſuche as aboūd with bloud. Alſoe you muſt drawe the humours a contrary waye, and pull them backe by ſharpe clyſters, ſuche as ſhalbe preſcribed in the Chap. of Apoplexia, and by often binding and much frication in the neither partes. Moreouer you may ſet cupping glaſſes to the hinder parte of the head, or to the necke. You muſt applye to the head irrigations and oyntmentes, that haue vertue to repell and dryue backe from it, and afterward you muſt vſe diſcuſſiue medicines, laſt of all ſuch thinges as doe ſtrengthen the braine. To repell and dryue backe, vſe oyle of roſes, and other ſuche like as are reherſed before in the 2. Chap. vſe them in Sommer time, and in hote complexions, cold and mixed with a litle vinegre, but in winter ſeaſon, and in cold complexions apply them bloud warme. Yf the feuer be vehement, and ouer much watching doe trouble the ſicke, vſe irrigations made of poppy heades, houſleeke and ſuch like medicines as haue vertue to coole and prouoke ſleepe in this ſorte. ℞. flowers of violettes,
                     Embrocha.
                   water lillies, and roſes. ana. M.j. hulled barley. ℥.j. heads of poppy. ℥.ſs. houſleeke. M.ſs. ſeath all theſe in ſufficient quantity of water, vntill the third part be conſumed, and make an embrocation. Or if the paine continew vehement, take greane leaues of henbane, or poppie, with oyle of roſes, a litle vineger and crommes of bread, commixe them and apply them to the forepart of the head, and to the forehead. When the braine is ſufficiently cooled,
                     Note.
                   then apply thoſe thinges which can heat the head againe, and ſo auoid and diſperſe the humours that remaine. And therfore you may vſe oyles of cammomill, dill, or ireos, or decoctions of cammomill, or Althea, or ſuche like. And if the humours be groſſe, and tough, you may boyle with thaforſaid thinges: Serpillum, penyroiall, calamint, mintes, or ſuch like. Laſt of all the head muſt be ſtrengthened by oyle of roſes, and ſuch like (that is) betony, cammomill, melilote, &c. The reſt of the cure of headach cauſed through the vehemency of the feuer, is to be ſought out in the treatiſe of feuers.
            
            
               CAP. XII. Of inueterate headache.
               
                  CEPHALAEA both in Greeke and Latine is the name of headache which is exceeding painfull,
                     Signa.
                   continuing long, and harde to ceaſe, which vpon light occaſions hath very great and ſharpe fittes, ſo that the patient can nether abyde noiſe, nor loud ſpeache, nor cleare light, nor drinking of wyne, nor ſauours that fill the braine, nor mouing, but he deſireth for the greatnes of the paine to ſit or lye quyet in the darke, ſuppoſing that his head were ſtroken with a hammer. Alſoe ſome of them doe feele thoſe thinges, that are about ther head as though they were bruiſed or racked. In many the paine procedeth vnto the rootes of the eyes. This diſeaſe ſometime doeth continew painfull alwayes, ſometime it hath fittes and intermiſſions eyther ordinate or inordinate. For in ſome ther is intermiſſiō in the fittes, as is in the falling ſicknes, ſo that for a time they ſeeme to be perfitelye hole. This diſeaſe doth vexe women more then men, for bicauſe of ther long heare. In ſome of them the filmes that couer the braine are pained, but in ſome only the filme that couereth the ſkul is greaued. It is cauſed of aboundance of bloud and other humours,
                     Cauſae.
                   or by the ſharpnes of humours or vapours contained within or without the ſkull, and inflaming the head, or it is cauſed through weaknes of the head. The paine that inuadeth the ſicke with graulty and heauines, declareth plenitude and aboundance of humours:
                     Signa.
                   if it come with pricking, gnawing and ſhooting, it betokeneth ſharpnes of humours or vapours▪ if it beate like the pulſes, it betokeneth inflammacion: yf ther be felt diſtenſion and bo
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  ng in the head without heauines or beating it declareth windines. But if ther be beating with it, ther is inflammacion in the filmes of the head: and if ther be heauines with the diſtenſion, then it declareth aboundance of humours within the filmes. And if the paine be felt ſuperficially, as it were outward, then it

betokeneth that the filme which couereth the ſkull is greaued. But if it be felt deepe within, the filmes of the braine are vexed. Note that thoſe, that haue paine within the ſkull,
                     Note.
                   they feele griefe at the rootes of ther eyes, becauſe that the tunicles of the eyes haue ther beginning of the filmes of the braine. And if ſo be that a putrified humour in the head doe waxe hoter and hoter, then ther is a feuer ioyned with the headache. They alſo are vexed with a feuer, which haue headach cauſed by inflammation. As for diet to be vſed in this griefe,
                     Victus ratio.
                   you may eaſily preſcribe it out of the former Chapters, according to the diuerſitye of the cauſes therofe: and therfore I omit it here willingly leſt I ſhould vſe a fond repetition of one thing often. The Cure doth differ according to the diuerſity of the cauſe.
                     Curatio.
                   For if you find aboundaunce of humours or vapours to be the cauſe, if it be engendred of plenitude of the whole body, you muſt beginn with euacuation of the whole bodye.
                     Venae ſectio.
                   And therfore you muſt let him bloud on the Caephalica on the ſame ſide, if his ſtrength will ſuffer it, and noe other thing let it. But if the head doth receiue the humors and vapours that do aſcend, for that it is weake: then you muſt pull back the matter into the whole body, and ſo remedy the parte affected. Therefor you muſt vſe very ſharpe Cliſters, and bindinges of the armes & legges,
                     Remi
                           •
                        ſi
                           •
                        .
                   and many frictions of the nether partes, and ſometime alſo in this caſe you may let bloud in the arme. And if after that bloud doe ſeeme ſtill to abound, you maie open a vaine in the noſethrills, and drawe bloud from thence, as much as ſhalbe requiſite. Shortly after you muſt purge the bodie with Hierapicra, or other things that are praeſcribed in the former Chapters. After purging of the whole bodie, you maie ſafely come to purging of the head, and in the end vſe medicines to ſtrengthen it. The head is to be purged with Gargariſmes,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   and with medicines put into the noſe, as iuyce of leekes or of Cyclaminus, or ſuch lyke which be reherſed before in the .vij. Chapter. To the head it ſelfe you muſt firſt apply thinges, that doe repell and dryue back, (ſuch be) oyle made of vnrype olyues, and oyle of roſes alone, or applyed with vineger, alſo oyle made of poppie heads and of iuye bearyes, and of grene mintes, and ſuch like, whereof we haue ſpoken before. But note,
                     Note.
                   if the humours that abound in the head be cold and crude, then applie the former medicines warme, but if the humours abounding be hote and cholericke, then applie thoſe medicines cold. Afterward you muſt apply thoſe medicines that doe diſcuſſe and diſperſe humours, as be oyles of cammomill and dill, and ſuche like before reherſed, but if the humours abounding be thicke and tough, boyle ſerpillum, or peniroyall, or calamint, or mintes in oyle, and thou ſhalt extenuate them by applying thereof. Beſydes theſe things doe ſtrengthen the parte affected, and therfore they are to be vſed vntill the cure be finiſhed.
                     Verbe
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        a re
                           •
                        ta.
                   Aboue all other things veruaine doth diſperſe humours, & mightely corroborate the head, eſpecially being greene. Alſo being dry, and boiled in ale, rootes and all together, with ſerpillum, it doth the like, if the head be annointed therwith. Moreouer if you boyle veruaine alone in oile, & do ſprinkle the head therwith, it helpeth all paine of the head of long cōtinuance, if it were cauſed of colde, or of groſſe & viſcous humours (as Galen witneſſeth. Lib. 2. de comp. medicam. ſecundū Locos. Alſo for the ſame it profiteth much to vſe oyle, wherin ſowes, called in Latin Millipede be boyled. And thus much of the cure of Caephalea comming of plenitude. As for the cure therof comming of other cauſes, you may gather it out of the former Chapters.
            
            
               CAP. XIII. Of the Migrime.
               
                  HEMICRANIA is a painefull euill remaining in the one halfe of the head, either on the right halfe or on the left, and is diſtinguiſhed by the ſeame that runneth along in the ſkull, from the midde forehead to the hinder parte of the head, this griefe in Engliſhe is called the Migrime. This paine cometh often by fittes, and in ſome the griefe is felt without the ſkull, in ſome within deepe in the braine, and in ſome other nigh to the temples in the muſcles ther.
                     Cauſae.
                   This paine is cauſed by aſcending and flowing of many vapours or humours eyther hote or cold, eyther by the vaines, or by the arteries, or by bothe. Sometyme

they only procead from the partes contained in the ſkull, that is, from the braine and his filmes, which thruſt out their excrementes and ſuperfluityes from them, and ſometime from the partes of the body beneth the head, which ſend vp corrupt vapours & humors from them ſelfes to the braine.
                     Signa.
                   The ſignes wherby you ſhould know whither vapours or humours do aboūd, & whither they be hot, or cold, are to be gathered out of the former chapters. As alſo to know in what parte of the head the griefe is, whither within the ſkull or without, reade the former chapter of Cephalaa. Only this I adde here, that if in this diſeaſe, the filme that couereth the ſkull be affected, then is ther paine ſo vehemēt, that they cannot ſuffer to be touched with ones hand, ſo that it ſeemeth the ſkinne it ſelfe is affected in this euill. As for ther diet what they ſhould vſe, and what they ſhould eſchewe, maie readily be gathered and preſcribed out of the former Chapters, according to the diuerſitye of cauſes: but ſpecially let the patient refraine from ſuche things as doe ſend aboundaunce of ſharpe vapours vp to the head,
                     Curatio.
                   as be garlicke, oynions, muſtard, raddiſhe rootes, and ſuch like. The cure is diuerſe according to the diuerſity of cauſes. And therfor when you will cure the migrime, conſider diligētly firſt whither the patiēt neadeth bloudletting or purging. For if the griefe com through plenitude & aboundāce of bloud & humours, then cut the Caephalica in the arme on the ſame ſide that the griefe is: but if the migrime be cauſed of aboundance of one humour, then purge that humour by conuenient medicines, which are preſcribed in the former chapters.
                     Localia.
                   The hole body being purged, you may come to local & outward medicines, & firſt cauſe the patient either with his owne fingers, or with a linnen cloth, to rubbe & chafe the halfe of his forehead which is grieued, and ſpecially about the muſcles of his temples, vntill it be red and hote, and this muſt be done befor the fitte of paine cometh. After the fitte (as Galen teacheth in the end of his ſecōd book, De compoſitione medicamentorum ſecundum locos) you muſt apply medicines which of the old Phiſitions were called Hemicrania, for that they were vſed for the migrime: noting this alwayes, that if with the paine ther were muche heat felt, then you ought to applie ſuch things as would ſomewhat coole. But if there were noe euident heat felt, then vſe thoſe thinges that are very hote. But you muſt commixe with either of theſe, ſomewhat that is reſtrictyue, and hath vertue to corroborate and ſtrengthen.
                     Vnguentum.
                   This ointment following is a very good remedie in a cold affecte. ℞. Of oyles of dill and Ireos. ana. ℥.ſs. of whit pepper, and ſerpillum. ana. ℈.j.ſs. of Caſtoreum. ℈.j. of Euphorbium ℈.ſs. of waxe .q.ſs. and make an ointment to be applyed vpon the halfe of the forehead and the muſcle of the Temples. Alſo in this caſe it profiteth much to poure this oyle following into the eare.
                     Ole
                           ••
                        .
                   ℞. Sweete oyle olyue. ℥.j. Euphorbium. ℈.j. commixe them and droppe one droppe into the eare warme. You maie put in more Euphorbium or leſſe, according as the body is quicke or dull in ſenſe: but beware you vſe not this medicine in thoſe that haue the migrime engendred of hote vapours or humours. AEtius ſaith that euphorbium diſſolued in vineger, and applyed to the left ſyde of the head, if the right ſyde be greaued, or contrarywyſe on the right ſyde when the paine is on the left ſyde, doth of a certaine hid property helpe the migrime. The ſame Author alſoe ſaith, that earth wormes beaten to powder, and applyed to the griefe, as alſo the fleſhe of ſnails bruiſed and applyed doth proffit much. The kernells of peaches bruiſed and applyed vpon the griefe (as report hath beene) doth proffit muche. Marcellus ſaith that the doung of a goate ſtamped and commixed with vineger ſquilliticke, if the forehead and temples be annointed therwith, it ceaſeth the paine of the mygrime for euer. Alſoe his counſell is, if ther be ſodaine paine of the migryme, take frankinſence, mirrhe, and a egge, beate them together, and applie that to the forehead and temples.
                     Note.
                   If the migrime be cauſed of hot humours or vapours, then vſe thoſe remedies which we preſcribed before in the cure of headach cōming of heat or of cholericke humours. Here I think it requiſit to praeſcribe certaine pilles, good to be vſed againſt inuerate headache,
                     Pilula.
                   and the migrime. Firſt it choler abound. ℞. powder of Hiera ſimplex Galeni. 
                  ʒ.ij. pilularū ar abicarum. 
                  ʒ.iij. trochiskes of mirabolās citrine. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. reubarbe. ʒ.j. ſpicknard. ℈.j. commixe them with ſyrupe of violettes, & reſerue the cōpoſition. When need requireth miniſter. ʒ.j. or. ℈.4.v. or vj. houres after ſupper, & let the patient ſleepe vpon it. This you may do once in tenn dayes, or once in fifteene dayes at all times (ſommer excepted). But if fleume aboundeth, make your pilles thus. ℞. of Agaricke trochiſcate. ʒ.iiij.

                  pilulae arabica, and Hiera ſimplex. Gal. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. floures of ſtaechados, and trochiskes of mirabolanes chebulorum. ana. ʒ.j. with ſyrupe of ſtaechados and oximel commixe them, & when occaſion ſerueth, miniſter. ʒ.j. or. ℈.iiij. at eche time in forme aboueſaid. But if melancholy be cauſe of the migrime, ℞. of the aforeſaid Pilulae arabica. 
                  ʒ.ij. of pouder of ſene & Epithimū. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. of Hiera ſimplex. Gal. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. of trochiskes of Mirabolanes indorum. ℈.iiij. with ſyrupe of furnitory & balme water make pilles, & when requireth, miniſter them in forme aforſaid.
            
            
               CAP. XIIII. Of Vertigo and ſwemming in the head.
               
                  THAT which the Latines call Vertigo, is a diſeaſe, wherin the patient doth imagine that his head is turned roūd about. Ther is another diſeaſe ſomewhat like vnto this, which in Latin is called, Tenebricoſa Vertigo, and that is when the patient doth thinck that al that he ſeeth turneth about, and ſodenlie with it, his ſight faileth him, he ſuppoſing that he is compaſſed about with miſt and darknes. It is cōmonly of the Phiſitions called Scotomia. Fuſchius doth thinck that they erre greatlie, that make a difference betweene the former kinds, but it maie be confirmed out of good Authors, Hippocrates, Galen & others. Both the aforſaid kinds be ingēdred after one ſort, and that is through the inordinate mouing of windy vapours and ſpirits, contained in certain partes of the braine.
                     Cauſae.
                   This diſeaſe is cauſed either of the braine it ſelfe being diſtempured and euill affected, or of the mouth of the ſtomake offending the braine. The braine it ſelfe is affected euill, when a groſſe and tough humour is contained in it, from whence a vaporous and windy ſpirite being reſolued by weake heat, is moued inordinately about in the braine. The mouth of the ſtomake doth affect the braine, when through corrupte humours being gathered aboundantly in it, vapours and windy exhalations are carried vp to the braine, & ſo turne about the animall ſpirits contained in it.
                     Signa.
                   Thoſe that are troubled with this diſeaſe, a darknes and miſte appeareth before ther eyes vpon euery light occaſion, ſpecially if they turn about. For it chaunceth to them by turning once about, as is doth to other when they turne often, and therfore the patient many times falls downe. Alſo it doth aſtony him, if he ſee another man, or a wheele, or any ſuch like thing turne about, as alſo it he ſee whirle pooles in the water turne about, for the viſuall ſpirites beholding a wheel that turneth about, or any ſuch like thing, doth alſo turne about in like ſorte, and ſo the mouing of the humour and the ſpirittes are troubled vnequall and inordinate. When this diſeaſe doth procead of the braine being euill affected, then ther proceadeth ſound of the eares, vehemēt paine in the head, and heauines therin. Alſo the ſmelling and the other ſenſes proceading from the head are hurte. Ther fitte is then chiefly when the Sunne doth heat them, or when ther head is hotte by ſome other meanes, & ſo the humours being diſſolued, do turne about in the braine. When the diſeaſe proceadeth from the mouth of the ſtomake, then they feele before it, a gnawing in the ſtomake, as it were the hart burne, & a diſpoſition to vomit. This diſeaſe maie be diſcerned from the falling ſicknes, for that this doth nether take awaie the ſenſes from the patient, nor it cauſeth not the crampe and writhing of members in the fitte.
                     Prognoſtica.
                   This diſeaſe is not to be lightly eſteemed, for the Vertigo (as Galen ſaith) is nigh to the falling ſicknes, and the Apoplexie. And therfore it wold be well looked to. For the 
                     Ʋertigo and ſcotoma will quickly be changed into pernitious diſeaſes, for that they are verie nigh to them, ſpecially to the falling ſicknes and the Apoplexie. And if thoſe things that the patient doth imagyne to ſee before his eyes, appeare bloudye and reddiſhe, he is apt to fall into madnes, but thoſe that ſeeme to ſee purple colours, are diſpoſed to the falling ſicknes. The Scotoma or darke vertigo becommeth moſt vehement in winter, or in the beginning of the ſpring. Beſydes in manie it is a ſigne that the falling ſicknes will followe. And many do vſe to call it a litle Epilepſie. As concerning diet:
                     Victus ratio.
                   let the patient remaine in an ayer, that is temperate, pure, bright, and cleare, and let him eſchewe groſſe and cloudie ayer. Let him eſchew windes, eſpecially ſouth windes, let him alſo auoid the beames of the ſunne & the moon: as alſo let him not behold things that moue ſwiftly, as rūning waters, or things

that turne about, as wheels, & ſuch like, or to looke into deep pittes is euill for him. Let him eate meates of good iuyce, & of eaſy digeſtion, & ſuch as engendre no windines, as partrich, capon, pheſant, chicken, veale, ſcaly fiſhes and ſuche like, that be eaſie of digeſtion. And let him vſe to eate but moderately of them, for ſatiety, as alſo long faſting is not good for him. He muſt eſchewe all things that cauſe vapours to aſcend into the head as oynions, garlick, leekes & ſuch like. And therfor if he drinke wyne, let it not be very olde, ſmall whit wine may be permitted him. After meate it is good for him to eat ſome reſtrictiue thing to ſtoppe the vapours that they aſcend not to the head, & that ſpecially if the ſtomake be cauſe of this diſeaſe. Let his excercyſe be moderate, let him eſchewe ſleepe of the day, nether let him ſleepe within two hours aftermeate. Let not the place be to hote wher he ſleepeth, nor let him not kepe his head to hote. In his excercyſes let him not ſtirre his head muche. And therefor it is good for him to vſe frictions often, eſpeciallie in the morning before he ryſeth, beginne at the vpper partes, & end with the nether. He muſt refrain from perturbations and affections of the mind, ſpecially from anger, feare, and ſadnes, as alſo from loud crying, and ſinging. Carnall copulation is not good for him. If he hath not a ſtoole once in a day,
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt helpe nature either by clyſter or ſuppoſitary. For the Cure if the fit be preſent, you muſt reuyue the patient again with ſweete and odoriferous ſmells, and with frictions and ſuch like. At which time alſo if need be, you may vſe a ſuppoſitary or a cliſter. Afterward if the party be ſtrong, and noe other impedyment preſent, let him bloud on the Caphalica vaine,
                     Ven
                           •
                         ſectio.
                   whither it be the beginning of the diſeaſe or otherwyſe. But take heede that you drawe not much bloud at once, for the patient will quickly fall through euery light occaſion. Therfor you muſt drawe away the bloud at ſundrie tymes vntill you haue ſufficient. But if any thing doe hinder you from bloud letting, firſt you muſt purge him with a ſharpe cliſter, whereof you ſhall haue example afterward in the Chapter of Apoplexye. Afterward miniſter a purgation according as the humour abounding doth require. But forget not firſt to vſe a preparatiue,
                     Localia.
                   when the whole body is ſufficiently purged, you muſt vſe locall things to the head, & firſt apply cupping glaſſes to the hinder parte of the head with ſcatification. Afterward vſe to miniſter gargariſmes, & ſternutations to draw rewme from the head. Poure into the noſe iuyce of chickweed, betes or cyclaminus. Alſo nitrum beaten with nigella and mixed with old oyle, purgeth well by the noſethrills. Alſo odours made of the decoction of maiorame, hyſope, & floures of ſtaechados, a litle caſtoreum, muſke, and vinegre being added is good. After that let the patient enter into a bath, ſpecially a naturall bath that is of alome, & if his head be ouer hote in the bathe, you muſt coole it often with oyle of roſes & vinegre applyed in clothes to it ſpecially on the fore parte of the head, and about the forehead and the tempels. And if the diſeaſe doe ceaſe by theſe remedies, then vſe noe other. But if it continew ſtill, you muſt cut the arteryes that be nigh the temples aboue the eares, ſpecially if the diſeaſe come of hote vapours aſcēding to the braine by the arteries. And this is not only the praecept of Galen, but alſo of Aetius, & Paulus Aegineta. How the arteries ſhould be cut you ſhall lerne of the ſaid AEgineta in his. 6. booke & 4. Chap. Albeyt Galen affirmeth, that ſome haue not bene helped by cutting of the arteries, partly for that the hote & vaporours ſpirits doth ſometime aſcend by deeper arteries into the braine, and partly for that a windy ſpirit maie be engendred by an inequall diſtempure of the braine. And therfor if the diſeaſe be cauſed by any of theſe meanes before reherſed, the patient ſhall feele ſmall eaſe or none by cutting of the arteries. And therfor be diligēt to enquire of the aforſaid cauſes, before you cut the arteries.
                     C
                           ••
                        teri
                           ••
                        .
                   It profiteth much to apply this cautery behind the eares. ℞. of cantarides ther heades, winges, & legges being caſt awaie. ʒ.j. ſharpe leauen. ʒ.ſs. with vinegre & aqua vita cōmixe them & applie them.
                     Cure of the vertigo that cometh of the ſtomake. V
                           ••
                        itus.
                   If the vertigo be cauſed by the conſent of the ſtomake (that is) if humours contained in the mouth of the ſtomake, do ſend vp vapours to the braine, and ſo cauſe the vertigo: it muſt be cured by vomit, which you ſhall prouoke in this ſorte. ℞. Of dill a handfull, ſeades of radiſh & rapes. ana. ʒ.ij. rootes of radiſhe. ℥.ſs. boile them in ſufficient quantity of water, vntill the third parte be cōſumed, then ſtraine it & put therto oximel ſcilliticū. ℥.j.ſs. cōmixe them & make a poriō, & miniſter it bloud warme after meat immediatly. And if this ſuffyſe not, it is good to purge him with Hierapicra Galeni. Or with pilles that be good for the ſtomake, called ſtomachicae for that cauſe, or with decoction of mirabolanes

citrine or chebuli, or with manna, or with ſyrupe of roſes ſolutiue, according to the diuerſity of the humour abounding. Let the patient vſe commonly after meate to eat ſome reſtrictiue thing that will cloſe the mouth of the ſtomake, and hinder the aſcending of vapours vp to the head, as is Diacotoneon ſine ſpeciebus, and quinces, or reſtrictiue peares, or ſuch like. Marcellus ſaith, the iuice of black beates annointed vpon the tempels helpeth the Vertigo. Alſo if ſothernwood be boiled in wine, or in oximell, & dronke warme, it is a moſt effectuall remedy to cure it perfectly.
            
            
               CAP. XV. Of the freniſie.
               
                  PHRENITIS in Greeke and in Latin is a diſeaſe, wherin the mind is hurte, & doth differ only from madnes, which is called in Greeke and Latine Melancholia, or Mania. For that a feuer is ioyned with the phreniſy, and therfor the freniſy may be called a continuall madnes & fury ioyned with a ſharpe feuer. Galen ſaith that the freniſy is an inflammacion of the braine or of the filmes therof. Aetius ſaith that it is an inflammaciō of the filmes of the braine with an acute feuer, cauſing raging and vexation of the mind.
                     Three 
                           ••
                        ndes of fren
                           •
                        ſie
                           •
                        .
                   Ther be three kindes of freniſies (as Galen doth witneſſe in his fourth Booke de Locis affectis. cap. 40.) according to the internal ſenſes, which be three in number, that is imagination, cogitation & memory, which may ſeuerally be hurt. Two of thoſe kinds be ſimple, and the third is compounded of thoſe two. For ſome be frenetick, which can iudge rightly of thoſe things that they ſee as touching commō ſenſe & imagination, and yet in cogitatiō & fantaſy they erre from naturall iudgemēt. Some other being frenetick are not deceiued in cogitation and reaſon, but only in imagination they erre. Ther be other ſome frentick which doe erre both in ſenſe and cogitatiō (that is) both in imaginatiō & reaſon, and doe ther with alſo loſe ther memory.
                     Cauſae.
                   The freneſy is cauſed eyther of aboū
                  dance of bloud, or of choler, occupying the braine or the filmes thereof. And if the choller wherof the diſeaſe engēdreth be burnt, then the frenſie is moſt vehemēt & more pernicious then any other. Thoſe that be frentick haue a cōtinuall feuer, & be madde, for the moſt parte they cannot ſleepe. Sometime they haue troubleſome ſleepes, ſo that they ryſe vp, & leap,
                     Signa.
                   & crie out furiouſly, they babble wordes without order or ſenſe, being aſked a queſtion, they aunſctere not directly, or at the leaſt raſhly, & that with loud voice, eſpecially if you ſpeake gently to them. Ther eyes be bloudſhotten and bleared, they rubbe them often, ſometime they are drie, and ſometime full of ſharpe teeres. Ther tongue is rough, and bloud will often droppe out at there noſe. Moreouer they pull motes & flockes from the bedding and clothes about them. Ther pulſes be ſmall & weak, and ſomewhat hard and ſenowy, they fetch ther breath but ſeeldom. Note that they which haue the freneſy, cauſed of bloud, they laugh in there madnes. But thoſe that be frentick through choler they rage furiouſly, ſo that they can not be ruled without bands, & ſuch do vſe to forget all things that they doe or ſay, ſo that ſome of them, when they require the chamberpot, doe forthwith forget to make vrine, or when they haue done it, they remember not to reſtore the veſſell againe.
                     Prognoſtica.
                   As touching the prognoſtication of this diſeaſe: Galen and all other lerned Phiſitions doe confeſſe that it is moſt ſharpe & moſt perilous, and is in deed vncurable and deadly for the moſt parte. Hippocrates ſaith in the 72. aphoriſme of his fourth booke that vrine white & cleer in thoſe that do raue, is a very euill and deadly token. Concerning diet let the ſicke be vſed in this ſorte.
                     Victus ratio.
                   If it be winter, let him lye in a warme place, if it be ſommer, let his lodging be in a coole place, let the ayer and the light be moderate, and let ther not be diuerſe pictures in the place. And for that ſome be troubled with the light, and ſome with darknes, it is beſt to trie them in both, and to lay him in the light, which is afraid of darkneſſe, and contrary he that is offended at the light, let him be in a dark place. But if the ſicke perſon do finde noe difference in the places, then, if he be ſtrong, let him haue light, if weak, keep him in a darke place. Let his deareſt frindes come to him, and let them ſometime ſpeake gently & ſoftely vnto him, & ſometime rebuke him ſharply. Let his meate at the firſt be ptiſan broth, or huſked barley boiled, or the crume of bread dipped often in aqua mulſa (that is) water & hony ſodden together, or in hony

of roſes. Boile in his brothes, endiue, ſuccory, lettuſe, mallows, & ſuch like, which haue vertue to coole & moiſten. When the diſeaſe decreaſeth, you may giue him ſcaly fiſhes, ſuch as lyued in grauelly ryuers. If he be very hote within, you may giue him pomegarnettes, and cheryes. Let his drinke be water, wherin a litle Cynamon or barley hath bene boiled, you may commixe with it ſyrupe of violettes, or of roſes, or of water lillies. But beware you giue them not much at once, nor oftentimes, but ſeldomee, and a litle at once. When ſignes of cō
                  coction appeare in the vrine, and the vehemency of the feauer is ſlaked, if then the ſick lacke ſtrength, you may giue him ſmall white wine allaied with water. Moreouer let the ſicke be kept quiet without mouing as much as is poſſible, if he be riche let ſeruauntes hold him, if poore, bind him, for inordinate mouing deminiſheth ſtrength. Alſo a bath of ſweete water is good for him, if the body be drye and rimpled, but he muſte vſe it bloud warme. For ſo it cooleth and moiſteneth, and by that meanes it cureth the drynes and ouermuche watching, but take heede you vſe not bathing before the body be purged. Moreouer perturbations of the minde do hurte frantick perſons excedingly, and therfor you muſt ſuffer them to vſe nothing,
                     Curatio.
                   that will make them ſadde, or engender choler in them. For the cure, if the ſtrength of the patiēt will ſuffer, let him bleed forthwith for ther is none ſo preſent a helpe. You muſt cut the vttermoſt vaine of the arme called Caephalica,
                  
                     Ven
                           •
                         ſectio.
                   and if that appeare not, take the midle vaine, & draw out as much bloud as ſtrength will ſuffer. But take heed you let him not bleed vntill he ſound, as many raſhely doe, for it is better to take leſſe then you ſhould doe, the body being much weakened by vehemēt motion. You muſt take good heede, leaſt the ſicke doe priuily take away the band of his arme, or looſe it. Afterward alſo you may ſtryke the vaine in the middeſt of the forehead. But if age or ſtrength doe forbid bloudletting, then vſe cupping with ſcarification, behind in the necke and on the back bone, which be profitable for that they drawe back the humours that flowe to the braine. For that purpoſe alſo cliſters are ſpecially to be vſed made in this ſorte.
                     Clyſter.
                   ℞. Mallowe leaues, violet leaues, endyue, and lettuce. ana. M.j. of Barley decorticate. ℥.j. ſebeſten. num. 11. ſeades of gourdes, melons and cucūbers. ana. ʒ.iij. ſeeth all theſe in ſufficiēt quantity of water, vntill the third parte be cōſumed, then ſtraine it and take of the decoctiō. ℥.xij. of caſia fiſtula newly drawen. ℥.j.ſs. of mel roſarum. ℥.j. of oyle of violettes. ℥.iij. of ſalt. ʒ.j.ſs. commixe them all and make a cliſter. If you will haue it to purge more ſtrongly, put to it of Hierapicra, or of Elcium de ſucco roſarum. ℥.ſs. binding of the extreme partes of the body profit muche to diuert the humours from the head. Alſo Mathiolus doth greatly commend ſtubium with the conſerues of roſes,
                     A purging potion.
                   & I my ſelfe haue proued it in this order to be moſt excellēt as followeth. ℞. g.12. made in very fine powder and put it into clarret wyne. ℥.iiij. and let it ſtand houres .30. and euery 6. or .7. houre ſhake it. And at the .30. houres end, poure it from the powder, and let him drinke it with a litle ſugar. This doth mightely purge the ſuperfluous humors from the head, as alſo to rubbe the feete with ſalte and vineger and ſuch like. You muſt ſprinckle the head with oyle of roſes,
                     Localia.
                   or vinegre of roſes being bloud warme. For the braine or his filmes being enflamed, can not ſafely abyde actuall cold, nor vehement heate. For the ſame purpoſe alſo you may vſe iuice of nightſhade, & of plantaine, or the diſtilled waters of them, or ſuch like herbes. If the euill be very vehement, moiſten his face cōtinually with oyle or water, wherin the toppes of poppye haue bene ſodden. You may alſo vſe odours to his noſe, of roſes, violettes, water lillies, and ſuch like. Alſo annoint his noſethrills within, and his forhead with the iuyce of the afore ſaid herbes. For you muſt endeuour to aſtonye and dull the braine, which burneth extremely by cooling it. If the ſicke watche ouermuch, then you muſt apply ſuch things as doe prouoke ſleepe,
                     Vnguentum.
                   as this ointement following, or ſuch like. ℞. Vnguenti populeon. 
                  ʒ.ij. oyle of violettes. ʒ.iij. ſead of henbane, & barke of mandrake rootes. ana. ℈.ſs. of opium gra. ij. of ſaffron. g.iij. vinegre a litle, whit waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an ointment, and annoint the tempels therwith. Alſo this embrocation maie be vſed bloud warme to the head.
                     Embrocha.
                   ℞. floures of violettes, redd roſes, and water lillies. ana. M.j. Barley decorticate. ℥.j. ſeades of whit poppy. ʒ.ij. ſeades of lettuce. ʒ.iij. ſeeth them in ſufficient quātity of water vnto the third parte, and make an embrocation. You ſhall make the decoction of more force, if you adde to it leaues of henban, nightſhade, poppy heades, mandrake appels, or rootes, and a litle vineger. You may alſo lay vnder his pillowe, poppie heades, or mandrake

appels. You maie alſo for the ſame purpoſe, giue him to drinke water wherin poppy or henban ſeede hath bene ſodden, or ſome ſomnoriferous compounde as is regines Nicolai, or philonium, or ſuch like, in miniſtring whereof you muſt obſerue, that you giue them not in the vehemencie of the fit, but in the declining therof. Beſydes note that you muſt eſchew continuall vſe of ſtupefactiue medicines aſwell inwardly as outwardly alſo. For in this diſeaſe, by ouermuch cooling you may turne the freneſy into a litargy, wherby you may cauſe him to ſleepe ſo, that you can awake him noe more. Alſo if the patient be weake beware how you miniſter ſtupefactiue things to prouoke ſlepe, for in ſuch as be weak (as Trallianus ſaith) ſomnoriferous potions doe noe ſmall hurte, and ſometime they kill. At the laſt when the diſeaſe is aſſwaged, and waxeth more gentle, which for the moſt parte, chaunceth the third day:
                     Diſcutienti
                           •
                        .
                   you may apply diſcuſſiue medicines which haue vertue to diſperſe the remnaunt of the diſeaſe. And for that purpoſe you may applie the aforſaid embrocation, adding to it before, floures of cammomil, dill, melilote, marſhe mallowes, and ſuch like. Ther be ſom that at this time (the diſeaſe declining) doe apply to the head, hennes or whelpes cut in the middes, or the loungs of a wether hote. But take good heed, that noe ſuch thing be applied in the beginning of the diſeaſe, or in the vehemencie thereof, for ſo you ſhould encreaſe the inflammation and the feuer, and make the ſicke in more perill. Moreouer if the euill continue long, you may boile in the embrocatiō 
                  ſerpillum, that is, wilde time or ſauerie. Alſo in the declination of the inflammation (as Galen teacheth) you may vſe Caſtoreum, for that it is of ſubtill ſubſtaunce, and will worke his force through the ſkull. When the frenticke perſon is recouered, let him eſchew dronkenneſſe, idlenes, variety and corruptiōs of meates, and eſpecially the burning heat of the ſunne. Hereby you may lerne not only, the cure of the freneſy, but alſo remedy againſt immoderate watching, & rauing in any ſort engendred by feauers, when the patient is ſo vexed by them, (although they come by conſent and be but accidētes of the feauers) that it is neceſſarie to remedy them leſt the braine in time be therby affected.
            
            
               CAP. XVI. Of the Lethargie.
               
                  LETHARGVS in Greeke and in Latin alſo, is a diſeaſe contrary to the freneſy for it cauſeth ſluggiſhneſſe and an inexpugnable deſyre of ſleeping, ſome call this diſeaſe, in Latin 
                     Ʋeternus. They that be taken with this diſeaſe, do forget al things, wher vppon it hath that name. For Lethe in Greeke is forgetfullnes,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Cauſae.
                   and Arges is ſlouthfull or dull, ſo that Lethargus is nothing els but a dull obliuiō, & therfor may be called in Latin Obliuio iners. It is cauſed of fleume, which cooleth the braine ouermuch, and moiſteneth it, and therby prouoketh ſleepe. The fleume doth putrify in the braine,
                     Signa.
                   & therby cauſeth a feuer which is alwaies annexed with this diſeaſe (as Galen teſtifieth in his. 13. booke de Methodo medendi. Alſo they haue alwaies a profound and dead ſleepe. Ther pulſe is great, and ſtryketh ſeeldome, and is watery (that is) it beateth as it were full of water. They fetch ther breath ſeldome and weakely they are continually ſluggiſhe and ſleepy, and can ſcarcely by any meanes be compelled to aunſwere. They will ſomtime open ther eyes, if you crie loud to them, and ſhut them again forthwith, they are forgetfull and doe raue. They gape and gaſpe often, and ſometime keepe ther mouth open ſtill, as though they had forgotten to ſhut it. Oftentimes being required to make water, & taking the chamber veſſell, they forget to make vryne. For the moſt parte their egeſtions be liquide: but contrary wyſe many are coſtiue. Ther vrine is like beaſtes vrine. Some of them doe tremble, and ſweate all ouer. Let the chamber wherin the ſicke doe lye be light and warme.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let his meates be ſuch as doe extenuate, cut, and drie, & let them be ſeaſoned with apium, anyſe, commin, pepper, cynamon, cloues, & ſuch like. Let the ſicke eat birds that liue vpon mountaines, and chickens, partriche, thruſh, and ſuch like. For pot herbes let him vſe Aſparagus, fennell, percely, and ſuch like. Alſo giue him broth made with Barley or oatmeele, or alica, with oximell, or peniroyall. Let his drinke be hidromel (that is) water & hony ſodden together, mead or watery, thinne whit wyne being aſtringēt, after he hath eaten it is not amiſſe

to bind the extreme partes for a certaine ſpace, that the vapours doe not aſcend to the head. For the cure (if ſtrength permit,
                     Curatio.
                   & nothing els doe let) it is good forthwith to let bloud. You muſt cut the middle vaine or the inwarde vaine of the arme, and draw out ſo much bloud, as ſtrength will permit. But if you may not ſafely let bloud then muſt the bowells be ſcoured with ſharpe Cliſters, whereof you ſhall finde examples in the Chapter of Apoplexia. Afterward the humour abounding muſt be prepared with decoction of hyſope in hony and water, or with time, peniroyall, mel roſarum, or oximell commixed with ſyrupe of borage, or infuſion of roſes, and waters of hyſope, betony, maiorame, and borage. And afterward purge him with ſom medicine that will expell fleume, wherof you ſhal find examples in the next Chapter following.
                     Localia.
                   In the meane ſeaſon apply to the head oxyrhodium, (that is) vineger of roſes, and that in the beginning, for the humour is to be repelled, and driuen back from the head, what ſoeuer it be. For the which purpoſe alſo, it is good to vſe frictions with pellitory, pepper, ſalt, and vineger and bindinges of the extreme partes. Moreouer apply to his noſethrills odours which will awake him, as be theſe, Caſtoreum, the ſnuffe of a candle quenched, tarre, galbanum, ſulphur, hartes horne, ſothernwood, or gotes hornes burnt a litle, and holden to the noſethrills. You may pricke ther legges, and ther extreme partes, and pull them by the heare violently to awake them. Alſo you may boile time, peniroyall, and origan in vineger, and hold that decoction to the noſe of the ſicke, that the fume aſcending to the braine maie cut, and deuide the tough humours. Alſo annoint the palate of the mouth with ſtrong & ſharpe medicines, as with muſtard & hony, with mithridarum, theriaca, powder of pellitory. And you muſt endeuour to plucke out the fleume that ſticketh ther with your fingers. Sometime alſo you may prouoke ſneſing with Caſtoreum, or pepper, or Eleborus, and if they can vſe it, let them gargaryſe. And if by this meanes the diſeaſe be not diſſolued, then ſhaue the head, & apply to it bagges of ſalt, or milium, or ſuch like. Or make this decoction following, and let it runne a heigh vpon the fore parte of the head. ℞. wild time, hyſope, and ſauery with a litle Caſtoreum, and boile them in oyle and vineger, and vſe it. Moreouer it profiteth to apply a ſinapiſmus, made of figges, and muſtard ſead beaten together with vineger. Afterward you muſt apply to the hinder parte of the head cupping glaſſes with great flame, about the firſt and ſecond ioynt of the necke, partly eaſily and partly with ſcarification.
                     Caſtoreum.
                   Alſo the head muſt be annointed with caſtoreum. (And as Tralli
                        •
                     nus ſaith) Caſtoreum dronke with oximell an houre befor the fitte, is exceding good: for (as he ſaith) he hath knowen many by that one medicine reſtored to lyfe & health. You may miniſter. ʒ.j. therofe-with. ℥.j. of oximell, or with ſo much whit wyne aſtringent, or with aqua mulſa. Beſydes you muſt often prouoke natur to expell excrementes with cliſters and ſuch things that prouoke vrine. You muſt annoint the ſhare with oyle of rewe, wherin a litle Caſtoreū
                   is mixed, you muſt giue him in drinke ſuch things as do extenuate & cut groſſe and clammy humours, as be the decoctions of Apium, fennell, maidenheare and ſuch like. You muſt admoniſhe the ſicke to ſwallowe downe ſuch potions often, & therefor you may droppe it into his mouth with a ſuckling boxe. In the lethargie it cōtinueth long, if ſtrength do permit you maie miniſter Hiera ex colocyut hide, and prouoke him to ſneeſe with the medicines aforenamed. At the laſt when the diſeaſe beginneth to decline, geſtation on horſback, or in a litter is profitable, and bathing is exceding good at that time, but the head of the ſicke maie not be wette by any meanes. And if the ſicke for lacke of ſtrength can not abyde the heat of the bathe: at the leaſt let him be waſhed at home in a veſſell of warme water. Let him be ſcoured in the bathe with ſharpe ſope, as with wyne lies burnt, with muſtard ſeed, pellitory, pepper, laurell bearies, quicke lyme, adding double as much nitrum.
            
            
               CAP. XVII. Of Memory lost.
               
                  
                     MEMORIA deperdita, the loſſe of memorie chaunceth ſometime alone▪ and ſometime reaſon is hurte with it.
                     Cauſ
                           •
                        .
                   It is cauſed in the lethargie and other ſoporiferous diſeaſes. It commeth to paſſe alſo that the ſoporiferous diſeaſes being ended, ther enſueth forgetfulnes. Which when it chaunceth, then a cold diſtempur is the cauſe that the memorie is periſhed or greuouſlie hurt. This

coldnes hath ſometime moiſtnes ioyned with it, and ſometime drynes: ſometime any one of the former diſtempures maie cauſe this diſeaſe alone. Therfore the Phiſition muſt diligently diſcerne the cauſes. The cauſes of this diſeaſe be either externall or internall, if they be internall, either aboundance of fleume, or melancholie is cauſe of it. If ther be no ſignes of thoſe humours abounding, then muſt it needes come of ſome externall cauſe, eſpeciallie if it come not through extreme old age. The externall cauſes you maie lerne by relation of the ſicke, and thoſe that are about him, as if anie diſeaſe be newly paſſed, and ſo turned into obliuion, or if medicines were miniſtred inwardlie, or applyed outwardly to the head which haue vertue to coole extremelie. Or if it came of immoderate labour with ſtudie & watching or ſuch like. If the memorie be but a litle hurte, it betokeneth that the braine is but litle cooled. If reaſon be loſt together with the memorie, then the affect is called Fatuitas or ſtultitia, (that is) foliſhnes or doltiſhnes, and both theſe do come of one diſpoſitiō, but that it is more vehement wher both are hurte. As touching ſignes,
                     Signa.
                   if only a drie diſtempure occupying the hinder parte of the head doe cauſe this euill then ouermuch watching troubleth the ſicke. If only a moiſt diſtempur be cauſe of it, then they are heauie and enclyned to ſleepe, and ther ſleepes be long and troubleſome. If cold be ioyned with moiſture, it engendreth the lethargy and Carus wherof we will entreate in the next Chapter. Therfore in them that haue loſt ther memorie you muſt obſerue ther ſleepes, whither they be ouer ſleepy, or in a meane, or ſleepe not at all, for ſo ſhall you finde what diſtempure doth moſt abound. Beſides you muſt marke whither they auoid any thing at the noſe, or whither any thing diſtill from the head by ther mouth, or whither thoſe partes be altogether drie. For by them you maie likewyſe coniecture the diſtempure abounding. And if fleume be cauſe of the euill, you ſhall perceue it not only by immoderate ſleepe, and aboundaunce of excrementes diſcending from the braine (as is afore ſaid) but alſo by the diſpoſition of the ſicke, by his age, and his complexion, by the time of the yere, the region, the ſtate of the ayer, and by the diet that he vſed before. For all thoſe or the moſt parte of them encline to cold and moiſture. Likewyſe if melancholy abounding be cauſe of the diſeaſe, you ſhall knowe it for that the ſicke is not ſleepy at all, nether doth he auoid any excrementes at all from the braine, beſydes the ſtate of his body and all other circunſtaunces aboue rehearſed encline to cold & drines. His diet muſt be dyuerſe according to the diuerſitie of the cauſes. But whatſouer the cauſe be,
                     Victus ratio.
                   let the aier that the ſicke remaineth in, be inclining to heat, and let his lodging be light, let not his windowes be north nor ſouth, for the one cooleth and the other filleth the head. Let him eſchewe much ſleep ſpeciallie in the daie time, and vpon a full ſtomake. But note, if the diſeaſe be cauſed of a cold & moiſt diſtempur, then the whole order of his diet muſt be hote and drie. But if the cauſe be cold and dry, then muſt the diet be altogether ſuch as will heat and moiſten. As touching the cure if loſſe of memorie be cauſed by vehement purgations,
                     Curatio.
                   or other immoderate euacuations, or by ſoundings often, and ſo ouer much drynes do hurt the memorie, then miniſter noe medicines, but only reſtore the bodie by good diet. For the bodie being corroborate, & ſtrength renewed, the memorie will come again. If you require to know what things are requiſite for ſuch a diet, you ſhall find it in the Chapter of the feuer hectike. If the memorie be loſt by extreme age, then phiſick will nothing auaill. But only they muſt content them ſelfes with diet cōuenient, but if the memory fail ſodainlie, the other members of the body being ſafe, then the falling ſicknes is to be feared, or the palſey, or the Apoplexy. And therfor in ſuch a caſe you muſt prouide diligently by al meanes that no ſuch thing chaunce as is to be feared. You maie preuent thoſe diſeaſes by the ſame remedies that you would vſe in the cure of them being preſent. And if the memorie faile by meanes of other diſeaſes, as through the lethargie or peſtilence, then medicines for cure thereof are to be vſed. The whole ſcope of curing the diſeaſe, if it come only of a cold diſtempure of the braine conſiſteth in heating. You muſt therfore miniſter medicines that haue vertue to heat aſwell inwardlie as outwardly. Outwardly you muſt annoint the head with warme oyle, & that in ſommer. In winter annoint it with oile of Ireos commixed with ſharpe vineger, and ſometime boile wild time, and calamint, and ſuch like in the oile, and ſo vſe it. Som do adde to it pepper, and laurell bearies. Alſo Caſtoreum is profitable being commixed with oile, and annointed vpon the hinder parte of the head. Alſo this ointmēt is very good. ℞. of oile made

of tyle ſtones,
                     Vngu
                           •••••
                        .
                   called Oleum de Lateribus, and oyle of Caſtoreum. ana. ℥.ſs. rootes af
                     •
                  corns, & valerian. ana. ℈.j. pellitory and 
                     •
                  ewe of eche. ℈.ſs. with waxe ſufficient make an ointment, & annoint the hinder parte of the head therwith being ſhauen, and apply this quilt vpon it. ℞. floures of roſemary,
                     Sac
                           •••
                        u
                           •
                        .
                   balme, and lauender. ana. M.ſs. flours of Elder. M.j. ſtechas. ʒ.iij. nutmegges, wood of aloes, and macis. ana. ℈.j. powder them, and ſtich them in ſilke, and make a quilt. You may make many ſuch like medicines by examples in other Chapters. You may miniſter inwardly conſerues of the floures of betonie, roſemarie, lauender, ſpicknard and baulme, adding to them pepper, cloues, Cinnamon, and ſuch like odoramentes. If memorie be loſt by cold, and moiſtnes ioyned together miniſter Hierapicra, which will purge out nothing that is good, but only that which is noiſome. Afterwardes let him vſe gargariſes, ſternutations, and whatſouer doth purge by the mouth & the noſe. Alſo a ſinapiſmus may profitablely be applyed to the head. If obliuion be cauſed of fleume abounding, then you muſt firſt prepare, and concoct that humour, with mel roſarum, oximel, ſyrupe of infuſion of roſes, with decoctions of betony, maiorame, hyſope, time, and ſuch like, after the adminiſtration wherof, the matter being concoct and prepared, you maie purge it with decoction of mirabolanes, chebulorum, and agaricke trochiſcat, to the which you may adde of the ſyrupe of infuſion of roſes, or Diacatholicon, or Diphenicon. And if the matter through his groſſenes, will not ſufficiently purge at once, then you muſt prepare it againe, and after purge it with pilles, arabicae, aurea, or aggregatiua, commixing ſome of them with agaricke trochiſcat, and ſo make pilles with hony of roſes, or ſyrupe of ſtaechados. After you may particularlie purge the head with gargariſes and ſternutations. After purging it is good to miniſter vnto them Caſtoreum or ſhauing of iuorie. ʒ.j. with aqua mulſa, or as much Confectio anacardina, or aurea Alexandrina, or diambra, diamoſchu dulce, or mithridatum, or theriaca with aqua mulſa or whit wyne. Afterward you maie vſe outwardly embrocations, and poure them downe from a heigh vpon the head being ſhauen, ſpecially nighe to the ſeame, wher the bone is looſeſt or thinneſt. You may make your embrocation thus. ℞. of hyſope ſerpillum, and time. ana. M.ſs. betony,
                     Embrocha.
                   maiorame, and floures of cammomill. ana. pug. ſs. floures of ſtechados. ʒ.iij. make a decoction, and adde therto of Caſtoreum. 
                  ʒ.j. of vineger. ℥.j. & make an embrocation. It is good alſo to annoint the firſt and ſecond ſpondill in the necke, and the hinder parte of the head, whith Oleum nardi
                        •
                     um, oyles of nutmegges, of Caſtoreum, of pepper, or Oleum coſtiuum.
                  
                     Seccul
                           ••
                        .
                   And you may apply theruppon a quilt, made in this ſorte. ℞. hyſope, maiorame, and floures of ſtaechados. ana. ʒ.j. Caſtoreum, nutmegges, ſpicknard, macys. ana. ℈.j. the barkes of frankinſence, maſticke, and wood of aloes. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. redd roſes dried the waight of all beat them to powder, and make a quilt. And if the euill ceaſe not by this meanes, then laſte of all, vſe a ſinapiſmus. If memorie be loſt by aboundaunce of melancholye, you muſt firſt prepare it to expulſion, by ſyrupe of borage, and fumitorie mixed together, and adding ſyrupe of infuſion of roſes, and waters of betony, hoppes and baulme and ſuch like. Afterward miniſter this potion following.
                     Decoctio.
                   ℞. Mirabolanorum, indorum. 
                  ʒ.iij. ſene, and epithimum. ana. ʒ.ij. floures of hoppes, fumitory, & borage. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. make a decoction in running water, & hauing ſtrained it, diſſolue therin of fine mamia. ℥.ij. of Diacatholicon. 
                  ʒ.vij. or Diaſene. ℥.ſs. and make a potion. As touching outward medicines, let them rather encline to moiſture then drynes. As by adding to the ointmentes before praeſcribed, oiles of cammomill, dill, & ſweet almondes. Likwyſe in making embrocations and quiltes, you may withdrawe ſuch medicines as drie, and adde moiſt things in ther ſtead. Hereby a circumſpect Phiſition maie not only haue a reaſonable Method, to cure eche kind of obliuion, but alſo to remedy any dullnes or weaknes of the memory. For that it commeth of the ſame cauſes that memory loſt doth come, allthough they be not ſo vehement, wher the memorie is weakned.
            
            
               CAP. XVIII. Of Carus or Subeth.
               
                  
                     Carus.
                  
                  CAROS in Greeke, and Carus in Latin is a diſeaſe, in which both ſenſe & mouing is altogether taken awaie, and yet ther breathing remaineth ſafe. The Arabians call this diſeaſe Subeth.
                  
                     Subet.
                   This diſeaſe differeth from the lethargie, for that they will aunſwere to a queſtion demanded, that haue the lethargie, and doe not

lye altogether downe. But they that haue Carus, are occupied with deep ſleepe, and if they be ſtirred or pricked, although they feele, yet they will ſay nothing, nor once open ther eyes. Beſides as Paulus Aegineta noteth, a vehement feuer doth vſe to go before Carus, and in the lethargie it followeth rather. Alſo Carus vſeth to ſuccead other ſymptomats and accidents. For it commeth often in the fittes of feuers, and in the falling ſicknes, and in preſſing of the braine, aſwell when the braine pann is cruſhed together, as alſo if the filmes that couer the formoſt ventricle of the braine, be thruſt downe. But the lethargie hath a certaine peculiar conſiſtence of him ſelfe. Alſo Carus doth differ from the Apoplexie, for that in it the breathing is very ſtraight, ſo that the ſicke can with much a doe ſcarce breath at all. But he that hath Carus (as Galē
                   witneſſeth in his fourth Booke de Locis affectis) hath his breath at liberty. Carus is cauſed of a cold, groſſe, and viſcous flegmatick humour filling the braine.
                     Cauſae. Signa.
                   You maie eaſily know the ſignes by that which hath bene rehearſed before. For in this diſeaſe they are altogether in a dead ſleep, and ther eyes alwaies ſhut. As for the diet, and the cure of thoſe that haue Carus, it agreeth altogether with thers, that haue the lethargy.
                     Victus. Cura.
                   Wherof we ſpake before (in the. 16. Chaptre) ſauing that in this diſeaſe you muſt vſe things that be of greater force to extenuate, cut, and deuyde the groſſe humours. Alſo you muſt apply emplaſters, and other medicines to the ſtomake, which haue vertue to heat, & corroborate it, for becauſe it is ſtuffed with fleume which doth coole it and moiſten it. Wherof you ſhall find examples in the beginning of the third Booke.
            
            
               CAP. XIX. Of Congelation or taking.
               
                  CATOCHE or Catalepſis in Greeke, in Latin may be called Occupatio, Detentio, & deprehenſio. The newe wryters in phiſick do call it Congelatio,
                  
                     Conge
                           •
                        atis.
                   in Engliſh it maie be called Congelation or taking. It is a ſodaine detention & taking both of mind and body, both ſenſe and mouing being loſt, the ſicke remaining in the ſame figure of bodie wherin he was taken, whither he ſit or lye, or ſtand, or whither his eyes be open or ſhut. This diſeaſe is a meane betwene the lethargie and the freneſy, for it cometh of a melancholy humour for the moſt parte, as ſhalbe declared afterward. Therefor in reſpect of coldneſſe it agreeth with the lethargie, and in reſpect of drynes with the freneſy. Hereupon it cometh that they which haue this diſeaſe, are nether like the freneticke altogether, nor like them that haue the lethargie.
                     Cauſae.
                   This diſeaſe is cauſed ſometime of aboundance of bloud flowing to the head and repleniſhing it. But for the moſt part (as AEtius witneſſeth) it is cauſed of a cold and drye melancholicke humour, troubling the hinder partes of the head and braine. This diſeaſe inuadeth a man ſodainly, and taketh away ſpeach and ſenſe from him, he heareth nothing,
                     Signa.
                   he aunſwereth nothing, his breathing is ſcarcely to be perceiued, but he lieth as he wer dead. His pulſe is ſmall & weak & very thick. His egeſtion & vrine are detained, or els they come forth in ſmall quantity, & that is not in reſpect of drynes, for the ſicke ſomtime doth abound with much moiſtur, but for lacke of ſenſe. Ther face is ſomtime redd, and that is when the euill is engendred of bloud, and ſomtime it is ſwart, & that is wher melancholy cauſeth the diſeaſe. Moreouer the eyes in this diſeaſe remaine immoueable, as though they were froſen. This euill differeth from Carus (as Galen ſaith) for that in it the eye liddes are euer ſhut, but in this diſeaſe they ſomtime remaine open. The diet in this euill muſt be diuerſe according to the diuerſity of cauſes. Let his food be ptiſan broth, and ſuch like.
                     Victus.
                   Let his drinke be aqua mulſa well boiled, or thinne white wyne well alaied, for ſuch wyne, ſeing it doth not fume into the head, doth much good. It his hurtfull for them to drinke water, for it cauſeth windynes, ſwelleth the ſplene, and quencheth not thirſt. As concerning the cure if the face of the ſicke be ruddy, and bloud ſeme to abound, if ſtrength permit and yeres,
                     Curatio.
                   let him fourth with bleed on the outwardmoſt vaine of the arme, & let him bleed according to his ſtrēgth. Afterward if the head be hot, apply thoſe things that coole. For that purpoſe you may boile the ſhelles of poppy heades in oile, and annoint the head therwith. But in other, that haue

ther face ſwart, & ſo haue tokens of melancholy abounding, you muſt firſt clenſe the guttes with cliſters, made of floures of borage, bugloſſe, fumitorye, tyme, epithimum, rootes of polipodie, leaues of ſene, adding to it oiles of cammomill, and dill, and caſia, diacutholicon, diaſena, or confectio 
                        •
                     amech in conuenient quantity. Whereof you ſhall find examples afterward in the Chaptre of Melancholia. And if the belly become not ſoluble by this meanes, then is it not amiſſe to boile in the former decoction rootes of Eleborus 
                        ••
                     ger. The head muſt be annointed with oile, wherin wild time is ſodden, or with oyle of lillies or dill, or ſuch like, & that you muſt do chiefly when the head ſeemeth cold. Moreouer if his vrine appeare groſſe and thick, you muſt giue him to drinke the decoction of dill, apium, calamint, & ſuch like, as haue vertue to extenuate. It profiteth alſo to annoint all ther whole bodie with oyle of dill ſpecially in winter. Alſo they that haue trembling with this diſeaſe maie haue. ʒ.j. of Caſtoreum commixed with aqua mulſa, and powred into ther mouth. The reſt that concerne the cure of this diſeaſe maie be gathered partly out of the Chapters of the freneſie and lethargie before, and partly out of the Chaptre of melancholie following.
            
            
               CAP. XX. Of dead ſleep.
               
                  COMA in Greeke, ſopor, or granis & profundus ſomnus in Latin. It may be called in Engliſhe dead ſleepe.
                     Coma.
                   It is a diſeaſe wherin the ſicke cannot awake, nor keep open his eyes, but doth keepe his eyes continually cloſſe ſhut, and is in a ſound ſleepe. But ther be two kindes hereof, the one wherof we haue alredy ſpoken, and that is called ſimply Coma or ſopor, or els Coma ſomnolentum. The other is called Vigilans ſopor, and it is an euill wherin the ſicke cannot hold open his eyes, though he be awake, but he winketh in hope to get ſleepe, & yet is altogether awake. Therefor you muſt make a difference betwen theſe two kindes. The ſleeping Coma (as Galen witneſſeth) is ſomtime cauſed by ouermuch moiſtening of the braine,
                     Cauſae.
                   as it chaunceth to many dronken perſons. Alſo in feuers only hot and moiſt vapours aſcending from the inferiour partes, and moiſtening the braine doe cauſe this euill. Moreouer ſomtime only cold, occupying the fore part of the braine is cauſe of this euill. Sometime profound ſleepe is cauſed of coldnes and moiſtnes ioyned together. The other euill called Vigilans ſopor, or Coma (that is) the watching drowſynes, it is cauſed of fleume mixed with choler, and for the moſt parte it commeth for lack of ſtrength, that they are not able to keep open ther eye liddes.
                     Signa.
                   The partie that is vexed with the ſoporiferous and ſleepy Coma, doth ſleep with his nether iawe open, and as often as he is awaked, he falleth into a new ſleepe forthwith. They that haue the watching Coma, they ſpeake they wote not what, & they lye with ther whole body out of order, and they haue partly ſuch ſignes as appeare in the freneſie, & partly ſuch as in the lethargie.
                     Curatio.
                   The cure is of two ſortes, according to the diuerſity of the euills. For in the ſoporiferous and ſleepy Coma, you muſt vſe thoſe remedies that are praeſcribed in the Chapters of Carus, and the Lethargie, and to ſpeak briefly after the whole body be purged, if the euill be cauſed of moiſtnes, then you muſt applye ſuch things as will drye the braine made with ſharpe vineger and roſes, and cammomill commixed, and you may alſo let the fume therof go vp into the noſethrills. If it be cauſed of cold, then apply oyle of dill, and cammomill warmed, and if the cold be great, you maie ſomtime boile in oyle, peniroyall & dill and vſe it. But if the euill be cauſed of cold and moiſture ioyned together: then muſt it be cured, as the Lethargy. If it com of weaknes and lack of ſtrength, then you muſt vſe reſtoratiues to recouer it againe. Suppoſitaries are very good to be vſed in theſe kindes of diſeaſes, for that they ſtirre and prouoke nature. For the watching Coma, ſince it conſiſteth of mixed and contrary cauſes, it muſt be cured by contrary medicines partly as the freneſie, and partly as the lethargie. And to know which of them you muſt vſe moſt, you may lerne that by the humour moſt abounding. For if fleume abound mor then choler, then you muſt vſe moſt the remedies againſt the lethargy: but if contrariewyſe choler do moſt abound, then muſt your remedies be for the moſt parte ſuche as are good againſt the freneſy. And therefor you may ſeeke conuenient remedies out of thoſe Chapters, as occaſion ſerueth.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXI. Of the Apoplexy.
               
                  APOPLEXIA in Greeke and Latin is a diſeaſe wherin the fountaine and originall of all the ſenewes being affected, euery part of the body doth ſodainly looſe both mouing and ſenſe. Or it is a depryuing both of ſenſe and mouing through out the whole body coming ſodainly with let and hurt of all voluntary functions. If this ſtopping of the brain come in on halfe of the body only then it is called Paralyſis in Greeke: in Engliſh the palſey wherof we will ſpeak in the next Chapter. The Apoplexie is cauſed of a flegmaticke humour, that is cold, groſſe and tough,
                     Cauſae.
                   which doth at one time aboundantly fill the principall ventricles of the braine, which humour ouermuch crudities, and chiefly dronkennes doth engender. Alſo it is cauſed by a fall or a blow which ſhaketh & bruiſeth the braine, and cauſeth humours to flowe thither. Alſo very cold ayer which doth thick and congele the humidities and excrements of the braine, doth ſomtime cauſe this diſeaſe: it may alſo be cauſed of a groſſe melācholy humour. Concerning ſignes ther goeth befor this diſeaſe a full and ſharp pain of the head,
                     Signa.
                   and a ſwelling of the vaines in the necke, the Vertigo, and brightnes before the eyes, alſo cold of the extreme partes without cauſe, panting of the whole body, ſlownes to moue, and gnaſhing of the teeth whyle they ſleepe. Ther vrine is litle in quantity, black, like ruſt and canker in metall, and hath a reſidence like meale. They that fall into this diſeaſe doe lack ſenſe altogether, they lye as they were a ſleepe with ther eyes ſhut, and do ſnort. The vehemēcie & greatneſſe of this diſeaſe maie be diſcerned by the impediment that they haue in breathing. For when it is very much differing from naturall order, it betokeneth vehemencie of the diſeaſe, and that it is a great and ſtrong Apoplexie. But when ther is a litle impedimēt in the breathing, then you may iudge that ther is but litle hurte in the braine, and ſo you maie account it a ſmall and weak Apoplexy. The worſt and ſtrongeſt Apoplexie is, wherin the breathing is ſo deminiſhed that it can very hardly be perceiued, and that is almoſt as euill, wherin the breath ſtoppeth for a whyle, and then is fetched with great violence. This diſeaſe for the moſt part doth chaunce to old men, which be of a flegmaticke complexion, and which doe vſe ſuch a diet as encreaſeth fleume. But if ſo be it inuade any yong perſon, and that in ſommer ſeaſon, it is moſt perillous. This diſeaſe is vncurable, or at the leſt is ſeeldome cured. And therfor Hippocrates writeth in the .42. Apho. of his ſecond Booke.
                     Progn
                           ••••
                        a.
                   It is impoſſible (ſaith he) to cure a vehement Apoplexie, & not eaſie to cure a weak one. For it threatneth ſpeady death. Beſides if it chaunce by medicines to be taken awaie, for the moſt part it departeth leauing the palſey behind it, ether in the whole body, or in ſome part thereof. Often alſo it corrupteth the memorie, wherupon we maye conclude that remedies are not to be vſed, againſt a ſtrong Apoplexie, for that it is of nature deadly. But if it be weak, which you may know by the ſignes afore ſaid, although ther be ſmall hope to remedy it, yet (as Galen teſtifieth) conuenient remedies being miniſtred, it maie parhappes be cured, as experience hath proued in ſome. Thoſe therfore whoſe cure is not altogether deſperate, if ther be ſignes of plenitude and fullnes, & ſtrength permit alſo,
                     Curatio.
                   muſt be let bloud on both the Caephalica vaines. But you muſt fortell the perill, for bloud letting doth either kill them, or deliuer thē: ſo that if after bloud letting (as Aetius ſaith) both mouing & ſenſe come not vnto him againe, ther is no more hope. You muſt not drawe away much bloud at ones, but rather at ſundrie times, and you muſt haue regard to his pulſe, the colour of his face, & his breathing. Beſydes you muſt prouoke him to the ſtole with ſharpe cliſters in this ſort. ℞. ſage, origan▪ betony,
                     C
                           ••
                        ſter acris.
                   and rew. ana. M.j. calamint, hyſope, & peniroyall. ana. M.ſs. ſeades of fenell, ſeſelis. & ammi. ana. ʒ.iij. centory the leſſe. M.j. rootes of polipody. ʒ.vj. fine agarick. ʒ.iij. pulpe of coloquintida. 
                  ʒ.ij. boile theſe in ſufficiēt quātity of water, vntill halfe be conſumed: then take of that decoctiō. ℥.xv. of Hierapicra, & Benedicta laxatiua. ana. ℥.ſs. of Electuariū nidum. 
                  ʒ.iij. of Diaphaenicon. 
                  ʒ.ij. of mel roſarum clarified. ℥.j.ſs. of oyles of laurell, rew, & Caſtoreū. ana. ℥.j. of fall gēme. ʒ.j.ſs. cōmix them all & make a cliſter. Alſo the vſe of ſuppoſitaries in this diſeaſe is very cōmēdable, made of Colloquintida, agarick, black hellebore▪ & ſuch like, after this ſort. ℞. of hony boiled to a height. ℥.ij. of Colloquintida, agaricke and hellehore. ana. ℈.ij. of fall

gemme. ℈.j. beat them into powder, commixe them with the hony and make ſuppoſitaries vj. fingers long, and hang a thread in them, that you maie drawe them out when you liſte. You maie alſo put into the ſuppoſitaries Hierapicra, or pilles Cochia. Afterward annoint the whole body with a good quantity of warme oile, wherin wild time, calamint, dill, and ſuch like hath firſt been boiled. Alſo the extreme partes muſt be bound ſtrongly and vehemently chafed with the decoctiō of the roote of floure deluce, many cupping glaſſes muſt be faſtned to the ſhoulders. The head muſt be ſhauen, and annointed with oiles of cammomill, dill, & rew, or with oile, wherin the aforenamed herbes haue been boiled. You muſt apply to the noſethrills ſuch thinges as by ther odour can ſtirre and raiſe vp the ſicke, as be opoponax, caſtoreum, ſagape
                        •
                     um, galbanum. Alſo you maie vſe medicines to prouoke ſneaſing made of white hellebore, caſtoreum & ſuch others reherſed in the former Chapters. Or it profiteth much to vſe embrocations, made of cāmomill, melilote, ſage, peniroyall, maiorame, origan, calamint, ſauerie, and hyſope boiled in equall portions of wyne & water. But yet it is better to vſe drie medicines to the head,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   as be ſinapiſ
                        ••
                     
                   made after this ſorte. ℞. Olei coſtiui. ℥.j. oiles of Caſtoreum and Euphorbium. ana. ʒ.iij. muſtard ſeed. ʒ.ij. Caſtoreum. 
                  ʒ.j ſagapenum. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. 
                     
                        •
                     uphorbium. ℈.j. vineger. ʒ.ij. with ſufficient quantity of waxe, make an emplaiſter. Alſo you muſt open ther mouth by force, and put into it your finger, or a fether dipped in oile of Ireos to prouoke vomit,
                     Vomitus.
                   and to cauſe the groſſe humours that be in the mouth to be caſte out. Alſo ther fondament muſt be annointed with ſuch medicines as diſſolue windines, as be rewe, comyn, nitrum and honie. When the euill is aſſuaged, you muſt giue him meat of eaſie digeſtion, for the moſt mixed with hony. If his ſpeache come not yet againe, ſo that ſtrength permit, you maie faſten cupping glaſſes to the hinder part of the head with ſcarification. And in like ſorte vnder the ſhorte ribbes, if you maie. Afterward let the ſicke be carried in a wagon or horſelitter.
                     Victus.
                   Let his drinke be mulſa, or oximell. Let him drinke no wyne. After. 21. dayes be paſte the ſicke may enter a bath, but as touching medicines requiſite for the reſt of the cure, you ſhall find them aboundauntly in the Chapter following. And this maie ſuffiſe for the cure of the Apoplexie, if ſo be it be curable.
            
            
               CAP. XXII. Of the Palſeye.
               
                  PARALYSIS in Greeke, Reſolutio in Latin: in Engliſhe the Palſeye. It is a diſeaſe wherin the one halfe of the body either the right or the left doth looſe both ſenſe and mouing. Alſo ſomtime the palſey chaunceth in one member only, (as for example) in the hand, the legge, or the tongue. But note here that the palſey which followeth the Apoplexy is particularly called in greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And therfore the word Paralyſis is a more generall name then Paraplegia. But wheras in the palſey, ſomtime ſenſe only is loſt, and ſometime mouing alone, and ſomtime both ſenſe and mouing: it is eſpecially called reſolution of the ſenewes or palſeye, when mouing is loſt. Why ſomtime feeling is loſt only, & ſomtime mouing alone, & ſomtime both together, Galen declareth at large in his firſt Booke de ſymptomatum cauſis, Cap. 4. & ther for it need not be here reherſed, notwithſtanding it ſhall not be amiſſe to aunſwere briefly to that queſtiō.
                     VVhy in the palſey ſometime ſenſe alone, ſometime mouing alone, and ſometime both together periſhe.
                   Firſt note that aſwell the faculty of mouing as of ſenſe floweth from the braine, as from a fountaine, and is deryued from thence by & in the ſenewes to the inſtruments of motion and ſenſe, and therfor it muſt needes be, if that faculty of the braine be hindred or ſtopped by any cauſe, that it cannot diſcend to the inſtruments of mouing or of ſenſe: that they ſhould looſe mouing or ſenſe according as the ſenewes be affected. And therfor in thoſe members that participate two kindes of ſenewes, as the eyes and the tongue doe, the former queſtion is eaſy to be ſoluted, for that they haue one kind of ſenewes for motion, & another kind for ſenſe, and ſo the one may be hurte, and the other ſafe, or they may be both hurt, and ſo both ſenſe and motion periſhe. But in members, that haue but one kind of ſynewe, the queſtion is more obſcure to aunſwere. In ſuch members therfore, if (the ſkinne being takē away) the muſcle lying naked cannot moue at all, and yet feeling remaineth in it, you may know that the hurt is not great. But if the ſenowes be much ſtopped, then hath it

loſt both ſenſe and mouing, for it is vnpoſſible that the ſenſe of a muſcle ſhould be loſt, and the motion remaine ſtill. The reaſon is for that leſſe of the animal facultie is requiſite for feeling, then for mouing, ſo that ther may come ſufficient quantitie of that facultie to a muſcle to cauſe feeling in it, and yet not enough to cauſe it to moue alſo, and therfor a naked muſcle, which hath his facultie both of feeling and mouing, of one kind of ſenowe, cannot moue and lacke ſenſe. But ether it hath ſenſe, and lacketh mouing, and then his hurt is but litle, or it hath loſt both, and that is when the hurt is great, and the ſenowe is altogither ſtopped. But where there is a member that hath ſenowes placed in the muſcles to cauſe mouing, and other ſenowes ſpread in the ſkinne to cauſe feeling (for the ſenowes that are diſperſed in the muſcles do not ſend out branches to the ſkinne as ſome ſuppoſe) I ſay it may come to paſſe in that member, that ſometime it may loſe feeling alone, and ſometime mouing alone, and ſometime both togither. For it may be that the ſkin which couereth the muſcle may looſe his ſenſe of feeling, the ſenowe being affected which is diſperſed in it, and yet the ſenowe that runneth in the muſcle may be ſafe, and therfore the muſcle may moue. But if the ſenowe which is ſpred in the muſcle be affected, and the ſenowe that commeth to the ſkinne remaine ſafe, that mēber cannot moue, and yet it hath ſenſe and feeling left, and that commeth to paſſe, becauſe the ſenowe of the one is hurt, and the other hath his ſenowe ſafe: although they ſpring both frō one place, yet they are deuided in the way as they come to the member. And if both the ſenowes be affected as well that, that cōmeth to the muſcle, as that which cōmeth to the ſkinne, then both ſenſe of feeling and mouing alſo periſh and ar loſt, and that is whē the cōmon foūtaine from whēce they do both ſpring, is affected and hurt. You may diſcerne that, when you know exactly the cōmon originall & ſpring of euerie ſenowe, in conſidering diligently whether the braine it ſelfe be affected, or the backbone at the head of it, or in any of his ſpōdils beſides. This is to be knowen by the Anatomie of Senowes, and therfore it behoueth to be well excerciſed therein, for in the palſey there is no: one certaine place affected, but diuers places.
                     To knowe if the brain be affected.
                   If the braine it ſelfe be affected (I meane not the whole braine: for thē is the Apoplexy engendred) but if the right halfe or the left be affected, you ſhall know it, for that the palſey or reſolution will be aſwell on the right or left ſide of the face, as on the right or left ſide of the body. But if the face be ſafe,
                     To 
                           •
                        nowe if the 
                           〈…〉
                         cauſe the palſey.
                   and one halfe of the body be depriued of ſenſe and mouing, then you may know that the place affected is the vpper end and firſt ſpondils of the backbone, but the one half only of the marow is affected, and that is it which is next to the ſide takē with the palſey. But if all the inferiour mēbers, (the face only excepted) be reſolued and paraliticke, thē is the backbone affected in the ſame place, euē in the beginning and vpper end of it, but thē is the hurt vehemēt, for the whole marowe is affected. But if it chaūce one only part to be reſolued, and taken with the palſey, you muſt ſearche from whence the ſenowes come that be contained in it,
                     Of members part
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         taken with the palſey.
                   which you may eaſely find, if you be well excerciſed in Anatomie. For if the marrowe of the backe be not affected aboue where his firſt beginning is, but lower among the ſpondils, then if the affect and hurt be great, all the inferiour partes beneth thoſe ſpondils affected, be reſolued and taken with the palſey, but if the hurt be but litle, and the marrow but half affected, then only the inferiour parts of the one ſide be reſolued. Therfore you muſt firſt learne by Anatomie to find the place affected, hauing foreknowledge from what part of the backbone, the mēbers reſolued haue their ſenowes.
                     Cauſae.
                   The palſey and reſolution of members is engēdred of aboūdance of groſſe and clammie humours, which ſtop the ſenowes, and hinder the animal facultie, that it cannot come frō the fountaine to the mēbers. It may alſo be cauſed of immoderat cold in ſnow or vehemēt froſt. Alſo it may be cauſed by an inflāmation, or a Scirrhus (which is a hard ſwelling without ſenſe) chauncing in the backbone, or in parts nigh adioyning or in other ſenowy parts, whereby the ſenowes are cruſhed and preſſed and ſo ſtopped that the animal faculty cannot paſſe. As alſo the ſenowes may be cruſhed togither by ſome externall cauſe, as by binding with a corde, or ſuche like meanes, & ſo cauſe reſolution, alſo whē ther is luxation or fracture in any of the ſpōdils of the back, or in other iointes or bones, there may follow reſolutiō by meanes of compreſſiō & cruſhing together of ſenowes. Alſo reſolutiō or palſey may be cauſed by meanes of a wound, or an vlcer, ether in the brain, or in the marrow of the back, or in any particular ſenowes. There need not many ſignes to know

this diſeaſe by: for any maie iudge eaſily, that parte or member to haue the palſey which is deſtitute of mouing: to knowe of what cauſe it proceded, you maie partlie learne by the relation of the ſicke, and partly by the ſignes reherſed before in the .7. Chaptre. fol. 8. where headache cauſed of fleume is entreated of.
                     Prognoſtica.
                   The palſey is noe acute and ſharpe diſeaſe, but of long continuance, and for the moſt parte curable. It chaunceth for the moſt parte in old folke, and in the winter time. The palſey that commeth by a ſynowe ſeperate and cut a ſunder is (as AEgineta ſaith) vncurable, and ſo is that which commeth by ouerthwart inciſions of the back or by great luxation of it. Moreouer if the member paraliticke do waxe leſſe, or chaunge his colour, it is hard to be cured, or rather not curable. For it declareth thoſe partes not only to be deſtitute of the animall faculty but alſo of the naturall, and after a ſorte of the vitall alſo. Ther diet muſt be altogether extenuating and drying.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let the ſicke therfore remaine in an ayer, that is hot and drie, and in the firſt three dayes he maie vſe altogether abſtinence, or let him content him ſelfe with aqua mulſa, or a litle ptiſan broth. Afterward giue him meats of good iuyce, light of digeſtion, and let them be roſted, let him eat chiefly birdes of the mountaines, and partrich, reare egges, almondes, and pyne nuttes. For pot herbes let him vſe fennell, parcely, hiſope, maiorame, ſage and ſauorie. Let him eſchew fiſhe, fruite, and all things that be cold and moiſt. Let him drinke but litle, for it is good for him to ſuſtaine as much thirſt, as he can poſſibly. Let him drinke mulſa wherin ſage or Cynamon hath bene boiled, or let him vſe to drinke, that which the barbarous Phiſitions at this daie call Hippocras: made after this ſorte.
                     Ipp
                           ••
                        as.
                   ℞. of choſen Cynamon. ℥.ij. of ginger. ℥.ſs. of long pepper, graines, and galingale. ana. ʒ.j. of cardamomes. ʒ.j.ſs. of nutmegges, cloues, and mace. ana. ʒ.j. boile them all in three quartes of running water vntill a pinte, and halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine it harde, and with halfe a pound of ſugar make it pleaſant to drinke, he maie drincke no wyne at all, vntill he be perfectly cured. But if the patient can hardly be kept ſo long tyme from wyne, giue him but a litle in the declyning of the diſeaſe, and let it be thinne and alaied. Mouing and exercyſe if he can vſe them, are very good for him. Let him eſchewe ſleepe on the daie. Let his night ſleepe be in a meane. Let him be mery and fly perturbations of the mind.
                     Curatio.
                   For the Cure, if age, ſtate of the body, tyme of the yeare, and ſuch like permit, it is good to beginn with bloud letting, ſpecially if ther be ſignes of plenitude. But you muſt drawe awaie bloud moderatly, leſt the body be cooled ouermuch,
                     V
                           •
                        nae ſectio.
                   and you muſt let bloud on the whole and ſound ſide. Then a fewe daies after bloud letting, you maie clenſe the inteſtines with cliſters made thus. ℞. of mallowes, holyhockes,
                     Clyſter.
                   mercury, cammomill, ſage, and betonie. ana. M.j. of ſtaechas. ℥.ſs. of rewe, and calamint. ana. M.ſs. of ſeedes of fennell, and ammeos. ana. ʒ.ij. boile theſe in ſufficient water vntill the third parte be conſumed, then take of that decoction. lb.j. of Benedicta Laxatina. ℥.ſs. of Ele
                        •
                     tuarium nidum. 
                  ʒ.iij. of honie of roſes. ℥.ſs. of oyles of laurell, Ireos, and rewe. ana. ℥.j. of ſalt gemme. ʒ.j. commixe them together and make a cliſter. Afterward miniſter vnto him decoctions and ſyrupes, which haue vertue to extenuate flegmatick humours, and make them apt to be purged, wheref you ſhall find examples before in the 7. Chap. The humours being thus prepared miniſter medicines which do purge fleume, beginning with gentle ones, & proceding by litle & litle to ſtronger. Beſides thoſe purgations which are reherſed in the 7. Chap. aforſaid, you may vſe pilulae azairet, arabicae, faetidae, with the which you muſt alwaies cōmix agarick. Neither doth it ſuffiſe to purge the patiēt once, but you muſt do it oftē, letting .4. or .5. daies paſſe betweē ech purging. The next day after he is purged,
                     Capitis purgatio.
                   it profiteth much to giue vnto him theriaca, or mithridatū. The body being welpurged, you muſt vſe ſternutatiōs, gargariſms, odoramēts, & ſuch other like, as ar reherſed in the 7. cha. And that ſpecially whē the brain is principally affected. For if the brain be not affected, you muſt rather miniſter ſuch medicins as may corroborat, & ſtrēgthen it, in this ſorte. ℞. of diambra, plicis, archoticon, & diamoſchu dulce. ana. ℈.j. of pouder of ſwallows preparate. ʒ.ſs. of coriander ſeedes preparate. ʒ.j. of ſugar roſet. ʒ.iij. with ſugar diſſolued in roſe water make lozēges,
                     Lozeng
                           •
                        s.
                   & let the patiēt hold a litle of one of thē in his mouth oftē. It profiteth alſo in this diſeaſe to take. ʒ.j. of Caſtoreū, or of opoponax, or ſagapenum, in aqua mulſa. Alſo diatrionpipereō
                   is good for thē. Yf the brain be chiefly affected, you muſt anoint the head with hote

medicines, as with Caſtoreum, mintes, laurell bearies, oile of Ireos boiled with a litle vineger, and ſuch like. Therfor if coldnes of the wether do not let it, you may ſhaue the head, and annoint it all ouer to the forhead. If the marowe of the back be affected at the vpper end wher he beginneth, then after the former purgation you muſt in the nape of the necke wher the marow of the back ſpringeth forth of the braine vſe oiles and ointments, which haue vertue to diſſolue & diſcuſſe, but you muſt begin with the weakeſt, as with oiles of cāmomill, dill, ſpike, lillies, Ireos, narde, nutmegge, S. Iohns worte, & earthwormes, wherwith you muſt annoint the nape of the neck, & the reſolued ſyde, ſpecially the halfe of the ridge bone: & you muſt wrappe the paralitick members in warme linnen clothes, or in a foxe ſkinne, to keep them warme▪ or you may bath them with the decoction of ſage, maiorā, cammomill, S. Iohns worte, ſtaechas, and roſemary. Afterward you may proceed to ſtronger medicines as be oiles coſtinum, vulpinum, oyles of rewe, and bayes, oiles of Caſtoreum, Euphorbium, and oile of tyle ſtones, called Oleum è lateribus, or Oleum Philoſophorum. To theſe you may adde theſe ointmentes, vnguentum aregon, vnguentum agrippa, and vng. martiaton, and hot ſimples maie be added. Alſo if you will, as be betony, ſage, roſemary, galingale, cowſlippes, rewe, calamint, pellitory, pepper, Caſtoreum, and Euphorbium. Of theſe you may make an ointment after this ſort. ℞. of vng. aregon,
                  
                     Vnguentum.
                   and martiaton. ana. ℥.j. of vnguentum agrippa. ℥.ſs. of oiles coſtiuum & vulpinum. ana. ʒ.ſs. of oile of earthwormes. ℥.ſs. of oile of caſtor. ʒ.j.ſs. of pouders of betony, pepper, ſage. ana. ℈.j. of caſtoreum, & euphorbium. ana. ℈.ſs. of galingale or rootes of acorns. ℈.ij. with waxe as much as ſuffiſeth, make an ointment. Or thus.
                     Aliud.
                   ℞. of oleum coſtiuum. ℥.ij. of oile of pepper. ℥.j.ſs. oile of euphorbium. 
                  ʒ.ij. of aqua vitae. ℥.ij.ſs. of iuyce of ſage, and coweſlippes. ana. ℥.j.ſs. of galingale. ʒ.iij. of ſtaechas & roſemary. ana. ʒ.ij. of pellitory & pepper. ana. ʒ.j. of Euphorbium. 
                  ʒ.ſs. bruiſe them and boile them vntill the aqua vitae & iuyces be conſumed, then ſtraine out the oiles, & put to the waxe and make a lynement. By example of them you may make a Cerote alſo after this manner. ℞. of bay bearies, pellitory,
                     Ceratum.
                   and pepper. ana. ʒ.ij. of galingale. ʒ.j. of ſtaechas, betony, & elder. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. of muſterd ſeed & nigella. ana. ʒ.j. of Euphorbium & Caſtoreum. ana. ℈.j. of oleum coſtiuū. ℥.j.ſs. of oile of pepper. ℥.j. of oile of euphorbium. 
                  ʒ.iij. with waxe & roſin ſufficient make a cerote. Alſo you maie make a quilt thus. ℞. hyſope, maiorame, S. Iohns worte, ſage, rew, & bay leaues. ana. ʒ.ij. ſpike,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . maſtick, caſtoreum & ſtaechas. ana. ℈.ij. cloues, maces, & nutmeggs. ana. ℈.ſs. red roſe leaues dried M.ſs. beat them all to powder, and make a quilt with them.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Alſo a fomentacion may conueniently be made thus. ℞. Sage, roſemary, S. Iohns wort, cowſlippes, hyſope, maioram, betony, peniroyall & calamint of ech. M.ſs. boile them in white wyne, and adde to the decoction of Caſtoreum. 
                  ʒ.ij. of floures of ſtaechas, & lauender. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. wherwith you may often bath the members affected, before you vſe the aforſaid ointmēts or quilt. Moreouer you may ſet cupping glaſſes lightly without ſcarification to the mēbers affected, that they may draw thither bloud, & heat, and ſpirits: & if the members them ſelfes cannot aptly haue cupping glaſſes applyed to them: apply them at the leaſt to the partes next adioyning. After cupping you may vſe the aforeſaid ointments & cerates, ſo that the members affected be firſt rubbed & chafed. And if the diſeaſe relent not by all theſe meanes (as Aetius doth counſell) you maie vſe ſinapiſmes or cauterizatiō by fier wher the originall of the affect is. Laſt of all a hot houſe or dry bath will profit much, or if they may cōueniently come to them naturall baths,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   which ſpring from brimſtone, alome, & ſalt, ſuch as be the bathes in Germany called Badeniae, Feriuae, Cellenſes, and ours in England at bath.
                     Gofiatio.
                   But it is good for them to vſe before bathing to be caryed vp & downe in a wagon or horſlitter. And this may ſuffiſe for the cure of the palſey, occupying on whole ſide. But if nether the braine, nor the beginning of the ridge bone be affected, but only ſome other parts of the marrow of the back, then you muſt ſearch out that part of the back that is affected. And apply ſuch remedies to it, as are before reherſed. And in like ſorte if any particular ſenowe be affected, you muſt find out his originall wher he ſpringeth, and ther applie the former medicines or ther like. Yet remember you muſt neuer alltogether neglect the braine, allthough it be not principally affected.
                     Of palſey cō
                        ming of cold.
                   If the palſey be cauſed of extreme colde without humours abounding in the bodie, then the place affected being found out, and the medicines before reherſed being applyed vpon it, you ſhall cure it. But you maie not altogether neglect the braine, nor the member that is

paraliticke, but vſe to them ſuch remedies as are afore taught. Bloud letting, purging, & all other euacuations may be omitted, only vſe remedies to alter and ſtrengthen the members. If the palſey be cauſed by an inflammation or Scirrhus of any parte,
                     Cure of palſey comming of other cauſes.
                   the ſame inflammation or hard ſwelling being cured, the reſolution will be cured alſo. If any pinching or binding of the ſynowes cauſe reſolution, the bond being remoued, the cure will ſoone enſue. If the ſpondills of the ridge or other bones being out of ioynt or broken do cauſe reſolution, if the reſolution be curable, it will be remedied by ther cure. Likewyſe if palſey enſue a woūd or vlcer in the head, or back, or in any particular ſynowe: it will be cured by ther Cure, except it be altogether vncurable.
            
            
               CAP. XXIII. Of Palſey in one member.
               
                  ALTHOVGH any expert man may eaſily gather out of the former Chap. the cure of reſolutiō chaūcing in any particular member, yet leaſt thoſe that haue leſſe ſkill, ſhould ſtande in doubte in ſome cauſes, it ſhall not be ſuperfluous to make diſcourſe of certaine particular reſolutions. There is an affect of the face called in Greeke Spaſmus Cynicus, & in Latin Connulſio canina, or of ſome Torturae oris.
                  
                     Curatio.
                   The Cure of this is like the cure of the palſey that is reherſed in the former Chapter. For both bloud letting if nothing be againſt it, and purging, and cliſters, and lynimēts reherſed in the former Chapter be good for this. Furthermore for the particular cure of this diſeaſe you muſt let the patient bloud on the vaines vnder the tongue, & faſten cupping glaſſes to the ſhutting of the ioyntes and giue him Maſticatoris made after this forme. ℞. ſeedes of ſtauiſacre, maſticke, the roote of pellitory. ana. ʒ.j. hyſope, origan. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. muſtard ſeedes. ʒ.ij. pouder them and commixe them with turpintyne and waxe, and make trochiſkes to chewe. Alſo it is good for the patient to looke often in a glaſſe, that he ſeeing the writhing of his face, may with all his power intend to amend it. Alſo to the grefe of the patient (that is) to the ſynowes that be ſprong you muſt apply the medicines that are in the former Chaptre. Alſo this following is very good. ℞. Olibanum, maſticke. ana. ℥.ij. l
                        •
                     gi aloes. ℥.j. cloues, galange, cynamon, zodoarie, nutmeggs, cubebibes. ana. ʒ.vj. mirrhe, aloes, labdanum, ſarcocol caſtoreum. ana. ℥.ſs. bay bearies, pyne nuttes. ana. ʒ.vj. Ireos, Ariſtolochiae rotunda dictamus cōſolide maioris. ana. ℥.j. gumme elemni, opoponacis, beniomen. ana. ℥.ij. the iuyce of camepitius, & the iuyce of coweſlippes. ana. ℥.iiij. turpentine. ℥.j. pouderal that is to be poudred, and put all in a limbecke of glaſſe, and diſtill it with a ſofte fier. And that which cometh firſt wilbe like water which you ſhall keepe, the next wilbe thick like oyle which keep alſo, and with this oile annoint the place, & let him drinke of the water three or foure ounces at once with a litle wyne,
                     Note.
                   this is very excellent good. But you muſt note in this place that the cheeke is not troubled with the palſey which ſheweth peruerſe and ouerthwart but the other.
                     Palſey of the tongue.
                   When the tongue hath the palſey, the bodie being firſt purged, you muſt cut the vaines vnder it, and apply a cupping glaſſe to the chinne. Alſo let him vſe Maſticatoris, and colluſions of muſtard ſeedes and ſuch like. Alſo let him not neglect exercyſes of the tongue. And the necke and the hinder parte of the head let them be annointed with ſharpe ointments and linements. Alſo the Phiſition maie apply Cerates and ſinapiſmes, & ſuch like as before. When the bladder hath the palſey, ſometime the vrine is withholden & ſometime it goeth awaie againſt the patient his will. In this caſe you muſt apply remedies to the belly and to the priuities,
                     Palſey of the bladder.
                   oile of rewe, narde, ſpike, or oile in the which is ſodden the roote of Eringium, rewe, comyn, or dill, or ſuch like. All are very good: and you may well commixe with them butter, Caſtoreum, Galbanum, Opoponax. And ther can be no better remedy, then to put theſe things into the bladder by the yarde with a ſ
                     •
                  reng. Firſt therfore if the patient cannot make water, you muſt get out the vrine by a fine pype made of ſiluer for that purpoſe called Cathetera. Afterward take thoſe medicines, that are reherſed a litle before, and poure them into the bladder with a Serenge, this will do maruelous muche good. Alſo medicines prouoking vrine giuen in drink be good for it, and ſo is caſtoreum likewyſe.

Alſo plaiſters made of laxatiue things are profitable therfore.
                     Palſey of the yard.
                   The palſey of the yard doth let and impedite the flowing of vrine, and ſparme, and carnall copulation, therfor you muſt vſe the ſame remedies which are reherſed for the palſey in the bladder: but priuatly you muſt apply to the loines, and to the iointes of the huckle bones things that will heat, and we muſt vſe thoſe medicines that haue power to erect the yard. And Caſtoreum may effectually be miniſtred, as well for this as for all other palſeyes, the ſicke muſt chiefly eſchew meates and drinkes that do coole. By theſe examples you maie eaſily find, how to cure other members, that be paraliticke.
            
            
               CAP. XXIIII. Of the falling ſicknes. DE EPILEPSIA.
               
                  EPILEPSIA in Greeke (as Galen ſaith) is a conuulſion, drawing, and ſtretching of all the whole partes of the body, not continually, but that which chaunceth at ſundrie times, with hurt of the mind and ſenſe, it is ſo called bycauſe it attachethe both the ſenſe and feeling of the head, & alſo of the mind.
                     Morbus comitialis.
                   The Latines call this diſeaſe, Morbus comitialis. Ther be .iij. differences in this ſicknes or diſeaſe. The firſt is cauſed, when this ſicknes cometh only of diſeaſe in the braine, as it chaunceth of groſſe and clammy fleume,
                     Cauſae.
                   or ſharpe choler doth  ſtoppe the paſſage of the ſpirite in the ventricles of the braine, if this euill cometh of a groſſe humour, then the diſeaſe commeth ſodainly, & it is ſoon gone again. Secondly it is cauſed  through euill affect in the mouth of the ſtomake, (that is) when the braine laboureth to driue awaie the vapours and humours that aſcend vp to it from the ſtomake. Thirdly the  falling ſicknes is cauſed, when as the patient feeleth a thing like vnto a cold ayer, comming from ſome member, and creeping vp to the braine, but this chaunceth very ſeeldome.
                     Signa.
                   Ther goeth before this euill an vnwyſe ſtate of the body and mind, ſaddeneſſe, forgetfullnes, troubleſome dreames, ache of the head, and continuall fullnes in it, eſpecially in anger, palenes of the face, inordinate mouing of the tongue, & many do byte it. Aſſone as this euill taketh them, the ſicke fall downe, and they are plucked vp together, they ſnort, and ſometime they crye out, many do tremble, and turn round about. But the peculiar ſigne of this diſeaſe is foming at the mouth. This diſeaſe chaunceth moſt to children. Galen ſaith, that if it taketh any parſon after .25. yeares of age, he ſhall haue it till he dye. The perfume or ſmoke of Bitumen, or Lapis gagatis, or of Goates horn will declare and ſhew them that haue the Epilepſie. Alſo the lyuour of an he goate eaten, or the ſauour of the lyuour ſodden will do the ſame.
                     Victus ratio.
                   It is profitable for them that haue this diſeaſe to vſe in their diet, things that will attenuate, cut, and deuide. Therfor let the ayer, in which the ſicke remaineth in be hot and dry, ſpecially if the euill be cauſed of fleume. He muſt eſchew all fleſh, except birdes that flye on mountaines: alſo he muſt auoid all kind of pulſes, fiſhe, & wyne, eſpecially if it be old and thick. Let his drinke be mulſa, or thinne ale: the eating of capers doth maruelouſly proffit. Excercyſe and frictions are good: but rubbe the head after all the other members be rubbed. Let him not vſe to much lechery: let him ſleepe meaſurablely on nightes, and let him eſchewe exceding ſleeping on the day. He muſt abſtaine from garlicke, oynions, muſterd, & ſuch like fumous things. He muſt eſchew drinking ſtraight after a bath.
                     Cure of infantes
                   If a child haue this diſeaſe you need not much to ſtudie for remedies, for with a moderat diet oftentimes the diſeaſe endeth by the owne accord: you muſt appoinct a diet for the infant and the nourſe. Therfore if the child be not yet weaned, let the nourſe vſe meates of good iuyce, and let her vſe excercyſe before meate, let her eſchew carnall copulation, and let her vſe for her diet things that be hot and dry, that therby the milke maie be hotter and thinner. Annoint the head of the infant continually with oile of dill and Ireos, putting to them the powders of Cypreſſe, Ireos, maiden heare, maioram & ſuch like, but neuer waſhe the head with water whither it be hot or cold. Alſo giue the child clarified honie to licke. Alſo this Ecligma is praiſed of many.
                     Ecligma.
                   ℞. fine whyte ſugar. ℥.ij. oyle of ſweet almonds, as much as is ſufficient to make it of the ſubſtaunce of a lohoch, and giue it to the child to licke. Alſo it is good to commixe with it

miſcle of the oke, and vnicorn. Alſo hang about the childes neck the roote of pionie being greene,
                     Cure of yong folkes.
                   for it helpeth maruelouſlie. Moreouer they that fall into this diſeaſe after they be paſt childes age, you muſt annoint and make ſtraight thoſe members, which are writhed, & plucked out of order in them. Afterward you muſt open the mouth, putting a wedge betwen the teeth, and with a fether dipped in oile of Ireos prouoke vomit to bring out fleume. Alſo it is good to quicken the ſenſes with odoramentes. Alſo pencedanum, or dogge fennell, rew, Bitumen, and iuice of ſilplinum. The matter continuing very ſharply, put into ther mouth Caſtoreum, or laſerpilium with oxymell. Alſo when they are raiſed, you muſt caſt in a ſharpe cliſter. They that beginn to recouer, (their ſtrength being refreſhed) purge them with Hiera Geleni,
                  
                     Cure of epilence in 
                           •
                        id folkes.
                   or ſome other conuenient medicine, and this the cure of a new & ſharpe epilence. Therfor nowe we will treat, how to help that which is olde. The patient muſt drinke water long time, or very ſmall ale, and that in the beginning of the cure, vnleſſe any thing do forbid it. Let bloud in the vaine of the hamme, or the ring finger, and then .iij. or .iiij. daies after you muſt comforte the bodie, and it is good to miniſter preparatiues to extenuate, as ſyrupes of wormewood, of hiſope, of ſtechados, oximell ſcilliticum, decoction of hiſope, roote of piony and others reherſed before. Afterward purge with purgations (that is) with pilula cochia, pilula de agarico and ſuch as purge fleume.
                     A purging po
                        
                           •
                        iō of ſtubium.
                   Alſo I iudge ſtubium to be of great force in this kind being vſed as is declared before in the .xv. Chap. fol. 17. which doth mightely purge the ſuperfluous humours from the head. And alſo I haue knowen this to helpe many, oile of excitore and with it annoint the hinder part of the head morning & euening warme. Furthermore make a twilt with .iij. ſheetes of graie paper,
                     Sacc
                           •
                        lus.
                   & baſt vpon it cotton woll, and let the patient weare it day and night .vj. daies. Then take two frying pannes, make them red hot, and hold one of them ouer his head, till it waxeth cold, then take the other and doe likewyſe, do thus, till the patientes head be very hote. And if his griefe take him in thy preſence, ſet the patient on his knees, and let his armes be holden croſſe ouer his bodie as maie be, and let his head be thus warmed many daies together, and euery morning and euening let him take theſe things. The firſt daie of the pouder of the ſkull of a man burned, on dramme at once, and the next daie of the miſcle of the oke, made in pouder. ʒ.j. & the third daie of the pouder of piony rootes. ʒ.j. and after thoſe .iij. daies, take theſe pouders eche daie, till the patient be healed which wilbe in 40. daies. But if this euill be engendred of melancholie, then ſeeke medicines to purge it in the Chap. of Melancholia: but it is lawfull to take the barck of drie black hellebote, and beat it vnto fine pouder, & to miniſter one dramme at ones with mulſa, and a litle pepper to it, alſo you may make pilles thereof, and giue them. And when the ſicke is purged inough, bring him to a bath, the third day faſten cupping glaſſes with ſcarification to the ſides and ſhoulders, and then many daies after comfort the bodie, & again purge him with Hiera Galeni.
                  
                     Hiera Galeni.
                   After that faſten cupping glaſſes to the nodle of the neck. The next daie apply to the head like a plaiſter, bread ſodden in mulſa, adding to it bitter almondes brayed, or ſerpillum, or calamint, or mints, or rew, and do that .iij. daies. Then ſhaue the head, and annoint it with iuyce of pencedanum, infuſed in vineger, in which ſerpillum, or Ireos hath bene ſodden. Then againe the bodie being refreſhed purge the ſicke only with three drammes of Hiera, after thoſe things be done miniſter ſternutaments, maſticatories, and ſuch things as do purge by the noſe, then afterwardes if you thinck good miniſter a cliſter. At the laſt apply ointments, lynements, and emplaiſters, which haue vertue to diſcuſſe and dryue away, wherof you maie find examples plenty in dyuers places.
            
            
               CAP. XXV. Of the Crampe. DE CONVVLSIONE.
               
                  
                     Spaſmos.
                  
                  SPASMOS in Greeke, in Latin Conuulſio, in Engliſhe the Crampe, is a diſeaſe in the which the ſynowes are drawen, and pluckt vp againſt ones will. Ther be of  it three kindes or differēces. The firſt is called in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in Latin Diſtentio. It is when the neck remaineth altogether immoueable, and cannot be turned

any waye, but muſt be holden right forthe. The ſecond is called in Latin Tenſio ad anteriora.
                   In this diſeaſe the head and the neck be drawen downe to the breaſt. The third is called in  latin Tēſio ad poſteriora.
                  
                     Cauſae.
                   In this diſeaſe the head is drawen down backward to the back & the ſhoulders. For the cauſes of this diſeaſe you muſt note that Hippocrates appointeth but only two (that is) fulnes and emptines of the ſinewes in the body, and ſomtyme it commeth with byting or ſtinging of ſome venemous beaſte. Yf that the crampe doth take one that is haild, or by and by aſſone as the diſeaſe commeth or not long after, then is the diſeaſe cauſed of fulnes, but when the conuulſion commeth after many ſweates, vomittes, watchinges or drynes, then is it cauſed of emptines. The dyet of them that haue conuulſion,
                     Victus ratio.
                   which cō
                  meth of fulnes muſt be hote and dry. But in them which haue the cōuulſion cauſed of emptines, the dyet muſt be moiſt. Therefor, the patient muſt be nouriſhed with ſoupinges & fat brothes, and fleſhe eaſie to digeſt, and that which nouriſheth well. For there drinke let them vſe wyne that is thinne and watery, which maye quickly be diſperſed into all partes of the body, vnles a feuer be preſent: for then iuyce of ptiſan is profitable or in ſteed of wyne miniſter decoction of Synamon. Alſo prouoke ſleepe. Let them eſchew exerciſes & all thinges that may empty the body: to be ſhort, let his dyet be like vnto thers, which haue the feuer Ethicke. The cure of the crampe cauſſed of fulnes,
                     Cures of fulnes.
                   muſt ſtraight beginne with letting of bloud, if no thing do prohibit it. It is meete to take away much bloud, but it may not be done all at once on heapes,
                     Bloud
                           •
                        etting.
                   but by little and little you muſt let bloud on the middle vaine on the arme. If after bloud letting it ſeemeth that the ſicke may ſuffer it, waſh the wombe with a ſharpe cliſter. That parte which is drawen, muſt be ſtronglye kept togither,
                     Cl
                           •
                        ſter.
                   and they muſt altogether eſchewe inordinate mouinges▪ and the place muſt be chafed with oyles of rewe, or ireos, or ſome other ſuch like, or they muſt be couered with woll dipped in the ſayd oiles, or you muſt lay vpon it a broad bladder filled with oile. And if the conuulſion commeth of fleume, then the fleume muſt firſt be extenuat, and made thinne,
                     The cramp comming of fleume.
                   and be prepared that it maye be apt to be purged: then by and by miniſter a purgatiō to purge fleume. Alſo apply cupping glaſſes with ſcarification, for light ones hurte. Yf the legges haue the cramp apply it to the haunches, and to the latter knittings of the ioynts. Yf the handes be drawen, apply it to the backe and to the ioyntes of the ſhoulders.
                     Capi
                           •
                        is pr
                           •
                        gatis.
                   Moreouer the head muſt be purged with Maſticator
                     •
                  es, gargarizes, and ſuch lyke medicines. Time proceeding, it is good to bath him, and therfor euerie day twyſe or thriſe let him diſcend into water of brimeſtone or alome, or ſalt water, but let him not tarie in them, leſt ſtrength fayle him: or if ther can not be vſing of naturall bathes, it is lawfull to vſe a hote houſe, or dry bathe,
                     Ba
                           •
                        ne
                           •••
                        .
                   or water wherin is ſodden laurell leaues, ſothernwood, peniroyall, wormwood, rewe, ſage, S. Iohnsworte, maiorā & betony, & the places that ar drawē ought to be couered with skinnes of wolues or foxes: alſo apply the ointments which ar reherſed in the cure of the palſey of the vſing of cold things, but miniſter often hote medecines, ſuch as be Theriaca and mithridatios, & ſuch as be hote. But the ſureſt and beſt of all other is the infuſion of Caſtoreum miniſtred the quantity of one dramm, truly not only the drinking of it but alſo the annointing of it outwardly is good.
                     The cramp cō
                        ming of emptines and drynes
                   Moreouer the conuulſion which commeth of emptines and drynes is ſuch an euill diſeaſe, as it is almoſt vncurable. Thoſe which ar ſo drawen, you muſt nouriſh with hote oyle or hidraleū. Alſo it is good to bring him to a bathe, and ſoft frictions wich oyle is good, and all ther whole cure muſt alwayes be lyke the cure of Ethicks. Yf the conuulſion chaunceth by the ſtroke of ſome venemous beaſt in the beginning of the cure: you muſt labour to drawe out the poyſon, which you may do by making the wounde wyder,
                     Cura ve
                           •
                        eni
                   and by ſcarifiing the place round about, ſetting vpon it cupping glaſſes: alſo you muſt annoint it with leeke ſeed, braied with ſalt, or garlick, or oynions, and after the fall of the ſcurffe, you ſhall keepe the wound xl. or lx. daies from a ſcarre: to the which if it make much haſte, you ſhall open the ſore again with aſhes of vrine or of figge tree: and it is good to annoint it with horehound or leaues of Anagallis. Alſo nouriſh the place with the decoction of the root of Sorrell. Alſo Theriaca infuſed in oile of roſes, and laid to the wound is good, becauſe it doth draw out & purge the poyſon from the bottome. Therfore they erre much, which ſay that Theriaca, being outwardly applyed, doth driue the poyſon inwards.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXVI. Of the Mare. DE INCVBONE.
               
                  EPHIALTES in Greeke, in latin Incubus and Incubo. It is a diſeaſe, where as one thinketh him ſelfe in the night to be oppreſſed with a great waight, and beleeueth that ſome thing commeth vpon him, and the pacient thinketh him ſelfe ſtrangled in this diſeaſe.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is called in Engliſh the Mare. This vice is cauſed of exceſſe of drinking, and continuall rawnes of the ſtomake, from whence do aſcend vapours groſſe and cold, filling the ventricles of the brain, letting the faculties of the braine to be diſperſed by the ſenewes.
                     Signa.
                   They that haue this diſeaſe can ſcarce moue, being aſtonied, and feeling in ſleepe imagination of ſtrangling, and as it were the holding of ſome thing, that doth violently inuade him. In this the voice is ſuppreſſed, ſome haue ſuch vaine imagination, that they beleeue they heare the thing that doth oppreſſe them. At the laſt with much trouble the vapours being attenuate and driuen away, and the paſſage of the ſpirits being opened, the ſicke is by and by raiſed. It is good to remedie this euill at the firſt: for if it continewe, it induceth and ſheweth before ſome greuous diſeaſe,
                     Victus ratio.
                   as the Apoplexia, the falling ſicknes, or madneſſe. Let there dyet be thinne, and ſuche as will not engender wyndines. Let him vſe no wyne but that which is mixed with water. Let him eſchew ſleeping in the daye, and let him not go to bed by and by after meat, and to be ſhort, let his whole dyet be ſuche as is deſcribed and ſet downe for the falling ſicknes.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure if the whole body be full, you muſt begin with bloud letting, and you muſt cut the Coephalica vaine.
                     Venae ſectio.
                   But if ill iuyce be gathered in the body, for the lacke of perfect digeſtion, then purge the body by purgations: and if fleume abound, you muſt firſt miniſter preparatiues to extenuate the fleume, and then purge it. The whole dody being purged, you muſt apply outward medicines, wherof you may find examples before. Blacke ſeades of piony doth chiefly helpe them, you may giue them fiftene ſeades brayed with water. And nouriſh the head with oile of Dill made hote, and couer the head with a Cappe, when they go to bedde. Miniſter within the body thoſe thinges which ſtrengthen the head, as Aromaticum roſatum, Diamoſchu dulcis, Diamber, Dianthon, Phriſarcotion, and ſuch other like.
            
            
               CAP. XXVII. Of Madnes. DE INSANIA ET FVRORE.
               
                  MANIA in Greeke is a diſeaſe which the Latines do call Inſania and furor. That is madnes and furiouſnes. They that haue this diſeaſe be wood and vnruly like wild beaſtes. It differeth from the freneſie, becauſe in that there is a feuer.
                     Cauſae.
                   But Mania commeth without a feuer. It is cauſed of much bloud, flowing vp to the braine, ſometime the bloud is temperate, and ſometime only the aboundance of it doth hurt, ſometime of ſharpe and hote cholericke humours, or of a hote diſtempure of the braine. There goeth before madnes debility of the head, tinckling of the eares,
                     Signa.
                   and ſhinings come before there eies, great watchings, thoughtes, and ſtraunge thinges approch his mind, and heauines with trembling of the head. If time proceed, there is raiſed in them a rauenous appetite, and a readines to bodily luſt, the eyes waxe hollow, and he do nether wincke nor becken. But madnes cauſed of bloud only, there followeth continuall laughing, there commeth before the ſight (as the ſicke thinketh) things to laugh at. But when choler is mixed with the bloud, then the pricking and feruent mouing in the braine maketh them irefull, mouing, angry and bold. But if the choler do waxe groſſe and doth pricke and pull the brain and his other members, it make them wood, wild and furious, and therfore they are the worſte to cure.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let there diet be then, ſoupings liquide, making

a good panch without fulnes, and ſuch things as do engender no bloud, and you muſt forbid him altogether drinking of wine.
                     Cure if it come of bloud only.
                   Where this diſeaſe is cauſed of aboundance of bloud, you muſt begin the cure with letting of bloud, it is good to cut the vttermoſt vaine of the arme, or if that do not appeare, then cut the middle vaine. In weomen cut the vaine on the anckles, for that prouoketh menſtrues,
                     Bloud letting.
                   you muſt draw out ſo much bloud as ſtrength will ſuffer. Therefore in letting of bloud you muſt continually feele the pulſes.
                     
                        
                           •
                        aternae medicine.
                   Moreouer after the letting of bloud, nouriſh the head with oyles of roſes and vineger, or iuyce of Poligonum, or oleum melinum, or vnguentum in frigdane Galeni. Then apply moiſt woll, wett in oile to the hinder part of the head. After bloud letting at night prouoke ſleepe, for if after bloud letting, watching do ſtill continue, the ſicke will appeare to be more outragious. Therfore miniſter boldly with iuyce of ptiſan Diacodion, or mingle it with water, for ſo ſleepe is plēteouſly entiſed. And two dayes after that miniſter Trochiſcies de heſtear with Diacodion. Alſo oile of violettes with womans milke is good.
                     Embrocha.
                   Likewiſe an Embrocation made of dry violettes, water lillies, willowe leaues, and roſes, leaues of lettuce, ſeed of poppy, and ſuch like, and other medicines rehearſed in the chapter. Furthermore the belly muſt be made ſoluble with conuenient food and with cliſters. Theſe things being done, if there be need, you muſt draw bloud out of the middeſt of the forehead, ſet horſeleaches round about the head, and eſpecially the fore part of the head.
                     Cure of it comming of choler mixed with bloud.
                   For the cure of them which haue madnes cauſed of choler mixed with bloud, you muſt miniſter purgations of Hierapicra, and other medicines that will purge choler. The iuyce of Eleborus niger doth maruellous much profit in this grief, ſo that you miniſter but 10. or 12. gra. at once. But if they doate & refuſe to drinke a purging medicine, then that you may the eaſilier deceaue them, cōmixe the purgation with there meates, or with fatt figges, or dates. Alſo the only roote of wild fennell helpeth them, and the ſeed dronke with water. The ſicknes declining, bring the ſicke into a bath,
                     Balneum.
                   and apply diſcuſſiue medicines to driue away that which remaineth. He that will haue more, let him ſeeke the chapiter following De Melancholia.
               
            
            
               CAP. XXVIII. Of Melancholie. DE MELANCHOLIA.
               
                  MELANCHOLIE is an alienation of the mind troubling reaſon, and waxing fooliſh, ſo that one is almoſt beſide him ſelfe. It commeth without a feuer, and is chiefly engendred of melancholie occupying the mind,
                     Cauſae.
                   and changing the temperature of it. It is cauſed thre kind of wayes: for ſometime it is cauſed of the common vice of melancholie, bloud being in all the vaines of  the whole body which alſo hurteth the braine. But oftentimes only the bloud which is in the braine is altered, and the bloud in all the reſt of the body is vnhurt, and that chaunceth  two wayes: for ether it is deriued from other places, and aſcendeth vp thither, or els it is engendred in the braine it ſelfe. Alſo ſometime it is engendred through inflammation, and euill affect about the ſtomake and ſides: and therfore there be thre diuerſities of melancholiouſnes, according to the thre kinds of cauſes. The moſt common ſignes be fearfulnes,
                     Signa.
                   ſadnes, hatred, and alſo they that be melancholious, haue ſtraūge imaginations, for ſome think them ſelues brute beaſtes, and do counterfaite the voice and noiſe, ſome think themſelues veſſels of earth, or earthen pottes, and therfore they withdrawe themſelues from them that they meet, leaſt they ſhould knocke together. Moreouer they deſire death, and do verie often behight and determine to kill them ſelues, and ſome feare that they ſhould be killed. Many of them do alwayes laugh, and many do weep, ſome thinck them ſelues inſpired with the holie Ghoſt, and do prophecy vppon thinges to come. But theſe be the peculiar ſignes of them that haue melancholiouſnes cauſed through cōſent of the whole body: for in them the ſtate of the body is ſlender, black, rough and altogether melancholious cauſed naturally or through certaine thoughtes, or watchinges or eatinges of wicked meates, or through

Emeroides, or ſuppreſſion of menſtruis. But they which haue melancholia cauſed of vice in the ſides, they haue rawenes, and much windines, ſharp belkinges, burninges, and greuouſnes of the ſides. Alſo the ſides are plucked vpward, & many times are troubled with inflā
                  matiō, eſpecially about the beginning of the diſeaſe. Alſo there is coſtiuenes of the wombe, litle ſleep, troublous and naughty dreames, ſweaming of the head, and ſound in the eares: Let his dyet be ſuch, as doth not engender melancholie. Therefore let him tary in an ayer hote and moiſt,
                     Victus ratio.
                   and let them vſe meates of good iuyce, that be moiſt and temperate, and let there bread be well baked & wrought, let there fleſh be capons, hennes, partriches, feſantes, ſtony fiſhes and ſuch like. Let the ſicke vſe wyne that is white, thinne, and not very old, and let them eſchewe wyne that is thick and black, let there excerciſes be meane, let them ryde or walke by places pleaſant and greene,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . or vſe ſailing on water. Alſo a bath of ſweet water with a moiſt dyet let the ſicke vſe often as one of his remedies, ſleep is wonderfull good for them, as alſo moderate carnall copulation. Let them be mery as much as may be, and heare muſicall inſtruments and ſinging. But when the whole body abound with melancholike bloud,
                     Vena ſectio.
                   it is beſt to begin the cure with letting of bloud, and you muſt cut the lyuer vaine on the arme. But when the melancholike bloud occupieth only the braine, the ſicke needeth no bloud letting,
                     Cure of it come of 
                           〈◊〉
                         they bloud.
                   vnleſſe there be very much bloud, and therfore let the ſicke vſe often bathinges, and moiſt dyet of good iuyce, which is without windines, and let them vſe delectations of the mind, and let them be cured by theſe without any ſtronger remedies, but if the diſeaſe hath endured long, it requireth ſundrie medicines that be ſtrong. Therfore whether the melancholiouſnes be cauſed through vice of the whole body (as is ſaid, the bloud being firſt drawen out) or through the only euill affect of the braine, you muſt miniſter medicines that will purge downward.
                     Purgatio.
                   And a few dayes after purging and bloud letting, let the ſicke drinck daylie in the morning this decoction.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   ℞. floures of Borage, Bugloſſe, violettes, ana. M.j. great Raiſons the ſtones picked out. ℥.j. hartes tongue. M.j. Fumetory. M.ſs. Barck of the roote of Capers, Tamariſcus. ana. ʒ.iij. rootes of fennell, percely, licotice. ana. ʒ.j. Time, Epithimum. ana. ʒ.ſs. ſeeth all theſe in thre poundes of water, vntill the third part be conſumed, then ſtraine it, and make the iuyce of that decoction ſweet with ſuger, and clarifie it with the white of Egges, and adde therto ſirupe of fumitory, and Epithimum. ana. ℥.ij. and make a potion. After that ſort at theſe dayes they miniſter ſirupe of violettes, and Bugloſſe, putting to them the water of harts tongue, hoppes, endyue, and Borage. But ſeing it appeereth that the ſtomache cannot beare very much vſing of diſtilled waters, it is better to vſe decoctions of the aforeſaid herbes,
                     P
                           ••
                        io.
                   commixed with ſirupes after this ſort. ℞. Syrupe of Borage. ℥.j. ſirupe of Epithimum. ℥.ſs. decoction of harts tongue, fumitory, and endyue. ℥.iij. commixe them all and make a potion. After this purge the body with conſectio hamech & diaſenae, pilula indae, pilulae lapide armenio, and ſuch like. Alſo it is good to vſe this purging decoction.
                     Decoctu
                           •
                         purg
                           •
                        ns Melancholiam.
                   ℞. flours of Borage, violettes, roſes. ana. M.j. Raiſons the ſtones picked out. Tamarindus. ana. ℥.j. Mirabolanes citrinae, nidos, emblicos, belliricos. ana. ℥.ſs. leaues of ſene, polipodie, ana. ʒ.vj. prunes damaſcene. numero .x. ſeeth them in iuſt quātitie of water vnto the third part: then ſtraine it and make the iuyce of that decoction ſweet with ſugar, then miniſter. ℥.iiij. therof in the morning. If this do not ſufficientlie purge, you may diſſolue therin. ʒ.ij. of diaſenae. Alſo the infuſion of Epithimum is maruelouſly good, being made thus. ℞. Epithimum. ℥.ſs. infuſe it .24. houres in. ℥.iiij. of whay made of goates milke,
                     Dilutum Epithi
                           ••
                        i.
                   then ſtraine it & wring it hard and miniſter it in the morning. Alſo the infuſion of the leaues of ſene, is good which may be thus made. ℞. leaues of ſene. ℥.ij. prunes damaſcene. in numero .xij. bray them and infuſe them in whay of goates milke 24. houres, thē ſtraine it & preſſe it, and let it be drunke in the morning.
                     Puluis purgatorius.
                   Alſo it is lawfull to vſe this powder. ℞. Epithimum. ℥.ſs. lapis armenius, agaricke. ana. ℥.ij. ſcamony preparate. ʒ.j. cloues in numero. 20. beat them all into powder, and miniſter euery weeke. ʒ.j. or. ʒ.j.ſs. Alſo it is good to mollifie the belly with whay, but let it not be that which is ſtrained out of cheaſe: for that is better which is ſeparate from the milke by ſome decoction, and let them vſe it, vntill the belly begin to be ſoluble, you may commixe it with honie. Alſo it is good a few dayes after the purgation to vſe cliſters, and let them be ſuch as this is.
                     Cliſter.
                   ℞. fumetory, hoppes, tyme. ana. M.j. Epithimum. M.ſs. ſene, polipody. ana. ʒ.vj. cartami. ℥.ſs. ſeedes of Anniſe, fennell, ammeos, comyn. ana. ʒ.ij, ſeeth all in

water vntill the third parte. Take of the Iuice of that decoction lb. 1. Caſia fiſtularis newly drawen. ℥.j. diaſena. ℥.ſs. oiles of violettes and cāmomill. ana. ℥.j.ſs. cōmon ſalt. ʒ.j.ſs. cōmixe thē all and make a cliſter. Moreouer if the diſeaſe be cauſed throughe the ſtopping of Emeroides or menſtruis, then we muſt miniſter medicines which will driue awaye the heauines of the mynde, reſtore ſtrength, and engender gladdneſſe, as is conſerues of Borage, endyue, violettes, roſes, anthos, laetificans Galeni Dianthon, and ſuch like. Alſo by no meanes, you maye forgett the vſing of Bathes of ſwete water.
                     Embrocha.
                   Alſo you muſt applye ſtrong Embrochae to moiſten the head as this. ℞. mallowes, althae, vyolettes. ana. M.j.ſs. cāmomill, ſtaechados. ana. M.j. floures of water lillyes. M.ſs. ſeades of lettuce. ʒ.j. ſeedes of ſcarioll. ʒ.j.ſs. boile them all in iuſt quantity of water, and ſprinckle the head being ſhauen with the Iuice of that decoction. After that ſort it is good to vſe vnctions of oiles, of violettes, water lillies, and ſuch like. Laſt of all the ſicke muſt labour that the falſe and wicked imaginacions, and great ſadnes may be driuen away by all meanes that can be inuented.
                     Cure if it co
                           ••
                         of diſeaſe in the ſides.
                   But yf the greife be cauſed throughe diſeaſe in the ſydes, they muſt continually vſe to drincke decoction of penyroiall, not only before purgations, but alſo after them, and likewiſe decoction of centorye. Afterward alſo miniſter continually decoction of wormewood,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         decoctam.
                   for it is profitable to the ſtomake, and it letteth ingendring of wind in the belly, nor it doth not aſſwage the belly extremely, but it prouoketh vrine, and cauſeth good digeſtion, ſo that many be healed by this only remedie. Alſo you muſt miniſter theſe thinges that prouoke vrine, as anyſe, dancus,
                  
                     Dia
                           •
                        tica.
                   
                  aſarum, ſmirinon, the ſeed and roote of wild fennell, and germaunder, let the water of the decoction of theſe be miniſtred, and miniſter the powder of them ſtrewed in drincke. Alſo it is good that the phiſition loke to the cure of the ſides. Therfore nouriſh them with decoction of rewe, dill, wormewood, penyroiall, ſeed of Agnus caſtus,, laurell bearies, ſauerie,
                     Fomenia.
                   mugwort and ſuch like. Theſe do caſe paine and driue away inflammation, eſpecially if they be ſodden in oyle and applied to the greif like a plaiſter. Againſt windines in the ſtomake with pricking, nouriſh the ſtomake with comyn, penyroiall and vineger ſodden together,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   & make emplaiſters of annyſe ſeedes, apium, comyn, ſmirinum, and ſuch like, ſodden in oile, and ſuffer the plaiſter to ly ſtill a good while aſwell before meat as after it. And when the plaiſter is taken away, couer the ſides largely with woll, or with a light lambes ſkin, the place being firſt annointed with oleum nardinum. Alſo you muſt apply cupping glaſſes lightly without ſcarification. To thoſe with whome this diſeaſe hath taried long,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . purging by vomittes is a preſent remedie. But you may not vſe ſtrōg vomittes, for they be malicious to the ſtomake, and cauſe greif in the belly. Therfore prouoke vomit with hote water commixed with oximell. But if the ſicke cannot vomit by this meanes, thē prouoke it by putting a fether or ther finger into the mouth.
                     Vomitus.
                   Alſo the only vomit made with Eleborus albus is good for thē being made after this ſort. ℞. Eleborus albus. 
                  ʒ.j. cut in ſmall peeces, and put them in a great radiſh roote, and after iij. dayes take out the Eleborus, and then ſtamp and wring out the iuyce of the radiſh, take of that iuyce. ʒ.vj. hote water. ℥.iiij. oximell. ℥.j. commixe them and miniſter it all at once to the ſicke warme. This hath bene proued to be very qood. ℞. ſtibium, x. or xij. gra. made in fine powder and put the pouder into. 4. ſponefull of muskedelle, or malmſey and let it ſtand .ij. dayes, and let it be ſhaked. 3. times on the day, and when you will miniſter it, poure it out ſoftely, leauing the powder ſtill in the bottome of the glaſſe, and giue but the very wine: which is an excellnet thing for this greif: ther be diuers other which I will omit till time more meete and conuenient.
            
            
               CAP. XXIX. Of trembling and ſhaking. DE TREMORE.
               
                  TREMOR in latin, in Engliſh trembling or ſhaking, it is a diſeaſe which is accompliſhed with two ſundry mouinges. One is while the member is cōſtrained through heauines and greif to crepe downward. The other, is while the member is caried vpward from his naturall courſe and facultie.
                     Cauſa.
                   This euill is cauſed altogether through weaknes of the ſenowes, which doth plainely declare old age: but pryuatly it commeth of other cauſes, (that is) of very cold temperature of

nature, cold drink taken out of time or ſeaſon, ſpecially in feuers. Moreouer the aboundāce of a cold groſſe and clammy humour, and much vſing of wyne that is vnmixt and cleere, old age,
                     Signa.
                   and feare are cauſes therof. There need no ſignes to know nether the euill nor the cauſes of it, becaus it may be knowen partly by ſight, and partly by the paci
                     •
                  nts wordes, and the ſtate of the body.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let the dyet be ſo ordained that it may be cleen contrary to the cauſes of the diſeaſe, and let his meat be ſuch as will eaſily be diſtributed, firſt Brothes, then Birdes that flie, and tender fiſhes. Againſt aboundance of groſſe and clammy humours, it is good to vſe thoſe things which haue power to deuide, extenuate, and cut, but he muſt wholy eſchew all things, which do hurt the ſenowes, & cheifly the drinking of wyne that is vnmixt. He muſt drinck wine alaied with water,Curatio. or hidromell, or ale. For the cure they which do tremble or ſhake through ſome manifeſt errour, they muſt altogether abſtaine from things that be hurtfull. They therfore that tremble through drinking of wine, vntill they be cleane deliuered of the diſeaſe, let them drinck in the meane while hidromell with the decoction of ſage, and Betony. If the ſhaking come of cold and groſſe humors, then miniſter the cure which is aſcribed for the palſey and the cramp comming of fulnes: (letting of bloud only excepted). You muſt annoint the outward parts of the body with oiles that will heat, and couer it with ſoft woll. Then faſten cupping glaſſes without ſcarification from the firſt ſhutting of the iointes,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . which may be drawen to the outward part of the ſkin, and ſo therby humours may the eaſilier be diſcuſſed and driuen away. Alſo it is good for the ſicke to drinck daylie fiue graines of pepper with. ℥.j.ſs. of Mulſa. There be moreouer certaine other ſimple medicines, which being taken doth help trembling, (that is) Caſtoreum, roote of Althea, decoction of Egrimony,
                     Simplices medicine.
                   and the brain of an Hare. But what need many wordes, for the medicines & ſpecially the ointments which are preſcribed in the cure of the palſey are to be vſed as remedies againſt this diſeaſe.
            
            
               CAP. XXX.
               
                  
                     I THOVGHT it good in reſpect of the vvorthynes of the member, and the many fold diſeaſes to the vvhich it is ſubiect, to ſubnecte the diſcours of the eye, vvith the remedies of the infirmities, vvhich by experience I haue found incident vnto it: And the multiplicitie of it is ſo great, that the treatiſe therof ſtretcheth beyond the boundes of other ordinary Chapiters. But (as I hope) the Reader vvill not account it as tedious, becaus of the pleaſantnes and neceſsitie of the diſcours, though it be ſomevvhat long: for God hath as it vvere packed and beſtovved an infinite varietie of maruels in one litle round ſubiect, vvhich if it be conſumed and diſtributed into his partes, and according to the dignitie of euery one ſufficiently treated of, (I ſuppoſe) it vvould fill a great volume, and require both an exquiſite Philoſopher to conceaue a right of it, and an excellent Orator, might ſeeme alſo neceſſary to lay abroad at length ſuch ſecret and vvonder full notions. But the eye vvhich is vvont vvith curious inſpection to prye into all other thinges, and to find out the nature and order of them, hath bene vnable to vnfolde his ovvn vvonderfull conſtitution, and hath bene alvvaye blind in iudging of it ſelf, and inforeſeing the diſcommodities vvhich attend vpon it, or in curing them vvhen they haue laid hold of it. For mine ovvn part I vvill not promiſe any abſolute vvorke, but as learned Phiſitians haue thought of it, and (as I my ſelf haue by experience learned) ſo I vvill frame and faſshion my Treatiſe. An eye therfore is a member, round, vvhole and hard, as the Ball of a foote, as the ſcoured nevve Baſon, full of cleare vvater, ſet in the vvell of the head to miniſter light to the body by the influence of the viſible Spirits, ſent from the phantaſticall Cell by a ſenovve, that is called Neruus opticus, vvith the helpe of a

greater light miniſtred from vvithout, and very fitly is the place, vvhere the eye is ſet, called the Well of the head, for the aboundance of vvatery humours and teares, vvhich often do iſſue out therof, ſometime of ſorovv and heauines of the hart, ſometime of ioy and gladnes, and ſometime of the aboundance of vvaterie humours cauſed of frigiditie and coldnes, and thus haue the Phiſitians deſcribed the Eye: It ſhall not be vnneceſſarie alſo to diſtribute it into his parts, & therfore (as Iohannicus ſaith) the eye hath ſeuen coates, vvhich they call Tunicae, four colours, and three humours. But his opinion cōcerning the tunicles by ſundrie Anathomiſtes haue bene euicted, making but onlie ſix: yea and ſome ther be, that (ſvvaruing frō the moſt receaued opinion) haue made roume for a coniecture of their ovvne as they thinck by reaſon excluding all thoſe ouercurious diuiſions, (namelie, Iris, Cornea, Aranea, and Vuea, and the reſidue) and imagine but onlie tvvo coates, the one vvherof they terme Saluatrix, becauſe it ſaueth and keepeth the humours and the ſecond they terme diſcolorata (that is, hauing no colour) and they maintaine that in the eye it ſelf there is no colour, but that vvhich is cauſed of the Chriſtalline humour, vvhich if it be planted verie neare to the tunicles, then the eye ſeemeth of no colour, if it lye deepe vvithin, it deferreth three viſible colours vnto the behoulder, and (as they ſay) the diuers placing of this Chriſtalline humour begetteth the varietie of colours in ſundrie eyes, vvhich gaue our Anathomiſtes matter to deuiſe their diſtributiōs, vvhile they referred the colour to the nature of the tunicle, vvhich (in deed) is to be imputed to the humours. For mine ovvne iudgement if it be lavvfull to iudge in ſo intricate a cauſe, (I thinke) I could very vvell maintaine, that the humours be the cauſers of the diuerſitie of the colours, though our blind Anathomiſtes do impugne in their common bookes. But I haue taken vpon me, rather to cure the malady of the eye, then to define the nature of it, although this litle Praeludium vvill not ſeeme altogether vnneceſſary.
            
            
               CAP. XXXI. Of a Cataract.
               
                  A CATARACT is a corrupt water, congeled like a corde, ingendred of the humours of the eye, diſtempered betwixt the tunicles, and ſet before the ſight of the eye and the Chriſtalline humour.
                     Four kindes of Cataractes curable.
                   Of theſe maner of Cataractes be ſeuen diuers ſpices or kyndes, wherof four be curable, and three be vncurable. The firſt kind of the curable Cataract, is light, right, bright, like white chalke, or as Alabaſter well poliſhed, and it is cauſed by a ſtroke in the eye either with a ſticke or a  ſtone, or any other outward violence. The ſecond kynd is ſomewhat white, and much like  to a Caeleſtiall colour, and this procedeth from the ſtomache, and is commonly cauſed of vnholſome meates, and vnkind nouriſhment, wherof a groſſe fumoſitie reſolueth, and aſcendeth vp into the brain, and from thence falleth downe into the eyes. The third kind is alſo whitiſh, but it turneth into the colour of aſhes, and is cōmonly engendred of paine in the  head, as of the Mygrime, or ſuch like diſeaſes, and it is cauſed ſometime of great ſorrow and great heauines, whereof commeth immoderate weeping, and ſometime of much cold and much watching, & ſuch other like. The fourth ſpice is of a Cytrine colour, and is commonly engenderd of exceſſiue meat and drincke indigeſt, and alſo of great labour, and ſometime  of the humour Melancholicke. Theſe are the four curable kindes, but they be neuer healed till they be growen and cōfirmed, and the ſigne or token of their full perfection is, when the patient ſeeth right nought, vnleſſe it be the brightnes of the Sunne by day light, or the light of the Moone by night. Many ignorant perſons, nether knowing the cauſe, nor the properties of theſe maner of cataractes, haue aſſayed to cure them with purgations, powders, and plaiſters, but they haue bene deceiued: for nether inward medicines, nor outward remedies can any whit preuaile, vnleſſe you ioyne to them Artem acuariam, the Art of the Nedle:

which, becauſe it is vnknowen to many of our practicioners, I will inſert a diſcourſe of it in this treatiſe. Neuertheleſſe, before you vſe the nedle, it is requiſite that the braine ſhould be purged with pilulae leroſolymi ana, which you ſhal make thus. ℞. Turbith. ℥.j. Aloes hepaticke. ʒ.ſs. maces, quibibes, maſticke, and ſaffron. ana. ʒ.j. and beat them to pouder altogether, and confect them with the iuyce of Roſes, and make pilles thereof: and this purgation muſt be miniſtred the daye before you trye with the needle. And on the next daye, while the diſeaſed party is faſting, about nyne of the clocke, cauſe him to ſitte ouerthwarte a ſtoole in ryding faſhion, and plante your ſelfe lykewiſe on the ſame ſtoole face to face againſt him, and bidde him, hold his ſound eye cloſle ſhutte. Encourage him alſo, and exhort him to be patient, for the tractabilitie of him maketh much to the conuenient diſpatche of your labour. Then with your left hand lifte vp the ouer eyelidde, and with your other hand putte in the needle made therfore, on the ſide furtheſt from the noſe: and ſubtillie thirle the tunicle ſaluatrice, writhing alwayes your fingers too and froe, till you touch the corrupt water (which is the cataract) with the point of the needle; and thē begin by litle and litle to remoue that water from before the ſight to the corner of the eye, and there keep it with the point of your needle,
                     Cautio.
                   the ſpace of three minutes of an houre, and then remoue your needle eaſilie from it. And if it happen that it riſeth vp againe, bring it backe the ſeconde time. But this caution you muſt be ſure to haue, that when the needle hath touched the cataracte; you doe not writh it about with your fingers too and froe, till it be ſet in his place before named, but that you gentlie drawe it thither: and when you haue brought it thither, thirle the needle about, till it hath gathered the water about it, and then pull it out. (this done) Cauſe him to ſhutte his eye, and apply therto a plaiſter of flaxe and the white of an egge, and cauſe him to lye in his bedde nyne dayes together, remouing the plaiſter three times on the daye, and three times on the night without any other ſtirring of it. Prouided, that he lye in a verye darke place, and let his dyet be thinne, as rere egges and white bread. And if he be young and luſtie, let his drinke be water, but if his body be weake, let him drinck wyne well lymphate. For truly much nouriſhment would preiudice our cure by ingendring much bloud in the eye, which is verie hurtfull nowe in the beginning of the healing it. (The nynth daye being paſſed let him ryſe and waſhe his eye well with faier cold water, and he ſhall enioye his ſight by the helpe of God, euen as he did before, although ſome one of the cataractes be fayrer healed then the other, as namelye the ſeconde kynde and the fourth kynde: but that which is cauſed by a ſtrype, (thoughe the water be with more eaſe extracted) yet the eye neuer recouereth his clearnes of ſight againe, becauſe it is greatlye bruiſed and troubled by the force of the ſtroke. And the third kynde alſoe, thoughe it be ſoone reſtored to his olde perfection, yet it abydeth not long therein, vnleſſe it be continued as well by good dyet, as alſoe by this electuarie, which is called Diaolibanum ſolarimitanum, which is thus confected. ℞. of cloues. ℥.ij. nutmegges of India, & ſaffron. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. and of good Caſtoreum. 
                  ʒ.j. Let all theſe be beaten into pouder and ſearced, and confect that pouder with clarified honye, and let the patient receiue of this electuarie in the morning faſting the quantitie of a cheſtnutte, or walnutte, and at euening to bedward as muche. And let him vſe digeſtiue nouriſhing meates, which ingender good bloud, but let him beware of beif and goates fleſh, and Eeles, and rawe onyons, for they ar oftentimes vſed to rypen the cataract, which muſt be done before you ſtriue with it. In winter, let the patient drincke hote wines, in the which let him infuſe Sage and Rewe. Let him alſoe abſteine from the companie of women, nether let him frequent common bathes, for euerie ſtrong fume hurteth him greatlie. The aforeſaid electuarie of Diaolibanum is good to drye teares. It auaileth alſoe againſt all maner of payne of the migrime which proceedeth of fleume. After this ſorte are all the curable cataractes healed, (I meane) by the needle, which muſt be made of golde, ſiluer, or of cleane Spanniſhe lattine: for Iron, or Steele are britle and frangible. And if the cataracte ſhould proue hard in drawing downe, the point might eaſilie breake, which, if it ſhould abyde in the eye, it would in time conſume the eye through aboundance of teares and greatnes of paine.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXXII. Of the three kindes of Cataractes vncurable.
               
                  THE firſt kynd of Cataracts vncurable the Phiſitians call Gutta Serena, and the ſigne of the knowing therof is this, when the pupill of the eye is black and cleare, as though it had no ſpotte, and the eyes ar alwayes mouing, and they-liddes doe tremble as they were full of quickſiluer. This kynde of cataracte is cauſed of a corruption in the mothers wombe, and therefore they that haue them, are for the moſt part borne blinde, and therefore they beſtowe their labour in vaine, that aſſay to cure them, for the Nerues opticke be oppilate and mortified, ſo that no medicines can preuaile, although many that haue this kinde, do ſee the light of the Sunne, and the ſtature of a man euen to their liues end: we call it Gutta ſerena, becauſe it is engendred of a water that falleth from the braine, of the which truly one litle droppe corrupteth and diſſolueth all the humours of the eyes, and ſtoppeth the hollow neruies and ſenowes, ſo that the viſible ſpirites may no more paſſe through them. The ſecond cataract incurable is that which appeareth in the eye of a greene colour, like water ſtanding in watery places, not much moued, nor remoued: this is the moſt daungerous kynde of all, if ther be any degrees in them, and it is procured by the ouermuch coldnes of the braine, and with great buffeting and beating about the head, with great faſting, and ſuch other like. The third vncurable Cataract is, when the pupill of the eye is dilated and ſpread ſo farre, that no circles may be ſeene within the tunicles of the eyes, and the eye ſeemeth all blacke, or els all white. And thus are the three kyndes of Cataractes vncurable diſtinguiſhed and knowen: which will forbidde the practicioners to deale with them.
            
            
               CAP. XXXIII. Of diſeaſes which chaunce to the eyes, by bloud, choler, fleume, or melancholy, and of their cures.
               
                  NOW after the deſcriptions of Cataracts, and the number of them which be curable, and which be not, and the curing, and knowledge of the curable and the cauſes of the vncurable, I will ſpeake of other maladies of the eyes cauſed and occaſioned of the four humours, as bloud, fleume, choler, & melancoly. But firſt I will treate of bloud, through the aboundance whereof oftētimes there groweth a rednes in the eye, with great burning, and after ward it turneth to great ytche: & this diſeaſe maketh the heare of the eyeliddes to fall away and of many it leaueth not one hear, and if this maladie be not cured within one yere, it will make the eyeliddes to turne vp, and make the patient bleareyed. But before it commeth to that extremitie, it may be cured by this colliry, which they call Collirium Ieroſolymitanum, which is made in this wiſe. ℞. Tu
                     •
                  ty of Alexander. ℥.j. and beate it into ſmall pouder, & temper it well with two poundes of white wyne, (that is) a quart, and put therto. ℥.j. of dry roſes, and boile it with a ſoking fire, till the wyne be half waſted, and then clenſe it through a linnen cloth, and keepe it in a viall glaſſe, and morning and euening put ſome of it into the eye, and if it be takē betimes, the patient ſhalbe cured within a weeke or two at the moſt. Neuertheleſſe before you apply this colliry, it ſhalbe good, if the patient be yong, to let him bloud on the veyne, that is on the middeſt of the forhead, or, if he be aged, to purge his brain with theſe pilles. ℞. of the beſt aloes, red Sanders, Eſula, and rewbarbe. ana. ℥.ſs. Turbith, Cataputia minor and Agaricke. ana. ʒ.ij. confect them with the iuyce of mugworte, and miniſter to the patient according to his ſtrength. And truly theſe pilles are not only good for the ytche of the eyes, but alſoe for all maner of ytche or ſcabbe, of what humour ſoeuer it be cauſed. There be other diſeaſes alſoe of the eye engendred of bloud, as the ophthalmy and pannicles; And theſe kyndes of infirmities are tyed to the ſeaſon of the year,

for they commonly happen about the end of Auguſt, and ſo foorth to the end of September and the rather then, becauſe they proceed of the eating of the varietie of fruictes. The Ophthalmy is thus deſcribed: An Ophthalmy is a corrupt bloud ingendred of hote humours, and commonly, it ſtandeth and appeareth in the white of the eyes, and round about the tunicles and blaknes of the eye, and it procedeth of immoderat ſorrow & burning, and of aboū
                  dāce of teares, which cauſeth the eyes to ſwell and make them ſo bolne, that from that time, forth the patient may take no reſt nor ſleepe, for euer it ſeemeth to him, that his eyes are full of grauell, or of thornes, or of ſmoke. In this kind of infirmitie it is good to vſe this powder, which many, (in reſpect of the notable vertue therof) do call Puluis benedictus, which is thus made. ℞. white ſarcocall, and beate it to verie fine pouder, and fill the patientes eye with it, and lett him ly with it wide open till the pouder be conſumed, and in the meane time make a plaiſter of flexenherdes, and waſh it well in cold water, which (when you haue dreined out in your hand) lay it on the patient his eye, which he ſhall ſtill kepe open, and it will procure him to take his reſt verie well. Many ignorant practicioners, while they haue endeuoured to cure this infirmitie with many impertinent medicines, haue added ſorrow to ſorrow, and haue brought the eye without his liddes, & ſo made it vncurable, which by the aforſaid pouder might eaſilie haue bene healed. And note that there be ſom which by the occaſion of the Ophthalmy are greatly troubled in their eyes, and haue them fumous & miſtie, which proceedeth of euill keeping, or becaus they eate contrarie meates. Nowe if ſuche happen, the braine muſt be purged with theſe pilles. ℞. polipody, Eſulae, Mirabolani citrini, and rewbarbe. ana. ℥.j. maſticke Quybibes, Saffron, Spiknard, nux Indiae, Cynamon. ana. ʒ.j. Confect them with milke or iuice of Quinces, and miniſter to the ſicke according to his ſtrength, and after this purgatiō giue him morning & euening of the Electuarie of Diaolibanum ſolarimitanum as before. And morouer put into his eye a pouder called Puluis Nabetis, the making wherof, we will ſhew in the cure of the third Pannicle; But this muſt be done only in the morning & euening, put in his eye the pouder called Puluis Alexandrius as before, and this do till the patient hath recouered his health, keeping him in the meane time from hurtfull meates.
            
            
               CAP. XXXIIII. Of Pannicles.
               
                  THE pannicles haue the ſame cauſe that the Ophthalmy hath, (that is to ſay) ſuperfluitie of bloud.
                     Cauſae
                   Sometime they are engendred of euill keeping, and ſometime by great paines in the head, as the Migrime, where the extremitie of paine aſcending into the temples and ſo into the browes, maketh the vaines to beate,
                     There be four kindes of p
                           •
                        nnicles.
                   by which painfull beating the eyes are troubled. There are four kind of pannacles: the firſt is, when vpon the tunicle ſaluatrice there  groweth a litle pearle, like the ſeede or graine of a corne called in latin millium. The ſecond  is when it appeareth in the aforeſaid tunicle in the likenes of a ſpot or freckle of the face, or  like the ſcale of a fiſh. The third appeareth on the one ſide of the eye, like as it were a flake  of ſnowe when it ſnoweth. The fourth is, when all the eye appeareth white, and then no blaknes, nether of the tunicle, nether of the light appeareth. The firſt pannicle is nether cured with laxatiues, nor pouders, nor colliries, nor electuaries, nor yet with cauteries, for any of theſe (if they be miniſtred) do annoy rather then help: But you ſhall make this precious ointment for the cure of it, which of many practicioners is proued to be of great credit. ℞. fourtie tender Crops of the Bramble, and ſtampe them ſmall, and a good handfull of Rewe, pouder of Alabaſter. lb.ſs. pouder of fennell ſeede. ℥.ſs. oile of Roſes. lb.j. all theſe incorporate wel together, put into a new earthē pot with a quart of new white wyne, & to all theſe put. ℥.iiij. of dry floures of cammomill, and of waxe. ℥.j. and then ſet the pot on the fire and let it boile with an eaſie fire, till the wyne be conſumed, ſo far forth that it ſeemeth to frye in & then put therto the whits of ſix egges, & all waies ſtirre it well, till it be incorporated together, and then ſtrain it through a faier linnē cloth: with this oyntmēt thus made, annoint the tēples of the patiēt, and the forhead down to the browes, and it will cure this kind of pānicle.

This ointment is not only tied, to this care, but it hath many vertues: ſom of the which, I wil expreſſe, though it be impertinent to this diſcourſe. It is verie good againſt a greene wound for it both purgeth & clenſeth it. It is good againſt the tooth ache or paine in the gummes, if the cheeke be annointed therwith. It is good againſt the paine in the matrice, if it be eaten like an electuarie. It is good for them alſo who are moleſted in exceſſe, if their ſtomach be annointed, and their feete together with their handes. It auaileth againſt the migrime, and generally for euerie paine of the eyes, if the patient be annointed therwith vpon the temples as before. The ſecond pannicle muſt be cured at the very beginning, for if it be incarnate and hardened vpon the tunicle, it may not by any ſubtilitie be remoued (the tunicle ſaued) and therfore it is not ſafe to aduenture to cure it, when by cōtinuance of time, it hath vnited it ſelf with the ſaluatrice. But at the firſt you ſhall cure it thus: firſt make a cautery in the temples with a round cautery, (as ſhalbe ſhewed afterward whē I ſpeak of cauteries) For fire diſſolueth and conſumeth the pannicle, and ſo keepeth it from vniting and incarnating with the tunicle, and maketh the eye fitte to be clarified with this medicine following. Whē the eye is cauterized, put into the eye ſome of the pouder called Puluis Nabetus (which I will teach afterward) and while he lieth with this pouder in his eye, take four crabbes, and roſt them vnder the Embres very well, and then take them, and being pilled and cored, incorporate them with the white of an egge in maner of an ointment, and lay it vpon a cleane flexin herde, and bind it to the eye with a linnen band, and ſo renew this plaiſter morning & euening till you haue abſolued your cure. Like as bloud begetteth many infirmities of the eye, as namely Ophthalmies and Pannicles:
                     Maladies comming of fleume.
                   So likewiſe many maladies are ingendred of fleume, but the moſt notable are four, the firſt is procured by ouer aboundance of teares, wherby the ouer eyeliddes are ſo ſoftened and mollified, that within their growe heares, which pricke the ball of the eye continually, as though ther were Hogges briſtles: which  heares then tho many bolde Chirurgians haue plucked out, and ſo for a time eaſed them: yet afterward (the heares being hardened with plucking out) do gall them farr worſe then before, & ſo in the end the patiēt being deſtitute of any other aide, leeſeth his ſight, (the heares fretting and conſuming the ſubſtance of his eye). But in deed the beſt way, which as yet experience hath found out to cure that malady is this: Take two needles of the length of the li
                     •
                  tle finger, and put a thread through the eyes of both of them, and bind them well together at both the endes, then with your fingers lift vp the ouer eyelidde, and with theſe needles take of the lether where theſe heares grow, that the patient may ſhut and open his eye, and let the needles hange, till they fall away together with the leather which was betweene them: which done, you ſhall put no medicine in the wound, for it will heale of itſelf: But if any pannicle be engendred in the eye by reaſon of the vehemēcie of the paine, it ſhalbe cured by Puluis Nabetus put into the eye twyſe a day, till ſuch time, as they be clarified & healed. And this pouder is made of Sugar Candy of Alexandria, which pouder is very auailable againſt many ſickneſſes of the eye. The ſecond infirmitie which happeneth to the eye by  fleume, is when the eyes appeare troubled and full of veynes, ſo cloſed with a pannicle that the patēit cannot well ſee, nor diſcern any thing, & this ſiknes is called pannicū vitreū
                   which is thus cured: firſt cauſe his head to be ſhauē, & thē cauteriſe him with a roūd cautery in the ſoft of his head, and with a long cautery in his tēples, (which ſo done,) put into his eyes the pouder of Cādy once in the day, til that he hath receaued again his full ſight, and twiſe in the moneth purge him with the pilles called Pillulae Ieroſolomitanae, and at his going to bed let him receiue of the electuarie called Diaolibanum ſolarimitanum till he be hole. The third infirmitie  cauſed by fleume is, when the eye appeareth carnous or fleſhie, the which carnoſity (if it be waxed hard by the ſpace of a yeare or two) giueth place to no medicine. But in the beginning cauteries (in that maner that I preſcribed them before) will heale it, ſo that after cauterizing you very warely cut away all the carnoſitie with a ſharp Raſour, without offending the tunicle Saluatrice, which when you haue done, fill the eye full of pouder of Candy, and then cauſe the patient to ſhutte his eye, and then lay to it a plaiſter of flaxe of the white of an egge, and chaunge the plaiſter twiſe on the day xv dayes, and after xv dayes, make this plaiſter. ℞. a handfull of Cardus benedictus, & ſtampe it well, and mingle it with halfe the white of an egge, and ſo make a plaiſter with flexen herdes, & lay it vpon the eye, remouing

it twiſe on the day, and after thre dayes leaue all plaiſters, and let the patiently with his eye open, and euerie day in the morning put into his eye the pouder called Puluis benedictus, & at euening the pouder of Candy till he be perfectly hole: in the meane time let him abſteine  from eales, onyons, Beyfe, and all ſuch meates. The fourth maladie cauſed of fleume is, when the eye appeareth all bolne, and alwayes ſheadeth teares, ſo that the patient may not open his eyes by reaſon of the heauines of the eyeliddes, for there is a fatnes on the ouer eye lidde, which troubleth the eye very much, and this diſeaſe is called the ſcab of the eye, and it proceedeth from ſuperaboundāce of ſalt fleume, the cure of it is this: you ſhall firſt purge the ſtomach and braine of the patient with this receipt: ℞. Turbith of the beſt Aloës & rewbarbe. ana. ℥.j. then take of the iuyce of the roote of walwoorte. lb.j. and the aforſaid things being beaten and reſolued in the ſaid iuyce, let it ſtād all night, and in the morning clenſe it, and let the patient take therof a good quantitie, and the next day ſubtillie with your Raſour pare away the aforſaid fatnes, euen from the one lachrimall to the other, (which done) lay on a plaiſter of herdes & the white of an egge 9. dayes after (euery day chaunging the plaiſter twiſe,) and then let the patient ly with his eye open, and put into it of the Collirie called Collirium Alexandrinum, which is taught before in the cure of the third pannicle, and that wil heale it very well. I haue hard that women did rubbe away that fatnes with ſugar, but it returned againe afterward, though for a time they were eaſed. There is an Electuarie, very auailable againſt theſe teares: which is thus made. ℞. Olibanum caſtoreum, Nutmegges, Nux Indi
                        •
                     , Cloues, Quibbybes. ana. ℥.j. leaues of Laurell, Spickenard, Saffron, and Cardamomum ana. ʒ.ij. ſeades of dill, Smaladge, baſilicon, Alyſaunder, anyſe, fennell, foure ſeades of henbane, white poppy, muſke, and Champher. ana. ʒ.j. all theſe muſt be beaten together to pouder ſauing the olibanum, which muſt be boiled with clarified hony till it be molten, & then poure it in to a faier large wodden platter together with the pouder before made, and incorporate them together by often ſtirring, and let it abide in the platter ſtill, and when you will miniſter it, giue as much as a Cheſtnutte at the patientes going to bed. It deſtroieth the teares, together with the fleume, it warmeth the Braine, it driueth away the paine of the migrime, it openeth the eyes, relieueth the eyeliddes, & clarifieth the ſight. It is good for them that haue the goute and the palſey, and for them that haue an impediment in their ſpeache.
            
            
               CAP. XXXV. Of the maladies in the eye proceeding of choler.
               
                  TWo kindes of greifs are incident to the eyes by choler: the firſt wherof is that which is cauſed by aboundance of choler in the ſtomach, from whēce ariſeth a corrupt fumoſitie into the brain, which annoyeth the braine, and troubleth the viſible ſpirits, ſo that the party thus affected, ſhall imagine an obiect planted betweene him and the light in maner of a darke ſhadowe. We cannot outwardly iudge of this malady, for it hath no euidēt marke either in the eye, or without the eye, but the cauſe of it abideth in the ſtomach, which muſt be taken away by an electuarie mitigatiue and apparatiue, which will aſwage the paine, and open the oppilate nerues and ſenowes, where by the viſible ſpirits may haue free paſſage: you ſhall make it thus: ℞. Rewbarbe, Eſulae minoris, redd Saunders, mirabolani citrini. ana. ℥.iiij. the rootes fennell, ſpynache, banſci, perſely, Apij Sicacellae, ſimory, and maiden heare. ana. M.j. polipody of the Oke. ℥.ij. boile all theſe rootes in faier water till half the water be waſted, and then clenſe it, and take the aforeſaid ſpices well beaten, and put them into the aforeſaid licour with two poundes of good Sugar, and make therof a Syrupe laxatiue. But you ſhall boyle it but litle the ſecond time, for the ſpices will ſoone loſe their vertue, & then clenſe it againe the ſecond time, and let the patient take of this twiſe in the weeke. The ſecond infirmitie ariſing of choler is, when ther appeareth before the tunicle as it were a thinne cloud in a cleare ayer, and this is brought by an euill diet, but it happeneth but to thoſe that be cholericke. For the cure you ſhall take a Saphire, and breake it in a mortar, and keepe the pouder in a veſſel of gold, and once in the day put of this pouder into the patients eye, & he ſhalbe hole in ſhort time. The ſame effect hath the gall of a hare dried & beaten into pouder, and ſo put into the eye.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXXVI. Of the infirmities of the eye cauſed of Melancholy.
               
                  OF the humour of Melancholy be ingendred in ſundry folkes many and diuers ſickneſſes by reaſon of the oppilation of the ſpirits viſible, which commeth by the diſtemperature of the braine, which is diſquieted by the aboundance of melancholy. In theſe diſeaſes therfore it ſeemeth to the patient, that there are flies flieng in the ayer, and that there are three or four Moones, and three or four faces, when he beholdeth but one: but theſe infirmities happen moſt cōmonly to aged perſons, which are melancholy, ſuperfluitie of melanchoy dimming their eyeſight. There muſt not therefore any medicine be put into the eye of the patient, but make this electuary mitigatiue and apparatiue, which will open the opilations of the nerues, which did before forcloſe the way to the viſible ſpirits. The electuarie is thus confected. ℞. the iuyce of lyquorace, eyebright, ſileris montani. ana. lb.ſs. the ſeedes of Rew baſilicon, Netles that cometh from beyond the Sea, or Cecilian, of fennell, of Alyſaunder, of Apium, and of Caraway ſeed. ana. ℥.ij. maſticke, Cloues, Nutmegges, Cynnamon, Quibybes, gummi, Almoundes, Cerache pomi gummorum Aragunton, and Saffron. ana. ℥.ſs. kernelles of Quince Apples. ℥.j. all theſe muſt be beaten together into ſmall pouder well ſearced, and then you muſt confect them with good Sugar, and make an electuarie of it, and of this let him receiue morning and euening, till he be healed. It auaileth alſo againſt that dimnes of the eyes which cometh by thought and of much heauines, and maketh them to ſee more cleerely, and of that effect it hath his name (that is) clarificatum oculorum. There is alſo an other infirmitie which cometh of melancholy, and that is, when the paine ſodeinly aſcendeth into the eyes, and greeueth ſo extremely, that it ſeemeth to the patient that his eyes would ſtart out: they appeare alſo moſt commonly very bolne. Many which are troubled with this kynde of maladie, doe looſe their ſight altogether, & many (though ther be ſome which do ſee) notwithſtanding but very feebly. But the ſeaſonable applying of remedies preuenteth ether diſcomoditie. Afther this ſort then, you ſhall encounter with this euill. You ſhall firſt purge the ſtomach and the braine with theſe pilles. ℞. Aloes mirabolani citrini, Turbith, Saunders citrine, and rewbarbe. ana. ℥.ſs. Scāmony, mirrhe, ſaffron, balſamum, maſticke, lignum Alo
                        •
                     s, olibanum, white Agaricke, nux Indiae, Iuyce of lyquorace, ſeed of Apium, Lettuce, ſuccory, baſilicon. ana. ʒ.j. Beate all theſe to pouder, & confect them with the iuyce of Roſes, and make pilles of them, and giue the patient after his power. The ſtomach and the brayne thus purged, lay vpon the eye this plaiſter. ℞. ſoure apples or crabbes, and roſt them vnder the Embres till they be ſoft, then core them and pare them, and bruiſe them well in a mortar, and to four of them putte halfe the white of an egge, and ſo braye them together till they be well incorporate, and ſo lay them vpon flexen herds, and morning and euening applye it to the eye, and you ſhall find that it will doe him muche good: for it both aſſwageth the ſwelling, leſſeneth the paine, refreſheth the ſight, and with all theſe fixeth alſo the eye in his place. There is another infirmitie alſo which proceedeth by the aboundance of melancholy, and that they call Vngula: for it is much like the Naile of a finger, ſometime it breedeth in the corner of the eye to the earewarde, & ſo ſpreadeth ouer the eye, if it be not hindred and reſiſted betymes: ſometime alſo it happeneth that another vngle ariſeth in the other corner, and if they meete, it maketh the cure more vncertaine, yet by headfull ſkill & diſcretion it may be healed by the hand: Take therfore a twiche of ſiluer, and therwith lift vp ſubtellie the vngle from the tunicle, proceeding to the lachrimall wher it grewe, and there cut it away, and then lay the white of an egge and flexe vpon it .x. dayes together, remouing it twiſe on the day, and at the end of ten dayes waſh his eye with hote water, and put into it Puluis Nabetus before named, till the eye be ſufficientlie cleared. Let him abſteine from ſuch meates as do feed melancholy. It happeneth alſo ſometime, that the ſuperfluous aboundance of melancholy, ſeated in the braine, begetteth a drynes in the eye liddes, which afterward turneth to ytching and burning. But this diſeaſe is cured by letting the patient bloud vpon the middle veyne in the forehead, and after with vſing this collirye. ℞. fourty tender croppes of the Bramble, and ſtampe them ſmall, then putte them in a newe earthen veſſell together with a quarte of good white wyne, and ſo boyle them till the halfe

be conſumed, and then clenſe it, and preſerue it in a glaſſe to your vſe, and twiſe in the daye put ſome of it into your patientes eye, till it be hole. Of the like ſuperfluitie of melancholy groweth ſomtime a corrupt humour without the eye vpon the lidde, which embolneth all the one ſide of the face with extreeme paine, but with no offence to the ſight of the eye. The ſignes of this diſeaſe are theſe: it maketh the eyeliddes hard and red, and keepeth the eye ſo ſhutte, that the patient may not open it. For the cure of it, you ſhall take fine flower of old wheate, and yolkes of egges. ana. ℥.j. of ſaffron. ʒ.j. and ſtampe them well together with womans milke, till it be as an ointment, then make a plaiſter of it, and applye it, ſo that none enter into the eye. You may alſo vſe this: ℞. a lilly roote and crabbes & roſt them in the embres, till they be ſoft, then, taking away the core & the pilles of the crabbes, ſtampe them both of like quantitie with the whites of egges, and ſo vſe it: On the ſteppe of the wound, where the ſore was, lay this oyntment, that it maye drawe the fleſhe together, ſo that no ſcarre maye appeare. ℞. Aloes, hennes greace, oyle of bitter Almondes, and white waxe, and incorporate them together into an oyntment and apply it. It is very good in all the diſeaſes of the eyes, to annoynt the temples of the patient, and the forehead with vnguentum Alabaſtrum before named, for it aſſwageth the payne and helpeth the other medicines in their operation. It happeneth many times in this infirmitie that the patient his eyeliddes, for want of prouident ſkill do reuerſe, which is a great blemiſhe. In this caſe you muſt ſubtellie with the Raſour deuide the eyelidde from the wound, and part them with a litle roule made of fine linnen clothe dipped in the white of an egge, which you ſhall lay betwixt the lidde and the ſore .xv. dayes together, chaungeing it daylie, and then make the oyntment of hennes greace and white waxe, and lay of it vpon the roule, and it will conſume the wound, ſo that there ſhall appeare no Cicatrice. The like cure you ſhall vſe, when the reuerſement of the eyeliddes is cauſed of ſuperfluitie of bloud. Of the melancholike humour ther is alſo engendred in many men a ſicknes, which groweth between the noſe and the eye, and it appeareth like a peece of lung or light. It is grauelly, and auoideth out alwayes filth. This ſore is called vulgalpus. For the cure of it, you ſhall only take a twiche, and lifte the ſore vp ſubtelly, and with the point of a Raſour cutte vp the ſore by the roote, and cauterize it with a hote yron, and vſe the oyntment before rehearſed, which they call vnguentum ſubtile, that is hennes greace and white waxe, and annoynt the place with it, till it be hole.
            
            
               CAP. XXXVII. Of diſeaſes happening to the eye by outward cauſes, as by blowes, with ſtickes, ſtaues, or stones.
               
                  THE only thing generallie, that you ſhall vſe when the eye is ſmitten, is the white of an egge and flexen herdes to the which God hath giuen three eſpeciall properties. The firſt is to aſſwage the paine. The ſeconde to purifie and cleere the ſight. The third is to lette and keepe away all ſuperfluous humours which otherwiſe would fall into the eye. You ſhall remoue it four times in the day, and twiſe in the night, by the ſpace of xv. dayes together, annoynting in the meane time the temples of the patient with the ointment of Alabaſter, which, as I told you before, was an adiuuant and aide to all medicines. Now after the xv. dayes be exſpired, if you ſhall perceiue the tunicle ſaluatrice to be hurt and broken, you ſhall then take xij. ſtreines of the newe laid egges of white hennes, and put them in a mortar, labouring them with the peſtill, till they be vnited in maner of an oyntment, and ſo reſerue it in a glaſſe, and twiſe in the day and once in the night put a litle of it into the eye, and it wil knit together, and make ſo nude againe the tunicle if it be broken or hurt: after this maner I haue cured many woundes in the eye which haue ſeemed dangerous, and vncurable to the ignorant beholder. But ſometime it will happen, that through the force of the blowe, ther will growe a cataract, and then in the beginning the tunicle muſt be ſaued by this forenamed preſcript, and the cataract muſt growe without let to his full perfection, and ſo be healed by the needle. Some vnſkilfull practicioners vſe to lay a plaiſter made of waxe and cōmyn to the eye, if it be ſmittē,

and other ſome vſe olibanum and woormewood, but both thoſe and all ſuch like hote oyntments are paſſing euill becauſe they conſume and waſt the ſubſtance of the eye. It followeth now that I ſpeak of watery eyes & of corrupt humours like teares, which the Phiſitians call fiſtoles, to diſcerne betweene the fiſtula and the watery profluence of teares. You ſhall therfore vſe this ſkill: Laye your▪ forefinger betweene the noſe and the corner of the eye, and ſtraining the place a litle, if it be a fiſtula, you ſhall ſee the mater of it runne out at the points of the eyeliddes; but if none appeare, then iudge it to be a watery humour. Manye boiſterus fellowes, (ſeing the place of the iſſue of the fiſtula) haue vſed to cauterize it with a hote yron, thinking by that meanes to haue dryed vp the mater, which in deed they haue done, but they haue deſtroyed the ſight, & deformed alſo the place. This therefore is the ſureſt way or courſe that you can take, to cure the fiſtula. Firſt purge the paciēt his ſtomak with Pilles of Ieruſalem, & then with the point of a raſour you ſhall make a litle inciſion betwixt the nether eyelidde and the noſe ſo diſcretely that the lidde be not touched: and this Inciſion ſhalbe throughout the skinne in long wyſe, and into the ſame put in the grain of a fiche binding it on with a litle pillowe of linnē, & ſo let it lye till the next day: thē remoueing the fich, you ſhall in the hole wher it lay, put in a litle of ſom pouder Corraſiue. After the pouder is put in, lay a plaiſter of flexē herdes, & the white of an egge (the patiēt always ſhutting his eye for feare of the pouder) In the morning after, you ſhall applye nothing but clean ſwynes grece, till the mortified fleſh be raiſed, & whē it is raiſed & remoued put in a peice of a ſpūge as much as the fich, in the hole which the pouder made, & it wil purge the drines of the woūd & whē you ſhall perceiue it throughly dried, leaue the ſpunge, & bind nothing to it els but fayer drye linte of linnen till the patient be hole. Now concerning the teares, they iſſue out of the eyeliddes both the vpper and the neither: but there is difference betweene the cauſes of ther iſſuing frō both places: for they which procead from the nether eye lidde, come from the hart, by reaſon of ſorrowe, dread, or ſmart, or they be cauſed by ſom maner of violence but the teares which flowe out of the hole of the ouer eyelidde, procead from the brain by reaſon of corruption and aboundance of humours, and there courſe ceaſeth not, vnleſſe the mater be purged with electuaries and cauteries, as I haue ſhewed before.
            
            
               CAP. XXXVIII. Of diſeaſes which come by ſkipping in of stones or chippes by chaunce into the eyes.
               
                  THESE diſeaſes happen eſpeciallie vnto Maſons, Millers, Carpenters, Wrightes and Smythes: for if any chyue, chippe or duſt skippe into the eye, and through negligence be left behinde, it will incarnate vpon the tunicle ſaluatrice, and then can you not cure the eye, but by remouing and drawing the ſaid chiue, which you ſhall do with your needle, deuiding it cunningly from the tunicle. And if it happeneth that there be any pitte in the place, where it lay, by reaſon that it abode long time therin: then put into the eye the ſtreyns of egges, ordered, as I declared before, twiſe in the day and once in the night, and vpon the eye lay a plaiſter of flexe, and the white of an egge, and within thre dayes it will heale the party diſeaſed. And after this ſort you ſhall alſo remoue the hawe in the eye. But you ſhall in drawing out the hawe, binde two needles faſt together at the toppe, and ſo take the hawe betweene the two pointes, and ſo eaſilie rewling the needles, bring it away. Sometime it happeneth that the eye is ſtung with the Bea or waſpe, or ſome other venymous thing, or blaſted with an infected ayer: and if any of theſe happen, the eye is much diſquieted and grieued, ſo that the patient may take no reſt, and it bolneth vp that he may not ſee. The only cure for ſuche & the like accidentes is this, as I haue by experience often tried. Take a handfull of Cardus benedictus, and ſtampe it ſmall, and temper it well with half the white of an egge, & therwith make a plaiſter laying it on flexen herdes, binding it hard to the eye, where it ſhall lye till it be dryed, and then applye another: and ſo conſequentlie vſe it till your patient be throughly hole. Theſe qualities this herbe hath: it aſſwageth ſwelling, and eaſeth the paine, deſtroyeth the venyme, and putteth away bloud from the eyes. This is alſo a preſent remedy for the eyes that are

bloudſhed, when they burne as though there were grauell in them. And thus much for the eſpeciall diſcourſes of ſundry diſeaſes, which do moſt commonly bend to that litle member, the eye, together with their particular cures.
            
            
               CAP. XXXIX. Of paine in the eares. DE AVRIƲM DOLORE.
               
                  PAINE in the eares is cauſed to ſome through cold takē in iourneying by cold wyndes.
                     C
                           ••
                        ſae.
                   Alſo ſometime it is cauſed of cold bathes and medicinable waters. Alſo it chaunceth to many through hote diſtempure. Sometime of inflammation. And like as inflammation by ſtretching out the partes that be inflamed, engendreth payne: Euen ſo a windy vapour, or a humour groſſe and clammy, for lacke of paſſage cauſeth paine. Alſo humours that be byting, and like whay and matter, do cauſe payne in the eares: Payne in the eares cauſed of cold, is ſoon knowen by the patients wordes, and becauſe that there is continuallie great payne without heauines, or, diſtenſion,
                     Signae.
                   or burning. The paine which is cauſed of hote diſtempure is knowen, in that there is felt paine and heate without heauines of bolning. But if heauines, diſtenſion, and beating heate & paine be felt in the head, thē the pain in the eare is cauſed of inflāmation. Only diſtenſiō without heauines declareth a windy vapour, which cannot find paſſage out. If ther be heauines in the head & the hearing: the pain is cauſed of groſſe & clāmy humours. If the pain be cauſed only of cold,
                     Cure of cold.
                   it will ſoon be cured by hote remedies: that is, with oyle of rewe, laurell, Narde, Dill, lillies, of Euphorbium, and Spike. Alſo if you ſeeth rewe, and common oyle or pepper, or Caſtoreum, it is a good remedie. Alſo oyle in which Garlicke is ſodden; or an onyon, dropped into the eares is maruellouſly good. There be ſome that doe cut out the core of a great oynion, thē they fill it with oyle, and they heate it meanly in hote embers, & poure it into the eares, when it is ſtrongly ſtrained. Alſo a very litle Euphorbium commixed with much old oyle,
                     Of water.
                   is much commended of Galene. Whatſoeuer you do miniſter, let it be miniſtred hote. But when ſome medicinable water is continued in the paſſage of hearing, you muſt continually poure in oyle that is very thinne that it may be waſhed: then wype it with ſoft woll, and againe poure in more. The white of an egge mitigateth the paine very much. Alſo womans milke. Alſo gooſe greaſe profiteth much, likewiſe foxes greaſe. But to drawe out plenty of water, nothing is better then to ſucke and drawe it out with a quill or hollowe pipe holden in the mouth.
                     Of heat.
                   When paine is cauſed of hote diſtempure, then oyle of Roſes is maruellouſly good for the head, if it be dropped into the eare, and vinegre and oyle of Roſes is good, or the white of an egge, or womans milke, or iuyce of nightſhade, or this. ℞. oyle of Roſes. ℥.j. Iuyce of nightſhade. ʒ.ij. vinegre▪ of Roſes. ʒ.j.ſs. commix them. If the paine be cauſed of inflammation, or groſſe and viſcous humours, you muſt vſe medicines which doe deuide and take away obſtructions and ſtoppings: as be all bitter thinges which purge and clenſe without Eroſion, as is yriſillirica, all kindes of Ariſtolochia, bitter Almoundes, the roote of 
                     
                        •
                     itiſalba, Centory the leſſe, polium, and Cynamon. Alſo oyle of Almoundes & other which doe purge, clenſe, wype, and vnſtoppe the paſſages without greif. Therfore of thoſe you may make medicines, and droppe thereof into the Eares. Among other alſo the iuyce of Leekes dropped into the eare warme is good, or iuyce of leekes mixed with hony. If that the payne be cauſed of inflammation, you muſt by and by let bloud on the Caephalica vaine, that is on the ſame ſide:
                     Venae ſectio.
                   and with cliſters you muſt pull backe the humours, that do flowe. Afterward you muſt droppe in oxyrhodinum warme, or gooſes greaſe, or hennes greaſe with oyle of roſes. But if the inflammation be vehement: then to ceaſe paine droppe warme into the eare the white of an egge with womans milke. Alſo this medicine is good. ℞. Iuyce of ſeene greene. ʒ.ij. oyle of roſes. ℥.ſs. vineger. ʒ.j.ſs. commixe them all and drop it into the ſore eare. Apply thoſe things outwardly which ceaſe payne, and do digeſt the matter heaped together. If the inflammation be very vehement, it is neceſſary to vſe thoſe thinges which do aſtony the ſenſe eaſily, and it is no ſmall daunger, leaſt that the ſenowe by which the vertue

of hearing, is diſperſed in the brain, be hurte thereby. But commixe a very litle Opium with womans milke, and the whyte of an egge. Alſo temper Opium with Caſtoreum: there muſt be of ech a like quantitie, or double as much Caſtoreum. The licour in which the aforeſaid medicins ought to be tempered, being firſt finelie beaten, muſt be Sapa:
                     Sapa·
                   for it doth ceaſe the pain much more then ſweete wine. Sapa is newe wine ſodden till it come to the third parte. Ther be ſome that commixe Opium with oile of roſes, or violettes, after this ſorte. ℞. Opij. ℈.j. oile of roſes and violettes. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Alſo the Antidote Philonium diſſolued in womans milke, and dropped in, is good. Without you muſt nouriſhe the eare continuallie with common oile, or with a hote foment, and you muſt dipp wooll in it, and put it into the eare: but in ſuch wiſe that it may not touch the places that be troubled with inflammation. But when the pain waxeth old, and turneth to ſuppuration, and impoſtumacion, you ſhall droppe into the eare a medicine of the iuice of line ſeed only with oile of roſes or chammomill mixed with it.
            
            
               CAP. XXXIX. Of ſound or noiſe in the Eares. DE SONITV AƲRIƲM.
               
                  NOYSE and tinckling in the eare,
                     Cauſae.
                   for the moſt parte is engendred of a windy vapour, or of groſſe & clāmy humours. Alſo many times it is cauſed through an exquiſite tardineſſe of the ſenſe of hearing. It is alſo cauſed through weakenes of the members, when as it chaunceth in the recouering of a diſeaſe, ſome humour is taken into the ſinowes of the eares. Alſo it is cauſed of outward thingS, as of cold, heate, or a blow on the head.
                     Signa.
                   If the euill chaunce through outward cauſes, it is ſone knowen by the patientes wordes: now becauſe the noiſe commeth by litle and litle, or at one time, or ſuddainly on a heape, that is alſo conuenient to know the diſeaſe by. For if the ſoundinges doo come, and then reſt for a certaine ſpace;
                     Of windy vap
                           •
                        ur
                           •
                        
                     
                   it is euident that a windie vapour is ſhut in, and can not get out, and ſo cauſeth ſounding, & ſpecially when the ſicke hath eaten windie meates. But if ſuch ſound in the eares doe not come ſuddainlie but by litle and litle, and there is felt withall a heauines like a waight: then it declareth the euill to be cauſed of groſſe and viſcous humours.
                     
                        Of groſſe 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                     
                     
                        Cure if it come of groſſe humours or vapours.
                     
                   For the cure if the ſound in the eares be cauſed of groſſe and viſcouſe humours, or of vapours: in the beginning purg the head with Pilulae Cochiae and ſuch like. But firſt miniſter before them potions and medicines which haue vertue to extenuat and deuide. Then you muſt vſe maſticatories and ſternutamentes. Moreouer you muſt drop into the eares, oile of bitter almondes, or oile in which Caſtoreum is brayed. Alſo let the eare be enclined to the vapour of the water, in the which Stechas, wormewood, maioram, mintes, and origan hath bene ſodden. Iuice of rewe,
                     Sacculi.
                   ſodden in the rinde of a pomegranat is maruelous good. Alſo Sacculi made of betonie, ſtechados, chammomill, maioram, and other thinges a litle before reherſed ar verie good, if they be applied to the eare warme. If the ſound in the eare be cauſed through ſharpneſſe of the ſenſe of hearing, which is knowen, if when the patient is hungry it encreaſeth,
                     If it come of ſharpnes of hearing.
                   and when he is full the noiſe is leſſe. Then you muſt vſe thoſe thinges which do aſtony the ſenſes, but you muſt take good head thereof and therfore begin with the eaſieſt, and if need be, proceed afterward to ſtronger. Oile of roſes is only commended with a grain or two of Opium put to it. Galen in this caſe praiſeth iuice of Mandragora and poppy. But if noiſe in the eares chaunce in feauers, there need no remedy for it, for commonly it goeth away ſtraight. But if it remain after a diſeaſe or a paine in the head, then you muſt nouriſh the eares with decoction of wormwood, pouring in vinegre and oile of roſes, or iuice of raddiſh, with oile of roſes, or the beſt aloēs tempered with mulſa. And if this help it not, vſe blacke helleboure braied with vinigre.
            
            
               CAP XL. Of Deafnes, and ſlowe hearing. SVRDITAS, ET GRAVIS AVDITVS.
               
                  
                  THE eare is ſo afflicted, that it cauſeth not only dulnes of hearing: but allſo deafnes that one can hear nothing at all. Somtime deafnes beginneth at ons birth Alſo ſometime it chaunceth after we be borne, which doeth chaunce, either through colericke humours ſteing vpward,
                     Cauſae.
                   or through crude and groſſe humours ſtopping the hearing. If daefenes come of cholerike humours ſpecially after feuers,
                     Signae.
                   then it is wont with ſuddain incurſions to runne to the brain. Alſo the face and all the eſtate of the body will ſhewe a cholericke temperature. But if it come of groſſe humours there is heauineſſe of the head, and other tokens be preſent which ſhew flegmaticke humours. They which remain deafe from there birth, or alſo ſone after they be born, being perfectlie deafe of a long time, are vncurable, neither doth anie of them euer ſpeake. They that be not alltogither deafe,
                     If of cholerik humours. If of groſſe humours.
                   yet, if it hath long continued, it is very hard to cure. Daefenes which is cauſed through cholericke humours ſteying vpward, is ſone driuen away by medicines, purging choler. If the deafeneſſe be engendred of crude and groſſe humours, this dul hearing is cured by bloudletting▪ or only by purgation of Hiera and Pilulae cochiae and other ſuch like. But miniſter before Oximel, and other medicinnes that haue power to deuide groſſe and clammy humours. The whole bodie being purged, you muſt drawe fleume out of the head by Maſticatories, ſternutaments, and Errhinis. Furthermore they muſt be dryed and by all meanes ſtrenghned. Alſo he muſt vſe a bath that floweth of it ſelfe or ſalt water. You muſt put into the eare medicins that deuide and cut groſſe and viſcous humours, wherof ther be many declared in the chapter againſt ſound of the eares. But priuatly iuice of rew, with hony, or Caſtoreum with oile of dill is good. Alſo you muſt vſe fomentes, and lean your eare vpon a quill or reede, hauing one end made fit for the eare, & the other for the hole in the couer of the pot being euerie where faſt ſtopped. Let there be in the pot, wormewood, mintes, maioram, origan, stechas or ſuch like ſodden in water, that the vapour that commeth from thence, may paſſe into the courſe of hearing. Alſo this medicin dropped into the eare is good. ℞. oile or Caſtor. ℥.ſs. comin ſeed. ʒ.ij. the pouder of Caſtoreum. 
                  ʒ.j. a great oynion, the core taken out, put in the pouders of Comin and Caſtor, and put in the oile, and wind it vp in wette papers, and put it in vnder the hote embres, & when it is roſted, ſtrain it hard, & let it be dropped into the eare. Morouer the vapour of vinigre taken with a reed, as is taught before is maruelouſlie good.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let ther diet be alltogether thin, and meats of light digeſtion.
            
            
               CAP. XLI. Of Jmpoſtumes breeding in the eares. DE PAROTIDIBVS.
               
                  PAROTIDES in greeke be inflamation which are wont to iſſue out in the kernelles, which be by the eares. It is cauſed of aboundaunt hote blood which is ether mixed with choler or fleume or melancholie.
                     Cauſae
                   And ſometime it is cauſed of humors compact in the head, and ſometime of the reſte of the body by ſickneſſe, & ſpecially by feauers. Parotides which are cauſed through fulneſſe and plenty of hote bloud,
                     Signa.
                   they do engender moſt vehemēt paine. They which are cauſed of cholericke bloude, they ſeeme much like Eriſipela, and they vexe the place that is diſeaſed, with no greife. That which is cauſed of melancholie blood, they be not redde, nor they doe not vexe with vehement paine, but they be harde. They which be engendred of fleumatike bloude, in the ſwelling they be raiſed ſharp vpward. Let ther diette be ſuch in a maner, as is appointed in other inflammations.
                     Victus ratio. Cura
                           •
                        io.
                   The cure if age, and other thinges will ſuffer, it muſt be begonne by letting of blood: you muſt cut the Cephalica vaine on the ſame ſide. Furthermore we vſe not in 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as we doe in other inflammations, to apply in the beginning thinges that repreſſe, but contrary wiſe thinges that doe draw. And if they be not in effect, faſten cupping glaſes, or apply continually fomentes. To mitigate the paine you muſt choſe thoſe thinges which haue heate with moderate moiſtneſſe, mitigating and ceaſing paine, meet to ripe, & digeſt, as is, decoctions made of wheat or barely, or the meale of lin ſeed with mulſa, or fenugrek, or althea, or cāmomill: for the ſame purpoſe annoint the place cōtinually

with butter, putting to it the white of eggs. Alſo ſwines greace with butter melted, with a litle wax put to it, that it may be a ſoft Cerate, may be well applied.
                     Cure of them that be meek.
                   But in them that be meek, (that is) in gentle Parotides, in which there flowe not ſuch plenty of humours that they cauſe vehement paine, nor ther is no heat of the humour, ſuch are eaſily cured with fomentes of brine and plaiſters, and medicinnes altogither diſcuſſiue, as is Diactrilon. If the parotides can not be diſſolued, you muſt vſe medicines to ripe, and bring the impoſtume to matter, as is, wheat meale with the decoction of figgs and oile. Alſo the medicine that is made of meale and flower and leauen. When the Parotides be riped, either cut the skinn with a knife, that the matter may be let out, or the botche may be broken with a ſharp medicin, as that which is broken with garlicke, and ſuch like, or to proue how to diſſolue it by medicines which haue vertue to draw and extenuat, remouing it twiſe daily, and nouriſhing it vntill the paine be ſome what releaſed, and the more part of the matter diſſolued. And if there be hardneſſe, that alſo muſt be mollified. Therefore you muſt make medicines that be of mixt qualities, ſo that you muſt commix drawing thinges with mollifiers, as is calues ſuet, goates ſuet, the marrow of a heart, bdellium styrax, ammoniacum, & ſuch other like.
            
            
               CAP. XLII. Of vlcers in the noſe. DE OZAENIS.
               
                  OZAENAE in greek be vlcers in the noſe that be deepe and rotten, ou of thet which is brethed an vnkind and ſtinking ſauour. Through ſharp and rotten humours which flow to the noſethrills, filthines is engendred,
                     Cauſae.
                   which if they be only ſharpe, they engender vlcers hard to be cured, but yet they ſtink not much, Therefore the cure of theſe vlcers conſiſt cheiflie in this, that in the beginning the head be dried and ſtrenghned. Becauſe vlcers come through the flowing of corrupt humours,
                     Curatio.
                   which flow out of the head to the noſeterills: the whole head muſt be ſtrenghned & dried, that no ſuperfluities do flow from the noſethrills. You ſhall adde ſtrenght to the head after this ſort, firſt you muſt clippe the head, then ſtraight you muſt lay on it thinges that do reſtrain & bind, as is oile of roſes, alom, vnripe galles, willow leaues, vineger & ſuch like: this muſt be continually laid and annointed on the head .ix. daies. When with thoſe thinges the head is made ſtrong, then go about to cure the noſethrills, that you may dry vp the matter, with medicines that be repulſiue and diſcuſſiue. Therefore thoſe things that repell and driue back be thinges ſharpe, and ſower, which alſo are reckned with reſtrictiue thinges, diſcuſſiue things muſt be hote and dry of vertue. Therfore to cure Ozenae. you muſt drop in the iuice of calamint, or blow in the pouder thereof being dried with a quill, or droppe in hony into the noſethrills. A while after miniſter ſternutamettes to bring out the ſcurfes,
                     Ster
                           ••
                        tamentioni.
                   which will fall of in iij. or iiij. daies. When they ar fallen of, cure it with gooſe greace and butter, and oile of roſes. The vlcers in the noſethrils may be annointed with iuice of a pomegarnet boiled in a braſen veſſell vnto the half or a whole pomegarnet ſodden in ſweet wine braied and dropped in. Alſo this is good. ℞. dry alome. ʒ.j.ſs. mirrhe. ʒ.j. the rinde of a pomegarnet, ſumach ſalt gemme, ſafron, frankenſenſe. ana. ʒ.ſs. beat them and blow into the noſe, of the pouder. Yf that after the vlcers ther remain paine,
                     Vnguent
                           ••
                        .
                   vſe this ointment. ℞. oile of roſes, mirtelles. ana. ℥.j. burnt lead, litarge. ana. ℈.ij. Ceruſe, bolearmeny. balauſtium. ana. ℈.j. white waxe as much as is ſufficient, and make an ointment & annoint the place.
            
            
               CAP. XLIII. Of bleeding at the noſe. DE SANGVINIS EX NARIBVS PROFLVƲIO.
               
                  FLuxe of bloud at the noſe The cauſes be partlie outward,
                     Cauſes Externae Internae Signae. Victus ratio.
                   and partlie inuard Outward cauſes be falling from a heigh place, a ſtripe, vehement exerciſe and tarcing in the ſunne. Inward cauſes is plenty of bloud or thinnes of the ſame. You may know if it come through plenty of bloud by heauy pain in the head much bloud in the face, and rednes of the eyes. Let the diet be ſuch that it

may coole and make thick, the blood, and the dyet muſt be thinne. Therfore let the ayer be cold, and the meate of good iuice, and eaſy to digeſt. If the blood be very hote, let the ſick eate lettuſe,
                     Po
                           •••
                        .
                   endiue, peares, quynces, chickens roſted or boiled with veriuice. Let him drinck thick redde wine mixt with water, or water cold, or decoction of cinnamon, by which through out my book: I mean water, in which a li
                     •
                  le cynnamon is ſodden: leſt water through his coldnes might hurt a weake ſtomacke. Let the patient ſpeak litle, and let eſchew mouing, trouble of mynd & cheefly anger. Alſo it is good io haue the lower partes of the head, higheſt. For the cure you muſt take heed, that in bleeding at the noſe, the lower partes lye higheſt,
                     Curatio
                   and the head downward. The cure muſt be begun with thoſe remedyes, which turne the blood to other partes of the body. Firſt therfore if the body be full, and age will ſuffer it, and if the ſick be not reſolued, you muſt cut the vaine in the arme right againſt the flowing of bloud at the noſe. When you haue drawe out a litle then let it alone an hour then draw out ſome againe,
                     Venae ſectio.
                   and afterward againe and againe, as the patientes ſtrength will ſuffer it. Moreouer friction & rubbing of the inferior parts as the armes, hands, thighes, ſhare, and feete. It is maruelouſly good to put the feete into warme water euer rubbing them vp and downe. Alſo ſtrong bindinges of the extremities is to be acounted among the remedyes that pull back. Alſo great cupping glaſſes faſtened to the ſydes doe retain blood breaking out at the noſe.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   Yf the bloud flowe from the the right noſethrill, faſten the cuppinge glaſſe vpon the lyuer: Yf at the lefte noſethrille, vpon the ſplene. If the blood come from both the noſethrilles, faſten cupping glaſſes to both places. Alſo faſten them to the ſhoulders with ſcarification: Thoſe bring done, miniſter both within the body & without, things which coole and reſtraine.
                     Epithema.
                   Outwardly apply to the forehead an Epithema of Iuice of plantaine, lettuce, ſorell, ſheperdes purſe, knott graſſe, or make it with the waters of thē diſtilled, A linnen cloth wett in cold vineger is maruelous good being applied to the forehead and neck again and again. Alſo nouriſh the forehead with ſpōges of cold water. Alſo it is good to vſe this Epithema applied to the forehead and the liuer. ℞. water of roſes, night ſhade, ſorrel. ana. ℥.iij. pouders of Diabrion ſautalon,
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Epithem
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                   
                  diarrhodon abbatis. ana. ʒ.j. bolearmenie, yuory burnt, lapis hamatites. ana. ʒ.ſs. commixe them all and make an Epithema. Alſo you muſt put into the noſe,
                     An 
                           〈◊〉
                         medicin
                           •
                         to ſtop b
                           •
                        ou
                           •
                        
                     
                   medycines to ſtoppe bloud, for the which this is very good. ℞. frankenſence. ʒ.ij. aloes. ʒ.j. pouder them and mixe therwith the whyte of an egge vntill it be as thicke as honie, then commixe the ſof
                     •
                  e heares of an hare, with it, and applie it to the noſe. Alſo you may wryth a linnen clothe dipped, in the noſethriles. Alſo mintes braied, and put into the noſethrilles is thought to be verie good. Alſo a ſponge wette in ſtrong and ſharpe vineger may be put into the noſe that bleedeth. Alſo this medicine is good. ℞. egge ſhells. ʒ.ij. vnripe galls. ʒ.j. being braied put them in a writhed linnen cloth wett in water or vineger, and put it into the noſethrilles. Alſo it is good to ſtopp the eares ſtrongly with linnen and waxe, and to hould in the mouth cold rayne water. Alſo iuice of the leaues of nettle, hauing linnen dip: into it, and put into the noſe, ſtoppeth bleeding at the noſe, alſo iuice of horſetayle, or the leaues brayed and applied, are good. The fleſhe of ſnailes braied with vineger, ar with ther ſhells burnt and braied are good being applied to the forehead and noſe with vineger. But aboue all, the bloud which commeth out at the patientes noſe is good,
                     Op
                           •
                        ima medicinae.
                   if it be burned in an earthen pott and then beaten, take of it. ʒ.iij. bolearmoniacke. ℥.j. Camphore. ℈.j. with the white of an egge and a little vineger, make it thicke lyke hony, and laye it to the forehead, and put it into the noſe. Neceſſity requiring it is lawfull to put to .ij. graines or .iij. nf opium. Aſſes dounge dryed & made in pouder is wonderfully good, and alſo hoggs doung hath the lyke property. Within the body miniſter thoſe thinges which do coole and reſtraine, as be ſyrupes of roſes, forrell & nympheae, Trochiſkes of terra lemnia, de ſucciuo & ſuch like medicines. Morouer if in the meane ſeaſon any bloud flowe into the belly or other places of the body, if it be much & plenteous, you muſt auoyd it by medicines which will diſſolue and bring forthe the clodder matter.
            
            
               
               CAP. XLIIII. Of diſtillation, reume, and hoarcenes DE DISTILLATIONE, GRAVEDINE, ET RAVCITATE.
               
                  CATARROS in greeke is called Diſtillatio in latyn, & in Engliſhe Reume.
                     Diſtillatio. Grauedo. Raucedo.
                   It is wheras an humour falleth downe to the mouth, and the iawes. Grauedo is when the humour falleth into the noſe, and cauſeth the poſe. Raucedo is when the humour chaunceth to diſtill to the ſharpe arterye. The cauſe of flowing of the humour is the brayne the which through could,
                     Cauſae.
                   is brought to a could tempure, which chaunceth ſpecially to them,
                     Cold.
                   which goe ſodainly about in the could bareheaded. But through heate the brayne is warmed and ſtuffed▪ the coldnes of humours which be in the braine,
                     Hea
                           •
                        .
                   wringing hard lyke as a ſponge dipped in water is wronge with ones hand. It cauſeth the flowing of humours to the lower partes. So oftentymes heate going about in the head diſſoluing the humoures in the braine. engendreth diſtillation. Moreouer all thinges that replete the head without meaſure,
                     Repletion of the head.
                   doe cauſe flowing of humours into the inferiour partes. Alſo wyne immoderatly droncke, and hote bathes, rawe meate remaynyng in the ſtomacke, and vaporous thinges in the head.
                     Signa.
                   The ſignes of the fluxe of humours come of heate, then the head is hote, and a ſharpe & thinne humour diſtilleth as well by the noſe, as by the mouth, alſo the face and the noſe is redd,
                     Ca
                           •
                        or.
                   and for the moſt parte ther followeth a feauer. Contrarywyſe they that haue the fluxe cauſed of could, ther head and ther forehead is ſtretched out euery wheare, the paſſages which be in the bones called, Ethmoidea, are ſhutt vp, ſo that the voyce cannot paſſe downeward by the noſethrills. Alſo a flegmatike and thick humour diſtilleth out of the noſe. Lett thē eſchewe ayer that is very hote or very cold, eſpecially from a hathe, and from Southe,
                     Vict
                           •
                        s ratio.
                   and north wyndes, and all thinges that can bynd or diſſolue humours in the braine. Let him vſe meates of good iuice, eaſy to be digeſted▪ let him eſchewe thoſe thinges that ſend plenty of vapours to the brayne, as be oynions, garlicke, muſtard ſeede, raddiſhe, & very hote adoramentes. Moreouer they which haue the diſtillation muſt eate leſſe at ſupper then at dinner. let ther drinke be aqua mulſa, or decoction of cynnamon or barley. let them eſchewe ſleeping in the day, and lying vpright in the night.
                     Curatio.
                   For cure when the head is vexed with a hote diſtempure, you muſt vſe thoſe remedyes, which are good for paine in the head engendred of ſuch a cauſe. The moſt preſent remedy of the head is to ſprinckle & poure vpon the head plenty of whote water: this is able ro dryue out the hote vapours engendred in the head. Moreouer ſuch muſt take comfort of warme bathes, of ſweet water. They which haue ther head vehemently hote and burning, and for that are troubled with continuall diſtillation, it is beſt for them, in ſommer to be annointed with oile of roſes. Yf a cold diſtempure vexe the head, it muſt be annointed with hote and thinne oiles, as oiles of Ireos, Rewe, and ſuch lyke: Oyle of Ireos is not only vſed, as an oyntment, but dropped into the noſe. Alſo other thinges that be applied, which are ſpoken of in the chapter againſt paine of the head cauſed of cold. If a hote humour diſtill from the head together with a feuer, and yf ther be fulnes of the bodye, you muſt let bloud out of the Caephalica vaine.
                     Vene ſectio.
                   But it any iuſt cauſe be againſt yt, waſh the belly with a cliſter, that yt may drawe the humours that doe abound in the head, downward▪ or miniſter a medycyne purging choler as is, pilulae aureae, alephanginae, azairet and ſuch lyke. Alſo you muſt turne the humours from the head by frictions, ligaturs, aod faſtening of cupping glaſſes to the ſhoulders. Miniſter within the body thinges that haue vertue to alter and quench the burning heate of choler, as is ſyrupe of violettes nympheae of poppye and ther conſerues. Alſoe Embrocha and odoraments reherſed before in the cap. of headache may be applied. Alſo a plaiſter of terra lemniae or bole armoniack and iuice of plantaine, made & laide vpon the head being ſhauen.
                     H
                           ••
                        er frigidus.
                   If it be a cold humour which diſtilleth, you ſhal empty with thoſe things which purge fleume, For which purpoſe a ſtrōg cliſter is good, which being done, you muſt drawe and turne away the humour from the head. Then when the humours be digeſted, purge the head with Maſticatories gargariſmes,

and ſuch like.
                     Saccu
                           ••
                        .
                   Moreouer apply to the head Sacculi made thus. ℞. floures of cāmomill, melilote, be
                     •
                  onye, origan. ana. M.ſs. cynnamon, cloues. ana. ʒ.j. maces. ʒ.j.ſs. nuttmegs, ʒ.ij. galla moſchatae. 
                  ʒ.j. pouder them all and put them in ſilke, and make a Sacculus, and lay it to the crowne of the head. It is very good alſo to annoynt the head with hote oyles, as is the oyles of Ireos dill, and Rewe. All thinges doe ſtopp diſtillation, which haue vertue to drye,
                     To ſtopp diſtillation.
                   ſpecially nigella parched, and comyn burnt or parched, putt into a lynnen clothe and knit is a preſent remedy, if the patient do ſmell to it. For the ſame purpoſe it is good to miniſter ſuffuments, as is this. ℞. frankenſence, maſticke. ana. ʒ.j. wood of aloes. ℈.j.ſs. cynamon, cloues. ana. ℈.ij. Gallae moſchata. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. laurell leaues, yelowe ſaunders. ana. ʒ.j. muſke ambre. ana .g.j. being braied commixe them with ſtorax liquidae, as muche as ſuffiſeth, and make trochiſkes.
                     Trokiskes of perfu
                           •
                        e.
                   Wherof put one vpon coles. ℞. ſage, maioram, roſemary. ana. ʒ.j. maces, cloues, cinamon. ana. ℈.ij. wood of aloes. ℈.j. frankenſence. ʒ.j.ſs. beate them all and commixe them, and make a groſſe pouder to ſtrewe vpon the coles. As for hoarcenes, it is cured almoſt with the ſame medycynes, that the coughe is.
            
            
               CAP. XLV. Of pain in the teeth. DE DENTIVM DOLORE.
               
                  TOOTHACHE (as Galene ſayth,) amongeſt other paines that are not mortall, is the moſt cruell and greuous of them all. It is cauſed ſometyme of hote or cold diſtempure.
                     Cauſae.
                   Alſo many tymes through flowing of humours out of the head vnto the rootes of the teeth, which with ther ſharpnes either doe gnaw about them, or els with their aboundance, they engender like greife in the teeth, as inflamacion is about fleſhie partes, paine in the teeth without inflamacion of the gummes, ſometym in the ſe
                     •
                  owe wherein the roots be planted. If the paine come through diſtempure of the bare quality,
                     Signa.
                   it will not be greuous. Hote diſtempure is knowen by the tempure of the whole body, becauſe that likewiſe is hote. Alſo the face is redd, and the dyet vſed before was hote. Cold is knowen by the contrary iudgmentes. If the paine be cauſed of flowing of ſom humour aboundantly, then greauous pain is not only felt in the teeth but alſo in other partes, which it paſſeth by, A where humour engendreth vehement paine a cold humour more meeker.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let the diet be ſuch as may defend that the paine come not, and let it be ſuch, as is not very hote nor cold. Alſo eſchew all ſharp, ſower & viſcous things. Alſo often vſing of milk doth maruelouſlie hurt the teeth, labour diligentlie to purifie the teeth.
                     Curatio.
                   The meates muſt be of good iuice, and eaſie to digeſt. For the cure, if it come of cold it is good to waſh the teeth with warme wyne. Let the cheekes be annointed outward with warme oiles of cammomill, rewe, ireos, and ſuch like. Alſo to waſh the mouth, ſeeth in vinigre,
                     If it come of heat.
                   origan, calamint, hyſope, penyroyall, ſauory, the root of veruaine and ſuch like. If the teeth doth ake through heat, you muſt ſeeth in vinigre, purſlaine, paretarie, ſingreene the leſſe, and lycorice: But if the heat be intollerable, you muſt vſe the ſeeds of lettuce, endiue, and poppie ſodden in vinigre. Without you muſt annoint againſt the greife with cold oiles, of roſes, water lillies, and ſuch like. Moreouer if the pain be cauſed through flowing of humours,
                     If of flowing
                           •
                         of humours.
                   if age, time of the year, and other thinges will ſuffer it, and if the body be alſo full of bloud, it is good to cut the Cephalica vain or mediae on the ſame ſide, that ther greife is. That done cut the vain vnder the toung, or faſten cupping glaſſes to the ſhoulders. If one on lie corrupt humour doth abound, then vſe conuenient medicines to purg that humour. For the ſame purpoſe cliſters are very good. The whole body being emptied, you muſt miniſter thoſe medicines that do repreſſe and ſtoppe, as iuice of plaintain▪ roſes, purcelain, both the endiues, either take the decoction of the aforſaid thinges, or ther waters diſtilled & mixed with a litle vinigre. It is onely good to waſh the aking with hote ſharp vinigre, with vnripe gales. or this. ℞. the root of hēban. ℥.j. pellitory. ℥.ſs. ſtaues acre. ʒ.ij. galingale. ʒ.ſs. Cāphore ℈.ij. alome. ℥.j. hony. ℥.ij. let all be bruiſed, and boile all in viniger. lb.j. Roſe water. ℥.vj waſhe the teeth with this e
                     •
                  h morning, and it will preſerue the teeth, and keepe them from

paine. But if it come of extreme cold, then vſe ſpecially this medciine. ℞. Pepper, pellitorie, melilote. ana. ʒ.j. ſtaues acre. ʒ.ſs. bruſe them and put the pouder into a linnen cloth,
                     If it come of cold.
                   and lay it on the aking teeth, and keepe it there a quarter of an houre, and it will ceaſe the pain. Alſo (as is ſaid before) to waſh the teeth with warme wine, is very good.
            
            
               CAP. XLVI. Of teeth that be blacke and looſe. DE DENTIBVS DENIGRATIS, LIVENTIBVSQVE ET MOLLIBƲS.
               
                  SOMETIME the teeth be ſwarte and black throughout there ſubſtance not vnlike a certain inflammation of the patientes, through flowing of vicious humours the teeth be loſe, ſometime through a ſtripe or fall,
                     Cauſae.
                   ſomtime through flowing of moiſtenes, which looſeth the ſenowes and ligamentes, and maketh the teeth looſe, or els gnawing, and weakneſſe of the gummes in the which the teeth ar ſet, cauſeth them to be looſe. The cure of vicious humoures muſt be begonne by purging.
                     Curatio.
                   Afterward if the teeth be ſwart or ruſtie: you muſt deuide the corrupt humours, which flow to the teeth with drying medicinnes, as is licium, frankenſenſe, mintes, galls, maſtick, mirrhe, nigella, and ſuch like. Among many other this is very good. ℞. nigella, mirrhe, frankenſenſe. ana. ℥.j. maſtike, white pepper. ana. ℈.ij. piſtolochiae. ℈.j. roch alome. ʒ.j. beat them into pouder, and rubb the teeth therwith: or commix them with venice Terebenthin and annoint them therwith. The corrupt humours being cōſumed,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   vſe dentrifices which haue vertue to ſcoure and dry, as this is. ℞. nitrum, roch alome, hartes horne burnt. ana. ʒ.j. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . ℈.j. the roote of trees illiricae, frankenſenſe, dry mints. ana, ʒ.j.ſs. comon ſalt burnt, piſtolochi
                        •
                     . ana. ʒ.j. purniſh 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſepiae. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. pepper, pellitorre, dry penyroiall. ana. ʒ.ſs. beat them 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſcarce them all and with this pouder rubbe the teeth daily. For teeth that be looſe, you may apply ſuch medicines, as reſtrain and ſtrenghten looſe gummes, and faſten them.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   Therefore colluſions of the mouth of decoctions of reſtrictiue thinges doe perfitte, as is this. ℞. redd roſ
                     ••
                   
                  
                     •••
                  
                  tes, plaintaine, ana. M.ſs. the barkes of Cipreſſe nuttes. ʒ.j. ſeed of mirtells ſum
                     •
                  che. ana. ʒ.ſs. pomegranat rindes, galls. ana. ʒ.ij. accacia. ℈.ij. ſeeth them all in redde reſtrictiue wine,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   & with that often waſhe the mouth. The mouth being waſhed it is laufull to vſe this dentriſicium. ℞. Galles, the rindes of ſweete pomgranates. ana. ʒ.j. balauſ
                        ••
                     um, ſumache,
                     Dentri
                           ••••
                        um
                   mirhe. ana. ℈.j. red roſes, ſanguis draconis, calyculorum glandium. ana. ʒ.j. frankenſenſe, hartes h
                     •
                  rn burnt ana. ʒ.
                     •
                  .ſs. pouder all, and ſcarce them, and rub the teeth therewith. or this is maruelouſe good. ℞. Balauſtium. nutmegges. ana. ʒ, iij., roch alome, ℥.j.ſs. pouder them and mixe them with honie. ℥.ij.ſs. and incorporate them well togither. and with this annoint the teeth twiſe or thriſe in the day.
            
            
               CAP XLVII. Of vlcers in the mouthe. DE APHTHIS.
               
                  THE vlcers which ar bredde, in the ouermoſt parte of the mouth and haue a certaine burning heat, in greek they ar called Apthae and of the barbarous ſort alcola, Some be whitiſh, and ſome reddiſhe, and ſome blackiſh,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . and theſe be moſt perrilous of all other. They engender for the moſt parte in infants & ſucking chilcren, when either the nurſes milk is naught, or the child cannot well dgieſt it. Alſo they chaunce ſometime to them that be of perfect age, as well through great fluxe of vicious and corrupt humours to the mouth, as alſo through ſharpneſſe of thoſe thinges that are eaten and dronken, The tokens ar eaſie,
                     Signa.
                   becauſe they be knowē by ſight and feeling if you touche it, the places will ſeeme hoter then they ought

to be, and there is ſwelling. They which be redd, do ſhew bloud to haue the maſtery. Yealownes ſignifieth bitter choler: whitnes, fleume: blaknes, melancholy. They which chāuce to children,
                     Curatio infa
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •••
                        .
                   may eaſily be cured by thoſe things that doe meanely reſtrayne. And you muſt giue them cheefly in ther meates, ſome quynces, and other ſharpe thinges, peares, and meſpilers, vidʒ. medlers or open arſes. Sometime alſo you muſt commix with there meat ſome lettuce, endiue, and purſlain. If there be inflammation of the vlcers, then take the iuice of purcelain, lettuce and nightſhade, the pouder of alome, and waſh the mouth with a fine cloth, or with a ſering, & if the child cā take no meat, thē the nurſe muſt vſe the ſame kind of diet. Alſo the decoction of galles balauſtium, ſaunders, Sumache, acacia, and ſuch like, commixed with Roberibes or Diamoron applied,
                     Cure of them that be of perfect age.
                   as before is taught. In them that be of perfect age onely the nature of the bodie is to be conſidered, whether it be ſoft or moiſt, or hard or drie. For in hard and ſtrong bodyes you muſt miniſter ſtronge medycines. In weake and ſoft bodyes, gentle medicines. For the dyet therfore in ſuch ages, they muſt eſchewe all things, that be ſharpe and ſalte,
                     Victus ratio.
                   and that engender corrupt iuice. For the cure in fulnes of the body, yf nothing do let it,
                     Curatio.
                   firſt cut the Caephalica vaine, and then thoſe vaines vnder the tounge. Yf the body be full of ill iuyce, you muſt miniſter a purgation againſt the corrupt humours. the body being purged, apply medicines which haue vertue to reſtrayne and ſtoppe. Moderate remedyes againſt vlcers be theſe, as ſumache, roſes, Balauſtium diſſolued in wyne or mulſa. But if the exulcerations begin to putrifie, this decoctiō is very profitable. ℞. fellerd leaues of ſage, hyſope, rewe, penyroiall, chamomill, wood bind, knottgraſſe, burſapaſtria, bryer leaues. ana, M.ſs. waſhe them cleene, and boile all in .ij.lb.ſs. of good ale or beere, & put therin three or foure ſponefull of hony, alome. ℥.ij. let it ſeeth to the conſumption of halfe then ſtrayn it, and waſh the mouth ther with .4. or 5. tymes in a day. But if the vlcers be more running and gnawing, annoynt the place with vnguentum Aegiptiacum, mixt with mel roſarum or ſuch lyke.
            
            
               CAP. XLVIII. Of a stinking mouth. DE FOETORE ORIS.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  THERE is greuous and ſtinking ſauour of the mouth cauſed for the moſt parte through putrefaction of the gummes or teeth, or through meate ſticking ſtil in the teeth. Many times it commeth through hote diſtempure of the skinne of the mouth: ſometime alſo through corrupt and rotten humours, ſticking in the mouth of the ſtomack: It chaunceth alſo manie times that exulceration of the mouth or lunges,
                     Signa.
                   doth hurt the breath of the mouth or lunges. If ſtinking of the mouth chaunce through putrefactinon either of the gumms, or teeth, or of meat ſticking in the teeth: it is ſoone knowne either by ſight or by the patients tale. If it be cauſed of a hote diſtempure of the mouth, then heat is felt in the mouth, and thirſt troubleth him. If through vice of the ſtomak, then the breath of the mouth is more grieuous, and ſtinking before meat then after meate, vlcerations of the lunges are knowen by extenuacion of the body, and by coughing.
                     Victus ratio.
                   In the diet the patient muſt auoyd all things that doe readily engender corruption in the mouth or ſtomache, as is, milke, fiſhe, almoſt all fruites, marowe, fat, naughty water, and ſuch lyke. Let the meats therfore which they vſe, be of good iuice, and eaſie to digeſt: but they muſt vſe meates rather roſte then ſodden: In the end of dinner and ſupper they may eate peares,
                     Curatio.
                   quinces, and ſuch like, eſpecially if the ſtincking ſauour come from the mouth of the ſtomacke. Let thē eſchewe ſleeping by and by after meate. If ſtincke of the mouth come through corruption of the gummes or teeth, if ther be fulnes of the bodie: Firſt drawe bloud out of the Caephalica vaine, and then faſten cupping glaſſes to the neck. But if the body be full of euill iuice, purge the humour that doth abound with a conuenient medicine: the bodie being purged, vſe out ward medicines ſpecially collutions and waſhings, which in this caſe ſeeme to be maruelouſe good as this is. ℞. redd roſes, plaintain, knotgraſſe. ana. M.j.ſs. galls, pomegarnet flours, cipreſſe nuttes. ana. ʒ.ij. rindes of pomegarnetes.

                  ʒ.ſs. roche alome. ℥.j. ſeeth theſe in iuſt quantity of water vnto the third part, and in the iuice of the decoction being ſtrained, comixe mel roſarum, diacarion, .ana. ℥.ſs. diamoron. ℥.iij. comixe them all and make a collution,
                     Collu
                           •
                        io oris.
                   with the which waſhe rhe gummes & the teeth euery morning, and euening. Alſo oftē waſhing with water mixed with viniger in the morning and by and by after meate, is good. If the ſtinck in the mouth be without exulceratiō, miniſter the roote of ireos ſteeped in old odoriferous wyne, & waſhe the teeth often withall. Alſo it is good to hould it in the mouth. Alſo mirrhe ſteeped in pure wyne miniſter to waſh the teeth. Alſo it is very good to chewe pellitorie, Tamariſcus and rewe. Likewiſe collution of vineger ſquilliticke, or decoction of ſage, or only wyne. Alſo decoction of mintes in vineger and water helpeth, if the mouth be often waſhed with it. This cauſeth ſweete breath,
                     For ſweet breath.
                   and maketh the teethe white. ℞. white ſalt, pumiſes, origā. ana. ʒ.ij. root of Ireos. 
                  ʒ.j. flours of ſqinnance. ʒ.ſs. beat them all and commix them and rub the teeth therewith. If ſtink of the mouth come of a hote diſtempure cure it with contrary medicines. But if it come of a corrupt humour in the mouth of the ſtomack, it is healed by thoſe things which do purge that humour. Thoſe thinges mhich be conteined in the mouthe of the ſtomacke may well be brought out by a vomit. How you ſhall prouoke vomit, it is declared in many places befor.
                     Vomitus.
                   After this miniſter medicines which do ſtrenghthen the ſtomacke, as is, Axomaticum roſaceum, Diambar, hydromalum, and ſuch like medicines, which be good in all cauſes, as be cloues, Maſticke, Mace, wood of Aloes, Cynamon, roſes, all the Saunders, Nutmegges, Quibibes, Yreos, and other of that like ſort.
               
                  THESE ſuffice. AND hovv many euills ſo euer ther be of the head, vvhoſe cure is not expreſly named by mee in this booke: yet you may find out medicines to cure them by that vvhich is declared in this Booke.
               
            
            Libri primi finis.
         
         
            
            The Second Booke.
            
               CAP I. Against the inflammation of the Columella. DE COLVMELLAE INFLAMMATIONE.
               
                  THERE chaunceth in the throte many daungerous inflamacions (as Hippocrates wryteth in his Prognoſticis) and firſt of this Columella appeareth a certaine fleſhie peece, hanging in the vpper parte of the mouth. If one do gape wide, and hold doun his tong, it may be ſeen By old time it was called Gurgulio,
                  
                     Gurgulio
                   now it is called Columella. It is often vexed with inflammations, which is cauſed through bloud, and other humours which diſcend out of the head. The diſeaſe may be knowen by ſight.
                     Signa.
                   Alſo ther chaunceth in it, difficultie in ſwallowing paine, ſwelling, redneſſe of the Columella, and a feauer. The diet in a manner muſt be ſuch as is ordained in other inflammations,
                     Victus ratio▪
                     
                   and ſpecially quietnes, reſte, ſilence, and hunger are good, and to eat litle, or nothing at ſupper. For the cure, if there be fulnes of the bodie, you muſt begin with bloudletting,
                     Curatio. Venae ſectio.
                   and firſt you muſt cut the Cephalica vaine in the arme, and afterward the vain vnder the toung. Alſo the belly muſt be purged by cliſters, ſo that by that meanes not only the belly may be ſoluble, but alſo that the flowing of humours to the greife may be taken away. Alſo for the ſame purpoſe you may faſten cupping glaſtes to the ſhoulders.
                     Cuturhi
                           •
                        ulae.
                   Neither muſt we let paſſe the remedies which are good to repreſſe and ſtopp fluxe of humours. For as they do in all other diſeaſes cauſed of the fluxe of humours; ſo in this behalfe for there firſt remedie they ſtoppe the fluxe of humoures. Therefore ſuch remedies muſt be of a reſtrictiue nature and facultie. If that the fluxe of humours be moderate, miniſter thinges which reſtraine moderatly, as theſe be which be called ſoure. But if it be more vehement, adde to it ſharpe thinges, for both be reſtrictiue, but ſoure be weake, and ſharpe thinges ſtrong, as Galen doeth ſay in his fourth booke of the vertues of ſimple medicines. cap. 6. and 7. Therefore vſe collutions made of thoſe thinges, as if they ſhould be moderate, ſeeth dates ſometime in water alone, and ſometime with a litle honie put to them. Likewiſe make decoctions of roſes, wine buddes, brambles, cipreſſe, the firſt buddes of pomgarnet floures, ſiligna, rootes of mulbery, ſoure apples, and ſorbus. Thoſe be ſtronger then theſe, which be made of the decoction of mittells, and ther bearies. Alſo of ſharpe quinces, and young buddes of oke, or the maſte of oke, alſo of meddlers, and a fruite called Cornus. The beſt collutions ar made of galles, Sumach acatia, and the floures of both the pomgarnettes, & their ſhelles. Among compound medicines this doth helpe wonderfully.
                     Gargariſmus.
                   ℞. the diſtilled waters of roſes, plantaine, ſorrell, prunella, ſolani. ana. ℥.ij. Diamoron ſucci medicati eribes. ana. ℥.ſs. ſucci medicati ex exiochanta. 
                  ʒ.ij.ſs. vineger wherin ſumach is ſteeped. ℥.j. iuice of pomgarnettes. ℥.ſs. comixe them togither, and with it waſh the mouth Another of the ſame vertue.
                     Alia.
                   ℞. red roſes, brambles. ana. M.j. pomegarnat floures and the ſhells, galls, maſte of oke. ana. ʒ.iij. ſumach, hipociſchidis, acatia. ana. ʒ.ij. ſeedes of ſorrell, & quinces. ana, ʒ.j. ſeeth them in. lb.j. of well water, vntill halfe remaine. the decoction being-ſtrained, put to it of diamoron. ℥.j. ſucci medicati eribes, diacarion. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. vineger. ʒ.vj. cō
                  mixe them all, and make a gargariſme. You muſt vſe theſe medicines in the beginning of

the diſeaſe, and eſpecially when the greife hath not the greateſt cauſe: nor whē the body of the ſicke is much ſtopped with humours, nor when the aggreaued place is weake through the nature of the impoſtume. But if it chaunce ſo (as it doeth often in the beginning, and often ſomewhat aftter) that is, the third day: you muſt commixe ſome of the dicuſſiue medicines, as is line ſeeds, fenugreeke, mallowes, root of Ireos, & honie. Moreouer of what ſort ſo euer the medicines be, miniſter them warme: for thoſe that labour of inflammation, may ſuffer no cold. After the vigor of it, you may ſafelie miniſter diſcuſſiues, vnleſſe the Columella begin to waxe harde: for them you muſt miniſter mollefiing medicines (that is) lineſeed, fenugreeke, mallowes, Altheae tragaganthum, and ſuch like, of the which you may make gargariſmes. After that vſe diſcuſſiues (as is) hiſope, figs, licorice, decoct togither. If it drawe toward rotting, which may be perceued by his colour, and doth not breake alone by collutions of Mulſa, and Oximel ſcilliticum, then open it with ſome inſtrument. After the breaking and burſting out of the matter, let him vſe medicines clenſing, abſterſiue and glutinatiue, eſpecially the iuice of enpatorie, and ſuch like.
            
            
               CAP. II. Of a looſe Columella DE LAXATA COLVMELLA.
               
                  OFtentimes it chaunceth that a looſe Columella doth hang vpon the roots of the toūg & iaws. Of ſom it is called the viula Wherfor in the beginning you muſt vſe ſuch kind of cure, as the inflammation thereof requireth. In the begining the bodie and the head muſt be purged by medicines ſpoke
                     •
                   of in the former chapter. Which being done you muſt make collutions and gargariſmes of ſuch thinges as do reſtrain and drie: after this ſort. ℞. redde roſes, ſorrell, enpatorie· ana. M.j. gallacum. 
                  ʒ.ij. Alome. ʒ.j. mirrhe, frankenſenſe. ana. ʒ.ſs. flaxe ſeed. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeeth them in water, to the third parte,
                     Gargariſmus.
                   and adde to the iuice of that decoction ſtrained of good. ℥.ſs. and make a gargariſme. Alſo pouders do profit being blowen in with an inſtrument for the purpoſe: as this is. ℞. drie roſes, galls, roch alome. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. pepper▪ ginger, ana. ʒ.ſs. mirrhe. ʒ.j. bray it and ſearce it, and put it vp as before. Alſo take green nuttes and drie them, and date ſtones burned ſufficientlie, take of ech of them equall portions, pouder them and vſe them as the other. Alſo vnripe galles ſoliarmoniacke. ana. ʒ.j. do likewiſe. If the Columella muſt needes be cut, it is good to empty the belly firſt, leſt the ſicke be ſtrangled. When the Columella is cut out, bow his head dounward, leſt the bloud runne inward, And afterward waſh his mouth with the decoction of ſumach acatia galles, putting to it roſewater and vineger. Afterward miniſter thinges to heale it vp.
            
            
               CAP III Of inflammacion of the tonſilles DE T0NSILLARVM INFLAMMATIONE.
               
                  TONSILLae be inflāmations of thoſe thinges which lye betweene the mouth and the throte, ſome do call them Amigdalae, (that is) Almondes. Thoſe tonſils oftentimes be inflamed: For their places be hote and moiſte,
                     Cauſae.
                   They are moſt vexed with this euill, which haue aboundance of bloud, and children and infants which do ſuck, through drawing of the milke. Alſo it chaunceth often to men and weomen through drinking of ſtrong wines, and through much greedie deuouring of meat, ſpecially if they be eagre and ſharpe.
                     Signa.
                   They that be ſo afflicted haue difficultie in ſwallowing, and paine, and alſo ſometime a feauer. Therefore the inflammation beginning you muſt take away meat, and miniſter to him water to drinck,
                     Victus ratio·
                   or water wherin a litle Cinamon hath ben ſodden, ſpecially if there be a feauer. Let the whole diet be ſo ordered, as it

it in other inflammations. Let his meates be ſoupinges, for otherwiſe he cannot ſwallowe it.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure, if the inflammation be light, you muſt vſe gargariſmes, reſtrictiues, ſuch as be taken in the beginning of an inflamed Columella. But you muſt beware in the beginning, that you put no hony to the gargariſmes, for it hath a ſharpnes in it. If that the inflammation be vehement, ſo that he be in perill of choking: you muſt cut the Caephalica vaine in the arme on the ſame ſide.
                     Veneſecti
                           •
                        .
                   And if the belly be not ſoluble enough, caſt in a clyſter. You muſt prouoke childrens bellies by putting in a ſuppoſitary, and by annointing the tuel. After purging you muſt vſe reſtrictiue medicines, vntill the vigour of the diſeaſe be ceaſed ſomething. All theſe things (as we admoniſhed before) muſt be miniſtred warm. Outwardly it is beſt to nouriſhe it with ſponges, laid gently to it. Alſo lay to it plaiſters made of barly meale, ſeeds of flaxe, fenugreke, and ſuch like. The inflammation declining and waxing leſſe: it is good to put in hony into your gargariſmes, which in the beginning and increaſing you may not do, leaſt the ſharpnes which is in it, do increaſe fluxe. Alſo at this time hotter gargariſmes do profit. Outwardly you muſt put about the necke, ſoft woll dipped in oyle, and if that by vſing of ſharpe collutions, or gargariſmes, the inflammations be increſed, and byting and gnawing come therby: you muſt vſe gentler, as is iuyce of ptiſan: Alſo gargaryz warme milke. When the inflammation and paine ceaſeth, annoint with the aforſaid remedies of the mouth, putting it in with your finger: ſo that by gētle annointing, the parts of the tonſilles which are ſwelled, may be thruſted, wherby they may put out the matter contained in them. But yet you may not thruſt hard, as many vſe to do, wherby they cauſe the inflammation to be augmented. And therfore if by that meanes any hurt do chaunce: we muſt be content with miniſtring gentle gargariſmes without any annointing. If that by miniſtring the remedies aforeſaid,
                     Signes of ſuppuration.
                   the greife be not eaſed, then looke for rotting of it, which you maye know by increaſing of the inflammation, and by ſharp exulcerations, exacerbations, and gnawinges in the euening when you looke for ſuppuration and rotting, you muſt help that it may quickly come to paſſe: therfore then you muſt miniſter hotter gargariſmes, as is aqua mulſa, and decoction of figges, hyſope, and ſeed of Althaea. Outwardly lay plaiſters of barly meale and fengreeke, with decoction of figges, Althaea, and hony. When it is perfectly rotten, the payne will diminiſh, and the ſwelling and inflammation wilbe made ſofter, ſo that it will giue place to the finger. Then you muſt miniſter ſharp collutions, that they may breake the botche. In meates he muſt take great gobbettes of bread ſteeped in water, and likewiſe his meate muſt be eaten in lumpes: for vehement rouling of it vp and downe about the tonſils will breake the botches, as well as if they were cut. But if the patient will not do it, then open it with ſome fine inſtrument for the purpoſe. And after it is broken, let the ſicke bowe his head downeward, that the matter may the better runne out. And let him gargaryze aqua mulſa alone, and afterward commixe with it decoction of lintels and roſes. And with theſe you muſt tary, vntill it be healed.
            
            
               CAP. IIII. Of malignant vlcers of the tonſilles. DE SERPENTIBVS ET MALIGNIS TONSILLARƲM VLCERIBVS.
               
                  THERE beginne malignant vlcers of the tonſiles, ſometime with a fluxe of them going before: ſometime they are cauſed of an accuſtomed inflammation being augmented.
                     Cauſae.
                   They chaunce often to children, and alſo to them of perfect age, eſpecially to thoſe which aboūd with vicious humours. They chaūce to children after the Apthis in the mouth.
                     Signa.
                   In colour they be like to ſkurfes, which are burnt with yron. Alſoe there chaunceth to the ſicke drynes in ſwallowing, and often choking, eſpecially when rednes is vnder the chinne. If gnawing and ſharpnes of humours hathe gone before, there followeth putrefaction. You muſt proceed in the cure ſpeedely,
                     Curatio.
                   and if he be of perfect age, & no other thing forbidding it, it is good to cut the Caephalica
                  
veine in the arme, or if that appeare not, the middle veyne. If they be maydes, whome, at perfect age, for lacke of purgation of menſtruis, this diſeaſe doth often infect: then in them you muſt cut the Saphena vaine, letting bloud but once only, and yet at that time, not till the hart faile, leaſt after it, vertue be deſtroyed by ouer much fluxe of menſtruis. Furthermore the belly muſt be emptied by clyſters, ſuppoſitaries, and by annointing of the tuell. And you muſt labour by all meanes to turne the humour from the aggreiued place: for the which purpoſe faſten cupping glaſſes nigh to the loynes, and vſe to bind the extremities as the handes and feete. Afterward it is good to vſe gargariſmes, declared before in the chapter of Columella, and in the chapter following. After the beginning of the ſicknes, miniſter Diamoron, or a collution mixed with Mulſa, then alſo decoction of Ireos, and other thinges rehearſed in the aboueſaid places. We muſt take heed, that we touch not the vlcerate tonſils with our finger, not ſo much as to touch it ſoftly. For the vnſkilfull, to whome with great error men do ſeeke in doubtfull matters: they do annoy it vehemently, alſo they doe thruſt the aggreiued place, & pull alway the ſcabbe or roue, which they ought not to do, before they ſee the rooue lifted vp, and ſcarce cleauing to the ſore. For if we intend to pull away the ſcabbe, whils it ſticketh faſt, the vlceration will pearce more deep, and inflammation will followe, and the paine will increaſe, and they will come to venemous vlcers. Therfore it is good to blowe in dry remedies, and to annoint liquid thinges with a feather. Dogges doung mixed with hony and annointed, taketh away the rooues maruellouſly, which wilbe the better, if the dogge be fed only with bones two dayes before. It helpeth greatly, nether hath it any vnſauorines being miniſtred in meates. Alſo the aſhes of ſwallowes burnt, and the aſhes of Centory minor burnt, with hony mixed is good. After the irritations and chaſinges made by medicines, you muſt appeaſe it with decoction of lycorice, and with a gargariſme, which is made of maſticke, mirrhe, Tracaganthum, amylum and ſaffron,
                     Gargariſme
                   miniſtring alſo, while the vlcer feedeth, milke mixed with terra lemnia to gargariſe. What need many wordes? You muſt be diligent and carefull, ſpecially in clenſing and purging the vlcers. Many infantes do ſuffer the crampe in purging of the vlcers. Some be ſtrangled, becauſe the way of ſwallowing is dryed vp. It is good to apply outwardly fomentes, and emplaiſters, with taking heed, leaſt we do coole it. For the cure will proſper, if the matter, that is holden within, can be drawen outward. Therfore alwayes after the taking of the plaiſters away, couer the partes that be about the chinn, by laying vpon it ſoft woll, ſprincled with oleum nardinum. To conclude, when the ſkurfes are looſened, and the vlcers purged, vſe this remedie following. ℞. flours of red roſes. ʒ.iij. ſaffron. ʒ.j.ſs. Balauſtiae. 
                  ʒ.ſs. mirrhe. ℈.j. pyne nuttes made cleane. ʒ.ij. Amyli. 
                  ʒ.j. Sumach, roch alome, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. beat them, commixe them with hony, and vſe to annoynt it three times on the day.
            
            
               CAP. V. Of the Squinnancie. DE ANGINA.
               
                  
                     ANGINA in latin, ſquinancie in engliſhe, But in greek Sinanchi.
                  
                     Gen. 4. It is properly an inflamacion which is in the throte, or in the iawes. Ther be fowre kinds of ſquinances, one is, when the iaws be inflamed: (by the iawes, I meane, the place, wher the endes of the weaſand, & the trachaea arteria do agree). Another  is, when nether the iawes nor other partes of the mouth, nor yet the outward  partes do ſeeme to be inflamed: yet the ſicke feeleth perill of choking in the throte The third is when the partes about the throte be inflamed both outwardly and inwardly. The fourth is, when the ioyntes betweene the bones of the head, and the necke be loſened  to the former part of the necke: whereby the place appeareth hollowe, and the ſicke feeleth payne, when it is toucheth without. The Sqinancy is cauſed through aboundance of hote bloud, flowing vnnaturally to the places afore reherſed.
                     Cauſae. Signa.
                   It is knowen by theſe ſignes the breath is drawen very hardly, and not without the necke be holden right, and there is difficultie

in ſwallowing.
                     Curatio.
                   Alſo in ſome, a feauer, rednes of the face and necke. There chaunceth alſo in many, ſwelling: the ſicke yauneth with open mouth, and draweth breath. Therefore in the beginning euery ſquynance requireth a haſtie and ſpeedie remedie. Wherefore you muſt by and by cut the outward veyne on the ſame ſide of the ſhoulders,
                     Venae 
                           〈…〉
                         ſectio
                   except ſome greater perill doe let it: but you muſt take away the blood by litle and litle, at many tymes, and not all at once; for the blood being taken away altogether on heapes, the hart ſoone faileth and ſo the perill of choking commeth vpon him. And moreouer alſo the refrigeration and fainting of the hart, the matter is quickly caried from the 
                     •
                  awes to the lunges, and ſo bring ineuitable perill. Take heed alſo that ther be litle diduction of the veine, for therof commeth much failing of the mind, and yet it is not good to make a narrow inciſion of the vaine, leſt the bloud be as it were ſtrained, & the groſſer parte remaineth within ſtil, which is the cauſe of this diſeaſe. It is profitable to them to haue the bloud drawen out againe the next day, vnleſſe the ſwelling of the diſeaſe let it, or faintnes of the harte. If the ſicke be a woman, cut the vaine on the anckles, ſpecially if the menſtruis be ſtopped, and the bloud muſt be drawē out moderatlie.
                     Venerum lingue ſect
                           •
                        o. 
                           ••
                        y
                           •
                        ier.
                   If by theſe he be but litle eaſed, then is it good to cut thoſe vaines which be vnder the tounge & that by and by, at the firſt or the ſecond day. And if there be any thing that forbiddeth bloud letting, the belie muſt be emptied with a ſharpe cliſter, ſuch as is deſcribed in the chap. of apoplexia. After vniuſerall euacuations, you muſt faſten one cupping glaſſes; and if there be ſwelling about the cheekes, or vnder the chinne, it is good to faſten cupping glaſſes to the ſwelling, and with ſacrification to drawe out much bloud. Alſo to ſtrew ſalt vpon the ſcarrif
                     •
                  ing and to rubb it.
                     Con
                           •
                        urbi
                           ••••
                        .
                   And if there appeare no ſwelling outward, you muſt faſten a cupping glaſſe behind in the neck, neere to the ſhutting of the firſt ioint, and you muſt vſe it with conſtant attraction, pulling away the glaſſe often. Alſo the humoures muſt be turned away,
                     Aue
                           •
                        ſio 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   leaſt they flow to the place which is agreaued and inflamed. For the which purpoſe, you muſt bath the feete with hote water. Alſo bind and rubb the handes & feete ſtronglie. The neck muſt be couered with wooll that is moiſt, or that is dipped in warm oyle. alſo by & by (at the beginning) you muſt vſe gargarizes, which doe neither vehemently driue back nor yet only diſcuſſe: For thoſe which doe altogether repell, and driue back they bring perill of choking, by thruſting humors to the lunges. Thoſe which be only diſcuſſiue, they draw more then is meet by reaſon of ther heat. Therfore when the beginning is with much inflammation, you muſt miniſter thoſe things, which do reſtrain gently, as is decoction of roſes, lintels, and dates, or els reſtrictiue gargariſmes declared before in the cap. De Columellae inflamatione commixing ſome diſcuſſiue medicines with it. of that ſorte ar roſes or ſumach ſodden with aqua mulſa, and decoction of Sebeſten. When the diſeaſe is at his ſtrength and ſtandeth: you muſt vſe thoſe things which haue diſcuſſiue vertue only in them, as is decoction of fenugreeke, figes, raiſons, licorice or ſtronger thinges, as the roote of ireos hiſope, nigella, ſothernwood with oximel. Therefore it ſhallbe lawfull at this time to vſe a gargariſme made thus. ℞. of licorice ſcraped. ℥.j. raiſons. ℥.ſs. dry figes in number. 6. fenugreeke. ℥.ij. hiſope, ſothernwood. ana. M.ſs. ſeeth them in one pound of well water, till halfe be conſumed: then put into the licour of that decoction being ſtrained of mel roſarum. ℥.j.ſs. oximel ſimplex. ℥.j. commixe them all & make a gargariſme. Alſo doges dounge, ſuch as is found amongeſt herbes,
                     Gargariſmus.
                   and is very white in colour, being beaten and finely ſearced, and mixed with hony, is a moſt excellent medicine, being miniſtred like a lohoch, that they may ſwallow it very ſoftely. Likewiſe the aſhes of ſwallowes burnt, is very effectuall being ſo mixed with hony. Moreouer to the necke without, you muſt apply thoſe plaiſters in them which be vexed with inflamacion which can concoct and diſcuſſe, as this is. ℞. the meale of line ſeede,
                     Cataplaſma
                           •
                        a.
                   fenugreeke, and barly. ana. ℥.j. ſeedes of althaea, 
                  ʒ.iij. mallows, floures of cammomill and melilote. ana. M.j. ſeeth them in water vntill they waxe ſoft, then ſtāp them in a morter, and make a ſofte plaſter. or put to it oiles of cammomill, and lillies, ana ℥.j.ſs. and being boiled againe, make an emplaiſter. Neither ſhall it be vnprofitable, if the necke be annointed with oiles of cammomill, dill, and lillies, or fomented with decoction of fenugreeke, melilote, & cammomill. They which are vexed with the ſquinancy, let thē vſe .iij. daies aqua mulſa for ther drincke.
                     Po
                           •
                        us.
                   Afterward iuice of ptiſan by it ſelfe, or with ſom ſweete potion, for that iuice hath vertue to extenuate diſcuſſe, nouriſhe, and to coole. Whē
                  
the inflammation is ſomewhat flaked, and the ſick beginneth to ſwallowe better: giue to him the yolks of rere eggs, and ſoupings made of Alica. To conclude the eating of the ſick,
                     Cibus.
                   & his meates muſt be according to his ſtrēght: therfor he muſt eſchew ouermuch feeding. Sleep muſt eſpecially be eſchewed aſwel in the ſquinancy as in all other inflāmations. For in ſleep (as Hippocrates ſaith) the bloud creepeth within, and the flowing of humours to the greeued place, doth encreſe more
            
            
               CAP VI Of the coughe. DE TVSSI.
               
                  THERE be diuerſe cauſes of the cough. For as Galen ſaith. 1. lib. 2. de ſimpt
                        •
                     . cauſis. Cold diſtempure of the inſtruments of brething cauſeth the cough.
                     Cauſae.
                   Alſo a humour diſtilling from the head to the Trachaea arteria, and ſharpneſſe onely  of the vpper skinne of trachaea arteria going about within, doth prouoke the  cough. Alſo wormes troubling the ſtomach, and raiſing vp ſome qualitie, ſending  it to the iawes, doth cauſe the cough. Moreouer a humour contained in the lunges, &  the breaſt is the cauſe of inflammation in the lunges, diſeaſe in the ſides, conſumtion, and  the cough. Thoſe which be outward ſignes, and may cauſe the cough, be ſmoke, duſt, and  whatſoeuer doth exaſperat the trachaea arteria.
                  
                     Signa.
                   The ſignes of coughing cauſed only throgh cold diſtempure of the inſtruments of reſpiration and breathing are that thoſe which be ſo afflicted, they ſpitt out nothing while they cough, nor the cough is not violent nor conſtraining: but it is ſo ſmall, that not onely it may be ſuppreſſed by holding the breath: but alſo vnleſſe it be very great, it maybe healed, becauſe through ſtopping of the breath, the parts vexed with cold, do waxe hote. Moreouer they which ar vexed with this kind of coughe, they are more prouoked to it by often fetching of ther breath, becauſe the cold thereby is encreaſed, and made more ſtronger. Therefore if they breath, and fetch ther wind eaſily, & be alſo in a warme houſe, they cough litle or nothing at all. They be pale of face, and not thirſtie, they are greeued with cold thinges, and are beſt with hote thinges. The coughes which chaunce with tikling of the partes on either ſide of the palate, they do openly ſhew a flowing humour, comming from the head to trachaea arteria: and to the lunges which you may well know by difficultie of breathing that followeth. And if that they which be thus afflicted do ſpit out nothing, it declareth it to be a thinne reume, which being cut of by expulſion of breath, it is caried no further by reaſon o
                     •
                   his thinnes, but the flowing of it returneth again. The diet is diuerſe, according to the diuerſity of cauſes: for if the cough be cauſed of cold diſtempure, ocupying the inſtruments of breathing: you muſt eſchew, aier, wind,
                     Victus ratio.
                   and alſo cold meat and drinck: but if the cough be cauſed through humours diſtilling from the head: let the diet be ſuch as is deſcribed before in the cap. of diſtillation. But vniuerſally they which haue the coughe, muſt eſchewe ſalte thinges, ſharpe thinges, and whatſoeuer would exaſperate the trachaea arteria. The cough that is cauſed through cold of the inſtrumentes of breathing, ſhalbe cured by remedies that can make them hote.
                     Cure of the cough cauſed of cold diſtempure.
                   Therefore let the neck be wrapped about with warme woll, and let him breath ſeeldome, becauſe that ſtopping of the breath (as is ſaid befor) doth not only let the cough, but alſo oftētims it heleth it. Therfor it is good to haue the ſick cōuerſant in a hote houſe, & let him breath very ſoftely. Alſo let the breaſt be fomented with hote ointments, as is oiles of ireos, lillies and dill. If a humour that is thinne and ſharp,
                     Cure of the cough cauſed of thinne and ſharp humours
                   flowing out of the head to the trachaea arteria and the breaſt, do cauſe a cough: then it ſhalbe healed ſpecially by meates of good iuice, and by medicines which do coole, thicken, temper, and ſtop ſharpneſſe and inordacitie. For which purpoſe it is good to miniſter ſtrupes of violettes of Nimphaea, of poppie, the antidote Diatragacantha, diapenidion ſiue ſpeicebus, pilula 
                        •
                     echicae, and ſuch like. Among all other this loche is excellent good. ℞. Diatragacantha, diapenidion ſiue ſpeciebus. ana. ʒ.vj. iuice of licorice. ʒ.ij. pilulae h
                        •
                     chicae. 
                  ʒ.j. storax calamint. ʒ.ſs. mirrhe, dry roſes. ana. ʒ.j. tragacanthe,
                  
                     Ecligma.
                   pine nutts. ana. ʒ.ſs. ſirupe of violettes, as much as ſhall ſuffice to commix them and make an Ecligma. Alſoe for that purpoſe it is good to miniſter thoſe medicines which ar ſpoken of before in the cap.

of diſtillations.
                     Cure of the cough cauſed of groſſe and viſcous humours. Decoctio.
                   But if a greeuous and viſcous humour be cauſe of the cough, we ſhall cure it by thoſe thinges which do deuide and extenuat. Therfore then we muſt miniſter to the ſick ſirupes of lycorice, hiſope, horehound, calamint and ſuch like, or els this decoction. ℞. roots, ireos, percely, lycorice. ana. ℥.j. rootes of Ella campana. ℥.ſs. dry figges in number vij. of raiſons the ſtones picked out. ℥.j. ſeedes of nettell, anniſe and fennell. ana. ʒ.ij. hiſope, maidē-heare, ſcabias and horehound. ana. M.j.ſs. the beſt agarick. ʒ.iij. Seeth them all in well water of iuſt quantity, till the third parte be conſumed, then ſtrain it, and to the iuice of that decoction put ſirup, and hiſope of horehound, ana. ℥.ij.ſs. and make a potion. Afterward if it ſeeme conuenient by the ſtate of the patient, you muſt empty the body with thoſe medicines which do purge groſſe and clamme humours.
                     Purgatio.
                   And among other ſpoken of in the firſt booke,
                     Infuſio agarici.
                   the infuſion of Agaricke is verie good: which is made after this ſort. ℞. of elect agarick. ʒ.ij. ginger. ℈.j. ſalt gemme. ʒ.iij. beat them and infuſe them one night in ℥.ij of odorife rous white wine, water of wormewood and fennell. ana. ℥.j. In the morning ſtrain it and wring it, and put to it Electuarium nidi maioris. 
                  ʒ.ij.ſs. Oximel ſquilliticum. ℥.ſs. and make a potion. The body being purged, let him haue a loch ſometime commixed with other antidotes:
                     Ecligma.
                   after this ſort. ℞. Loch, epino, loch ſaniet experti, Loch è ſcilla. ana. ʒ.iij. Diayreos Salomonis ℥.j. pouder of Diapenidion cum ſpeciebus. 
                  ʒ.j. pouder of the rootes of Enula and ireos. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. iuice of Lycorice. ʒ.j.ſs. ſirupe of horehound, as much as ſhall ſuffice, to commixe them. Moreouer the breaſt muſt be annointed outwardlie with hote oiles of lillies, Ireos & ſweete Almondes, putting to them greace and other thinges after this ſort. ℞. oiles of lillies and ſweete Almondes. ana. ʒ.iij. of hennes greace. ʒ.j.ſs. freſh butter. ʒ.ij. the muſcelage of fenugreek and rootes of Althaea. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. storax. 
                  ʒ.ſs. pouder of the rootes of Enula and Ireos. ana. ʒ.j. ſafrone ℈.j. white waxe as much as is ſufficient,
                     Vnguentum.
                   make an ointment. The reſidue that is requiſite for the cure of the cough, are to be ſought in the chapter of diſtillation.
            
            
               CAP. VII. Of the Asthma. DE ASTHMATE.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  THE Asthma is cauſed when as groſſe and clammy humoures be gotten in aboundantlie into the griſtells or lappetes of the loungs, or that there be ſome ſwelling in it, like vnto a botch. Alſo they do breath difficultlie, weereby the Trachaea arteria is repleat and filled with diſtillations.
                     Signa.
                   Theſe euills are eaſie to be knowen a ſunder. For diſtillation doth alſo chaunce in hailefolke by and by through as manifeſt a cauſe in a manner altogither without a feauer, hauing the tokens of a diſtillation following it. If ther be ſwelling of the loungs like a botche, ther muſt needes follow a feauer, and ſo within fewe dayes after, the inflammation being rotted the matter of it is caſt out with the coughe. Yf ther be a crude and rawe tubercle and botch ingendred, ſuch doe not feele any great griefe, nether are they much troubled, with difficultie of breathing: but they are much troubled, when they eate or drinke, becauſe they cannot ſwallowe but with much griefe. Thoſe which be properly aſtamatickes, or orthopnickes, they haue no feauer at all, and there chaunceth to them heauines of ſenſe, and they do not ſpitt out matter with their ſpittle. Let their dyet be altogether hote and drye, therfore he muſt eſchewe ayre cold and moiſt.
                     Victus ratio.
                   He muſt eate the fleſh of partriches, birdes of the mountaines, hennes, capons, and ſuch like. He muſt eſchewe fiſhes, fruicte, pulſe, and all other thinges, that can ingender groſſe and clammy humours. Let him vſe often hyſope, percely, and fennell. Vniuerſally let him drincke a ſmall quantity at once, which haue a botch riſen, but much drincke muſt be vſed of thoſe, whoſe griſtles and flappes of the lunges are ſtopped with groſſe and clammy humours, which are not eaſie to be caſt out with the ſpittle becauſe of ther thickenes, and therfore they haue need of muche moiſtening, that it may come out the eaſilier. He muſt vſe exerciſe before meat, but not ſudanely by and by becauſe many by theſe meanes are dead. Frictions and rubbinges of the breaſt do profit. Perturbations of the mynd, eſpecially, wrathe and lamentation are to be eſchewed. But for the cure of the

aforſaid euils generally, you muſt labour that the aboundance of that humour, which engendreth theſe euils, may be aboliſhed and conſumed.
                     Curatio.
                   But before the cure of the euils particularly, if the euill be engendred of groſſe and clammy humours, you muſt cure it by extenuating and clenſing medicines. If it come of ſwelling like a botche, you muſt cure it by extenuating and drying medicins. Againſt groſſe and viſcous humours, thoſe medicines be good, which do extenuate and ſcoure without heat vehement,
                     Note.
                   for groſſe and viſcous humours doe vexe more toughe and clammy as well with vehement heat as they do with cold, ſo that afterward they can ſcarce be deuidid and pluckt away. Therfore Oximell ſquilliticum or ſquilla roſted and brayed with hony is eſpecially to be miniſtred vnto them. Alſo Syrupes of lycorace, horehound, and hyſope; Alſo the decoction reherſed in the laſt chapter before is good for purging. Yf neceſſity requyre, before all thinges cut the middle vaine in the arme, or the inner vaine, and draw out ſo much bloud as ſtrength will ſuffer. But if the body be not full, (the humour being preparate to purging by the premiſſes) you muſt miniſter often ſtronger medicines, which may driue out the groſſe and clammy humours. Therfore pilles of Agaricke, and pilulae cochiae, alſo Diaturbith with Rewbarbe, antidotum indi, and diaphaenicon are good for this purpoſe. Alſo miniſter the infuſion of Agaricke deſcribed before in the laſte chapter. Alſo the belly muſt be waſhed with ſtrong cliſters.
                     Clyſter.
                   Alſo he muſt vomit nowe and then, by taking of radiſh and other thinges which prouoke vomitte, of the which we haue ſpoken in the firſt booke of melancholiouſnes. But in the meane ſeaſon whyle purgations be miniſtred, you muſt miniſter medicines which can diſſolue and extenuate humours contained in the breaſt by little and little, and he muſt take Ariſtolochia rotunda, the rootes of Enula and Ireos, nettleſeede, hyſope, nigella, calamynt and ſuch like. Where with you may make decoctions or loches. For which purpoſe alſo thoſe Ecligmata,, which are reherſed in the chapter of the coughe, are good. Alſo Trochiſchi Becci
                        •
                     albi be moſt excellent. Outwardly you muſt lay to the breaſt, plaiſters made of figges, barly meale, or rather meale of fitches, hauing roſen, hony, and waxe commixed with it. Alſo apply to the breaſt of Ireos,
                     Vnguentum.
                   dill, rewe, and ſuch like, as is this. ℞. oyles of dill and rew. ana. ℥.ſs. the greace of hennes and duckes. ana. ʒ.ij. the rootes of Ireos, Enula, and Dracontij maioris. ana. ʒ.j. ſeede of flaxe. ℈.ij. Storax. ʒ.iij. waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an ointment. But the breaſt muſt firſt of all be rubbed with a rough linnen cloth, that (the poores being opned & vnlocked the ſtrēgth of the medicine may more readily pearce to the bottome. Alſo you muſt vſe thoſe medicines which can exulcerat the ſkinne, and can drawe out matter and watterye humours: as thoſe be which are named rubefacientia.
                  
                     Rubefacientia
                   For this purpoſe the breaſt muſt be rubbed with nettles, brayed or beaten. The places that are bliſtered are to be cured with warme oyle. But in an inueterat euill, and where all medicins are miniſtred in vaine, we muſt flye to burning, as Aetius teacheth in lib. 8. cap. 57. how it ſhould be done. For the cure of that which is like a botche, which hath need of medicines to attenuate and dry, (as is ſaid before),
                     Cure of Abſe
                        
                           ••
                        us.
                   you muſt note that it is cured with Aromaticke thinges, becauſe they do extenuate drye & heat. Therfore then you muſt giue vnto the Aſtmatickes ſpecially Antidotes, cōpounded of theſe thinges as is Theriaca, Mithridatum, Antidotum è moſcho dulce, Diambar Aromaticum roſaccum Diamargariton callidum, and many ſuch other like.
            
            
               CAP. VIII. Of the Pluriſie. DE PLEVRITIDE.
               
                  PLEVRISIE, to ſpeake exquiſitely and properly, is an inward inflammacion of the vpper ſkinne girding the ribbes and the ſides. In latine it is called lateralis dolor. Neither is it raſhely added to ſpeake exquiſitely and properly. For throughe many tormentes and throughe meates groſſe and flegmatike there doe engender humours that be could, crude, groſſe and viſcous in the bodie, which often tymes doe place themſelues by and by in the voide place of the breaſt, or in the lounges yt ſelf, and by reaſon of there multitude, they ſtretch out the vpper skinne, girding

the ſides within,
                     Cauſae.
                   and cauſe paine. But of this we will ſpeake nothing, becauſe the cure of it doth differ litle from the cure of aſthma, reherſed in the laſt chap. The pluriſie which is an inflammaiont of the vpper skinne, which girdeth the ſides within, is cauſed of aboundaunce of hote bloud,
                     Signa.
                   flowing vnnaturally to the aforeſaid vpper ſkinne within. The ſignes hereof ar difficultie of breathing, the coughe, a continuall feauer, vehement pricking paine, a hard pulſe, and ſharpe like a ſawe. And if his ſpittle be redde and bloudy, it ſignifieth bloud to haue dominion, if it be yellow and ſubpale, choler hath the maſtery, if it be white and froathie, fleume ruleth, if it be blackiſh, it betokeneth blacke choler to haue the maſtery or melancholie. The firſt two daies the ſicke muſt be content, with the iuice of ptiſan for his meate.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Afterward make him almonde milke with the decoction of ptiſan, or the crummes of fine bread mixed with the broth of a chicken or cocke, ſpecially if the patient be weake. He muſt vniuerſallie eſchew all thinges that be ſharpe and reſtrictiue. Let his drincke be water wherein cinamon is ſodden, and let the patient eſchew cold water as a pernicious thing, becauſe it maketh the ſpittle groſſe and thicke. Alſo let him eſchew wine altogether. Let him lie vpon the ſide, that is greaued. Let him auoyd wrath, ſorrow, and other perturbations of the mind.
                     Curatio.
                   In the beginning of the cure, the phiſition muſt diligently conſider, whether the body of the ſicke be greaued with aboundance of humours or noe, ſo that he muſt knowe at the firſt, whither the paīne doth mitigate and diſſolue with heating medicines, and when it doth not. For if the body be not full of humours, then in the beginning of the pleuriſie and inflammation the paine muſt be mitigated and diſcuſſed with fomentes & medicines that doe heate. But if the bodie doe abound with euill humours or be full of bloud you may not beginn the cure with thoſe thinges that doe heate, for they moue fluxe of humours to the aggreued place, for the place, to the which thinges that doe heate are laide, draweth more to it, then it ſendeth out by vapours againe. Therefore then you muſt not vſe hote fomentes which can not diſſolue the paine, but all the bodie muſt be emptied by bloude letting,
                     Ven
                           •
                         ſectio.
                   and you muſt cut the inner vaine of the arme, which they call the liuere vaine, or the ſplene vaine, on that arme which is right againſt the greefe on the ſame ſide. For bloud letting on the ſame ſide, doth not only drawe bloud away from the aggreaued parte, but alſo it purgeth it quickely, which is greately requiſite in the pleuriſite, and in other inward inflammationes. After bloud letting, if the womb do not caſt out the excrementes of it ſelfe, as it ought to doe, then caſte into the bellie this eaſie cliſter. ℞. mallowes, leaues of purple violetts, mercurie, ſpinage, of both the garden endiues. ana. M.j. whole barley. ℥.j. ſeeth theſe in iuſt quantity of water,
                     Cl
                           •
                        ſ
                           •
                        er.
                   vntill the third parte be conſumed: then take of the iuice of that decoction. lb.j. of caſia fiſtula newlie drawen. ℥.j.ſs. of the oiles of cammomill and violettes ana. ʒ.j.ſs. freſh butter. ℥.ſs. comon ſalt. ʒ.j. and commixe them all, to make a cliſter. After the bodie is emptied you muſt apply outwardly fomentes that do heat and mitigate paine,
                     Sacculi.
                   ſuch as ſacculi be, which are made of the floures of Cammomill, dill, melilote, tapſus barbatus, ſeede of flaxe, fenugreeke, milium, and branne mixed together, the decoctions of the herbes aforeſaid being put into bladders, or ſome other deuiſes. Alſo you may well apply a great ſoft ſponge, being dipt in the aforeſaid decoctions, & applied to the greife warme. You muſt couer the foments with clothes, leſt there ſtrengh do vaniſhe away quickly. Alſo take an aple, take out the core of it and fill the hole with Olibanum, & roſt it till it be ſoft, then take of the skin of the aple, & mixe the ſoft of the aple & the Olibanum together, and let rhe patient make bols of it, & ſwallow it all at once, which doth remoue the pain very much. This plaiſter alſo is good for this purpoſe. ℞. floures of Cammomill,
                     Empl
                           •
                        ſirum.
                   
                  tapſus barbatus, and dill. ana. M.ſs. line ſeede fenugreeke. ana. ʒ.iij. Anniſe ſeede. ʒ.j. barly meale. M.ſs. bray them and put them in water, till they be as thick as hony, after put to oiles of Dill and cammomill. ana. ℥.j.ſs. boile them again and adde to it the yolkes of two eggs,
                     Concurbi
                           ••
                        lae.
                   Of ſafron. ℈.j. and make an emplaiſter. After the 7. day if the pain do continewe ſtill after one ſorte: faſten a cupping glaſſe to the ſide, and ſcarrifie the skinne, for a manifeſt comoditie doeth enſue to them that haue the Pleuriſie, hy applying of cupping glaſſes. The cutts of the ſcarrified places muſt be ſtrewed with ſalt if the patient can abide it, if not, lay vpon it a linnen cloth dipped in oile and ſprinkled with ſalt. The next day after the ſcarrefi
                  
                     •
                  g is done, it is good to faſten on a cupping glaſſe againe, that the matterie bloud may be

drawen out of the litle wounds. This ſecōd extraction is better then the firſt, for at the ſecond time the blood is not drawen away, but the matter. Alſo the Phiſition may not neglecte to miniſter to the ſicke ſuch medicines as are good to make the fleume come vp eaſily (as is) Diapenidion, Diatragacanthes, conſerues of violettes, Trochiſci pectorales, putting to them other looches reherſed before in the chapter of the cough. Outwardlie you muſt apply medicines that haue vertue to diſcuſſe (as is) fenugreeke, dill, melilote, hiſope, and ſuch like. And if there do appeare tokens that it will rotte, and turne into matter, you muſt further it with this or the like oyntment. ℞. oyles of chammomill, of ſweete almoundes, and of lillies.
                     Vnguentum.
                   ana. ʒ.iij. butter without ſalt, hennes greace. ana. ʒ.ij. the muſculage of fenugreke, lyne ſeed, & the rootes of Althaea. ana. ʒ.j. waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment. The botche being broke, you muſt miniſter thoſe thinges that do clenſe and purifie matter and filthe, (as is) aqua mellis, or decoction of bareley, or ſuger roſet. The filth being clenſed, you may miniſter glutinatiue medicines, which ſhalbe ſufficiently declared in the chapter of the Ptiſicke afterward.
            
            
               CAP. IX. Of the inflammation of the Lunges. DE PERIPNEVMONIA.
               
                  PERIPNEVMONIA is an inflammation of the lounges with a ſharp feauer.
                     Cauſae.
                   This diſeaſe for the moſt part is cauſed of ſtrong diſtillations falling to the lounges, or els of the ſquinauncy, or the Aſthma, or the Pleuriſie, or of other diſeaſes. Alſo ſometime only inflammation is the cauſe of this diſeaſe.
                     Signa.
                   They which haue this euil, haue difficult breathing, the lounges lying vpon the hart doeth bring choking, they haue a ſharpe and burning feauer, and alſo fulnes and ſtretching out of the breaſt without payne. But if the ſkinnes which be ioyned all the length of the breaſt within be inflammate, then they feele payne at the breaſt. All the face, and the aggreued place looke red, the noſe is croked in the toppe, the veynes of the temples doe beate, the eyes do ſwell, the toung is dry, the appetite is loſt, the breath is hote, they couet cold water, and rather cold ayer, they haue a dry cough, it is froathy and cholericke, or bloudy and red which be the worſt tokēs. Yf the ſicke ſhall dy, he ſhal watch much, & haue fearful ſhort ſleaps, the hands & feete ſhalbe cold, the nailes ſhalbe crooked & ſwart, & he ſhal dye the fourth or the ſeuenth day at the furtheſt. But if the ſicke ſhall recouer, ther will follow bleeding aboundantly, or perturbation of the wombe, by paſſing forth of many cholerike and froathy humours, and ſometime the inflammation is chaunged into matter, and the matter being filthye is driuen out either with egeſtion or with the vryne, and the ſicke is deliuered from all the greife by and by. And if it do flow into the lounges and that aboundantly, or do choke him, then it is chaunged into a Ptiſicke. For ther dyet you muſt miniſter to them ſoupinges made of the iuice of Ptiſan, mixed with hony, origan, or hyſope.
                     Victus ratio.
                   They haue more need of extenuatiue meates then thoſe that haue the Pleuriſy. Alſo Alica, or aqua mulſa is good for them. Let them drincke litle, for moiſtnes hurteth the lounges. You may miniſter for preſeruing of ſtrength (eſpecially if choking conſtraineth you) Mulſa alone, & with pine nuttes, or mulſa wherin hyſope is ſodden, the pouder of dry Ireos to aqua mulſa is good. Generally the dyet of thoſe that haue Peripneumonia muſt in a maner be the ſame, which the pleuriſie ſhould haue, ſpecially if they begin to recouer.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure you muſt eſchewe letting of bloud in ſuch as haue fallen to this euill out of other diſeaſes, eſpecailly if they haue bene long in this caſe, or if they were let bloud before. You muſt mollifie the belly with cliſters, if he be coſtiue, or apply cupping glaſſes to the breaſt and ſides, if nothing do lett it, and that great boxinges and many, the ſkinne being cut and ſcarified. But if the peripneumonia began firſt without any other diſeaſe going before, then let him bloud,
                     Venae ſectio.
                   if ſtrength and other thinges will ſuffer it, you muſt cut the inner vaine of the arme and if ſtrength will ſuffer it drawe bloude on bothe the armes, and firſt but a little, in no caſe, vntil his harte faile, ſo that ſome ſtrength may be kept for the bloud letting of the next arme. But if anie thing doth forbid bloud letting, you may faſten cupping glaſſes to the whole breaſt, and the

ſides. And you muſt gett out as much bloud as ſtrength by them will ſuffer. Alſo it is good to mollifie the belly with ſharp cliſters, made of the decoctions of hyſope, yreos and rewe, putting to it the pulpe of Coloquintida, Sal gemme, and other thinges neceſſarie for ſuche clyſters. After this you muſt labour and ſee, that the breaſt & the lounges be purged by muche ſpitting, which muſt be made ſwift and eaſy. For the which purpoſe you muſt vſe thoſe Ecligmaes, oyntmentes, and emplaiſters, which are declared before in the chapter againſt the pleuriſie, excepting that in this caſe, you muſt miniſter the moſt ſtronge thinges, and thoſe that haue much ſtrength and vertue in extenuating. Therfore you muſt miniſter loch e ſcylla, loch e pulmone vulpis, the decoction of the roote of yreos & Enula. And you muſt make a cerate of oyle of rewe and nardinum, putting to it the marrow of a hart, of yreos, hyſope, & horehound beaten verie fine, and commixed with Venyce turpentyne, and lay it all ouer the breaſt, and the ſides.
            
            
               CAP. X. Of ſpitting bloud. DE SANGVINIS REIECTATIONE.
               
                  SPITTING of bloud is cauſed many times of an outward manifeſt cauſe, as of falling from a high place,
                     Cauſae.
                   or a ſtroke giuen to one outwardly, or with vehement ſtriking,
                     Externae.
                   or leaping, or if anie heauy thinges haue fallen vpon the breaſt, either els with great crying, or immoderat cold: for cold as Hippocrates witneſſeth breketh veines. Alſo ſpitting of bloud may be cauſed through heate. Alſo ſometime ſpitting of bloud is cauſed of inward and ſecret cauſes as fulnes and aboundance of naughtie bloud,
                     Internae.
                   gnawing aſunder the vaines, & bruſting open the heades of them. The gnawing a ſunder of thoſe vaines is cauſed of ſharpe humours either falling from the head to the lounges, or els engendred in the lounges it ſelfe. Moreouer the bloud, that is ſpit out, ſometime commeth from the breaſt and the lounges, or from the Trachea arteria, and ſometime from other places of the mouth or gummes, or the iawes, or from the ſtomake, vnto the which doth fal bloud out of the veyns and members adioyning (that is to ſay) from the liuer & the ſplene. The outward cauſes are knowen thus: If the ſpitting of bloud be cauſed of aboundance of bloud,
                     Signa.
                   then the bloud commeth out guſhing all at once, and after it is out, the ſicke is better and lighter. But if it be cauſed through bruſting of the mouthes of the veynes, then hote perturbations haue gone before it, as though the patient had vſed many hote bathes, & had dwelt in a hote Region, vſing hote dyet, in a hote ſeaſon. If ſpitting of bloud be cauſed throgh gnawing and eating a ſunder the veynes, then the bloud is not ſpitted forth all on a heape, but by little and little with the cough, and they are alwayes worſe. Alſo if the bloud which is ſpitted, be froathy and paliſh and cometh forth now & then with the coughe without any paine, it is a ſure token, that the bloud commeth out of the lounges. If flegmaticke bloud be ſpitted out with eaſie coughinges and reaching, then the bloud commeth from the Trachea arteria. If bloud be ſpi
                     •
                  ted forth being blacke and clodded together, hauing alſo the cough and paine in the aggreaued place, thē it is a token, that it cōmeth from the breaſt. For the dyet let him vſe meates which haue a moderat adſtriction, as be Ryce, hulled wheat, called Alica,
                  
                     Victus ratio.
                   and ſuch other like mixing with them the yuices of pomegranates or peares. For fleſh let him eat wild doues, turtles, and partriches, if they be boyled with veryuice, or yuice of ſoure grapes, or with Sumach. Alſo he muſt vſe quinces, peares, reſtrictiue apples, medlers and mulberies and ſuch like reherſed before in the chapter againſt bleeding at the noſe. He muſt drincke thicke redd wyne, or in ſteed of it, water wherin ſteele is quenched. He muſt eſchewe great noyſes,
                     Curatio.
                   often ſpeaking, all mouing of the body, and anger. As for the cure it differeth according to the diuerſitie of cauſes: for if the bloud come out of the head, it needeth but a ſimple and eaſie cure, for reſtrictiue things applyed cold to the palate of the mouth by collutions and gargariſes do performe the cure. What thinges they be, you maye ſeeke in the beginning of this ſecond Booke the firſt chapter. But if there do flowe much bloud from the head, then you muſt let him bloud on ſome vayne. Thoſe which ſpit bloud through diſtillation,
                     Venae ſectio.
                   you muſt by and by in the beginning let him bloud on ſome veyne, vnleſſe

a ſharp humour doth diſtill vehemently. Alſo afterward miniſter a ſharp cliſter, and empty the wombe, Alſo rubbe the handes, the armes, and the legges very much with a medicine that will heat and extenuate, and bynd the outward partes. After that, if the diſeaſe endure longer, ſhaue the head, and applye therto a medicine which hath vertue to dry, and diſcuſſe (as is) that, which is made of the doung of wyld doues, and after three houres ſpace, bring him into a bath, ſo that the head be annoynted with no fat thing. Afterward couer them meanely, and nouriſh them with ſoure ſoupinges. When they go to ſleep, miniſter to them Theriaca. The next day all the whole body (the head being excepted only) being rubbed; kepe him in quyet: and againe at night miniſter to him Theriaca. And if through theſe the diſtillation be not ſtopped, then the third day in the morning miniſter a litle hony ſodden, and rubbe all the body, and ſuffer him to reſt. The fourth day, after the taking of the Theriaca, miniſter againe much hony, and lay to the head a medicine of doues dounge.
                     Concurbi
                           •
                        ula.
                   And if the euill do endure longer, faſten a cupping glaſſe to the hinder part of the head. Laſt of al miniſter thoſe things which are able to purge the humours that are flowen into the lounges. But if it be a very ſharp humour, which diſtilleth out of the head, you muſt beware of bloud letting, and you muſt rather vſe purgations, and you muſt vſe the nouriſhmentes and remedies hereafter declared, and alſo before in the chapter againſt diſtillations. They which do ſpitt bloud comming from the lounges, by reaſon of breaking of ſome veynes in it, or by bruſting opē of ther heades, thoſe you muſt firſt of al charge, leaſt that they do breath much and make a noyſe, and that they ſpeake but litle, and in a maner not at all. Let them ſitt in open ayer hauing a ſtedfaſt bed, and of a good height.
                     Cure of 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                   For ſuch you muſt by and by cutt the inner veyn of the arme: and you muſt draw blood twiſe or thriſe a litle at once, for ſuch haue no neede of much blood letting. Alſo for the ſame purpoſe (that is to ſaye) that the blood may be drawen another way, you muſt rubbe the extremities, and vſe to bynde them harde with broadlinnen clothes. Theſe ſoe done, you muſt miniſter to him a drincke, made of vineger and water infuſed and warmed, and let him drincke it, ſo that if anie clodde of bloud doe cleaue one the fleſhe, it may (being there by diſſolued) be caſt out,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   neither doeth anie thinge let, but that you may miniſter this potion twiſe or thriſe in three houres. After thoſe you may miniſter both within the bodie and without medicines, which be reſtrictiue, and haue power to ſtoppe the poores. For thinges taken inwardly it profiteth to eate purcelaine albeit that his iuice dronken is of more effect, the iuice of knotgraſſe, ſharp grapes,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   decoction of ſumach, galls, the ſhells of acornes, the roote of bremble, balauſtia, ſeed of ſorrel, the rootes of horſetaile and ſuch like, which are declared in the chapiter againſt bleeding at the noſe. But theſe are better and of more effect, then the aforeſaid thinges (that is to ſay) terra lemnia beaten into very fine pouder, and miniſtred with the iuice of pomegarnettes, or of knottgraſſe, or lapis hematitis at once. ℈.j. in the like iuice. Amonge compoundes you muſt vſe this lohoch. ℞. of old conſerue of roſes,
                     Ecligma.
                   of roberibes. ana. ʒ.j. of diatragacanthum frigdium, and diacotoneon ſimplex. ana. ℥.ſs. of the powders of corall, lapis hematitis and terra lē
                     nia. ana. ℈.ij. bole armoniacke. ʒ.j. dragons bloud. ʒ.ſs. pomgarnet floures. ʒ.j. frankenſēce the roote of conſolida maior. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſirupe of mirtells, as much as is ſufficient to cōmixe them, & make an Ecligma. Afterward you muſt ſprinckle the breaſt outwardlie with reſtrictiue wine, & the oiles of roſes, quinces, and myrtines. But if ther be much eruption of bloud (eſpecially being ſommer) and the ſpitting out there of comming without a coughe, and the ſicke not being weake, but ſtronge and fleſhie; then you may take vineger for wyne, and apply it to with ſponges. It is good to put to the aforeſaid oiles, bolearmoniacke, terra lemnia, corall, and ſuch like, and to make an ointment there of with waxe. Alſo apply ther vnto a ſofte plaiſter made of dates, Acatia, the roote of conſolida maior, the barckes of pomgarnettes; and the meale of lintles. Alſo a cerate made of the meate of pomegarnettes, frankenſence, red coral, balauſtia, bolearmony, terra lemnia, and ſuch like is good of effecte. But you muſt ſpecially take head, that by and by after the rupture of the veſſels, it may grow together againe, before it take inflamacion: for if ther come inflamacion, before it be growen together; ther is but litle hope of the conglutinacion of the wombe, for it keepeth it ſtretched out many daies. For you muſt waſhe awaie aſwell the matter, as the watery bloud out of the vlcer; after that the inflamacion is gone. But here the reader muſt be admoniſhed, that

he take heede that he do not apply outwardlie againſt that place,
                     Note.
                   where the bloud runneth out, nether reſtrictiue thinges nor cold thinges without reſtriction: vnleſſe matter be firſt turned another way, & drawē from that place; for els it would dryue the bloud inward and ſtop the vaines full that be within. Therefore firſt alwaies you muſt drawe the bloud to the contrarie parte,
                     Cure of ſpitting of bloud cauſed of ſharp humours
                   and after that applie reſtrictiue thinges outwardlie. Thoſe which ſpitt bloud through eroſion and gnawing of ſharp humours, you muſt firſt of all miniſter thoſe thinges vnto them which haue vertue to purge ſharpe humours, diſtilling into the lounges, ſuch; as be ſpoken of before in the chapter of diſtillation. After that miniſter thoſe thinges which can alter and make thicke the thinne and ſharpe humours: and ſoe haue vertue to ſtop the diſtillation, as is ſirupe of violettes, roſes, mirtines, hidromalon, ininacotoueorum and ſuch like. For the ſame purpoſe ſometime miniſter ſirupes of poppie & other ſomnoriferous medicines. The diſtillation being ceaſed, you muſt reſtore the gnawen partes with meates of good iuice,
                     Cure of 
                           〈◊〉
                         bloud.
                   and with medicines that doe engender fleaſhe. Moreouer they which vomit bloud muſt vſe the ſame diet and cure, which is before rehearſed (that is) if the bloud flow from the liuer, cut the vaine on the arme. But if the bloud be caried from the ſplene, into the belie; cut the vaine on the left hand, which is betweene the litle finger, and the ringe finger, and miniſter to them reſtrictiue meates and drinckes, adding this to the cure, that they doe not take meate and drincke often: for they may eaſily be cured, if the remedies which be receiued in, be applied to thoſe partes that ſheade bloud. And for bloud congealed in the ſtomacke like a hillocke, let him drincke creame, and ſpecially of a harte, or let it be auoided with ſauery mixed with vineger or with aloē. Thoſe, which ſpitt bloud from the palate of there mouth, they muſt gargariſe with reſtrictiue thinges, and applie to the forehead, and to the head, thoſe thinges which are applied vnto the noſe, when it bledeth. Furthermore to conclude, after that all thinges be done, and that the fluxe of bloud be ſtopped then the ſtrength muſt be cheriſhed and reſtored againe. And ſpecially he muſt beware of the often vſing of bathes, of drincking of wine, of wrathe and of Venus.
            
            
               CAP. XI. Of ſpitting of matter. DE EMPYEMATE.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  EMPIEMA In Greeke ſignifieth a mattery ſpitting. In latin it is called Suppuratio It is cauſed when an impoſtume, or botch being in the vpper skin of them which girdeth the ribbes inwardly, or els in ſome other vpper skinne of the breaſt, broken all at once, and is ſhedde and powred into the empty place of the breaſte, which is between the lounges and the vpper skinne that girdeth in the ribbes. It is cauſed ſometime through braſting out of bloud (an vlcer not being brought to his ſcarre, and perfect ſhutting vp). Alſo ſometime through fluxe of the head, and other vpper partes falling thither,
                     Signa.
                   which it wont often to chaunge into the ſquinnancie. The ſignes be theſe, heauines is felt in the bottom of the breaſt, a ſtrong cough and a drie without pain. And alſo ſometime with moiſtneſſe, for the which they ſeeme to be eaſed. In the beginning there chaunceth to them feauers faint, inordinat, and hard to be iudged. When the impoſtume draweth neere to a rupture, then they haue a feauer more vehement with quaking, and they are trobled in there ſpeeche. Being broken there appeareth ſomewhat to flowe into the breaſts bottome, according to the often chaunging of there lying, and ſpecially when they chāgeying from one ſide to an other, then ſurely the multitude of matter is euident, and oftentimes a certain noiſe of the flowing may perfectly be heard when they turne them. Alſo the matter that commeth out is ſometimes cleare, ſometime thicke and dreggie. Some impoſtumes doe bruſt out vpward, that is, vnto the voide place of the breaſt, and theſe be more perillous. Some impoſtumes doe flowe out downward vnto the paunche, & the bowells & alſo the blader. They alwaies labour of the feauer ethicke, vntill all thinges be brought out vpward. Thoſe that be vexed with this deſeaſe of ſpitting of matter, let them remaine in a dry ayer,
                     Victus ratio.
                   let them vſe meates of good iuice eaſy to digeſt, brothes of cockes, the fleſhe of

henns, chickens, birdes of mountaines. Alſo vſe decoctions & brothes of cicers with herbs (as is) hiſope, & parcely▪ let his drincke be aqua mulſa, and thinne white winne.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure in this diſeaſe, except diligent ſpeede be made by and by, the gathering together of matter cauſeth the ptiſicke, the lounges drawing vlceration. Therefore firſt you muſt helpe the concoction of the impoſtume with fomentes by ſponges or bladders, with cataplaſmes or emplaiſters, made of the meales of barley, fenugreeke, and lyne ſeedes, of figges, doues doung mallowes, Althaea, and a litle roſen. Alſo you muſt apply to it cerates, made of butter, ireos laurell bearyes, rewe, and other thinges, which can ripe & diſſolue the impoſtume, whereof thou ſhalt find many in the chapter of Aſthma before, and if the euill be not diſſolued, you muſt apply to it, thinges that will breake the botche. The breaking of the botch is procured by lying on the hole ſide eating of ſalt meates, and theſe pilles giuen vnto him, when he intendeth to ſlepe. ℞. of the pouder of Hierapicrae Galeni. ℥.j. of the pulpe of Coloquintida. ℈.j with the iuyce of wormewood as much as is ſufficient to commixe them, and make pilles, whereof let him hold one at once in his mouth. By this meanes it ſhall come to paſſe, that the ſick ſhall couet to ſpit often, & ſo by ouermuch ſpitting the impoſtume may break. The rupture being made, you muſt take diligent heed, whether the matter runneth, for you muſt help his auoyding, for if it creepe into the belly, you muſt miniſter moſt of all mollifications. Yf it fall to the bladder, you muſt miniſter moſt thoſe thinges which prouoke vryne. Yf the matter commeth out by a cough, then nothing is more meete to be miniſtred then ptiſan, mixed with good hony. Alſo abſterſiue and ſcouring thinges doe profit, which are partly declared in the chapter againſt the pluriſie, and part of them ſhalbe ſpoken of in the next chapter. But you may commodiouſly commixe with ther meate, thoſe thinges which prouoke vryne, howſoeuer the matter intendeth to flowe. As for the purging and driuing out of the matter, aqua mulſa decoct with ireos, and muche lycorice is maruellous profitable. Moreouer the decoction of hyſope, ireos, horehound and ſuch like is good, wherof you may ſeeke more in the chapter of aſthma. The reſt that ſeemeth to be neceſſarie for the cure of this diſeaſe, ſhal be ſpoken of in the next chapter.
            
            
               CAP. XII. Of the Ptiſicke. DE TABE.
               
                  PTHISIS in Greek, Tabes in latin, It is properly an exulceration of the loungs, till there followeth ſpitting of bloud withall.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed for the moſte part through a ſharp & gnawing humour, flowing from the head into the lounges Alſo it is cauſed through the bloud and matter that remaineth, after the bruſting out of it in them that haue the pleuriſie, the Peripneumonia, or Empyema.
                  
                     Signa.
                   They which labour of this diſeaſe, they are knowen by waſting the whole bodie, and the fleſhe. Alſo there noſethrilles be ſharpe, there temples be ſliden downe, there eyes be holowe, and there ſhoulders ſtick out like birdes winges. Moreower they cough, and be vexed with the feauer Ethicke, they breath difficultly, ther cheeke balls wexe ſwart, ther nailes do crooke and ſeem pale. Alſo the euil ouercomming, the belly is troubled, and thirſt doth vex them more, their heere doth ſhedd, and that which they doe ſpitt out, is of a vehement ſtinking ſauour. As for vlcers of the loungs, they are verie hard to be cured, becauſe they cannot be purged and cleanſed without the cough, and in them that cough,
                     Looke Hippocrates in his apharip
                           •
                        e .5. the 14. & the 13. & the 11 Theſe cauſes why the cura is hard.
                   the vlcer is broken and ſo the euill returneth as it were by a certaine circuit. Alſo the loungs among the other inward members, becauſe of reſpiration and breathing, are alway in mouing, and alſo are rent with coughing. But the vlcers, which are to be healed, would require quiet and reſt. Moreouer ſtrength of the medicines cannot come to the vlcers, before it be altered in the ſtomake, and in the body, in the liuer. Neuertheleſſe although cauſes before reherſed, make the cure to ſeeme hard, yet we may go about to cure that vlceration. Therefore in the beginning you muſt aſcribe to thoſe that be ptiſicke a conuenient diet after this ſort, Let him dwell in a dry ayer temperat betwen heate and coldnes, let ther meat be ptyſan almōd

milcke, reere egges, fleſh of the birdes of mountaines, of partriche, of pheſants, of owſils, of black birdes, of hennes, of capons, of calues, of ſucking kiddes. Alſo ſcalie fiſhes in ſtony waters, crabbes of the freſh riuer. But among all meates, milcke is beſt for them that be ptiſicke, ſpecially womans milke, after that aſſes milcke, & gootes milcke, which would he ſucked out of the dugges, if it might be, or let it be drunke by and by after the milcking of it, while it is hote. But you muſt beware, that they take no meate by and by after their milcke, and ſpecially no wine, for then it would be corrupted with it in the ſtomake. But if they be very much feuerous, ſpecially of a rotē feuer, thē it is not good to take milke. Among fruites it is good to eat rayſons, ſweet almoundes, pyne nuttes, figges, dates, piſ
                     •
                  ay. Let them eſchew exerciſes and mouinges that be vehement. It is not vnprofitable to walke eaſilie before meate, and after meate, they muſt altogeather reſt, let them vſe to ſleepe on nightes meanely. Let them eſc
                     •
                  hw wrath and ſadnes, vnmeaſurable watchinges. Hunger, thirſt, lecherie, hote houſes, and whatſoeuer may emtie the body. Let his drinke be but ſmall & thinne, or if his feuer be vehement, let him drinke water, wherein a litle cynnamon is ſodden, or the drincke that is called Hippocras, whoſe making is declared in the firſt booke, in the chap. againſt the palſey. If the euill be cauſed through the flowing of a ſharpe humour out of the head, you muſt begine the cure by remouing of the diſtillation, which we haue taught before, in his proper chapiter. Therfore now we will ſhewe the exulceration of the lounges,
                     Curatio.
                   how it is to be cured. And firſt for the cure therof, we muſt miniſter thoſe thinges which haue an abſterſiue and ſcouring vertue, & that which will cauſe that the matter may eaſily be brought vpward, for the which purpoſe Hydromel is ſpecially good. And alſo decoction of barely with ſugar and hony, alſo decoctions of ireos, figes, maidenheare, hiſope horehound and licorace. If there come a feauer, you may commixe with the aforeſaid thinges the four great cold ſees. Outwardlie you muſt apply emplaſters, and Cataplaſmes made of line ſeed, fenugreeke and ſuch like declared in the laſt chapter de Empiemate. Alſo for the ſame purpoſe you may ſeeke many remedies in the chapter againſt the Asthma. The lounges being clenſed and purged from matter: you muſt miniſter thoſe medicines which will glutinate and heale vp the vlcer. For this purpoſe conſerue of roſes is commended almoſt of all Phiſitions, for this hath not onely the vertue to glutinate, but alſo to clenſe and ſcour, but the newer it is, the more it ſcoureth, & the older it is the more it glutinateth. Alſo theſe are maruelous good, bolearmony, dragons bloud, ambre, corall, purcelain ſeede, and ſuch like, which haue vertue to ſcour and ioine together. Alſo theſe thinges are good loch de pulmone vulpis, loch è pino, conſerues of conſolida maior, and maidenheare. Therefore of theſe you may make this compound medicinne. ℞, conſerues of Conſolida maior, and of maidenheare ana. ℥.ſs. conſerus of roſes. ℥.j, loch è pulmone vulpis. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. loch è pino. 
                  ʒ.ij. pouder of Diatragā canthos hos frigidum. 
                  ʒ, iij. bolearmoniacke. ʒ.j.ſs. ſirupe of poppie as much as will ſuffice to commix it,
                     Ecl
                           •
                        gma.
                   and make a loch. Alſo this pouder daily miniſtred cauſeth much eaſe. ℞. of the ſeds of white poppie. ʒ.ſs. gumme arabick, Amylum, and gumme tragacant. ana. ʒ.j, ſs. ſeedes of cucumbers, citrons gourds, melons, quinces. ana. ʒ.iij. burnt Iuory, iuice of licorace. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. penidies,
                  
                     Puluis.
                   as much in weight as all the reſt. Make a pouder, of the which miniſter daily euerie morning. ʒ.ij with ſirup of poppy or roſes. Moreouer at that time, that the wounds be you muſt annoint the breaſt without, with oile of quinces, mirtelles or roſes, adding thereto ſometime ſumach, Hipociſchidos, pomegarnet rindes, acatia, gales and ſuch like. In the end the bodie being extenuat and waſted, it is good to reſtore with a conuenient diet vſing all thoſe meats which be of good iuice, eaſy to digeſt, and nouriſh much, at which time alſo you may miniſter this medicine. ℞. of the pulpe of a capon. ℥.j. cockes ſtone, pine nuttes piſtax,
                     Morſuli refectori
                           •
                        .
                   ſweet almonds. ana. ℥.ſs. of the pouder of the Antidoti de gēmis. 
                  ʒ.ſs, pouder of Diarro don abbatis, dianthon, & arromaticum roſarum. ana. ℈.j. white ſaunders and cinamon. ana. ʒ.ſs. maces. ℈.j. white ſuger of the fineſt. lb.j. diſſolue, the ſuger in water of bugloſſe, and ro
                  
                     •
                  es, and make lozenges, or an electuarie, of the which miniſter euery day.
            
            
               
               CAP. XIII. Of panting of the hart. DE CORDIS PALPITATIONE.
               
                  PALPITATIO & tremor cordis in Latin, is in Engliſh panting and trembling of the heart, it is a corrupt motion of the heart, or a ſtretching out of it againſt nature. The new ſort of Phiſitions do wrongfullie call it Cardiaca. It is cauſed of all ſuch things as do trouble and affect the heart aboue nature (as is) euerie diſtempure,
                     Cauſae.
                   or the multitude of an humor contayned in the outwarde ſkinne that goeth about the heart, or elſe of ſwelling contrarie to nature and ſuch like. The diſeaſe is eaſily known by the wordes of the patient, who doth eaſily feele the beating and panting.
                     Signa.
                   And alſo you may know it by the pulſe: for in a hote diſtempure there commeth a feuer, & the pulſe is ſwift and great, in a cold diſtempure, the contrarie. If plentie of an humour contayned in the vpper ſkinne of the heart do cauſe beating therof, then the pulſe is ſoft and feble. The diet muſt be ordained diuerſlie according to the diuerſitie of cauſes: for in a hote diſtempure of the heart, the ayre ought to be meanly cold, but in a cold diſtempure it ought to be meanly warme: But vniuerſally whatſoeuer the cauſe be,
                     Victus ratio.
                   you muſt eſchewe any thing that doth trouble or reſolue the vitall ſpirites, (as be) ouermuch heate, anger, hunger, watching, lecherie, vnmeaſurable cold, meate of euill iuice. If aboundance of any humour contayned in the vpper ſkinne, that goeth about the heart, do engender panting of the hart: let his whole di
                     ••
                   be extenuatiue, let their drinke in a hote diſtempure be thinne and ſmall, or a iulep of violets or roſes, or decoction of Bugloſſe. In a cold diſtempure they maie drinke pure wine, or other ſtrong drinke. Thoſe, that be vexed with beating of the hart cauſed of hote diſtempure, they muſt haue remedy by cold medicins, which can correct the hote diſtempure,
                     Cure of 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   & adde ſtrength to the heart. (As theſe be among ſimples) roſes, violetts▪ flours of water lillies, Saunders, Corall, Camphire, and ſuch like. Among compounds be theſe, Diamargariton frigidum, diarrodon abbatis, conſerues of roſes, of violetts, of Bugloſſe, and their plantes, iuices and ſyrupes. Therfore of the aforeſaid things there may be made potions, electuaries, and lozengs as you thinke good. Outwardly appoint ointments and emplaiſters, eſpecially epithemes, ſacculi and other like, whatſoeuer is able to alter the hote diſtempure of the liuer.
                     Vnguentum.
                   And firſt among oyntmentes this is good, ℞. the oiles of roſes, violets, and nimphea. ana. ʒ.ij. of red corall, & red ſaunders, & red roſes, ana. ℈.j. Camphire, gr. ii. whit wax as much as is ſufficient, and make an ointment, wherewith annoint the region of the harte & the backebone. Amonge epithemes, let this be eſpecially laid to the harte. ℞. the waters of roſes, ſorrell, and bugloſſe. ana. ℥.iij. water of baume. ℥.j. pouder of the cordiall medicine. ʒ.j. red ſaunders, red corall. ana. ʒ.ſs. purcelaine. gr. iij. ſaffrron. gr. iiij. commixe all together & make an epitheme.
                     Epithema.
                   Alſo amonge the ſortes of drye bages this is beſt. ℞. floures of bugloſſe, violettes, red roſes. ana. M.ſs. all the ſaunders of eche. ʒ.j. red corall and white of eche. ʒ.j.ſs. of pearles. ℈.j. being firſt poudred, put them in ſilke and make a Sacculus.
                  
                     Sacculus. Cure of diſtempure of the heart cauſed throughe cold mak
                           •
                        ng it to beate & pa
                           ••
                        e. Vnguentum.
                   But thoſe that be aggreaued with a cold diſtempure of the harte to ſuch among ſimple medicines, theſe be profitable (that is) ambre, muſke, ſaffron, wood of aloes, ſtorax, cloues, maces, zedoary, baulmes, and ſuch like, among compoundes theſe are good: the electuary, pliriſar ooticon, dianbar, dianthos, aromaticum roſarum, and ſuch like of the which may be made kindes of medicines, like as wee did againſt hote diſtempure of the harte. For ointementes may be made after this ſorte. ℞. the oiles of lillies of ſpike, and of ſaffron, ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. gallia moſchata, cloues. ana. ℈.j. woode of aloes. ℈.ſs. maces. ℈.j. ſaffron. gr. iij. waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an ointment.
                     Epithemae.
                   Alſo you may make an epitheme thus. ℞. waters of balme, maioram, bugloſſe. ana. ℥.iiij. pouders of the electuares. diambar and diamoſche; ana. ʒ.ſs. maces, wood of aloes. ana. ℈.j. amber. gr. j. of the beſt wine. ℥.j. commixe them together, and make a epithema.
                     Sacculus.
                   An example of ſacculus is thus. ℞. floures of balme, and bugloſe. ana. M.j.ſs. choſen ſinamon, cloues, maces. ana. ʒ.j. wood of aloes. ℈.j. barke of the citron apple. ʒ.j.ſs. ſaffron. ℈.j. ambre. gr. j. braie all together, and make a ſacculus of ſilcke to lay to the harte.
                     Cure of panting of the hart cauſed of an humour.
                   And if there be panting of the harte, engendred throughe ſome humour contained in the vpper ſkinne that compaſſeth the harte: it muſt be cured (as galene witneſſeth) with a diet which will extenuate, and by cutting of a vaine in the arme, Therefore you muſt cut the inner vaine of the arme, or the

middle veyne. And afterward one muſt miniſter and applie as well inwardly as outwardly, medicines, that haue vertue to extenuate and ſtrength the harte by applying of ointments, and epithemes, and ſacculi, and ſuch like. Of the which thinges to make priuate exemples, wee thincke it in vaine, ſeeing it is eaſie to any man by examples now declared heere, and in other places, to make medicines for his purpoſe of whatſoeuer ſorte he will.
            
            
               CAP XIIII. Of ſwounding. DE SINCOPE.
               
                  SINCOPE is a ſwift falling of the ſtrength (as Galen ſaith) it is cauſed through much excretion and auoyding of bloud or through vnmeaſurable emptying of the belly,
                     Cauſae.
                   or vehement mouing, or through great paine, or much and oftē waſhinges. Alſo through aboundant ſwetts, and all other immoderate vacuations, alſo feare, dread, and all ſuch like perturbations of the mind. Moreouer through abounding of crude & raw humours, through great inflāmaciō or through vicious and thinne humours, or els by taken breath in a ſtincking ayer. The ſincope is knowen by theſe tokens,
                     Signa.
                   the pulſe is rare and obſcure, the extreme partes, as the hād
                     •
                   and feete be cold, ſwete about the face, the taking away of the brightnes of the ſkinne that is in it, and as it weare a palſey of the whole body. Moreouer to theſe ther commeth deſperation, vexation of the mind, & ſhaking of the body. And moreouer there chaunceth ſometime with the ſwounding of the harte,
                     Syncope c
                           •
                        rd
                           •
                        .
                   a vice (that is) when the harte is vehemently diſtempured. Alſo ſometime it chaunceth to the ſtomach (that is) when humours abounding or heaped together or crude, either els ſharpe and gnawing be in it: that kind of ſincope is called ſtomachica.
                  
                     Syncope ſtomachica.
                   They which fall in a ſwoun through plenty of raw humours contained in the mouth of the ſtomake, in ſuch the ſides are inflate and puffed vp, & the whole body ſeemeth to be of a greater bignes then it ſhould naturallye be, alſo there colour chaungeth whyter then it was wont to do: and to conclude therbody is lyke to them that haue the dropſy; alſo to many ther colour waxeth ſwarter and blacker lyke lead, but the pulſes of the ſenowes be leaſt of all other, moreouer they be obſcure and inequall. Thoſe which are vexed with ſwoūding through aboundance of ſharp humours, they feele continuall pulling, twitching and gnawing in the mouth of the ſtomacke. They which through thinne vices which doe ſwiftly exhalate and ſtye vp doe ſuffer ſwoūding, in them there face appeareth by and by as though it wer dead, there noſe is ſharp, there eyes be hollow, and ſuch like. The other cauſes of Sincope are knowen by the talk of them that ſtand by without any great buſineſſe. It is eaſie to know,
                     Cure of ſwounding throughe vnmeaſurable emptying.
                   that the cure muſt be diuerſe, according to the diuerſitie of the cauſes. If ſoū
                  ding doth inuade one through excretion and auoiding of bloud, or through anye other vnmeaſurable or ſuddain empteing, you muſt ſprincle there face with cold things, or with roſe water, which hath a maruelouſe good effect in this caſe. The extreame parts of the bodie, muſt be bound vehementlie with bandes, and muſt be rubbed a litle with ſharp linnen clothes. If the empteing be vpward, you muſt rubbe the legges: if it be dounward, rubbe and bind the handes. Alſo cupping glaſſes are to be faſtned lightly, diuerſly, according to the places where the euacuations, or where the bloud bruſteth out. Moreouer the mouth muſt be opened, by putting in your fingers, or a vedge, or ſome other thinge, but the paſſage of hearing, and of the noſeterilles would be thruſt togeather, that the aire that is breathed in, might ſtirre and comforte the ſpirits. Alſo it is good by and by for to conſort the ſprites with ſundry odoraments. For as Hypocrates ſaieth in his booke de alimentis, there is nothing that calleth the ſtrenght again ſooner thē odoures. Therfore it is good to apply to the noſe of the ſicke, chikens roſted, and parted a ſunder in the middeſt. Alſo roſes, violettes, quinces citrons and ſuch like be good. You muſt miniſter wine to him that is thinne, and alaied. Let the aire of the chamber be cold, but let not the chamber be verie full of light, let there counter pointes be taken away that ly vpon them, and let the couerings wherewith they be couered be ſoft, and ſtrew the floore with leaues of mirtells, vynes, okes, briers, and roſes thē
                  
ſelues, and ſprinckle it with water.
                     S
                           •
                        oppers of great ſweties.
                   In vnmaſurable ſwetes annoint the ſweting partes with oile of mirtells, roſes, ond quinces: but ſpecially the necke, the breaſt, the places vnder the arme holes and the ſhare. For this purpoſe alſo, it is good to annointe amilum, and pouders of frankenſence, mixed with the white of an egge, and other reſtrictiue medicines. Alſo you muſt hold to his noſe diuers odoraments, as roſes, ſaunders, quinces, flours of water lillies, & campheir, but you may not then bind the extreme partes of the body.
                     Cure of ſwounding cauſed of paine.
                   If ſounding be cauſed through pain, you muſt diligentlie enquire the cauſe: for if it come of an outward cauſe, the ceaſing of the paine cureth the ſwounding. But if the paine be cauſed of noe outward cauſet, hou muſt find out ſome inward cauſe which cauſeth paine, If fulnes with retching and ſtretching out do cauſe the payne by and by, if ſtrength will ſuffer it, let him bloud on that veyne, that is nigheſt to the aggreued part, but if ſtrength be feeble, then you muſt only pull it backe, or you muſt driue it vpward or downward or both wayes, or vſe frictions. But whereas the paine is cauſed of vicious humours, you muſt rather purge it. If both the aforeſaid cauſes come together, then you muſt vſe euacuations both wayes: but bloud letting muſt firſt be vſed before any of them. Afterward if the corrupt humours be faſtened, and do ſticke faſt in ſome only place, you muſt begin your cure with diſſoluing and diſcuſſiue medicines. As for curing of other paines, they may be ſought in their owne proper chapters, and eſpecially in the chapter againſt the cholicke. Thoſe which do ſwound through great ſorrowe, feare, and other perturbations of the mynd,
                     
                        Cure of ſwounding by affections of the mynd.
                     
                     
                        Cure of ſwounding throughe aboundance of crude humours.
                     
                   they are fully cured by vſing of there contraryes. Nether let paſſe to miniſter vnto them that do ſwound for great ſorrowe, odoriferous thinges, & other thinges, which being taken inwardly may comfort the ſpirits. They which be troubled with ſwounding through plenty of crude humours, they may nether ſuffer letting of bloud nor purging; Therfore you muſt cure ſuch by frictions. And you muſt by and by in the beginning of the euill begin, and you muſt rubbe the legges firſt from the vpper part, and ſo downward with linnen clothes not very ſofte, but ſomewhat ſharpe: afterward likewiſe the armes from the ſhoulders to the fingers. And when all the arteries and veynes be ſufficiently heat, and that ye doubt that ſome wearines will come to the ſenſes through ouer much rubbing: you muſt vſe oyle ſolutiue and looſing, as is oyle of dill, and chammomill, and you muſt beware eſpecially of reſtrictiue thinges. And when thou haſte annoynted the partes of the body, and rubbed them well, then you muſt come to the bone, and that you muſt likewiſe firſt rubbe with a linnen cloth, and then with oyle: from that you, muſt go againe to the legges, and then to the armes, and ſo againe to the backe, and ſo you muſt do all, and that in a bright chamber without moiſture, whoſe ayre muſt be temperat. Moreouer mulſa, wherein hyſope is ſodden is moſt meete for them; and you muſt beware that you miniſter not to them, nether meate, nor brothes, nor water, nor to ſuffer him to drincke liberally, but only mulſa the three firſt dayes, and to rubbe him by courſe continually, graunting him only but time to ſleepe, which muſt be in a meane. But if there pulſe be very ſmall and feeble, or alſo beſides that wonderfull inequall, you may know that there is extreme perill: but yet you muſt do as it is taught before, and go about none other thinge. But if the pulſe be indifferently ſtrong and great, and be not cut of, nor thruſt together, then you muſt conſider the ſtate of the belly, and if it do not auoid ordure ſufficiently of it ſelfe, you may poure in ſomwhat boldly beneath. For it chaunceth after the taking of aqua mulſa, that the ſuperfluities which are wont to be gathered in the principal veynes (that is) they which be about the liuer, and the bowell which ioyneth with the midrife vnto the backe, by that thing, they are well caſt out. And if a heape of ſuperfluities do violentlye prouoke the belly aboue reaſon, firſt you muſt ſeeth your mulſa more higher, for ſo it doth make the belly leſſe ſoluble, & it nouriſheth more. After this, if the ſuperfluities do diſcend more largely, the belly may not be ſtopped ſo, but you muſt miniſter for aqua mulſa, the iuyce of ptiſan. And if they continew ſtill to flow, nouriſh him with ſoupinges of alica, taking heed to the working of the pulſes in the meane ſeaſon: for ſometime they are chaunged to imbecillitie, or vnequalnes or ſmalnes. At which time it is good to miniſter bread infuſed in wyne, & that, if nether the belly nor the liuer be troubled with an impoſtume; for if they be vexed with it,
                     P
                           •
                        leg
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        .
                   (the body being ſtuffed with crude and rawe iuyces) the ſicke is deſperate of al health. Therfore in ſuch a caſe, of the ſicke, thou ſheweſt thy ſelfe without blame, if thou ſay before that

he will dye, and vſe no better medicines. But if there be at any time found aboundance of clammy humours, by and by miniſter Oximel in ſteed of mulſa. Therefore if it be Sommer, and the ſicke vſed to cold potions, giue him the Oximel colde. but if it be winter, miniſter it hote. Alſo theſe thinges are verie euill for them, as well bathinges, as alſo the open ayer, as often,
                     
                        Cure of ſwounding now preſent.
                     
                     
                        Phleg
                              •••
                           .
                     
                   as it is ouer hote or ouer colde. But if thou art called to them, which be preſently vexed with ſwounding, where the belly and the liuer be without impoſtumation, thou ſhalt miniſter a litle bread, and that with ſome wyne, becauſe it cauſeth ſwift diſtribution into other partes of the body, and thou ſhalt come ſtraight to frictions and rubbinges, and thou ſhalt do according to the order before preſcribed. Bu if it be Sommer, or the Region naturally hote and burning, or the ſtate of the heauen vehemently hote: thou ſhalt alay the wine with cold water, but if there be no ſuch thing, with hote. But the drincke that ſhalbe giuen the ſecond & third time, thou ſhalt miniſter it altogether hote. For in the whole cure, where we vſe frictions, heate is beſt, as a helper of the concoction of crude humours. But to thoſe which haue ſwounding cauſed of choler, which troubled the mouth of the ſtomake, to them you muſt miniſter cold potions. But yet it is good to miniſter to all that haue the ſyncope, wyne, that is hote by nature, yelowiſh in colour, thinne in ſubſtance, cold, and that which prouoketh diſtribution in the body: for we woulde haue the food that is receiued, to be diſtributed about the body, and not to tary in the ſtomake. They that are vexed with ſwounding through vice of thinne humours,
                     Cure of ſyncope cauſed of thinne humours.
                   thoſe you muſt empty by little & little, & continually, becauſe that they cānot ſuffer much emptying at once, thoſe alſo we muſt nouriſh by little and litle, and often, the outward part of the ſkin muſt be thickened: and you muſt make the ayer of the chamber cold and reſtrictiue. Alſo you muſt annoint them with reſtrictiue medicines and oyntmentes. and you muſt giue them meates, that do not readilie diſperſe & flow: therfore giue nether aqua mulſa, nor ptiſan, but bread and ſoupinges of alica, & ſoure fruictes, which will not eaſilie be corrupted. You ſhall alſo giue ſometime to them egges, ſpecially ther yolkes, for their whites be hard to digeſt. Moreouer the ſtones of cockes, which be nouriſhed with milke. Alſo ſwynes brayne, but let it ether be diligently roſted, or well ſodden in water with leekes, and dill. To conclude you muſt labour by all meanes, that you maye make the ſubſtance of the iuices more thicke, and thicken the ſkin, and to ſtoppe the exhalations. Watery wyne is neceſſarie to them after meate in the beginning of ſicknes. And if all follow your mynd, you may alſo after other thinges giue him nouriſhment by fleſh, ſpecially after the fourth day,
                     Cure of ſwounding throughe inflammation.
                   (the iuices comming now to concoction.) If ſwounding come through vehement inflammation, the members and partes of the body are to be rubbed and nouriſhed, and the handes and feete muſt be bound. You muſt commaūd him to watch, becauſe the bloud in ſlepe crepeth to the inward members. You muſt driue them cleane from meat and drincke.
                     Cure of ſwounding throughe humours in the ſtomake.
                   Whoſoeuer haue the ſyncope, through vicious humours gnawing the mouth of the ſtomake, they muſt be cured by prouoking of vomyt: or if that take no place to moue the belly, do other thinges which be expounded in the chapiter of paine in the ſtomake. They that begin to ſwound in a Bath, you muſt bring them quickly out, nor you may not moiſten thē with much pouring in of water. They that be already in a ſwound, they muſt be caryed out very quickly, and the reſt of the body muſt be couered with a light couering. Let the face be weat with a ſponge, dipped in cold water, or ſprincle it with roſe water. Alſo the face, the ſtomach, the feete muſt be rubbed. Alſo the mouth muſt be opened by putting in of quilles or ones finger. And you muſt go about by all meanes that the humours that cauſeth the ſwounding, may be vomyted out, by pouring in of warme water in at the mouth. They that be of perfect age, pull of their heares, and the loud calling of one is profitable, but many at once is hurtfull.
            
            
               CAP. XV. Of lacke of milke. DE LACTIS DEFECTV.
               
                  
                  THE want of milke, doth chaunce through dry diſtempure of the pappes, or of the whole body. Alſo through ſmall quantity of good bloud,
                     Cauſae.
                   or becauſe the child is ſo weake, that he can not ſucke well of the pappes: for looke, the more that he draweth out by ſucking of thē the more draweth to thē again.
                     Signa.
                   The tokens whereby the diuerſities of cauſes are knowē, are euidēt enough by things before ſpokē, but yet I will reherſe thē again. A dry diſtempure is knowen by the diſpoſition of the whole bodie, & by leanneſſe & drines of the body & pappes & ſuch like. Smal quātity of good blood is knowen by the ill ſtate of the body, and by the euill coloure of it. Alſo vnmeaſurable euacuations comming out of the body before, (that is to ſay) by menſtruis, by fluxes, by extreeme exercyſes, by hunger, and ſuch like. For the cure of lacking of milcke,
                     Cure of lacke of 
                           〈◊〉
                         in a diſ
                           •
                        empure.
                   which is cauſed of a drye diſtempure, we will teache nothing in this place. becauſe it maye eaſilie be cured by that which is declared before in other chapters, and ſhall alſo be declared afterward in the chapitre againſt the feauer Ethicke. Therfore here we will only treate of the cure of lacke of milcke, cauſed of the little quantity of good bloud.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   In this cure firſt you muſt behould the bloud: for ether there is leſſe then ther ought to be, or it is worſe then it ſhould be. Therfore when there is leſſe then there ſhould be, a dyet muſt be aſſigned with moiſt and heat meanly, for whatſoeuer doth heate more then is conuenient,
                     Victus ratio.
                   ether els do dry or coole thoſe partly by corrupting the bloud that remaineth, and partly by diminiſhing of it, they do forbid the milke to come. Therefore it is good to giue them pure bread, milcke, veale, chickens, partriches, byrdes, rere egges, fiſhes ſcaly, & ſtony rayſons, ſweet almounds, lettuſe, bugloſſe, baulme, gourdes, and ſuch like. They muſt drincke wyne, that is thinne and watery, they muſt eſchewe immoderate exerciſes, anger, ſorrowe, and all thinge, that may deminiſhe the bloud. But if the bloud be worſe, (as if it be cholericke) firſt purging of the cholericke humours is requiſite, and then vſe the dyet before preſcribed, but if it be flegmaticke bloud, it requireth medicines that do heate in the firſt or ſecond degree, but they may not dry vp, for ſuch by heating of the flegmaticke humours do turne them into bloud: but among ſuch the ſtrongeſt be, which are not only medicines, but alſo nouriſhments, (as is) rockat, fennell, dill, percely, and thoſe thinges greene before they be dryed for being dryed,
                     Euill bloud.
                   they do heat, and dry more then they ought to do. And thoſe thinges which doe drye, they make the humour which ſeedeth the bloud, the more groſſe, and more ſmall in quantity. The bloud ought to be meanely hote: & not groſſe, that the milke may be engēdred therof. Moreouer thoſe things that do meanly heate, and haue no great drynes ioyned with it, they haue vertue to engender milcke: among which beſide thoſe which are ſpoken of before, is Seſamum boyled in wyne. Alſo freſhe butter, the weight of one once droncke with wyne. Alſo ſweete almoundes, piſtax, pyne nuttes beaten, and eaten with butter. Alſo this thing is ſpecially prayſed. ℞. Ryce, tenn times waſhed and dryed againe, & beate it to pouder, then ſeeth it in good milcke vpon burning coales, whyle it doth ſeethe, put to as much of white Sugar as is ſufficiēt, & make a potage. It is made the better, if you adde to it ſweet almounds, piſtax, pyne nuttes, barely meale, cycers, & ſuch like: but you muſt labour alſo, that by gentle rubbing of the breaſt, & by whote medicines, which haue ane attractiue vertue, the milke may be drawen, and entyſed to the pappes.
            
            
               CAP. XVI. Of aboundance of milke. DE LACTIS REDVNDANTIA.
               
                  IT chaunceth ſometime that through aboundance of milke, the pappes are ſo filled and ſwollen, and ſo ſtretched out with it, that they are ſcarſe able to hold the aboundance of it.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed through aboundance of good blood The euill is knowen by ſight and feeling. You muſt help this by and by,
                     Signa.
                   for els it is to be feared; leſt the pappes be taken with Inflammation. Therefore a
                     •
                   the beginning cut the veine of the arme, or the middell veine which is in the arme.
                     Curatio.
                   After that, vſe thoſe thinges, which doe lightly repreſſe and driue backe, leſt that the bloud be

thruſt into the loungs by a certain violence. For this purpoſe it is good to apply a ſoft ſpōge dipped in warme Poſca,
                  
                     Poſca is vineger and water mixed together and wyne & water
                   and to bind it with bands to the pappes, or apply dates braied with bread & Poſca. Alſo it is good to applie an emplaiſter made of oile of roſes, of ſaunders, Corianders, Pſillium, purcelain, bean meale, lintels, iuice of plantain, and of vinigre after this ſorte. ℞. of beane meale and of lintells. ana. ℥.j. ſeed of purcelain. ʒ.j. ſeedes of flaxe and Althaea. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. of plaintain. M.j. ſeede of Coriander. ʒ.ij. boile them altogeather in water, vntill it come to the thicknes of hony, after that, put to it oile of roſes. ℥.j.ſs. boile thē againe and add thereto the yolkes of two egges, and make an emplaiſter, or make a cerate after this ſorte.
                     Emplaſtrum.
                   ℞. of the oile of roſes and mirtells. ana. ℥.j.ſs. the meales of beanes and lintels. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. of mintes and rew. ana. ʒ.ſs. with waxe,
                     Cera
                           •••
                        .
                   and venice turpenteine, as much as is ſufficient, and make a cerate to apply to the pappes. Alſo wild rapes do profit maruelouſly being annointed with water and hony. Moreouer the leaues of cherua annointed with the iuice of greene parcely is very profitable. Moreouer the ſtone pyrites poudred and applied with oile of roſes and vineger, doth ſhow a maruelous effect againſt aboundance of milcke And let ther whole diet be ſuch, that therby but litle bloud may be engendred. Therefore hunger in this euill aboue other things is maruelous good.
            
            
               CAP XVII. Of milke that is curded. DE LACTE IN GRVMOS CONVERSO.
               
                  MANIE times the milke curdeth in the pappes, and turneth into the forme of cheeſe curdes.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed through aboundance of milke (that is) when it is kept long time together on heapes in the pappes, and is not ſucked out. It is cauſed alſo of a hoate diſtempure, when that, through ouermuch heate, the thinne parte of the milcke is digeſted and diſſolued, and the reſt groweth together, and turneth into curdes. Alſo the like may chaunce of colde, which may cauſe milke to curde and congeale as well as other licours. Alſo ſometime milcke of his owne nature is groſſe and clammy inough, and for that cauſe doth eaſily turne to curdes. There neede noe tokens to know this euill:
                     Signa.
                   for it is knowen by & by, both by touching and by the patientes wordes.
                     Victus ratio.
                   The diet in this euill is diuerſe according to the diuerſities of cauſes. For in a hoate diſtempure of the pappes, let the diet decline to cold thinges, but in a cold diſtempure contrariwiſe to hoate thinges. If this euill come through groſſenes of the milke, ſhee muſt vſe altogether an extenuate diet.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure, if ther be aboundance of milke, not being as yet curded in the pappes in them that be of lawfull age, and being ſkilfull women, let it be eaſily ſucked out by litle and litle. Let the pappes be outwardly annointed with iuice of grene parcely, mintes, fenugreeke, & other thinges rehearſed before in the chaptre of aboundance of milcke. Alſo the creame of a hare beaten with water, if it be annointed, is good againſt all ſwellinges of the pappes, ſpecially cauſed of the corrupt aboundaunce of milcke. Alſo lintels ſodden in bryne is maruelous good, if the pappes be waſhed with the decoction, and annointed with the lintles being ſtamped. Alſo the decoction of fenugreeke and althaea doth great pleaſure. But if ouermuch heate doeth cauſe the milcke to curd in the pappes: then annoint them with iuice of purcelaine, and gardeyn nightſhade. Alſo apply oyle of roſes with vinegre. Alſo mouſeare annointed is of good effect. Alſo the earth called cimolia annointed with vinegre or with water and oile of roſes doth good. Moreouer lintels ſodden in vinegre and applied as is aforeſaid, againſt cold diſtempure of the pappes. Vſe decoctions of chammomill, fennell, dill, line ſeede, and fenugreeke, and there with foment the pappes. Alſo annoint them with oiles of chammomill, dill, lillies, and ſuch like, but beware they touch not the nipple. Oxes gall annointed is good. Crummes of bread are good with vinegre annointed, But you may put to it mintes or parcely, and make the medicine the ſtronger. This plaſter is excellent good. ℞. of hony. ℥.ſs. of ſtorax calamitae. 
                  ʒ.iij. of oxes gall. ʒ.ij. of oile of chammomill. ℥.ij. mirrhe and frankenſence, ana. ℥.ij.ſs. commixe them together, and make an emplaiſter to lay on the pappes.
            
            
               
               CAP. XVIII. Of inflammacion of the pappes. DE INFLAMMATIONE MAMMARVM.
               
                  IT is cauſed ſometime, (as other inflammations be) of plenty of hote bloud flowing to the pappes.
                     Cauſae.
                   Alſo ſometime through milke (that is) when it turneth to ſuppuration and matter. The aforeſaid cauſes are eaſie to diſcerne a ſunder: For the firſt cauſe of inflammation chaunceth to them that be not with child, nor brought in bed: the other cauſe chaunceth only to ſuch. For the cure in the firſt cauſe you muſt ſee bloud drawen from the inward veyne of the arme,
                     Curatio.
                   or the middle veyne on the ſame ſide, vnleſſe the menſtruis be ſtopped: for then it were better to cut the veyne of the hamme or anckle. After this you muſt come to reſtrictiue medicines,
                     Venae ſectio.
                   which may not be ſtrong, leſt that the humours doe violently thruſt inwardly to the noble partes of the body, or els you may mixe with them ſome diſcuſſiue thinges. Therefore for that purpoſe it is very good to take oyle of roſes, with the iuice or water af nightſhade vineger, and the decoction of chammomill. In this dippe and wett linnen cloathes, and applye it to the pappes. Alſo an emplaiſter made of Barely meale, lyne ſead, Saunders, Bolearmoniake, greace and oyle of roſes are good.
                     Emplaſtrum.
                   And if the Phiſition doeth ſee that repercuſſiue medicines do not much good, he muſt ſtraight proceed to my Booke of the cure of impoſtumes in the Breaſtes. But if inflammation be cauſed of curded milke, in the beginning you muſt apply a ſoft ſponge dipped in warme poſca, and bind it to it. Alſo apply dates brayd with bread and poſca. Alſo apply crummes of bread with mirrhe, ſaffron, and mintes, and ſuch like. But if the inflammation endure ſtill, proceed to the chapter of impoſtumes in the breaſtes, as hereafter ſhall proceede.
            
            Libri Secundi Finis.
         
         
            The Third Booke.
            
               CAP I. Of weaknes of the ſtomake. DE IMBECILLITATE ƲENTRICVLI.
               
                  WEAKNES of the ſtomache is ſometime cauſed through diſtempure of the effectrix and working qualities without any flowing of humours. For as Galene ſayeth in lib. 3. de ſimplic. cauſis. cap. 10.
                     Cauſae.
                   All vehement diſtempure doeth ouerthrowe and caſt down the ſtrength. Alſo ſometime it is cauſed of an humour, being conteyned in the boſome, and large ſpace of the ſtomach, which hath power and vertue ether to heate, or coole, or to moiſten, or drye, or two of theſe qualities mixt together. ſometime it is cauſed of an humour,
                     Signa.
                   ſtuffed and drowned, in the filmes, and cotes of the ſtomach. Vehement thirſt, abhorring of meat, and ſauoring belkinges do betoken diſtempure only of a hote quality. Contrarywiſe litle thirſt,

vnmeaſurable appetite, and ſoure belkings betoken diſtempure of a cold quality. And to be ſhort, if the ſtomach be grieued with hote or cold diſtempure, it chaungeth the meates that be eaten into the nature of the diſtempure, ſo that the meates may be perceiued to be chaunged into the ſauour of roſting or ſourenes without the commixing of any humour. Moreouer if the diſtempure be hote, you ſhall ſee the patient by and by eaſed with taking of medicines, or meates, or drinckes that be cold. But if the diſtempure be cold, the patient feeleth eaſe in hote meates or medicines, but he feeleth hurt with cold thinges. In a moiſt diſtempure, the patient feeleth no thirſt, or very litle, he hath aboundance of ſpitle, & doeth deſire moiſt meates. In a dry diſtempure there is drynes of the tongue, extenuation of the body, litle ſpitle, and vehement thirſt. Moreouer vomiting and deſire therto, heauines of the ſtomach, and belking ſpecially after meat, betoken aboundance of naughtie and corrupt humours. And if yelow colour do abound, ther followeth bitternes of the mouth. vomiting vp of choler, thirſt, belkinges, with ſauour roſted, and gnawing of the ſtomach: but if fleume do abound, it doeth cauſe no gnawing in the ſtomach, vnleſſe it be ſalt fleume: ther are preſent ſour belkinges, no thirſt and ſtretching out of the ſtomach. If melancholy abound, it cauſeth ſadnes & feare, ſtincking belkinges & ſpittinges, & ſauor of fiſhe, ſleepe with fittes of ſtrange imaginations, contraction & paine of the hammes, and calfes of the legges. Euery diſtempure is corrected and amended by his contrary.
                     Curatio.
                   Therefore you muſt coole a hote diſtempure, and heat a cold diſtempure: alſo moiſten a dry, and dry a moiſt diſtempure: likewiſe muſt you do in compound diſtempures, ether heat and dry, or heat and moiſten, or els coole and moiſten,
                     Cure of a hote diſtempure.
                   or coole and dry. Thoſe that be vexed with hote diſtempure of the ſtomach, are cured with a cooling dyet, but ſpecially if they take cold thinges with vineger. Therefore let there bread be mixed or dipped in poſca. For fleſh let him vſe chickens, partrich,
                     Poſca is a ſauce made with vineger and water.
                   veale ſodden with vineger or veriuyce. For potherbes, lettuce, and purcelaine are verye good. Alſo apples and ſharpe peares. The ſicke muſt drincke ſmall Ale or Beere, if he hath bene vſed to it, bu
                     •
                   if not, let him drincke the decoction of cinnamom, or wyne, that is thinne & watery. You muſt apply & lay vpō the ſtomach outwardly ſuch medicines as do meanly reſtraine and coole. They which be vexed with a cold diſtempure of the ſtomach, you muſt heale them with the contraries to the oforeſaid thinges,
                     Cold diſtempure.
                   with the decoction of Aniſe ſeede, rewe, and percely ſeede. Let the meates which they eate be condyte and dreſſed with Cynnamon, calamus aromaticus, cloues, pepper, and ſuch like adoramentes. Alſo giue vnto them Diatrionpipercon, diacalaminthes, and theriaca. Annoint the ſtomach outwardlye with thoſe ointmentes, which haue power to heat, and let them vſe to drincke that is old, & ſomewhat aſtringent.
                     
                        Moiſt diſtempure.
                     
                     
                        Drye diſtempure.
                     
                     
                        Cure of weaknes of the ſtomake cauſed of an humour. Choler.
                     
                   A moiſt diſtempure is helped with meates that do dry, without any ſtrong heat or coldnes. Moreouer vſing of leſſe drinck then he is accuſtomed to do. A dry diſtempure muſt be cured as the feuer Ethicke is cured, of which we will treate in the fourth booke. But if ſome humour hauing power to heate, or coole, do cauſe weaknes of the ſtomach, you muſt marke and conſider diligently whether that humour do ſwimme in the boſome, and largenes of the ſtomach, or whether it be ſtuffed in the filmes and cotes of the ſtomach. If the humour be contained in the boſome of the ſtomach, and be a cholericke humour, it muſt be purped ſtraight by vomit, warme water or thinne mulſa dronken doth cauſe an eaſie vomyt. It will be better if you miniſter before it thinges that do moiſten, as is the broth of Ptiſan, or els the yolke of an egge. But if the cholerike humour be ſtuffed in the filmes of the ſtomach, purge him with Hierapicra, for as Galene ſayth, ther can no better medicine be found againſt vicious humours, being ſtuffed in the filmes of the ſtomach. The humour being purged,
                     Victus ratio.
                   let them vſe the ſame dyet, that they do which are vexed with a hote diſtempure, as is taught before. Miniſter within the body conſerues, which haue vertue to coole and moiſt. Alſo miniſter electuaries hauing like vertues. Apply outwardly to the ſtomake thinges that do coole, and meanly reſtraine, as is oyle of Roſes, oyle of Quinces, putting to ſaunders, balauſtie, corall, and purcelaine. But yet vſe thinges that doe coole in a meane according to the contrarietie of the diſtempure. For ouermuche vſe of cold thinges doeth not only not proffit, but alſo oftentimes it cauſeth an incurable diſeaſe: becauſe of the great heat that is requiſite for concoction and digeſtion.
                     Fleume.
                   If humours being flegmaticke, groſſe and toughe, do ſwimme in the bredth of the ſtomache, he muſt vſe oximell, wherein hath beene ſodden

medicines which haue vertue to extenuat and cut (as is) hyſope, the roote of ireos, origan, ſauory and horehound. But if the flegmatike humours be drowned in the filmes and cootes of the ſtomache, then firſt you muſt miniſter thoſe things which do cu
                     •
                   & deuide clammy humours and groſſe fleume, but afterward you muſt purge him. If you will know what medicines do purge tough fleume, looke before in the firſt boke. cap. 12. Alſo Hierapicra is no: vnprofitable to purge groſſe humours. Let him alſo vſe a dyet which doeth extenuate: and let him vſe electuaries that do heate, as diatrionpipereon, diagalanges, diacinnamomum, diambar,
                  
                     Dyet.
                   ginger condyte, diacorus, and ſuch like. Apply outwardly to the ſtomach things that do heat as is oyle of nardinum, oyle of myntes, oyle of wormewood, and oile of maſticke, and other thinges hauing the like vertue. For this purpoſe alſo Cerotes are commended, which the Phiſitions commonly do call ſcutum ſtomachale, ſuch as this is. ℞. cinnamon choſen, cloues.
                     Scutum ſtomachi.
                   long pepper. ana. ʒ.j. galliae moſchatae, maces, ana. ʒ.ſs. calamus aromaticus, franckenſence. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. wood of aloes, ℈.j. ſowen mintes, ʒ.ij. maſticke, lapdanum, ana. ʒ.ij. oiles of maſticke, & narde. ana. ℥.ſs. with wax and turpentine, as much as will ſuffice, make a cerote to laye vpon the ſtomach, and couer it with purple ſilcke. Or vſe this medicine. ℞. maſticke beaten to powder. ℥.j.ſs. then ſtrew it vpon leather being cut like a buckler,
                     Aliud.
                   and powre vpon it oleum nardinum, then hold it to the fire till it be molten together, and ſtrewe vpon it choſen cinnamon, nutmegges, and cloues. ana. ʒ.j. beaten into pouder, and apply it to the ſtomach.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   To be ſhort, theſe and other thinges, which do ſtrengthen and heat the ſtomach, are to be applied (as is) mintes, wormewood, franckenſence, maſticke, cinamon, galingale, ginger, maces, wood of aloes, calamus adoratus, and ſuch like reherſed in our firſt booke of making medicines, of which one may make diuerſe kindes of remedies as he ſeeth cauſe.
            
            
               CAP II. Of yealking and vomiting. DE NAVSEA ET VOMITV.
               
                  DISPOSITION to vomite (called Nauſea) which is a naughty and wicked motion of the expulſiue vertue of the ſtomach.
                     Cauſae 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   It is cauſed of a vicious humour conteyned in the ſtomach, being ether hote or cold, which humour ether ſwimmeth in the concauity and hollownes of the ſtomach, or it is ſtuffed in the filmes of the ſtomach, cleauing like birdlyme, and can ſcarce be drawē away: or the humour being more watery, it is drowned in the cotes of the ſtomach, like water in a ſponge. And ſuch humours are oftentimes engendred through diſtempure of the ſtomach aſwell hote as cold: ſomtime ſuch humours do flow from the whole body, or from other partes (being firſt euill affected) into the ſtomach as it were the excrementes: as from the liuer or the ſplene, or the head, or from the whole body. If thoſe humours be engendrrd through the diſtempure, you may eaſilie perceaue it by the ſignes declared in the laſt chapter before this. But whether that humour ſwimme in the hollownes of the ſtomach,
                     Signa.
                   or be ſtuffed in his cotes, thus ſhalt thou know it. If the vicious humour doeth ſwimme in the ſtomach, and cauſe nauſea (that is) diſpoſition to vomite, then for the moſt part vomiting followeth, & the ſtomach corupting the meates, it doth manifeſtly infect it with that humour, and chaungeth it into his nature: but if a tough humour be drowned in the cotes of the ſtomach, it cauſeth diſpoſition to vomit, but yet ſuch a diſpoſition, as bringeth forth nothinge, although the patient doeth prouoke and ſtraine him ſelfe as though he could vomit: but if that humour be watery and wheiſh, then it cauſeth vomiting, not only before meat, but alſo after meat, and ſpecially if that humour ſwimme in the breadth of the ſtomach: for if it be ſtuffed and cleaue to the toppe of the ſtomache, it doeth moue vomiting without bringing any thing vp before meate: but when other partes (from which do flow excrementes into the ſtomach) be euill affected, the ſicke himſelfe doeth firſt feele the griefe of the member that is diſeaſed: for ether he feeleth heat, or cold, or heauines nigh about the place that is diſeaſed, or alſo he cannot ſuffer to let the place be touched hard. But if the whole body be full of vicious humours, you may know that by the colour, and by breaking out of wheales

and puſhes in the ſkinne,
                     Curatio Nauſea.
                   and alſo by the vryne you may diſcerne it. For the cure, you muſt diligently conſider which grief it is, whether it be a diſeaſe cauſed only of the ſtomach, or of the whole body, or of ſome other member. For if humours do flow into the ſtomach from ſome other member, or from the whole body; you muſt firſt take care for the whole body, or for that member that is diſeaſed, but yet you may not neglect the ſtomach altogether. For vnleſſe the whole body be firſt purged of vicious humours, he laboureth in vaine that goeth about to reſiſt the flowing of humours into ſome one place. So alſo he that doth cure the member that is firſt diſeaſed, he cutteth of as it were the fountaine of all flowinges into the ſtomach. Yf you will knowe how thoſe members are to be cured that doe ſend excrementes into the ſtomach, you muſt learne that in ther proper chapters before or after. But if humours be ingendred in the ſtomach cauſing diſpoſition to vomit, you muſt marke whether thoſe humours be thinne, cholericke and wheyiſhe, and being contained in the hollownes of the ſtomach, for then you muſt giue him very thinn iuice of ptiſan, or hote water, and the ſicke muſt prouoke vomit with his finger, or with a feather being put downe into his throte. But if the humours be ſtuffed within vpon the top of the ſtomach, you muſt miniſter one drachme of aloes to drincke being diſſolued in water. For againſt hote humours which be in the ſtomach, Aloes is the beſt medicine, ſo that often it hath healed euil ſtomaches in one day. After rhe humours be purged and other medicines miniſtred, which doe ſtoppe or make temperate the ſharpnes of Choler, then you muſt cure the hote diſtempure of the ſtomach, as is taught in the laſt chapter before this. If they be flegmaticke, groſſe and tough humours which do ſwimme in the breadth of the ſtomach, you muſt cure them after that ſort that is taught of vs in the former chapter, and then you muſt get away the cold diſtempure of the ſtomach,
                     Of vomyting.
                   as is afore taught. Now, for vomiting you muſt note that in the beginning it ought not to be ſtopped,1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. if the ſicke be the better for it, according to Hippocrates ſaying. In vomiting which commeth by it ſelfe, if ſuch thinges be purged as ought to be, it is good and may be ſuffered, but if not, ſo then the contrarywiſe it is euil. Therefore you may not ſtoppe that vomit which is decretory, or where humours do flowe from the whole body into the ſtomach, or when humours be engendred in the ſtomach through diſtempure. But then you muſt rather help the motion of the expulſiue vertue in a hote cauſe by miniſtring hote water with oyle of violettes to drincke: but in a cold cauſe miniſter oximell and other thinges before rehearſed.
                     Cure of immoderate vomyting.
                   But if the vomiting be immoderate and do begin to weaken the ſtrength of the ſicke, then you muſt go about to ſtoppe and reſttaine it. Therfore firſt let the ſicke ly vpward in a conuenient houſe, and contrarie to the diſeaſe (that is) let the houſe be cold, if the diſeaſe be hote, and contrariewyſe let it be hote, if the diſeaſe be cold, let the extreme parts of the body be rubbed, and let them be fealt with warme hands, and alſo bynd them ſtrongly with bandes, alſo put the feete and handes in luke warme water. Alſo hold adoramentes of good ſauour to the noſe for to ſmell, as roſes, quinces, penyroyall, myntes, fennell, ſpickenarde. Annoynt the ſtomach outwardly with oyles of wormewood and roſes. Emplaiſters made of Dates, quinces, and wormewood be good. Alſo Cerates made of them and ſuch like as myntes, darnell meale, franckenſence, maſticke be good being laid vpon the ſtomach. Alſo you muſt ſtampe well dates that haue beene ſteeped in old wine, afterward you muſt put to it maſticke and franckenſence, ech of them finely powdred by it ſelfe afore, and then bray them together. To this place alſo you muſt call the remedies, that are ſpoken of hereafter, partlie in the chapter of cholera, and partly in the chapter of the fluxe dyſemeria. Furthermore that euill continuing long, if the meate cannot tary in the ſtomach, you muſt faſten a cupping glaſſe to the mouth of the ſtomache with great flame, vntill the place waxe red: and you muſt giue the patient meate, while the glaſſe hangeth on ſtill.
            
            
               CAP III. Of immoderate thirst. DE SITI IMMENSA:
               
                  
                  THIRST, as Galene witneſſeth in lib. 1. de ſimpli. med. facultate, cap. 30. is cauſed two maner of wayes: partly through want of moiſture, and partly through aboundance of heat. The ſtomach is heat many & ſundry wayes,
                     Cauſ
                           •
                        .
                   that is ether through hote diſtempure of the bare quality ſimple or compound, or through hote and cholericke humours engendred in the ſtomach, or els flowing to it. Alſo through aboundant drincking of old wyne. The ſtomach is dryed ether throughe the drye diſtempure that is in it, or through ſalt humours, or drincking of ſalt water. Alſo often times it is dryed through conſent of the whole body, as it chaunceth in burning feauers and feauer Ethickes. The diuerſitie of cauſes may eaſilie be knowen by the patients wordes,
                     Signa.
                   and by thoſe ſignes which we haue ſpoken of in the 2. chapter next before. Therefore the cauſe being knowen, you muſt remedy ech of them according to ther cauſes diuerſlie.
                     Curatio.
                   Therefore you muſt remedie thirſt comming of heat, by miniſtring thinges that doe coole. Therefore both the drawing in of cold ayer, and water or watery wyne being droncken are good. Alſo Cucumberſeed chewed, or if it be hulled and beaten, and druncken with water, it helpeth greatly againſt thirſt engēdred through heat of the ſtomach. Likewyſe lettuce ſeed chewed and droncke profiteth. Alſo purcelaine ſeed likewyſe. The beſt thing to quench thirſt is this. ℞. of the ſeedes of ſowen Cucumbers huſked. ℥.j. tragacanthae. ℥.ſs. bray tragacantham and ſerce it, and beat the ſeedes, and put thoſe pouders to the whytes of egges being rawe,
                     Pilles to hold vnder the tongue.
                   and beating them altogether, make pilles and dry them in the ſhadow. Of theſe pilles miniſter one at once to be hold vnder the tongue, that it may diſſolue by little and little, and ſo be ſwallowed. They that haue had burning and heat in the ſtomach long time, the iuyce of the ſweete roote being droncke, doth help them, & alſo the roote it ſelfe with water and the iuyce of purſelaine. But thoſe which are vexed with thirſt cauſed of heat and drynes, as it chaunceth in all burning and very dry feauers, and to thoſe which labour in ſommer, or in great heat,
                     Oxycratum ſeu poſ
                           •
                        a.
                   ſuch are beſt 
                     •
                  ealed with oxycratū
                   (that is) a drincke made with vineger & water ſodden together. For vineger doth coole mightely, and doth perce to euery place quickly, and the water beſides the coolenes that it hath, it is moiſteſt of any thing: for nothing (as Galen ſayeth in the place before reherſed) is moiſter then water. Alſo the thirſt which engēdreth in feauers, may be mitigated in ſprinckling the head with the coldeſt oyles, as oyle of roſes being ſprinckled aloft on the fore part of the head. Alſo the beſt remedie for drynes is ſleepe, where heat & moiſture, ar commixt together, as it chaunceth in that kind of dropſy, in which plenty of ſalt humours be heaped in the ſtomach and belly, or in thoſe which haue their ſtomach ſtuffed with ſalt fleume, then vineger is the beſt remedie. It is alſo good for them to ſoupe the iuyce of quinces or peares, or veriuyce with water. If humours cholericke or ſalt ſwimming in the ſtomach, or drowned & ſtuffed in it do prouoke thirſt, thē you muſt miniſter medicines which can purge out thoſe humours. Afterward you muſt vſe medicines which do reſtraine and comfort the ſtomach and ſtrengthen it, Examples wherof you muſt ſeeke before. They which thirſt through drincking of much old wyne, are holpen with drinking of cold water and other thinges reherſed in lib. 1. cap. 14.
            
            
               CAP. IIII. Of payne in the ſtomache. DE DOLORE STOMACHI.
               
                  PAINE of the ſtomach is cauſed when naughty venemous and gnawing humours be kept in the ſtomach,
                     Cauſae. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Signa.
                   wherby it chaunceth that through intollerable gnawing they cauſe ſwounding, which they call ſtomachica. The diſeaſe is knowen by the cōtinuall pricking and gnawing of the mouth of the ſtomach. In this euill you muſt giue him meates that do coole, and which may bringe ſtrength to the ſtomach (as is) lettuce and purcelaine taken with vineger.
                     Dyet.
                   Alſo pomegranates, and Orenges, peares, ſharpe grapes, and ſuch like. Alſo bread being ſteeped in very cold water is good. Alſo let his other meates be ſuch that will eaſily digeſt, and yet not eaſy to corrupt (as be) chickens, partrich, birdes of moūtaines, & ſuch like ſodden with veriuice.

Alſo fiſhes bred among ſtones, ſodden with vineger, limons, and the ſharp iuyce of Cytrons. Lykewiſe let the ſicke drincke water wherein hath bene ſodden a litle cynamon, or giue him thinn waterie wyne.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure in the beginning you muſt prouoke vomit by the remedies aforeſaid. Then after that alſo he muſt purge downeward, by Hierapicra takinge. Which thinges being done, you muſt vſe remedies to ſtrengthen the ſtomach both inwardly and outwardly, as is taught in the 2. chap. and in other places alſo.
            
            
               CAP. V. Of inflammation of the ſtomach. DE INFLAMMATIONE VENTRICVLI.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  INFLAMMATION of the ſtomach is cauſed no otherwiſe then the inflammation of other partes of the body (that is to ſay) through the flowing together of aboundance of hote bloud.
                     Signa.
                   Signes hereof, is exceeding great paine continually, which cannot be mitigated with any medicines that be applyed to it. Moreouer there is ſwelling and burning which you may feele. Alſoe a feauer,
                     Victus ratio.
                   heauines, and appetite to meate. The dyet (like as it is in other inflammations) muſt be thinne, ſmall, and exquiſite. Therfore he muſt vſe iuyce of ptiſan: and he muſt abſtaine from fleſh, and wyne, and from other hote meates. Let the ſicke drincke water, wherin hath bene ſodden a litle cynnamon, or iuice of ſoure pomegarnates, or of ſome other fruict that is cold and reſtringent. Let him ſleepe litle, and let him not talke much. Let him eſchewe as much as he can ſadnes,
                     Curatio.
                   and let him remaine in an ayer meanly cold. You muſt beginne the cure with letting of bloud, if there be fulnes of the whole body, and ſtrēgth of the ſicke. You muſt cut the inward veyne of the arme, and you muſt draw bloud according to the ſtrength of the patient. After this you muſt applye outwardly thoſe thinges that do repreſſe and reſtraine, ſpecially vpon the place where the paine and ſwelling do moſt appeare. For the ſtomach, ſpeciallie the mouth of it, hath euer need of the commixing of thoſe thinges that do reſtraine, but moſt of all when it hath an inflammation. Therfore thoſe which do attempt the cure with looſening remedies onlie, without the commixing of thoſe thinges that doe ſtrengthen the ſtomach, they cauſe perill of death. Therfore alwayes whether it be an oyle that the inflamed member be nouriſhed withall, or a ſoft plaiſter laid vpon that member, you muſt commixe ſome reſtringent thing with them. Therefore for this purpoſe it is good to applie to it oile wherein wormewood or quinces hath bene ſodden, commixed together with maſticke; Alſo the iuice of quinces, or peares, putting to it red roſes, barley meale, ſaunders,
                     Ceramen.
                   bole armoniacke, and ſuch like. Alſo you may vſe this cerate. ℞. barly meale. ℥.ſs. white ſaunders, and red roſes. ana. ʒ.ij. bole armoniacke. ʒ.j.ſs. aloes, maſticke. ana. ʒ.j. wormewood nutmegges, balauſtiae. ana. ʒ.ſs. oiles of maſticke, and roſes. ana. ℥.j.ſs. with waxe & turpentine as much as is ſufficient, make a cerot to lay vpon the ſtomach. But if there be neede of great reſtriction (as it chaunceth then, when the ſtomach is ſo weake that it cannot holde and retaine meate) you may commixe with the ſaid thinges veriuice, or iuice of wormewood, or hipociſchidos, & ſumach, and ſuch like. All theſe thinges. if the inflammation be vehement, muſt be applied to the griefe cold. And if the bellie doth ſend forth nothing, you muſt prouoke it with eaſie clyſters. Nor he worketh vnwiſelie, that doth miniſter. ℥.ſs. of caſia fiſtula diſſolued in endiuē water, after that the burning heat is ſomewhat abated. Alſo at that time you may commixe with the reſtrictiue medicines, which you apply outwardlie, many things that do diſcuſſe and diſſolue (as is) fenugreeke meale, floures of chammomill, and Althee, & lineſeed; you muſt neuer (as we warned you before, noe not at that time, when ther floweth no more to the griefe, & that cannot be driuen backe, which is conteined in the diſeaſed member) you muſt nor I ſay at that time, nether vſe only looſening medicines, or only diſſoluing medicines: but alwayes you muſt commixe with them reſtrictiue thinges which haue power to preſerue and keepe the ſtrength of the ſtomach. Therefore at that time you muſt vſe this emplaiſter.
                     Emplaſtri
                           ••
                        .
                   ℞. the meale of lyneſeed and fenugreeke. ana. ℥.ſs, ſeed of dill. ʒ.ij. flours of chāmomill & melilote. ana. ℥.ſs. wormewood, balauſtie, red roſes. ana. ℥.ij. hypociſchidis.

℈.ij. oyles of Chammomill, lillies, roſes, maſticke, ana. ℥.ſs. hennes greace, and gooſe greaſe, ana. ʒ.ij. commixe them all together, and make an emplaiſter. But before it be applied, it is not in vaine to annoint the ſtomach with this oyntment. ℞. oyles of Cammomil, dill, and quinces, ana. ʒ.iij. pouder of the roote of Althoea, wormwood,
                     Vnguentum.
                   lineſeede. ana. ℈.j. waxe ſufficient, make an oyntment.
            
            
               CAP VI. Of abhorring of meate. DE CIBI FASTIDIO.
               
                  ABHORRING of meate, or looſing of appetite doeth chaunce either through looſing of the ſenſe of ſucking of the veynes, which is naturall hunger,
                     Cauſae.
                   as Galen witneſſeth libro primo, de ſympt. cauſis. cap. 7. or becauſe there is no ſucking out, or becauſe the bodie is not emptied. Alſo ſometime it chaunceth through ſome hote diſtempure, ſpeciallie of the ſtomach, which diſtempure doth diſſolue the hard and ſound members by looſing of them, and maketh them weaker in drawing: but the moiſt members, it ſtretcheth out vnmeaſurablie by ſhedding. Sometime it is cauſed through aboundance of vicious humours conteyned in the ſtomach: & through immoderate flux of the belly and bowelles: alſo through ouermuch bloudletting. Alſo the ſicke doth abhorre meate in continuall and vehement feuers, alſo in inflammacions of the ſtomach, the liuer and the matrice, and for many other cauſes which neede not to bee rehearſed here. The ſignes which betoken a hote diſtempure,
                     Signa.
                   are rehearſed before in the firſt chapter. Thoſe which abhorre meate, through the vice of cholericke humours, are troubled with gnawinge of the ſtomach, and with appetite to vomite, and with thirſt. Thoſe that haue humours that be rotten, they haue ſometime a feuer. But thoſe which haue lothinge of meate thorough groſſe and clammie humours, they neither feele gnawinge of the ſtomach nor thirſt. But commonlie to all there commeth diſpoſition to vomite. If lothing of meate doeth come about the beginning of the diſeaſe, or about the vigour and ſtrength of it, which the pacientes ſtrength may yet ſuffer, it cauſeth no perill, for the ſicke neede but little nouriſhment. But if loſſe of appetite do come in the declination of the whole diſeaſe, or in longe weakeneſſe, or in lacke of ſtrength, or of vnmeaſurable purging, it is not without perill and daunger. This euill is encreaſed of age. For children are vnluckely troubled with this diſeaſe (that is to ſay) ſuch as are deuourers by nature, and haue neede of continuall nouriſhment. Therefore if children haue this diſeaſe, great exceſſe aboue nature is ſignified by it. For cure of this diſeaſe,
                     Curatio.
                   if the loſſe of appetite be cauſed thorough weakeneſſe of the ſtomach, you muſt marke what diſtempure doeth weaken the ſtrength, and you muſt cure it by contraries to that diſtempure, as is before taught. If the preſence of vicious humours do cauſe lothing of meate, if thoſe humours be thinne and gnawing: you muſt firſt beginne, before any other thinge be miniſtred, to purge the humours contayned in the ſtomach by vomite. And if the pacient doeth vomite vneaſilie, miniſter vnto him ſoupinges, and other nouriſhmentes which do moyſten, that they may driue thoſe humours downe into the bellie, and driue them out beneath, or purge the wombe with hierapicra. Then wee muſt bring the bodie to a good temper, with ſuch thinges as be meete for that purpoſe. Thoſe that do abhorre meate thorough groſſe and clammie humoures, you ſhall cure them by extenuatinge and cutting the humours as well with Oxymell, as alſo with thoſe medicines, that are made of this and other ſawces, as with Capares, Olyues, muſterde-ſeede, and ſuch like declared in the firſt Chapter. If loathing of meate happen thorough inflammation, or ſtoppinge of anie other part of the bodie, then you muſt go about the curinge of that member or parte. And you muſt go about to prouoke appetite againe, onelie by odoramentes, either by odour and ſmelling of wine infuſed, or decoction of quinces, or peares. Alſo you ſhall go about the ſame thing with ſofte annoyntinges with oyles, as oyles of roſes, maſticke, and ſuch like, & moderate frictiōs & rubbings of the body. Alſo inſeſſions to be applied to the loins & ſhare.

Alſo let meates be prepared of diuerſe and ſundrie kinds, and after the daintieſt faſhion, that beſides their ſweeteneſſe, they may entice and prouoke their appetite, firſt of the beſt kind of corne,
                     Alica is made of who
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in water, beatē & dried in the ſunne, and then broken groſſely.
                   and ſuch as doth nouriſh much, as is Alica waſhed with the decoction of dates and dam
                     •
                  ſcene prunes: reere egges, birdes of the mountaines that be leane and of no ſtrong ſauour: ſwines feete much conſumed in ſeething. For if he onely taſt ſuch meates, they nouriſh the bodie ſufficiently. Whatſoeuer you miniſter, ought to be of ſuch ſort, that it maye eaſily be deuoured and ſwallowed. For thoſe thinges that require much chewing, do cauſe vnpleaſantneſſe, and put away appetite. Nor you may not neglect to applie outwardly vppon the ſtomach beſides the oyntmentes, emplaiſters made of dates, quinces, wormewood, and ſuch like. Alſo Cerates made of the ſame thinges, examples whereof you muſt ſeeke before.
            
            
               CAP. VII. Of a doglike appetite. DE APPETENTIA CANINA.
               
                  A Doglike appetite is contrarie to loſſe of appetite. For they that are thus diſeaſed, they deſire much meate: and when they can not reſtraine their appetite, they deuour in meate without meaſure: then they being heauie with the multitude of meate, and their ſtomach not beinge able to beare the meates, that are in it, without hurt, they turne to vomiting. Then afterward they fill them ſelues with meate, and againe they returne to vomiting like dogges. It is cauſed through colde diſtempure of the ſtomach, or through vicious and ſharp humours which do gnaw and pricke the mouth of the ſtomach. For cold vicious humours do cauſe a gnawing much like the proportion of ſucking, and do raiſe appetite of meate. Alſo ſometime it chaunceth thorough vnmeaſurable diſſipation and ſpreading abrode of the whole bodie, which do followe either the violence of heate, or the weakeneſſe of the vertue retentiue. Cold diſtempure of the ſtomach is knowen by euill digeſtion,
                     Signa.
                   windineſſe, romblinge, and many egeſtions or ſeiges, and by other tokens declared before in the firſt Chapter. Sharpe humours are knowen by ſoure belkings, and much egeſtion, and verie thinne. If it be cauſed of vnmeaſurable diſſipation and ſpreading abroade, and that through heate which conſumeth the meate like fire, and rarefieth the ſkinne: then the egeſtions ſent out by the bellie, be leſſe in quantitie, then the meate that is eaten, and alſo the egeſtions be drier: But if that diſſipation come through weakeneſſe of the retentiue vertue, which cannot maiſter the meates:
                     Curat
                           ••
                        .
                   then there is much deiection, and caſting out of thoſe thinges that are eaten. For the Cure, colde diſtempure muſt be healed, as is taught in the firſt chapter of this booke. If Doglike and vnmeaſurable appetite be cauſed of ſharp humours ſtuffed in the mouth of the ſtomach,
                     Cure if it be of ſharp humours.
                   and as it were, water ſoked into a ſponge: you muſt miniſter in the beginninge, Hierapicra Galeni. For this doeth not onely heate, but alſo it doeth cut of and make clean, and draw out from the depth of the mouth of the ſtomach, humours that be ſtuffed in it, and it cauſeth them to auoide downwarde. And yet it addeth ſtrength to the ſtomach, that afterwarde it will not eaſilie receaue any hurtfull humour. Therefore that is the beſt remedie for vicious humours, ſtuffed in the ſtomach, to bring them foorth. It is miniſtred the weight of ʒ.iiij. with wine infuſed with warme water. If a child doth labour of this diſeaſe, which cannot drinke the medicine for bitterneſſe, make ʒ.j. or ij. of it in pilles, and annoint it outwardly with hony, and let them ſwallow them downe. Seing that for the moſt parte, this euill chaunceth of ſharpe and ſoure fleume, you muſt vſe ſuch meates and medicines, as haue power to cut, deuide, ſcoure, and heate, as be, garlicke, leekes, tyme, ſauorie, origan, penyroyall; and ſuch like. Therefore the humours that be vicious being purged in the beginning,
                     Victus ratio.
                   you muſt let them vſe this diet. Let not their bread be newe, nor well leauenned, with the which alſo you muſt mixe thinges that prouoke vryne, as is, Anniſe ſeede, Caraway ſeede, Commin, parſleye, and ſuch like. Let his meates be fatte and oylie. Alſo ſoupinges are good, that do deſtroye appetite, as be pottage made

with much hony, and much oyle, or gooſe greaſe, hennes greaſe, or ſwines greaſe. Let his pot hearbes be mallowes. Alſo giue him the braines and fatteſt partes of birdes, and of fiſhes likewiſe, and thoſe thinges that do altogether deſtroy appetite, and cauſe fullneſſe, and that do nouriſh but little, although they be eaten in great quantitie. You maye well giue them great plentie of wine, euen as much as they can drink, and ſuch wine that doth heate greatly, as thoſe do that be yellowe in colour, thinne in ſubſtance, ſweete in ſmelling, and without reſtriction. For this doeth heate the ſtomach, and deſtroy the ſharpeneſſe of humours, ſo that often ſuch wine with fat and oylie meates, ſuffiſeth for the perfect cure.2. Apho. 21. As Hippocrates ſayth, drinking of wine eaſeth hunger. And you muſt giue wine, aſwell to them that be faſting, as to them alſo which haue eaten meate, although they be not yet a thirſt. But you muſt giue it to them that be faſting, hoate, or warme at the leaſt. He muſt abſtayne from all ſower and reſtrictiue meates and drinkes, but ſpecially from fruite. Let their banquetting meates be piſtacium, Almondes, pine nuttes, and oliues with hony. Miniſter alſo vnto them milke, as well alone, as alſo with wine called Paſſum, or with hony, ſo that neuertheleſſe, you muſt take heede that you giue it not to thoſe, that are wont to haue it waxe ſoure in their ſtomach, for to thoſe it doth more hurt then good. But if it be well digeſted, it doeth not onely ſtop the appetite, but it ſofteneth the bellie being ſtopped, and ſtoppeth his fluxes. Alſo you muſt make potions and fine cakes with milcke, and giue them to him, as be, marchpaines and Riſe ſodden with milke. Alſo he muſt waſh nowe and then, and make fat their ſkinne largely. This kinde of cure you muſt vſe as long, as the ſicke is diſeaſed, and till he be cleane whole. If the doglike appetite through vnmeaſurable ſcattring abroade, opening, and diſſipation, then in ſuch a diſeaſe it is good to thicken the ſkinne,
                     Cure if it come of immoderate diſſipation.
                   and make it groſſer with oyle made of vnripe Oliues, or oyles of roſes, or of mirtles, or anie other wherein anie reſtrictiue thing hath bene ſodden with a ſoft fire. Let the ſicke remaine in an ayer, that is cold and perſpirable. Let him eſchew hote ayer and hote bathes. Alſo let him eſchew wine and all things as well outwardly as inwardly that do heate. Let his drinke be cold water or decoction of Cynnamon. Put the ſicke in a cold bath if nothing do let it as ſlenderneſſe and leanneſſe of the bodie, or the coldneſſe of ſome member of the bodie, as the breaſt or ſome other. You muſt giue vnto them meates that be ſtable, durable, and hard to corrupt, as be periwincles, and all kindes of ſhell fiſh, if they be ſodden with water twiſe chaunged. Alſo ſwines fleſh being in full ſtrength and ſpecially the bellie. Alſo fatte bieffe, and all things that be all fatte, and that do ſwimme in the ſtomach, and be hard to be digeſted and diſtributed. For there be ſome, that haue this diſeaſe, which by reaſon of a ſharp & biting heate, and as it were a feuerous heate in them which do digeſt and conſume bieffe and other thinges hard of digeſtion with leſſe labour then fiſhes of ſtony places, and ſuch like things which be eaſie of digeſtion. Of egges thoſe are good for them, which be ſodden till they be hard, or fried in a frying pan. Giue them manchet made of fat broths without honie. Alſo rice ſodden with butter, and vnleauened bread. Looke how much the euill is abated, & ſo much you muſt abate of the groſſe meates that you are wont to giue, and you muſt miniſh the reſtrictiue things alſo that you lay without. For ſome time the vehemencie of the appetite being abated, when the bodie is filled with crude and groſſe humours, it turneth into ſome other worſe diſeaſe. Among reſtrictiue medicines beſides thoſe thinges which are aforeſaid you muſt vſe this oyntment. ℞. oyles of mirtles,
                     Vnguentum adſtringens.
                   and quinces. ana. ℥.ſs. oyle of roſes. ℥.j. iuice of plantaine. ʒ.ij. red ſaunders, maſticke, biſtorta, red roſes. ana. ʒ.j. bole armoniake. ℈.ij. Hipochiſtidos, acatia, ſanguis draconis. ana. ℈.j. waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment.
            
            
               CAP VIII. Of great famine. DE BVLIMO.
               BVLIMOS in Greeke is nothing elſe, but great, and vehement famine or hunger. It is cauſed through coldeneſſe of the ſtomach,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Cauſae.
                   and for want and wakeneſſe of ſtrength, and in a man it taketh his beginninge altogether of outwarde colde

for long iourneyes, ſpeciallie when there is ſnow cauſeth this diſeaſe. It is knowen thus. In the beginning there is felte much hunger,
                     Signa.
                   which for all that, doeth not long endure. For afterwarde the heart of the patient beginneth to faile him with coldeneſſe of the extreame partes, and want of ſpirit and breath. You muſt apply remedies for this diſeaſe by and by, becauſe there be that in deſert places,
                     Curatio.
                   or in bathes, being ſuddenly taken with this diſeaſe, do periſh for lacke of helpe. Therefore they that are troubled with great hunger, in a iourney without a feuer, or any other wayes, you muſt recomfort them with vinegre, or penyroyall, giuen them to ſmell vnto, or earth whatſoeuer it bee, ſprinckled with vinegre, or apples, or peares, or ſuch other like fruite which is next hande. Alſo newe bread holden to the noſe doeth helpe, and cheeſe of good ſauour. Alſo porke roſted or ſodden, and vniuerſallie all that doth nouriſh much: but eſpecially that which hath ſauour of roſted meate, and is well ſeaſoned, and hath a ſufficient ſauour. For by ſuch odoures and ſauours they that haue this diſeaſe, are for the moſt part refreſhed, ſeeing there is nothing (as wee ſayed before in the ſecond booke, the fourteenth chapter) that doth refreſh and renue the ſtrength ſooner then odours. Moreouer you muſt binde the extreame partes of them with bandes, and you muſt put the tippes of their handes and feete in verie hote water, and you muſt raiſe them and ſtirre them, as well by prickinge of the cheekes, as alſo by pullinge of the heare and eares. And when he is ſomewhat come againe to him ſelfe, you ſhall miniſter vnto him breade infuſed in wine, or ſome ſuch thing, which doeth reſtore ſtrength verie quickelye, (as be) reare egges, Alica with wine. The next remedie they muſt looke for by meate, which if they can not take when it is offered them, you muſt put it into the mouth violentlye, and compell them to ſwallowe it, for by and by after that, they are deliuered from their great hunger, and from their fayntinge, and are rayſed quicklye. For this purpoſe are good alſo the Antidotes, which are compounded of diuerſe ſweete odoures (as is) Aromaticum Roſarum, Diamber, Dianthon, diamoſchi, Alipta moſchata, and ſuch other like. And if this diſeaſe chaunce to come in feuers (which is ſeeldome ſeene) and if it doeth ruſh in ſuddenly about the declination of fittes belonging to feauers, you may miniſter meate without feare. But if it chaunce in the beginning of the augmentacion or in the vigour and ſtrength of the feauer, the ſicke muſt be refreſhed by the odoraments aforeſaid, and ſpecially by thoſe things that haue corne in them, as is Polenta, wet with water,
                     Po
                           •
                        tia is barely ſteeped in water the right, then dried, then fried and then ground.
                   or hote bread that ſendeth foorth a burning ſauour. Alſo you muſt vſe frictions & rubbings of the extreme parts, & applie plaiſters made of dates, or quinces ſodden in wine▪ and this muſt you do vntill the declining of the fit, that you may ſafely giue him meate. And if the ſicke be neuer the better through theſe things, you muſt venter to help him by giuing of meate. Therfore miniſter iuice of Ptyſan, or one morſell or other wet in wine that is white and thinne. For they being refreſhed and as it were ſodainly called backe, they afterwarde come to the declining of the fit. We muſt eſchew altogether in them that haue this diſeaſe, long delay from meate, and hunger. For you ſhall giue him euerie houre verie little meate, for it taketh away great famine, and the fainting wherby the ſick is eaſed. And that it is lawfull to nouriſh and giue meate to the ſicke in a fit, Galene teacheth, libro decimo, method. capite tertio.
            
            
               CAP IX. Of euill digestion. DE CRVDITATE.
               
                  RAWNESSE of the ſtomach or ill digeſtion, is, when as the meate is not alltogether chaunged.
                     Cruditas.
                   The cauſes of it, is diſtempure in the ſtomach, inflammacions,
                     Cauſae.
                   hardeneſſe, impoſtumes, and ſuch other like. Sometime the meates remaine raw and vndigeſted, although the ſtomach be not diſeaſed: either through immoderate deuouring of meates and drinkes at one time, or through the euil and vicious qualities of the meates them ſelues. Or through heating of them out of due time, or thorough inordinate takinge of them: or thorough

ſome viciouſe ſuperfluitie growing: or through ſhort ſleeping as Galene ſayth, libro tertio de ſymptomatum cauſis capite primo.
                  
                     Signa.
                   The diuerſitie of cauſes be known partly by the tale of the patient, and them that be about them: and partlye by certayne tokens. By the tale of the ſicke, and of them that be about him, you may knowe whether meates and drinckes haue bene taken immoderately, or out of due ſeaſon, or inordinately. Alſo you may know of them the ſhortneſſe of ſleeping: you may knowe if the meates their ſelues were of euill qualities by his belkinges and ſauours, like thinges roſted or burned. For in them that be hoate and cholericke, the belkinges or corruptions ſauour like meate roſted or burned. But in them, that be of a colde nature and more fleugmatike, the corruptions are ſoure or ſharpe. Likewiſe you muſt iudge of excrementes that be fleugmatike and colde, they cauſe ſoure corruptions, but thoſe that be hote and mixed with bitter choler, do cauſe ſauour like burned meate. Likewiſe iudge of the ſtomach beinge▪ anie otherwiſe euill at eaſe, for if the diſeaſe be coulde, it cauſeth ſharpe and ſoure permutations, but if it be hote, it cauſeth a burning ſauour. VVhen perfect cruditie and rawneſſe is engendred without corruption, in ſuch ſort, that the meates do remaine altogether euen as they were eaten: by this you maye knowe that the ſtomach is ouercome, either thorough great quantitie of meates, or thorough vehement coulde taken in a hoate thirſt. Therefore if you woulde not haue this cruditie and euill digeſtion,
                     Victus ratio.
                   you muſt beware of all the aforeſaid things (that is) that you neither offende in the quantitie, nor qualitie, nor order, nor due ſeaſon of the takinge of your meate: and that you eate thoſe thinges onely, which you are able to digeſt, and not that, which appetite requireth. Therefore you muſt eſpecially take diligent heede to the meaſure, and quantitie of your meate, and you muſt refraine your appetite, and eate no more then your ſtrength is able to ſuffer. Alſo you muſt beware of euill order (that is) that you do not firſt eate quinces, or pomegranates, or ſome ſuch like thing: and afterward to eate pot herbes out of oyle of ſauce made with ſalted fiſh, or other things which do ſoften the bellie. Alſo you muſt eſchewe eating out of due ſeaſon (that is) that you do not eate before ſome moderate exerciſe, or before yeſterdayes meat be well diſcended, and alſo not before your accuſtomed houre. Alſo you muſt eſchewe all thinges that be hard by nature to digeſt: as is fleſh that is hard by nature, that is, bieffe and hartes fleſh, alſo eſchewe all old fleſh. Alſo you muſt beware of meates that be fatte, or that be poudred in ſalt, and ſtale kept. Among pot-hearbes, thoſe that be verie hote, or verie coulde, or alſo thoſe that engender wind, be hurtfull. Eſchew fiſhes, which are hard and dried by long keping. Alſo abſtaine from meates that be corrupt, or that do ſtinke, or ſmell ilfauouredlie. Refraine from ſweete fruite, or that, which doth engender windineſſe, or that which is corrupt. Alſo eſchewe iunkets which be hard of digeſtion. Alſo you muſt eſchewe meates that be ſtraunge and vnaccuſtomed, and that haue the power of a medicine, as people vſe to commixe in their tartes and fine cakes, but you muſt eate your meate in due time not greedilie nor in gobbets, nor ſwallow it not without chewing. Neither let your drinke interrupt and diſturbe your meate: for that doeth hinder the vnitinge and knittinge together of the meate: and cauſeth eche peece to ſwimme from other. After meate eaten, you muſt eſchewe vnequall and troubleouſe motions. Alſo eſchewe heate and coulde, for thoſe thinges do ſtoppe the digeſtion of meate. But calefaction and chaufing of the ſides, and rubbinge of the feete do helpe digeſtion. And if there be heauineſſe about the ſtomach, ſo that thorough it a certaine painefulneſſe bee ſpread thoroughout the whole bodie, then laye your hande beinge ſtretched foorth, vppon the mouth of your ſtomach, or applie to it a fleſhie infant, for as Gallen ſayeth, it is much better and more naturall, then the heate which is procured by Fomentes. For which cauſe, ſome do laye little whelpes, while they reſt vppon theyr ſtomach, which doeth encreaſe the aboundance of heate, that digeſteth the meate. Alſo you muſt procure ſleepe in the night equall and without diſturbaunce. For this: you muſt prepare to lye ſtraight and let your head bee boulſtered vp high, and in your lyinge, you muſt encline towardes the lefte ſide. And if you can not ſleep, you muſt lie without tourninge or ſtirring of your bodie, and keepe it ſtill in one forme of lying, for often ſtirringes and toſſinges do diſturb the meates, and make the body windy & the bowels likewiſe.
                     Curatio.
                   The cure muſt be diuerſe according to the diuerſity of

the cauſes. For hote diſtempure of the ſtomach requireth one kinde of curing, and cold diſtempure requireth another kind. Alſo inflammation of the ſtomach requireth another kind of cure, and hardneſſe or impoſtumacions another kinde, and all thoſe cures you ſhall ſeeke out in the proper chapters. For here it ſuffiſeth to ſay thus much. When there commeth an vnpleaſant belking, declaring manifeſtly that there is corruption of meates: without prolonging you muſt prouoke vomite, and by drinkinge of warme water, you muſt conſtraine all that is corrupt to come foorth. For if they remaine in the ſtomach, they cauſe tormentinge and wreſtlinge and heauineſſe of the head: and ſometimes they ſende foorth choler vpwarde and downewarde,
                     Vomitus.
                   or they cauſe fluxe of the wombe or feauers. Therefore ſuch as can not digeſt but hardly, wee accuſtome them longe tyme before, that they maye vomite eaſilie, for that is beſt in manie perilles. And if anie be harde to vomite by nature, and be ill diſpoſed to drinke coulde thinges, in anie cauſe it is not inconuenient to giue him a cuppe of pure coulde water to drincke, for the ſtomach beinge ſtrengthened, it ſoone thruſteth out thoſe thinges that ſticke in it, and ſendeth them downe to the lower partes. Then the next daye let the ſicke be kept in quiet and reſt, and vſe rubbinges of his feete, and chafing of the ſides, vntill the rumbling and windineſſe breake out beneath, and vntill the belkinges do come foorth with a gentler qualitie. And then it is good to riſe vp, that firſt the bellie may ſende out the corrupt thinges by ſeege, and afterwarde let the ſicke walke moderately, and let him be idle, becauſe of the troubled vapours, which be aſcended into the head through corruption. After this he muſt apply his minde to daylie buſineſſe without perturbation and indignation. Then againe the bellie muſt be prouoked to auoide thoſe thinges that remaine yet. Afterwarde you muſt bidde him reſt, and you muſt powre vppon and nouriſhe the feete with warme water: and the face being waſhed with pure coulde water, let him reſt in his bedde, and procure him to ſleepe by all meanes. After which let him vſe a little walkinge, and then a Bathe. After bathinge let him take meate moderately,
                     Long pepper helpeth digeſtion.
                   and that which the bodie is able to digeſt. But yet you may not ouerpaſſe medicines that do helpe digeſtion, as is pepper, eſpeciallie long pepper, which doth onelie helpe digeſtion. But if you haue it not at that preſent, you may vſe white pepper, and if you haue not that neither, take blacke pepper. Alſo for the ſame, Diacotoneon is good, and diospoliticum. Alſo there bee other thinges to be applied as well inwardlie as outwardely both ſimples and compoundes, to ſtrengthen the ſtomach, which are rehearſed in the former chapters. But all theſe medicines (eſpeciallie ſuch as do pierce quickly, as is Caraway ſeedes, fennell ſeedes, Apium, louage ſeede, parſley ſeede, ammeos, pepper, ginger and ſuch like) muſt be giuen two houres before meate: but after meate you muſt neuer take them: for then there is diſperſed together with them ſome of the crude meates, and cauſeth obſtructions. Therefore let them be vſed moſt before meate after the rubbings in the morning, and two houres before exerciſe.
            
            
               CAP. X. Of windineſſe of the stomach. DE INFLATIONE VENTRICVLI.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  THe ſtomach is windie through the windineſſe that is engendred in it. Windineſſe is engendred through fleugmaticke humours in the ſtomach, or elſe thorough meates diſſolued into vapours through want and debility of heate. For cold onely doth cauſe no windineſſe, becauſe it can neither extenuate nor diſſolue meate. Vehement heate for the moſt part, ouercomming thoſe things that it comprehendeth, it extenuateth and maketh thinne the meate, ſo that no vapours can engender thereof: vnleſſe it be eaſie to turne into windines, of the owne nature. But the windineſſe that is ſo engendred is troublous and cloudie: and alſo it is but little, and endureth but a little while, ſo that at one belkinge or other it vaniſheth awaye ſtraight. The heate that woorketh in the meates, if it be but of little force and ſtrengthe, (that is) doeth ſomewhat diſſolue them, but not altogeather conſume

them, thereof muſt needes engender windines, (as Galen teacheth lib. 30. de ſympto cauſis. 70. They that are thus diſeaſed, haue ſtretching out and heauines of the ſtomach:
                     Signa.
                   alſo ſometime ſwelling, and a certaine bowing out of the mouth of the ſtomach, and of the ſtomach it ſelfe: alſo emptie belkings doe come, ſometimes lightening a litle, and a ſtopping of the windines which is wont to breake downeward. Alſo this euill ſometimes is all ouer the breaſt, and ſometime behind, about the backbone and backe, and ruſheth among the iointes, and often it occupieth both places. Beſides theſe thinges there is vehement paine in drawing of breath, becauſe of the preſſing down togither of the midriffe, ſo that ſome do feele like as though they were choked. They are eaſed by the meate going downewarde, and by windines breaking out either by belking, or by the bellie. Alſo rumbling and noiſe is hard within. Therefore if the windines of the ſtomach be cauſed of flegmatique meates:
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt miniſter an extenuating diet, and ſuch medicines, as doe deuide and purge fleume, which we taught in the firſt chapter of this booke. But if the windines be engēdred through want & weakenes of heate, he muſt vſe meates eaſie of digeſtion, and of good iuice. Alſo you muſt eate but litle: for faſting is very good for this diſeaſe. After all the meate you muſt miniſter wine that is pure and vnwixed: but yet he muſt eſchue much drinke, as a deadly enemie. Alſo let him eſchew fruite and eating of moiſt oyles. Alſo let him vſe hote bathes in great veſſels, for thoſe doe mitigate ſo often and diſſolue windines whereſoeuer it be, and prouoke ſleepe. And when ſleepe commeth, it eaſeth the pacient much becauſe it helpeth digeſtion maruelouſlie. And as for medicines, let them vſe this decoption. ℞. Calamint, mintes, wilde mintes, chamomill, origan,
                  
                     Decoctum.
                   
                  peniroiall. ana. M.j. wormewood. M.ſs. ſeedes of annyſe, apium, comin, daucus, parcely, fennell. ana. ʒ.iij. ſeedes of nettles, carawayes. ana. ʒ.ij. of the roote of Enula Campana. ℥.ij. ſeath theſe in iuſt quantitie of water, till the third parte be conſumed: then ſtraine them, and put to ſufficient ſuger to make the iuce of that decoction ſweete, and put to that licour, of ſyrop of Calamint. ℥.iij and make a potion whereof let the ſicke drinke euery day, in the morning. ℥.iiij. Or let him vſe this pouder. ℞. the pouders of Dianyſum, diacuninum, diacalum, inthes, ana. ℈.ij. ſeedes of Annyſe,
                     Tritura.
                   daucus & fennell. ana. ℈.j. quibbybes, cloues. ana. ℈.ij ginger. ℈. pepper. ʒ.j. ſugar lib. ſs. commixe them altogeather and make a powder. They which haue taken meate, but a litle before, muſt firſt vomit. Alſo you muſt miniſter ſuppoſitories made of thinges that entice windines. After this ſort. ℞. hony ſodden ℥.ij. ſeedes of rew, comin, and fennell. ana. ℈.j. ſeedes of Careawayes & anyſe. ana. ʒ.ſs. ſalt. ℈.ij. commixt them altogeather and make ſuppoſiſitaries. If the wombe be very coſtiue, you muſt caſt in a Cliſter made thus.
                     Glandes.
                   ℞. of the decoction aboue taught. lib. j. of benedicta laxatiua. 
                  ʒ.vij. oyles of worewood, rew, & dil,
                     Clyſter.
                   ana. ℥.j. gooſe greace and hennes greace without ſalt. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. common ſalt, ʒ.j. cōmixe altogeather, & make a clyſter. In this diſeaſe you muſt annoint the ſtomach outwarly with the oyles aforeſaid or make a litle bunch of wooll, and wet it in the aforeſaid oyles, being warmed, & apply it to the ſtomach. And vpon the buntch of wooll being wound vp together, ſtrew comin beaten, or ſeede of Apium or dill. If the diſeaſe endure longe apply to it plaiſters made of line ſeede, bareley meale, darnell meale, comin, dill ſeede, or Apium, or fennell beaten, the toppes of Centorie and ſuch other like, or apply this cerote.
                     Ceratum.
                   ℞ oyles of rew, dill, narde, and laurell. ana. ℥.j. meale of lineſeede, and fenugreeke ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeedes of Apium, careawayes, and Nigella Romana, ana. ʒ.j. laurell bearies, and Centorie ana. ʒ.j.ſs. gumme ammoniacke, and opoponax ana. ʒ.ij. wax and roſen as much as is ſufficient, make a Cerate. Alſo a great cupping glaſſe comprehending the nauell euery where, being applied with greate flame, is a remeady in this diſeaſe. Alſo Caſtoreum dronke with Poſca, and alſo applied outwardly with oyle of dill, is good.
            
            
               CAP. XI. Of yelking or hicket. DE SINGVLTƲ.
               
                  
                  YELKING is motion of the ſtomach, and it is as it were a crampe of the ſtomach raiſed of the expulſiue vertue which goeth about to thruſt forth euill & hurtfull thinges.
                     Cauſae. 6. Aph. 39. This diſeaſe is cauſed for the moſt parte, either of fulnes or of emptines, as Hippocrates Witneſſeth. Alſo ſomtimes it is cauſed through the byting and gnawing of ſharpe humors. Alſo the meate being turned into a gnawing qualitie, and ſo corrupted, cauſeth ſome to yelke. Alſo coldnes of the mouth of the ſtomach, and corruption of the food cauſeth yelking, which cauſeth children ſpecially to haue the hicket often. Alſo yelking engendreth in feauers, ſpecially whē the ſtomach or ſome other bowell is inflamed.
                     Signa.
                   The outward cauſes are eaſily knowen by the telling of the ſicke and them that be about him. Fulnes is knowne by heauines and emtines by thoſe thinges that went before. You may knowe if the meate be corrupt by the burnt ſauour of it. But you ſhall know ſharpnes by gnawing, pricking and pulling. Therefore when yelking is engendred of coldnes, you muſt lay vpon the ſtomach, wooll dipped in the oyle,
                     Cure of priking of cold.
                   wherein hath bene ſodden rew, comin and wormewood. Alſo oyle of maſtick, and of Caſtoreum being annointed doth profit. To children warme linnen clothes being applied to, doe helpe often. They that be of full age, miniſter to them to drinke wine or Apium ſodden in aqua mulſa, or comin beaten, or Aſarum or penyroyall, eche of theſe by him ſelfe or elſe mixt with other. Alſo ſquilliticke vinegre is good to ſoupe. Alſo giue thē 
                  ʒ.j. of Caſtoreum with Poſca, aſwell againſt yelking cauſed of colde: as alſo, if it be cauſed through multitude of humours. Alſo if it be applied outwardly to the ſtomach with olde oyle, it is good for both the ſaide griefes. Moreouer holding of the breath which doth encreaſe heate,
                     Cure of yelking of 
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        nes.
                   is a preſent remedy for them that doe yelke through cold. When yelking is cauſed of fulnes, vomiting is the beſt remedie. If there be groſſe humours, they muſt be extenuate and cutte with Oximel ſcylliticum, and calamint and horehound their decoction, & ſuch like before reherſed.
                     Auerſion.
                   Afterwarde you muſt apply thoſe thinges which may draweth aboundannce of humours a contrary way, and turne them cleane aſide. For which purpoſe are good thoſe thinges which do purge downeward, and ſpecially cliſters, bindings & rubbings of the extreame partes, and cupping glaſſes with much flame, faſted to the breaſt, to the ſtomach and to the backe. Alſo theſe thinges are good for them, longe and quicke walking,6 Aph. 13. bearinges about and chiefly ryding. Alſo it is good for them to ſneeſe as Hippocrates ſaith. For when the yelking is cauſed of fulnes there is neede of violent mouing. Alſo handſome calling loud, with much clamor, and with holding of the breath is good for them. Moreouer the ſtomach muſt be ſtrengthened by medicines miniſtred as well inwardly as outwardly. Inwardly by comforting Electuaries, and outwardly by applying of ointmets, emplaiſters and cerotes before taught. Yelking, that is cauſed of emptines, is cured by giuing to the patient conuenient food,
                     Cure of hickes cauſed of 
                           ••
                        
                        tines.
                   and by thoſe thinges that do fill his wanting: which partly be afore taught, & aboundantly ſpoken of hereafter in the cure of the feauer Ethicke. It doth much good in this kinde of yelking, to annoint the ioyntes of the necke and the backe with moiſting oyle,
                     Cure of yelking through inordina
                           ••
                        e.
                   (as is) oiles of violets and of ſweete almondes. But if yelking be cauſed of gnawing thinges, firſt we find that vomiting is a ſufficient remedy for it: than alſo ſtupefaction of feeling, and ſuch thinges as doe alter the gnawing. The ſenſes be aſtonyed and ſtupefact by cooling things,
                     Pillulae de cyngi
                           •
                        ſta.
                   for which purpoſe you muſt miniſter philonium, or pils of hounds tongue, which do profit maruelouſlie in this diſeaſe, you muſt vſe them thus. You muſt make of one drachme, ſix pilles, whereof let the ſicke take one before he go to bed. The mordacitie and gnawing is altered and driuen away by medicines which doe ſtoppe, attenuate, and dry. Stoppers of gnawing be theſe, iuice of Endiue drunke, cowcumber ſeedes husked and beaten being drunke, lettuſe ſeede likewiſe taken. Alſo iuice of purcelaine drunke, & purſlaine it ſelfe taken in meate. Alſo Sebeſten dectoction taken in drinke, but ſpecially aboue all Aſſes milke is good. Or if you haue not that, cowes milke new milked is good being dronke. For the ſame purpoſe miniſter conſerue of roſes, or of violets, or of water lillies diarrhodon, diatrion fautalon. Iulep of violets of Nimpheae (that is) water lillies and ſuch like.
                     P
                           •
                        ſtillus.
                   The Throchiskes doe ſtoppe, extenuate and drie vp. ℞. Coſtus, ſaffron, ſpikenard, greene roſes, maſticke, ana. ℥.ſs. aſarum, aloës. ana. ʒ.ij. opium. 
                  ʒ.j. with iuice of pſillium. make trochiskes, of the which giue ʒ.ſs. or ʒ.j. Note that opium, and the roſes, &

the iuice of pſillium be of a colde operation. The ſpiknard doth diſcuſſe, diſſolue and corroborate. The Aſarum doth bring out the vicious humors by vrine. The Aloës doth purge out the vicious humors, and driue them out beneth at the ſeege. The ſaffron digeſteth and ſtrengtheneth the partes, for by his temperament of heate he cauſeth digeſtion, and by his reſtrictiue vertue which he hath, he addeth ſtrength. The coſtus doeth ſufficiently heate, and moderatly reſtraine, which you may perceiue by his taſt. Galen commendeth this medicine very much lib. 8. de comp. Med. ſecundum locos. cap. 3.
            
            
               CAP. XII. Of Choler. DE CHOLERA.
               
                  CHOLERA in Latine, is an immoderate perturbation of the ſtomach cauſed by vomit both vpward and downwarde. The barbarous ſorte call this diſeaſe, Cholerica paſsio: they that haue this diſeaſe be called of the Latines Cholerici.
                  
                     Cholerici Sauſae.
                   It is cauſed through much cruditie and rawnes of the ſtomach and ill digeſtion, which many times engendereth of great wickednes of the meates and ſometime through aboundaunce of vicious humours alſo. The ſignes whereby this euill is knowne be verie manifeſt: for they auoid both vpwarde and downward: alſo there followeth thirſt and ſwet, & ſhort pulſe and drawing vp,
                     Signa.
                   and ſtretching out of the muſcles of the handes, and feete, and ſpecially of the calfe of the legges. Therefore ſeeing this euill is moſt ſharpe and doth cauſe verie greuous ſoundings, if it endure long, you muſt doe your diligence, that you helpe it by and by without any tarying.
                     Curatio.
                   No Phiſition, if he ſee this diſeaſe to be engendred through aboundaunce of vicious humours, will in the beginning all at once go about to ſtop that which is ſent forth, for ſeeing they be vnprofitable & hurtfull they haue neede of purging. Therefore if the patient hath diſpoſition to vomit, and be troubled with vndigeſted meates remaining in the ſtomach, you muſt giue him warme water, and then he muſt vomit by his finger or a fether put into his mouth. But you may not prouoke vomit by miniſtring of Aqua mulſa, nor with water mixed with oyle: becauſe theſe thinges doe encreaſe the fluxes, and cauſe mordacitie and writhinges. Alſo you muſt helpe the matter that purgeth downewarde: for a ſtraung poyſon as it were being within doth gnaw the ſtomach and the guttes, and draweth the humours from the whole bodie, you muſt miniſter vnto him the eaſieſt purging medicines as is Aloës, Caſia fiſtularis, decoctions of Mirabolanes and ſuch like. After that the ſuperfluous thinges be brought forth, then he muſt reſt, and it is good to nouriſh the ſides with oyles of Maſticke, or nard, or wormewood, and to cauſe ſleepe. You muſt commixe ſometime with the aforeſaid other thinges which can ſtrengthen the ſtomach, which be afore taught, and with them you muſt make oitmentes. When there appeare exact and perfect concoction and digeſtion, vſe bathes of ſweete water, & meates of good iuice. Among which is brothe of chickens with veriuice, the fleſh of ſmale birdes of mountaines, reere egges & ſuch like. In drinke let him vſe iuice of Pomgranates, or ſyrupe of roſes, or water wherein burning ſteele hath bene quenched three or foure times. But when the euill hath endured long, and hath cauſed ſlendernes and leanes throughout the body, and ſpecially if the belly or ſtomach doe reſt after the remouing from his place, and that the pulſe be leſſe, and thicker, then you muſt bynde the extreme and vttermoſt partes by bandes, and you muſt make them faſt by much oyle. Alſo apply to the ſtomach Cataplaſmes, and emplaiſters, made of reſtrictiue and ſtrengthening thinges, as thoſe be which are made of dates, hypociſchidos, Acatia, Sumach, bole armomacke, franckenſence, balauſtiae, roſes, and fruit of mirtles. Alſo it is an effectious remeady, if a linnen cloth wet in the iuice of crabbes, be laid vpon the ſtomach, or this Cerate. ℞. of the oyles of Roſes, mirtells,
                     Scu
                           •••
                         ſtomachi.
                   & quinces ana. ℥.j maſticke, franckenſence, acatia. ana. ʒ.ij. hypociſchidos. ʒ.j.ſs. ſaunders whyte and redde. ana. ʒ.j. baluſtiae, dragons blood. ana. ʒ.ſs. bole armoniacke ʒ.j. wax and roſon as much as is ſufficient, make a Cerate to lay vpon the ſtomach couered with ſilke. In drincking

giue him the meaſure of one Cyathe of cold water to ſoupe of (that is) ℥.j.ſs. but you muſt beware that it be not ouer cold,
                     A Cyathe is, ℥.j.ſs. for that being giuen ſodainly is vomited vp againe, and ſometime with his ſtupor and coldnes it hurteth verie extreemely the naturall heate, or it cauſeth inflammation of the ſtomach, or of ſome of the bowels. And you may ſometime droppe into the water, a litle of the iuice of ſharpe pomegranates, or of roſes, or of the decoction of vine braunches. And if thoſe thinges that be voyded furth be verie ſharpe; and that thirſt and burning doe trouble the patient: then miniſter cucumber ſeedes with three Cyathes of water. Alſo you may giue it commodiouſlie with Amylum. Then alſo miniſter endiue or lettuſe or both ſodden in Poſca. Afterward procure ſleepe and reſt by all meanes: but if the fluxe will not be ſtopped, and the pulſe decaie betweene this and that, and that cold and ſwet doe take him, and alſo ſometime yelking, you muſt come to wine that is meanely reſtrictiue, which is not very ſtrong, but yet ſweete & not odoriferous. And put into it, warme if it may be, or elſe cold, crummes of bread or Alica, and ſo by litle and litle at ſundry times let them ſoupe it vp. But yet they muſt eſchew much quantitie of wine, & by all meanes you muſt goe about to bring them to ſleepe, by ſtrewing the pauement of the houſe, with roſes, vine leaues, bryer, and ſuch like afore taught. Alſo apply odouraments to the noſe, as roſes, quinces, and ſuch like, alſo annoint ſoporiferous and ſleepy ointments about the temples and forehead. If he goe to the ſtoole ſtill, caſt in by a clyſter Amylum with decoction of poppy heades, for it doth both reſtraine and coole and cauſe ſleepe. To ſtop vomits,
                     Conſtri
                           •
                        tion of vomites.
                   it is good to eate and deuoure the iuice of meddlers, quinces, pomegranates and peares. If with theſe remedies, and others that be taught before in the 2. chapter of this booke, the ſicke cannot keepe & brooke his meate: you muſt apply without vpon the ſtomach a very great cupping glaſſe lightly. Againſt the contractions and drawing vp of the muſcles,
                     Againſt conſtriction in the muſcles.
                   you muſt wind about the muſcles, linnen clothes ſooked in warme oyle, and apply moiſt Cerates and ointmentes, wherein is put ſome Caſtoreum and oyle of ireos. You ſhall finde examples enough of thoſe in the chapter of the palſey before in the firſt booke. When the diſeaſe decreaſeth, you muſt refreſh and reſtore the patient againe, with good meates as chickens, doues, hennes, partriche, wood culuer, and ouſills, or blackbirdes and ſuch like.
            
            
               CAP. XIII. Of the fluxe diarrhaea. DE DIARRHAEA.
               
                  DIARRHAEA in Latine, is a copious & great fluxe of the wombe without exulceration and inflammation. It is cauſed through weakenes of the inſtruments that be long,
                     Cauſae.
                   and doe ſerue to digeſtion: alſo through aboundance of nouriſhment and meate that is moiſt, and viſcous, and through corrupting of the ſame meate. Moreouer gnawing and byting of thoſe thinges that are contained in the belly: alſo flowing of ſome thinges from aboue to the belly, and alſo wekenes of the retentiue vertue.
                     Signa.
                   The ſignes whereby the cauſes are knowen are very manifeſt. For if this fluxe diarrhaea be cauſed through the weakenes of the inſtrumentes that ſerue for digeſtion (as is) the ſtomach, the bowels, the liuer and the ſplene: you muſt ſeeke the ſignes of theſe out of their owne chapters. But if it be cauſed through much deuouring of euill meates and drinckes, you may know it partly by the patients tale, and partly alſo by thoſe things that come forth by ſeige. For if they be cholericke they be yellow of colour, & they be not caſt out without feeling of gnawing & heate: alſo the patient feeleth bitternes of the mouth, thirſt, thinne ſtate of the body, & other tokens which ſignifie choler. If it be flegmaticke, thoſe thinges which come out with the ſeige, ſhalbe contrarie to that, which is ſayd before of Choler. And if humours doe flowe from the head to the belly, the egeſtions will appeare frothy, and the tempre of the braine wilbe very moiſt. If the fluxe be engendred through fulnes of the whole bodie, or if it be indicatorie, the ſignes are reherſed in another place, and of Galen lib. de plenitudine & criſibus. And if this fluxe of the wombe, be cauſed through weakenes of the inſtrumentes,
                     Curatio.
                   the diſtempure which is cauſe of this,

muſt be cured and corrected by his contraries, a
                     •
                   is taught in the firſt chapter of this booke. If this fluxe of the wombe be cauſed through other cauſes,
                     Note.
                   and that nature doth labour to driue out of the body ſuperfluous and hurtfull matter by this meanes, and that you can eaſily ſuffer it, which be troubled with it, then you muſt ſuffer and watch, till nature hath beſtowed all her care and charge: or elſe alſo it is good to helpe natures motion, but for to goe about to ſtriue with it, and to ſtoppe the fluxe, it cauſeth a worſe and greater diſeaſe. For thoſe humours which are ſtopped being caried vpward doe cauſe paine in the head, or phrenſie, or litargie, or impoſtumation behind the eares not without daunger. Therefore in the beginning you may not ſtop the fluxe, which floweth profitably for the health of the body. But after that the fluxe hath endured long, not onely carrying forth ſuperfluities, but alſo melting as it were the ſtate of the body and conſuming the ſtrength, then you muſt labour to ſtoppe it, as well by thinges giuen in at the mouth, as alſo caſt in at the foū
                  dament, and alſo by thinges applyed outwardly vpon the belly. Therefore if there come forth excreementes of cleane choler, you muſt chaunge it into a better and more healthfull ſtate, but yet you may not cure them by ſtopping of it ſtraight wayes.
                     Cure of a Diarrhaea of choler.
                   For the cholericke matter that is gathered togeather, and heaped in the ſtomach, and in the bowell called ieiunum, if it be withholden and kept there ſtill, it hurteth greatly. For it both ouerturneth the ſtomach, and cauſeth inflammations of the bowels, it kindleth thirſt and reſtoreth feauers, and cauſed the euils aforeſaide, and generally cauſeth a worſe diſeaſe. Therefore if there be aboundaunce of cholericke humours in the body: nature muſt be expelled with eaſie purging medicines, (as is infuſion) of rewbarbe, caſia fiſtularis, the barkes of mirabolanes, Citrine or manna. After that giue cowes milke or goates milke warme, being new milked: or ſeeth it at the fire and ſtirre it continually, till it be conſumed vnto the third part: which you may doe by quenching of redde hote iron, or ſteele gaddes in the milke often, but while it ſeetheth you muſt take the ſcume or ſome of it. For ſurely you can finde noe quicker remedy againſt fluxes of choler. And becauſe the milke that is eaten of one that hath a feuer, is wont to turne into a burning ſauour, or alſo ſharpe or ſoure, and ſo cauſeth more hurt thē good: therefore if the patient hath a feuer togeather with this fluxe, you ſhall eſchew miniſtring of milke to him, dreſſed after rhat ſorte. But you muſt poure the fourth part of water to the milcke, and ſeeth it vntill halfe be conſumed, and then miniſter it vnto him. If the choler be heaped vp togeather in the bowels, you muſt caſt in cliſters made of the decoction of barcley, with ſuger, roſet, oyle of roſes, yolkes of egges and ſuch like. At the length, when the cholericke humours be voided out, you muſt miniſter inwardly ſuch medicines, as do reſtraine and ſtrengthen (as be) conſerue of roſes, diacotoneon without ſpyces, diatrion ſantalon, trochiskes of spodium Hydromalon and ſuch like. And what kinde of medicines they muſt be that ought to be applied outwardly, we will tell you a litle heareafter. Alſo the foundament muſt be fomented and nouriſhed with a decoction made of ſome reſtrictiue thinges. If the fluxe Diarrhaea be engendred through flegmaticke humours that be groſſe and tough, or through corruption of them,
                     Cure of D
                           ••
                        arhaea of flegmaticke humours.
                   then you muſt begine your cure as you did before with eaſie purging. Therefore then you muſt miniſter the infuſion of Agaricke, with mirabolanes imbelitici: or ſome ſuch like medicine, which is able to bring furth the afore ſaide humours. Alſo clyſters are good, ſpecially if there be aboundaunce of clammy humours heaped vp in the bowels, let them be made of the decoction of Centory, and oyle of rew, and ſuch like. Miniſter within the belly Diacotoneon with ſpices, greene ginger, & other medicines which haue power to heate and drye. Alſo apply outwardly thoſe thinges which doe adde ſtrength. If the fluxe Diarrhaea be cauſed through the weakenes of the vertue retentiue, you muſt miniſter and apply thoſe medicines,
                     Cure of Diarrhaea of the weakenes of the vertue retentiue.
                   which are applyed againſt other vnmeaſurable fluxes of the wombe. Therefore apply irrigations and ſprincklinges of oyle omphacine, or oyle of roſes, or oyle of the bloſſomes of apples with ſome ſoure or ſharpe wine, but oyle of mirtles is of more effect, if there be neede of vehement reſtriction, hauing the third or fourth part of wine added to it. And if their bodies be ſtrong, you may ſeeth in that irrigation, gawles, pomegranate rindes, and Baluſtiae. If the fluxe endure ſtill: apply Cataplaſmes, emplaiſters, and cerates, made of reſtrictiue and drying things, whereof we will make mention in the next chapter. Alſo this Cerate is effectious to be made.
                     Cera
                           •••
                        .
                  
                  
Take ſeuen mulberies, or blackberies which be ſoure and whytiſh for lacke of ripenes, bray them well and adde to it oyle of roſes ℥.ij. wax ℥.j. and make a cerate. After the voyding of ſuperfluous and hurtfull humours, theſe thinges heale the fluxe of the wombe being miniſtred in drinke, (that is) comin, decoction of maidenheare, the roote of white thorne, likewiſe on drachme weight of the ſeede of Apium miniſtred: for it prouoketh vrine and turneth the fluxes that be in the bowels thither. Alſo vnrype Mulberies being yet ſoure, if they be dryed many dayes in the Sunne and ſo kept, if they be beaten and drunke when neede requireth, they reſtraine and ſtop the wombe maruelouſly. Alſo they may be 
                     ••
                  aied and mixed with his meates, as they are wont to vſe Sumach, which ſometimes is ſodden, the quantitie of an ounce weight with a chicken: but yet blackeberies of the brier being vnripe and ſharpe, do bind the bellie more, if they be dryed as is aforeſaide and miniſtred in drinke. Among compound medicines theſe are maruelous good (that is) trochiskes of Spodium, of terra le
                        ••
                     ia, diacotoneon, diatrion ſantalon, Triacle: and this compound made in Lozenges is good.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   ℞. the powders of diatrion ſantalon, diarrhodon abbatis. ana. ℈.ij. red corall, choſen franckenſence, red roſes. ana. ʒ.ſs. ſpodium, 
                  ʒ.j. ſeedes of ſorrell, ſumuch. ana. ℈.j. balauſtiae, acatiae, ana. ʒ.ſs. maſticke ℈.ſs. bole armoniacke. ℥.j. fine white ſuger▪ lib. ſs. diſſolue it in the ſtilled waters of Plantaine, and roſes, and make lozenges. Alſo this loch is good:
                     Eclig
                           ••
                        .
                   ℞. of old conſerue of roſes, of diacotoneon without ſpices, rob è ribes, rob de berberies ana. ℥.ſs. hydromel. 
                  ʒ.iij. diamoron. 
                  ʒ.v. the powder of diatrion ſantalon. ℈.ij. red corall, ℈.j. ſpodium, balauſtiae. ana. ℈.ſs. bole armoniacke. ʒ.j. ſyrupe of mirtles as much as ſhall ſuffiſe and make a loch. Moreouer you ſhall euer haue this water ready made. ℞. ſumach, one quarter,
                     A precious water.
                   raine water. lib. 3. in which ſteepe the ſumach a day and a night, then boyle, them, and ſtraine the ſumach well and ſtrongly. And in that water, ſeeth rice, or milcke, or other meates, or at the leaſt way, poure ſome portion of this water to them. If the fluxe Diarrhaea be cauſed through flowing of humours from ſome other member of the bodie you muſt ſeeke the cure out of their proper chapters. As for example, if the humours flow from the heade into the ſtomach: you muſt returne to thoſe thinges which are ſpoken of before in the chapiter againſt diſtillation or reume, and ſo doe likewiſe with other partes of the body.
            
            
               CAP XIIII. Of the fluxe Lienteria. DE LIENTERIA.
               
                  LIENTERIA in Greeke, is a certaine lightnes, or ſmoothnes of the bowels, euen like as there chaunceth of a ſcarre without on the skinne of the body. In this diſeaſe the bowels do not hold the meate, but they let it ſlide away before it be chaunged and perfitly digeſt, euen in the ſame forme and likenes that it was eaten. Therefore in Latine, it may well be called leuitas, or leuor inteſtinorum,
                  
                     Cauſae.
                   and in Engliſh, lightnes or ſmothenes of the bowels. It is cauſed oftentimes through a grieuous fluxe diſenteria by name going afore, which cauſeth deepe exulceration of the bowels, then ſcarres that be hard cloſed togeather and ſmooth do follow: which ſcarres by reaſon of the hard cloſing, will not ſuffer the meates to be diſtributed aboue the body, becauſe the mouthes of the veines, which are wont to drawe nowriſhment from the bowelles to them ſelues, are now ſtopped. And becauſe of ſmoothnes (as is aforeſaide) the bowels ſuffer the meates to ſlide out, before they be perfitly digeſted. Alſo this diſeaſe is cauſed many times through weakenes and debilitie of the vertue, that ſhould keepe and holde the meates in the ſtomach. For this vertue being weake and ſickly, the food or meates be neither digeſted nor diſtributed: but they are caſt forth crude, moiſt, and nothing chaunged, (the belly being alwayes ſoluble). Alſo ſometime it engendereth after long fluxe of the wombe. Alſo ſometime when dropſey water, auoideth by the belly, this fluxe Lienteria followeth. Therefore of what cauſe ſoeuer this fluxe is engendred, the ſicke doth taſt or feele no meate,
                     Signa.
                   and it cauſeth euill ſtate or plight of the bodie. Therefore there chaunceth to the patient continuall ſeiges, crude and raw, in colour pale or whitiſh, vnequall and very

waterie without anye commixinge of bloode and choler. Alſoe he feeleth a burninge, which ſpreadeth all ouer the ſides, loothinge of meate followeth it.6. Aph. 1. It is a good and a friendely ſigne in them, that haue had this fluxe longe, if their chaunce to them ſharpe and ſoure belchinges, for it betokeneth that the meate doeth abyde ſome while in the ſtomache vntill it beginne to be chaunged.
                     Victus ratio.
                   When this diſeaſe chaunceeth, it is eaſie to perceiue, that you muſt refreſhe and recreate the vertues retentiue and digeſtiue, aſwell of the ſtomache as of the bowelles by all meanes, and that may chiefelye be done by myniſtringe of conueniente meates, and ordeyning of a dyette meete to reſtoore and refreſhe ſtrength. Therefore the fleſhe of the byrdes of mountaynes are good, alſo chickens roſted in whoſe bellies alſo muſt be putte Sumache or maſticke, and other thinges which ſhall be rehearſed in the next chapter. Lette the meat which you giue him, be litle in quantitie and eaſie of digeſtion. And if his ſieges be ſharpe and cholericke, make him meate with rice and Alica and ſuch like, with the which ſeeth ſome reſtrictiue thinges, peares, quinces, meddlars and ſuch other like. Alſo milcke ſodden is good for them, but if their ſeige bee flegmaticke, you muſt miniſter vnto them contrarye meates. Alſo commixe ſome what that is pleaſaunte and acceptable to the ſtomache, as is Annyſe ſeede, comyn, or Daucus. In cholericke ſeiges lette their drincke be wine that is waterye and thinne: but in flegmaticke let the wine be olde and hotte. And generally let him drincke but litle, for muche drincke is not onely in this fluxe Lienteria, but alſo in all other fluxes of the wombe, moſt hurtfull. For curinge of this diſeaſe, if the fluxe Lienteria be engendred through weakeneſſe of the vertue of the ſtomache,
                     Cure of Lienteria of weakeneſſe of the vertue of the ſtomach.
                   you muſt turne to the chapter of weakeneeſſe of the ſtomache, and there ſeeke the cure. But to be ſhorte you muſt miniſter both within and without to the bodye thoſe thinges that doe reſtraine, and that can ſtrengthen aſwell the ſtomache as alſo the bowelles. Therefore myniſter ſyruppes of wormewoode, and mintes and other electuaries which doe ſtrengthen the ſtomache. And you muſt applye thoſe thinges outwardely, which be rehearſed before in the chapter of Diarrhaea, and ſhall be taught in the nexte chapter followinge. But this medicine is ſpeciallie good. ℞. oyles of Maſticke, wormewoode, myntes, and myrtles. ana. ʒ.ij. pouders of cinnamon choſen, cloues,
                     vnguentum.
                   and galingale. ana. ℈.j. Balauſtiae and redde roſes. ana. ℈.ſs. waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment, or vſe this cerote. ℞. oyles of maſticke, of wormewoode, and of quinces. ana. ℥.j. oyle of myntes. ℥.ſs. calamus aromaticus, cloues, franckenſence,
                     Cera
                           •••
                        .
                   ana. ʒ.j. woode of Aloes. ℈.ſs. redde roſes, whyte ſaunders and redde. ana. ʒ.ſs. maſticke, comyn. ana. ʒ.j. Hypochiſchidos, Acatia, Sumach. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Gallia moſchata. ℈.j. with waxe and turpentine as muche as is ſufficient, make a cerate.
                     If Lienteria be cauſed of a ſcarre.
                   Moreouer to thoſe that youe coniecture haue a ſcarre, to thoſe the eating of ſharpe thinges is profitable, for it cauſeth a certaine refrication and rubbing open againe of the ſcarre, alſo it reuyueth againe the naturall heate, and doeth ſome what refreſh the digeſtiue vertue. Therefore in this caſe (as Galen witneſſeth in chapter nientie fiue, Artis Medicae) they be good which doe ſcoure, and wype awaye ſufficientlie, and reſtraine a litle, therefore allwayes commixe ſcouring thinges with reſtrictiue medycines. In all other cauſes of this fluxe Lienteria, you muſt vſe the ſame kinde of cure, which you doe vſe to them that be afflicted with the fluxes Diarrhaea, or Dyſenteria.
               
            
            
               CAP. XV. Of the fluxe Dyſenteria. DE DYSENTERIA.
               
                  
                  DYSENTERIA in greeke properly is nothing elſe then an exulceration of the bowelles. The Latynes call this diſeaſe tormina, becauſe through it, the bowells are tormented and fretted verie much with payne. We ſayde before properly,4 Kindes of dyſenteria.
                   becauſe the greekes recken foure kindes of bloudy Dyſenteria, as witneſſeth Galen lib. 30. de ſymptomatum cauſis. The firſt is, when  bloud is ſent furth by circuite through ſome part of the bodie being cut of, or through ſome exerciſe of the former life, being let paſſe for a time. The ſecond is when waterie bloud,  like vnto the water, wherein bloodie fleſhe being newe killed, hath bene waſhed and ſooked, is ſent out: which chaunceth through weakeneſſe of the liuer. The thirde is,  when there is ſent forth an humour more ſhyning & blacker, then that which is naturall, being commixt of bloode and melancholy. And of theſe, we doe not ſpeake here, but  we ſpeake onely of the fourth kinde, in the which many times by litle and litle, and betweene whyles ſometymes is caſt out of pure bloode. Alſo ſometyme clodded bloode, or ſhauing of the bowelles, commeth out with pure bloode. Alſo many times is caſt out thicke dounge ſprinckled with droppes of bloode. This fourth kinde (as it is ſaide) is cauſed through exulceration of the bowelles,
                     Cauſae.
                   which ſometime chaunceth through outwarde cauſes, as of colde, heate, and moyſtneſſe. Alſo through drincking of pernicious and naughtie medicines (as is ſcammony and ſuch like. Alſo through eating of fruicte, through cruditie and rawnes, or through eating of ſharpe or ſoure meates, or through ſharpe and gnawing humours, flowinge from the whole bodie to the bellie, or engendred in the bellie it ſelfe. And this beginneth after Tenaſmus ſometime, and ſometyme by it ſelfe.
                     Signa.
                   The excremententes firſt are cholericke, diuerſe and fattie
                     •
                  , by reaſon of the fatte that cleaueth within in the bowells beinge melted. But when the ſuperficies of the bowelles is altogeather bare, and exulceration doeth abyde about it, then the excrementes that come forth, be full of dregges and bloodie. And when the exulceration hath pearced deeper, then alſo is ſent forth filthines, hauing as it were litle peaces of parchemente commixed with it. And if it be not ſtopped, it eateth and feedeth in ſhortetime, the places nigh vnto it, and it ſendeth forth matterie excrementes,
                     S
                           •
                        gnes of exulceration of the 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   ſuch as are wonte to runne from deade bodies. When the ſmall guttes are exulcerate, there abydeth payne about the nauill, the excrementes are cholerike hauing the colour of a leeke, and altogeather garniſhed with ſundrie colours, commixed with much ordure or dounge. The patiente feeleth greefe and frettinges, and gnawinges and loſening, ſo that the ſicke is not farre from faynting and fayling of harte. Alſo they are troubled with thriſte and be feuerous, and the ordure commeth forth crude and rawe, and the bowell called ieiunum is exulcerate, but that is verie ſeldome: but if it doe chaunce the egeſtions doe appeare more crude and rawe hauing blacke blood wrapped with it vehemently and yelow choler, and much thirſt, and alſo diſpoſition to vomit doe trouble the ſicke. Alſo ſometime they vomit and abhorre meates. Alſo there remayneth vehement payne aboue the nauill, and ſometime alſo malignaunt feauers doe engender. And they that are ſo diſeaſed be waxen ill coulored, and doe ſweate out euen till faynting and failing of harte. Their ſtrength doeth quickly fayle them,
                     Signes of exulceration of the great bowels.
                   and they be not farre from death. But if the vlceration be engendred in the great bowelles, then the ordure it commeth forth is pure and much and heaped togeather, and commeth out with windines and frothenes ſometime. Alſo fatneſſe is commixed with it, and blood ſwimmeth alofte: as Galen ſheweth largely in libro 60. de male affectis locis. For it helpeth greatly to the cure to knowe this thinge. For if the exulceration be in the vpper and ſmale bowelles, you muſt goe about to cure by medicines, giuen in at the mouth, but if it be in the great and lower bowelles, it is more conuenient to throwe in clyſters. The beginning of the cure of them that haue the fluxe Dyſenteria, from whence ſoeuer the fluxe proceedeth, muſt be with quiet & reſt, and litle meat. Therefore if a feauar do not let it, let him eate milcke new milcked, while it is yet warme:
                     Diet.
                   or it ſteed of it miniſter milcke ſodden: as we taught before in the chapter of diarrhea. For this firſt clenſeth & purgeth downward, and tempereth togither thoſe thinges

which be in the bodie, and laſt of all it ſtoppeth and bindeth the wombe. But you muſt giue him moreouer wet bread after the taking of the milcke. Alſo pottage prepared of milcke, hath both the nature of medicines, and alſo they cauſe good nouriſhment, as is rice with milcke, amylum, and egges mixed with milcke. Alſo ſoupings or pottage made of alica, & milium, ſumach, being added to it, is good. Alſo you muſt prepare meates of dry bread, pouring to it Poſca, or iuice of dates, or quinces, or of peares, or of ſumach.
                  
                     Lenticula.
                   Alſo miniſter chittes well roſted, with plantaine, or ſodden with quinces, brayed: thuſing of oyles is not neceſſary nor needefull, but you ſhall miniſter to taſt vpon endiue, to both wilde and tame ſodden, and plantaine, and colewortes twiſe ſodden. Giue him alſo the yolkes of egges roſted. Fleſhe is not good to be giuen to them that haue the fluxe dyſenteria, becauſe they be of a ſtronger nouriſhment, and doe ſtriue againſt digeſtion: but yet you muſt giue it to them, that be troubled with this diſeaſe longe. Amonge all kinde of fleſhe, you muſt ſpecially chuſe birdes, as is partrich, and wood culuers and birdes of mountaines. Amonge foure footed beaſtes, gotes fleſhe and hares fleſhe are good. But you muſt forbidde him the fleſhe of cattell that drawe, and of all other foure footed beaſtes.
                     Potus.
                   From the beginning let him vſe for his drinke rayne water which is not fallen from houſes couered with leade: For ſuch water being droncke, euen of them that be whole, engendereth the Diſenteria: and if good rayne water be not preſent, you muſt vſe running water, wherein burning ſteele hath bene quenched. But if the ſtomach be diſeaſed, or if his ſtrength be caſt downe, giue him wine, alſo let it be reſtringent and not verie olde.
                     Curatio.
                   Sleepe is the beſt remeady for them that haue the Diſenteria. For this cure you muſt vſe ſuch remeadyes, that doe reſtraine, ſtoppe, drie vp, and prouoke vryne, and that doe carry the fluxe ſome other waye. Reſtrictiue thinges be theſe: ſorrell ſeede ſumach, gaules,
                     Adſ
                           •••
                        ngen
                           •••
                        .
                   pomgranate ryndes dryed, bryer roote, lapdamum, acatia, hipociſchis, balauſtium, willowe leaues, comferie rootes leaues and ſeede, rheum ponticum, if it may be gotten, roote of Altheae, horſetaile, corall, maſticke, hares creame, dragons bloude, the barke of franckenſence, terra lemnia, roote of verbaſcus, plantayne ſeede, white dayſies, a kinde of mallowes called alcea, oxis, ſanicula, ophrys, ophiogloſſum, knotgraſſe, ſheepeheardes purſe, walworte, pedelion, numularia, dragans the male, ſharpe mulberies, carnells of grapes, the barcke of maces and ſuch like. Theſe thinges doe ſtoppe and make temperate the bytyng, gnawing and ſharpeneſſe of humuors, as is Amylum, tragacantha, gummes,
                     Obtunde
                           •••
                        .
                   tallowe of goates, kiddes, ſwyne, geaſe, and hennes. Theſe doe drye vppe: hares creame,
                     Reſiccant
                           •
                        a.
                   hartes horne burnt, the ſhelles of crabbes of running water and ſage. Thinges to prouoke vryne, you ſhall finde in his owne place. Therefore if the exulceration be in the great bowels, you muſt miniſter clyſters firſt, ſuch as haue power to ſcoure and clenſe,
                     
                        Cure if it be in the great bowels.
                     
                     
                        Clyster abſtergens.
                     
                     
                        Clyſter glutinans.
                     
                   as this is. ℞. of the decoction of whole bareley lib. j. mel roſarum ſtrayned ℥.j. ſugar roſet. ℥.ſs. yolkes of egges in number ij. oyle of roſes. ℥.iij. commixt altogeather and make a clyſter. Abſterſion and cleanſing being firſt done, caſt in thoſe thinges that doe glutinate and ioyne togither, as this is. ℞. redde roſes, plantaine, leaues of comferie, knotgraſſe primeroſe. ana. M.ſs. balaustiae. 
                  ʒ.j. ryce burned ℥.j. roote of comferie. ℥.ſs. ſeeth altogeather in water, wherein ſteele hath bene quenched, vntill the thirde parte be conſumed, then ſtrayne it, and take of the iuice of that decoction. ℥.xij. iuice of plantayne. ʒ.ij. acatia hipociſchidos. ana. ℈.ij. bole armoniacke, ſanguis draconis. ana. ℈.j. gotes tallowe. ℥.j. oyles of roſes, mirtelles, quinces. ana. ʒ.j. commixe altogeather and make a clyſter. Sometime it doth not onely require thinges to ſtoppe the vehemencie of the payne, but alſo medicines that be ſtupefactiue. Therefore then it is good to vſe this clyſter.
                     Clyſter doloreus leniens.
                   ℞. of goates milcke, or of cowes milcke. lib. j. freſh butter. ℥.j. goates greace. ℥.j.ſs. tragacantha, gumme. ana, ʒ.j. yolkes of egges in number iij. pilles of hounds tongue. ʒ.j. oyles of roſes. ℥.iij. cōmix altogeather & make a clyſter. If there be neede of more ſtupefactiō vehement: you muſt augment the weight of the pilles, or elſe you muſt adde to the aforeſaid weight of pilles .iij. or .iiij. graines of opiū, or more or leſſe, according to the vehemency of the paine, & the ſtate of the body. If the exulceration be in the ſmall & thin bowels, then it rather requireth medicines that are giuē in at the mouth. Therfore the decoctiō of reſtrictiue things, which is afore taught, is good, if you cōmixe with it ſyrupe of roſes & mirtles, & ſo miniſter

it,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   and alſo other medicines which are taught in the chapter of Diarrhea, are good. Alſo you may conueniently miniſter this potion. ℞. of the decoction of the roote of comfery, or of ſome other reſtrictiue thing. ℥.iij. ſyrupe of roſes. ℥.j. ſyrupe of mirtles. ℥.ſs. powder of the trochiskes of ſpodium, plantine ſeede, boyle armoniacke. ana. ℈.ij. commixe altogeather and make a potion. Beſides thoſe thinges that are rehearſed in the chapters of Diarrhea and Lienteria, you muſt apply outwardly vppon the bellie this cerote. ℞. of the oyles of maſticke,
                     Opti
                           •••
                         Cera
                           •••
                        .
                   roſes, mirtles, and quinces. ana. ℥.j. meale of barley and fenugreeke. ana. ʒ.j. of red roſes, plantine. ana. ʒ.j. balauſtiae, ſanguinis draconis, ana. ʒ.ſs. bole armoniacke. ʒ.j. hypociſchidos, acatia, maſticke. ana. ʒ.ij. with waxe and roſen as much as is ſufficient, make a cerote. By the examples aforeſaide, you may make many other remeadies, which we ouerpaſſe here.
            
            
               CAP. XVI. Of Tenaſmus. DE TENASMO.
               
                  TENASMVS, is a continuall deſire to go to the ſtole or ſeege, which the patiēt cannot deferre nor eſchewe, and yet he auoydeth nothing, except it be a litle bloode,
                     Cauſa.
                   or filthie matter like ſneuell. It is cauſed oftentimes through outwarde colde, or through humors ſharpe and cholericke, or of ſalt fleume, or impoſtumation, or of inflammation engendred in the ſtreight gut. Alſo many times, the ſtopping of harde dounge in the blinde gut, may cauſe the Tenaſmus.
                  
                     Signa.
                   The Phiſition may eaſily know, if it be cauſed of outward colde, by the tale of the ſicke, becauſe either he hath ſitten vpon colde thinges, or he hath taken much colde in winter, or he hath taried long in cold water, you may know the humours by that which he auoydeth, which either be cholericke or flegmaticke. In a botch or byle his egeſtion is matter and corruption, and he feeleth pricking in the foundament. Inflammation cauſeth ſwelling of the right bowell, and greauous paine togeather with a feauer, aboundance of doung cauſeth feeling of grieuous diſtention, and ſtretching out about the bottome of the bellie. The cure is diuerſe according to the diuerſitie of cauſes.
                     Curatio. Tenaſ
                           •
                        us of co
                           •
                        d.
                   Therefore if the Tenaſmus be cauſed of cold, you muſt miniſter pure and vnmixed wine, hote, and you muſt ſprinckle foment and nouriſh the ſhare, and the partes about the priuy members with hot oyles and foments: as are, oyles of rew and lillies: alſo branne ſodden in wine, & put in a bag, may well be applied to the fondament. Alſo it is good to throwe in clyſters made of the decoction of wild mintes, origan, calamint, chammomill, ſothernwood, ſeede of annyſe, fennell & ſuch like, putting to it oyles of dill, chammomill, and lillies. Alſo it is maruelous good, if you take a very cold tyle which is blacke with ſmooke, & bray it with the geere that is contayned on it, then commixe it togeather with ſeething vinegre, & binde it vp in a cloth, and apply it to the fondament by and by after he hath auoided any thing. But if the Tenaſmus be cauſed through cholericke humors withholden & remaining in the bowels & fondamēt you muſt caſt in cliſters which haue vertue & power to ſcoure,
                     
                        Tenaſmus of cholericke humours.
                     
                     
                        Clyſter abſtergens.
                     
                   waſh and clenſe. As this is ℞ of the licour of the decoction of barley lib. j. ſuger roſet. ℥.j.ſs. mel roſarum ℥.j. yolkes of egges .ij. oile of roſes. ℥.iij. commixe them and make a cliſter, he muſt eſchew all ſharpe things, and he muſt vſe thinges meanly colde and moiſt, and all thoſe thinges which do ſtop and temperate the ſharpnes of choler. If Tenaſmus be cauſed of flegmaticke humours, it ſhall be healed like that,
                     Tenaſmus of flegmaticke humours.
                   which is cauſed of cold, onely adding to, and commixing with the cliſters, ſuch medicines as haue vertue to purge flume, as is Electuarium nidum, or diaphaemicon, or benedicta laxatina. And if Tenaſmus be engendred of inflammation, caſt in broth of Ptyſan, wherein hath bene ſodden a fewe redde roſes,
                     Tenaſnus of inflammation. Clyſter.
                   or if vehement inflammation doe trouble him, miniſter this clyſter. ℞. of the licoure of the decoction plantine. ℥.v. oyle of roſes. ℥.ij. the white of one egge, commixe them togeather and make a clyſter. Outwardely you muſt ſprinkle, and annoynte the place betweene the pryuie member, & the fondament wiih oyles of rew,
                     Fomentum.
                   & mirtles: or apply this foment. ℞ redde roſes, plantayne.

ana. M.j. balauſtiae. 
                  ʒ.iij. ſidiorum. ℥.j. mirtle bearies. ʒ.ij. leaues of bryer. ℥.j. ſeeth altogeather in ſufficient water, vntill the third parte be conſumed, then wet a ſponge in the licoure of that decoction, and apply it to the foundament.
                     Diſcuſſiues.
                   Moreouer when there is neede of ſuppuration, rotting or diſſoluing, apply fomentes made of the decoction of the roote of Althaea, of fenugreeke, chammomill, inolilote and branne. If the Tenaſmus be cauſed of an vlcer or botch, firſt caſt in the thinges which haue an abſterſiue and clenſing vertue:
                     Cure of Tenaſmus cauſed of an vlcer. Vnguentum.
                   and then afterward, things that doe glutinate, and ioyne togither muſt be vſed, euen as you did in the fluxe Dyſenteria. Alſo this ointment put into the foundament is good. ℞. oyle of roſes ℥.j.ſs. the muſcilage of Tragacantha, and gumme. ana. ʒ.iij. Ceruſe, burnt leade, ana. ʒ.ſs. Aloes, franckenſence. ana. ℈.j. waxe, as much, as is ſufficient, make an ointment, wherein dippe linnen clothes, and put them into the tuell. If the paine be wonderfull great, you may adde to the aforeſaide thinges, opium. ℈.j.
                     Tenaſmus of multitude of dounge. Clyſter lenitiue.
                   If the Tenaſmus be cauſed through multitude and aboundance of donge, then in the beginning the doung muſt be brought out by litle and litle with ſoluble and gentle clyſters, as this is. ℞. Mallowes, Althaea, mercurie, beetes, leaues of blacke violettes. ana. M.j. ſeedes of fenugreeke and lyneſeede. ana. ℥.ſs. boyle them all in ſufficient quantitie of water to the thirde parte: then take of the licour of that decoction. lib. j. medullae caſiae fiſtularis. ℥.j.ſs. common oyle. ℥.iij. ſalt beaten. ʒ.j. and make a clyſter. But of this one thing, you muſt ſpecially beware,
                     Note.
                   that in this caſe you do miniſter no purgation at the mouth, for that woulde bring great perill and deſtruction to the patient, by reaſon of drawing of mo excrementes from the whole bodie thither.
            
            
               CAP. XVII. Of the Cholicke. DE COLI DOLORIBVS.
               
                  THE Colick, or paine, which is bred in the gut called Colon of the Greekes is cauſed many wayes: but it hath foure ſpeciall cauſes.
                     Cauſae.
                   For ſometime it is engendred through groſſe and flegmaticke humours fallen downe within the thinne skinne of the gut Colon. Alſo ſometime through windines, which hath no roume to get out. Alſo it is cauſed through inflammation of the groſſe and thicke gut ſtretching out and troubling or vexing. Alſo it is wont to engender through ſharpe and gnawing humours, which do afflict and vexe the aforeſaide bowell vehemently.
                     Signes of a groſſe humor.
                   Thoſe that haue the colicke engendred of a groſſe and flegmaticke humor, they be greaued & vexed aloft, all ouer the Abdomen, (that is) the place which is vnder the mouth of the ſtomach: ſpecially they are grieued, where the gut Colon lyeth: for there they feele paine, as though the gut were braied or boored through. Alſo they be fretted, and haue diſpoſition to vomit, belkings, ſundry and ſtraung vomitings and ſpecially of fleume. Alſo the wombe is letted and ſtopped and ſendeth forth nothing, not ſo much as wind. Alſo the dounge, which are ſometime commeth forth, doth looke like oxes doung, & it is light & full of winde. And there goeth before theſe thinges continuall vſing of meates that be very colde & of a groſſe iuice, alſo filling with meates, ill digeſtiō, & crudity, idlenes, & ſuch as be adioyning to theſe. Thoſe that haue the cholicke cauſed of windines they feele extenſion,
                     
                        Signes of windines.
                     
                     
                        Signes of inflammation.
                     
                   ſtretching forth and bolning. They that haue the Colicke cauſed through inflammation, they feele inward burning and heat, & no ſmall feauer: alſo retention both of the vrine & ordure. Alſo they are troubled with thirſt burning heat, diſpoſition to vomit, & vomiting ſpecially of color without any ceaſing of the euil at al. And this is the moſt grieuous & worſt kind of colick,
                     
                        Signes of ſharpe and gnawing humours.
                     
                     
                        Diet for the colicke cauſed of flegmaticke and tough humours.
                     
                   which do threaten to turne into the paine of the Iliacapoſsio. They, that haue the colike engēdred of ſharpe & gnawing humors, they be troubled & vexed with burning thirſt & watching, yea & ſmale feauers, the vrine is made ſharpe, & cholericke humors are throwen out oftētimes going to the ſtoole doth raiſe greater payne & torment. Alſo meates & drinkes that be hot, being receiued, doe prouooke it grieuouſlie. The diet and cure of this diſeaſe is diuerſe according to the diuerſ
                     •
                  e of the cauſes. Therfore whē groſſe & clammy humours do cauſe the

colicke, the whole diet muſt be extenuate and made thinne. Therefore let the bread which the ſicke ſhall eate be new and well baked in an ouen or furnace. Fleſh is good ſpecially of birdes, as hens, partrich, wood culuers, turtles, blacke byrdes, and doues, he muſt eſchue all kind of ſoules which do ſwime or liue in waters, as thoſe thinges which do abound with many ſuperfluities. Among foure footed beaſtes the fleſh of calues and kiddes are good. He muſt eſchew all kinde of pulſe, which do maruelous hurt in this diſeaſe. For pot herbes, you muſt vſe fennell, apium asperage and ſuch like. Alſo it will not hurt to take garlicke & oynions raw. To be ſhort, let his food be eaſie of digeſtion and engendring good iuice. Let him eſchew fulnes and cruditie: he muſt drinke wine that is ſomewhat reſtrictiue, white, thinne, ſhining, of meane age, temperatly alayed, and let him drinke but litle. For the cure of the cholicke cauſed of groſſe humours:
                     Cure of Colicke cauſed of groſſe humours.
                   you muſt cure it ſo, that you doe not heate vehemently with no medicines, for ſuch remeadies doe ſpread abroad, puffe vp, & make windy all cold & groſſe humours, which puffing vp and ſpreading in the bowels doth cauſe more vehement paine. Therefore it is good to deuide, cut, & digeſt thoſe humours without vehement paine or heate: and by vſing of thoſe things which do not puffe vp and make windy. Therefor in his ſharpe & extreeme paine make irrigations of the oyles of rew, chamomill, and dill. Alſo make fomentes and ſacculi of the flowers of chamomill, dill, and melilote, ſeedes of flaxe, of fenugreke, of Althaea, of mill & branne. Alſo cliſters made with the oyles aforeſaid, and with the decoction of the aforeſaid herbes are maruelous good, or with the decoction of the roote of wild cucumbers, putting to it comin, or rew, with gooſe greace,
                     Clyſter.
                   or hens greace after this ſort: ℞. mallowes, Althaea, chamomill, Mercury, dill, ana. M.j. origan, calamint, peniroiall. ana. M.ſs. ſeedes of flaxe, fenugreeke, comin, louage. ana. ʒ.iij. ſeeth altogether with well water, of iuſt quantity vntill the third part. Then take of the licour of that decoction being ſtrained lib. 1. Hierapicra. ℥.ſs. benedicta laxatina. 
                  ʒ.v. of Electuarium nidum. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. of melroſarum ſtreined. ℥.ſs. of oyles of chamomill, dill and rew, ana. ℥.j. the yolkes of egges in number two, common ſalt. ʒ.j. commixe all togeather and make a clyſter. Alſo the putting in of ſuppoſitaries, and annointing of the foundament made by iuice of Cyclaminum, with hony and ſalt peter, or centorie with hony and ſalt peter do profit.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Example of a ſuppoſitorie is this. ℞. of hony ſodden. ℥.j.ſs. pouder of hierapicra, 
                  ʒ.j. colochinthid
                        •
                     s. ℈.j ſal gemme. ℈.ſs. commixe them and make long ſuppoſitories. Alſo vomiting before ſupper,
                     Vomitus.
                   if the patient can vomit eaſily, doth helpe aboue all other thinges. Moreouer after the purging, if the paine hath bene prolonged forth many dayes, let him go into a great veſſell of hot oyle if it may be had.
                     In
                           •
                        eſſion.
                   Alſo it is good to ſit in the decoction of Athaea, peniroyall, lawrell leaues, fenugreeke, chamomill, mootherworte, dill and ſuch like.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         abſynthytes.
                   The moſt conuenient medicine againſt the cholicke, is wine wherein wormewood hath bene infuſed or ſodden, if they neede drincking after a bathe: it is alſo verie profitable for them that they thirſt not. Alſo decoction of the herbe it ſelfe, when it hath once boyled being commixed with wine, may commodiouſlie be miniſtred after a bath. Alſo Caſtoreum continually dronke,
                     Caſtoreum.
                   doth deſtroy the diſeaſe vtterly: and it is better then all medicines. It is miniſtred to the ſicke. ʒ.j. in three Ciathes, of Aqua mulſa. And if the payne doe not ceaſe and reſt, you muſt miniſter diatrion piperion or theriaca. If that the payne be vehement,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   it is good to vſe medicines, that doe meanly eaſe, make ſoluble, and mitigate, aſwell put in beneath as alſo giuen to drinke. For you muſt eſchew thoſe thinges that doe ſtupefact and aſtony ſtrongly, becauſe they doe ſomewhat eaſe and mitigate, but they make the diſeaſe longer by making the humors more groſſe, & thickning of the paſſages of the bowels. If the cholicke be cauſed of windines, you muſt caſt in cliſters, that doe diſſolue winde,
                     Cure of the colicke cauſed 
                           〈◊〉
                         Clyster.
                   as is this, ℞. ſothernewood, origan, peniroyall, calamint, chammomill, ana. M.j. rew, mints, wildemintes. ana. M.ſs. ſeedes of annyſe, fennell, carawayes, comin, dil, louage, and daucus, an. ʒ.ij. ſeeth altogeather vnto the thirde parte. Then take of the licour of that decoctiō ſtrained. lib. j. hierapicra, benedicta laxatina. ana. ℥.ſs. Caſtoreum. 
                  ʒ.j. powder of diacuminum. 
                  ʒ.ij. oyles of rew and dill, ana. ℥.j.ſs. common ſalt. ʒ.j.ſs. commixe thē altogeather and make a cliſter.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   Alſo there may be added to the aforeſayde thinges the confection of bay bearyes: for there is nothing of more effect to diſſolue and driue awaye windineſſe. Alſo it is good to miniſter dayly the quantitie of an haſell nut of the ſaide

decoction or electuarie of laurell beries in the decoction of ſome cutting and extenuating medicine. Applie outwardly vpon the bellie aloft, fomentes and irrrigations of ſuch things as do diſperſe and ſcatter windineſſe, as theſe be, beſides the afornamed things nigella animi, parſley bitter Almondes, blacke pepper, wilde mints, bay beries, wormewood, nettleſeede, gladon, marioram, Cinnamon and others, of theſe therefore you may make Cataplaſmes, foments, and bagges.
                     Note.
                   But that which farre excelleth all the reſt (as Galene witneſſeth) is a great cupping glaſſe faſtened lightly with aboundant flame to the whole bellie aloft, which doth maruelouſlie as it were by inchauntment.
                     Diet.
                   Let the ſicke beware of and eſchewe wine that is alayed, and drinking of cold water, and alſo from vſing of milke and other things that do coole, and from meates and drinkes which engender windineſſe. And let him rather vſe to drinke wine that is vnmingled and pure, and let him vſe a diet which doth heate and out or deuide. If the collicke be cauſed of inflammation of the bowels,
                     Cure of collick cauſed of inflammation.
                   you muſt open the paine in the arme. But if difficultie and hardneſſe of makinge water, do rule and beare a ſway, you muſt draw bloud from the veines of the anckle. Alſo you muſt vſe the aforeſayd remedies, excepting ſharp things, and vehement purgers. And you muſt rather vſe clyſters mitigating and eaſing paine, alſo Cataplaſmes and irrigations, and going down into oile. Alſo faſten to them cupping glaſſes. Let his diet be thinne, almoſt the diet of feuers,
                     Diet. Cure of collick cauſed of ſharp & gnawing humours.
                   vntill the inflamation be ſlaked. And if the collicke be cauſed through ſharp and gnawing or fretting humours, it is good to poure in at the fundament thoſe things that can waſh out and purge thoſe humours without any mordacitie and gnawing: as is broth of Ptiſan, or the decoction of fenugreeke, lineſeede, chammomill, and Althaea, with freſh gooſe greaſe, or hennes greaſe and oyle of roſes. This cliſter is ſpecially good. ℞. leaues of violets,
                     Clyſter.
                   both the tame endiues, leaues of Althaea, chammomill. ana. M.j.ſs. ſeedes of fenugreeke, flaxe, ana. ℥.ſs. boile theſe in iuſt quantitie of water, vntill the third part be conſumed. Then take of the licour of that decoction being ſtrayned, ℥.xiij. caſia fiſtula. ℥.j. hierapicra. 
                  ʒ.vj. oyle of roſes. ℥.ij. oyle of dill. ℥.j. gooſe greace and hennes greace. ana. ʒ.iij. yolkes of egges in number ij. commixe them all, and make a cliſter. Moreouer you muſt not onely purge the hurtfull and corrupt humours, but alſo you muſt temper and moderate them. Therefore he muſt vſe bathes of ſweete water, for they do mitigate and alſo prouoke ſleepe: for which purpoſe miniſter ſyrupe of violets, and roſes, and ſuch like, which are able to temperate, & ſtop the violence of the gnawing humours. Alſo he muſt vſe ſouping meates as Ptyſans,
                  
                     Victus ratio.
                   and brothes of fiſhes of ſtony places. He muſt abſtaine from all hote and ſharp things, whether they be meates or medicines, or cataphaſmes or foments, or irrigations that be hote: as alſo he muſt abſtaine from drinking of wine, eſpecially from old wine. And to be ſhort, let his whole diet be cold and moiſt. If the paine be not a whit releaſed, but do rage more vehemently, then you muſt come to the vſing of ſtupefactiue things.
                     Stupefac
                           ••
                        tia.
                   For in this diſeaſe they do not onely pleaſure and profit by aſtonying of the ſenſe and feeling: but alſo becauſe they make the thinne humours more thicke and groſſe, and do quench the intollerable heate. Among ſtupefactiue things Philonium is ſpecially good,
                     Philonium. Pilulae de Cynegloſſ
                           •
                        .
                   of the which you may miniſter for the moſt part one whole drachme. Alſo pilles of hounds tongue are maruelouſlie good, if as is afore taught you do make ſixe pilles of, ʒ.j. and miniſter one of them to be ſwallowed before they go to bed. But there be very manie things which do helpe the collick with their whole vertue and ſubſtance. Among the which white dong of a wolfe taken with water, or thinne white wine is not the worſt. That dong is better which hangeth on herbs or buſhes, then that which toucheth the ground. Alſo the ſaid dong of the wolfe,
                     Lib. 9. cap. 31 eaſethe the collicke being bound to the Ilions. Greene mintes as Aetius affirmeth, ſodden awhile and dronk iij. dayes healeth Collickes.
            
            
               CAP. XVIII. Of Iliaca paſsio. DE ILEO.
               THE Iliaca paſſio, is a diſeaſe cauſinge moſt grieuous & deadly paine in the ſmall guttes. The Latines do call this diſeaſe, voluulus & connoluulus. The barbarous do call it Iliaca paſſio.
                  
                     Cauſa.
                   This diſeaſe is cauſed through continuall corruption & cruditie

of meates, but ſpecially offat meates, which, if they be without corruption and being withholden, they engender obſtructions in the ſmall guttes. Alſo it is engendred of certaine ſtripes and blowes in certaine places in which the ſmall guttes do lye. Alſo through vehement cold reſtrayning, and with holding of the excrements. Moreouer through aboundant drinking of cold things, ſpecially if much be taken when they ſweate. Alſo it chaunceth to them, whoſe bowels be fallen into the coddes togethr with the dong: and being violentlie thruſt backe from thence againe, and through that it is enflamed. Alſo it is cauſed through drinking of deadly medicines, & through hard dong being impact about the thinne bowell. For the moſt part this diſeaſe is engendred either through inflammation, or through obſtruction of the drie dong. This diſeaſe is common to children, but yet they eſcape it, through helpe of naturall humiditie. It is not wont to chaunce verie often to olde men: but if they chaunce to haue it,
                     Signa.
                   they almoſt be neuer rid of it. They that haue this diſeaſe haue moſt vehement paine, and ſome ſwelling of the thinne and ſmall gutts ſticketh out, that it ſeemeth wounden together like a ſtring called Chorda, whereupon manie do call this diſeaſe Chordapſon, alſo there is ouer much moiſtneſſe of the ſtomach, looſeneſſe, vaine and empty belkings, and doing no eaſe, rumbling and noyſe of the bowelles, perfect ſtopping and letting of the dong and of windineſſe. If the euill do increaſe and waxe greater, he auoideth all vpward, and therefore he vomiteth vp fleume and choler, he hath coldneſſe of the whole bodie, and paine. Alſo to manie there chaunceth difficultie and hardneſſe of breathing. Moreouer to them that ſhall die there chaunceth colde ſweat, difficulty and hardneſſe of making water, yea the foundament is ſo bound and cloſe; that no ſmall inſtrument will enter in. And ſometime dong is caſt vp by vomitting. For the cure of this diſeaſe, you muſt cure children with irrigations,
                     Curatio.
                   cataplaſmes, clyſters, ſuppoſitories and foments as is declared in the chapter of the Collicke. But the cure of them that be of age muſt differ according to the diuerſitie of cauſes.
                     Cure of it come of 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   Therefore if Iliaca paſſio be cauſed of cruditie and ill digeſtion, and thorough deuouring and eating of manie and diuerſe meates which yet remaine in the ſtomach: you muſt prouoke vomite with thinges aforeſayd. But if there do remaine no raw and vndigeſt meates in the ſtomach, you muſt go about by all meanes, to draw out beneath, aſwell windineſſe as alſo the dong: and that muſt be done by cliſters, ſuppoſitories, and annointinges with great diligence in ech of them. Therefore you muſt caſt in this clyſter. ℞. Mercurie, Rewe,
                     Clyſter.
                   leaues of Althaea, centorie. ana. M.j. hyſope, calamint, wormewoode, ana. M.j.ſs. roote of Althaea, ℥.j. roote of wilde cucumber. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeedes of flaxe and faenugreeke. ana. ʒ.iij. ſeedes of commin. ʒ.ij. boyle them in iuſt quantitie of water, vntill the third part be cō
                  ſumed, then take of the liquor of that decoction being ſtrained. ℥.xiiij. of benedicta laxatina. ℥.j. freſh butter, melroſarum ſtrayned. ana. ℥.ſs. oyles of Rewe, and dill. ana. ℥.j.ſs. common ſalt. ʒ.j. commixe them altogether and make a clyſter, and caſt it in before meate: but if the euill be vehement, caſt it in alſo after meate. And you muſt warne the pacient, that he doe hold it as long as he can. Alſo you muſt make ſuppoſitories, as you doe for the Colick, putting to them ſeeds of rew,
                     Glandes.
                   comin, and ſtalkes of colewortes, And you muſt make them the lōger,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Cataplaſmae.
                   that they may pearce the deeper. Alſo you muſt annoint the fundament with iuice of Cyclaminum, or honie with nitrum or ſalt peter. The foments and cataphaſmes, wherwith this euill is cured, be almoſt ſuch as are ſpoken of in the chapter of the Collicke. Alſo fomentes made of wooll wet in oyle, wherin commin, dill, rewe, and creſſes hath bene ſodden, be verie good. Alſo emplaiſters made of lineſeede, faenugreeke, barley meale, darnell meale, rewe, cōmin, ſeedes of dill and apium are good. Alſo it is good to diſcend into a veſſel filled with water and oyle: but ſeeth in the water Althaea, rewe, and dill. After theſe, faſten on cupping glaſſes,
                     Cucurbind
                           •
                        . Purgatio.
                   firſt lightly to places ſomewhat farre of, and then alſo to the places that are grieued, making deepe ſcarifications. Alſo it is good to miniſter purgations, ſpecially if the dong be drawne out firſt by ſuch thinges as are afore rehearſed. It is maruelous good if they vomite, by drinking dill ſodden. After drinking, caſt bread into ſcalding water, & miniſter peeces of it to eate by and by hote. They that haue the Iliaca paſsio engēdred through taking of ſome venimous medicine,
                     Cure of Iliaca paſſio cauſed of p
                           •
                        iſon.
                   you muſt giue them much warme water, and let them drinke it, and conſtraine them to vomite. After that you muſt giue them hote oyle in drinke, or fat broth, that they may vomite againe. After, within a fewe dayes giue him theriaca diſſolued

in wine, and let him eate meates of good iuice. And if the obſtruction do continue ſtill emptie the bellie with milke, with a little ſcammonie or Aloës,
                  
                     Cure if it be of inflammation.
                   or ſome other purging medicine. If the Iliaca paſſio be engendred through inflammation, you muſt beginne with bloud letting: then you muſt faſten cupping glaſſes about the inflamed partes ſcarifiing them. Alſo caſt in clyſters made of the decoction of mallowes, faenugreeke, lineſeede, with oyle and butter. Alſo applie outwardly thoſe things, that are good againſt inflammations, and do eaſe paine, you muſt preſcribe vnto them a moſt thinne diet.
                     Cure if it be of falling of the bowels into the coddest
                   If the Iliaca paſſio be cauſed through falling of the bowels into the coddes, you muſt by and by labour (the patient lying vpright) to thruſt backe againe the bowels that are fallen down to the ſhare, and keepe it vp eaſily without violence or preſſinge of it together, with bandes and truſſes applied, conuenient for it.
            
            
               CAP. XIX. Of wormes. DE LVMBRICIS.
               
                  THERE be three kindes of wormes. The firſt be round and long, named teretes. The ſecond be brode, called therefore Lati. The third: thoſe be called aſcaridoes. The firſt kind of wormes called teretes:
                     Teretes.
                   according to their thickneſſe they be round and a hand breadth in length, and ſometime longer, and they be commoner then other. They be often in the ſlender and ſmall guttes, and they go into the ſtomach, and therefore they are voyded often by the mouth, and to ſome alſo they come out at the noſthrilles. And this kind of wormes is peculiar to infants & children, and boyes, and girles. The ſecond kinde of wormes called Lati,
                  
                     Lati.
                   be broade and longe like a gard or band. They be of incredible length as Plinie witneſſeth, lib. 2. cap. 3.3. Sometime they are ſeene three hundred foote long, and ſometime more. This kind of worme (as Paulus and Aetius witneſſe) is nothing elſe but a permutation and chaunging of the thinne filmes going about the ſmall guttes within, into a certaine liuing bodie, that will moue and ſtirre. The third kinde of wormes called Aſcarides, be thinne and ſhort like ſmall wormes.
                     Aſcarides.
                   They be found moſt commonly in the right gut, and in the end of the fundament. All the afore kindes be engendred and cauſed of crude, rawe, groſſe, and fleugmatike mater,
                     Cauſae.
                   and through conuenient rottenneſſe, ſuch as is gathered ſpecially in children, and in other great eaters. They that haue round wormes, do feele incredible gnawing of the bowelles,
                     Signs of round wormes, teretes
                   and of the ſtomach, thinne and ſmall coughes, and oftentimes prouoking and drie. In manie there followeth yeſking and ſleepe with mouing of the ſtomach: and alſo they do ariſe vp vnreaſonablie. Manie do awake and leape vp with noyſe & crying out, & fall aſleepe againe: but ſome do both put foorth their tongue, & ſhut their eyes and be quiet, and keepe ſilence, & do fret & fume with them which raiſe them, becauſe they cannot watch they be ſo weake. Some haue their eyes ſprinkled with bloud, and a pulſe that is vnequall, obſcure, fayling & running backe. Alſo to manie there chaunceth loſſe of appetite. Children, while they ſlepe do chewe their tongue, and alſo faſhioning of their mouth as though they ſucked or receaued meate. Alſo to ſome there chaunceth gnaſhing of the teeth. But theſe things are done by little and little and betweene whiles. To ſome they runne foorth into the ſtomach, and do cauſe gnawing and diſpoſition to vomit, and the pacients refuſe meate: and if they be compelled to eate, they ſcarce can ſwallowe that which they take, or they vomit it vp againe. In manie the bellie doeth throw out corrupt meates, and is puffed vp like as it were a timpanie. The reſt of the bodie it doth conſume and make leane without reaſon, neither faſting going before, nor vnmeaſurable purging being made. Alſo it chaunceth ſometime the face to be made verie red, ſpecially about the balles of the cheekes: but this colour turneth againe into ſwartneſſe. Some do ſpeake fooliſh thinges in their ſleepe like franticke perſons. Some chaunge the place that they lie downe in, and tumble, and caſt them ſelues from place to place: they increaſe feuers in them without order with vehement coldneſſe of the extreme partes, hauing fittes the third or fourth day without order. But alſo theſe ſignes

and tokens altogether which we haue now rehearſed, muſt not euerie one of them be looked for in euerie bodie: but the chiefeſt of them & ſometime manie. Brode wormes do bring continuall gnawing of the ſtomach, and an impotent, and incorrigible appetite to meate. For the worme that is in the guttes,
                     Signs of brode wormes, Lati.
                   deuoureth the meate that is eaten, ſo that he hath need of more ſtraight way, and except he eate ſtraight way, the bowelles are gnawne: they that are thus diſeaſed there followeth ſlenderneſſe and weakeneſſe of the body with inequality. The moſt ſure and infallible ſigne is, if certaine things like cucumber ſeedes be auoided out with the egeſtion or excrements.
                     Signes of Aſcarides.
                   
                  Aſcarides do raiſe a vehement itch in the fundament, and do prouoke the patient to go to the ſtoole continuallie. And they that be troubled with this diſeaſe, for the moſt parte be the better after egeſtion and eaſing of themſelues. Let their diet be hote and dry, ſpecially if the pacient lacke a feauer, and let them vſe meates of good iuice, and which will ſoone be diſperſed throughout the whole body: and ſuch as do not increaſe the cauſe that ingendreth wormes. Therfore all meates are to be eſchewed, which can ingender fleugmaticke humours. Moreouer they that are troubled with wormes, muſt be nouriſhed and fed liberally, and may not ſuffer hunger: becauſe the wormes, except they haue meate to feede on, they then by and by gnawe the hard partes of the bodie: but giue thē meate at that time, ſpecially when they are not altogether emptie. Let them drink watery wine.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure it is not to be ſpared: and ſomtime if there be a feuer with it, you muſt haue reſpect to that, and to the worms alſo: & ſometime you neede to be carefull but a little for the feuer, and you muſt be diligent notwitſtanding to get the wormes out of the bodie. Therefore when many haue not ſpied and knowen this, it commeth to paſſe for lacke of heede taken to auoide the wormes, that they be gnawen and eaten of them, and ſo being pulled and gnawne, they die. The cure aſwell of the round wormes, as of the flat wormes, conſiſteth in this point, that you may driue them out of the bodie being firſt killed. They are killed ſpecially with bitter medicines, among which (if a feuer be not preſent) theſe ſimples are good:
                     Simples to kill wormes.
                   wormewood, Scryphium, which is a kind of wormewood growing in the ſea, ſothernwood, calamint, horehound, dittaine, hyſope, rew, leaues of perſica, coriāder ſeeds, harts horne, lupins mints, penyroyall, origan, Centorie, ferne, gentian, ariſtolochia rotund
                        •
                     , garlike, ſeede of coleworts, and roote of enula campana. To theſe, if a feauer be preſent, you muſt adioyne the ſeedes of both the endiues and alſo the iuice of ther herbes, and myxaria.
                  
                     Al
                           •
                        es.
                   Among all other the moſt commendable remedie is aloes. Therfore if infants will hardly take aloes becauſe it is ſo bitter, you muſt keepe them vpright with bandes, & their mouth being opened & ſeparated, you muſt caſt it in againſt their wils by a certaine pipe ſtrengthned with a long ſplent. Of theſe aforſaid ſimples now rehearſed, there may be made diuerſe cōpounds,
                     Co
                           •
                        p
                           •
                        ſita.
                   as decoctions, powders, cataplaſmes, emplaiſters, & oyntments. Among other things this powder is onely good.
                     Puluis.
                   ℞. of wormeſeede. ʒ.ij. of centorie, wormwood, hartes horne burnt. ana. ʒ.j. calamint, peniroyall, origan. ana. ℥.ſs. ſothernwood, mintes, lupines, leaues of ariſtolochia rotunda. ana. ℈.j. aloes. ℈.ij. commix them altogether, & make a powder, of the which, miniſter the weight of one drachme, or halfe a drachme, accordinge to the age and ſtate of the bodie of the ſicke, in milke or hony or ſyrupe of liquorice: for thoſe things, which do kill the wormes, muſt bee miniſtred with ſweet liquors, that thereby the wormes may taſt of the medicine the ſooner being allured by the ſweetneſſe of it, that is miniſtred with it. Annoynt the nauill you muſt outwardly with bulles gall, or with this ointment.
                     Vnguent
                           ••
                        .
                   ℞. oyles of bitter almondes, and of wormewood. ana. ℥.j. Bulles gall. ℥.ſs. Centorie, wormewood, lupines. ana. ℈.ij. leaues of perſica, hartes horne burnt, aloes, ſothernwood, ana. ℈.j. waxe as much as is ſufficient and make an oyntment. Or applie all ouer the ſtomach this Cerate. ℞. aloes,
                  
                     Caerat
                           ••
                        .
                   wormewood, meale of lupines. ana. ʒ.ij. nigella, mintes, origan, penyroyall, horehound. ana. ʒ.j. centorie, calamint. ana. ʒ.ſs. oyles of wormewood, & bitter almonds. ana. ℥.ij. oleum coſtinum. ℥.j. bulles gall. ℥.ſs. with waxe and roſen, as much as ſhall ſuffiſe, make a Cerote. By examples of theſe you may eaſily make emplaiſters and cataplaſmes, ſo that I neede not to rehearſe here an example of ech of them. Moreouer it is good to caſt in beneath abundance of mulſa, that thereby the wormes being allured by the ſweetneſſe of the hony, may creepe downward. But when the wormes were killed by the aforeſaid medicines you muſt driue them out without delay: for there proceedeth a vicious

exhalation from them, which both deſtroyeth appetite and hurteth digeſtion, and being lifted vpward it cauſeth ſweamiegs, and other euilles. The wormes being killed are driuen out for the moſt part by ſuppoſitories and purgations,
                     
                        Pillulae. Rufi.
                     
                     
                        Cure if flux of the womb be ioyned with wormes.
                     
                   but ſpecially by hierapicra and pillulae peſtilentiales or rufi, which haue a maruelous efficacie in killing and bringing out of worms. But thoſe that are troubled with wormes and with flux of the wombe alſo: thoſe you muſt cure by thickening of the flux, and by chaunging the digeſtion into a better ſtate, aſwel with meates, as alſo with cataplaſmes: for the more that the fluxe preuaileth, ſo much the more the engendring of wormes is increaſed: and againe the fluxe ceaſing, the wormes do reſt and pauſe. Therefore you muſt diligently labour to ſtop and reſtraine the wombe, and to ad ſtedfaſtneſſe and ſtrength vnto it. Therefore miniſter iuice of plantaine: or elſe let him take dried plantaine: for both haue like efficacie aſwell againſt the fluxe, as alſo againſt worms. Alſo make cataplaſmes, cerotes and oyntments of raw barley meale, pomegranate rindes, hypociſchidos, and ſuch like reſtrictiue thinges: but adde vnto them thoſe thinges which be good to kill wormes. Reſtrictiue medicines are good to be applied outwardly for this cauſe, becauſe they do corroborate and ſtrengthen againe the ſtomach, being hurt through often vſing of bitter medicines. Alſo it is lawfull in this caſe to miniſter earth wormes being dried, and beaten to pouder with hydromel. The wormes called Aſcarides,
                  
                     Cure of worms called Aſcarides.
                   being in children that be infants, they muſt be brought out with ſuppoſitaries made of honie and ſalt. In thē that be elder they muſt be brought out wich clyſters, made either with ſharp brine, or with decoction of worme wood, centorie, calamint, lupines, penyroyall, and other aboue rehearſed putting to oyles. After miniſtration of cliſters, annoint the ſtraight gut, or foundadament with theſe ſimples, (that is) Acatia, hypociſchidos, iuice of Sumache, or ſome other reſtrictiue medicine. For the fleſh being conſtrained by reſtrictiue things, it looſeth the habilitie, that engendreth the wormes, and it excludeth and ſhutteth out the aſcarides. But this that followeth is good both for children, and for thoſe that be of greater age, and is moſt effectuous. Take olde fleſh that is poudred, cut of the fat, and faſhion it long and round, like a ſuppoſitarie fit for the fundament and thruſt it into the tuell: applying a ligament or band, and let it alone within, as long as they can ſuffer it, then loſen it and draw it out together with the wormes, that ſtick on it. After that you ſhall poure in the things aforeſaid, and alſo annoint it as is aforeſaid.
            
            
               CAP. XX. Of the hemmorhoides. DE HEMMORHOIDIBVS.
               
                  THE Hemmorhoides is an vnfolding and ſpreading abrode of the vaines in the tuell. Of theſe ſome be blinde, which do ſwell and do ſend out none,
                     Cocae. Apertae.
                   or very little bloud, ſome be open, which be ſet wide open abroade certaine times, and do ſend foorth bloud.
                     Cauſae.
                   The hemmorhoides are cauſed through dreggie & melancholy blound, when there is aboundance thereof, which the liuer ſendeth to thoſe vaines. The ſignes whereby this euill is knowen, neede not to be required.
                     Signa.
                   For the blind hemmerhoids may be ſeene with eyes, and they cauſe vehement paine, ſpecially in auoiding the dong. But the open hemmerhoides do bleede, therefore the patient cannot be ignorant what they be. Therefore when blinde hemmerhoides appeare,
                     Curatio c
                           •
                        car
                           ••
                        .
                   and do rayſe great tormenting in the fundament, if the bodie be full of humours, cut the veyne of the hamme or of the anckle bones. Alſo you muſt make the bellie ſoluble aboundantly, left the drie dong, while it is ſent foorth, do engender paine. Alſo you muſt apply where vehement paine is, thoſe things that can and will mitigate. Among which are crummes of bread ſteeped in milke, and ſodden with yolkes of egges, and applied like a plaiſter. Alſo it profiteth to ſit in a bath made of the decoction of mallowes, violet leaues, melilot, faenugreeke, chammomill, leaues of althaea, lineſeede, floures of roſe campion, and ſuch like. And if the patient cannot vſe that, wet woll or a ſponge in the ſaid decoction, and applie it to the griefe. And if theſe aforeſaid things do no good, you muſt get out bloud of them. Therefore put

into the euell,
                     To open the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   woll annointed with iuice of cyclaminum, or with onions, or with oxe gall. The ſame effect alſo hath the iuice of centorie, doues dong, ſtaues acre, figge leaues: if they be rubbed with it, and alſo the pulpe of Colocynthidis ſteeped in the oyle of bitter almondes.
                     Emplaſtrum.
                   Among many other, this emplaiſter is verie good. ℞. of doues dong. ℥.ſs. ſeede of ſtaueſ
                     •
                  cre, lupines. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. bitter almonds. ʒ.j. pulpe of coloquintida. 
                  ʒ.ſs. iuices of cycla
                        ••
                     inum, and onions. ana. ℥.j. commixe them altogether, and make it like a plaiſter, putting to it if neede be, oyle of bitter almonds. But to take away the paine preſently, vſe this following. ℞. elder leaues. M.j. boile them in water, vntill they be verie tender, then take a peece of ſcarlet, as much as a mans hand or greater, and wet it in the decoction, and lay it to the place as warme as may be ſuffred, and when it is cold lay it to againe, being wet, in the ſame decoction as before. Do thus v. or vj times together, then lay the herbes vpon the ſame ſkarlet, lay the herbes verie hote alſo, this doth mollifie the hemmorhoides, and ſeaſeth the paines verie quickly, which my ſelfe haue often prooued. Alſo you may put long ſuppoſitaries in the foundament,
                     Glandes.
                   made of the roote of Cyclaminum. Alſo bloudſuckers, or horſe leaches, being included in a reede, ſo that they can put foorth, but only their head, are wont to be put to the hēmorhoids to open thē, & if you cannot pull them away eaſily, ſtrew aſhes vpon their heades, and you ſhall make them to fall of alone. But if the hemmorhoides be open,
                     Curatio aper
                        
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        um.
                   and do auoide out bloud meanely at certaine times, they may not be ſtopped, for the burſting out of ſuch bloud doth cauſe men that haue this diſeaſe, to be free from manie other diſeaſes. Which thing Hypocrates witneſſeth, where he ſaith in Epidemys, theſe words. They which haue the hemmorhoides,6. Epid. par. 3. 
                        
                           •
                        ph. 19 neither be vexed with paine of the ſides, nor inflammation of the longs, nor a feeding vlcer, nor with felons, or cattes heare, nor with terniuithis, nor with the leprie, nor with morphue. But if the hemmorhoides do throw out bloud immoderately, or longer then they ſhould do, ſo that the patient do conſume and waſt away with this euill, and their ſtrength decayed and throwne downe, they muſt be ſtopped by and by: but otherwiſe there is perill in ſtopping them, but in this caſe it is to doubt, leſt the dropſie ſhould follow, the liuer being cooled through moderate vacuation & purging. Therfore let thoſe that be ſo emptied and purged out of meaſure,
                     Diet.
                   vſe meats that haue but little bloud, and that do engender but little ſuperfluities or excrements, & which alſo do drie and reſtraine, as is Alica and rice. Of potherbes, endiue, ſuccorie, purſlane, and ſuch like. Commix his meate with ſumach, and iuice of vnripe grapes. If his ſtrength be much weakened, you muſt nouriſh and feede the ſicke with meate thus, you muſt ſtraine out the iuyce that is in the meate, and commix with it iuice of quinces, and let him ſoupe that vp, he muſt drinke wine that is reſtrictiue.
                     Curatio.
                   For the cure if there be abundance of humours in the bodie, it profiteth to cut the inner veine of the right hand in the arme: but if there be not, you muſt ſtudie to auert and tourne away the bloud by faſtening of cupping glaſſes to the ſides, and to the liuer. For the which purpoſe it is good to bind the handes and the feete with bands, and to vſe ſharp & hard frictions & rubbings. Morouer you muſt miniſter within the body thoſe things which do reſtraine, as are, ſyrupes of Roſes, of mirtles, and of quinces, red corall, bole armoniacke, trochiſtes of ambre, of ſpodium, of terra lemnia, and other which be rehearſed in the Chapter of ſpitting of bloud. Alſo applie thoſe thinges outwardly, which can ſtoppe bloud that floweth. Among which as Aëtius witneſſeth. lib. 14. cap. 5. is aloës laid on with Poſca. The ſame effect alſo hath ſcales of iron or burnt lead. This medicine is notable good which is deſcribed of Galen lib. 5. therap. method. ℞. of frankenſence one part, of Aloes one part and a halfe,
                     Medicamentū Gal
                           •
                        ni.
                   commixe them with the white of an egge, vntill all come to the thickneſſe of hony, and lay it vpon the ſoft hayres of an hare, and apply it to the place that bleedeth, being bound outwardly with bandes of fine linnen. Alſo ointments, bathes, inceſſions, fomentes, and other ſuch like medicines, made of things hauing a reſtrictiue vertue do profit, whereof you ſhall finde manie examples before in the Chapters of diarrhaea, lieuteria, Dyſenteria and tenafinus.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        cculi.
                   And if you ſhall vſe little bagges, it is beſt, before you apply them, to boyle them in wine that is red and reſtrictiue, or at the leaſt to ſprinkle them with it. Examples of other medicines ſeeke before.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXI. Of the falling out of the tuell. DE PROCIDENTIA ANI.
               
                  IT chaunceth ſometime, that reſolucion or weakenes of the ouertwhart muſcles which do plucke the fundament vpward, doth cauſe the tuell to fall out.
                     Cauſa.
                   Wherefore ſeing it cannot be drawen backeward againe, nor pulled vpward of the aforeſaid muſcles, it hath neede of handes or medicines to put it vp againe. When the tuell is fallen out, you muſt dilgently conſider,
                     Curatio.
                   whether it be free from inflammation or no, for if it be not enflamed at all, it muſt by and by be thruſt & put to his former place by compulſion. And becauſe it muſt not fall out again, after that it is thruſt in, and put vp into his own place, you muſt apply reſtrictiue medicines outward to it. Therefore firſt, you muſt annoint it about with oyle of roſes being warmed, or ſcoure the tuell with reſtrictiue wine, and then being put vp againe into his place, you muſt bind him vp. And that you muſt do by & by, as ſoone as the ſick hath bin at the ſtoole, leaſt that, when neceſſitie conſtrayneth them to go to the ſtoole againe, the tuel ſhould fall out againe. You muſt applie a lineament of acatia and hypociſchidos with wine. Alſo you muſt ſeeth in water till it be red, gaules, baluſtiae, ſhelles of maſt, pomegranate rindes, daiſies, ſumach, ſhales of quinces and ſuch like, and afterward of that decoction make inceſſions and waſhing. But after that the tuell is waſhed with wine or with ſome reſtrictiue decoction then it is lawful to ſtrew vpon it, & to apply to it dry medicines. For which purpoſe you may applie bole armoniake, frankenſenſe, ſanguis draconis, galles, acatia, mirrhe, hypoci
                        •
                     chidos, harts horn, & ſuch other reſtrictiue medicines, as we haue rehearſed often before. But if the tuell thorough inflammation be ſo ſwollen, that it cannot be thruſt vp againe: if the body be full of humours, you muſt firſt cut a veine, and prouoke vomit. And alſo you muſt apply to the tuell by & by in the beginning, thoſe things that do reſtraine & ſtop or appeaſe: but if there be no abundance of humors in the body, let the ſick vſe inceſſions of the decoction of Chammomill, mallowes, althaea, lineſeede, fenugreek, and ſuch like, or let him deſcend into hote water, & tarie in it for a time. Alſo it is lawfull to apply a ſponge or woll wet in the decoction. Moreouer you muſt annoint the tuell with oyles of chammomill, & dill, vntill it may be put vp: for they becauſe of their diſſoluing vertue, do readily take away the ſwelling, and do alſo cauſe, that it may be put vp againe, without any difficultie or paine. But after it is put vp againe, then you muſt vſe the aforſaid reſtrictiue medicines, that it fall not out againe.
            
            
               CAP. XXII. Of the clefts of the fundament. DE RIMIS ANI.
               
                  CLEFTES of the fundamēt be chaps which are made in the muſcle that ſhutteth the fundament, or in the circle round about the fundament, they be like the chaps, which are made through a north wind on the lips.
                     Cauſae.
                   They ar cauſed through flowing of ſharp humors, or through inflāmation, or through extentiō of the ſwelling of the tuel. This euil is apparēt to the eyes,
                     Signa.
                   & therfore we neede to ſhew no ſignes to declare it by. For the cure, if the clefts of the fundament be engendred of ſharp humors, then they firſt of all muſt be purged & tēpered.
                     Curatio.
                   But if it be cauſed through ſwelling of the fundament cauſed of inflammation, you muſt likewiſe vſe at the beginning purging, medicines. Alſo the bellie all the time of the cure muſt be kept ſoluble with meates that do moiſten, and fat meates, leaſt drie dong ſhould hinder, and tarie the conglutination. Of ſuch qualities be mallowes, ſpinache, milcke of sweete Almondes, ſoft egges, fat broth, and ſuch other like. But to the chappes them ſelues you muſt vſe this oyntment. ℞. of the oyles of roſes and mirtles. ana. ℥.j. franckenſence,
                     Vnguentum.
                   maſticke, litarge, ſanguis draconis. ana. ℈.j. aloës, burnt lead, ceruſe, balauſtiae, bole armoniake. ana. ℈.ſs. white wax aſmuch as is ſufficient, make an oyntment. Or thus. ℞. oyle of Roſes.
                     Aliud.
                  
                  
℥.j.ſs. galles, mirrhe, terra lemnia. ana. ℈.j. roote of comferie, roch a lume, burnt lead. ana. ℈.ſs. the yolke of an egge being roſted, wax as much as is ſufficient, and make an ointmēt. VVith theſe oyntments you muſt annoint the cleftes, thriſe on a day, but waſh them firſt with decoction of roſes, galles and fidiorum. And if burning and inflammation do vexe the diſeaſed place, you muſt annoint it with vnguentum album camphoratum.
               
            
            
               CAP XXIII. Of the weaknes of the liuer. DE IMBECILLITATE IECINORIS.
               
                  
                     Cauſ
                           •
                        .
                  
                  WEAKENESSE of the liuer is cauſed of diſtempure either hote, cold, moiſt, or drie. Hote diſtempure doth roſt, and as it were burne vp as well the humours which were before in the liuer, as alſo thoſe humours, which are caried to the liuer by the veynes meſenterij. But cold diſtempure doth make the flegmatike and rawe humour, which is alreadie contayned in the liuer, groſſe and tough and hard to be moued, and the humours that be caried to the liuer, it leaueth them halfe digeſted. Drie diſtempure doth make the humours drier and thicker. Moiſt diſtempure doeth make the humours thinne and more waterie. Therfore they which haue weake facultie and ſtrength of the liuer they are called hepatici, as Galen ſayth. Hote diſtēpure vexing the liuer, there are colliquations,
                  
                     Signa.
                   firſt of the humours, and after that of the liuer it ſelfe: alſo choler that is ſtinking and groſſe is auoided by the belly, and is aboundantly coloured: alſo a feuer vexeth him, he abhorreth meate and caſteth vp choler. Moreouer thirſt doth trouble thē, their vrine is ruffe, and the pulſe is ſwift. VVhen there is cold diſtempure, they make not many excretions, nor much in quantitie, the euill endureth long, & the belly floweth certaine dayes aboundantly. But the egeſtions be leſſe ſtinking, then thoſe which be melted through heat, neither haue they colour alſo nor thickeneſſe, but are like putrifact bloud which is curded. And if you do diligently marke it, it is neither curded bloud, nor blacke bloud, but as it were certaine ſlime and dregges of groſſe bloud comming nigh to melancholie. And alſo diuerſe and manie colours of the excrementes do ſignifie cold diſtempure. Alſo in it there appeareth a faint feuer. The face doth not fall, and he hath greater appetite of meates. To either of these diſtempures, if there come drineſſe, the excrements will be drier and l
                     •
                  ſſe and the ſicke wil be more thirſtie. But if moiſtneſſe come to either of them, the egeſtions will be more liquide and more aboundant,
                     Curatio.
                   and they ſhall be leſſe troubled with thirſt. For the cure the chiefe point is to amend the griefe by conrraries. Therefore you muſt coole a hoate diſtempure,
                     Note.
                   and heate a cold diſtempure. Likewiſe you muſt moiſten a drie diſtempure, & dry a moiſture. But in the cure this onely muſt alſo be conſidered that in all medicines for the liuer, that as well thoſe which be taken by the mouth inward, as alſo thoſe that be applied to it outwardly, commixe ſome reſtrictiue things with them, whereby the ſtrength and ſtability of the liuer may be conſerued and kept. Therefore in a hote diſtempure, for his diet, let him vſe broth of Ptyſan,
                     Diet in a hote diſtempure.
                   and other meates that do meanelie coole, as lettuſe, endiue, ſuccorie, ſowthiſtle, and water and bread mixed together, or bread dipped in water. Alſo chickens, partrich, birds of mountaines, and veale, theſe being ſodden in veriuice or lymōs. of fruits let the ſick eate faiſons, lymons, & ſweete almonds. He muſt eſchew wine altogether, except ſome other cauſe let it, as weakeneſſe of the ſtomach, for then you muſt miniſter thinne and watery wine. Let them drinke, for wine, iuice of pomegranates, and ſyrupus acetoſus ſimplex. Alſo oxyſaccharum, with decoction of barley or endiue. Alſo they muſt eſchew all meates and drinkes dreſſed with hony, and that be verie hote, and haue vertue to cut and deuide.
                     Cure of a hote d
                           •
                        ſtempure. Orbiculi.
                   For the cure miniſter vnto him by the mouth, conſerue of roſes diarrhodō abbatis, diatrion ſantalon, and other ſuch like antidotes. Alſo theſe lozenges profit, ℞. the powders of Diarrhodon abbatis, and of diatrion ſantalon. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeedes of both the tame endiues, red roſes. ana. ℈.ij. raiſons. ℥.j. white ſaunders, withwind, floures of ſquinaunt. ana. ℈.j. ſuger. ℥.vj. diſſolue it in the ſtilled waters of withwind, & endiue that hath the brode leaues, and make lozenges. And alſo the antidote Philoniū, only once miniſtred, ſomtime hath maruelouſlie

healed all hote diſtempure of the liuer. Applie outwardly foments made of roſes, chāmomil & quinces, or ſeeth wormwood or dates in the aforeſaid oiles of roſes, chāmomil and quinces, and then wet woll or a ſpong in them, and lay that right againſt the liuer. Alſo you may vſe this oyntment. ℞. oyles of roſes, of quinces,
                     Vnguentum.
                   and of water lillies. ana. ℥.j. white ſaunders and red, red roſes. ana. ℈.j. ſcraping of iuorie. ℈.j.ſs. ſeedes of both the tame endiues. ana. ℈.j. vinegre. ʒ.j.ſs. purſlayne ſeede. gra.ij. waxe as much as is ſufficient and make an oyntment. Alſo Epithemes in this diſeaſe are wont to profite not a little:
                     Epithema.
                   which may be made thus, or after this ſort. ℞. the diſtilled waters of ſowen Endiue, with the broade leaues of lettice, of ſorell, of roſes, of water lillies. ana. ℥.iij. iuice of ſengreene, ℥.j. vineger. ℥.j. red roſes, red ſaunders, ſhauing of iuorie. ana. ʒ.j. powders of Diarrhodon abbatis, diatrion ſantalon. ana. ʒ.ſs. ſeede of purſlayne. ℈.ſs. Commixe them all, and make an Epitheme. You muſt applie Epithemes in ſommer coldo, and in winter warme. When there is colde diſtempure of the liuer, you muſt vſe medicines that do heate,
                     Cure of cold diſtempure.
                   and adde ſtrength and ſtabilitie to the liuer. In his diet he muſt vſe meates eaſie of digeſtion, and heatinge. For pot herbes let him take ſauorie, hyſope, fennell, parſley, ſothernwoode, ſage, and ſuch like. And let his meates be dreſſed with Aromaticke thinges, as Cynnamon, cloues, and ſuch others. He muſt drincke wine that is thinne, yellowe, and odoriferous. He muſt eſchewe eating of fiſh, and colde fruictes, and idleneſſe, and in concluſion what ſo euer doeth make colde. Within the bodie he muſt take this decoction. ℞. rootes of Apium, of fennell, and of parſley. ana. ℥.j. agrimonie, hyſope, mintes,
                     Decoctum.
                   wormwood, ſuccorie, withwinde, origan, calamint, Aſarum. ana. M.j. ſeedes of Aniſe, fennell, daucus, commin, carawayes. ana. ʒ.ij. ſquynaunt. ʒ.j.ſs. maſticke. ʒ.j. floures of Chammomill, redde roſes. ana. M.j. Cynnamon choſen. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeeth all theſe in a pound and halfe of wine, and one pounde of running-water vnto the third part, then ſtraine it, and put to the licour of ſyrupe of agrimonie. ℥.iij. ſyrupe of wormewood. ℥.j. Commixe all together and make a potion: of the which let him drinke in the morning, and after dinner. ℥.iij.ſs. at a time, for the ſame purpoſe you may miniſter hoate antidotes, as diacinnamomum, dianiſum, conſerue of ſage, galingale condite, rootes of pimpernell couered with ſuger, and ſuch like. You muſt annoint him outwardly with hote oyles, as be, oyles of Narde, Chammomill, wormewoode, and ſuch like. Alſo it is verie good to vſe this oyntment. ℞. of the oyles of wormewood, and narde. ana. ℥.j.ſs. Iuice of Agrimonie. ʒ.ij. cinnamon, cloues, wood of Aloës. ana. ℈.ij. ſpicknarde,
                     Vnguentum.
                   ſquynaunt and maſticke. ana. ℈.j. wax, as much, as is ſufficient, make an oyntment. You may alſo applie this Cerate. ℞. of the meale of faenugreeke, and of lupines. ana. ʒ.ij. roote of yreos,
                  
                     Cer
                           •
                        tum.
                   and Aſarum. ana. ʒ.j. of agrimonie, wormewood, melilotte, and ſquynaunt. ana ʒ.ſs. gallia moſchata. ℈.j. ſeede of Anniſe and fennell. ana. ℈.ſs. maſticke. ℈.ij. mirrhe and frankenſence. ana. ℈.j. oyles of maſticke, narde, roſes, and dill. ana. ℥.j. waxe and roſen, as much as is ſufficient, and make a Cerote to apply to the liuer.
                     Epitheme.
                   Alſo the vſing of this Epitheme is good. ℞. ſeedes of aniſe, fennell, ammeos. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Cinnamon, cloues, ſquinaunt. ana. ʒ.j. ſeeth all in a pound and halfe of malmeſey, till halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine it and commixe with the licour of that decoction, waters of wormewood and agrimony. ana. ℥.ij. pouders of diacinnamomum, and diagalanges. ana. ʒ.j. withwind. ℈.ij. vinegre. ʒ.iij. commix altogether and make an Epitheme. In a moiſt diſtempure of the liuer, let him vſe a diet that doeth drie,
                     Cure of a moiſt diſtempure.
                   as fleſh of birdes roſted, thinne wine: thoſe thinges that do prouoke ſweat, as drie bathes, or hoate houſes, and alſo bathes comming of their owne accord: generally he muſt eate & drinke but little. He muſt eſchewe all kind of fiſhes, and fruites that haue power to moiſten. You muſt miniſter within the bodie, ſyrupe of wormewood, dialacchae and diacureuma. You muſt applie, outwardly thoſe thinges which do drie without anie great heate: of the which we will ſpeake afterwarde in the Chapter of the dropſie anaſarca.
                  
                     Cure of a drie diſtempure.
                   Drie diſtempure of the liuer muſt be cured like the other, by his contraries. Therefore that wee may comprehende the matter in fewe wordes: it is good for him to vſe a diet that doeth moyſten, and bathes of ſweete water, and other thinges which do moyſten, whereof wee will ſpeake aboundantlie in theyr places. But this muſt not be forgotten, which wee alſo admoniſhed you of before, to commixe alway with your moyſtening things, thoſe things which ad ſtrength

to the liuer.
                     L
                           •
                        pi
                           ••
                         Ie
                           •••
                        .
                   But among thoſe thinges which ſeeme to be good, by the propertie of their whole ſubſtance, the beſt is wolues liuer, if it be diligently dried and beaten, and ʒ.j. therof miniſtred with ſweete wine alayed with water. For this, by often proofe is knowen to be good againſt all diſtempures of the liuer. For as we ſayd, by the propertie of his whole ſubſtance, he hath his efficacie, and not by heating or cooling.
            
            
               CAP XXIIII. Of obſtructions of the liuer. DE OBSTRVCTIONE IECINORIS.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  OBSTRVCTIONS of the liuer are cauſed of vapours, windinſſe, and groſſe and hard to digeſt. But ſometime it is cauſed of groſſe and viſcous humours in the endes of the veynes, ſpringing from the flat part of the liuer, by the which veines nouriſhment is ſent to the liuer from the ſtomach and the bowels.
                     Signae.
                   If abundance of groſſe and vaporous windineſſe be heaped vp together, which can not find free paſſage out, and ſo doth ingender obſtruction, there ariſeth then not onely griefe & heauineſſe about the right ſide, but alſo feeling and perceauing of diſtenſion and ſtretching out. If obſtruction be engendred through groſſe & viſcous humours, there followeth heauines with feeling of paine, ſometime eaſie, and ſometime vehement: alſo ſometime without a feuer, and ſometime with a feuer. For groſſe and viſcous humours, being many, do cauſe obſtruction and ſtopping more then other, & ſpecially when the pacient doth vſe vehement mouing after meate. And if they be ſharp and much in quantitie, which be taken in meats, the paine of the obſtructiō is made more vehement: when the body is ſtopped, they ſuffer both ſtretching out,
                     Victus ratio.
                   and alſo pricking. You muſt giue vnto them which haue this diſeaſe, hote meates, & that haue vertue to take away obſtruction and ſtopping, as be leekes with oximel, ſperage, fennell, parſley, capers, & other like things either ſodden in pottage and meates, or taken with ſome heating ſauce, which taketh away obſtructions. You muſt eſchew all meats and nouriſhments engendring groſſe iuice. Alſo refraine bathes and exerciſes after meates. He muſt vſe for drink, wine that is thinne and old. Beſides his diet it is requiſite for him to vſe verie quickly medicines that do attenuate,
                     Curatio.
                   and take away obſtructions: for obſtructions waxing old doth not onely engender putrifaction in the liuer, but alſo in all the whole body,
                     Simples taking a
                           •
                        ay obſtructions of the liuer.
                   & kindleth a feuer. Among ſimple medicines theſe that follow do take away obſtructiōs notably and without griefe (that is) wolues liuer, fumitorie, agrimonie, chammomill, galingale, dragons roote, aſarum, aniſe, apium, wormewood, caſia, ireos, licorice, rhapontic
                        •••
                     , lupines, capares, axini, with wind parſley, piſtacium, bitter almondes, ſpikenard, ſtichados, gentian, roote of plantaine, alſo the ſeede and leaues dried, iuice of Anagallis the female, ſuccory, alkakengi, both the endiues, ſperage and bruſcus. Of theſe alſo you may make diuerſe compound medicines, and ſpecially decoctions, putting to it Oximel ſimplex, ſcilliticum, ſyrup
                        •
                     s, acetoſus compoſitus. Syrupes of wormewood, of hyſope, of calamint, of horehound, & ſuch other like. For the ſame purpoſe it is lawfull to miniſter trochiſtes of Agrimonie, of wormewood, of rubarb and ſuch like. Alſo theſe Antidotes; diaſaccha, diacurcunia are good and ſuch other like. Among other ſimples before reherſed piſtacium is notable good to take away obſtructions. Therefore it will not onely be profitable but alſo pleaſant, if you ſteepe piſtacia ten or twelue houres by night in malmeſey, and miniſter them in the morning, the digeſtion being ended. You muſt applie outwardly, Epithemes, ointmentes, emplaiſters, and Ceroces, which be declared in the former Chapter, of the cure of cold diſtempure of the liuer. And theſe aforeſaide medicines do ſuffiſe, if the euill be not yet inueterate and growen older for when the euill is im
                     •
                  eterate you muſt vſe both bloud letting and purgagations, if nothing do forbid it. You muſt purge him with pilles of Rubarb and of agaricke, & with other antidotes, which do purge groſſe & thin humors by the belly. You muſt purge thē ſpecially by the belly, when the hollow part of the liuer is vexed. But you muſt purge by vrine, whē the roūd emboſſed part of the liuer is vexed. The body being purged by bludlerting & purgatiōs thē you muſt miniſter thoſe medicins, which ar before rehearſed. And ſpecially

this Electuarie. ℞. of the roote of ireos, chamoepityos,
                  
                     Antidotum liquidum.
                   of ſeedes of aniſe and apium. ana. ʒ.ij. of aſarum. 
                  ʒ.ij.ſs. of cinnamone, ginger, carawayes, chammomill. ana. ʒ.j. of ſtaechadus, gentian, and horehounde. ana. ʒ.ij. with Oxymell ſcilliticum as much as is ſufficient, make an electuarie. This doeth maruelouſlie take away obſtructions, not ſo much thoſe that be in the hollowe part of the liuer, as thoſe that ſticke in the out ſide of the liuer. For it purgeth out vehemently by vrine.
            
            
               CAP. XXV. Of inflammation of the liuer. DE INFLAMMATIONE IECINORIS.
               
                  THERE is inflammation ingendered in the liuer aſwell as in other members,
                     Cauſae.
                   and thorough the ſame cauſes that they be engendred of. If the liuer be vexed with inflammation, there is felt paine and heauineſſe all ouer the right ſide comming vp to the necke, and downe to the baſtard ribs.
                     Signae.
                   Alſo there is ſwellinge of the right ſide, ſpecially, if the outwarde part of the liuer be enflamed. He hath a ſharp feuer, a ſmall and drie cough, an infaciable thirſt, abhorringe of meates, hardneſſe and difficultie of breathinge, the colour of the tongue firſt redde and afterward blacke. Vomites aſwell of pure choller, as alſo like yolkes of egges, and afterwarde alſo ruſty, the belly is coſtiue. Alſo the colour of the bodie is chaunged, like as in the yellowe iaundiſe, alſo hee hath the hicket. In the time of their fitte they are taken with a certaine rauing, and do voide foorth ſharpe vrine. The inflammation that chaunceth through cauſes in the crooked and hollowe partes of the liuer, do cauſe abhorring of meate, diſpoſition to vomit vomits of choler, and vnquenchable thirſt. The inflammation, that ingendreth in the outward and round partes of the liuer, cauſeth the patient to haue greater paine in drawinge of breath then the other, and do raiſe a greater cough, & it doth ſtretch out paine vnto the right part of the necke, ſo that it ſeemeth to plucke it of. Alſo it chaunceth ſometime, that the muſcles leaning vppon the liuer be enflamed: therefore manie being deceaued, do thinke it to be an inflammation of the liuer. Therefore it is neceſſarie to tell the differences betweene theſe. For if the liuer be inflamed, there followeth a round ſwelling, faſhioned like the liuer, which will alſo be faſhioned accordinge to the laying of the bodie. For it appeareth greater, when the bodie is tourned downe on the lefte ſide, and againe leſſer, when it is tourned to the right ſide. For the liuer going vnder the baſtard ribbes, it neither appeareth to the ſight, nor to the feeling. Againe the thinne ſkin, inclining to the inflammation of the liuer, it apperreth to haue a naturall faſhion. If the muſcles be enflamed, the ſkinne is ſtretched out round about, ſo that if one would pull it vp with his fingers, he can not eaſilie. Moreouer there appeareth a ſwelling according to the placing of the muſcles, that lye vppon the liuer, long in faſhion and manifeſt to ſight & feeling. For the cure, when the liuer beginneth to be enflamed,
                     Curatio. Venae ſectio.
                   you muſt by and by let him bloud, if age and ſtrength will permit it. Therefore as Galene witneſſeth you muſt both pull backe and purge the bloud, that floweth to the liuer▪ by cutting the inwarde veine of the arme: becauſe that veyne in the right arme is right againſt the liuer, and hath a large paſſage: hauing ſocietie with the veyne which is called 
                     Ʋena caua. If this veyne doeth not appeare, you muſt cut the middle veyne. And if that doeth not appeare neither, you muſt cut the vpper veyne, you muſt drawe out aboundaunt, and ſufficient bloud if his ſtrength will ſuffer it. After bloud-letting within a little ſpace, make the bellie ſoluble, with a ſimple and eaſie clyſter, ſpeciallie if it do not voyde by it ſelfe.
                     Clyſter.
                   The next day after the bloud lettinge, faſten on a cupping glaſſe, with ſcarification, and againe, likewiſe faſten it on, within a day after: for many haue felt more eaſe the ſecond time of the applying: then at the firſt time. Alſo you muſt vſe foments of woll wet in oyle, cataplaſmes, cerotes,
                     F
                           •
                        ment
                           •
                        .
                   and epithemes. In the applying of the which, this onely is to be obſerued, that to the other medicines that be mollificatiue and diſcuſſiue, you alwayes commix ſome reſtrictiue medicines. Therfore make a foment of oyles of quinces, or of maſtike, or roſes, or mirtles, putting to it

odoriferous wine: or applie a ſponge wette in the decoction of wormewoode, melilot, red roſes, chammomill, dill, plaintaine, tame endiue, and other like. Alſo make Cataplaſmes or emplaiſters of lineſeede and faenugreeke,
                     Cataplaſmes.
                   barley meale, quinces, melilo
                     •
                  e, floures, wormewoode and ſuch like. Or this emplaiſter. ℞. barley meale. ℥.ſs. meate of quinces beaten. ʒ.iij. wormewood,
                     E
                           •
                        plaſtrum.
                   floures of melilot, ſquinaunt. ana. ʒ.ij. lineſeede. ʒ.j. oyles of Roſes, quinces, chammomill, wormewood. ana. ℥.ſs. vinegre. ℥.j. Commixe altogether,
                     Cer
                           ••••
                        .
                   and make an emplaiſter. Alſo this Cerote is good. ℞. of the meate of Dates. ʒ.iij. of mirrhe, ſteeped in olde reſtrictiue wine, ſtoraxe, and maſtick. ana. ʒ.ij. floures of melilot, wormewood, chammomill. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſaffron. ʒ.ſs. oyles of quinces, of maſticke, and of roſes. ana. ℥.j. with waxe and roſen as much as is ſufficient, and make a Cerote to applie to the liuer.
                     Epithe
                           •••
                        a.
                   For the ſame purpoſe, you may make Epithemes of the decoction of Roſes, plantaine, wormewood, chammomill, or of their watets diſtilled. And in makinge of all theſe thinges, you muſt take heede, that when there is vehement inflammation, the reſtrictiue thinges may preuaile, & exceede the thinges that mollifie and looſen. And contrariwiſe when the vehemencie of the heate is ſomewhat ſlaked, the mollifyinge thinges muſt exceede reſtrictiue thinges.
                     Note.
                   Moreouer you muſt beware, that you do not applie the aforeſaid things when they are colde, but firſt warme them a little. Moreouer in inflammation of the liuer, when there is great and vehement paine, you muſt alſo miniſter drincke medicines, that do eaſe paine: but ſo, that you do eſchewe continuall vſe of them: you muſt vſe drinking of ſimples moſt. Therefore miniſter ground ſwell ſodden, aſ a thing very profitable, or iuice of lycorice with hote water. Alſo iuice of endiues doeth profite no leſſe then the other, putting to them a little honie: for beſides that it cooleth, and addeth ſtrength to the liuer, it alſo purgeth the mouthes of the veynes of the liuer. But the bellie muſt alſo be prouoked by eatinge of nettles or mercurie ſodden. Alſo in the declination of the diſeaſe, the bellie muſt be emptied by cliſters, for which purpoſe polibodie & Epithimum with mulſa are put in: and that ſpecially, if the inflammation be in the hollow part of the liuer. For the hollowe parte of the liuer (as wee ſayd before) muſt be purged by the guttes. But the round and outward part of the liuer, muſt be purged by vrine. Moreouer in inflammation of the liuer there is neede of an exquiſite diet (as Galen witneſſeth lib. 13. Therap. method. The liuer it ſelfe requireth meate chieflie that can withſtand obſtructions.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Such be all thoſe that be of thinne ſubſtance, and which do ſcoure without gnawing, as is, ptyſan, mulſa, and ſuch like. Therefore the beſt foode for them that are thus diſeaſed, is ptyſan broth, wherein apium hath bene ſodden. Alſo you may miniſter broth of a chicken, wherin parſley hath bin ſodden: but drinke mulſa or barley broth, or decoction of the tame endiues. And if that inflammation do begin to chaunge to ſuppuration and rotting then all the aforeſaid ſignes will increaſe,
                     Cure of inflammatiō turning to ſuppuration.
                   as paines, feuers, rauings, carefulneſſe, and abhorring of meate. Then you muſt help the permutation, and rotting, that it may quickly be done, leſt other members in continuance of time do rot with it alſo. Therefore you ſhall help it to rot with this cataplaſme. ℞. of the roote of Althaea. ℥.j.ſs. faenugreeke,
                     Casaplaſma.
                   and lineſeede. ana. ʒ.ij. leaues of Althaea and mallowes. ana. M.ij. dry figges in number vj. boile theſe in water till they wax ſoft, then bruiſe them, and make a Cataplaſme. Neither ſhall you do amiſſe, if you applie an emplaiſter,
                     Emplaſtrum.
                   that can help it to chaunge into matter. As this is. ℞. of barley meale, and faenugreke. ana. ℥.iij. of the roote of Althaea. ℥.ſs. of the roote of white lillies. ʒ.j.ſs. lineſeede. ʒ.j. floures of cammomill, and melilote. ana. M.ſs. boile all in water vnto a iuſt thickneſſe, then commix of oyle of cammomill. ℥.j. of oyle of lillies. ℥.j.ſs. boile them againe, and make an emplaiſter. Of theſe ſaid things you may alſo make a cerote, by putting to them butter; ladanum, roſen and waxe. VVhen the ſuppuration and rotting is fully come to a perfection, then the paines do ceaſe, and all the fittes do appeare gentler and meeker. In the time of the rupture or breaking,
                     Ruptura,
                   the paine doeth encreaſe more againe, therefore then alſo you muſt helpe the rupture or breaking of it, by vſing of goates dong and doues dong, nettleſeede, muſtard ſeede, and other things that do drawe to the ſuperficies. And by heating potions, as is decoction of poley, fumitorie, roote of Chamaedrios, and ſuch like. VVhen it is broken you muſt miniſter water of hony, or decoction of cicers, & other like things, which haue an abſterſiue & ſcouring vertue. And if the matter doth auoid by the veines, you muſt

commix thinges that prouoke vryne: as be ſium, aſarum, caſia, and cinamome. But if it auoyde by the belly, commix thoſe thinges which doe purge gently, as be goates wheye, tamarindes, & caſia ſiſtularis. Alſo it is lawfull then to vſe clyſters made of the decoction of bareley. When clenſing and ſcouring of it is done miniſter medicines, which can glutinate and ioyne it vp.
            
            
               CAP. XXVI. Of diſtempure of the Spleene. DE INTEMPERIE LIENIS.
               
                  LIKE as other partes of the bodie haue eight kindes of diſtempures, ſo many hath the ſpleene, and moſt often it ſuffereth cold and moiſt diſtempure. Eche particuler cauſe is not to be declared here: for there be ſome cauſes,
                     Cauſae.
                   that be in other diſtempures of other members of the bodie,
                     Signes of diſtempure of the ſplene in bare qualities. Colde diſtemper.
                   therefore you ſhall ſeeke them in Galen ex capitibus primi, 2. & 3. lib. de morborum cauſis. The ſureſt & ſhorteſt ſignes of diſtempure of the ſpleene is knowen by thoſe ſignes that be eaten and droncken, and by thoſe thinges which are applyed outwardly vpon the skinne, nigh to the skinne, nigh to the left ſide. For if colde diſtempure doeth vexe the ſpleene, all meates & drinckes which doe coole notably, doe ſoone and manifeſtly hurt the ſpleene. Alſo al cold thinges applyed outwardly doe hurt it: and therefore they ſignifie colde diſtempure of it: but contrariwiſe all hot thinges doe eaſe it. And if the diſtempure of the ſplene be hot,
                     Hot diſtemper.
                   it is not vexed with colde meates or drinckes or with cold thinges being applyed outwardlie. And if the heat increaſe there is not onely no ſwelling in it, but alſo it ſuffreth contraction, and ſhrincking vp, ſpecially if a feuer be preſent. But meates and drinkes that be hot, and thoſe thinges that adde heat being applyed outwardly doe encreaſe hot diſtempures, and make them outragious. Alſo all cooling thinges be ioyfull vnto them.
                     Dry diſtempure.
                   Likewiſe alſo you may ga
                     •
                  her the ſignes of dry diſtempure, ſpecially when it is not euident by the proper nature of it for lacke of greatnes. Alſo thoſe thinges that be applyed outwardly to the body, and that be receiued inwardly, if they haue vertue and power of drying, they doe drie vp the ſplene. When the ſplene is vexed with moiſt diſtempure▪
                  
                     Moiſt diſtemper.
                   and ſo continuing a while, it cauſeth it to encreaſe ſo much, that it toucheth both the ſtomache and the liuer. Alſo the kinde of payne togeather with theſe aforeſayde ſignes, do declare the diſtempure that vexeth. For in a hot and cold diſtempure, they haue ſmall payne or none at all, neither haue they any alſo in a moyſt diſtempure
                     •
                   but leaſt of all in a dry diſtempure. By theſe aforeſayd ſignes, you may make coniecture of compounde diſtempures of the ſplene. For in a manner altogeather, when a hote diſtempure is vehement, a dry diſtempure followeth it: and to a cold diſtempure being inueterate, a moyſt diſtempure followeth.
                     Signes of diſtempure of the ſplene through humours. Choler.
                   But in ſo much as humours flowing into the ſpleene do cauſe ſwelling: you muſt haue diligent conſideration to them. For if choler doe flow thither, the whole bodie appeareth hotter, although there be no feuer preſent. Alſo the eyes and the vrine be coloured by choler. The ſicke ſhall alwayes accuſe drines, and complayne of thirſt, and choler troubling his mouth. He abhorreth meate, and is troubled with watching, and deſireth colde thinges, and withall theſe his tongue is yelowiſhed. He hath tertian fits, and the manners of the ſicke be wrathfull, and they will chauſe out of meaſure. If Melancholie doth flowe,
                     Melancholy.
                   his colour doth appeare as well on the tongue, as in all the reſt of the body, and he hath vnnaturall appetite to meate, the patient is ſad and heauy,
                     Fleume.
                   and other ſignes of choler be preſent with theſe. Alſo fits do vexe him the fourth day. When a flegmaticke humor floweth into the ſplene, his color ſhal be like fleume. The ſick doth not thirſt, he deſireth meate, vnleſſe the humour be ſalt fleume: for the ſicke abhorreth meate, and be more deſirous of drinke, for they are thirſtie. Alſo fits vexe them euerie day. And their vrines are whyte, and they themſelues be ſlowe and ſluggiſhe. Some of them that haue colde diſtempure with it, haue a great and a hard ſpleene. And if it be a ſanguine humour,
                     Blood.
                   that floweth into ſpleene, it is poſſible for it to chaunge the colour both of the tongue, and of the skinne. As for the appetit or abhorring of meates, the ſicke is in a meane betwene both, and they be

more ſicke then the reſt, although they haue not like ſwelling of the ſpleene. The veynes of the whole body doe appeare full of blood, and the vryne is yellowe. Theſe ſignes we haue declared at large out of Aetius,
                  
                     Note.
                   becauſe they are common, and may almoſt be applyed to all diſtempures of other medicines, cauſed through flowing of humours. Generally diſtempure of the bare qualitie of the ſplene is almoſt without ſwelling.
                     Cure of diſtempure of the bare qualitie of the ſplene. Hot.
                   You muſt cure and correct them both by meates and drinckes, as alſo by ſimple medicines and fomentes, oyles and oyntmentes and ſuch other like, which be contrary to the diſtempure. Therefore you ſhall heale hot diſtempure of the ſplene, (as you did of the liuer) by meates and drinkes that do coole, and by annoyntinges with oyles of roſes and olium molinum & other things which be rehearſed before in the 23. chapter of this booke. Likewiſe colde diſtempure of the liuer,
                     Cold. Moyſt.
                   by thoſe thinges which doe moderatly heat. In a moiſt diſtempure of the ſplene, beſides thoſe thinges which are rehearſed before in the 23. chapter, theſe thinges doe profit: roote of fiue leaued graſſe, dry plantaine, the floure & ſome of ſalt, ammoxiacum, iuice of willow and ſuch like. If you make of them an oyntment or cerote by putting to ſufficient vinegre, ſuch as we will a little after deſcribe. Alſo frictions are moſt conuenient for this,
                     Dry.
                   which haue a diſcuſſing vertue. Dry diſtempure of the ſplene is cured by ſweete bathes and hot waters, alſo annointinges with ſweete oyle, and meates moiſting without coldnes,
                     Cure of diſtempure 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   as is Ptyſan iuice. If diſtempure of the ſpleene be cauſed through flowing of an humour, then if the humour be ſanguine, you muſt let blood of the inner veine of the left arme, called lienaris vena, or if that cannot be founde, let blood of the veine, which is betweene the ring finger, and the eare finger, then apply both inwardely and outwardly medicines which doe ad ſtrength to the ſpleene, as is, the barcke of the roote of capers, of hartes tongue, Ceterach, maydenheare Yreos, calamint and ſuch like, which alſo are able to adde ſtrength and ſtability to the liuer: of which we will ſpeake aboundantly in the chapters following. If other humours flow to the ſpleene, firſt you muſt auoyd the ſuperfluous humours by purging them with medicines: then all the reſt of the time, you muſt correct the diſtempure that is left, and alſo apply thinges that ſtrengthen the ſpleene.
            
            
               CAP. XXVII. Of inflammation of the Spleene. DE LIENIS INFLAMMATIONE
               
                  THE Spleene, like as other members is vexed with inflammation as oft as hot blood doth flowe thither vnnaturally.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is knowen by heauynes and ſwelling of the left ſide,
                     Signa.
                   which will not giue place to the feeling: alſo by paine & ſtretching out of the place, by feauers and by burning heate. But if aboundaunce of humours doe ruſh in thither, it is knowed by the greatnes & ſwiftnes of the engendring of the inflammation. Let the diet of them that be vexed with inflammation of the ſpleene be ſimple,
                     Dict.
                   and giue them thoſe thinges that will eaſily digeſt for their meate, as is Ptyſan iuice, bread wet and other thinges which be often rehearſed of vs before in the inflammation of other members. And if the inflammation endure longe, you may alſo giue them birdes fleſh, and fiſhes taken in grauellie places. Let the drincke of the pacient be decoction of cinnamome or waterie wine.
                     Potus.
                   Let the cure be begunne by cutting of the veine of the ſpleene, or that veine, which is betweene the litle finger,
                     Curatio. Venae ſectio. Clyſter.
                   and the ring finger, if there be no cauſe to forbid it. Let the bellie be often waſhed with cliſters, but ſpeciallie, if you may not let him blood. Then laie vpon the ſplene reſtrictiue medicines, which can appeaſe the furie of that, that floweth: and keepe the ſtrength of the liuer and ſpleene, but yet you may not onely apply reſtrictiue thinges, but you muſt commixe with them, thoſe thinges which doe extenuate, cut and looſen without euident heat, leaſt groſſe matter be ſtopped in it, and doe waxe more vehemently hard. Therefore if there be moderate inflammation,
                     Fomenta.
                   you muſt apply moiſt woole wet in wine that is olde, ſharpe and thinne and mixed with ſweete oyle. But if there be greater heate, take oyle of roſes, or oleum melinum, or oyle of chammomill with vinegre you may commix them togeather

after this ſort. ℞. oyle of roſes and quinces. ana. ℥.ij. oyle of chamomill. ℥.j. the beſt vinegre. ℥.ſs. commix them altogeather for a foment & irrigation. And if the aforeſaide oyles be not at hande, ſeeth bryer leaues and quinces in oyle, and adde to alſo ſome extenuating thinges, as is wormewood and peniroiall.
                     Note.
                   And you muſt beware alſo that you apply nothing vpon the ſplene colde, but whatſoeuer medicine you apply to it outwardly, let it be warmed. After fomentes and irrigatiōs, you muſt paſſe to cataplaſmes: in the making of which you may adde the meale of darnell and barley with dry figges lineſeede and oyle, wherein wormewood and penyroiall be ſodden. But you muſt beware that the place be not kept bare after irrigations, and cataplaſmes, but aſſone as thoſe be taken away, by and by applie ſuch cerotes or emplaiſters as be deſcribed in the chapter of inflammation of the liuer. For both the liuer and the ſplene require one kinde of medicines, but the ſpleene requireth ſo much the ſtonger medicines, as it is of groſſer nouriſhment. Therefore you ſhal ſeeke examples of medicines meete for this place out of the chapter of inflammation of the Liuer: obſeruing onely this thing, that you alwayes commixe vinegre, and ſomewhat that is acceptable to the ſpleene, and that doeth peculiarly defend his ſtrength. And if the inflammation of the ſpleene tendeth towarde ſuppuration and rotting, which doe ſeeldome chaunce, you muſt helpe to further the ſuppuration, leaſt other members putrifie, by cataplaſmes that bring it to matter, whereof we haue ſpoken in the inflammation of the liuer.
            
            
               CAP. XXVIII. Of hardnes of the Spleene. DE LIENIS SCHIRRHO.
               
                  INFAMMATION of the ſpleene, if it be not rightly cured, it draweth togeather a hard ſwelling of the ſpleene. The cauſe of this diſeaſe is a certaine humour, which cleaueth ſtubburnly to the ſpleene:
                     Cauſae.
                   but it is when hardnes engendreth without inflammation into ouer much ſwelling.
                     Signa.
                   The euill is eaſely knowen by touching, of what cauſe ſoeuer it be. His diet muſt be extenuating: therefore he muſt eate meate which is eaſie of digeſtion,
                     Victus ratio.
                   and doth engender good iuice and thine. He muſt eſchue all hard fleſh, which doth engender groſſe iuice, & which doe ſtriue againſt digeſtion. He muſt drincke wine that is thinne in ſubſtaunce, yelowiſh in colour, not verie olde and being without all reſtriction. Alſo he muſt put much truſt in exerciſes, which, it is good to vſe before meate, the body not abounding with ſuperfluities. Alſo it is manifeſt that vociferation, and crying out, oportunatly done and in time, doth greatly helpe in this euill. For the cure, you muſt vſe verie ſtrong thinges as well outwardly as alſo inwardly. Therefore with in the body miniſter moſt ſtrong potions,
                     Curatio.
                   for thoſe they may ſuffer without griefe. Among the which, the chiefe be, the barkes of the rootes of capers, harteſtongue, the roote and herbe of Tamariſcus, ſodden in vinegre or oxymell. Alſo iuice of centorie droncke, and decoction of bitter lupines taken with rew and pepper. Anagallis the female. ℈.j. with Poſca or oximell, profiteth maruelouſlie to drincke it. Alſo the moſt conuenient remeady for the hardnes of the ſpleene is yron quenched often in water, or wine or Poſca. For that water or wine or Poſca miniſtred in the beginning is pleaſant, and moſt profitable, and is giuen many dayes orderly. Therefore to them that haue the feauer, miniſter water or Poſca: but to them that haue tender fleſh, and lacke a feauer, miniſter wine. Let the yron that is quenched in them be ſome inſtrument that is laide with ſteele. Alſo the ſcales of yron may profitablie be miniſtred to ſtrong and rude men. For, this doth melt the ſpleene notablie, for it hath a conſuming vertue. But yet leaſt it ſhould hurt the ſtomach, it is good to commix with it ſome ſtrengthning medicines, as is harteſtongue, toppes of wormewood, caſia, annyſe ſeede, ſepillum montanum, or ſuch other like. Apply outwardly this foment. ℞. centorie, harteſtongue, rew. ana. M.j. barke of the roote of capers. ℥.j. ſeeth all in vinegre, and when they be ſodden,
                     Fomentum.
                   wet a ſponge in the decoction, and applie it hot to the ſpleene.
                     Vnguentum.
                   Moreouer this oyntment ſheweth a maruelous effect. ℞. of the oyles of capers, lillies and yreos. ana. ℥.j. marrow of oxes ſhankes. ʒ.ij. muſcilage

of the roote of Althaea, fenugreeke, and lineſeede. ana. ʒ.j. badgers greace, hennes greace, gooſe greace. ana. ʒ.ij. the barke of the roote of capers, Tamariſcus, coſtus, centory. ana. ʒ.j. gumme ammoniacke, bdellium, galbanum. ana. ʒ.ſs. the gummes being firſt diſſolued in vineger, with waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment. Alſo emplaiſters and cerotes doe profit much being made after this ſorte. ℞. of the oyles of lillies, yreos, and of capers. ana. ℥.j. barley meale,
                     Cer
                           ••
                        u
                           •
                        .
                   fenugreeke, lineſeede. ana. ʒ.j. the barke of the roote of capers, harteſtongue. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. roote of Althaea 
                  ʒ.j. bdellium, ammoniacke, galbanum. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. opop
                        ••
                     ax, mirrhe, fanckenſence. ana. ʒ.ſs. with roſen, turpentine & waxe, as much as is ſufficient make a cerote. Moreouer the Phiſition muſt looke diligently to the diſeaſe, as he ſeeth cauſe ſometime adde, and ſometime take away thoſe thinges which doe either mollifie, or attenuate and diſſolue, or which addeth ſtrength. In concluſion cupping glaſſes faſtened with ſcarification, is not a litle profitable.
            
            
               CAP. XXIX. Of obſtruction of the Spleene. DE LIENIS OBSTRƲCTIONE.
               
                  IT chaunceth ſometime not onely through weakenes of attractiue vertue, which is in the ſplene, but alſo through ſtopping of the paſſage, by which the dreggy humour of melancholy is deriued from the liuer vnto the ſplene there followeth obſtruction. Afterward that vnpure and naughty blood is diſtributed all ouer the whole body, which, if it chaunce, then the colour of the bodie is corrupt, and enclieneth to blackneſſe. Alſo ſometime they that are thus diſeaſed, haue vncurable vlcers. The cauſes may eaſily be knowen by thoſe cauſes,
                     Cauſae.
                   which we ſpoke of, in the chapter of the obſtruction of the liuer. This euill is knowen by heauines,
                     Signa.
                   which is about the left ſide. If the whole body be corrupted with it beſides, it is eaſie to know ſpecially by the colour of the face, difficulty of breathing, troubleſome dreames,
                     Dye
                           •
                        . Cure.
                   and other ſuch like aforeſaide. This diſeaſe is cured with an extenuating diet, and by medicines which take away obſtructions, whereof you may finde great plentie rehearſed in the chapter of obſtructions of the liuer: for both theſe members haue neede of like medicines: But yet the ſplene hath neede of ſtronger medicines ſo much as it is nouriſhed with groſſer food. Therefore againſt groſſe humours, that they may obey readilie to be purged,
                     Preparatio 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   there behoueth preparatiues, which preparatiues ſhall be the ſame that are for obſtructions of the liuer, (this onely obſerued) that here all thinges be ſtronger, and that they haue thinges commixed with them, that doe adde ſtrength to the ſpleene, (the humour being preparate) then they muſt be purged by ſuch medicines, as doe purge groſſe and dreggie humours, whereof we haue ſpoken often before. After this apply ſuch medicines both inwardly and outwardly, as are contained in the former chapter, & in the chapter of obſtructiō of the liuer. Therefore thoſe places will ſhew you medicines aboundantly.
            
            
               CAP. XXX. Of the Iaundes. DE ICTERO.
               
                  
                     Ic
                           •
                        erus 
                           ••
                        igo 
                           〈◊〉
                         reg
                           •••
                        . Cauſae.
                  
                  THE Iaundies is nothing elſe but a ſhedding either of yelow choler, or of melancholie all ouer the body. Sometime there chaunceth ſhedding of choler to the skinne, the liuer being ſafe, as in the Criſis of diſeaſes. Many times the iaundeis is cauſed, and doth chaunce when the blood is corrupted without a feuer of ſome outward occaſion, and is made cholericke, as it chaunceth by byting of venemous beaſtes. So a certaine man, when he was ſtong of a viper, had all his bodie ſpotted like the colour of leikes. Alſo it may chaunce that through inflammation, or chaunging of the naturall temperament of the liuer, ſuch corruptiō of humour may happen

that ſometime all the body ſhall be manifeſtly like herbes that be whitiſh with palenes. Alſo ſometime it ſhall be like the colour of lead, as alſo ſuch colours be blacker if they happen through diſeaſe of the ſpleene. Alſo it is cauſed many times through weakenes of the bladder that receiueth the choler, which doeth not draw as it was wont to doe the cholericke humour from the liuer vnto him, & therefore leaueth the blood vnpure. Alſo ſometime it is cauſed through obſtruction and debilitie of the veſſels; whoſe mouthes are deriued from the gall to the liuer, and do not therefore draw the cholericke humour. Alſo many times through obſtruction of the paſſages, which goeth to the bowelles. But that we may diſcerne well the cauſes of the iaundeis,
                     Signa.
                   you muſt of neceſſitie conſider the figure of the excrementes, and the colour, ſeing in ſome they appeare much coloured by yellow choler, as alſo in ſome the vrine doeth appeare. Therefore in them that haue choler burſt out vnto the skinne, by reaſon of a good criſis in feauers, their excrementes and vrine ſhall ſeeme to be of naturall colour. But if with the feuer cholericke derections do inuade, and there be heauines in the right ſide, it ſignifieth burning inflammation in the liuer: by whoſe violence the blood is chaunged into choler, and carried all ouer the bodie. But if there be burning without heauines, and griefe, the euill engendred onely through hote diſtempure of the liuer. But if without a feauer, togeather with feeling of ſome heauines about the right ſide, white excrementes be auoided: in them you may iudge, that there is obſtructiō of the paſſages of the bladder that receiue the choler. If ſuch egeſtions come forth without that heauines, you may iudge their ſtrength to be weake, either the attractiue vertue which fetcheth out the cholericke humour from the liuer, or weakenes of the expulſiue vertue, which driueth out to the bowels. Alſo by & by after moſt cholericke humours be ſent out with the vrine aboundantlie.
                     Blacke humours.
                   Thoſe that haue melancholie ſent to the skinne togeather with the the blood, they be vexed togeather grieuouſlie: for there followeth it ſaddneſſe without reaſon, and gnawing of thoſe thinges which be about the bellie, difficultie of breathing, abhorring of meate, and they auoid blacke vryne, but their dunge is like the colour the coperouſe or ſhomakers bleache, & their wombe is much coſtiue. But thoſe that haue the iaundeis cauſed of yelow choler, haue no gnawing about the belly, nor alſo they do not ſo much abhorre meates. They auoid white egeſtions, their vrines be coloured like ſaffron, but they remaine troubled, but commonly to all that haue the iaundeis, there chaunceth ſluggiſhnes to moue, and a contrarie minde to ſweete meates. Alſo itch of the whole bodie followeth. The whytes of the eyes and the partes of the face nigh the temples, and the balles of the cheekes doe betoken it by their pale colour. Alſo the veynes vnder the tōgue are founde full and ſignifie an aboundant humour. The iaundeis that is cauſed by reaſon of a good criſis, when the feauer is parfectly ended, they are ſoone cured,
                     Cure of iaundeis comming through criſis of a feauer.
                   if they vſe bathes of ſweete water, and frictions or chafinges with diſcuſſiue oyles, and all thinges that ratifie, the skinne, (as be) oyles or chammomill, of dill, of yreos, or ſuch like. Alſo roſemarie ſodden in oyle doth diſcuſſe and diſſolue much. Let their whole diet be moiſte, and extenuating groſſe humours.
                     
                        Of venemous byting.
                     
                     
                        Cure of iaundeis of hot diſtempure of the liuer or inflammation.
                     
                     
                        Cure of the iaundeis through obſtruction.
                     
                   They that haue the iaundeis cauſed through byting of a venemous beaſt, they are to be cured almoſt as thoſe be, which be bitten with a madde dogge of the which we will ſpeake in another place. Thoſe that haue the iaundes through hot diſtempure of the liuer, or through inflammation of it, you muſt miniſter the cures which are rehearſed before in the diſeaſes of the liuer. Therefore that which we haue rehearſed there, muſt be referred hither. But if the iaundeis be cauſed through obſtruction of the bladder that receiueth the choler, then two ſpeciall remeadies muſt be vſed: blood letting & purging. In them therefore that blood doe much abound togeather with choler all ouer the bodie; & that be troubled with heauines or ſtretching out, about the liuer or the ſpleene, nothing can be done more profitably, then to let him blood, ſo there be not cauſe that letteth it. You muſt cut the innermoſt veyne of the right arme, and that if the liuer be affected euill: but if the ſpleene be diſeaſed, cut the veine in the left arme,
                     Venae ſ
                           •
                        cti
                           •
                        .
                   you muſt drawe out the blood now and then, leaſt if you ſhould draw it out on heapes, the ſtrength of the ſicke ſhould faile him. And if we be prohibited from blood letting, we may conueniently miniſter a clyſter. For a clyſter may well be caſt in after blood letting, for by the auoyding out of the dounge, it maketh eaſie breath & by prouoking and gnawing of the bowels it draweth

and pulleth backe to it the humours that are ſent out to the ſkinne. Make it after this ſorte. ℞. both the endiues,
                     Clyſter.
                   horehounde, agrimonie, maidenheare, origan, wormewoode. ana. M.j. ſeedes of annyſe, fennell, percely, ſperage. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. licoryce, apium, fennell, the rootes of them. ana. ℥.j. boyle them in ſufficient water vntill the third part: then ſtraine them and take of the licour of that decoction. ℥.xiij. caſia fiſtula. ℥.j. hierapicra. ℥.ſs. electuarium de ſucco roſarum. 
                  ʒ.ij. oyles of dill and yreos. ana. ℥.j.ſs. ſalt. ʒ.j. commix them all and make a cliſter. But purgations be moſt proper and familiar for this diſeaſe: but ſo that the humours be firſt attenuated, and made thinne by brothes, potions, and alſo medicines. Therefore he muſt vſe meates of eaſie digeſtion and extenuating,
                     Victus ratio.
                   birdes of mountaines, fiſhes of grauelly places, and potherbes prouoking vrine: ſpecially endiues, ſperage, louage, fennell, and ſuch like. Fleſh of wilde beaſtes being tamed, are beſt, ſpecially of goates. For his ſauce vinegre is good, wherein Ariſtolochia hath bene ſteeped. He muſt abſtaine from fruites, but let his banket be almoundes, a few at once, and cicer, a litle toſted. Alſo the decoction of it continually droncke profiteth not a litle. Wine white and thinne & not verie olde, is good. For medicines let him haue thoſe, that be taught in the chapter of obſtruction of the liuer, and alſo in the 1. book, the 11 chapter. Aboue other, ſpecially, apium percely, maidenheare, calamint, veruaine, roote of chickweede, or mather, ariſtolochia, ſepillum, S. Iohns worte, being decoct, are good. The humours being preparate and extenuate at length,
                     Purgatio.
                   you muſt miniſter a medicine that purgeth choler. You muſt giue ſtronge purgations to them that haue the ianndeis: for through the drines of their ſtomach, the medicines ſeeme weaker, and leſſe in effect in them. The beſt purgation in this caſe, is infuſiō of rewbarbe, deſcribed in the firſt booke the 11. chapter. Alſo Hierapicra, electuarium de ſucco roſarum, de pſyllio, and diaphanicon. And if you profit him nothing with the firſt purgatiō, you muſt returne againe to thoſe thinges, which haue vertue to take away obſtructions and ſtopping: and after three dayes you muſt purge him more vehemently againe. If the iaundeis be engendred through diſeaſe of the ſpleene, you muſt turne to the chapter of Melancholiouſnes, and the chapter of obſtruction of the liuer. The belly being purged, you muſt againe miniſter medicines, which do purge the entrailes. For which purpoſe the roote of, Cyclaminum beaten and druncke is onely good: for this doeth not onely purge againe the intrailes, but alſo it is moſt meete, to ſhut out the choler, by ſwet in the whole ſkinne all ouer. Therefore after it is druncke, you muſt helpe the excluſion of the ſwet by coueringes, and warmings in bed. You may giue of it. ʒ.ij. or iij. with aqua mulſa. Alſo iuice of the barcke of radiſh doeth notably well, if it be mixed with ſweete wine vnalayed, or vinum mulſum, ſo that. ℥.ij. of the iuice be tempered with ℥.j. of wine. Alſo earthwormes dry giuen .iij. dayes with vinum mulſum, doe ſende out the iaundeis by the vrine. Alſo you may giue very profitably iuice of endiue and ſuccorie to them that haue feauers by itſelfe, and to them that lacke feauers with wine. Alſo iuice of cuſcuta profiteth maruelouſlie. Alſo chammomill is moſt profitable, which is called leucanthemus, and alſo buphthalmum. But all the medicines miniſtred in drincke, let them be miniſtred in a bath if it can be, when the patient ſitteth in a great hot veſſell. Alſo you muſt be much diligent at this time to giue him a dyet, that recomforteth and refreſheth ſtrength, by the which the vertue expulſiue may be repayred: and if any member be hurte, let it be ſtrengthned, and let the corruption of his colour be purged away. Alſo it is good for him to vſe exerciſes, geſtations, annointinges & ſweating out. For this purpoſe dry hote houſes are good: in the which annoint the bodie with oyle, wherein ſepillum or roſemarie hath bene ſodden. And if any of the iaundeis be lefte about the face and the eyes, if the vrine appeare pure, and the bellie auoyding after his accuſtomed manner you muſt vſe infuſions into the noſe: for which purpoſe iuice of cyclaminum is poured in, alſo 
                     
                        •
                     igella with vinegre, iuice of the roote of beetes and anagallis. Alſo let the ſicke ſitting in abathe drawe into his noſethrilles verie ſharp vinegre and let him keepe it a while, preſſing his noſethrilles, togeather, and it will purge maruelouſlie.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXXI. Of euill state of the bodie. DE MALO CORPORIS HABITV.
               
                  CACHEXIA in greeke is nothing elſe,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . but an euill and naughtie ſtate and diſpoſition of the bodie. For it is in ſuch caſe that it is ſpredde abroade in waterynes, and all the whole bodie is looſe and waxeth ſofte.
                     Cauſae.
                   This diſeaſe for the moſt parte is engendred of a longe ſicknes. Alſo it followeth when ſome entraile is hardened ſpeciallie after the hardeneſſe of the liuer and the ſpleene. Alſo it chaunceth often in a continuall Dyſenteria, and the diſeaſe called Caeliacus morbus. Alſo through letting of ſome accuſtomed excretion. The whole bodie is made whitiſhe and weake,
                     Signa.
                   ſo that his legges are ſcarce able to beare him: and in the beginning his digeſtions be letted, his appetite remaining it ſtill: but afterward there followeth abhorring of meate, and their breathing is ſeeldome and weake. Alſo their bellie ſendeth out vnequall excrementes. Olde men and children are ſpecially taken with this diſeaſe, which do ſoone periſh through weakenes of the vitall facultie, & becauſe the iuice doth breath out of them readylie through thinnes of the ſkinne. But they that be of full age, doe ſeeldome fall into this diſeaſe, and do ſoone get it awaie againe. If this diſeaſe doe endure longe, it turneth into the dropſie. Therefore his cure may not be differred. Let his diet altogeather be thinne and drie: therefore let their meates be ſimple, & which will eaſelie digeſt, and that can ingender the beſt bloode.
                     Diet.
                   Let them eſchue all fruites alſo that engender groſſe and viſcouſe humours, and that be harde to digeſt. Wine is good for them which is white, thinne, and odoriferous. For the cure if the diſeaſe happen by letting of accuſtomed excretion you muſt ſtirre vppe,
                     Curatio.
                   and prouoke the excretion. Therefore you muſt vſe blood letting, if nothing doe let it, which you muſt drawe out by litle and litle at ſundrie times vnto the thirde or fourth day in them that fell into this diſeaſe through retention of hemorhoides or menſtruis. But in them that haue it through aboundaunce of vicious humours, bloodletting is hurtfull. Therefore rather purge them with ſome conuenient purgation. The bodie being purged, let him vſe chieflie waters that ſpring by them ſelues of alome and ſalte peter, and afterwarde ſulphurous waters. Alſo let them exerciſe diuerſe deambulations, geſtacions, vociferations, frictions with linnen, & other moderate exerciſes. After let them vſe annointings with oyle, wherein is put ſomwhat that dryeth vp humors, (as be) nitrum & ſaltes. To cure the wearines apply certaine bathes betweene whiles. Alſo potion of wormewood helpeth them maruelouſlie, & dropaces applyed. Alſo if the liuer be euill affected, or ſome other of the inward mēbers, it is good to cure them by their own remeadies before preſcribed. If the euill turne into the dropſie, you ſhall find it next.
            
            
               CAP. XXXII. Of the dropſey DE AQVA INTER CVTEM.
               
                  THERE be three kindes of the dropſie. The firſt is called in Greeke Aſcites. The ſeconde Tympanites, and the thirde Anaſarca, Ypoſarca,
                  
                     Aſcites.
                   
                  Sarcites, and Leucophlegmatia. Aſcites is, when much, waterie humour is heaped vppe betweene the ſkinne or fylme called peritoneum, and the bowels. Tympanites is when much windyneſſe and ſuperfluous breath is gathered in the aforeſayde places of the bellie. Anaſarca is,
                     Timpanites. Anaſarca.
                   when the humour is diſperſed throughout the whole bodie, that all the fleſhe appeareth altogeather moyſte and wette like a ſponge or paper. The dropſye is cauſed through great coldneſſe of the liuer, or through other partes verie notably cooled,
                     Cauſae.
                   which can bring the liuer into the ſame effecte. The liuer is affecte by the ſpleene being colde and by the ſtomach and the bowelles, alſo by the longes, the reynes, and the mydriffe. Alſo it chanceth through vnmeaſurable auoyding of the hemorhoydes: or through womans fluxe,

or through retention of menſtruis, or through ſoule other great affection of the wombe. For in all theſe the liuer hath no vnnaturall ſwelling: and yet the bodie is taken with the dropſie, onely through refrigeration of the liuer, affected in the beginning. But afterwarde ſometime it alſo waxeth harde, which is euident to be ſeene in them, which through vntimely drincking of colde water, haue their liuer cooled on heapes, ſo that the dropſie followeth by and by, before the liuer be lyfted vppe into a knottie ſwelling. Many haue fallen into the dropſie after the goute, and through the vexing paine of the hucklebones. Moſt commonly thoſe which feele not their meate, and haue euill ſtate of the bodie, and alſo that be troubled with the Iaundeis, the dropſie followeth it. Alſo it followeth Caeliacus morbus, and Dyſenteria. Commonly euerie dropſie cauſeth difficultie of breathing,
                     Signa.
                   and ſwelling, and heauines and naughtie colour. Alſo they abhorre meate, and deſire drincke largely, ſpecially they that haue Aſcites. For the humour that is holden and kept in the aforeſaide places, is ſalt and rotten: therefore alſo after for the moſt parte, there is wont to follow a feauer. Women are leſſe trobled with the dropſie then men. Children for the moſt part are taken with the dropſie Anaſarca. Among the ſaide three kindes of dropſies, Tympanites is the moſt perilous. Aſcites leſſe perilous then it,
                     Diet.
                   and then Anaſarca. One diet is common to all theſe kindes of dropſies: that their meate be eaſie of digeſtion and ſufficiently coact, and drie. For that meate that is loſe and moiſt, is apt to be turned into watrines. Therefore let his bread be verie well baked,
                     Panis.
                   and let it haue ſalt, ammi, fennell, annyſe, or comin commixed with it. Alſo it ought to be well leauened, for ſo it reſtraineth and ſtoppeth the leſſe. Of birdes the drieſt are good, as partriches, turtles, blackbirdes, and thruſhes and ſuch like. Of foure footed beaſtes goates and hares. Alſo chickens, their extreeme partes, when they are roſted. Of fiſhes, crabbes of flouddes. Alſo egges roſted are good. Let him vſe pothearbes, but ſeldome. Let thoſe thinges that be miniſtred vnto them be ſomewhat ſharp, and that haue vertue to attenuate and heate: as is, Apium, percelie, Dancus, rocket, penyroiall, colewortes, garlicke ſodden, onions and leikes. He muſt altogeather abſtaine from pulſes. For ſauce let him vſe vinegre with pepper, cinamon and ſuch like. Let their ſalt be compound with fennell,
                     Potu
                           •
                        .
                   hyſope, roſemarie and Apium. You muſt giue them ſo much drincke onely as ſhall ſuffice ſomewhat to breake their thirſt: for ouer much drincke doeth dammage them that be ſicke of the dropſie without meaſure. They muſt drincke thinne wine, and that doeth prouoke vrine. But they muſt eſchue ſweete wines, and mulſum: vinegre doeth maruelouſlie quench their thirſt. Moreouer let them take the greateſt portion of meate at ſupper. Let them eſchue much fruites and ſecond tables: but yet nuttes, almondes, pomgranades, peares ſodden, and drie figges are to be giuen vnto them, but yet let them take all thoſe moderately and not euerie day. Let not their bedde be verie ſofte, ſpecially them that haue Anaſarca. Strew vnder them drie herbes, as be, penyroiall, calamint, origan, and ſuch like. For it is maruelous, how much thoſe doe drie vp, while they ſleepe: ſo that it hath ben proued that ſome being wrapped and hidden in a heape of wheate, to haue riſen againe after ſleepe ſtronge and ſafe. Alſo lette them vſe exerciſes in the Sunne, if it be ſommer and a ſaire daie, but let their heade be couered:
                     Exercitatio.
                   but if it be colde, let them vſe it in houſes being warmed, and nigh a fire, or at a fire
                     •
                   Riding is expedient at the firſt, and to be carried hither and thither in a chaire. But if the ſtrength of the patient may ſuffer it, it is better to walke much on his feete, and ſometime to runne, then to be borne. Alſo the patient muſt be wrapped in skinnes dried with the Sunne, or digged into hote ſande. After exerciſes wipe of the ſwette with ſharpe linnen clothes. Alſo it is verie good if you vſe daiely, thriſe or foure times, frictions: for this doeth open the paſſages that are ſhutte: and it dryeth vppe, extenuateth and caſteth a ſunder humours. Therefore it doeth verie quickly prouoke forth much ſwette, and conſtraineth the fleſh. They muſt be rubbed with hrye handes, or with ſalte beaten in water or hot oyle. After this they muſt be waſhed with alommewater, or ſulphure water, or ſalte water. For manie which haue beene taken with the dropſie Anaſarca, and haue vſed ſuch kynde of bathes, they haue ſuffiſed to weare out the diſeaſe, and alſo to make a ſtronger ſtate of the bodye. And

hitherto, we haue rehearſed a common diet for all kinde of dropſies. For the cure, the remeadie that is common for all dropſies, is that by and by in the beginninge,
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt purge the humour that doeth abounde. That you may doe both by blood letting, and by purgations, and by thoſe medicines that prouoke vrine. That which is good particularly for this or that kinde, we will teach in the chapters following, in which we will follow the cures of them euerie one particularlie.
            
            
               CAP. XXXIII. Of the dropſey Anaſarca. DE ANASARCA.
               
                  IN the dropſie Anaſarca, all the whole bodie, and the fleſh appeareth looſe, and wet like a ſponge as it is ſaide: ſo that all the whole bodie ſwelleth vp,
                     Signa.
                   and is like a dead bodie. In this diſeaſe you muſt beginne the cure with letting of blood,
                     Curatio.
                   ſpecially if the euill be engendred of ſuppreſſion of hemorhoides or menſtruis, and if age and ſtrength will ſuffer it. For by this meanes thea boundaunce of humours that doe hurte, are drawen out, and the feeble nature being vnloden is ſwifter, and the cauſe of the diſeaſe is miniſhed, and alſo health commeth againe with leſſe labour. The naughty humours being drawn out and purged by blood letting, you muſt come to the remeady of purging medicines.
                     Purgatis.
                   But if there be neede of extenuation & preparation of the humors before their expulſion, you ſhall miniſter decoctions and other things which be rehearſed before in the chapters of weaknes of the liuer, and obſtruction of the liuer. For which purpoſe miniſter alſo ſyrups of wormewood, of tame endiue with the broad leaues, of Agrimony and bizantijs. Let the purging medicines be, of ſimples, rubarbe, and agaricke, of compoundes pilles of rubarbe, pilulae de hiera ſimplici: and pilles of agaricke and ſuch like. Alſo hierapicra is good in the beginning becauſe it taketh awaie obſtruction, and addeth ſtrength to the entrailes. Therefore you muſt onely beware, that you miniſter not purging medicines that be ſtrong, and which ad no ſtrength to the liuer: but you muſt bring forth the hurtfull humour with eaſie medicines by litle & litle. For if you purge but once, and on heapes, you deſtroy the ſtrength maruelouſlie and coole the liuer. Therefore euerie weeke you muſt make the wombe ſoluble, and you muſt alwaies paſſe from gentle remeadies, by litle and little to ſtronger. Therefore in this kinde of dropſie the Antidotes, diaphanicon, and Electuarium nidum be good. Alſo the roote of Elder ſodden in wine doth purge notably. Alſo the roote of wolwort profiteth, for they be both of one vertue. Moreouer the reſt of the time of the cure, while he abſtaineth from purging medicines, you muſt miniſter thoſe thinges that adde ſtrength to the liuer, whereof many be recited before, where we taught the cure of obſtruction and weakenes of the liuer. Alſo miniſter thoſe thinges which prouoke vrine. For which purpoſe, you may well miniſter diarrhodon abbatis, aromaticum roſarum, dialacca diacurcuma, trochiskes of agrimonie, of rubarbe, of wormewood, theriaca, and ſuch licke. And this medicine profiteth notably. ℞. the pouders of diacurcuma,
                  
                     Tri
                           •••
                        .
                   and of dialacca. ana. ℈.j. pouders of diatrion ſantalon, and of diarrhodon abbatis. ana. ʒ.ſs. pouder of aromaticum roſarum. ℈.j. rubarbe choſen ʒ.ſs. ſeedes of endiue with the broade leaues, of melons, and fennell. ana. ℈.ij. of wormewood, chammomill, and withwinde. ana. ℈.j. of nutmegges, ſquinaunt and ſpiknard. ana. ℈.ſs.j. of verie white ſugar. ℥.j. commixe them togeather, & make a pouder. Alſo this profiteth maruelouſlie. ℞. ſeedes of caraway, fennell, and annyſe. ana. ℈.ij. ſeedes of comin and S. Iohns worte. ana. ℈.j. ſeedes of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; parcely,
                     Alia.
                   daucus and louage. ana. ʒ.ſs. of the rootes yreos and of Aſarum. ana. ʒ.j. wormewoode. ℈.j. of licorice. ʒ.j. ſugar, the weight of all the reſt, commixe them all and make a pouder. And you muſt doe your diligence, that in Anaſarca, the medicynes be more drie then moyſt, becauſe the whole ſtate of the bodie is ſo waterie. Moreouer you muſt apply thoſe medicynes outwardelie, which can drie vppe humours, as be cataplaſmes▪
                  
emplaiſters, ointmentes, and other like thinges that haue drying vertue in them. Therefore a 
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  aplaſme is good made of barley and beane meale,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   of fenugreeke, of the roote of walworte, of laurell bearies, of wormewood, and of origan ſodden in wine, and laide ouer all the whole bodie. Alſo oxes doung conueniently dryed, may well be applied with poſca or oxi
                        •
                     ell, hauing the fourth part of brimſton put to it. Alſo freſh cheeſe hauing much creame being layd to, maketh well againſt all ſwelling partes. Moreouer doues dounge and goates dounge, maieweede, and chammomill, by euen portions bruiſed, ſodden in vinegre, and hony may be applied. Moreouer you muſt vſe emplaiſters of leauen, dry figges, intrum, yreos, melilote, ſage, peniroiall, cardamomum, ſulphur vinum, laurell bearies, ſtaues acre, ſalt armoniacke, maſticke, franckenſence, ſothernwood, Ariſtolochia rotunda, doues doung, make it vp with oximell. But you muſt altogeather eſchue fat and rozennie cerotes, for they engender windines and cauſe ſwellinges. But yet the legges and the hands, and other partes of the bodie being ſwollen, may often be annointed with this oyntment in the Sunne or by a fire. ℞. of vnguentum agrippa. ℥.j. of the meales of lineſeede,
                     Vnguentum.
                   fenugreeke beanes and bareley. ana. ℥.ij. ſeedes of Althaea, nigella, dancus. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Sulphur vinum. 
                  ʒ.iij. bolearmoniacke. ʒ.ij. roote of yreos. 
                  ʒ.ij.ſs. roche alome, fanckenſence. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Euphorbium. 
                  ʒ.j. oyles of yreos, white lillies and chammomill. ana. ℥.j.ſs. with waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment, wherewith annoynt the ſwollen partes verie often, it being melted on the coales. For his dyet you muſt ſeeke it in the former chapter of the dropſie.
            
            
               CAP. XXXIIII. Of the dropſie Aſcites. DE ASCITE.
               
                  
                     Signa.
                  
                  IN the dropſie Aſcites, all the whole bellie is ſwollen vppe, and if it be ſtroken, there is hearde ſuch a ſounde, as a bottle doeth make that is not full of water,
                     D
                           •
                        et.
                   but the other partes of the bodie, ſpeciallie the vpper partes▪ are not puffed vppe nor ſwollen. Let his diet be, that hath this dropſie, of birdes of mountaine and other meates eaſie of digeſtion, and which doe engender good iuice,
                     Cure.
                   as is ſayde before in the thirtie two chapter. The cure muſt be begunne by vſing of purging medicines. Let them be ſuch as we rehearſed in the former chapter. Colewortes of the ſea called ſoldana, and ſoldanella taken in drincke excelleth all the reſt: for this ſheweth a maruelous effecte in bringing furth the hidropicke water, ſo that many by the onely vſing of it, haue bene reſtored to health. Giue of it in wine or wheye. ʒ.ij. or more or leſſe according to the diuerſitie of the bodie. Alſo pilles of ſagapanum are verie good: and two drachmes or three of the iuce of the roote of yreos, putting to it. ℥.j. of ſugar. Alſo you muſt miniſter ſharpe clyſters, vnleſſe the bellie be ſoluble of it ſelfe:
                     Clyſter.
                   for then it is more conuenient to drie vppe. Among other this clyſter is ſpeciallie commended. ℞. floutes of laurell. ʒ.ij. roote of polipodie, agaricke. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. dodder or cuſcutha. 
                  ʒ.iij. ſeeth them in wine or water vntill the thirde parte be conſumed. Then take of the licour of that decoction being ſtrainned. lib. 1. of benedicta laxatina. ℥.ſs. of Electuarium nidum. 
                  ʒ.ij.ſs. mel roſarum. ℥.j. oyles of rewe, chammomill and yreos. ana. ℥.j. ſalt gemme. ʒ.j.ſs. commix them all and make a clyſter. For the ſame purpoſe, if you thinke good, you may ſeeth colocy
                        •
                     this▪ cartanus, laurell bearies, annyſe ſeede, ammi, and carawaie ſeedes, rewe, roote of wilde cucumber, and other like thinges out to them. After the aforeſaide remeadies you muſt lay vppon the whole bellie, ſome of the preſcribed cataplaſmes and emplaiſters. Alſo apply oyntmentes and reamedies that prouoke vrine and ſwette: and let him vſe exerciſes of the which we haue ſpoken aboundantly before.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXXV. Of the dropſey Timpanites. DE TYMPANITE.
               
                  IN this kind of dropſie, the belly is puffed vppe and ſtretched out:
                     Signa.
                   and being ſtroken, it maketh a noyſe like a tabour or timbrell, but the other partes of the body wax leane. It requireth like diet,
                     Victus ratio.
                   that the other kindes of dropſies haue: but in this all windy thinges are ſpecially to be auoided. Alſo let their exerciſes be much, and great thirſt do helpe & ſuccour the patient ſtrongly. Let the cure be begune with purging medicines, whereof you ſhall finde examples before.
                     Curatio. Clyſter.
                   Alſo it is good to caſt in clyſters, which haue vertue to diſſolue and diſcuſſe wind, as this is. ℞. rootes of apium, and fennell. ana. ℥.j. ſeedes of Annyſe, fennell, daucus, louage, parcely and comin. ana. ʒ.ij. careaway ſeede. ʒ.iij. rew, aſarum, leaues of waleworte, melilote, ana. M.j. boyle them in water vnto the thirde parte, and then take of the licour of that decoction being ſtrained. ℥.xij. hieropicra, benedicta laxatiua. ana. ℥.ſs. Electuarium de baccis lauri. 
                  ʒ.iij. oyles of rew and dill, ana. ℥.j.ſs. ſalt. ʒ.j.ſs. cōmix them togeather, and make a clyſter. You muſt giue alſo vnto them thinges that doe prouoke vrine, and you muſt vſe aſwell inwardly as outwardly thoſe thinges that doe diſſolue and diſcuſſe windines, whereof you ſhall finde plentie in the chapter of the cholicke.
                     Sac
                           •••
                        .
                   The belly muſt daiely be nouriſhed with Panicum mil
                        •
                     um, ſalt, branne, leaues of rew, chammomill floures, hote aſhes ſewed in bagges. Alſo you may apply to it this cerote. ℞. floures of chammomill and melilote. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. myntes, ſauorie, aſarum. ana. ℈.j. ſeedes of Annyſe, fennell, rew,
                     Ceratum.
                   comyn, daucus. ana. ʒ.j. cardamomum. ℈.ſs. mirrhe, caſtoreum. ana. ℈.j. oyle of rew. ℥.iij. oyle of dill. ℥.j.ſs. roſen & waxe as much as is ſufficient, make a cerote. Moreouer cupping glaſſes faſtened often to the whole bellie lightly, and with much flame do maruelouſly profit. Afterwarde the bellie muſt be rubbed with a ſharpe linnen cloath, ſo longe till it be redde. Inwardly he muſt vſe the antidotes, dianiſum, diacuminum, and electuarium e baccis lauri, or theſe lozenges. ℞. the pouders of dianiſum, and diacuminum. ana. ℈.j. the pouders of the antidote of laurell bearies. ʒ.j. the pouder of diagalangae. 
                  ʒ.ſs. ſeedes of annyſe,
                     Lozenges.
                   carawayes, dancus, and fennell. ana. ℈.ſs. leaues of rew, ſeedes of Apium and louage. ana. ℈.j. ſugar. ℥.vj. diſſolue it in the diſtilled waters of fennell and Apium, and make lozenges. The other remeadies are to be ſought in the chapter of the cholicke.
            
            
               CAP. XXXVI. Of raynes that ſendeth furth bloodie vrine. DE RENIBVS CRVENTAM VRINAM EXCERNENTIBVS
               
                  MANY times there happeneth a diſeaſe of the raynes, through the which thin wheyiſh blood is piſſed. It is cauſed through weakenes of the reines,
                     Cauſae.
                   which be not therfore able to deuide the vrine: or it is cauſed through amplitude of the reines, which ſtraine out the vrine from Vena cana vnto the raines. For when the paſſages are wider and ſtronger, they alſo ſende out ſome of the blood to the reines, & other groſſe matter. Alſo oftentimes the raines do ſend out blood like wiſe as it is wōt to do in the hemorhoides. Moreouer ſome do void out blood frō the raines through breaking of a vaine in the raines: as it chaunceth to thoſe which haue lift vppe a great weight or haue lept greatly, or haue fallen out of an high place, or haue ſuffered ſome ſuch other violēt thing. Somtime it chanceth through gnawing of the veines of ſharpe humors flowing frō aboue.
                     Signa.
                   If this diſeaſe be cauſed though weaknes of the raines the blood is ſent out very wheyiſh. But if it be through amplitude & largnes of the veines, thē they feele no paine. If the excretiō of blood be by certaine circuites, thē either there is fulnes of the whole body, or neglecting of accuſtomed exerciſes, or reſectiō of ſome mēber that wēt before. And if it chance through breaking of a veine, thē blood is piſſed forth moſt abondantly:

but if it be of gnawing, then blood is ſent forth by litle and litle, and paine doeth vexe the reines.
                     Cure of bloody vrine by weaknes of the reynes.
                   Therfore you ſhall cure that excretiō of bloody vrine, which is cauſed through weaknes of the raines, or amplitude of the veſſels that ſtraine out vrine to the raines, by quiet and reſtrictue meates, drincking of blacke wine & other things which are reherſed, in the chap. of ſpitting of blood. You muſt abſtaine from thoſe things ſpecially which prouoke vrine & from carnall copulation. In drincke beſides thoſe thinges that are rehearſed in the chapter aforedaide, miniſter decoction of the roote of comferie, and tragacantha miniſtered, that is ſteeped in blacke wine, is good. Alſo. ℥.j. of harte ſhorne with wine, iuice of marigoolds doth ſtop bruiſinges out of blood from the reines. Likewiſe leaues of willow braied with wine, lapis hematitis. 
                  ʒ.j. roote of white thorne and decoction of knotgraſſe. Moreouer. ʒ.j. of bolearmoniacke miniſtred, is good. Siruppes of roſes and of mirtles, trochiskes of ambre, of terra lemnia and of ſpodium. Moreouer ſheepes milcke is onely praiſed being miniſtred faſting. ℥.iiij. with ʒ.j. of bolearmoniacke cōmixed with it. Apply outwardly to the reines and the loynes thoſe thinges which be deſcribed againſt ſpitting of blood, and in the chapter of Dyſenteria, and other eruptions of blood. And whatſoeuer can togeather with his reſtraining and drying adde ſtrength alſo: (as be) leaues of bryer and oke, maſt, mirtle bearies, pomegranate rindes, balauſtiae and ſuch like. After this the ſtate of the body muſt be refreſhed and reſtored with meates of good iuice, with milke & fleſh of birdes, alſo with ſwines fleſh that is lene. That therby the whole body may be brought to his former ſtrēgth and the reines being ſtrengthned alſo they may fulfill their owne proper office, & that they may deuide,
                     Cure of blood
                           •
                         vrine cōming through circuites, or breaking of a veine, or gnawing.
                   and ſtraine out the wheyiſh humour from the blood. But if the reines do ſende out blood according to the circuites, or through breaking of a veine, or through gnawing of ſharp humours flowing from aboue, then by and by you muſt cut a veine of the ſame ſide in the arme. To thoſe that ſend out by circuites blood, let them blood a litle before the circuite, but let the other bloode by and by in the beginning: but it is better to parte the drawing out of the blood, that his pulling backe and auerſion may be done by litle and litle. Let the places about the reines be couered with ſponges wet in Poſca, or moiſt wooll with oyle of roſes and vinegre. After this apply oyntmentes, emplaiſters and cerotes deſcribed in the places before rehearſed. Alſo a cupping glaſſe may commodiouſlie be applyed ſpecially if you ſuſpect inflammatiō to be preſent in them, which piſſe blood through breaking of a vaine. Alſo potions are good rehearſed before in the chapter of ſpitting of blood. In the meane ſeaſon alſo, the ſicke muſt be driuen from all ſalt and ſharp thinges. But when excretion of bloode ceaſeth, he muſt vſe a diet that doeth not engender much blood, ſpecially in thoſe that void out blood by circuite. Alſo the vpper partes of the body muſt continualy be exerciſed. In thoſe, which piſſe blood through breaking of a veine, if the exulceration be left in the places you ſhall cure them after the blood is ſtopped by thoſe thinges that are ſpoken of in the chapter of exulceration of the reines.
            
            
               CAP. XXXVII. Of inflammation of the Reynes. DE RENVM INFLAMMATIONE.
               
                  THE Raynes are vexed with inflammation for diuerſe cauſes. For both corrupt humours,
                     Cauſae.
                   and ſtrypes, and rubbinges togeather, and drincking of medicines doe engender inflammation of the reines, and ſpecially continuall & vehement rydinges.
                     Signa.
                   There commeth to the ſicke a beating payne behinde about the firſt ioynt of the back, a litle aboue the baſtard ribbes: but the paine ſtretcheth vpward, euen vnto the liuer, ſpecially the right ſide raine being vexed, but downward vnto the bladder & priuy members and the loynes & hippes: & alſo to the ſhare and thighes. Alſo there followeth aſtoniſhment of the leg that is neere, that it can neither be ſtretched out right, nor he cannnot go on his feet. And whether ſneeſing or any other concuſſion do chance, they are vexed with moiſt vehement paine, their extreeme parts be cold & moſt the calfes of the legges, & the feete. There is preſent difficultie in making of water,

and they piſſe continually and painefully. In the beginning their vrine is thinne and watery, hauing no reſidence in it: but the inflammation waxeth worſe, it is more rubicund. Alſo afterward it is groſſe and filthy, and there be vehement feuers preſent. And if the inflammation increaſe ſtill, all theſe ſignes wax more vehement. To theſe commeth diſpoſition to vomite, and gnawing of the ſtomach, and vomiting of choler. Many of them are vexed, & ſweate vntill their hartes faile them: their belly is ſtopped, ſo that they are puffed vp with wind, & do ſend out belkings continually. There followeth vehement abhorring of meate, and to ſome there are continuall exacerbations, but to ſome betweene whiles. And generallie egeſtion of the wombe, and much excretion of vryne do go before thoſe paines. The ſicke muſt ly in a verie ſoft bed: and the firſt day he muſt abſtaine from meate, but you may not extend his faſting to manie dayes. For the vrines being made more pure and ſharpe by faſting, do vex with moſt vehement byting and gnawing.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Therefore in the beginning you muſt nouriſh them with thinne ſoupinges, that do eaſe and ceaſe gnawinge and bitinge, (as is) broth of Ptyſan or alica of barley. Alſo mallowes for his pot herbes doth much profit. Let his drinke be water, wherin a little cinnamon hath bene ſodden. To be ſhort let his diet be thinne, and ſuch, as is in other inflammations. For the cure, in the beginning you muſt by and by let him bloud, and you muſt cut the veine that is in the hamme or in the anckles,
                     Curatio.
                   and that muſt be done one the legge that is right againſt the Reyne, that is vexed. Alſo ſomtime (as Galen ſayth) you may let bloud of the arme (that is) when the inflammation is newe, and aboundance of bloud is preſent. After bloud letting you muſt come to outward medicines, as Cataplaſmes, fomentes, linimentes, emplaiſters, and ſuch like,
                     Localia.
                   which haue vertue to coole meanely, and to eaſe paine, made of the oyles of roſes, quinces and chammomill, of barley meale, beane meale, fenugreeke, lineſeede, and ſuch like, which be rehearſed in the Chapters of inflammation of the liuer and the ſplene. And if the paine be not eaſed by thoſe things that be applied outwardly: apply a cupping glaſſe to the loynes, & the guts, & ſcarification being made, you muſt draw out much bloud. Then you muſt vſe nouriſhment of ſponges, and other things which can eaſe paine. You muſt only beware all this time, that you giue not ſuch medicines to drinke as prouoke vrine,
                     Note.
                   for they hurt vehemently by bringing in gnawing and byting humours to the inflamed partes. This medicine I haue proued to be ſingularly good. ℞. the iuyce of clary, and the iuyce of nightſhade. ana. ℥.ij. dronk in ℥.vj. of ſtale ale, morning and euening vj. dayes together. Alſo you muſt beware in the beginning of the inflammation of purging medicines. But yet you may vſe ſoft clyſters (ſpecially if the belly be coſtiue) made of the decoction of mallowes, or lineſeede, & fenugreke, or Ptyſan broth, putting to it oyle of violets, or chammomill oyle. But you muſt beware that you put not in great abundance of it, for then the bowels being filled and ſtretched out with it will preſſe together the Reynes. But when the inflammation is perfectly ceaſed and concoct, which you may knowe by the ceaſing of the paine, then alſo you may purge him by medicines that prouoke vrine. For after inflammacions concoct, and digeſt, the vrine commeth foorth much in quantitie and groſſe. And in thoſe that haue reſidence, it is good, and ſo iudgeth the beſt altogether. VVhat medicines prouoke vrine, we haue taught in the ſecond booke of making of medicines the ſeuenth chapter, ſpecially among pot herbs, fennel, apium, and parſneps well ſodden, are good. And if by the aforeſaid medicines, the inflammation be not driuen away, and if neither the paine, nor the feuer,
                     Signa ſuppurationis.
                   nor the heauineſſe do reſt by vſing of thaforeſaid things, and alſo if difficultie of piſſing, and often dropping down of the vrine, do vex the patient, theſe betoken matter to be gathered in that part. Therefore as ſwiftly as you can, you muſt help the ſuppuration, and breakinge out of the matter. For the which purpoſe, a ſponge continually wet in water and oyle applied in ſteede of a fomēt profiteth. For the ſame purpoſe alſo vſe cataplaſmes, which are made of barley meale, bran, figges, althaea, and ſuch like, rehearſed before in the Chapter of inflammation of the liuer. Alſo it profiteth greatly to deſcend into a bath made of mollifying herbs, as mallows, althaea lineſeede, fenugreeke. And if after perfect ſuppuration, the rupture and breaking be delayd and taried (which you may know if the feuers and paines wax leſſe,
                     Signa perfectae ſuppurationis.
                   and ſenſe of heauineſſe remaine about the reyne that is affected) miniſter thoſe thinges in drinke, which prouoke vrine, as is, decoction of fennell, peniroyall, origan, and ſuch like. For theſe ſometime do

breake the ſuppuration, and purge out the matter with the vryne. And if the vſing of them do profit nothing, you muſt waſh the bellie with ſharp clyſters: as with roote of wilde cucumber ſodden and alayed, or decoction of garlike or radiſh. You muſt ſteepe thoſe in brine and commix a little oyle, whereby they may be made ſlipperie to be poured in. Theſe muſt be throwen in with a clyſter pipe, and the ſicke muſt be bidden to holde it long time: for they are wont often to breake that ſuppuration, together with that, that they mollifie the bellie. Alſo if the rupture and breaking tarie, commin with wine called paſſum helpeth, and rewe with vinum mulſum.
                  
                     Signa rupturae factae.
                   Moreouer the rupture being made, little peeces af fleſh being long, are ſent out with the vrine. And if the vlcers be malignant, there be ſent out homours ſtinking, ſwart, and ſlimie, but if they be benigne and gentle, the matter that is piſſed forth, is white, equall, light, and without grieuous ſauour, and little in quantitie. After the eruptiō and breaking out of the matter, miniſter milke, with hony, and other things which ſhall be rehearſed in the Chapter of vlcers of the Reynes.
            
            
               CAP XXXVIII. Of the ſtone in the reines. DE CALCVLO RENVM.
               
                  THE ſtone of the Raines happeneth oftener to men of perfect age, then to children.
                     Cauſae.
                   The cauſe of ingendring of ſuch ſtones is continuall cruditie and rawneſſe of the ſtomach, whereby in aboundance of groſſe and earthly humours is heaped vp together, and burning of fierie heate about the reynes, parcheth the humours, and knites them together, and hardeneth them into a ſtone. The ſtones be in the reynes, nigh their ventricles either little or great, and ſometime ſmaller,
                     Differences of 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   ſometime manie, differing among them ſelues in greatneſſe, figure, colour and ſharpneſſe: for they are found blacke, whitiſh and pale. There chaunceth to the ſicke grieuous paine in the raines,
                     Signa.
                   and he feeleth like as it were a bodkinne thruſt in, & yet there appeareth no ſwelling without. He can turne his backe bone hardly. The leg that is right againſt the raine, that is diſeaſed, is aſtonied, there is preſent abhorring of meate and vomitting. About the beginning of obcuration and ſtopping, the vrine is piſſed foorth little in quantitie and waterie. Afterward there followeth perfect ſuppreſſion of the vrine, and the womb auoideth nothing, but it maketh manie proffers to go to the ſtoole. Sometime there is auoided forth bloud, through the violence of the ſtones, ſpecially if they be ſharp ſtones. Alſo the vrine hath grauelly reſidence ſpecially when the ſtone is remoued from the reines, which ſignes aforeſaide Hyppocrates declareth in lib. 6. Epid. par. 1. Aphor. 5. Moreouer things that be light and round, are eaſilie ſent out: but not ſo, if they be of any other forme or faſhion: but ſpecially if they be long and ſharp, they are hard to be ſent out. VVhen the ſtone,
                     Curatio.
                   ſtopped in the raynes, doth cauſe moſt vehement paines, leſt aboundance of bloud through the greatneſſe of the paine ſhould come downe together to the member diſeaſed, in a body that is full of humors and ſtrōg,
                     Veneſectio.
                   you muſt by & by cut the veine in the hāme of that legge that is aſtonied, and is right againſt the reine that is diſeaſed. But if thoſe that labour of ill digeſtion or uitious humours,
                     Purgatio.
                   purging of the abundant humour is good for them. Neither may this caution be omitted, except ſome other thing do forbid them: which alſo Hippocrates biddeth, while he teacheth that young men ſhould be purged with hellebore. And if it be not lawfull to let bloud, nor to miniſter purgation, you muſt waſh the womb by miniſtring of clyſters, which you muſt do at that time ſpeciallie, when there is great plentie of excrements in the bowels. But you muſt onely beware that they be not ſtrong clyſters, & that they do not drawe plenty of humours from other places to the bowels, leſt the paſſages of the vrine ſhould be ſtraightned and preſſed together. But let them be ſuch as are onelie able to auoide the excrements contained in the bowels,
                     Clyſter.
                   as is this Cliſter. ℞. Mallowes, althaea, mercurie, maidenhaire, parietarie. ana. M.j. water creſſes. M.j.ſs. ſeedes of parſley, apium, fennell, and flaxe. ana. ʒ.iij. roote of gladon. ℥.j.ſs. branne. ℥.j. boyle them in iuſt quantitie of water vnto the third part, and then take of the licour of that decoction being

ſtrained. ℥.xj. of caſia fiſtula. ℥.j. of hierapicra. ℥.ſs. mel roſarum ſtrained. ℥.j.ſs. oyles of dill, rewe, and chammomill. ana. ℥.j. ſalt. ʒ.ij. commix them all and make a clyſter.
                     Note.
                   But we may in no caſe vſe continuall cliſters, and neglect almoſt all other remedies, as many phiſitions do now adayes, but vſe them twiſe or thriſe, but ſo that they be not kept aboue theyr accuſtomed time. For if they be holden longer then they ought to be, they cauſe preſſing together, and ſtraightneſſe of the reynes, and the conduites of the vrine. When the belly is purged and emptied of excrements, you muſt miniſter thoſe medicines, which can looſen the condui
                     •
                  s and paſſages. For which purpoſe the region of the reynes, and the loynes muſt be annointed with this medicine. ℞. oyles of dill,
                     Vnguentum.
                   and of ſweete almondes. ana. ʒ.ij. oyle of cammomill. ℥.j.ſs. hennes greaſe, and gooſe greace. ana. ℈.ij. butter without ſale. ʒ.j. wax as much as is ſufficient, make a ſoft oyntment.
                     Inceſſions.
                   Alſo he muſt vſe inceſſions of the decoctions of calamint, origan, water creſſes, cole wortes, leaues of althaea, mallowes and ſuch like, or the ſicke muſt often be let downe into a great veſſell of warme ſweete water. Alſo foments of branne, with leaues of althaea, ſodden, being applied to the grieued place be verie good. Alſo cataplaſmes made of wheate meale, of lineſeede and fenugreeke, of lupines,
                     Cataplaſ
                           ••
                        ta.
                   of the roote of dog fennell beaten verie ſmall, and of cammomill. Alſo it is good to lay bread ſodden in wine called paſſum about the loynes and the bellie. Neither ſhall he do raſhly which applieth cataplaſmes, and other things before rehearſed to the bladder and the ſhare. But you muſt bring on heapes one plaiſter after another, before the firſt do coole. For cold doth draw together and bind, and ſo doth hold ſtill the ſtone in the raines, and in the conduites of the vrine. And if you liſt not to vſe ſo many cataplaſmes, you may couer it with ſome heating thing vpon it that it coole not. For theſe ſometimes, and that not ſeldome, are wont to ſuffiſe for to caſt out the ſtone by the vrine. And if theſe driue not away the diſeaſe, you muſt miniſter in drinke thoſe thinges, which prouoke vrine. Theſe that follow drawe much vrine: gladon, S. Iohns wort, parſley, orcoſelinum, grommell, ammi, ſeede of daucus and fennell, aſarum, roote of briony and mather, barke of the roote of capares, ſperage & ſuch like. With theſe commix thoſe things that bring downe vrine vnto the Reines: as is roote of pē
                  cedane, or dog fennell, briony, apium and raedicula. Alſo commixe with them thoſe thinges that breake and teare the ſtone in the reines, as is, ſium, maidenhaire, bdellium, 
                  
                     •
                  utſan feede, bruſcus roote, ſaxifrage, betonie, roote of damoſonium, broth of cicers, roote of Cypreſſe, gromell, lapis indiacus, xanthium, the ſeede and roote of althaea, gumme of plomb tree, earth wormes ſodden, and ſtones and ſponges of the ſea. Euerie one of theſe part of them ſodden and part of them verie finely poudred, miniſter them to drink. But it is beſt to miniſter thoſe things which prouoke vrine and breake the ſtone, at that time, when the vehement paines be releaſed: which chaunceth when the ſtone is remoued, and ſtirred out of his place. But if the ſtones be eſtabliſhed faſt, and be vehemently compact in the Reines, he muſt eſchewe much drink, and alſo thoſe things that prouoke vrine. For ſeing they bring with thē to the raines a great abundance of excrements, they cauſe the paſſages of the vrine to be ſtopped, and letteth the paſſing of the ſtones out of the raines. You muſt releaſe and loſen the rains, and the conduites of the vrine, with foments, cataplaſmes and inceſſions, as is aforeſaide. Alſo the belly muſt be voided with light clyſters, leſt the paſſages of the vrine be ſtopped. After that the paine is a little releaſed▪ you may alſo apply profitaby to them a cuppinge glaſſe, ſpecially ſubtilly faſtened to, if inflammation do not let it: for often times cuppinge glaſſes do ſo remoue on heaps thoſe ſtones, that they ceaſe the paines by and by (that is) the ſtones being caried into the amplitude of the bladder. VVherefore in the beginning faſten a cupping glaſſe aboue from the reine, and then to the part about the priuie members, ouer thwartly according to the placinge of the conduites of the vrine. Moreouer ſtones being brought from the raines to the bladder, and for their greatneſſe being holden ſtill about the necke of the bladder; they do often bring the ſicke into extraeme perill, as well thorough their pricking paine, as alſo becauſe they will not ſuffer the vrine to come out. You muſt go about to let the ſicke lye in ſuch a faſhion, that he may lye vpright, and haue the 
                     •
                  oyntes of his 
                     ••
                  ickle bones lye verie high. Then you muſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   them manie wayes, that by all the meanes, that you can inuent, you may make the ſtone to fall out of the paſſage of the bladder. Afterward you muſt bidde the ſicke to put out the vrine quickly▪ but when the ſtone is

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
bloud or atter be piſſed out, it ſignifieth exulceration either of the reynes, or of the bladder. And by & by after he ſaith, if in a groſſe and thicke vrine, there appeare little peeces of fleſh, or as it were haires,
                     Diet.
                   they are ſent from the reynes. Therefore when theſe appeare, let the ſicke eſchewe crudities, and ſacietie or fulneſſe. Therefore let him eate no raw things in his meates, neither that which is hard of digeſtion, or that will eaſily corrupt, or ingender inflammations or windineſſe. Let him chiefly abſtaine from thoſe thinges, which do ſoone waxe ſoure or ſharp. Alſo from all ſharp and burning things, and whatſoeuer doth breede and ingender choler: as is, much thirſt, abſtinence, hunger, labour, wrath, ſolitarineſſe, exerciſe, watching, & immoderate ſauces. He muſt eſchew aboue all things immoderate riding, and all vehement mouing and ſtirring: alſo he muſt auoid perpetuall idleneſſe, and continuall bathing. He muſt vſe new bread well wrought. And giue him fleſh of birdes of the mountaines, and kids fleſh, and ſuch like tender fleſh. Alſo giue him ſcalie fiſhes of grauelly places, roſted on a grediron. Moreouer riuer crabs, ſoupings of Ptyſan and amylum ſodden with milke, be maruelous good. Giue him alſo milke mixed with egges, and the fat broth of an henne. Alſo rere egges miniſtred alone, are good. Of pot herbes, mallowes, endiue, ſorrell, purſlaine, and lettuce are good: but all theſe muſt be ſodden, for the ſicke muſt eate nothing that is rawe, as is aforeſaid. Of fruicts, raiſons are not hurtfull, and pine nuttes. Alſo almondes well blaunched are good. Much drinke & ſtrong muſt be eſchewed. And he muſt altogether abſtaine from cold drinke. For cold, as Hyppocrates ſayth, 5. Aph. 20. is an enemie to vlcers. For his drinke let him vſe wine that is alayed, and ſomewhat reſtrictiue: or let him drinke goates milke, or ſheepes milke, or almond milke. Carnall copulation is maruelous euill not onely for vlcers, but alſo for all other diſeaſes of the reynes, ſpecially in old men, and in them that be weake of nature. Such things muſt be eſchewed, as do prouoke vrine. Alſo bathing let be ſeeldome vſed, as is aforeſaid. It is not vnprofitable to vſe natural Bathes, and waters ſpronge of them-ſelues, and ſpeciallie allome waters, and brimſtone waters, for it is commodious to waſhe cold places: It deſtroieth vlcers that be hard to cure, as well outwardly as alſo inwardly. Alſo naturall waters dronke after the morning walke are good.
                     Curatio.
                   The cure of vlcers of the reyns, whē as they are cauſed through ſharp & gnawing humors, muſt be begun of purging of vitious and gnawing humours. They that are thus affected,
                     V
                           ••
                        i
                           •
                        e.
                   you muſt alſo purge them by vomite. For vomit is not good onely for to auoide vicious humours, but alſo if any man do vomite boldly euerie moneth, he ſhall diſſolue the vlcer of the reines, and what euill ſoeuer may chaunce there: for it turneth the mouing of the humours into a contrary part.
                     Medicines ſtopping gnawing of humours.
                   Alſo in the meane ſeaſon you muſt miniſter medicines which do ſtop the gnawing of the ſharp humours, as is, mallowes, endiue, ſorrell, purſlaine, ſeede of melons, cucumbers, and gourdes, ſyrupes of violets, roſes, and water lillies, and the conſerues of them.
                     Purging of the vlcers.
                   But when the vicious humours be purged, he muſt drinke aqua mulſa, or the decoction of fenugreeke with honie, or of cucumbers, or of mallowes, or of melons ſeede with hydromell. Alſo miniſter milke with honie newly milked, and hote, for it is good to purge the vlcers. Alſo goates whey, decoction of barley, of rayſons, and of licorice, is maruelous good, alſo the iuyce is likewiſe. When that the vlcers be purged and cleanſed: which you may knowe, if there appeare in the vrine, neither peeces of the couer of the vlcer, nor yet dreggie and filthie atter, but matter that is whitiſh, light, equall and little in quantitie: then miniſter ſuch medicines, as do drie vp and conglutinate. For which purpoſe giue him Bole armoniacke,
                     Gl
                           ••
                        i
                           •
                        ati
                           •
                        et. Pul
                           •
                        is.
                   gumme, tragacanth, amylum, terra lemnia, and ſuch like before rehearſed. But among other thinges, this powder a maruelous good. ℞. Terrae lemniae, bole armoniacke. ana. j.ſs. Tragacanthae, ſpodium burnt. ana. ʒ.j. amylum, pine nuttes toaſted. ana. ʒ.ſs. lineſeede, cucumber ſeede blaunched, melons ſeede. ana. ʒ.ij. ſeede of Apium. ℈.ij. dragons bloud. ʒ.j. beate them altogether, & make a verie fine pouder, of the which giue the ſicke dayly. ʒ.ij. with milke newe milked.
                     To drie and ſtrength the reines.
                   Moreouer outwardly you muſt applie ſuch thinges as can drie and ſtrength the reynes. Therefore miniſter emplaiſters and cerotes, or oyntmentes made of the oyles of roſes, and of mirtles, of barley meale, frankenſence, maſticke, red roſes and ſuch like. Examples whereof you may ſeeke before. As for other remedies, we will rehearſe hereafter in the chapter of vlcers of the bladder.
            
            
               
               CAP. XLI. Of the stone in the bladder.
               
                  STONES in the bladder do ingender oftenner in children, then in older folke.
                     Calculum veſicae. Cauſae.
                   When that vrine groſſe and verie thicke is caried into the largeneſſe of the bladder, it ſetleth and ſtayeth there, like dregs of wine, or muddy water, and afterward through the heate, that is in children, being dried and compact together, it breedeth a ſtone. Therfore there be two ſpecial cauſes of the ingendring of the ſtone in the bladder (that is) thickneſſe of the vrine, and heate of children. They that haue the ſtone in the bladder, they itch often,
                     Signa.
                   and do handle his priuie members, which alſo are ſwollen, and they are conſtrained to make water continually, and they are vexed with the ſtrangury, or dropping out of vrine.
                     Curatio.
                   The cure of this diſeaſe is almoſt the ſame, that the cure of the ſtone in the reynes is. But they differ in this thing, becauſe the ſtones of the bladder require ſtronger medicines, and you muſt apply the medicines in another place then you did in the cure of the reynes. The ſtones that are ingendred in the bladder, are broken chiefly with theſe medicines (that is) the ſeede & roote of fennell, of louage,
                     To breake the ſtone in the bladder.
                   black piony ſeeds, motherwort, chammomill, the roote and ſeede of althaea, ſium, maydenhaire, ſorrell rootes, the ſtones of ſponges, the ſtone of tecolithus, grommell, bruſcus roote & ſeede, the ſtones, which come out of men (with their vrine) brayed & drunk, the ſeed of little burs, the bark of capers, ſothern wood ſeede, iacint, white violets, ſmalach, parſley and other ſuch like, which do prouoke vrine, and which be rehearſed in the chapter of the ſtone in the reines. To theſe you muſt conioyne the moſt laudable remedie (that is) a hedge ſparow being dreſſed in ſalt, & taken raw in meate, doth heale the diſeaſe perfectly. For it expelleth the ſtones that are alreadie ingendred by the vrine, and it letteth them from ingendring any more. Alſo goats bloud is a preſent remedie, aſwel for the ſtone of the reines, as of the bladder: for it diſſolueth thoſe that be engēdred, and it driueth them out with the vrine, & it prohibiteth other to ingender any more, and it ceaſeth paine. Furthermore if the ſtones of the bladder cannot come out by the paſſage of the vrine, but that they be there ſtopped, & compact togither, & ſo do cauſe ſuppreſſion of vrine: then the ſicke muſt be vpward, ſo that his hippes muſt lye vpward and higheſt, and then you muſt moue him hither and thither many wayes, that thereby the ſtone may fall out of the paſſage, and afterward bid him piſſe euen as he lyeth yet vpward. But if he can not make water ſo neither, prouoke the vrine by a cyring, and after that you muſt miniſter thoſe medicins, which haue vertue to breake the ſtone in the bladder. And if the cure come not to paſſe by this meanes, you muſt come to cutting. The ſtone therefore being conſumed by any of the meanes aforeſaid, ſuch an order of diet muſt be appointed to the patient, that the ſtone may not engender againe, which we haue preſcribed in the Chapter of the ſtone in the reynes.
            
            
               CAP. XLII. Of bloud broken out of the bladder or curded in it.
               
                  IT chaunceth ſomtime that a veine breaketh in the bladder,
                     Cauſae.
                   & then ſome of the bloud is ſent out, & ſome waxeth thick and curdeth within. When the bloud is thickened and curded within, the patientes heart fayleth him,
                     Signa.
                   and he waxeth pale, his pulſes be ſmall, darke, and thicke, he is ſorowfull, he is colde, and his ſtrength decayeth. And ſometime when a clodde of bloud, chaunceth to fall into the paſſage of the vrine, thē it ſtoppeth the going out of the vrine. You muſt in this caſe, as alſo in other bruſtinges out of bloud, cauſe a verie quicke and ſpeedie remedie.
                     Curatio.
                   Therefore if nothing forbid it, it is good to cut the veine in the arme, drawing out the bloud by times, that by this meanes the bloud may be drawen back often, and by little & little. Let the pacient in his lying be laid vpward, and let his hips be lifted vp, & applie ſponges dipped in poſca (that is) water & vineger ſodden togither to coole him. Alſo the extreme parts muſt be bound, & the ſhare muſt be couered with ſpōges dipped in poſca. If the euil increaſe cupping glaſſes faſtened to the ilions, & to the loynes profit much. After irrigaciōs with the

ſponges dipped in poſca, you muſt vſe cataplaſmes of knot graſſe, brambles, plantaine and pomegranate floures. Alſo vſe Cerotes made of hypociſchis, acatia, bole armoniack and ſuch like rehearſed before in the Chapters of ſpitting of bloud, and of the fluxe dyſenteria. You muſt poure into the bladder iuice of knot graſſe, plantaine, or millefolie, commixing with it acatia, bole annoniacke, trochiſkes of spodium and ſuch like. Alſo inceſſions of ſuch like things are good. For both Poſca and decoction of Lentiſcus, and alſo of brambles and ſuch like,
                     To bring out bloud.
                   are good. Alſo you muſt miniſter in drink, medicines apt to bring out bloud, as be rhaponticum finely beaten, and 12. red ſeedes of pionie, terra lemnia, horſe taile, the roote of centory the great,
                     To diſſol
                           •
                        e curded bloud.
                   the bark of frankenſence & ſuch like. But in them that bloud is congealed & curde
                     •
                   in the bladder, firſt you muſt go about to diſſolue & diſperſe that bloud with conuenient medicines. Therfore you muſt miniſter in drink, motherwort, ſtichados, citrine, wormwood, ſothernwood, ſhauing of a vine, radiſh ſeede, hares or goats creme, ech of thē with oxymell. Alſo oximell miniſtred by it ſelfe doth profit maruelouſlie, for it diſſolueth the curds, that afterward they may come forth by little & little, with the vrine. Apply outwardly bathes, ointments, irrigations, and other things that haue vertue to looſen & releaſe, which you muſt ſeeke out of the chapter of the ſtone in the reynes.
                     Ceratum.
                   Aboue other things this cerote is verie good. ℞. of the oyles of roſes and chammomill. ana. ℥.j.ſs. calamint, comin, leaues of elder. ana. ʒ.iij. bitumen iudaicum, gumme ammoniak. ana. ʒ.ij. hares creame. ʒ.iij. ſothernwood, meale of fenugreeke. ana. ℥.ſs. ſpermacety. ʒ.j. with roſen and wax as much as is ſufficient, make a cerote to apply to the ſhare. And if you profit nothing by doing thus, but the vrine is ſtil ſtopped, you muſt of neceſſitie vſe a ciring: by the which when you haue brought out the vrine, you muſt againe miniſter the things aforeſaid in drinke, & apply thoſe things outwardly, which do diſſolue congealed bloud. And if the cloddes of bloud will not yet be diſſolued, you muſt come to the cutting of it, likewiſe as you did in the ſtone of the bladder.
            
            
               CAP. XLIII. Of inflammatian of the bladder.
               
                  
                     Inflammatio veſ
                           ••
                        ae.
                  
                  OF diſeaſes that be in the bladder, and ingender there, the moſt grieuouſe and deadly is the inflammation therof. The ſicke hath theſe tokens following. They are vexed with a ſharp feuer, they watch, they raue, and ſpeake they wotte not what:
                     Signa.
                   they vomit pure choler, and they cannot make water. The ſhare becommeth hard and hath vehement paine, they haue deſire to the ſtoole, as is wont in the diſeaſe called Tenaſmus. The ordure that commeth foorth is thinne & hath no reſidence. Alſo ſometime inflations follow, and the womb is coſtiue the right gut being preſſed together of the inflammation of the bladder.
                     Curatio.
                   To them that haue this diſeaſe, if nothing let it cut the veine of the hamme without any tarying, or draw bloud of the ankles. Alſo miniſter to him a thinne kind of diet,
                     Diet.
                   as is preſcribed in other inflammations. He muſt alſo abſtaine from wine, & he muſt vſe water, wherein a little cinnamon hath bene ſodden. Outwardly you muſt applie thoſe things, that haue power to ceaſe and mitigate paine. Therefore the place of the bladder muſt be nouriſhed with oyle wherein hath bene ſodden dill, lineſeede, and ſometime rewe and althaea. Medicines that be cold and reſtrictiue muſt altogether be forborn: and that chiefly becauſe the bladder is full of ſinews. For cold as Hyppocrates witneſſeth 5. Aphoriſ. 28 is an enemy to ſinewes. Moreouer becauſe cold things do ſhut vp & bind, & ſo do ſtop the vrine (which thing chauncing in this euill by it ſelfe) it increaſeth it. And laſt of all becauſe cold things do prohibit and let that the humours cauſing inflammation, may be diſſolued, conſumed & digeſted. Therefore medicines meanely hote are rather to be applied, which haue vertue to ceaſe paine, to loſen the pipe and paſſage of the vrine, and to diſſolue the inflammation. Alſo let the guts be waſhed with ſoft & eaſie cliſters, and after the dong is comfoorth,
                     Clyſter.
                   caſt in oyle of dill, or ſuch like thing to eaſe and ceaſe the paine. It is good to ſeeth poppie ſhelles, together with oyle, and to poure in gooſe greace, or freſh henns greace ſodden together in the ſame oyle. In moſt vehement paine you muſt poure in ʒ.j. of pilles of houndes tong diſſolued in oyle of dill: or take opium with mirrhe & ſaffron, & annoint it vpon

woll, & put it vp into the fundament. Alſo let the ſicke ſit in the decoction of lineſeede, fenugreeke, roote of altheae, dancus ſeede, and ſuch like, and bid the ſicke piſſe as he ſitteth in the water of the decoction. For the bladder is not ſtrong enough to receaue & expell out the vrine: therefore the patient or ſome that be about him, muſt thruſt and preſſe the ſhare eaſilie and ſoftly, and that muſt not be done out of meaſure, leſt that paine ſhould be augmented thereby. Alſo after clyſters and inceſſions vſe foments by hote water,
                     Fomenta. Sacculi.
                   and apply oyle in oxe bladders, or other veſſels, halfefull, or little bagges as is ſhewed in the chapter of the pluriſie. And if for all theſe thinges, the euill ceaſe not, faſten a cupping glaſſe with ſcarification to the grieued places. Moreouer he muſt abſtaine from thoſe thinges which prouoke vrine vehemently, and he muſt eſchewe much drinke, when there appeareth euident declination of the diſeaſe, you muſt come to the vſe of thoſe thinges that haue vertue to diſſolue and mollifie, whereof we haue ſpoken often before.
                     Catheter.
                   The putting in of a Cyring into him that is diſeaſed with inflammation of the bladder is not eaſie to vſe & ſpecially in men: for ſeing it can not be put into them without paine, it ſharpeneth the paine and increaſeth the inflammation: but in women it is no great hurt to vſe it. For the paſſage of the vrine in them is ſhort and ſtraight, ſo that they may ſuffer the doing of it without paine. But if the perill through the ſtopping of vrine do verie much conſtraine you, then you muſt of neceſſitie vſe a ciring in men alſo: not becauſe it taketh away the anguiſh of the diſeaſe, but rather becauſe it ſhould amende the great ſuppreſſion of vrine, and deliuer the patient from deadlie perill. After that you haue entiſed out the vrine, you muſt come againe to the remedies which do ceaſe paine, vntill the inflammation be diſſolued and rotted. Oftentimes the inflammation is wont to be diſſolued by and by thorough the meanes of an Eriſipela, riſing outwardly vppon the ſkinne, and remayning there, and not returning againe inwarde. Yea and oftentimes much vrine being caſt out, doeth iudge the euill. Yet neuertheleſſe although theſe things appeare, you muſt ſtill vſe the remedies aforeſaid: in as much as for the moſt part, perfect tenſion and ſtretching out being riſen, continuall exacerbations and fittes are cauſed, and long conſtitution of the euill. But when the perillous fittes are ceaſed, and the conſtitution of the diſeaſe is nowe waxen olde, you muſt come to the vſing of ointments, which do call out and bring foorth the humours from within: and likewiſe emplaiſters, which do rubifie and bliſter the ſkin, are to be applied which you may find after.
            
            
               CAP. XLIIII. Of vlcers of the bladder and his necke.
               
                  THE bladder is exulcerate either thorough ſome bile, or botch, or ſwelling,
                     Vlcera veficae
                   which hath bene before, or through ſome rupture, or by eating, and gnawing of a fluxe, or through ſome ſuch like cauſe. There followeth this ſickneſſe ſharp paine of the bladder, at all times piſſing and auoiding out matter.
                     Signa.
                   And when the vlcers be foule and filthy, there commeth foorth dreggie and ſlimie matter, and ſuch as hath a groſſe reſidence like branne. And ſometime thinne ſkinnes like leaues, and woll are ſent out with the vrine. If the vlcers do ſpreade abroade and feede deepe, there is ſent out vrine that is bloudie, atterie and ſtinking. To theſe ſignes may be added, difficulty of making water, and riſing vp of the yarde. There is paine not onely, when the paſſage of the vrine is exulcerate, but alſo when the exulceratiō is in the bottom or depth. You may knowe whether the exulceration be in the bottome of the bladder, or nigh the pipe and paſſage of the vrine by this: for if it be in the depth of the bladder, there followeth paine about the ſhare: but if the vlcers be nigh the necke of the bladder, there is paine felt onely at ſuch time, as he maketh water, and ſpecially at the beginning and ending of his piſſing: & alſo his paine is the greater if the vrine be ſharp. They that are vexed with this euill, they either ſit continually, or they can not ſtand vpright, nor reſt lying along, & thorough great and continuall paine they are killed with feuers,
                     VVhy the vlcers of the bladder be incurable.
                   watchings, and conſumings, ſome ſooner and ſome later. But the vlcers of the bladder be incurarable, or at the leaſt wayes very harde to cure: as well becauſe the bladder is ſmowie, as

alſo becauſe the vrine which is of nature ſharp doth cōtinually touch the vlcers, & ſo gnaweth them: and will not ſuffer them to conglutinate and ioyne together. For although much vrine be ſent out, yet all the bladder can not be cleane emptied, but alwayes ſome of the vrine is left in it, which doth continually touch the vlcers▪ Yea when the abundance of vrine is ſent out, then the bladder ſhrinketh vp and falleth together, ſo that the vrine that is left in it, although it be verie little, yet it toucheth euery part therof. But ſeing that oftentims ſome thinges chaunce beſides our expectation, you ſhall go about the cure, by the which, if you bring nothing elſe to paſſe,
                     Curatio.
                   yet you ſhall deminiſh the paines of the fits. Firſt therefore, you muſt perſwade the patient to ly down and to reſt in his bed: and that ſpecially, when that he hath a feuer. Then you muſt miniſter remedies for intermitting feuers. The chiefe thing in this caſe hath bene drinking of milke, and this is to be compared aboue all other medicines. For it maketh ſmooth roughneſſe, and waſheth vlcerations, and ſcoureth the euill. Let the reſt of his diet be ſuch, as that is, which is miniſtred in the exulceration of the reynes. Alſo you muſt comfort the ſicke by medicines, that will let the ingendring of ſharp vrine, which doth gnaw & fret the vlcers. And if there be inflāmation with the exulceration, cataplaſmes of lineſeede, and fenugreeke, and other things, which are rehearſed before in the chapter of inflammation of the bladder, are apt and meete to be applied. Moreouer, if the exulceration do ſpreade broder & eate depe, you muſt apply outwardly medicines ſomewhat reſtrictiue, and that ſuch as be hote whē they are applied, that by their heate they might help the painfull places round about by mollifying them, & that through their vertue, they may prohibite the places nigh adioyning to feede and eate.
                     Reſtrictiue medicines.
                   Reſtrictiue medicines be theſe: galles, pomegranate rinds, alome, acatia, hypociſchis, and ſuch like often rehearſed of vs before. Alſo you muſt vſe to miniſter to them, medicines caſt in with a cyring. You muſt caſt into the exulcerate places, milk newly milked, or verie good oyle of roſes warme. And if none of theſe be at hād, you muſt caſt in continually moſt ſweete water warmed: ſpecially at ſuch time as the gnawing is preſent. Alſo you muſt driue in by the fundament the iuice of Ptyſan, or the decoction of lineſeede,
                     Note.
                   cucumber ſeede huſked, fenugreeke, mallowes, or milke with oyle of roſes. Moreouer when thou wilt miniſter a cliſter to him which is diſeaſed in the bladder, he may not ly vpward, for the bladder then will not ſuffer the infuſion to enter in, becauſe it lyeth vpon the ſtreight bowell: but the patient muſt lye groueling vppon his knees, and ſo you muſt caſt in your infuſion. Alſo let the ſicke ſitte often in hoate water, and in diſſoluing decoctions, for theſe do ceaſe paine ſomwhat. And when the vlcers do ſpreade abrode and feede, you muſt caſt into the bladder by a Cyring ſuch thinges as can ſtoppe the feeding: as be acatia, hypociſchis, terra lemnia, bole armoniacke and other rehearſed a little before. But if the vlcers be foule and filthie, you muſt poure in medicines, which haue vertue to ſcoure and cleanſe them, as is mulſa much watered, or milcke with a little honie, or with the ſeede of Cucumbers cleanſed. But if there followe ſharpneſſe and gnawing, caſt in milcke newlye milked, mixed with good amylum, or Tuttie waſhed and dryed with manie waters, and then mixed with the milcke. When the vlcers be ſcoured and purged cleane, you muſt procure to bring them to a ſcarre, and to heale them. And that muſt be done by reſtrictiue inceſſions, and by emplaiſters, fomentes, and irrigations, that be of like facultie and vertue. But if the exulceration doe endure long time, as it chaunceth for the moſt parte, then the pacient hath exacerbations and fittes ſometime and intermiſſion and ſpace from them at other times. Therefore in the painefull fittes applye emplaiſters and irrigations, hauinge power to ceaſe and eaſe the paine, and in the time of the intermiſſion betweene the fittes, vſe ſuch thinges as haue vertue to deſtroy the euill. Therefore applie to the ſhare, Synapiſmes, and ſuch thinges as will rubifie and bliſter. And let the ſicke vſe a diet that is good to reſtore ſtrength. And if the euill doeth not waxe gentler, you muſt make burnt ſcurfes about the ſhare, either by medicines or with iron, and to ſuffer the vlcers to purge and cleanſe them ſelues long time with matter flowinge out.
                     To ceaſe paine.
                   You may alſo miniſter medicines to ceaſe paine in drincke, if vehement paines vexe him. For this purpoſe aboue other thinges, which we haue rehearſed in other places, the pills of Alkakengi with opium are good. Alſo theſe things following do much mitigate the paines of exulceration (that is) cucumberſeede, mallowes, white poppie, tragacanthe,

amylum, pine nuttes and almondes. Therefore this medicine may be miniſtred. ℞. conſerue of violets. ℥.iij. ſeede of mallowes. ʒ.ij. of the foure great colde ſeedes. ana. ʒ.j. liquorace ſcraped. ʒ.j.ſs. gumme. ℈.ij. bole armoniake. ʒ.ſs. trochiſkes of terra lemnia. 
                  ʒ.j. make them vp altogether with ſyrupe of liquorice. Miniſter of it dayly in the morning the quantitie of an haſell nut. Moreouer you muſt throwe into the bladder medicines that can ceaſe paine, and heale the exulceration.
            
            
               CAP. XLV. Of the strangurie. DE STILLICIDIO VRINAE.
               
                  STRANGVRIA in greeke, ſtillicidium vrinae in Latine, is a diſeaſe wheras the vrine diſtilleth downe by drops,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   or by little and little and cauſeth a continuall prouoking and deſire to piſſe. This diſeaſe is cauſed through the ſharpneſſe of the vrine, or by exulceration of the bladder,
                     Cauſae.
                   or by an impoſtume of the liuer, or the reynes, which being broken and ſending the filth and atter to the bladder, through the ſharpneſſe thereof, it cauſeth continuall deſire to piſſe. You ſhall iudge that ſharpneſſe is the cauſe, if his vrines be cholericke,
                     Signae.
                   and alſo all the ſtate of the bodie, if the reſt of the ſignes betoken choller, and that gnawings do chaunce about the bladder. You may know the exulceration of the bladder, as alſo an impoſtume or bile of the liuer and the reynes, by the ſignes afore rehearſed in their owne proper chapters.
                     Curatio.
                   If therfore the ſtrangurie be cauſed through ſharpnes of the vrine, then you muſt purge the vicious and naughty humour, that doth abound, with all ſpede. For the which purpoſe, beſides thoſe thinges which are often ſpoken of before, whey with caſia fiſtula, is maruelouſe good, or ſome other medicine that bringeth out choler. The cholerik humour being auoided & purged, the patient muſt vſe meats that be temperate, and that can ſtop the ſharpnes: as is,
                     Victus ratio.
                   iuyce of ptiſan, mallowes, purſlaine, violets, cucumber ſeede and ſuch like. He muſt abſtaine from all things that be ſharp or ſalt. Alſo let him eſchew wine, exerciſes, wrath, and ſlow eating: for all theſe things do heape vp choler in the bodie. Let them vſe ſtony fiſhes, and bathes of ſweete water, which is wont to make temperate vicious humours maruelouſly. In drink you muſt miniſter much ſweete water hote, or the decoction of barley with ſyrupe of violets, & roſes. But you may not giue him wine, as is ſaid, except it be ſweete and alayed with water. Alſo milk drunk hote, is the beſt thing that can be. To conclude for the order of his diet, he muſt vſe meates that do moiſten, and brothes that do make the womb ſoluble. But the ſicke muſt be compelled to piſſe continually: for if the ſharp dregs do tarie long in the bladder, it gnaweth and exulcerateth it. Alſo to ſtop the ſharpneſſe of the humours, miniſter the medicine which we haue deſcribed in the end of the former chapter. For the ſame purpoſe miniſter decoction of licorice, or this pouder following. ℞. of the ſeedes of melons huſked,
                     Puluis.
                   citrons, and cucumbers. ana. ʒ.iij. ſeedes of gourds, purſlaine, and lettuſe. ana. ʒ.ij. of red roſes. ʒ.j. iuice of licorice & of maſt. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. beate them all and make a fine pouder: whereof giue dayly the weight of ʒ.j.ſs. in the morning with ſyrupe of licorice, or inleps of violets or roſes. Alſo venice turpentine waſhed in roſewater or endiue water,
                     Terebinthina veſ
                           •••
                        .
                   & miniſter the quantitie of a nut, or ſometime two or three is maruelous good for this (as Galen witneſſeth. lib. 5. detuenda ſanitate) doth not only looſen the bellie without hurt, & ſo by that meanes, turneth away the ſharp humours from the paſſages of the vrine: but alſo it ſcoureth & clenſeth the inwarde partes, and ſpecially the reines. And there hath bin ſome, that haue recouered health onely by the vſe of this. Alſo cliſters made of the decoction of mallowes, violettes, althaea, leaues of willowe, water lillies, and other afore rehearſed, putting to thē 
                  caſia fiſtula, ſuger,
                     Clyſter.
                   and oyle of violets, and roſes do profit much. But if the ſharpneſſe do ſtil increaſe, you muſt alſo caſt in by the yarde into the bladder milke with amylum. Alſo for the ſame purpoſe you may caſt in the decoction of white poppie, and you muſt annoynt outwardly vppon the ſhare, and there aboutes oyles of violettes, and water lillyes, puttinge to them a verie little of the iuyce of purſlaine. But if the Strangurie doeth chaunce through exulceration

of the bladder, or thorough ſome other part of the bodie being euill affected, and ſo purging it ſelfe out by the vrine, then it is manifeſt that thoſe members ought firſt to be cured, but yet ſo that this preſent euill be not neglected. The cures of euerie part you may ſeeke out of their proper places and chapters.
            
            
               CAP. XLVI. Of difficultie of piſsing. DE DIFFICVLTATE VRINAE.
               
                  DISVRIA in Greeke, vrinae difficultas, it is a diſeaſe wherein the vrine is piſſed hardly and difficultly.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed through weakeneſſe of the bladder, and through cold diſtempure of it which hurteth his actions. Alſo ſometime it is cauſed of groſſe and fleugmatike humours which ſtop the necke of the bladder.
                     Signa.
                   You may know colde diſtempure if it come of an outward cauſe, by the patients telling, and by the thinneſſe and whiteneſſe of the vrine. But if beſides the whiteneſſe there appeare groſneſſe in the vrine, you may iudge it a fleugmatike humour, which hath ſtopped the neck of the bladder,
                     Cure of a colde diſtempure.
                   as is aforeſaid. Cold diſtēpure is cured by thoſe things that do heate. Therefore be muſt vſe heating meates, & wine that is hote and condite. Alſo he muſt vſe medicines which prouoke vrine, as are parſneps well ſodden, fennel, apium, ſperage, ſmalach and ſuch like. Alſo crabs and hedgehogges do prouoke vrine very well. You muſt dry their fleſh and miniſter the weight of one ʒ. in drink. Alſo miniſter in drinke the decoctions of aromatique things, or electuaries made of them, and ſo named of them. Aboue other things the antidotes of diacalaminthes, dialactia, and diacurcuma, are verie good. Alſo triacle giuen in drinke is maruelous good. You muſt nouriſh the ſhare without, with hote oyles, as is, oyles of rewe, dill, lillies, ſcorpions, and of caſtoreum. Alſo you muſt applie foments,
                     Foment
                           •
                        .
                   and little bags made of chammomill, ſothernwood, betony, mugwort, rewe, calamint, ſaucin and ſuch like herbs. The ſicke muſt ſit in the decoction of the aforeſaid herbes, and couer and make hote the bottome of the belly. Alſo ſometime it profiteth to caſt in the decoction of the ſaide herbes mixed with hoate oyles into the foundament. If a colde and fleugmatike humour do cauſe difficulty of piſſing,
                     Cure of a fleugmati
                           •
                        ke humor that ſtoppeth.
                   then the patient muſt vſe oxymell, and decoctions of hyſope, penyroall, origan, time, & ſuch like often before rehearſed. Alſo let them vſe foments, irrigations, & little bags made of hote things, wherof we ſpake a litle before, & in the former chapters. Moreouer whether a groſſe humour or the ſtone, or a clod of bloud, or any other thing of that kinde through ſtopping do let the paſſage of the vrine, it is good to put in a Cyring, vnleſſe inflāmation of the members do let it, which alſo we haue ad moniſhed before.
            
            
               CAP. XLVII. Of stopping of the vrine. DE SVPPRESSIONE ƲRINAE.
               
                  ISCVRIA in greeke, ſuppreſſio vrine in Latin, it is a diſeaſe, in the which the vrine of the pacient is altogether letted & ſtopped.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Cauſae.
                   This diſeaſe is cauſed ſomtime through weaknes of the bladder, not being able to thruſt out that which is contained in it. Alſo ſometime it chaunceth through ſtopping of the nether paſſage of the bladder, or of groſſe humours, or of a ſtone congealed. Alſo it is wont to come either of an inflammation, or of hardneſſe, or ſome ſwelling againſt nature, which maketh the paſſages ſtraighter, or ſtoppeth it altogether. Alſo ſometime it cometh by a little peece of fleſh, or a hard knob ingendred in the paſſage of the vrine. Alſo bloud congealed into cloddes in the bladder, is cauſe of the ſuppreſſion and ſtopping of vrine. Alſo atter ſent down to the bladder frō the reines, or the liuer, or from ſome other vpper part, cauſeth ſtopping of the vrine, euen like as a groſſe & clammie humour doth. Alſo it chaunceth ſometime, that through the dull ſenſe of the bladder, that the vrine is not made, and yet

it is without hurt of the vertue expulſiue, when as his proper ſynowes be euill affected: ſo in haile folke when the vrine is holden long time, the bladder is ſtretched out, and the vrine is ſtopped. If ſtopping of the vrine be cauſed through weakenes of the bladder,
                     Signa.
                   it is knowne by thoſe ſignes which declare the cold diſtempure of the bladder. If it be cauſed of groſſe humours, it is knowen by the diet that went before. As if one that liueth idlely, hath vſed much meates which do engender groſſe and clammie humours. If it be cauſed of the ſtone, you may knowe it by the ſignes which are rehearſed before in the chapter of the ſtone. If it be cauſed of inflammation or of any other ſwelling, it is knowen by paine by feauer and by ſight. When ſuppreſſion of the vrine is cauſed through ſome peece of fleſhe, or ſome knobbe, it may be knowne by the ſignes of vlcers aforeſaide: and alſo becauſe that a cyring being put in, the vrine commetn out. Alſo a cyring being put into that part of the conduite or paſſage, where you coniectured the byle to be before, it moueth paine, and the fleſh being broken with the cyring, there followeth out with the piſſinge of the vrine, both blood and fragments of fleſh. If clodded blood cauſe ſtopping of the vrine, there went before it excretion and piſſing of blood, or fluxe thereof. When as attre hath ſtopped the vrine, you may know it by things that chaunce before: for either the bladder or the reynes laboured of ſome euill before, whereby ſuch, & ſo much atter might gather: or there hath bene an impoſtume in ſome member aboue the reines, which being broken the attre is ſent downe into the reines, and ſo into the bladder: the reſt of the cauſes may be knowen by the patientes telling.
                     Curatio. Cure if it be of weakenes of the bladder
                   The cure is diuerſe according to the diuerſitie of cauſes. For if the ſtopping of vrine be cauſed through imbecillitie and weakenes of the bladder, you muſt miniſter and apply thoſe thinges which doe heate, as is ſaide in the former chapter. For you muſt altogeather remoue cold diſtempure, which letteth the actions of the bladder. If the withholding of vrine be engendred of groſſe and clammie humours, he muſt be cured by fomentes, inceſſions,
                     Cure if it be of groſſe humours.
                   and cataplaſmes made of herbes that be hot, and that haue vertue to cut and deuide the humours, and with a diet of ſuch like things. Beſides thoſe things which we haue rehearſed in the former chapter of difficultie of piſſing, this oyntment following is notably good,
                     Vnguentum.
                   to take away the diſeaſe. ℞. of the oile of ſcorpions, oyle of narde, and of lillies. ana. ʒ.iij. gumme ſerapine, bdellium, and oppoponax. ana. ℈.ij. gooſe greace, duckes greace. ana. ʒ.ſs.. roote of Enula campana. ℈.ij. penyroiall, calamint. ana. ʒ.ſs. diſſolue the gummes in wine, and with wax as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment. Alſo you muſt throw into the bladder with a cyring, oyle of ſcorpions, or lillies, or ſome other thing that can diſſolue, cut, and deuide clammie humours. If the vrine be ſtopped through the ſtone or clodded blood:
                     Cure if it be of the ſtone or clodded blood.
                   you muſt ſeeke the cure out of their proper chapters. For the ſtone which hath ſtopped the paſſage of the vrine muſt be remoued out of his place as is taught before in the 41. chapter: but the clodded blood muſt be diſſolued, as is taught in the 42. chapter. If the vrine be ſtopped through inflammation,
                     Cure if it be of ſwellings.
                   or ſome other ſwelling againſt nature, the cure muſt alſo be ſought out of their owne propre chapters. And if the vrine be ſtopped through ſome litle peece of fleſh or hard knobbe,
                     Cure if it be of a peece of fleſh or knobble.
                   apply bathinges and other diſſoluing and looſening medicines and ſuch as doe open and ſpread abroad the pype & conduit of the vrine: examples whereof you may ſeeke out of the chapter of the ſtone of the reines. And if the vrine doe not come out ſo, you muſt come to the vſing of a cyring, and by putting in of the inſtrument you muſt entice out the vrine.
                     Cure if it be of the obtuſe ſence of the bladder.
                   If the vrine be ſuppreſſed through the dull ſence of the bladder, you muſt raiſe vp his action, by prouoking vrine, and you muſt helpe it by inceſſions, fomentes, and other hot medicines, which can take awaie his ſleeping and dulnes. But you muſt onely eſhue thoſe thinges which prouoke vrine, leaſt that through plentie of it, the bladder be ſtretched out, and ſo the contractiue vertue of it ſhould be hurt. Moreouer you muſt entice out vrine with intrum, or ſalt peter, or with a quicke louſe, or with ſome other thing, that can ſtirre vp the vertue expulſiue of the bladder. In healthfull folke, when through ſome great buſines the vrine is holden to long, and ſo hath made the bladder feeble, that it cannot expell it out,
                     Cure if it come in haile folke.
                   then he muſt helpe himſelfe thus. He muſt ſtand, ſo that the necke of the bladder may leane downward, and he muſt lay both his handes about his ſhare, and he muſt preſſe it & thruſt out the vrine by litle & litle, & thus may he do alſo in the dul ſence, of the bladder aforeſaid.
            
            
               
               CAP. XLVIII. Of exulceration of the priuie members. DE EXVLCERATIONE PVDENDI.
               
                  VLCERS engendred in the priuie members without inflammation haue need of medicines, which doe drie vppe vehemently: ſuch as theſe be paper burned,
                     Aloe 
                           •
                        rida.
                   drie dill burnt, and drie Aloës made into powder, for you can ſcarcely finde a more preſent remeadie. Alſo the roote of Ariſtolochia rotunda doeth bring preſent remeadie to the exulceration of the priuie members. Alſo among compounde medicines,
                     P
                           •••
                        is opti
                        
                           •••
                        .
                   that is the moſt effections and profitable. ℞. Aloës epaticum. 
                  ʒ.ij. gaules. ʒ.j. dragons blood, bole armoniacke, tuttie. ana. ʒ.j. rootes of Ariſtolochia rotunda. 
                  ʒ.ſs. mirrhe. ℈.j. of gumme arabicke. ʒ.ij. alome burnt. ʒ.ſs. let all theſe be beaten,
                     Abſtertion of the vlcers.
                   and make a fine pouder, and ſtrew it vppon the exulcerate partes. But if the vlcers be verie moiſt and foule, firſt ſcoure them and clenſe them with mulſa well alaied, and then after with goates milke: which thing being done, vſe the aforeſaid pouder, or lapis h
                        •
                     matites or frankenſence or pomegranade ryndes, or terra lemnia or ſuch like beaten into pouder. If there chaunce inflammation togeather with the exulceration, you muſt firſt remoue the inflammation with linnen cloathes wet in rooſe water, or night ſhade, or purſelaine water, or houſleeke water, putting to it the white of an egge, and applying it to the diſeaſed place. The reſt of the remeadies, ſeeke out of other chapters.
            
            
               CAP. XLIX. Of the continuall standing of the yearde. DE PRIAPISMO.
               
                  PRIAPISMVS (as Galen witneſſeth in lib. 6. de male affectis locis. cap. 6.) is whē the yeard is ſtretched out in length and in breadth,
                     Priapiſmus.
                   nothing prouoking the patient to luſt and deſire, nor no heate gotten. And if there chaunce to the yeard panting or beating, then the euill is called Satyriaſis. This euill is cauſed (as Galen doth witnes in the place aforeſaid) either through immoderate opening of the mouth of the arteries,
                     Satyriaſis Cauſae.
                   or of ſome vaporous ſpirite engendred in the hollow and fiſtulous ſinow. But it followeth often after the gaping and opening of the mouthes of the arteries. For it is eaſier for them to ſtretch out wide, then for flatuous and windy aire to engender in the hollow ſinow. For the loynes being het, it is reaſon that the arteries are made hotter, and that alſo other mouthes ſhould be wider opened. Therefore at that time, they ſend out no ſmall ſubſtaunce of ſpirite or aire into the hollow ſenew, which being a litle filled, it ſtretcheth out the yarde, ſo that all his power doth ſeme to conſiſt in the holow ſinow. Sometime this euill chaunceth to them which haue abſtained long time from carnall copulation contrarie to their cuſtome. And this thing chaunceth ſpeciallie to them, that doe abound with much blood, and doe not ſtudie to diſperſe the aboundaunce of blood with much exerciſe. They that labour of this diſeaſe be grieued, as thoſe be, which be taken with diſtention and ſtretching out of the ſynewes: for the yard being puffed vp, and ſtretched out, ſuffereth as it were a crampe. They that haue this conuulſion or crāpe, doe quickly periſh, vnleſſe helpe be vſed to them by and by: and when they die their bellie is puffed vp,
                     Curatio.
                   and their ſwet is colde. The cure is diuerſe according to the diuerſitie of cauſes▪ for if the diſeaſe do chaunce through gaping of the mouthes of the arteries, and ſo through the heate of them, by and by it is good to let blood by cutting of a vaine which thing alſo you ſhall doe, when this euill taketh them which abound with blood, and haue abſtained long time from carnall copulation, contrarie to their cuſtome. And you muſt cut the blacke veine which is called media or mediana, the middle veine of the arme. Alſo he muſt vſe a thinne diet, and abſtaine from wine. Giue him but litle meate made of corne, and that which doth engender no wind at all, and that cauſeth thirſt, and it is good for him

to vſe to drincke water exerciſes and frictions or rubbings are well applyed and vſed, to diſſolue and diſperſe the ſpirites or ayre. Alſo it is good to goe about emptying by vomiting. Alſo if the wombe be coſtiue and bound, you muſt make it ſoluble with a clyſter,
                     Cliſter.
                   that is not verie ſharpe, as that is which is made of the decoction of beetes, mallowes and mercurie. You muſt altogeather abſtaine from purging medicines, leaſt that the humours ſhould be drawen downwarde, for the ſame cauſe alſo, he muſt eſchue thoſe things which haue vertue to prouoke vrine.
                     The ſumme of the cure
                   To conclude you muſt altogeather labour and ſtudie to miniſter thoſe medicines which can voide and emptie the aboundaunce, and draw vpward, and ſo turne the humours from the priuie members. And if the euill endure long, faſten cupping glaſſes with ſcarification. And if there be fulnes apply horſe leaches. But you muſt laie vpon the loynes, thoſe thinges which doe euidently coole, as is, nightſhade, purſlane, henbane, and ſingreene. Alſo you muſt of neceſſitie annoint the yarde, and the ſpace between the fundament and the yard, with ſome iuice or water of herbes that doe coole gentlie. If a cerote made of fine oyle of roſes, waſhed often in colde water be applyed as well to the yard, as alſo to the loynes, it doth notably well. The making of this cerote which is called ceratum liquidum, is taugh of Galen. lib. 1. de ſimplicium medicamentorum facultate. cap. 6.
                     Ceratum.
                   Alſo this cerote is good. ℞. white wax waſhed tennetimes in colde water. quar. j. purſlane. ʒ.ij. commix them togeather & bring them into the forme of a cerote. To be ſhort, applie, and alſo miniſter in drincke thoſe medines which can extinguiſh and quench ſeede: of the which we will ſpeake aboundantlie in the next chapter. Moreouer it is hurtfull for him to reſt, lying vpright, but he muſt lie on his ſide. He muſt altogeather be kept from ſightes and ſtories, and rehearſing of thoſe thinges, which pertaine vnto lecherie. If this diſeaſe chaunce of a vaporous and windie ſpirite or ayre engendred in the hollow ſinow, all your whole cure muſt be turned to the diſperſing and diſſoluing of it. Therefore you muſt turn backe to the chapters of curing of inflammation, and windines of the ſtomach, and to the cure of the windie cholicke: for there you ſhall find plentie of remeadies.
            
            
               CAP. L. Of shedding of ſperme. DE SEMINIS PROFLVVIO.
               
                  GONORRHAEA in Greeke, ſeminis proflunium in Latine,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . it is excretion and ſhedding of ſeede or ſperme againſt the patientes will, and without ſicknes of the yard.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed through imbecillitie and weakenes of the retentiue vertue in the veſſels, conteining the ſperme: or through ſome other diſeaſe, that moueth the partes of the veſſels of ſperme, after that ſort, as the expulſiue vertue doth, according to nature: as in the falling ſicknes it chaunceth ſometime, and in other violent conuulſions & crampes. Alſo ſometime it is cauſed through fluxe of the ſpermaticke veſſels. The ſeede that ſhedeth out, is waterie thinne without 
                     〈◊〉
                   petite of carnall copulation: and for the moſt parte without feeling of it, but ſometime it commeth out with certaine pleaſure. They that haue this diſeaſe,
                     Signa.
                   their whole bodie corrupteth by litle and litle, and waxeth leane ſpeciallie about the loynes. And 
                     〈◊〉
                   followeth much weakenes, not for the multitude of ſeede, but for the principallitie 
                     〈…〉
                  . And if it come out (the yard not ſtanding) there followeth imbecillitie and 
                     〈…〉
                   the retentiue vertue in the ſpermaticke veſſels. But if it commeth out (the yard 
                     〈…〉
                   the griefe is ſomewhat like a conuulſion, or crampe. This diſeaſe chaunceth not 
                     〈…〉
                   men, but alſo to women, and in women it is hard to cure. The cure of this diſeaſe is 
                     〈◊〉
                   with thoſe cures that are miniſtred in euerie fluxe. Firſt therefore you muſt keepe 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſicke in quietnes with litle meate, and with drincking of water. Then alſo you muſt 
                     ••
                  uer the places about the ſhare and priuities, and the loynes with woll wet in oyle of roſe
                     •
                   in wine, or in oyle of bloſſomes of apples, or of quinces. Alſo ſponges wet in in Poſca applyed are not hurtfull. The daies following you muſt vſe cataplaſmes, emplaiſters, and ointmentes, made of vine braunches, quinces, acatia hypociſchis, ſumach, and ſuch like afore

rehearſed. Alſo he muſt vſe reſtrictiue inceſſions made of the decoctions of bryer, plaintaine, mirtles and ſuch other like. Theſe thinges muſt be ſodden in auſtere and ſharpe wine, or alſo in water. Let him vſe meates which are harde to corrupt, and that are difficultie chaunged, and that haue power to drie vp. Alſo you muſt giue him with his meates and drincke, the ſeede of Agnus caſtus, and of hempe, ſpecially roſted. Alſo the ſeede and leaues of rew, the ſeede and ſtalke of lettuce, and the roote of water lillies. In drincke miniſter daiely, in ſteed of common water, the water wherein yron hath often be quenched. To be ſhorte he muſt eſchue the vſing of ſharpe thinges, and drincking of much wine, and eating of pottage, and all his whole diet muſt be appointed of ſuch things, as doe drie vp and reſtraine.
                     To extinguiſh ſeede.
                   And you muſt miniſter ſuch medicines, as doe extinguiſh and quench ſeede, as is, tutſan ſeede toſted and rubbed, alſo the leaues and floures of it are ſaid to reſtraine lecherie, not onely when they are eaten, but alſo when they are taken in drinck, or ſtrewed vnder one. Purſlane eaten, and lettuce ſeede drouncke, and the roote & ſeede of waterlillies taken in meate, doe extinguiſh the ſeede by cooling of it. But rew eaten corrupteth and deſtroyeth the ſeede with his heate. They which eate calamint continuallie, doe looſe the power of generation, and likewiſe the ſeede of white violettes doth the ſame. But ſmithes water, in which yron is often quenched, being continually droncke, doth diminiſh the ſeede without any griefe. Moreouer of theſe ſimples before rehearſed, you may compound and make diuerſe remeadies. And ſpecially this pouder is good. ℞. of the pouders of diacuminum,
                  
                     Tri
                           ••••
                        .
                   
                  diacalaminthes. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeede of tutſan & rew. ana. ʒ.j. calamint. ʒ.ij. ſeede of luttuſe and purſlane. ana. ʒ.j. ſugre, the weight of them all: commixe them togeather and make a fine pouder, whereof miniſter. ʒ.j. or ʒ.j.ſs. infuſed in ſoure wine.
                     Lami
                           ••
                         P
                           •
                        ubea.
                   Alſo it is counted notable, to lay a plate of leade vpon the loynes, for it is wont to coole much. To thoſe which cannot ſuffer the hardnes of leade, you muſt giue counſel, that they ſtrew vnder them ſome of the aforeſaide herbes dried: for the which purpoſe aboue other thinges, vine leaues, rew, calamint, and roſes are praiſed: for theſe profit, and beſides that they hurt not the reynes. For vehement colde thinges being applyed to the loynes, doe hurte the reines. Alſo let not his bed be ſofte, and let him lie for the moſt part vpon his ſide, eſchuing vpright lying, leaſt thereby the arteries of the loynes ſhould wax hot. After that the diſeaſe hath dured a while, you muſt commit the ſicke to exerciſes, whereby the whole bodie, and ſpecially the diſeaſed partes, may be confirmed and ſtrengthened. Alſo it ſhall be good, if nothing elſe doe let it, to vſe colde bathing and waſhinges, which is wont to driue away all the griefe engendred of fluxe: and that ſpecially if the water be indewed with any medicinable qualitie. Alſo it is good at certaine times to vſe thoſe thinges that doe rubifie and bliſter, and that can fetch out from the depth and bottom, vnto the top of the skinne. Moreouer the patient muſt exclude all thought belonging to carnall copulation.
            
            
               CAP. LI. Of the loſſe of carnall copulation. DE IIS QVI RE VENEREA VTI NON POSSVNT.
               
                  THEY which be maried, and cannot vſe the act of generation, becauſe of the ſluggiſh impotencie and weakenes of their members:
                     Cauſae.
                   comming of a colde diſtempure wherewith they be vexed, or of ſome other cauſe: ſuch ough to exerciſe the neather partes, and to vſe meates that doe heate and engender good humours:
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   as is the fleſh of hennes, capons, partrich, feaſauntes, yong 
                     〈◊〉
                   of mountaines, and ſpecially ſparrowes, cockes ſtones and ſuch like. Not 
                     〈◊〉
                   good nouriſhing meates, but alſo windy meates are good for him, as be chiche 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  eanes, ſcalions, leekes, the roote and ſeede of perſneppes, pine nuttus, ſweete 
                     〈◊〉
                  , rape rootes and ſuch other like. Alſo the egges of partriches doe ſtirre vp car
                  
                     ••••
                   luſt. Let the patient ſleepe in a ſoft bedde, and let him reade thinges that doe ſtirre vp luſt,
                     Curatio.
                   or let him heare them read. Let his priuie members be continually chafed and rubbed with oyles, ointmentes and other heating medicines. For which purpoſe vſe this ointment

following. ℞. oyle of lillies. ℥.j.ſs. oyle of caſtoreum. ℥.ſs. pepper, nigella, pellitorie. ana. ℈.j. mirrhe. ʒ.ſs. Euphorbium. gran. iij. wax as much as is ſufficient, and make an oyntment.
                     Vnguentum.
                   And alſo he muſt vſe medicines, which doe engender plentie of ſperme, and can heate. Among ſimple medicines, theſe that follow doe chieflie ſtirre vp carnall luſt, as be rocket, muſtard ſeede, gardein creſſes, nettleſeede, roote of Aron, and pepper, ſatyrion, orminum,
                  
                     Simples to prouoke carnall luſt.
                   annyſe, ſquill, orchis, called alſo teſticulus canis, whoſe greateſt round roote druncke with milke doth prouoke ſtiffenes of the yearde, but the the leſſe roote thereof droncke with water doeth ſlake the ſtiffenes thereof, alſo fennell and dill are good. The ſtones of a fox dried, beaten to pouder and droncke, doth cauſe a ſtiffenes of the member: not hurtefull nor vaine. Alſo the partes of ſcinces which embrace the reynes, are druncke to raiſe a ſtiffenes of the yarde. Moreouer burne the drie piſſell of an harte and miniſter. ℥.j. of it with pure wine. Among compoundes it is good to vſe this medicine. ℞. Dianthos,
                  
                     Antidotum liquidum.
                   
                  pliriſarcoticon, diagalangae. ana. ʒ.iij. diaſatyrion. 
                  ʒ.vj. pine nuttes, ſweete almondes, piſtax. ana. ʒ.ij. ſatyrium. 
                  ʒ.j. roote of Aron. ℈.j. ſeedes of rocket, nettles, and gardein creſſes. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſcincus. 
                  ʒ.ſs. nux indica. 
                  ʒ.j. of long pepper and ginger. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. pouder of hartes piſſle. ℈.j. ſyrupe of mintes, and ſugar as much as is ſufficient, and make an electuarie: where of miniſter before ſupper or faſting the quantitie of one drachme, or two alone, or in good wine.
            
            
               CAP. LII. Of bursting or ruptures. DE RAMICE.
               
                  CELE in Greeke, ramex and hernia in Latine, the barbarous writers call it rupura. It is cauſed diuerſe wayes, and thereupon it hath diuerſe names.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                        
                           •
                        up
                           •
                        ura.
                   For if the Peritonaeum doth breake, and the bowelles fall downe into the coddes, it is called in Latine, ram
                        •
                     x inteſtinorum: that is,
                     Ramex inteſt
                           •
                        norum.
                   the rupture of the bowelles. But when the bowelles doe cleaue or ſtaie aboue the priuie members, it is called in Lataine ramex inguinis: that is, the rupture aboue the priuie members.
                     
                        Ramex inguinis.
                     
                     
                        Ramex aqnoſus.
                     
                     
                        Ramex carnoſus.
                     
                   And if any quiet and waterie humour be gathered in any parte of the filmes, or skinnes of the coddes, it is called in latine, ramex aqnoſus: that is waterie rupture. When there groweth harde fleſh, within the coates and tunicles of the ſtones, it is called in Lataine ramex carnoſus, that is a fleſhie rupture. To be ſhort, the kindes of ruptures euer take their names of the thinges that doe fill vp the coddes. As if the call or filme that lappes in the bowelles, doe fall downe into the coddes, it is called in Latine ramex ormenti: that is the rupture of the filme.
                     
                        Ramex ormenti.
                     
                     
                        Ramex ormē
                           ti inteſtinique. Ramex varicoſus. Cauſae.
                     
                   And if the bowelles doe ſlippe downe alſo with it, it is called in Latine ramex ormenti & inteſtini: that is the rupture of the filme and the bowelles. So when the veynes which nouriſh the ſtones be ſpread abroade, and ſwollen out of meaſure on heapes, it is called ramex varicoſus: that is the rupture of the ſwollen veines. The rupture of the bowelles, and of the partes aboue the priuie members, are cauſed either becauſe the Peritonaeum, is ſtretched out more then it ought to be, or becauſe it is broaken. Both theſe doe chaunce through ſome violent occaſion going before, as a ſtroke, or leaping or crying, or by taking vp of a great weight. A waterie rupture is cauſed ſometime of a ſecret cauſe, and ſometime of a manifeſt cauſe. Of a ſecret cauſe 
                     〈…〉
                   the veſſelles that are ioyned togeather be increaſed in the coddes, and then a 
                     〈…〉
                   mixed with blood is driuen downe to thoſe partes, and reſteth there. Of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   cauſe, as when through ſome blowe or ſtroke, the veſſelles breake and ſlide down
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   then blood flowing downe thither to nouriſh them, it is chaunged into a waterie and 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſubſtance. A fleſhie rupture is ingendred of a ſecret cauſe, as through the ſtone 
                     〈◊〉
                   without a fluxe and waxing harde, or of a ſtripe, or by ill curing after the cutting of a rupture. The cauſes of the other ruptures are euident by their deſcriptions. The ſignes, both of the rupture of the bowelles, and the rupture about the priuie members are commō.
                     Signa.
                   For there is a manifeſt ſwelling in the coddes, or about the priuie members, which appeareth greater, then it did before in exerciſes, iourneis, holding of the breath and ſuch like occaſions:

being thruſted togeather, it goeth backe againe ſlowly, and it rouleth downe againe quickly. The particular ſignes whereby ruptures that come, when the Peritonaum is but ſtretched out, be theſe: that the bowelles fall downe not for a long time togeather, but for a ſhort ſpace, and for verie litle cauſe, the ſwelling appeareth equall and deepe, the bowelles that fall downe being ſtayed with the peritonaeum. The proper ſignes of a rupture that commeth when the peritonaeum is broken are, that the bowelles fall downe vniuerſally from the beginning of the rupture, and that onely through violent cauſes: the ſwelling is of a wonderfull greatnes, inequall, and it ſheweth ſtreight way ſticking out in the ſkinne, becauſe the bowelles are fallen out of the peritoraum. The common ſignes of a waterie rupture be theſe: ſwelling that is without paine, and firme, and permanent in the coddes, not vaniſhing by noe occaſion, but in them that haue but a litle of the humour, it giueth place, and in them that haue not ſo much of it, not ſo. And when there is a waterie humour in the coddes, the ſwelling ſhineth of the ſame colour: that the humour is, as like dregges or blood, or rubicund, or ſwarte. And when theſe ſignes appeare in both ſides of the coddes, it betokeneth that there is a double rupture. There followeth after a fleſhie rupture, hardnes, and a colour alwayes like vnto it. But if the ſwelling doe encreaſe into a hardnes or kernell, then there is nether colour nor ſence, nor feeling. But if the humour be of a wicked nature,
                     Cure of the ruptures of the bowelles and of the inguen.
                   then pricking paine doth vex him. The rupture of the bowelles, and of the partes about the priuie members, be cured in this wiſe. You muſt lay the patient vpright and ſeparate his legges, and then put vp the bowelles by little and little: and when they are put vp, you muſt keepe them vp with conuenient truſſes, and ligamentes. But if the places adioyning to the coddes, or to the place about the priuie members, be grieued with inflammation and moſt grieuous paines, and that there come with it frettinges and windines, and ſo thereby the bowelles be made diſobedient to goe vp againe, then you muſt vſe and apply fomentes, lynementes and bathes, which haue vertue to mollifie and to ceaſe paine and inflammation, and to diſperſe windines: as thoſe thinges be which be made of mallowes, chammomill, dill, lineſeede, fenugreeke, caraway ſeede, annyſeſeede, comin and ſuch like. Alſo nouriſh the places that be vexed with paine, with woll that is moiſt, dipped in wine and oyle. When the bowelles are put vp againe into their places, you muſt goe about, that they may be kept vp ſtill, with conuenient truſſes and bandes: apapplying to it firſt,
                     Ceratum.
                   reſtrictiue or glutinatiue cerotes, or emplaiſters, as this is. ℞. ſhip pitch, maſticke. ana. ʒ.iij. franckenſence. ʒ.ij. hypociſchis, ſarcocoll, acatia. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. lapis hamatitis, dragons blood. ana. ʒ.ij. bole armoniacke rootes of comforie, gales, pomegranate rindes. ana. ʒ.iij. misſle of the oke. ʒ.j.ſs. of either Ariſtolochia. 
                  ʒ.ij. ſumache, pomegranade floures. ana. ʒ.j. goates tallow. ʒ.ij. turpentine and wax as much as is ſufficient: diſſolue the gummes firſt in vinegre or wine, and make a cerote, and put it in a weathers skin, and apply it binding it faſt, and doe not looſe it before the ſeuenth day. Alſo in the mean ſeaſon 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſicke tarie thirtie daies in his bed,
                     Diet.
                   and let him abſtaine from windie meates, 
                     〈◊〉
                   much drincking of wine, from vehement mouing, running, leaping, crying loude 
                     〈◊〉
                   other like. And in the meane ſeaſon let him drincke this decoction. ℞. both the kindes of ſanicula, of ſolidago ſaracenica, or conſolida ſar acenica, ophio gloſſum, pedelion, agrimonie,
                     A gluminati
                           ••
                         decoction. Pr
                           ••
                        ella.
                   
                  
                     
                        •••
                     laria. ana. M.j. knotgraſſe, clematis daphnoides, great plantaine, burnet. ana. M.ſs. 
                     〈◊〉
                   of comfrey, houndes tongue. ana. ʒ.ſs. roote of the ſixt kinde of geranium. 
                  ʒ. 
                     〈…〉
                   mirtles. ʒ.iij. pomegranate floures. ʒ.ij. leaues of laurell. ʒ.j.ſs. boyle theſe in 
                     〈…〉
                   water of iuſt quantitie till the thirde parte be conſumed. Then ſtraine it and 
                     〈…〉
                   to it ſugre, make the liquor of the decoction ſweete, and purifie it, and make a 
                     ••••
                  potion, whereof miniſter dayly in the morning. ℥.iiij. Alſo you muſt take verie 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ead, that the bellie wax not coſtiue: for if he be conſtreined to labour much, when 
                     ••••
                  uld goe to the ſtoole, the bowelles will ſlide downe againe. Alſo he muſt vſe apt 
                     •••
                  onuenient deligatures and truſſes, as be admoniſhed before. And he muſt vſe them ſpeciallie,
                     To cure a waterie rupture.
                   at ſuch time as occaſion and neceſſitie of mouing requireth it. A waterie rupture muſt be cured by ſuch medicines, as doe heate and drie vp, as be beane meale, laurell, bearies, lineſeede, dancus, althaea, nigella, and ſuch other like, which we haue rehearſed in the chapter of the dropſie Aſciles, and other dropſies. To conclude: as for the cure of theſe

ruptures, or anie other by ſurgerie, let it be ſought out of Paulus Aegineta. libro ſexto, chapter ſixtietwo, where he treateath of it aboundantly: for it is not our intent to treate thereof in theſe bookes: therefore we will proceede to the diſeaſes of the wombe.
            
            
               CAP. LIII. Of stopping of menstruis. DE SVPPRESSIS MENSIBVS.
               
                  THE menſtruis of women are ſuppreſſed and ſtopped in them either naturally or againſt nature.
                     Cauſae. In whom the floures are naturally ſtopped.
                   If they be naturally ſtopped you ſhall knowe it chieflye by this: becauſe the woman thereby is vexed with noe griefe of the whole bodie, nor yet of the wombe. Alſo you ſhall haue a reſpecte to the age, for in manie the floures beginne to flowe the fourtenth yeare, and in verie fewe before the thirtenth or twelfth yeare. And to moſt women they burſt out after the fourtenth yeare. For the moſt parte, the purging endureth for two or three dayes, to many fiue dayes, in ſome it endureth vnto the ſeuenth daie. The menſtruis alſo doe ſtoppe in ſome the fiftie yeare, or the fiftie fiue yeare, and they flowe not vntill the ſixtie yeare, but in fewe women. Alſo barraine women and dauncers, are not naturally purged: for whatſoeuer excrement is in them, it is conſumed by the vehemencie of exerciſes. And to be ſhorte, women of a hote temperature, that be wilde, and doe vſe ſtronge exerciſes, they purge out little or nothing. But many times the menſtruis are wont to be ſuppreſſed and ſtopped againſt nature,
                     In whom the floures are ſ
                           ••
                        pped againſt nature.
                   either through ouer much groſſenes, or ſlendernes. For fat folke are more without blood, then other folke, and they haue leſſe and ſtreighter veynes, and that little blood which is in them, turneth almoſt in fat. But they that are leane and ſlender which be waſted with ſome continuall ſicknes, they haue no ſuperfluous bloud in them. Moreouer the meſtruis doe not flowe in them, whoſe bloud is either groſſe or clammie, or if it be ſent to ſome other parte of the bodie, and purged out, as for example, if it goe out at the noſe, or at the fundament. Alſo in ſome that haue caſt out much bloud from the breaſt, the menſtruis are ſtopped, and in ſome, becauſe much bloude hath gone out of a veine being cut. Alſo other kindes of emptyinges hath often done the ſame thing, as aboundaunt ſweating, continuall vomiting, fluxes of the bellie: and all kindes of puſtules and wheales which budde out of the skinne. Beſides the cauſes nowe rehearſed, oftentimes the menſtruis are withholden through great and ſharpe ſickeneſſes, and through aboundaunce or ſcarcitie of foode. For of little foode, that little doeth expirate and breath out ſtreight, and of much foode the paſſages are ſtopped, and the excretion and voiding out of the menſtruis is preuented and letted. And for thoſe cauſes the menſtruis are ſpecially ſuppreſſed & ſtopped, the whole bodie being euill affected. Alſo they are in like manner withholden and ſtopped, when the wombe it ſelfe is afflicted with a particular diſeaſe or vice: which thing chaunceth to the wombe ſometime through hote or colde diſtempure of the ſame. Alſo many times the purgation of the menſtruis is letted through hardenes engendred in the mouth of the matryce, or through ſome excreſcence and growing vppe of a peece of fleſhe, or alſo through aboundant fatneſſe. Alſo to ſome by and by in the beginning, certaine filmes or thinne skinnes engender about the necke or entrie of the matrice. To other ſome the ſcarres of vlcers, which haue bene before in the wombe, haue ſtopped the mouthes of the veſſelles, which caried bloud into the wombe. To ſome after the aborſion of the wombe, (the mouth of it being exulcerate, and afterwarde healed and brought to a ſcarre) there commeth conioyning & compaction of it, which beſides that, it letteth all other tranſpirations of the wombe, it alſo ſtoppeth the excretion and voiding out of bloud. Moreouer ſtubburne carefulnes, immoderate feare and great ſorrowe doe ſtoppe the menſtruis. There followeth ſuppreſſion and ſtopping of the menſtruis, heauines of the whole bodie,
                     Signa.
                   deſire to vomite, abhorring of meate, and certaine terrible diſcurſions, ſuch as chaunce to thoſe that haue conceiued. Moreouer, there be paynes about the loynes, thighes,

necke, the hinder parte of the eyes, and the foreparte of the heade. Alſo there followe continuall feauers, and blackiſh vrines, with certaine red attre, and filth in them, euen like as one ſhoulde mixe ſoote with the water wherein newe killed fleſhe hath lately bene waſhed. Alſo to many either the vrine doeth come forth difficultly or elſe it is ſtopped altogeather. The diuerſitie of cauſes is knowen partely by the diſpoſition of the whole bodie,
                     Cold diſtemper
                   and partely alſo and for the moſt parte, by the telling of the patient. Women may knowe a colde diſtempure in them ſelues, by theſe ſignes ſpecially, becauſe they be more ſleepie and ſlower to all kinde of mouing, and whiter of colour, and as it were of a leadie colour. Moreouer their vrine is waterie and ſuch like ſignes appeare, which are often rehearſed before.
                     Hot diſtemper
                   The tokens of a hote diſtempure are cleane contrarie to theſe ſignes of a colde diſtempure before rehearſed. Signes of fulnes beſides thoſe that may be gathered out of the former chapters,
                     Plenitudo.
                   are wonte ſpecially to be theſe: that women, that are vexed therewith, are greeued moſt in the time of the menſtruis, and they feele vehement paine, about the loynes and the priuie members, and their veines are ſwolne vppe verie great.
                     Curatio. Cure of a cold distemper.
                   The cure is diuerſe according to the diuerſitie of cauſes. For if a colde diſtempure of the liuer or wombe doe ſtoppe the flowing of meſtruis, it muſt be cured driuen awaie with contraries: that is, with meate and medicines that doe heate. Therefore you muſt give vnto them hote meates, and wine that it yellowe, odoriferous and olde. Alſo you muſt preſcribe to them exerciſes and you muſt miniſter other thinges which can helpe the bodie. Aboue other theſe thinges that followe are good, peniroiall, tyme, calamint, ſotherwood, diptaine, roote of yreos, caſia, gladon, aſarum, and ſaueyne: of which you may make decoctions and fomentes. Alſo you muſt miniſter vnto them faſting, after a bathe, pure wine hote. Alſo the meete and conuenient times to take theſe medicines be, firſt, if the patient drincke ſtraight waye, when the time of purgation is at hande: ſecondarilie, if he drincke ſtraight after a bathe, fomentation, or annoynting, that the medicine helping the bodie being yet hote and looſe, may ſhewe his ſtrength and effecte the more eaſilie and effectuallie. Women that be too hoate and vſe much everciſe haue no neede of curing:
                     Cure of hote diſtemper.
                   for it were better to the ſafegarde of their proper health, to preſcribe them ſuch a dyet, whereby their bodies ſhoulde be ſo dryed, that the meſtruis ſhoulde not neede to be purged: but this were againſt conception: for they doe not conceiue which be not purged. Therefore for conceptions ſake, and for becauſe that almoſt all women keepe an vndiſcreete dyet, purgations be neceſſarie. Therefore it is good alſo to adioyne the cure, whereby the menſtruis, that are ſtopped through hote diſtempure, may be brought out. Women therefore, that be hote, and vſe many exerciſes, muſt chieflie be made moyſter by moyſte meates and drinckes taken in good quantitie, as be ſoupinges of ptyſans, and of Alica, and meates that are made of lambes fleſhe, kiddes fleſhe, and fiſhes that be tender, birdes of mountaynes, milcke. Let their potherbes be luttuſe and gourdes, and their fruict, newe figges. They muſt vſe whyte wine, that is not verie olde, and let it be alaied. Alſo bathes of ſweete water are good, and to conclude, the diet aſcribed to them that haue the feauer Ethicke,
                     Cure of fulnes.
                   is to be preſcribed to theſe. If the menſtruis be withholden and ſtopped by reaſon of the fulnes that vexeth the woman, and if nothing elſe doe let it, you muſt beginne the cure with letting of blood. And you muſt cut the veynes of the anckles or of the hammes: and that not before the accuſtomed time of the menſtruis. Neither will it be vnprofitable, if cupping glaſſes be faſtened to the legges. The blood being emptied, miniſter potions, which can prouoke menſtruis, and apply fomentacions, bathes, and annointinges of other thinges, which we will deſcribe hereafter. But if there be no fulnes, but only groſſe & flegmaticke humours do ſtoppe the flowing of the menſtruis:
                     Cure of vici
                        
                           •••
                         humours.
                   Firſt you muſt miniſter medicines which can cut & deuide the aforeſaide humours, and preparate them, and make them eaſier to be expelled and purged out:
                     Decoction.
                   as is this decoction. ℞. the rootes of gladon, yreos, parcely and ſperage. ana. ℥.j. of the ſeedes of apium, fennell, bruſcus, annyſe, daucus, ammi, & nettles. ana. ʒ.j. calamint, wormwood. ana. M.ſs. origan, ſothernwood, mugwort, peniroiall, aſarū. ana. M.j. Iſope. M.j.ſs. choſen cynnamon. ʒ.j. ſeeth all theſe in a conuenient quantity of water, vntil the third part be conſumed: then ſtreine it & make the

licour of that decoction ſweete with ſugre, and clarifie it with the white of an egge, putting into it of the ſyrupes of calamint, of hyſope, and of horehounde. ana. ℥.j.ſs. and make a potion, whereof miniſter daiely in the morning the weight of ℥.iiij. When that decoction is droncke vppe, miniſter ſome purging medicine: as is, hierapicra,
                  
                     Purgatio.
                   
                  diaphaenicon, and electuarium nidum, pilles of agaricke, of benedicta, or ſuch like.
                     Exerciſe.
                   After purging the patient muſt vſe exerciſes, and frictions of the neather partes, and ſpecially walkinges. Moreouer apply fomentations, and bathinges made of chammomill,
                     Fomentes. Vnguen
                           •••
                        .
                   motherworte, myntes, and other thinges rehearſed in the decoction aboueſaide. Alſo annoint the patient with this oyntment. ℞ of the oyles of lillyes, and rew. ana. ℥.j. mootherworte with the thinne leaues, penyroiall, calamint. ana. ℈.j. roote of yreos. ℈.ij. Iſope, origan. ana. ℈.iij. with waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an oyntment. After this, for the cauſe aboueſayde, miniſter medicines, which can ſtreight waie prouoke and bring forth the menſtruis being ſtopped, ſuch as theſe be: mirrhe, caſtoreum,
                  
                     To prouoke menſtruis.
                   laurell bearies, madder, pepper, ſage, rewe, ſauine, caſia, and ſuch other, which be rehearſed before of vs.
                     A notable medicine.
                   This medicine is not able good. ℞. caſtoreum. ℥.j. wild myntes beaten into pouder. ʒ.ſs. olde wine, or mulſa. ℥.iiij. commixe them togeather, and miniſter it hote after a bathe. Alſo the decoction of penyroiall, mugworte, rewe, comin, daucus, ſage, dill, ammeos, fennell, enula campana, and ſuch like are good. Alſo calamint beaten into pouder, the weight of ʒ.ij. or ſauyne, the weight of ʒ.j. droncke in wine or mulſa, is verie good. Moreouer trochiskes of myrrhe, do maruelouſlie profitte. Alſo wine wherein wormewoode hath bene infuſed or ſodden, muſt be droncke all the time of the cure. Alſo you muſt vſe to put peſſaries into the wombe, if that neceſſitie ſo require it, ſuch as this is. ℞. of Triphera magna, that is without opium. 
                  ʒ.j. of the meale of ernum, nigella, mather, mugworte,
                     Peſſus.
                   penyroyall. ana. ℈.j.ſs. iuice of rewe. ℥.ij. commix them togeather and make a peſſarie, and put it in with woll or cotton. Or this peſſarie. ℞. mirrhe, bdellium, ſtorax. ana. ʒ.j. calamint, ſothernwood,
                     A
                           •
                        us.
                   & wormewood. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. rootes of gladon and mather. ana. ʒ.j. ſeede of nigella, drie rew, laurell bearies. ana. ℈.ij. ſaueyne. ℈.j. caſtoreum. ℈.ſs. beate all theſe to fine pouder, and commixe them with honie or Triphera, or mithridatum, and make peſſaries to put into the womans priuities. Alſo you muſt caſt into the wombe hote oyles, as is oyles of yreos, lillies, laurell and ſuch like. Alſo it is good to vſe ſuffumigations made of Storax, galbartum, franckenſence,
                     Su
                           ••
                        ius.
                   
                  bdollium, the roote of Ariſtolochia, mugworte, cloues, cynnamon and ſuch like. Examples whereof you ſhall finde in our booke of making of medicines. Moreouer the wombe muſt be euaporated, and fomented with odiferous thinges, as with maioram, ſauorie, calamint, chammomill, penyroiall, mugworte, roote of yreos and ſuch like ſodden in a potte, which you muſt couer with a couering that hath a hole bored through it, wherein you muſt put a reede or ſome other pipe, and you muſt annoint it rounde about aloft, that the woman ſitting thereon, may be fomented with it. Alſo it will profit, if the woman ſit in this decoction vp to the nauell, and after receiue the peſſaries before rehearſed.
                     Cure of fatte women.
                   Fat women muſt be cured with a dyet that can extenuate, and with ſwifte exerciſes, and with other medicines which can make the bodie ſlender and leane: as be continuall deiection and ſolution of the bellie▪ oyntmentes that haue vertue to euaporate and breath out, and ſuch like, which be aboundantly intreated of by Galen lib. 14. ther. meth. cap. 15. & lib. 6. de tuenda ſanitate. Thoſe which are not purged of their menſtruis, through leanes of the bodie, whether it chaunce through ſicknes, or any other meanes, you muſt firſt recreate,
                     Cure of leane women.
                   and refreſh them, and reſtore the fleſh of their bodies by a conuenient diet, and by other medicines, which Galen rehearſed in the places aforeſaide. And if they wexe fleſhie, there is good hope, that the menſtruis will burſt out by their owne accorde, which if they doe not come forth alone, then you ſhall prouoke them by potions, fomentes, and other medicines aboue rehearſed. If the menſtruis doe not flowe, becauſe of ſome diſeaſe and vice of the wombe, firſt you muſt cure the euill, that is cauſe of the ſtopping of the menſtruis:
                     Cure if it be of vice of the wombe.
                   and after that, we muſt proceede to the prouocation and purging of the menſtruis. The cure of the diſeaſe of the wombe, muſt be ſought out of their proper places.
            
            
               
               CAP. LIIII. Of flowing of menstruis. DE REDVNDANTIBVS MENSIBVS.
               
                  WE ſay, that menſtruis doe redound and ouerflow in women, when that great plentie of them do flow out longer, then the accuſtomed time of their purgation. There is no iuſt or certaine time of their purgation. For to moſt women they flow ij. or iij. dayes to many v. dayes, and to ſome ſeuen dayes. The mē
                  ſtruis do chaunce to flow out of meaſure,
                     Cauſae.
                   through great or ſmall veſſels opened wide, or broken. Alſo immoderate purgations do engender in womē, ſomtime through grieuous trauaile in childbirth, which alſo do ceaſe oftentimes of themſelues. Oftentimes after aborſion, they labour of a vehement aborſion, and fluxe of menſtruis, and ſometime it bringeth them into a daungerous perill.
                     Signa.
                   If the greather veſſels be broken or open, the bloud floweth out gusſhing on heapes: but if the leſſer be open, it floweth out by litle and little, and not in great quantitie. If it be cauſed through eating or gnawing, it doth not onely flow by little and litle, but alſo it floweth with verie great paine. Moreouer when the menſtruis flowe immoderatly, there followe a filthie colour, the feete are puffed vp with a light ſwelling, the ſtrength of the bodie is decaied, both the digeſtion and appetite of meate is corrupted. And in all pointes ſuch ſignes, as are wont to follow immoderate voyding of bloud, either by the hemorhoides, or by any other fluxe of blood doe follow in this diſeaſe.
                     Curatio.
                   Firſt therefore in the beginning of the cure, you muſt bind the places betweene the ioyntes, and the extreeme partes of the bodie with bandes, beginning at the arme holles and the ſhares. Alſo you muſt faſten great cupping glaſſes lightly vnder the pappes, as Hipocrates teacheth. 5. Aph. 50. Alſo they muſt vſe meates and drinckes, that be ſharpe and reſtrictiue, as is ryce and ſuch like: and let the ſicke rather eate roſted meates, then ſodden. And ſpecially ſuch fleſhe, as is of nature able to drie vp, as be birdes that liue in mountaines, and wilde beaſtes. They muſt abſtaine from mouing, and winde, and wine, and in ſteede of it they muſt vſe ſome reſtrictiue potion, or poſca, not colde but warme. Moreouer you muſt miniſter reſtrictiue medicines in drincke, as theſe ſimples be following. ℞. pomegranate flowers, hipociſchis, acatia, corall,
                     To refraine menſtruis.
                   
                  Lycium, terra le
                        ••
                     nia, galles, knotgraſſe, both the Conſolidaes, the ſtone haematites, ſhelles of maſte, plantaine, barberies and ſuch like. Compounde medicines be theſe following, as ſyrupes of roſes, mirtelles, trochiskes, of ambre, and of terra lemnia. Alſo theſe pilles following are maruelous good, to ſtoppe and reſtraine the menſtruis. ℞. terra lemnia,
                  
                     Ca
                           ••
                        p
                           ••
                        ia.
                   bole armoniacke, franckenſence, maſticke, galles. ana. ℈.ij. dragons blood, the ſtone haematites. ana. ℈.j. hartes tongue burnt. ʒ.j. hypociſchis, acatia, red, corall. ana. ʒ.ſs. pomegranate flowers, red roſes. ana. ℈.ij. Ambre. ℈.j. commixe them with ſyrupe of mirtles, and make pilles wherof miniſter the weight of one drachme or. ʒ.ſs. Alſo foment the place outwardly, with the oyles of roſes, mirtles, quinces, and ſharpe wine. And apply ointmentes, emplaiſters, and cerotes, and reſtrictiue Epithemes, whereof you ſhall find many before in the chapters of the fluxes, Dyſenteria, Diarrhea, and Lienter
                        •
                     a. Alſo inciſſions made of the decoctions of the aforeſaide medicines be good.
                     Inſeſſus.
                   Alſo you muſt vſe ſuch medicines, as are caſt into the wombe with an inſtrument. For the which purpoſe iuice of plantaine is maruelouſlie commended, wherewith Galen ſayth, in foure dayes, he ſtopped a fluxe of the wombe, that could be ſtopped with no other medicine. The quantitie that muſt be throwne in, ſhoulde be the meaſure of one cyath. Of the ſame effect be the iuices of knotgraſſe, or nightſhade, or hypociſchis, or atatia, or ſuch like caſt in. Alſo the vſing of Peſſaries is not to be diſpiſed: among which this is ſpecially praiſed. ℞. of franckenſenſe, pomegranate flowers,
                     Peſſulus.
                   and galles. ana. ʒ.j. of gumme arahicke, acatia, ambre, hartes horne burnt. ana. ʒ.ij. bole armoniacke. ℈.ij. beate all theſe to ſine pouder, and mixe it with woll dipped in oyle of roſes, and put it into the wombe.
            
            
               
               CAP. LV. Of womans fluxe. DE FLVORE MVLIEBRI.
               
                  VTERI fluor, in Latine, fluxe of the matrice in Engliſh, is a continuall diſtillation, and flowing out for a long time, of the whole bodie, purging it ſelfe. That which is voided out, doth repreſent ſuch forme and colour,
                     Cauſae.
                   as the humour that doth abound in the bodie. For ſome is red, as blood putrified, or attre: ſome white, which commeth of fleume, ſome is pale, which ſignifieth choler: and ſome is waterie which is, of a wheyeiſh matter. And if pure blood come forth, as in the cutting of a veine, you muſt take good heede, that ſome eroſion and gnawing be not engendred in the wombe. By theſe ſignes following the fluxe is knowen.
                     Signa.
                   The places are continually moyſt with the humours, being diuerſe in colourſe. The patient is ill coloured, ſhe ſauoureth no meate but abhorreth it, in walking ſhee breatheth difficultly her eyes be ſwollen, ſometime with paine, and ſometime without paine, or with exulceration or without it, and either with an inflammation, that is with the vlcer, or elſe it is filthie or pure. The diuerſitie of cauſes you may knowe by the colour of that that floweth furth as is aforeſaide. And if a woman be vexed with a red fluxe, in the beginning,
                     Cure of the red fluxe.
                   if age and other things will ſuffer it, you muſt come to letting of blood. For many incommodities would follow, if you ſhould firſt goe about to repreſſe and ſtoppe the rage and violence of the blood that floweth, as the dropſie, vice of the ſinowes, or of the mouth of the ſtomach, or of the head. You may part the times of your blood letting, as you doe in them, that ſpit blood, ſo that thereby the auerſion and turning away of the blood may be the longer a litle. You muſt cut a veine in the arme. After this you muſt binde the extreeme partes of the bodie with bandes, and you muſt vſe and apply all ſuch thinges, as can turne the fluxe of the humour another waie. Therefore all thoſe remeadies that be rehearſed of vs in the former chapters be good. Let her whole diet be reſtrictiue, and ſuch as doth engender groſſenes and thicknes. Let her drincke be water,
                     Victus ratio.
                   or if ſhee be weake wine that is groſſe and reſtrictiue. But if the fluxe that is white or wheyiſh doe vex a woman,
                     Cure of a 
                           〈◊〉
                         that is 
                           〈◊〉
                         and arterie.
                   it may not be ſtopped at the beginning, that euill humours may be purged out of the bodie. Nor alſo, it is not againſt reaſon, ſeeing that, that which is flowed out, is engendred of fleume, if you do miniſter a medicine to her, which doth purge fleume. And you muſt miniſter, and apply to the whole bodie, medicines and remeadies which doe drive vp, ſeeing that the diſeaſe it ſelfe is moyſt. Therefore exerciſes ſpecially of the vpper partes, and frictions are good. Alſo they muſt eate fleſh which hath vertue in it to drie, as byrdes of the mountaines, and wilde beaſtes. Alſo in the beginning of the euill, ſuch medycines may be miniſtred, as doe extenuate groſſe humours, and after that doe bring them out with the vrine, as be aſarum, fennell, apium, and ſuch like, often rehearſed before. The beginning being paſt, you muſt apply to the wombe thinges that be moderately reſtrictiue, as be oyles of rooſes and quinces, and other rehearſed in the former chapter. Alſo you muſt vſe abſterſiue and ſcouring medicines, leaſt that vlceration be made with the humour that floweth, wherefore the wheyiſhe humour muſt continually be waſhed with hot water. After the ſcouring and cleanſing of the filth, you muſt annoint oyle of roſes, or of quinces or of mirtles. Likewiſe, when a woman is diſeaſed with pale fluxe,
                     Cure of a pale and cholerick fluxe.
                   it may not be ſtopped at the beginning, but the bodie muſt be purged with a medicine that purgeth choler. Then you muſt ſtudie howe to pull backe, and turne away the humour, and you muſt vſe other reſtrictiue medicines, not neglecting abſterſiue and ſcouring thinges, whereof you ſhall haue ſpeciall neede, becauſe of the ſharpenes of the humour. Moreouer to conclude, when the fluxe ceaſeth, they muſt long abſtaine from ſwifte goinges and walkinges, from much frictions and rubbinges of the bellie and the loynes, alſo from eating of ſharpe thinges, from thinges that heat, and from ſuch thinges as do prouoke vrine.
            
            
               
               CAP. LVI. Of strangling of the wombe. DE VTERI SVFFOCATIONE.
               
                  SVFFOCATION or ſtrangling of the wombe, is nothing elſe, but a drawing backe of it vp to the vpper partes. It is cauſed through ſtretching out of it, which is engendred of fulnes,
                     Cauſae.
                   that followeth after the retention and ſtopping of menſtruis. For in women the wombe, when it is retched and ſtretched out, it runneth not to an other place like a wandring beaſt but is drawen backe through the extention. Alſo it chaunceth oftentimes, through the ſeede that is reſtreined. Alſo many times it chaunceth through cold, which happened to the wombe, at the time that the purgation of the menſtruis is miniſtred. Alſo ſometime it cōmeth through ſome hard aborſion, or when as any hath haſted to ſtop ſodainely a fluxe of blood flowing from the wombe.
                     Signa.
                   They that are vexed with this diſeaſe, when the fit is nigh, there followeth heauies of minde, ſlownes, weaknes of the legges, palenes of face, and a ſorowfull countenaunce. But when the ſuffocation and ſtrangling is now preſent there followeth diſpoſitiō to ſleepe, doting, a withholding of the inſtruments of the ſences, the voice doth wax domb, & the legges are drawen vp togeather. The pulſes are ſmall and weake. Alſo oftentimes they are altogeather ſtopped. Alſo in many the breath that ſhould come out at the mouth & noſethrils, is ſtopped altogither, & yet that which is in the arteries, doth remaine ſtil. Whē the euill doth ceaſe, the bals of the cheekes begin to wax red, and the eyes be lifted vp and opened. Alſo a certaine humiditie and moiſtnes, that one may by feeling perceiue to runne out of the wombe of women, & the bowels do make a noiſe: and alſo the wombe it ſelfe is a litle looſened, & ſo their mind, ſences, and mouing commeth to them againe. This diſeaſe commeth by courſes at certaine times as the falling ſicknes doth: & that chaunceth whē the matrice (as is aforſaid) is filled with ſeed, or with ſome other mater that putrifieth & rotteth, in it. When the wombe it ſelfe is diſeaſed with the quantitie & qualitie of any thing then mēſtruis, or ſeede, or other kinde of ſymptomates are engendred. If that which is able to coole the whole body, do cauſe this diſeaſe, he body is ſo vehemētly cooled, that both breathing & arteries beating, cānot be perceiued by the ſences. Which humor, if it be either groſſe or ſharp, it cauſeth cōuulſions & cramps: but if it haue the nature of the melancholie, it cauſeth ſorrow & ſadnes, & defection of the minde, refrigeration, & paine of the ſtomach. This kind of diſeaſe engendreth in all ſeaſons▪ but ſpecially in winter & Autumne, & moſt commonly yong folke, and ſuch as be prone to leacherie, & barren, ſpecially if they be made ſo by medicines be moſt taken with this diſeaſe. Many doe recouer from this diſeaſe, & many againe doe periſhe ſodainely in the very fit, or at the leaſt way within fewe houres after. That which chaunceth, when the pulſes be ſwifte and inordinate, and then doe leaue of and vaniſh cleane awaie. At the laſt a colde humour in litle quantitie doeth bedewe and moiſture the ſkinne alofte. In the fittes therefore you muſt binde the extreame partes,
                     C
                           •
                        ratio. How to doe in fit.
                   and beſides the bindinges, you muſt rubbe all the legges, and the hole bodie, and do euen as you would recouer one that is founded. And you muſt. place the ſicke with her necke and ſhoulders, bending, and riſing vpwarde, and with her thighes and ſhare leaning downewarde. You muſt apply to her noſethrilles, ſtincking thinges, as the ſnuffe of a candle newly put out, feathers ſpecially of partriches, burnte, or wooll burnte, or ſooles of ſhowes, or ſhales of garlicke, or onions: alſo heares burnt, and ſpecially if they be the heares of the ſicke, or gotes horne burnt. Alſo pitch melted vpon the coales, galbanum or caſtoreum, or ſuch like. Alſo you may hold a chambre veſſell with olde vrine to their noſe, or olde linnen cloathes dipped in brimſtone and burned. And you muſt perfume the priuities beneath with odiferous thinges, as be ſtorox, wood of Aloes, cinnamon, cloues, and ſuch like. And it is good to faſten cupping glaſſes with much flame, and lightly to the partes aboue the priuie members; and to the bottom of the bellie. As ſone as the fit doeth come, you muſt apply fomentes, and little bagges warmed, to the bottom of the bellie and ſhare,
                     Sa
                           ••
                        li.
                   for you ſhall ſcarcely finde a more preſent remeadie in the comming of the fit of this

diſeaſe. And you ſhall make them of both the moother wortes, and with origan, betonie, chammomill, calamint, wormewood,, penyroyall, lineſeede, louageſeede and ſuch like. And if the fit be prolonged, you muſt alſo ad to, ſuch things as are good to diſſolue & bring out windineſſe: whereof you ſhall find examples and names out of the Chapters of windineſſe of the ſtomach, and paine of the collicke. Alſo then, you muſt poure into the womb, both ointments and oyles, that be verie odoriferous, as is, oyles of ſpike, and yreos, and ſuch like. Alſo let a midwife dippe her fingers in theſe oyles, and then put them into the mouth of the matrice, rubbing it, long and eaſilie, that through that prouoking, the groſſe and clammy humour may be auoided out. Alſo let the woman be raiſed with loud callings, and call her loude by her proper name. Alſo at this time, you muſt miniſter thoſe thinges that cauſe ſneezing, as be pepper, caſtoreum, ſtruthium, and ſuch like. There be ſome that think it good to vſe inceſſions made of the decoction of laurell beries, and leaues, peniroyall, calamint, motherwort, horehound, ſaueine, althaea, cammomill, ſerpillum, yreos, ariſtolochia, and fenugreeke. But in the time of the inceſſions, wee may not omit the cure of the braine, but you muſt irrigate and ſprinkle the head, with oyle of roſes and vinegre. But I iudge, that you muſt rather vſe foments and little bagges, then inceſſions, ſpecially when as for the moſt part, although thou wouldeſt neuer ſo faine, thou canſt not vſe inceſſions in this euill. When the fit reſteth and is ceaſed, compell the patient to vomite: for all vomites do lighten, but ſpecially ſuch as are vexed with meate. The third day after,
                     VVhat muſt be d
                           •
                        ne 
                           〈…〉
                         after the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   you muſt applie cupping glaſſes with ſcarification to the loynes, and the ylions. After the ſeuenth day miniſter the purgation of hiera colocy
                        •
                     thide, or pilles of agarick, & by & by come to the drinking of caſtoreum, which being continually dronke, it deliuereth the patient ſtraight way from this euill. Alſo you muſt miniſter euerie day thereof. ʒ.j. ſometime with mulſa, ſometime with the decoction of motherwort, and ſometime miniſter it with thinne wine. Therefore at this time, rather then in the time of the fit (as is ſaid) it is lawfull for you to vſe inceſſions, and peſſaries, that do mollifie, made of gooſe greaſe, ſtorax, maſticke, gumme armoniacke, and ſuch like. Alſo the wombe muſt be perfumed beneath with ſuch thinges as do heate, and haue vertue to bring out wind.
                     Trochiſkes of parfume.
                   Therfore vſe this parfume ſpecially. ℞. of the Trochiſkes of gallia and alipta moſchana. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. ſtorax. 
                  ʒ.iij. cloues, maces. ana. ʒ.j. wood of aloes. ℈.ij. cinnamon choſen, leaues of laurell. ana. ʒ.ij. lapdanum. ℥.ij.ſs. beate them into powder, and commix them with ſtorax liquida, and make trochiſkes for perfumes. In the meane ſeaſon, let the woman be content with a verie little meate and drinke, and let all their diet be exciccatorie and drying vp. This cure following is to be vſed in the fittes of this diſeaſe.
                     Diet, Cure 
                           •
                        f the whole bodie.
                   In reſtoring and recreating the whole bodie, ſpecially if that the diſeaſe hath endured long, you muſt begin oftentimes with bloud letting: ſpecially if the menſtruis haue ben ſtopped, and letted of their purging. Then you muſt come to purging with hierapicra. The purging being done, you muſt faſten on cupping glaſſes lightly, but with much flame, and you muſt drawe them of violently. Alſo ſometime the places may be ſcarified, and ſtrew vpon the ſcarification, ſalt, then you muſt heale it with conuenient medicines. Alſo you may apply verie well Synapiſmes, and dropaces made of Euphorbium, pellitorie, pepper, and muſtard ſeede. Alſo a good diet doth help much, as deambulations in the morning, geſtacions,
                     Diet.
                   and caryinges in a cart or in a ſhip, or on a beaſt, be good. Alſo, after they be moued with carying about, crying out loude, diſtinct and apt reading is conuenient. Alſo annointing and frictions vſed nowe and then are good. Bathes of ſweete water are ſeeldome to be admitted, and not, but becauſe it ſhould ſcoure and cleanſe the filth. It is verie good to vſe naturall bath
                     ••
                  , which flowe by nature, and this, as it were, the verie laſt refuge. Aboue others thoſe bathes are good, which be in Badenia in the baſe Germanie in Marchia.
               
            
            
               CAP. LVII. Of falling out of the wombe. D
                     •
                   VTERI PROCIDENTIA.
               
                  
                  WE ſay, that the matrice falleth out, when it is ſo turned downward, that it ſtic
                  
                     •
                  eth out outwardly. And yet the whole matrice rowleth not down, being loſened from the bands & ligaments, as many vnwiſe folk do think, for if it ſhould fall down ſo, it could not be reſtored againe. Although the wōb do fall out but ſeldome, yet there be many cauſes of the falling out of it. For a woman falling from an high place,
                     Cauſae.
                   if ſhe fall on her haunches, the pannicles and filmes, that holde vp the womb, and the members adioyning do breake and cauſe this diſeaſe. Alſo it chaunceth manie times that in a ſore trauell of child birth, the womb falleth out becauſe of the drawing out of the ſecundine, which, the womb that ioyneth to it doth follow. Alſo many times it chaunceth through negligent and vnſkilfull drawing out of the child, ſpecially if it be dead. Moreouer it chaunceth ſomtime through a ſtripe, or lifting vp of a great weight, or through vehement perturbation of the mind, as death of children, or comming of enemies, or thorough perillous ſayling, or through ſome ſuch like cauſe, all the bodie being louſened, the womb falleth out. Alſo ſometime this euill chaunceth (all the whole being looſened) thorough reſolution or weakeneſſe of the pannicles and muſcles, which thing chaunceth ſpecially to them that be olde. Oftentimes the womb falleth out, through the flowing downe of an humour much in quantitie and clammie. It falleth out moſt commonly by the mouth of it,
                     Signa.
                   and that which falleth out, is like to the egges of an oſtrich, differing only in that, that it is bigger, or leſſe in quantitie. There is no neede of manie ſignes, becauſe the diuerſitie of cauſes may partly be knowen by the conſtitution and ſtate of the bodie, and partly alſo by the telling of the ſicke, and them that be with them dayly: when this diſeaſe is but newly begunne,
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt endeuour to put vp the wombe againe, and to reſtore him into his owne place, for in the beginning it will be obedient to be put vp readily, and being in his owne place, it will tarie ſo ſtill, ſpecially if age agree vnto it. For in them that are well ſtricken in age, the wombe being put vp againe, it ſlideth out againe through euery light cauſe. It is good therefore, if there be hard dong in the right gut, to bringe it out with a clyſter. Likewiſe if vrine be gathered in the bladder, let it be brought out with a cyring, that the matrice may be at free libertie on ech ſide. For otherwiſe it chaunceth by their ſtretching out, that the matrice, which is in the middeſt betweene them, is preſſed togither, and pent in a ſtraite place, and ſo when he is fallen out, they let it and ſtop it, that it can not be put vp againe into his owne place. When you haue thus done, you muſt lay the ſicke vpright, ſo that her haunches may lie higheſt, her hammes bowed, and her legges ſpreade abrode: then you muſt bath and nouriſh aboundantly that part of the matrice which is fallen out, with warm oyle, or butter, or mallowes ſodden, or with the decoction of althaea, fenugreeke, lineſeede, or ſuch like: and you muſt prepare wooll together on a heape, in figure and thickneſſe, according to the proportion of the member, and wind it about aloft with a fine and pure linnen cloth: then dip it in the iuices of Acatia or of hypo
                        •
                     iſchis infuſed in wine, and put it into the womb, and you ſhall wreſt and writh vpward all that which is fallen downe by little & little, and without violence, vntill the matrice be put vp into his owne proper place. Outwardly you muſt couer the partes about the priuie members with a ſponge wroong out of Poſca. The woman ſhall ly with her legges ſtretched out and ioyned together, that the one may leane vpon the other. But it is more ſafegard, to bind the feete together, bringing the band vp to the knees. But if that part of the matrice which is fallen out, be ſwollen through continuance of time, and be ſtuffed vp with plentie of humours, ſo that the ſwelling do let the putting vp of it, you ſhall nouriſh it with decoction of beetes, & then you muſt clenſe it & waſh it with vinegre, & ſtrewe in it, ſalt finely poudred, & when it leaueth ſwelling then put it vp, as is aforeſaid. Then faſtē cupping glaſſes with much flame to the nauel, & both the ilions or ſmall guttes: and apply continually to the noſe odoriferous thinges. The third day (the woll being as yet ſtill in the womb) let the woman ſit in blacke ſoure wine a litle warmed, or in the decoction of mirtles, bramble leaues, pomegranate rindes and ſuch like. This being done let her lye vpright againe with her haunches higheſt, then take the former woll out, and put in ſuch another in the ſteade of the firſt, dipped in the ſame medicine. Alſo apply cataplaſmes and emplaiſters outwardly to the bottome of the bellie, made of dates, pomegranate rindes, lentilles and ſuch like. Alſo Cerotes that are made of maſticke, wood

of aloes, lapdanum, frankenſence, ſquinant, acorus, nutmegs, gumme tragacanthe, and ſuch like, are good to be applied. But let theſe things be changed euerie third day, vntil the cure be ended perfectly. Alſo during the whole time of the cure, let the woman eſchew mouing, and ſuch things as prouoke ſneezing. And the womb muſt be perfumed beneath with ſtinking thinges, but to the noſe you muſt applie moſt odoriferous thinges, for becauſe the matrice flieth from ſtinking thinges, and it followeth and embraceth odoriferous thinges.
                     V
                           •
                        ctus ratio.
                   Let her meates be ſuch as ingender good iuyce, and giue her odoriferous wines. Alſo the bellie muſt be made ſoft & ſoluble, leſt if ſhe ſhould go to the ſtoole difficultly, the matrice ſhold alſo fall out againe. But yet you muſt take good heede, that the belly be not to much looſened, for then the parts adioyning are looſened, & ſo the matrice will fall out againe. Moreouer if that part of the womb which is fallen out, hath through continuance of time by negligence bene putrified and rotten, and through continuall wetting of it with vrine, and filthineſſe ſticking in it, it be exulcerated: you muſt cut of and ſeare that which is vnprofitable, or burne it without any feare of daunger: for it hath bene knowne (as Paulus teſtifieth) that the whole matrice, becauſe it was rotted; hath bene taken away, and the woman lyued ſtill.
            
            
               CAP. LVIII. Of the mole in the matrice. DE MOLA.
               
                  MOLA in Latine, is called of Aetius and Paulus, a ſwellinge that is hardened, ſometime in the mouth and entrie of the matrice, and ſomtime it ſticketh out in all the matrice, & in feeling it is almoſt like a ſtone. Galen in li. 14. ther met. defineth Mola to be a peece of fleſh without ſhape. This diſeaſe is cauſed of womans ſeede, & much menſtruous bloud flowing into the matrice,
                     Cauſae.
                   & there kept, retayned and ſtopped, which immoderate heate doth ioyne together, and chaungeth it into the forme and faſhion of fleſh. There followeth this euill, a hard ſwelling, with contraction and drawing vp of the ſides, ſlenderneſſe of the bodie, euill colour, loſſe of appetite,
                     Signa.
                   and ſuppreſſion of the menſtruis. Alſo in this euill the pappes do ſwell, ſo that at the firſt it cauſeth ſome to ſuſpect that the woman is conceaued with child, but in proceſſe of time it may be diſcerned. For paine followeth the Mola, cauſing pricking, neither is there any mouing perceaued in this diſeaſe, as is in conception. Many of them do make a ſuſpection of the dropſie, but yet there is a difference betweene them two: becauſe the ſwelling is hard, and doth not giue place to the thruſting of the hand or finger, as the dropſie doth, nor maketh a noiſe as the timpanie doth. But yet often in proceſſe of time, the liuer is cooled and the dropſie ingendreth. This euill for the moſt part is incurable, except remedies be applied in the beginning. But howſoeuer it chaunceth, the cure may not be neglected,
                     Curatio.
                   but you muſt apply and miniſter all things that ſeeme to be good for it. But firſt of all you muſt giue her meates that ingender good iuyce, and let her vſe moderate drinking of wine. Let not the woman vſe vehement mouing, for that will cauſe the fluxe to the diſeaſe, but let her vſe geſtations, and caryings, and deambulations and bathes, & in her lying let her feete be higheſt In the meane ſeaſon if fulneſſe be preſent, you muſt cut a veine of the arme, and then you muſt purge her by pilulae foetidae. When the bodie is purged and emptied, applie cataplaſms, foments, inceſſions, peſſaries, ointments and cerotes, which haue vertue and power to diſſolue, and looſen, as they be that are made of Althaea, mallowes, cammomill, melilot, fenugreeke, lineſeede, and ſuch like. For this purpoſe alſo it is good to apply vnguentum dialthaea or emplaſtrum diachylon ſimplex,
                  
                     Vnguentum.
                   or apply this ointment. ℞. of the oyle of ſweete almondes. ʒ.iij. oyle of lillies. ʒ.ij.ſs. gooſe greace & hennes greace. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. muſculage of lineſeede and fenugreeke. ana. ʒ.j. of the gummes ammoniacum, & bdellium. ana. ʒ.ij. roote of althaea, nigella ſeedes, and daucus. ana. ℈.ij. diſſolue the guumes in wine, and with wax as much as is ſufficient, make an ointment. Alſo you muſt put in Peſſaries made with butter,
                     Poſſ
                           •
                        .
                   ſwines greace, hartes marrow, reiſons, fat figges, lineſeede and fenugreke. After this you muſt miniſter ſuch medicines, as can prouoke menſtruis: for which purpoſe beſides thoſe thinges

that we rehearſed in the Chapter of ſtopping of menſtruis, this medicine is good. ℞. the pouders of diacinnamonum, diagalanga, diacuminum. ana. ʒ.ſs. pouder of diamber. ℈.j. powder of dialacha. ℈.ſs. Cinnamon choſen,
                     Morſ
                           •
                        li.
                   S. Iohns wort, calamus aromaticus, aſarum, roote of gladon, aniſe ſeede. ana. ℈.j. ſeed of rewe, ginger, motherwort, horehound, dictemus, ſage, ana. ℈.ſs. ſuger diſſolued in the waters of motherwort, and S. Iohns wort, as much as is ſufficient, and make lozenges, whereof miniſter dayly the weight of two or three. ʒ. Alſo it is good to put in this peſſarie. ℞. of the roote of Aſarum, gladon, and madder. ana. ʒ.ij. ſeede of rew,
                     Poſſus.
                   
                  nigella. ana. ʒ.ſs. maioram, nutmugs, cloues, laurellberies. ana. ʒ.j. ſaueine. ℈.j. caſtoreum, 
                        ••
                     phorbium. ana. ℈.ſs. pouder them and ſearce them that haue neede, and with turpentine make a Peſſarie. To conclude, you muſt vſe medicins that can diſſolue and loſen congealed bloud: for ſo there will follow excretion, and voiding out of much blacke bloud and clodded. Alſo it profiteth maruelouſlie to the takinge away of this diſeaſe, ſpecially if the euill hath continued long, to vſe naturall bathes, and ſuch as ingender by them ſelues, which haue vertue to diſſolue and diſcuſſe. Moreouer many other remedies rehearſed in the Chapters of the dropſie, may be vſed in this.
            
            
               CAP. LIX. Of inflammation of the wombe. DE INFLAMMATIONE VTERI.
               
                  THE womb is inflamed through manie cauſes. As through a ſtripe or retentiō, and ſtopping of menſtruis,
                     Cauſae.
                   alſo by oborſion, exulceration, vnmeaſurable lecherie, ſitting on a verie hard ſtole, verie long and ſwift deambulation & walking. Alſo oftentimes it chaunceth through cold, prohibiting and letting the tranſpiration and breathing out. The companions to inflammation of the matrice be theſe:
                     Signa.
                   an acute feuer, paine of the head, the ſhare, the loynes, and the rootes of the eyes. Conulſion and cramp of the armes, the fingers, and the necke, and declining of them contrarie. Alſo paine of the ſtomach, and ſhutting vp of the mouth of the matrice, and pulſes that be ſmall and often. If the inflammation be feeble and ſmall, the aforeſaid ſignes wil not be great and ſtrong, and the wombe will be vexed with greater paine. But if the inflammation be vehement, then all the whole wombe is vexed with a panting paine, and all the ſignes will be the more vehement. If all the wombe be inflamed, it will be painefull all ouer, but if ſome part of it be vexed with an inflammation, then the paine is greateſt in that part. For if the hinder parts of it be vexed with inflāmation, the paine will afflict the loynes moſt, and hard dong is withholden and ſtopped, becauſe then the right gut is preſſed together verie much. If the former part be inflamed, then there is paine about the priuities, and the ſtrangury or difficulty in piſſing is ingendred, becauſe the bladder is preſſed togither. If the ſides of it be enflamed, the parts about the priuie members are ſtretched out, and the legs are grieued, and difficultly, moued. When inflammation afflicteth the mouth of the matrice, there is paine in the Abdomen, and if you put in your finger, you ſhall feele the mouth hard, vnpleaſant,
                     Curatio.
                   ſhut vp, and burning hote. In the beginning therfore of the cure, if neither age, nor ſtate of the bodie, nor time of the yeare do let it, you muſt cut the veine of the hammes or of the ankles, (if the inflammation came not after aborſion or great voiding of bloud.) Afterward you ſhall place the ſicke in a dark houſe, which is moderately warme, biddinge her to be quiet, and prohibiting all mouing from her legges. Then you muſt rub the ſpace betweene the ioyntes, and alſo the extreame partes, that you may turne away the courſe of the fluxe from the wombe.
                     Diet,
                   For her meate which muſt bee little in quantitie, you muſt vſe Ptyſan broth and rere egs: but there muſt be a day betweene: ſhe muſt abſtaine from drinking of wine, and for that, ſhe muſt vſe the decoction of Cinnamon, or hote water. Alſo the bellie if it be not ſoluble enough of it ſelfe, muſt be waſhed and emptied by eaſie and mollifying clyſters.
                     Localia.
                   Outwardly you muſt applie vppon the loynes, and about the ſhare woll wet in vinegre, wherein roſes hath bene ſodden. Alſo dates or quinces ſodden in wine, & commixed with oyle of roſes, is good to be applied. Alſo you muſt apply Cataplaſmes made

with the meale of lineſeede, fenugreke, and with melilot, plantaine, lentilles, knotgraſſe, purſlaine, ſingrene, and ſuch like: and that ſpecially if the inflammation be of the nature of an cryſipela. Moreouer you muſt put into the matrice, woll moiſtened with oyle of roſes, or quinces, or in the iuyce of purſlaine, or ſingrene. When the inflammation beginneth to decline & ceaſe, you muſt come to the vſing of thoſe things, which haue vertue to releaſe, diſſolue and diſcuſſe. Therefore you ſhall bid the pacient ſit vp to the loynes, in fenugreeke ſodden, or in the decoction of althaea, lineſeede, mallowes, and ſometime alſo motherwort, horehound, and ſage. Alſo you ſhall annoint about the priuities, and the loynes, barley meale with fenugreeke and lineſeede ſodden in mulſa, or the decoction of drie figges. Alſo put in peſſaries made of butter, harts marrow, gooſe greaſe, hennes greace, and ſuch like. When the cure hath proceeded, ſundrie meates and light will be much profitable. And when the declination of it, is manifeſt, bring the ſicke to bathes, and giue her wine that is waterie and thine.
            
            
               CAP. LX. Of windineſse in the wombe. DE INFLATI0NE VTERI.
               
                  THE wombe is puffed vp through colde, or humours corrupt in it,
                     Cauſae.
                   or through aborſion, or ſore trauell in child birth, the dore of it being ſhut, or a clod of bloud being in it & ſtopping it. Oftentimes the windineſſe ingendreth in the hollow bought and ſpace of it, ſometime in the boſome of it, which is euidēt to the ſenſes, & ſometime in the thinner parts of the ſuſtbance of the womb,
                     Signa.
                   not appearing to the ſenſes. There followeth this euill, ſwelling of the bottome of the bellie, with hardneſſe and paine that pricketh, which goeth vp to the midriffe and the ſtomach: and yet neuertheleſſe it is ſtretched out on both ſides, ſometime to the ſhare, & ſomtime the paine is in the loynes, & at the nauell, to whom alſo the head agreeth. Alſo many times wind breaketh out of the priuities that the ſicke may feele it. If therefore windineſſe be gathered in the hollowneſſe of the matrice, there is hard a certaine rombling and noiſe in the bodie, ſuch as chaunceth to the guttes, which are vexed with gripings, alſo if you beate your fingers of it, it maketh a noiſe like a timpanie. But when the windineſſe is contained in the thinne and ſlender paſſages of the matrice, then they are vexed with more vehement paine, and harder to cure. This euill is cured firſt, if age, the region,
                     Curatio.
                   and time of the yeare do not let it, by bloud letting, faſting, and purging, with hierapicra Galeni: which being done, you muſt vſe foments, and annointings with oyle of rewe, or with oile wherin dill hath bene ſodden. Alſo let her vſe inceſſions made of the decoction of rewe, peniroyall, calaminr, horehound, motherwort, althaea, and ſuch like. Alſo apply cataplaſmes made of the ſeedes apium, fennell, caraway, commin, louage, daucus, aniſe, fitches or darnell meale and ſuch like. Alſo you muſt poure into the wombe ſuch things as haue power to looſen & diſſolue windineſſe: as is, oile of rewe, ammeos, origan, and the decoction of thinges before rehearſed. And if windineſſe be included and ſtopped through the meanes of a clodde of bloud, after the vſing of the aforeſaid things, and ſpecially inceſſions: Let the midwife put her finger being firſt annointed, into the womans priuities, and diſſolue, and bring foorth the clod eaſily and by little and little. And if the euill hath continued long, you muſt come to more effectuous remedies. Therefore you muſt vſe linimentes, emplaiſters, and cerotes that be ſtronger as this is. ℞. ſothernwood, origan,
                     Cera
                           •
                        um.
                   and calamint. ana. ʒ.ij. ſeede of tutſan. ℈.ij. of centorie the leſſe. ʒ.j. Caraway ſeedes, a
                        ••
                     mi. ana. ʒ.ſs. caſia. ℈.j. bdellium, ammoniacke. ana. j.ſs. oyle of rewe and dill. ana. ℥.j. with wax and turpentine as much as is ſufficient, make a Cerote and applie it to the wombe. Alſo ſometime you muſt proceede to the vſe of Synapiſmes and Dropaces. Alſo cupping glaſſes maye be faſtened to the places lightly in a circuite, and muſt be pulled away violently, for theſe do help as it were a charme. Alſo ſomtime ſcarificatiō muſt be made: & you muſt vſe ſuch things altogether, as haue poer to draw out, & call forth frō the bottō to the top. Alſo,
                     Diet.
                   for her diet you muſt miniſter food that doth attenuate and diſſolue windineſſe, and miniſter medicines alſo that haue the ſame vertue, as diamſon, and diacuminum, and diacalaminthes, and ſuch like.
            
            
               
               CAP. LXI. Of exulceration of the wombe. DE VTERI EXVLCERATIONE.
               
                  
                     Cauſae.
                  
                  THE matrice ſometime is exulcerate, becauſe of hard child birth, or drawinge out of the child, or through corrupting of the matrice, or through ſharp medicines or fluxes, or through impoſthumes or botches broken. They that haue this diſeaſe do feele a prickinge paine in the aggrieued part:
                     Signa.
                   and at certaine times ſtinking and atterie humours are ſent out from the filthy vlcer. And other ſignes proper to the diſeaſes of the wombe do followe, as headach, and ſpecially of the forepart of the head, of the great ſinewes in the necke, and of the rootes of the eyes, is felte paine, which alſo extendeth vnto the fingers endes, and other tokens declared before in the chapter of inflāmation of it. Therfore if the vlcer may be ſeene, it may be knowen by an inſtrument called ſpecillum oriculariū
                  : but if it be deep within & hidden, thoſe things which come from it will declare it: for a diuerſe humour is ſent forth. If the vlcer be enflamed, the humour is little in quantitie, bloudy or dredgie with great paine. If the vlcer be foule and filthie, the humour commeth out in more aboundance, and is matter with leſſe griefe. If the vlcer doeth eate and feede,
                     Curatio.
                   the humour is ſtinking, blacke, and with vehement paine. For the Cure, when the bile, or vlcer is enflamed, you muſt vſe bloud letting and other medicines that are good againſt inflammation, as is afore taught. In other cauſes you muſt vſe purging medicines, ſpecially if the bodie doth abound with vitious and corrupt humours. Alſo applye ſuch medicines, as doe repreſſe and ſtop the flowing of humours, and correct their hote diſtempure, as is, the iuyces or waters of purſlaine, plantaine, burſa paſtoris, and ſuch like before rehearſed. Then, if the vlcer be filthy, you muſt vſe ſcouring and cleanſing medicines, as is, Ptyſan with hony, and mulſa, with the decoction of the roote of Ireos, ariſtolochia, wormewood, or agrimonie. Thoſe vlcers which do eate and feede, muſt, be waſhed with mares milke or Aſſes milke newly milked, you muſt mixe with the milke, hony, and roote of yreos. Theſe thinges, is the vlcers may be ſeene, may be annointed: but if they be deepe within, caſt them in with an inſtrument called metrenchita. When the vlcers be well purged and cleanſed, you muſt vſe ſuch thinges, as will cloſe them vp: firſt gentle things:
                     Cera
                           •••
                        .
                   and then thoſe that be of a more effect. The Cerote of Aetius doth eſpecially pleaſe me, which is this. ℞. of white waxe. ℥.j. of fine oyle of roſes. ℥.iij. and melt them together vpon the coales, and when it is cooled, then put it into a morter, & put therinto womans milke, or Aſſes milke, or goates milke newly milked, and worke them together with a peſtle, vntill it be white, then poure out the aforeſaid milke, and put in new milk, and then work them againe, and then put to it about. ℈.j. of ſaffron. And if thou wouldeſt haue it to mitigate paine more, ad to it oyle of roſes. ℥.ij. the greace and marrow of a gooſe. ana. ℥.ſs. Alſo you may put to oyle of quinces, in ſteede of oyle of roſes. You muſt apply this Cerote to the belly and the haunches. For the vertue of it is ſent into the wombe by ſecrete and hidden paſſages. Alſo you may caſt into the matrice of that faculty: as be, the decoctiō of pomegranate rindes, roſes, quinces, bremble, mirtles, ſumache, acatia, hypociſchis, with reſtrictiue wine. To this place you may transferre and bring medicines out of the former Bookes, and out of the chapters of vlcers of the reines, the bladder, and the yard.
            
            
               CAP. LXII. Of straitneſſe of the matrice. DE PHINOSI VTERI.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  PHINOSIS in greeke, obturatio, or coarctatio vteri in Latin, it is a ſtopping or ſtreightening in the mouth or necke of the matrice, whereby thoſe places are made ſo ſtreight, that it will not admit nor ſuffer any ſeede: or if they do receaue it, they cannot hold it, for becauſe of their knobby hardneſſe, it can not ſhut together. Sometime it receaueth ſeede, and it is kept and retained in

ſtreight mouth of the wombe, & thereof is a child conceaued, but the conception bringeth occaſion of death to the woman: ſeing, becauſe of the great ſtraightneſſe of the places, it can not be brought foorth. This diſeaſe is cauſed in the mouth of the matrice,
                     Cauſae.
                   either of exulceration going before, or of an inflammation there hardened. There is no neede of ſignes to know this diſeaſe by: for by the telling of the ſicke, & by touching of it,
                     Signa.
                   you may eaſilie know it. The cure of it muſt be wrought with fomentacions, that can releaſe, diſſolue, & mollifie. Alſo with cataplaſmes and inceſſions, that be of like power and vertue.
                     Curatio.
                   Therefore you muſt apply foments made of the decoction of fenugreeke, and hydrelaeon. Alſo you muſt vſe peſſaries, that can mollifie and diſſolue, as that is which is made of aeſipum, that is, oyle tried out of woll in ſheepes flanks or necks, ſalt peter, and turpentine. To be ſhort, to the cure of this diſeaſe you muſt vſe mollifying medicines, as is mallowes, althaea nigella, fenugreeke, lineſeede, ammoniake, bdellium, rozin, greace, and ſuch l
                     •
                  ke, of the which you may make cerotes, emplaiſters, & all kind of outward medicines. And if the euill be waxed old, you muſt vſe ſuffumigations, and euaporations made of aromatique things. And when the places do ſeeme to be ſofter to the feeling, then you muſt put a drie ſponge, that hath a cord hanged at it, into the ſtreight place, to the intent to make it wider: which if it fall out, you muſt put in another that is thicker. Therfore you muſt haue many and ſundry drie ſponges readie. Afterward you muſt annoint vpon the ſponges that you will put in, ſome medicine made of alome, & claterium, mixed with hony, that thereby the place may be made wider. And if, after the ſponges be taken away, the place do not ſeeme open & wide enough, and inflammation be preſent through the eating & gnawing of the medicines that were applied, then annoint vpon the ſponge, that you will put in, this ointment.
                     Vnguentum.
                   ℞. oile of ireos. ℥.j. of fine turpentine. ʒ.ij. of gooſe greace. ʒ.j. roote of ireos & frankenſenſence. ana. ʒ.ſs. wax as much as is ſufficient, & make an ointment. But if the inflammation be vehement, take oile of roſes, or violets in ſtede of oile of yreos. When the inflāmation is ceaſed & the place is open, anoint vpon a ſponge a cerote made of oile of roſes & gooſe greace, & vſe that vntill it be healed, making the place a little ſounder: but yet you muſt alwayes put in ſponges vntill the end of the cure, leſt that the mouth of the wombe do gather together againe.
            
            
               CAP. LXIII. To take away barainneſſe. DE STERILITATE REMOVENDA.
               
                  STERILITAS in Latin, barennes in Engliſh.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed of the womans part or of the mans part. It is of the mans part, when his ſeede is either hote, & as it were burned, or elſe cold, thinne, waterie and feeble, as is the ſeede of old and feeble men: or when it is ſent foorth thicker then it ought to be: or becauſe the men be halfe geldinges, & haue a very ſhort yard, ſo that they can not caſt their ſeede into the innermoſt place of the matrice, which alſo ſometime chaunceth through much fatneſſe: for fat men haue ſuch great bellies, that they cannot caſt the ſeede into the deepeſt partes of the bodie. Alſo women of their part can not conceaue, that haue their matrice either hote and fiery, or cold and moiſt, or foule, filthy & drie. For (as Hippocrates faith) 5. Apho. 62. the ſeede is corrupted or quenched in ſuch. Alſo women that be very groſſe and fat, do not conceaue (as Hippocrates witneſſeth. 5. Apho. 46. Moreouer women that be leane & ſlender do not conceaue, or if they do conceaue, they do ſuffer aborſion ſtraight way, which alſo Hyppocrates witneſſeth. 5. Apho. 44. Alſo ſome do not conceaue, becauſe their wombe is weake or ſtraight or ſhort: or becauſe the veſſels of it be ſtopped or ſhut vp, or blinded and couered by reaſon of a ſcarre, or becauſe the necke of the womb is drawn crooked, or becauſe the mouth of the matrice is to ſtreight or to wide open. Alſo vnwilling carnall copulation for the moſt part is vaine and barren: for loue cauſeth conception, and therefore louing women do conceaue often. Alſo age to great, or to little, doeth let conception. Therefore you muſt ſeparate them that be young from carnall copulation, ſo that the man may be 30. yeares old, and the woman 18. But ſpecially an vncomly

& fooliſh ſhape and forme of the womans bodie, doth giue an occaſion to barennes. For a woman, that is fertile, ought to haue a moderate ſtature & height of the body, breadth of the loynes and the ſhare, buttocks ſticking out, a handſome & conuenient greatneſſe of the belly, a ſtreight breaſt and large pappes. The ſignes whereby the diuerſitie of cauſes be known be theſe.
                     Signa. Hote diſt
                           •
                        pure
                   The hote diſtempure of a man, is eaſily known by the abundance of haires, ſpecially blacke haires vpon the genitalles, and the places adioyning, from aboue vnto the midde thighes. Alſo this diſtemperature is laſciuious and readie to carnall luſt, but it is ſoone ſatiate and filled.
                     Cold temperature.
                   A temperament that is to cold, is declared by the partes being about the ſtones being bald and without haire. Alſo they that be of this temperature, be not deſirous and prone to carnall luſt. Heate of the matrice is known by the heate in the reſt of the body, & becauſe fewe menſtruis are ſent out and that with paine, ſo that ſometime the womans priuities are exulcerate with it, & that which is ſent out, is blackiſh▪ Alſo there followeth this temperature, an inſtinction or tickling to lecherie, and drineſſe of the whole bodie. A temperature of the matrice, which is cold, is known by ſuppreſſion & ſtopping of the menſtruis, and by aſtoniſhment engendred in the loines, the legs, & the parts about the priuities. Alſo they that haue this temperament, doe deſpiſe vſe of carnall luſt, and haue the mouth of the matrice drawen togither. If through to much moiſtneſſe, barenneſſe be ingendred, then in the act of generation, they are verie much bedewed with moiſtneſſe and the menſtruis floweth much in quantitie and thinne. Drineſſe is knowen by the contrarie ſignes to moiſtneſſe. The reſt of the cauſes may be knowen partly by ſight, and partly by the telling of the partie, or other about her. For the cure commonly to both, as well the man as the woman:
                     Cure of both to men and womā commo
                           •
                        .
                   It is conuenient for them to keepe the whole bodie verie temperate, and to keepe a meane and meaſure in labouring, eating, drinking, and bathing, and in all other exerciſes. Men therefore that haue their ſeede corrupted through naughty and euill kind of diet, if they vſe a more ordinate diet and healthfull, their genitours will haue fecunditie and fertilitie. Let the woman neither wearie her ſelfe with to much labour, nor let her not be altogether idle: for idleneſſe doeth fill and ſtuffe the whole bodie with ſuperfluous humours, and excrementes: but great labour drieth vp the bloud, and conſumeth the menſtruis. Let her vſe meates and drinkes eaſie of digeſtion, and ſuch as the ſtomach may well comprehende and conſume. And you muſt ſpecially obſerue in their order of good diet, that neither the man nor the woman be made fat. For they that be fatte, are vnapt to procreate and beget children, becauſe their genitours can not touch together, and alſo becauſe they ſend out little ſeede. Moreouer it is conuenient that you giue vnto ſuch as deſire to get children, ſome accuſtomed and pleaſant thing to eat or drink before meate, which be moſt apt to prouoke carnall luſt, & to ingender ſeede: as thoſe be that do heate meaſurably, & puffe vp with wind. Therfore wine in this caſe meaſurably drunk, is to be preferred afore water. For as the prouerb is ſine Cerere & Baccho friget Venus. (that is) If you haue not bread & wine: carnal luſt wil coole & pine. For potherbs they muſt vſe rocket, orminiū, it is an herb like vnto horehound, eriſymo, & other ſuch like which we haue rehearſed of them that cānot vſe carnall copulatiō. Rew, calamint & mints muſt be eſchewed altogether: for calamint & mints, although they ingender much ſede, yet, that which they ingender, is feble & weake: but rewe doth altogether corrupt & deſtroy ſeede. If a woman do not conceaue through the vice and corruption of certaine humours,
                     Cure of a woman full of corrupt humours.
                   it is good to empty her with a purging medicine, & to amend her with a good diet. Particularly for womē, it is good for them to take as good heede as can be to thoſe thinges that chance to the matrice, and that their menſtruis may flowe without any, impediment. Therefore when the purgation of their menſtruis is nigh at hand, let them keepe a meaſure in eating and drinking with all their dilgence. And let them take ſome of thoſe thinges, that can prouoke and ſtirre vp the purgacion of the menmenſtruis, as be herbes that be odoriferous and ſharpe, as is, Cerefolium, fennell, apium, louage & ſuch like, wherof you ſhall find plentie in the chapter of ſtopping of the menſtruis. After the purging of the menſtruis, both the right ſide and the left ſide of the matrice is open. If colde diſtempure doeth cauſe barenneſſe, you muſt correct and amende it by foments,
                     Cure of a cold temperature of the wombe.
                   Cataplaſmes, and ſuffumigations, and other medicines that haue vertue to heate: as thoſe be which are made of motherwort, poniroyall, ſage, rewe, aniſe ſeede, commin,

gladon and ſuch like. Alſo it profiteth her to drinke Caſtoreum, and odoriferous ſeedes, comin, aniſe ſeede, and iuniper fruict, and other thinges that be rehearſed in the Chapter of ſtopping of menſtruis.
                     Cure of a hote diſtempure.
                   You muſt amend and correct a hote diſtempure of the matrice cauſing barenneſſe, with ſuch things as do coole & moiſten: as theſe herbs be, letuſe, mallowes, gourdes, puſlaine, & orach with ſuch like. Alſo ſhe muſt drink wine that is thinne, white & alayed. Alſo it profiteth her to ſleepe, and to bath in ſweete water. Alſo you muſt applie to the loynes and about the priuities ſuch thinges as do coole, as iuyce of nightſhade mixed with oyle of roſes, which alſo being laid vpon woll, may be put well into the matrice. They which do not conceaue through moiſtneſſe of the matrice, it is good for them to vſe a drier diet. Alſo they muſt exerciſe them ſelues much,
                     Cure of a moiſt diſtempure.
                   & they muſt be rubbed in the vpper part of the bodie. Alſo to thintent to purge out, and turne away humours, let them vomite ſometime after dinner, and ſometime faſting, and you muſt dry them with ſcarcity of meate, and let them eate fleſh of middle aged beaſts roſted, and giue them pure wine, that is mighty to drink, but giue it them ſeldome. Alſo it profiteth to apply reſtrictiue things to the matrice, as be roſes, leaues of brier, galles, ſumach, mirtles, knotgraſſe, pomegranate rinds, and ſuch like ſodden. But you may not do this, vnleſſe the whole bodie be firſt purged. A dry matrice muſt be cured by the contrarie to that which is aforeſaid, as with bathes of ſweete water,
                     Cure of a drye diſtempure. Cure of groſſe humours.
                   annointings, & meates that do moiſten, Let her vſe wine that is alayed, being not very old. And if a womans conception be impedited and ſtopped through groſſe humours, if they be gnawing it is good to purge the womā well with hierapicra in whey: & ſhe muſt vſe a more exquiſit diet, & meats that do ingender good iuyce: but you muſt conſume the fleugmatike humours with much labour, with ſweating, vomiting or by purging by the nether parts: & all other things which be rehearſed in the chapter of ſtopping of menſtruis, which it behoueth not to rehearſe here particularly. Alſo windineſſe ingendred in the womb,
                     Cure of windineſſe.
                   doth let the fertility of conception, & cauſeth barenneſſe. Such women therefore as haue this, muſt firſt be amended with a ſtraighter diet. Then you muſt miniſter both outwardly, & inwardly to them, ſuch medicines as can diſſolue, diſperſe, & conſume windineſſe, as is comin, rew, dill, ſeede of apium, & ſuch like, which be rehearſed in the chapter of windineſſe of the matrice, and in other places. If ſhutting vp of the matrice doth cauſe barenneſſe,
                     Cure of a matrice ſhut vp.
                   you ſhall open it by caſting in of odoriferous cliſters, and by vſing of foments, & inceſſions made of fenugreeke, lineſeede, mallowes, & ſuch like rehearſed in the chapter of ſtraightneſſe of the womb. And afterward you muſt proceede to ſtronger medicines, as motherwort, calamint, peniroyall, & maioram. They which haue the mouth of the matrice gaping much,
                     Cure of an ap
                           •
                         matrice.
                   it is good for them to vſe a drying diet, and drying foments. And it is good alſo to vſe reſtrictiue medicines, as be the decoction of galles, bremble rootes, mirtles, & ſuch like rehearſed before in the cure of a moiſt diſtempur. Laſt of all, if crookedneſſe of the matrice do cauſe barenneſſe, you ſhal direct & make ſtraight the matrice with mollifying foments: for foments can do that beſt:
                     Cure of a writhed matrice.
                   but yet you may conueniently put in mollifying peſſaries. But ſpecially the decoction of peniroyall, & motherwort, & caſtoreum drunk with poſca, are wont to be good for a writhed matrice. Paulus ſaith, that then carnall luſt vſed backward is good to conceaue. We here haue generally comprehended the cures, onely by other chapters. For the particular cure of ech cauſe, muſt be ſought out his proper chapter.
            
            
               CAP. LXIIII. Of ſore trauaile in child birth. DE DIFFICVLTATE PARTVS.
               
                  SORE trauaile in child birth doth chance either through default of the parent,
                     Difficilis partus.
                   or of the child, or of the ſecundine, or through ſom outward cauſe. Of the parent if ſhe be groſe & fat & faint harted, & vnſkilfull of paine, or if the whole matrice be ſmall, or if there be inflammation of the whole womb, or of ſome part of it, or that it be vexed with ſome other diſeaſes, or if ſhe be naturally weake, ſo that ſhe can not driue out the child: or if that ſhe do labour before her time. Alſo if the neck of the mouth of the matrice be croked, or if there be ſom piece of fleſh ingendred

there, by reaſon of a bile or vlcer going before. But default of the childe is, if it be of an vnaccuſtomed greatneſſe, or ſmall and of a little weight, or if it hath a great head, or if it be monſtrouſe, as hauing two heades, or three feete, or if it be dead, and ſo doeth not labour to come foorth, or if it ſwell, or being aliue, if it be weake, ſo that it can not proceede foorth: or if they be two or mo, and do all ruſh ſodainly togither into the necke of the matrice, or if the child be faſhioned contrarie to nature. For the naturall forme of a child comming foorth is, firſt with his head, (his hands being ſtretched out vpon the thighes) & with his head declining to the neither parts, but ſtraightly directed to the mouth of the matrice. the beſt forme in comming foorth, next vnto this, is, firſt with his feete, hauing the hands ſtretched vppon both the thighes, and ſo deſcending ſtraight vp. All other formes in comming foorth, except theſe two, are contrarie and abhorring to nature. The trauaile is made difficile through the Secundine: if it be not pulled away, becauſe of the groſſneſſe or thickneſſe of it, or if it breake before it ſhould do, becauſe of the thinneſſe of it. For then, the humoure that is gathered together in the matrice, is ſent out before the conuenient time. Therfore the priuities be without moiſture, and be drie at the time of the trauaile, when moyſtneſſe were neceſſarie, which ſhould make a ſlipperie, & eaſie, going out of the child, and ſo through drineſſe, the childe ſlideth out hardly. Alſo difficultie in childe-birth is engendred of outward cauſes: as of colde, which thickeneth the matrice, and maketh the paſſages ſtraighter, or through a great heate, which diſſolueth and weakedeth the ſtrength. But outwarde cauſes are knowen by the telling of the pacient, or of them that ſitte by her. Weakeneſſe of the woman that laboureth,
                     Signa.
                   as fatneſſe may be knowen by the ſtate of the bodie. Alſo by diſeaſes, that ſhee hath had before, you may readily come to the knowledge of weakeneſſe, and of many other euilles. Weakeneſſe of the childe is knowen by feeble and ſlowe mouing of it. Which if it be dead, it moueth not, and there is coldneſſe of the belly, and great paine about the nauell. Alſo a ſtinking breath is breathed out, & a naughty colour of the face. Greatneſſe of the childe may be coniectured by the conſtitution of the parentes bodie, and by greatneſſe of the womans belly. Groſſeneſſe and thickeneſſe of the ſecundine may be gathered & known thus: if none of the aforeſaid ſignes be preſent, and the woman ſtrong and luſty, and the child moueth quickly and eaſily. As for the cure, it varieth according to the diuerſitie of cauſes.
                     Cure of a fat woman.
                   Therfore you muſt place a fat woman downward in a little bed, that is, hanging downwarde with her head, and her face toward the ground, bending & enclining her knees to her thighs, that the womb ſtretching to the Abdomen, may be right with his mouth. You muſt with your fingers annoint the mouth of the matrice, with butter, oile, ducks greace, hens greace, & ſuch like, & you muſt ſpreade it abroad, & open it wider by little & little. You muſt comfort & incourage a fearefull woman. And if ſhe be vnſkilfull of paines in trauaile,
                     Cure of a feare full woman.
                   admoniſh her to hold and ſtop her breath ſtrongly, and let her thruſt it out to the ilions with all her might. If ſore trauaile in childbirth be cauſed of adſtriction, & binding, or aſtoniſhment, or, as it were, adarctation and pending in of the child, you muſt help it with diſſoluing & releaſing, by pouring in largely ſweete wine & hote. Alſo the decoction of fenugreeke, or mallowes, or lineſeede, or alſo egs are good, becauſe they are of a loſening & mollifying vertue. Afterward you muſt nouriſh the parts about the priuy mē
                  bers, & the belly & loynes with the aforeſaid decoction, or with ſome other loſening & mollifying medicine. Alſo it profiteth to vſe hote inceſſions & euaporations, & to haue the aire of the houſe enclining to heate. Alſo it is good to vſe inſuſions & annointings, with oiles that be hote in touching & vertue, & cōueniēt cataplaſmes be good. And if neither a feuer, nor any thing els do let it, ſhe muſt vſe releaſing & diſſoluing bathes, & you muſt moue her, with bearing her in a chaire, in an aire that is meanely hote. Many do vſe to ſuch violent ſhaking of the body. And if any woman be weake, and haue ſore trauaile in childe birth thorough reſolution of the bodie, you muſt comfort and refreſh the bodie, with medicines that do thicken, and drawe togither, and with ſuch meates and drinkes, as do recreate, reſtore, & ad ſtrength to the bodie: as be inceſſions & ſprinklings with mirtles, vine leaues, pomegranates, roſes, ſmelling to vinegre, and annointinges with wine, mixt with cold oyle of roſes. VVhen the infant is ouer great, you muſt apply thoſe thinges which can make wider, ſtretch out, and looſen the mouth of the matrice. If ſore trauaile doe chaunce thorough

an innaturall forme of the child in comming foorth, you muſt bring him to a natural forme and figure, as much as is poſſible, partly by putting backe, partly by drawing to you, partly by turning, and partly by making it ſtraight. And if the head or foote, be ſent out firſt, you may not drawe out the childe taking holde by that member: but put your fingers to the ſhoulders or haunches of the childe, and thruſt vp that againe, which is come forth into the conuenien place, if there be two or three, or mo children, and do thruſt altogether into the necke of the matrice, you muſt driue backe the reſt into the bottome of the wombe, and bring that out firſt, which ſeemeth to be moſt readie: but if it do not come foorth, becauſe the infant is dead, or hath a very great head, or through ſome other cauſe, you muſt come to drawing out of the childe, or to cutting, which is taught aboundantly of Aetius, lib. 16. cap. 23. and of Paulus lib. 6. cap. 74. For it is not our purpoſe to teach handy cure heare. Moreouer if the tunicle or ſecundine of the childe be thicker and ſtronger, then that it may be broken, you muſt cut it. Thoſe that haue the humour, which is contained in the tunicles or ſecundine, flowing and running out before the conuenient time, ſo that the places be dried vp, you ſhall waſh it all about with whites of egges, with the decoction of mallowes, and fenugreeke ſtrained, or with iuyce of Ptiſan warmed. A medicine that doth vniuerſally helpe all that haue ſore trauell in child birth, is this that followeth. ℞. Cinnamon choſen.
                     Puluis optimus.
                   
                  ʒ.ij. mirrhe, caſia lignea. ana. ℈.j. white ambre. ʒ.j.ſs. beate them together and make a fine pouder, wherof miniſter in wine that is odoriferous, the weight of one drachme. Moreouer the child being borne, oftentimes it chaunceth that the Secundine doeth ſticke faſt in the wombe, which if it chauceth, then ſometime the mouth of the matrice is found open, and ſometime ſhut, and the ſecundine manie times is ſtill ioyned to the bottome of the womb, and many times it is ſeparate. If therefore the mouth of the matrice be open, and the ſecundine which is left therin do cleaue to ſome part of the womb, being wound vp together like a ball, it may eaſily be drawne out.
                     To draw out the ſecundine.
                   You muſt drawe out the ſecundine with your lefte hand being warmed, and annointed with ſome fat thing, and put into the wombe. If the ſecundine be faſtened and knit to the bottome of the womb, you ſhall likewiſe put in your hand, warmed and annointed with greaſe, and take hold of the ſecundine, and draw it out: but you may not drawe it ſtraight foorth, leſt the matrice come out with it: nor pull it verie vehemently, but ſoftely and eaſilie, firſt pulling it crooked, bringing it this way and that way: then after that, you may draw it ſomewhat harder, for by this meanes you ſhall looſen it from the faſtening. But if the mouth of the matrice be ſhut, you ſhall vſe perfuſions, & with the fingers of your left hand you ſhall labour to open it eaſily, and to make it wider by little and little. Which if you cannot bring to paſſe, it is good to apply about the priuities, fomentes, perfuſions and ointmentes that can mollifie, diſſolue and releaſe. If ſhe be ſtrong, you muſt put into her noſthrilles at that time alſo ſneezing powder, made of Caſtoreum, pepper and ſuch like. For Hippocrates in 5. Apho. 49. writeth thus: that the ſecundine may come out, giue her ſneezing powder, and let her ſtop her noſe and mouth. Alſo you muſt miniſter vnto her, potions that can prouoke menſtruis: which thinges aforeſaid, you muſt do the firſt and ſecond day. Moreouer ſhe muſt vſe ſuffumigations, ſeething in a pot, motherwort, yreos, ſaueine, peniroyall, calamint, dictamus and ſuch like. Then put the pot vnder a cloſe chayr, vpon the which let the woman ſit, being compaſſed in round about with clothes. After that, if you finde the mouth of the matrice opened, put in your hand and labour to pull out the ſecundine, as is aforeſayed, but if it will not obey to come foorth, you may not rent it, for within a fewe dayes after being rotten and tourned into atter, it will fall out. But becauſe thorough the euill ſauour and ſmell, when it is rotted, it filleth the head and marreth the ſtomach. They that are troubled with this euill, muſt be continuallie perfumed. For which purpoſe theſe thinges are good: Cardamonies, bdellium, with ſaueyne, frankenſence, storax, lapdanum, wood of Aloës, and ſuch like. Alſo a perfuming with 
                     •
                  eate by a pipe, which is put into the mouth of the matrice, doeth profite maruelouſlie. Alſo ſimples, ſuch as prouoke menſtruis, be good: as decoction of mootherwort, and laurell bereies, with vinum mulſum. Alſo make Peſſaries of mirrhe and Cyclamminum commixed with oyle.
            
            
               
               CAP. LXV. Of the Sciatica. DE ISCHIADE.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  ISCHIAS in Greeke, properly is called a moſt grieuous paine, which is wont to chaunce about the ioint, which the Greekes do call iſchion, the Latines, Coxa, in Engliſh the huckle bone. The Latines call this diſeaſe Iſchias, and they that are afflicted with this diſeaſe, are called Iſchiadici. The barbarous ſort call this diſeaſe, Sciatica, & they cal thē that be diſeaſed with it Sciatici. It is cauſed through a groſſe & flegmatike humour,
                     Cauſae.
                   which being cōgealed, abideth in the ioint of the huckle bones. Therfore continuall crudities and rawneſſe, and vnmeaſurable vſing of venerious acts do not a little help the ingendring of a Sciatica. Alſo ſometime ſwift deambulations and walkings, and ſuppreſſion or ſtopping of the hemmorhides, & cuſtome of vomiting being omitted, & purgation of menſtruis, or alſo other familiar, & accuſtomed emptyings being impedited & ſtopped, & neglecting of exerciſes. For ech of theſe do ingender abundance of flegmatike humours.
                     Signa.
                   There goeth before this euill ſomtime paine of the muſcles that be nigh vnto it, and ſpecially of the loynes, ſomtime the beginning is in the buckle bone it ſelfe. Alſo ſomtime it chanceth (that the paine of the huckle bone being takē away) there remaineth griefe only about the hammes: & to ſome about the ankles, but in ſome all the leg is equally vexed with paine. Alſo in many, there is paine about the priuy members, & then alſo the bladder being vexed, doth ingender difficulty in piſſing: & then chiefly the whole legge,
                     Curatio.
                   from the haunches to the heeles ſuffereth paine. Let the cure be begunne with voiding and purging of the humour that doth afflict the patient. And if the bodie do equally abound with all humours, before all other remedies, cut a veine in the hāme, or the outward ankle, or alſo in the arme, on that ſide that is diſeaſed. For ſometime the Sciatica is cured in one day, by this emptying out of the legges. But if the bodie be ſtuffed with a fleugmatike and groſſe humour, you muſt beginne the cure with purging of that humour. For the wich purpoſe, you muſt miniſter Clyſters often, made after this ſort, or in like maner. ℞. of Centorie,
                     Clyſ
                           •
                        er.
                   ſage, 
                     Ʋerbaſculi odorati, rewe, chamaepityos. ana. M.j. rootes of gladon. ℥.j. ſtechados. 
                  ʒ.iij. ſeedes of anniſe and fenuell. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. agaricke of the beſt. ʒ.ij. roote of polipodie. ʒ.v. ſeeth theſe in ſufficient quantitie of water, vntill the thirde part. Then take of the licour of that decoction. ℥.xiij. of hierapicra. ℥.ſs. of electuarium nidum maius. 
                  ʒ.ij. of oyle of lillies. ℥.ij. oyle of rewe. ℥.j. the yolkes of two egges, ſalt. ʒ.j.ſs. commixe them all and make a Clyſter. Alſo vomitings doth helpe them, that haue the Sciatica, much more then the purging downwarde by the bellie,
                     Vomitus.
                   for that doeth repell and put backe the humour downward ſodenly. Therefore you muſt prouoke vomites in the beginning by and by after meate. But afterward you muſt miniſter vomiting medicines, beginning firſt with them that be eaſie. They that haue humours vehemently compact and thickened together, which can difficultly be diſſolued and looſened, cauſed thorough Phiſitions vſing ſharpe medicines out of time,
                     Cucurbita magna.
                   ſuch be holpen by faſtenning on of a verie great cupping glaſſe with ſcarifications. But in the Sciatica, we do not vſe ſuch medicines as can repreſſe and ſtoppe the fluxe. For ſeing the diſeaſe is placed in the bottome of the huckle bone, bloud is expelled from the veines and muſcles that be nigh adioyning to it, and is ſent thither. Therefore in the beginning of this diſeaſe, there is neede of medicines that can mittigate and aſſwage which neithr do coole much, nor that do heate vehemently. For as thoſe thinges which do coole, do thruſt the humours violently to the ankle bone: ſo thoſe thinges that doe vehemently heate, do drawe more matter out of the members adioyning. Moreouer you may not come to the vſing of ſharpe medicines, till after bloud letting or emptying by purgacions.
                     VVhen ſharp medicine may be vſed.
                   For if anie man applie ſharp medicines to the diſeaſed member, before the bodie be emptied or purged, he ſhall make the diſeaſe harde to cure, becauſe of a multitude of humours ſo thickened there, that they cannot be diſſolued. For beſides other things it is made groſſe and viſcous, and through the heate and drineſſe of the ſharp medicines, it ſuffereth as it were roſting, or burning. Firſt therefore you muſt irrigate and ſprinkle the aggrieued

place with oyle of rew. After you muſt apply more effectuous medicines, which do heate and can draw humours from the bottom to the top, as be oleum nulpinum, oyle of pepper, oleum coſtinum, oyle of iuniper, vnguentum aragon, martiatum, and agrippa. Alſo ſage, rew,
                     Simples.
                   laurell leaues, elder, roote of wallworte, peniroiall, ſauine, opoponax, bdellium, ammomacum and ſuch like. Of the which you may make fomentes, ointmentes, emplaiſters & cerotes. But if the griefe be extreemely painefull, then vſe this, which followeth, for it is moſt excellent againſt this euill. ℞. roſen of the pine tree lib. j.ſs. Galbanum. ℥.v. melt them with a ſoft fier, and then ſtreine it through a cloath,
                     Emplaiſtrum.
                   and put vnto it of the pouder of maſticke. ℥.j. and then ſpread it warme vpon dogges leather, or lambes leather, and ſtricke it a good thicknes, and before you apply this plaiſter to the pained place annoint the place with this oyntment following. ℞. freſhe hogges greace. ℥.j ſs. and take ſowes or monkes peaſon in number, twentie, and beat them both well in a morter, till they be well incorporate,
                     Vnguentum.
                   and therewith annoint the place and the plaiſter, and warme the plaiſter againſt the fire, till it be ſofte, and laie it to the agreeued place, and let it lie nine dayes. If there be heares vpon the place, you muſt ſhaue them of firſt, and roole it well, leaſt it ſlippeth away, then euerie daie, morning and euening at ech time, let the patient take. ℥.j. of this electuarie. ℞. of the rootes of Acarus, or gladian, being made cleane. lib. j. ſtampe them verie ſmall,
                     Electuarium.
                   (as poſſible you may doe) then take of clarified honie. lib. iij. and put in the rootes by litle and litle, euer ſtirring it: and when it is well ſodden, put into it of cynnamome. ℥.j. made in verie fine pouder, which being well incorporate, keepe it to your vſe, and at the ende of the nine dayes, if the paine be not cleane gone, lay to, the forenamed plaiſter, other nine dayes, vſing the ſame electuarie, and procure vomit, as before, euerie ſixte or ſeuenth daie, for that doth greatly reuert the humour. But in the beginning of the griefe, apply to the aggrieued place againe and againe, ſponges wet in the decoction of iuniper, or ſage, or elder leaues. Afterward, vſe this oyntment. ℞. of vnguentum martiaton. 
                  ʒ.iij. oyle of yreos,
                  
                     Aliud vnguē
                        tu
                           •
                        .
                   and lillies. ana. ℥.ſs. iuice of rewe, and chamaepityos. ana. ʒ.ij. hony. ʒ.j.ſs. ſage, peniroiall, pepper. ana. ʒ.ſs. pellitorie, ſtaueſa
                     •
                  re. ana. ℈.j. wax as much as is ſufficient, make and an ointment. Alſo the vſing of this cerote profiteth. ℞. oleum coſtinū,
                  
                     Cera
                           •••
                        .
                   & vulpinum. ana. ℥.ij.ſs. oile of pepper. ℥.ſs. opoponax, bdellium, ſtorax. ana. ʒ.iij. roote of brionie, ſalte peter, leaues of elder. ana. ʒ.ij. ariſtolochia rotunda, rewe, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. Euphorbium. ℈.j. diſſolue the gummes in verie ſharpe vinegre, and with turpentine and waxe, as much as is ſufficient make a cerote. And if the euill doe remaine ſtill, you muſt vſe cliſters, againe: and then faſten a verie great cupping glaſſe with much flame to the huckle bone, making good deepe gaſhes with ſcarification. And if that the diſeaſe be not ended ſo, you muſt vſe againe purging vomites, and the other remeadies aforeſaide, which being done, you muſt 
                     •
                  ome to the vſing of Dropaces, and Synapiſmes, and ſo to the vſe of burning medicines: amongeſt which, the roote of the hearbe called iberis, is not the worſte, being newe, digged vp in ſommer, and diligently braied, and mixed with a little olde ſwines greace, being laid and bounde to the ioint of the huckle bone, or to the whole ſhanke or legge. Alſo the leaues of it will doe the ſame thing. And being ſo applyed, let it lie not paſt two houres to women, but let it lie foure houres to men, if it be poſſible for them to ſuffer it: for it raiſeth ſwelling with burning and rednes, as a Synapiſme is wont to do. Afterward bring the ſicke into a bath, in the which, when he hath ſwet a little, bid him ſit downe in the veſſell, becauſe of the byting heate, and compell him to ſuffer it ſtrongly. For in the beginning, it is wont to bring byting and gnawing with burning heate, then bring him out: from which alwayes almoſt (as Aetius witneſſeth) although they be caried in of other, they will goe out alone vppon their feete. After the bathing, commixe much oyle with a verie litle wine, and ſhake them togeather, & annoint it: then wipe of the humour with a ſharp cloath, and couer the legge it ſelfe with verie ſofte wooll. And truely (this being done) it hath bene wonte to neede no other remeadie for the cure. But if ſometime it chaunce any part, or remembraunce of the euill to be left ſtill, within a few daies after, you may vſe againe the ſame remeadie. And certaine dayes after, you may lay on the cerote, which is a little before diſcribed. Moreouer, among burning and bliſtring medicines, this is good. ℞. Mel anacardinum, leauen. ana. ʒ.j. cantharides, (the winges caſt away) ʒ.ij. vinegre, as much as is ſufficient:
                     Cansti
                           •••
                        .
                   and commix

them togeather.
                     Aliud.
                   Or this is good. ℞. Euphorbium, ſalt peter. ana. ℈.ij. ſope, quicke lime. ana. ʒ.j. mel anacardinum, as much as is ſufficient, ſo that all being mixed togeather, may be of the thicknes of honie.
                     Vict
                           ••
                         ratio.
                   Let his diet be ſuch, that his meate may be meanely thin, and eaſie of digeſtion. Let his exerciſe be walkinges, continuall writhinges, leapinges, or dauncinges and running. It is good always to haue the bodie ſoluble. And if the diſeaſe hath endured long, and cannot be driuen away with the aforeſaide medicines, you muſt vſe burning in three or foure places, after that ſort, as Paulus teacheth in lib. 6. cap. 76. and Aetius. lib. 12. cap. 30.
            
            
               CAP. LXVI. Of the goute in the feete and ioyntes. DE PODAGRA ET ARTHRITIDE.
               
                  PODAGRA & arthritis in Latine, be diſeaſes of one kinde. And therefore they differ not, but in places diſeaſed. For in both of them there is weakenes of the ioyntes, and an vnnaturall humour floweth to them. And if that the fluxe of the humour doe flow to the feate, that is called Podagra in Latine. But if the humour flowe to other ioyntes,
                     Podagra. Arthritis.
                   it is called in Greeke Arthritis, in Latine, articularis morbus, the ioint ſicknes. Sometime, this euill doth ruſhe in ſodainely, being equally diſperſed throughout all the ioyntes. But for the moſt parte, the fluxe is wont to fall in priuilie, and by little and little. For in ſome, paine doth inuade the ioynte of the great toe, but in ſome the ende of the heele is afflicted. Againe in ſome other, the hollownes of the foote is grieued, either through chafeing of the ſhoe, or ſome ſuch like thing. The goute taketh his beginning at the feete, whereupon it taketh the name, and it proceedeth vpward by little & little to the knees, & alſo to the ioyntes of the huckle bones, & the thighes. Afterward to the handes, euery ioint particularly being grieued. They that are taken extreamly with this diſeaſe, they haue paine in the backbone ioyntes, and in the ioyntes of the ribbes, and eye liddes, and to ſome paine in the throte alſo: neither is there anie connexion or knitting of boanes,
                     Cauſae.
                   which is free from this euill. This diſeaſe is engendred of continuall crudities and drunckennes, and of immoderate vſing of lecherie, through vehement and ſwift deambulations and walkinges, through longe ſtanding or often ryding, by ſuppreſſion and ſtopping of accuſtomed excretions and fluxes, and through intermiſſion of familiar exerciſes. Sorowes, cares, watchinges, and other perturbations of the minde do not onely engender this euill, but alſo doe breede hurtefull and corrupt humours. Alſo many times the cholicke being naughtely cured, is wont to be a cauſe, why the ioint ſickneſſe ſhould follow. But, for the moſt parte, a diſpoſition to this kinde of diſeaſe proceedeth from the parentes to the children, and their poſteritie. Alſo vniuerſally aboundaunce, of all rawe humours is the cauſe of this diſeaſe. The humours that do abound, and doe faſten them ſelues in the ioyntes, either be ſanguine, or cholericke, or flegmaticke, or melancholious.
                     Signa.
                   Alſo ſometime this euill is engendred of commixion of humours. The outward cauſes may eaſely be knowen by the telling of the ſicke, or them that be about him. The difference of humours you ſhall know by the ſignes following. The humour of blood, if it be much in quantitie,
                     Signes if bloud do flow.
                   it cauſeth fulnes, and great ſwelling, not onely of the veines, but about the skinne of the whole member that is grieued, and maketh it red in colour. They which are afflicted with this euill, cannot ſuffer remeadies to be applyed that be verie cold, or verie hote, and they are continually vexed with paine, becauſe the flowing of the bloude doth chaunce continually and equally. Their vrines are yelowe and meane of ſubſtaunce. Alſo their veynes doe abounde with bloude, and are puffed vppe and ſwollen. The conuenient age for this euill, is youth. Alſo meates that engender good iuice, and nouriſh aboundantly were eaten before, and exerciſes were neglected. The time of the yeare in the which the patient is moſt afflicted is ſpring time.
                     Signes of cholericke fluxe.
                   If the humour, that floweth into the ioyntes, be cholericke, you may knowe it by the yealowiſh colour of the skinne. Sometime rednes is mixed with the yealow colour, that is when choler is commixed with bloud. Alſo there is ſenſible heate and ſharpe paine like launcing. Alſo moyſtnes ſodainly

burſteth out of the skinne, without euident ſwelling. The patient is eaſed with cooling medicines, and reioyceth, but with hote thinges his paines augment. In the ſtate and ſtrength of the fitte, a feauer taketh him, and a verie great thirſt. His vrine is cytrine, and ſometime alſo it is ſharpe. There is wont to goe before this diſeaſe, great cares, and wrath watchinges, and wermes, and a diet, that was apt to engender choler. The age, complextion, and time of the yeare, that is hote and drie, be apt to cauſe this cholericke fluxe. And if the humour, that floweth into the ioyntes be flegmatick,
                     Signes of flegmaticke fluxe.
                   the ſwelling will giue place to the thruſting of the finger, and it is looſe and moderate. The coler of the member afflicted, is white. Olde age is moſt afflicted with this humour, and a complexion colde and moyſt, and it chaunceth in the winter time. His vrine is thinne and waterie. There went before it idlenes, reaſt, and a diet that engendreth flegmaticke humours. If it be ſalt fleame, great ich, and gnawing, or byting doth trouble the diſeaſed members. If the fluxe to the ioyntes be of melancholie, which chaunceth but ſeldome,
                     Signes of melancholy ſto
                           •
                        
                        ing.
                   the colour of the ſwelling is blackiſh. The age, which doth moſt engender this fluxe, is the declination of middle age. Alſo the complexion is colde and drie, and the time of the yeare, harueſt, a countrie that is colde and drie, and like ſtate of the aire, and a diet that engendreth melancholie. When the humour that floweth into the ioyntes, is bloud, by and by you muſt let bloud, not once onely, but often taking it awaie by little and little: for if you doe omit bloudletting,
                     Cure of bl
                           •
                        ud fl
                           ••
                        ing.
                   and do vſe repercuſſiue medicines, you ſhall be an authour of great euill. For the bloud being, driuen backe from the vnnoble members, it ruſheth vp to the principall members, and that be neceſſarie to life. Therefore in fluxes of bloud, letting of bloud is verie neceſſarie, ſpecially in them that abound with bloud. You muſt cut a veyne in the arme beneath, right againſt the legge that is vexed with the fluxe. And if the right hande be vexed with paine of this diſeaſe, cut a veine in the right legge, about the hamme, or the ankle, or the ſole of the feete: for a veine being cut right againſt the member that is afflicted, is of great efficacie and ſtrength. Then ſpecially muſt bloudletting be vſed, when this euill beginneth firſt to inuade any man. For they that be vexed often with this fluxe of bloud, doe feele more hurte, then helpe of bloudletting, ſpecially if their bodie be weake and colde.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . After bloud letting, you muſt applie remeadies to the agrieued member, which doe neither coole greatly, leaſt they ſhould driue togeather, and thicken the humours, nor heat vehemently, leaſt they ſhould draw mo humours vnto the diſeaſed membre. Therefore you muſt ſprinckle the grieued place with olde vinegre, and oyle of roſes mixed togeather, ſpecially if the cauſe of the paine doe ſeeme to be deepe within. For vinegre of his owne proper thinnes, going into the deapth, maketh a readie way for the oyle of roſes, which naturally can eaſe paines. But if the paine be aloft, nigh the skinne, you ſhall helpe it geatly with oyle and wine, applying it in ſommer warme, in winter hote. Afterwarde alſo you muſt vſe cataplaſmes, which can eaſe, and ceaſe paine, without any prouoking of fluxes,
                     Cataplaſma
                           •
                        a.
                   made of the meale of fenugreeke, bareley, beanes, lupynes, chammomill and ſuch like: and you muſt ſee that thoſe thinges be euer hote, which may well be, if they be continually chaunged, and couered ouer alofte with woll. Alſo this medicine profiteth not a little. ℞. goates milcke. ℥.v. the yolkes of two egges, oyle of roſes. ℥.j. ſaffron. ʒ.ſs. crummes of bread as much as is ſufficient, that it may haue the forme of a cataplaſme ſtampe theſe, till they be well commixed togeather, and then apply thereof to the member that is grieued. Alſo you may make an emplaiſter or cerote of oyle of roſes, vinegre, rozen, waxe, galbanum, gumme ammoniacke, franckenſence, ſaffron and ſuch like. You muſt giue him meates,
                     Victus ratio.
                   which do extenuate, and that do nouriſh but little, as be potherbes. Let him abſtaine altogeather from fleſh, except it be birdes of mountaines. Let him vſe fiſhes that breede in ſtonie waters. Wine if the intemperaunce of the ſicke may ſuffer it, muſt altogeather be taken away: for it is almoſt the onely reaſon, whereby health ſhoulde follow: which, ſeeing among a thouſand, ſcarce one doth obſerue, it is not maruaile,
                     VVhy fewe be cured of the go
                           ••
                        e at theſe dayes.
                   though there be verie few which be deliuered from this diſeaſe at theſe dayes. In ſteede of wine let him vſe water, wherein cinnamome, annyſe ſeedes, or ſuch like hath bene ſodden: or that drincke, which is called foliſhly now adayes ypocras: the making whereof you may finde before in the chapter of the Palſey. Let the ſicke diligently auoide fruicte and carnall luſt. Alſo he ought to haue a

ſoluble bellie alwayes, that can auoide out the ordure readily alone: which, if it doe not well,
                     Cure of a cholericke fluxe.
                   waſh it with ſome eaſie clyſter. If through flowing of choler, the diſeaſe in the ioints be cauſed, then your labour muſt be to voide and purge out the humour that doth vexe the patient, which you muſt doe, aſwell by vomiting, as by the belly downe warne. Therefore you muſt ſurely purge them that be thus afflicted, by medicines that draw out choler. After that, vntill the full ſtate of it, you muſt apply medicines that haue vertue to coole and reſtraine, as be thoſe that are made of ſingreene, greene roſes, ſharpe ſorrell, nightſhade, plantaine, and ſuch like, often before rehearſed. In this kinde of fluxe, many times, becauſe of the vehemencie of the paine, you muſt vſe ſuch medicine, as can cauſe aſtoniſhment.
                     S
                           ••
                        pefaecio
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           ••
                        .
                   For the which purpoſe, it is good to apply the medicine which we deſcribed before, of gotes milcke, crummes of bread, ſaffron, and yolkes of egges, with the which, you muſt commixe poppie ſeedes. ʒ.iij. or opium. ℥.ſs. or more, or leſſe according to the paine. Alſo, for the ſame purpoſe, leaues of hemblocke and henbane doe profit, being applyed and laide on.
                     Not
                           •
                        .
                   But, you muſt note, and take heade, that, when you be compelled to vſe ſtupefactiue thinges in feruent, and vehement paynes, that afterwarde you doe recreate and nouriſh thoſe members by ſuch thinges, as doe heate. For vnleſſe you doe ſo, you ſhall make thoſe members weake, and intemperant, and ſo they ſhall be ſubiect to a perpetuall fluxe, and ſhall ſone catch hurte in their actions. Heating medicines be origan, ſauorie, muſtardſeede pepper and ſuch like. Alſo you muſt helpe to prouoke ſweating with heating and rubbing of the bodie: but ſo, that you touch not the aggreued member. Moreouer, you muſt miniſter in drincke thoſe thinges, that doe prouoke vrine: for ſuch do voide out choler by the vrine. Alſo ſuch thinges miniſtred, as doe cauſe ſleepe, are wonte to do good, becauſe the fluxe is ſtopped and dried vp by them, ſpecially, if they be miniſtred after a purgation. You muſt giue them meates, that do coole, but not that do moiſten: for moyſtnes encreaſeth the fluxe.
                     Diet.
                   Let them not ſuffer hunger, for that maketh choler ſharper. Of fruites, let them vſe reſtrictiue apples and meddlars, and other, that doe coole, & ſtop, or let the fluxe. Let them abſtaine altogeather from wine, as is aforeſaide. They which are diſeaſed through flowing of fleame, you muſt beginne the cure of them with purging of fleume.
                     Cure of a flegmaticke fluxe.
                   The flegmaticke humour is auoided by vomiting, but neuertheleſſe alſo downward by the bellie. But the beſt purging in this euill, is downward by the bellie, whither the diſeaſe ſtricke about the handes or the feete: and ſo much the more, if the fluxe be in all the ioyntes of the bodie. For the way, that is moſt familiar, and leaſt perilous for fleame, is to goe out by the guttes. For if it were drawen by violence vpward to the ſtomach, & not purged out, it cauſeth perill. Therefore it is more ſafe, and healthfull to purge it downeward. But before you miniſter purging medicines, you muſt miniſter thoſe thinges, that haue vertue to cut, extenuate and deuide, that by this meanes the groſſe humours may be preparate, and made apt to purge. If emptying may not be done by purging, then they muſt vſe hungre and famine,
                     Flegmaticke folke can ſuffer hunger eaſely.
                   many dayes, for they, that be flegmaticke of nature can ſuffer hunger eaſily and without hurt. Hereupon Hypocrates ſaith, 7. Apho. 6. It is good for the bodies, that haue moſt fleſh to vſe hungre: for the hunger dryeth the bodies. Alſo they muſt vſe diſcuſſiue & diſſoluing frictions, & ſtrong cliſters & medicines that prouoke vrine: but you muſt apply outwardly ſuch medicines, as can eaſe, and ceaſe paine, and which can diſſolue and drie moderately, of which we ſpake a little before. But in the beginning of the diſeaſe, you muſt mixe with them ſome thinges, that haue vertue to reſtraine & binde. After the beginning, you muſt vſe onely diſſoluing and diſcuſſiue thinges. The gentleſt is this: of leaues althaea, ſodden & beateh alone, or with floure, or bareley meale applied to it. Alſo, the roote of it ſodden in aqua mulſa, and ſtamped and applyed, is good. And this oyntment is good. ℞. of the oyles of laurell,
                     Vnguentum.
                   and yreos. ana. ℥.j. olde ſwines greace, butter ana. ʒ.iij. the warrow of a hart. ʒ.ij. fine turpentine. ʒ.v. galbanum, diſſolued in vinegre. ʒ.j. Iſope, roote of althaea, fenugreeke ſeede. ana. ℈.ij. waxe as much as it ſufficient, and make an oyntment.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Moreouer let the meates that you giue to nouriſh him, be drie of nature, & ſmall of noriſhing, as is iuice of rice, rootes, and ſuch like: but yet fleſh of the birdes of the mountaines roſted is not hurtfull to them. Capers with acetum mulſum. doth maruelouſlie profit. Giue vnto him wine, in verie little quantitie, at certaine times, and let it be

thinne yealow & olde. They that are diſeaſed through flowing of melancholie,
                     Cure of a melancholy fluxe
                   they muſt be emptied either with bloudletting, or by purgation. Vſe boudletting, when the bloud is infected with melancholie. And vſe purgations, when the patient declineth to melancholie: but if both theſe abounde togeather, it is not ſufficient for you to vſe one of the aforeſaide thinges. But firſt, cut a veine, and then vſe a purging medicine: which thing you muſt alſo doe in other euills that haue neede of dowble purging. In the beginning of the diſeaſe, and in the verie time of emptying and purging, you muſt vſe ſuch thinges as can repreſſe, ſtoppe, and alſo heate ſenſibly. After purging, vſe thoſe thinges that can gentlie heate, attenuate and diſſolue or diſcuſſe, as is afore taught. But becauſe knobbes,
                     Cure of knob
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                   and harde ſwellinges doe engender afterward in the ioyntes, aſwell, becauſe of the groſſenes, and earthie hardnes of the humour that hath flowed thither, as alſo through the vſing of immoderate diſcuſſiue, and drying medicines, without mixing of ſuch with them, as haue a mollyfiyng vertue. Therefore to take thoſe knobbes away, you muſt vſe thoſe medicines, which be declared of vs before in the chapter of hardnes of the ſpleene. But ſpecially verie olde and ſharpe cheeſe, brayed in the decoction of verie fatte, and olde ſwynes fleſhe, is good to be applyed. Alſo, for this euill, figges braied, and laid on, are good. Alſo Althaea, twyſe ſodden, oates, nettles, briony roote, round rootes, dill, ſothernwoode, maieweede, horehounde leaues, mixed with pitch, ſulphur and wine. Alſo you muſt commixe fatte, and greaces of ſwine, goates, calfes, and geeſe. Alſo all marowes and other thinges, that haue vertue to mollifie and ſoften. And alſo bathinges,
                     Bathe
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                   after the inflammation is ceaſed, is moſt commodious, and profitable to all that haue the goute. While they waſh them, put ſponges wet in vinegre, and ſalt mixt togeather, round about the diſeaſed places, that they may remaine ſafe from humours flowing to it. They muſt waſhe them ſelfes, not once onely, but often, in an ayre that is altogeather meane and moderate. But they may not tarie long in hote water. It is beaſt therefore, that they be ſprinckled, & wet with hote water, poured on them. Alſo it is profitable, that all the bodie be rubbed with drie linnen cloathes. Moreouer, they that be cured of the goute, ſhall defend themſelues afterwarde from it, by this meanes. Firſt, twiſe in a yeare, that is,
                     A defence for the g
                           •
                        ute.
                   at ſpring time and autumne, if nothing doe let it, let him bloude largely. Alſo about thoſe times, and oftener, let him vſe purging medicines. Alſo it is neceſſarie for him to eate litle meate, and to abſtaine from fulnes. Alſo you muſt vſe meates that be eaſie of digeſtion, and which readily be diſtributed into the members of the bodie and be without excrementes. Let him abſtaine altogeather from wine, or let him vſe it verie ſcarely. Let him vſe exerciſe verie often, and that before meate: for labour (as Hippocrates ſayth) muſt go before meate. And to conclude, they, that deſire to be free from the goute, let him remember this ſhorte, and moſt holſome precept of Hypocrates: the way to helpe and preſerue health, is not to be filled with meates, and to be vnſlouthfull in labouring. Alſo let his ſleepes, and venerous actes be in a meane. As for remeadies in this caſe, let ſalt be brayed ſmall in oyle, and the ioyntes rubbed therewith, for it helpeth greatly all thoſe, that will be free from this euill, except they be of a wonderfull drie temperature. And he muſt vſe annoynting with that, morning, and euening all the dayes of his life
            
            Libri tertij finis.
         
         
            
            The fourth booke teaching the cure of feauers.
            
               CAP. I. An expoſition of feauers. FEBRIVM EXPLICATIO.
               
                  
                     Febris q
                           •••
                        d.
                  
                  FEBRIS in Latine a feauer in engliſh, it is an vnnaturall heate, which taking his beginning at the hearte, is ſpreade by the arteries, and veines into the whole bodie, and doth hurte, and let the operation of it. For although a man be whotter now, then ne was before: it followeth not, that he hath a feauer, vnleſſe, (the heate being immoderately encreaſed, doe offend the man, and hurte his operations, and actions. Moreouer, as there be three things, (Hyppocrates witneſſing) which doe ordeine and conſtitute our bodie (that is to ſaie) thinges conteined, thinges cō
                  teining, and thinges, that flowe about violenlie, (that is) the harde and ſounde members in the bodie,
                     Three principal kindes of ſimple feauers.
                   the humour, and the ſpirite or aire: ſo alſo, there be three kindes of ſimple feauers. For if immoderate heate be kindled in the ſpirites, and aire of mans body, it is called in the Greeke, Ephimera, and in Latine Diaria febris, and in Engliſh it may be called one day feauer.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Diaria.
                   This feauer is like to hote ayre or winde, included in a bladder or bottle: for, like as the aire heateth the bottle, that it is in, euen ſo, the ſpirites of a mans bodie, being heat more then they ſhould be, doe heate all the whole bodie. There chaunceth in this kinde of feauer, but one fitte, and for the moſt part it endureth but one daie of his owne proper nature; whereupon, it is called Dairia febris, (that is) the one day feauer.
                     Note.
                   For they ceaſe after the firſt fitte, If they be rightly handled. But you muſt note, that there be feauers called Diariae, which laſt vntill the thirde daie, as thoſe be, which are engendred of thickening and ſtopping of the conduites and paſſages. For although that this worde, Diaria, be not of the verie ſubſtaunce of ſuch feauers, yet becauſe they lacke a conuenient name, to the entent, that our teaching ſhould be briefe & euident, notwithſtanding that the worde repugne againſt it, ſeing that they be of the ſame nature, that true diaries be of, they may moſt rightly be called Diariae, (as Galene ſheweth aboū
                  danlie in lib. 9. therapentices cap. 1.) Hereupon it is euident,
                     
                        Diariae ſimple
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Diariae pluriū dierum.
                     
                   that there be two kinds of diaries: Or, which is named Diari ſimplie and without adiection or putting to of any word, which feauer doth not extend aboue the ſpace of a naturall day (that is) 24. houres. An other kinde there is, which is called Diaria plurium dierum, (that is) a diarie of manie daies. It is called by an other name of Galen (that is) Synochus non putrida. The ſecond kinde of ſimple feauers is, when as immoderate heate is kindled in the homours, and it is called putrida (that is) rotted,
                     Putrida.
                   onely becauſe the humours, in this kinde of feauers do putrifie and rotte. It is like vnto hote water: for as that doth heate a colde veſſell, that it is poured into: So alſo humours, heat aboue nature, doe heat the bodie. The humours doe putrifie and rot either within the veſſels or without. If they rot within the veſſels, then either

all the humours doe putrifie togeather, or elſe one alone. If all the humours doe putrifie equallie and a little within all the veſſelles or veines, or ſpeciallie within the greateſt: it cauſeth a feauer called Synoca putrida, which, to the intent you may perceine what it maeneth:
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . you muſt note firſt that the Phiſitions of Grece doe call that feauer Synochos, in the which one fitte remaining ſtill continually from the beginning to the ending, extendeth and continueth many dayes. Or, it is a feauer which is with out any great mutation vntill the ende of it. This feauer may be called of the Latines continent febris, and is in Engliſh a conſtant or continuall feauer. But although there be one forme and likelyhood of ſuch feauers, whereupon they name them Synocus, yet, there nature is not: all one.
                     Two kindes of Synochus.
                   For ſome of them haue manyfeſt ſignes and tokens of rottenneſſe: and ſome againe haue none at all, which (as we ſaide a little before) be of the kindes of Diaria.
                  
                     Synochus putrida non putrida.
                   We to the intent that our doctrine maybe the more euident, doe call the firſt Synochus putrida, and the laſt we call, Synochus non putrida. And in this place you may not followe the barbarous ſorte, which call the laſt of them Synocha, and the firſt Synochus: ſeeing the Greekes (as Galene witneſſeth, conteineth them both vnder the name of Synochus. Of thoſe feauers, which are named Synochi, there be three ſundrie ſortes or differences:
                     Three ſortes of Synochus.
                   for ſome of them doe endure of an  equall vehemencie, and force from the beginning vntill the ending: thoſe the Greekes call homotonos, and acmaſtic
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , (that is) remaining ſtill in the ſame force and vigoure. Some  alwaies encreaſe and augment by little & litle, thoſe the Greekes do call, anabaticos, & epacmaticos, (that is) encreaſing and augmenting more and more. Some doe decreaſe and  deminiſh by little and little thoſe the Greekes call paracmaſticos, (that is) decreaſing. Moreouer, if one onely humour do putrifie and rotte within the veſſelles: it kindleth a feauer, which the Greekes doe call Synechis, and the Latines, continua febris,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . VVhat a continual feauer is.
                   in Engliſh a continuall feauer, which is, when the feauer doeth not leaue the patient, but it hath a certaine remiſſion and ſlaking in euerie fitte. Whereby it is euident that the feauer Synochus and Synechis (that is) a conſtaunt feauer and a continuall feauer doe differ much a ſunder. For in a feauer Synochus, there is no remiſſion or ſlaking of the heate,
                     
                        Difference betweene 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     
                        Three kindes of continual feauers.
                     
                     
                        Tertiana continua.
                     
                     
                        Quotidiana continua.
                     
                     
                        Quartana cō
                           tinua.
                     
                     
                        Likeneſſe betweene continuall and intermitting feauers.
                     
                   but in the feauer Synechis, there is ſenſible remiſſion and ſlaking in euerie fitte. Alſo the feauer Synochus, hath not one onely fitte: but in Synechis there be many fittes. And they two agree in this, that neither of them doeth leaue the patient ſometime. Of feauers, that are called Synechis, or elſe continue febres, there be three kindes: for if choler doe putrifie and rotte within the the veſſelles, it cauſeth a continuall tertian, or a burning feauer, which is called of the Greekes, cauſos. If fleame doe putrifie or rotte with the veſſelles, there engendreth a continuall quotidian. But if melancholie doe putrifie and rotte within the veſſelles, there engendreth a continuall quartaine. And theſe continuall feauers be ſomewhat like to the intermitting feauers, of the which we will ſpeake ſtraight waie. For a continuall tertian, agreeth with a true intermitting tertian, in that, that it hath a fitte, aſwell as it, euerie thirde daie. And a continuall quotidian agreeeth, with an intermitting quotidian, becauſe ech of them hath a fitte euerie daie. Alſo a continuall quartaine agreeth with an intermitting quartaine, becauſe both of them cauſeth a fitte euerie fourth daie. But yet theſe feauers doe differ two wayes, notwithſtanding that they agree in the humour, that cauſeth them. Firſt they differ becauſe in continuall feauers, the putryfied humour is contayned within the veynes, but in intermitting feauers, that humour is diſperſed into all the members of the bodie, whereuppon it chaunceth through vyolence of ſpreading of humours, the feauers are purged out by them ſelues. Hereby alſo they differ another waie,
                     Difference betweene continuall and intermitting feauers.
                   (that is) the intermitting feauers ſlake betweene the fittes, but the continuall feauers doe not ceaſe at all betweene the fittes. Heatherto we haue rehearſed what kindes of feauers humours putryfied within the veſſelles doe cauſe and engender. Nowe we will expounde, what feauers humours putryfied without the veſſelles doe conceiue, engender, and kindle. If therefore an humour doe putrifie and rotte without the veſſelles, it cauſeth an intermitting feauer, which is ſo called,
                     Intermittens febris.
                   becauſe the fitte doeth not endure continuallie, but it hath a ſlaking or ceaſing, and leaueth of betweene the fittes. It

may moſt aptly be called in Lataine febris interpolata,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . beauſe the fittes come and renewe at their times: ſome call it deficiens febris. Of this feauer there be thre kindes, (that is) a Tertian,
                     Tertiana 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Quotidiana exquiſita.
                   a Quotidian, and a quartaine. A pure and exquiſite Tertian is cauſed when choler doth putrifie and rotte without the veſſells. It is ſo called becauſe it ceaſeth one daie, and cometh againe the thirde daie. An equiſite Quotidian, which in Greeke is called Amphymerimon, it is cauſed of ſwete fleume being putrified and rotten without the veſſels, and it is ſo called becauſe it returneth euerie daie. We did not raſhlie ſaie ſweete ſteame: for if glaſen fleame doe putrifie and rotte a little,
                     Epialos.
                   it cauſeth a feauer called Epialos. And this Epialos is a feauer, in which the patient is both feuerous, and feruentlie colde, and doeth feele both heate and colde immoderate in all partes of his bodie, both at one, time togeather.
                     Lypiria.
                   To the aforeſaide feauer doeth belong a feauer, in Greeke called Lypiria. In this feauer there is heate fealt within, and in the bowelles and entrailes: but in all the outward partes,
                     Quart
                           •
                        n
                           •
                         intermittens.
                   there is colde fealt. An intermitting Quartaine is engendred of Melancnolie putrified and rotted without the veſſelles. It is ſo named bycauſe it ceaſeth two dayes,  and returneth againe the fourth daie. The thirde kinde of ſimple feauers in generall is cauſed, when heate is kindled in the ſounde, harde, and fleſhie partes of mans bodie, and it is called both in Greeke and Lataine,
                     Hectica febris
                   
                  Hectica febris, and in Engliſh the feauer ethicke. This feauer is like to a hote veſſell, for as the veſſell doeth heate the water that is poured into it: ſo alſo the feauer Ethicke, which ſticketh in the ſounde and fleſhie partes of the bodie, and is infixed in them, is able to heate all the humours of the bodie. And if this feauer doeth ſo encreaſe, that it doeth melt and conſume the whole bodie, and all the harde,
                     Maraſmus.
                   and ſounde partes of it: then it is called Hectica maraſmodes, and maraſmus. And this (as Galene witneſſeth) is vncurable. For although you might quench the heate, yet the drineſſe which is lefte, being proper to olde age, will kill the pateint. Beſides the feauers nowe of vs rehearſed, there is an other feauer which is cauſed of breathing in of peſtilent aire. But ſeeing this feauer (as Galene witneſſeth libro primo de differentijs febrium,
                  
                     Peſtilen
                           •
                         feauer.
                   capite quinto,) is engendred of rottenneſſe, for the aire about vs, being corrupted with a putrifying, and rotting euaporation, cauſeth alſo the humours of the bodie to rotte. Therefore it may be conteyned vnder the ſeconde principall kinde of feauer called putrida. Moreouer in this place, we may not let paſſe to tell, that ſome feauers be engendred without diſeaſe or griefe in any member of the bodie, and ſome feauers be kindled through the inflammation of ſome member. Therefore,
                     Feauers engendred by inflammation of ſome member.
                   as the former feauers haue their names: ſo alſo eche of theſe that followe haue their proper names. For that feauer, which is engendred through inflammation of the filme or caull, that girdeth in the ribbes, it is ca
                     •
                  led pleuretica febris. That which engendreth through inflammation of the lounges is called, peripneumonica febris. That which chaunceth through inflammation of the ſtomach, the liuer, or the longes, is called in Greeke typhodes (that is) inflaming or burning. Likewiſe all other feauers, which engender through inflammation of any member, haue diuerſe names, according to the diuerſitie of the member. Therefore in euerie ſicke perſon you muſt diligently diſcerne feauers, which come without diſeaſe of other members, from thoſe feauers which engender through inflammation of ſome member. Of the aforeſaide feauers, ſome be Typicae, (that is) certaine and ordinate: and ſome be, erraticae, (that is) vncertaine and vnordinate. Typicae be ſuch feauers, whoſe fittes and ſlakinges from them doe come iuſtly at their appointed time. Erraticae are ſuch feauers as be contrarie to theſe, for they keepe no certaine and iuſt time, nor any order of fittes, nor the intermiſſion betweene them, as be thoſe feauers, which engender of melancholie, which is moued in cetaine members, and in ſome it remaineth vnmoueable, in other members it putrifieth, or beginneth to boyle. Hitherto we haue rehearſed the kindes of ſimple feauers: it remaineth therefore, that we declare brieflie the kindes of compoundes and mixt feauers. Therefore compound feauers are cauſed two wayes:
                     The kindes of compound feauers.
                   firſt, becauſe theſe feauers aforeſaide (that is) a Tertian, Quotidian, and Quartain, may be mixed togeather without the diſeaſe of any member. Secondarily, becauſe theſe feauers, which be engendred through inflammation of ſome member, may commixe togeather. The feauers that come without the inflammation of any member, are ſometime complicate

and ioyned togeather, and ſomtime they are altogeather confounded. Complicatiō (as Galen witneſſeth) is when the feauers inuade the patient at diuerſe houres. And confuſion is, when they begine at one time. There be foure complications or ioyning togeather of the feauer Tertian and Quotidian (as Galene witneſſeth.) One,
                     Complications of Quotidians and Tertians.
                   when a Tertian and Quotidian are mixed togeather being both intermittig feauers. Another is, when an intermitting Tertian is ioyned with a continuall Quotidian. This is called by a peculiar name of the greekes Hemitritaeus,
                  
                     Hemitritaeus.
                   becauſe all his nature hath the halfe parte of ech of the ſayde feauers. The thirde is when an intermitting Quotidian is mixed with a continuall Tertian. The fourth is when a continuall Quotidian is ioyned with a continuall tertian. To be ſhorte, feauers of one kinde are complicate and ioyned with feauers of the ſame kinde, as continuall with continuall, and intermitting with intermiting feauers, and tertians with other tertians, and one quartaine with an other quartaine. Alſo it chaunceth many times, that feauers of diuerſe kinds are coupled togeather as quotidians with tertians and each of them with quartaines, and ſometime intermitting feauers are mixed with continuall feauers. Moreouer after the ſame ſorte, feauers which are engendred with inflammation of ſome members, are ſometime mixed togeather, as if diuerſe members doe ech of them kindle a feauer, proper to them ſelues, or the affection, where they engender be mixed. Seeing therefore, that feauers are compounded and wixed many ſundrie wayes: firſt the kindes of ſimple feauers muſt be with great diligence perfectly learned of them, that ſtudie Phiſicke: for vnleſſe they know them verie perfectly, it can not be that euer they ſhould know well compound feauers. Therefore ſeing the knowledge of them is verie harde, in ſo much that often times cunning Phiſitions are deceiued in iudging of them: you muſt ſeeke the ſignes and tokens, whereby you may know them, diligently out of Galene, who hath taught this thing more exactly then any man. We, to helpe the memorie of the ſtudious haue comprehended all the kindes of ſimple feauers in this table following.
               
                  TABƲLA FEBRIVM.
                  Of ſimple feuers, there be three principall kindes. For vnnaturall heat is kindled & engendred either in the &c.

                        Spirites or breathe, and doth cauſe Ephemera, or diaria, wherof be two kindes, that is to ſay.

                              Ephemera ſimpliciter, or Diaria, one day feauer.
                              And Diaria, plurium dierum other wiſe called Synochus non putrida, enduring three or foure dayes.
                           
                        
                        Or in the humours, and cauſeth putrida febris, a rotten feauer, they do rot in two places, either.

                              Within the veſſels and that two waies for either.

                                    All the humours doe putrifie and rote equally, and cauſe a feauer called Synochus putrida.
                                    Or one only humour putrifieth, and ſo cauſeth a continual feauer and if there be putrefaction of.

                                          Choler it cauſeth a continuall tertian or a burning feauer.
                                          If fleame doe putrifie it cauſeth a continuall quotidian.
                                          If melancholie doe putrifie it cauſeth a continuall quartaine.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Or they putrifie without the veſſels, and cauſe an intermitting feauer. For if there be putrefaction of &c.

                                    Choler it cauſeth an intermitting tertian.
                                    If fleame that is

                                          ſweete doe rotte, it cauſeth an intermitting quotidian.

                                                Exquiſite and pure.
                                             
                                          
                                          Glaſen, it cauſeth Epialos.
                                       
                                    
                                    If melancholie doe rotte, it cauſeth an intermitting feauer quartaine.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Or in the fleſhie partes, and cauſeth either.

                              Hectica febris.
                              Or Maraſmus.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               CAP. I. Of one day feauer. DE DIARIA.
               
                  DIARIA Febris in Lataine: Ephemera, in Greeke: in Engliſh one day feauer. It is that which hath one onely fitte,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . q
                           ••
                        id.
                   finiſhing for the moſt in one daie, at the moſt, of his owne nature. For it endeth after the firſt fit, & doth not exceede, nor paſſe a naturall daie, if it be rightly vſed. And that, becauſe of the matter, wherein it is, (that is) the ſpirite or breath which is eaſily diſſolued and disperſed. Therefore Galen doth moſt worthely call this, the moſt ſimple feauer, becauſe it is the ſhorteſt, & the moſt gentle feauer, being nothing malignant. Therefore if any thing in this feauer be committed either by ignoraunce of the Phiſitions, or through intemperance of the ſicke, or by errors of the miniſters & aſſiſtants, wherby it turneth into another kinde of feauer,
                     Cauſae.
                   that doth not chaunce through the nature of this feuer. Diaria febris is cauſed, whē as the ſpirite or breath is inflamed & heat aboue nature without any putrefaction or rottennes. And that chaunceth many wayes: ſomtime through conſtipation binding or thickning of the ſkinne, which ſtoppeth & keepeth in, the vapours or ſpirites which were wōt to flow out by the poores, which becauſe they be hote and ſharpe, therefore they engender a feauer. Sometime it is cauſed through wearines, and vehement defatigation. Alſo through watchinges, crudities, and lacke of digeſtion, ſadnes, feare, yre, vehement care of the mind, burning of the Sunne, colde, hungre, dronekennes, and ſwelling of the carnelles in the throte,
                     Signa.
                   and ſuch like, which can heate the ſpirites and enflame them. The Signes whereby diaries are knowen, are of two ſortes: for ſome ſignes be common to all diaries, and ſome be proper and peculiar to ech cauſe.
                     Common ſignes ſix.
                   The common ſignes be ſix in number, whereof the firſt is the pulſe. For all the diaries, as much as in them is doe chaunge the pulſe in greatneſſe  ſwiftneſſe, and oftnes. But it keepeth exquiſitely that order, ſoftnes and equallitie, which  is according with nature. The ſecond common ſigne is the vrine, which in diaries is altogeather according to nature, or doth little turne from a naturall ſtate. An vrine, that accordeth with nature,
                     A naturall vrine.
                   is ſubrufe in colour, meane in ſubſtaunce, hauing in it a reſidence, white, light, and equall. The thirde token is the equalitie of heate which in all diarie  feauers is gentle, pleaſaunt, and eaſie. The fourth ſigne is the maner of ending of it, for  all diaries are looſened and ended by a breath or vapour, which cannot be perceiued, or by  aboundaunt vapours or moiſtures, or ſwete ſwettes. The fifth is the wanting of euill ſymptomates and accidentes: as be vehement paine of the head and ſtomach, and other parts,  abhorring of meates, vnquietneſſe, vnſatiable thirſt, and ſuch other like. The ſixth common ſigne is, that all diarie feauers be engendred of an outwarde cauſe, which the Phiſitions at theſe daies cal a primitiue cauſe. But the particular ſignes, whereby ech Diaria doth differ from other,
                     Particular ſignes of diaries.
                   be theſe that follow. They which haue Diaria feauer, cauſed through watching, there chaunceth to them a naughtie colour, and ſwelling of the face, heauie motion of the eyes:
                     Signes of watchinges.
                   for they ſcant lift vp the eye liddes, there is moiſtnes of the heares of the eye liddes, and ſmall pulſes. For watching (as Hippocrates ſaith) ſeeing it letteth digeſtion, it engendreth aboundaunce of crude and raw humours and vapours, it diminiſheth the naturall heate, and vnlooſeneth the bodie, whereupon there followeth the tokens aforeſaide. To be ſhort, watchinges doe reuoke and pull backe nature from digeſting: therfore they cauſe great cruditie and rawnes, aſwell in the braine, as in the reſt of the bodie, whereupon alſo doth chaunce the tokens aforeſaide. The ſignes of a diarie, cauſed of care and ſorrowe be theſe,
                     Signes of care and ſorrows.
                   leannes of the bodie. If ſorrow be the cauſe, it is clearer, if care, it is darker. Alſo hollowneſſe, and drienes of the eyes doth ſignifie both the ſaide effectes: but in thoughtes and congitations it is leaſt, becauſe the ſpirites and humours are leſſe conſumed. And it is moſt euident in ſorrow. Alſo there follow theſe effectes, a certain vnaccuſtomed palenes or ſwartnes, ſo that the ſkinne is deſtitute of her naturall colour. They which haue a diarie through, wrathe or furious anger, they haue neither hollowneſſe of eyes,
                     Signes of anger.
                   nor euill colour of the face, but rather their eyes ſeeme to ſticke out further

and their face is redde, and there is loftines of the pulſes. So alſo the ſignes of the reſt of the diaries, being engendred through perturbation of the minde may chiefely be knowen by the pulſes. For in ſadnes the ſpirites are caried inwarde,
                     
                        Signes of ſadnes.
                     
                     
                        Signes of feare
                     
                   and therefore the pulſes be ſmall, feeble and rare. In feare newe begonne, the bloud and ſpirites runne inwarde as it were to the ſpring heade, and the minde is troubled. For nature being vexed driueth the ſpirites hither and thither, which through mouing are inflamed, whereby the pulſes are made ſwifte, neceſſitie compelling them, and the minde being chafed maketh them vnequall and ſharp. In old feare (the ſpirites being diſperſed and vertue being feeble), it cauſeth ſuch pulſes, as we ſpake of before in ſadnes. They which haue a Diaria feauer,
                     Signes of Sun-burning.
                   through burning & heate of the Sunne, their ſkinne is hote and drie, their heade ſeemeth to them to burne, becauſe of the ſpirites inflamed in it. Their eyes waxe redder, and ſomtime the veynes in their eyes, temples and foreheade, and in all their whole face are ſtretched and puffed vppe. They, that haue this feauer through colde, they are taken with heauie diſtillations, and reumes, becauſe colde bindeth,
                     Signes of co
                           •
                        d
                   and withholdeth and keepeth the fumous excrementes within the skinne. Moreouer the skinne is leſſe hote, and all the bodie ſheweth to haue a greater moiſture, becauſe the wonted fluxe is reſtrained and ſtopped through colde. Moreouer there is no filthineſſe in the face for the ſame cauſe. They which haue this feauer cauſed of wearines, their skinne is made drier,
                     Signes of werines.
                   then it is in other diaries, becauſe exerciſe drieth vppe the bodie, and draweth out the moyſture of it: alſo their pulſes be vnlike: for they, that haue vſed great exerciſes, and be wearied aboue meaſure, they haue ſmall pulſes, becauſe of imbecillitie and weakeneſſe of ſtrength, but they that haue vſed but ſmall labours, their pulſes be great, becauſe their ſtrength is no
                     •
                   deminiſhed yet.
                     
                        Signes of dronkennes & hunger.
                     
                     
                        Signes of ſwelings about the throte.
                     
                   They which be taken with a Diaria feauer through dronckennes or hungre, they neede no ſignes to knowe the cauſe, for ſuch cauſes may be knowen by telling of the ſicke. They which haue this feauer through kernels, ſwellings, or impoſtumations about the throte or mouth, or otherwhere: they haue verie great pulſes, & becauſe of the feuerous heate, they be ſwift & often. Alſo there is equallitie of their pulſes becauſe the inſtrument of mouing is not letted neither by obſtruction, nor through aboundaunce of humours, nor of ſharpe vapours, nor by preſſing togeather, vnleſſe the inflammation be verie great. Their face is altogeater red and ſwollen, becauſe of the aboundaunce of heat. And their vrine appeareth pale, becauſe the choler that ſhould colour the vrine is tranferred to the botch or impoſtumatiō. The cure of all diarie feauers is brought to paſſe by diet, whoſe chiefe point in all diaries that be ſimple conſiſt in this:
                     Victus ra
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        .
                   that you miniſter vnto them meates that engender good humours, and that be eaſie of digeſtion and apt to be diſtributed about the bodie. Giue vnto them that are burnte in the Sunne, and to them that be angred, a diet which doth coole and moiſte. And vnto them, that are colde, giue a diet that nouriſheth leſſe, and that doth heate moderately. Againſt watchinges or ſadnes, or conſuming with oner much care, vſe a diet which can both moiſten and prouoke ſleepe, that it may deliuer them from the drines that thoſe euills haue cauſed, and alſo that it may recreate & refreſh their ſtrength. They that haue a feuer of wearines, you muſt allowe them to eate aſmuch meate, as they can digeſt: for you muſt alwaies eſchewe cruditie and rawnes of the ſtomache. For the ſubſtaunce of the bodie being diſſolued and diſperſed with labour, muſt be repaired with much meate, being eaſie of digeſtion. You muſt meaſure the quā
                  titie of taking of meate by the patientes ſtrength, age, naturall temperament, and cuſtome of the ſicke. Moreouer by the time of the yeare the region, and ſuch other like. But thoſe, whoſe temperature of the bodie is verie hote and drie, thoſe you muſt feede with meate by and by at the firſt beginning of the fitte. For in them the diarie▪ feauer will chaunge verie ſwiftelie into an acute and rotten feauer. Chiefelie aboue other, theie maie be fedde with a thinne diet, which haue a diarie cauſed of a botche or impoſtumation, for in them, the ſubſtaunce of the bodie is not dimyniſhed.
                     VVine good for diaries.
                   Wine that is white and thinne is good almoſt for all diarie feauers, thoſe, which be properlie named ſo, and doe endure but twentie foure houres. For beſides that, it helpeth digeſtion, it alſo prouoketh vrine and ſwette (as Galene ſaieth) But you maie graunte it more aboundantlie to the feauerous through watchinges ſorrowe or care, becauſe great

aboundaunce of ſpirites is ſpent and conſumed in them, which wine will eaſely and quickly reſtore in them againe. But to thoſe that haue headach, wheather they haue watched, or be feauerous by any other occaſion, they muſt refraine from wine, becauſe it pearceth the head quickly. And they that haue this feauer engendred of great anger and furie, vnleſſe they be altogeather quiet from that perturbation, they may haue no wine giuen to them, for the ſpirites, and bloud is maruelouſlie chafed, and boileth ſore. Alſo you muſt driue from wine thoſe that be feauerous, through the ſwelling of botches or kernelles in the throte vntill it be looſened: not, that it is ſo vnprofitable for the feauer, but that it hindereth the cure of the botch. For it encreaſeth the flowing of the humours into the greeued place, and ſo cauſeth inflammation, and thereby augmenteth the feauer. You muſt cure all ſimple feauers that be diaries (as Galen witneſſeth) with bathes.
                     Curatio.
                   Therefore whoſoeuer hath this feauer, in the declination of the firſt fitte, you muſt bring them into a bath. But yet all may not be bathed alike, nor all muſt vſe the ſame partes of a bathe. For they that haue this feauer cauſed of botches, or impoſtumations they may profitablie tarie in the aire or fume of the bathe, becauſe it both rarefieth and maketh thinne the ſkinne, and alſo it prouoketh and enticeth ſwette out of the bodie. Neither doeth it hurte thoſe patientes with drines, as it would do thoſe, that haue this feauer engendred of werines, watchinges, cares, and other perturbations of the minde. For ſeeing their body is dried vp altogeather by thoſe cauſes, they muſt be kept from the aire of the bathe, leaſt it augment their griefe. Therefor ſuch may tarie the longer in a bath of ſweete water being made hote, that through the moyſture of it, they may recouer the humiditie that is loſt, and is decayed in them. Afterwarde ſofte handes muſt rubbe them gentlie, with plentie of warme oyles, wherein there is no manner of reſtriction or binding. For this friction and rubbing doeth moyſten, looſen, and ſoften the harde and fleſhie partes, and it diſſolueth and diſperſeth thoſe things which are conteyned in the poores and conduites of the bodie. They that haue this feauer cauſed through burning of the Sunne, you muſt cure them by and by in the beginning with cooling, and with many bathinges of ſweete water, and onely with pouring on a little oyle without friction or rubbing of it, for it raiſeth heate. Thinges that doe coole the heade being applyed to it, be oyle of roſes, and of vnripe oliues, and other which be rehearſed in libro primo. Theſe being firſt made colde, and then receiued with wooll, and holden vppe alofte, you muſt preſſe it with your hande, and let it droppe downe vpon the foreparte of the heade, and that continually, while the feauer doeth decline: then afterwarde bring the ſicke into a bathe. If any perſon haue this feauer through colde he muſt alſo be brought to a bathe in the remiſſion of his fitte, and his head muſt be nouriſhed both before and after the bathing with oyle of yreos and oleum nardinum, and ſuch like. For they that haue a feauer through this cauſe, haue neede of medicines that can heate, and remoue conſtipation and bynding. They that labour of a Diaria feauer through hunger, in the inclination of the fitte, you muſt bring them ſtraight vnto a bathe, and pouring vppon them much ſweete oyle warmed, rubbe them ſoftlie, and you muſt keepe them longe in the water of the warme bathe, that thereby the drienes, which hunger hath cauſed in the bodie, may be corrected and amended by the oyle and the bath. When they be come out of the bath you muſt recreate and refreſh the ſtrength with conuenient meates, & then you muſt bring them againe to a bath, and when they come out againe, (the perturbation with their bathing being ceaſed) you muſt giue them hote water to drincke, and by and by you muſt miniſter iuice of ptiſan, and ſometime they may take luttuſe, and they may eate fiſhes taken out of grauellie places, & being light meate ſodden in a whyte broath, which, what it was in old time, Galen ſheweth in lib. 4. de ſanitate tuenda. If the feauer Diaria doe chaunce throught cruditie or rawnes of the ſtomach: you muſt firſt conſider, whither the wombe be ſoluble, or elſe coſtiue. If it be ſoluble, and thoſe things only which be corrupt, do ſeeme to void furth, then you muſt waſh him and nouriſh him in the remiſſion of the feauer. But not vnleſſe firſt you diligently behold and foreſee all thinges chauncing to the Stomache. For if ſuch aboundaunt emptying hath bene alreadie, or doth nowe continue, ſo that, the vertue and ſtrength of the ſicke is wearied, it is better to giue him meate, and waſh him both

togither. But you muſt diligently behold firſt thoſe things that be about the ſtomach. You muſt vſe about the ſicke, if the emptying do endure no longer irrigations and ſprinklinges of the ſtomach with oyle and wormewood and other things which are rehearſed before in the third Booke in the Chapter of weakeneſſe of the ſtomach.
                     Note.
                   But thoſe thinges that be applied to the ſtomach, let them be well heat. For thoſe things that be applied bloud warme, do diſſolue and looſen the ſtrength of the ſtomach. If the belly be altogether coſtiue, handle, and feele the ſides, and then the whole belly, & conſider, whether the meate is diſcended into the ſmall guts, or into the colon. And if the meate abide yet ſtill in the ſtomach, let the ſick drink much warme water, & put his finger or a fether down into his throte, and vomite vp all that vexeth and troubleth him. Then you muſt foment and nouriſh his hypochō
                  ders and ſides, and let him reſt. But when the foode is deſcended alreadie into the bowells, you muſt bid them lye with their face and ſtomach downward, and you muſt nouriſh the belly & prouoke ſleepe: for that digeſteth cruditie maruelouſlie.
                     Sleepe digeſteth.
                   After ſleepe to bring out excrementes from the womb, you muſt put in a ſuppoſitarie or caſt an eaſie cliſter to looſen the wombe. They which haue a feuer cauſed through ſwelling of the kernells of the throte, in them you muſt firſt cure the bile or botch that cauſed the inflammation, after that ſort, that Galene teacheth in his bookes de medendi ratione. When the fit declineth, they muſt be waſhed. Alſo they muſt be nouriſhed with a thinne and ſcarce diet, becauſe in them, the ſubſtance of their bodie is not loſt. Alſo they muſt be kept from wine, for the cauſes aforeſaide. And this ſuffiſeth for the Curing of a Diaria Feuer, being ſo called ſimpliciter, without any addition.
            
            
               CAP. II. Of a Diarie lasting moe dayes. DE DIARIA PLVRIVM DIERVM.
               
                  THERE is another kinde of Diaries, which is named Diaria plurium dierum for no other cauſe, but becauſe it extendeth and continueth vnto the third day.
                     
                        Pi
                              ••
                           i
                              •
                            pluriū dierum.
                     
                     
                        Synochus non putrida.
                     
                   It is otherwiſe called Synochus non putrida. The auncient Authors haue called this feuer Diaria, becauſe it is of the ſame nature that right Diaries are of. For it endeth after the firſt fit, if it be rightly and well handled. This feuer is cauſed of thickning or ſtopping of the poores, & paſſages of the ſkin.
                     Cauſae.
                   That thickning (as Galen witneſſeth) doth chaunce either becauſe the ſmall poores are ſtopped vp, or becauſe they wax narrower, or alſo becauſe the bodie it ſelfe is moderately thicked, which is wont to change thorough colde, or after a bath, or by a medicine that is verie ſharpe and reſtrictiue: or thorough burning of the Sunne, and other ſuch like which can drie the ſkinne. This feuer may be knowen firſt by touching: for in them that haue it, the ſkinne is felt harder,
                     Signae.
                   and  more compact togither, then it is wont to be: Secondarily you may knowe this feuer by  mouing of the heate, for at the firſt touching it ſeemeth gentle, and eaſie, but afterward, if you holde ſtill your hand longer, the heate is ſharper. Thirdly you may knowe this feuer  by the vrine, which is not much altered from his naturall ſubſtaunce and colour: for the bloud doeth not boyle verie much, neither is there much choler ingendred, whereby the vrine ſhould be made higher coloured. Fourthly, you may knowe it by the bigneſſe  of the bodie, which keepeth one ſtate and doeth not fall awaye, becauſe the thickeneſſe of the ſkinne doeth let the diſſoluing of the vapoures and moiſture, and therefore alſo the eyes are not hollowe, nor drie, but more ſwollen and more moiſture, then they ſhould be naturallie. Fifthly, you may knowe it by the pulſe, which is equall, great, ſwifte, frequent and vehement. They that be taken with this feuer, if you will cure them rightlie  and truelie, you muſt let them bloud, and you muſt drawe out ſo much bloud,
                     Curatio.
                   as the ſtrength of the patient will ſuffer. And knowe this for a ſuretie, that vnleſſe you vſe this remedie to thoſe, which by nature haue their bodie vnapt to breath out vapoures becauſe of aboundaunce, it will come to paſſe that either they ſhall be choked, or be in daunger of often ſwounding, vnleſſe great ſtrength or much ſweating, or large fluxe of bloud doe

deliuer them from death.
                     Abſterſiue medicines.
                   The bodie being emptied by bloud letting, ſhortlie after miniſter meates and medicines, which can cleanſe and ſcoure. The meates which can doe this in feuers (as Galene witneſſeth) be Ptyſan and mulſa. The medicines be Ptyſan, oxymell, and thinges ſodden in mulſa, as be calamint, hiſope, origan, Serpillum, yreos and apium. But all theſe be hoater, then they ought to be, and therefore they enflame and kindle feuers,
                     Oxymell.
                   as alſo wine doeth. Oximell doeth onely ſcoure and cleanſe ſtrongly, and doeth not inflame and kindle feuers, ſo that it doth diſſolue thoſe things that be glutinous, clammie, tough and groſſe, and it deliuereth the conduits, poores & paſſages from obſtructions & ſtoppings. Obſerue & watch how much of the feuerous heate is diminiſhed by this diet. For if the third day in the morning, you ſee verie little of the feuer left, & if there be no ſignes of rottennes of humours in the pulſe nor cruditie or rawneſſe in the vrine: if the ſuſpect houre wherin the feuer tooke the patient the firſt day be after noone, you may boldly waſh the patient quickely long before ſixe of the clocke, but it is ſufficient, if you ende the waſhinge three houres before. Likewiſe if you ſuſpect the tenth houre, you may waſh him vntill the ſeuenth houre, for three houres or foure is ſpace enough betweene the bathing and the fit. When the bodie hath beene heat in the bath, being firſt annointed with ſweete oyle warmed, and rubbed verie moderately and eaſilie, then by and by it muſt be wiped without and waſhed. Theſe things following do ſcoure and cleanſe moſt moderately (that is) meale of Eruum, and of barley, and alſo of beanes. Moreouer mulſa which is waterie doeth the ſame. Stronger thinges be yreos, roote of panax, and ariſtolochia, and mulſa, which is of a meane commixtion, but that mulſa ſcoureth moſt of all, that is pure, which is when there is but a little water mixed with the hony, ſo that the melted hony may eaſily enter into the ſmall pores of the ſkinne. Stronger ſcourers then theſe, be the froth of ſalt Peter, the ſalt Peter it ſelfe, and then aphonitrum, ſope is one of them that is able to ſcoure moſt of all. Moreouer after a bath, you muſt giue the patient no thing, but water, which hath had a little apium ſodden in it, although there be three houres ſpace betweene the bathing and the ſuſpected houres. But if the fitte doeth inuade the patient in the euening, or two houres ſooner, then you may waſh him in the morning, and giue him meate, but you muſt giue him onely, iuyce of Pryſan. Then if the ſuſpected houres bring nothing with them, then you may waſh him againe, if you will and giue him meate, but you muſt haue reſpect to the vrine and the pulſe. But if there chaunce anie thing in the ſuſpected houres, you muſt conferre it with the fitte, which you had the firſt day, and then you muſt conſider the vrine, and alſo the pulſes. For all theſe will appeare to be in a meane temperature, when there is left but a little obſtruction. Wherefore you ſhall waſh him the fourth day, and giue him meate, hauing reſpect to the aforeſaide conſideracions: and you ſhall hope that nothing will be left the fifth day. But if there be great obſtruction cauſed, that feuer is not of the kinde of Diarie Feuers.
            
            
               CAP. III. Of a rotten Feuer called Sinochus. DE SINOCHO PVTRIDA.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  SYNOCHVS in Greeke is a Feuer, wherein one fit continuine perpetuallie from the beginning to the ending, remaineth manie dayes, or els it is a feuer which is without all great mutation vntil the end of it. Hereupon it is called in Latine continens febris,
                  
                     Continens febris.
                   and in Engliſh it may be called a conſtant and ſtable feuer. There be three ſundrie differences of theſe conſtant feuers, as appeareth before in the expoſition of feuers. This feuer Synochus putrida or continēs febris is cauſed when all the humoures do putrifie and rot equallie togither within all the veſſelles,
                     Cauſae.
                   and ſpecially in the great veſſelles, which be about the armeholes, and the ſhare, which is wont to chaunce, when a feuerous heate is retained and kept in of a vehement binding and ſtopping, which is within the bodie. For whatſoeuer things be hote and moiſt, and may hardly breath or fume out, they putrifie and rot quickly and readilie. Therefore

this kinde of feuer is not engendred nor kindled in folke that be leane and ſlender, nor in them that haue a thinne and rare ſtate of their bodie, nor in a colde temperament of the bodie, nor in a colde age: but for the moſt part it ingendreth in them which doe abound with bloud, and in thoſe, that be hote as well by their age and nature, as by exerciſes and diet, and ſpecially it kindleth in them that be fleſhie, groſſe, and thicke bodied,
                     Signa.
                   or elſe in them that be ſtuffed with hoate excrements. They which haue this feuer, their pulſe is verie great, vehement, quicke, frequent and equall. The conſtitution or ſubſtance of the arteries is neither harder nor ſofter, then it ſhould be by nature: but the quickeneſſe and frequencie of it, is according to the greatneſſe of the feuer, and theſe ſignes are common with the ſignes of the Diaria plurium dierum. But particulerly in this feuer, there is ſignes of rottenneſſe, and that aſwell in the vrine, as in the pulſe, and by the qualitie of vnkinde heate. The Cure of this Feuer muſt be begunne with letting of bloud.
                     Curatio.
                   And if vertue and nature bee ſtrong, and no other notable thing do ſtoppe it or let it, you muſt drawe bloud till he do faint and ſwound. For if the patient be ſtrong, this is the chiefeſt remedie for this kind of feuer (as Galene ſayeth.) For firſt the bodie is turned into a contrarie ſtate, for it is cooled quickelie through the fainting and ſwounding. As for cooling of the bodie, nothing can be founde that is more pleaſaunt, nor more profitable, either for the ſicke, or for nature. Moreouer in ſuch bodies there chaunceth of neceſſitie, looſeneſſe of the bellie, or a laske, And oftentimes alſo vomiting of choler. Which thinges, moiſture or ſweates do gather from the whole bodie. Therefore you ſhall do beſt by and by in theſe feuers, not to marke the number of dayes paſt, but onelie to conſider the ſtrength of the patient. For if that he be ſafe and ſtrong, you may let bloud not onlie the 6. or 7. day, but alſo in the daies folowing. But, and if you are compelled at anie time to cure a patient, to whom not only the remedy of bloudletting hath bin pretetmitted & kept back, but now alſo either through ignorance of Phiſitions, or through feare of the ſick or his aſſiſtents in proceſſe of time, you are forbidden to let bloud, you muſt come to the miniſtring of cold things. But you muſt diligently diſcerne & cōſider before, how much hurt may chance by it. For if the hurt wilbe ſmal or none,
                     VVhen colde thinge 
                           〈◊〉
                         be miniſtred.
                   miniſter verie cold drinke, as much as the ſicke will drink. And you may be the more bold to do it, if the patient hath bene vſed to drink cold drinks. But if you feare that great diſcōmoditie would ariſe through it, you ſhall abſtaine from it: and vſe other remedies whereby obſtructions may be taken away, and abundance auoided, and that, the burning heate of the feuer may be cooled and eaſed.
                     diſcōmodities of cold drinks.
                   The diſcommodities and hurts which do follow cold drinks miniſtred immoderatelie and out of time, be theſe: firſt becauſe it prohibiteth and letteth groſſe & clammie humours to be attenuated & digeſted, whither they haue ingendred obſtructions or rottennes, or inflammation, or impoſtume, or knobby hardneſſe, or ſuch like affects. As often therefore as a feuer is kindled of ſuch humours cold things are not good for their auoiding: but to this feuer it bringeth much eaſe, becauſe it quencheth the feuer that is alreadie kindled. But yet ſeing the cauſe of the feuer remaineth ſtill, of neceſſitie another feuer muſt be kindled new againe, and manie times a worſe, then that which went before, becauſe that the bodie is thickned through cold. And this is one diſcommodity not to be neglected. Another is, that cold things hurt manie weake members of the patient, whether they be weake by naturall diſtemperature, or by ſome vice that they haue gotten. So in ſome, it hath bene found that their throte hath bene ſo hurt, that they could not ſwallowe, in ſome, the ſtomach, that they could ſcarce digeſt. In ſome the mouth of the ſtomach, or the liuer, or the gut colon, or the longs, or the midriffe, or the reines, or the bladder, or ſome other ſuch like member is ſo ſtriken with cold, that it is made weake and vnable to do his proper action and office. Manie by immoderate drinking of it out of time, haue by and by bene taken with difficultie of breathing, & with cramp and trembling, and haue had hurt in all their ſinewes. Therefore to be ſhort, in them that haue anie ſwelling of fleume or bloud, or anie knobbie hardneſſe: you may not giue cold water vnto them, nor yet to them,
                     Of cold water.
                   that a rawe humour doeth hurt with obſtruction of rottenneſſe. But if there be no ſuch ſwelling as is aforeſaid, & then you do perceiue euident ſignes of digeſtion and concoction in the vrine, & if then there be no member ſo giuen to a cold temperature, that it might take hurt: then you may boldlie giue cold water. Alſo if the ſicke haue vſed to drinke cold water, you may the

more boldly miniſter it, for all the members haue learned before by experience to ſuffer it familiarly without hurt. The drinking of cold water is perillous in them, that haue but little bloud and fleſh.
                     Contin
                           •
                        us febris hath 
                           〈◊〉
                         remedies chief
                           •
                        ie.
                   Therefore by theſe thinges before  rehearſed, it is euident to all men, that the chiefeſt remedies of theſe kinds of feuers called Synochus putrida, be theſe two: blud letting, and drinking of cold water: but bloud letting may be vſed at anie time, if the ſtrength of the patient will ſuffer it, and drinking of cold water muſt be vſed when euident ſignes of concoction are ſeene in the vrine, when the feuer it greateſt, and when you are compelled to leaue bloud letting. You muſt note well the time, when you ſhould let bloud, and marke what went before,
                     You may not let bloud on a full stomach.
                   and what followeth. For if crudite and indigeſtion of meates do go before, you muſt refraine ſo long time from bloud letting, as will ſuffiſe as well to digeſt the meate, as that the excrementes may deſcend downe. But if there will follow of neceſſitie anie fluxe or emptying, you muſt leaue ſo much bloud ſtill, as will voide by that fluxe, Therfore if at the time of bloudletting, the menſtruis do chaunce to flow, or alſo that the hemmorhoides do open and burſt out, if you beholding the vehemencie of the fluxe, ſhall think it to be ſufficient to purge and emptie out that which you require without anie helpe, then you ſhall let nature worke alone. But if you thinke it contrarie, drawe out ſo much bloud, that thereby vnder them both conioyned togither, you may bring to paſſe your requeſt and expectation.
                     Diet.
                   Let the diet in theſe feuers be chieflie this that followeth. In them that haue bene let bloud, miniſter to them two houres after bloud letting, iuice of Ptiſan, and commaunde quiet and reſt. And when they are awaked out of ſleepe, miniſter againe Ptyſan broth. In this diet the patient muſt perſiſt and continue vntill the third day. You muſt note, that in theſe feuers called Synochi,
                  
                     VVhen the ſick ſhould be fedde.
                   the patientes muſt be fedde at ſuch time as hayle folke are wont to eate, and when they feele moſt eaſe: for ſo they ſhall the eaſilier ſuffer & beare their foode. And if they be ſtrong and luſtie, and you looke for the vigour and ſtate of the feuer ſtraight way, the patient muſt vſe a moſt thinne and ſcarce diet. But contrariwiſe if he be weake and feeble, you cannot miniſter a thinne diet to him without perill. Therefore in giuing of meate to the patient, you muſt diligentlie foreſee, and ponder his ſtrength and abilitie. He that deſireth to knowe more of this kind of feuer as touching the Cure of it, let him reade Galene in lib. 7. therapeut. meth. cap. 5.
            
            
               CAP. IIII. Against continuall Feuers. DE C0NTINVIS FEBRIBVS.
               
                  
                     Febris cōtinua
                  
                  FEBRIS continua in Latine, Synechis in Greeke, in Engliſh it is called a continuall feuer. It is a feuer that leaueth not of altogether betweene the fits but it hath a certaine ſenſible ſlaking of heate betweene the fits.
                     Cauſae.
                   A continuall feuer is cauſed, when one onely humour doth putrifie and rot within the veſſelles. And there be three differences of this feuer according to the diuerſitie of the humour that putrifieth in the veines:
                     Three differē
                        ces of cōtinuall feuers.
                   for if choler do putrifie within the veſſelles, it ingendreth a continuall Tertian, which the Greekes call cauſos, in Latine it is called ardens febris, in Engliſh a burning feuer. If fleume do putrifie & rot within the veines, it ingendreth a cō
                  tinuall Quotidian: but if melancholie do putrifie within the veines, it kindleth a continuall Quartaine.
                     Signa.
                   There is not a more certaine ſigne of a continuall feuer, then that, none of them do come to intermiſſion and ſlaking altogether betweene the fittes, vntill the feuer be quite ended & quenched. Their other ſignes are common with the intermitting feuers: for an exquiſite burning feauer or continuall Tertian, hath all the other ſignes of an exquiſite intermitting Tertian: differing onely in this, that it doeth not inuade and begin with vehement cold & ſtiffeneſſe, neither doth it end in quiet and reſt. Likewiſe a continual Quotidian hath all the ſignes of an exquiſite intermitting Quotidian, but it only differeth from it becauſe it doth not intermit and ſlake betweene the fits. In like maner the continuall Quartaines haue the ſignes of intermitting Quartaines, but that they come not to quiet and reſt betweene the fits. Seing it is euident by that which we haue ſaid, that continuall feuers be

of the kind of rotten feuers. It is neceſſarie for him,
                     A compendiū of curing in feuers.
                   that will cure them commodiouſlie and rightlie, firſt to ſtop and let the putrifying and rotting: Therefore two things muſt be taken heede of at the firſt, wherof one is the feuer, another is the rottenneſſe. And in the feuer you muſt alſo regard two things, the one that the portion of the feuer, which is now kindled & enflamed, may be cured and quenched: the other is, that the portion of the feuer which is not yet kindled may be letted & ſtopped. Alſo two things muſt be cōſidered concerning the rottenneſſe, one is, that the rottenneſſe alreadie engendred, may be healed, the other is, to let and ſtop that which is readie to engender putrifaction. That which is readie to ingender, is cauſed through perſpiration and breathing out, if it be impedite and letted. So that of this other two conſiderations do ſpring: firſt that the humour which is withholden, may be purged and emptied out: ſecondarily to prohibite and keepe in, that which is to be with holden and kept backe. It will be prohibited with thoſe remedies, which do heale obſtructions. Againe note, that the obſtructions, which are engendred, muſt be cured, and they which are to com muſt be letted & driuen back away. You ſhal cure that obſtructiō, which is alreadie ingendred, by thoſe things that do looſen, deliuer and open obſtructions. And you ſhall driue away and ſtop the obſtructions, which are to come, if you bridle and ſtop the fluxe of obſtructiue and ſtopping humours, whereby it appeareth euidently, that the laſt thing which we haue founde in this Compendium of curing, that muſt be done firſt in the working of the cure.
                     There be fiue things to conſider in feuer
                           •
                        .
                   Seing that therefore (when wee haue examined the matter perticularlie) there be fiue thinges in continuall feuers, from the which, conſideracions in curing be gathered (that is) the feuer, rottenneſſe, perſpiration impedite and letted, obſtruction and abundance of obſtructiue humours.
                     Curatio.
                   You muſt beginne the Cure with the laſt cō
                  ſideration. Therefore ſeing that the aboundance of humours, that cauſe obſtructions, doth require purging and emptying out: in the beginning, if vertue be ſtrong in the patient, and if time of the yeare, and his age, and other thinges do agree, you muſt let him bloud.
                     Bloudletting.
                   You muſt then ſpecially let him bloud, when the whole bodie ſwellleth more then it was wont to doe, or when the veynes be ſwollen vp, or ſtretched out, for that doe
                     •
                  h ſignifie aboundance of bloud. When the multitude of humours are voided and emptied out, you muſt next come to the curing of obſtructions, and you muſt miniſter medicines, whereby obſtructions may be taken awaye. But becauſe moſt of thoſe medicines be hoate, it is to be feared, leſt they ſhould increaſe both the rottenneſſe, and alſo the feuer.
                     How obſtructions 
                           •
                        hould be healed. O
                           •
                        ymed.
                   Therefore you muſt vſe to miniſter thoſe thinges that can deliuer the patient from obſtructions without heate. What thoſe thinges be, wee haue declared before in the ſeconde Chapter of this Booke. When thoſe humours that cauſed the obſtructions be deuided, cut and ſcoured, you muſt aſſay to voide and emptie them out by the wombe or guttes, by the vrine, and by ſweattes. But ſeeing thoſe thinges, which ſhould bring this to paſſe, be hote, of neceſſitie the rottenneſſe and the feuer muſt be encreaſed by them. Therefore as much, as we maye, we muſt labour to chooſe ſuch a thing, as doeth heate but little, or, if wee can finde anie, that doeth not heate at all, (as in this caſe a Bath,) you muſt vſe that. Galene teacheth in libro tertio de tuenda ſanitate, capite tertio, that a bath can do this.
                     Bathing doth coole.
                   For he ſayeth, that the ſtrength of ſweete waters made hoate, if they be temperate, be hoate and moiſt, but if they be warmed, they be colde and moyſt. And a litile after he ſayeth, A bath, if ir be diſcreetlie vſed, it mollifieth the harde, and ſtretched partes, and it bringeth foorth excrementes or moltinges, if anie ſticke within the ſkinne. Theſe thinges being done, and thoſe humours ſcoured out, which were compact togither in the ſkinne, ſo that the obſtruction and perſpiration impedited be taken away, you muſt come to the Cure of the rottenneſſe.
                     Cure of putrifaction.
                   Therefore at this time you muſt firſt corroborate and reſtore the ſtrength, whereby it may exuperate, and ouercome the rottenneſſe, and be able to digeſt the humoures. And you ſhall heale the putrifaction and rottenneſſe, if you do voide and emptie out by all meanes, that which is corrupted & putrified. That which is left ſtill within, you muſt bring it to an exqulſite meane by moderate motions, and coole breathinges, and you ſhall worke the emptying out of the humoures by vrine, egeſtions, vomiting, and ſweattes. Laſt of all you muſt proceede to the curing of the feuer,
                     Cure of the feuer.
                   which muſt be done by cooling thinges. For euerie feuer, inaſmuch as it is a feuer, muſt be remedied by cooling

and moyſtening thinges. But to knowe, howe eche of theſe thinges ſhould be rightlie done it is partlie rehearſed before, and partly it ſhall follow here after. In continuall Feuers, whoſe ſtate or vigour of the diſeaſe will come at the furtheſt within ſeuen dayes, if their ſtrength be luſtie, and their age agreeing to it, you muſt ordeine them a verie exquiſite and thinne diet.
                     Diet.
                   But in the continuall feuers, whoſe vigour, force, and ſtate is longer then ſeuen dayes after the beginning, or if vertue be weake and feeble, at the firſt you muſt feede them liberallie, when the vigour and ſtate draweth neare, their diet muſt be more ſcarce, but in the ſtate and vigour of the diſeaſe you muſt feede them moſt thinnely and ſcarſlie. Afterward againe, augment his diet, and feede him moſt, encreaſing his diet, in like caſe as the vigour and ſtate of the feuer doeth miniſh, as Hippocrates ſayeth in the firſt ſection of his Aphoriſmes.
                     Aphor. 10
               
            
            
               CAP. V. Of a burning Feuer. DE ARDENTE FEBRE.
               
                  
                     Continua Tertiana.
                  
                  ARDENS febris in Latine, Cauſos in Greeke, in Engliſh it is called a continuall Tertian, or a burning feuer. It is of the kinde of continuall feuers, as is declared in the former Chapter. And it is cauſed when choller putrifieth and rotteth within the veynes. Therefore it agreeth with an exquiſite intermitting Tertian, becauſe it is ingendred of the ſame humour that the other is. But yet it differeth from it in that,
                     Difference betweene a burning feuer & a Tertian.
                   that in an intermitting Tertian, the choler is caried all ouer the bodie: but in a burning feuer the choler is contained in the veſſelles together with the bloud. Hereupon it commeth that the fittes in a burning feuer do not intermit nor ſlake. But when the choler in them is ſtirred more vehementlie, and is driuen about, by nature waxing ſtrong, then there is wont to come vehement colde and rigour, & the feuer endeth. Which Hippocrates declareth 4 Aphoriſ. 58. ſaying, he that is taken with a burning feuer, if vehement colde and rigour come vppon it to him, he is deliuered from the diſeaſe.
                     Signa.
                   A burning feuer is knowen by theſe ſignes, their tong that haue this feuer is drie, groſſe, rough and blacke, there is gnawing of the ſtomach, intollerable thirſt, watchinges, and alſo manie times rauinge, and egeſtions of the wombe be liquide and pale,
                     Diet.
                   which ſignes Hippocrates rehearſeth in libro quarto Ʋict. Acutorum. They which haue this feuer let them lye in a colde place, and in a ſweete ayre, from whence pure winde commeth. Alſo let them lye in a ſofte fetherbed, which muſt be made often, let the coueringes be verie thinne and cleane: which muſt be continuallie chaunged, and let his bedde be of a great wideneſſe, that he may eaſilie mooue his members that be hoate to other colde places of the bedde. And if the ayer be quiet, ſtirre it with a fanne, or ſuch like. You muſt giue him meates that haue vertue to coole and moiſt, as is, lettuſe, gourdes, ſorrell, ptiſan broth and ſuch like. Let his drinke be water, wherein a little cinnamon hath bene ſodden, or veriuyce. If the ſicke haue vſed it, or if no other thing do let it, after meate giue him cold water a ſpoonefull or two, or mixe Iulep of violetts, or ſome lulep of roſes, or ſuch like, with decoction of barley. Moreouer the ſtomach muſt be refreſhed with iuice of roſes. And other coolinges muſt be vſed, as ſtrewinge of the floore with greene vine leaues, and with the leaues and floures of roſes, water lillies, and violets, and by ſprinkling & pouring often of cold water in the floore vp and downe. For the Cure in the beginning ſtraigh way,
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt cut a veine, if age, time, vertue & ſtrength will permit it. Heruppon Hippocrates ſaith in the Aphoriſmes thus. In great burning feuers, if bloud be drawne till the hart faint, by and by the ſtate of the whole bodie is cooled, and the feuer is quenched. In manie alſo a lape is cauſed,
                     Outward medicines.
                   and ſweats flowe foorth. Afterward let the breſt and ſtomach be nouriſhed with dates brayed with oyle of roſes, or of quinces, or of water lillies. Alſo other cooling medicines be good, as be, vine buddes brayed, endiue, ſuccorie, knotgraſſe, lettuſe, ſorrell, vine leaues and ſuch like. Alſo a fine napkin folded together, and dipped in oyle and water made hote, and applied to the breaſt and ſtomach. It ceaſeth the burning

of feuers marueilouſly. Alſo a handfull of woll ſooked in water, & oile of roſes bet greatly, & being holden vp aloft to drop vpon the breaſt doth eaſily quench the vehemencie of the burning heat. Theſe thinges muſt be hote, for warme thinges do diſſolue the ſtrength, and vigour of the members. Neither ſhall you raſhly alſo commixe vineger againſt vehement burning feuers. You may not applie epithemes nor other cooling medicines in the beginning and increaſing of the fit: for at that time the affect of the body is driuen aboue, & the heate is in the inward members: therfore cold thinges applied do driue the heate to the innermoſt partes, & be an occaſion of greater hurte, for fiery heate being oppreſſed and ſtopped within, it raiſeth a more vehemēt & burning heate againe. Therfore in the force, ſtrength & vigour of the fittes, when the heate is already ſpred ouer all the body, theſe cold thinges may well be applied for then the reſidue of the vnnaturall heate which remaineth about the inward members may readily be quēched. Hereupon the patiēt will begin to breath better, & ſhalbe troubled with an eaſier thirſt. Alſo ſome by breathing out of a dewy vapour do fall on ſleep.
                     Epithema.
                   The epithemes which you muſt vſe in this feuer, is this, ℞ of roſe water, & lettuſe water, ana. ℥.iij.ſs. waters of endiue & ſuccotie, ana. j.ſs. good vinegre. ℥.j. all the three ſaunders of eche. ℥.ſs. ſead of purcelaine. gra. iiij. cōmixe altogether & make an epitheme. Moreouer when the vigour & ſtrength of the ſickneſſe is at hand, you may ſafely miniſter pure cold water,
                     VVhen cold water ma
                           •
                         be miniſtered.
                   if none of theſe thinges which be rehearſed in the third Chapter, do let it. And if feare of any hurte, although it be very litle, do let it, you ſhall miniſter the firſt draught refrained after this ſort. Take one cupfull of temperate water, & commixe fiue cupsfull of pure cold water with it, and ſo miniſter it to ſuſpect bodies. To conclude in the curing of burning feuers, you muſt needes bring to paſſe one of theſe thinges, that either the cholerike humours may be voided and emptyed out,
                     Not
                           •
                        .
                   or elſe that they may be quenched within. They may be voided & emptied out by ſweates, vomites & egeſtiōs. They may be quenched by drinking of cold water wherwith very oftē great burning feuers haue bene cured quite and cleane.
                     To whome a bathe is good.
                   A bathe of ſweet water is good onely to them which haue a burning feuer without any ſwelling, tending to the nature of an inflammation or Eriſipela. But & if ſignes of concoction do appeare in the vrine, it is much more conuenient for the patient. Let the ſicke which in a vehemēt burning feuer deſireth to vſe a cold bathe be young & of a moderate ſtate of the body, as alſo Hyppocrates witneſſeth and moniſheth. Neither let it be done to him in Sommer time, & in hote times of the yeere, and in the vigour and ſtrength of the feuer, and let it be one, that hath vſed to waſh in cold water in his health. But when the feuer waxeth more moderate, and vertue is ſtronger, and if there be ſignes of concoction together with it. A bath of ſweete and temperate water is ſufficient and doeth good. For annointinges, oile of chamomill doeth good, ſpecially if the weather be cold.
                     Vncti
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        .
                   But the aboundance of matter, wheron you ſhould make competent remedies againſt burning feuers, you ſhall find in the Chapiters following.
            
            
               CAP. VI. Of a pure intermitting Tertian. DE EXQVISITA TERTIANA INTERMITTENTE.
               
                  EXQVISITA tertiana febris intermittens in Latine, an exquiſite and pure intermitting tertian feuer in engliſh.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is cauſed of choler caried by the ſenſible partes of the bodie, and by the proper nature of it, it remaineth pure, ſincere and vnmixed. Therefore ſeing it is ingendred of choler that is ſincere and pure, and not commixed with any other humour, it is called of the Phiſitions exquiſite.
                     Signae.
                   This feuer engendreth in perſons that be cholerike by nature and in their flouriſhing age, in ſommer time, in hote and drie regions, and when the weather is hote and drie, and in bodies oppreſſed with labours, watchings, cares, deepe thoughtes and burning of the ſunne. Alſo this feuer by and by in the beginning, and in euerie fitte cauſeth a vehement cold, rigour, and ſtiffeneſſe, and by this meanes it differeth from a burning feuer, as is before rehearſed. And the cold in this feuer differeth from the cold in a quartaine feuer thus,
                     Differences of coldneſſe in a tertian and quartaine.
                   becauſe in this feuer the patient thinketh his bodie were pricked, and as it were vlcerated. But in a quartaine the cold ſeemeth to the patient like the colde that haile folke feeele in winter time. Therfore a tertian feuer doth

not chaunce without vehement rigour and could, pricking and wounding in the fleſh: but a quartaine feuer doth not by and by the firſt daie inuade the patient with vehement rigour and colde. For as it proceedeth forward and increaſeth: ſo alſo the rigour and cold encreaſeth, and the patient doth not feele pricking, but rather feeleth great cold, and as it were nipped to the bone with it. There is in a tertian feuer an exact and perfect order and equalitie of the pulſes: but yet in the encreaſing of the fittes, the pulſes are raiſed and prouoked to vehemencie, greatneſſe and fregnencie. Moreouer in the vigour and force of the feuer, it cauſeth thirſt, and burneth vp the patient, ſo that he caſteth of the clothes, to make him bare, and naked, and he breatheth largely and often, and he bloweth out as it were a flame of fire, and requireth to drinke cold water. Afterward the heate ſpreadeth equallie all ouer the bodie, ſo that the breaſt is no hotter, then the extreame partes and members. And when you laie your hand vpon him, at the firſt touching you ſhall feele much gnawing, and byting heat, bruſting out as it were with a certaine vapour & moiſture: but not long after your hand will vanquiſh it, if you do holde it ſtill. Moreouer there followeth this feuer vomiting of choler, and the bellie is laxatiue, and they piſſe vrine that is cholerike, ſubrufe, and ſomewhat yealow and moderately thicke. Alſo their vrine hath by and by a white cloud, or a laudable ſublation in the middes. If the vrine be redder, and if in the firſt fitte there do appeare, neither ſublation in the middes, nor cloud, the feuer will extend and remaine ſeuen fittes. Moreouer this feuer leaueth of till another fitte, when the fitte hath endured the ſpace of xij. houres at the moſt. For this is the longeſt time of a fitte in true and pure tertians. But ſometime the fitte is ſhorter then the aforeſaid ſpace of time, hauing difference more or leſſe according to the quantitie and qualitie of choler within, or becauſe of the ſtrength of the patient, or through the preſent affect of the patientes bodie at that preſent time. Therefore we name that an exact and pure tertian feuer, which endeth his fitte within twelue houres: but that which hath a longer fitte, that is not called an exquiſite tertian, but an extended and ſtretched out tertian. And if the feuer doth inuade the patient daily with vehement rigour and cold, and with the ſignes aforeſaid of the vrine and pulſes, as alſo of other thinges afore rehearſed: then it is called duplex tertiana,
                  
                     Signes of a doub
                           •
                        e tertian.
                   a double tertian. But as for an exquiſite tertian, becauſe it is engendred of pure choler moued about, you muſt moiſten it and coole it, as much as you maie poſſiblie by all meanes. For this humour (as Galen witneſſeth) is the hotteſt & drieſt among all the other that be in the body. Let the ſicke lie therfore in a colde place againſt a ſweete and pleaſaunt aier. Alſo you maie not ſuffer many to be in the houſe, becauſe they ſhould make it hote with their breath. Let the floore be ſprinkled often with cold water, and with roſe water, violet water and ſuch like. And ſtreue on the floore willow leaues, floures of roſes, violettes, water lillies and ſuch like.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let the patientes vſe meates that haue vertue and power to coole, and moiſten. And you muſt giue him ſo much of them, as he can very well digeſt. Let his potherbes be orache, beates, ſpinache, mallowes, lettuſe, gourdes, ſorrell, endiue, ſuccorie, & ſuch like. Alſo giue him ptiſan broathe, and ſoupinges made with alica. Of fiſhes, let him eate ſuch as liue in grauelly places: for ſuch, beſides that they do coole & moiſten, they engender good iuice, and are eaſie to digeſt. Of foules let him eate them that be ſoft of fleſh, as be chickens and partriche, doues, yong ſparrowes, feaſauntes and ſuch like: but of thoſe, that haue not ſoft fleſh, let him eate their winges, which are without excrementes, becauſe of their often exerciſes. Alſo he may eate cockes ſtones, and ſowes feete, for they be without excrementes, becauſe they are exerciſed: and their braines, ſpecially if they be well ſodden. Alſo, if you miniſter the fleſh of pigges well ſodden, you ſhall not hurte, for ſo it may the eaſilier be conſumed of the ſtomache. Alſo reare egges, which be but onely hote through, may be ſuffred ſpecially the yolkes of them: for they be eaſier to digeſt then the whites, and they do coole meanly. You maye ſuffer him to eate fiuictes, which be not very hard to digeſt, as be chearies, proines, mulbearies. He muſt abſtaine from hony, becauſe it will eaſily turne into the choler,
                     Potus.
                   and from muſtard, ſalte meates, and all ſharpe thinges. Alſo you muſt keepe the ſicke altogether from wine, vntill the diſeaſe be digeſted, and let him drinke in the meane ſeaſon, water, wherin a litle cinnamon hath bene ſodden. Or let him vſe to drinke this, ℞. iulep of violettes. ℥.iiij. water wherin a litle cinnamon hath bene ſodden. lb.j. commixe them together, and powre them out of one veſſell into another, often. But when the diſeaſe beginneth

to digeſt, you muſt giue him in the beginning a litle wine, that is thinne and alayed with water, and giue him more liberally of it, when the ende of the diſeaſe is at hande. This is the order of diet for many, but not for all men: for they that are not deintily brought vp, but do liue hardly, and are ſtrong of nature, you muſt ordeine for them a thinner diet (that is) let them be contented with ptiſan brothe vntill the iudgement of the feuer.
                     No ſleepe in fittes.
                   As for ſleeping they may not ſleepe in their fittes, but rather let them watche, that therby the bloud and ſpirites, and naturall heate may be letted, & ſtopped from creeping to the inward members, and contrarywiſe may therby be drawen to the outward partes: for otherwiſe the feuers will ſcarce be diſſolued, and they will come very ſlowly to their ſtate, and fluxes will increaſe and be multiplied: when the fitte is ended ſleepe is not hurtefull. The patient muſt eſchew exerciſes, and all other vehement motions. Alſo let him ref
                     •
                  aine perturbations of the minde, ſpecially, anger, feare, ſorrow, and ſuch like.
                     Curatio.
                   But you may not onely vſe the diet before preſcribed, bu
                     •
                   alſo you muſt miniſter medicines to the patient which can coole and moiſten. In the beginning to quenche the boyling of choler, and to mitigate the cholerous heat, let him vſe this decoction, ℞. of flours of violettes, borage, and red roſes,
                     A decoction to digeſt choler.
                   ana. Mj. flours of water lillies, M.ſs. endiue, ſuccorie, lettuce, ana. M.j.ſs. of raiſons picked. ℥.j. damaſcene proines, number .ij. ſeedes of endiue, ſuccorie lettuce, purcelaine, gourdes, ana. ʒ.iij. of the roote of ſuccorie, ʒ.vj. ſeeth altogether in lb.ij. of well water, vntill the third parte be conſumed, then ſtraine it and make the licour of that decoction ſweete with ſugar, and purifie it with the white of an egge, then adde to it ſirupe of endiue, with the broad leaues, and iulep of violettes, ana. ℥.ij.ſs. commixe them together and make a potion, & let the ſicke drinke therof euery morning faſting. ℥.iiij.ſs. But and if the ſicke be more delicate, & do abhorre potions,
                     M
                           •
                        ſturae.
                   let him take daily of this medicine, ℞. of conſerues of violettes, borage, roſes, water lillies, and ſuccorie, ana. ℥.ſs. electuarium de prunis damaſcenis without diagredium. 
                  ʒ.vij. diarrhodon abbatis. ℥.j. diatrion ſantalon in powder. ℥.ij. of iulep of violettes aſmuch as is ſufficient to commixe them and make a loche. Moreouer you muſt remoue the cauſe of the feuer,
                     Vacuation.
                   which you ſhall do, if you emptie out the cholerike humour. Therfore you muſt emptie out the choler which is crept into the ſtomache by prouoking vomite.
                     Vomiting.
                   By what meanes you may prouoke vomite it is declared in the former bookes. The choler which is caried downward, it is beſt to emptie it out by a laske of the wombe: which alſo is wonte to come ſomtime of it ſelfe in an exquiſite tertian. Vomiting ſhould be prouoked chiefly in the beginning of the fit, for at that time, nature is wont to thruſt in choler thether: as in the inclinatiō & ſlaking of the fit, nature thruſteth it to the neither partes & to the skin. Therfore at that time you muſt caſt in an eaſly & ſoft cliſter, that they may both bring out the choler eaſily, & that alſo by their gentlenes, the ſharpnes of the choler which is wont to vexe & gnaw the guttes, may be ſtopped & broken. Make therfore ſuch a cliſter. ℞. of mallowes, leaues of purple violettes, mercury,
                     Cliſter.
                   endiue & ſuccorie. ana. M.j. ſead of purcelaine & of melōs. ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. ſeeth them all in ſufficient quātitie of water, till the third part be conſumed, ſtraine it, & adde to the licour of that decoctiō, the marow of caſia fiſtula newly drawen. ℥.j. oile of violettes. ℥.iij. common ſalte, ʒ.j.ſs. commixe them & make a cliſter. Alſo you muſt empt
                     ••
                   out choler by prouoking of vrine & ſweattes ſpecially, if it be caried thither by nature. This thing you may well do by medicines that prouoke vrine,
                     Prouokers of vrine.
                   but not by all ſuch, but by thoſe that can do it without drying. Therefore you muſt prouoke vrine with potions wherin apium or dill hath bene infuſed or wet. And if ſignes of concoction do appeare, then you may miniſter wormwood ſoftly,
                     Abſynthium.
                   which is a ſpeciall remedy for the ſtomache, when it is vexed with choler: ſpecially if you take of the 
                     ••
                  ppes of it aſmuch as is ſufficient, and infuſe it in 
                     
                        •••
                     licratum, that is, wine & hony ſodden together: for it purgeth choler out of the wombe and ſtomache by egeſtion, and out of the veines it purgeth it by vrine. You ſhall prouoke ſweating with this, and ſuch like medicine. ℞. rootes of apium,
                  
                     To prouoke ſweate.
                   ſperage and ſuccorie, ana. ℥.ſs. of the ſeedes of percely, fennell, bruſcus, and louage, ana. ʒ.ij. blacke cicers. ʒ.iij. dill. M.ſs. ſeeth all in ſufficient quantitie of water that runneth vnto the third parte, then let it be ſtrained, and make it ſweete with ſuger, adding to it oxymel compoſitum. ℥.ij. and make a potion. Or beate all the aforeſaid thinges into powder, and miniſter of it euery time. ʒ.j. or ʒ.j.ſs. with ℥.iij. of oxymel ſimplex. Theſe medicines which prouoke ſweat, muſt be miniſtred in the declination of the fitte, or on that daye, that the ſicke hath not his feuer. For this purpoſe

alſo annointinges with oiles of chammomil, dill, and ſuch like, are not a litle profitable. Moreouer hote bathes of ſweete and potable water do profit two wayes,
                     B
                           •
                        thes of ſo
                           ••
                        ie water.
                   both bycauſe they prouoke out ſome of the choler, as alſo becauſe of their qualities, they do much good: for ſuch bathes do moiſten and coole. But bathes of Sea water, ſalt water, ſalt peter water, and brimſtone water, they bring out more choler, but they profit much leſſe thē potable waters. Therefore it is beſt not to call them profitable, ſeeing they doe more hurte by drying, then they do good by emptying and voiding, for the remedies muſt haue contrary, qualities to the humours that haue inuaded againſt nature: for that doeth more commoditie, then the emptying by any meanes (as Galenus witneſſeth ad glauconem,) by the which wordes it is euident that emptyinges and purginges in an exquiſite tertian doth but litle pleaſe Galene. Specially thoſe emptyinges that are done by bloud letting, and by a vehement purging medicine, for all ſuch kind of purging medecines be of a hote facultie and qualitie. But ſeeing this feuer is the hoteſt of all other, therefore it rather deſireth to be cooled and moiſtened, then to be vehemently purged. It rather permitteth and requireth emptyinges by other meanes, and ſpecially when nature laboureth and aſſayeth to driue out the humour. Alſo nature muſt be holpen, if of it ſelfe it be not able to performe her entent. As for a bathe this is the effect and ſcope of it, therby to haue the bodie weat and moiſtened. Therefore you muſt ſtrewe in, neither ſalt peter, nor ſalt, nor muſtard ſeed, but it is good to poure much oile, being made hote,
                     
                        
                           •
                        aintum.
                   vpon the patient, & to bring him into the bathe & to waſh him. And if he will ſwimme in it, you may ſuffer him to do it as long as he can. And they that are delighted in bathing if you ſuffer them to waſhe twiſe in a daye, you ſhall not do amiſſe. But you muſt haue this in memorie, that it be opportunatly, and done in due time, for if ſignes of concoction do now appeare, then if you waſhe him oftener, you ſhall not erre from Galenes doctrine.
            
            
               CAP. VII. Against a bastardly tertian. DE TERTIANA NOTHA.
               
                  A Baſtardly tertian is cauſed, when choler is mixed for the moſt parte with fleume.
                     Cauſae.
                   Hereupon it commeth that all the ſignes of this feuer, do not declare the nature of pure and ſincere choler,
                     Signa.
                   as in an exquiſite tertian they do. In this feuer alſo the time of the fittes doth exceede 12. houres, neither is this iudged in ſeuen fittes, as an exquiſite tertian is. Moreouer in this baſtardly tertian, the ſignes of concoction do appeare more ſlowly, neither is there ſuch great heate in the vigour and ſtate of this feuer, as in the exquiſite tertian. Beſides all theſe, it doeth not ende with aboundance of ſweate,
                     Diet.
                   as an exquiſite tertian doeth. Therefore the diette in this feuer muſt not be altogether cooling and moiſtening, as it is in an exquiſite tertian: but let it haue ſome power and vertue to heate, cut and deuide: for the choler in this feuer is groſſer, neither is it ſo hote. They therefore that haue this feuer, maye profitiblely take brothe of ptiſan, wherin ſome pepper is put, and you muſt giue them mulſa to drinke, wherein hath bene ſodden hiſope, origan, and ſpikenard. Alſo you muſt giue them ſoupinges and brothes eaſie to digeſt. Moreover ſeeing the time of the fitte is long, and ſo endureth a whole daye, you may not giue him meate daily but eache other daye: for by this meanes we ſhall beware and take heede, that nature be not called awaye from her office and worke, and ſo the diſeaſe ſhould be increaſed: for you muſt onely take heede that the diſeaſe doth not increaſe, and that the ſtrength of the ſicke, which muſt ſtriue and fight a great while, be not weakened, debilitate and caſt downe. But it is hard to keepe and ſaue both, becauſe hunger looke how much it profiteth to the digeſtion of the diſeaſe, and ſo much or more it hurteth and debilitateth the ſtrength. And meates, looke how much they increaſe the patientes ſtrength and ſo much they hinder, and let concoction and digeſtion. To conclude therefore, you muſt vſe hunger to them that be ſtrong and luſtie, and their diſeaſe hard to digeſt. And you muſt feede them more largly, whoſe ſtrength is debilitate and weake, and their diſeaſe not ſtubborne for to digeſt.
                     Potus.
                   Let their drinke be water, in which a litle cinnamon and ſome hyſope, or origan

hath bene ſodden. Quiet and reſt is good for them, but exerciſes do hurte them: for this doth call fourth outwardly nature, and naturall heate, which ſhould concoct & digeſt crude matter within. For the cure, if you may let the patient bloud, you may not faile to do it,
                     Curatio.
                   but by and by in the beginning, if the age, time, region, and ſtate of the bodie will permit it, you muſt draw out ſo much bloud, as the preſent ſtate of the bodie requireth and will ſuffer.
                     Bloud letting.
                   By the preſent ſtate, vnderſtand the ſtate aſwell of the patient, as of the diſeaſe: for the ſicke, if he be ſtrong, may ſuffer bloud letting, if not, the contrary: if the diſeaſe remaine, and be cauſed through aboundance of humours, it requireth bloud letting not a meane quantitie, but according to the aboundance of them. But when the diſeaſe will endure long through cruditie, and lacke of digeſtion, you muſt drawe out but a meane quantitie of bloud, that the ſtrength of the patient may be kept and endure vntill the ende of the diſeaſe. Alſo you muſt caſt into the bellie not verie eaſie cliſters,
                     Cliſter.
                   that they may bring fourth the ſluggiſh and hurtfull matter, and make them thus, ℞. mallowes, mercurie, leaues of violettes, origan, and hyſope, an. M.j. ſeede of cardamum. 
                  ʒ.iij. ſeeth altogether in ſufficient quantitie of water, and adde to the licour of that decoction, benedicta laxatiua, hierapicra, an. ʒ.iij. mel roſarum. 
                  ʒ.vj. oiles of violettes and chammomill, an. ℥.j.ſs. common ſalte. ʒ.ij. and make a cliſter. Alſo you muſt miniſter to the patient decoctions made of ſuch thinges as can cut, and deuide,
                     Decoctum.
                   and alſo prouoke vrine without any great heating and drying. As this is, ℞. rootes of apium, fennell, and ſuccorie, an. ℥.j. endiue, ſuccorie, origan, and hyſope, an. M.j. lettuſe. M.j.ſs. the foure common cold ſeedes, an. ʒ.j. ſeedes of fennell and apium, an. ʒ.j.ſs. ſeeth all theſe in two poundes of water, vntill the third parte be conſumed. Then ſtraine it, and make the licour ſweete with ſugre, and purifie with whites of egges the ſtreined licour. Then adde to it 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     rupus acetoſus ſimplex, mel roſarum clarified, oxymel ſimplex, an. ℥.j.ſs. and make a potion, wherof miniſter daily euery morning ℥.iiij. After theſe you muſt miniſter ſuch medicines,
                     Purgatio.
                   as do emptie the belly gently, as is infuſion or ruberbe, electuarium e pſillio, and diaphanicon and ſuch like, which are able by themſelues, or mixed with other to bring & purge out choler together with fleume. Wherof we haue rehearſed many in our former bookes. After the ſeuenth day you may miniſter continually decoction of wormewood:
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   alſo oxymel 
                  
                     •
                  ronke alone helpeth many. Alſo vomiting after meate is ſo healthfull, and profitable to theſe olde and inueterate feuers▪ that many (as Galene witneſſeth in lib. 1. ad glauconem) haue bene cured with this one remedie. For a feuer which hath continued longe, doth ingender and breed many flegmatike excrementes in the ſtomache, which being caſt out by vomiting, the patient is deliuered from the feuer. Alſo the ſides muſt be nouriſhed with hote medicines, that therby the windes and bolning, which ſtrecheth them out, may be diſſolued and diſperſed. Among other this foment is verie good, ℞. floures of chammomill, melilote, and dill,
                     Fomentum.
                   an. M.j. wormewood. M.ſs. red roſes. M.j. lineſeede and fenugreeke, an. ʒ.iij. boile theſe in ſufficient quantitie of water, vnto the third parte, then dippe a ſponge in it, and nouriſh the ſides therwith. Alſo it profiteth to annoint the ſtomache with this, or ſuch a like ointment,
                     Vnguentum.
                   ℞. oiles of maſticke, roſes and chammomill, an. ʒ.iij. of cloues. ʒ.j.ſs. waxe aſmuch as is ſufficient, and make an ointment. Moreouer bathing in this feuer is not healthfull, before that,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . ſignes of cō
                  coction do appeare, becauſe crude and rawe humours, which ſhould be digeſted within, are brought out by it to the skinne, and ſo it doeth increaſe obſtructions.
            
            
               CAP. VIII. Of a quartaine feuer. DE QVARTANA FEBRE.
               
                  AN exquiſite quartaine is another kind of the intermitting feuers,
                     Cauſae.
                   which is ingendred onely of a melancholie humour, putrifying and rotting without the veſſells.
                     Signae.
                   This feuer doth not by and by in the beginning inuade the patient with vehement rigour and cold the firſt daie, but it is like to them that are cold in winter through vehement froſt: but when the feuer hath continued and proceeded forward and is increaſed, then alſo the rigour and cold increaſeth with it, and waxeth

greater and ſtronger daily, till the whole diſeaſe be come to his full increaſe and force. And the cold doth not ſeeme to the patient as it were pricking and vexing the skinne, as it doth in an exquiſite tertian, but there is cauſed vehement cold, and as it would breake the bones. Their pulſes are verie rare and ſlow in the beginning of the fittes, but when the feuer is in his full force, or alſo when it is increaſed, then of neceſſitie the pulſes are ſwift and often: but yet they do keepe their naturall ſlowneſſe and raritie, if you conſider the ſwiftneſſe and frequencie comming in the fittes. But the mouing of the heate, the increaſing, and the vigour, and force of this feuer is cleane contrarie to that in tertian feuers. For in this feuer the melācholy humour is kindled and inflamed by litle and litle, as it were a ſtone, or a ſhell, or a bone, or ſome other ſuch like cold and drie bodie. And when that any flame or heate is kindled in it, then in the fitte it leaueth nothing fumous or ſmokie, but it burneth and conſumeth it. And therefore there is longer ceaſing and intermiſſion of this humour,
                     Cauſe of long intermiſſion 
                           •
                        n quartaine fittes.
                   betweene the fittes, then there is in fleume. And the intermiſſion and ceaſing betweene the fittes ſeemeth to be exquiſite and pure without any greefe at all: becauſe in this feuer, looke how much melancholie is kindled and inflamed, and ſo much in the time of the fitte is diſperſed, conſumed, and drawen out cleane. Moreouer in a quartaine feuer there followeth not vomiting vp of choler. Their vrines are thinne, white and waterie, and as it were ſtrained from a groſſer matter. Alſo this feuer beginneth ſpeciallie in Autumne or Harueſt, comming after erratike feuers. But you muſt behold both the nature of the patient, and his temperament, alſo his diet vſed before, his age, the region, and other ſuch like. For if thoſe thinges de cold and drie, then you maie looke more ſurely, that a quartaine feuer will enſue, ſpeciallie if at that time, quartaines be rife among the people. They that haue a quartaine feuer, in the beginning they muſt be handled and ordered moderately and gently,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   neither maie they be vexed with any vehement medecine, or by vehement emptying and purging: for the humour which cauſeth the quartaine, is ſtubburne to be drawne and handled. Therfore in the beginning, and before it be digeſted, it will hardly and ſcarcely follow the medicine that draweth it: and that becauſe of his groſſeneſſe and coldneſſe, and alſo becauſe it ſtoppeth the narrow wayes, by the which it ſhould paſſe out.
                     Bloud letting.
                   Yet if bloud doe ſeeme to abound much, then you muſt take awaie that. And if when you haue ſtricken a veine, the bloud that commeth out, do appeare blacke and groſſe, as for the moſt parte it doth in diſeaſes of the ſplene, you maie then boldly draw it out. For great aboundaunce of ſuch bloud being drawen out, nature will get the vpper hand in digeſting the reſt of the humour, and will make the feuer ſhorter. You muſt cut the innermoſt veine of the left arme, which is called lienaris vena, the ſpleene veine, or mediana: for this veine emptieth out the melancholie humour, ſpeciallie from the ſplene, which is wonte to be diſeaſed in a quartaine feuer: but if, when the veine is ſtriken, the bloud doth appeare thinne, and yealowiſh, you muſt ſtoppe it by and by: for ſuch an humour is not vnprofitable in a quartaine, but it correcteth and amendeth the groſſe and cold humour, aſwell bycauſe of his ſubſtaunce,
                     Diet.
                   as alſo with his qualitie. You muſt ordeine for the patient a verie good diet, ſuch one as is not windie, and ingendreth good iuice. Therefore you muſt keepe the ſicke from ſwines fleſh, and from all other meates that be groſſe, toughe and clammie, and ſlow of digeſtion. Moreouer, let him abſtaine from all thinges which doe coole and drie the bodie. He muſt eate birdes that liue vpon mountaines, and do engender good iuice: for thoſe that do liue in fennes and mariſhes, they be vnwholeſome and full of execrementes, and do ingender a groſſe humour. He muſt vſe fiſhes of grauellie waters, which be ſoft and without toughneſſe, but in this feuer ſalte thinges and muſtard muſt be miniſtred in meates, that they maie extenuate, cut, and deuide, the groſſe and clammie humours, and that they maie conſume and feede vp the ſuperfluous humiditie and moiſture.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . They muſt vſe wine, that is white, thinne, and meanly hote: for that by the thinneſſe of it doth extenuate the groſſeneſſe of the melancholie humour, and by the meane heate that it hath, it heateth the bodie by litle and litle, which is cooled with the melancholious humour, and it helpeth digeſtion and alſo prouoketh vrine. They maie not altogether be kept and refraine from frictions, deambulations, and other occuſtomed exerciſes (that is to ſaie) you muſt ſuffer them to vſe exerciſes, but not ſo much as they did in their health. Neither maie they vſe frictions, deambulations, and other excerciſes of the bodie ſo often, nor ſo vehemently as they did in their health, for

that would cauſe perill and daunger of obſtructions. But if exerciſes be vſed moderately, and that in the time of intermiſſion betweene the fittes, they will voide out excrementes and bring other commodities which Galene rehearſeth in lib. 2. de tuenda ſanitate. They muſt altogether abſtaine from bathing if they can,
                     Balneum.
                   and be content onely with frictions and rubbinges: for although bathing, becauſe it doth heate, doeth profit, yet, becauſe it calleth forth humours outwardly, it bringeth perill of obſtruction, ſpecially when the bodie doth abound with excrementes. And if the quartaine be ſhorte, and not violent, it is not hurtfull in the intermiſſion betweene the fittes, when the patientes haile daies be, if he vſe his wonted exerciſes. As for the bellie if it can be by anie meanes it muſt be kept ſoluble, either with his accuſtomed meates, or with medicines mixed with them, or with cliſters firſt gentle and eaſie, and after ſharper: for you muſt increaſe their ſtrength and ſharpneſſe by litle and litle, as the matter of the feuer doth concoct and digeſt by litle and litle: for at the beginning (as is ſaid before) you muſt handle and order theſe feuers gently and eaſily. You maie ſeeke examples of eaſie cliſters out of the former Chapiters.
                     Cliſter.
                   A cliſter ſomewhat ſharper is this that followeth ℞. mallowes, chammomill, mercurie, leaues of blacke violettes. an. M.j. leaues of ſeene, the rootes of polipodie. an. ʒ.v. hartiſtonge. M.j.ſs. ſeeth all theſe in ſufficient quantitie of water vntill the third parte. Then ſtraine it and commixe with the licour of that decoction, the marowe of caſia fiſtula. ℥.j. diaſena laxatiua. ℥.ſs. common oile. ℥.iij. mel roſarum. ℥.ſs. ſalte gemme. ʒ.j. and make a cliſter. Within certeine daies, giue to the patient diatrionpiperion: but becauſe it doth heat vehementlie, you maie not miniſter it dailie, whoſe making and vertue you muſt ſeeke out of Galene in lib. 4. de ſanitate tuenda. Alſo (as Galene ſaieth) the patient ſhall do rightlie, if be drinke daily, onely pepper with water:
                     P
                           •
                        per.
                   for it heateth and diſſolueth the groſſeneſſe of mindie ſpirites and vapours, and it extenuateth and digeſteth the crude and rawe humours, which are heaped and gathered vp together in the hipochonders and ſides. And theſe thinges muſt be done from the beginning of the feuer, vntill it come to the vigour, force, and ſtate. And if the ſicke ſeeme now to be in the vigour and ſtate of the diſeaſe, then he muſt vſe a thinner diet, then he did before, or muſt do afterward, and you muſt command long quiet and reſt to the patient, leaſt nature being occupied about digeſting of the matter of the diſeaſe, ſhould be called from her office and worke. Afterward you muſt prouide and forſee the intrailes which are wonte to be ſwollen & ſtretched out with viſcons,
                     Prou
                           •
                        ſi
                           •
                        n f
                           •
                        r the mira
                           ••
                        es.
                   toughe and groſſe humours and alſo with aboundance of windie ſpirites and vapours, which being diſſolued and emptied out, the bowells waxe ſofte and are looſened. Therfore you muſt annoint them with thoſe thinges which can mollifie and looſen, as be ointmentes which are made of barlie meale, ſead of apium, rootes of ireos, rewe and ſuch like.
                     Vnguentum.
                   Among other annoint the lefte ſide with this ointment. ℞. of oile of capers. ℥.iij. oile of ireos, and of ſweete almondes, an. ʒ.ij. ſeedes of apium, and of comin, rootes of ireos, an. ℈.j. waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an ointment. After theſe thinges you muſt miniſter medecines, which haue vertue and power to prouoke vrine, & not before this time: for if you miniſter ſuch thinges before the inward members be free from obſtructiōs, becauſe thoſe medecines be hote, they carie the humours downe with them, and do increaſe the obſtructions. For to prouoke vrine you muſt miniſter mulſa, wherin dill, or rewe,
                     Prouokers of vrine.
                   or elſe apium hath bene ſodden. If ſignes of concoction do appeare, then you muſt ſtraight waie vſe purging medecines, which can purge out melancholie,
                     Purgation of melancholie.
                   and you maie not purge him once onely, but oftener, if the matter ſeeme to require it: for that melancholie cannot be brought out all at once, ſeeing the bodie is not able to ſuffer and beare ſo ſtrong a purgation, as ſhould purge out all that ſtubburne humour at once. You maie ſeeke examples of ſuch medicines as doe purge out melancholie, out of the firſt booke in the Chapter of Melancholiouſneſſe. But yet aboue other thinges Aetius praiſeth ſweete wine infuſed in the inward parte of coloquintida, but ſo that you commixe with it ſome apium or daucus, to make it pleaſaunt. After meate,
                     Vomitus.
                   you muſt prouoke vomite (if nothing let it) with white hellebore firſt commixed with radiſhe as is declared in the other bookes, which if it worke litle or nothing, you muſt miniſter hellebore by it ſelfe. And if anie man abhorre from hellebore, let him vſe this or ſuch like medicine. ℞. iuice of radiſh,
                     Vomite.
                   or diſtilled water of it. ℥.iij. oxymel ſimplex. ℥.ij. commixe them & make them warme to drinke, but they which cannot vomite, muſt be purged downward,

ſuch be they that haue a ſtraight and ſlender breaſt. After purging you muſt giue them theriaca, or ſomewhat that is of like vertue, as is this. ℞. Liquoris cyrenaici, fine mirrhe, pepper of eache a like much, beate them by them ſelues, and commixe them with iuice of rewe, and make pilles therof, and miniſter the weight of. ℈.ſs. They that miniſter any of theſe medicines at the beginning of the ſickeneſſe, or at all, before the vigour, ſtate, and force therof: they make of a ſimple quartaine oftentimes a double quartaine, or without doubt they make the ſingle quartaine greater and more vehement: and of a double quartaine, they make a triple quartaine or elſe the double one is made greater.
            
            
               CAP. IX. Of a quotidian feuer. DE QVOTIDIANA FEBRE.
               
                  QVOTIDIANA febris intermittens (that is) an intermitting quotidian feuer. It is ingendred of putrified and rotten fleume being thruſt of nature by the ſenſible partes of the bodie.
                     Cauſae.
                   It is called of the Greekes amphimerina, becauſe it cauſeth a fitte euerie daie.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . But if glaſen fleume which is the coldeſt of all other fleumes, do putrifie by it ſelfe the one halfe of it (that is) if the whole ſubſtance of it do not putrifie equallie, but ſome parts of it do putrifie and ſome do not, then it ingendreth a feuer called Epialos febris:
                     Epialos febris.
                   in which the patient is feuerous, and vehementlie cold together, and at one preſent time he ſeeleth immoderate heate, and immoderate cold in all the partes of the bodie together. For parte of that humour, which is not putrified nor rotten as yet, being ſpread by all the veines, or in the reſt of the bodie, ingendreth the rigour and cold, but,
                     Signa.
                   the other rotten parte of the humour ingendreth the feuer. A quotidian feuer doth not inuade the patient with rigour and vehement cold by and by the firſt daie, but in proceſſe of time, it commeth rather like a cooling, then like a rigour. The pulſe when the fitte beginneth is inordinate and vnequall, ſlow, litle, and weake. Neither alſo in the augmenting and increaſing of the quotidian, is there ſwiftneſſe of mouing of the pulſes, nor greatneſſe, nor vehemencie. The heate in this feuer is not ſo ſharpe and vehement as it is in a tertian: for it neither burneth them, neither are they compelled to make naked their bodies, and to throw of their clothes, neither doth it compell them to breath much and often, and to blowe out of their mouthes as it were a flame, nor to deſire to drinke cold water, but it is moiſt and ſmoky, and commixed with much vapour. Alſo it is hardly kindled, and it conſumeth a longe time, vntill that, by increaſing, it come to the force and ſtate. Moreouer, they that haue this feuer, do not thirſt, becauſe not onely the tongue, but alſo the whole bodie in this feuer is moſt moiſt. The vrines in quotidian feuers either be white, and thinne, and waterie, or thicke, and troubled. There bruſteth out no ſweate at all in the firſt dayes, neither is there any exact and perfect reſt from being feuerous. For the feuer remaineth eche time almoſt the ſpace of 18. houres. There chaunceth alſo to them vomiting of fleume: and thoſe thinges which are ſent out by egeſtion, are colder, moiſter, cruder, more waterie, and more flegmatike. Alſo a quotidian feuer doeth chiefly, vexe them that be moiſte, and flegmatike of nature. Alſo it chaunceth in a moiſt ſeaſon, ſpecially in winter that is cold and moiſt, and in olde folke and children. Hereupon Galene writeth, that he neuer ſaw a young man that was choletike and drie by nature, taken with this feuer: but they that be older, and moſt flegmatike, hauing a groſſe ſubſtance of the body, and do liue an idle life, ſeruing their belly and giuen to drounkenneſſe, vſing bathing often and ſpecially after meate, they are ſoone taken with this quotidian feuer.
                     Victus ratio.
                   Let the diet in this feuer be altogether extenuating, cutting and deuiding. Therefore you muſt now ſeeke ſuch places, wherin we haue declared aboundantly, what kind of diet, it ſhould be. In the firſt dayes (that is) when ſignes of cruditie and indigeſtion do yet appeare, the fleume muſt be deuided and cut, and the poores & paſſages that be ſtopped,
                     Curatio.
                   muſt be ſcoured and clenſed. And therefore you muſt miniſter oxymell, becauſe it doth ſcoure mightly, it cutteth and deuideth the glutinous and clammie humours, and it deliuereth the poores from obſtructions. And you muſt miniſter thoſe thinges which prouoke vrine,

that (the fleume being already extenuated and deuided) may the more readily paſſe by the conduites, and be emptied out. Therefore it is good to miniſter decoction of the roote of apium, percely, ireos, fennell, and ſuch other like often rehearſed before with ſirupus acetoſus compoſitus, and mel roſarum, and ſirupus è duabus radicibus, and other that haue the vertue and power to extenuate, cut, and deuide. About the vigour and force of the feuer, you muſt take heed and haue regard to the ſtomache, and ſpecially to the mouth of it. Therefore you muſt prepare thoſe thinges, which (being applied outwardly,) may adde ſtrength to the ſtomache, ſuch as be, maſticke, ſpikenard, wormwood, and ſuch other like.
                     Vnguentum.
                   Therefore before meate vſe this ointment. ℞. oiles of maſticke, wormewood and narde, ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. maſtike, cloues, and wood of aloes, ana. ℈.v. cinnamon. ℈.j. with waxe as much as is ſufficient, make an ointment, wherwith annoint the region of the ſtomache. The ſtomacke being ſtrentgthened, you muſt compell vomiting, firſt by miniſtring of radiſhe, then after, meates muſt be eaten for ſo it lifteth vp the meates, and cauſeth the eaſier vomite. After he muſt vſe medicines, that doe purge out fleume: for fleume vhen it is digeſt, may conueniently be purged. What medicines thoſe be that can purge out fleume, it is euident in our other bookes, and this here ſuffiſeth to cure a quotidian feuer.
            
            
               CAP. X. Of a feuer ethicke. DE HECTICA FEBRE.
               
                  HECTICA febris in Latine, the feuer ethicke in Engliſh.
                     Hectica febris.
                   It is a feuer wherin an vnnaturall heate is not onely kindled in the ſpirites and humours, but now alſo it is kindled in the maſſie, ſound, and fleſhy partes, and members. This feuer knoweth no paine, and they that haue it, do thinke that they haue no feuer, neither do they perceiue or feele any heate, ſeeing all the membres of their body be equally heat, (as Galene declareth aboundantly in his booke de inaequals intemperie. The feuer ethicke is ingendred and cauſed two wayes. Firſt,
                     Cauſae.
                   for the moſt parte of burning feuers, which haue continued ſo longe, that in proceſſe of time they conſume the humiditie and moiſture, that is conteined in the body of the hearte, or alſo, if it reſiſt more aboundantly, then thoſe feuers are not onely ethickes, but alſo maraſmodes (that is) conſuming & melting feuers: for feuers being ingendred, (the humiditie yet ſtill remaining) when they haue caught and occupied the bodie of the hearte, hereupon they are ſpecially kindled and inflamed like the flame of a candle with a matche. And this is one way of ingendring of the feuer ethicke. Another way of ingendring of them is this, when they begin of them ſelues by and by, being ingendred as diary feuers be, either of ſorrow, or anger, or ouermuch weryneſſe, together with burning of the heate of the ſunne. The feuers that be thus ingendred, be not very hard to cure: but ſuch feuers of theſe, as be turned into conſuming and waſting, which the Greekes do call maraſmos, through the negligence and ignorance of phyſitions, if thoſe feuers be in their force and ſtrength, and not as it were beginning ſtill,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . it is not onely hard to cure theſe, but it is alſo impoſſible to remedy them. For the nature of them is hote and dry, ſo that the hearte is in like eaſe, as the ſnafte of a candle, when it is very much burnt. For when it is much burnt, it will breake and diſſolue, and through dryneſſe fall a ſounder, ſo that although you power aboundance of oile to 
                     •
                  t, yet you cannot cauſe a geater flame to be kindled: for the flame being ſmall and weake panteth alwayes vp and downe in it, and waxeth continually leſſe and leſſe, till it be altogether quenched out. Euen ſuch is the feuer which is altogether maraſmodes (that is) conſuming.
                     Signa.
                   The feuer ethicke which turneth into maraſmus or a conſumption, is very ready and eaſie to know: for before you do conſider the pulſes and heate by touching them, you may ſee the eyes wonderful hollow, as thoughe they were hid in ſome ditches or furrowes, for then all the moiſt ſubſtance of them is exhauſt and conſumed, ſo that you maye ſee the bones of the eyebrowes ſticke out. Alſo there hangeth on the haires of the eye liddes, dry gumme and filth, and vnclenly affectes, as is ſeene in them ſpecially, that goe a long iourney in the duſt, when the ſunne burneth hote. Alſo the vitall

flowre in them periſheth, and the skinne of their forehead is dry and retched out, and their eye liddes wincke often as though they were ſleapy, but their diſeaſe is not to ſleepe, but is rather impotency and debility to watche. Alſo the fleſh of their temples is conſumed, ſo that they ſeeme hollow places, for what other thing haue they but skinne and bone? for if you looke vpon their bare belly, it ſhall appeare to you, that neither bowell nor filme is lefte. The hypochonders and ſides are pulled vpward to the breaſt. And if you touch their ſkinne, it is very drye, which if you take hold on with your fingers, and pull it vp, it is like the hide of a beaſt. The pulſes be thinne, hard, weake and often. The heat when you lay your handes firſt on him doeth ſeeme weake: but a litle after it bruſteth out ſharp and gnawing more and more, if you hold your hand longe vpon him. Alſo this ſhalbe a great and vndubitate ſigne to you: when you do giue him meate, the heat is inflamed and increaſed, and the pulſes are augmented in greatneſſe and ſwiftneſſe.
                     Hectica febris.
                   It is called a feuer Ethicke, ſo long as naturall humiditie and moiſture is kept and reſerued: but when it is to be doubted that there is left no more humidity and moiſture in the body then it is an abſolute & perfect conſumption, which is called in Greeke maraſmos.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . For the cure of a feuer ethicke before it come vnto conſumption,
                     Curatio.
                   you muſt by all meanes coole it. And therfore the effect and ſumme of the whole cure doeth conſiſt in theſe pointes (that is) to coole and moiſten aswell with thoſe thinges that be outwardly applied,
                     A
                           •
                        er.
                   as alſo by them that are miniſtred inwardly. Therefore let the ayer that the patient doth breath in be cold and moiſt. And if it be not ſo by nature, make it ſo by arte, as is taught before in the 6. Chapter,
                     Diet.
                   in the cure of the tertian. He muſt alſo vſe meates, that do coole and moiſten, as broth of ptiſan, bread ſteeped a litle in cold water, the fleſh of kiddes, feaſauntes, birdes of the mountaines, cockes ſtones, capons fleſh, reare egges, new cheeſe without ſalte, and fiſhes of grauelly waters, lettuſe, endiue, ſuccory, gourdes, ſpinache, mallowes and ſuch like: cheries, proynes, pomegranattes, melons, figges, and ſuch like. He muſt alſo take milke,
                     L
                           •
                        c.
                   for that profiteth him maruelouſly ſo that this feuer be not compounded and mixed with another feuer, that is ingendred of rotteneſſe of humours Let his drinke be cold water,
                     Potus.
                   but ſpecially if the ſicke haue bene vſed to it before. Let him drinke therof moderately, or let him drinke water wherin a litle cinnamon hath bene ſodden, or wine that is watered and thinne. Moreouer it is good to them that haue this feuer, to eate meate often in a daye, that by that meanes they may beware and take heed that they eate great aboundance of meate at one meale, which vertue being weake ſhould not be able to ouercome and digeſt. They muſt eſchew immoderate mouing, and all thinges that can reſolue and weaken the ſtrēgth.
                     Note.
                   You may not miniſter any purging medicines to them that haue a feuer, ethicke: for purgations are hotter and vehementer, then they are able well to ſuffer: but if the belly be more bound, then it ought to be, you muſt looſen it with eaſie cliſters, that can coole and moiſten, adding to them marow of caſia fiſtula. You muſt miniſter ſuch thinges within the body, as haue vertue and power to coole and moiſten. As among the compound medicines be theſe, ſirupe of violettes, of water lillyes and of tame endiue, ſirupus acetoſus and ſuch like. Alſo diarrhodon abbatis, diatragacanthum frigidum, diapapauer and ſuch like. Of ſimples theſe be good, the iuices, and diſtilled waters of lettuſe, purſelaine, tame endiue, and poppie. Among thoſe thinges that are to be applied outwardly, bathes at all times are conuenient,
                     B
                           •
                        lurum.
                   and profitable to them that haue this feuer. I meane bathes of ſweete waters, to the which the ſicke muſt be caried in a bed, or in a fine ſheete, and let there be foure to carie the ſheete, at eche corner one. The water of the bathe muſt be moſt temperate: and alſo the patient muſt tarie in it not longe, leaſt any of his moiſture within him ſhould be drawen out by it, therefore in no caſe muſt he ſweate in it. There be ſome that vſe to ſeeth in the water of the bathe, herbes, as violettes, mallowes, lettuce, floures of water lillies and ſuch like: ſome other do ſeeth calues feete, or lambes heades, vntill the fleſh be ſodden from the bones. Alſo you muſt beware, leaſt any thing be poured on his head, ſeeing it is ſufficient for it, to be dipped twiſe or thriſe in the water with the whole bodye, the ſheete being let downe eaſily, and then againe lifted vp by foure young men, which muſt carie him. Straight, when he is brought from thence, he muſt be dipped all ouer once in cold water, and he may not tarie in it any time at all. They that haue this feuer, and be brought into a bathe, vnleſſe they be dipped in cold water, is helpeth them nothing (as Galene ſaith.) By and by, aſſoone

as he is drawen out of the water, let another ſheete be ready, and caſt him into that, and then into another. Then lay him in his bed, and firſt wipe him with ſponges, and after with ſoft linnen clothes. And let them not handle him violently, that do wipe him, but as eaſily, as they can poſſibly. To conclude, after this, he muſt be annointed with cold oiles, and with other moiſtening things. Among other this linimēt is good,
                     Linimentum.
                   ℞. oile of violettes. ℥.ſs. oile of gourdes. ʒ.iij. new butter without ſalte, ſwines greace, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. commixe them, and make a liniment, wherwith annoint the whole body. Or adde to it muſculage of tragacanthae. ʒ.ij. marow of calues ſhanckes. ʒ.iij. waxe aſmuch as is ſufficient, and make an ointment. Alſo oile of water lillies, and of poppie, are good, and ſpecially oile of roſes, which (as Galene ſayth) doth marueilouſly moiſten dried bodies. When he is annointed & clothed, you muſt bring him againe vpon a bed, or a ſheet, into the place where he is fed, and you muſt nouriſh him with meates. Alſo, it profiteth him to haue his hearte cooled, and moiſtened with epithemes: as is this,
                     Epithema cerdis.
                   ℞. waters of violettes, water lillies, and lettuce, ana. ℥.iij. ſtrong vineger. ℥.ſs. red roſes, all the ſaunders, ana. ʒ.j. pouder of diamargariton. 
                  ʒ.ſs. ſeed of purcelaine. G.iij. 
                     •
                  affron. ℈.ſs. commixe them and make an epitheme, and apply it to the region of the harte cold.
                     Epithema iccoris.
                   Likewiſe it is good to coole & moiſten the liuer thus, ℞. water of lettuce. ℥.ij. vinegre. ℥.j. diarrhodon abbatis. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. ſcraping of iuorie, ℥.ſs. purcelaine. ℈.ſs. cōmixe them & make an epitheme & apply it to the liuer. Alſo for them that haue the feuer ethicke, medicines are good which cā coole & moiſten, with their odour and ſauour, as be flours of water lillies, purcelaine, violettes, roſes,
                     Odoramētum.
                   and ſuch like. Alſo you may find moe thinges, that are good for the cure of the feuer ethicke, in the ſecond booke, in the Chap. of the Ptiſicke or Conſumption. And in curing of the feuer ethicke this onely muſt be your ſtudie and labour, that the body may not only be cooled and moiſtened with thoſe thinges which be miniſtred inwardly, but alſo by thinges that be applied outwardly, and ſpecially by annointing with oile. How much oile applied and annointed outwardly, ſpecially doth helpe to the conſeruatiō of the body, and to the reſtoring of ſtrength, We are taught by the notable example of Pollio Romulus,
                  
                     Pollio Romulus.
                   who being aboue an hūdred yeares olde (as Plinie telleth) diuus Auguſtus his hoſt asked him, by what meanes he kept that vigour, force, and ſtrength of body and mind: he aunſwered thus: Intus mulſo, foris oleo (that is) I keepe me moiſt with mulſa within, and oile I annoint vpon my skinne.
            
            
               CAP. XI. Of an hemitrice feuer. DE HAEMITRITAEO SEV SEMITERTIANA.
               
                  ALTHOVGH there be diuerſe kindes of compound feuers, as is declared in the beginning of this booke in the explication of feuers: yet in this place we will onely ſpeake of that feuer, which is compounded of an intermitting tertian, and a continuall quotidian. And it is called in Greeke, haemitritaeus, and in Latine ſemitertiana, in Engliſh halfe a tertian.
                     Hemitritaeus quid.
                   It is ſo called becauſe this whole feuer hath halfe the nature of the ſaid feuers, eche of them: by the example of this compound feuer, you may learne to cure all other compound feuers.
                     Cauſae.
                   Therfore an hemitrice feuer is cauſed, when putrified fleume is commixed with rotten choler. It is declared before that a tertian inuadeth the patient with rigour and vehemēt cold,
                     Signae.
                   and a quotidian commeth with cooling of the extreme partes. Therefore the feuer which is compounded of them both cauſeth horrour and ſhaking for cold, which is leſſe, then the rigour of a tertian, and greater & more vehemēt then the cooling of a quotidian: ſo that it is a meane betwene them both. It is ingendred two ſundry wayes: for either two fittes are ioyned together by and by at the beginning, and do inuade the patient together both at once, or elſe eche of them cōmeth ſeparate from the other. Therefore when the tertian doeth exceed the other, it cauſeth a more horrible feuer, and alſo it hath much rigour and vehement cold in the augmenting of the fitte, and there is preſent greater heate and more burning, and choler is driuen out either by vomiting, or by egeſtion, or it breatheth out a moiſt vapour, but whē the quoditian exceedeth the tertian, then cold is in the extreme partes, & but a litle ſhaking, and neither burning nor thirſt doth

vexe him. But when the intermitting tertian, and the continuall quotidian be equall and of like force and greatneſſe, the fit doth come with horrour and ſhaking for cold. And when the quotidian is of greateſt force, the pulſes and horrour waxe leſſe and gentler: but if the tertian preuaile, by and by the pulſes and horrour increaſe and waxe greater. Note therfore, when a feuer is ingendred of an intermitting tertian, and a continuall quotidian being equall of like force, greatneſſe and ſtrength, then it is called an exquiſite hemitriteus ague: but if one feuer do exceed the other,
                     Exquiſitus haemitriteus. Non exquiſitus hemitritaeus. Curatio.
                   thē it is called an vnpure hemitrice. You may vnderſtand by the former Chapters, how this feuer ſhould be cured. For ſeeing an exquiſite hemitrice feuer is ingendred of two feuers equally commixed (that is) a tertian and a quotidian: you muſt alſo vſe a cure conuenient and agreeing equally to a tertian and a quotidian. But in an vnpure hemitrice, when there is moſt of choler, or moſt of fleume: you muſt alſo vary and chaunge the cure, according to the humour and feuer that aboundeth. For if choler haue the vpper hand, you muſt chiefly vſe the remedies, which we haue declared in the cure of the tertian. But if fleume abound moſt, vſe the thinges moſt that be declared in the cure of the quotidian. To conclude you muſt moſt couet the cure of that which hath moſt neede, and doeth moſt abound, but ſo, that you do not altogether neglect the other. Therefore we neede not in this place rehearſe the remedies, wherby this feuer ſhould be deſtroyed and cured, ſeeing euery man may learne the cure of them, more readily according to the diuerſitie and nature of the humours out of the Chapters of curing of the tertian and quotidian. Therfore if any man do firſt learne to know exactly and perfectly the curing of ſimple feuers, he ſhall alſo know how to cure compound feuers without any more labour: for the cures of ſimple feuers being knowen, and conſidered, it is moſt ready to any man to cure compound feuers, ſo that here we ſhall not neede to write ſeuerally of the curing of compound feuers.
            
            
               CAP. XII. Of the Pestilence. DE PESTILENTIA.
               
                  SEEING that at this preſent time and day, there be euery where treatiſes of the Peſtilence made of diuerſe new Authours: I neede not now longe diſpute here of it: but it ſhall be ſufficient, if we do briefly declare the cauſes, ſignes, and curing of it,
                     Cauſae.
                   as we haue done in other diſeaſes before. There be two eſpeciall cauſes of the Peſtilence (as Galene writeth in lib. 1. de differentijs febrium. 
                   cap. 5. The one is, an infected, corrupted and ro
                     ••
                  er ayer. The other  be humours gathered through naughty and corrupt diette of the body, which humours be ready to putrifie and rotte, when a man taketh any light occaſion to kindle a feuer of the corrupted aire. Therefore the chiefeſt cauſe why men are infected with the Peſtilence, is breathing in of ayre, without which no breathing thing doeth prolonge their life. For it beginneth for the moſt parte of breathing in of ayre which is corrupted of a putrifying and rotting euaporation.
                     VVheren rottenneſſe beginneth.
                   The beginning of corrupted ayre, and of the rotten euaporation, is either a multitude of dead bodyes not burned or buried, as it chaunceth in warres, or the euaporation of ſome pooles, fennes or mareſhes in the Sommer time. It chaunceth alſo ſometime to come before immoderate heate of the ayer, when the temperature of the ayre is chaunged from his naturall ſtate, to immoderate heate and moiſture, of neceſſity the Peſtilence muſt follow.
                     Notae.
                   Hereupon Galene ſayeth, that of all temperamentes of the ayre, the worſe is that, which is hote and moiſt. Alſo oftentimes (as is afore ſaid) naughty and corrupt diette ingendreth humours in the bodye, that be eaſie and ready to putrifie and rotte, and ſo is the cauſe why ſuch bodyes are infected with the Peſtilence. And then truely they ſpecially haue the Peſtilence, which vſe a naughtie and corrupt diette, and ſo be full of all kindes of ſuperfluities. Therefore it neede not ſeeme marueilous, if ſometime ſome one among many (which yet doeth very ſeldome chaunce) be infected with this diſeaſe, the ayre yet not being peſtilent and corrupt. For they that keepe a good and heathfull diet, and be without ſuperfluities in their bodies, they take no hurte at all, or elſe very litle hurte, although

they be in the corrupt and peſtilent ayre and may eaſilie returne and be brought to their naturall habite & ſtate. Hereby it is eaſie to aunſwere them that aske,
                     Note.
                   howe it chaunceth that all men are not taken equallie with the Peſtilence, ſeing euerie one is conſtrained to breath in the peſtilent aire. The firſt cauſe why ſome remaine vnhurt, is becauſe they be not full of ſuperfluous humiditie and moiſture, but do vſe moderate diet and exerciſes, and haue their bodie eaſie to breath out vapours. Another cauſe is, becauſe all mens bodies be not of like diſpoſition and affect. For diſpoſitions of mens bodies are of manie ſundry forms, for ſome bodies are quickly ouercome and infected, and do moſt readily ſuffer any cauſe: but ſome againe be inſuperable, & can not be ouercome, nor will at all ſuffer the infection, or els verie hardlie. And therfore the greateſt portion of ingendring of diſeaſes, is the diſpoſition of the bodie of him that ſuffreth the diſeaſe. For elſe all men, that taried long in the burning heate of the Sunne, or that vſed ouermuch mouing, or that were loden with wine or inflamed with anger, or affected with ſadneſſe, ſhould fall into a feuer. Alſo we doe not denie,
                     Plagues from God.
                   but that ſometime great plagues and Peſtilence be ſent of God for the grieuous ſinns and horrible offences of men, wherewith he puniſheth the great offences of vs: whereof there be manie euident teſtimonies in the Prophets, and ſpecially in Ezechiell. cap. 5. The time of the yeare in the which chieflie by nature the Peſtilence is rife and flouriſheth,
                     The time of the Plague.
                   is the end of Sommer, and the beginning of harueſt or Autumne: for then both the aire and mens bodies are moſt apt to putrifie, corrupt, and rot for many cauſes.
                     Signes of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   There be manie and diuers ſignes of the Peſtilence to come rehearſed of the new Authors: among which ſignes: the firſt is the chaunging of the times of the yeare. The ſecond is often phaenomena in the ayre, ſpecially in Autumne. The third is, when puſhes, pockes, and meaſils do not onely vex children, but alſo young folke of perfect age. The fourth is, when the windes are often in the  ſouth and in the weſt in Autumne. The fifth is a darke and troubled aire in Autumne threatning  raine, but yet it doeth not raine at all. The ſixt is, if women conceaued with child, do  ſuffer aborſion for euerie light cauſe. The ſeuenth is, when in ſommer after raine ſodenlie a  great aboundance of frogges of diuerſe colours do gather togither on a heape. The eight is, a great multitude of flies, wormes and creeping things. The ninth is the dying of foure footed  beaſtes and fiſhes. The tenth is the flying of birds from their neſtes, leauing their egges  there ſtill. The eleuenth is the dearth of victualls and corne. The twelfth, (which is the moſt  certaine ſigne) is a hote and moiſt temperature of the yeare. There be manie ſignes,
                     Signe
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        f 
                           •
                        he infected.
                   that declare when one is alreadie infected with the Peſtilence. The firſt is if the outward members be cold, and the inward members burning hote. The ſecond is heauineſſe, wearineſſe, and  ſlouth of the whole bodie, and difficulty in breathing. The third is paine and heauineſſe in  the head. The fourth is carefulneſſe of the minde and ſadneſſe. The fift is a maruelous inclination  for the moſt part to ſleepe, for ſometime watching and rauing do vexe him. The ſixt  is a diuerſe and frowning looke of the eyes. The ſeuenth is loſſe of appetite. The eight is immoderate  thirſt and often vomiting. The ninth is bitterneſſe and drineſſe of the mouth. The  tenth is a pulſe, frequent, ſmall, and deepe. The eleuenth is the vrine, for the moſt part rroublous, thicke, and ſtinking like beaſts vrine. Although ſometime the vrine of them ſeemeth  to differ little from the vrine of healthfull men, therefore by ſuch an vrine, they that are vnſkilfull of the other ſignes be quickly deceaued, ſuſpecting no hurt, becauſe of the good colour of the vrine. The twelfth, which is the moſt ſureſt token of all is, if there do ariſe & ingender botches, behind the eares, or vnder the armeholes, or about the ſhare, without anie  manifeſt cauſe, or alſo if carbuncles do ſodenly ariſe in any member: for when they appeare, they betoken ſtrength of nature, which being ſtrong and mightie doeth labour to driue the poiſon out of the bodie. Alſo they do declare, which members of the bodie being affected aboue other, do thruſt out from them the venemous humours.
                     Signifying of botches.
                   For if they do appeare in the neck, they do declare that the veines be chiefly vexed: if vnder the armholes, the hart: but if they appeare in the ſhare the liuer is moſt affected. But ſeeing that botches do not alwayes appeare, (which is moſt perillous and daungerous, for it betokeneth that nature is weake and feeble, and is not able to expell and driue out the venimous humors) you muſt haue reſpect to other ſignes and tokens, which be rehearſed a little before.
                     Curatio. Venae ſectio.
                   As for the Cure if the aforeſayed ſignes doe appeare, then if nothing doe let, by and by you muſt

cut a veine on that ſide, in which the peſtilent botch doeth appeare. If the botch doe appeare behinde the eares, or about the chinne, or in other partes of the face and necke you muſt let bloud out of the Cephalica veine on the ſame ſide. If it appeare and come out vnder the armehoales, you muſt cut the innermoſt veyne of the arme, on the ſame ſide, it is commonly called baſilica: or if that veine will not appeare, take the middle veyne. If the botch doe appeare in the ſhare, you muſt drawe out bloud from the ankles of the ſame ſide. But if there do appeare no hotch outwardie, you muſt draw out bloud from the ſame ſide, where there is felt greateſt paine and heauineſſe. But out of which veyne you muſt let bloud, the paine and griefe of the members afflicted, will declare to you well enough: for if the members aboue the breaſt be greeued and afflicted moſt, cutte the Cephalica veyne. But if the partes beneath the necke be moſt greeued and afflicted, cutte the baſilica or the middle veyne: and if the neather partes be moſt vexed you muſt cutte the veyne of the hamme or ankles. And if nature bee ſtrong, and other thinges not letting, you muſt drawe out bloud aboundauntlie. But if through age or for other cauſes, you may not vſe bloudlettinge,
                     Cucurbita.
                   you muſt faſten cupping glaſſes to the necke and the ſhoulders, or to the backe, or to the legges. And if the Peſtilence doe inuade anie man at his dinner time or ſupper time,
                     Vomitus.
                   when the ſtomach is filled with meate, then, he muſt vomite ſtraight waye. At the laſt, when the bodie and ſtomach is emptied, you muſt by and by miniſter ſome medicine,
                     Alexiteria.
                   that can reſiſt poyſon, that it may drawe the poyſon to it, and call it backe from the heart, for that is the propertie of ſuch medicines. Among a great number of the which,
                     Electuariū de ouo.
                   this is praiſe worthie, which is called Electuarium de ouo, which once a good and wiſe Emperour called Maximilianus did vſe. Whie I doe preferre this almoſt before all other is, becauſe of his maruelous effect, and vertues, which haue appeared often in diuerſe ſicke perſons: and becauſe it is eaſie to make, except the roote of white diptayne, which can not well be gotten, for the which it is better to vſe the leaues of trewe diptayne, which maye well be come by. Miniſter of the aforeſayed Electuarie to them that be of perfect age. ʒ.j. and to them that bee younger ſometime. ℈.ij. will ſuffice, you muſt diſſolue it in water of roſes, or endiue, or ſcabious: Alſo this medicine vſed is good to preſerue a man from the Peſtilence, if he take thereof daylye the weight of a graine or two of barley, or the quantitie of a peaſe. Alſo the taking of this Potion doeth helpe much. ℞. Theriaca Andromachi. ℈.ij. Mithridatum. ℈.j. Bole armorniacke preparate. ℈.ſs. waters of roſes,
                     Potis. Bolus armenius.
                   ſcabious and bugloſſe. ana. ℥.j. Commixe them. What power and ſtrength is in bole armoniacke to driue awaye the Peſtilence, Galene teacheth aboundauntlie in libro nono, de ſimplicium Medicamentorum facultatibus. Where hee writeth that in a great Plague that was in Roome, as manie as droncke this medicine were quickelie healed. Wherefore this medicine ought chieflie to bee vſed in the time of the Peſtilence.
                     Puluis optimus.
                   Moreouer this powder doeth profite verie much. ℞. the leaues of true diptaine, the roote of turmentill, the roote of pimpernell, zedoarie, gentian, roote of Betonica altilis, commonlie called tunica. ana. ℥.ſs. Bole armoniacke preparate. ℥.j. terra lemnia. 
                  ʒ.iij. Aloes epaticke, mirrhe. ana. ℥.ſs. ſaffron. ʒ.j. maſticke. ʒ.ij. and beate them all to verie fine powder, and make a Tritura. VVhereof miniſter to the ſicke. ʒ.j. in roſe water or ſorrell water. VVhen the Patient hath taken ſome of the aforeſaide medicines, lay him in a warmed bedde being made with ſoft ſheetes,
                     Sudor.
                   and well couered with clothes, that he may there ſweate foure or fiue houres, or longer according to his ſtrength. But and if by this meanes you can ſcarſly prouoke him to ſweate, you muſt laye tiles being heatte at the fire, to the feete of the Patient, for theſe by reaſon of their heate will readilie prouoke ſweatte. And in all the time that the ſicke doeth ſweate, you muſt onelie take heede, that he do neither ſleepe, eate, nor drincke. After ſweating you muſt diligentlie wipe of the ſweatte with verie cleane and fine lynnen cloathes. Then afterwarde lette the ſicke riſe from his bedde, if hee will or if hee canne, and let him eſchewe the open aire. Let the ayre of the chamber in which the ſicke doeth lye, be corrected, anmended and purified with odoriferous thinges,
                     Acris correctio.
                   and with ſweete ſmelling perfumes, daylie foure or fiue times. It is beſt for the ſicke to chaunge from one chamber to another. Becauſe the ayre of one

chamber by the continuall tarying of the ſicke in it, is much corrupted, and can not eaſilie be corrected and amended. Let the ayre of the chamber into the which the ſicke ſhall remoue, be firſt corrected and purged with perfumes. VVhat thoſe thinges ſhould be, we will declare afterwarde. Two or three houres after the patient hath ſweatte, giue vn-him the broath of a chicken, and,
                     VVhen meate ſhould be miniſtred.
                   that you muſt do often afterwarde according to his ſtrength: for the ſicke muſt be nouriſhed and refreſhed by little and little. Therefore it is good for him to eate often, and but verie little at once: for they that are thus fedde, will ſooner recouer againe then other. Alſo he may vſe to eate the fleſh of chickens, ſodden with ſorrell, or with iuyce of lymons, or elſe veriuyce. Alſo the ſicke muſt be kept altogether from ſleepe the firſt daye by talke of the aſſiſtauntes,
                     Of ſleepe.
                   by rubbing of the extreame partes, by pulling of their eares, noſe, and hayre. For the which purpoſe it is not vnprofitable to dippe a ſponge in verie ſharpe vinegre, and holde it to the noſe. If the Patient haue vehement thirſt,
                     Potio.
                   he may vſe this potion. ℞. Iulep of violettes. ℥.iij. ſyrupe of the ſharpe iuyce of Cytrons. ℥.j.ſs. ſyrupe of ſowen Endiue. ℥.ij. of the decoction of ſorrell, ſcabious, and floures of bugloſſe. ℥. tenne, or ſo much of their diſtilled waters, commixe them and make a potion. Alſo you muſt take the wa
                     •
                  er wherein bareley hath bene ſodden a little, and commixe with it iuyce of roſes, or ſorrell, or lymons or of vnripe grapes, and miniſter it in ſteede of drincke. And you muſt miniſter medicines (ſpeciall
                     •
                  e if the ſtrength be feeble) which can ſtrengthen and comfort the heart, and other principall members of the bodie, as this is. ℞. conſerues of violettes,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   roſes and bugloſſe. ana. ℥.j.ſs. Bole armoniacke preparate. ʒ.j. redde corall. ℈.j. barkes of the Citron apple. ʒ.j.ſs. Camphire. ℈.v. with ſyrupe of the iuyce of ſharpe Citrons, as much as is ſufficient, make an Electuarie or liquide antidote. Alſo you muſt lay vppon the region of the heart, (ſpeciallie if the ſicke doe yet feele heate about the breſt) this Epitheme. ℞. waters of roſes, bugloſſe and ſorrell. ana. ℥.iiij. powder of Electuarium de g
                        •
                     mmis. 
                  ʒ.j. wood of Aloe
                        •
                     ,
                  
                     Epithema.
                   red ſaunders, the barkes of a citron apple, beaten to pouder, the bone of the Harts heart. ana. ℈.v. ſaffron. gr. 6. commix them all and make an Epitheme. But you muſt note that the Epithemes may not be applied, except they be made hote: and as ſoone as they are cooled, you muſt take them away ſtraight way: for then they conſtraine & ſhut vp the poores, and ſo do bring vnto the patient no ſmall griefe. Therefore it is better to vſe cordiall baggs, as this is,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . ℞. floures of red roſes, water lillies, and of violets. ana. ʒ.ij. of all the ſaunders, corall, white and red, ſpodium, pearles. ana. ʒ.iij. cinnamon, cloues, the bone of the harts hart, wood of aloes, barks of the citron apple, ſaffron. ana. ℈.j. ſeede of ſorrell. ℈.ij. ſeede of purſlaine. gra. iiij. beate all theſe into a fine powder, and make two ſquare bagges of ſilk, & apply ech after other being heat. Moreouer you muſt altogether couet & labour, that the venimous humors may be entiſed and drawne to the place, where the botches appeare and burſt out, and you muſt do it by ſetting to of cupping glaſſes, or by medicines applied,
                     Cure and medicines.
                   that haue vertue and power to drawe thoſe humours, as this is. ℞. fat figges in number vj. great raiſons. ℥.ſs. ſalt gum. ʒ.ij. hony. ℥.j. with oile of chammomill, make it into the forme of an emplaiſter, & apply it hote to the botch. Or apply this plaiſter,
                     Emplaſtrum.
                   which is much commended of all men. ℞. a great onion, and cut of the head of it, and picke out all the core within, then fill it with Theriacha Andromachi, adding to it iuyce of rewe or ſage, which done ſtop the hole faſt that is in the top of the onion with lute, and ſet the onion in the imbres to roſt. And when you doe thinke that it is roſted enough, pull of the barks of it, and then bray it in a morter, vntill it be thicke like an emplaiſter, and apply it hote to the botch. You nede not to be afraide to apply theriaca to the botches, becauſe of the authoritie of Gentilis and 
                     Ʋaleſcus and ſome other authours. For theriaca, and ſuch like medicines againſt poiſon doe not worke their operation by driuing the poiſon from them (as they being in a wonderfull errour doe affirme) but rather they worke by drawing the poyſon to them (as Galene teacheth, in his booke de theriaca ad piſonem.) Alſo this emplaiſter is good,
                     Errour of Gē
                        tilis and Valeſcus.
                   for it helpeth much to the rotting of the botch. ℞. meale of fenugreeke, and lineſeede,
                     Emplaſtrum ſuppuratorium
                   of floures of chammomill. ana. ℥.ſs. rootes of althaea and white lillies. ana. ʒ.ſs. figges in nomber ſixe, leaues of true diptaine. ʒ.iij. rootes of valerian. ʒ.ij. muſtarde ſeede. ʒ.j.ſs. doues dong. ℥.ſs. oyles of chammomill and lillies. ana. ℥.j.ſs. make them into the forme of an emplayſter or

pultiſe.
                     Aliud.
                   Alſo this is praiſed. ℞. of emplaſtrum diachylon ſimplex. ℥.ij. of gumme armoniack, & galbanum. ana. ℥.j. bray them togither, and bring them to the forme of an emplaiſter. But if the botch will not breake of him ſelfe by applying the aforſaid things, you muſt then lay vpon it gooſe dong diſſolued in the common oyle, or in oile of chammomill. And this is ſufficient to ſpeake of here as touching the cure of them which be taken with the Peſtilence.
               
                  
                     A preſeruatiō from the peſtilence.
                  Now we will brieflie expound, by what means a man may preſerue and defend him ſelfe from the infection of the Peſtilence, which vexeth and infecteth in ſome certaine place or region. And ſeing (as we haue declared in the beginning of this Chapter) it is euident that the peſtilence is not cauſed, but through the breathing in of peſtilent and corrupt aire: there can not be a more preſent remedie to preſerue one,
                     Flight is the beſt remedie.
                   then flying from the corrupt aire. For there is no other meanes to auoide the peſtilent ayre, becauſe whether we will or no, wee muſt drawe in ſuch aire, vnleſſe we get vs away into ſome other place, where the ayre is not corrupted nor infected, but pure and good. Which you muſt the rather and more quick- he do if the euill be greatly infectiue. And you muſt flee farre of into ſuch a place whereas the aire is knowen to be pure and good, and deſtitute of corruption, neither muſt you returne home againe from that place verie ſoone. Hereuppon it is not raſhlie ſayde of the Common ſort, that theſe three Aduerbes Cito, longe and tarde, in the time of the Peſtilence, do more pleaſure and profite then three ſhoppes verie well furniſhed. Therefore they, that may conueniently for their buſineſſe, flee away let them not ſuffer them ſelues to be perſwaded by anie meanes, to tarie in the peſtilentayre: which if they doe, they ſhall fooliſhlie put them ſelues in daunger of Peſtilent death: but if you may not flee for vrgent buſineſſe, and iuſt cauſes, then let your firſt care be, that the houſe in which you muſt tarie, be without all kinde of ſtinke, and kept cleane from all filthineſſe and ſluttiſhneſſe. Let the windowes of it be iuſt ſhut, ſpeciallie in cloudie and rainie dayes, that the peſtilent aire enter not in. But if you will open them, ſee that they open vppon the eaſt or north quarter, and doe it, when the Sunne is riſen aboue the earth ſome houres. You muſt come abroade but ſeeledome, and not except the element be cleare and bright: neither come then, vnleſſe you haue firſt taken ſome medicine, which is able to preſerue you from the infection. You muſt make fiers daylie in your houſes, with oken wood, Iuniper, tamariſcus, laurell or ſuch like, that thereby the corrupt ayre that is in the houſe, may be corrected and purged. For there is a maruelouſe vertue and ſtrength in fire to amende and correct the rottenneſſe and corruption of the ayre. Alſo you muſt ſtrewe often vppon coales this powder following.
                     Suffi
                           •
                        en
                           •
                        a.
                   ℞. roſemarie. M.ſs. ſage, betonie, wormewood, mergerome, origan. ana. M.j. braye all finely and make a powder. Or vſe this powder. ℞. of Iuniper bearies. ℥.j. mirrhe. ʒ.iij. frankenſence and maſticke. ana. ʒ.iij.ſs. roote of benedicta. 
                  ʒ.j. rewe. ℥.ſs. Cipreſſe barkes. ʒ.j.ſs. roote of Angelica, lauender. ana. ʒ.ij. beate all togither, and make a powder. Let poore folke lay vpon quicke coles, iuniper clefte in ſmall ſtickes, or the bearies of Iupiter. Let richer folke vſe wood of Aloes, or powder of Gallia moſchata, cloues and ſuch like. When neceſſitie conſtrayneth you to go abroade,
                     A pomander.
                   carie this or ſuch a like pomander with you. ℞. Lapdanum. 
                  ʒ.iij. ſtorax calamitae. 
                  ʒ.ij. cinnamon, mace, cloues, nutmegges. ana. ʒ.j. wood of Aloes. ℈.j. ſpikenarde. ℈.ſs. mirrhe, maſticke, frankenſence. ana. ʒ.ſs. muſk and ambre. ana. gra. iij. pouder them, and ſearce them, and with ſtorax liquida, and water of mergerome, as much as is ſufficient, commix them & make a pomum odoratum. In ſommer time, let the aire be purified and corrected with cold things, as with floures of roſes, violets, water lillies, vine leaues, and branches, willow leaues, & ſuch other like. Alſo ſprinkle the pauement or floure with water of roſes, ſorell, and ſuch like, or with cold water, wherewith ſome vinegre is commixed, alſo it profiteth to ſmell roſes, vinegre, camphire, ſaunders, & ſuch otherlike. Or to ſmell to this pomander.
                     Pila odorata.
                   ℞. Lapdanum. ℥.ſs. storax calamitae. 
                  ʒ.iij. flowers of water lillies, roſes, & violets. ana. ʒ.j. barks of the citron apple. ʒ.j.ſs. all the ſaunders. ana. ʒ.ſs. of maces & cinnamon. ana. ℈j. maſtik. ʒ.j. white poppy. ʒ.ſs. camphire, ℈.ſs. ambre, muſk. ana. gra. ij. bray all & commix thē with ſtorax liquida and roſe water, & make a pomander. But ſeing Galen ſaith, that one of the chiefeſt thinges,
                     Diet.
                   which they that would be preſerued from the peſtilence, ought to regard and take heede of, is that their bodie be for the moſt part without ſuperfluities and excrements,

and may well breath out the vapours. Truly there is nothing more to be eſchewed at ſuch a time, then ouermuch deuouring, and ſwalowing in glotonouſly of meate & drink. Therfore let their meates be altogether eaſie of digeſtion, & ſuch as ingender good bloud, and be not readie to putrifie and rot. And alwayes commix with the meats, that be eaten at that time ſome vinegre, or ſome other ſharp iuice, as veriuice, or iuice of citron apples, or of lymons, or orenges. In ſommer time he muſt vſe for potherbs, bugloſſe, endiue, ſuccorie, & lettuce, and in winter let him vſe ſage, parſley, apium, mergerome, balme, and hyſope. He muſt abſtaine from all fruits, vnleſſe they be ſharp, as be pomegranates, citrons, lymons, orenges and ſuch like, which are good for him to vſe. Let his drink be wine, that is thinne & waterie. Let euerie man beware of ſtrong wine, that is vnalayed and new. To conclude, let his diet be altogether cooling & drying. Therfore he may not vſe exerciſes,
                     Exerciti
                           ••
                        n.
                   but in a meane and in a temperate place, and in an aire being firſt purified, amended, and corrected by medicines and perfumes. Therfore you muſt eſchew common dauncings openly and alſo runnings, leapings, and whatſoeuer ſuch like exerciſe there be that requireth often breathing in of aire. Therefore becauſe of this alſo in the time of the peſtilence, he muſt eſchewe companies gathered, together by magiſtrates, by ſome open commaundement for matters of the common wealth, as courtes, ſeſſions and ſuch like. Let his ſleepe, watchinges and all other thinges be moderate and in a meane. But he muſt ſleepe in a chamber that is cloſe, well ſtopped and ſhut, leſt the peſtilent aire ſhould enter into it: the aire of which chamber muſt be purified and corrected with ſome perfume aforeſaide, morning and euening. He muſt vſe ſheets that be pure and cleane, and that haue bene laide vp a while with odoriferous thinges. When he is awaked from ſleepe, let this be his firſt care and worke to empty the bodie of ſuperfluities and excrementes.
                     Excretion.
                   And you muſt only take heede and beware that the bodie be not coſtiue at any time. Therfore if it do not of it ſelfe voide out excremēts daily, you ſhall prouoke them out with pilulae rufi, or with a ſoft cliſter, or with a ſuppoſitary made for the purpoſe. When the body is emptied from ſuperfluities & excrements aſwell by the guts as by the bladder, he muſt take ſome medicine, that can preſerue him from the infection of the peſtilence, for the which there be manie things before rehearſed. And if neceſſarie buſineſſe do conſtraine you to go abroade openly, you may chew zedoarie, or roote of angelica, or pimpernell, or you ſhall ſmell to rew. For the ſauour of it doth maruelouſlie reſiſt the peſtilent aire. He muſt eſchew all carnall luſt, ſpecially immoderate vſing thereof.
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   After copulation, he muſt keepe him out of the open & infectiue aire. Bathes muſt altogether be abhorred, as a moſt preſent poiſon, ſpecially common bathes, becauſe when the poores of the bodie are opened by the heate of it, the peſtilent aire doth readily creepe into the body. They that will vſe a priuate bath, let them preſerue and defend them ſelues moſt diligētly from the corrupted aire, when they do go out of the bath. But it is better and more holeſome to vſe frictions at home in a rectified aire, and let bathes alone, but yet you may waſh the head weakely with lie, wherein hath bin ſodden aſarum, maioram, lauender, roſemarie, betony, ſage, cammomill, & ſuch other like, but yong men and ſuch as abound with bloud, muſt in the time of the peſtilence vſe bloudletting: & that, not onely once,
                     Bloudletting.
                   but (if nothing let to the contrarie) bloudletting often doth profit much to preſerue them in health: bicauſe it doth much coole the ſtate of the bodie, & bringeth it to a moderate heate. Alſo you muſt purge the bodie (if nede require) with purging medicines,
                     Purgatio.
                   & that ſpecially in the ſpring time & Autumne. As for perturbations of the mind, he muſt eſchew ſadneſſe, anger, hatred, feare, great cares, & heauy thoughts, and he muſt vſe ioy and mirth in a meane. Now it remaineth,
                     Preſeruatiues
                   that we deſcribe medicines, which can keepe and preſerue vs ſafe from the infection of the Peſtilence. Among which the pilles that are called pilulae rufi or peſtilentiales, or els communes,
                  
                     pilulae communes.
                   are principall and chiefe. ℞. aloes epatick, two parts, ſaffron orientall, mirrhe. ana. one part, with white wine, or with water of ſcabious, make pilles of which miniſter daylie. ℈.j. and more, or leſſe according to the age and ſtrenghth of the patient. Theſe pilles becauſe of the Aloes and mirrhe in them, which doe moſt reſiſt putrifaction, they haue a maruelous efficacie and vertue againſt the infecting of Peſtilent aire.
                     Pi
                           ••
                        le.
                   Alſo you may vſe theſe Pilles followinge. ℞. Aloes epaticke. ʒ.iij. mirrhe. ʒ.j.ſs. agaricke preparate. ʒ.j. ſaffron orientall. ʒ.ſs. bole armoniacke preparate. ℈.j. ſeede of Citron apples. ℈.ij. maſticke. ℈.ſs.

roote of pimpernell. ʒ.ſs. with roſe water make 13. pilles of ʒ.j. of which miniſter one or two.
                     Electuariū de nucibus.
                   Alſo you may vſe that medicine, that is commonly called electuarium de nucibus. ℞. of walnuts in number 20. of fat figges in number 13. rewe. M.ij. of wormwood, cotula foetida and ſcabious. ana. M.j. roote of ariſtolochia longae. ℥.ſs. roote of ariſtolochia rotunda. ℥.j.ſs. of turmentill, petaſitis, and pimpernell. ana. ℥.ij.ſs. leaues of true diptaine. M.j. of laurell bearies. ʒ.iij. of harts horne burnt. ʒ.ij.ſs. maces, mirthe, bole armoniacke, true terra lemnia. ana. ʒ.iij. ſalt of the ſea. ʒ.j.ſs. nux vamica. 
                  ʒ.ij. flowers of bugloſſe. M.j. beate them all, and commix them with lib. ij. of clarified honie, and make a liquide medicine like a Loche. Alſo this pouder is verie good. ℞. leaues of true diptaine. ℥.ſs. of the rootes of zedoarie,
                     Puluis.
                   
                  tunica, pimpernell, and turmentill. ana. ʒ.ſs barkes of the citron apple. ʒ.iij. terra lemnia. 
                  ʒ.vj bole armoniocke. ℥.j. mirrhe choſen, aloës epatick. ana. ℥.ſs. ſaffron. ʒ.ſs. maſticke. ʒ.j.ſs. lycorace, ʒ.j. ſcabious and ſortell. ana. ʒ.iij. red ſaunders. ʒ.j. ſcraping of Iuorie, and anthera. ana. ʒ.ſs. the bone of the Harts heart, red Corall. ana. ℈.ij. ſeede of purſlaine. gran. 5. bray all finely, & make a powder. If you will, you may make of theſe, lozenges, with ſuger, & waters of roſes and ſcabious, and miniſter daylie of them. ʒ.j. or more, or leſſe according to age & ſtrength. Alſo onely bole armoniacke taken with vinegre, is notably praiſed. Likewiſe theriaca, mithridatum, and ſuch other are good, wherof there is plentie named of them that haue written of the Plague. Wee therefore here will make an end of ſpeaking of this kinde of euill.
            
            Libri quarti finis.
         
         
            THE FIFT BOOKE CONTAINING THE CVRING OF TVMOVRES WHICH HAPPEN ABOVE NATVRE.
            
               CAP. I. VVhat that ſvvelling is, vvhich happeneth beſides nature, vvhich commonly is called by his generall name Apoſtema, and the ſifting out of the true definition, and of the diuiſion of the ſame, according to the opinion of the Neoterickes.
               
                  THESE Tumours which haue their being beſids nature, the later ſort both of Phiſitions and Chirurgians, and not they onely, but almoſt the vniforme conſent of olde writers haue comprehended vnder this name Apoſtema:
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . whereas indeede 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , both by Galene, and all other Grecians, hath bene reputed, but as one kinde of thoſe ſwelling tumours, which commonly are ſaid to chaunce beſides nature, which the Latines haue verie fitly tearmed abſceſſus,
                  
                     Abſceſſus.
                   and the crewe of yonger Phiſitions do call it exitura, deriuing the originall of the word from the interpreter of Auicene: of the which, and of all other kindes we will intreate particularly in his

ſeuerall chapter. Although in deede it hath pleaſed ſome of the later ſorte to make Apoſtema as the ſpecies or differentia of thoſe tumours beſides nature: appointing it to be diuerſe from that which they call exitura, and alſo from that other kinde pustula. For vnder the name of Apoſtumes, they will conclude and place thoſe tumours onely, which being lifted vp into a great bignes, doe fetch their procreation from the influence of naturall humours (as they tearme them) whereuppon they call them vera Apoſtemata. Therefore when Apoſtema is taken for the genus, comprehending vnder it all the tumours beſides nature by Auicene and his followers it is thus commonly defined. An Apoſteme is a diſeaſe compounded of three kindes of maladies, all aggregated into one bignes,
                     The common definition of Apoſtema.
                   which definition they doe affirme to be eſſentiall, conſiſting (as they ſay) of genus and differentia, which doe verie ſufficiently explane the nature of that, which is defined, appointing this worde diſeaſe to be the genus, and the other wordes which are annexed, doe ſtand to manifeſt the difference of other the like infirmities, which doe happen by the compoſition & conſtruction of the inſtrumentes: All which diſtinctions and diuerſities, Galene doth recite in his booke intituled de morbo & ſymptomate. But theſe three kindes of ſores,
                     Three kindes of diſeaſes appointing the eſſence of tumours beſides nature.
                   which in that ſwelling beſides nature commonly called Apoſtema, do concurre eſtabliſhing the eſſence of one onely diſeaſe, are theſe: intemperature, which they alſo call an euill complexion: immoderation, whereby they intend a ſyniſter compoſition, and the ſolution of that agreeing vnitie which nature affordeth to euerie bodie. To which three kindes, the Greekes haue aſſigned three appoſite and fitte termes, calling the firſt, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the ſecond 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the thirde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : but they bring alſo many other diſcriptions rather then definitions of this Apoſtema: for definitions I dare not tearme them, when as they doe not conuert with that which is defined, neither doe they ſerue either to the ſufficient explication of his nature, or the conſtitution of his eſſence, which they verie wel
                     •
                   knowing, are content to let them goe vnder the name of accidentall definitions. One of them they haue deſumed and taken out of Galen his booke which he wrote de tumoribus praeter naturam. An Apoſteme or tumour beſides nature,
                     Accidentall definitions.
                   is one of thoſe thinges which happening to the bodie, doth inflate that part which it occupieth, to the extremeſt dimenſion. This definition they haue extorted out of Galene his wordes, which he ſet not downe as an exquiſite definition, but as an ordinarie aſſertion. You may faſhion (if you pleaſe) many ſuch definitions, as this for one.
                     
                        Definitio prima.
                     
                     
                        Secunda.
                     
                     
                        Tertia.
                     
                   An Apoſteme is an increment exceeding naturall conſtitution: or this: an Apoſteme is a tumor, in the which the partes haue departed from their naturall ſtate and habite in quantitie, and bignes. Whereas Galen in his lib. 13. therap meth. hath theſe wordes: in this thirteth part of our whole worke we will beginne to diſcourſe of thoſe tumours happening beſides nature, in which the partes haue forſaken their naturall conſtitution by becomming more bigge, ſo that you ſeeing the ſlēder weight of theſe definitions, you muſt annexe this Particle, actiones laedeus, hurting the duties of the bodie, or thus, inducing an euident detriment to the actions, or elſe they will not be abſolute or eſſentiall: for euerie tumour making diſtention or ſwelling in length, breadth or profunditie, beyonde the ordinarie conſtitution of nature, other in all the bodie, or in any part thereof: or euerie excrement or greatnes exceeding nature, muſt not according to the vulgar acception be named either Apoſtema, or a ſwelling beſides nature. For (as Galene ſaith in his booke de tumoribus praeter naturam) ſuch like augmentations may befall not only to the diſeaſed, but alſo to the healthfull, as well in the whole bodie, as in any member of the ſame. For groſſe men, although they be enlarged,
                     
                        A perfect definition beſides nature, taken out of the writinges of Galen.
                     
                     
                        The diuiſion of a tumour beſides nature into his ſpecies after the opinion of the later ſort.
                     
                   and as it were diſtended both in breadth and profunditie: yet they haue not this diſtention beſides nature, but (as he ſaith) onely not naturally: for they haue not yet paſſed the boundes of nature, neither are the actions and duities of their part maymed or anoyed, which is the border of thoſe increments which are beſides nature: and thoſe tumours which abide in thoſe partes, which are yet ſound and without the taſt of griefe, may well be ſaide to be aboue and beyond nature, but not beſides nature, as for example: if both the teats, or one of them onely be maruelouſlie increaſed, or inflated, yet ſo that his ſubſtaunce be free from all annoiaunce, this cannot appoſitiuely be ſayd to be beſides nature, but onely beyond nature. Therefore if you deſire on abſolute definition of this tumour, which happeneth beſides nature, collected

out of the writinges of Galene, you ſhall thus define it: A ſwelling beſides nature is an increment ſurpaſſing the ordinarie habite of nature, bringing with it a maime to the actions thereof. But ſuch like tumours beſides nature are wont to be diuided into three kindes by Guido,
                     Apostemata.
                   and thoſe of his age, into impoſtumes, abſceſſions, and pusſhes or vlcers. Impoſtumes they call great tumours, in which the matter, whereof it ſpringeth, doth offende in plentie or quantitie:
                     Puſtulae.
                   pusſhes are thoſe little tumours (which they call bothor) in which, the ſubſtaunce whereof they ariſe is troubleſome rather in qualitie then in quantitie, yea & in them there lurketh a poyſonous venyme (as they ſay) but the abſceſſions are thoſe tumours which the Latines call Abſceſſus, and of the Greekes may well be named 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as we proued before:
                     Exiturae.
                   but let it be lawfull for euerie man to impoſe what titles or names they will, ſo that (as Galene ſaith) they doe not ſwarue or ſtraie from the naturall meaning of the thinges them ſelues: but leauing all the ſcrupulous and ſcholerlike contentiōs, which ſome doe vſe in the intreatie of this ſubiect, as impertiment to our purpoſe. I will orderly ſet downe the braunches of all the tumours or impoſthumes, (if ſo you will terme them) which happen beſides nature: and firſt we will beginne with inflammation.
            
            
               CAP. II. Of the differences of thoſe tumours which happen beſides nature. DE DIFFERENTIIS TVMORVM, QVI PRAETER NATVRAM INCIDVNT.
               
                  THERE be many and ſundrie differences of tumours beſides nature, which commonly are called by this generall name Apoſtumes: the difference wherof,
                     
                        The diuiſion of a tumour in it his differences.
                     
                     
                        From whence the differences of tumours beſides nature are taken of the latter ſort. S
                              ••
                           ſtantiae.
                     
                   of the later Chyrurgians are obſerued to proceed, either from the ſubſtāce of the ſore, or from the matter thereof, or from the Accidentes, or from the affected partes, or elſe from the efficient cauſes. The differences, which they deſume from the ſubſtaunce, are ſuppoſed by Auicene and his ſect to be two, either the greatnes of the ſwelling, or the littlenes thereof. Amongeſt the bigge tumours, they doe recken phlegmone (which appeare commonly in fleſhie places, which are fit to be diſtended) and aedema, eryſipelas, and ſchirrhus, which all doe growe vp to a great bignes & quantitie. Little tumours are called of them little eminences or appearings, or breakings out called pusſhes, which are commonly ſeene in the skinne, and the vttermoſt partes of the bodie, as the Greekes leproſie, the ſcabbe, the ringworme, and ſuch other like, of the which we will ſpeake more at larg hereafter. The matter of the aforeſaide tumours are the foure humours,
                     Materia.
                   as well naturall, as not naturall (that is to ſaie) fleame, melancholie, choler, and thoſe humours which are altogeater beſides nature, ſometime the ſoundnes of certaine bodies, and ſometime a yealowe or pale humour, the handling of all which differences we will referre vnto another place. The ſymptomates or accidentes, which are commonly incident to theſe tumours are,
                     Accidentia.
                   griefe, heat, ſoftnes, hardnes and ſuch like: from the which they will deriue ſome differences: but thoſe which they take from the members and from the affected partes, as ophthalmia, the inflammation of the eye, the ſquince, the inflammation of the throte,
                     Pars affecta.
                   
                  phyma, phygethlum, and thoſe inflammations which we terme glandulae and bubones. But the efficient cauſes from the which certaine differences be borowed,
                     Cauſae eff
                           •
                        cientes.
                   are congeſtion and fluxe, and criſis (that is to ſaie) iudgement thereof which happeneth in diſeaſes: there be alſo certaine other cauſes both internall and externall, wherof we wil diſpute more copiouſlie and earneſtly in that which follow. But yet truely all the diuerſities and differences of theſe kindes of ſwellinges chauncing aboue nature,
                     From whence the difference of tumours aboue nature doe come and ariſe.
                   haue their beginning from the nature and ſubſtaunce (which prouoketh the ſwelling) of that which floweth (as witneſſeth Galen in his booke which he wrote of Tumours happening aboue nature.) Likewiſe in his ſeconde booke that he wrote vnto Gluco. cap. 13. meth. med. in which places he declareth that the varietie of all ſwellings which are aboue nature, doth aryſe

of the nature of that which floweth: for when (ſayth he) a flatuous matter hath more free acceſſe, then alſo the tumours are made more flatuous: but they are more like vnto phlegmone when as bloude aboundeth: as likewiſe Eryſipilas, when melancholie hath his courſe: and they be alſo more vexed with aedema, when fleame or reume diſcending from the heade doth raigne. Alſo they be grieued with the diſeaſe Scirrhoſis, when either a thicke or too colde a humour is ſettled in ſome parte thereof. Therefore all tumours doe chaunce (as Galene affirmeth) beſides nature which proceede either of humours, or of a flatuous and windie ſpirite, which is gathered ſometime vnder the skinne, ſometime vnder the thinne filmes that couer the bones, ſomtime in the bellie, ſomtime in the intrailes, oftentimes in the middeſt of theſe, and of the peritonaeum. The Greekes call it Emphyſema:
                     Ephyſema.
                   Auicene termeth it a windie apoſtema. If ſuch ſwellinges happen of humours, then they are either hote, or colde, or mingled togeather.
                     Callidi tumores.
                   Hote tumours come of the beſt bloud (that is to ſaie) which is parfectly ruddy, and of a meane ſoundnes and moderate qualitie, and then the Greekes call it phlegmone, the Latines, inflammatio: or they proceede of yealowe choler or of burning and thinne bloud, or elſe of thoſe thinges which be hotter then bloud or choler. They terme this euill Eryſipelas, but theſe name it Sacerignis. But cold ſwellinges are prouoked either through thinne fleame, and then the Greekes call it aedema,
                  
                     Tumores frigidi.
                   but our Phiſitions terme it laxus tumor: the interpreter of Auicene vndimia, or elſe it is cauſed through the humour of choler, or through thicke, colde, and clammie fleame. They call this Scirrhon, the Latines, durities, the Arabians, ſephirus.
                  
                     Tumores ſeroſi.
                   Alſo ſwellinges ſometimes do chaunce by reaſon of a late taking awaie of ſuperfluous bloud, as hereafter ſhall be declared. Tumours are ſaide to be mingled, when ſuch kinde of humours are tempred togeather, and if one maiſtereth the other, from that which exceedeth in the mixture,
                     
                        Tumores complicati.
                     
                     
                        One euill ſeemeth to haue ſome affinitie with the other.
                     
                   is the name giuen to the ſwelling, as in bloude ruling choler, we will call phlegmone the principall, to be Eryſipelatodem, and alſo becauſe of melancholie gouerning, Eryſipelas is ſaide to be phlegmonôdes. Nowe of other mixtures there is the like interpretation, both Scirrhus phlegmonoſus with phlehmòne ſcirrhoſa: and aedema phlegmonoſum with phlegmone aedematôſa. And after this example you ſhall name the other tumours, although there chaunceth commixion togeather of three or foure humours at once. Moreouer, if the humours be of like force, and equally incorporate, ſo that the one can not ouercome the other, then we will name the tumours by the coupling togeather of thoſe humours, which they ſtirre or rayſe vp. As if bloud be equally mingled with choler, that euill may be called, by reaſon of their ioyning togeather phlegmone and eryſipelas, or (as Galen hath it) it may be termed a meane in the kinde and nature of phlegmône & eryſipelas.
                  
                     The chiefe tumours that are cauſed of flowing of humors.
                   Theſe truely be the chiefe ſwellinges and tumours, which are recyted in Galene by the flowing of humours: (that is to ſay) phlegmone, eryſipelas, aedema, ſcirrhus: vnto the which innumerable other tumours, exceeding the meaſure and boundes of nature are reduced, and comprehended vnder them, although they haue choſed to themſelues diuerſe names according to their ſundrie cauſes. Therefore, there partayneth vnto a kinde of phlegmone, phygethon,
                  
                     VVhat tumors doe aſſociate phlegmone.
                   which is called panus (Celſus being the authour) but of our men phyma and tuberculum, alſo it is named of the ſame Celſus terminthon of Oribatius, the kindes or ſpecies of phyma, but of Aetius, phigethlum: alſo they be called dothienes, which Celſus doth call furunculi, felons. Likewiſe gangrena of ſome member, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (that is to ſay) mortification but not abſolute, and alſo ſphacelus, which is called of the Latines ſyderatio, & of Auicene aſcachilos. Carbunculus alſo called of the Greekes Anthrax: whereof Auicene writeth in the chapter de pruna & igne perſico. But vnto eryſipelas are referred herpetes,
                  
                     Eryſipelatoſ
                           •
                         tumores.
                   which in kinde be two manner of wayes (that is to ſay) miliares and exedentes, byting and gnawing, which the Greekes do call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . He which expoundeth Auicene hath called both the kindes formicae,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . but he being deceiued with the likenes of the name, hath mixed thē in the ſame chapter by great ouerſight, with thoſe verrucae, which the Greekes call mirmeciae, the Latines formicae. Celſus ſeemeth to haue comprehended thoſe herpete vnder the name of ignis ſacer: but the Chirurgians of later time haue numbred them among the cholericke puſtules (as they terme them.) There commeth alſo of choler almoſt thoſe diſeaſes called of the Greekes phlyctaenae, and therefore they belong vnto eryſipelas,
                  
                     O
                           •
                        dematoſ
                           •
                         tumores.
                   whereof Auicene doth intreate in his chapter de veſicis & inflammationibus.
                  
Vnto the tumours cauſed of fleame, that is, vnto aedemata, are referred certaine tumours, comprehended of the Greekes vnder the name of apoſtema which be called of Auicene nodi, of Haly abbas, ſelaa, and dubeleta phlegmatica, of the Latines abſceſſus: whereof there be diuerſe kinds according to the diuerſe matters conteyned in them. Moreouer in Galene there be three ſuch kindes of abſceſſus chauncing verie often whereof eueryone hath borrowed his proper name of the Greekes: thoſe be, atheromata, ſteatomata, melicerides, which in deede be called after the likenes of bodies conteyned in them, as we wil hereafter declare more at large. There is alſo a kinde of apoſtema, that is, of abſceſſus, wherin are other thinges conteyned, which do repreſent not onely the proprieties of humours: but alſo of certaine ſound bodies: but theſe (ſayth Galene) chaunce verie ſeeldome. And of theſe alſo we will ſpeake hereafter, when we ſhall intreat of abſceſſions. But now vnto the ſaide kindes of abſceſſus, there appertaine certaine names of tumours being deuiſed of the latter ſort,
                     Certaine newe names of tumours giuen of the latter ſorte of Phiſitions. Teſtudo. Talpa. Nata. Ganglium.
                   and neuer as yet founde out amongeſt auncient writers, as teſtudo, which is a ſoft ſwelling cleauing to the whole heade of a man, and talpa: the one ſeemeth to belong vnto atheroma the other vnto melicerides. But vnto ſtratomata doth belong a certaine ſwelling without paine, which they call nata, or napta, whereof we will ſpeake in his place. Hitherto alſo doe pertaine the euils called of the Greekes ganglia, of Auicene glandulae, which doe differ from the aforeſaide nods. There commeth alſo of fleame that which the common ſort call ſcrofula, and therefore they are reduced vnto aedemata. Theſe be called of the Greekes charades, of the Latines, ſtrume. Notwithſtanding Galene in a certaine place amongeſt the diſeaſes named ſcirrhi,
                  
                     Strumae.
                   doth take it for durities. Alſo vnto aedema is referred in Galene that kinde of Hydrops, which is named of the Greekes, leucopblegmatia, and hypoſarca.
                  
                     leucopblebmatia. Scirrb
                           •
                        ſi 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Cancer. Carcinoma.
                   But the ſwellinges or tumours which partaine vnto choler, and which be comprehended vnder the ſaide ſchirrbus, are cancri, which of the Greekes be called carnici, & carcinomata: Notwithſtanding Celſus maketh a difference betweene cancer, and carcinoma, that he might ſaie, that it did come and proceede by little and little of thoſe thinges which do chance outwardly, & that it is engendred within (ſome member being corrupted). The ſame Celſus deuideth cancer into many parts or kindes (that is to ſay) into eryſipelas,
                        Elephantiaſis.
                      gangrena & vlcus nigrum of this kind alſo is elephantus or, elephantia, or elephantiaſis, called of the common ſort of Phyſitions lepra, & of ſome ſancti lazari morbus. Therfore the name of lepra ſignifieth with Auicene and with the vnlearned company, a moſt grieuous and deadly diſeaſe, when yet with Gal. Paul. Aegineta, and with other grecians it is counted but a light griefe not much differing from that which we call ſcabies, which is called of the ſame writers pſ
                        •
                     ra. Among this hard ſwelling kinde of tumours, are accounted the diſeaſes called in the Latine tongue of the interpreter of Auicene, verrucae, which be ſwellinges like vnto little hillockes appearing in the skinne,
                     Verrucae.
                   whereof they haue this name, being called of the common ſort porra.
                  
                     Porra. Myrmeciae. Acrochordones. Clauus. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Thymion.
                   To this kinde alſo may be referred myrmeciae, as if one ſhould call them formicula, and acrochordones, which of our countriemen are termed penſiles verrucae and clauus alſo, which in forme is like to a harde rounde pillar called of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , of Auicene they are called almiſmar, Thymion, or thymon repreſenting the knobbie toppes of the herbe thyme. Auicene ſemeth alſo to haue giuen it this name tuſiū, or (as another tranſlation hath it) tarſecum. Alſo among the diuerſe kindes of verrucae, there be euils called of Auicene cornua, ſo called, becauſe they being verie long, are turned againe croked like vnto hornes.
                     Cornua. Calli.
                   In like caſe alſo there be calli which the Greekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , theſe are engendred by meanes of the skinne being obdurated & hardened through much labour. Vnto choler alſo there ſeemeth to partaine this euill, which the grecians call dracontion,
                  
                     Dracunculi
                   the Latines dracunculus, according to the liuely ſimilitud or likenes of that name, Auicene calleth it vena medeni, Haly Abbas, vena ſanioſa. Whereof Paulus Aegineta intreateth cap. vltimo lib. 4. This diſeaſe is not great rife with vs. Beſides theſe tumours which we now haue rehearſed, there chaunce other alſo, affecting oftentimes the ſuperficiall partes of the bodie (that is to ſay) certaine ſmall appearings,
                     Puſtulae.
                   which they call puſtulae, and bothor. Which although they differ both among them ſelues, and alſo from thoſe tumours, which we haue aboue recited, yet they are cauſed of the ſame humours, of the which alſo they are now called great tumours. Therefore they onely ſeeme to differ from them

in reſpect of their greatnes and ſmalnes. But that ſuch little tumours (which truely a chyrurgion ought not to be ignoraunt of) might appeare more manifeſt, and eaſie to be cō
                  ceiued of euerie man: I haue thought it expedient, and a thing worthy the labour, to ſet downe in this place the names of them, both in Greeke and Lataine, and alſo their barbarous title, with a certaine rude diſcription thereof, as we haue alreadie done in the greater. Therefore that we may enter into the matter it ſelfe, there are of the kinde of puſtules or puſhes, lepra, ſo called of the Greekes and retayning the ſame title amongeſt the Latines, and pſ
                        •
                     ra called of the ſame writer ſcabies, being truely diſeaſes verie neere of affinitie among them ſelues: for there is roughnes and ſharpnes of the skinne with itching & pritching in the bodie, comming of the ſame humour (that is to ſay) of choler. Notwithſtanding they differ in this,
                     Lepra. Pſ
                           •
                        ra. Lichene.
                   becauſe lepra doth conſume the skinne with manifeſt ſcales ſomewhat deepe, as it were in a circle: but pſ
                        •
                     ra doth onely hurt the outward part with diuerſe formes and doth vnloſe a cer
                     •
                  aine ſcurfe of the bodie. Hitherto alſo doth pertaine that light infection of the skinne, called of the Greekes licene, of the Latines impetigo, in Engliſh the ringworme and commonly of ſome (as Manardus reporteth) they be called volatica. This chaunceth by reaſon of the mingled putrefaction of wilde bloude being thinne and ſharpe, with other that be thicke: and verie often and eaſilie it doth turne it ſelfe (Galene affirming the ſame) into the aforeſaide euils (that is to ſay) into lepra and ſcabies, which they call pſ
                        •
                     ra. Yet there are ſome which thincke, that that, which the Greekes call lepra, is called of Celſus impetigo. But truely, ſeeing he doth write ſpecially of impetigo, appointing foure kindes thereof lib. 5. ſuae medicinae, it is euidently apparent, that he meant ſome other thing by this worde impetigo, then licene amongeſt the Greekes,
                     Four kindes of impetigo.
                   ſeeing that truely we neuer read in any Greeke authour, that there were ſo many kindes of licene euer agreed of or acknowledged. Therefore if we will with Galen ſpeake properlie lepra & lichene or impetigo, cannot be one and the ſame euill:
                     Impetigo.
                   otherwiſe the ſame ſhould be chaunged into it ſelfe. That I may therefore draw the whole matter into few words: when the skinne is lightly infected, with an onely roughnes and itching, that is called in Greeke lichen, but in Latine impetigo. But when the griefe waxeth worſe, it chaungeth the name togeather with the forme. But if lichene doth cauſe manifeſt ſcales, and doth pearce the skinne ſomewhat deepely, it is properly called lepra. But if it be ſtretched out onely by the outwarde ſuperficies, and doth cauſe brannie or ſcaly bodies it is called pſ
                        •
                     ra of the Grekes,
                     Lepra. pſ
                           •
                        ra Scabies.
                   of vs it is called properly ſcabies. Although this worde ſcabies doth extend verie farre commonly alſo among the Phyſitions of late time, who doe name all the euill of the skinne to be ſcabies. But they ſpeake verie improperly, for the pure and true ſcabies, ſo called of the Latines, is without all doubt that diſeaſe which is called of the Greekes pſ
                        •
                     ra, of Auicene alſo albara and morphea, cleane contrarie to the opinion of ſome. For that which is ſaide of him and almoſt of all the Phyſitions of Africke to be albara, is named of the Greekes & of Celſus alſo leuce. But mongeſt them it is called morphea, among the Greekes alphon,
                  
                     Albara. Leuce.
                   in which diſeaſe the whole fleſh is not affected, but onely the externall partes of the bodie, euen as though (as Galene ſaith) it were ſet about with certaine ſcales. But theſe alphi (as it is in Galene) in their kinde are of two ſortes (that is to ſay) white,
                     Alphon is of two ſortes.
                   which come of fleame: and blacke, which proceede from a melancholike humour. But theſe thinges we now haue ſpoken of being led by the conſequence of thinges. For neither leuce, nor alphi them ſelues are accounted amongeſt the tumours beſides nature, but rather among the euilles of the skinne. Which thinges although they hurt verie little yet becauſe they doe diſhoneſt and bring ſhame, they are wont to be for the moſt parte a greater heauines and werynes (eſpecially vnto women). then many other diſeaſes which truely doe hurt, but yet they be ſecret. both theſe euilles (that is to ſay) rucae and alphon, Celſus hath comprehended vnder the name of vitiligo (making three kindes thereof) although other ſtudentes of Phyſicke, turning Greeke into Latine,
                     Vitiligo.
                   doe conuert lucae in all places into vitiligo, which would more aptly agree, if it were put with his epithete or addition, as to ſay alba vitiligo. Ʋitiligo therefore, if we will comprehende it vnder any certaine heade or kinde, is a filthie colour of the skinne, proceeding of an euill habite of ſome parte of the bodie, which could not well receiue any nouriſhment to it ſelfe. For this euill chaunceth

through the default of the nouriſhing facultie, whereof ſome doe conſtitute two kindes, the one, which doth infect the skinne onely with certaine markes, which doe cleaue faſt vnto it like vnto little ſcales, the other which goeth in ſome what deeper, ſo that it toucheth the verie fleſhe, and coloureth the hayres: for in it there aryſeth gray hayres, like vnto a certaine kinde of mooſynes: this is gathered togeather of viſcous & glutinatiue fleame, but both of them do defile and ſtaine either with their white, or eſpecialy with their black colour. The firſt ſpecies, which is aloft and ſuperficiall, wheather it be white or blacke, it is called of the Greekes alphūs, by the ſame name (as before) becauſe it chaungeth the colour of the skinne, for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (whereof 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is deriued) ſignifieth amongeſt the auncient Greekes to chaunge. Auicene calleth it morphea. But the other kinde, which we haue declared to pearce ſomewhat deeper, is called of the Greekes, and of Celſus alſo leuce, and of the reſt of the Latines alba vitiligo, of Auicene albara. Haly Abbas onely among the Arabians calleth lepra, a filthie diſeaſe, which is harde to be cured, yet he doth not declare it to be pernicious and deadly, who hath not accounted it altogeather as a light thing (as the Greekes affirme it) and little differing from a ſcabbe: neither (as Auicene thought) pernicious and grieuous, but onely lothſome and filthie. Whereby we may coniecture, that little credite is to be attributed to wordes or names, vnleſſe the matter be throughly diſcouered.
                     Small credit to be giuen to wordes of names.
                   For one and the ſelfe ſame worde by varietie of authours hath enforced to vphold many diuerſe & different ſignifications, as in their commentaries doth euerie where appeare. But we haue ſpoken by the way of the euilles and defedations of the skinne, only that the confuſion of things might be eſchewed, which happeneth by words miſunderſtood. Therefore omitting theſe thinges, we will returne vnto out purpoſe, and with as much breuitie as we can, we will diſpatch the diſcourſe of the reſidew of ſwelling ſores, amongeſt which, beſides thoſe, which we haue rehearſed and touched alreadie, are reckened by the Greekes ionthi, epinyctides, hidroa, pſydraces, exanthemata, celſi papule, and Plinij mentegra.
                  
                     Ionthi.
                   
                  Ionthi are little ſwellings and thoſe harde which ariſe in the outwarde skin and ſuperficies of the face (as Paulus and Galene thought) proceeding from a groſſe humour, which are either reſolued, or elſe rypened by a little matter which ſpringeth with it. The Latines call them vari: Galene maketh mention lib. 5. de medica. ſecundum locos, of an affect, which he calleth ionthoſus affectus, which he ſayth is the foundation and beginning of elephantiaſis, vnder the which diſeaſe he ſeemeth to comprehend the thirde and fourth kinde of that which Celſus nameth impetigo.
                  
                     Epinyctides.
                   
                  Epinyctides, (as Celſus ſuppoſeth) are peſtilent puſhes either of pale colour, or of a blacke colour, or of a white hewe, not exceeding the bignes of a beane aryſing either in the legges or in the fette. About them there is alwayes a verie vehement inflammation, and when they are opened, there is founde a verie thicke and clammie exulceration within. His colour is like vnto his humour: but the griefe greatly ſurpaſſeth the bignes of the ſore, which in quantity ſurmounteth not a beane. They borrowed their title frō the night,
                     VVhy they be called epinyctides.
                   either (as Celſus thought) becauſe that in the night time they pricked & moleſted more grieuouſly, or becauſe they moſt cōmonly aryſe in the night. Plinie termeth thē blewiſh puſhes, diſquieting ſpecially in the night time. The Arabians call them eſſere, ſere, or ſaire, which words explane the forenamed nature of the ſore. Thoſe which are called of the Greekes hidroa, the Latines terme ſudamina, and Plynie papule ſudorum.
                  
                     Sudamina. Planta noctis.
                   Auicene planta noctis, & almanſorus, & alhaſaphum: whereby it commeth to paſſe that epinyctis doth much differ from Auicene his plantanoctis, although the Greeke worde epinyctis doth draw his originall from the night. But theſe ſudamina (as Galene ſayth) lib. 4. Apho. Aphor 21. are reckened among thoſe kinde of puſhes or whelkes, which ſticking in the verie ſuperficies of the bodie, doe pricke & ſhoote, not vnlike to our common vlcers, and they come (as their name doth declare) by many bilious ſwettes, which byteth the skinne and maketh it to itch and pricke like vlcers. But this affect is common to boyes and young men, and to thoſe which are cholericke, but in the time of heate: but it is ſo eaſie to be cured, that of it ſelfe without any aide it will heale, rypening with a white toppe. But Auicene thinkes that theſe deſudations, by their diſcription, agree ratheir with Celſus his exanthemata, then with Galene his ſudamina. But he, who will obſerue the nature of the wordes,
                     Deſudationes Auicene.
                   will thincke, that Auicene his deſudations may well be the Greekes hidroa,
                  
which the Latines call ſudamina. But we muſt not followe the names ſo much among the Barbarian and Arabian writers, but the genuyne and ſincere deſcripitons of the thinges them ſelues. Pſydraces or pſydracia,
                  
                     Pſydraces.
                   are puſhes which abyding in the verie vttermoſt part of the skinne, are reſembled to bladders excited by fire, which are called phlyctane. Theſe ryſe ſpecially in the heade. Pſizacionis not truly read in Celſus for pſydracion. Thoſe puſhes, which grow in the skinne firſt comming by thicke humours ſtuffed in the skin, which are commonly called morbili and variola, of Galene becauſe they ſwell, and waxe bigge, as it were the bud of a floure they are called exanthemata, but of Hippocrates,
                     Morbili. Variolae. Exanthemata. Ecthymata
                   becauſe they doe breake out of them ſelues, they are termed ecthymata. For 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whereof exanthema is deriued, ſignyfieth a floure, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whereof ectyma commeth, ſignifieth to burſte out. Plynie callet
                     •
                   ſuch pusſhes, whelkes, and the eruptions of fleame. But theſe are of two kindes: for ſome of them are ſteipe, and ſome goe out into breadth thoſe which are ſteipe, doe growe of a more thinne and hote humour and doth excyte itche. But thoſe which are broade, doe flowe, and proceede from a more colde & thicke humour, and doe not a whit procure itch. The firſt ſorte, of the common Phyſitions are knowen by the name morbile: the ſeconde by this name variole. But the French men prepoſterouſlie abuſing the names haue called the lowe and broade kinde rubeole, but the higher ſorte variole. Hippocrates. lib. 3. Epi. doth deuide theſe kindes of puſhes into little and great ecthymata, in calling the ſteeper kinde magni herpete, either becauſe (as Galene ſayth) they occupie a great place, or elſe becauſe they happen with a vehement gnawing. For in deede theſe ſometimes appeare great in heyght only, ſometimes both in height and breadeth. Cornelius Celſus lib. 5. medicinae ſuae in his treatiſe of impetigo remembreth two kindes of whelkes: the one ſome what ſmall,
                     Papulae C
                           •
                        lſi.
                   which if it be dayly rubbed with faſting ſpittle, it waxeth whole: the other ſomewhat greater, wherein the skinne is made more ſharpe, and is exulcerate, and groweth verie vehemently, and looketh red, and is hardly cured. He ſaith, that this is termed of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in Latine fera. But in both theſe kindes he confeſſeth that there is leſſe impediment or corruption then in impetigo, ſo that he affirmeth, that that euil, whoſe cure is harde, except it be taken away, doth chaunge and turne into impetigo. The Frenchmen (if I may iudge thereof) doe call both theſe kyndes, but eſpeciallie the firſt, dartrae. For that euill beginneth to be verie round, and after the ſame manner it commeth (as it were) into a cyrcle, and creepeth ſlowelie.
                     Dartrae Galinae.
                   Which whelkes or pusſhes doe agree in all thinges to be thoſe, which are ſayde of Celſus to be of the firſt kinde. Some doe conſtantly affirme that theſe whelkes ſo named of Celſus doe nothing differ from lychene among the Greacians, or the impetigo among the Latines. And we haue read that that onely authour among the Latines hath turned lychene into papulae. Mintagra a Latine worde vſed of Plynie, wherein he ſeemed in the beginning lib. 26. to haue altogeather meant another thing from impetigo,
                  
                     Mentagra.
                   and that it was farre a waie a worſe euill, then that which the Greekes comprehend vnder the name of lichene, although in his Phyſicke he hath interpreted ſometime lichene among the Greekes to be impetigo, and the like diſeaſe called mentegra, he termeth alſo in the ſame place lichene. Furthermore the ſame Plinie reporteth,
                     Plinie lib. 26. that this euill crept firſt into Italie in the raigne of Tiberius Caeſar, which griefe in all the time before was vnknowen to all Europe, much leſſe vnto Italie. It was of ſo great filthines and corruption, that any death was to be preferred or wiſhed before it, and alſo of ſo great infection, that by the ſwifte paſſage thereof onely by kiſſing one another it infected the people but chiefely thoſe that were gouerners and rulers among them. This euill beganne almoſt at the chinne, for that it did chiefely affect and annoie, whereuppon it toke this name mentagra. This perhappes is that ſcabbe, which certayne of the Frenchmen call mala dartra. Galene alſo ſeemeth to acknowledge this diſeaſe:
                     Galene acknowledgeth mentegra.
                   for in his firſt booke de medicam. compoſ. ſecundum locos, he remembreth a moſt vile kinde of impetigo of the chinne, which (as he rehearſeth, out of Crito (prouoketh itcheing, it afflicteth alſo the patientes, and bringeh them into no ſmall daunger. For ſometime (ſayth he) it runneth ouer the whole face, and goeth vppe to the verie eyes, and it cauſeth the greateſt deformitie of the bodie almoſt that can be, which deſcription of impetigo doeth conſent in all thinges with the

                  mentagra of Plinie. But they doe greatly erre, which doe thinke that this moſt contagious lichene called of Plinie, mentagra, is that diſeaſe which at this day commonly ſome do call Gallicum malum,
                  
                     M
                           •
                        rbus Neapolitanu
                           •
                        , & venereum.
                   ſome Neapolitanum, other ſome not bearing any hate or iniurie to their contries do call it venereum. For this infection was altogeather vnknowen to the ancient Phiſitions, and alſo of the former age, and firſt of all it crept into Neapolis in the yeare after the incarnation of Chriſt. 1493. At which time Charles the eight, that moſt inuincible king of Fraunce did ouercome and winne the Alpes, going abount alſo to inuade Italie: although not long before, it had ſpred it ſelfe abroade through the countries of Spaine (as ſome report). Wherefor hauing as it were the originall & beginning from thence, it began to be called Hispanica lues, the ſpaniſh peſtilence, which plague being ſent vpon the earth as it were by the iuſt reuengment of God (as we may thinke) for their filthie and abhominable whoredome forbidden of God, hath corrupted and ouerthrowen with the cō
                  tagion thereof a great part of humane kinde. For the ſame ſicknes the magiſtrates and officers taſted of, the pryſoners and captiues felt, the heades of their countries ſuſtained, & the common people alſo were infected withall: ſo ſwift was the paſſage thereof from one to another, and now alſo it ſtraieth and wandreth through the countries of Spaine, Fraunce, Italie and all Europe to the great annoiance of the people. There are alſo certaine pusſhes beſides theſe,
                     Puſtulae glandoſae.
                   reherſed euen now out of Auicene lib. 4. called glandoſae, which do ſeeme to differ nothing from the diſeaſe called ganglion, but in reſpect onely of the leſſer or the greater. There is mention alſo made by the ſame Auicene. lib. 3. of certaine whelkes, which he calleth in the ſame place, bothores iuncturarum, & in lib. 4. he calleth them almatim, which, becauſe he ſheweth that they be blacke, & reſembling greene corne, they muſt doubtleſſe be thoſe which the Greekes call terminthi,
                  
                     Terminthi.
                   which a little before we accounted among the ſpecies of phyma. Theſe Celſus ſeemeth to compare vnto vari, which be ſpottes in the face, who alſo iudgeth them to be called of the Greekes helcodes, that is, vlceroſae, full of ſcabbes or ſores.
                     Puſtulae albae
                   Theſe white and milkie puſhes, ſo called of Raſis and Serapion, and of Auicene lenis bothor if their deſcriptions be throughly conſidered, they will ſeeme to partaine vnto the whelkes called of the Greekes Ionthi, which we in Latine haue named vari: although the ſelfe ſame remeadies, which Auicene hath ſet downe for them, be taught of Dioſcorides for the diſeaſe ephelide (that is to ſaie) for the roughnes and ſwartnes of the face, being cauſed by the heate of the Sunne. Hitherto haue we intreated of the differences of tumours aboue nature, which chiefly haue their reſidence outwardly aboue the bodie. Now let vs proceede to declare the cauſes of them.
            
            
               CAP. III. Of the cauſes of tumours aboue nature appearing vniuerſally on the outſide of the bodie.
               
                  THERE are two cauſes of tumours chauncing beſides nature, agreed of among the latter ſort of Phyſitions and Chyrurgians:
                     The cauſes of tumours beſides nature.
                   that is to ſaie, generall and ſpeciall cauſes. Generall cauſes are theſe, the fluxe, which the Greekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and the congeſtion or heaping togeather of humours. Againe by the ſame writers there are appointed to be ſix cauſes in number of this fluxe,
                     Fluxionis cauſae.
                   that is to ſaie. 1. the ſtrength of the repulſiue member. 2. the weakenes of the retentiue. 3. the aboundaunce and plentie of matter. 4. the looſenes or fulnes of the poores of the bodie, through the which the fluxe happeneth. 5. the ſtraighnes of the repulſiue partes. 6. & the lower ſituatiō of the place retayning the fluxe. But theſe may be reduced vnto foure heads, as vnto the repulſiue mēber, the part that reteineth, the ſtate of the humour that floweth,
                     
                        Part propelleus.
                     
                     
                        Particula excipens.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            fluens.
                     
                   & the place or courſe, through the which the flowing chāceth. But the flux is prouoked either by the meanes of the expulſiue mēber, or becauſe of the fortitude of the expulſiuever tue, or by reaſon of the naturall knitting togither that it hath with the retentiue mēber, or becauſe of the ſtraitnes of the particular poores, but ſome part receiueth the fluxe becauſe

it is either painefull, or hote, or ſomewhat weake, or ſeldome, and baſe, or ſettled in the neather roume. Furthermore by meanes of the humour there is a defluxion or flowing down into ſome part of the bodie, becauſe it is in aboundance ſuperfluous, of nature troublſome, and of ſubſtance thinne. But the ſpace or place is a cauſe of the fluxe by reaſon of the largnes of the paſſages, as of the veynes, arteries and poores. But of congeſtion,
                     Spatium.
                   (which is the other generall cauſe of tumours which chaunce aboue nature) there are aſſigned two cauſes: (that is to ſay) the fault of the vertue nutritiue,
                     Cauſes of congeſtion.
                   and the imbecillitie of the vertue expulſiue. By the which things we gather, that hot tumours happen for the moſt part through the defluxion of humours, but colde tumours are rather prouoked by their congeſtion. But after what manner a hote fluxe excyteth the tumour,
                     How a hote de fluxion prouoketh a tumour.
                   Galen doth declare plainely and wittilie, in that little booke which he intituled inaequalis intemperis, writing after this manner. A hote diſcending of a fluxe (ſayth he) aſſone as it hath once placed it ſelfe in the muſcle, firſt the greater arteries and veynes are filled & ſtretched out, then by their meanes the leſſer are diſtended, and ſo it proceedeth vntill it commeth to the leaſt of all. In them, whē a fluxe is ſtrongly compact togeather, and can no longer be conteyned, parte thereof iſſueth out through the extreame partes of them, and part is ſtrained out through the holes of the tunicles, and is ſpeadily ſent forth, and then thoſe voide places are filled with the fluxe, which are betweene the beſt and chiefeſt bodies. Thus all thinges proceeding of the humour do waxe hote in euerie place, and alſo are ſtill poured forth. And theſe are they the ſynewes, the bindinges or ligaments, the ſmall ſilmes, the verie fleſh, and beſides theſe, the arteries and veynes, wich truely being the principall, are diuerſly and many waies afflicted aboue the reſt. For inwardly by reaſon of the fluxe they are both made hote, and alſo are ſtretched out, and torne and pulled a ſunder. And outwardly alſo, they are not onely made hote, but alſo are ſuppreſſed and made heauy. But the other partes of the bodie, ſome truely are onely made hote or kept downe, and ſome are affected with both. And this diſeaſe is called phlegmone. Hitherto Galen. Therefore in ſuch kinde of tumours chauncing beſides nature, which are cauſed of the flowing of humours, ſomething alreadie (at the leaſt waie at the beginning, and before the fluxe did beginne to ſtriue) is made and engendred, and ſomething is yet to come, and reſteth in the generation. That which doth happen as yet, is the matter which went before, which as yet abydeth in the fluxe: but that which is engē
                  dred alreadie, is the ioyned matter, which hath alreadie flowed: and is compact in the agrieued place. Hereupon therfore there muſt be vſed a diligēt care of the Phyſition in ſuch kindes of phlegmone which as yet remaine in generation (as in all other tumours alſo, & diſeaſes, which are yet in begetting, neither as yet haue obtained perfection) as Galen lib. 13. meth. med. doth declare thē to be known & perceiued, both by that which foreſeeth,
                     There is a twofold declaration, of all thoſe euills which are yet in begetting. Speciall cauſes of tumours aboue nature. Praegreſſae. Antecedentes. VVhich are ſaide to be naturall humors.
                   & that which cureth: but theſe things pertaine to an other kinde of ſtudy. But it is conuenient, that we ſet down the ſpeciall cauſes of tumours which are aboue nature, to the which theſe three are commonly appointed: Primitiue cauſes, which we cal both praegreſſae & euidentes, & cauſes antecedent, which we name antecedentes, & ioyned cauſes, which we terme coniunctae or continentes. Theſe be called of the Greekes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The primitiue cauſes are ſaid to be theſe, which while they do worke any diſeaſe are ſeparated, as a fall, a ſtripe, a blow, a bruiſe, a tumour, or a ſolution, or that euill which is committed by admitting a diſſolut diet. Antecedent cauſes are thoſe, which of themſelues are fit & materiall to beget any diſeaſe or affect, as are four humours both naturall & not naturall. Naturall humours are thoſe which ſerue to nouriſh the body, & haue their being with the blouds, & are comprehended vnder the name of bloud. Which if they be ſent out from the veynes & arteries, they do ſodenly congeale & gather togeather, wheather they flow without the body, or do remaine ſtill in the place wherein they be conteined. But they call thoſe vnnatural humours,
                     VVhich are ſaide to be vnnaturall humours.
                   which are founde ſeuered from the bloude with the which the bodie is noriſhed, and by reaſon of their corruption and naughtines by their owne nature, are not nutritiue, the which doe ſometime grow although they remaine in the aire which compaſſeth vs. And theſe as it were by a certaine kinde of prouidence of nature, being deſtyned and ordeyned for ſome vſe, are demitted and ſent into certayne receptakles, either into the vttermoſt partes of the bodie, and ſo engender vnkinde ſwellinges called abſceſſus, or

whelkes, ſcabbes, defedations and alterations of the skinne, and vnnaturall ſwettes: or ſometime by an inſenſible ayer inwardely infuſed they doe excite ſweatinges. Sometime alſo they putrifie within, and beget feauers. But ſuch like (ſay they) are improperly termed humours aſſuming to them ſelues the names of naturall humours. For they holde this opinion,
                     VVhat iuices are properly termed natural humours.
                   that onely thoſe iuyces, which come from the liuer in the generation of bloude, and of nutrition and moyſture, are properly to be termed naturall humours. Such are ſincere and pure bloude, cholericke alſo, flegmaticke and melancholicke, by the which foure kindes all the partes of the bodie are generally, nouriſhed and maintayned: ſome partes with a more pure, and (as I may ſaie) a more bloudie humour: other with a humour more cholericke, other with a flegmaticke, and other with a melancholicke, as the nature of euerie parte requireth. Therefore all the humours are conteined in the veynes and arteries, the which may appeare by their varietie of colour and conſiſtencie (as Galene hath expreſſed in in libro de atra bile. Furthermore of thoſe foure tumours which are called naturall,
                     
                        Of the foure natural humours: are engendred foure lawfull and 
                              〈…〉
                           .
                     
                     
                        VVhat tumors 
                              〈…〉
                            of vnnatura
                              ••
                            humours.
                     
                   foure eſpeciall tumours are engendred, which are commonly called apoſtemata. In the which the ſwelling is verie bigge, and the matter doth offende rather in quantitie then in qualiltie. They are called by their proper names, phlegmone, eriſypelas, aedema, ſcirrhus. Of tumuors not naturall (as it pleaſeth the latter Phyſitions) doe procede abſceſſus, which they alſo call exiture and puſtule, which they thinke cannot well be called apoſtemes. To the which they will adde and reduce two other kindes alſo, flatuous and waterie, which proceede of a fluible ſubſtaunce, and are cōmonly called apostemata venteſa & aquoſa (that is) windie and wateriſh apoſtemes. There be therefore ſix titles attributed vn
                     •
                  o ſimple tumours, (that is) phlegmonoſi, eryſipelatoſi, adematoſi, ſcirrhoſi, flatuoſi, & aquoſi. But the compounde tumours are not all called according to the concourſe of humours, (becauſe a great many may happen in one diſeaſe) but they are named by the predominant humour eſpecially as we haue manifeſted heretofore, and will hereafter more plentifully in his owne place. But coniunctae cauſae or continentes of thoſe tumours beſides nature,
                     Coniunctae cauſae tum
                           •
                        rū praier naturā.
                   which they commonly call apoſtemata, puſtule and exiture are matters and ſeuerall ſubſtances, which are founde to be aggregated and ſtuffed togeather in the affected parte, and which doe yet remaine after they haue excited the ſwelling: and while they encreaſe the tumours alſo doe greatly augment, and when they decreaſe, the tumours are deminiſhed, and when their ſubſtaunce is vtterly ſpent and extinguiſhed, the tumours alſo of them ſelues doe fall awaie. And this cauſe called coniucta or continens cauſa, of all the maladies and ſundrie diſpoſitions of the bodie, is after this manner by Auicene defined,
                     VVhat it is which is called continens cauſa.
                   that, when it is preſent, his diſeaſe alwayes accompanies him, and alſo when it is taken away, his diſeaſe alſo vaniſheth. But for all this, ſome Phyſitions of our age, and thoſe verie well learned, doe contende that Galene woulde admitte but two cauſes (that is to ſaie) an externall, and an internall (or as they ſaie nowe) a primitiue and an antecedent. Of the which that (he ſayth) doeth happen to the bodie outwardely, which altereth and chaungeth the ſame greatly, the which alwayes is ſeperated, vntill it hath eſtabliſhed his maladie, as heate, colde, the byting of a Scorpion. But the internall hath his being within the bodie, and doth preſently procreate the maladie, as are humours affected beſides nature. But they doe conſtantly affirme, that he neuer ſo much as dreamed of that, which they terme cauſa coniuncta, when as according to his opinion, euerie affect which letteth and hindereth the actions and duities of the bodie, is a maladie it ſelfe, and not the cauſe of a maladie, and that coniuncta cauſa, which Auicene and his ſecte haue inuented, according to their owne deſcription, which they aſſigne vnto it, is nothing but a certaine kinde of affect letting the execution thoſe duties partayning to the bodie: which is the verie definition of a maladie it ſelfe. And therefore they proue that it nothing differeth from a diſeaſe it ſelfe, which is wonte to preiudice thoſe actions which agree with nature.
                     Some thincke that coniuncta cauſa nothing differeth from the maladie it ſelfe.
                   But becauſe one, and the ſelfe ſame opinion hath occupyed all mens mindes of this latter age concerning this triple kinde of the cauſes of all ſuch diſeaſes, it ſhall not ſeeme altogeather abſurde, if that I throughout all this treatiſe of myne, for playneſſe ſake, ſhall deuide and diſtinguiſhe theſe three cauſes, into theſe three kyndes and titles:: I meane primatiua, antecedens and coniuncta.
                  
And thus much for the cauſes of tumours happening beſides nature. Nowe the courſe of our treatiſe doth exact, that we ſhould adde the ſignes and tokens of the ſame, if that before, we ſhall intreat ſomewhat of the nature and generation of the abſceſſus.
                  
                     VVhat abſceſſus Galene thinketh to be.
                   
                  Abſceſſus therefore, called of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and of the common Phyſitions exiture, are called of Galene (libro de tumoribus praeter naturam, & ſecundo ad Glauconem) diſpoſitions, in which the partes of the bodie doe depart one from another, which before did touch and meete: for the matter which doth excite theſe tumours, being thruſt out without the fleſh of the muſcle, doth bring the partes out of their places, and maketh them part and feuer. Therefore ſayth Galene, there muſt of neceſſitie be a place voide in the middeſt, which borroweth either ſome flatuous moiſt, or tempered, or mixed ſubſtaunce from the partes, which in length of time is altered, into many and ſundrie ſubſtaunces. But there is a double kind of theſe abſceſſus, one is, when as the inflammation being turned into matter,
                     Two kindes of abſceſſus Gal. lib. 14. Thera. meth. & lib. 2. ad Glauconem.
                   the matter it ſelfe is packed vp togeather in a corner or hole: the other is, when as no inflammatiō proceeding or going before, a certaine humour either vaporous, or elſe a ſubſtance mixed of both parts, is in ſome part collected togither which alſo happeneth two waies: for either in the ſpace lying betweene the ſeuered partes, ſuch like ſubſtaunce is engendred, or elſe it runneth into the partes them ſelues, and that eitheir in the beginning, or elſe that waie by the which thoſe diſeaſes happen called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . which (ſaith Galene) then doe chaunce, when as humours which before haue infeſted and greaued ſome one parte, doe thence remoue, and are inforced into another. And this ſubſtaunce, which begetteth this abſceſſus, worketh him ſelfe a place betweene the skine and the fleſh. And in time it doth flea of all the skinne, either becauſe it is very vehement, or elſe becauſe the plentie of matter doth putrifie, and ſo breake the skinne. But if thoſe humours, with the which, the ſpace ſituated betwene the ſeuered partes is filled, doe continue any time: they haue (as I ſaide before) many alterations, and are chaunged into many ſubſtaunces, which doe repreſent the proprieties not onely of humours, but euen of ſolide and harde bodies. For you ſhall finde ſundrie matters within theſe ſpaces, ſome like vnto ſtones,
                     VVhat things may be found in abſ
                           •
                        eſſus.
                   ſome to grauell and ſand, ſome to wood, ſome to coales, ſome to durte, ſome to the foame of oyles, ſome to the dregges of wine, the varietie of ſubſtaunces, ſome ignoraunt men haue thought to proceede from the force of incantation.
            
            
               CAP. IIII. Of the ſignes of tumours beſides nature generally appearing togeather with the iudgements therof.
               
                  TVMOVRS beſides nature, being reſyaunt in the extreameſt partes of the bodie (the examining and ſpeculation whereof doth appartaine to the chirurgion) being ſurueyed by the iudgement of the ſenſes,
                     Generall ſignes of tumours aboue nature.
                   & the affected parts being touched and felt with the handes are eaſilie deſcried and knowen. For in euery part of the bodie there appeareth a certaine kinde of encreaſing exceeding the naturall ſtate, and diſtending aboue the meaſure of nature that parte which it affecteth, and it letteth the duities or actions thereof, becauſe either ſome humour, or ſome ſuch ſubſtaunce proceeding of the humour, or which doe fauour ſomewhat of the nature of the humour, or a vaporous ſpirite hath excyted it, there alſo muſt needes happen a tumour beſides nature. But the tumours which they call true Apoſtemes, are diſcerned by their ſwelling, by their paine, & by their heate, being ſtretched out more or leſſe. But they are not counted to be true apoſtemes in deed, which we haue termed puſtule & abſceſſus, beſides that tumour, which maladie the Grecians call cacôethia, and alſo in the greater or leſſer ſequeſtratiō, determinata. But the ſignes of euery particular difference,
                     Particular ſignes.
                   & of their matters wherof they be engēdred, ſhalbe declared in their due place, in that which followeth. In the meane time we will handle the ſimple differēces of thoſe tumours, which are aboue nature, by the which the compounde differences ſhall alſo be eaſely knowen. But we muſt not

come vnto particular thinges, before we haue throughly diſcourſed of vniuerſall, for that order is wonte to be obſerued in the inſtitutions of the Artes neither truely vnworthely or without cauſe. For thoſe vniuerſall and common thinges are more manifeſt vnto vs then particular, becauſe theſe particular things are more confuſed and more mixed one with an other (as Ariſtotle teacheth lib. 1. Phyſicorum cap. 1. Let no man therefore maruell, though euerie where in this treatiſe of chyrurgie, we alwayes beginne of more common thinges, and of thoſe which comprehende many thinges vnder them. But let vs returne to our purpoſe,  & let vs proſecute the iudgements of tumours conſiſting aboue nature. In the which firſt of all we muſt note,
                     Iudicia.
                   that all thoſe tumours which they call true apoſtemes (if we will credit Galene and Auicene) are greatly complicate and folded togeather, neither can any of them be eaſely iudged or founde, out to be pure and ſincere: for (as Galene ſayth) with phlegmone (that is) with an inflammation comming of bloude,
                     Lib. de diffe. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   there is ſomething chiefly mingled which doth preſerue the nature either of eryſipelas, or aedema, or ſcirrhus. But eryſipelas, becauſe it repreſenteth a kinde of phlegmone, or aedema, or ſcirrhus, and ſo likewiſe cō
                  ſider & marke in all the reſt of the tumours. But truely thoſe tumours beſides nature, which they terme not true apoſtemes, are verie often found ſincere and pure. But we will handle the cures of ſimple and ſincere tumours in thoſe thinges which followe, by the which the remeadies alſo of compound & intricate tumours ſhall manifeſtly appeare. For I thinke it good to diſcourſe of all the kindes of tumours, and alſo to diſpoſe aright that which ſhall ſeeme ſuperfluous. For if a man ſhall knowe all the ſimple tumours, and learne after what manner they be compounded togeather, he ſhall be furniſhed ſufficiently to exerciſe him ſelfe particularly in the reſt. But now let vs ſet other opinions and iudgementes generally concerning the tumours them ſelues. Periodi, paroxiſmi, and the criſes of tumours beſides nature doe followe the analogia of the humours whereof they be conflated or engendred (Guido affirming the ſame) which analogia, we here declare to be a propertie, or proportion, a nature, or a likenes of ſubſtaunce, which they call forma ſpecefica & occulia, a ſpeciall and hidden forme. Such kinde of tumours, eſpecially they which be holſome, & which are cauſed of the flowing of humours,
                     Foure times of tumours beſides nature.
                   are diſtinguiſhed by foure times (that is to ſay) by their beginning, by their increaſing, by their ſtate, and by their declination. The  ſigne of their beginning is, when the member beginneth to be ſtretched out, and when the beginning of fluxe is preſent,
                     Principium.
                   but yet with ſmall griefe. We may alſo iudge augmentation  to be preſent, when we ſee the tumour to be raiſed: like a heape or pyle, and the place affected to be filled,
                     Augmentum.
                   and the ſymptomates, which are wont to followe euerie tumour, to be  manifeſtly increaſed. But the token of their ſtate is, when all the aforeſaide thinges (that is to ſay) the tumour,
                     Status.
                   and the ſymptomates of the differences of euerie tumour, hath his owne proper force and vigoure: neither can they any longer admit any encreaſing but the  matter cauſing the tumour doth degenerate and chaung it ſelfe into another kinde of ſubſtance.
                     Declinatis.
                   But their declination is then knowen to be preſent, when the pyle of the tumour, and the proper ſymptomates thereof are decreaſed and diminiſhed, or when the matter which prouoketh the tumour beginneth to be transformed into another ſubſtance. Therefore ſuch kinde of times do receiue their differences from three kindes eſpecia
                     •
                  ly (that is to ſay) from the eſſence of the tumour it ſelfe (that is) from the greatnes or ſmallnes,
                     The times of tumours doe take their difference from three thinges chiefly.
                   from the diſpoſition of the matter, and from the accidentes, which doe very much alter the declaration of the cure. But theſe foure times, ſometime doe ſeeme to happen altogether, becauſe of the ſhort hardnes of euerie one of them, which almoſt cannot be perceiued, (as it chaunceth in venemous inflammations,) yet not mortall or deadly, which ſtraight way do flouriſh and increaſe.
                     Tumoures aboue nature are contained vnder 4 modes.
                   Furthermore theſe kinde of tumours, which doe chiefly happen through the influxiō of humours, except they be hindred by repreſſing the matter that floweth, or except they lurke ſecretly within, either of their own accorde, or without any manifeſt cauſe (the fluxe hauing recourſe thither:) it is neceſſarie that they ſhould be comprehē
                  ded vnder one of theſe foure either vnder inſenſible exhalation or reſolution, or vnder ſuppuration, or putrefaction, or induration & hardning. But of all theſe waies the beſt and the moſt to be deſired is that which is made by an inſenſible diſſolution, & next to that, that which cōmeth by ſuppuration or mattering. But that which is cauſed by induration & hardning

is ſaid to be euill, & that which happeneth by the corruption of the affected part is to be thought the worſt of all, the which Galen doth inſinuate in libello de inaequali intemperie,
                  
                     Gal. lib. de inaequali intemtemperie.
                   writing on this manner. Therefore of the two, we muſt of neceſſitie followe the one, either that the bodie be putrified and corrupted, becauſe fluxion is predominant, or elſe we muſt graunt, (that this putrifaction being reſiſted and ouercome) the muſckle muſt returne to his naturall habite and conſtitution. Let vs therefore imagine that all fluxion is withſtood and impeached, then you haue two meanes to cure it, either by digeſting thoſe humoures which were in the affected part, or by diſſoluing or looſening them: of theſe the diſſolution is beſt. But in the concoction of the humours, theſe two thinges are ſpeciallie required: vi
                     ••
                  . the perfect generation of the matter, and alſo his abſceſſion into ſome ſpace by it ſelfe. And a little beneath he addeth alſo theſe wordes. But if that fluxion do make the parts as it were ſubiect to it, then they do fall to ſo great an intemperature, that their ordinarie action periſheth and in proceſſe of time they are corrupted and putrified. Thus farre Galene. The tokens of diſſolution and looſening of the humours are theſe,
                     
                        Signes of diſſolution.
                     
                     
                        Signes of putrifaction.
                     
                     
                        Signes of induration.
                     
                     
                        Signes of the regreſſion and lurking of a tumour.
                     
                   the ſoftneſſe of the ſore, and the little throbbing and beating thereof. But the ſignes of predominant fluxiō, and of the putrifaction of the part it ſelfe, are the blacke & blew colour, to which alſo ſometime happeneth an odious ſtinch. But the tokens of a ſtonie hardneſſe of the tumour are, the imminution of the tumour, and alſo the extreame hardneſſe therof. The notes & ſignes alſo of the egeſtion and lurking of the tumour, are the ſodeine diminution thereof, which chaunceth ſometime by to much refrigeration and coldneſſe, ſometime by reaſon of a ſecrete venime, which lurketh in the place. And this ſame ſodaine and oftē imminution of the tumour, ſucceedeth commonly ſome feuer, and alſo other euill ſimptomates. And thus farre of the ſignes & tokens of theſe tumours. Which our common Phiſitions haue comprehended vnder this name Apoſtema. The tokens alſo of thoſe tumours which we call puſtulae, ſhall not be forgotten, when we ſhall haue occaſion to handle them. But the tokens and ſignes of the abſceſſe
                     •
                  , commonly called exiturae, either theſe which do foreſhew their comming, or elſe thoſe which do manifeſt their preſence alreadie, are theſe. When thou ſeeſt (ſaith Auicene) pulſation and beating, or hardneſſe to haue continued a great time,
                     Signes of Abſceſſiō to come
                   and alſo that the griefe togither with much heate doth augment, then you may imagine that the next euent that followeth is, that the Apoſteme wilbe turned into matter and ſuppuration, and ſo conſequently to be an Abſceſſion. But when thou findeſt that the place is ſoft,
                     Signes of Abceſſion alreadie preſent.
                   and that the griefe is ſomewhat aſſwaged, and the heate mitigated, and that one place of the tumour is ſupereminent aboue the reſt, and againe if by thruſting it with your finger, you ſhall perceaue a wateriſh inundation to ſubſiſt, and againe that the colour of his top ſhall wax white, then you may well thinke that the tumour is mattered, and alſo that it is turned into Abſceſſion. And therefore it was verie well iudged of Hippocrates, that Feuers did oftenner happen,
                     Aph. 47. lib 2 when that the matter was in ripening, then when it was alreadie come to his maturitie. Moreouer the markes & tokens as well of the preſent Abſceſſion, as alſo of the Abſceſſion to come are comprehended in theſe common verſes:

                     Durities longae, pulſus, dolor, & calor aucti,
                     Signant pus fieri: ſed factum, dictae remiſſa.
                     Sub digitis vndans, albeſcens pars & acuta.
                  
which may be thus Engliſhed:

                     By hardneſſe long, by pulſe and griefe, and eke by heate encreaſd,
                     We knowe that matter doeth approch: but made we iudge indeede,
                     If that it yealdes to finger weight, and whiteneſſe doeth appeare,
                  
—and painefull be alſo.
               But you muſt be verie attentiue and vigilaunt in diſcerning and iudging of the matter it ſelfe. For the manifeſt knowledge of the matter and ſuppuration is ſometime withholden from the Phiſition by reaſon of the thickeneſſe of the ſkinne in the which it is included, (as it is proued by this Aphoriſme of Hippocrates.
                     Aph. 41. lib. 6.) Whoſoeuer is ignorant of the ſuppuration which is in the bodie, his ignoraunce proceedeth of the thickeneſſe of the matter, or of the place, wherin it is comprehended. And thus much for the ſignes of Abſceſſions. Nowe of the iudgementes of them, theſe thinges are deliuered vnto vs of

Auicene and his ſect.
                     Indicis abſceſſuum.
                   Abſceſſions which are planted neare vnto anie ſtrong member or vnto anie iuncture or ioynt, and in thoſe places where there are moſt veynes and ſinewes, and againe in a weake parte, hauing gathered his debilitie by the defect of naturall heate, being indurate alſo and couered with a thicke ſkinne, conteyning alſo thicke matter, and ſo the more ſlowe in motion, the outward place being plaine alſo, and euen, not aſcending like a little hillocke, I ſay, ſuch a like ſore is greatly ſuſpected, and verie hardlie and ſlowlie ripened, and ſuch a one as is euerie way by deſcription oppoſite and contrarie to this,
                     VVhat abſceſſions may eaſily be digeſted.
                   is of good and laudable habite, for both ſoone and eaſilie it mattereth, and oftentimes alſo (no outwarde medicine aiding or aſſiſting) of it ſelfe it gapeth and openeth. If therefore the abſceſſion doe growe vp into a ſharpneſſe, and the ſubſtance of the matter be thinne, and the ſkinne not thicke or harde, of his owne nature and power it will expell and thruſt foorth the conceaued humour without anie forreine aide, vnleſſe a man by making inciſion will anteuert and preuent his voluntarie opening.
                     VVhat abſceſſion may ſooneſt be ended through reſolution.
                   Such like Abſceſſions are digeſted ſometime by breathing or winde (no ſolution being made ſubiect within the ſkinne,) but that happeneth when the matter is ſmall in quantitie, good, and thinne, and not ſticking verie deepe. But if there be anie emiſſarie, or way made into the tumour either by nature or by Art, the humour conceaued within doeth breake foorth oftener then digeſt. But that opening or apertion which is made by nature, is a great deale ſafer, then that which is made by the hand: but if it be ſo, that it muſt be mollified by Art,
                     Abſceſſions are ſaflier opened with a 
                           〈◊〉
                         then with ruptor
                           •
                        ū medicamentū
                     
                   you ſhall ſaflier doe it by a ſharpe penne knife, or other cleare and bright inſtrument of yron, then by that medicine which they call ruptorium medicamentum. And therefore (as before I ſayed) euerie apertion, which is made and enforced by Art, is worſe then that which nature affoordeth of it ſelfe, becauſe ſuch like manuell openinges to make the matter rancke, may perhappes tourne into Fiſtula. But when neceſſitie vrgeth, and when wee can not vſe a better remedie, wee muſt boldlie attempt that. And by this meanes you ſhall eſchewe thoſe diſcommodities, which before I named, if (when the matter ſo requireth) you doe ſeaſonablie make apertion, and by that meanes haſten the ripening of the other baggadge which lurketh in the tumour. Hippocrates in his laſt Oracle of his firſt booke of Praedictions hath expreſſed the verie notes and markes of the worſt matter,
                     The notes of the beſt and worſt matter, out of Hippoc.
                   and of the beſt, ſpeaking after this manner. That matter it eſteemed beſt, which is of colour white, and euerie way like it ſelfe, and ſoft, and gentle to the toucher, and as little vnpleaſant to the noſe as may be. And that which is euerie waye contrarie to this, is the worſt of all. But the tokens and ſignes of all the other humours and ſolide ſubſtances alſo which are included in theſe abſceſſions, ſhall be manifeſted and ſhewed in their particular Chapters, as they ſhall by conſequence and order enſue.
            
            
               CAP. V. Of the generall method of curing of all tumours beſides nature, but of thoſe eſpeciallie vvhich proceede from the influxion of humours, as Apoſtemes, and Abſceſsions commonly called Exiturae.
               
                  OF all Tumoures aboue nature, as well thoſe which are alreadie ingendred, as thoſe which are not yet in generation,
                     The common order of curing of tumours
                   there is one common and principall order of curing (as it is in Galene lib. 13. and 14. method. Medic.) namely that that, which is aboue nature reſident in any member, and raiſeth the ſame into a Tumour,
                     The common method of curing of tumors doe chaunge according to the difference of the tumour and the member affected.
                   ſhould altogether be emptied out. But thoſe which are yet in begetting, in them there is a certaine obſtruction of the humour that floweth to the aggrieued place, before the euacuation. In them therefore there is required a diligent and ſingular care of the Phiſition, to declare the cure of them. But theſe common manifeſtations, according to the difference of the Tumour it ſelfe, and the nature of the affected membre, doe verie much differ and alter. For truely in all Tumours alreadie ingendred, and in euerie part of the bodie, the euacuation of that which annoyeth, and infeſteth, is in no caſe to be vſed and

miniſtred, as Galene teacheth libro 2. ad Glauconem, and in the places aboue recited, which alſo ſhall manifeſtlie appeare in that which followeth. But we muſt not cure thoſe tumors with ſuch remedies, which are yet but beginning and occupying euerie member, or emptie, out that which is alreadie ingendred in them, but we are enforced (if we intend to followe the right order of curing) to vſe ſometime one remedie, ſometime another, which is of force to ſtop the fluxe, and auoide out that which is engendred, ſo farre foorth, as the kinde of the tumoure and the nature of the affected member doeth require.
                     The order of curing of tumors is chiefly taken from two things.
                   Galene therefore chieflie draweth the demonſtrations of the cure of tumoures aboue nature from theſe two thinges. vidz. from the diſpoſition it ſelfe or eſſence of the euill, and from the nature of the affected member. Moreouer the diſpoſition of the euill (which we haue nowe in hande, or the eſſence thereof doeth comprehend three thinges in it, according to the iudgement and conſent of the later ſort (that is) the quantitie, the qualitie,
                     The eſſence of a tumour doth containe three thinges in it.
                   and the matter or ſubſtance which prouoketh the tumour. By the meanes whereof that chiefe and common declaration is chaunged, and from them is taken alſo the perticular order of curing. For a great tumour is cured one way, and a ſmall tumour another way. For the difference of them is knowen by their greatneſſe and ſmallneſſe (as ſome ſuppoſe.) And one way is a mightie phlegmone, & another way a little herpes healed. Otherwiſe alſo is that Tumour remedied, which is cauſed by fluxe, and is yet in begetting, then that which it procreated through congeſtion, or is alreadie ingendred and congealed. Alſo a hote tumour as Eryſipela
                        •
                     
                   is otherwiſe cured then a colde, as is oedema and ſchirrus. The quantitie therefore which in a tumour aboue nature varieth the cure is either great or ſmall. The qualitie is the fluxe, or (as ſome tearme it) the deriuation and congeſtion. The Matter thereof is the humour, be it either hoate or colde.
                     Foure thinges to be conſidered chiefly in the nature of affected members.
                   But in the nature of affected members foure thinges chieflie are to be conſidered. vidz. their temperature, their forme or faſhion, their ſituation or place, and their power and ſtrength. To the which alſo may be added a fift thing, which is the facilitie (as I may terme it) and difficultie of the ſenſes. Except you will with Galene comprehend and containe it vnder the laſt thing, which is the vertue and ſtrength of the tumour. Theſe things therefore alſo doe much alter that generall order of curing, which is commonly obſerued throughout all kinde of tumours aboue nature. It is therefore requiſite, that, in curing thoſe tumoures which chaunce beſides nature, we remember all thoſe declarations which are taken from them. For Phlegmone, or anie other tumour which hath his abode in the fleſhie parts of the bodie, is otherwiſe cured then thoſe which are ſituated in the ſinewie places: otherwiſe in the eye, then in the knee or neck: and otherwiſe are the kernels in the throte cured, then thoſe which are reſident in other parts of the bodie. But to be ſhort, the temperature, the faſhion, the ſituation and the ſtrength of the member that is affected, and beſet with the tumour, do change all thoſe operations, which we ſhal attempt and proue in their cure: reteyning ſtill that generall intention,
                     Libro 2. ad Glauconem. The order 
                           •
                        f handling that which followeth.
                   which Galene hath taught to be alwayes taken from the diſeaſe. Therefore firſt we haue here decreed to ſet downe a common & generall method of curing of tumours aboue nature▪ eſpecially of thoſe, which are cauſed through the influxion of humours, taking their manifeſtation from the affect or euill it ſelfe, nothing reſpecting the affected part. Afterward we will teach the vniuerſall cure of them, but chieflie of inflammations, when as they ſhall degenerate and change into abſceſſions. Then moreouer we will declare the perticular order of curing all differences, eſpecially of thoſe which be ſimple, by whoſe proportion or Analogie, the cure of compound tumours ſhall eaſilie be learned. And in the meane time, as the place ſhall require, we will rehearſe out of Galene certaine thinges concerning the order of curing, which haue their aſſumption from the partes which are affected, & as it were beſieged with a tumour which things being rightly weighed and conſidered, it ſhall be eaſie for anie reaſonable Phiſition or Chiruigian▪ by our certaine methode & order,
                     The finding out of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         is the beginning of the cure of tumours aboue nature.
                   to cure all kind of tumours which are inſident in anie part of the bodie. We therefore imitating Galene, will draw the beginning of the cure of tumours which are ſaid to be aboue nature frō the flowing of ingendred humors and from the inuention of the cauſe of the verie euill, that ſo both the cauſes which excite the ſame, may be preuented, and that which is alreadie ingendred in it may be taken away. Therefore by the example and analogie of one difference of tumours, which are cauſed thorough

defluxion (for here we mind to intreate only of them) we will vnderſtand alſo other differences,
                     Phlegmone quod.
                   which do grow through the flowing of humours. And here we will ſet downe a briefe and compendious curing of one kind of phlgemone, which chanceth verie often, and procureth feauers and other verie daungerous euilles and ſimptomates. But in this place vnder the name of phlegmone, our intent is not to comprehend euerie hote and flaming diſpoſition▪ which the Greekes call phlogoſis, but that onely which proceedeth by the meanes of a bloudie fluxe, chieflie incident to fleſhie and fat bodies, wherin is vehement paine, & redneſſe appearing in the outward parts, and as it were a burning heate, a ſtretching out, and a ſtriuing or thruſting, and when the euill is increaſed, there is ſence of the pulſes beating. For this inflammation with Galene and other Greeke writers, as Paulus, Aetius, and Oribaſius, which do followe him as their beſt guide,
                     Gal. lib. 13. me
                           •
                        h. med. The common ingendring of euery phlegmone.
                   we properlie call phlegmone. That we may therefore come to the matter it ſelfe, theſe are the verie wordes of Galene. The common ingendring of euerie phlegmone commeth by the influxion of bloud, and that more aboundantlie then was wont to happen to that member. For bloud doeth flowe verie aboundantly (ſometime one or other member ſending it foorth) and that part doth entertaine and receaue it, which beginneth to be affected with phlegmone: but ſometime that member which is afflicted doeth drawe it vnto it ſelfe. But the partes which ſendeth it foorth do driue out the iuyce, being either ſuperfluous by reaſon of the plentie therof, or grieuous bicauſe of the qualitie, or els becauſe of both. But they which are attractiue, do draw or pull with a ſicklie heate or griefe. But to theſe alſo are adioyned certaine helping cauſes. vidz. the weakneſſe and baſeneſſe of the member, the fulneſſe of the conduites and paſſages thorough which the flux paſſeth, the ſtraitneſſe alſo & narrowneſſe of the poores & expulſiue parts, & the inferiour place,
                     
                        The helping cauſes of flux. Three orders are ſet downe for the cure of thoſe tumours which are cauſed, through the influxion of humours. Primus ſcopus.
                     
                     
                        P
                              •
                           ethora quod.
                     
                   as we haue already declared. Therfore of all theſe, there are three intentions or orders of curing thoſe tumours, which haue their beginning of flowing, collected & gathered of the later ſort of Chirurgians. 1. The firſt is to turne away the fluxe, & preuent it altogether. 2. The ſecond is, to mitigate the griefe, & altogither to remoue that cauſe, for the which, the member intertaineth or alſo draweth the flux vnto it. 3. The third is to empty out all that humour that hath flowed to the aggrieued place. But how the firſt intention ſhould be finiſhed, Galen hath fitly taught li. 13. meth. med. where he declareth vnto vs all the waies to auert & turne away the flux, & the meanes to ſtop & inhibite phlegmone, which as yet remaineth in generation, writing after this manner: when humours are equally augmented amongſt them ſelues (which the Greekes call plethora) yea alſo when all the bodie is void of excrements & doth containe a mediocrity of iuicie humours, (paine & the heate of that mē
                  ber alſo wherin phlegmone raigneth raiſing the flux) through the emiſſion of bloud we helpe and remedy phlegmone which now beginneth to rule. Plethora alſo is cured both with often bathing and with exerciſe, and alſo with much friction and rubbing. Furthermore it is cured by medicines that will digeſt, ſo that a feuer be not preſent, and beſides all theſe it is helped through hunger, & a good diet, although the ſick be feuerous. But when the body is ſtuffed either with melancholie, or choler, or fleume, or with other clammie & viſcous humors (which ſtate of the bodie the Greekes call cacochymia) the euacuation thereof muſt be laboured by a purgation,
                     Cacochymia.
                   which is a fit remedie for euerie humour that raigneth. But of them we will ſpeake more at large in their perticular Chapters.
                     Antiſpaſis.
                   Nowe Antiſpaſis (that is) a reuulſion the contrarie way, is a common remedie againſt all theſe kind of tumours, while the fluxe doeth yet ſtronglie preuaile, as in the beginning and encreaſing of the euill: but in the end of the ſtate, and in the declination thereof, while the fluxe nowe remaineth and ſticketh in the member, and the whole bodie is ſufficientlie emptied, the euacuation muſt be attempted and fetched either from the affected part, or from that which is next adioyned thereunto.
                     Secundus ſcopus.
                   The ſecond intention contayneth remedies to prouoke ſleepe. vidz. which do mitigate paine, and alſo bind and preuent the fluxe. Morouer it teacheth remedies, which are able to looſen and diſſolue the naturall poores, by the which the affected member is wōt to be throughly purged. But the matter of all theſe ſhall be aboundantly deſcribed hereafter.
                     Tertius ſcopus
                   But we will handle the third intention, which is perfited with ſuch things as do euacuate the matter that exciteth the tumour, from the affected place. And that matter is euacuated not only by medicines which do euaporate & diſſolue, but alſo by ſuch as do repell and repreſſe

ſuch as the Greekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . And therefore in the beginning of theſe phlegmonous tumors, and other whatſoeuer do deriue their beginning from the influxion of humours, we may rather vſe repreſſing medicines, then thoſe which do euaporate: except in certaine caſes, of the which (ſaith Guido) Galene ſeemed to haue appointed foure.
                     Caſes in which we may not vſe repelling or repreſſing remedies.
                   1. The firſt is, when that ſuch tumours be in cleane and pure members. 2. The ſecond is, when the ſubiect therof is venimous. 3. The third is when the matter is thicke, and not pliable to repulſion. 4. The fourth is, when it is verie vehementlie packed togither. Auicene excepteth only two cauſes, vidz. when it happeneth in anie cleane or pure part, or in any other place, out of the which it is to be feared that the matter will flowe to ſome principall part of the bodie. Some other appoint onely one cauſe, other ſixe, other tenne, other nineteene, other twentie three. But before we do eſtabliſh any thing of this ſo doubtfull a cauſe, we muſt know that there be two kinds of repulſiues, both amongſt the late Phiſitions & alſo the Arabians (that is to ſay) common & proper.
                     Repellentia communi
                           •
                        .
                   Common repulſiues are ſuch as do inhibite all flux keeping vnder & repreſſing the ſame, & that is done either by cooling it, or by thickening it, or elſe by ſtuffing it (that is) by reaſon of the thicknes of his ſubſtāce, by ſhutting & occluding the poores & wayes wherby it would flow out, or elſe by confirming the parts affected Theſe things following do repreſſe flux by refrigeration & cold, ſengreene, lettuce, pſillium, cotyledon (that is to ſay (vmbilicus Veneris, lenticula paluſtris, caphura. And theſe alſo do ſtuffe & ſtop the paſſages farma called volatilis, the white of an egge, amylum, gluten, & the kindes of gummes. To conclude all ſuch things as do refrigerate with eaſe and without biting. But thoſe thinges which doe confirme and roborate (I meane ſuch as do reſtore the naturall temperature to the part affected) as oyle of roſes, oleum omphacinum, oile of mirtles, oyle of chammomill, abſynthium, horehound, nux cupreſſi, and ſuch like thinges, which being applied do ſtrengthen the affected part, and ſo do free it and defend it from all imminent flux. But proper repulſiues are ſuch, as when the humoures doe ſlide into ſome other part,
                     Repellentia propried
                           ••
                        ia.
                   doe meete with the ſame, and do enforce them to retire againe. And theſe are to be vſed then, when the member is grown thicke, as attractiue medicines are commonly applied to thinne Tumoures. Of theſe manie are of a colde qualitie, and manie of a hoate, but both ſortes, (that is) both hote and cold are in operation aſtringent, and binding. The medicines repreſſing which of nature are cold, are theſe, vine leaues, plantaine, nightſhade dipſacos,
                  
                     Frigida rep
                           •
                        imen
                           ••
                        a.
                   vidz. virga paſtoris, or burſapaſtoris, Glaucium, balauſtium, omphacium, ſumach, terra c
                        •••
                     lia, commonly ſo called, and terra ſigillata, and others of that kinde. Thoſe be the ſimples out of the which manie compoundes are made, as oxycratum, the ointment of bole, the ointment of Galene, and ſuch like. But the hote repulſiues are, allome, Cipreſſe nuttes,
                     Callida repellentia.
                   called galbulae iuuens rotundus or odoratus, called of the Grecians 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , called alſo blatta biz▪ intia, lupinorum farina, and certaine auſtere and ſharpe wines, and manie other ſuch like things. But we will ſet downe the whole order of applying of repelling medicines in the beginning of fluxions, preſcribed by Guido in two ſeuerall prologues. In the beginning of all tumoures,
                     The first prologue of Guido in repreſſiue things.
                   which proceede from the influxe of humoures, but eſpecially of ſuch humoures as are phlegmonous, it will be auailable to vſe repulſiues as they are called, theſe tenne cauſes onely excepted, that is to ſay, when the tumour is in a fat member, or when it proceedeth of a venimous matter, or a ſubſtaunce which is verie thicke, and ſo vnfit to be repelled, or elſe, when the humour is vehemently packed in the affected part, and deepely alſo, if the Tumour be inclined to ſuppuration, or deſcending from a primitiue cauſe,
                     Gal. 2. ad Glauconem.
                   if it be in a plethoricke or full bodie and verie weake, if it be ſeated next vnto a principall member: to conclude, if it happeneth with vehement griefe, for in theſe caſes, we may better vſe medicines, which will mitigate the tumour and the paine thereof, rather then ſuch as ſhall repell and reſiſt the humoures. The ſeconde Prologue is after this manner.
                     The ſecond Prologue.
                   In the beginning of all tumoures, but chieflie of thoſe which are phlegmonous, common repulſiues are profitable: (three caſes onelie excepted,) that is, if the tumour happen in thoſe partes which are called glanduloſe, if they be enclined to ſuppuration, or if they proceede of a venimmous matter. And in all theſe caſes, but eſpecially then, when the humour doth ſtand, and when the fluction conſiſteth, and is almoſt made a tumour, it is behouefull to diſſolue and ſcatter the matter, applying to the ſwolne place, diaphoretica, not biting or ſharpe, but milde,
                     Si 
                           •
                        umeri
                           ••
                         factus eſt.
                  
                  
and gentle, being moderately hote and moyſt, but this muſt be done principallie in the three laſt remembred caſes, in the which we muſt endeuour to attract and drawe the matter which is diſpearſed, to the head, where the tumour moſt appeareth, and we muſt encreaſe the tumour as much as we can, and ſo inhibite the courſe and fluxion of the mixed humours. Which truely we may ſometime do, by vſing attractiue emplaiſters, and oftentimes by faſtening cupping glaſſes to the aggrieued place,
                     Emplaſtri
                           ••
                        . C
                           •
                        c
                           ••
                        bicula. 
                           〈◊〉
                         canon generalis.
                   (as Auicene teacheth.) Let this therfore be a generall rule or canon of art, In the beginning of all tumours, which proceede of the influxion of humours, (thoſe three excepted which were named a little before) onelie pure repreſſiues are to be vſed. But in their increaſing we muſt mingle with theſe repulſiues, ſome of thoſe thinges which do diſſolue and diſcuſſe. But in the ſtate of tumours, yea and ſomewhat before the ſtate, wee muſt commix repreſſiue medicines equallie with diſcuſſiue, and when there is declination preſent, or the end of the ſtate, we may lawfully vſe onely reſoluing and releaſing remedies: to conclude, ſo long as the humour doeth yet abound, we muſt labour to repell it, and driue it away: but if the fluxe doth ſtill remaine, we muſt ſeeke to digeſt it. But if it dependeth vppon both, (that is to ſay) that partly ſomthing hath alreadie flowed, and cleaueth faſt to the place, and partly ſome thing may yet abound and flow: then it ſhall be lawfull to vſe commixed remedies, (that is) partly thoſe, which can reſolue & vnbind, and partly thoſe which are able to bring backe, and repell. For (contrary diſeaſes being gathered into one place togither, we muſt vſe alſo compound cures, as Galene ſaith. 13. Therap. Furthermore, al theſe things truly are to be vnderſtood, as thus, if a tumour aboue nature is to be diſpatched & cured by reſoluing medicins, or (that I may ſpeake generallie) by the way of reſolution. But their cures, whereby we will finiſh all thoſe intentions whereof we intreated before, according to their diuerſe matter that exciteth the tumour ſhall be deſcribed and declared in their perticuler Chapters, as by conſequence and order they ſhall followe.
            
            
               CAP. VI. Of the cure of abſceſsions generallie. DE CVRATIONE ABSCESSVVM IN VNIVERSVM.
               
                  
                     Of the cure of tumors which are turned into abſceſſions, which they cal Exit
                           •
                        ra.
                  
                  BVT if Phlegmone, or anie other Tumour doeth degenerate and turne into Abſceſſus, the cure thereof in the beginning is finiſhed and ended (as ſaith Galene lib. 2. ad Glauconem) by helpes and remedies that doe mitigate, which the Greekes call chalaſtica, (that is) by reſoluing and remitting medicines: of the which nature and force is that medicine, which is called of Galene tetrapharmacum, being verie ſofte, and prouoking ſleepe: with the which according to the opinion of the ſame Galene. lib. 13. Therap. there muſt be commixed a little honie.
                     Tetrapharmacum.
                   But Tetrapharmacum conſiſteth of foure thinges, of the which there muſt be of euerie one a little portion or quantitie (that is to ſay) of waxe, of roſen, of the gumme of the herbe colophonia, which diſtilleth from the roote thereof, and of bulles tallow. But in proceſſe of time, we muſt paſſe ouer vnto thoſe things, which are able to concoct and digeſt, or to ripen and bring to ſuppuration. But thoſe, which are tourned into another kinde (that is) into another ſubſtaunce, and that altogether beſides nature, they are to be remoued and cured by the Art of Chirurgie. Moreouer in remouing them according to the counſell of Galene. 14. Therap. it ſhalbe requiſite to conſider, that among all the wayes and meanes, whereby we intend to finiſh our purpoſe, we ſhould alwayes make choice of the beſt of them.
                     The beſt order of curing is declared three wayes.
                   The beſt meanes and wayes are declared and manifeſted vnto vs, three manner of wayes: vidz. by the ſhortneſſe of the time to cure in, by curing without paine, and chieflie by curing ſaflie, & without danger. Againe that thou maiſt cure ſaflie, there are three  eſpciall things diligentlie to be conſidered. The firſt, & the chiefeſt is, that you throughly attaine  to the perfection of your labour. 2. The other is, that if you can not attaine to the ſame,  yet at the leaſt, that you hurt not the ſick. 3. The third is, that the euill or diſeaſe may not eaſilie returne or come againe. By theſe conſiderations, if you will declare the beſt methode of curing, you ſhall find in all thoſe tumoures before mencioned, when the cure is to be ended

by the helpe of Chyrurgie, and when by the force of medicines. But truely the ſtudie of Chyrurgie in theſe chiefly, which how we doe intreat of, (that is) in thoſe tumours, which are altogether aboue nature, doeth make and tend to the killing and deſtroying of them, and doth wholy declare, after what ſorte they may be taken away. But if it cannot bring this to paſſe, the next counſell is, to transferre the euill, as we vſe to do in thoſe humours called Hypochyma
                        ••
                     , (that is to ſay) the webbe in the eye. But that which is fetched from medicines, doth firſt tende vnto this end, that that which is aboue naiure, may both turne into matter, & alſo into putrefaction: but this he appointeth in the ſecond place. Theſe thinges hath Galene. Therefore when the partes, which are troubled with phlegmone, do beate very vehemently, ſo that now you begin to deſpaire of their cure, (they being not yet mattered:) all the auncient Chyrurgians (ſayeth Galene 4. Therap.) do miniſter and apply ſuch kind of medicines,
                     Ex lib. 4. Therap. meth.
                   which do ſpeedily procure matter: but before it be mattered, they vſe none at all. And although thoſe partes which are annoyed with phlegmone, be annointed with a cataplaſme, which may both heat them and moiſten them, and bring them to ſuppuration, yet the ſame doth not appeare by the firſt reaſon or way, that is, as the remedy and helpe of the euill, but as the mitigating & eaſing of the ſymptomate, that is, of the paine. For truely the remedies of phlegmone are of a drying nature. And the ſame Galene addeth moreouer a litle after, that a ſhort and compendious cure of thoſe partes which are affected with phlegmone is quickly ended & diſpatched, by remedies which are able to drie and vnbind, which truely do altogether either remoue the affect, or elſe, if they leaue behind them ſome litle relict, which may turne to ſuppuration, it is needfull to vſe ſome other ſharpe medicine, which is able to bring out the matter, or if the skin about the tumour be thinne, and you willing, ſpeedily to eaſe the ſicke, you neceſſarily muſt vſe inciſion. And this truely is that, which Auicene ſayth, namly,
                     Auicene.
                   that the cure of an Apoſteme, (as it is an Apoſteme) is the extraction & drawing out of the ſtraung matter which raiſeth the Apoſteme. But to declare the remedies of them, wherwith it is expedient to draw and moue the matter, & to manifeſt other thinges alſo, which we ſpoke of a litle before, they are to be ſought, out of their particular Chapters. Furthermore,
                     VVhē Abſceſſiōs are chiefly to be cut and opened.
                   the Abſceſſion being already come to Suppuration, or chaunged, or ſtrongly compact together, if the matter, or any other baggage therin conteined, be not diſcuſſed & diſſolued, or if, in conuenient ſeaſon, and while the occaſiō is offered, it be not opened without the labour of the hand, you muſt make an iſſue by inciſion for that, which otherwiſe will not be digeſted. But this thing chiefly is to be proued and interpriſed, if there be feared any eroſion or gnawing to enſue,
                     
                        A mattered tumour is more ſaf
                              ••
                            opened with a knife, thē with burning medicines.
                     
                     
                        Lib. 13. Ther. A ſection imitating the oliue or mirtle leafe.
                     
                     
                        Great harte commeth by wide inciſions. VVhy ma
                              •
                           tered impoſthumes about the ſhare muſt be 
                              •
                           ut ouerthwart.
                     
                     
                        Seuen thinges to be diligētly marked in the apertion of an abſceſſion already ma
                              •
                           tered.
                     
                   or any other daunger yea if neceſſitie commandeth, it ought ſtraight way to be opened, and the matter to be drawen out, as ſpeadily & ſafely as is poſſible, for the cauſe before alleaged. But Apertion is made more ſafely with a knife, then with burning and ſcalding medicines, if nothing do hinder it, and commonly ſuch kind of phlegmonous tumours, being already turned into ſuppuration, are opened with a penknife. Moreouer Apertion, or the letting out of the matter ought to be done, by reaſon, both of the aboundance of matter there gathered together, and alſo of the affected place. But if any part of the mattered member, ſhall ſeeme to be putrified & rotten, it is needful to cut it of, to the forme or likneſſe of an oliue or mirtle leafe, that it may heale the more eaſily. But Galene commandeth to auoid & eſchew alwayes any great inciſions, who did heale ſuch kind of mattered tumours, both in the partes about the priuy membres, and alſo in the armeholes onely by inciſion (as he vſed chiefly to do) and by medicines that were of force to dry: Now if neede ſometime required to cut of ſomwhat, by reaſon of the plenty not only of matter, but alſo of the corrupted partes, he vſed no greater inciſion thē the breath of a great mirtle leafe. For by wide & large ſections, whē the member is brought vnto a ſcarre, beſides that it is made moſt filthie, it alſo becommeth very weake, and vnfit to moue withall. But theſe kind of ſections imitating the mirtle leafe are vſed in thoſe tumours eſpecially, which do matter vnder the armeholes, and about the ſhare. And in thoſe truely, the lenghtes of them muſt be drawen ouerwart, and not by the ſtraitneſſe or rightneſſe of the legge or body: for when we bend the legge or the arme, the skinne naturally doeth apply it ſelfe with it. But in other places, we alwayes almoſt do vſe ſimple inciſions. Now in this apertion or inciſion, ſeuen thinges are eſpecially to be marked, according to the conſent of the later Chyrurgians. Firſt that inciſiō be made in that place wherin the matter is conteined.
                  
                   The ſecond, that inciſion be made in the neither place of the tumour that the mattered and  corrupted filthineſſe may the better be voided out. The third, that it be made next the wrinckles  and proceſſe of the muſcles. The fourth, that you doe auoid and eſchew the ſenowes,  veines and arteries, as much as you can. The fifte, that all the matter be not brought out aboundantly together and all at once, eſpecially in great abſceſſions, leſt that, by to much emptying out and that ſodainly, and alſo by the reſolution of the ſpirites there follow weakneſſe  and faintneſſe. The ſixt, that the place be handled and touched very gentlely, and with as litle  paine as can be. The ſeuenth, that apertion being made, the place be wiped very cleane, and filled with the fleſh againe,
                     Two thinges conſidered of Galene in the apertion of a 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   and brought to a ſcarre after the maner of other vlcers. But Galene lib. 13. Therap. warneth vs chiefly to marke two thinges in the inciſion of a ſuppurated abſceſſion, writing ofter this maner. 1. If at any time the aboundance of matter execeedeth & ouercommeth your medicines, neither do they ſeeme vnto you to be able to digeſt all the corruptiō, it is requiſite to make an iſſue by inciſion for that matter which yeeldeth not to digeſtion,  in that place eſpecially, where it is moſt highe. 2. Moreouer in the inciſion alſo of an other abſceſſion, which pertaineth vnto fluxe, & yet reſpecting both the kindes▪ you muſt not forget to cut and launce that which is already come to ſuppuration: and then apply ſome medicine therto,
                     Detergentis.
                   which can dry it vp without eroſion or gnawing. But after the impoſthume be opened, you muſt vſe remedies that be of a ſcouring and cleanſing nature, & fit to purge the filthie vlcer, as are ſoft floxe or linte, and ſoft linnen, emplaiſtres, and ointmentes, which ſhalbe ſpoken of in their particular Chapters. At the firſt time, Guido did apply the yolke of an egge being thickened with alume zuccharinum, which medicine Guilielmus à Saliceto did alſo vſe.
                     Ointments are to be 
                           〈…〉
                         is opened.
                   But afterward you muſt come to the applying of mel roſatum, and inundificati
                        ••
                     m ex ap
                        •
                     o: and laſt of all, to vnguentum Apoſtolorum, and Aegyptiacum, if the matter ſo requireth. But aboue without, you muſt miniſter ointmentes, as baſilicon, diachylon, and diaphoenicon ſo commonly called, and other of that ſorte, which are appointed for vlcers. For when you haue cut an abſceſſion, it muſt be cured after the maner of other vlcers. Galene lib. 13. Therap. after the skinne was cut in thoſe phlegmonous tumours which chaunce about the arme holes & priuie members,
                     
                        The vſe of Māna & th
                              ••
                            after the inciſion, and the vertue of thē. The 
                              〈…〉
                            be eaſed.
                     
                     
                        VVhat things are to be layed to an vlcer.
                     
                   did fill the affected place with that medicine, which the Greekes call Manna, which is thuris purgamentum. For this hath a light adſtriction or binding. But you muſt alſo (ſayeth he) firſt aſſwage the launced member, (as much as you ſee cauſe,) firſt with fomentes, then with cataplaſmes, & ſtraight after with ſome moiſting medicine, or elſe with ſuch as do not much dry (all theſe being applied outwardly vpon the vlcer.) For in the very vlcer, both of Manna (as hath bene ſaid) & alſo of thoſe remedies which are taught & declared by vſing of linte, thoſe thinges truely are firſt to be laid on, which do moue and prouoke the matter, and afterward thoſe which do purge and clenſe. After the applying of which thinges, if there remaine any hollowneſſe, you muſt miniſter thoſe thinges which may fill the ſame: but if it fall out otherwiſe, you muſt vſe thinges to bring it to a ſcarre. Moreouer if the ſicke will not ſuffer inciſion to be made either with ſome bright inſtrument, or with penknife, by reaſon of the ſoftneſſe therof, then the apertion is to be finiſhed with burning medicines. For this purpoſe Auicene prayſeth the ſead of line or flaxe,
                     Auicenn
                           ••
                         in fine tract
                           •
                        . 1. 
                        
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        . 3. lib. 4. leuen, & doues dounge, which you may make more excellent and forcible, if you mingle them with a litle ſofte ſope, or with the filthineſſe that cōmeth of muſtard ſead. But that medicine which is called ruptorium or cauſticum, which is made of lime, and ſope, in this matter is moſt excellent, and obteineth greateſt fame. Hetherto haue we ſpoken of Tumours aboue nature generally, now it followeth that we intreate of the particular differences of them, as they follow in order.
            
            
               CAP. VII. Of a true Phlegmone, & of other tumours ingēdred of bloud.
               
                  HAVING ſpoken generally of thoſe Tumours, which conſiſt aboue nature, it is conuenient, that we entreate particularly of the differences or euery one of them, taking our Exordium from Phlegmone, as a tumour, which chaunceth very often,
                     Phlegmone taken two wayes.
                   and exciteth (as Galene ſayeth) very daungerous ſymptomates. Therfore Galene lib. 1. de morbis & ſymptomatis, taketh phlegmone two kind of

wayes. One way generally ofter the maner of the Auncient writers which were before his time (that is) for euery kind of inflammation of any member, and for any heating or burning,
                     
                        Phlegmone taken for phlogoſit. 2.
                     
                        Phlegmone alſo is taken for an inflammation comming of the beſt bloud. Phlegmone. 2. 1. Vera. 2. Non vera.
                     
                   (that is) for euery hote and flaming diſpoſition, which the Greekes do properly call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Another way, both with Galene and other late writers, it is taken for a true and pure tumour ingendred of bloud, that is, the beſt, and that alſo, which reteineth but meane thickeneſſe or groſſeneſſe. And this truely borroweth his name of the kind therof, and of the Latines it is called diuerſly by reaſon of kind, Inflammatio, of the Greekes abſolutely, Phlegmone. But this, after the minde and conſent of the later ſorte is two fold, videlicet, Vera, & non vera. A true Phlegmone is cauſed of good bloud, which is the beſt both in qualitie, and ſubſtance or eſſence, but yet more aboundant then naturally ſhould happen to the member. But phlegmone which is not a true and lawfull phlegmone, is cauſed of naughty and vnnaturall bloud. For bloud is a hot and a moiſt humour proceeding from a more temperate parte of the very Chylus, which is a certaine iuice that commeth of the meate in the firſt digeſtiō.
                     Sanguis quid.
                   And it is two wayes: Naturall and not naturall. Naturall bloud is a hote and moiſt humour,
                     Sanguis quo
                        
                           •
                        uple
                           •
                        .
                   ſlender and meane in ſubſtance, but of a very red colour, in ſauour and taſt it is ſweete, gentle and good. But that bloud is ſaid to be vnnaturall, which differeth or digreſſeth from the former deſcription of bloud: yet notwithſtanding conteining it ſelfe within the boundes of his breath and largneſſe, which if it doth once paſſe, it is no more to be called a bloud, but ſome other humour. But bloud doeth chaunce to degenerat from his proper nature two kind of wayes.
                     Bloud 
                           〈◊〉
                         degenerate 
                           〈…〉
                         proper nature two waies.
                   The firſt way is (as they terme it) in it ſelfe, that is, in reſpect of it ſelfe, (his proper ſubſtance being chaunged without any commixtion with an other.) The ſecond way is by an other, or in reſpect of an other. And yet it conſiſteth two wayes by it ſelfe, (that is to ſay) either becauſe the ſubſtance therof is more thicke, or more thinne then it ought to be: or becauſe it is burnt, and that which is thinneſt of it, is turned into melancholie, but that which is thicke into choler, and that without ſeparation. But in reſpect of an other, bloud becometh not vnnaturall, whenas an other humour is mingled withall. Which may happen many wayes, according as the diuerſe kindes of choler, fleume or melācholy may be commixed with bloud. By which thinges it is manifeſt, that of bloud,
                     Foure differences of tumours cauſed of bloud.
                   there are ingendred foure kindes or differences of tumours aboue nature. Firſt, of naturall and good bloud, there is ingendred a true phlegmone. But of bloud, which is corrupted through the admixtion of other humours, there doe grow three differences of that kind of phlegmone, which is neither true nor lawfull: becauſe that the three other humours (that is to ſay) fleume, choler and melancholie may be eaſily commixed with bloud. Therefore if melancholie be mixed with bloud, it is called phlegmone Scirrhodes, if choler, (which then is conflated of both kindes) it is called phlegmone Eryſipelatodes, if fleume, is is termed phlegmone Edematodes. But of bloud, which is filthie and corrupted through the aduſtion and corruption of his owne proper ſubſtance, according to the maner of the thinneſſe or thickneſſe therof, there are ingendred either Carbuncles, which are called of the Greekes Anthraces, or elſe Gangraenae and Sphacelus, which we call Cancres. Of the which diſeaſes we will ſpeake of hereafter, in that which followeth.
            
            
               CAP. VIII. Of the cauſes, Signes, and Iudgementes of Phlegmone.
               
                  THERE are three cauſes of phlegmone:
                     The cauſes of phlegmone.
                   as there are alſo of all other tumours beſides nature, which doe chaunce through the defluxion of humours. videlicet. 1. Primitiua, which we call both praegreſſa and euidens: 2. Antecedens: 3. and Coniuncta. Euident cauſes of inflammation are outward cauſes: as,1. Praegreſſa.
                   beating or belking, diruption, conuulſion, breaking or bruſting, a wound, a voluntary vlcer, a looſeneſſe, and other of that ſorte, which doe prouoke fluxe, by exciting paine in the affected member. The Antecedent cauſe, as aboundance of bloud,2. Antecedens.
                   which is good and faultleſſe, as when the veines touche much together to the moderate repletion of the Arteries. For then is bloud prouoked (as a certaine ſuperfluous thing,) to flow and deſcend to ſome member which is either weake, or immoderatly hote, or affected with paine, where it is

thruſt, and abideth compact together, vnleſſe it be by and by repreſſed from the beginning, (as we haue ſaid before in our generall Chapiter:) to the which we muſt therfore haue continuall acceſſe, that we may attaine to a more perfect knowledge of particular tumours, wherof we now entreate.3. Coniuncta.
                   The Coniunct or continent cauſe, is the bloud it ſelfe, which is already ſtuffed in the affected place. The markes or tokens of phlegmone are the tumour, or the augmenting of the member aboue the naturall habite,
                     Signes of a true phlegmone.
                   vehement heate, ſo that the member ſeemeth to burne. There appeareth redneſſe in the outward partes, ſuch as is wont to come through bathes which are made hote either with the fire, or by ſome other meanes. There is extreme paine, vnleſſe the member hath altogether a dull ſenſe. There is alſo greiuous beating,
                     Lib. de Tumo. praeter naturā. & 13. method.
                   and pulſation very vehement inwardly. There is alſo extenſion or ſtreatching out of the member, which not onely we alone haue found out, but alſo the patient him ſelfe may perceiue by his owne feeling. There is furthermore reſiſtance of the member if it be touched, after the maner of extenſion. There be alſo other ſuch like ſignes, which doe teſtifie that aboundance of bloud is preſent in ſome parte of the bodie.
                     Foure times of phlegmone.
                   
                  Phlegmone hath foure times, 1. the beginning, 2. the increaſing, 3. the ſtate, 4. and the declination: except at the leaſt waye, fluxe hath recourſe within, or it be ſtraight waye repreſſed by repulſiue medicines. But when it ſhall lightly paſſe ouer theſe foure times,
                     Iudicia.
                   it is needfull, either to reſolue and draw out the matter of it, or to bring it to ſuppuration, or elſe to putrifie and rotte it, or to turne it into a ſcirrhous and ſtony hardneſſe. And truly the ſignes of all theſe are to be ſought out of the Chapter that intreateth generally of them: where the markes of all times, and the meanes to finiſh tumours aboue nature, (which they commonly call apoſtemata) be declared and expreſſed.
                     Symptom
                           ••
                        es 
                           〈◊〉
                         hinder 
                           〈◊〉
                         cure of phlegmone.
                   But phlegmone is accompanied with many other euill ſymptomates, which do altre and chaunge the order of his cure, as are, vehement paine, which doeth greatly occupy the ſenſible parte, recourſe of the matter from the kernells (which the Greekes call Adenae, and commonly they be called Emunctoria) to the internall partes. Alſo mortification of the affected member (which they call corruptio eſthiomenica) proceeding of too much refrigeration, and of a ſtrong compacting or ſtuffing of the matter, which did cauſe the inflammation. Alſo a ſtony and almoſt an indiſſoluble hardneſſe, commonly called Sclirotica, which proceedeth through a certaine ouerthwart and vntoward diſſolution of the thinner humour.
                     Ca
                           •
                        . 5. Wherfore in curing tumours, which conſiſt aboue nature, we muſt diligently oftentimes marke and conſider, how farre we meane to proceed in the matter, and what accidentes may chaunge vnlooked for, that ſo, we may chiefly inſiſt, and be occupied about that moſt, which appeareth, and is moſt vrgent. Which Galene hath admoniſhed vs of very well lib. 2 ad Glauconem, and 13. Therape. ſpeaking after this ſorte: In diſeaſes, whoſe reſolution is difficult, and hard, it is to be feared, leaſt ſome remnaunt of them be left behind which is very hard. Wherfore in euery reſolution, we muſt diligently conſider, into what thing euery tumour, whoſe cure is once begon, may be chaunged. For that cure which is attempted by medicines, that do mightely dry, doeth leaue very hard knobbs, which art hard to remoue hetherto Galene. But the time requireth, that we now declare the cure of phlegmone.
               
            
            
               CAP. IX. The order of curing Phlegmone cauſed of the defluxion of humours, affecting the outvvard partes of the body.
               
                  
                     The methode of curing phlegmone which is yet in generation.
                  
                  SEEING that inflammatio, which is called of the Greekes properly phlegmone, doeth ingender and grow through the influxion of bloud, happening more aboundantly to ſome member then nature requireth, and fluxe alſo (phlegmone being yet but beginning to raigne) is partly in begetting, and partly begotten already: there muſt needes truely be a double conſideration in the cure of the phlegmone being yet but beginning (that is to ſay) to empty out and auoid that which hath flowed already, and to hinder and ſtoppe that which is now a flowing. Moreouer,
                     By what meanes fluxe is ſtayed.
                   we ſhall ſtoppe fluxe, if we ſhall draw backe and repell the humour that floweth, if we ſhall adde ſtrength to the afflicted member, and if we ſhall ſeeke to remoue that which cauſeth

the fluxe. We ſhall draw it backe,1. Retractio.
                   and bring it into a contrary defluxion of other humours, by bloud letting, if ſtrength and age will ſuffer it, but if not, we ſhall do it by applying cupping glaſſes, or by vſing bindinges and frictions, or by heating thoſe partes which haue a direct paſſage to the affected parte. We ſhall bring backe and repell fluxe,2. Repulſio.
                   by miniſtring thoſe medicines, which are able to driue and turne the fluxe another way.3. Cauſae ſu
                           •
                        
                        motio.
                   We ſhall alſo remoue the cauſes that do bring or fetch defluxion to the member already infeſted with phlegmone, by confirming and ſtrengthening the member, if it be weake, by vſing aſtriction if it be to looſe, by cooling it if it be hote, as it is wonte to be, by eaſing the paine if it be vehement, and by emptying the whole body with bloud letting, if it doeth abound with bloud, and if it ſendeth infection to the member: of all which thinges we will ſpeake by and by. But we doe empty out and auoid that which is flowed already,
                     
                        Vacuation of that which is flowed already.
                     
                     
                        Gal. Ther. 13.
                   and hath gotten it ſelfe into the affect parte, not onely by thoſe medicines which do digeſt, that is, which do diſcuſſe and reſolue, but alſo by thoſe remedies which do bind together and refrigerate. And truely in phlegmonous tumours now beginning, we muſt rather vſe (ſayeth Galene) cooling and aſtrictiue medicines, then thoſe which do concoct & digeſt, and ſo much the rather, if that, which floweth be not of a thicke ſubſtance. But if bloud be greatly compact together in that parte which phlegmone hath caught and taken vp, you muſt not apply any longer repercuſſiue remedies (as we ſaid before) but then it is conuenient to vſe thoſe which can digeſt. Alſo in an old & inueterate inflammation, which after the euacuation of the whole body, & other ſome fit cure, hath lefte behind it a certaine hardneſſe and blackneſſe in the member: it is not vnprofitable (Galene alſo affirming the ſame) to take away the bloud by ſcarification.
                     Scarificatio.
                   And theſe thinges haue we ſpoken briefly and by a generall methode concerning the cure of inflammations that do happen through the defluction of humours, which the Greekes properly are wonte to call phlegmone: which thinges may be ſufficient to content a reaſonable Phyſition, & one which is exerciſed in this kind of ſtudie. But becauſe we haue taken in hand to write theſe thinges for the practitioners of Chyrurgie, and not for the learned onely, it ſhall not be amiſſe, neither any thing from our purpoſe, if after this generall and compendious methode, we ſet downe more particularly thoſe thinges which not onely the auncient Phyſitions, but alſo the later ſorte of Chyrurgians hath left behind them in writing.
                     Foure intētiō
                        
                           •
                         in the cure of phlegmone.
                   Therfore aboue the generall rule (as they terme it) the Chyrurgians of our age are wont to reduce the order of curing phlegmone, into foure braunches or particular intentions: that is to ſay, into a iuſt obſeruation of a good diet, 2. the ſtopping of fluxe, or the turning away of the matter  which went before. 3. the emptying out of the humour, which hath already interteined him  ſelfe in the member (which they call materia coniuncta.) 4. and the correcting or amending of  the ſimptomates.1. The firſt intention is an order in diet.
                   The firſt intention therefore is made perfit by the due vſing or adminiſtration of ſix thinges, commonly called vnnaturall thinges, and by the vſing of thoſe thinges alſo, which are ſaid to be annexed vnto them. And theſe thinges, which are ſix in number, called of the Phyſitions res non naturales,
                  
                     Res non naturales.
                   (as hath bene declared from the beginning of this treatiſe) are, the ayre, meate and drinke, mouing and reſt, ſleepe and watching, emptying and filling, the affections of the minde or the accidentes. All which thinges (becauſe phlegmone doth commonly prouoke feuers) ought to pertaine vnto coldneſſe and moderate moiſtneſſe. For which cauſes we haue thought good to ſet downe theſe preceptes following. Let the ſicke be in a pure and cleare ayre, & that ſomewhat cold. Let him keepe a thinne diet, cold,
                     Aer.
                   and moderatly moiſt. Let him drinke ſmall ale, or beere or other ſmall drinkes.
                     Cibus potus.
                   But if a vehement feuer ſhall haue any acceſſe (which is wonte often to happen) let him altogether abſtaine from wine. Let him not exerciſe,
                     Mo
                           •
                        us. Qui
                           •
                        s. Somnus. Repletio. In
                           •••
                        ti
                           •
                        . Animi pathem
                           •••
                        . Venus.
                   or moue that member which is be ſet with phlegmone. Let him be quiet as much as he can, eſpecially if there be very great aboundance of humours in the body. Let him keepe a meaſure in ſleeping and watching: and let him ſhunne ſleeping on the day time eſpecially about none. Let him diligently beware of dronkenneſſe and gluttony. Let the belly be alwayes kept ſofte and ſoluble, and now and then let it be waſhed with cliſters, if neede require. Let him flye, anger, cryinges out, and wrathe, as deadly enemies. Let him abſtaine from venereous actes, as a mortall foe.
               The ſecond order in curing Phlegmone, which is the turning away of the fluxe,2. The 
                           〈◊〉
                         of the fluxe is the ſecond intention.
                   is diſpatched by letting of bloud, if ſtrength and age doeth ſuffer. But in all members of the bodie,

whether you intend to reuell (that is) to draw backe among an other way, or to turne it from that place at the ſide,
                     A veine is alwayes to be cut directly.
                   either ſtreight ouer againſt the place, or directly forth (which is called in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) a veine muſt alwayes be cut, although there be great aboundance: but directly, the right ſides do aunſwere to the right partes, and the left to the left. Therefore if ophthalmia doeth annoy the right eye, or the ſquinancie doeth affect the right ſide of the throte, the ſhoulder veine, or ſome other in his place (if that doeth not appeare) muſt be cut in the right arme, by and by at the beginning of the fluxe. But if a humour doeth flow in the knee, you muſt cut a veine in the elbow either the outward or the middle veine except you meane to ſcarifie the other legge, or breake the veine a ſunder in it, as Galene counſeleth in a certaine place.
                     The choice of bloud letting is declared of the affected parte.
                   Therefore the election of the cutting any veine, and the inuention to turne the humour another way, (which Hippocrates calleth antiſpaſis) is manifeſted and declared by the affected parte, and by the place or ſituation of the member that is to be cured, as Galene 13. and 14. meth. med. and in other places, doeth oftentimes teach. But that body, which phlegmone occupieth, not onely when it is plethorike and full of humours, but alſo when the greatneſſe of the euil doth exhorte vs to it, (though it be but meanely ſtuffed with humours,) we muſt empty and euacuate by letting of bloud, if we will follow the aduiſe of Galene, who lib. 13. meth. med. commandeth that, it ſhould be ſo, thus writing. Paine truely, and the heate of the member wherin phlegmone hath ſetled him ſelfe, (although the whole body be void of excrementes) do happen by reaſon of the fluxe. But then it is expedient to do it but meanly. (that is) to draw fourth bloud and to make euacuation, no further then it ſhall beſt agree with the age and nature of the patient. Further, you muſt haue conſideration both of the time of the yeare, of the nature of the ayre wherin the ſicke remaineth, and alſo of the former cuſtome of the man. Alſo theſe do profit not a litle to draw backe the bloud that floweth to the affected parte, walkinges, frictions, and binding of the appoſite member, but firſt chiefly the detraction of bloud, (as hath bene ſaid.) Therefore if phlegmone appeareth in the handes, the legges are to be exerciſed, bound and rubbed, if in the legges, the handes muſt be alſo ſo vſed. But theſe thinges belong more vnto the Phyſition then the Chyrurgian.
               
                  3. The third intention is the euacuation of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         or alread
                           •
                         compact in the member.
                  We now diſpatch the third ſcope or intention, in the beginnings of phlegmone, onely by applying repulſiue thinges to that member which laboureth with the inflammation (excepting theſe caſes before rehearſed.) For that which is filled with corrupted matter (as Galene ſayeth) is emptied out, not only by thoſe medicines which do digeſt, but alſo by thoſe which do bind and refrigerate: as be thoſe, which are called repellentia and regerentia repulſiues, and reſtrictiues. But in the increaſing therof at the preſent intention, (that is) to emptie out that, which is flowed, and alſo to ſtoppe, that no more doeth abound, you muſt ioyne digeſtiue medicines with repreſſiues:
                     Repreſſiues in the increaſe, muſt exceede digeſtiues.
                   but yet ſo, that the aboundance and ſtrength of the one may yet preuaile with the other. But in the ſtate they muſt be equally cōmixed together by euen portiōs, and ſomewhat more milde and mitigating remedies muſt be applied, if paine be vehement. But in the ende and declination of the ſtate, it is requiſite to euacuate by digeſtiues onely that which is compact together, if that phlegmone muſt be ended by reſolution or diſcuſſion. If truely it doeth turne into abſceſſion,
                     If phlegmone doth turne into abſceſſion.
                   and that it cannot be, that the gathering together and erup
                     •
                  ion of the matter ſhould be letted, it ſhalbe lawfull to vſe medicines which can both mattre, open, and clenſe the vlcer. Furthermore thoſe remedies which do dry, are profitable in the ende of both the euills (that is) of phlegmone and abſceſſus, for they do altogether conſume that which remaineth of the humour, but when inciſion is made in the abſceſſiō which is already come to ſuppuration, you muſt lay on ſuch a medicine as may dry without eroſion or gnauſing,
                     Repulſiues are to be vſed in the beginning of phlegmone. Oxycraton.
                   (as hereafter ſhalbe ſaid.) But in thoſe phlegmonous tumours which now are but in the beginning▪ the moſt apteremedy to repell and driue backe, is oxycraton in Galene, which the Latines call puſca aquoſa. It is a mixture of water and vineger, ſo tempered together; that it may be drunke: and then (a ſponge being wet and laid in this oxycratu
                        •
                     , muſt be applied to that parte, where phlegmone is. But in ſtead of oxycratum, by the counſell of Galene; we may take ſharpe wine, or apply cold thinges only, to the partes, which are about the ſinewes.
                     Lib. 13. Meth. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   Theſe are the wordes of Galene. In thoſe members which are about the ſinewes, it ſhalbe ſufficient, in the beginning of phlegmone, to lay on a ſponge dipped either in cold water, wherwith a litle vineger is mingled▪ or in water onely, or in ſharpe and ſoure wine.

For the ſame purpoſe alſo this cataplaſme of the ſame Galene very effectuall,
                     Galeni cataplaſma, lib. 2. ad Glau.
                   made of ſengreene and the rindes of pomegranates ſodden in wine, of rh
                        •
                     , that is, ſumach, and polenta. This, by reſtraining doth repell that which floweth, & by drying doth empty out that which is conteined in the tumour, and both wayes it doth ſtrengthen and corroborate the affected partes. This remedie hath bene deſcribed of the later ſorte: of Auicene ofter this ſorte,
                     Fen. 3. lib. 4. trac. 1. cap. 3. as followeth, ℞. of the iuice of ſengreene, lb.j. of wine, that is thicke of ſubſtance, and ſharpe in taſte, lb.ſs. of barley meale, one quarte, of the rind of pomegranades, and ſumach poudered, ana. ℥.ſs. boile them and make a liniment. There is alſo another, which greatly auaileth for the ſame purpoſe, inuented of Haly Abbas, ℞. of ſantalum, white and red,
                     Haly Abbas Linimeruum.
                   ana. ʒ.iij. of memitha, which is called Glaucium. 
                  ʒ.ij. of terra cimol
                        •
                     a, and bole armoniacke, ana. ℥.j.ſs. let all be brayed into very fine flower or pouder, and well ſearced, then diſſolue them in the iuice of ſengreene, or purſelaine, or lettuce, and make a liniment.
                     Aliud.
                   Another alſo in the beginning of phlegmonous inflammations, very common and much vſed, which is very profitable for greene woundes, and bruiſes taken lately. It is made of the white of an egge, of oile of roſes, and of the diſtilled water of roſes, (that is) of roſe water, wherin you muſt wet fine cloutes, and lay them to the inflamed member, and let them be chaunged often. But there are many other medicines both ſimple and compound, which do profit in the beginning of phlegmone to reſtreigne and repell fluxe, which are to be ſought out of other Authours, which haue written of this thing. But theſe ſhall content vs for this time.
               Amongeſt the remedies which in the increaſe of phlegmone,
                  
                     Remedies to be vſed in the increaſing of phlegmone.
                   being outwardly applied do greatly helpe, oile of roſes is marueilouſly effectuall, (the Greekes call it rhodinon.) For this doeth partely draw backe, and partely doeth digeſt through the vapour: bycauſe it perfectly holdeth a midle nature betwene the oile and the roſes. Therefore in oile of roſes there is a certaine aſtriction, which cannot (ſayeth Galene) ouergo the weake partes of the tumour:
                     Lib. 3. de 
                           〈◊〉
                         medic.
                   but when they haue pearced ſomewhat deeper, it beginneth then to worke outwardly according to the ſtrength, both to thruſt together, to draw into one place, and to thicken greatly, wherby it commeth to paſſe that in the augmenting of phlegmonous tumours,
                     Oile of roſes a preſent remedie in the increaſe of phlegmone.
                   oile of roſes, is a moſt excellent and ready helpe. In the augmenting of phlegmone there is another in Auicene very profitable, ℞. of the leaues of mallowes. M.j. of wormewood, roſes, ana. ℥.ſs, of barely meale. ℥.j. of oile of chammomil. quart. ſs. ſeath them, and braie them together, and bring them to the faſhion of a ſofte emplaiſtre. Another of the ſame, ℞. of wine boiled either to the halfe or the third parte, (one we call ſapa, the other defrutum.) quart. j. roſe water, and vineger, ana. quart. ſs. ſaffron. ʒ.ij. let them be a litle het ouer a ſofte fire, then ſtraine them, and dippe clouth in the liquour of that decoction, which you muſt applie to the phlegmonous member after the maner of an epitheme. Moreouer ſuch kind of remedies, which are vſed in the increaſing of the inflammation, and haue their power and vertue commixed together of repreſſiue and digeſtiue medicines, ought ſeeldomer to be remoued and chaunged, then thoſe which repell the matter, being miniſtred in the beginning of phlegmone.
               
               Actius, in the vigour or ſtate of phlegmone, and when there is vehement paine felte,
                     VVhat things do helpe in the ſtate of phlegmone.
                   hath ſet downe theſe remedies: as mallowes, mingled with a litle bread and with oile of roſes. Alſo melilote boiled in the licour called paſſum, and applied with a litle bread, of the like vertue (ſayeth he) are dates ſodden in paſſum, and mingled with bread and oile of roſes: Another alſo, which digeſteth through breathing, in the vigour of phlegmone very effectuall, ℞. pellitory of the wall, mallowes, ana. M.j. fine branne the flour of meale, ana. p.j. fengreeke, dill, ana. ℥.ſs. oile of chammomill. quart. ſs. let them be boiled in wine, and well braied together, till they be well incorporate, and make an emplaiſtre. Another taken out of Galene,
                     Emplaſtrum Galeni.
                   
                  lib. 13. Therap. ℞. of the crummes of bread made of corne. lb.j. ſteipe it in hote water the ſpace of one houre, then ſtreigne it, and commixe therwith of the beſt hony, quar.j. and make it to the forme of a cataplaſme. This doeth diſſolue and mitigate paine. Auicene counſeleth to miniſter in the rigour of phlegmone, vnguentum baſilicon, & that which is made of the iuices therof called diachylon: but the one is good to mollifie, the other to ripen and bring to matter: although notwithſtanding both of them do cary with them a digeſting qualitie. But theſe and other ſuch remedies, which are miniſtred to diſſolue that which is already flowed, and to eaſe paine, becauſe they are of a very moiſt nature, muſt be chaunged very ſeeldome.

Furthermore, when as by the remedies before mencioned, the humour which is falen into the member that is troubled with phlegmone, is diſſolued and diſcuſſed, and the tumour together with the extenſion therof is deminiſhed, and the griefe ſomewhat aſſwaged, then it is to be iudged that the declination of the inflammation is at hand, at which time you muſt vſe onely diſcuſſiue thinges,
                     VVhen remedies muſt be vſed in the decla
                           •
                        ation of phlegmone.
                   as are wild mallowes bruiſed annointed, raiſons (the kernells being taken out▪) applied with bread and a litle hony, and barely meale vſed alſo with hony. Alſo moiſt wooll, flaxe, a ſponge, or ſome ſuch like thing, wet in hote wine, then ſtreigned or wringed, you muſt miniſter it: for all theſe haue an excellent diſcuſſiue nature, and doe not prouoke paine. But if, by reaſon of the ſtubburneſſe and hardneſſe of the diſeaſe, the affected place doth conteine too great plenty of matter and that ſuch as reſiſteth reſolution, you muſt not by and by (as ſome do) breake forth vnto Chyrurgie, that is, to make inciſion, or to ſeald it and burne it, but you muſt labour by all meanes poſſible, that the humour collected together may be digeſted and diſſolued by ſuch medicines as can worke this effect. For it is conuenient to attempt the digeſtion of the humour by ſuch medicines as can profit in that caſe, before you begin to cut the inflammation. But if the tumour will not yeeld to digeſtiue medicines, and no further hope doth remaine to diſſolue that which is compact in it, but the matter ſeemeth rather to pertaine vnto ſuppuration, you muſt come vnto thoſe, thinges which can ripen & procure matter.
                     VVhat reſolution is to be hoped for.
                   And we hope that a tumour (although it degenerate into abſeeſſion) may through the vapour be digeſted, if the matter which exciteth the ſame, be thinne and litle, and fute to be reſolued: or if it remaineth not any thing deeply within, and the skinne of the affected member be thinne. But if the humour be plentifull, and thicke, and lurketh very deepe, and the skinne alſo thicke, exhalation or reſolution is not to be hoped for.
                     Put 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   Therefore you muſt come vnto thoſe helpes which can ripen and prouoke matter, of which force is this cataplaſme, made of wheate meale, ſodden moderatly in water & oile: for this (Galene being our Authour) doeth ſpeedily bring to ſuppuration thoſe inflammations,
                     Lib. 2. ad Gla
                           •••
                        .
                   which will not yeeld to digeſtion, and it hath alſo a heate like vnto our heate, that is, temperate and meane, and by reaſon of the meale and oile (which haue a certaine clammy and glewiſh property, wherby in ſtopping the pores, they hinder the naturall heate of the member) it hath the force of an emplaiſtre, which two thinges are moſt required in medicines that do ripen and moue matter. There are ſome which do mingle with this cataplaſme a litle ſaffron to colour it. But if a tumour, by reaſon of the thicke & viſcous humours which are ſtuffed in it, be hardly brought vnto ſuppuration, this cataplaſme doeth notably helpe which is made of the decoction of the rootes of althea, and of figges that be ſweet and fat, which do reſemble the thickneſſe of hony,
                     Haly Abbas remembreth this cataplaſme.
                   commixed with wheat meale, as followeth, ℞. of the aforſaid decoction, lb.j. of wheat meale, lb.ſs. boile them throughly together, and bring them into the forme of a cataplaſme. But if in ſtead of wheate meale, you vſe barely meale or crible bread, which the Greekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , it more auaileth to diſcuſſe the inflammation then to bring it to ſuppuration (as Galene hath noted lib. ſecundo ad Glauconem.
                  
                     Ali
                           •
                        d.
                   There is another alſo excellently profitable to prouoke matter in the declination of phlegmone, which is commonly vſed of the common Chyrurgians,
                     A common cataplaſme.
                   ℞. of the barke of the roote of marſh mallowes, that is, of althea, of the roote of lillies, grownſwell, called in Greeke 
                     
                        •
                     rigeron, leaues of mallowes, ana. M.j. wheat meale, quar.j. of the meale of the ſead of flaxe. ℥.j. freſh ſwines greace, lb.ſs. ſeath the herbes in ſufficient quantitie of water, and bray them with the other thinges in a mortar, and make a cataplaſme. But if, (when the matter is gathered together and diſpatched,) the abſceſſion wherinto phlegmone is tourned, doeth not open of the owne accord: (the members now being free from the inflammation) you muſt go about to euacuate and empty out the matter which cannot be digeſted, with a penknife, or ſome ſuch inſtrument, or by ſome drawing medicine. Then you muſt bring the vlcer vnto a ſcarre, like vnto other vlcers, which you muſt do by cleanſing the ſore, by filling it with fleſh, and ioining it together, which at the laſt will cauſe a ſcarre. Moreouer, if the matter be thicke, which bringeth fourth the tumour, and very diſobedient to reſolution and digeſtion, and be exceedingly compact in the paſſages of the fleſh (as is wonte to be in continuall inflammations which be naughtely cured, the thinne parte of the humour being reſolued, and the thicke parte remaining ſtill in the paſſages, then you muſt not be afraid to vſe ſcarification, eſpecially (as

Galene admoniſheth lib. 2. ad Glauconem) whē hardneſſe, blueneſſe or blackneſſe do appeare.
               The fourth intention,
                     Symptomatum correctio.
                   which in the cure of phlegmone was propounded to the Chyrurgian & Phyſition, is the correction and remouing of the ſymptomates, which do ſodeinly come vpon the inflammation, and thoſe are paine, recourſe of the matter, wherof the tumour is raiſed, to the inward partes, putrefaction and corruption of the mattery member, and as it were a certeine ſtony hardneſſe remaining behind, by reaſon of ſome mightie drying & digeſting medicines. Therefore if vehement paine ſhall happen to the tumour,
                     Dolor.
                   you muſt labour by all meanes poſſible to mitigate and aſſwage the ſame, becauſe, (beſides that it weakneth the ſtrength, and hindreth the lawfull duties of the body) it prouoketh fluxe and draweth bloud vnto it. If paine therefore doth grieuouſly torment in phlegmone, ſtraight way you muſt lay on thoſe medicines,
                     Lenifiers of paine in phlegmone.
                   which can lenifie and eaſe the vehemencie of the paine without any hurte, as is this of Galene, which is made of the licour called paſſum, of oile of roſes, and a litle waxe melted with them both: but this is to be taken in moiſt wooll, which hath much oile in it, and to be miniſtred cold in Sommer, and hote in Winter, Therefore ſuch a medicine being tempered and applied (as is ſaid before) doth rarefie, extenuate, digeſt, and euacuate: it maketh the humour that is ſharpe, viſcous, groſſe, or plentifull, and which cleaueth to the aggreaued partes, to be equall conſtant and moderate, and it diſcuſſeth the thicke vapour which can find no fit iſſue, and ſo it mitigateth paine: it bringeth no hurte with his hear, for it maketh dull or taketh away the heate of the oile of roſes. Wherby it commeth to paſſe, that this remedie doeth aſſwage paine without doing any hurte, and diſprofiteth not the euill, as hote water, oile, and wheate meale, which thinges in an inflammation that happeneth with paine, cannot be profitable (as Galene witneſſeth.
                     Lib. 2. ad G
                           •
                        .
                  ) For theſe do looſen and releaſe through their heate and moiſture, and do reſolue the ſtrength of the member, wherby it is made more weake, and more prone and apt to interteine fluxe. To the ſame vſe (that is to alay the paine in phlegmone) you may apply affectually oile of roſes, yolkes of egges, crummes of white bread ſteiped in hote water, and then ſtreigne them, and commixe them with oile of roſes. Theſe alſo are a preſent remedie, mallowes ſodden in water, and mingled with branne and oile of roſes, or with oile of violettes.
                     Cr
                           •
                        cum.
                   But Auicene in mitigating euery paine vſeth ſaffron, which he profitably commixeth with aſſuaging medicines. Furthermore if the ſharpneſſe of paine be ſo great and vehement, that it cannot be eaſed with thoſe thinges, which becauſe they mitigate and lenifie paine, (the ſuccours of nature being ſtretched out) are properly called Anodyna & paregorica (that is) prouokers of ſleepe and helpers of paine: you muſt paſſe ouer vnto thoſe aides which we call narcotia, (that is) ſtupefactiues. Amongeſt the which we haue tried by daily experience beſides the authoritie of ſome writers,
                     N
                           •
                        ta de ſ
                           •
                        .
                   that henbane hath profiteth in this caſe marueilouſly, whoſe leaues you in muſt take, and bake them in the hote embers, then mingle with them freſh ſwines greace and apply them to the place. This doeth pacifie vehement paine, and bringeth plegmonous tumours vnto ſuppuration. But, while you attempt this thing, you muſt haue a diligent care leaſt you apply to much moiſture, becauſe it is a thing, which in the beginninges of inflammations, whē fluxe aboundeth with great griefe, is very pernicious (as we ſaid a litle before.
                     Recurſus 
                           •
                        ateriae ad interiora.
                  ) But if you feare recourſe of the matter, that exciteth phlegmone, to the inward partes, and that chiefly toward the principall members: you muſt cauſe him to come fourth by ſome drawing medicines, or elſe by applying cupping glaſſes, which doe draw vehemently from the inward partes.
                     Durities relicta.
                   But if by reaſon of vehement drying and digeſting medicines being raſhly applied to the inflammation, the relictes of the tumour do turne into Scirrhus: you ſhall boile in water the rootes of wild cucumber (which is commonly called in herbaries and ſhoppes cucumer aſininus) or of briony or of Aſarum, ſeathing them oftentimes alone by them ſelues (as Galene commaundeth) and ſometime putting to them fatte figges. Then commixe meale with water,
                     Galens cataplaſme for hard tumours.
                   to the which alſo put a litle ſuet, either of a gooſe or a cocke, but if there be not plentie of theſe at hand adde ſwines greaſe and make a cataplaſme. This doeth notably heale that ſchirrhous affect which through mightie drying & digeſting medicines in the member which phlegmone occupied, doeth ſtill remaine behind. Alſo the aforeſaid herbes together with the rootes of althaea, being, after a moderate boiling well mingled with bread and ſuet, and then applied, do diſcuſſe and diſſolue ſuch hardened tumours: as Galene doeth plainly teach lib. 2. ad Glauconem.
                  
Therefore if you feare, that plegmonous tumours, which are ſcarely, digeſted through their vapour, neither yet are eaſily concocted, be turned into Scirrhus: you muſt alwayes commixe with digeſtiues thoſe thinges which can mollifie and ſoften. Moreouer if any parte of the mattering member ſhall putrifie, you muſt ſtraightway cut it out, or elſe ſeeke to cure it by many deepe ſcatifications:
                     Putrefactio.
                   afterward you muſt ſprinkle on it ſalte water, and then lay on it an emplaiſter made of the meale of beanes or tares ſodden in oxymel. There be other thinges alſo to be proued in this caſe, which we will by and by ſet downe in the cure of Gangrena. But now it ſhalbe more profitable, if we comprehend the Chapters concerning the cure of ſuch phlegmonous affectes,
                     Galen. lib. 2. ad G
                           •
                        anc.
                   in ſome ſhorte ſentences. And firſt we will begin to declare the ſumme of the cure of phlegmone, being yet but beginning, and not yet vexing with  any grieuous paine. 1. Let the whole body be emptyed with conuenient purgations, and  eſpecially by letting of bloud, if nothing do let it. 2. Let the inflamed member be all to waſhed  and annointed with ſuch thinges, as haue power to driue backe the flowing of the humour.  3. Let the humour, which is conteined in the aggreaued place, be emptied out by drying and digeſting medicines.
                     The ſumme of the cure of phlegmone, when is 
                           〈…〉
                         much paine.
                   4. Let the affected parte, and thoſe alſo which are about it, be ſtrengthened and fortified. Now followeth the ſumme of the cure of the ſaid phlegmone, when it tormenteth with a more greiuous paine. 1. Whenas inflammation being cauſed through the defluxion of humours, doeth vexe with great paine, you muſt mitigate the vehemencie of the ſame without any hurte doing. 2. Then, you muſt not miniſter thoſe things,  which doe ſtrongly bind, or vnlooſen through their heat and moiſture, or reſolue ſtrength.  3. But you muſt apply to the inflamed place ſuch helpes, as, by meanly binding, can repell  that which floweth, and euacuate that which infeſteth the affected member. 4. Apply to the tumour, a ſponge dipped in ſharpe wine or poſca, that ſo you may preuent the paſſage of  the humour that floweth. 5. If theſe thinges ſhall profit, and yet the matter appeareth not any where, you muſt vſe ſoft and gentle emplaiſters, and thoſe eſpecially, which are made as  remedies againſt fluxe. 6. Amongeſt thoſe thinges, which are of power to drie, and repell the fluxe of bloud without paine, you muſt chooſe the beſt, as is that reſolution with oile of roſes, which it made of the ſtone chalcitis: then lay vpon it pure wooll dipped in ſharpe wine.  7. But when matter appeareth in the member, you muſt often applie the aforeſaid cataplaſme,  or that rather, which is made of barely meale. 8. If the aboundance of thicke matter doeth exceed the medicines ſo that there is no hope of reſolution you muſt make an iſſue for that which yeeldeth not vnto digeſtion in that place eſpecially, where it is higheſt.  9. After inciſion, you muſt drie the wound, if paine be not vrgent, and clenſe it and ſcoure it  without greife. 10. If after inciſion, paine be vehement, you muſt firſt aſſuage it with fomentes, then with a cataplaſme, ſtraight after with ſome moiſt medicine, or with ſuch a one  as dryeth not. 11. If the member be ſtill enflamed, lay on a cataplaſme made of a certaine pulſe called chittes, which doeth empty out and driue backe.
            
            
               CAP. X. Of a Carbuncle, and a Cancre, and of the maladie named Sphacelus, all vvhich they call ſanguineae puſtulae, 1. bloud puſhes.
               
                  
                     
                        De Carbuncul
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Gangrena &, Sphacelus doe follow great phlegmones.
                     
                  
                  SEEING that we haue intreated aboundantly, as much as pertaineth to a Chyrurgian, of Phlegmone, which is the firſt difference of inflammations, and moſt incident to mans body: it now remaineth that we ſpeake firſt of Carbunculus, which is called in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : next of Gangrena, the Cancre, and laſt, of Sphacelus, (which with the expounder of Auicene they commonly call eſthiomenon) for that hath his beginning of a bloudy fluxe, as phlegmone hath, and doeth prouoke a moſt ſharpe feuer, but theſe are wonte oftentimes to acompanie great phlegmones, as Galene libello de Tumoribus praeter naturam, and in many other places hath diligently noted.
                     The generatiō and deſcriptiō of a Carbūcle.
                   A Carbuncle therefore proceedeth of the flowing of bloud, which is blacke, thicke, filthie, burning, and exceedingly hote, with the which if there be mingled but certaine thinne humours: there are raiſed vp on the out ſide of the ſkinne whelkes or

puſhes, like thinges that be burned or ſcalded,
                     
                        Carbunclus de plex.
                     
                     
                        Signes of a Carbuncle.
                     
                   and then this inflammation is called Carbunculus cum puſtula, the Carbuncle with the puſhe, which euill truely doeth happen very often. In the meane time notwithſtanding it beginneth (although ſeeldome) without puſhe or puſhes: but then is cauſed a cruſtie or hard vlcer: I ſaye without puſhe or puſhes,1. Vlcus cruſtoſum.
                   becauſe ſometime there ariſeth with this euill one onely puſhe of ſome greatneſſe, which being broken, the vlcer is brought fourth with a ſcurſe or ſcabbe:2. Some great whelkes, ſome ſmall.
                   but oftentimes not one puſhe alone doeth breake out, but many litle and ſclender ones, ſticking thicke in the member like vnto the ſeades of hirſe: which being bruſt fourth, there doeth likewiſe ariſe a certaine cruſtie vlcer, ſuch as hote iron doeth cauſe. But betwene their beginning, before that the puſhes doe appeare, they trouble the member throughly.3. The colour of the c
                           •
                        uſt either earthy or blacke.
                   Now theſe ſcales or ſcurfe doe ſometime receiue an aſhye or earthly colour, ſometime blackneſſe, and in that place the ſkinne cannot be eaſed, but it is, as it were faſtened to the inner fleſh. The fleſh alſo about it, is brought into an exceeding hote inflammation, which the Greekes call Phlogoſis, and is blacke in colour, and ſhineth after the maner of lime or pitche,4. The fleſh blacke abou
                           •
                         it.
                   as though there were a litle blacke commixed with a great quantitie of redde. This colour is cauſed altogether of melancholie. And theſe truely are the ſignes and tokens of a Carbuncle drawen from the very affecte it ſelfe,5. Greeuous paine.
                   to the which alſo may be added a very greeuous and vehement paine of the afflicted member, as though it were bound with ſtrong chaines. They alſo which are thus affected doe neceſſarily fall into a feauer, and that ſooner, then they,6. A vehement feauer.
                   which are vexed with Phlegmone Eryſipelatoſa. But if any poiſon doeth lurke within (as oftentimes it chaunceth) the ſicke perſons are miſerably tormented with perbraking and continuall vomiting,7. Nauſeae.
                   together with a want of appetite and lothing of meate.8. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . There are preſent alſo with them quaking of the hearte, panting or mouing of the ſtomache, and an often fainting of courage.9. VVante of ſtomache.
                   This euill is called properly of the Chyrurgians of our age, Anthrax,
                  10. Ca
                           •
                        dis tremor.
                   differing from Carbunculus, by reaſon of the malice and cruelty of the euill (as they pleaſe.) Whenas in very deede 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   among the Greekes is the very ſame, that Carbo,
                  11. 
                        〈…〉
                     . or Carbunculus is among the Latines. Therefore it is ſuperfluous to diſtinguiſh, and to handle in diuerſe Chapters the ſignes and cure of them (which all Chyrurgians almoſt doe vſe at this time.
                     
                        Carbuncle 
                              〈…〉
                           .
                     
                     1. VV
                              •
                           en a Carbunc
                              •
                           e 
                              •
                           s m
                              •
                           ſt deadly, (the iudgemēt therof being taken from the affected p
                              •
                           ace.)
                     
                     2. Another iudgement taken from the affected place.
                     
                     3. Iudgement of the colour.
                     
                     4. Iudgement of the accidentes.
                     
                  ) But theſe Carbuncles doe chiefly ariſe of violent cauſes killing the people ſodenly, and they follow a peſtilent plague. Wherefore there is required a diligent heede or care about them, neither in any caſe muſt they be neglected. Moreouer although 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or euery Carbuncle be a ſharpe diſeaſe, daungerous and contagious: yet the worſt of all and the moſt deadly is that of Auicene, which doeth ariſe in the pureſt places and neere to the principall members. For it is to be feared, that this venemous matter which exciteth the Carbuncle, doeth ſodeinly returne to the inward partes, and to ſome principall member: which if it ſhall happen, the ſicke is in great daunger of his life, eſpecially if any euill ſignes ſhall bewraye the ſame. But if the exhalation therof be onely filthie and corrupted with abhominable poyſon, it is enough to kill the man. If a Carbuncle chaunceth about the ſtomache, or about the cheekes or lawes, it ſodeinly oftentimes (as Celſus ſayeth) burſteth out the ſtomache. And leſſe deadly is that Carbuncle in Auicene, which appeareth firſt redde, and then yelow or of orenge colour. But if it waxeth blue or blacke, it killeth almoſt euery man, and there is none that is iudged more daungerous of the one nature then it. If the Accidentes, which are wonte to accompanie this diſeaſe, be very much remitted or releaſed there is ſome hope of recouerie. But if they be ſtill more and more continually ſtretched out, and made more vehement, then truely the matter is in great deſpaire.
            
            
               CAP. XI. Of the cure of a Carbuncle.
               GALENE lib. method med. 14. & ſecundo ad Glanconem,
                  
                     The cure of a Carbūcle muſt be begun by bloud letting.
                   commandeth that the cure of a Carbuncle (hauing ſet downe a conuenient order of diette) muſt be begun with bloud letting by and by at the beginning (if none of thoſe thinges doe let it, which

are wonte to forbidde the cutting of a veine) who alſo willeth to draw bloud euen to the fainting of the hearte. For it profiteth muche thoſe that be troubled with this euill: and this alwayes is to be marked,
                     Ven
                           •
                         è 
                           •••
                        ecto ſecunda.
                   that the veine be ſtrooken directly againſt the vlcer. But the chooſe of the veine is manifeſted vnto vs of the affected member (as we haue ſaid in the cure of Phlegmone.) Therefore in that matter, euen a ſkilfulll Phyſition muſt take counſell of the Chyrurgian, who hath the knowledge to declare, from what place and how much bloud is to be drawen out. The veine (as it behoueth) being cutte, if nothing (as I ſaid) doe hinder you,
                     Deepe ſcarification.
                   it ſhall not be amiſſe to ſcarifie the ſaid tumour, vſing ſomewhat deepe cuttes or woundes by reaſon of the thickneſſe of the malicious humour, (that is) ſuch cuttes as are ſomewhat deeper then ordinarie (as it pleaſeth Galene.) There are ſome, which would haue ſcarification made in the cruſtie or hard vlcer onely, and then they ſtraight waye ſprinckle thoſe inciſions with hote ſalte water,
                     
                        Sprinckling of hote ſalte water.
                     
                     
                        Arſonicum. Sanguiſugae.
                     
                   that bloud might not meete together in them or encreaſe, but that it might be emptied out. Sometime alſo they applie ſome gnawing medicine, as is arſenike, which in this caſe among the reſt hath the greateſt vertue, but ſome doe miniſter to the ſcarified place horſleches or bloud ſuckers. But ſtrong repulſiues are in no wiſe to be vſed or applied to the aggreaued member (although refrigeration be needefull which in deede doeth belong vnto the inflammation.
                     Fluxe in a Caerbuncle cannot be turned away, neither ought it, Lib. 14 Ther.
                  ) For you cannot ſo turne awaye the fluxe or preuent the malice hereof, becauſe of the thickneſſe of the humour. And if at any time you ſhall doe it, you ſhall finde ſome other naughtie humour (as Galene ſayeth) which is ſetled in the deepth or inward partes of the bodye: but this humour muſt not be ſuffred to flowe aboundantly (the ſame Galene being our Authour.) Therefore ſuch remedies are to be ſought for, as by a moderate repreſſion can digeſt or diſpearſe the humour.
                     A Cataplaſme good for a carbuncle.
                   Such truely is that cataplaſme, both that which is made of plantaine, and alſo that which is made of lintels twiſe ſodden. But with this you muſt commixe crummes of bread, which haue bene baked in an ouen. Let the bread (after Galens counſell) be neither altogether without branne, nor very full of it. But this kind of cataplaſme is called of the latter ſorte Emplaſtrum de Arnogloſſa,
                  
                     Cataplaſm
                           •
                         de Arnogloſſa.
                   which they make after this ſorte, ℞. of plantine, lintles, breade baked in the ouen, of eache a like portion, let them be boyled in water. To theſe Auicene putteth gaules, who alſo for this purpoſe doeth alowe the cataplaſme which is made of the two pomegranates ſodden either in vineger,
                     A Cataplaſme of pomegranates. Pa
                           ••••
                        .
                   or in ſharpe or tarte water, and theſe they applye both to the affected member, and alſo to the partes about it. Of this minde alſo is Paulus Aegineta, who ſayeth, that, if you will plucke vp a Carbuncle as it were by the rootes, and diſſeuer it from hauing any ſocietie with the partes about it, you muſt ſeath in vineger a ſharpe pomegranate cutte in ſmall peeces: when the ſore is corrupted you muſt wipe it ſmoothe, and clenſe it with a linnen clothe, and when it waxeth drye,
                     Nux 
                           •
                        uellana.
                   you muſt moiſten it with vineger. Alſo the kernell of the olde filberd nutte or of the young doeth ripen and breake Carbuncles. But the beſt remedie for the partes lying about it, is the ointment made of Bole armoniacke, of oile of roſes or mirtles, and of vineger: which is vſed, becauſe the humour, which hath flowed alreadye, ſhould not returne backe againe within. There are ſome which doe drawe and allure the poyſon,
                     Remedies to draw the poyſon in a Carbuncle.
                   and malicious humour in a peſtilent Carbuncle with ſucking or drawing it, with cupping glaſſes, and with medicines that can bring the humour to the place which is be ſet with Carbo. Which thing truely I would alſo counſell to doe, if 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   doeth occupie the arteries, and the partes about the leſſer veines, and if fluxe doeth moue but ſlowly. But if it ruſheth or breaketh fourth ſtrongly and aboundantly, the rage of the humour muſt be tamed and bridled by medicines that can moderatly repreſſe (as of late we recited out of Galene) leaſt that there be cauſed too vehement paine through the fluxe that floweth ſo ſtrongly in the affected member, and ſo the euill be made more painfull and angry.
                     VVhat muſt be applied to a cruſtie vlcer.
                   But vpon this harde or cruſtie vlcer, eſpecially when the member is putrefied, you muſt laye ſome ſtrong medicine both which can greatly drye (but not that which can concoct or digeſt) and alſo which can moue the matter, (ſeeing that ſo, you ſhall fauour the putrefaction of the member,
                     A Cataplaſme of the meale of Tares & oxymel.
                  ) of this nature is that of Andron Muſu, Puſro, or Polyida: and it muſt be waſhed in ſome ſweete wine, or in Sapa, by reaſon of the thickneſſe of the filthie humour. That cataplaſme alſo which in Galene is made of the meale of Tares

and oxymell, is rightly applied, when as the vlcer is malignaunt and corrupted. But commonlie the oyntment called 
                     Ʋnguentum Aegyptiacum is to be applied. But if theſe thinges doe little profite, you muſt come vnto more ſharpe remedies,
                     Vnguentum Aegyptiacum.
                   which haue euen a fierie force. Of the which kinde are theſe, the roote, of Dracunculus or Ariſtolochia broken and layed in vineger, lime, arſenicke, yellow oker, and other of this, ſort,
                     Adurentia medicamenia.
                   which do burne like fire. Theſe do profit ſufficiently, if they do throughlie reſolue the corrupted member euen from the quicke. This being done, whatſoeuer is corrupted and dead within, you muſt by and by pull away and plucke it vp by the rootes. But when after theſe gnawing medicines there foloweth a ſcurfe or ſcarre, which is drawne euerie way from the quicke fleſh,
                     VVhē aduſtiō muſt be vſed.
                   the wound truelie, which is raiſed through them, muſt be diligently regarded, as in other ſores that be burned. But ſeeing in extreame diſeaſes (as Hippocrates ſaith) extreme remedies are perfectly the beſt, we are conſtrained ſometime (our medicines not preuailing with the euill) to roote out a malicious carbuncle by actuall or manuell inſtrumentes (as they call it) that is, with a bright knife or ſome other ſuch thing. But the ende of burning is,
                     Finis adurēdi.
                   while there is ſenſe of paine euerie way, as Celſus hath taught verie well. After theſe thinges the cruſt or ſcabbe, which is vpon the vlcers muſt be reſolued by ſuch medicines as are meete for that purpoſe. But if the ſicke ſhall refuſe to ſuffer aduſtion, the help of ſome poore and baſe fellowe is to be vſed, who by laying holde on the carbuncle with his teeth may quite extinguiſh and pull vp the ſame. As were in time paſt certaine people in Italie named Pſilis,
                  
                     Pſilis.
                   who did ſuck their woundes which they receaued by the ſtinging of Serpentes, and that without anie harme taking thereby. Moreouer the carbuncle being thus taken away, or conſumed anie other way, the hollowneſſe thereof (the inflammation nowe ceaſing) muſt firſt be cleanſed, and afterward being made pure and cleane it muſt be healed with filling medicines (which the Greekes call Synulotica.) Which when it is throughly filled, neither doth there remaine anie hollowe place at all in it, it is conuenient to vſe thoſe thinges which can bring it to a ſcarre, as in other vlcers. But if the euill doeth not rage verie much, but ſhall ſeeme to offer vs truce and peace,
                     Ma
                           •
                        urati
                           •
                        um Auicenne.
                   it is ripened and opened (as Auicene ſayeth) by applying figges commixed well togither with leauen and ſalt. And when this Cataplaſme or the like is layed to twiſe or thriſe, the place is wont to appeare altogither blacke and full of chinckes or clyftes, and then the place is to be ſcoured and cleanſed with mundificatiues made of Apium. That medicine alſo,
                     Mundifi
                           •
                        ati
                        
                           •
                        um ex ap
                           ••
                        .
                   which is made of the yolkes of egges and of ſalt, if it be often applied, it ripeneth and openeth a Carbuncle, (as Theodaricus writeth.) For the ſame purpoſe we vſe commonly at this day that medicine, which is made of honie, ſalt, wheate meale, and the yolkes of egges. Conſolida maior,
                  
                     
                        A common catapla
                              •
                           me vſed in Paris.
                     
                     
                        Cōſolida maior
                     
                   (that is) comferie (which the the Greekes call ſymphyton) being brayed betweene two ſtones, doth heale Anthrax verie maruelouſlie (as they report) and within the ſpace of one day it quite deſtroyeth it, ſo that it needeth no other curing after any more, beſides alſo it is a common help for other wounds. Some alſo do declare wonderfull things of Scabioſa: becauſe that,
                     Scabioſa.
                   (it being eaten or dronk in wine) it thruſteth out internall tumoures to the externall places, and it doth diſſolue and diſcuſſe them without paine.
               In the vlcers of a carbuncle theſe do reſolue the cruſtes or ſcurfe, freſh butter,
                     VVhat things do reſolue the cruſts of vlcers.
                   ſwines ſuet, and other fatte thinges of that ſort. For this purpoſe alſo this emplaiſter followinge doeth maruelouſlie profite: for beſides that it reſolueth the ſcarre, that is, the cruſt, more ſpeedelie, then the aforeſaide thinges, it alſo aſſwageth the paine that is cauſed either of the ſharpe and burning medicines, or of the bright inſtrument, and it mightely diſcuſſeth the malicious humour, which exciteth the Carkuncle. ℞. of wheate and barley meale. ana. ℥.iij. of the which make a ſolide emplaiſter with the decoction of mallowes, violettes,
                     Emplastrum eſchar
                           •
                        m reſoluens.
                   and the rootes of Althaea, and put thereunto of butter, and ſwines ſuet melted. ana. ℥.ij. the yolks of two egges, which muſt be put in, when they are taken of the fire: & all theſe muſt be diligently commixed & incorporat togither with the aforſaid roots & herbs, which muſt be well beaten & brayed togither the one with the other, & then ſifted through a ſcarce. As concerning their diet, epithemes, cordials, and other of that kinde, which are made to ſtrengthen the heart▪ alſo Euacuations, if they be needefull, they doe altogether pertaine vnto that part of Phiſicke, which cureth with diet and medicines. Wherefore in miniſtring

them, you muſt aſke the aduiſe or counſell of ſome learned Phiſition. But commonlie all men almoſt do vſe theri
                        •
                     ca,
                  
                     Theri
                           •
                        ce.
                   which is wont to be miniſtred to the greatnes of a beane, made of the water of ſcabeous, or if a verie ſharp and vehement feuer be preſent, you muſt make it of roſe water, or water of bugloſſe: which the ſick muſt take ſixe houres after meate. But becauſe we haue made mention before of the Trochiſkes of Andr
                        ••
                     , Polyida & Muſa (which Galene ſo greatly vſed) it ſhall not be amiſſe to ſet down here the deſcription of them.
               
                  
                     Andronis Troch
                           •
                        ſ
                           •••
                        .
                  ℞. of Cytines (that is) of the firſt floures or buddes of a Pomegranate. ʒ.x. of alume that may be cut. ℥.iiij. of coperous or vittioll. ʒ.xij. of mirrhe. ʒ.iiij. of frankenſence, Ariſtolochia, and gaules. ana. ʒ.viij. of ſalt ammoniacke. ʒ.iiij.
               
                  
                     Polyida Poſtill
                           •
                        s.
                  ℞. of pomegranate rindes. ʒ.vj. of mirrhe. ʒ.viij. of Alume that may be cut. ʒ.v. of frankenſence. ʒ.iiij. of coperous. ʒ.iij. of the gall of a bull. ʒ.vj. let theſe be taken in ſweete wine.
               
                  
                     Polyidae paſ
                           ••
                        ctus 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  ℞. of cut or clouen alume. ʒ.iij. frankenſenſe. ʒ.iiij. of mirrhe as much, of coperous. ʒ.ij. of the floures of pomegranates. ʒ.xij. of bulles gall. ʒ.vj. Aloes. 
                  ʒ.viij. Take theſe in ſharp wine.
               
                  
                     Muſae 
                           •••
                        hiſku
                           •
                        .
                  ℞. of cut alume, aloes, mirrhe, coperous. ana. ʒ.vj. of ſaffron, and of the dregges of the oyle of ſaffron. ʒ.iij. of the floures of pomegranates. ʒ.iiij. Let them be taken in mulſum made of Faler
                        ••
                     um.
               
            
            
               CAP. XII. Of Gangrena and Sphacelus.
               
                  
                     VVhat a Canker is, and whēce it hath his beginning
                  
                  GALENE lib. 2. au Glanconem, calleth them Cankers, which by reaſon of the greatneſſe of the inflammation be made and chaunged into mortifications, yet they be not throughly engendred and alreadie confirmed. The force and tyrannie of this euill is ſo outragious, that except it be remedied verie ſpeedelie, the affected member doeth eaſilie repreſent the habite of death (that is) it doeth verie readilie drawe together the extinction and quenching both of life,
                     Gangrena peſſimus tyrānus
                   ſence and mouing. But when the member is ſo corrupted and ſo feeble, that it is altogether without ſence, and as it were dead, ſo that whether it be ſtroken, or cutte, or burned, the ſicke feeleth it not, then the Greekes call this euill no longer Cangrena, but Sphacelus, the Latines Syderatio, the later ſort call it Eſthiomenon: which name alſo they giue vnto Gangrena.
                  
                     Sphacelus.
                   But Auicene calleth it Eſthiomenon, when as the corruption thereof doeth paſſe to the continuall partes, which tearme the Grecians do vſe in an other order. Some call this affect ſometime Herpeta eſthiomenon,
                  
                     Sydenatio oſſ
                           •••
                        .
                   ſometime verie improperly, Cancer vlceratus. But this affect chaunceth alſo to the bones, when as the fleſh being beſet and compaſſed about with them, bringing foorth and engendring filthie and ſtinking corruption, doeth infect them with this horrible poiſon and conſumeth them with moſt corruptible rottenneſſe. Therefore when as the member ſhall altogether appeare voide of life, ſence and mouing,
                     The benūmed member muſt ſtraightway be p
                           ••
                        ed.
                   you muſt by and by pare it to the quicke as neare as you can to the ſound fleſh. Sphacelus therefore differeth from Gangrena, becauſe the one doeth growe vp in the bones (as we haue declared) and not in the fleſh and veſſelles of the bodie onely, but the other commeth not to the bones. Not withſtanding it is one kinde of Sphacelus but it borroweth a proper and ſingular name beſide the common tearme. This kinde of corruption being perfect in the affected part, and altogether depriued of ſence, is called commonlie in Fraunce Ignis Sancti Antonij. In another place Ignis Sancti Martialis. But this mortification of the members,
                     
                        Ignis Sancti Antonij.
                     
                     
                        Thre cauſes of mortificatiō
                        
                     
                   or the extinguiſhing and deſtroying of the life in them, chaunceth three wayes. One way, when as the member can no longer receaue the life that is ſent to from the heart thorough the Arteries, by reaſon of the diſſoluing of the  mixture and conſent of the affected member. Which mixture and harmonie of the member is diſſolued and deſtroyed either becauſe of too much colde, (as ſometime it happeneth in ſharpe and boyſterouſe winters) or by reaſon of immoderate,
                     VVhat things do diſſolue the mixture of the member.
                   raſh, and vnaduiſed refrigeration of the inflammation, or elſe becauſe of the exceedinge, and vnmearable vehement heate, and poyſon of the inflammations, and malignant vlcers (as they call

them.) Another way Gangrena and Sphacelus are cauſed, whenas the life being gotten into  the member is choaked and ſtopped, as it oftentimes happeneth in great inflammations, which ſometime doe ſo cloſe vp, and ſtop the veynes, Arteries, and poores of the ſkinne, that there the ſpirites, (the breathing foorth of the vaporous ſtreames, and the drawing in of the aire, being altogither hindred) are ſtrangled and choked. The thirde  way, theſe mortifications and deſtroyinges of life are cauſed in the members, whenas the paſſage and flowing of the vitall breath from the heart to ſome member is letted and forbidden, and that happeneth either by reaſon of a vehement and ſtrong binding, or elſe becauſe of ſome bruſe receaued in theſe paſſages and poores, through the which the breath is caried. To conclude, Gangrena and Syderatio, which the Grecians call necroſis and ſphacelus, do chaunce vnto mens bodies, deſtroying either the member, or the vitall facultie,
                     Signes of Gangrena & ſphacelus.
                   or the naturall heate and temperature of the bodie. But the ſignes of Gangrena and Syderatio, Galene in his little treatiſe of Tumours aboue nature declareth to be theſe: Firſt truelie that flouriſhing colour is extinguiſhed in them, which is wont to be in phlegmonous inflammations, then paine, and beating of the pulſes (that is) the mouing of the Arteries, which is felt of the ſicke, doe depart a little aſide, yet their naturall diſpoſition not altogether ended, but their ſenſe altogether dead and mortified. Whereupon the member ſtraight way appeareth blacke, and it is verie ſoft, and full of corruption, it breatheth out a fithie ſauour  and it is like vnto a dead thing without life. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that when  it is touched with the finger, it eaſilie yeeldeth verie deepely, neither after doth it riſe vp againe or returne, but the ſkinne appeareth as though it were ſeparated from the fleſh. But this mortification of the affected member, (which the Grecians call Gangrena,) is of ſo great crueltie and madneſſe (as Paulus ſayeth) that except you preſently ſeeke a remedie for it without all delay, the affected member ſoone periſheth,
                     Iudicia lib. 4 and then it inuadeth the other parts that be next vnto it, and killeth the man.
                     Lib. 5 But if (as Celſus reporteth) it yet hath but ſmall power, but is nowe a beginning, it is not verie hard to cure, eſpecially in a young mans bodie, and ſo much the rather if the muſcles be ſound and whole, if the ſinewes be not hurt, or ſmallie affected. But when this euill hath taken deepe roote, and is turned alreadie into sphacelus, it it vncurable, and verie manie do die of a cold ſweat.
            
            
               CAP. XIII. Of the cure of Gangrena cauſed of great inflammations, and of the deſtroying or curing of Sphacelus, vvhich is engendred of Gangrena.
               
                  BECAVSE aboundance of bloud doeth ingender a canker,
                     Emptying of corrupted bloud.
                   the order of the cure therof muſt be ſtraight way attempted by a plentifull & copious euacuation of the corrupt bloud, which is packed togither in the affected mē
                  ber. But in the meane ſeaſon, you muſt not neglect thoſe thinges which ſhall ſeeme to belong vnto diet, medicines, cutting of a veyne (if neede require) and ſtrengthenning of the hart, in which thinges the Chirurgian muſt take the aduiſe of ſome learned Phiſition, who knoweth how to enſtruct him therein (as the matter ſhall require.) But there muſt be great plentie of that congealed bloud (which cauſeth mortifications) drawne out from the affected part, either in the veyne that is cut, if it appeareth anie thing full, and ſwolne about the ſame member, or in the whole ſkinne of the part affected, together with his ſubſtaunce either kept downe and made obedient, or cut, or deuided by manie deepe ſcarifications. Some to this ende doe applie horſe-leaches, and they doe open the little veynes that be next the ſore, but thoſe deepe and often ſections or ſcarifications are much more effectuall to cure that Euill. But becauſe of the greatneſſe of the Cankre, wee vſe verie great ſections, or often inciſions (which we call Scarifications:) the one, when the eueill is neare rotten, the other when it onelie beginneth to rotte. For the greater the euill is, the greater remedie it

requireth (as euerie man may knowe.
                     
                        After ſcarificatiō you muſt waſh the place with ſalt water.
                     
                     
                        Medicines putrefactiues.
                     
                  ) But when you haue drawne out bloud abundantly by thoſe deepe ſlaſhes or cuts, you muſt waſh the place with ſalt water, that the thicke bloud which otherwiſe would abound there, may be brought foorth. Then you muſt apply ſome medicine, that can let and diſſolue putrifaction, as is the meale of tares or darnell, (which the French men call yuraia, becauſe it doth prouoke dronkeneſſe after the maner of wine) or if there be ſcarcitie of them, you muſt vſe the meale of beanes with oxymel and ſyrupus acetoſus. It ſhall be profitable alſo to waſh the ſcarified place twiſe in a daye with hoate vinegre, but eſpeciallie with mulſum. For theſe by reaſon of the drineſſe, doe conſume the filthineſſe and corruption, and do cleanſe it, but bycauſe of their coldneſſe they do chalenge of putrifaction that, which is not yet defiled and corrupted. But when this feruēt heate is nowe abated, and the furie of the euill ſomewhat remitted and ſlaked, you muſt lay aboue vpon the ſore that oyntment which is commoly called vnguentum Aegyptiacum,
                  
                     Vnguentum Aegyptiacum
                   made of verdigreaſe, alume, honie, and vinegre, of eche a like quantitie commixed and boyled togither. This doeth ſtop putrifaction and reſolue it: and it doeth diſſeuer alſo the putrified and corrupted humour from the ſound and whole partes, and it doeth cauſe it to fall and periſh. Moreouer it procureth a cruſt or ſcarre, and preſerueth and defendeth the whole partes from anie infection. But if you will apply a more ſtrong and effectuall medicine, mingle ſalt with the aforeſaide thinges: or if the euill ſhall encreaſe yet more and more,
                     B
                           ••
                        ning Trochiſkes.
                   miniſter ſome of the Trochiſkes before mencioned, being thoroughly brayed and beaten togither, and then waſhed in vinegre and wine: as that either of Andron or Polyida or Muſa: or one of thoſe which are called of the later ſort, calidicon, Aldaron, or that made of Asphodelus, which by reaſon of the burning force do ſeparate the corruption from the ſound partes. In this matter before all other thinges Arſenicon is praiſed and allowed of, which they call ſublimatum,
                  
                     Arſenicon ſublimatum.
                   
                  purum or correctum, which muſt be diſſolued either in ſome pouder or in wine, and taken in linnen or cotten (which the French men call Coton.) And ſo applied betweene the ſound and corrupted member. For this doeth ſtraight way ſtay the euill, and that truely without paine. But if neceſſitie requireth, you muſt deuide the good from the euill with a certaine inſtrument called a probe, or ſkliſe. But in miniſtring ſuch medicines: that the matter may be handled more without care, you muſt be diligent to knowe the nature of the ſicke bodie, (as Galene hath well taught vs ſaying.) If the bodie be ruſticall and hard by nature,
                     Lib. 2. ad Glane.
                   it requireth verie vehement medicines: but if it be tender and ſoft, it requireth more gentle and milde medicines. Infantes alſo or children, and they which loue to liue at their owne pleaſure in idleneſſe, muſt haue gentle medicines miniſtred to thē. Moreouer the nature of the partes which are euill affected muſt be regarded as well as the whole bodie. VVhen you do either cut of, or cut about that which is putrified & corrupted. For there are ſome ſores, which verie quickly do come to matter, & corruption, if they be negligently cured: and ſome verie ſlowlie: ſome alſo do ſlowlie feele the force and benefite of medicines applied, and ſome verie ſoone.
               
                  
                     VVhē aduſtiō is to be vſed.
                  Furthermore if (notwithſtanding theſe burning medicines) the euill ſhall yet remaine, you muſt burne that place which is beetweene the whole and corrupted member. But all theſe remedies are wont ſometime to profite nothing at all, and then this is the onelie helpe,
                     If the canker turneth into ſphacelus.
                   although (as Celſus ſayeth) it be a miſerable helpe (that is) to cut of the member, which by little and little waxeth dead, that ſo the other partes of the bodie may be without daunger. For that which is once corrupted, euen with touching, it doeth infect and corrupt that part which is whole and ſound after the maner of poyſon. But if at anie time you ſhall cut of this putrified and dead member, or ſhall launce of that which is corrupted in anie member euen to the ſound fleſh,
                     Li. 2. ad Gla
                           ••
                        
                     
                   then by the counſell of Galene for more quietneſſe ſake, you muſt ſeare or burne with ſome bright inſtrument that member, which as a roote, is ioyned to the whole and ſound bodie, for ſo you ſhall quickelie ſtay the flowing of bloud, and debarre corruption.
                     Lib. 4. Remedies that can loſen the cruſts frō the ſeared members.
                   Nowe aduſtion being done and ended, you muſt vſe the iuyce of leeks, or (as Paulus ſaith) you muſt applie ſalt with the leekes, or ſome of thoſe remedies, which wee haue ſpoken of a little before. For theſe doe drie and binde the corruption, and do alſo ſtop the fluxe of humoures. But when by vſing theſe remedies rottenrenneſſe or corruption ſhall ſeeme to ceaſe: that the cruſtes and ſcurfe may ſoone fall

away, you muſt vſe a Cataplaſme made of bread, or barly meale, or wheate meale boyled in hydraleon. Alſo that medicine, which they call Cephalicum, annointed with honie. Theſe through their cleanſing or ſcouring, do reſolue the cruſt from the fleſh which lieth vnder it. Moreouer that medicine which is called Tetrapharmacum, and that alſo called macedonicum, by mouing & mollifying the matter do bring the ſcurfs from the parts that ly vnder thē, as all other thinges do, which do bring the ſores vnto ſuppuration. For theſe remedies do both mollifie, & ripen or end the matter vnder the cruſt, which matter doeth reſolue it: (I meane that matter which lyeth betwene the cruſt & the fleſh. Bread alſo beatē & brayed with apiū, or ocinium, through their clenſing doth mightely draw the cruſtes frō the whole parts without eroſion or gnawing, of the like vertue alſo is Iris, or the roote of panax, or of ariſtolochia,
                  
                     Butyrum.
                   or of acorus mixed with honie. But they are commonly wont to vſe butter or ſome other annointing thing to reſolue the cruſts. But when the cruſt is fallen of, they waſh the place with vinegre, and then apply this plaiſter following, which is rehearſed by Guilielmus de ſaliceto.
                  
                     Emplaſtrum Guilielmi à Saliceto.
                   ℞. hony. lb.ſs. raw yolkes of egges iij. or iiij. of barley meale. lb.ſs. mingle theſe togither & bring them into the fourme of an emplaiſter. But two or three dayes after, that the mundification or cleanſing may be the better accompliſhed, you may ad to this emplaiſter of choſen mirrhe. ʒ.x. But in tender and yong bodies for the ſeparation of the cruſt, and deterſion of the filthie corruption, the meale of tares mingled with honie,
                     
                        Lib. 2. ad Glauconem.
                     
                     
                        The ſumme of the cure of Gangrena & ſphacellus.
                     
                   or frankenſence (which was vſed of Galene) doth aboundantly ſuffice. Theſe thinges being rightlie ordered, ſuch kind of vlcers muſt be brought vnto ſome ſoundneſſe of health with ſuch kind of medicines as can drawe together the fleſh, and procure a ſcarre: the Grecians call them ſynulotica and epolotica. 1. Empty out aboundantly the corrupted bloud, which is ſtuffed in the affected member. 2. After ſcarifications or ſections, waſh the affected place with ſalt water. Then  lay on a medicine appointed for corrupted ſores. 3. When the furie of the euill is ſomewhat ſlaked, miniſter vnguentum Aegyptiacum. 4. If the euill will not yeald to theſe remedies, ſeare with a bright and hoate yron that place which is betweene the filthie and corrupted  member. 5. But if all theſe thinges ſhall nothing help, and now Gangrena is chaunged into  
                  ſphacelus, cut of that member verie ſpeedily, which is ſo periſhed euen to the whole, ſo that no filthineſſe remaine behind. 6. When you haue cut of that which was putrified, you muſt  vſe ſome hote burning inſtrument, that ſo you may the more quietly pull vp euen the very root of the euill. 7. After exuſtion, miniſter the iuyce of leeks, and other ſuch thinges, which  do drie, bind, and ſtop fluxe. 8. Make no great ſpeede to reſolue the cruſt or ſcurfe by vſing  burning medicines, or ſome hoate inſtrument from the ſubiect places (for then there is wont to follow abundance of bloud.) 9. When rottenneſſe or corruption is ceaſed, and  you feare no more the flowing of bloud, apply thoſe thinges which can drawe of the cruſt. 10. VVhen the cruſts or ſcurfes be falne from their places, you muſt vſe the ſame cure, as in  other vlcers.
                     Apheriſms 1· pertaining 2. to a phiſitiō
                     
                  
               
               1. Firſt appoint a thinne and coling diet for them which are vexed with Gangrena and sphacelus. 2. If nothing doe let it, tourne awaye the fluxe by letting of bloud: and drawe it out aboundaunlie, if it floweth plentifullie. 3. Purifie the bloud with the medicine which is called Catholicon, or with the blacke pith of Caſia fiſtularis, or with the decoction  of Tamarinds, of hoppes, and fumitorie. 4. Let the ſicke take Theriaca, and other of that kinde, which are able to defende the heart, (which is the fountaine and beginning  of life) from thoſe corrupted and filthie ſmelling fluxes, which are mounted vp from the putrified member.
            
            
               CAP. XIIII. Of Eryſipelas and other tumoures cauſed of Choller.
               
                  ALthough fleume in the genration of humours, doth follow next vnto bloud,
                     Fleume in the generation of humours is next vnto bloud
                   and there be greater abundance of that humour in the bodie next vnto bloud, thē of other humours, yet becauſe tumours aboue nature proceeding of choler (which they cōmonly call cholerike apoſtems) do in manie things greatly conſpire & aagree

with bloudie humours, it followeth (after the determination of phlegmone, and of other tumoures conſiſting aboue nature, which proceede of bloud) that we nowe ſpeake of thoſe ſwellings, which are cauſed of choler, and are called of the Greekes by this generall name Eryſipelata,
                  
                     Eryſipel
                           ••
                         q
                           ••
                        d.
                   but of the auncient Latines Ignes ſacri. Eryſipelus therefore is the braunch or bud of cholericke fluxe, moſt abiding about both the ſkinnes, (that is) both about that which outwardlie couereth all the partes of the bodie, and alſo about that filmie and thinne ſkinne which inwardly compaſſeth the internall parts. But oftentimes alſo it occupieth ſome of the fleſh that lieth vnder it, as phlegmone (which is the iſſue of bloudie fluxe moſt incident to fleſhie bodies) doeth alſo poſſeſſe ſome of the ſkinne. Therefore when verie thinne choler, or hote bloud which is thinne alſo in ſubſtaunce, (called of the later ſort cholera naturalis, but of Galene 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) is ſpread abrode ouer the ſkinne onely, nothing moleſting the fleſh vnder it, and yet ſomewhat raiſing the member into a tumour with a languiſhing inflammation and yellow redneſſe, and altogither doth yeeld when it is touched. This affect is properly called of Galene,
                     Eryſipelas exquiſ
                           •••
                        .
                   a true and exquiſite Eryſipelas. But this is for one conſideration, or (as they ſay) it chaunceth vniformely, and without vlceration. Auicene calleth it ſpina.
                  
                     Spina.
                   But when a humour of bitter choller ſhall be more thicke and ſharpe, then that it can returne againe naturallie it doth exulcerate or fetch of that little outward ſkinne, (which the Greekes call Epidermida) and ſometime that exulceration of the ſkinne in proceſſe of time pierceth ſomewhat deepely, ſo that it toucheth the inner fleſh vnder it, and then that affect is called alſo Eryſipelas but with vlceration,
                     Eryſepelas cū vlceratum.
                   which (as Galene ſayth) is all one with Herpes. But if it be neither a cholericke fluxe, nor a bloudie humour, but equallie congealed of them both, it is not then called Eryſipelas onelie, but Galene tearmeth it a diſpoſition throughly commixed with Eryſipelas and the inflammation.
                     Eryſipelas non legiti
                           •••
                        .
                   But of that which is predominant in the mixture, is the title giuen to the euill. For when bloud ruleth, it is called phlegmone eryſipelatoſa: but whē choler raigneth, we tearme it Eryſipelas phlegmonôſum. But when neither hath ſuperioritie, but the accidents of them both appeare equall together in power,
                     Mediū 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   then that euill ſhall be called a meane betweene phlegmone & Erypelas. Now alſo of other mixtures there ſhall be the like interpretation, that is, if much choler be mingled with a thinne and ſmall humour, either of fleume or melancholie, it ſhall be called Eriſipelas oedemat
                        •
                     ſum or ſchirrboſum. Moreouer when we ſpeake ſimplie of choler, or of a bilious humour,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . after the maner of Galene and other Phiſitions, we meane pale choler, yelow, and bitter, and not that which is ſoure and blacke. And this is called of others, naturalis & certa cholera, hauing his generation of bloud that is thinne and hote. But melancholy we neuer abſolutely do tearme choler, but alwayes with an adiection of the humour, which ioyneth the colour of the name. Choler therefore, which is called of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , & commonly cholera, is a hote & drie humour, proceeding of the thinner & hotter part of chylus, or of thinne and hote bloud (as we ſaide a late.) And this is two maner of wayes according to the diuiſion of the newe Phiſitions,
                     Bi
                           •
                        is flena duplex.
                   that is to ſay, naturall and vnnaturall. Naturall choler is a humor of power hote & drie, in ſubſtance thin, of colour yellow or red, declining vnto a certaine colour like orengetaunie, but in taſt verie bitter, & not ſharp or ſoure (as ſome vntruly haue affirmed.
                     Not naturall.
                  ) Vnnaturall choler is ſaid to be that, which doth degenerate from the aforeſaid bilious humour, and yet it keepeth it ſelfe within the bounds of his circuite, which if it doth once paſſe or go out of, it is now not to be accounted choler, but rather ſome other humour.
                     Choler doeth digreſſe from his owne nature.
                   But this (I meane choler) doth happen to tranſgreſſe the limites of his liberty or circuite two wayes. 1. One way (as we may ſay) by it ſelfe, and in it ſelfe. 2. The other way by admixtion with others. By it ſelfe and in it ſelfe is alſo two fold. 1. one way, whenas that naturall choler doth putrifie, and is burned within, and that is called aduſtae per putrifactionē
                   .i. burnt through patrifaction. 2. The other way, whenas vnnaturall choler called vitellina,
                  
                     Bilis vitellina Porr
                           •
                        acta. Praſſina. A
                           ••
                        uginoſa
                   is throughly concocted euen with a fierie heate in the liuer, or in the ſtomach, or in the veins, & it is made of the colour of leeks, which they alſo call praſſina, or it is cauſed to be ruſtie or cankred, which truly are extreme griefes. But vnnaturall choler, or choler aboue nature, through admixtion, is cauſed, when as another humor doth come vnto it extraordinarilie. And this truly happeneth many waies. For if thinne & wateriſh fleume be mixed with it it is made yellow & like vnto ſaffron, if thick & viſcous fleume be commixed therwith, it is

made like to the yolks of egs: but if burned melancholie be ioyned therwith,
                     Crocea. Auicene. Haly.
                   it is made bilis aduſta per admixtionē. And ſo after Auicenes minde & iudgement, there are ſix kinds of naturall choler with: Halyabbas, foure only, for he maketh no mention at all of the two kinds of aduſted choler. But Gal. lib. 2. de virtut. naturalibus ſaith that there is no choler beſides nature, but that which is vitellina, very like both in colour & thicknes to the yolkes of egs: for he ſaith that porracea & aerubinoſa bilis are engendred oftentimes in the ſtomach, of naughtie and corrupted humours, by reaſon of the cruditie or rawnes of meates and drinckes, as are, the herbe called beete, oynions, coolewortes. And alſo ſometime, when theſe things are not wel digeſted, it is engendred in the verie veynes, by reaſon of ſicknes, or ſome other euill diſpoſition. By theſe thinges therefore it is gathered, that there are foure kindes or differences of inflammations engendred of choler (which commonly are called cholericke apoſtemes). That is to ſaie. Of true ſincere,
                     
                        Foure differences of inflammations comming of choler.
                     
                     
                        Verum eryſipelas.
                     
                     
                        Three vnlaufull eryſipelas.
                     
                   and laudable choler (which we call thinne & hote bloude) is engendred that kinde of inflammation, which Galene lib. 2. ad Glauco. calleth a true and exquiſite eryſipelas, which is as it were a paſſion of the ſkinne onely: in Greeke it is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . But of vnnaturall choler, being mixed with other humours, there do ariſe three other differences, as eryſipelas phlegmonôdes, eryſipelas aedematodes, and eryſipelas ſcirrbodes. And of choler which beſides nature is cauſed of aduſtion, by reaſon of the thinnes or thickenes of the ſubſtaunce thereof there are engendred either herpetes eſthiomeni (that is) excedentes, which are of the ſame kinde with thoſe eryſipelata,
                  
                     
                        Herpes exedens.
                     
                     
                        Phagedaena. Can
                              •
                           ri 
                              ••
                           erati.
                     
                   which doe chaunce with vlceration, or there are engendred phagedaene, which doe ſomewhat deepely gnaw the fleſh togeather with the skinne, & there are cauſed exulcerat cankres, & other ſuch gnawing euils, there are alſo engēdred cacoethe (that is) malignant vlcers, which are called of the late chirurgians puſtulaa corroſiuae. Therefore in ſuch kinde of humours, that is truely the moſt thinne, which raiſeth the exulcerated herpes: & that moſt thicke, which prouoketh the cankre. Then that which parteineth vnto thicknes, occupieth the next place, which doth engendre phagedene, as Galene hath noted lib. 14. meth med. The cauſes of a true eryſipelas as alſo of a true plegmone are three. Praegresſae,
                  
                     Cauſae veri eriſipelatis.
                   which are called alſo primatiue 2. antecedentes 3. and coniuncte. But epyſipelas is ſeeldome cauſed of anie primitiue cauſe: notwithſtanding violent frictions, the applying and miniſtring of attractiue medicines doe oftentimes excite or cauſe the ſame.
            
            
               CAP. XV. Of the ſignes and tokens of a true eryſipelas.
               
                  THE markes and tokens of a true and exquiſite erypelas are gathered & knowen by conferring the ſame with phlegmone according to the doctrine of Galene 14. Therap. and 2. ad Glauconem:
                     Signes of eryſipelas.
                   whereby it plainely appeareth that a true and lawfull eryſipelas is a certaine species of plegmone (that is) of an inflammation, as it is generally taken. The ſignes therefore of eryſipelas are theſe, a red colour to beholde, declining ſomewhat to yellow,
                     
                        A yealowish rednes 
                              •
                           eiding to the finger. a ſmall 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ vehement heat.
                     
                     
                        Small pulſe. Pricking paine. Indicia.
                     
                   which yellowiſh colour doth eaſely yeld to touching or handling of it, (that is) by thruſting it downe with the fingers, and then it ſlydeth in againe, a ſmall tumour rather remaining in the ſkinne, then deſcending deepely, vehement heate cauſing a more vehement feauer then that which is accended of phlegmone: for eryſipelas is farre awaie more hote, then phlegmone No great or ſtrong breaking of the pulſes, which is the proper ſimptomate of a great phlegmone. A byting and pricking paine without any extenſion, as it chaunceth in phlegmone, & many other like ſignes which doe ſignifie the dominion and rule of choler. But that which partayneth vnto the iudgementes hereof, eryſipelas doth chiefly laie holde one the face, and beginneth commonly in that part of the noſe, which is commonly called lepus. then ſtraightwaie it ſpreadeth ouer the whole face, and that through a double occaſion, that is, for the thinnes of the skinne, & lightnes of the choler. But in the vncouering or laying naked of any bone, eryſipelas is a ſodaine and maruelous diſeaſe, as Hypppocrates writeth lib. 7. Aporiſm. 19. that is to ſay, it is an euill ſymptomate, if the fleſh lying rounde about the naked bone doth ſeeme to be occupied of eryſipelas, but this, as Galene witneſſeth, chaunceth verie ſeeldome. Againe

the ſame Hippo. writeth in the Aphoriſme following, that of eryſipelas there commeth corruption, ſuppuration, togeather with the diſeaſe, which thinges (ſaith Galene) neuer doe chaunce vnto eryſipelata, except it be to them,
                     Eryſ
                           •
                        pedas followeth the order of a tertiā 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   which are verie malignaunt. A true & lawfull eryſipelas hath foure times or ſeaſons, as other tumours alſo aboue nature haue: the ſignes whereof are to be ſought out of thoſe thinges which went before. An exquiſite eryſipelas is ſeeldome ended by ſuppuration, but chiefly through an inſenſible tranſpiration or reſolution. There happen ſometime in eryſipelas certaine ſymptomates, which oftentimes by reaſon of their greatnes do exceede the verie cauſe of the euill it ſelfe and therefore they do hinder the order of the cure (that is) they doe chaunge and peruert the method of curing (as hath alſo bene ſaide before in phlegmone). Moreouer eryſipelas followeth the mouing of a tertian feauer, with whoſe matter it hath a certaine analogie and proportion, for the matter of them both, is a cholericke humour. But it is not good to driue or turne eryſipelas from the outward partes to the inwarde, but contrariewiſe, from the inward members to the outward partes, as Hippocrat. hath written lib. 6. Aphoriſ. 25. But thoſe eryſipelata,
                  
                     Eryſ
                           •
                        pelata aboue the head are verie hard to be cured. Eryſipelas in the wombe of a womā 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   which doe ariſe about the head do put vs to more trouble, which (as Paulus ſayth) are wont to be ſo daungerous, that except they be holpen with ſome effectuall remeadie, they ſometime ſtrangle & choake the ſicke. Hippo. alſo writeth that eryſipelas is verie mortall & deadly, if it chaunceth in the wombe of a woman with childe, for eriſipelas being thus engendred in the wombe, the childe of neceſſitie dieth. For truely a ſharpe feauer (as Galen ſaith in his commentaries) oftentimes deſtroyeth it without inflammation.
            
            
               CAP. XVI. Of the cure of eriſipelas.
               
                  
                     Two generall orders in the cure of eryſipelas.
                  
                  SEEING that eryſipelas (as is alſo phlegmone whereof we intreated a little before) is a hote affect, and engendred of the defluxion of humours: the method of the whole curing thereof ſhall alſo be two fould (: that is to ſay) refrigeration, and euacuation. And as in plegmone the order of euacuation did 
                     •
                  urmount and ouercome the methode of refrigeration: ſo in eryſipelas refrigeration is more needefull then euacuation. For the one doth trouble and moleſt in quantitie, but the other (which is eryſipelas) in qualitie. Therefore eryſipelas muſt be greatly cooled and little emptied, whereas contrarywiſe an inflammation ought to be plentiefully euacuated, and little refrigerated. Although there be a common chapter and ſumme of curing both affectes, as Galene ſaith, that is: the vacuation of the troubleſome humour. And therefore after that eryſipelas hath bene cooled, we vſe thoſe medicines which can digeſt or diſcuſſe. Furthermore that we may attaine vnto this vniuerſal methode which we haue ſaide to be twofoulde (I meane refrigeration and euacuation of the noyſome humour):
                     Foure particular intentions of curing eryſipelas
                   it ſhall not be amiſſe, if we declare this cure by foure other particular orders after the conſent of the Chirurgians of our time. The firſt ſcope conſiſteth in the  right obſeruation of a good diet. The ſecond concerneth the auerſion of the humour that  floweth to the affected member, which they call antecedens materia. The third conſiſteth in  the emtying out of the humour, which hath flowed alreadie into the diſeaſed part, which  they alſo call, materia coniuncta. The fourth & the laſt is buſied & occupied about the correction and keeping backe of the euill ſymptomates that may happen thereunto.
                     Primus ſcopus.
                   We ſhall eaſily diſpatch the firſt ſcope, if the applying of all thoſe thinges, which they call res non naturales ſhall belong vnto moiſtnes and coldnes, as in a feauer tertian, ſeeing that eryſipelas hath his beginning of choler,
                     Aire.
                   which is of a hote and dry temperature. Therefore chuſe & prepare an aire as neare as you can, that is ſomewhat colde and moiſt. In ſommer let the ſicke be in a veri colde houſe ſomewhat within the ground, that is windie, and towardes the North. But if there be no ſuch place to be had, and the ayre verie hote, make it ready for him your ſelfe by arte. Poure colde water verie often out of one veſſell into another ſprinkle the pauementes of the houſe dayly with water that is altogeather ye
                     •
                  e, and colde. ſpread vpon the floore, roſes, and violettes, vyne leaues and braunches, fallow 
                     •
                  oughes, &

other floures and buddes, which are of a colde and moiſt facultie. Let no great companie of men come into the parlour or place where the ſicke abydeth. Let him eſchew all fatte, ſweete, ſoure, and hote meates. Let him eate luttuſe, gourdes, purſlane, ſorrell,
                     Cibus.
                   (which they call acetoſa) ryce, and other thinges of that kinde, which doe thicken and refrigerate bloud. Let him altogeather abſtaine from wine. Let his drincke be Ptyſan broath,
                     Potus.
                   or bareley water. Let him keepe a temperate diet. Let his bellie be alwaies ſoft and ſoluble. Let him abſtaine from all exerciſe, and mouing,
                     Motus. Animi affectus. Venus.
                   eſpecially that which is vehement and immoderate. Let him eſchew anger, contentions, and all vehement motions and perturbations of the minde as mortall enemies. Let all things be cleane & handſome about him. Let him refraine from carnall copulation. And let theſe things ſuffice concerning the firſt ſcope. But we ſhall alſo bring to paſſe out ſecond intent about the cure of eryſipelas,
                  
                     Secundus ſcopus.
                   if by conuenient euacuation we take away that humor which is left behind in the bodie. Therfore in a true and lawfull eryſipelas not neceſſariely as in phlegmone, we muſt draw bloud out of a veyne, but we muſt alſo purge the bellie downeward with ſome medicine which can expell choler (called of the Greekes cholagogon) if that the affect be great, and the bodie doth ſeeme to abounde with choler. Therefore when eryſipelas doth accend and kindle feuers, & thoſe more vehement then phlegmone, thoſe medicines which are exceedingly hote and the iuice of ſcammonium, called of new Greece dacrydion) and that alſo which is commonly called in the ſhoppes electuarium de ſucco roſarum, are in no wiſe meete or conuenient for this diſeaſe, and therefore you muſt vſe either rubarbe, or that potion which of Raſis is called aqua tamarindorum, which is made as followeth. ℞. damaske prumes .24. tamarinds that be new. ʒ.x. of broken ſugar. quar.ſs. to the which things to make them more effectuall, you may adde rubarbe that is well waſhed. But if the euill be verie little and ſmall, theſe medicines called cholagoga ſhall not neede, but it ſhall be ſufficient to vſe at that inſtaunt ſome ſharpe clyſter, (as it pleaſeth Galene.2. ad Glan
                           •
                        . In a Phlegmonous eryſipelas it is good to let bloud.
                  ) But in a phlegmonous eryſipelas your labour ſhall not be fruſteate, if you ſhall beginne the cure with bloudletting (if nothing do let it). For that kinde of eryſipelas doth often lay holde on the face, whereupon Paulus cō
                  mandeth that by & by in the beginning you muſt cut a veyne in the elbow eſpecially choſing in it the ſhoulder veyne. But if that doth not appeare, you muſt take that which is moſt obiect to the ſight. And if any thing doe hinder the detraction of bloud, he commaundeth to vſe a purgation made of ſome medicine which is dedicated and appointed to driue out choler, yet Paulus doth not contend with Galene: for whereas Paulus hath commaunded to cut a veine in that eryſipelas which doth riſe about the heade or face, he meant that of a phlegmonous eryſipelas, which verie often moleſteth the face: but Galene ſpeaketh of a lawfull eryſipelas, wherein he vſed no detraction of bloude. But in eryſipelas aedematoſum or ſcirrhoſum, you muſt vſe a purgation which hath a mingled and manifolde force, that is, which can purge, partly choler, partly fleame, or a melancholie humour. And truely in all theſe thinges the aduiſe of ſome learned and wiſe Phyſition is to be asked,
                     In phlebato
                           •
                        y and purging the chirurgian muſt be taught by the Phyſition.
                   from whoſe coū
                  ſell and decree the chirurgian out not in anie wiſe to ſwarue or digreſſe. And let this be ſufficient that once you haue bene admoniſhed, that the chirurgion ought to attempt nothing at all in thoſe thinges which belong vnto purging and bloodletting, without the counſell and warrant of ſome cunning Phyſition, except ſometime neceſſitie ſhall compell him, and when no Phyſition is readie at hande. The thirde intention is finiſhed and perfourmed by cooling and repelling medicines in the beginning of the fluxe,
                     Tertia intentio.
                   excepting thoſe cauſes which we haue mencioned in our generall diſcourſe. But the beginning being paſſed, and fluxe now remaining, you muſt emptie that which cleaueth faſt vnto the member and is compacted therein, by applying outwardly digeſtiue or euaporatiue medicines, that is to ſay, through the tranſpiration and breathing through to the ſenſe. But of all theſe kind of tumours thus conſiſting aboue nature, there is a double euacuation. Gal. lib. 14. Therap. one truely of repulſiues to other partes, the other of outwarde digeſtiues, through that vaporous breathing, which doth flie the ſence. But becauſe eryſipelas doth afflict and moleſt not onely in quantitie, but alſo in the verie qualitie by reaſon of the vehement inflammation: it doth require a more often and greater refrigeration then phlegmone,
                  
                     Hic Guido depra
                           •••
                        è citat. Gal.
                   doth. Therefore after the emptying of the whole bodie, as we haue ſaide a little before, we

will vſe repreſſiue remeadies, cooling it as it is cōuenient) the afflicted member, or that part which ſuſteyneth the skinne: eſpecially when eryſipelas is engendred without any manifeſt cauſe. But the ende of refrigeration is the mutation or chaunge of the colour: for that which is a pure eryſipelas doth by and by reſt and ceaſe with this,
                     How much eryſipelas is to be refrigerated.
                   but that which is not pure, but after a ſort phlegmonous, if you ſhall refrigerate it much, it maketh the skinne blacke and blew, but if you ſhall deſiſt from ſeaking to chaunge the colour, it waxeth blacke, eſpecially in an aged bodie: ſo that ſome of thoſe refrigerated tumours cannot parfectly be healed, no truely not with digeſting medicines, but that ſome ſcirrhous tumor will remaine behinde in the member. It is farre better therefore (ſaith Galene) when you ſee the colour of the affected member altered,
                     Lib. 14. Ther.
                   to paſſe ouer from refrigerating and moderating helpes vnto their contraries (that is) vnto diſſoluing or digeſting and drying remeadies, before that the member be altogeather blue or blacke. But you muſt alwayes beware and take good heede, that thoſe thinges which be annoynted, be verie liquid and moiſt, and that they be often chaunged, and that thoſe thinges which be applyed, be often waſhed with ſponges dipped in ſome colde liquor. For the great heate of the member quickly bruſting forth into a vapour, doth drie vp theſe thinges. But amongeſt thoſe thinges which carie with them a refrigerating and repelling force verie conueniēt for this affect. Auicene chiefly prayſeth among ſimple remeadies the ſprinckling on of colde water. But Galene commendeth the iuice of nightſhade,
                     Materia refrigerantium ex Gal.
                   of ſengreene, of purcelaine, of pſyllium, of henbane, of lettuce, of vmbilicus veneris (which herbe is called of the Greekes cotyledon) of endiue, and ſuccorie, of fenne lintles, of gourdes, and other of that ſort. Alſo that cerote made of verie colde water,
                     Ceratum.
                   which conteineth foure times aſmuch of oyle of roſes with white waxe. ℞. oyle of roſes with oyle of vnrype grapes made without ſalt, which being made verie ſoft & pliable in a morter, ſprinckle on cold water, as much as you thinke good, with the which if you commixe a little vinegre that is thinne, and verie cleare, you ſhall make the medicine more excellent and more effectuall. Moreouer all theſe thinges muſt be miniſtred cold, and often chaunged, before they be any thing dryed or withered. It profiteth alſo verie much and that preſently to annoint the member annoyed with Eryſipelas with ceruſe onely, or mingled with vinegre and lycium, or with terra cimolia, or with potters claye, with nightſhade, or with ſpuma argenti with oyle of roſes, and with acatia with vinegre. To this purpoſe alſo this compound following helpeth much. ℞. iuice of plantaine. ℥.j. oile of roſes ℥.iij,
                     A compound medicine.
                   
                  lithargyri nutriti. ℥.j. ceruſae lota. 
                  ʒ.iij. of womans milcke. ℥.ſs. let all be commixed togeather and brayed in a leaden mortar, and make a lyniment. But lythargyrum and ceruſa ought firſt to be beaten, and then the oyle and iuice aforeſaide muſt be poured one them ſoftly by litte and little, vntill they be throughly incorporate togeather the one with the other. But if you deſire greater coolers, you may commix with theſe and other remeadies before recited (according to Paulus minde) a little opium or cicuta, or mandrake. But I thincke it good to abſtaine from applying either of them or the like, which are of a ſtupefactiue nature, except great neceſſitie doth moue you thereunto. But when the inflā
                  mation of the affected member is ſomewhat abated, & the heate of eryſipelas ſlaaked, Galene (before that any blewnes did appeare through refrigeration) did vſe to diſſolue the humour gotten into the member (which they call coniuncta materia) by laying one a cataplaſme of bareley meale,
                     Euacuation of the ioined 
                           •
                        atter by euaporatiues.
                   or of cruda polenta (called in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) & of other things before mēcioned in the order of curing phlegmone. For euē as the ſignes of eryſipelas were deſumed & knowen by the annalogie of the tokens of phlegmone: ſo alſo the remeadies of the cure of eryſipelas are to be fetched from the proportion of the remeadies of healing phlegmone.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Furthermore of ſuch kinde of medicines, which haue a diſſoluing and breathing qualitie verie neceſſarie in this euill, there are verie manie, both ſimples and compoundes, rehearſed of Paulus Aegineta lib. 4. cap. 21. and of Aetius lib. 14. de re medica. But nowe it ſhall be ſufficient to rehearſe among ſo many, one onely remeadie which of all the reſt ſeemeth in my opinion to be moſt excellent. ℞. of the tender leaues of althea lib. j. boyle thē in hydreleum,
                  
                     Hydreleum is a mixture of water and oyle.
                   and being well boyled, braie them well togeather, putting thereunto of oyle of roſes. ℥.iiij. of argenti ſpuma, and ceruſae. ana. ℥.ij.ſs. againe plane or ſmoth them with the iuice of coriander, of ſengreene, or nightſhade, then put thereunto a few crummes of bread

and annoynt them after the manner of an emplayſter.
                     Silin
                           ••
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         locum occupari
                           •
                        .
                   But if paraduenture blewnes ſhall nowe occupie the place, (the skinne being cut before) you muſt lay a cataplaſme aboue vpon it, and sprinckle the place aboundantly, as Galene hath commaunded, with hote water: for it doth digeſt & waſh the woundes: alſo water and ſalt brine in the meane ſeaſon ſhall auaile to nouriſh or cheriſh the place, when it is ſomewhat thicke, and groſſe, which thinges doe ſcoure and clenſe the thicknes thereof.
                     Quarta intentio.
                   The fourth intention of the cure of eryſipelas, which is the correction of the accidentes, is perfited, (as we haue ſaid in the cure phlegmone) when as we ſhall returne and driue blacke the recourſe of the matter, induration, and corruption togeather with the payne and the heate. For theſe ſymptomates are wont to happen as well vnto eryſipelas, as vnto phlegmone. Moreouer the beſt remeadie to aſſwage paine and vehement heate, is made of the leaues and rootes of henbane,
                     A remeadie to mitigate paine and heat.
                   which you muſt rowle vp in towe and ſeath them with prunes: then commixe them with the ointment commonly called populeon, or with ſwynes greace (as is ſaide before in the cure of phlegmone). But if eryſipelas ſhall chaunce to be exulcerated,
                     If eryſipelas be exulcerated
                   you ſhall cure it with applying vnguentum album or vnguentū de lithargyro, with the which if you ſhall commix a little ſcoria, which is the droſſe of lead molten in the fire, you ſhall make the remeadie moſt excellent and effectuall. But it ſhall be more profitable to comprehend the whole order of the cure of eryſipelas in ſome ſhorte ſentences, after the maner of an Epilogue, that thoſe thinges whereof we haue ſpoken before ſomewhat at large, may take the deeper roote in our mindes and memories.
                     Seuen Apho. out of Galene cōcerning the whole cure of eryſipelas.
                   For this cauſe therefore we haue taken out of Galene theſe ſeuen Aphoriſmes following, which ſummarily doe containe the whole cure of eryſipelas. 1. In an exquiſite eryſipelas make no detraction of bloud. 2. If the bodie be full of choler and the affect be great, purge the bellie downward with the medicine cholagogon. 3. If the diſeaſe be little & ſmall and the bodie without choler, vſe no medicine to purge choler, but  content your ſelfe with ſome ſharpe clyſter. 4. When you haue purged the whole bodie (as  you muſt) annoint the affected member in the beginning with medicines that can moderately  repreſſe and aboundantly refrigerate, euen to the chaunging of the colour. 5. When  you ſee the cholour of the aggreaued member altered, and the heat of eryſipelas ſlaked, and  the inflammation ceaſed, you muſt paſſe ouer from refrigerating and adſtrictiue medicines  before that the member be throughly blew or blacke, vnto their contraries (that is) vnto digeſtiues or diſcuſſiues and drying remeadies. 6. Thoſe eryſipelata which are cauſed of vlcers, and of other manifeſt cauſes you muſt firſt ſcarifie, and afterwarde apply a cataplaſme of barely meale. 7. If eryſipelas be not exquiſite or true, but phlegmonous: you may let bloud  without fearing any thing, eſpecially if bloud do abound in the bodie.
            
            
               CAP. XVII. Of Tumours which doe aſſociate Eryſipelas as Herpes both Miliaris and exedens, which are called of the late Chirurgians cholericke pusſhes.
               
                  THOSE tumours aboue nature, which haue any ſocietie with the aboue mencioned eryſipelas,
                  
                     De herpet
                           •
                        .
                   or any waie do ſeeme to partaine thereunto (for that they haue their proceeding of vnnaturall, & hidden choler (that is) which is not mingled with other humours, both the latter ſort of Phyſitions and alſo of Chirurgians do call mala cholericae puſtulae: but the Grecians, as Hippo. Galene and Paulus doe call them herpetae,
                  
                     Puſtulae cholericae vn
                           •
                        go appella
                           •
                        ae herpetes.
                   which worde doth almoſt ſounde and agree with the Latines, as malum quod ſerpit, the creeping euill. For 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Greeke is all one with ſerpo in Latine, whereupon 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is called ſerpens, yet herpes doth not perfectly ſignifie among the Phyſitions malum quod ſerpit, but a certaine kinde of diſeaſe whereof we now entreate, therefore the creeping euil extendeth and ſtretcheh further then herpes for phagedene are alſo called ſerpentia vlcera, creeping vlcers. But Auicene calleth all theſe kindes of pusſhes formica, and Galene numbreth them among inflammations,
                     Formica Auicennae.
                   but Celſus ſeemeth to comprehend

them vnder the name of ſacer ignis. lib. 5. cap. 28. herpes therefore is cauſed when yelow choler,
                     VVhen herpes is cauſed.
                   vnnaturall, alone, and ſecret (that is to ſaie) which is commixed with no other humour, doth flow into ſome member and there remaineth: whoſe ſubſtaunce if it be any thing thicke and ſharpe,
                     Two kindes of herpes.
                   it exulcetateth the whole skinne euen to the fleſh which lyeth vnder it, and then this euill is called of Hippo. and other Greecians 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but of  the Latines herpetes exedens or depaſcens, an eating or feeding herpes: & it is called 14. Therap. of Galen by this abſolute name,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 1. exedens vel depaſce
                           ••
                        .
                   
                  herpes. But if choler be ſome what thinne and not ſo thicke and hote, it exciteth ſmall whelkes outwardly in the ſuperficies of the ſkin (for that it doth onely as it were burne and ſcald) like vnto the ſeedes of millet or hyrſe: thy reaſon of which ſimilitude and likenes the affect is then termed of the Latines miliaris herpes: but of certaine of the Greecians after Hippocrates time it was called for the ſame reaſon 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :  for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in Greeke, is called milium with vs. And this kinde of ſpecies of herpes (Galen witneſſing the ſame lib. 2. ad Glauconem) doth borrow his name or title of the generall worde,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſome herpes 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   ſeeing that the ſame Galen calleth it herpes ſimply and without addition. Not withſtanding in another place by the name of herpes, Galene calleth it herpes eſthiomenus (that is) exedens,
                  
                     Lib. 14. therap.
                   as afterward ſhall be ſaid. But this kinde doth not altogether cauſe the vlcer, as the other doth which is called exedens, but as it hath bene ſaid, it exciteth little ſmall pusſhes to the likenes of milium, which puſhes in proceſſe of time, when they are broken out, doe turne vnto an vlcer. Therefore not without any great reaſon or cauſe did Oribaſius and certaine other alſo before Galens time, iudge and thincke, that in this kinde of euill,
                     Ex Paulo, & Gal.
                   there was mixed with choler ſome thinne fleame, which did bring forth thoſe little pusſhes, whereupon it was called of ſome puſtuloſus herpes. But the other which is called eſthiomenos,
                  
                     Lib. de 
                           〈◊〉
                         praeter naturam.
                   is not ſo mixed with fleame, but ſeemeth to be a pure choler infected with no other humour: and therefore it chaunceth with eroſion, which continually affecteth the skinne, whereupon this name is attributed vnto it. For eſthiomenos is all one with erodens o
                     •
                   
                  exedeus. And truely this euill is of one and the ſame kinde with a puſtulous and exulcerate eryſipelas, from the which notwithſtanding it ſome what differeth by reaſon of the thinnes of that bilious humour (whereof both of them doe take their beginning). That is that which Galene teſtifieth in theſe wordes. It is (ſaith he) a verie thinne humour which raiſeth herpes,
                  
                     Lib. 14. meth. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . The cholerick humour, which cauſeth herpes as verie thinne.
                   and ſo thinne truely, that it paſſeth through not onely all the inward members, which are euerie where of a fleſhie ſubſtaunce, but alſo through the verie skinne euen vnto the outward little skinne (which is called of the Greekes epidermida) which onely becauſe it ſtaieth there, it both gnaweth and feedeth on: but if it ſhould alſo pearſe through this, after the manner of a ſweat, it ſhould in no wiſe excite any vlcer, for that is a common thing vnto vlcers which doe aryſe of a byting humour, which vlcers they call spontanea, becauſe the humour which cauſeth them, is ſtayed and tarieth ſtill in their going out or iſſue. Heatherto Galene. When he nameth herpes ſimply and without any addition, he meaneth herpes eſthiomenus, as it is eaſie to be knowen by the ioyning togeather thereof, by the ſignes and cure, and ſo in that place it borroweth his title of the generall word, when it is ſimply and abſolutely called herpes, as in that litle booke de Tumeribus prater naturam, where the ſame Galene writeth thus of that kinde of herpes word for word. Herpes alſo feadeth and gnaweth vpon thoſe partes which are about it,
                     Herpes exulcerateth onely the skinne.
                   but the exulceration is of the skinne onely. But almoſt all the barbarous ſort of Chirurgians euen they of late time do comprehēd both theſe kindes of herpes videl. miliaris & exedens, vnder this title formic
                        •
                     , to whom both in this thing and in many other alſo Auicene firſt gaue the occaſion of errour, who being deceiued by the likenes of the name,
                     Auicen cōſo
                           •
                        
                        ̄
                        deth myrmeciae with herpetes.
                   becauſe the Greekes call myrmecia, that is, formica, a certaine kinde of verrucae hath through a maruelous ouerſight euē in the ſame chapter confoū
                  ded thoſe verrucae with herpetes. Guido notwitſtanding maketh a difference betweene herpes & formica, and confoundeth the name of formica ſometime with verrucae, which the Greekes call mirmecia and acrochordonae ſometime with herpes exedens, which (I meane herpes comedens) is ſometime named of the ſame Guido herpeſtes,
                  
                     Herpes eſthiomenus and eryſipel vlerratum are not all one.
                   ſometime abſolutely herpes, who alſo thought this herpes to be nothing elſe, but a puſtulous and vlcerated eryſipelas, whē this notwitſtanding, as we haue alleadged out of Galene do differ from the other by reaſon of the thinnes of the humour. For that choler which excitech herpes is thinner then that

which cauſeth an vlcerate eryſipelas. Furthermore eryſipelas, which chaunceth with vlceration, doeth not onely occupie the skinne, but with it alſo, it annoyeth ſome parte of the fleſhe vnder it. But herpes, whereof we now intreate, layeth holde on the skinne onely, and exulcerateth it. Therefore although theſe euilles are of one and the ſame kinde (as Galene thought) yet they are not altogeather one, neither are they alike.
                     Morbili ſunt, ex herpetum genere.
                   Thoſe whelkes alſo, which the interpreter of Auicene and the vnlearned companie of Phyſitions doe terme morbili, Hippocrates libro tertio epidemiarum hath comprehended vnder herpes. But theſe morbili are cauſed of a more thinne and ſlender matter then thoſe puſhes which are commonlie called variole.
                  
                     Variole.
                   For theſe (as Auicene writeth) proceede of bloude, but the other are cauſed through the admixion of choler and bloude. But if any man doeth longe or deſire to knowe what name the auncient Phyſitions did bequeath vnto theſe puſtulous vlcers: we haue declared that in Latine they were called of Plinie papula, and ſometime pituite eruptiones, fleumaticke eruptions:
                     Papularum eruptiones. Ecthymata. Exanthemata
                   but in Greeke of Hippocrates libro tertio epydem ecthymata. Of Galene exanthemata. But the ſignes, iudgementes, and cauſes of both kindes of herpes, may ſufficientlie be knowen by thoſe thinges which went before. It remayneth therefore that we nowe declare the cure of them. In curing theſe euilles called herpetes,
                  
                     
                        Herpe tum curatio.
                     
                     
                        Three thinges to be marked in the cure of herpes.
                     
                   (as in other ſuch like voluntarie vlcers, which haue their originall of a byting and vehement humour) three intentions are to be obſerued and marked. The firſt is, that the confluxion of the homour into the affected parte be ſtopped and letted. The ſeconde is, to make euacuation, of that, whatſoeuer is flowen already into the aggreued member and ſticketh faſt in the ſame. The thirde is to heale the vlcer. We doe finiſh our firſt intent, by purging the whole bodie  with ſome medicine that can bring forth the humour, whereof the euill doth grow,
                     Primus ſ
                           ••
                        
                        pus.
                   and when the bodie is throughlie emptied, by repreſſing and driuing backe the humour that floweth. Therefore in herpes exedens we muſt vſe ſome medicine, which can prouoke choler downewarde,
                     Herpes requireth the med
                           •
                        
                        cine 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   ſeeing (as we haue ſaide before) a pure and ſincere biluous humour doth procreate this euill. It happeneth therefore that in reſpecte of the emptying of the whole bodie, comedentes herpetes muſt be cured like vnto eryſipelata. Therefore becauſe it is a thinne & wateriſh humour which cauſeth this euill, Galen hath ſufficientlie declared to moilifie and ſoften the bellie gentlie, or to prouoke vrine with thoſe thinges, which can moderatlie cauſe the ſame. But in the other kinde of herpetes,
                  
                     
                        Herpes 
                              〈◊〉
                            requireth a remeadie which can purge both choler and fleame.
                     
                     
                        Reprimendi tempus.
                     
                   which by reaſon of the ſimilitude which it hath with milium, we haue ſaide to be called in Greeke miliaris and cenchria, there is required ſome remeadie which is of a mixed facultie (that is) which can purge furth both choler and fleame. For ſome haue thought and that not without great reaſon (as Galene ſayth) that in this euill there is ſome fleame commixed with choler. Furthermore that humour which aboundeth in the bodye, and cauſeth the euill, being emptyed out (as it is required) you muſt apply thoſe medicines which can repreſſe and keepe backe the flowing of the humour, for then the miniſtring of them ſhall be more without daunger, and more conuenient alſo,
                     Lib. 14. Ther
                           •
                        p.
                   ſeeing that (as Galene ſayth) if one doe thruſt backe but a little portion of the vicious humour, which after conuenient purging, remaineth yet in the bodie, to the bowelles and great veynes, yet will not cauſe any ſenſible euill at all, that can be felte.
                     Repreſſi
                           •
                        es a
                           •
                         not to be vſed if the humour be plentifull. Repriment
                           ••••
                         materia.
                   But if the quantytie of the humour be great, it ſometyme coucheth it ſelfe in ſome pryncipall member, whereas through the force of the purgyng nature the whole bodye is not euacuated either by purgyng downewarde, or by the vrine, or by the skinne, which includeth the whole bodye. But repreſſiues and repulſiues be not onelie thoſe which doe bynde, but alſo thoſe which can refrigerate without anie adſtriction. Of the which nature are theſe, as lettuce, bnottegraſſe, fenne or ponde lintles, purcelayne, endiue, ſengreene, and other of that ſorte, which were verie conuenient alſo for eryſipelas. But thoſe medicines,
                     Thoſe remeadies which doe coole & moyſten are not meete for herpes exedens.
                   which beſides their cooling are alſo apt by nature to moyſten, herpetes eſpecially depaſcentes doe in no wyſe require, but they doe onelie admitte thoſe refrigeratiues, which can alſo greatlie drie vp. For thoſe remeadies which haue but a meane and weake force to coole and drie as is nightſhade, are not ſufficient for them. Therefore by Galenes counſell you muſt in the beginning laye vppon them

the yong tender buddes of the vine,
                     Repreſſ
                           ••
                        e
                           •
                         meete for herpes exedens.
                   bremble leaues, leaues of rubum caninum, and plantayne. After applie alſo with theſe, lentles, ſometime honie and bareley meale. Alſo miniſter that cataplaſme ſine ſemper
                        •
                     ino, which is appoynted for thoſe phlegmonous tumours which proceede of fluxe, for it doth repell that which ſloweth, and it dryeth vp that which is conteined in the affected member, and it ſtrengthneth the parts about it. The beginning of the euill being paſt,
                     Cataplaſma.
                   this remeadie auaileth greatlie. Make a cataplaſme of the ryndes of pomgranades ſodden in wine, & of rhu or rhoe (that is) of the ſeedes of the ſhrub coriariū
                   (which of the late Phyſitions is called ſumach) and of the meale of bareley. But by this cataplaſme you ſhall verie well accompliſh the ſecond intention or ſcope of curing herpes,
                  
                     Sumach. Theſe thinges doe accomplish the ſecond intentiō.
                   becauſe it is of ſufficient power to digeſt that, which is flowen alreadie into the affected place, for it appeareth euidently, that thoſe remeadies which haue a repreſſing facultie, ought to exceede in the generation of the vlcer, but when the vicious humour doth ceaſe to flowe any more into the affected part then thoſe medicines are requiſite which do digeſt. As concerning our third intent which declareth the cure of the vlcer,
                     
                        The cure of the vlc
                              •
                           r in he
                              •
                           pes 
                              〈◊〉
                            our 
                              〈…〉
                            muſt be dryed vp.
                     
                     
                        Lib. 2· ad Gla
                              •
                           . How exulcerated places muſt be looked to.
                     
                   it behoueth you briefly to know theſe thinges following: videl. that euery vlcer wheather it commeth of the owne accorde, or be cauſed by ſome accidentall cauſe, doth deſire to be dryed vp by ſome medicine) as Hipp. ſaith) that is not ſharpe, byting, or vehemently prouoking, except, when the vlcer be malicious and full of corruption, for ſuch euills (ſaith Galen) require more ſharpe medicines, and thoſe which haue euen the power of fire, as is, myſos and chalcitis, and arſenicum, and lyme, and ſaendaracha, & other thinges of that kinde, which burne as hote as fire. Thoſe places therfore that are exulcerated in herpes exedens, muſt be tēded with pilles, & trochisks, writtē for the cure of herpes in thoſe bookes, which are called pharmacentici: which remedies, when neceſſitie cōpelleth vs to vſe them, muſt be throughly waſhed in paſſum or in ſome other ſweete wine, or if ſweete wine be not readie at hand, in thinne & ſomwhat ſharp wine, which is not to old (that is which for age hath no ſharpe taſt) or elſe in poſca aquoſa (which they call oxycratum.
                  
                     P
                           •
                        ſ
                           •
                        ae. Remeadies taken of Panius. Aliud. A
                           •
                         herpetes depaſcentes.
                   Paulus in the cure of herpes, which annoyeth vnder the skinne, vſeth theſe remeadies the ſcouringes of leade ſteyped in the iuice of ſmooth rew, or a cerote of myrtles in ſtead of rew. Another, of olde woll, waſhed and burnt about a torch. ʒ.xij.ſs. of wax. ʒ.xxv. of the ſcouringes of lead. ʒ.j. of goates tallow, trimmed and waſhed with water. ʒxxv, of mirtles. ℥.v. But for thoſe herpetes, which do gnaw and byte vehemenly called depaſcentes, he chargeth to vſe this remeadie: ℞. of the ryndes of ſweete pomegranates. ʒ.vj. argenti ſpume. 
                  ʒ.vj. of waſhed wooll cleauing to the torch or to ſome ſweete wood, and that burnt. ʒ.iij. of waxe ʒ.xij. of ceruſe ʒ.viij. of frankenſence, alume ſciſſible, ana. ʒ.j. let them be ſteiped in wine or in oyle of mirtles. But now the vlcers being of long continuance,
                     For inueterate vlcers.
                   thoſe trochiskes aboueſaid, and other ſuch like medicines which are appointed to cure herpetes, muſt be waſhed neither in ſweete wine, nor in poſca aquoſa, but rather in wine that is ſome what ſharpe, eſpecially in that which is blacke, and if that be not to be had, you muſt vſe white wine. But thoſe medicines which are moſt effectuall & moſt meete at that time, when vlcers be inueterate, are the pilles of muſa, andron, & polyida, whoſe deſcriptions are ſet downe in the ende of the cure of carbunculus, & thoſe trochiskes alſo, which of Auicene and the latter ſort of Phyſitions are called calidicon and aldaron. But thoſe herpetes,
                  
                     VVhat is to be done in p
                           •
                        ſtulae miliares if they turne into an vlcer. Lib ſecendo. ad Glaucon.
                   which do onely exulcerate the outward skinne, as they be, which we haue called miliares, muſt in no wiſe be enioyned to any of thoſe medicines before hearſed (if we wil credit Galen) For they be verie vehement, and doe greatly drie. But thoſe medicines whatſoeuer they be, which haue the nature and force of glaucium (that is) of memytha, ſhal ſuffice theſe vlcers, and you muſt waſhe them with this, but eſpecially with water. But if theſe thinges ſhall nothing auaile, you muſt alſo commixe vinegre therewith. Alſo if you annoint it with iuice of nighſhade, or plantaine, you ſhall help it greatlie. Heatherto haue we ſpoken of herpes. Now becauſe in that which we haue ſaide, we haue not as yet touched by the waie any thing concerning the euilles called formice, which both the Arabians, and the latter ſort of phyſitions doe erroniouſlie, as we haue ſaid, confound with herpetes: this preſent place doth require, that we ſet downe a few wordes both of them and of other tumours and increaſinges appearing in the skinne, which the Latines call verrucae.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. XVIII. Of the euils called Formicae, and of other differences of verrucae.
               
                  THOSE little tumours, or low ſwellinges, which are ſeene to appeare in the skinne like little hillockes, the Latines haue fittely called verrucae,
                  
                     Verrucae. Porra.
                   for verruca ſignifieth properly the hyeſt parte of a mountaine or hill: but the common ſort call them porra, leekes, becauſe ſomtime they haue certaine threads lying betweene them not much vnlike vnto the rootes of leekes.
                     There be diuerſe kindes of verrucae.
                   The Greekes haue no name, wherein they may comprehend all thoſe kindes of verrucae, but they doe call a certaine kinde thereof by proper names, which be theſe, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Verrucae therefore of them be called myrmecia, which are of a large foundation, and as it were ſitting iuſt to the grounde, and when they be touched,
                     Myrmecia.
                   they are felt payneful like vnto the byting or ſtinging of an ant, whereupon their name is giuen vnto them, for the Greekes doe call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , formica. Wherefore the Latines applying the name thereof to the Greeke word, haue called formicae, verrucae, and for their forme and faſhon,
                     Seſſiles verrucae.
                   
                  ſeſſiles verrucae. Theſe euils ſayth Celſus lib. 5. doe grow either in the palmes of the hands or in the ſooles of the feete: but theſe take deeper roote, and are lower and harder then a wart, and doe cauſe greater payne: and they ſend forth more ſtore of bloud, and they ſcarce at anie time exceede the bignes of a hoppe. But acrochordon is a verruca that is as it were hanging,
                     Acrochordon penſi
                           •••
                         verruca.
                   and of a more narrow foundation (that is) a certaine round highnes or growing vp in the skin, which hath the foundation (that is) the neather part verie ſtraight to the skin. It is ſo called becauſe it ſemeth to hang as though it were tyed with a ſtring.
                     The differēce betweene acrochordones, & myrmecia.
                   By this difference therefore, acrochordones are diſtinguiſhed from myrmecia, becauſe they are very ſmal at the neather ende next the skinne, but at the other ende are verie large and broad: contrarywiſe myrmecia, (as hath bene ſaide) are of a large foundation, but at the other end they are verie ſmall and ſlender. But theſe oftentimes are equall altogeather with the skin▪ and acrochordones doe alwayes appeare aboue the skinne, (as Galene. 14. lib. de morbis curandis hath manifeſtlie declared.) Beſides theſe thinges, acrochordones (as Celſus ſaith) doe grow vp thicke and manie togeather, and doe moſt trouble children, and oftentimes they fall againe ſodainely: and ſometime they cauſe but meane inflammation, there are ſome alſo, which ar turned into corrupted matter, but they ſeeldome paſſe the greatnes of a beane. They be called of Auicene claui, but the Latines doe terme claui, verrucae albae,
                  
                     Claui.
                   becauſe they be like to the round heades of nayles. Theſe do chiefely happen in the fingers, and the ſoles of the feete, where they doe cauſe great paine, the Greekes call them 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Almiſmar. Thymion.
                   but Auicene almiſmar. Theſe be often cauſed of a bruiſe, and ſometime otherwiſe. But thymion or thymon, in Engliſh a warte, is called of Celſus and of the Greekes verruncula, a litle hillocke, appearing aboue the bodie, which at the neather part next the skinne is verie ſmall (as acrochordon is) but aboue it is more large: it is alſo ſomewhat harde, and verie ſharpe in the toppe, which doth repreſent the colour of the floure time, whereuppon the name is giuen vnto it, and alſo it is eaſely ſpread abroade. Oftentimes it giueth forth ſome bloud, and is almoſt as great as an Aegyptian beane, ſeeldome bigger, but ſometime leſſer:
                     Thymij magnitudo.
                   ſometime there grow vp one alone, ſometime many togeather, either in the anckles of the feete, or in the handes, or in the ſooles of the feete.
                     Thymia in obſcaenis peſſima
                   But the worſt thymia of all are in the filthie partes of the body, where they do commonly bleede. Auicene ſeemeth to haue named this kinde of verruca, tuſium, or (as another tranſlation hath) tarſeum. Of the kinde of verrucae be thoſe euils alſo, which Auicene calleth cornna, not much differing from the other ſortes,
                     Coruna.
                   but that they be ſomewhat long and are turned crooked againe like vnto hornes. The euills called calli, (called of the Greekes alſo 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
                     Calli. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .) doe not much differ from the aforenamed claui, but that they be of themſelues without griefe and nothing painefull, and of the cholour of the skinne wherein they are reſident, neither doe they ingender of themſelues or of their owne accord, but of the hardnes of the skinne cauſed by labour.
            
            
               
               CAP. XIX. The iudgementes and cure of verrucae.
               
                  AMONG all theſe euilles acrochordon and Thimion, are oftentimes (as Celſus reporteth) ended and doe heale of themſelues,
                     Acrochordon. Thymion. Lib. 5. Myrmecia. Cla
                           •••
                        .
                   and the leſſer they be, the ſoner they be ended. But myrmecia and claui doe ſcarce at any time ceaſe without curing. If acrocordon be cut of, it leaueth noe roote he hinde it, and therefore it groweth not againe. But where thymeon and clanus be cutte of there ryſeth vppe vnderneath a little rounde roote, which deſcendeth downe ſomewhat deepe into the fleſh, and there abyding, it doth cauſe the aforeſaide euilles to grow againe. Myrmeciae doe holde faſt with verie broade rootes, and therefore they cannot be cutte of without great vlceration. It is verie profitable to cutte of clanus and then ſprinckle it ouer with hote water, for ſo it doeth waxe ſofte and tender without any more adoe, and if it doth bleede, it oftentimes dyeth and ceaſeth. It is alſo taken awaie, by clenſing it rounde about, and by laying on it roſen mixed with the beaten powder of lapis molaris. But the other kindes (as the ſame Celſus affirmeth) muſt be cured with hote medicines. Nowe the fitteſt remeadie for the other euilles is that, which is made of the dregges of wine,
                     Myrmeciae.
                   and that medycine is good for myrmecia, which is made of alumme and yelow oaker. Paulus Aegineta lib. 4. cap. 15. rehearſeth verie manie remeadies,
                     The cure of verrucae 
                           〈◊〉
                         of Paulus.
                   which doe take awaie and vtterly abandon theſe verrucae, eſpecially thoſe which be ſeſſiles and penſiles of the which kinde are claterium (which is the iuice of wilde cucumbers) rubbed on with ſalt, the barke of franckenſence with vinegre, rathe rype figges, which are rype before their time, with vinegre, meale and nitrum. Alſo the iuice or liquor of the aforeſaide figge tree annoynted doth greatlie helpe, the iuyce of tythymalus, in Engliſh ſpurge, the heade of the fiſh ſmaras ſalted and burnte, the ruſte of ſome mettall with quicke brimeſtome, (that is) which is not throughly burnt in the fire, the leaues of ocymum with ſhoemakers bleache, (which the Greekes call chancalthum,) the water of the greene twigges of the vine burnt in the fire) ſheepes dounge with vineger,
                     Aqua ex ſarmentis d
                           •
                        ſt
                           •
                        ll
                           ••
                        s.
                   goates gall anaointed, the fruite of the great herbe heliotropium applyed by it ſelfe, or miniſtred with wine, rewe with nitrum and pepper, nitrum with the vrine of a younge boy not yet accuſtomed with venerous actes,
                     Stercus bului
                           ••
                        .
                   oxes dounge miniſtred in vinegre. But theſe, which we haue mencioned as remeadies for the extirpation of myrmecia and acrochordones, are greatly alſo effectuall for thoſe euills called claus and thymia. They doe vſe alſo the heade of a lyſarde to take awaie myrmecia, acrochordones, and claui. There are ſome which doe boyle the heades of ſalted fiſhes in that water,
                     Lacertae cap
                           ••
                        .
                   which diſtilleth out of the greene braunches, while they be burning: which they doe declare to be a moſt excellent remeadie for the aforeſaide euils. Otherſome to extinguiſh theſe diſeaſes doe make a lynament of the ruſt of braſſe (which of the late Phyſitions is called virride aris & flos aris) of brimſtone, and of the diſtilled water of vine braunches. And this is the onely methood of curing, which they are wont to vſe in racing out of verrucae, (that is) by gnawing and ſcalding medycines. But this one thing is moſt diligentlie to be obſerued in adminiſtring ſuch kynde of medicynes, which Celſus doth admoniſh vs of in his fifte booke: namelie, that thoſe partes, which are about the euilles, ought to be couered with leaues, leaſt they alſo be exulcerate, for which cauſe ſome doe annoynt the places about the diſeaſes, with oyntment of bole armoniacke, with terra ſigillata, with roſe water and vinegre. Furthermore we aboliſh achrochordones, myrmecia, and thymia, not only with theſe aforeſaide burning medycines: but alſo with the flame of the fire, or with ſome hote inſtrument rightly applyed to them. Oftentimes alſo we cutte them of. But ſometyme we doe take them awaie and vtterly deſtroie them by a lygature cunninglie made and prepared for them,
                     Other orders of curing.
                   (as it happeneth in that true diſeaſe called ficus) or elſe by ſetting to the fore teeth,
                     How verrucae are ſafely burned.
                   as ſome at Rome in Galenes tyme were wont to doe. But if you ſhall applie fire or ſome hote inſtrument to verruca, you muſt prouide, that a plat of Iron or ſome ſuch thing being boored through be made readie for the burnt ſore, the hole whereof

muſt ſo fittely comprehende the ſame, that none of the skinne about it may be ſeene Aduſtion being now made, you muſt reſolue the cruſt with butter,
                     
                        The cure of myrmecia being equal with the skine.
                     
                     
                        A new cure of myrmecia out of Galene.
                     
                   or with ſome other annoynting medecine. Afterward you muſt cure the ſore like vnto other vlcers. But how mirmecia, which doe not appeare out of the skinne, but are altogeather, equall therewith, ought to be brought forth & cut of: Gal. teacheth verie well lib. 14. method. med. where he maketh mention of one in his time at Rome, who deuiſed a new order to cure theſe verruca, firſt he brough out the euilles by applying his lippes vnto them or by ſucking them, and then (which did ſeeme maruelous) he plucked them from the roote, afterward, ſetting to his foreteeth he vtterly deſtroyed them. But acrochordones,
                  
                     
                        Another cure of myrmecia Lib. 14. meth. med.
                     
                     
                        Scalprion. Scolopomach
                              •
                           
                           rion.
                     
                     
                        Another cure inuented by a quill
                     
                   appearing aboue the skinne he ſtraightway bote of with his teeth, and ſo quickly diſpatched them. Galene alſo ſetteth downe another double manner to cure theſe euills, ſaying: but a Chirurgian being ſomewhat exerciſed in manuell practiſe, may eaſily cut of theſe verrucae, both with that inſtrument made to the forme of a mirtle leafe, and with that alſo, which the Greekes can ſcolopomacherion: (this alwayes prouided) that the ſore be kept and ſeparated from the skinne or partes about it. We alſo bring fort myrmecia, by laying ſome ſtrong and ſtiffe quill about the compaſſe or circle thereof, the hollownes of which quill muſt be equall with the thicknes of myrmecia, that it may pinch it round about in euerie place. Which being afterward turned about the ſore and enforced downward it will quickly bring forth the whole myrmecia togeather with the very roote, but you muſt marke, that the verie end of the quill, which ſhall cut it in a circle, ought to be not onely thinne and ſlender, but alſo ſharpe and ſtrong. The quill therefore of an olde cocke,
                     Prima ſcitè radicem verſus abſcind
                           •
                        
                        ̄
                        da.
                   or rather of an egle is verie fit for this purpoſe. But you muſt cut it of, onely towardes the roote, ſeeing the hollownes of the other part of the quill may eaſely comprehend myrmecia,. And truely by this abſceſſion, if it be done cunningly, you ſhall learne great arte. Hitherto ſpeaketh Galene. But the vlcer which remaineth, (verruca being thus taken away) muſt be filled vp and brought vnto a ſcarre, as other vlcers be.
            
            
               CAP. XX. Of Oedama and other colde fleumaticke and flatuous tumours.
               
                  HAVING ſufficiently entreated of thoſe tumours, which are engēdred through hote humors: we are now againe determined to handle thoſe tumors which haue their originall of a colde matter, taking our exordium from that euill, which of the Greeciās is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For as eryſipelas is cauſed of a cholerick fluxe: ſo adema proceedeth of a fleumaticke humour.
                     Oedema quid.
                   
                  Oedema therefore (Galen defining the ſame) is a certaine looſe and vnpainefull tumour, or it is a certaine thinne ſwelling without paine, ryſing of a flegmatick humour that floweth into ſome member of the bodie, ſo that the ſame Galene lib. 14. The. thought of adema, that it was a diſeaſe and no ſymptomate. For truely we know (ſaith he) that ademata doth come otherwiſe then of the flowing of a flegmaticke humour, (that is to witte) of a flegmaticke humour, or vaporous ſpirite gathered into ſome member, and ſometime engendred in the ſame, as in the legges and feete, which are troubled with a corrupted water running vnder the skinne, & with the euilles called phthoe, & cachexia, which are euill habites and deformities of the bodie. For in thoſe daungerous diſpoſitions,
                     Oedema eſt 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   
                  adema is an accidentall ſymptomate of that affect which oppreſſeth the man (that is) an accident neceſſarilie following, which requireth no ſeuerall or proper cure, (as afterward it ſhall appeare). Oedema (as phlegmone and 
                     
                        •
                     ryſpelas alſo) is decerned of the chirurgians by two differences (that is) by the true, or vntrue or vnlawfull adema. A true adema commeth of naturall choler,
                     Oedema duplex verum.
                   which truely is nothing elſe, but a rawe bloude not throughly digeſted,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . which is founde in a lumpe of bloude, verie fitte to nouriſh fleugmaticke members. An vntrue and vnlawfull edema proceedeth of vnnaturall fleame.
                     VVhat fleame is.
                   That we may not deale herein any thing obſcurely, naturall choler is cold and moiſt humour, in ſubſtance crude or raw, in colour

enclyning to a certayne whiteneſſe, but in ta
                     •
                  t, and (if I maie ſpeake it) in ſmell, it is ſweete and pleaſaunt: vnnaturall fleame is that which doth degenerate and differ from that fleame before deſcribed, & yet it keepeth it ſelfe within the boundes of his circui
                     •
                   & liberty, which if it ſhall once paſſe, it is then no more to be called phlegma or fleame, but ſome other humour▪ But this fleame chaunceth to degenerate from his own proper nature two manner of waies.
                     VVhat and af
                           •
                        e
                           •
                         wh
                           ••
                         ſort fleame d
                           ••
                        h 
                           〈◊〉
                         from his owne 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   One way is (as they ſay) in it ſelfe, when in his owne naturall & proper ſubſtance it is chaunged without any admixion with any other humour, which truely happeneth very often for it is turned either into a wateriſh ſubſtaunce, or into a flatuous ſubſtaunce, or into a verie thinne matter, and then it is called phlegma aqu
                        •
                     ſum flatu
                        •
                     ſum or 
                     
                        •
                     enne: or it is turned into a thicke and viſcous ſubſtaunce, which maketh the fleame verie groſſe and clammy, and through a greater (or as we may ſay) through a further induration, it is cauſed to looke like a playſter or like glaſſe, or it doth putrifie and is altered, and then it is made both ſalt, nitrous, and corroſiue. The other waie, vnnaturall fleame is cauſed through admixion, that is, when as ſome other humour doth happen to come vnto it extraordinarily, as for example, either bloud, or cholor of melancholie. If bloud be commixed with fleame, it is made ſweete: if choler be mingled therewith, it is cauſed to be ſalt, if melancholie, it is made ſoure and ſharpe. There are therefore eight kindes of vnnaturall fleame after the opinion of Auicene. Haly Abbas appointeth foure onely. But Galen, ſaith Guido, ſeemeth to aſſigne vnto it two onely kindes,
                     Galene appointeth two kinds of fleam
                   that is, ſalt and ſower, although in his ſecond booke of the differences of feauers, and in his ſecond booke de locis affectis, and in many other places alſo, he maketh mention of the flame called vitreum, which oftentimes doth ioyne him ſelfe with ſower fleame, by reaſon of that affinitie and acquaintaunce that it hath with it. By theſe thinges therefore it is gathered, that of fleame there are ingendred eight ſpecies or differences of tumours beſides nature.8. Differences of tumours beſides nature comming of fleame.
                   For firſt of fleame that is naturall, commeth a true and lawfull aedema. Secondly of vnnaturall fleame by reaſon of admixion there proceede three other differences of tumours, becauſe that three other humours may be commixed therewith and theſe be they: aedema phlegmon
                        •
                     dos, aedema cryſipelatôdes, and aedema ſchirrhôdes. Thirdlie of vnnaturall fleame, through the alteration of his proper ſubſtaunce, there aryſe foure other differences of tumours. For firſt of windie and vaporous fleame doth come that tumour, which of the Latines is properly called inflatio, but commonly among the Phitiſitions it is termed apoſtema ventoſum, a windie apoſteme, ſecondly, of wateriſh fleame there proceedeth a wateriſh Apoſteme. Thirdly of rawe, thicke, and groſſe fleame there are engendred thoſe tumours, which ſome doe call leues nodi, and there are alſo engendred flegmaticke abſceſſions, which they doe commonly call exiturae phlegmaticae. But theſe are called of the interpreter of Auicene dubelet frigida, of which ſort are theſe ſ
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     om
                        ••
                     a, atheramata, and melicerides, ganglia alſo, which be called of Auicene glandula, and other of that kinde, which ſhall be ſpoken of in that which followeth. Now of hard or rather of indurated, and (as I may ſay) of caked fleame, there doe ariſe all thoſe harde knottes; which are moſt founde in the ioyntes, and thoſe euilles alſo called ſtrumae, which are commonly called ſcrofule. Fourthly of corrupted and putrified fleame, the do come fiſtulae and other vlſers which they call ſcrufuloſa.
               
               
                  
                     Three cauſes of aedema.
                  The cauſes of aedema, as alſo of other tumours beſides nature are threefolde. 1. Primitiue cauſes are theſe, a fall from ſome high place, a ſtripe, a naughtie dyet. 2. Antecedent,  cauſes, as the aboundaunce of a flegmaticke humour running downe into ſome member  of the bodie. 3. Coniunctae cauſae, is the verie fleame, which is alreadie ſtuffed and heaped  in the member that is beſet with a tumour.
                     Signa 
                           •
                        dema i
                           •
                        .
                   The ſignes of aedema are theſe, a looſe and ſofte tumour, which yealdeth to the weight of the finger, and is hollowe after the manner of a ca
                     •
                  e or defie, it doeth not ryſe vppe agayne at the remouing of the finger, but it doeth retayne the verie footeſteppe or marke of that which preſſeth it. There is felte verie ſmall payne, or almoſt none at all. Verie little heate, a verie white colour, or as ſome will haue it) a meane betweene whiteneſſe and paleneſſe, and other ſuch like ſignes, which doe teſtifie the dominion and power of fleame.
                     Iudicia.
                   
                  Oedema (as other tumours alſo) hath four times, the beginning the augmenting, the ſtate, and the declinatian of the tumor. This kinde of tumour is moſt cured by reſolution, or exhalation, but ſeeldome by ſuppuration,

verie often by turning and chaunging them into knottes or kernelles called nodi, or into other increaſing (as they call them) which are tearmed of the Graecians 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but of the Latines Abſceſſur. But the markes and tokens of the ending and finiſhing of theſe kindes of tumours are handled before in our generall diſcourſe of tumours. Theſe oedomatous tumours are rather excited in the winter time, then at other ſeaſons, for then very much fleume is gathered togither in mens bodies. Theſe tumours alſo do greatly and verie often trouble olde men, and them which be giuen to gluttonie.
            
            
               CAP. XXI. Of the cure of Oedema cauſed of a fleugmatike humour flowing into ſome member.
               
                  BECAVSE oedomata, after the manner of other tumours,
                     Curandi oedematis ſcopus duplex, cum ad huc gignitur.
                   are raiſed through the flux of humours into ſome member the ſcope and order of their cure, ſhall alſo be two fould. 1. The one is to diſſolue the ſubſtance of theſe humours which now do occupie the member. 2. The other is, to withſtand & reſtraine the fluxe. And as the one ſcope doth excell the other, ſo the remedies of their cure muſt be commixed togither, the one with the other, either ſomewhat plentifully or ſomewhat ſparingly. When therefore the order of raſtrayning ſhall ouercome that, which counſelleth vs to vſe euacuating and digeſting remedies, the force of reſtrictiues muſt be augmented. But when there is more neede of euacuation then of reſtriction, the nature and vertue of digeſting or diſcuſſiue and drying medicines, muſt of neceſſitie excell in the mixture. Morouer both the plentifull flux & the ſmall deale of matter in the affected part doeth tell vs that in the mixture the vertue of reſtrictiue medicines muſt be more effectuall of greater force. Contrariwiſe you muſt vſe a greater meaſure of drying & digeſting remedies, when matter aboundeth in the member very plentifullie, & the flux verie little. But in an old & inueterate oedema, & that which is alreadie ingendred,
                     The order of curing an 
                           ••
                        de oedema.
                   you ſhall not vſe any longer this order of curing which hath a mingled power, but you ſhall applie ſuch things as can diſpearſe & deuide the matter. VVhich thing alſo is diligētly to be obſerued in all other continuall vlcers. But oedema,
                  
                     Oedematis 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſymptoma eſt curatio.
                   which is an euill ſimptomat following other daungerous affects, as leanneſſe of the bodie, the dropſie & an euill habite of the body, which the Grecians call cachexia) doth deſire no proper, peculiar or ſeueral cure (as we haue before mētioned) for it cannot be cured but by expelling that euil affect, wherof it firſt groweth. Yet ſomewhat is to be remitted out of it, if it doth debilitate the ſtrength or increaſe the chiefe affect, or elſe hinder the cure. It ſhall therefore be ſufficient (if it ſhall neede any cure) to rub diligently the ſwelling place, ſometime with oxyrhodinum, ſometime wirh oile mingled with ſalt, or elſe with oxyrhodinum with ſalt. For this kind of friction doth ſlake the tumour, and doth mitigate paine, if it be prouoked through to much diſtention (as ſometime it chaunceth.) Oxyrhodinum doth ſtay the fluxe, oyle with ſalt hath power to digeſt & emptie out that which is compact in the member. But oxyrhodinum with ſalt, doth partly digeſt & drie vp, and partly reſtraine and ſtop the affluxion of humours. But our generall method being before declared, let vs turne our penne to declare the proper and particular order of curing a lawfull oedema, which hath his beginning of the flowing of thinne fleume, which method according to the opinion of the Chirurgians of our time, doth conſiſt of foure thinges,
                     Foure perticular orders to be kept in curing a lawfull oedema.
                   (as hath bene ſaid of Phlegmone and Eryſipelus) that is to ſay, 1. In a iuſt order of diet. 2. In preparing of the fleugmatike humour, which they call aequatio, an equall diuiſion, and in purging the ſame. 3. In repreſſing, diſſoluing and drying vp the humour that is flowed alreadie and nowe doeth occupie the member. 4. And laſt of all in correcting and remouing the ſimptomates or Accidentes which doe followe oedema. Theſe therefore are the foure perticular intentions, by the which we diſpatch thoſe two generall orders before mencioned.
                     Prima intētio,
                   The firſt intention therefore is perfited or finiſhed by the dewe and iuſt vſage of ſixe vnnaturall thinges, which ſhall be well and fitly applied to the ſicke bodie, if they ſhall all

decline vnto heate and drineſſe with a certaine attenuation or deminiſhing. Therefore chooſe and prepare a thinne and drie ayer.
                     A
                           •
                        r. Po
                           ••
                        s.
                   Let him take for his drinke wine that is fined and cleane from dregges, cleare, white, or ſome what red, which they call claret wine, which in his kind muſt be excellent good, and alayed a little with water. Let his bread be verie well baked,
                     Cib
                           •
                        t.
                   and well handled. Let him eate the fleſh of ſheepe, or the fleſh of the birdes of mountaines and of the plaines, and thoſe rather roſted, then ſodden. Let him vſe ſparingly fat brothes, potherbes, and other fat meates. Let him abſtaine from thinges that be vnleauened, rawe, & verie moiſt. Let him not eate of anie kind of pulſe or cheeſe, nor of vntimely and vnripe fruites, nor of fiſhes (except they be thoſe which liue in grauellie places, and thoſe alſo either roſted, or boyled in wine.) Roſted meates generally are better then ſoddē, and better then thoſe thinges alſo,
                     Rep
                           ••
                        t
                           ••
                        . lu
                           ••
                        i
                           •
                        io. Mo
                           •
                        us.
                   which the induſtrie of the baker can prouide. Let him eate little, and drinke leſſe. In all his diet let him eſchew lecherie, and gluttonie. If the belly be bound, looſe it with figges or with Carthamus. Take therefore fiue or ſix dry figges, & fill them with the pith of the ſeede of Carthamus, and eate them either in the morning, or before dinner. Let the bodie be exerciſed moderately, if ſo be, the affected member can permit the ſame without hurt.
                     S
                           •••
                        nu
                           •
                        . Balne
                           •••
                        . Secunda intē
                        tio.
                   Let his ſleepe be little and ſhort. Let him altogither auoide bathing, and all other moyſtening thinges. The ſecond intention is accompliſhed by preparatiues, or by remedies equallie deuiding (which they commonly call digeſtiues) and by medicines which can euacuate that fleugmatike matter, wherewith the bodie of the ſicke doeth abounde. Therefore you muſt giue him ſome kinde of oxymell, which can cut, deuide, & purge foorth the ſleume thar lurketh in the bodie. Afterwarde the matter going before the expulſion being thus prepared, at the appointment of ſome cunning Phiſition, muſt be emptied out with ſome medicine, that can purge fleume called phlegmagogon. But if (ſaith Guido out of Cauliacus) aboundaunce be preſent in the bodie, you may ſafelie open a veyne, but yet not without the aduiſe of ſome expert Phiſition. But in a plethoricke and full bodie there are ſcarſe at anie time ſeene anie oedemeta, eſpeciallie, theſe which be lawfull, for fleume doeth not abound in it more plentifullie then other humoures doe. Therefore it being ſimple and alone, not commixed with other humoures, it can ſeeldome flow into anie part of a plentifull bodie, wherefore letting of bloud eſpeciallie in a lawfull oedema doeth ſeeme to be nothing profitable.
                     Tertia intētio
                   The third intention is finiſhed in the beginning by applying repercuſſiues, and not by thoſe remedies, which by binding vehementlie with their naturall coldneſſe do repell and driue backe, but by thoſe which haue power to drie greatlie, and digeſt well, which they call prouokers of drineſſe and reſolution. But in the increaſe, by vſing diſcuſſiue remedies ſomewhat more forcible. But in the ſtate thereof, eſpeciallie about the end, the fluxe being alreadie ſtayed, by pure medicines, and by thoſe which do verie ſtrongly digeſt and reſolue. But in the declination by conſuming and drying helpes if the cure be to be diſpatched by reſolution. But if it doth degenerate & turne into Abſceſſions, which they call Exitura, it ſhall be cured by ripening medicines and by other helpes,
                     Remedies to be vſed in the beginning of oedema.
                   which are ſet downe for the cure of Abſceſſions. Moreouer repreſſing remedies endued with a drying and digeſting nature, which do profite in the beginning of oedema comming of the influxion of a fleugmatike humour, are comprehended vnder three ſpeciall  rules. The firſt is out of Galene libr. 14. Therapeut. & ſecundo ad Glauconem, where he ſaith, that if Oedema doeth conſiſt of a fleugmatike humour flowing into ſome member, a ſponge wet in water wherin is a little vinegre, ſhall ſometime aboundantly ſuffiſe. But theſe muſt be ſo well tempered and commixed togither,
                     Poſca aquoſa.
                   that they may either be dronke, or that they may not haue much vineger vpon it. But you muſt bind the ſponge to the place, beginning at the neather part, & ending aboue. Let the ſponge be verie new. And if there be not a newe to be gotten, you ſhall cleanſe and ſcoure the old verie diligently by waſhing it in nitrum and aphonitrum, and in lye. Auicene commaundeth that in ſteede of a ſponge, you ſometime apply a double linnen cloth, or ſome ſuch like thing. The ſecond rule is mencioned  of Auicene him ſelfe. ℞. Baurach of the decoction of water (that is) of ſalt peter, or of  the ſome of ſalt peter, of aſhes, of vinegre, of eche as much as ſhall ſuffice. The third rule is deſcribed of Razi
                        •
                     
                   after this maner. ℞. Aloes, mirrhe, lycium, acatia, ſief, memitha (that is) of Glaucium,
                  
                     Emplaſtrum Razi
                           •
                        .
                   of Cyperus, of crocus orientalis, of bole armoniacke, of ech a little quantitie: pouder

them, and commixe them with the iuyce of colewortes called Braſſicae, and with vinegre: & make an emplaiſter. Furthermore thoſe remedies which were of late rehearſed,
                     Remedies to be vſed in the time of increaſing.
                   do alſo help much the increaſing of this oedematous tumour, if you do put vnto them a good quantitie of vinegre, and a little Alume, eſpecially in ſtrong bodies, which haue a harde ſkinne, and when as aquoſior poſca ſhall not auaile. Therefore if oedoma doth not ceaſe or reſt with theſe helpes mencioned a little before, when you binde it to againe, you ſhall commixe a little more vineger, that the poſca may be the ſtronger: or you ſhall lay on a little alume, and apply a newe ſponge. For this doth helpe as an excellent medicine, and doeth long continue verie effectuall, and with his ſubſtance it doeth drie vp the affected member. If there be no plentie of new ſponges, it is better (ſaith Galene) to vſe that which the common ſort call,
                     Lib. 14. Ther. & 2. ad. Glau.
                   
                  elychnion. But aboue all things let it be ſoft, which kind is vſed at Tarſis, whereof if there be anie plentie, you may boldly vſe: for you ſhall trie it to be more profitable, then the vſing of ſponges. But let it be wetted in Poſca, & a little alume therewith. Then (as it is ſet down alreadie) let it be bound to, and let the binding beginne at the neather partes, and end aloft. Let the binding be meane and ſmall, as in the ſetting of a bone. But truly the firſt caſting about of the ſwathing band, which muſt begin beneath, ought to be tied ſomewhat ſtrait, but all the reſt, muſt be ſlaked by little and little, but yet not ſo,
                     Remedies 
                           〈◊〉
                         the ſtate and declination.
                   that any part of the binding be looſe. Now the remedies which are to be miniſtred after the vigour of the ſtate, whē the flux is ſtayed, and in an vniuerſall declination (if oedema doth require reſolution) are wont alſo to be deſcribed and contained vnder a three folde rule. 1. The firſt is of Auicene, which is a  ſponge dipped in lye, of the aſhes of the figge tree, of the vine, and of the holine, which is a kind of oke, apply theſe to the mēber,
                     S
                           ••
                        ng
                           •
                        a aqua 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                   for truly in them there is great power and vertue both to drie and to cleanſe. 2. The ſecond is of Brunus which Theodoricus alſo vſed. ℞. of Alume, brimſtone, mirrhe and ſalt, of ech a like quantitie. Commix all theſe with oyle of roſes, and with vinegre, & make a liniment,
                     Lini
                           •
                        entum.
                   which yet doth drie more ſtrongly then the former remedie. 3. The third is of Auicene likewiſe, whoſe deſcription is this as followeth. ℞. of cowes  dung. lb.ſs. of olibanum, of ſtyrax, of Vſnea (that is) of the moſſe of trees,
                     E
                           ••••
                        aſirum 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Vſnea 
                           〈…〉
                         ſeu 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   which is called of the Grecians bryon, of calamus aromaticus, of ſpikenard, of wormwood. ana. ℥.ſs. apply all theſe with vineger, and with the decoction of coleworts, and make an emplaiſter. And this trulie is the way to cure oedema, which is finiſhed by reſolution. But if they do not yeeld vnto digeſtion, but doe come vnto ſuppuration, you may apply and that verie profitably vnguentum è ſuccis called diachylon, and that ointment eſpecially which Rogerius was wont to make. To the ſame purpoſe alſo this emplaiſter following is verie effectuall. ℞. mallowes, branke vrſine, or hircina, which is called Achantus and achanta, roote of Althaea, roote of lillie, roſted onions, ſnailes, leauen, lineſeede, ſodden and kneaded, and mingled with ſwines greace, or with butter, bring them into the forme of an emplaiſter, or rather of a cataplaſma. Another for the ſame purpoſe verie effectuall. ℞. of the iuyce of elder, of walwort, of ſorrell (which our countrimen do call lapatium acutum) of leuiſticū
                   or liguſticum, & of fennel: of ech of thē,
                     This is giue
                           •
                         to Theodoricus.
                   as much as you thinke good, yet of an equall weight, boile them with dialthaea, with hony, oile, and butter, and of them make a cataplaſme. The Apoſteme being ripe, do not tary till it open of the owne accord, for that happeneth ſeldome, or peraduenture neuer, but let apertion be made with ſome hote iron, or ſome burning medicine,
                     Apertio.
                   wherwith the matter may be purged out, according to the maner and forme before expreſſed. Then let the filthineſſe be cleanſed out and wiped away with that ointment commonly called vnguentum Apoſtolorum, or with a mundificatiue of apium, & with the iuyce of wormewood, or with this ointmēt following which doth draw and cleanſe the thicke and groſſe matter. ℞. of galbanum,
                  
                     A mundificatiue ointment which is attributed to 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   of Ammoniacum, of roſen, terebinthina, pitch, of bullocks tallow, of old oyle. ana. a like quantitie: diſſolue the gummes in vinegre, & let them melt or boile vpon the fire with the reſt, & make an ointmēt. Afterward let it be cured like vnto other filthy vlcers. But we diſpatch our fourth intention, according to the nature & qualitie of the accidents that chaunce verie ſodenly,
                     Qu
                           •
                        rta intentio.
                   as if paine doth happē, it muſt moſt eſpeciallie be mitigated, by applying moiſt oyle of wol, (after the doctrine of Auicene) or by boiled wine, or by a cerate made of the oile of chāmomil, of the oile of wormwood, of the oile of ſpeake & of wax. But if hardneſſe be preſent it muſt be diſſolued & mollified with the marrow of the bones of bullocks, or with harts marrow, or

with ſome ſuch like thing,
                     Li. 2. ad Gla
                           ••
                         Oedemare 
                           〈◊〉
                        . C
                           •
                        pi
                           •
                        a curatio 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   as hereafter ſhall be ſaid. But Galene in an inuerterate oedema did annoint the ſore with oile, & then miniſtred a ſponge dipped in lie, and binding it ſomwhat iuſt or ſtraite did perfectly cure the euill.
               Now it remaineth that we ſet downe the ſumme of the cure of oedema. 1. Firſt therfore vnto  an oedema, which is a ſymptomate happening and comming ſodeinly with other diſeaſes (as the dropſie,
                     Oedema morbi accidens.
                   leanneſſe of the bodie, & that euill called cachixia) apply ſuch medicines as can diſcuſſe & dry vp without griefe. 2. Therfore rub the ſwolne place diligētly with oxymel, 
                   or with oxyrhodinum, or with oyle and ſalt, or elſe with oxyrhodinum & ſalt: for by this frictiō you ſhall both mitigate the paine (if any be cauſed through diſtention) & remit the tumour  alſo. But to an oedema which commeth of the influxion of thinne fleume, if flux doth not yet ceaſe apply thoſe medicines,
                     Oedema morbus.
                   which can partly digeſt, & partly cōſtraine & reſtraine. 4. Therfore bind to a new ſpong, or ſome other dipped in lie, or wetted firſt in alayed Poſca, eſpecially  in ſoft and tender bodies, & (if the tumour doth poſſeſſe the members of the bodie) bind about them ſoftely ſome ſwadling band from the neather part to the vpper, as we vſe to do in ſetting of bones. 5. But if by theſe remedies, the tumour doth not ſlake or yeeld, put a little  alume with poſca. vidz. with oxycratum. 6. But if the affect ſhalbe of any cōtinuance you muſt  not vſe anie more theſe remedies which haue a mingled faculty (that is to ſay digeſting and reſtraining) but rather digeſtiues & diſcuſſiues.
                     Oedema i
                           ••
                        eteratu
                           •
                        .
                   7. Therefore, the member being firſt annointed  with oyle, you muſt miniſter a ſponge (as we haue ſaid) dipped in lie, & bind it with ſwathing bands ſomwhat iuſt and ſtrait.
            
            
               CAP. XXII. Of Tumours aboue nature, which the Latines call inflationes, but they are commonly called vvindie Apoſtemes, apoſtemata ventoſa.
               
                  IT is nowe verie requieſite for vs to diſpute of the tumours called Inflationes, whoſe cure is diuerſe from the cure oedemata.
                  
                     The differēce betweene inflatio & oedemae.
                   For they (as Galene ſaith lib. 14. Therap.) haue their originall of a phlegmaticke humour, and therefore do yeeld vnto touching and handling, and our fingers being layed theron do deſcend ſomewhat deepely into them. But Inflationes doe come of a flatuous ſpirite gathered togither, breeding ſometime vnder the ſkinne, ſomtime vnder the thin filmes, which are compaſſed about with the bones, or they doe ſhut in and include the muſcles, or elſe ſome part of the bowelles. Furthermore ſometime there is alſo not a little of this humour gathered togither in the belly and in the inward partes, and alſo in the middle ſpace of them, and of the peritonaeum, as in that kind of water (ſaith Paulus) vnder the ſkinne (which euill we call a Timpanie.
                     Lib. 4 Theſe alſo differ from oedemata, becauſe they being touched with the fingers do not retaine anie mark, and they do giue a ſound like a tabour, and alſo becauſe ſomtime, they are contained in a ſenſible hollowneſſe, and that oftentimes verie great. The cauſe of theſe kinds of inflations, is the weakeneſſe of the naturall heate, which is placed in a flegmatike matter to prouoke windineſſe.
                     Inflation
                           ••
                         cauſae. Lib. 6. de morbis et ſympto
                        
                           •
                        a.
                   For truely heate may take vp ſuch a vapour of a moiſt ſubſtance, but it can not deuide nor diſcuſſe it. For euen as (ſaith Galen) we ſe in outward things, that a verie cold conſtitution (eſpecially when the North wind bloweth) doth make the aire verie calme, and a verie hote conſtitution in ſommer maketh the ayre pure & cleare, but the middle conſtitutions do cauſe cloudes, ſo it happeneth in liuing creaturs. For heate, neither by extreame weakeneſſe, nor yet by vehement ſtrength can beget wind, but when it getteth a meane betweene theſe affections. For this vapour is holden in ſome place (as Auicene ſaith) either becauſe of the thickneſſe of the member, or for the groſneſſe of the vaporous ſpirite.
                     Lib. 4. Which thing alſo Paulus after the opinion of Galene witneſſeth in theſe wordes: ſaying, that the thickeneſſe of the members, and the groſſeneſſe of the ſpirit or vapour doeth cauſe, that the ſame vapour is not diſpearſed abrode.
               The ſigns of inflation are theſe, a tumor not yelding to any touching or handling, it appeareth very cleare & bright,
                     Inflationum notae.
                   & whē it is beatē on, it giueth a ſoūd like vnto a bottle, or timpany Moreouer there is felt oftentimes windineſſe throughout the whole bodie, ſomtime running this way,
                     Inflationum prognoſtica.
                   ſometime that way, which cauſeth extenſiue paine. But concerning the iudgementes

and opinions hereof, a flatuous or vaporous ſpirit, which is not diſſolued and dſperſed, doth procure manie diſcommodities. But a breathing and windie vapour▪ courſing vp and downe within the bodie with paine and great anguiſh, is greatly to be feared, becauſe it doth ſeeme to be drawn from ſome venemous matter. But now ſeing theſe three thinges. vidz. the moiſt matter, the imbecillity of the naturall heate,
                     Inflationum curatio.
                   and the thickneſſe of the poores of the bodie, do concurre togither to the generation of inflatio (as hath alreadie bene declared) the order therefore of the cure thereof ſhall be this, firſt to ſtrengthen the ſubſtance of the heate, to extenuate the vapour and flatuous matter, & to preuent or open the thickneſſe of the poores of the bodie (wherein this vaporous ſpirite gathered nowe togither, is contayned.) Nowe wee make perfect and we finiſh the two later thinges, that is, the raryfying of the thicke bodie, and the extenuation of the groſſe vapour, by one and the ſame kinde of medicines, which is by vſinge thoſe remedies which doe profite to the extenuation of the members and by applying thoſe helpes, which can heate either more or leſſe according to the inflation of the afflicted members according to the thickeneſſe or thinneſſe thereof, and according alſo to the groſeneſſe or thinneſſe of the vapours. For according to the difference of theſe things, the power or facultie of thoſe medicines, which are miniſtred, ought to be intended and remitted. The thinne parts therfore, & the vapour or ſpirit which is not verie thick, are but meanely to be dealt withall: but the groſſe members, & that vapour which containeth much thick matter, do require medicines, which may greatly extenuate & heate them. But if the ſubſtaunce of naturall heate ſhall periſh or deminiſh, it muſt be repaired againe, regarding the greatneſſe of the loſſe thereof. But if it ſhall be altered, you muſt bring it vnto a certaine mediocritie. But if greefe therewithall ſhall vexe or moleſt the ſicke, you muſt haſten vnto thoſe helpes which can mitigate paine. Verie well therefore haue the Chirurgians of our age declared,
                     Three intent
                           ••
                        ns of 
                           〈◊〉
                         inflations.
                   that the cure of Inflationes (which they call Apoſtemata ventoſa) is diſpatched by three intentions. The firſt conſiſteth of a iuſt and due obſeruation of diet. The ſecond of a good concoction or digeſtion, and the thirde dependeth of the diſcuſſing and diſpearſing of the windie ſpirite, which is aſſembled in the member. Therefore let the inſtitution of diet be after this manner.
                     Prima intētio
                   Firſt of all you muſt abſtaine from all groſſe, viſcouſe, rawe, fleugmatike, and windie meates:
                     Cibus.
                   as are, ſweete meates, all kinde of pulſe, rawe fruite, rape rootes, Cheſtnuttes, and other thinges of that ſort, which doe ingender a flatuous vapour. You muſt vſe hoate and drie thinges, and thoſe remedies alſo, which can attenuate, and diſſolue windineſſe, as is bread made of barley with a little ſalt and commin ſeede. Let the patient his drinke be white wine, or claret wine, or vinum Graecum.
                  
                     Potus.
                   Let him vſe the decoction of Cicers mixed with onions, let him take apium hortenſe (which is commonlie called petroſelynum, parſley) calamint, rewe, commin. Let the fleſh which he eateth on, be rather roſted then ſodden, and eſpecially the fleſh of birdes (as hath bene ſaide in the former Chapter.
                     Secunda intentio.
                  ) But nowe that you may diſpatch the ſecond intention, you muſt ſtrengthen and corroborate the vertue concoctiue with ſome ſweete and odoriferous ſauours, and by confections, and by electuaries appointed for this purpoſe, as be theſe, diacuminum, diacalaminthae, Aromaticum roſatum, and this confection following, which they call Drageta. ℞. of anniſe,
                     Drageta helpeth digeſtion
                   of fennell, Caruus, daucus, commin, of laurell bearies, beaten togither. ana. ℥.j. of liquorice, galingale, white ginger. ana. ℥.ſs. of Cloues, cubebs, of long pepper, ſeede of rewe. ana. ʒ.ij. of anniſe ſeede couered ouer with ſuger. ℥.iij. of ſuger. lb.ſs. make a powder. But outwardlie let the ſtomach be annointed with oyle of ſpeke, of Coſtum, and rewe: or make an Epitheme of thoſe thinges which can diſcuſſe winde, and which are appointed to helpe concoction, and let it be applied to the ſtomach. But theſe things do rather pertaine vnto Phiſicke, then vnto Chirurgie.
                     Tertia intentio.
                   The thirde intention is accompliſhed by applying ſome medicine, which hath a double vertue (that is) which can both concoct, digeſt, and moderately binde, neither will increaſe paine. But to the perfiting of theſe things, there are appointed three manner of remedies. libr. 14. Therapent. The firſt is mentioned of Galene in theſe wordes. In the arteries (ſaith he) and in the muſcles, which are vnder the ſkinne, or vnder the filmes which doe couer the bones, when Inflatio is riſen, if it be without griefe, ſome liquor applied to the thinneſt members ſhall profite greatly, of the which

nature is lye miniſtred with a newe ſponge. But if griefe doeth alſo trouble him, you muſt annoint the member with ſome oyle,
                     Inflatio commeth of a bruſe in the arteries, muſcles, & filmes which couer the bones.
                   which hath power to mitigate and remit the ſame. Theſe diſeaſes happen through a ſtripe or bruiſe, when as either the muſcle, or the filme, which compaſſeth the bone, is bruiſed or hurt, vppon which filme that goeth about the bone, the aforeſaide ſponge muſt be layed. 2. The ſecond rule is deſcribed alſo in the ſame place after this ſort: but vnto the muſcles (for they ſometime are painefull) you muſt apply ſome medicine which can mitigat paine in greater meaſure, ſo that to them you muſt applie not onelie lie alone,
                     Sapa.
                   but you muſt put into it both Sapa, and alſo a little oyle. But it ſhall be more profitable in the beginning not to applie lye, but to vſe Sapa with wine, and a little vinegre, and to put to them a little oyle, which thinges when they are mingled togither,
                     Lana ſuccida.
                   it is good to heate them, and lay on vnwaſhed wooll (which they call ſuccida) dipped in them. But if there be no plentie of ſuch wooll, then the oyle of wooll is to be vſed with the former mixture,
                     Oeſipus
                   but if oyle of wooll be at hand neither, you ſhall commix very well ſome Cerate,
                     Ceratum e
                           •
                        t 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   which is made of the oyle of wooll. For the bruſed muſcles muſt needes be lenified with ſome medicine which hath a double ſtrength (that is) which can both concoct, digeſt, and moderately binde. But if the medicine containeth no aſtriction, it increaſeth ſometime phlegmone, and eſpeciallie in thoſe bodies, which are plethoricke and full of humours. Being mindfull therefore of theſe three indications alreadie declared (that is, of concoction, digeſtion, and moderate adſtriction) in the muſcles which are inflated by meanes of ſome bruſe or ſtripe, when great paine doeth afflict, you ſhall the rather vſe a more mitigating remedie, and you ſhall greatlie reſiſt paine, by vſing more oyle and wine, whoſe force I knowe to be mightie, when as paine togither with the inflation doeth ſpeedelie haſt to an end. And truely the time is the ſhorter, if you miniſter thoſe things, which haue a ſtrong and mightie effect, as are theſe, lie and vinegre, and next after them wine hath a mightie operation. As often therefore as you minde not to aſſwage paine, you ſhall caſt into the mixture a greater quantitie of lye and vinegre. Againe when you intend to repell and driue backe, you muſt put in more of wine then of other thinges, which wine ſhalbe the more effectuall for this purpoſe if it be blacke and ſharpe. But if you pleaſe to digeſt, you ſhall miniſter the greater quantitie of lye. But if you ſhall mingle vineger with them, the mixture ſhall be profitable both wayes, becauſe that vinegre hath a double & mingled facultie. But when the muſcle is not pained, you may lawfully for want of lye vſe Aphronitrum but it muſt not be grauellie,
                     Proliximio Aphro
                           •
                        irum. Formnia tertia.
                   but rather foamie. The third rule is an emplaiſter made of the filthineſſe which is wiped from the bodies of men that wraſtle, and of vnſlaked lime, boiled togither in water and wine. Theſe are the words of Galene lib. 14. Therap. But thoſe inflations (ſaith he) which through negligence are inueterate and of ſome antiquitie, you ſhall apply to them thoſe helpes which are made of lye (as hath bene ſaid before) and ſecondlie you ſhall miniſter ſome emplaiſter.
                     How an olde inflation must be handled.
                   But I will declare alſo the example or order how to prepare theſe thinges. Firſt the filthineſſe that cometh of mens bodies muſt be heat, and thoroughly ſtrained, that it may be cleane and pure: then againe take the lime, which muſt be brayed as ſmall as meale, and ſprinkle it in the veſſell where the filthineſſe is, and tempter it togither to the thickneſſe of clay. That medicine alſo is very good for theſe inflations, which is made of Sycomorus, and other remedies of that ſort do greatly help alſo. But if this flatuous ſpirite,
                     If the 
                           •
                        iddie vapour ſhalbe venemous.
                   which cauſeth the inflation, ſhall be ſmokie, wicked, corrupted, and excited of a venemous matter, with intollerable paine, and vehement heate, running vp and downe in the members of the bodie, no more ſafe or better counſell can be giuen, then that (when it is reſident in ſome perticular member) that member be ſtraightway bound beneath and aloft, & in the middeſt the tumour be opened with a raſour, or wi
                     •
                  h ſome hote inſtrument, ſo that the venemous vapour may eaſily come foorth. Afterward the gaping wound muſt be filled with Aloes, and with bole armoniacke diſſolued in oyle of roſes and vinegre. But within three or foure dayes after,
                     Victus ratio. Theriaca. The ſumme of curing of a flatuos tumour.
                   you muſt fill vp the wounde with fleſh, and bring it to a ſcarre. But in ſuch venemous inflations, a verie thinne diet muſt be obſerued, and the bodie muſt be emptied with ſome purging medicine. And if you miniſter Theriaca to the ſicke, it will helpe him greatly. Nowe there remaineth the ſumme of the cure of a flatuous tumour,  which we minde to declare in theſe wordes following. 1. Firſt confirme and ſtrengthen

the weake ſubſtaunce of heate that is in the affected member, reſtore the ſame againe, and when it is altered bring it into ſome mediocritie. 2. Extenuate the vaporous and windy humour, which raiſeth the tumour. 3. Open the thicke pores of the skinne, and of the whole  affected member with medicines that are effectuall for the thinneſſe of the members, afterward ſeeke to diſcuſſe the flatuous vapour. 4. But according to the difference of the affected  partes, and according to the thickneſſe of the flatuous vapour, or the thinneſſe of the medicines which are applied, intend and remit aſwell the matter, as the facultie & vertue of them. 5. Furthermore, if ſuch a vaporous tumour ſhall chaunce with greife and with inflammatiō
                   (as it happeneth in the muſcles which through ſome bruiſe are ſtuffed out with wind) apply in the beginning mitigating medicines: but in proceſſe of time, vſe ſuch remedies, as haue power to diſſolue, encreaſing by little and little the plentie thereof. 6. Inflations, through  negligence are inueterate, firſt annoint them with lie, and then lay to ſome plaiſter, which can mollifie, diſſolue and diſcuſſe them.
            
            
               CAP. XXIII. Of a Tumour cauſed of a thinne ſubstance, which they call Aquoſum Apostema (that is) a wateriſh Aposteme.
               
                  IF fleame doth vniuerſally abound throughout the whole bodie, that kinde of diſeaſe (which is a wateriſh humour running betweene the skinne and the fleſh, called Leucophlegmatia) doth accompanie the ſame,
                     Leu
                           •
                        o
                           ••••
                        gmatia.
                   as Galene hath noted in his ſixte booke de ſymptomatum cauſis. But when this flegmaticke humour doth flow in one onely member, there is engendred oedema: for ſo they call a looſe tumour, which is without paine. But if wateriſh excrementes doe abound,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   they are wonte to bring the d
                     •
                  opſie (which they call aſcites) which if they ſhall couche them ſelues in one onely member, they doe raiſe in it phlyctaenae (that is to ſay) puſhes or whelkes. Furthermore the latter ſorte of Phyſitions haue bene accuſtomed to call this kind of wateriſh tumours, Aquoſum phlegma, as alſo they doe terme that humour to be fleame,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . which floweth in the feete and legges of them, that are troubled with the dropſie, and aboundeth in the leane partes of the bodie, and in other members, which doe labour of an euill habite, (which the Grecians call Cachexia. And theſe kindes of tumours which doe proceede of wateriſh fleame, or of the aforeſaide ſerous encreaſing, they doe alſo call vnlawfull and vntrue oedemata. But in thoſe daungerous diſpoſitions or diſeaſes they call it Tabes, which name Hydrope and Cachexia doe require,
                     Li. 2. ad Glau. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . & 14. Therap.
                   but oedema (as hath bene alreadie declared out or Galene) doth not deſerue the name of a diſeaſe, but of a ſymptomate, for that truely it needeth no particular or ſeuerall cure. For the onely rubbing of it with oxyrrhodinum, or ſometime with ſalt and oyle, or with ſalt and oxyrrhodinum doth ſtop it, and many other things or that kinde doe worke the like effect. But the cauſes of theſe tumours are theſe, the altering of the vertue or facultie of the members through a colde and corrupted intemperature of the bodie,
                     Cauſae.
                   & the naughtyneſſe of nouriſhment, declining to aquoſitie, as you may eaſilie gather out of the ſixth booke de ſymptomatum cauſis.
                  
                     Signae.
                   The ſignes and iudgementes are almoſt all one with a true oedema. Yet they differ in this, becauſe in the wateriſh tumours the tumour is more looſe, then in a lawfull oedema: and therefore it doth not ſo reſiſt touching, neither doth it ſound like winde, but rather as water, and it doth ſeeme to ſhine after a ſorte, when one beholdeth it againſt the light. Now concerning the iudgements of this kinde of tumour there is no doubt but that a wateriſh tumour proceedeth of a greater coldneſſe then a flatuous tumour doth,
                     
                        Indiciae. Aſcites is cauſed of more 
                              〈◊〉
                            then Timpani
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        VVhat partes theſe tumuors do moſt occupy.
                     
                   as Galene declareth in the eleuenth commentarie of his fourth booke of Aphoriſmes. But it ſeemeth (ſayth he) that a wateriſh Hydrops, which they call Aſcites, is engendred of great coldneſſe, but a Tympanie of leſſe colde, which diſeaſe is named of Hippocrates a dry water running betweene the skinne. For a moyſt ſubſtaunce cannot be chaunged into a flatuous vapour without ſome heate. Moreouer wateriſh tumours doe happen oftener in the feete, in the ſtones, and coddes, in the heade, and in the ioyntes, then in any

other partes of the bodie, both becauſe ſuch a kinde of humour doth readily ruſh into thoſe partes, and alſo, becauſe heate is verie meane and litle in them: for becauſe they be farre of from the hoteſt members. And as a flatuous vapour is ſeeldom found without a wateriſh humour: ſo a wateriſh or ſerous humour is ſcarce contained at any time in any member without a windie ſpirite. Hitherto haue wee ſpoken of the generation, the cauſes, ſignes, and iudgementes of a wateriſh Tumour: nowe we will ſet downe the cure thereof. Seeing that theſe wateriſh tumoures are cauſed (as we haue ſaid alreadie) of the flowing of a ſerous humour,
                     Aqu
                           •
                        ſi in
                           •
                        oris c
                           ••
                        atio.
                   there needeth no other meanes, eſpeciallie no other generall order to Cure them, then that methode, which we haue expreſſed alreadie in the Cure of other tumoures, which are ingendred of the influxion of humoures into ſome member.
                     Curatio duplex.
                   The order therefore of remedying ſuch kinde of tumoures in the beginning ſhall conſiſt of two pointes (that is to ſay) 1. to emptie out that which is flowed. 2. and to ſtop and inhibite the fluxe of the humour. Wherefore, as in all other diſeaſes, which are yet but a begetting, ſo alſo in theſe affectes, the Phiſition muſt be carefull and diligent, as well in curing them, as in foreſeeing the daunger following. (that is) both to remedie the diſeaſe, and prouide for the fluxe. The firſt order therefore is ſubiect to that part of the arte of Phyſicke, which cureth the diſeaſes: but the ſecond belongeth to that part, which preuenteth the diſeaſe to come. But that we may profit and diſpatch this doubt and generall methode,
                     Fiue particular intentions in curing a wateriſh tumour.
                   it is neceſſarie to recite fiue other particular intentions, expreſſed of Guido out of Cauliacus for the cure of a wateriſh tumour in this manner & order, as followeth. The firſt conſiſteth in a iuſt inſtitution & obſeruation of a good diet. The ſecond in the helping & furthering of concoction. The thirde in  purging out the wateriſh humour by the bellie. The fourth in bringing out of the wateriſh  humour through the paſſages of the vrine. The fifte & the laſt conſiſteth in the euaporating  and drying vp of that wateriſh humiditie which is compact & contayned in the aggreaued member. But becauſe the foure firſt intentions do rather partayne vnto the Phyſition then vnto the Chyrurgian, for whoſe profit we haue taken this worke in hande, and alſo becauſe they may ſufficientlie be knowen by thoſe thinges, which went before: we are determined to handle in this place the laſt intention onely, which requireth ſome newe inuented remedies. The fift intention therefore is ended with thoſe medycines which can drie vppe, and reſolue theſe wateriſh and ſerous humours, which are contayned in the affected member.  But of theſe remedies there are commonly ſet downe three rules or orders. The firſt is out of Galene lib. 2. ad Glauconem, and lib. 14. method. medendi. which is made of oxyrrhodinum 
                   and ſalte (as hath bene before declared.) The ſeconde is out of the ſame authour, which is a new ſponge, dipped in lie, and to this purpoſe ſerueth thoſe remedies alſo, which we haue before ſet downe for the cure of oedemata: with the which helpes (that they may drie vppe and diſcuſſe the more ſtronglie) you muſt commixe, Aphronitrum, alume, and b
                     •
                  ymeſtone. The thirde rule is a certayne emplayſter deſcribed of Auicene for the  cure of ſcrofule, which emplayſter he attrybuted to Galene in libro ſuo de compoſitione medicamentorum 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . But this emplayſter (as he ſayth) within one weeke at the moſt, and oftentimes within three dayes doth reſolue all the hardneſſe of the euill. But although this emplaiſter cannot be founde in the booke before rehearſed to belong vnto Galen: notwithſtanding we may vſe the ſame verie fitly to the diſſolutiō of a wateriſh and flatuous hardneſſe: whoſe diſcription out of Auicene is this that followeth. ℞. of muſtard ſeede, of nettle ſeede,
                     Auicennes emplaiſter to diſcuſſe wateriſh tumours.
                   brimſtone, ſpuma maris, ariſtolochia rotunda, and bdellium ana. ℥.j. of ammoniacke, old oyle, & wax ana. ℥.ij. But if the hardneſſe of the tumour be not diſcuſſed by this emplayſter, you can deuiſe no other more excellent or more preſent remedie, then to open it with ſome inſtrument, & then to clenſe it & ſcoure it, & afterward to cure it after the maner of other filthie vlcers.
                     Capita curationis aqu
                           •
                        ſi tumoris.
                   The ſumme of curing a wateriſh tumor is this. 1. Appoint ſuch a diet to the ſick, as can attenuate, heate, & dry vp. 2. Let him vſe a moderate exerciſe of his body, let him eate & drinck litle, let him not ſleepe much, let him oftētimes prouoke his belly & bladder to auoyd  excremēts. 3. Take heed that he digeſteth his meate wel, & that it begetteth not windines. 4. Purg out the wateriſh humor, wherwith the whole body of the ſick doth aboūd by the belly, & by the pores of the vrine. 5. Dry vp, & digeſt through breathing that ſerous humor which 
                   is included in the affected mēber. 6. But if it cannot thus be diſcuſſed, put ſome penknife, or

ſome other hote inſtrument into the tumour, if it occupieth the arteries, and open it in that place where it is moſt inclined downward, that ſo the humour may the more eaſily come foorth. 7. Euacuate the humour, which did cauſe the tumour by ſome emiſſarie, and then  without delaie diſpatche all other thinges which doe pertaine vnto the cure of other corrupted vlcers of the like nature.
            
            
               CAP. XXIIII. Of the diſeaſes called Glandulae, Nodi, and Strumae, together vvith other Abſceſsions, vvhich they call Phlegmaticae Excreſcentiae.
               
                  GANGLIA ſo called of the Grecians, Choerades (that is) Strumae,
                  
                     Enumeratio abſceſſu
                           ••
                        m pitu
                           ••
                        oſ
                           •
                        rum.
                   which they alſo call Scrofule, Bronchocêle, which they name Bocium, and Hernia gutturis, Melicerides, Steatomata, and Atheromata: alſo Teſtudo, Talpa, Nacta or Nap
                        •
                     a, which names giuen to Tumours were inuented of the late Phyſitions, and are not to be found amongeſt auncient writers: Thoſe Tumours alſo which Auicene calleth Fugille, alſo Nodi, and vulgaris Bubo, together with many other tumours of that kind, in what parte ſoeuer of the body they do grow, they haue their generation of fleume, and for that cauſe they are iuſtly referred vnto phlegmatike tumours. But although certaine of the aboue named Abſceſſions do degenerate into a ſtony hardneſſe and into ſcirrhous diſeaſes: yet the roote and the originall beginning of them for the moſt parte is fleume, (as Auicene declareth) yet we will not deny, but that ſome other humour may ſometime be commixed with fleume, wherof ſuch kind of Abſceſſions do come, and ſo there do grow vp thoſe Abſceſſions which are both compound and of an other kind. But our intent is to ſpeake here of ſimple Abſceſſions onely, by whoſe proportion or analogie the knowledge of compound tumours ſhall appeare moſt euidently:
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   for the one muſt alwayes be referred vnto the other as it were vnto certaine rules or canons (as we haue ſaid elſe where.) Therefore all the aforeſaid tumours are comprehended vnder the kind of phlegmatike Abſceſſions or (that I may ſpeake after the maner of the cōmon Chyrurgians) vnder the Genus of phlegmatike increaſinges, which diſeaſes haue certaine ſpeciall differences among them ſelues, (as it ſhall afterward appeare.) For Glandula, (as Guido thought) tooke his title of the likneſſe of Glans,
                  
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   an acorne, which forme he doeth ſeeme to vnderſtand in this place: This Glandula, ſayeth he, is euery where ſofte, one alone, moueable, and diſſeuered from the other partes lying about it, oftentimes growing in the cleane and pure partes of the body.
                     Auicen
                           •
                         Glā
                        du
                           •
                        e are a
                           •
                        l 
                           〈◊〉
                         with Ganglia.
                   But Glandule in Auicene doe breed either in the hande, or in the foote, or in ſome other place ioined to the ſinewes and cordes of the body, and theſe Glandule he would not haue deſtroyed, leaſt the ſicke therby ſhould fall into Spaſmos, the crampe. They do happen alſo in the palme of the hand, and in the forehead, as Auicene ſayeth, who alſo calleth them ſometime Glanduloſa Apoſtemata, ſometime Nodi: for he doeth intreat of theſe euills very raſhly in diuerſe Chapters, as in his Chapter de Nodis euen vnto the ende, and in his treatiſe de Glandulis. Therefore Auicens Glandulae doe ſeeme to be diuerſe from Guido his Glandule, and Ganglia among the Grecians to be all one with Auicene his Glandule which thing Paulus his wordes next following doe plainly teſtifie. Ganglium (ſayeth he) is a gathering together of the ſinowes,
                     Cap. 16. lib. 4. Ganglium quid.
                   which is cauſed of ſome ſtripe or of wearyneſſe, & that in many partes of the body eſpecially in thoſe which are alwayes mouing, as in the middeſt of the hand and in the feete. Aētius ſayeth, that it ſeeldome poſſeſſeth the elbow and the head, and it doeth ſeeldome alſo ariſe voluntarily. And againe the ſame Paulus lib. 6. cap. 39. declaring what Ganglium is, how it doth grow, in what members chiefly it doth ariſe, & what ſignes or tokens doth accompanie it confirmeth thoſe very wordes which we ſpoke before ſaying: Gangliū
                   is a conuulſion of the ſinewes, cauſed of ſome blow or of labor, chaūcing for the moſt part in the iointes of the hands, & of the armes, and in the ancles and iointes of the feete, although alſo it ariſeth in other partes of the body. Theſe are the ſignes of Ganglium, the tumour is all of one colour,
                     Signa Gan
                        
                           •••
                        .
                   reſiſting touching or handling, and without paine, but if you doe thruſt it any thing violently, it is felt painfull,

being not deeply rooted, but lying vnder the very skinne next the ſides: but againe, if you prouoke it by force it doeth ſo neither before nor after. Hetherto ſpeaketh Paulus Aegineta de Ganglijs. Now we will diſcourſe of other fleugmatike tumours. Thoſe Abſceſſions which the common ſorte call Scrofula are nothing elſe,
                     Scroful
                           •
                        .
                   but hard kernels conteined within the litle filmes, videlicet, Glandula chiefly, appearing in the necke, the arme holes, and in the partes about the priuie members, where Glandula are placed by the veſſells of the bodye that ly vnder them: yet ſometime (although ſeeldome) they are cauſed by meanes of the fleſh of the ſame places, which through a certaine kind of affinitie is turned into the nature of Strumae, and is increaſed by the addition of matter (as it pleaſed Laeonidas.) The Latines call them Strumae,
                  
                     Ch
                           •
                        rades Graec
                           •
                        rum.
                   but the Greekes, Choerades, either truely becauſe of the ſtones called Choerades growing in the Sea, or elſe becauſe of thoſe beaſtes called Sowes that bring foorth a great companie of pigges at once (for theſe euills do riſe vp many together) which beaſtes are often infected with that diſeaſe.
                     Sues. Struma. Celſ
                           •
                        .
                   For Scrofa, that is to ſay, Sues haue thicke and glandulous neckes and commonly they be ſtrumous and full of kernells. But Celſus ſayeth that Strumae is a tumour, wherin vnder the congealed place there do ariſe certaine thinges like glandule of matter and bloud. But theſe do not onely poſſeſſe the necke, but alſo the noſethrills, the priuie partes of the body, & the ſides. The Chyrurgian Meges declareth alſo that he hath found them in the pappes of women.
                     Lib. 6. Paulus alſo ſpeaketh thus of them: Strumae, ſayeth he, do ariſe in the fore parte of the necke, or in one parte or other both at once, either two or more: But all are included within their filmes,
                     Lupia.
                   as Steatomata, Atheromata, and Melicerides. Lupia, ſayeth Guido, is ſofte and round like vnto a hoppe, and chiefly choſeth his place in hard and drye places of the body, as in the eye liddes and in other ſinowy members: the Frenchmen call it commonly vne L
                        •
                     upe. Therefore if the deſcription and cure of it, (which ſhall be afterward handled) be conferred with the deſcription and cure of Ganglium amongeſt the Greekes: the diſeaſes will appeare not much different or vnlike: but they do greatly erre▪ which do make this euill called Lupia,
                  
                     Lupus morb
                           •
                        s.
                   to be all one with that diſeaſe called Lupus. For Lupus is a malignant vlcer quickly conſuming the neither partes, but ſpecially annoying the thighes and legges, and it is very hungry like vnto a woulfe (wherof it ſeemeth to receiue this title) eating vp the fleſh that ly next vnto it, which euill without doubt is of the kind of Phaged
                        •
                     nae. Diſeaſes therefore are farre diuerſe among themſelues the one from the other, although in name they be ſomewhat acquainted.
                     Nodi.
                   
                  Nodus, (as the knot of a rope) is ſaid of the ſame Guido, to be round, harde, and abiding in one and the ſame place, growing eſpecially about the ſinowy places of the body.
                     Auice
                           ••
                        ae nodi.
                   But Auicenne in a certaine place defineth Nodi to be dubeleta a frigida, and he compa
                     •
                  eth this name with Steatomata, which are called adipoſi & adipini nodi, fat 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  les, and with Melicerides, which are called melli
                        •
                     ij nodi, and with Atheromata, which conſiſt of a certaine kind of matter like vnto a pulſe, which the Greekes call Athera. But becauſe theſe three kindes of Abſceſſions, that is to ſay, Steatoma, Meliceris, and Atheroma, are moſt incident to mens bodyes, and Galen alſo maketh mention of them in very many places: we thinke it conuenient (hauing here gotten ſo fit oportunitie to intreat of them) plainly to declare their nature and their markes wherby they may be knowen, and in what thinges alſo they do differ and diſſent,
                     Atheroma.
                   and in what thinges they do alſo conſpire and agree. Atheroma therefore is a tumour of one and the ſame colour and without paine, conteining within the filme or ſinowy tunicle a ſofte humour like vnto Athera, that is, a kind of pulſe, which is made of boiled meale. Sometime alſo in Atheromata together with a ſofte humour, there are found certaine ſtony and hard ſubſtances, and other thinges like vnto ſmall peeces of brimſtone, oftentimes there are found in them certaine thinges like vnto the chewed bones of a henne, and like vnto heares wound vp together. This tumour Atheroma, appeareth in forme and figure very long, and ſomewhat eleuated in height, which being preſſed with the fingers, by reaſon of the clammiſhneſſe and thickneſſe of the humour, it doeth ſlowly yeeld or go backe, and the fingers being remoued, it doth ſlowly alſo returne againe. But Meliceris is a tumour,
                     Meliceris.
                   which is voide of paine alſo, but yet it is round, wherin the humour, which is alſo included in ſome ſinowy tunicle, (which they call Cyſtis) is found ſomewhat thinne, repreſenting the ſubſtance of hony: whereupon ſome of the Latines doe call it mellifanium, a hony combe. Meliceris therefore doeth differ from Atheroma in

fa
                     •••
                  ion; and in the ſubſtance of the humour: for both the forme is more round, and the ſu
                     •••
                  nce of the humour more ſclender. This hony tumour therefore is further extended th
                     •
                   
                  Atheroma, and by preſſing it with the fingers it doeth ſpeadily giue place, and when 
                     〈…〉
                   are remoued, it doeth with the like celeritie returne to the former place. But 
                     〈◊〉
                   is a tumour alſo beſides nature, all of one colour,
                     Stea
                           ••••
                        .
                   and very gentle to be handled in th
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  eginning truely it is very ſmall, but in proceſſe of time it increaſeth and becommeth 
                     〈…〉
                  , wherin is conteined a humour very like vnto tallowe, which is alſo comprehend vnder the filmes of the bodye. This is diſtinguiſhed from Meliceris and from Atherom
                        •
                     
                   by reaſon of the hardneſſe therof, for it is both full and plentyfull, and it doeth ſo reſiſt
                     •
                   aching, that it will in no wiſe yeeld to the thruſting of the fingers. But let vs now procee
                     •
                   to declare other kindes of Apoſtemes, which are almoſt reduced vnto theſe three, whe
                     •••
                  f we haue now intreated. Teſtudo (ſayeth Guido) is a great Abſceſſion,
                     Teſtudo.
                   very humorall, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and of abroad faſhion, after the maner of a targette, (wherupon it receiued the 
                     〈◊〉
                   which euill if it groweth (ſayeth he) in the head, it is called Talparia or Talpa: if in 
                     〈…〉
                  , it is called Bocium: if in the ſtones, Hernia: but ſometime it is found with matter, 
                     〈◊〉
                   with certaine ſcales, or with a fiſtula accompanying it. But Teſtudines and Talpae, amon
                     •
                  ſt the auncient Phyſitions, had neither any proper name, nor yet once entreated of. But 
                     〈◊〉
                   of our dayes doe define Teſtudo to be a ſofte tumour, or not greatly hard, yet ſome 
                     〈◊〉
                   bigge, in the which is conteined a groſſe matter lying hid in a certaine tunicle, whic
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  loth ſo cleaue vnto the whole head of a man (for it is a diſeaſe incident to the skinne of the 
                     •
                  ead) that it oftentimes corrupted the ſame. This euill (no doubt) is to be accounted a
                     ••
                  ng the number of Abſceſſions, and comprehended vnder Meliceris, or Atheroma, but it ther ſeemeth to incline vnto Meliceris: but Talpa,
                  
                     Talpa.
                   becauſe it conteineth a white matte
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   rather referred vnto Atheroma, then vnto Meliceris: Notwithſtanding Guido affirmet
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  hat it is a kind of Teſtudo, yea alſo that it is Teſtudo it ſelfe (as we ſaid a late) as Hernia 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   and Bocium, which he alſo nameth: but theſe affectes haue barrowed there diuerſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   according to the varietie of the places, wherin they are found. But that which the comon ſorte call Bocium,
                  
                     Bocium.
                   the Greekes (fetching their title or name euen from the verie deep) doe properly call Brouchocêle, but our countrey men call it Hernia gutturis, whereupon they alſo call them Gutturoſi, which doe labour of that dieaſe.
                     Broucho
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        e.
                   
                  Brouchocêle is a great 
                     〈◊〉
                   chauncing in the necke, verie round betwene the skinne and the wind pipe, wherin 
                     ••
                  ere is included, ſometime deade fleſh, ſumetime a certaine humour like vnto hony, or 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or ſodden meale, or water. Sometime alſo (as Celſus ſayeth) there are found in ſuch t
                     •
                  mours certaine heares mingled with litle bones.
                     Nacta.
                   
                  Nacta (as Guido writeth) is a great tu
                     •
                  our, full of fleſh, like vnto the fleſh of a mans buttockes, of diuerſe formes and greatneſſ: as are melons and gourdes, and therefore it borroweth ſundrie names according to the va
                     ••
                  etie of the faſhion and member wherin it is placed. Moreouer this tumour which of the lat
                     •
                  r ſorte is called Nacta or Napta, is voide of paine,
                     Nacta or Napta is referred vnto Steatomata.
                   except peraduenture it be ſo great, th
                     •
                  t by the continuall drawing of the partes of that member, it bringeth ſome griefe to the pa
                     •
                  es about it. This alſo is of the number of Abſceſſions, and doeth parteine vnto Steatomaa (as we ſaid before in the enumeration of tumours beſides nature.
                     Bubo.
                   
                  Bubo (ſayeth Galene) is a diſeaſe of the looſe members, or of Glandulae, (which the Greekes call Adenae) that is to ſay, a ſimple inflammation. Wherfore Guido hath either vnfitly here rehearſed it among the number of flegmatike abſceſſions: or elſe he vnderſtandeth ſome other matter then Galene doth. But Bubones, which are cauſed through a fall from ſome place, or by other vlcers & diſeaſes, are without any danger: but thoſe which are wonte to happen in peſtilent feuers, are the worſt of all, whether they inuade the thighes, or the noſethrills, or the necke. Fugilla (ſayeth the interpreter of Auicene) is of the kind of glandulous Apoſtemes, and this terme (ſayeth he) is appropriated vnto it, becauſe it is a diſeaſe chauncing behind the eares.
                     Fugillae.
                   By the which deſcription it may eaſily be coniectured, that Fugille, ſo called of Auicene, is that tumour, which is called of the Greekes Parotis, that is,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . VVhat Bubo is with Guido and other late Phyſitions.
                   a glandulous diſeaſe growing vnderneth the eares. But ſome do thinke Fugille to be all one with Bubo: but then Bubo is farre otherwiſe taken of them, then of Galene and Paulus, which is (as they ſay) a tumour that is deeply planted and rooted, and oftentimes not compaſſed with any skinne or filme, it is

very hard alſo after the maner of the euills called Scrofule, & in that ſignification (as I iud
                     •
                  ) is Bubo takē of Guido, becauſe he doth regiſter Fugillinus Bubo amongſt the number of fle
                     •
                  
                  matike abſceſſions. But there are now found out very many titles giuen to theſe kin
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  f phlegmatike abſceſſions. But we ought not greatly to ſtand vpon the names of them, ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   we know and vnderſtand the onely differences of them, becauſe it falleth ſo out, that ac
                     ••
                  
                  ding to the diuerſitie of their names,
                     The differēces of flegmatike abſceſſions.
                   their cures and iudgements do varie. Therefore of 
                     〈◊〉
                   kind of abſceſſions, ſome truely are included within a certaine skinne or tunicle (which 
                     〈…〉
                   call Cyſtis) and ſome are deeply planted in the fleſh: ſome haue a ſclender foundatiō, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   roote, and ſome againe are very large and broad. Alſo ſome are eaſie to be reſolued, 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſome are farre otherwiſe: ſome great, and ſome litle. Some alſo do come vnto ſuppuran, and ſome do not. To conclude ſome tumours are ſcaly, fiſtulous, and cancerous, but 
                     〈◊〉
                   do admit or ſuffer none of theſe thinges.
                     
                        Of the cauſes ſignes & iudgmentes of the aforeſaid tumour
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Cauſes of tumours which pertaine vnto fleume.
                     
                     
                        The matter of flegmatike abſceſſions.
                     
                   The cauſes of theſe kindes of tumours are 
                     〈◊〉
                   fould: videlicet. 1. Primitiue cauſes, as a fall, a ſtripe, exceſſiue or inordinate liuing, 
                     〈◊〉
                   an euill diet. 2. Antecedentes cauſae, as are vnnaturall humours, eſpecially thoſe which be 
                     •••
                  gmatike, and true oedemata, which do degenerate into abſceſſions. 3. Coniunctae cauſae, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   are the diuerſe ſubſtances, and properly the matters of euery abſceſſion, conteined in 
                     〈◊〉
                   affected member. But in theſe kindes of tumours there are conteined certaine humours, 
                     〈◊〉
                   be either ſerous or wateriſh as is vrine, or putrified and corrupte, or filthie, or dirtie, 
                     〈◊〉
                   elſe humours, like vnto hony, or ſodden meale, or vnto fatte. But there are ſometime 
                     〈◊〉
                   within theſe abſceſſions phlegmatike, and wateriſh and glandulous fleſh, ſometim
                     •
                   alſo ſtones, ſand, ſhelles, wood, coales, and other ſuch like ſolide ſubſtances. Notwithſta
                     •
                  ding theſe three kindes of tumours do moſt frequent mens bodyes (as we haue ſaid before) herof euery one hath borrowed in Greek his proper title:14. Therap.
                   as Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meeris, which are thus called by reaſon of the ſimilitude of the ſubſtaunces conteined in the
                     •
                  
                  ▪ For there is another tumour amongſt theſe, like vnto tallowe, or ſome other fatte thing, a
                     •
                  other like vnto hony,
                     Signa.
                   another like vnto a thinne kind of meate, which they call Athera. Th
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  ignes and iudgementes of ſuch kindes of tumours, which belong vnto fleume, may eaſily bound out by their deſcriptions and differences before declared. But the marke, wherby 
                     〈◊〉
                   may know whether they be couered with any vale or not,
                     Notae abſceſſu
                           •
                         relament
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   is this, there is mouableneſſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   inconſtancie of the filme or skinne, called Cyſtis, which the auncient Phyſitions haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  tunica, and there is a ſeparation of the skinne: but when they be ſurely fixed, that is, 
                     •
                  iding in one place, and do cleaue faſt to the fleſh, it is an euident token, that they are garde
                     •
                   about with no filme or tunicle at all.
                     Indicia abſceſſ
                           •••
                         pim
                           ••
                        ſ
                           ••
                        um.
                   Futhermore thoſe tumours which are new and tr
                     •
                  ctable, may eaſily be diſcuſſed, but they which be hard and inueterate can in no wiſe be r
                     ••
                  olued. Redneſſe, paine, and increaſing of heate do declare that thoſe abſceſſions will either 
                     〈◊〉
                   to ſuppuration, or elſe degenerate into a fiſtula or a Cancre. Strumae numeroſae, which 
                     〈◊〉
                   affect the outward members, and do often chaunge their place, wandring here and there a
                     •
                  out the body, with a certaine extraordinary heate, do teſtifie and declare very plainly, that 
                     ••
                  ey will beget and breed thoſe inward diſeaſes called Chaerades,
                  
                     Arnaldus à villa 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   as Arnaldus hath noted in a 
                     •
                  ertaine place. Thoſe remedies therfore, which are outwardly applied to them, do profit li
                     •
                  e or nothing. But theſe diſeaſes (as Auicene thought) are increaſed and do multiplie by ſo
                     •
                  e fall, or by ſome hurt or bruiſe in the body.
                     Auicema
                           •
                        .
                   Now theſe ſtrumous tumours are greatly helped by vſing purging medicines, diureticall potions, & electuaries, (as they call them) which can drie vp. Alſo the chaunge of age doeth greatly auaile in young children.
                     In what ages and bodyes Strumae doe raigne.
                   But children, by reaſon of their exceſſiue eating and immoderate diet, and the ſclenderneſſe of body, are very often annoyed with Strumae. But olde men by reaſon of the contrary cauſes, are ſeeldome troubled therwith. Moreouer they which haue a narrow forehead, and ſtraight temples, and great checkes, are ſubiect to Strumae. For in ſuch, the matter is readely brought downe to the necke, as one Henricus among the number of the late Phyſitions, hath noted very well. But Strumae (as Celſus ſayeth) are wont commonly to weary Phyſitions,
                     Celſus.
                   becauſe they procure feauers alſo, neither do they at anytime ripen eaſily, and they are cured either with ſome hote inſtrument, or with medicines, and oftentimes they do riſe vp againe beſide their ſcarres, and a long time after they require medicines againe, and moreover it ſo commeth to paſſe that they remaine in the fleſh along ſeaſon. The inſciſion, and corroſiuing of ſuch tumours

is greatly to be feared about the belly, the necke, and the iointes, by reaſon of the affinitie and knitting together of the veines, the arteries, and the ſinowes, and alſo of the internall capacitie. In the inciſion alſo of great Glandule, it behoueth greatly to eſchew that veine, which lyeth at the roote of them, and doth bring nouriſhment vnto them. For oftentimes it cauſeth great profuſion of bloud, wherupon there enſueth ſtraight waye no ſmall danger. Theſe euills called Strumae, do greatly differ amongſt them ſelfes both in greatneſſe, nature, place, beginning, multitude, and ioining together of the veſſells (as Aetius hath gathered out of Leonidas. Therefore litle Strume are ſooner and more eaſily cured then the great, euen as the gentle tumours are more tractable then thoſe which are enflamed. Noyſome Strume cannot be remedied. For ſeeing all ſuch diſeaſes called Strumae are cancerous,
                     Magnitude Strumae.
                   and do ſtuffe vp the veſſels of the body, while they are curing, they muſt needes bring the daunger of profuſion of bloud, beſides that alſo,
                     Natura.
                   they are found very deepe in the fleſh and therfore they cannot any way be cut of. For a malicious and hurtfull Struma doeth poſſeſſe the beſt veſſells, (that is) the greateſt veines and arteries (which are called Carotides) euen as though it ſhould hold by certaine rootes.
                     Locus.
                   The ſuperficiall Strumae are more eaſie to be cured then the internall by reaſon of their place, and thoſe alſo are curable which do happen in the necke, where yet you muſt, be very diligent to eſchew the loud and great ſenowes: for many by cutting Strumae about the windpipe, and by cutting other loud ſenowes haue cauſed the ſicke all the time of his life after to remaine ſpeachleſſe. For beſide the exciſion of that ſenowe, the great veſſells being laid bare, and cooled in the cure, do hurte the dutie of the tongue. For the multitude of Strume, it appeareth,
                     Multitude. Ortus.
                   that one alone may eaſilier be cured them many together. And concerning the maner of their riſing, it is manifeſt alſo, that they which hange downward are a great deale ſooner healed, then they which are planted in the fleſh. Thus much concerning Struma, which Aetius hath recited out of Leonidas. The cure of theſe kindes of Abſceſſions, which haue their originall of fleume,
                     
                        Duplex abſceſſuū pituitoſorum curā
                           di ratio.
                     
                     1. Vniuerſalis.
                     
                   is of the late Chyrurgians appointed to be two fould (that is to ſay.) 1. Generall, and vniuerſally common at all, 2. and particular, which is proper in euery difference. Therfore our generall methode of curing theſe tumours ſhalbe, to appoint ſuch an ordinarie and conuneient diet to the ſicke, as that the matter, which cauſeth ſuch abſceſſions, be not heaped vp together in the body, and by all meanes to preuent and turne away the antecedent matter (as they call it) which now is gathered together in the ſicke bodye, leaſt at the lenght it be vnited to the ioined cauſe, that is, vnto that matter, which now bringeth the diſeaſe. But we ſhall accompliſh the firſt intention of our generall cure, if the ſicke do diligently obſerue that kind of diet, which is preſcribed in our former Chapters (this one thing excepted) which is,
                     Victus ratio.
                   that they ought to keepe a very thinne diet, and that, which is more conuenient to deuide thicke and clammie humours. Therefore if they will follow the counſell of Auicene, let them eſchew all thoſe meates which are of a groſſe iuice, the drinking alſo of cold thinges, too much ſatietie and immoderate fulneſſe, and thoſe thinges alſo which procure vomite and abhorring of meates. But they muſt abide as much hunger as can be. They muſt chiefly procure good digeſtion, and auoide a moiſt houſe, that is either ſituated in lowe vallyes, or in fennes, or frequented with corrupted waters. Let his drinke be wine that is excellent and of the beſt, or elſe let it be water of alume, or of brimſtone. For ſuch kind of minerall waters,
                     Aquae 
                           •
                        l
                           ••
                        inoſae vi
                           •
                        .
                   eſpecially thoſe which do repreſent in taſt the dregges of wine, do not onely diminiſh & diſcuſſe theſe inward Strumours and flegmatike abſceſſions: but thoſe alſo which do outwardly affect the ſuperficiall partes of the body (as Arnaldus affirmeth.
                     Antecedenti
                           •
                         materia euacuatio.
                  ) But we do perfit the other parte of our former proceeding (that is to ſaye) to turne away the antecedent matter, leaſt it be mingled with coniuncta materia, by foure kindes of euacuations, that is, by ſome medicine to purge fleume downward, and ſometime by letting of bloud, alſo by thoſe thinges which can prouoke vrine, and laſt of all by thoſe remedies which can through their vapour both reſolue and digeſt the humour which is gathered together in the inward partes of the body.
                     
                        Vacuantia pe
                              •
                            alnum.
                     
                     
                        Puluis Turbith.
                     
                   To purge the body downward, the powder of Turbith is greatly commended, which is made thus in Auicene, ℞. of Turbith, ginger, and ſugar, of eache a like portion, but he taketh therof two drammes, and he affirmeth alſo, that (beſides that it doth reſolue groſſe fleume) it doth neither heate, nor violently wreſt the inward members. But Razes,
                     Razes.
                   who was verie bold in declaring

and vſing purging medicines, made this kind of powder, in his ninth Chap. de doleribus ve
                        ••
                     ris ad Almanſorem, of twenty partes of Turbith, of tenne of ginger, and thirty of ſuger,
                     Hierapicra.
                   and miniſtreth of it at one time, ʒ.iij. Benedicta alſo and hierapicra, and pillule de agaric
                        •
                     , and pillule maiores de hermodactylis do greatly helpe theſe diſeaſes. To prouoke wrine, Guido out of Ca
                        •
                     liacus was wente to vſe this potion ſlollowing,
                     
                        Prouokers of vrine.
                     
                     
                        Po
                              ••
                            Guido
                           
                              ••
                            à Ca
                              •
                           liaco.
                     
                   which (he ſayeth) he gathered out of the writinges of many Phyſitions, ℞. of Scrofularia, partes iij. of phylipendula part .ij. of pimpernell, mouſeare, Tanacetum, of red coleworts (which of ſome are thought to be Braſſica marucina) of rubia maior, ana. part .j. of the roote of Ariſtolochia, of ſpathula ſatida, of the roote of radiſh, ana. part .ſs. put them altogether, and boile them in white wine and hony, vntill halfe be conſumed, then ſtreigne them, wherof euery third day in the morning let the ſicke take three onces, and let it be dronke hot. But in the applying of all theſe remedies, (as alſo for bloud letting, if at any time it be required) the counſell of ſome learned Phyſition is to be vſed, who may preſcribe both the qualitie, quantitie and vſe of them, But to reſolue through breathing,
                     Quae per halitum dege
                        
                           •
                        a
                           ••
                        .
                   and to digeſt the humour, which is gathered together in the deepth of the bodye, and doeth excite inward Glandule, (which alſo are the cauſes of outward diſeaſes) Galene lib. 14. Therap. willeth vs to miniſter Theriaca, Athanaſia, Ambroſia, and that medicine alſo, which is made of cretica calaminthe: the Greekes call it Diacalaminthe: whoſe compoſition is to be ſought out of the fourth booke de Sanitate tuenda. Many other helpes are appointed for the cure of theſe abſceſſions, as potions, electuaries, and oiles, which are caſt into the eares. There are alſo very many remedies called Empirica, conſiſting in practiſe deſcribed and celebrated of the auncient Phyſitions, the vſe wherof I do not allow, and therefore I thinke it good to pretermit the declaration of them in theſe our commentaries. Notwithſtanding this one thing I ſteadfaſtly affirme that the Chriſtian king of Fraunce is indued as it were by inſpiration with ſo wonderfull a gifte,
                     The kings of Fraunce doe cure Strumae by applying the handes.
                   that with the onely laying on of the handes he can reſtore them which be diſeaſed with Struma or Scrofula, to their perfect health againe. King Edoward alſo (as Hiſtories doe reporte) was wonte marueilouſly to cure Strumous perſons onely by touching them which gifte immortall, doeth come as it were by inheritaunce to the kinges that ſuccede. For the kinges of England at this day, by laying on of handes, and rehearſing certaine ceremoniall prayers, do heale Struma. And theſe thinges truely are generally ſpoken in all the abſceſſions before mentioned. Now thoſe thinges which follow,
                     
                        VVhat things doe 
                              •••
                           er the particular cure of abſceſſions fleugmatike.
                     
                     
                        Tempus quid inſa
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           .
                     
                   do concerne the particular and proper methode of curing euery difference: which methode is made not only diuerſe, but alſo it is chaunged, both by the ſubſtance of matter, wherof they haue their beginning, and by the quantitie of them, whether they be great or ſmall, and by the nature alſo of the affected member, and of the whole body. But the continuaunce of time, although it declareth not the cure, yet ſometime it ſheweth vs and it doeth inſinuate the qualitie of the diſpoſition therof, (as Galene hath ſet downe. lib. 4. de morbis curandis.) Therefore although many indications and intentions of their cure may be gathered and learned by thoſe thinges, which we haue ſpoken before: yet, for our preſent purpoſe, we haue reduced them vnto ſix pointes, which we alſo haue expreſſed  in theſe ſix canons following. 1. The firſt wherof is after this maner: imprimis, let thoſe flegmatike abſceſſions that are ſofte and ſmall, (which are commonly called Lupiae, & of the interpreter of Auicene, Glandule) if they be feated in the ſtrong partes of the body, and (becauſe they are not yet inueterate) haue their thinne Cyſtis, that is, their filme to couer  them, let them, I ſay, be appeaſed, ſuppreſſed, conſumed, and afterward dryed vp. 2. Mollifie, diſcuſſe, and conſume the great abſceſſions which be not greatly hard, nor inueterate,  after the maner of oedematous tumours wherof we haue before intreated. 3. Ripen, open, and clenſe ſuch fleugmatike, corrupted, and vlcerous Apoſtemes, which doe pertaine vnto  ſuppuration. 4. Thoſe Strume which are not cured by the former remedies, and yet are  moueable, gentle, tractable, and obedient, cut them of and draw them out. 5. Thoſe, which are vnmoueable, deeply rooted, inwardly planted, and wound about the veines and arteries,  and broad at the roote within, corroſiue them about, and clenſe them througly, 6. Thoſe, which are faſtened but to a thinne and ſclender roote, bind them about, & plucke them out. The firſt canon,
                     Copreſſ
                           •
                        o & artritio.
                   according to Auicene his opinion is perfited after this maner, if, when you do conſume and ſuppreſſe vehemently theſe ſoft and litle abſceſſions, (which Auicene doth

call Glandule, and the new Phyſitions Lupie) you do lay on a plate of lead made fitte for the tumour, and bind it very ſtrongly in the middes, leſt it ſlide from the place. For this doeth digeſt theſe kindes of tumours. Firſt therefore let Lupia be ſoftely rubbed with the hand,
                     Lupia curatio.
                   vntil it waxe ſomewhat hote, and vntill it be after a ſorte ſofter then it ſelfe. Afterward let the affected member be ſurely laid hold on with the handes, and let it be ſo often, and ſo vehemently ſtroken with the bottome of a ſaucer, or with ſome other ſolide thing, that it may be diſſeuered and that the inward Cyſtis therof (which is the filme wherin it is included) may be rent and broken, and ſo the matter therin conteined may be diſperſed. Which thing being done, apply the plate of lead vpon the place,
                     Lamina plumbea.
                   & let it be bound very ſtrongly with a ſwathing band that hath two endes, neither let it be remoued for the ſpace of nine or ten dayes, but let the plate be of that greatneſſe (as it was ſaid a late) that it may aunſwere to the proportion of Lupia. But there are ſome, which before the application of any plate of lead, do miniſter this ointment made of burnt lead, of the barke of the elder tree, or of the figge tree,
                     Vnguentum Rogerij.
                   with oile and vineger. Other do firſt vſe an emplaiſter made of Aloes, acacia, mirrhe, olibanum, ſcarcocolla putting to them a litle vineger, or the white of an egge, as much as ſhall ſeeme ſufficient to commixe with the reſte. Henricus was wonte to lay vpon them litle flakes (as he & other Chyrurgians of that ſecte do call them) made of flaxe, dipped in the white liquor of an egge, with ſalte and alume zuccharinum vnthicked.
                     Ganglij curatio ex Philagrio.
                   Moreouer Philagrius almoſt after the ſame maner was wonte to cure Ganglia (as it is in Aetius) which diſeaſes are tumours vnequall (as we ſaid before) ſpeaking after this ſorte. We deny (ſayeth he) the labour of the Chyrurgian, that is bloud letting, in Ganglia, eſpecially if they chaunce in the handes or in the feete, but we muſt cure them onely by medicines. For we annoint them by the fire with ammoniak which muſt be made pliaunt to the thickneſſe of an emplaiſter: afterward we apply a plate of lead equall for the tumour and leaſt it ſhould ſlide away from the place, we bind it in the middeſt with ſtraight bandes. But a few dayes after, when we know that Ganglium is mollified, we take away the bandes, and (not ſaying any thing to the ſicke) while the place is yet hote, we faſten the thumbe of our right hand vpon Ganglium, and laying faſt hold on the member with our other foure fingers, we violently breake it, and ſo Ganglium is preſently diſſolued. Hetherto Philagrius. Therefore by this our order of cure, it may eaſily be gathered, that Lupia amongeſt the late Phyſitions, Auicene his Glandule,
                  
                     
                        Lupia & Gā
                           glion is all on euill.
                     
                     
                        Archigenes lib. 4
                   and Ganglion among the Greekes, is all one diſeaſe, which, the former deſcriptiōs of them do alſo manyfeſtly declare. Archigenes in this diſeaſe, commendeth to lay our lime, with the fatte of a gooſe, and with roſin Terebenthina, which is the right turpentine. The ſame Archigenes alſo did oftentimes vſe that medicine, which is made of the ſtone called Lapis achates, as Paulus reporteth. But Oribaſius vſed very often this medicine, ℞. of ceruſſe, reſinae piceae. olde oile,
                     Oribaſius his medicine to mollifie Ganglia.
                   ana. ℥.j. of ammoniake Thymiama, and Galbanum, ana. alike quantitie, of waxe. ℥.iiij. The ſame medicine is to be ſeeme in Aetius, but the quantitie doe varie in certaine thinges, as thus, ℞. of ceruſſe, olde oile, and reſina piceae, ana. lb.j. of waxe. ℥.ij. of ammoniacum Thymiama, and of Galbanum, ana. ℥.j. boile the ceruſe with oile, till it looſeth his ſtaining facultie, then bray the ammoniake, and caſt it into the ceruſe with the oile, afterward caſt in the reſina picea, and the waxe, and laſt of all the Galbanum, which firſt muſt be made very ſofte and tender. Moreouer that famous Phyſition of Greece, I meane Oribaſius, did not apply any plate of lead, as Philagrius, Auicene, and other late Chyrurgians were accuſtomed, but he did lay and bind vnto Ganglium, a thicke round peece of leade, like vnto a wherue,
                     Verticillum bl
                           ••
                        mbe
                           ••
                        .
                   which do hange vpon womens ſpindles to make them turne rounde, which was more large and ample for the diſeaſe. For truely, ſayeth he, with the weight therof, it doeth more ſpeedily diſſolue the euil. Therefore in the cure of Ganglia, it is farre better to vſe ſuch mollifying and diſcuſſing medicines, then the diligence of the Chyrurgian, (which is exciſion of the tumours) eſpecially when they doe grow in the legges, or in the armes, or in the principall partes of the body. For it is to be feared, that, if they be cut of, the member is made lame and vnperfect. But thoſe diſeaſes which do occupy the head or the forehead, may ſafely be cured with the hand, that is, may be cut of, or plucked vp by the rootes.
                     Ganglierum per Chyrurgiā curatio.
                   Therefore diuide the outward skinne with a pen-knife, and then, (if the tumours be ſmall) lay hold on the foundation of them with a paire of pinſers, or ſome ſuch like inſtrument, & cut them of from the roote. But if they be great,

thruſt them through with a hooke, and lift them vp, and winde them round about, vntill you haue plucked and drawen them forth; laſt of all, ſow vp the ſides, or brimes of them together, and vſe thoſe medicines which are appointed for bloudy vlcers. But theſe things belong vnto the fourth canon.
                     Secundus Canon.
                   The ſecond Canon (becauſe I will be ſilent in thoſe medicines which are appointed for fleugmatike and oedematous tumours, which we haue deſcribed already, and yet, together with theſe remedies following, they be very profitable and expedient for theſe Abſceſſions wherof we now intreate, and alſo for all kind of Hernia) is finiſhed by the applying of a certaine emplaiſter,
                     Diſcuſſion by digeſtiues.
                   which is deſcribed of Galene libro ſexto de compoſitione medicamentorum 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : which emplaiſter (as he himſelfe teſtifieth) doth digeſt through breathing, and doeth repell Phlegmone, and is affectuall againſt the diſeaſes called Strume, Taxi, and Parotides: it is auailable alſo againſt the goute, and it benefiteth many other diſeaſes.
                     Emplaſtrum.
                   The emplaiſter is this, ℞. of olde oile. ʒ.100. ſpumae argenti, picis ſicce. ana. ʒ.50. of Ladanum. 
                  ʒ.25. of aerugo raſa. 
                  ʒ.8. of Galbanum. 
                  ʒ.4. let Argenti ſpuma, which they call Lithargirum, be brayed, and boiled in the oile, and when they are ſomewhat thickened together, put in the pitche and the ruſt or ſcouringes of braſſe, then the Ladanum, and Galbanum. Afterward power them out into a morter and bray them and mollifie them, and reſerue them to your vſe. Some, to make it haue a good colour, and to looke ſomewhat browne, do commixe with them alſo the offall of braſſe. ʒ.viij. for otherwiſe it would be very blacke. This emplaiſter is found otherwiſe deſcribed in Guido his commentaries, vnder this forme, ℞. of old oile. ℥.xij. of the ſcouringes of braſſe. ʒ.xiiij. of dry pitche. ℥.vj. of Ladanum. ℥.iij. of Lithargirum. 
                  ʒ.xij. of Galbanum. ℥.iij.
                     Diathyl
                           •
                        n
                   For the ſame purpoſe Diachylon alſo, which is called Com
                     
                        ••••
                      & treatum, doeth profit much, wherof you muſt take one pound, and commixe therwith of the powder of the roote of ireos. ℥.j. The ſame effect likewiſe hath that Diachylon, called magnum Meſnes, whoſe deſcription ſhall afterward enſue. Some do counſell vs, for the digeſtion of theſe Abſceſſions,
                     Siertus 
                           •
                        apri
                           •
                        um ve
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        .
                   to apply vnto the aggreiued place, the olde dounge of a goate with hony and vineger, which muſt be het ouer the fire vntill they be well incorporate together & then brought to the forme of an emplaiſter, alſo an emplaiſter made of fenugreeke, of the ſeed of flaxe, & of coleworts, with the ſcrapinges of the roote of Althaea, which medicine, (if there be any hope of ſuppuration) doeth ripen it notably.
                     Haly Abbas emp
                           •
                        aſtrum.
                   Haly Abbas alſo for the ſame purpoſe doeth greatly commend this emplaiſter following, ℞. of beane meale, and of barely meale, ana. ʒ.x. of the roote of liquorace, of the roote of Althaea, and of pitche, ana. ʒ.v. of white waxe, gooſes ſuet, ana. ʒ.x. Bray them, and mingle them together with old oile, and with the vrine of a child, that hath not yet tried venus ſportes, and ouer a ſofte fire make an emplaiſter.
                     Emplaſtrum Auicennae.
                   Another out of Auicene, which Guido vſed, ℞. of oxes dounge. ℥.ij. of the roote of coleworts, of the roote of capers, of the fiſh called a ſhrimpe, of fat figges, ana. ℥.ſs. of hoppes, and bdellium, ana. ʒ.ij. of vineger, hony, ſowes tallowe, of the dregges of olde oile, of eche as much as is ſufficient,
                     Brunni & Theodorici emplaſtrum ad ſtrumas.
                   wherof make an emplaiſter. Brunnus approueth this remedie following, whoſe opinion Theodoricus alſo doeth confirme, ℞. of ammoniake, bdellium, Galbanum, of eche a like quantitie. Steipe them three dayes in vineger, wherto (when they be diſſolued) you may adde of ſmall branne, as much as ſhall ſuffice, and make an emplaiſter. Rogerius was wont to vſe this remedie for Strume (which they cōmonly call Scrofule) ℞. of the roote of brakes,
                     Rogeri emplaſtrum.
                   of daffadill, or of walworte (if you pleaſe) of eche, as much as you thinke good, let them be boiled in the beſt wine, and then brayed in a mortar, and adde to them a litle quicke brimſtone,
                     Emplaſtrum praeceptoris G
                           ••
                        d
                           •
                        nis ex L
                           •••
                        cibus.
                   and make an emplaiſter. Guido his maiſter in monte Peſſulano, hath often tried this emplaiſter to be moſt effectuall, which, is made of xij. ſnailes (which they alſo call Limaces) boiled in wine, or in lye made of aſhes commonly called clauelata. But (that which is more profitable) he did miniſter euery day to the ſicke to be eaten, one ſnaile either dry, or otherwiſe prepared, and as they terme it, made ready to chew. Paulus alſo was wont notably to diſcuſſe Strume with vnſlaked lime, ſteiped in hony, or in the filthineſſe of mens bodies that do ariſe either in exerciſing thēſelues or in bathes, or elſe in oile, or ſowes greace. The like vertue, ſayeth Aetius, hath the filthineſſe of exerciſing places, ſcraped from the walls, which muſt be well beaten together, & ſpred vpon a linnen cloth, and applied after the maner of an emplaiſter. For the ſame purpoſe, this helpeth effectually, ℞. of lime, and nitrum. ana. a like portion, of Cardamomum, & fenugreke, foure times as much with hony, & apply it after

the maner of a mollifying plaiſter. Alſo the meale of bitter hoppes boiled, and annointed with oxymel doth diſcuſſe Strumae. For the ſame purpoſe alſo oxes dounge boiled in vineger, & annointed, doth notably auaile, which being applied after the maner of a cataplaſme, doth marueilouſly diſſolue all hard and ſcirrhous tumours. Rathe ripe figges alſo, eſpecially of the wild figge tree, applied with hogges greace, do diſcuſſe all kindes of tumours. Therefore by this our methode in curing, you ſhall heale all kindes of Strumae, which are but newly begon, and not yet inueterate, aſwell in children, as in them which cannot abide manuell practice, euen by the applying of ſuch medicines as can diſſolue, digeſt, and diſcuſſe, But firſt you muſt labour to mollifie, and afterward to diſcuſſe, or elſe vſe ſome medicine of a double qualitie, which can worke both theſe effectes together, of which kind are all thoſe remedies almoſt, which are before deſcribed. Now if digeſtiue medicines ſhall nothing preuaile in theſe Abſceſſions, they muſt be either brought vnto ſuppuration, or conſumed, or elſe cured by Chyrurgie, (as it ſhalbe ſaid herafter.) But here we muſt not omit that thing,
                     The vſing of vipers & ſerpentes doeth marueilouſly helpe them which are ſtrumous.
                   which is recorded of ſome very diligently, (namely) that they which are diſeaſed with Strumae, and with any leproſie, are marueilouſly holpen by the vſing of vipers and ſerpentes, and by the drinking of the gumme called Laſer, euery day faſting, to the quantitie of a ciche peaſe. There fore caſt the dead ſerpent into a potte, and ſtoppe the mouth therof very iuſte with ſome plaiſter, and ſet it in the fire, then take the aſhes of the burned ſerpent, & mingle them with the like quantitie of fenugreeke, and vſe them in wine. For this doeth excellently helpe them which be ſtrumous. Alſo in them that labour with Struma, you muſt prouide that the belly be made ſoluble, and a ſclender diet obſerued: you muſt daily prouoke vomiting, and endeuour to purge fleume vpward, you muſt alſo dry the head, and apply cataplaſmes to the fore parte therof, which can raiſe litle puſhes in the skinne, as is the roote of capers with polenta, and other ſuch like thinges. And you muſt alſo vſe purging medicines, and fine powders, that be of the like vertue. We alſo do generally dipatche the declaration of the third rule, by the  vſe of the former remedies. For all mollifying and reſoluing medicines,
                     Terta Canoris declaratio.
                   if they finde any place or matter diſobedient vnto reſolution, they doubtleſſe doe ripen the ſame matter, and bring it to ſuppuration: eſpecially if the ſaid matter be gentle and tractable, or commixed with bloud. But Haly Abbas,
                     Suppurantia, ce
                           •
                         mararantia.
                   that he mought bring theſe kindes of abſceſſions vnto maturitie, miniſtred a plaiſter, made of barly meale, pitche, and olibanum, and of the vrine of a young child, all well incorporate together. But Auicene, to repreſſe the vehemencie of the heate, willeth to commixe the decoction of coriander with the aforeſaid vrine. But if theſe thinges do nothing helpe, and there be required a more effectuall remedie: take of mirrhe, pars .j. of licium, part .ij. and mingle them with the aforeſaid decoction. This medicine vnder written doeth bring Strumae vnto ſuppuration,
                     Pauli medicamentum ad ſtrumas ſuppurandas. Detergentia.
                   which medicine is recorded of Paulus Aegineta Lib. 4. ℞. of mirrhe. ʒ.x. of ammoniacum Thymiama. 
                  ʒ.vij. of viſcus quercinum. 
                  ʒ.viij. of Galbanum. 
                  ʒ.iiij. of propolis. 
                  ʒ.j. beate them in a mortar. But when theſe abſceſſions be ripe, and brought vnto ſuppuration (which you ſhall eaſily perceiue by the tokens of the matter) they muſt be opened and clenſed within, which you ſhall do very well, if you do clenſe them after their apertion with that ointment cōmonly called vnguentum Apoſtolorum,
                  
                     Vnguentum Apoſtolerum.
                   which is an ointment of great efficacie in malignant and vlcerated Strumae. To this purpoſe alſo the ointment called vnguentum Aegyptiacum is very profitable,
                     Vnguentum Aegyptiacum. Diachylon. Diapalma.
                   and the Emplaſtrum de ſuccis (which they call Diachylon) and Diapalma, (which the Greekes call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) whoſe deſcriptions are to be found in other places. But if theſe Abſceſſions ſhall poſſeſſe any member, wherin there ſubſiſteth any putrefaction, and corruption of the bones, or any euill ſymptomate ſhall haue acceſſe to them: they muſt be cured after the maner of vlcers, with the which they haue ſome affinitie and acquaintaunce. Concerning our fouth Canon, you ſhall cure, gentle, obedient, ſuperficiall, and curable Strumae, very cunningly and ſhortly after this ſorte. Firſt,
                  
                     The waye to cure and deſtroy Strum
                           •
                        , one of Albucaſis and Leonidas.
                   commaund the ſicke to lye down: for that, when he ſitteth, his heart will quickly faile him. when he is thus laid, binde his legges ſurely together, and tye them to the beadſtead, and charge the ſeruauntes about him to holde his head very hard. Then cut the skinne that compaſſeth the tumour either with a right or a litle ouerthwart ſection, but that inciſion, which is drawen ouertwhart in the neck, is altogether vnprofitable, becauſe in it the veſſells and ſinewes are extended right foorth. But you ſhall not cut the whole thickneſſe of the skinne

haſtely at one time without ceaſing: for out minde is to vſe no violēt thing in this our work. And truely in little tumours, that is, in ſmall ſtrumae, make but a ſimple inciſion, or diuide them with a ſmall line; but in great abſceſſions cut the skinne to the forme of a myrtle leafe: then thoſe veſſelles which are vncouered (as the veynes and arteries) put them ſoftely and eaſily aſide. After theſe thinges, diſtend and ſtretch out the ſides of the ſection, or the edges of the diuided skinne, with pinſers, or with other ſuch inſtruments, and plucke out the filmes within, either with your fingers, or with ſome other inſtrument appointed for that purpoſe, and ſo by little and little picke out ſtruma, where it appeareth bare and vnfolded from the tunicles. But if ſtruma ſhalbe wound about the veſſells, you muſt handle the cure with great attention, leaſt through negligence, there followeth a copious profuſion of bloud. Therefore in diſpatching this cure, drawe one onely ſide of the ſection at once with the pynſers, and ſo by little and little ſeperate it with the poynt of a penknyfe from the other partes therunto adioyned, and when you haue drawen and looſed the connexion on the one ſide, doe the like alſo on the other ſide, and then cut out the whole foundation or ground worke becauſe of the ſinowes and veſſelles lying vnderneath. But in thoſe ſtrumae, which do chaunce about the armeholes, and about the pryuie members, you muſt make an ouerthwart inciſion by reaſon of the doubling of the skinne. Moreouer in that ſection, which is made in ſtrumae that poſſeſſe the necke, you muſt haue a ſingular care, leaſt either the arteries, which they call carotides, or the quiuering ſinowes be touched and hurte. But if by the cutting of any veſſell when you make inciſion, the profuſion of bloude doth delaie and hinder your worke, either take vp the veſſell with a ſmall corde, or (if it be not verie great) cutte it quite of (as Paulus counſelleth) or elſe, (if it burſteth not out with great violence) applie ſuch remedies, as are appoynted to ſtench the bloud. Afterward returne againe vnto your enterpryſed labour. Therefore, when the foundation of ſtruma is brought into a narrowe roome, cutte it cleane of, cunninglie and handeſomlie, and then put in the forefinger, and ſearche the place diligentlie, wheather there be any other ſtrumae thereunto adioyned or not, which, (if there be anie founde) you muſt alſo drawe forth after that manner, which we haue before expreſſed. Moreouer you ſhall eaſily repreſſe a meane fluze of bloud by applying thoſe thinges which haue power to drie vppe, as flaxe, ſponges, or lynamentes made of cotten, infuſed in colde water, or in vineger, or in a mixture of both, (which they call oxycraton) and afterwarde wronge out. But if the ſection ſhall continue without bloudeſhead, fill it vp with the powder of franckenſence, and applie linymentes, and for the longer preſeruation of the lynimentes,
                     VVhat is to be done, of a veyne be annexed v
                           •
                        to ſtruma.
                   bynde to woll dipped in winne. But if anie full veyne worthie the ſpeaking of, be connexed within the roote or bottom of Glandula, or ſtruma, or ſome ſuch like tumour, it is not conuenient to cut it of at the verie ground, but to take it vp and binde it with a ſmall corde, that it may fall out of it owne accorde: peece by peece without any daunger. In which fall the cure muſt be followed with lynimentes, But the corde muſt be of ſome matter, which will not eaſily putrifie, as are thoſe threedes which are called ſerica,
                  
                     Cordes made of ſilke.
                   or ſmall lute ſtringes: for thoſe bandes which doe quickely rotte, doe ſone fall from thoſe members whereunto they are tyed. But if when the worke is finiſhed, ſome of the skinne that couereth the matter of the former abſceſſions, or ſome other ſtrang thing ſhall remaine behind,
                     Albucaſis.
                   
                  Albucaſis willeth it to be drawen out, firſt by filling the wounde with cotten, or with ſome other like thing, dipped in ſalte water. But Guido, to drawe out thoſe relickes which remayned behinde did fill vppe the gaping vlcer, firſt with the white of an egge, and with Alume ſprinckled ouer it, afterwarde with vnguentum Aegyptiacum, or with ſome of thoſe corroſiuing medicines which are deſcrybed in the Antidotarie. Moreouer in all theſe operations, you muſt applie ſuch medicines as can lenifie payne, but among all other thinges we doe commonly lay on flaxe dipped in the whyte of an egge, and in oyle of roſes. You ſhall finiſh the ſcope of our fifth rule after this ſorte: breake the ſkinne with ſome burning hote medycine according to the greatneſſe of the Abſceſſion,
                     C
                           ••
                        r
                           •
                        ſio & 
                           ••••
                        dificatio.
                   but while you attempt that thing, you muſt giue diligent heede, leaſt the ſcalding medycine doe touche the other partes lying about the tumours. You ſhall notablie diſpatche this labour,
                     Caſticum ex calce & ſap
                           •
                        
                        ne.
                   by applying ſome hote medycine made of lyme, of ſope, which thinges doe happelie execute their effectes with in the ſpace of twelue houres,

but though they remaine ſomewhat longer, yet there will enſue no daunger or diſcommoditie thereby. The ſkinne therefore being thus broken by ſome burning medicine, & cruſt procured in the place, you ſhall deuide the tumour with a ſtraight line all a long through the middeſt of the cruſt (but you muſt make inciſion ſomewhat deepely, almoſt to the verie quicke) and then lay vpon the cut, or gaping wounde, a lyniment ſtriked with ſome conſuming or eating medicine, as is, the powder of Aſphodelus. Moreouer although manie do apply a great number of medicines in theſe abſceſſions:
                     Arſenicum.
                   yet Arſenicke in this caſe obtayneth the preheminence, ſo that a man knowe howe to vſe it aright. But the certaine quantitie of vſing the ſame can not be deſcribed (as Galene hath noted. lib. 3. Therapeut.) It is not therefore to be vſed raſhly, becauſe it is a medicine vehement and violent without meaſure, exciting feuers, and procuring manie other vitious ſymptomates. Beſides that alſo the miniſtring of a ſmall quantitie doth perfourme a maruelous and almoſt an incredible effect,
                     Quantit
                           •
                        s arſen
                           •••
                        .
                   notwithſtanding the common meaſure or quantitie thereof is the medietie of one graine of wheate, in a ſtrong bodie, and in thoſe members which are farre of from the principall partes: but in weake natures, and in thoſe places which are ſituated neare vnto the principall members, a leſſe quantitie muſt be applied. But to be ſhort, it is better, and more ſafe to miniſter a little at once, and often, then at one time to applie an immoderate quantitie. The operation or effect of Arſenicke remaineth three whole dayes, in all which time the ſicke muſt vſe the diet of them that are feuerous. But the affected member, and the partes lying about the ſame, both for the owne defence, and to ſtoppe the fluxe, (which immoderate heate may cauſe) ought to be annointed and all to waſhed with the ointment called populeon, with water alſo, or with the iuyce of nightſhade and with vineger, and with other refrigerating remedies of the like kinde. But when you are certainelie aſſured, that Glandula is deſtroyed and waſted away (which you ſhall know by the hardneſſe and ſwelling of the procured cruſt) then the cruſt muſt be reſolued euen from the quicke, by waſhing it with butter, and by applying a little wheate meale thicked together,
                     Quādo 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                   or by ſome other fat and vnctuous thing that is not ſalted, as ſwines greace and ſuch like. But when the cruſt is fallen from the tumour, if anie thing either of glandula, lupia, or ſtruma doe yet remaine behinde, it muſt be fetched out with ſome gnawing medicine, as with the powder of Asphodelus, with vnguentum Aegyptiacum, or with ſome ſuch like thing. But if there remayneth nothing behinde it muſt be brought vnto a ſcarre after the manner of other vlcers. But nowe, that wee may alſo accompliſhe the intention of our ſixt canon: theſe abſceſſions which haue verie narrowe baſes or foundacions, muſt be faſt bound either with a corde of ſilke, or with horſe hayre,
                     L
                           •
                        ga
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        r
                           •
                        e & 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   and they muſt be bound daylie more and more, either with the former bandes, or with other newe cordes, vntill they appeare verie drie, and voluntarilie doe fall awaye of their owne accorde, (as wee haue ſayed of thoſe Abſceſſions, which are deepelie planted, and foulded, about the great veſſelles.) But the bande muſt be ayded with ſome conſuming and drying medicine. The paine alſo muſt be aſſwaged with the white of an egge, with oyle of roſes, with vnguentum populeon, or with ſome other remedie that can mitigate payne. But when the cordes ſhall fall of alone of their owne accorde, the tumour muſt be cured after that manner, which wee haue before expreſſed. And thus much generally concerning thoſe Abſceſſions which vniuerſallie conſiſt aboue nature, eſpeciallie of them that haue their originall of fleume. Nowe wee haue here thought it conuenient, to ſet downe the proper and peculiar methode of Curinge Melicerides, Steatomata, and Atheromata, which diſeaſes are alwayes and often incident to mennes bodies, and doe comprehend vnder them other certaine kindes and differences of tumoures beſides nature, called of the late Phiſitions after certaine newe titles and names, which among the auncient ſort were neuer hearde of, as Talpa, Testudo, Nacta, and others of that kinde, which wee haue expreſſed in our former Chapters. In thoſe three kindes of Abſceſſions,
                     Curatio Atherom
                           •
                        ti
                           •
                        , ſteatomatis & meliceridis.
                   which do moſt frequent mennes bodies, (I meane in Steatomata, Atheroma, and Meliceris) there is one generall order of their Cure, namely, that that matter, which is contayned in that tunicle, which they call Cyſtis, may be diſcuſſed, or that the whole tumoure together with the verie tunicle, may be conſumed by medicines, or taken away by ſection. But ſome of thoſe Tumours

require a three fold method of Curing,
                     Ho
                           •
                         manie wayes theſe abſceſſion may be cured.
                   as theſe, which containe a more liquide humour as is meliceris. Some againe are cured two wayes, as Atheroma, which is deſtroyed by ſection, and conſumed by medicines. But Steatoma can neither be diſcuſſed, nor conſumed: but it is cured by the onely labour of the hand (that is) by ſection onely. Moreouer of medicines, which in theſe affectes haue power to diſcuſſe and diſpearſe, you ſhall find plentie among thoſe remedies,
                     Lib. 4. Curatio per digerentis.
                   which we before haue ſet downe for the cure of ſtrumae. But Paulus doth perticulerly and properly diſcuſſe melicerides with that medicine, which conteineth, of preſſed grapes (the kernels being taken out,) xx. of the ſcourings of braſſe. ℥.iiij. which medicine muſt not be applied before the member be nouriſhed with foments. Another emplaiſter appointed for melicerides,
                  
                     Lib. 15. which Aetius reported vnto Leonidas. ℞. of preſſed grapes, (the kernels being detracted. lb.j. of comin ſeede beaten verie ſmall. ℥.vj. of nitrum. ℥.iij. bray all togither in a morter, and bind them to the tumour. Another diſcuſſiue medicine expreſſed of the ſame writer, verie profitable againſt melicerides. ℞. ſalis ammoniaci, of the ſcourings of ſiluer, and of Ceruſe. ana. lb.j. of wax, Terchinthina, chalbana, opoponax. ana. ℥.j. of rubrica ſinopica. ℥.vj. of vinegre. ℥.vij.ſs. boile the ſcourings of ſiluer, ceruſe, and ſalt beaten very ſmall, altogether, then caſt in the rubrica ſinopica, which firſt muſt be ſteeped in vinegre, and melt them togither, laſt of all, when they be all boyled togither and cold, commix therewith op
                        •
                     ponax and chalbana, both diſſolued in vinegre, and conſerue them to your vſe. But if in ſuch kinde of Abſceſſions you mind to waſt the humour by applying of gnawing medicines (which the Grecians call Septica) it is expedient firſt to vncouer them (as alſo in ſtruma) by hote burning medicines applied to the ſkinne,
                     Curatio per 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      4 whereof (ſaith Paulus) the beſt remedie is that, which conſiſteth of quick lime (that is) which is not yet quenched with water of ſope, and of the aſhes of lye that are made in a ſtillatorie. There is another more diuerſe remedie, which may be kept a long time. ℞. of vnſlaked lime. ʒ.iiij. of ſphecle, (that is) of the burnt dregges of wine, of liquide nitrum parched in the fire. ana. ʒ.ij. of minium or rubrica ſinopicae. ℈.j. Let them be brayed with the diſtilled aſhes of lye, and when you haue brought them to the thickneſſe of liquide honie, heate them thriſe ouer the fire, that it may be of a meane ſubſtance, and lay on pixis plunubra, with the diſtilled lye aboue, left it dry vp to ſoone. Therefore firſt breake the ſkinne that is beſet with ſuch medicines, as can procure a cruſt: but when the cruſt is falne of, apply conſuming remedies, among which this remedie following doth notably waſt without gnawing and biting. ℞. of the offall of braſſe. ʒ.iiij of Sandaracha (that is) of red arſenicke,
                     A medicine to wa
                           ••
                         without biting.
                   and of Helleborus niger. ana. ʒ.ij. apply them with oyle of roſes. Another remedie verie effectuall for the ſame purpoſe. ℞. of a burnt hedghog, of Teſtaſepia, and of orpine or arſenicke. ana. an equall portion. Commix them with oyle of roſes. But the partes which lye about the tumour, and are adiacent therunto, let them be firſt annointed with ceruſe and oile.
                     Curatio per Chirurgiam.
                   But if we purpoſe to cure theſe kinds of Abſceſſions by making inciſion (that is) by Chirurgerie: truly in that method of curing (whether it be a mealie humour, or a hony, or a fat humour, or of what ſubſtance ſoeuer it be, which is contained in them) we muſt obſerue one only and perpetuall intention, (namely, to take away the tunicle wherein the humour is included.) But in enterpriſing the ſame, we muſt be verie attentiue & warie (as wee haue ſaide before of ſtrumae) that we raſhly hurt not and teare in peeces the filme or tunicle, whereupon the humour, which was contained therein, guſhing out plentifullie, doeth both hinder our operation, and ſome portion thereof alſo remaineth ſtill behinde. For if (when the tunicle is deuided, and the humour iſſued) the tumour ſhall ſinke downe, the tunicle will hardlie be plucked away and cured. But if anie remnaunt of the humour be lefte behinde in the Abſceſſion, it is to be feared, that the diſeaſe will growe againe (as doeth ſtruma) when as anie portion thereof ſticketh behinde. But if anie ſuch thing doeth happen, it is not expedient to ſowe together the Abſceſſion, but to drawe out the relictes thereof either with thoſe conſuming medicines, which we haue before expreſſed, or by ſome ſuch like remedies. Nowe if ſteatoma hath a verie broade toppe, and a verie narrowe and ſclender foundation, then (ſetting aſide all other ſuperfluous remedies) you muſt cut it vp quite euen by the verie roote,
                     Aetius lib 15. for ſo the labour of the Chyrurgian ſhall quicklie be ended, the vlcer made plaine and equall with the other partes, and the Cure ſhortlie diſpatched.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXV. Of harde and Scirrhous tumoures, ingendred of melancholie.
               
                  WE haue hitherto diſcourſed of thoſe tumoures which are cauſed of bloud, choler and fleume: of 
                     Ʋerrucae alſo, and of thoſe abſceſſions, which are excited through a wateriſh humour and a flatuous vapour: of thoſe Apoſtemes alſo which haue their beginning of a phlegmaticke ſubſtaunce, and of other tumoures generallie conſiſting aboue nature. Nowe it remayneth that wee intreate of thoſe Abſceſſions, which doe proceede of a melancholike humour, as are ſcirrhous, indurated and cancerous tumoures, which they call Canceroſi apoſtemoſi. To Scirrhus therefore (as alſo to phlegmone, Eryſipelas, and Oedema) there is aſſigned of the late Chirurgians a double difference, which notwithſtanding is comprehended vnder the ſame title, vidz. Scirrhus verus, & Scirrhus non verus.
                  
                     Scirrhus duplex.
                   But a true and lawfull Scirrhus is ſaide to proceede of naturall melancholie. Alſo naturall melancholie is the dregges of good bloud, and as it were a certaine ſlimie ſuperfluitie, and verie groſſe bloud, whoſe colour is blacke,
                     Melancholia naturales.
                   but the taſt thereof ſharpe and ſoure (as it is not vnknowen to them that doe vomite the ſame) it is lodged in a certaine bloudie corner, wherein all the humoures are contayned, and appointed of nature to nouriſh the melancholike members.
                     
                        Scirrhus illeg
                              ••
                           mu
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Melanchola non natura
                              •
                           is.
                     
                   But an vnlawfull Scirrhus after the opinion of the late Chirurgians, is that which is ingendred of vnnaturall melancholie. And vnnaturall melancholie is that, which differeth from the former deſcription of the naturall humour, and yet it keepeth within the precinctes of his libertie, which if it ſhall once pretergreſſe (they ſay) it is no longer to be called melancholie, but ſome other humour. But melancholie (to enter into the generall definition thereof) is a colde and drie humour, proceeding (as Guido ſayeth) of a verie groſſe portion of that which wee call Chylus.
                     Differentiae 4. non natural
                           ••
                         me
                           ••
                        ncho
                           ••
                        ae.
                   But of vnnaturall melancholie there are commonly appointed foure differences. The firſt is, when as that melancholike humour, which is called naturall, and doeth daylie ingender in the bodie, euen when a man is in perfect health, is in his owne proper eſſence, burned, putrified and become exquiſite melancholie.
                     B
                           •
                        is a
                           •
                        ra exquiſite.
                   For that (as Galene ſayeth) is ingendred of a blacke humour, that is vehemently burnt, and it gliſtereth like vnto lime and pitch. But this is ſoure, and being powred on the grounde, it is hoate like vinegre, and it riſeth vp like leauen. It is alſo verie vnpleaſaunt vnto all creatures liuing, ſo that neither mice nor flies will taſt thereof. It ſheweth likewiſe, like vnto aboundaunce of ſalt, wherein no liuing thing can vpholde his life, as the ſea which is ſayed to be dead. Furthermore this blacke kinde of choller is then ingendred, when as that ſlimie bloud,
                     Gal. co
                           •
                        . 21. (which we haue ſaid to be naturall melancholie) doeth continue long in the bodie, and is purged out neither by anie ſenſible nor ſecret effluxion: but is transformed, corrupted, and rotten. For truely this humour (ſayth Galene) when it waxeth vehementlie hoate, either becauſe of the corruption thereof, or becauſe of a burning feuer, it cauſeth melancholie:
                     Lib. 4. Apho. Lib. 14. Therapeutices.
                   which truely is cold becauſe it reſembleth the nature of the earth, but yet it is not voide of heate, as is aſhes and vinegre, and when it is purged downewarde (as it happeneth ſometime to them which are diſeaſed with Dyſenteria) it appeareth more gliſtering and more blacke then that thicke and blacke bloud, which we doe call a melancholious humour. 2. The ſecond ſpecies or difference of vnnaturall melancholie is that,
                     Melancholy cōmeth by the aduſtion of other humours.
                   which commeth through  the aduſtion of other humoures, as that which proceedeth of choler vehementlie burnt, which is of ſo great malice and rancour, that it raſeth the earth, and lifteth it vp on high, after the manner of exquiſite melancholie. But the flyes alſo doe abhorre it, as in a trewe melancholie. If bloud alſo or fleume ſhall be vehementlie heated in the bodie, and burnt, there is alſo cauſed a melancholike humour, which Auicene becauſe of the aduſtion tearmed to be vnnaturall. But theſe two laſt kindes, which doe come of the aduſtion of bloud and fleume, Auicene hath thought to be verie milde and gentle, yet Galene writeth, that that kind of melancholie, which is ingendred of burnt choler, is a great deale more daungerous then that which hath his generation of groſſe bloud,
                     Com. 29. lib. 3 praed
                           •
                        ct. Hyp.
                   which is like vnto the

dreggs of wine in the bottome of a veſſell, or in proportion reſembling the dregges of oile, for this is more gentle & milde, yea and eſpecially when as it tarieth not long within the bodie with any aboundaunt heate exceeding nature. But before it be chaunged into exact melancholie, it paſſeth firſt into a yellowiſh forme, ſecondly into a leekye ſubſtaunce, and  thirdly into a ruſtie colour. 3. The third ſpecies of vnnaturall melancholie is that, which boroweth his originall of a certaine ſtonie concretion,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   as when through the ignorance of vnſkilfull Phiſitions or Chirurgians, Eryſipelas, and thoſe inflammations (which the Grecians call phlegmone) or anie other tumours proceeding of naturall humours, are too vehemently cooled and bound by the applying of extraordinarie remedies: or elſe when thoſe medicins which do mightely drawe & digeſt, are miniſtred to the ſame tumours. For then (the whole ſubſtance which was verie ſmall in them, being diſpearſed) the groſſe matter which remaineth, being exceedingly dried, will reſemble the hardneſſe of a ſtone, & be conuerted into a  melancholious humour. 4. The fourth difference of vnnaturall melancholy ariſeth, when as ſome other humour is mixed with naturall melancholy,
                     Melancholy through 
                           〈…〉
                         humours 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                   which thing, while it happeneth, it is made ſweete, & doth wax mild, vntill ſuch time as one burnt choler or other be commixed therewith, for then it waxeth ſharp, and bitter, & is made pertaker of immoderate gnawing. We may gather therefore by our former words, that the foure differences of tumours aboue nature do proceede of melancholy: for firſt of naturall melancholy (which we haue ſaid to breede dayly in found bodies) there is cauſed a true and lawfull ſcirrhus, called among the Arabians ſeph
                        •
                     ros, but of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   (that is) ſcirrhus or ſcirrhus non exactus, ſeu non exquiſitus, which kind of tumour truly is very hard, & void of paine, but yet not altogither inſenſible: Auicene calleth it impurus. Yet Galene lib. 14. meth. med. pardoning them which do contend about the names of tumours, calleth it a tumour conflated of a melancholious humour, and then properly ſcirrhus, whenas notwithſtanding it is expert of any feeling or ſenſe, but if it be not yet made altogither inſenſible, it is rather to be called a ſcirrhous tumour,
                     
                        Scirrhus phlegmon
                              •
                           de
                              •
                           , oedema
                              ••
                           de
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Eryſipela
                              ••
                           des
                     
                   then ſcirrhus it ſelfe. Secondly of vnnaturall melancholie through the admixtion of other humoures there doe growe three other differences of tumoures (that is to ſay) Scirrhus phlegmonodes, oedema
                        •
                     ode, and Eryſipelatôdes, which diſeaſes are here rehearſed for one onely difference. Thirdlie of vnnaturall melancholie cauſed through a certaine ſtonie hardneſſe,
                     Scirrhus exquiſit
                           ••
                        .
                   and concretion, there is engendred an exquiſite Scirrhus, harde, and voide ofe ſence and paine, it is called of Auicene purus, which euill admitteth no cure. Fourthly, of vnnaturall melancholie thorough deuſtion, are all the kindes of Cankers ingendred,
                     
                        Scirrhus can
                           
                              •
                           roſus.
                     
                     
                        Scirrhus prop
                              •••
                            quod.
                     
                     
                        Cauſe
                              •
                           
                         3. ſcirrhi 
                              ••
                           g
                              ••
                           m
                              •
                           .
                     
                   as well vlcerate, as not vlcerate: of the which kinde is Scirrhus caneroſus. Scirrhus therefore properly is a Tumour verie harde and without paine, but yet not altogether without feeling, proceeding of a naturall melancholie, and vncorrupt humour, which definition the late Chirurgians haue aſſigned thereunto. The cauſes of Scirrhus, as of other tumours beſides nature are three. Firſt Primitiue, as is an euill diet, ingendring and gathering groſſe and melancholike bloud. Seconde Antecedent, as a melancholike humour collected in the bodie, which is drawen from the ſpleene (whoſe duetie it is to purge the liuer from that groſſe and muddie bloud) and yet is not expelled without the bodie (as it ought to be.) Thirde, Coniuncta cauſa, is the melancholike humour it ſelfe,
                     Signae.
                   compacted in the affected member. The ſignes of Scirrhus his preſence (as Guido reporteth) are theſe, a hard tumour, & mightely reſiſting, a middle colour betwene a red and a blacke, which is a browne colour. This Scirrhus when it happeneth in the parts of the bodie,14. meth. med.
                   manie of the Phiſitions (as Galen ſaith) do call it pelidnon, that is to ſay, black and blewe. Morouer if thaffected member hath any manifeſt veines appearing in it, you ſhall ſee them puffed vp and ſwolne by the meanes of thicke and blacke bloud, ſuch as is ſometime purged downward in them which labour with the diſeaſe of the liuer, but then it is called ſcirrhus impurus & cancroſus.
                  
                     Guido n
                           •
                        tas Cancri tribuit ſcirrho.
                   For theſe ſignes which Guido doeth here aſcribe vnto ſcirrhus, do properly agree with the ſignes of Cancer (as Galene writeth decimo quarto methodi medendi.) And truely they may verie fitlie be attributed vnto Scirrhus, if this one thing be excepted, namely, that Scirrhus hath not ſuch ſwelling and full veynes, as Cancer hath, except Scirrhus (as wee haue ſayed before) chaunce to be cancroſus, for Scirrhus doth oftentimes degenerate into Cancer, & that not without great cauſe, ſeeing they both

proceede of one matter (that is) of a melancholike humour. The proper ſignes therefore of a lawfull ſcirrhus are theſe, a harde and ſtonie tumour, verie obſtinate and reſiſting touching, wherein there is preſent a verie dull ſenſe. There doe alſo appeare manie other ſignes which doe teſtifie the dominion of a melancholie humour in the bodie.
                     Iudicia ſcirrhi
                   Such tumoures as are truelie ſcirrhi, in their beginning and firſt conception are wont to appeare verie ſmall, but in proceſſe of time, they increaſe by little and little, and become great and mightie, whereof ſome doe annoy one onelie member, but ſome doe leaue that member, which they did firſt infeſt, and afterwarde doe paſſe ouer to the poſſeſſion of another, which thing when it happeneth, then Auicene calleth the euill ferinos. Furthermore,
                     Ferinos.
                   theſe kindes of melancholious tumoures, if they be rightly handled, they are commonly cured by reſolution, oftentimes they continue indurated and hard, and many times (which is worſt of all) they degenerate and chaunge into Cancer.
               
               But nowe wee will proſequute the abſolute cure of theſe kindes of harde tumoures aboue nature, which are called true Scirrhi, and not exquiſiti, by three ſpeciall intentions.
                     
                        The cure of a true & lawful ſcirrhus, yet not exquiſite, & growen into a ſtony hardneſſe, altogither inſenſible Three Intentions.
                     
                     
                        V
                              •
                           ctus ratio. Euchyma. Panis. Potus. O
                              •
                           a. Carnes. Olera.
                     
                   The firſt preſcribeth a conuenient order of diet. The ſeconde admoniſheth to take awaye the antecedent matter, which is readie to procure the diſeaſe. The thirde warneth vs to enterpriſe the vacuation of that coniunct matter (as they call it) which nowe cauſeth the euill. Therefore (to ſpeake generallie) you muſt appoint to them which are diſeaſed with ſcirrhus a ſober and a moderate diet, and ſuch a one as declineth vnto heate, and moyſture in thoſe thinges (which they call res non naturales) as before. Giue him therefore meates of good iuyce, and which can ingender good bloud. Let his bread be made of wheate, well knodden and baked in an ouen with a ſoft fire, and let it haue ſome leauen, and ſalt, as much as ſhall ſuffiſe. Let his drink be thinne, and odoriferous wine, eſchewing that which is thick and black. Giue him rere egges, the fleſh of chickens, capons, hens and the brothes of them. Let him alſo eate the fleſh of partriches, pheaſaunts, quailes, yong kiddes, ſucking calues, & of weather of a yeare old. For potherbes, let him vſe that which the Arabians call Aſpa
                        •
                     ar, but we ſomewhat altering the name, do call it ſpinach, alſo lettuſe, hoppes, borrage, bugloſſe, and other herbes of that nature, which can purge foorth bloud, and make it more pure. To conclude, let him flie and auoide all thoſe thinges, which naturallie doe ingender melancholike bloud, which things Galene libro tertio de affectis capite ſexto, hath deſcribed vnto vs, as are, the fleſh of goates, and of oxen, and of bulles,
                     Carner. Limacet.
                   but eſpecially the fleſh of Aſſes and of cammelles, of foxes and of dogges, of hares alſo and of bores. Furthermore ſnayles, (if they be accuſtomed to be eatē) & the fleſh of all terreſtriall creatures ſeaſoned with ſalt. The fleſh alſo of fiſhes, as of the Tunie, of the fiſh called Balaena, the ſea calfe, the Dolphin, the dogge-fiſh, and of all kinde of whales. But of potherbes,
                     Piſces. 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         is made of vineger and ſalt.
                   Coolewortes is wont onelie to ingender this kinde of bloud. The buddes alſo of trees, when they are ſeaſoned either with brine, or with oxalme, eſpeciallie of the tree called a maſtixe tree, of the Terebinth, of the brier, and of the wilde eglantine brier which the Greekes call Cynoſbatos.) But of all kinde of pulſe lintles chieflie are accounted amongeſt the number of melancholike meates. Bread alſo made of branne,
                     Legu
                           •
                        inum panis. Typhae. Vinum.
                   and that which is made of Rye and of other corrupt and naughtie ſeedes, which other Countries doe vſe in ſteede of corne. Moreouer, thicke and blacke wines are verie fitte to engender a melancholious humour: eſpeciallie if one drinking them aboundauntly, doeth by occaſion keepe his bodie in great heate. Finallie olde cheeſe, when as by chaunce it ſhall be exceedinglie hoate in the bodie,
                     Caſeus.
                   doeth eaſilie breede this kinde of humour. Theſe thinges haue we hitherto recited out of Galene. Furthermore you muſt diligentlie beware of meates that are burnt, roſted,
                     Sanguinem adurentiae.
                   and fried, which doe vehemently drie vp, of ſalt meates alſo, and of thoſe which are ſharpe and ſoure (as onions, garlicke, pepper, muſtarde, and of other thinges of that kinde, which do burne the bloud. You muſt alſo eſchewe, anger, wrath, ſadneſſe, watchings,
                     
                        Animi 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                     
                        Exercitatio.
                     
                   heauineſſe, carefulneſſe, and immoderate exerciſes. Quietneſſe and tranquillitie of minde, with mirth and gladneſſe is greatly to be deſired: and you muſt diligently endeuour, euerie day to emptie the belly. Hitherto concerning the firſt ſcope. 2. Now that we may accompliſh that, which our ſecond intention doth propound:
                     Vacuatio materia antecedemi
                           •
                        .
                   let vs ſomewhat conſider the precept of Auicene, who willeth vs to euacuate the whole body both by bloudletting, if too black & groſſe

bloud ſhall appeare, and alſo by ſome purging medicine, which can expell melancholie as are theſe which followe, out of Meſua, Epithyntum, Sene, polypodye, fumus terra (which of the Grecians is called Capuos or Capuios, of the Latines fumaria) lupulus, and the herbe called volubilis. Alſo Caſia fiſtula, myrobalani Indi, lapis lazuli, which the Greekes call Cyaneus, the Romanes Caeraleus, Diaſene, diacatholicon, hiera Ruphi, all which things do purge foorth melancholike humours. But theſe thinges, which pertaine vnto Phiſicke do exceede the boundes of Chirurgians. Omitting therefore the profeſſours of the art of Phiſicke, we will haſten vnto the third ſcope, which we ſhall verie ſpeedily diſpatch, if we labour to emptie  out all that matter, which vnnaturallie is compacted in the aggrieued member. Which, truly is the generall and principall indication of all tumoures which conſiſt aboue nature:
                     Vacuatio matr
                           ••
                        ae 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   in which that leekie matter (as wee haue ſayed before) is not yet ingendred. But this is the onelie and proper waye to euacuate them, about the which the Chirurgian ought to be verie circumſpect and attentiue. For truelie the matter of ſuch kinde of tumours, is naturallie ſo malignaunt and ſtubborne, that it will turne into a ſtonie hardneſſe if it be raſhly reſolued.
                     Materia 
                           〈7 words〉
                        .
                   Againe, if it be mollified more then is requiſite, it is greatly to be feared, that it will putrifie and corrupt, and that Schirrus will degenerate into Cancer. We muſt therefore in this caſe followe the counſell of Galene and Paulus (who wrote of this thing long before Auicene.) Namely, that in ſuch ſchirrous affectes, wee muſt not apply anie vehement, hoate, and drying medicine, neither any thing elſe, which hath the power onelie to mollifie and moyſten. For that tumour, which hath a ſuperfluous humour, it doth nothing at all diſſolue: but that which hath a ſmall fluxe, it doeth more drie vp then neede requireth. Hereupon Auicene did well admoniſh vs, to apply to theſe indurated tumoures by turnes, ſometime mollifying,
                     Medicines 
                           〈…〉
                         ſcirrhus.
                   and ſometime digeſting remedies. But becauſe that order was very tedious, and hard to be done, it pleaſed Galene to vſe for the cure of theſe euilles, ſuch medicines as h
                     •
                  d a mixed and a double facultie, which deuiſe was more ſafe and leſſe daungerous. For by this meanes we ſhall both mollifie and digeſt the indurate and harde ſubſtaunce all at one time: yet in the beginning we muſt commix ſomething with them which can moderately repreſſe. For this purpoſe, Auicene hath ſet downe manie kindes of remedies, which, becauſe they are rather appointed for thoſe Schirri, which proceede of phlegmone and Eryſipelas when they be exceedingly cooled (as wee will declare in the Chapter following) wee will omit them,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         medica
                        
                           ••••••
                         ad 
                           〈◊◊〉
                          & di
                           〈7 letters〉
                        .
                   making choiſe of that medicine which Razis libro ſeptimo ad Almanſorem hath deſcribed: vſing notwithſtanding at the beginning ſome equall repreſſion of the flowing of humours (by applying ſome moderate repelling remedy.) The forme of the medicine is this. ℞. of Bdellium, Ammoniacum, and Galbanum. Of eche a like quantitie. Beate them in a morter with oyle de ben, which the Greekes call balanum myrepfice, the Latines, Glaus vnguentaria,) or with oyle of lillies. Then take of the filth of fenugreeke, of lineſeede, and of figges: the weyght of all the former thinges. Bray them altogether, till they be thoroughly incorporate the one with the other. Galene for this cure both greatly commendeth the barke of the roote of Althea,
                  
                     Ga
                           •
                        eni catap
                           •
                        aſma. T
                           ••
                        rap. 14 (which the common ſort, ſaith he, doeth call Anadendromalache, as though one woulde ſay, arboreſcent malua) melted with the fat of a gooſe or of a cocke, and then beaten togither, and brought into the forme of a cataplaſme. But if the tumour doth belong vnto ſuppuration, you muſt be verie warie,
                     I
                           •
                         ſcirrhus wil m
                           ••
                        ter.
                   leſt the affected member be incended or ſtirred with hoate medicines, or by anie other meanes, for ſo Cancer ſhould eaſilie be procured. But if the tumour be opened, and the ſubſtaunce thereof alreadie tourned into matter, you muſt vſe the helpe of that ointment, which is called diachylon. Againe, if it ſhall degenerate into a ſtonie hardeneſſe, you muſt ſtraight way repare vnto thoſe remedies which ſhall be described in the Chapter following.
                     
                        
                           ••
                        rhus illegi 
                           〈◊〉
                         & non 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                        .
                  
               
               But nowe when as thorough the vnſkilfulneſſe and ignoraunce of Phiſitions, thoſe inflammations which, the Grecians call Phlegmonae) or Eryſipelata are exceedinglie refrirated, or elſe raſhlie reſolued thorough the miniſtring of ſuch medicines, as can vehementlie drawe, and digeſt by their vapour: then all that ſubſtaunce which is anie thing thinne and ſclender in them, if diſſolued, but that which remayneth behinde, beeing as it were congealed togeather, and maruelouſlye dreyed vppe, doeth take vnto it a

ſtonie hardneſſe, and at the laſt commeth to that diſeaſe,
                     The cauſes of hardnes in the partes of the bodie.
                   which is called of the Greekes ſcirrhus. But it chaunceth ſometime that ſome member is hardened thorough extenſion of the fleſhe, which commeth by reaſon of wine or by ſome other wateriſh humour (as wee haue ſaide before in our treatiſe of flatuous and wateriſh tumours.) Oftentimes alſo there aryſeth vp in certaine members a ſtonie hardneſſe, cauſed of the priuation of the moyſture of the bodie and thorough too much dryneſſe, as it happeneth in the hardneſſe of the ioyntes, and in the poores of the bodie when the goute or ſuch like diſeaſes do raigne. But here we will onely diſcourſe of ſcirrhus, or of other harde tumours, which haue their originall from phlegmone or eryſipelas or elſe from aedema, when as they be greatly refrigerate and cooled, which tumours we haue termed not without ſome reaſon ſcirrhi ex coincidentia procreati, (that is) ſcirrhi proceeding of an vnitie,
                     
                        Scirrhi ex coincidentia procreati.
                     
                     
                        The ſignes of an vnlawfull ſcirrhus.
                     
                   being as it were a double diſeaſe incident both at one time. The ſignes and tokens of an vnlawfull ſcirrhus, which is not exquiſite or perfect, are theſe, a harde tumour, ſcarce ſenſible that is, as though it were with feeling and payne, parfitlie repreſenting the colour of the bodie, drawing his beginning from vnnaturall melancholie. This euill is not altogeather incurable, and yet it admitteth no eaſie cure, neither is it eaſely remedyed. For that humour, whereupon this euill gathereth his force is clammiſh, glewiſh and thicke, or (as Galen ſayth) a partaker of both kinds,
                     Iudicia.
                   which when it is ſtuffed in the hard members, it doth obſtinately withſtand reſolution, and when the humiditie thereof is throughlie reſolued, then that which remaineth behinde, is dryed vp, and made as harde as a ſtone. But an exquiſite ſcirrhus,
                  
                     Scirrhus exquiſitus curationem non ad 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   and ſuch a one as is altogeather inſenſible, doth not receiue any cure. But if it may be holpen any way, it muſt be done by ſome moyſtening medicine. That hardnes alſo which commeth through too much exciccation, and when the moyſture of the bodie is cleane extinguiſhed, is alſo incurable, for it is ſufficient if you ſtoppe it, that the drynes may proceede no further. But thoſe ſcirrhi alſo, wherein there do grow certayne heares, and which are great, and verie hard,
                     Scirrhi incurabiles.
                   and doe reſemble the colour of the bodie are neither cured, not yet chaunged at any time into any other diſeaſe (as Auicene hath declared.
               The common and generall declaration of curing theſe tumours, is in this order deſcribed (namely) to euacuate all that matter, which vnnaturally is contained in the member.
                     Summa curandorum ſcirrhorum.
                   For the only waie of euacuation (as Galen hath noted lib. 14. meth. med.) is this, euen to clenſe and draw out that corruption, which ſtubburnely doth cleaue to the humour. But if anie man ſhall aſſaie to make euacuation by thoſe medicines which do vehemently draw & digeſt, neither ſhall mollifie and ſoften with any drying and moiſtning remeadies, the cure ſhall ſeeme to him within few dayes greatlie to haue preuailed, for ſcirrhus will manifeſtly appeare to be deminiſhed. But that which remaineth of the diſeaſe, will be incurable, for truely when the whole ſubſtaunce, which is verie thinne in the tumour, is digeſted or diſperſed, then that which remaineth behinde, is turned into a certaine ſtonie concretion. For this cauſe therefore there is no medicine that doe vehemently heate or drie vp, meete and conueniet for theſe hard & ſcirrhous affectes, but ſuch remeadies only,
                     Medulla ſena
                   which can fitly both mollifie, and alſo digeſt: as are theſe things following: the marow of a harte and of a calfe, alſo goates ſuet, bulls ſuet, the tallow of a lybard and of a lyon. Among the fatte of byrds,
                     Adipes.
                   gooſes greace is chiefly commended, next that the fat of a cocke and of a pheſaunt. Alſo ammoniacum thymiama, (videl.) ſuffimen, perfume galbanum, and bdellium of both kindes,
                     
                        Gal. 14. meth. med.
                     
                     
                        Anadendromalache.
                     
                   but rather that which is called ſcithicum, becauſe it is ſomewhat moyſt. Styrax alſo, which is ſomething moyſt and fat. Moreouer the rote of althea, and of the wilde mallow, which groweth almoſt euerie where, the leaues whereof muſt be moderately boyled with gooſes or cockes ſuet, or if there be none of thoſe at hand, you may vſe ſwynes greac, theſe remedies are greatly profitable for this intention. But Auicene warneth vs not to commix anie hogges tallow that is ſalted, with the former thinges, and to vſe maſtiche, ladanum, oyle of wooll, ſtrygmenta gymnaſiorum, (which they call the filthines of bathes) aſſes dounge, and the dregges of oyle of lillyes, of oyle of alchanna which they call cyprinum, and of cherna, which of the Greekes is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but of the Latines ricinium.
                  
                     Oleum reci
                           •••
                        
                     
                   But that cure which is adminiſtred by vineger is profitable for this euill, that is for ſcirrhus which is full growen, and when the member is prepared to receiue mollyfyng medicines, as Galene alſo hath declared,

for truely ſaith he, the force of vinegre, if it be vſed moderatly and in due time, is verie holſome for theſe diſeaſes,14. Meth. med. 
                           〈◊〉
                         A
                           •
                        eti.
                   becauſe it doth diuide and reſolue the groſſe humours included in them: but if it be applyed immoderatly and out of a conuenient ſeaſon, it violentlie conſumeth the thinner partes, and maketh that, which remaineth behinde, to become verie harde, alſo if it be vſed longe, it will diminiſh and corrupt the verie ſubſtaunce of the ſinowes. For this cauſe therefore, we muſt not verie often nor at the beginning, nor any long time, apply thoſe medicines to the great ſinowes or cordes of the bodie, which are compounded and made of vineger. Wherefore Galene did cure the childe of one Cercilius,
                     Hiſtoria. Lib. 2. ad Glauconem. Oleum ſabinum.
                   who through to much cooling, and vehement bynding of eryſipelas, had a hard and ſcirrhus tumour remayning in his thighe, after this manner. Firſt he annointed his thighe, with oleum ſabinum, which of all oyles is moſt thin, in ſteede whereof they vſe in theſe daies olenum ſambucinum, oyle of elder, which the common ſort call iaſminum. When he had thus waſhed & annoynted the member, he applyed amnoniacum thimiama, which muſt be groſſe and not verie olde,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . commixed with the aforeſaide ſuettes and marrowes. Afterwarde he annoynted his whole thigh rounde about with verie fatte ammoniacum, diſſolued in exceeding ſharpe vineger, and commaunded the childe to hoppe on the other legge, that ſo the more nouriſhment mought be brought vnto it. By ſuch medicines therefore as coulde releaſe and mollifie the tumour, & by digeſting or reſoluing remeadies alſo, and by the moderate and right vſe thereof, he perfectly cured the childe. But in thoſe great ſinewes and ligamentes of the bodie,
                     
                        The cure of ſcirrh
                              •
                           us ſi
                           
                              •••
                           es & veynes, out of Ga
                              •
                           ene and Pae
                              •
                           lus.
                     
                     
                        Lapis milites. Lap
                              •
                           s pyrites.
                     
                   which are drawen togeather and couered with ſcirrhus, you muſt vſe vineger after this ſort, as Galene counſelleth vs. Take a ſtone, and heate it verie hote in the fire, and quench it in verie ſharp vinegre, if it be poſſible, let the ſtone be that, which we call pyrites, but if there be no plentie thereof, take the ſtone called lapis molaris, which the Greekes call mylites, then let the affected member be holden ouer the hote vapour that ryſeth vp from the ſton
                     •
                   out of the vineger, that it may receaue the ſteeming vapour, which doth diſſolue ſcirrhus: and afterwarde lay one againe ſome mollyfying medicine: yet the affected part muſt be euerie daie euen from the beginning throughly annointed with oyle and not with water, which oyle muſt not be aſtrictiue in any caſe, but of a thinne ſubſtance, as is oyle of ſauin. But ſometime you may boyle in oyle the rootes of althaea, and of the wild cucumber,
                     Oleum ſabi
                           •
                        ū.
                   and other thinges of that ſort, by this method of curing, many men truely haue bene perfitly healed in a ſhorte ſpace, ſo that ſome haue thought it (as Galene ſayth) to be done by the arte of magicke.2. ad Glauconem.
                   By theſe thinges therefore it doth plainely appeare, that with that cure, which is accompliſhed by mollifying remeadies, aſwell in the ſinowes, as in the ligamentes of the bodie, you muſt commixe ſome medicine that can cutte, diſſolue and diuide,
                     Lib. 6. among which number vineger is chiefly the principall. Now as concerning other medicines which can mollifie the hardneſſe of theſe tumours, we haue ſpoken nothing hoping that they may eaſily be gathered out of our former diſcourſe. Now followeth the ſumme of the cure of ſcirrhous tumour,
                     The ſumme of curing ſcirrhous tumours.
                   which we haue drawen into a compendious forme hereafter enſuing. 1. That kinde of ſcirrhus, which hauing all his humiditie and moiſture conſumed and waſted, is growen into a ſtonie hardneſſe, and is altogeather deſtitute of  ſence (as is that which Galene calleth exquiſitus ſcirrhus) of ſuch a ſcirrhus, I ſay, attempt not the cure, but leaue it as an euill incurable. 2. To ſcirrhus non exquiſitus (which is not  altogeather inſenſible, & yet ſcarce feeleth any thing) apply ſuch medicines as carrie with them a maruelous heat, and a meane moiſture (that is to ſay) which by mollifying, can alſo mederatly digeſt. 3. Vnto ſuch members as are infected with ſcirrhus, miniſter no remedies  which do vehemently digeſt, and immoderatelie drie vp, for in them their ſmall humiditie is quicklie reſolued, and then that which abydeth ſtill behinde, is dried vp and turned into a ſtonie hardnes. 4. In hard and groſſe members which are annoied with ſcirrhus 
                  (as are the great veſſels of the bodie) and in other places alſo, where the euill is inueterate, you muſt commix ſuch medicines at haue power to cut and diuide, as is vinegre, with thoſe remeadies which can mollifie and moderatly digeſt. 5. Alſo commaund, that this ſcirrhous 
                   member which is hard and groſſe, or anie other part beſides, which is affected with ſcirrhus, be holden ouer the hote vapour of lapis molaris burnt in the fire and quenched in vinegre,  and let this be done often. 6. Furthermore let the aggreaued member be euerie daie annointed

with ſome thinne oyle, wherin either the roote of the wild cucumber, or of althaea, or greene and freſh dill, or ſome ſuch like thing hath bene boyled and infuſed, 7. Applie vnto the aforeſaide ſcirrhous members ſuch medicines as can drie, diuide, and reſolue the  groſſe humours moderatly (that is to ſay) neither often, nor anie long time, nor out of cō
                  uenient ſeaſon, that is, not at the beginning of the diſeaſe, to preuent the vſe of mollyfying remeadies. 8. To conclude, all ſuch ſcirrhous tumours, as are not indurated and of a ſtony  hardneſſe, let them be cured with ſuch medicines as can fitly digeſt and mollifie. 9. Laſt of all commit the cure of a ſcirrhous ſplene and a lapidous liuer, to the wiſedome of the  Phyſition.
            
            
               CAP. XXVI. Of a Cancerous Tumour, which thy commonly call Cancer Apostematoſus.
               
                  THE name and title of the diſeaſe called cancer, among the Phyſitions & chyrurgians hath diuerſe and ſundrie ſignifications:
                     Cancer partaineth vnto two kindes of diſeaſes.
                   for the notifying or declaration thereof is extended vnto two kindes of diſeaſes (that is to ſay) vnto a cancerous tumour (which they cōmonly call cancer apoſtematoſus aſwell that which is euident and appeareth in the outwarde members, as that which is  hidden, and lyeth in the in warde and ſecret partes of the bodie, as in the hippes, the roufe of the mouth and in the pappes of a woman) the other ſignifications partaineth vnto an vlcerate  cancer.
                     Of 
                           〈…〉
                         engendred. Cancer fine vlcers.
                   But both theſe euils are ingendred of melancholie (that is to ſay) of ſuch a humour, as reſembleth the dregges of wine, & the filthines of oyle, which thing Gal. libro decimo quarto therapeutices, and in his little booke de tumoribus praeter naturam doth plainely teſtifie. Now this aforeſaide humour, when it is quiet, milde, and gentle, it engendreth a ſecret or an inward cancer without any vlcer. But if it happeneth to be ſharpe, fierce, and malignant, it gnaweth the skinne, and cauſeth a cancre with an vlcer.
                     Cancer 
                           〈◊〉
                         vlcere.
                   But here we will onely diſcourſe of that kinde of cancre which hath his reſidence in the outwarde partes of the bodie, & of that which is not yet exulcerate, which alſo ſometime (as Galen affirmeth,) is ſaide to be a priuie cancre. That cancre therefore, whereof we here intreate, is a harde tumour, vnequall, rounde, hauing the veynes rounde about it, ſwo
                     •
                  len and puffed vp,
                     Cancre 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   it is blue or browen, and (as Paulus ſayth) it is more blacke in colour then in an inflammation, it is alſo hote, but yet not ſo vehement as inflammations are, it ſodainely increaſeth, and greatlie wearieth the ſicke, & afflicteth them almoſt with a continuall griefe: in greeke it is called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
                     Can
                           •
                        ri nomen à 
                           •
                        ancro aqua 
                           •
                        ico.
                   which title aſwell the Latines as the Grecians haue aſſigned to this diſeaſe of the fiſh called a crabbe, becauſe the veynes about this euill are filled and it ſtretched out, verie like vnto the feete of crabbes, deſcending from the round compaſſe of their bodies. But ſome haue giuen it this name, becauſe it is verie hardly pulled awaie from thoſe members, which it doth lay holde on, as the ſea crabbe doth, who obſtinately doth cleaue to that place which it once hath apprehended. Moreouer this tumor doth alſo repreſent the colour of a crabbe, whoſe hue is verie blacke. But the firſt beginninges of theſe cancres are ſometime ſo confuſed and ſo ſmall,
                     
                        Cancri notae per i
                              •
                           itia confuſe, & obſcurae.
                     
                     
                        Lib. 14. Therap.
                     
                   that the common ſort may be ignoraunt thereof: for when they doe beginne, they do ſcarce reſemble the greatnes of a peaſe or of a beane. Wherefore it is no maruaile (ſayth Galene) though the common ſort doe not knowe them, for they be like vnto the little rootes that ariſe out of the earth, which are not diſcerned but of skilfull husbandmen. But afterwarde they growe vp into ſuch a huge greatnes, & do bring with them ſo vehement, great, & manifeſt ſymptomates, that a childe may eaſily diſcerne them. Let no man therefore doubt of the name thereof, ſeeing all men with one conſent do terme this kinde of diſeaſe cancer, becauſe (as we haue ſaide) the veines in this euill doe ſwell one euerie ſide, and are greatly ſtretched out, and they doe repreſent the forme and likenes of a crabbe.
                     Notae cancri 
                           •
                        urdentis non vlcerati.
                   A cancerous tumour (as we haue ſaide before) is harde and vnequall, which by the touching of it doth plainely appeare. It hath a blue or browne colour, which is a meane betweene red and blacke, called

of the Greekes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . About the place where cancre is lodged, there is felt a certaine beating or pulſe, and as it were a pricking: ſometime alſo (as Celſus ſaith) the tumour is a ſleepe, and as it were deade. It maketh the veynes rounde about it to ſwell and ryſe vppe, like vnto the cancre in the armes. Oftentimes alſo in ſome they are ſecretly hidden, and when the place is touched, it is felt in ſome verie painefull, but in other ſome it is contrarie. This tumour alſo is maruelouſlie ſtout, and reſiſteth touching. Moreouer it hath in it a certaine ſtraunge,
                     Iudicia. Lib. 14. Ther.
                   and extraordinarie heate. Cancer or carcinoma generally is a grieuous and pernicious diſeaſe, for it can ſcarcely be healed any way by reaſon of the groſſnes of the humour, neither can it be repreſſed or diſcuſſed, neither wil it yeald to any purgatiō, though it be throughout the whole bodie. The malice alſo of this diſeaſe is ſo great, that it contemneth all gentle and eaſie remeadies, putting furth but the middle finger to them (as the prouerbe is) but it muſt be ſtirred and chafed, and ouercome with verie vehement remeadies (as we wont to do in the euill called crabro.
                  
                     Celſus lib. 5.) This diſeaſe is wont to happen in euerie part of the bodie, but eſpecially in the vpper partes about the face, the noſethrills, the eares, the lippes, and about the pappes of women, and of thoſe chiefly, which are not naturallie purged of menſtruis. But cancres do alſo commonly haunt men, whoſe accuſtomed purginges are ſuppreſſed through hemorrhoides growing in the fundament:
                     Ga
                           •
                        . lib. 2 ad. Glauconem.
                   for by them, that groſſe and thicke bloud (whereupon this euill taketh his firſt beginning) is wont naturally to be purged out. Moreouer when this melancholious humour reſembling in proportiō the dregges of wine, doth deſcend and flow into any member, and there abydeth compact togeather: it cauſeth ſometime the diſeaſe called varices, and ſometime it breedeth a cancre, as when the ſame is ſomewhat cooled. But when it is thruſt out to the whole skinne, it cauſeth that euill, which they call elephans. Cancer therefore is a certaine particular elephantiaſis, which the common ſort call lepra, the lepry. But the thicker and the blacker the bloud is whereof cancre proceedeth the more daungerous will the diſeaſe be. Now when cancre is full growen, as they ſay, and inueterate, it admitteth not any cure, except it be plucked vp by the rootes either by ſectiō or by aduſtion: but thoſe cancres, which haue their conſtitution in the inward partes of the bodie, doe not deſire any ſuch kinde of cure, as that auncient Hippocrates ſimplie the prince of Phyſitions hath taught vs very well in the Aphoriſme following:
                     Apho. 38. Lib. 6. ſaying that it is not good to cure all inward cancres: for when they are cured, they doe ſoone periſhe againe, but when they are not cured they remaine a longe time. For experience hath taught vs, as Galene witneſſeth in his commentarie vppon this Aphoriſme, that they which enterpriſe the cure of theſe cancres either by ſection or vſtion, doe rather encreaſe their furie then abate it, whereby they ſhortly deſtroy thoſe men, whō this euill hath attached. Thoſe cancres therefore are onely curable which doe ſticke in the outward part of the bodie, and which are exulcerate, and doe ſo wearie the ſicke, that they willingly deſire the diligence of the chyrurgian: and theſe tumours alſo do conſiſt in thoſe partes, which a man may cut and ſeare of hard by the rootes. Nowe when I name the rootes of cancer,
                  
                     VVhat cancre muſt be rotted out, and what not.
                   I meane as Galene affirmeth, thoſe veynes which are full of melancholike bloud, and which euerie way are extended toward the places lying about the tumour. But of an vnulcerate cancre, there often proceedeth an vlcerate tumour, when as in proceſſe of time, the humour doth putrifie, and the diſeaſe is couched in the veſſels of the bodie, or elſe when it is ſtirred and made worſe by medicines vnaduiſedly miniſtred. This exulcerate cancre of all others is thought to be moſt vile,
                     An exulcerate cancre worſt of all.
                   becauſe it doth altogeather reſiſt that true cure, which attempteth and worketh all thinges to bring the ſicke member vnto health, for this tumour, to cure it perfitly and abſolutely, doth require gnawing, ſharpe, and vehement medicines: howbeit by ſuch remeadies, as we haue ſaide, it is the more prouoked and ſtirred to anger, and therfore it cannot be, that it ſhould either be lenified, or cured by them. It ſhall therfore be ſufficient to hinder the encreaſing of vnulcerate cancres, which as yet doe occupie the outward partes of the bodie, eſpecially thoſe which be great and inueterate, with drawing our skill frō any perfect cure, which thing Hippocrates alſo hath admoniſhed vs of in his former Aphoriſme. For thoſe tumors which doe wearie the ſicke without exulceration,
                     VVhat things doe foretell exulceration.
                   Galene alſo hath called them ſecrete & inwarde cancres wherein both their vehement heat, and their great pulſe or beating doe threaten or foretell exulceration to enſue.

The cure of a cancre which is not yet vlcerate, but newly begone, hath three principall intentions. 1. The firſt is to ſtop the generation of the melancholike humour.
                     Curatio cancri non vlcerati.
                   2. The ſecond is to emptie out the melancholious humour diſperſed throughout the whole bodie. 3. The thirde is to digeſt the humour which poſſeſſeth the affected member, and to ſtrengthen, & confirme the diſeaſed place.
                     Primus ſcopus.
                   The firſt intention is finiſhed by a iuſt and due obſeruation of that kinde of diet, which is before preſcribed in the chapter de ſcirrho legitimo. But among other thinges this is chiefly and principally to be obſerued, (namely) that ſuch nouriſhment be giuen to the diſeaſed, as haue vertue to refrigerate and moyſten,
                     Victus ratio tenuis ſit & probi ſucci.
                   and which doe engender good and ſlender iuyce: as are theſe the iuyce of bareley ſteyped in water & preſſed, fiſhes of grauelly places, birds of all kindes, ſaue thoſe which liue in fenny groūdes, the yolkes of egges, but eſpecially of rere egges, (which the Grecians call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) & other thinges of that ſorte. But if any extreeme heate ſhall infeſt the aggreaued place, and yet without a feuer, you may ſafely giue him bullockes milcke, from the which the butter is taken, or elſe the whey of milke. Potherbes alſo, which haue a coole and moyſt nature, as mallowes, orage, ſpinache, & when time ſerueth gourdes: citrons alſo and borage may be giuen him in meate. The ſeconde ſcope (which is to purge the whole bodie from that melancholicke humour,
                     
                        Secundus ſ
                              •
                           opus.
                     
                     
                        Humoris melancholi
                              •••
                            ac
                              •
                           ratio.
                     
                     
                        Epithymum.
                     
                   whereof this euill proceedeth) is accompliſhed by the applying of purging medicines which are appointed to euacuate melancholie, wherof you may finde plentie in the chapter of ſcirrhus: among the which epithymum (which the Romaines cal
                     •
                   
                  inuolucrum) as a preſent remedie doth obtaine the preheminence, whereof you muſt take foure drammes ſtyeped in the whey of milke or in mulſa, (as Galene commaundeth lib. 14. meth. med. But this quantitie of epithymum, or ſomewhat more, muſt be offered euerie thirde daie, that the melancholike humour, which is gathered togeather in the veynes, and cauſeth the generation of cancre, may by little and little be emptyed and purged out, becauſe it is impoſſible to euacuate all at one time. But we cannot alwayes prohibite the fluxe, leaſt afterward the like humour be engendred in the bodie, and compact togeather in the veynes. The purging therefore of the antecedent matter muſt be attempted at the beginning, as it were by turnes, by the applying of ſome ſimple medicine: afterwarde, (if the matter ſo requireth and the miniſtring of ſimples doth little auayle) you may vſe the helpe of ſome compound remedies, as is that medicine of Galene dedicated for the purging of melancholie, which conſiſteth of two and thirtie ſimples, or hiera Ruffi,
                  
                     Hiera Ruffi Hiera A
                           •
                        icennae.
                   or hiera A
                     
                        •
                     icennae, which is made of blacke helleborus. But you muſt not deſiſt from thoſe former rehearſed purgations, vntill the whole melancholious humour which is ſtuffed in the veynes, be brought out, and vntill the member which is beſet with this cancrous tumour, be thorowghly reduced to his naturall ſtate. But if nothing doe let it, as age and ſtrength, it ſhall not be amiſſe in theſe cancres to let bloud,
                     
                        Sanguinis 
                              •
                           uſſio.
                     
                     
                        Lib. 14. meth. medendi.
                     
                   and then to purge (as we haue ſaide before:) and if they be women, you muſt labour to purge menſtruys, if they be not aboue fiftie yeares olde (as Galene hath taught vs lib. 2. ad Glauconem.) This ſeconde indication (ſaith Galene) is the firſt and chiefe of all, for that which is put in the firſt place, doeth rightly chaleng the ſecond degree. The generall manifeſtation therefore (ſaith he) of the cure of a cancre, conſiſteth in the ſpedie emptying out of that humour whereof this euill groweth, and in the prohibition and ſtopping thereof, and to foreſee, (if it be poſſible,) that this melancholious humour be not collected in the veynes by the meanes of another. But if that thing cannot be brought to paſſe, you muſt euacuate the humour by turnes now ſome and then ſome, and you muſt alſo endeuour to ſtrengthen the member, leaſt the aboundaunce of the humours doe plentifullie flow vnto it. 3. The thirde intention, which is generall to all ſuch diſeaſes cōming of the flowing of humours,
                     T
                           •
                        rtius ſcopus.
                   doth will vs to digeſt the humour, which lurketh in the affected member, and to roborate the ſame, leaſt the humors aboundantly haue acceſſe thereunto: moreouer you muſt appoint a conuenient time to repell that which is flowen, and that truely in the beginning, aſwell in the verie time of purging, as before, but now, when the whole bodie is throughly purged, then may you lawfullie endeuour to digeſt, and if there went before but a ſmall and meane purging, then you muſt applie ſome remedie which hath a mixed facultie, that is to ſay,
                     Quod 
                           〈…〉
                         cancris.
                   which can both repreſſe and digeſt. Nowe, that we may iuſtlie accompliſh theſe intentions, we muſt make

choice of thoſe medicines, which are of a meane force, and of a gentle qualitie, for ſuch remedies are moſt conuenient for theſe diſeaſes. For thoſe which carie with them a weake and feeble power doe worke no effect (as Galen ſaith) but are eaſily ouercome:
                     Lib. 14 Ther.
                   but ſuch remedies as are ſtrong and mightie, do vehemently either digeſt or thruſt backe the thinne bloud which lyeth in the veynes: but the groſſe and melancholike partes, which we haue likened before to the dregges of wine, they neither purge forth nor repreſſe: but rather do make them more obſtinate and more hard to be diſſolued and diſcuſſed. Therefore to cure theſe cancres, but yet beginning, you muſt vſe medicines of a meane & moderate ſtrength, which neither their imbecillitie can be vanquiſhed, nor for the vehemencie can mightily thicken the bloud. Furthermore you muſt apply (as it is ſaide) ſuch medicines as are gentle and which doe not gnaw or bite: becauſe the malignitie of the euill through ſuch vehement medicines is ſtirred, and prouoked, and made more fierce and ſauage (as we commonly terme it.) But when the matter, whereof theſe cancres doe come, is for the moſt parte groſſe and thicke and diſobedient to reſolution, and partener alſo with many other vitious humours, we ſhall deale ſufficiently in this caſe (eſpecially, when we feare the daū
                  ger of chirurgie, and that the euill cannot otherwiſe be cured) if wee by the vſe of the former remedies, which are made of burnt and waſhed metalles (as Galene counſelleth) ſhall ſtop and hinder their growing and encreaſing, eſpecially, if they be great tumours: or elſe after the opinion of Auicene, if we ſeeke to defende them from vlceration. For the which intentions, Galene lib. 2. ad Glaucon. doth greatly commend the iuice of nightſhade, and that medicine which is made of pompholygos,
                  
                     
                        Su
                              •••
                           s ſolani. Diaphompholygos.
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              •
                           enicon ſ
                              ••
                            
                           
                              •
                           ma Vnguentum 
                              〈…〉
                           
                        
                     
                   or that which conſiſteth of chalcites commonly called diapalma. Therefore Theodoriticus alſo for the ſame purpoſe, appointed the ointment named diapompholygos, which is made of oyle of roſes, of white waxe. ana. ℥.v. of the iuice of red pomegranates, and of nightſhade. ana. ℥.iiij. of ceruſe waſhed. ℥.ij. of lead burnt and waſhed, of pompolygos, which is commonly called tuthia, ana. ℥.j. of franckenſence. ℥.ſs. Galene alſo reporteth libro primo de compoſitione pharmacorum ſecundum locos, which booke is entituled of the auncient interpreter myamis, a certaine ointment inuented of Apollonius for vlcers appearing in the head, which the Greekes call achorae, which ointment he affirmeth to be verie effectuall againſt theſe cancrous tumours.
                     Arp
                           ••••
                         medicamentum.
                   The medicine is this. ℞. of oyle of roſes, or of vnrype olyues, hemina, which the Greekes call cotyle vidz. ℥.vij.ſs. which muſt be infuſed or put into a leaden mortar, and ſtirred vp and downe with a leaden ladle, or elſe brayed with a leaden peſtill ſo long till it waxeth thicke and blacke, reſembling the verie colour of lead: then beate by the ſelfe alone, of lythargirum, lib. 1. of ceruſe as much, and commixe them with the oyle, and make an oyntment. Moreouer how great the force of leade is in all ſuch cancrous diſpoſitions, eſpecially that which is burnt and waſhed:
                     The force of leade it meruelous in cancrous tumours. Paulus lib. 4. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         archigene.
                   all men may ſufficiently know, which haue had ſome experience thereof, and which haue ſtudeouſlie peruſed thoſe thinges which Galene libro nono de ſimplicium medicamentorum facultate doth write of leade, which he himſelfe calleth in Greeke molybdos. For this cancrous diſeaſe Paulus and Auicene doe greatly commende the emplaiſter made of ſea crabbes, eſpecially if it be mingled with an equall quantitie of the ſcouringes of braſſe. Take therefore of ſea crabbes burned, and of the off all of braſſe an euen portion, beate them to flower, & ſtraw them vpon the tumour, or elſe laie on the aſhes of the crabbes with a ſearce cloath or cerate. But the ſame Auicene willeth to plucke vp theſe little cancres hard by the rootes, or elſe to cut them of, and then to wring and crouſe out the thicke bloud on euerie ſide, and afterward to ſeare the place with ſome hote inſtrument. For this doth diſſipate the relictes of the matter, and conſumeth them, it ſtrengthneth the member and ſtoppeth the fluxe of bloud. Galene alſo before Auicene his time, did allowe that cancres might ſometime be cured by chirurgie.
                     Lib. 14. Meth. med.
                   But truely although Galene and Auicene doe permit this manuell cure by chirurgie: yet to auoide the daunger of immoderate fluxe of bloud, and of vlceration, yea and of the life of the ſicke, omitting thoſe things, we ought to follow that preſcript rule of curing,
                     Chirurgery not rashly to be vſed in cancres.
                   which is onely accompliſhed by gentle and milde medicines, as a more ſafe waie and leſſe troubleſome, and to content our ſelues with that onely methode: becauſe that if ſuch a cancrous tumour, which is growen to a mightie bigneſſe, ſhould be cut round about in thoſe places, which are ioyned to the whole parts, the

daunger of immoderate profuſion of bloud woulde ſtraightway followe, by reaſon of the greatnes of the veſſells and wideneſſe of the arteries, which partes (ſaith Galene) if you ſhould take vp and binde them with cordes, the other members by reaſon of their neare acquaintance would be troubled and greatly grieued. Moreouer Celſus ſaith,
                     Lib. 5. that although carcinomata be cut of, and brought to a ſcarre, yet they will returne againe, and giue occaſion of death. But if you intende to ſeare of the rootes of this euill, yet truely you cannot doe this neither without hurting of the next partes, eſpecially if you make exuſtion neere vnto the principall members. Great cancres therefore, and thoſe which are inueterate, muſt neither raſhly be burned with any inſtrument, nor cutte of with a penknife, but rather handled gently and mildly (as we haue ſaide before.) For many men not by the applying of any forcible or vehement medicines to take away this euill, but by the onely miniſtring of eaſie and gentle remedies, which can as it were pleaſe or delight, haue ſo hindred theſe tumours, that they coulde not attaine vnto any perfect age or rypeneſſe. Now followeth the ſumme of the cure of Cancer non vlceratus, which is yet but beginning,
                     Capita curationis Cancri non vlcerati.
                   and doth occupie the outward partes of the bodie, briefly in theſe wordes. 1. Imprimis in a canker which is but newly begone, and which conſiſteth of noe verie thicke humour, nor cauſeth the veynes to ſwell greatly: purge out the melancholicke humour which cauſeth  this euill vniuerſally throughout the whole bodie. 2. If age and ſtrength doth ſuffer it, cut a veine in the elbow, and draw out as much bloud as neede requireth. 3. Afterward myniſter  to the ſicke ſuch medicines as can purge melancholie downewarde: in the beginning  let them be gentle and eaſie, but afterwarde ſomewhat vehement increaſing their force by little and little. 4. If the purging of menſtruis in women before fiftie yeares of age, or of hemorrhoides both in them and in men be ſo ſuppreſſed, that bloud aboundeth not at times  nowe and then, you muſt prouoke them by all meanes poſſible. 5. In the meane time appoint vnto the ſicke a thinne diet, which can engender good iuyce, and cauſe no melancholike  bloud. 6. If you cannot auoyde it, but that a groſſe and melancholious humour be  gathered togeather in the veynes: you muſt euacuate the ſame by turnes, both with ſimple and compound medicines. But theſe former Aphoriſmes doe pertaine vnto the Phyſition: nowe we will declare the dutie of the Chyrurgian. 7. applie vnto the affected member bothe before purging, and in the verie time of purging, ſuch medicines as can repell, and  driue backe: but when the bodie is vniuerſally purged, then vſe digeſtiue remedies, but let them be ſuch as are of a moderate ſtrength and of a gentle nature. 8. Therefore miniſter  to the aggreaued place iuyce of nightſhade, or the medicine made of Pompholygos, or that which conſiſteth of Calcites, commonly called Diapalma, and othe remeadies of that ſort. 9. But if by the arte of chyrurgie you dare enterpriſe the cure of Cancer, you muſt firſt  (taking the Phyſitions counſell) purge furth the melancholike humour, and then cut the corrupted tumour cleane of, and ſuffer a good quantitie of bloud to come forth, and wring the thicke bloude out of the adioyned partes, and afterward cure the diſeaſe after the maner of other vlcers.
            
            Libri quinti finis.
         
         
            
            THE SIXT BOOKE TEACHETH THE FORME AND RVLE OF MAKING REMEDIES AND MEDICINNES WHICH OVR PHYSITIANS DO COMmonly vſe at this day, and to know after what ſorte their proportion and quantitie is diſtributed and noted with the names of ech Medicine.
            
               CAP. I. Of Suppoſitaries.
               
                  A Suppoſitary is a remedy whole, long & round, which is put into the fundament, that it may auoid the pricking, and moue & prouoke the vertue expulſiue to the auoiding of the excrements cō
                  poſt, or ordure. We do vſe Suppoſitaries eſpecially for three cauſes: the firſt is for bringing out of the ordure, which when it lyeth in the right bowell, it requireth no cliſter: the ſecond cauſe is, when one or two cliſters haue ben put into the body, & doe not come out againe at the fundament, as it doth chance in paſſiōs of the colick, thē it is very perillous to put in other cliſters: the third cauſe is, whē the ſick perſon is ſo weake, that he may better ſuffer a ſuppoſitary thē a cliſter. A ſuppoſitary is made of hony that is boyled ſo long, til it doth wax thick & hard, oftētimes common ſalt is mixed with the hony:
                     A ſuppoſitarie to bring forth the ord
                           •
                        re.
                   but if you will make it more ſharp & quicke, take ſalt gemme, the dongue of a mouſe, agaricke, or elſe hiera ſimplex. ℞. a Suppotary made of hony, which if you thincke ſo weake that it will not moue the compoſt or ordure, ad to theſe following. ℞. a common ſuppoſitary of ſharp hony, ckmon ſalt. ℥.ſs. or of ſalt gemme. ℈.ſs. or of mouſe dongue. ℈.ſs. or ℈.j. or of hiera ſimplex. 
                  ʒ.ſs. Alſo make ſuppoſitaries of white ſope, tallow of beaſtes, fat of bacon, candles, the ſtalkes of beates or mercury, or their rootes annointed with oyle or hony, & ſtrewed with pouder of ſalt ſpecially for children & ſucking babes,
                     A ſuppoſitarie againſt the 
                           •
                        urmes called L
                           ••
                        brici.
                   for whom one corne of ſalt put in is ſufficient. ℞. tyme, or cyclaminum, or wormwood, or ſothernwood, ſtāped in a mortar. ʒ.j. or ſs. of boyled hony ſo much as ſuffiſeth, & make a ſuppoſitary. Suppoſitaries are good againſt the Palſey made of pellitory, pepper, napy (that is a kinde of rapes called a nauew) centorie, bitumen (that is a kinde of of lime) the roote of panax, hyſope, galbanum mixed with dry roſen, or pitch & waxe. Let a ſuppoſitary be roūde and 6.7. or 8. fingers in length. We do vſe no Suppoſitaries to them which haue the hemorhoides, or any other ſwellings in the fundament.
            
            
               CAP. II. Of making Nodulus.
               
                  NODVL
                     •
                   be thoſe which are called of Aetius in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , they are good for thoſe which haue clefts and ſwellinges in the fundament. Theſe do auoide and take away the hardnes of ſuppoſitaries, becauſe ſomtime we are compelled

to vſe flockes in their ſteedes, their matter is the ſame that ſuppoſitaries be. ℞. flockes mingled or beaten with hony, & put it into the tuell, & truely that nodulus is beſt and ſweeteſt which is made of ſalt & the white of an egge in cloath or wol, made in the forme of a beane, and put it into the tuel with a thread hanged at the end, that it may be drawn out againe.
            
            
               CAP. III. Of mabing Peſſaries.
               
                  A Peſſarie is a medicine which is made of ſofte woll, or ſuch like thing, and it is put into the priuities of women. The figure or ſhape of it is like a ſuppoſitary, but that it is longer and thicker, becauſe it muſt be put into the wombe. It is made of waxe, or of cloath or cotton, or of lint firſt dipped & wet in oyntmēt, or in a medicine meete and conuenient for the cure. Afterward wind them in ſilke, and hang a thread thereon, that it may be drawen out the more eaſilie. It is put into the tuell and into the wombe, to ceaſe the inflammations and vlcers of them both. Priuatly it is put into the wombe to prouoke the menſtruis and the ſecundine, or to ſtoppe immoderate fluxe of menſtruis or to mollifie the hardnes of the wombe, or to cure other diſeaſes of the wombe. ℞. a peſſarie dipped and wet in vnguentum roſatum, and put it into the place.
                     To ceaſe inflammation.
                   To this ſometime is added opium, that is, where the inflammation cauſeth great paine. Opiū
                   by his coldnes maketh aſtonied, therefore his quantitie ought to be ſmall, as from halfe a ſcruple to a ſcruple, and let it be holden a little time, leaſt through his coldnes the partes which are ſenowy be not hurt. It therefore may be holden halfe an houre. ℞. a peſſary dipped and wet in vnguentum pompholygos, put it into the tuell,
                     To drie vlcers.
                   or into the matrice that is grieued. Peſſaries to bring forth menſtruis are made otherwiſe. The medicines are taken in ſilke cloath, that is as thinne as ſindall, and let the forme & faſhion be thicker,
                     To bring forth menſtruis.
                   which may bring out with his power, as thus. ℞. hierapicra compoſita. ℥.j. of euphorbium, and the apple of coloquintida. ana. ℈.ſs. mixe them and make a peſſarie. Annoint it with oleum nardinum, or with the iuyce of herbes that prouoke menſtruis. Such peſſaries be made oftentimes of brayed herbes prouoking menſtruis, as, ℞. mercurie, neppe, or mugworte or ſothernewood. M.ſs. braie them and roule them in ſilke, and make a peſſarie. If the menſtruis haue endured with ſwelling and paine, firſt make a bath, for that doth mollifie and moiſt, the paunch ought firſt to be emptied and the bladder to be vnloden, becauſe the matrice is in the middes betweene them: for theſe being filled, and preſſing the matrice, the menſtruys for ouermuch ſtraitnes, may be retained, and made ſlow in comming out. If immoderate menſtruis do flow, do thus. ℞. a peſſarie wet in vnguentum comitiſſae, and put it into the matrice, or thus. ℞. of plantaine or knotgraſſe, or brere, or mirte, or other,
                     To mollify the hardnes of the wombe.
                   that can ſtop menſtruis. M.ſs. braie them and role them in ſilcke and make a peſſarie. Peſſaries mollifiyng may be made of the marrow of a calfe, and a harte, of roſen, terebinthine, fatneſſe of a goſe, or porke, and of gumme armoniacke diſſolued in water.
            
            
               CAP. IIII. Of Clysters or Enema.
               
                  A Clyſter or Enema, is a kinde of medicine the which is caſt and put into the bowels by the fundament liquid and thinne, and it is profitable for eight thinges. 1. to mollifie the wombe reſtrained with hardnes. 2. to prouoke the violence deteſtable and aſtonied. 3. To auoid any kinde of humours. 4. To put away ventoſities. 5. To ceaſe dolours and paynes. 6. To binde and reſtraine the bellie. 7. To make cleane vlcers of the guttes or bowelles. 8. To make ſounde the ſame. There may be alſo added to alter or chaunge: as here followeth. ℞. of lettuce, ſcarioll, reſtrum percinum, leaues of ſallowe. ana. M.j. floures of violettes, and nenuphar. ana. p.j. make a decoction of one pounde, in the ſtrayning let one ounce of Caſia fiſtula be diſſolued, oyle of violettes and of nenuphar. ana. ℥.j.ſs. camphire. ℈.j. and make a clyſter. ℞. the foure kindes of remollitiues, or mollificatiues,
                     A clyſter mollificatiue.
                   pellitarie of the wall. ana. M.ſs. the rootes of the mallowes called althea, & white lillies. ana. ℥.j. ſeede of flaxe, fenugreke, &

anyſe. ana. ℥.ſs. of fat figges. 4. make a decoction of lb.j. in weight. In the ſtrayning therof diſſolue therein Caſia fiſtula, mel violatum, and freſh butter. ana. ℥.j. oyle of violets. ℥.iij. and make a cliſter. If you will make a cliſter mollificatiue lacking the thinges aforeſaide doe thus. ℞. of oyle made warme. lb.j. and make thereof a clyſter, or thus. ℞. oyle & freſh butter. ana. lb.ſs. & make a clyſter. ℞. the foure remollitiues. ana. M.j. ſeede of Carthamum. ℥.j. of anyſe,
                     A clyſter prouoking and making voide the violence aſtonied.
                   fennell, and careum. ana. ʒ.iij. and make a decoction of. lb.j. and in the ſtraining diſſolue hiera ſimplex, or benedicta, or diaphenicon, or electuariū de ſucco, or electuariū Indi maioris. ℥.ſs. of clarified hony, or iuice of ſquill. ℥.j. or common ſalt. ʒ.ij. or ſalt gēme. ℈·j. or. ʒ.ſs. Many doe adde to clyſters. ℥.j. of the iuyce of beetes, which doe moue and griue the belly, or iuyce of beetes & coleworts. ana. ℥.ſs. of cōmon ſalt. ʒ.ij. or ʒ.j. which bite & gnaw the bellie, or leſſe, but the iuſt weight, muſt be as you coniecture to be eaſie or harde for the ſicke. Alſo ſuch a cliſter expulſing the deteſtable facultie or matter, may verie well be made onely of hony, or hony with iuice of ſquilla, or other thinges decoct. And if that the vertue expulſiue be aſtonyed & dull through the hardnes of the ordure, then make a cliſter partly of mollificatiues, and partly of expulſiues aforeſaide. Cliſters which auoide humours are made ſo,
                     A cliſter 
                           〈◊〉
                         humours.
                   that they varie according as the humours differ. For when the humour is groſſe and colde, euill diſpoſing the bowels, let it be made thus. ℞. the foure remollitiues. ana. M.j. cammomill, the tops of dill, organ, calamint, ſothernwoode. ana. M.ſs. anyſe, careum, comin, ameos, ſeſeleos. ana. ℥.ſs. bearies of lawrell, ſeede of rew. ana. ʒ.ij. make a decoction. In the ſtrayning diſſolue catholicon, and diaphenicon. ana. ℥.ſs. or diaphenicon, or benedicta. 
                  ʒ.vj. or of both. ℥.ſs. of red ſugar, and mel anthos. ana. ʒ.iij. or. ℥.ſs. oyle of dill & cammomill. ana. quar. ſs. or oyle of rew. ℥.j. oyle of dill. ℥.ij. or oyle of lillies. ℥.ij. make a cliſter. If ventoſitie be preſent, adde carmmatiues, if paine be preſent, take a medicine releaſing griefe by prouoking ſleepe, as hereafter ſhall appeare by axamples. If a cholericke and gnawing humour muſt be brought out with a cliſter, then let the cliſter be made of ſuch thinges as will auoide that humour, and mixe it partly with ſuch helpes as do ceaſe inflammation, as thus. ℞. mallowes, biſmallowes, violets, pellitorie of the wall, endiue, ſuccorie, lettuce, purſlaine. ana. M.j. and if there be ſo much neede of coldnes, take the foure great cold ſeeds bruſed. ana. ʒ.iij. or ℥.ſs. of whole barly. p.j. make a decoctiō of one poūd. In the ſtraining diſſolue caſia fiſtula, & common ſugar. ana. ℥.j. the white of one egge or two, oile of roſes or of violets, or common oile. quar. j. make a cliſter. If ſuch a paſſion commeth of a meladcholike humour, make it thus. ℞. the foure mollificatiues, the leaues of bugloſſe and borage, the tops of dill, lupuli, and fumitorie. ana. M.j. melilote and chammomill. ana. M.j. ſeede of charthamum, & polipodie of the oke. ana. ℥.j. anniſe, and fennell. ana. ℥.ſs. make a decoction. In the ſtrayning diſſolue hiera ruffi, which is not in vſe, or confectio hamech ℥.ſs. or catholicon. ℥.j. red ſugar, or mel roſatum, or violets. ℥.j. oile of dill, lillies, and violets ana. ℥.j. make a cliſter. ℞. mallowes,
                     A cl
                           •
                        ſter to put and driue away vent
                           •
                        ſi
                        
                           ••
                        es.
                   
                  biſmaluae, pellitorie of the wall, organie, calamint, cā
                  momill the tops of dill. ana. M.j. of anyſe, carecum, comin and fennill. ana. ℥.ſs. or. ʒ.vj. of lawrell bearies. ʒ.ijj. or ℥.ſs. ſeede of rew. ʒ.ij. or iij. and make a decoction. In the ſtrayning diſſolue benedicta, or diaphenicon, or electuartum indi maioris which we do not vſe here ℥.ſs. confection of lawrell bearies. ʒ.iij. or. ℥.ſs. red ſugar. ℥.j. oyle of dill, cammomil & rew ana. ℥.j. make a cliſter. Into theſe cliſters which put away vētoſities, oiles of nuts is holſom to put in, and alſo (as Galen ſaith) vinum maluaticum cretenſe may well be mixed with ſuch a cliſter as is aforeſaid. The ſignes of ventoſities and wind contained in the bowels, be often farting and noiſe in the guts, becauſe it chanceth as often as burbles are broken in the bowels. Bowels wherein be burbles (as Galene teacheth Particula 2. Aphoriſm. ſtrangulati nondu
                        •
                     s moriui &c.) be cauſed of ayre ſhut and encloſed with the humour.
                     A clyſter to ceaſe paines.
                   Cliſters to ceaſe paines are made many wayes, for if the cauſe be a hote gnawing humour, the example is ſhewed afore by cold things, where he intreateth of a clyſter to auoid humours, if the paine be of a cold cauſe, take the ſame that is giuen againſt ventoſitie laſt before, if the paine do come of moe cauſes, make a clyſter of many of thoſe things, which are meete for the cauſes, & when the cauſe of the paine is not knowen, make it thus: ℞. floures of chāmomill, mellilote, the toppes of dill, ana. p.ij. make a decoction in milcke. In the ſtrayning diſſolue therin whyte ſugar becauſe the redde is byting & pricking. ℥.j.ſs. whytes of egges .ij. oyle of

dill and chammomill. ana. quar. ſs. and make a clyſter, or thus: ℞. oyle of cammomill dill and violettes. ana. ℥.iij. caſt it in with a clyſter, and when we wante ſuch oyle, we make it of quar. iij. or. lb.j. of oyle olyue. ℞. milke ſodden. quar. iij. or. lb.j. amylum ſiue amydum. 
                  ʒ.ſs. or. ʒ.j. at the moſt,
                     A clyſter reſtrayning.
                   gumme arabicke or Tragacanch or both a litle burnte. ana. ʒ.ſs. or. ʒ.j. or. ʒ.ij. bole armoniacke and Sanguis Draconis. ana. ʒ.ij. oyle of roſes and cammomill. ana. ℥.j.ſs. make a clyſter. ℞. the iuyces of plantayne, Arnogloſſa, (that is) a kynde of plantaine, knottegraſſe and purſlayne:
                     A clyſter profitable againſt a hote humour gnawing in the bowells.
                   let theſe iuyces be cleanſed either by ſeething or reſidence, take of all theſe, or of one of theſe, as much as ſufficeth for a clyſter adding of the powder aforeſayde, and with thoſe oyles make a clyſter. Note, that when there is neede, then you may make clyſters of thoſe herbes ſodden, or of the waters diſtilled out of them adding roſe water, as. ℞. the water of Arnogloſſa, of plantayne, of roſes, of purſlayne, of knottegraſſe, as much as ſuffiſeth, and diſſolue ſome of the aforeſayde thinges therein. It is to be noted that ſometime there are putte into the aforeſaide decoctions, ſeedes and fruictes that be ſtypticke to make harde and to binde, ſo that they lacke ſharpeneſſe, becauſe elſe they woulde pricke, prouoke, and expulſe, therefore we can mixe togeather, the ſeedes of mirte ſorrell, of purſlayne, plantayne, cypreſſe, cauda equina, horſetayle and ſuch like. Moreouer note, that oyle muſt neuer be putte into clyſters, if the bowelles be vlcerate, as they be in Dyſenteria, (which is a fluxe in the bodie) yet many doe neglect that, not knowing that oyle is an enemie to vlcers (as Galene entreateth 3. and 4. Methodi.) Truelie wyne is a ſpeciall friende, the creame or curde of a hare or goate in weyght. ʒ.iij. Sorbus, prunes, meddlars, quinces, ana. ℥.ij. more or leſſe doe reſtrayne and binde. ℞. whole bareley. p.ij. of redde roſes and commomill,
                     A cl
                           •
                        ſter is ſecure and clenſe vlcer
                           •
                         in the guttes.
                   and of plantayne if payne be preſent. ana. p.j. make a decoction. In the ſtrayning diſſolue therein Mel roſatum. ℥.j. the whyte of one egge or two, make a clyſter. Such a clyſter is to be giuen alwayes before clyſters reſtrayning, bynding and conſolydating, by meanes whereof the thing is made prompte and eaſie. A clyſter conſolidating is made when the filthyneſſe of the bowelles is not purged and tryed out, becauſe that is deadlie,
                     A clyſter 
                           •
                        nconſolidating (that is) making 
                           ••
                        unde of vlcer
                           •
                        .
                   and therefore there needeth no clyſter, but that prognoſticating is ſufficient. ℞. iuyce of plantayne, Arnogloſſa, and purceſlayne. ana. ℥.iij. of bole armoniacke, Sanguis Draconis, and Amylum. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. or the tallow of a male or female goate. ʒ.j. or ℥.j.ſs. and make a clyſter. And becauſe goates tallowe, cannot well diſſolue, but almoſt alwayes it congealeth and hardeneth togither in the bowelles of the ſicke. Therefore it may be and ought to be diſſolued with a little oyle of roſes, and then it neede not to be feared for vlcers. Alſo oyntmentes conſolidating (as is vnguentum album) ſometime are made liquide and mixed, and ſpeciallie, when the vlcers be nigh, or in the great guttes. Sometime in the ſteede of iuyces may clyſters be made of milcke verie well for his whey portion, which doth reſtraine and conſolydate. Oftentimes both in theſe and in reſtraining clyſters, the whites of egges harde ſodden are diſſolued. And thus finiſheth the making and vſe of clyſters or Enema.
            
            
               CAP. V. Of making Syruppes.
               
                  A Syrupe is of medicines, a iuyce with ſugar or honie molten therein, decoct and boyled vnto the meaſure of that ſagar. Practicioners doe put a double vnderſtanding in ſyrupes, (that is) ſimplex, which is called vſuall, and compoſitum, which is called magiſtrall. Simples or vſualles be theſe, ſirupes of violettes, roſes, of endiue, of nenuphar, of maydenheare, of wormewood, of mynts, oxymell ſquilliticum, ſyrupe of eupatorie, of epithymum, and of byzantijs. They are called ſimples, aſwell becauſe they conſiſt in one ſimple medycine, as alſo becauſe they are ordayned for one ſicknes & one vſe. Syrupus compoſitus which is called magiſtrall, is compounded of diuerſe medicines, being good for ſundrie diſeaſes, as in example: if any

man compound togeather Syrupe of wormewoode and ſtechados being taken in euen portion or quantitie, there would come thereof a Syrupe good for the ſtomach, becauſe of the wormewoode, and good for the heade becauſe of the ſtechados. A Syrupe is good & profitable to digeſt humours before a purgation, that they may the eaſier and better obey the purgation. Therefore they are vſed of many Phyſitions to be giuen before medicines, although we haue not read, that olde practiſers did obſerue it, but they did commit the digeſtion of humours wholy to nature. Looke the comment. Aphoriſm. 9. lib. 2. when anie man will purge the bodie, it behoueth to make it flowing. Truely Hippocrates would doe thus, ſaying, that the concoct and digeſt matter ought to be healed and moued, and not the crude and rawe matter. And Galene ad Glauconem. lib. 1. ſpeaking of the cure of Tertiana notha, woulde not haue worme woode to be giuen till the ſeuenth daie. Therefore it doth appeare for a truth, that ſyrupes ought rather to be giuen for the humours lefte after a purgation, then for their digeſtion and coction. But many doe obſerue and vſe, that humours being groſſe, clammie, and viſcous, may by ſyrupes that do attenuate, cutte and deuide, be preparate and made eaſie to auoyding and purging they call this digeſting of humours. Colde and cleauing humours are preparate with ſyrupes that be hote cutting and ſcouring, as to digeſt reumie matter, ſuch as is a feauer Quotidian, and to prepare it to the purging. ℞. the fiue rootes apperitiue,
                     A ſyrupe digeſting of re
                           •
                        
                        
                        
                           •
                        y matter.
                   made cleane and tempered in vinegre foure houres. ana. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.iij or the ryndes of the fiue rootes, orygan calamint, hyſope betonie and germander. ana. M.ſs. of anyſe and fennell. ana. ʒ.ſs. of rayſons the ſtones pulled out. ʒ.iij both the ſtechados. ana. p.j. make a decoction. In the ſtrayning diſſolue of good honie. quar. iij. of whyte ſugar. ℥.iiij. make a ſyrupe perfectly ſodden. miniſter three ſponfull, with double as much of water of liquorace or with ptyſan or withwater of rayſons or anyſe. Humours that be moueable and thinne, muſt be preparate to the auoyding and purging by ſyrupes that doe make thicke and let the mouing,
                     A ſyrupe againſt thinne and moveable humours.
                   which humours if they be caryed to the wayes of expulſion, or be kept and contayned in the waies and conduytes by which an apt and readie expulſion may be made of them, then they may be auoided without any preparatiue. But if thoſe humours be reſtrayned and kept out of the places aforeſaide, then they ſhall be rectified and remedied with colde ſyrupes, the making whereof doth follow. ℞. ſyruppes of purcelaine,
                     A ſyrupe to make humours groſſe and thicke. Iulep.
                   ſorrell, endiue, nenupharis, of rybes, of barberies, of agreſta, of quinces, of roſes, take of one of theſe or moe. ℥.vj. miniſter it with double as much of well water ſodden: there may alſo conuenientlie be made a iulep in this wyſe. ℞. ſyrupes of roſes, purcelayne and ſorrell ana. ℥.j.ſs. or ℥.ij. water of roſes, Arnogloſſa, ſuccorie or endiue, or purcelaine or ſorrell. ana. ℥.ij. water ſodden or burnte, ſpecially if fluxe of the bellie be preſent. ℥.vj. make a iulep clarified, and aromatized with ʒ.ij. of cynnamon elect. Furthermore if thoſe humours doe not make and cauſe fluxe of the bellie,
                     Note.
                   but being inflamed doe beginne a feuer, then neither ſyrupes ſtipticke, nor waters are to be vſed, but rather colde ſyrupes lacking ſtipticitie, as be ſyrupes of endiue, purſlaine, violettes, of nimphea called water lillies, of maidenhaire. But if we do ſuppoſe that there ought to be a greater extinguiſhing and quenching, that the rotten matter may be driuen out the more eaſilie, we doe vſe colde ſharpe ſyrupes, as be Syrupus acetoſus ſimplex, which is put in both cauſes as well hoate as cold. Alſo oxizaccharum ſimplex, & Syrupus de acetoſitate citri, and of lymons, which if the fluxe diarrhaea be preſent, being raiſed and cauſed of ſuch hote humoures, then ſyrupes that be acetoſe and ſharpe are not to be miniſtred, becauſe they excoriate, raſe, and ſlea, but ſyrupes of ribes, barberies, quinces, and iuyce of ſorrell may be ſuffred and giuen, becauſe they haue but meane ſharpneſſe and acetoſitie. But againſt hote humours make potions or ſyrupes magiſtrall in this wiſe. ℞. Endiue that is yong or newe ſet, and not growen long, waſh it not, adiantum, maidenhaire, ſuccorie, puſlaine, lettuce, ſingreene, ſcarioll, plantaine, of all, or of ſome of them two or three. ana. M.ij. the foure great cold ſeedes. ana. ʒ.iij. the roote of ſuccorie, the roote of ſorrell, of gramen and nightſhade (that is) the leſſe morrell, called Solatrum. ana. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.iij. make a decoction, to which may be added the iuyce of the herbes afore written, cleanſed ſo much, and halfe ſo much, or halfe as much more as the third part of the decoction. In one pound of the ſtrayning diſſolue ſuger taberzet. ℥.vj. of

wine of pomegranates. ℥.j.ſs. or vinegre. ℥.ſs. make a ſyrupe clarified and aromatiſed with. ℈.ij. of white ſaunders or red or both. ana. ℈.j. But if thou wilt make the ſyrupe perfectlie concoct and ſodden, ad to ſuger, and let it be ſodden to the perfection that it may be kept. The vſe and miniſtration muſt be with double as much of ſome licour as water ſodden, water of lycorace, or the water of ſome of the herbes aforeſaid diſtilled, yet I doe not much praiſe and allowe the vſe of diſtilled waters. But if the ſyrupe be not perfectly boiled (as is ſhewed in the firſt example) it muſt be giuen by it ſelfe, and without the adminiſtration of any thing elſe, neither ſhall the iuyces be put in, which ſhould be put in,
                     A ſyrupe for melancholy humours.
                   in a ſyrupe perfectly ſodden. Like formes and vſes may be made of ſyrupes, rectifying or digeſting colde matter. Syrupe of Epithimum, ſyrupe of fumitarie, which is made two wayes: one way is of the onely decoction or iuyce of fumitorie, and then it is Syrupus de fumiterrae ſimplex: another way is according to the deſcription of Meſuae, and ſuch a ſyrupe hath mirabolanes, caſſia, & many other things, which ſyrupe is called compound, for that cauſe, ſyrupe of bugloſſe, ſyrupe of borage, ſyrupe of Harts tongue, which openeth and looſeth the ſtoppinges of the ſpleene, and ſyrupe of violets becauſe it moiſteneth verie much.
               The ſimple medicines, wherewith theſe ſyrupes are compounded, be theſe, borage and bugloſſe, fumitorie, lupulus, Epithimum, and ſuch like, that doe helpe and aide the digeſtion of ſuch an humour. Out of the aforeſaid things, may be made ſyrupes, potions, and Iuleps, decoct and boyled to the ſatisfying of theſe intentions and meanings. Oftentimes there be made ſyrupes laxatiue for the purging and auoiding of marter that is reumie and filthie, and alſo melancholike matter, when long continuing diſeaſes be bred of them, partly to the digeſtion of raw matter or humours, & partly to the auoiding and purging of humours, which be rotten or halfe rotten, as is in long feauers.
               ℞. the toote of Apium, fennell & parſley ſcraped and made cleane, ana. ʒ.iij, of hyſope,
                     A ſ
                           •
                        rupe 
                           〈…〉
                         matters, & feuer: Nothae.
                   origan and calamint. ana. M.ſs. of ſeede of Carthamum. ℥.iij. greene polipodie of the oke. ℥.ij. of anniſe, fennell and dill. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. of liquorace ſcraped. ʒ.iij. of raiſons, the ſtones pulled out. ℥.ſs. of the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. make a decoction ſtrained to lb.j. or. lb.j.ſs. in the which infuſe nowe trochiſkes of Agaricke. ℥.j.ſs. leaues of ſeane cleanſed. ℥.ij. after tenne houres make a ſtraining, wringing it ſtrongly, whereto adde ſyrupe of violets, ſyrupi de bizantijs, and white ſuger. ana. ℥.iiij. make a ſyrupe perfectly ſodden and aromizate with ʒ.j. of cinnamon elect, and with one ſyrupe. ℈.j. 
                     
                        •
                     iloaloes. The droſſe of this ſyrupe by meanes of the thinges that are put into it, maybe. ℥.j.ſs. which alſo the fourth or fifth day, may be giuen with double as much of hydromell (that is) water and honie ſodden togither, or aqua mulſa, or of ſome other docoction. By like meanes may the laxatiues entring into this preſent ſyrupe be encreaſed or deminiſhed by reaſon of the quantitie making of the ſyrupe, for this preſent ſyrupe is ordained for 6. or 7. or mo doſes, therefore the forme and faſhion of the proportions being kept, it may be made for 1.2.3. or moe doſes. Moreouer by like reaſon, a ſyrupe laxatiue is made, for matter cholericke and filthie (as one would ſay) vitelline, the which cauſeth feuers hard to be eradicate and taken away.
               ℞. the rootes of Apium, and of fennell cleanſed and ſcraped and tempered in vinegre one nightes ſpace. ana. ℥.ſs. of hyſope, maidenhaire, adiantum, politricum,
                  
                     A ſyrupe laxatiue againſt filthy colerick matter.
                   ſome call it wall ferne, Harts tongue, endiue, ſuccorie. ana. M.ſs. or M.j. the foure great colde ſeedes bruiſed. ana. ʒ.ij. or ʒ.iij. Raiſons the ſtones pulled out. ℥.ſs. the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. make a decoction in the which infuſe agaricke newly made in Trochiſkes. ʒ.vj. the leaues of ſene made cleane. ℥.j. in the ſtraining diſſolue ſyrupe of maidenhaire and violets. ana. ℥.iij. of white ſuger. ℥.iiij. make a ſyrupe perfectly boyled putting in, in the end of the ſtrayning of it. ℥.ſs. of rewbarbe elect. infuſed as it ought to be, which thing after it be ſtrayned, let it boyle on a ſoft fire without flame or ſmoke vnto the perfection of the decoction: the dos of it is. ℥.ij. or ℥.j.ſs, with double as much of the decoction of endiue, and ſuccorie, or liquorice, or with double as much of whey made of goates milke. This ſyrupe is for 5. or .6. Doſes. And if the firſt dos will not ſatisfie your intent, then you muſt diſſolue ſomewhat therin that hath power to purge the humour that thou woldeſt haue brought out: as in example. ℞. of the ſyrupes aforſaid. ℥.j.ſs. of whey made of goates milke. ℥.iij. make a doſe. And if therof do not follow theffect that you looke for, ad therto either of caſia fiſtula. ℥.ſs. or of diae

pruuis laxatine. 
                  ʒ.j. or ʒ.ij. or diaphenicon. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. or alſo ſome rewbarbe. You may alſo doe the ſame in the example of the ſyrupe made to auoide Reume.
               
                  
                     A ſyrupe againſt melancholy.
                  ℞ the iuyces of lupuli (that is) hops, and of fumitorie, but it is vnpleaſant, of bugloſſe, of borage, & of ſweete apples clenſed. ana. ℥.iij. or ij. Let them be twiſe clenſed, either by decoction and clarifying, or by reſidence of greene polipodie of the oke. ℥.ij. or ℥.iij. of fat Tamarindes. ℥.j. of Epythimum Cretenſis put in the ende of the decoction. ℥.ij. of adiantum, hartiſtongue, and the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. make a decoction ſtrayned to quar. iij. in the which infuſe the leaues of ſene made cleane. ℥.iij. make a ſtrayning, and mixe it with the aforeſayed iuyces: afterwarde adde thereto, ſyrupe of violettes. ℥.vj. ſyrupes of bugloſſe and ſuger taberzet. ana. ℥.iij. make a ſyrupe perfectlie ſodden, and aromatizate with. ʒ.j. of cinnamon, and ℈.j. of white ginger ſcraped. The doſe is two ounces with water of bugloſſe, or hoppes, or fumitorie, or whey made of milke.
            
            
               CAP. VI. Of making Iuleps.
               
                  A IVLEP doeth not much differ from a ſyrupe, but that it is leſſe boyled then a ſyrupe is, and becauſe alſo it is made without the permixtion of anie other decoction with it, as ſyrupes are wont to haue when they be made. Iuleppes are made either of water of infuſion or diſtillation, or elſe of the iuyce of ſome ſimple medicine, as thus. ℞. of the water of infuſion of roſes, or the water of infuſion of violettes. ℥.v. ſuger. ℥.iiij. boile it eaſilie, and make a Iulep: miniſter it with twiſe or thriſe as much of ſodden water made colde againe. Or thus, ℞. water of roſes. ℥.viij. of ſuger. ℥.iiij. boyle them eaſily and make a Iulep: Or thus, ℞. the iuyce of roſes, or the iuyce of violettes. ℥.vj. Suger. ℥.iiij. boyle them eaſilie and make a Iulp. Likewiſe Iuleppes may be made of other thinges, that doe either make warme and hoate, or that doe open and looſe, or that doe reſtaine and binde. But yet Phiſitions commonly doe call a ſyrupe, diſſolued in ſodden water, a Iulep, ſaying. ℞. ſyrupe of roſes, or the ſyrupe of violettes, or ſyrupe of maidenhaire, or of anie other ſyrupe. ℥.iij. of ſodden water. lb.ſs. mixe them togither, and make a Iulep.
            
            
               CAP. VII. Of Dolis, ſiue Potio.
               
                  DOLIS otherwiſe called Potus, or Potio, is a medicine laxatiue diſſolued in ſome kinde of licour and giuen in drinke. There be of this manie differences, becauſe of the diuerſitie of humours that they voide and purge. The ſimple medicines do purge and bring foorth rewme or fleume, as be theſe, Agaricke, Turbyth, Carthamus, colocynthis, and other often ſought out by Meſue. The compoundes be Diaphaenicon, in forma opiatae, Diacarthami in the forme of lozenges, electuarium de Citro, Electuarium Indum maius & minus, Benedicta, & Hiera ſimplex, Hiera compoſita, and ſuch like. But theſe be compounded, not that they auoide onelie one humour alone, but being mixed with another humour, as choler mixt with fleume or melancholie. Medicines are miniſtred in diuerſe fourmes and faſhions. As firſt in the fourme of a Potion, for one onelie Doſe, or for one time, in the fourme of a Bole, whereof ſhall be ſpoken hereafter, in the fourme of an Eletuarie liquide, as opiatae, whole in fourme, as lozenges, in the fourme of ſyrupes or Iuleps.
                     The fourme of a potion.
                   Alſo in the fourme of powder and pilles. ℞. Diaphanicon. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.vj. if the ſicke be ſtrong, diſſolue it with water of the decoction of liquorace, raiſons and anniſe, as much as ſuffiſeth. Make a doſe with ſyrupe of violettes. ʒ.vj. or ℥.j. or diſſolue it with common ſtrayning, and make a doſe, or diſſolue it with Hydromell or diſſolue it with certaine diſtilled waters, as waters of hoppes, Bugloſſe, ſuccorie, or ſuch like, or diſſolue it with the decoction or broth of a chicken, or with whay of milke,

or thus: ℞. the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. of prunes damaſcene, iniubarum, and Sebeſten. ana. foure in number, liquorace ſcraped. ʒ.j.ſs. anniſe. ʒ.j. make a decoction ſtrayned for one doſe: in the which diſſolue Diaphaenicon. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.vj. ſyrupe of violettes. ℥.j. & make a doſe. If you will adde to it another Electuarie laxatiue, take of one a quantitie away, and adde to aſmuch of another, as where it is ſaide, take of Diaphaenicon. 
                  ʒ.vj. you may ſay take of Diaphaenicon and Carthamum. ana. ʒ.iij. and ſo likewiſe of other.
               ℞. raiſons the ſtones pulled out. ℥.ſs. ſeede of Carthamum and polipodie of the oke. ana. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.vj. of anniſe, fennell,
                     The forme of a potion or doſe, whoſe decoctiō doth auoid certaine reume and fleume. Simples to auoide choler.
                   and liquorace ſcraped. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. leaues of hyſope. ʒ.j. make a decoction in the which infuſe Agaricke newly trochiſcate. ʒ.j. or ℈.iiij. or ʒ.j.ſs. In the ſtraining diſſolue Diacarthamum or diaphaenicon, or Benedicta. 
                  ʒ.iiij. or ℥.ſs. ſyrupe of violettes. ℥.j. and make a doſe. Theſe thinges auoide choler, iuyce of roſes, violettes, Tamarindes, manna, diagredion (that is) ſcammonie preparate, Pſillium, rewbarbe, and myrabolanes. Caſia fistula purgeth as well choler as reume, iuyce of roſes and ireos do bring foorth thinne choler and yellowe water. Compoundes to auoide choler be theſe Electuarium de ſucco roſarum, diaprunis laxatiuum, diaprunis ſimplex, trochiſkes of violettes,
                     Compounds.
                   which be ſeeldome in vſe.
               ℞. offat Tamarindes. ℥.j. the three cordiall floures. ana. p.ſs. liquorice ſcraped. ʒ.j.ſs. of prunes damaſcene. numer .vj. make a decoction in a little quantitie of water,
                     The forme of a potiō 
                        
                           •
                        o ſing & reſoluing choler.
                   in the which let the Tamarindes be ſtrongly wrong out. In the ſtraining diſſolue caſia fiſtula that is new. ℥.j. or ʒ.x. make a doſe. In the like decoction you may diſſolue. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.vj. of diaprunis ſimplex with. ʒ.j.ſs. or ʒ.ij. of diaprunis laxatiue. If it be feared that Diagredion will doe hurt, and if the ſicke be rich, in the ſteede of Diaprunis laxatiue may be diſſolued. ʒ.j. or ℈.iiij. or ʒ.j.ſs. or rewbarbe. Take heede and note, that ſuch a potion is good in cholericke feuers, and in thoſe feuers, in which the frenſie is feared, and truely it is excellent good, for by it, is eſchewed the auerſion, and alſo the refrigeration and cooling. In the ſtede of this preſent decoction and colature, medicines laxatiue may be diſſolued in a common decoction, or with water of frutes, or with hydromell, or with waters diſtilled, either with endiue, ſuccorie, hops, or with the broth of a chicken, or with the whey of milke. ℞. raiſons, the ſtones picked out. ʒ.iij. liquorace ſcraped, and aniſe ſeedes. ana. ʒ.j. proines damaſcene. num. vj. Tamarindes. ℥.ſs. the three cordiall floures, ſuccorie,
                     The forme of a common 
                           〈◊〉
                         in the beginning of cholericke feuers ſpecially in Tertian feuers
                   yong ſet endiue. ana. M.j. make a decoction boiled for one doſe, in the which diſſolue newe caſſia fiſtula. ℥.j. or ʒ.vj. after the ſtrayning infuſe. ʒ.j. or ℈.iiij. or ʒ.j.ſs, of rubarb elect as it ought to be, of ſyrupe of violets. ℥.ſs. or ℥.j. make a doſe. Let it be giuen in the morning before dinner 5. or 6. houres, on that day that he is leaſt afflicted. If choler be mixt with fleume, by reaſon of that mixture, let ſuch thinges as do looſen choler, and ſuch things as diſſolue reume be mixed togither. Spikenarde which is wont alwayes to be ioyned with rubarbe, is vnpleaſant to the belly, for it loſeneth opilations and ſtopping vehemently. Alſo it prouoketh vomite, & in women with child, it prouoketh menſtruis ſtrongly. Therfore manie do think that it ought not to be mixed with rubarb in medicines, that are giuen to women with child, or to thoſe which be apt to vomite. For that cauſe, if it be mixed. ʒ. or 4. graines are ſufficient for ʒ.j. of rubarb. For delicate perſons which do abhor all medicines,
                     A doſe vnder the forme of a ſyrupe for delicate folke.
                   make a doſe vnder the forme of a ſyrupe for two or three times, or for one doſe after this ſort, ſpecially for Tertians exquiſite and deintie. ℞. endiue yong ſet, and ſuccorie. ana. M.ſs. the three cordiall floures. ana. p.ſs. liquorace ſcraped. ʒ.i.ſs. proynes damaſcene vj. in number, fat Tamarindes, ʒ.6. aniſe. ʒ.ſs. make a decoction boyled to ℥.iij. or elſe you may make a decoction for one doſe, in which diſſolue ſyrupe of violets and endiue, ana. ʒ.vj. or ℥.ſs. of white ſuger, ℥.j. the wringing and ſtraining of. ʒ.ij. of rubarb elect, infuſed as it ought to be without ſpiknard, make a long ſyrupe, that is as it were in the forme of an Apozema (which is a decoction ſo called of the Greekes & vſed of them in ſteede of our ſyrupes.) Let it be boyled vpon the coles without anie ſmoke long time together, wringing the rubarb ſtrongly, being bound in a peece of lynnen cloth, clarifie it, and aromizate it, and make a doſe of. ℥.j.ſs. it may be multiplied for two or three doſes (the proportion of all being kept and obſerued.) But if you will make a ſyrupe to laſt long, ſeeth it to the perfection, and of that ſyrupe miniſter. ℥.j.ſs. or ℥.ij. with whey of milke, or with the decoction that ſerueth for thy purpoſe. Alſo you may adde ſome Seene in the infuſion,

ſpeciallie if you do thinke that choler aduſt doeth raigne,
                     A doſe againſt baſtardly feuers, ſpecially Tertians.
                   or if you deſire a more full and quicke effect of the medicine. ℞. of yong ſet endiue, of ſuccorie, of Adiantum, and of hartes tongue. ana. M.j. the foure great colde ſeedes. ana. ʒ.iij. the ſeede of Carthamum. ℥.j.ſs. polipodie of the oke. ℥.ij. fatte Tamarindes. ℥.j.ſs. ſeede of endiue, ſcarioll, and liquorace ſcraped. ana. ʒ.ij. of raiſons, the ſtones plucked out. ʒ.p. proynes damaſcene 12. in number, the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. make a decoction of lb.j. or ℥.viij. in the which infuſe the leaues of ſeene cleanſed. ℥.j.ſs. agaricke newelie trochiſchate. ℥.j. In the ſtrayning of the decoction diſſolue ſyrupe of violettes, and maydenhaire ſyrupe. ana. ℥.iij. white ſuger. ℥.ij. make a ſyrupe boyled vpon a leate fire, without ſmoke, putting into it the ſtrayning of. ʒ.vj. of rewbarbe elect, infuſed as it ought to be, make a ſyrupe perfectlie boyled and aromatizate, with. ʒ.ſs. of cinnamon, and. ℈.ij. of red ſaunders, reſerue it in an earthen or glaſſen veſſell. The doſe of the aforeſaid ſyrupe ſhall be the fourth parte of it (that is to ſay. ʒ.ij.) the which may be diſſolued with whay of goates milke, or water of the decoction of the common colature, or with the waters of the decoctions or diſtations of ſuccorie or endiue. But Igorreus, doth not allowe diſtilled waters, And if the aforeſaid doſe doe not ſufficiently moue the bellie and cauſe it to be ſoluble enough: an infuſion may conueniently be added to the ſecond doſe. ℈.ij. or ʒ.j. of rewbarb elect, or ſome Diaprunis laxatiue, or Electuarium de ſucco Roſarum, as in example. ℞. of the aforeſaide ſyrupe. ℥.ij. the ſtrayning of two ſcruples of rewbarbe elect, or Diaprunis laxatiue. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. or ʒ.ij. of whey made of milke. ℥.ij. or as much as is ſufficient, and make a doſe. It is to be noted that the aforeſayed ſyrupe ought rather to be giuen and miniſtred to thoſe that haue Tertianae Nothae (that is baſtardly Tertian Feuers) rather then to thoſe that haue feuers exquiſite, deintie, and lawfull, for theſe be of fewer fits, and be ended in a ſhort time. The other be long and of more fittes, ſo that they remaine manie times and often from one Equinoctiall to another. To this alſo the Tertians that be exquiſite and pure, doe come, and are cauſed of ſincere and good choler: and the feuers Nothae and baſtardlie doe come of filthy and vile choler. Here note alſo that Carthamus and Agaricke which do auoide and purge reume, the leaues of ſene which doe purge melancholie, and alſo rewbarbe which doeth purge choler, may be put togither to the aforeſaide ſyrupe, whereby the matter that cauſeth feuers Nothae of long continuaunce, is auoided and purged. Alſo note that in one day, or in the thirde or fourth day, one doſe ought to be giuen, but moe dayes muſt be let paſſe according to the doctrine of Auicene de Cura Tertianarum Notharum.
                  
                     Simples to purge the melancholike humour.
                   Theſe doe purge melancholie, hoppes, fumitorie, Epithimum Cretenſis, polipodie of the oke, the leaues of ſeene, lapis lazuls, myrabolani nigri or Indi, lapis armenius, blacke hellebore, and a thouſand other are to be ſought out of Meſue. The compoundes that doe purge melancholie, be Catholicon or Diacatholicon, diaſenae, Catharticon imperiale, Hiera, Rufi, Confectio Hamech, pilulae de fumitoriae, pilles of lapis lazulus, pilles of the v. kindes of myrabolanes, of Epithimum, of Hellebore, pilles, wherof the doſe is. ʒ.j. We can or doe ſeeldome vſe the other compound medicines, for the bitterneſſe that they haue in taſt: all electuaries (except catholicon) be euill in taſting,
                     The forme of a doſe againſt melancholie.
                   and therefore they are confect and made in forme of potions. ℞. fumitarie, and the toppes of hoppes. ana. M.j.ſs. the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. of rayſons, the ſtones picked out. ʒ.iij. or ℥.ſs. of greene polipodie of the oke. ʒ.iij. of cuſcuta, and epythimum. ana. ʒ.iij, of anyſe and liquorace ſcraped. ana. ʒ.j.ſs. make a decoction in the which infuſe the leaues of Sene made cleane. ʒ.ij. or ʒ.iij. In the ſtrayning of the decoction diſſolue diacatholicon. 
                  ʒ.j. or ʒ.x. ſyrupe of violettes. ʒ.j. make a doſe. In this doſe ſyrupe of violettes and the cordiall floures are put in, that they may temperate the dryneſſe of ſene, and epithymum. If we will more diligentlie purge melancholie, we doe put in hiera rufi, whoſe doſe is halfe an ounce, in which Hellebore is entred, which is not in vſe at Paris, or elſe take confectio hamech. ℥.ſs. the which is exceeding bitter for the plentie of coloquintida that is therein. Remember and note that medicines looſening and purging choler or rather melancholike, may conuenientely be diſſolued with the whey of goates milke, or with the water of the decoction or infuſion of the things aforſaid, putting in the doſe afore written: as in example. ℞. of all thoſe or of part of thoſe good things which be written in the doſe aforeſaide, afterwarde make a decoction in the whey of goates milke,

and in the decoction infuſe the leaues of ſene, &c. And with ſome of the aforeſaide electuaries confect and make a doſe, according to the nature and ſtrength of the ſicke perſon: or thus. ℞. the leaues of ſeene, made cleane. ʒ.iij. infuſe them in the whay of goates milke, all one night, and in the ſtrayning of the decoction, diſſolue catholicon. ℥.j. or. ʒ.x. or ℥.j.ſs. and make a potion. Note that epythimum doth ſuſtaine and maintaine a decoction, and therefore we may write thus. ℞. epythimum cretenſis. ℥.j. let it boyle with wheie of goatrs milke, afterward ſtraine it, and wring it out ſtrongly, and with ℥.j. of ſyrupe of violettes make a doſe, which if it ſeeme not to be ſufficient, adde to it ſome catholicon. Galene doeth counſell to take this potion lib. 13. Therapeu. in which place he conſidereth, that cankres, and all melancholike diſeaſes ought to be taken heede of before hande, and to be eſcheued, but he putteth in, but. ʒ.iiij. which drachmes doe ſhewe to be of none effecte, becauſe (as I thincke) we haue not the good epythimum, and therefore we take an ounce for the quantitie, whereby the working of it may be the quicker and the better. All authours doe followe this ſentence, which in their bookes of practizes or abridgementes haue remembred this againſt the elephantia, which is commonly called the leprie, and is now made for the cure of elephantiaſis.
                  
                     The decoction of an old co
                           •
                        k.
                   Many doe thincke and iudge that the decoction of an olde cocke is verie good and holſome for diſeaſes growen and begone aſwell of melancholie, as alſo of Rume and fleame. The chiefe vſe of it is againſt the paynes of the colicke, cauſed of rume, and partely of winde, and alſo againſt diſeaſes of the breaſt, as difficultie in breating, and moreouer againſt diſeaſes of the ioyntes cauſed of colde matter. It is prepared and made againſt the colicke, cauſed partely of reume, and partelie of ventoſitie and winde. It is this, as followeth. ℞. of hyſope, calaminte. ana. M.j. of rayſons the ſtones picked out. ℥.j.ſs. of anyſe, fennell, and carui. ana. ʒ.vj. of the ſeede of carthamum. ℥.ij. of greene polipodie of the oke ℥.j.ſs. the three cordiall floures. ana. p.j. of the floures of cammomill. p.ſs. and make a decoction, putting all togeather into the bellie of an olde cocke preparate as it ought to be, infuſe in the ende of the decoction the leaues of Seane made cleane. ℥.ij.ſs. of agaricke newly trochiſcate. ʒ.x. make a decoction of two pounde, and reſerue it to your vſe. ℞. of the aforeſaide decoction. ℥.iiij. ſyrupe of violettes. ℥.j.ſs. make a doſe. Note that if the ſicke perſon be ſtronge and ſtubburne, there may be put in the diſſoluing of ſome Diaphaenicon, as ʒ.j.ſs. or. ʒ.ij. or as much benedicta. Take heede alſo: for agaricke (as manie doe thinke and iudge) is ſuſpected, and thought to be hurtefull to thoſe that haue the colicke: becauſe that if the ſubſtaunce of it be throwen in with a clyſter, the lightneſſe of his ſubſtaunce cleauing to the guttes, doth pricke them and greaue them, and doth prouoke a fluxe alſo, and oftentimes doth cauſe one to deſire to ſitte longe on the ſiege, becauſe that, it hath vertue and power to drawe downe humours from the farre partes of the bodie, and therefore Democritus (as Meſue doth witneſſe) called it medicinam familiae, the medicine of his familie or houſholde. Therefore it may not well be giuen to thoſe that haue payne in the bowelles, becauſe it maketh a fluxe, that woulde not be, excepte that cauſed it, and therefore I counſell in ſuch caſes, to take awaie agaricke. Furthermore note, that chammomill may aptlie, and well be put into theſe decoctions, although the vſe of it is rare, and ſeeldome ſeene among Phyſitions, yet it is manifeſt, that the onely decoction of it in the broath of a chicken or chapon, is excellent profitable againſt all inwarde griefes, and ſpecially for thoſe which haue the cholicke & the nefreſie, (as many haue proued it, to the great preſeruation of their health.) The water of the diſtillation of chāmomill is miniſtred for the ſame purpoſe, but yet the decoction thereof is of more and better effect, then the diſtillation of it. The bitterneſſe of the decoction may be mitigated with ſugar, if it be for delicate perſons. Alſo the decoction of a cocke may conueniently be giuen for diſeaſes in the breaſt & of diſpuras, if medicines pectorall be decoct with it: as ℞. of hyſope, & of caula campana. ana. M.j. the third part of Sauerie. M.j. the fourth part, horſehofe called vngula caballina, which is an herbe called of ſome little clote, whereof you may take. M.j. ſeede of carthanum, and greene polipodie of the oke. ana. ℥.ij. of anyſe and liquorace ſcraped. ana. ℥.ſs. rootes of ireos and rootes of enula. ana. ʒ.iij. or ℥.ſs. of fatte figges not putrified foure or ſixe in number, of fatte dates the skinnes and filmes taken awaie, foure in number, of Iuiubes

and ſebeſten. ana .xij. in number of rayſons the ſtones picked out. ℥.j. the three cordiall floures, ana. p.j. make a decoction in the bellie of an olde cocke, that is hunted preparate and dreſſed as it ought to be, putting into it at the ende, of Agaricke and of the leaues of Seane, as much as you thinke will be ſufficient for your purpoſe: but note that here agaricke may conueniently be vſed and miniſtred. There are other medicines alſo which be made againſt all ſuperfluities in other formes (that is to ſay) in the forme of liquid electuaries (that is) ad formam opiatae: or in forme whole, (that is) like an electuarie made in logenzes or tables.
            
            
               CAP. VIII. Of making Bolus.
               
                  BOLVS in Engliſh is called a morſell. It is a medicine laxatiue, in forme & faſhion it is meanely whole, & it is ſwallowed by litle gobbets. It is made of diuerſe thinges by reaſon of auoyding and purging of diuerſe humours: but the playneſt and ſimpleſt waie of making it, is of medulla, caſiae fistulae, new drawen out of a fat cane or reede ʒ.vj. or ℥.j. of ſugar ſo much as ſuffiſeth: & make a bole. But if it be feared that caſia will do hurt, as if great paine be in the bowels wherby many times is prouoked ſoūding, as ſome do that haue but weake and tender bowels: to ſuch caſia is not to be miniſtred neither by bole nor by cliſters. And for that cauſe the ſicke perſon muſt be asked how he feeleth him ſelfe before caſia be miniſtred to him. Truely many authours doe thinke that this hurt which caſia may bring, may be taken away if there be added to it ſome graines of barberies or ſugar roſet: for they are of this minde, that through their ſtipticitie the bellie and the bowels are ſtrengthened, and the paine impedite and letted, which caſia doth cauſe by his clammines and mollifying ſoftnes. There be other that do mix ſome laxatiue with caſia, that it may quickē the ſlownes of his operation, & that it deſcending may the ſoner ſlide away & be auoided. Boles chiefly are thus ordeyned and made, being verie profitable remedies againſt the diſeaſes of the reynes. ℞. medulla caſiae fiſtulae newly drawen. ℥.j. or ʒ.x. the graines (that is the kernelles) of barbaries. ℈.ſs. and with ſugar roſet make a bole. Other doe adde. ℈.ij. or. ʒ.j. or. ʒ.ij. of diaprunis laxatiue, or electuarium de ſucco roſarum: as in example following. ℞. meduldae caſia fiſtulae newly drawen. ʒ.vj. of diaprunis laxatiue. 
                  ʒ.ij. of ſuger roſet tabulate as much as ſuffiſeth make a bole. Note that many, becauſe of the ventoſitie which caſia doth engender in the bowels, they adde to the bole pouder of anyſe. ℈.j. or. ʒ.ſs. which auaileth much ℞. caſiae fiſtulae newely drawen out of a fatte cane or reede. ʒ.iij. or. ℥.j. the ſofte matter of fatte Tamarindes. ʒ.j.ſs. of choſen rewbarbe. ʒ.ſs. or. ℈.ij. or. ʒ.j. ſugar as much as ſuffiſeth,
                     The forme of a bole purging choler.
                   make a bole. If the ſicke perſon be poore, in ſteede of rewberbe▪ make a bole with. ℥.ſs. or. ʒ.vj. of caſia, and ʒ.ij. of diaprunis laxatine, and with ſugar. ℞. catholicon. ℥.j. or. ʒ.x. and with white ſugar make a bole, or thus: ℞. catholicon. ℥.ſs. or ʒ.vj. of confectio Hamech. 
                  ʒ.j. or. ʒ.j.ſs. and with ſugar make a bole.
                     The forme of a bole againſt melancholie.
                  
               
            
            
               CAP. IX. Of making Pilles.
               
                  PILLES are miniſtred for the auoiding of euery humour: videl. againſt rume or fleame rayning and alſo againſt Cholera Notha, which is vile and filthie choler hauing dominion in man. Pilula aggregatiuae after the diſcription of Meſue, de agarico, de rhubarbaro, ſtomachicae, de hiera ſimplicli, de hiera compoſitae, which reſpecteth the heade. Cocciae or cocchiae which is ſo called of granis cocci, and not of the heade as ſome thinke. Pillulae aureae, Elephangina, ſine quibus, de Hermodactilis maior & minor, de Serapina, de Sarcocolla. Truely the foure kyndes of pylles laſt recyted are moſt appropriate and agreeing, againſt corrupte and ſtincking humours,

of the which vertue alſo be Arthretica maiores and minores when reume reigneth, but theſe when choler reigneth in the diſeaſes of the ioinctes: then alſo the pilles of Hermodactylis maior and minor are dedicate and miniſtred. Pilles that doe onely voide pure choler and purge it, there are a thouſand to be found, but many of them hath more reſpect to the auoiding of filthie and baſtardly choler, or that which is greatly mixte with reume: as, Pillulae de Rheubarbaro, de Hiera ſimplici, Aggregatiuae de Agarico, Ante Cibum, Imperiales. In a maner the cheife doſe of pilles is. ʒ.j.ſs. of which make nine pilles, and with ſome conuenient ſyrupe, as ſyrupe of endiue, ſyrupe of maidenheare, ſyrupe of ſtaechados, or alſo with Oxymel or Hydromel, or with ſome other licour.
            
            
               CAP. X. Of making Apozema.
               
                  AN APOZEMA is a decoction of medicines gently made for the concoction and digeſtion of humours, or for preparation of them, and ſometime for euacuation and purging. It may be made diuerſe, and for diuerſe intentes and purpoſes: as to make hote and to make cold, to make moiſt, and to make drye, to looſen and open, to reſtraine and binde, to attenuate and make thinne, to make groſſe and thicke, to prouoke menſtruis and vrine. Of medicines particular and conuenient, and of their rootes, fruictes, ſeedes, (and other, as it ſhall ſeeme meete and expedient for your purpoſe.) In effect an Apozema doeth not differ from a ſyrupe, but in boyling: for ſyrupes are wonte to be boiled long and to the perfection, but an Apozema is boiled eaſily & litle. Therefore ſyrupes may be long kept, and Apozemes may be kept but a few dayes. ℞. of ſuccorie, endiue, Cuſcuta and Adiantum, ana. M.ſs. of the rootes of ſorrell,
                     The forme of an Apozeme againſt cholerike humours.
                   and of gramen, ana. ℥.ſs. the foure great cold ſeedes made cleane, ana. ʒ.j. of the three cordiall flours, ana. p.j. make a decoction of. lb.ſs. In the ſtraining diſſolue ſyrupe of violettes, or Syrupus acetoſus, or ſyrupe of Limmmons, or alſo of white ſugar. ℥.iij. and make an Apozema, clarifie it, and aromatizate it with. ℈.ij. or ʒ.j. of cinnamon elect for two doſes. Likewiſe Apozema may be made againſt other humours, the matter and effect wherof muſt be ſought out of the head of the ſyrupes. Note that in the confection and making of Apozema: for ℥.ij. or at the moſt for ℥.iij. of the decoction it is ſufficient to adde. ℥.j. of ſuger or ſyrupe. Alſo there maye be made Apozemes laxatiue, as there be ſyrupes laxatiue, adding to laxatiue thinges in that decoction, or infuſing them in it after the decoction is made. Looke in the title of ſyrupes for the example, for they be like them, (this onely excepted as we ſaid before) that an Apozema after the diſſoluing of the ſuger or ſyrupe in it, ought not to be boyled any longer.
            
            
               CAP. XI. Of making Mulſio.
               
                  MVLSIO is made of ſeedes clenſed or of fruictes or of both ſometime to quenche the thirſt, and the inflammacion of the breaſt and lounges, and againſt diſeaſes of the reines and the bladder, or againſt Iſchuria (that is) retention and with-holding of vrine, and for the ſtrangurie, (that is) the voiding of humours by cauſing the vrine to iſſue out by droppes with burning in the yarde. ℞. of the foure great cold ſeedes new and cleane,
                     The forme of Mulſio.
                   ana. ʒ.iij. or ℥.ſs. of ſweete almondes blaunched in cold water. ℥.j. beate all together in a ſtone mortar, with well water firſt ſodden, and make a decoction of lb.j. and reſerue it and keepe it in a glaſen veſſell. The aforeſaid Mulſio is good againſt the burning of the vrine, or the ſtrangurie, if. ℥.iiij. or vj. be giuen in the morning three or foure houres before dinner and two or three houres before ſupper, the ſame quantitie of the premiſſes, or a litle leſſe with one Lozenge of Diatragacantum frigidum, in which are putte in the aforeſaide ſeedes, and gummes, and many other

thinges. But if in the aforeſaid caſes we thinke that there be greater neede of infrigidation and cooling: mixe with your Mulſio the ſeedes of pourcelaine, of lettuſe, and of white poppie. But in the diſeaſes of the breaſt, adde to new pine apples, ſweete Almondes and freſh figges that be not putrified, with one Lozenge of Electuarium Di
                        •
                     iris ſimplicis, or Diairis Solemnie, let it be miniſtred ſtraight way without delay. Alſo with the aforeſaid Mulſio, there n
                     ••
                  lye conueniently be mixed ſome quantitie of Suger, or ſome Syrupe apte and meete for the purpoſe: (as Ruellius was wonte to make againſt the filthie matter, and corrupt bloud in the vrine of man:) as thus: ℞. the ſeede of white poppie, and the foure great cold ſeedes, or ſweete Almondes, ana. ℥.ſs. ſtampe all theſe in a mortar with as much water of the decoction of liquorace as ſuffiſeth. In the ſtraining diſſolue of Syrupe of violettes, of maidenhea
                     •
                  e, and of mirtles, ana. ℥.j. make a Mulſio for two times, and let the greiued perſon take it in the morning fower howers before dinner.
            
            
               CAP. XII. Of making Powders.
               
                  A POWDER is made of Seedes, Rootes and mineralles powdred and beaten finely, and ſuger put to them, that they maye be the more pleaſaunt. Powders be miniſtred for many cauſes and intentes, where of their moſt common miniſtration is after meate to helpe digeſtion, or to ſtoppe and keepe downe vapours, which aſcend and are caried vp into the braine, or elſe for both cauſes as it often chaunceth. ℞. the ſeedes of aniſe and fennell,
                     A powder to helpe digeſtiō.
                   ana. ʒ.j. the ſeede of citron cinnamon, liquorace, and roſes, ana. ℈.j. of choſen pearles and the ſcraping of yuorie, ana. ʒ.ſs. of ſuger roſate, as much as ſuffiſeth: make a fine Powder, wherof miniſter after meate, one ſponefull: and looke what powder is ſo made to ſtoppe and keepe downe vapours, euen the ſame is good to helpe digeſtion: as is this that followeth. ℞. coriander preparate. ʒ.j.ſs. the ſcraping of yuorie, red corall, the horne of a Harte burned, ana. ℈.j. of cinnamon. ℈.ſs. of ſuger roſate as much as ſuffiſeth: make a powder which maye be giuen after meate. Alſo they are good for many other thinges as for wormes in children, for binding, in the belly, and for ſtrength, and againſt the Plague comming of the owne proper matter: Theſe Powders are to be miniſtred before meate, ſome alone, ſome with wine, or vpon toſtes of bread weat in wine. Sometime they are giuen for the corroboration and ſtrengthening of all vertues, in malignant feauers, and in great imbecillitie and weakneſſe of ſtrength. ℞. the ſcraping of an vnicornes horne, gra. 4.5. or 6. the ſcraping of yuorie, of choſen pearles, and of hartes horne, ana. gra. 6. ſeede of citron, and Cardus Benedictus, ana. gra. 4. and make a fine Powder, which may be giuen with conuenient liquour as with white wine, diſtillation reſtoratiue, water of Scabious, or Bugloſſe, or of ſome other ſuch like. And ſuch Powders for the moſt parte are miniſtred about midnight, or early in the morning. There may alſo be made Powders laxatiue (as is) Diaſene, and Diaturbithe, and the powder of Electuarium Diacarth
                        •
                     mi, to the which ought to be added three times or foure times as much ſuger, & they may be miniſtred being diſſolued in the decoctiō of a chicken, or of liquorace or of ptyſan. But yet theſe powders are ſeeldom vſed among practicioners.
            
            
               CAP. XIII. Of Electuaries, and Conſerues: Of Lozenges, and Manus Christi.
               
                  AN ELECTVARIE is ordeined and made two wayes (that is) either liquide, as in Forma
                        •
                     piatae, or whole as in tables or lozenges, or in faſhion foure ſquare and long which they call Manus Chriſti. Electuaries truely are miniſtred to corroborate and ſtrengthen, and for that cauſe they be called Ionica, as afoording ſtrength

to the membres (that is to ſay) they roborate and ſtrengthen the vertues naturall, vitall, and animall. If they be confect and made to ſtrengthen the naturall faculties and vertues then they muſt be miniſtred to a faſting ſtomacke. lf the vertue digeſtiue be weake through coldneſſe, miniſter them after meate. But if any matter ariſe through moiſtneſſe, then miniſter one houre or two before meate, that they may alter the temperature and drye vp the vnwholeſome ſubſtance. But if the vertue vitall requireth ſtrengthening, you maye miniſter them very well in a maner at all houres. But if you intend to ſtrengthen the vertue animall, you may conueniently miniſter in the houre of ſleepe or about midnight.
                     An Electuarie ſtrengthening the naturall vertue.
                   The formes of Electuaries are in this order as followeth, and firſt, of a liquide Electuarie which is profitable to ſtrengthen the naturall vertue when the ſubſtance of the bellie is made feeble by coldneſſe and moiſtneſſe. ℞. of the powder of Electuarium Aromatici maioris (which Gabriell deſcribeth.) ʒ.ij. powder of Electuarium Diacalaminthi. 
                  ʒ.j. of Diatrion piperion. ℈.ij. of Conſerua Anthos (that is) of flours of Roſemarie, and of roſes, ana. ℥.ſs. of ſuger taberzet. ℥.j.ſs. of ſirupe of mintes as much as ſuffiſeth, make a liquide Electuarie in Forma Opiatae, and miniſter it before dinner or breakefaſt an houre or an houre and halfe, or two houres: the doſe is. ℥.ſs. or rather. ʒ.ij. Electuarium Aromaticum Roſatum, being miniſtred faſting taketh awaye all corrupt and rotten humidities, and being miniſtred after meate it ſtrengtheneth the vertue digeſtiue.
                     An Electuarie againſt hote diſtempure of the liuer.
                   Now followeth the forme of a whole or hard Electuarie made in Lozenges, or faſhoned like Manus Chriſti, againſt hote diſtempre of the liuer and againſt obſtructions of the ſame, as thus: ℞. of the powder of Tria ſandalorum. 
                  ʒ.ij. the powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis. 
                  ʒ.j. of conſerues of ſuccorie and roſes, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. or ſuger taberzet or white ſuger diſſolued in water of ſuccorie or endiue, as much as ſuffiſeth, make an Electuarie in Lozenges of the weight of. ʒ.ij. or ʒ.ij.ſs. or ʒ.iij. miniſter one before meate. Many times conſerues are not put in, but onely powders. The Apothecaries are wonte for euery drachme of powder, to put to. ℥.j. of ſuger. But if you will make the Electuarie more ſtrong, you maye well take a drachme and a halfe of powder, for. ℥.j. of ſuger.
                     An Electuarie againſt Melancholi
                           •
                        .
                   If the ſtomache be troubled with the preſence of Melancholie abounding and flowing to it, either through the vice of the liuer that multiplieth it, or by diſeaſes of the ſpleene, as be ſtoppinges, which hinder the receipt therof: then make an harde Electuarie, or in Forma Optatae, with thinges following, as in example, ℞. of the powder of Electuarium latificans Galeni. 
                  ʒ.iij. the powder of Electuarium Diamargariton Calidum, 
                  ʒ.j. the powders of the Electuaries of Aromatibus, or of Gemmis, or Diamuſci dulcis, or Diambrae maye be putte in, ſeeing that they haue the ſame vertue: of conſerues of Bugloſſe, and Borage, and Violettes, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. the barke of Cytron ſeaſoned. ʒ.j. of as much white ſuger diſſolued in water of Bugloſſe or Borage as ſuffiſeth: Make an Electuarie in Lozenges, or in litle gobbettes, or like Manus Chriſti: in weight. ʒ.iij. or. ℥.ſs. And if you will make it in the forme of a liquide Electuarie, putte to it twiſe or thriſe as much more of the conſerues, and ſome powder of white ſuger or ſuger roſate (that is to ſaye) ℥.ij. as is ſhewed in the example aforeſaide, with ſome ſyrupe hauing reſpect to the Melancholye humour (as is) ſyrupe of Bugloſſe, of Borage, of Roſes, of Hartiſtongue, of Epithimum, of Fumitorie, of which, adde to as much as ſuffiſeth: My meaning is, that it maye be in a liquide forme.
               An Electuarie for the ſtrong ſtopping of the liuer or the ſpleene, wherin there is daunger of the Dropſey, or in breeding of Cachexia, (that is) a ſpice of conſumption: ſuch an Electuarie (I ſay) is made of the powders of the Electuaries Diagalangae, Diacucumeris, Diacapparis, Dialaccae, and of conſerues, which if you will commixe together, conſerues of Succorie may conueniently be mixed with them. Note alſo that Electuaries be made of Trochiskes, or of powder of Trochiskes, hauing reſpect to the diſeaſe, as in a hote cauſe take Trochiſci Diarrhodon, trochiskes of Carolus, Trochiskes of Bole armoniake, of terra ſigillata (ſpecially if we would reſtraine or bind) trochiskes of Carabe, if we would ſtoppe the fluxe of bloud. But if we would open or looſen the obſtructions of the liuer or ſpleene, we muſt bring this to paſſe with trochiskes of Reubarbe, or of Capparis. Electuaries reſpecting the vertue vitall, if it be aggreaued with cold, may be made of Electuarium Diambrae,
                  
                     An Electuarie for the vertue vitall.
                   
                  Diamuſci dulcis, Electuarium de Gemmis, and Aromaticum nardinum, Aromaticum muſcatum,

Aromaticum Roſatum, maior Gabrielis, Latificans Galeni or Raſis, Electuarium Concialitoris, of Alkermes confection and making. Conſerues for the ſame intent be theſe, Conſerues of Roſes, Bugloſe, Borage, Anthos, barkes of Citron, ginger condite, orenges condite, and other of that ſorte. If the vertue vitall be wearied, and laboureth of heate, take the Electuarie Roſatanonella, Electuarium trium Sandalorū, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum, and Trochiskes of Camphora, vſe them often. Theſe be the Conſerues that be good, Conſerues of Roſes, of Violettes, of Bugloſſe, and of Borage, and alſo of Nimphaeae or Nenuphar (that is) water lillies. If the coughe be preſent, and if the humour conteined in the breaſt be hote, flowing and thinne, if you will cauſe it to auoide and come foorth, miniſter Diatragacanthum frigidum: if the humour be clammiſh and thicke, miniſter Diatragacanthum calidum, and Diaris ſimplex or Diairis Salomonis. And if there be ſuſpicion of any venemous ſubſtance, then with the powders of Electuaries cold or hote, which do reſiſt poiſon▪ we do commixe maces, and muske, Zedoaria, ſaffron, Cinamon, and Xiloaloes in cold cauſes. But in hote cauſes there may conueniently be mixed pearles, corall, chryſtall, roſes and Camphora. In cauſes mingled one with an other either hote or cold, by a certaine propertie, theſe doe corroborate and ſtrengthen, and defende, pearles, ſeed of Citron, roote of Tormentill, Tunici, and Dictamus, the bone of the Hartes hearte one in number, or if you will weye it. ℈.j. or ʒ.ſs. as in this example following againſt a peſtilentiall feauer: ℞. the powder of the Electuarie of Diamargariton frigidum. 
                  ʒ.j.ſs. or white ſhining pea
                     •
                  les,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   elect and powdred in a marble mortar. ℈.j. of Camphora. G. ij. or elſe trochiskes of Camphora. ℈.j. or ℈.ſs. the rootes of Dictamus, of Tormentill, and of Tunici, and the barkes of Citron, ana. ℈.j. of conſerues of Bugloſſe, Borage, Nimpbeae, and Roſes, take of theſe, one, two, or three, or all, to the quantitie of two or three drachmes: of white ſuger diſſolued in water of Roſes, or of Bugloſſe or Borage as much as ſufficeth, make an Electuarie in Lozenges, or make a liquide Electuarie in the forme aforeſaid. ℞. the three kindes of Saunders,
                     An 
                           〈…〉
                         vertue animal, in a hote cauſe.
                   and Diarrhodon Abbatis, ana. ℈.j. the bone of the Hartes hearte one in number, ſuger Roſate tabulate, or white ſuger diſſolued in roſe water as much as ſuffiſeth, make an Electuarie, gilte it with leaues of pure golde in weight. ℥.ſs. Alſo there be made Electuaries laxatiue againſt all ſuperfluities and diſeaſes, that together with the purging, we maye alſo ſtrengthen as in example, againſt longe diſeaſes comming of Reume, or of ſome clammiſh humour breeding the coughe. ℞. Caſſia that is new. ℥.ij.ſs. Diacarthami. 
                  ʒ.vj. new Penidios,
                  
                     An Electua
                           •
                         againſt d
                           •
                        ſea
                           •
                        es of the 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and againſt the coughe.
                   and Diairis ſimplex, ana. ℥.ſs. of conſerues of Violettes. ʒ.iij. of ſweete aniſe powdred, and powder of liquorace, ana. ʒ.ſs. ſirupe of violettes as much as ſuffiſeth: make a liquide Electuarie, in forma Opiatae. The doſe is. ℥.j. or. ʒ.x. or at the moſt. ℥.j ſs. the which may be miniſtred an houre or an houre and halfe, ſwallowing it, or he may take it foure houres before dinner, becauſe it maye not conueniently be giuen a litle before meate, bycauſe of the Diacarthamum which hath Diagredium in it. Alſo you may diſſolue it in the brothe of a chicken, or in ptyſan, or in a common pectorall decoction, and make a potyon, and miniſter it foure or fiue houres before meate. And this note, that you muſt appoincte the wayes and meanes of the miniſtration of Phyſicke, according as you ſee the nature and condition of the ſicke perſon. Such Electuaries which maye be brought into a powder, are made in Lozenges or Boles of laxatiue medicines that be pleaſaunt in taſte, the forme and faſhion wherof maye be knowen in taking Diacarthamum, and Electuarium de Succo Roſarum, after which faſhion you maye make other very meete and ſeruing for your purpoſe.
            
            
               CAP. XIIII. Of making Conditum, and Conſerua.
               
                  CONDITA be made as Electuaries be made to ſtrengthen the might and the primitiue and worthieſt membres. They rather haue reſpect to the ſubſtance and matter of breathing, then to the beautie and ſoundneſſe of the fleſh. But foraſmuch as the weakneſſe of ſtrength, cauſeth ſores and diſeaſes to grow in their inſtrumentes,

therefore is it miniſtred to them that begin to recouer and waxe ſtrong,
                     A Conditum to ſtrengthen all vertues & powers.
                   ℞. Conſerua Authos (that is) of Roſemary, conſerue of Borage, Bugloſſe, maiden heare, and Succorie, ana. ʒ.ij. the barke of citron condite. ʒ.j.ſs. the powder of Electuarium pliriſacroticon, the powder of Electuarium ducis, Diarrhodon abbatis, and Tria ſandall, ana. ʒ.ſs. the leaues of golde in nomber .vj. of white ſuger as much as ſuffiſeth, make a Conditum. Of the ſame powders of Electuaries is made a whole and a hard Conditum, as thus: ℞. the powder of Electuarium pliriſarcoticon, the powder of Dianthos, the powder of Ducis, Diarrhodon abbatis, and Tria ſandali, ana. ℈.ij. conſerues of Roſes and Succorie, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. white ſuger diſſolued in roſe water, as much as ſuffiſeth make an Electuarie in lozenges or morſels, like vnto manus Chriſti. of the weight of. ʒ.ij. In like proportion may condites or Electuaries be made to ſtrengthen all kinde of vertues: as in example. If onely the vertue vitall be weake, then take Electuaries and conſerues either hote or colde, hauing reſpect to the vertue, according as the owne diſtempure or the cauſe of it deſireth:
                     
                        Hote Electuaries reſpecting the vertues vitall.
                     
                     
                        Cold Electuarie.
                     
                     
                        Condites reſpecting the vertue vita
                              ••
                           .
                     
                   now there followeth theſe hote Electuaries hauing reſpect to the vertue vicall: as Electuarium Diambra, Diamargariton Calidum, Diamuſcum amarum, Diamuſcum dulce, de Gemmis, latificans Galeni. Cold Electuaries, Electuarium Diamargariton frigidum, Diarrhodon Abbatis which is temperate, Tria ſandali. Conſerues reſpecting both the diſtempures (that is) hote and cold: as Conſeruae Roſarum, Boraginis, Bugloſſae, Violarum. Cold conſerues, Conſeruae Nimpheae, Violarum. Hote Condita reſpecting the vertue vitall, as Cortex Curi conditus, which may be miniſtred in both cauſes, Confectio de Cinamoma, Confectio de Xiloalo, Confectio Alkeruces, which is common to the Phyſitians of Montiſpeſſulari, ginger condite, peares condite, apples condite, and ſo of other. Hote Electuaries for the vertue animall, be theſe: Pliriſarcoticon, Dianthos,
                  
                     
                        Hote Electuaries, for the vertue anima
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        Hote conſerues.
                     
                     
                        Hote Electuaries, for the vertue naturall.
                     
                     
                        Hote conſerues reſpecting the vertue naturall.
                     
                     
                        Cold 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Cold conſerues A Condit
                              ••
                           n againſt the hote diſtempre of all kindes of veines.
                     
                     
                        Another for the 
                              〈◊〉
                            diſtempre.
                     
                   
                  Diamuſcum dulce and amarum, Mithridatum and Triacle, which be opiatoe (that is) liquid. Hote conſerues reſpecting the vertue animall be theſe, Conſerua Anthos, Acori, Roſarum, which is temperate, almoſt all Opiatae (that is) liquid thinges, as Mithridatum, Triacle, and aurea Alexandrina. Hote Electuaries for the vertue naturall be theſe, Diacalaminthum, Diacuminum, Diatrion pipereon, Aromaticum roſatum maioris (which Gabriell deſcribeth) Diarrhodon Abbatis, which is temperate, and neceſſary in both cauſes, Diairis Salomonis, or ſimplex, Dialacea, and Diacucurma, the which are good againſt opilations of the liuer and againſt the dropſie. Hote conſerues reſpecting mightely the vertue naturall, be theſe: Conſerua Eringiorum, conſerua Satyrij, Zinziber conditum, Cortex Citri conditus, meate of quinces condite, peares condite, and ſuch like. Cold Electuaries, be theſe, Tria ſandali, Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum, Cold conſerues▪ be theſe: Conſerua Violarum, Cichoreae, Nimpheae. &c.
               ℞. the powder of Electuarium trium Sandolorum. 
                  ʒ.ij. the powder of Diamargariton frigidum, and Diarrhodon Abbatis, ana. ℈.ij. conſerues of ſuccorie and violettes, ana. ʒ.j.ſs. white ſuger diſſolued in water of endiue, or ſuccorie, or roſes as much as ſuffiſeth. Make a condite in lozenges in weight. ʒ.ij. or ʒ.iij. or thus, ℞. conſerues of ſuccorie, of violettes, of Nimpheae, and of Bugloſſe, ana. ʒ.ij.ſs. conſerue of Roſes. ʒ.j.ſs. powder of Tria ſandali, and of Diamargariton frigidum. ana. ℈.iiij. the leaues of golde .viij. numb. white ſuger as much as ſuffiſeth, make a condite: the doſe is one ſiluer ſponefull. Many in theſe condites, where there is ſuſpection of ſome venemous matter: as in peſtilent feauers, or in ſwounding, they doe adde to, the ſeede of Citron, the ſeede of Carduus Benedictus, the roote of Dictamus and Tormentill. And for riche folke of the ſcraping of vnycornes horne (although there is no Authour that maketh mention of it) but onely the opinion of the common people: as in example, in the aforeſaid Conditum take awaye ſome portion of the aforeſaid Electuaries (that is to ſay) the third or fourthe parte, and then let it be in this order as followeth. ℞. of the ſeed of Carduus Benedictus, of the ſeede of Citron, of the roote of Dictamus and Tormentill, ana. ℈.j. or ʒ.ſs. two or three of theſe maye be added. Furthermore Trochiskes are added to Electuaries and condites, as in example: To ſtoppe the fluxe take Trochiskes of Diacorallus, Diarrhodon, of Terra ſigillata, of bole Armoniacke, and of Carabe. And to keepe the temperance of the hearte take Trochiskes of Camphora, of the which take as much in quantitie, as the powders of the Electuaries be, when there is no ſuger put into them.
            
            
               
               CAP. XV. Of making Pasta Regia or Mazapane.
               
                  
                     PASTA Regia is a confection, ſo called by the Phyſitians of late time, which is ſpecially ordeined for diſeaſes of the breaſt, or to driue awaye the cauſes of leannes. The forme and making wherof doeth follow being verie effectuall againſt both the cauſes: (that is) the diſeaſes of the breaſt, and the lounges, and againſt leanneſſe: as thus, ℞. ſweete almondes blaunched. ʒ.iij. of new pines clenſed, and tempered ten houres in water of ſcabious, or of Enula campana, or in ſome other meete for this purpoſe. ℥.ſs. of Piſtacium, (that is) a kind of nuttes, let them be new, clenſed, and tempered one daye in ſome of the aforeſaid waters. ℥.j. of Amylum, Diaga
                        •
                     anthum, and of gumme Arabicke, ana. ʒ.ſs. of the meate of dates, proines damaske, and ſebeſten, and raiſons, one or elſe more of theſe to the quantitie of one ounce, white ſuger diſſolued in well water, or in roſe water, or in water of Enula, as much as ſuffiſeth, make a Taſia Regia, and cut it in faſhion like a wafer, or elſe make it in litle gobbettes. Alſo ſometime the great colde ſeades (the barkes being picked of) are put into them.
            
            
               CAP. XVI. Of making a Lohoch or Ecligma.
               
                  A LOHOCH or Ecligma is a medicine that muſt not be eaten or chewed, but it muſt melte in the mouth, and diſtill downe to the ſtomache by litle and litle. It is good againſt diſeaſes of the breaſt & the lounges, (as is) Diſpneas, Apneas, ſhorte and hard breathinges, ſighinges, and coaghes whether it commeth by heaping of matter together, or by falling downe of ſome moiſt ſubſtance (as be cat
                     •
                  rres,
                     A Lohoch againſt 
                           •
                        eume congealed together, cl
                           ••
                        
                        miſh, hard, & thicke.
                   and reumes, which chaunce oftentimes.) ℞. Electuarium Diairis Salomonis, and Diairis ſimplex, ana. ʒ.vj. Lohoch de Pino. ℥.j. conſerue of Enula Campana. ℥.ſs. oxymel Scilliticum, as much as ſuffiſeth. Make a Lohoch and let the ſicke vſe it with a liquorace ſticke, licking or ſwallowing a litle at once. If there be greater neede of deterſion and ſcouring, then there is of inciſion and cutting, you muſt augment and increaſe the quantitie of the ſcouring receiptes, and in ſtead of oxymel Scilliticum put to ſirupe of liquorace, or of Horehound called Praſſium, or of iuiubes, or elſe of hyſope, many doe thinke ſirupe of Hiſope to be abſterſiue, onely for the ſaying of Auicene, which (Meſue declareth) is vnlike to be true. Lohoch Compoſitum, Lohoch de Pino, Lohoch de caulibus ſanum and expertum, Lohoch de Scilla, theſe may conueniently be miniſtred by them ſelues. But when a feauer is preſent (as in the Pluriſie) then to auoide and bring out from the breaſt, the materiall cauſe that floweth, and partely for the matter that is already flowen, we maye make a Lohoch after this ſorte and faſhion. ℞. Electuarium Diatragacanthi frigidi. 
                  ʒ.x. new penidies,
                     A Lohoch in the beginning of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         where the matter floweth.
                   and white pilles, ana. ʒ.iij. ſirupe of violettes, or of Iniubes, or of both as much as ſuffiſeth, make a Lohoch and vſe it with a liquorace ſticke, ſwallowing it by litle and litle. If the ma
                     •
                  ter be partely flowed, and partely flowing, you ſhall make a Lohoch to correct both after this faſhion, R Electuarium Diairis ſimplex. ℥.j. Diatragacanthum frigidum. 
                  ʒ.vj. new Penidies. ℥.iij. ſirupe of Iniubes, or Iſope, euen as you thinke good, the more to enforce the matter now flowed or flowing: & make a Lohoch. A Lohoch alſo may be made againſt defluxions and flowinges of humours that be hote, and ſharpe, or gnawing, cauſing the coughe: that the heate and gnawing of the humour may be ſtopped, and alſo that the thinneſſe and ſubtilitie therof may be made thicke and groſſe, and the partes to which the fluxe commeth being ſubiect and obedient, they may be made ſafe from any nocument or hurte (as in example,) ℞. Electuarium Diatragacanthi frigidi. ℥.j. bole Armoniacke waſhed in roſe water. ʒ.ij. Trochiskes of Terrae ſigillata. ℈.ij. ſirupe of poppy as much as ſuffiſeth and make a Lohoch. In the ſteede of Diatragacanthum maye be taken Diapapauer, or of eache a like quantitie.

Alſo Trochiskes of Carabe in the which is put ſome opium, may be added to them, if there be no cauſe that opium be ſuſpected to do hurte. Theſe Lohoches are giuen againſt the Ptyſicke in the houre of ſleepe, Electuarium Diapapaueris, Lohot of Popie. All the pilles of Meſue for this vſe againſt diſeaſes of Catarre and Reume, may be mixed and giuen the ſame houres, and for the ſame intent.
            
            
               CAP. XVII. Of making Balneum and Semicupium.
               
                  BALNEVM is a baine: the vſe wherof was common and often among olde practitioners, but now it is rare & ſeeldome, and not at all vſed almoſt, except it be in certaine diſeaſes, as in an vniuerſall goute, in the palſie and in conſuming feauers. But againſt the goute and the palſey naturall baines are conuenient, in the which, although there be pennurie and lacke of thinges, yet we may make thinges artificially, and cunningly, prepared, with boiling together in water, hearbes, rootes, ſeedes, flours, and alſo many mettalles, as it ſhall ſeeme requiſite for the diſeaſe. But Semicupium, which in Latine is called Inſeſſum, is a particular bathe, which is applied for paines of the nefreſie, for the cholicke, and for the iliacke, ſo that they come not by reaſon of an impoſtume. It is profitable againſt diſeaſes of the belly and wombe, for it is a conuenient aide and defence to prouoke menſtruis, and to amende the diſtempre of the wombe. Now followeth the forme of a Semicupium,
                     The forme of Semicupium.
                   when we would in the Nefreticke diſeaſe, haue the poores and paſſages of the body e
                     •
                  larged and made ſofte and plyaunt, and alſo to ceaſe the paine, as thus, ℞. the rootes of Alt
                        •
                     aea. ℥.iiij. the leaues of Maluae, Biſmaluae, and Parietarie, the flours of cammomill, and melilote, the toppes of dill, ana. M.ij. of origan, calamint, betonie, and ſothernwood, ana. M.j. ſeedes of flaxe and fennell, ana. ℥.ij. of leane branne. p.iiij. put all theſe in a litle bagge, and make a boiling in ſufficient water, for a Semicupium. Note alſo that one that hath the N
                     •
                  freſie may enter a Bathe before he hath receiued a Cliſter. If the paine of the cholicke or the Nefreſie ſeeme to come of much ventoſitie, or of a cold humour, which ſeemeth to haue neede of calefaction, and attenuacion or thinneſſe with inciſion and cutting,
                     Al
                           •
                        ud Semicupium.
                   make a Semicupium thus, ℞. origan, calaminte, toppes of dill, and of cammomill, ana. M.iiij. fenugreeke, carawayes, aniſe and fennell, ana. ℥.ij. laurell bearies. ℥.ſs. And if there be moe ſickneſſes and cauſes wrapped in with the aforeſaid griefes, you may adde to ſuch medicines as be meete for your purpoſe, as if there be neede of mollifying and making ſofte, the leaues of Maluae, Biſmaluae, Parietarie and violettes, will worke that effect. If you iudge it neceſſarie to make inciſion, or to open the poores and paſſages of the body, adde to, of the roote of ſpinache, bruſcus and Apium, knitte them in a litle bagge and ſeeth them for a Semicupium. Likewiſe to prouoke menſtruis, make Inſeſſus or Semicupia, putting in medicines meete and apte to prouoke menſtruis, as Muggworte, Sauien, Horehounde, nex, cypreſſe, and iunipper bearies, of all theſe there may be put in. M.ij.
            
            
               CAP. XVIII. Of Epithema or Fotus.
               
                  EPITHEMA is a medicine ordeined, to laye to the hearte or liuer to coole it: and Fotus is a medicine nouriſhing or keeping warme. They are made for many intentes and purpoſes, but chiefly to correct the hote diſtempure of the liuer, the make wherof is this, as enſueth, ℞. the waters of endiue, ſuccory, roſes,
                     Epitheme.
                   and petymorrell and night ſhade, ana. ℥.iij. of vineger. ℥.j. the powder of Electuarium tria ſandali. 
                  ʒ.ij. or ʒ.j.ſs. mixe them for an Epitheme of the liuer with a felte, or a peece of linnen or wollen clothe, or a ſponge, infuſed in the aforeſaid licour, and laid againſt the liuer before meate an houre or an houre and halfe. Alſo there is made for the ſame purpoſe the like decoction of

the herbes, as is of the aforeſaid waters. If there be ſtoppinges of the liuer, together with his hote diſtempure, make an Epitheme after this ſorte, ℞. ſuccorie booth the roote and the herbe, young ſet endiue, a grimony (which is) eupatorie, ana. M.j. flours of ſuccorie. p.j. the foure great cold ſeades, and litle cold ſeade, ana. ℥.ſs. of cypreſſe. ʒ.ij. of lupines. ʒ.iij. all the ſaunders, ana. ʒ.j. of ſquinaunt. ʒ.ſs. the toppes of warmewood. M.ſs. make a litle bagge, and boile it in foure partes of water, and one of wine, and a litle vineger, with one onely great heate in an earthen veſſell, and make a fomentacion in the maner aforeſaid. Such an Epitheme is very good for diſeaſes depending vpon opilation or ſtopping, and misfortune comming by opilation and ſtopping, as is a fluxe, and for him that is diſeaſed in the liuer, and for thoſe diſeaſes for the moſt parte which come and goe by courſes. Alſo it is good againſt conſumptions, which cauſe diſtempres and ſtoppinges of the liuer. Moreouer againſt the beginninges of knobbes and kernells, to which (if they be come foorth) there muſt be applied mollificatiues, and thinges that do looſen and vnbinde. Alſo there be Epithemes that be made for many purpoſes of the ſtomache: Firſt to ſtrengthen the ſtomache that it receiue not the ſuperfluities comming from other places, and then the Epitheme is made of ſtipticke thinges: Secondly to correct and amende the diſtempure of the ſtomache: And thirdly they ſerue to ceaſe the paines, that are cauſed by the nature and condition of that griefe: miniſtring duely to the contrarietie of the matter, as the cauſe ſhall require. The making of the firſt intent, that the ſtomache may be deliuered from flowinges of humours to it, and may be preſerued ſafely, that it ſhall not ſuffer inflammacion, or courſe of euill humours. ℞. red roſes. p.ij. of Arnogloſſa and plantine. ana. M.ſs. the toppes of wormewood. M.j. the third parte, all the ſaunders, ana. ʒ ij. red corall. ʒ.iij. put all theſe into a litle bagge, and make a decoction in ſufficient quantitie of water, with a litle vineger, to which may be added a litle renniſh wine and make a fomentacion. Corall (although it be Achymum) yet it is not put into the decoction without great cauſe, for it profiteth naturally againſt all diſeaſes of the ſtomache, and therefore it ought rather to be beaten into powder. Epithemes for all other intentes and purpoſes may be deſcribed by particular and proper medicines, after the forme of the late deſcribed Epitheme. There be Epithemes good for the ſtomache made of oile, as oile of roſes, cammonill, wormewood, maſticke and mirtles. Note that in all Epithemes, for what intent ſoeuer they be miniſtred, you muſt mixe ſome thing with them that may preſerue and keepe the eſſence and ſtrength of the member, that the Epitheme is laid to, as Galene commandeth and teacheth in many places, to be obſerued and done likewiſe in medicines taken inwardly. But Epithema and Fotus be all one, yet ſome do make a difference, ſaying that Epithema is onely that, which is made of diſtilled waters, and powders mixed together: and Fotus is a more generall thing, which is made of the decoction of any kind of herbes and rootes.
            
            
               CAP. XIX. Of making Sacculus.
               
                  SACCVLVS, videlicet, a litle bagge. It is miniſtred for the ſame cauſes that Fotus be vſed for. It is made of herbes, flours, ſeades and other ſuch like thinges. They be laid to, either drie, or elſe weat in ſome liquor. The drie be chiefly made of ſeedes and herbes: the weat muſt firſt be preſſed, before it be laid to the place. ℞. milij vſtulati. p.iiij. of orobum,
                  
                     A drie bagge againſt the windy cholick or Timpanites.
                   (which ſome thincke to be tares) and of leane branne, ana. p.ij. flours of Cammomill, and toppes of dill, ana. p.j. of commin and carawaye, ana. ℥.ij. of laurell bearies. ℥.iij. make therof two litle bagges, and ſew them in, into two linnen clothes of a competent biggneſſe, and baſt them throughly. Let them be ſo bigge, that they may couer the belly, and let one after another be laid hote to the belly againe and againe. Now followeth the forme of a moiſt bagge for the digeſting,
                     A moiſt bagge
                   mollifying, and diſſoluing of raw humours as thus: ℞. the flours of Cammomill. p.ij. the toppes of dill, melilote, and origan, ana. p.j. fenugreeke and flaxe ſeede, ana. ℥.j. the leaues of maluae, biſmaluae, and violettes, ana. M.ſs. make a litle bagge, or make two bagges, & boile them in water or in cowes milke,

and of the decoction make a fomentacion with a ſponge, or a felte, or wollen clothes, or two bagges, let them be laid to the greiued places one after another. According to this forme, you may make and apply bagges, partly of thinges that can mollifie and partly of thinges that can remoue and diſcuſſe, and laye them to kdubbes, karnells, and hardneſſe in the fleſh. But if the perſon be ſtrong, take other remollitiues, or diſcuſſiues, euen as you ſhall finde the matter, that cauſeth the hardneſſe, to require.
            
            
               CAP. XX. Of making Scutum.
               
                  SCVTVM in Engliſh is a target or buckler. Scuta are miniſtred to the ſtomache, and made for the ſame cauſes that ointmentes and Epithemes be. They are often made of the drie powder of medicines, to correcte ſome diſtempre of the ſtomache, and to adde ſtrength to it. Furthermore they ſerue in the ſteed of ointmentes or emplaiſtres, when the patientes do refuſe and abhorre them for their tediouſneſſe.
                     A Scutum againſt 
                           〈…〉
                         diſtemp
                           •
                        re 
                           •
                        f the 
                           〈…〉
                         with 
                           〈◊〉
                         and 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſubſtance.
                   ℞. mintes, maioram and wormewood dried, ana. p.j. or ʒ.j.ſs. of cloues, galingale, and Xiloaloës, ana. ℈.ij. of commin and red corall, ana. ʒ.j. make a powder, wherwith make a Scutum with a litle cotton, ſewed in betwene two litle clothes with ſtichinges betwene and bands as it ought to be, let it be bound to the ſtomache. Powders to Scutum ought not to be paſt an ounce and a halfe at the moſt, many times. ℥.j. or ʒ.vj. is enough.
            
            
               CAP. XXI. Of making a Cataplaſme.
               
                  CATAPLASMA is a plaiſter, &c. Cataplaſmata be made of herbes, rootes, ſeedes, and meale ſodden in water or milke, with ſome greace or oile added to them as the matter requireth. Cataplaſmata be made for diuerſe intentes, ſometime to ceaſe paines, ſometime to reſolue and vnbind, ſometime to make ripe, ſometime to mollifie or make ſofte, ſometime to conſume, and ſometime to drie vp humours and vapours. In commixed affectes and cauſes, diuerſe intentes and purpoſes are mixed together in Cataplaſma, as remollitiues with diſcuſſiues, and diſcuſſiues with ſuch thinges as ceaſe paine, as the examples following ſhall declare. And firſt of the forme of a cataplaſme for the cure of Oedema, (which is a botche of fleugmaticke matter, or an impoſtume without griefe,) in the which euill it is neceſſary to haue remollition with diſcuſſion, or (as they ſay) reſoluing, looſening and ceaſing of paine, as thus, ℞. the leaues of maluae, biſmaluae, and violettes, ana. M.j. or M.ſs. the roote of Althaea, the roote of white lillies, and the roote of ireos (that is) flour de luce, ana. ℥.ſs. or ℥.j. flours of cammomill, melilote, & toppes of dill, ana. p.j. ſeed of flaxe, and of fenugreeke, (or rather) meale of flaxe ſeed, meale of fenugreeke, and meale of barley, ana. ℥.ſs. or ℥.j. or you may meaſure it by litle handfulls, comin. ʒ.j. laurell bearies. ʒ.ij. ſaffron. ℈.j. or ʒ.ſs. of duckes greace, gooſe greace, the marow of calues ſhanckes, freſh butter, oile of lillies, and oile of ireos, ana. as much as ſuffiſeth: make a Cataplaſme. In this plaiſtre are conteined three intentes and purpoſes (that is) mollifying, diſſoluing, and ceaſing of paine, as may be knowen by the matters conteined in it. The quantitie of mollificatiues ought to be moſt, if there be greateſt neede of mollifying, and the quantitie of diſſolvers ought to be moſt, if there neede to be great diſſoluing, & ſo likewiſe of ceaſing of paine. Therefore in the beginning of Oedema, is alſo in the beginning of euery abſceſſion or courſe of ill humours, you muſt commixe together with mollificatiues ſome repercuſſiue remedy, wherwith the member may be comforted. In the beginning of the augmenting, take moſt remollitiues, and feweſt diſcuſſiues. In the ende of the augmenting and ſtate of the diſeaſe, take of both a like much. In the declination, take and applie onely diſſoluers, and looſeners. In the making of this preſent plaiſtre, you muſt put into it no ſtipticke thing: but if you do put in any, put it in at the beginning of the flowing of the humour. But what medicines

they be that haue ſtipticke vertue, and which do comfort the member, and alſo which do mollifie, and diſſolue, you muſt ſeeke them in the tables of Authours, as Arnoldus, and Sauanorolla, and ſuch like. Alſo there be plaiſters made without oile or greace, as is that common thing of crummes of bread ſteiped in cowes milke, and a litle ſodden together, with whites of egges, oftentimes mixed with a litle of ſaffron, as x. or xij. chiues. And this Cataplaſme we often vſe for the cure of the goute.
            
            
               CAP. XXII. Of making Emplastrum.
               
                  EMPLAISTRES are ordeined and made fot diuerſe purpoſes, and the making of them is common as well to Phyſitians as Chyrurgians. They are made of gummes, oiles, greace, and drie medicines, commixed with ſome ſufficient quantitie of waxe, or without waxe, if that the materialls can thicken, and gather together of them ſelues. Emplaiſtres are applied to all partes of the body, but chiefly to the ſtomache, for the ſame cauſe that ointmentes, Cataplaſmes, and Scuta are ordeined. Now followeth the forme of an Emplaiſtre for the ſtomache when it is afflicted with a cold diſtempure, by reaſon of the flowing of ſome cold ſubſtance, as thus. ℞. Ceratum ſtomachi canfortati
                        •
                     i Galeni. ℥.ij. of galingale, cloues, and red corall, ana. ʒ.ſs. of waxe diſſolued, brayed all together, in a mortar with oile of maſticke, or of wormewood, as much as ſuffiſeth. Commixe them and make a Plaiſtre ſpread vpon leather like a buckler with a double linnen cloth, well ſtitched and baſted as it ought to be. Alſo an Emplaiſtre may be made of ſimples for the aforeſaid intentes, in this maner, ℞. pure Lapdanum. 
                  ʒ.vj. maſticke. ʒ.ij. franckenſence. ʒ.j. coriander preparate, red corall, dry mintes and galingale ana. ℈.ij Xilo aloes, and macies, ana. ʒ.ſs. turpentine. ʒ.ij. waxe diſſolued with oile of ſpikenard, or wormewood, or maſticke, or roſes, or of two or three of theſe, as much as ſuffiſeth. Make it in a lumpe together, ſpread it vpon leather, and make it like a Scutum of double linnen with ſtiches and bandes, and laye it to the ſtomache as it is requiſite. Warne the Apothecarie to diſſolue the gummes with wine and oile, afterward let him commixe the reſte without the vſe of any fire. Ceratum ſtomachi confortatiuum Galeni is made of roſes, wormewood, maſticke, ſpicknard, waxe and oile of roſes. In hote cauſes and cholericke vomittes, you may likewiſe make Scuta of cold ſimples, as is, mirtles, coriander, corall, maſticke, which is temperate, Pſidiae, balauſtia, alſo oiles, as of roſes, mirtles, quinces,
                     A plaiſtre for the hote diſtempre of the liuer.
                   and of maſticke. There are made Emplaiſtres for the liuer, for the alaying of euery diſtempore of it, to looſen the obſtructions therof, and to ſtrengthen it alſo, as in this example following, ℞ Ceratum ſandalinum. ℥.ij. meate of quinces. ℥.j. of maſticke. ℥.ſs. of corall. ʒ.j. of waxe diſſolued with oile of roſes as much as ſuffiſeth. Make it in a lumpe, and ſpread it vpon leather, like a moone when ſhee is beginning to encreaſe, with a double linnen clothe, and with bandes, as it ought to be, and applie it to the liuer. Emplaiſters alſo are made to ceaſe paines, and partly to ripen Apoſtemes, and partly to reſolue them, as in example, ℞. Muſcilaginis of the ſeede of Althaea, fenugreeke, and ſeede of flaxe, ana. ℥.iij. barley meale. ℥.iiij. oile of white lillies, and the fatneſſe of a henne, ana. ℥.ij.ſs. butter. ℥.j. ſaffron. ℈.j. the whites of egges in number .ij. boile the Muſcilagines with a ſofte fire, and with the meale, and put in the whites of egges id the ende. It doeth ſoften and ripen all Apoſtemes congealed of a hote and cold matter, and it ceaſeth their paine, in what parte ſoeuer of the body they be reſident. If you will appropriate this Emplaiſtre to all kindes of cold Apoſtemes, then adde to it, Ammoniacum, Bdellum, ſtorax liquida, ana. ℥.j. and it will worke a maruellous and profitable effect.
            
            
               CAP. XXIII. Of making Vnguenta.
               
                  
                  VNGVENTA in Engliſh, ointmentes: And thoſe which pertaine vnto Phyſitians, are made to lenifie and aſſwage paine, to repreſent, ſhew, and aſſigne alteration and chaunging, to mollifie and diſſolue knobbes and kernells, ſpecially in the liuer, in the ſpleene, and in the ſtomache. The vertue of ointments for other purpoſes and for other members belongeth to Surgerie, the forme and making wherof is to be ſought out of the Antidotaries.
                     An ointment for the ſtomache.
                   The forme of an ointment to mitigate the paine of the ſtomache cauſed of cold, or by the preſence of ſome ſuch like ſubſtance, is in this maner, ℞. oile of maſtie, ſpicke, and wormewood, ana. ℥.ſs. cloues, Xilo aloes, maces, and Calamus Aromaticus, ana. ℈.j. gallia muſchata. 
                  ʒ.j. or ʒ.j.ſs. if he be riche, becauſe of the deareneſſe therof, of new waxe as much as ſufficeth, make an ointmēt for the ſtomache, and a Scutum with cotton, and with bandes, as it ought to be, and laye it vpon the ſtomache after the annointing. But to ceaſe the paine in the ſtomache comming of a hote cauſe,
                     Aliud.
                   as of the flowing of choler, which often chaunceth in feuers, vſe this ointment, ℞. oile of roſes. ℥.j. oile of mirtles or elſe of quinces. ℥.ſs. white ſaunders, and red, ana. ℈.ij. or ℈.ſs. new waxe waſhed in endiue water, or in roſe water, as much as ſuffiſeth, and make an ointment for the ſtomache. Alſo make a Scutum of cotton, and apply it to the ſtomache after the annointing. In ointmentes we do not exceed or paſſe the quantitie of. ℥.j. It is alſo to be noted that ſome do waſh oiles with the iuice or the water of the diſtillation of cold herbes in a hote cauſe, or in hote iuices, in a cold cauſe or diſeaſe. Moreouer note, that many doe thinke, that there ſhould be no ointment nor cerote applied to the ſtomache without galingale, neither to the hearte without mace or ſaffron, neither to the braine without Spica Arabica, nor to the liuer without Spodium, or ſaunders, or wormewood, or other ſuch like thinges, thinking verily, the nature of the member to be preſerued with reſtrainers, but yet not alwayes in the afore named medicines. For that law and methode is to be kept in all cauſes of contrariety, which ſhould be broken in medicines, if galingale were added to the aforeſaid medicine, becauſe galingale is hote. For truely the nature of the ſtomache is ſtrengthened ſufficiently by the commixing together or ſtipticke thinges which are put into the aforeſaid ointment, becauſe truely they be temperate in heat, as it appeareth by their nature. Now followeth an ointmēt very profitable for hardneſſe and knobbes of the liuer or ſpleene, wherwith theſe two members are moſt in danger, in this forme, ℞. the rootes of Althaea, and the rootes of white lillies,
                     Vnguentum.
                   ana. ℥.j. leaues of Maluae, Biſmaluae, & violettes, ana. M.j. of the flours of cammomill, melilote, and the toppes of dill, ana. M.ſs. meale of fenugreeke, and meale of flaxe ſeed, ana. ℥.j. gumme Ammoniaci, called Serapini. ℥.j. Bdellum that is ſoft and whitiſh. ℥.ſs. turpentine. ʒ.iij. gumme of pine tree. ℥.ſs. Storax liquida. 
                  ʒ.ij. or ʒ.iij. the marow of calues or heartes ſhankes, if you can get it, hennes greace, and duckes greace, oiles of ſweet almondes & of ireos, ana. ℥ j.ſs. or ana. as much as ſuffiſeth. Diſſolue the gummes with wine and a litle vineger, and to the aforeſaid oiles adde to new waxe as much as ſuffiſeth, then afterward take the ſaid greaces and powders, or meales, or herbes firſt ſodden and brayed, and mixe them altogether, and make an ointment: in this ſaid ointment there be moe thinges that do mollifie, then there be that diſſolue, becauſe the matter of ſcirrhous knubbes doth chiefly require the ſame. If you will miniſter the aforeſaid ointmēt for the hardneſſe of the liuer, you may adde to it of the braunches of wormewood, of roſes, of ſquinance, or of ſpicknard to preſerue the ſtrength and nature of the member. If you will miniſter it to the ſpleene, you may mixh with it ſome Tamariſcus barke, the roote of caparres, or ſuch like. If you miniſter to the hardneſſe of the ſtomache, adde to wormewood, red roſes, Calamus aromaticus, mintes and galingale.
            
            
               CAP. XXIIII. Of making a Liniment.
               
                  LINIMENTVM is an ointment that is ſofte and liquid, which hath in it litle waxe or none at all. It is alſo made for the ſame vſe that ointmentes be made for. The forme of a Liniment to ceaſe paine, (as in the Pleuriſie) is after this maner, ℞. oile of cammomill, and capons greace, ana. ℥.ſs. freſh new butter without ſalte. ʒ ij. a litle waxe waſhed, and make a Linimente.
            
            
               
               CAP. XXV. Of making Frontale.
               
                  FRONTALE or Splenium be plaiſtres made to apply to the forehead, either to ceaſe paine in the foreparte of the head, or to cauſe and prouoke ſleepe, or to ceaſe paine in the head cauſed of a hote diſtempre, as it oftentimes chaunceth in feauers. Againſt cold cauſes make a Frontale (as Galene teacheth) of red roſes ſteiped and ſooked in vineger, laid betwene two linnen clothes of three fingers breath, and in length from one eare to another, or make it for the ſame intent, after this faſhion, ℞. red roſes. p.j.ſs. flours of water lillies and violettes, ana. p.j. betonie, and melilote, ana. p.ſs. put all betwene two fine linnen clothes, (if the patient be riche) or betwene two courſe linnen clothes, if he be poore: and make a Frontale well ſewed (as it ought to be) for the forehead and the temples if you will prouoke ſleepe, adde to the aforeſaid Frontale, the leaues of lettuſe, or of new white poppie, or of mandragoras in the places and times, that you may haue it, but there is but ſmall ſtore of theſe cold thinges. At all times you may put in the ſeedes of white poppie, or the barkes of the heades of white poppie, or lettuſe ſeede, or henbane ſeede▪ as in example, ℞. flours of water lillies, violettes, and melilote, ana. p.j. flours of lettuce, or white poppie, ana. the third parte of M.j. or of eche of them. M.ſs. ſeede of white poppie. ʒ.ij. lettuce ſeed, dill ſeed, and white henbane ſeed, ana. ʒ.ſs. bray all together, and make a Frontale betwene the courſe or fine linnen clothes well ſewed and baaſted in right order. To the former Frontale melilote and dill ſead is added to comforte the braine, that it be not hurte with cold thinges. In the diſeaſes called Coephalalgiae comming of a cold cauſe, make Frontalia, of hote hearbes and flours, as ſage, roſmary, cammomill, betony, briony, mellilote and ſuch like. Frontalia, before they be laid to the forehead, are wonte to haue ſome licour powred vpon them, or to be ayered with ſome vapour, as in example, ℞. the waters of roſes, betony and bawme, ana. ℥.j. of vineger. ℥.ſs. commixe them, and of the aforeſaid waters, poure a litle portion vpon a burning tyle, or ſome ſuch like thing, and hold the aforeſaid Frontale ouer the ſteeme and ſmoke of the ſaid waters. The foreheard is oftentimes annointed with many ointmentes ſeruing for the ſame vſe and purpoſe, that Frontalia do ſerue for, as in a hote cauſe, vnguentum populeon, rubea trochiſcata diſſolued in water, very meete for this purpoſe, and yet it is ſeeldome in vſe with them at Paris. Many Phyſitians in the olde time, in a cold cauſe did annoint with Mithridatum, and Aurea Alexandrina, and ſuch like. In all cauſes (ſayeth Galene, 12. lib. Therapeutices) you may conueniently annoint with Oxyrhodinum, which is made of oile of roſes, and ſixe times ſo much vineger, as in example: ℞ oile of roſes. ℥.j. vineger. ʒ.ij. commixe them, ſtirring them in a plate, or elſe thus in hoter cauſes, whenas without foreſight the freneſie will breed, then we commixe cold thinges, as thus, ℞ oile of roſes. ℥.j. oile of nenuphar. ℥.ſs. oile of popie. ʒ.iij. iuice of Solatrum, or lettuſe, or white poppie, water of roſes and of vineger, ana. ℥.ſs. commixe them together, ſtirring them very longe in ſome peece of plate: and annoint the fore parte of the head therwith, yea all the head, if there be inflammacion of the braine.
            
            
               CAP. XXVI. Of making Cucufa, and Semicucufa.
               
                  CVCVFA is made for the cure of the euill called Coephalalgia, which is a paine in the head comming of cold, and many times alſo to ſtoppe reume, as in example, ℞. Sampſucus, (that is) marioram, roſemary, ſtechados both, of Araby, and yeallow, ana. p.j. of red roſes. p.j.ſs. dry cytron barkes, graines of Alkermes, ana. ʒ.iij. macis, long pepper, quybibes and cloues, ana. ʒ.ſs. Make a powder, and make a Cucufa, betwene two fine linnen clothes, with a litle cotton baaſted betwene, or with flaxe, or ſcarlet ſcraped, and giue it according to the meaſure. And if the paine lyeth moſt in the fore parte of the head, put moſt of the powders or ſpices in that place: likewiſe if it be in the hinder parte, do ſo alſo, and if the Cephalagia be

in all partes of the head, then commixe them equally. But it is called Semicucufa, when we prouide but for one parte of the head. If we will ſtoppe reumes, then we mixe with it ſtipticke thinges, or we make a Cucufa only of ſtipticke thinges, either cold or hote as the cauſe requireth. Therfore we make a cucufa with milium burned, or not burned, mirtles, cipreſſe nuttes, and ſandaracha (commonly called vernice) vdz, yealow oker, the barke of franckenſence, and ſuch like ſtipticke thinges.
            
            
               CAP. XXVII. Of making Suffitus.
               
                  SVFFITVS (in Engliſh a perfuming) is made of dry thinges to ſtoppe diſtillations which fall from the braine into the lower partes, and it is made of reſtraigning medicines, as thus for example, ℞. redde roſes. p.j. maſticke. ℥.ſs. vernic
                     •
                  s, that is yealow oker. ℥.j. mixe them and make a perfuming for the head, or thus, ℞. Milium. p.j. red roſes, p.ſs. of vernice and Olibanum, ana. ℥.ſs. Commixe them and make a perfume for the head. Note that when the diſtillation falleth to the lounges, and therof commeth ſpittell, then take no perfume by the mouth, becauſe it ſhorteneth the breath, and letteth the ſpitting, and maketh the humours groſſe and thicke: but you muſt perfume the couering of the head, or elſe perfume ſome woll, and applie it to the head.
            
            
               CAP. XXVIII. Of making a Collirium.
               
                  COLLIRIVM is a medicine, that is miniſtred in a liquide forme to heale the 
                     •
                  yes Wherefore, becauſe there be diuerſe euills in the Eyes, the Colleries are made of diuerſe faſhions: for you muſt vſe one kind in the beginning of Ophth
                        •
                     lmia: another in the ſtate or it, and another in the declination therof as it is alſo commonly vſed in the inflammations of other membres. Therefore in the beginning you muſt make it of cold and ſtipticke repercuſſiues, as the whites of eggges, the ſappe of quince ſeed, and Pſyllium, and other thinges of the like vertue: miniſter them alone, or elſe let them be firſt diſſolued with conuenient waters, and afterward applied, as in this example following: ℞. the white of one egge,
                     A Collirium in the beginn
                           •
                        ng 
                           〈◊〉
                         Ophthalmia.
                   and ſtirre it with roſe water, or plantaine water, or with water of bawme, or with all theſe waters, make a Coll
                     •
                  rie, and put it into the eye that is pained. Or thus: ℞. the ſappe of quince ſeed drawen out with plantaine water, or roſe water. ℥.j. and mixe them with the white of an egge, and ſtirre it a long time with a ſpater, and make a Collirium. But if there be no paine nor redneſſe in the eyes, but a certaine vncleanneſſe which ought to be dried vp, then it is good to make Colliries of Tuttie preparate, and of Aloes waſhed, and of Lapis calaminaris, and other ſuch like thinges, which ought to be taken with ſome conuenient licour, (except it rather liketh you better) to put into the Eye the powders of them: for ſo they drye vp, and wipe awaye the filthineſſe the cleaner.
            
            
               CAP. XXIX. Of making Naſale or Erthinum.
               
                  NASALE and Erthinum be medicines which be caſt into the Noſe for many cauſes and intentes, as to ſtoppe bleeding at the noſe, to prouoke ſneeſinges, to cauſe child birth, or to bring foorth the Secundine which is reteined within after the birthe, and furthermore it purgeth the braine. It may be made many wayes, as in drye powders,
                     A Naſale to 
                           〈◊〉
                         bleeding at the Noſe.
                   which muſt be ſnufted or blowen vp into the Noſe, or it maye be made liquide, and then you muſt annoint the noſethrills within, or you may make it whole and hard, and then it muſt be put vp into

the Noſe. ℞. the heares that be in a Hares bellie. p.ſs. the ſaweduſte, or mooſynes of willow. p.ſs. bole armoniacke and Sanguis Draconis powdred, ana. ʒ.j. cut the heares very ſmall and mixe them all together, and blowe them vp into the Noſe, or diſſolue them all with ſome ſtipticke water, or with the iuice of ſome hearbe, or with the white of an egge, and adde to them alſo (if you pleaſe) Balauſtia, or the rindes of pomegranats, or Acacia, all powdred, and with a linnen clothe make a Naſale, and dippe it in the aforeſaid medicines, and put it into the Noſe. Sneeſinges are prouoked by drye powders, ſnufted or blowen into the Noſe,
                     A Naſale to prouoke ſneeſing.
                   which be ſharpe and byting, as be theſe, pepper, pellitorie▪ ſtauiſacre, and roote of flour deluce powdred. You may commixe the ſaid thinges with ſome licour, and annoint the noſethrilles, or take clothe or ſilke wounde vp together, and dippe it in the aforeſaid licour, and put it into one noſethrill, or into both.
            
            
               CAP. XXX. Of making Apophlegmatiſmus.
               
                  APOPHLEGMATISMVS is a medicine which cauſeth one to vomit vp fleume: it prouoketh reume out of the braine into the mouthe, and it is good to purge the braine. Maſticke is commonly vſed in this caſe, which being longe holden in the mouthe and chewed, it bringeth foorth reume and fleume. Alſo Sage 
                     •
                  eaues holden in the mouth doeth likewiſe purge reume by the mouth. Alſo make Noduli of Pellitorie, pepper, ſtouiſacre, roote of Ireos, and Panax, and hold them in the mouthe. Furthermore make gargariſmes of the ſame medicines. Alſo there are ointmentes made of the ſame thinges, wherwith the roufe of the mouthe muſt be annointed, for they by reaſon of their heate and tarteneſſe, do draw fleume and reume into the mouthe.
            
            
               CAP. XXXI. Of making Distillations Restoratiue.
               
                  DISTILLATIONS be made to ſuſtaine ſtrength and mighte, when the ſicke is ſo weake, that he cannot digeſt any hard nouriſhment. Diſtillations ar of a mixed kinde, (that is to ſaye) they are partely food, and partely medicines. They are made for many intentes and purpoſes: for ſome be made to reſtraine, as in the fluxe of the bellie, ſome to alter or chaunge, as when they are miniſtred for feauers to refrigerate, or in cold diſeaſes to make hote, and ſome doe reſiſt poyſon and malignant humours,
                     A diſtillation reſtoratiue reſtreining.
                   as in peſtilent feauers, and they are made after this maner. ℞. conſerues of ſuccorie, of roſes, of Simphytum (that is) cumfrey, of Cornelus, of Miua, and of quinces, ana. ℥.ij. powder of Electuaries, Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Tria Sandalt, ana. ʒ.ij. trochiskes of Carabe, of Berberies, and of Terra ſigillata, ana. ℥.ſs. of red corall, & Lapis hematidis, ana. ʒ.j. water of the decoction of one capon or of two, altered with plantaine, knot graſſe, moley
                     •
                  e, lettuce, ſeed of Berberies, Sumaach, and Omphacium, 
                  lb.vi
                     •
                  j. put all together in a Limbecke with the fleſh of two chickens, or of two partriches, or of two turtle doues, or of one capon, or of moe of theſe, and with the crummes of one white loafe, or of two wette in roſe water,
                     Another.
                   and make a diſtillation in balneo Mariae with a ſofte fire. ℞. of the aforeſaid diſtillation. lb.ſs. iuice of pomegranates. ℥.j. or ℥.j.ſs. ſuger roſet. ℥.ij. cinnamon elect. ʒ. ſtraine them (as Hypocrates teacheth) through a ſleaue, and let the ſicke vſe it euery houre. But if you will made a diſtillation to haue a cooling vertue, alwayes obſerue the ſame order and portion that is ſpoken of before,
                     A diſtillation reſtoratiue cooling.
                   and for the reſtraigning conſerues, adde to ſuch as doe coole, as conſerues of water lillies, of violettes, of roſes, ſuccorie, and bawme, and likewiſe cold Electuaries. as Diamargariton frigidum, and Trochiskes of Camphora, alſo alter the decoction of the fleſh with lettuce,
                     Againſt malignant and peſtilent feauers.
                   ſorrell, purcelaine, ſcarioll, and ſuch like. Moreouer you ſhall make a diſtillation reſtoratiue againſt malignant and peſtilent feauers in this ſorte. ℞. Conſerues of violettes, water lillies, bawme, borage, and bugloſſe, ana. ʒ.ij.

barke of citron condite. ℥.j. roote of Dictamus and Tormentill, roote of Angelica, and roote of gentian, ana. ℥.ſs. powder of Electuarium Diamargariton frigidum, all the Saunders, bole Armoniacke, trochiskes of Camphora, wood of Aloës, ana. ℥.ij. ſcraping of yuorie, and hartes horne, maces, cinnamon, cloues, and ſeede of Cardus Benedictus, ana. ℥.j. of olde Triacle. ʒ.iij. the water of the decoction of two chickens, or of capons altered with ſorrell, ſcabious lettuce, borage, bugloſſe, quar. iij. put all together in a glaſſen Limbecke, with the fleſh of ſome thinges, and with the crummes of two white loaues infuſed in white wine, and make a diſtillation with a lente and ſofte fier, in conuenient order as is requiſite,
                     Another.
                   or thus. ℞. of the afoſeſaid diſtillation. lb.ſs. Syrupus de acetoſitate Citri. ℥.ij. commixe them together, and let the ſicke vſe it euery houre.
            
            Finis Libri Sexti.
         
      
   