
      
         
            
            
            A CATHOLICKE
APOLOGIE AGAINST
THE LIBELS, DECLARATIONS,
ADVICES, AND
CONSVLTATIONS MADE, WRITTEN,
and publiſhed by thoſe of the League, perturbers
of the quiet Eſtate of the Realme of France.
Who are riſen ſince the deceaſe of the late
Monſier, the Kings onely brother.
By E. D. L. I. C.
            Anſwere a foole according to his folly, leaſt he ſhould
thincke him ſelfe wiſe.
            Prouerb. 26.
            
            
               ❧Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas.
         
         
            
            
            THE PREFACE
to the Reader.
            
               O Chriſtian and Catholick
Frenchman, neuer
was there offered better
meanes then at this
time to diſcouer and
ſmel out the ſubtelties
of our enemies, & with
what money Sathan vſually paieth his ſeruants,
whē we ſee ſome of thē ſo blinded,
that beeing vppon the poynt of their deſtruction,
they promiſe to themſelues all
aſſuraunce, ſtill coueting to conceale their
abhominable wickedneſſe, with ſleights,
ſhiftes and lyes. Neuertheleſſe, when they
do moſt hide themſelues they are fooneſt
ſpied. For, to ſay the trueth, what goodlier
or more apparant pretēce could the perturbers
of the quiet of our Fraunce take
holde of, then Religion and the reliefe of
the people: but as the enemie of trueth
hath allured thē vnto him by lyes, ſo hath

hee for their repaſte left them no other
foode vpon his Table, and yet doth that
alſo faile them, when they make it an vſuall
meſſe, and trueth remaineth Miſtreſſe.
According hereto, the lyes and horrible
ſlaūders, that to this day haue bene ſpued
foorth againſt the King of Nauarre, & the
Lord Prince of Condie, by certaine ſtraungers,
enemies to this Crowne & the Royall
Progenie, vnder the pretence of zeale
of Religion doth ouerthrowe them, becauſe
cōtinually they haue ſought to perſwade
our ſouraigne Lord the King and
all the French Nation, that theſe Princes
were his euill ſeruaunts, Rebels, and diſobedient
perſons, enemies to his Eſtate, in
the preſeruation and encreaſe whereof,
they haue greater intereſt then any other
worldly perſon next vnto his Maieſtie, vnto
whom they haue the honor very nerely
to appertaine. As alſo in truth, we are hartely
to giue GOD thankes, eſpecially, in
that after ſo many falſe and ſlaunderous
inductions made vnto the moſt Chriſtian
Maieſtie againſt theſe two Princes, his
good kinſmen and moſt faithfull ſubiects
and ſeruants (by whoſe reliefe this feeble,
weake and pale Realme hath oftentimes

eſcaped falling) it hath pleaſed him to open
the Kings eyes, & to let him perceiue
that all the illuſions vnto him preſented,
tended only to the ouerthrow of himſelf,
his Crowne and Eſtate, in offering hetherto
to his viewe one thing in liewe of an other.
For herevpon his Maieſtie ſmelling
out the cauſes of paſſed miſchiefe, hath finally
in earneſt done as the good Phiſitiō,
who whē he ſeeth his Patient pale, weake,
faint, and grieuouſly ſicke, beginneth his
cure with bringing him to his bed, & diſcharging
him frō all painfull toyle, & cauſing
him to take ſome reſt: euen ſo our
King, caſting his eyes vpō his poore realm
afflicted with ciuill warres which ſo long
haue bene kindled vnder a falſe and ſlaunderous
pretence, to the end to begin the
cure, hath firſt ſought to ſet it in peace,
that after ſome time of reſt he might haue
better opportunitie to heale the reſt of
the cauſes of the diſeaſe, & to put from about
him thoſe who vnder his authoritie
had by their falſe & wicked perſwaſiōs ſo
hardly entreated it. Which when his euill
Councellors perceiued, & ſeeing that they
could no longer goe forward in the ſame
path, they haue ſought with open play to

compaſſe that which ſo lōg they had craftely
practiſed, & now haue plainly ſhewed
that it was the State & Crowne that they
leueled at, procuring the writing of diuers
Libels aduices and conſultations of their
ſuffragās, to the end not only to diminiſh
and blemiſh the King of Nauarres vndoubted
& lawfull ſucceſsion, if it ſhould
pleaſe God to worke his will of the Kings
Maieſtie without leauing any iſſue Male,
but alſo to aduaūce their own falſe, ſlaunderous
and ſuppoſed titles and pretēces.
Howbeit, although the ſaid Lord King of
Nauarre neede not yet to pleade his cauſe
or preſently to aunſwere all theſe ſleights
and counſailes of the wicked, in reſpect of
the ſufficient terme & ſmall likelihood of
occaſion euer to put the ſame in executiō,
cōſidering the King is (thāks be to God)
yong, in health, & in good diſpoſition, together
with the ſmall intereſt that in my
opinion the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre,
pretendeth to any ſuch ſucceſsiō, as being
a Prince both wiſe & circumſpect, & ſuch
a one as hath not ſo ſmal forecaſt but that
he knoweth vndoubtedly, that the greateſt
wealth, reliefe, good hap & contentation
that may redound to him cōſiſteth in

the proſperitie, health, & long and happie
life of the King his Lord, to the ende perpetually
to be vnder him the ſame that he
is, to liue vnder his liking & in his protection,
wherby & vnder the fauour wherof
he ſhalbe not only preſerued from the cō
               ſpiraties
which his enemies worke againſt
him, but alſo, which is more, if it pleaſe
God to encreaſe him, he ſhal alwaies be by
the King fauoured & aduanced, vnto whō
he hath the honor to be the firſt Prince of
his bloud. Neuertheleſſe, how euer it be, I
do not thinke that any man at this day cā
with reaſon and iudgement conceiue any
bad or ſiniſter opinion of the ſayde Lorde
King of Nauarre, though he lay open his
iuſt cauſes, ſith thoſe that haue no right,
and for whō there can be no likelihood at
all, are ſo impudent, raſh, & vndiſcreete, as
to bring to the barre a matter wherevpon
euen their moſt affectionate ſeruāts durſt
not before haue thought: which to ſaye
the trueth, is one of the cōſideratiōs that
moued me to ſet hand to the pen, to the
aunſwering of ſuch diffamatorie Lybelles,
diſcourſes, aduices, & cōſultatiōs, as within
this yeere haue come to my hands: and
I proteſt that I haue done it without either

cōmaundemēt or commiſsion of the
ſayd Lord King of Nauarre, vnto whom I
neuer had the honor to approach, neither
is it of any affectiō or deſire to aduaunce
the Religiō that he profeſſeth, ſith my ſelf
am and all my life time haue bene a Catholick,
and liued vnder the authoritie of
the Apoſtolicke Romiſh Church: But the
onely cauſe hath bene that being borne a
Frenchman, I haue thought it my duetie
to vphold the rightful cauſe of the French
Princes, vnto whome, after his ſoueraigne
Maieſtie, & for whoſe ſeruice, we are naturally
bounde and holden to procure all
honor, wealth, & proſperitie, to maintain
and defend them from ſlaūders and ſuch
deceipts as Sathan would ſtirre vp againſt
their excellēcie & greatneſſe: beſides that
euery mā may perceiue that theſe Tragedies
are kindled to the vtter ruine, loſſe &
fubuertion of this miſerable Realm, ſo as
the loue of my Countrey, Chriſtian piety,
and that compaſsiō that I take in beholding
my fellow Citizens and my ſelf with
them in daunger to conſume our ſelues in
that fire that by thoſe ciuill warres, which
vnder this curſed and deteſtable pretence
are like to bee kindled, will ſeaze vpon al

degrees, haue beene to mee as a ſpurre to
haſten my penne to aunſwere theſe damnable
writings, fearing leaſt the people
ſhould ſuffer themſelues to be won thereby,
& ſo might withſtād y• truth & equitie
if euer occaſiō to debate thereof were miniſtred,
or that theſe pretēders ſhould propoūd
or bring this cōtrouerſie in queſtiō.
            I doe therefore moſt humbly deſire the
French & Catholike Reader (laying a way
al paſsions) to cal to mind firſt the bond &
commaundement wherein by God he is
bound to the King and the Princes of his
bloud according to the order and natural
ſucceſsion by the Lawes of this Crowne.
Secondly, the loue of his Countrey, conſidering
wee all are men, all Chriſtians, all
Frenchmen, and al louers of our ſelues, &
that if we ſhould ſtoope vnder the yoke of
theſe tyrāts that would bring vs into ſubiection
and abuze vs with lyes, falſhoodes
and forged titles, they would afterward
beare vs the like minde, and their faith as
tainted & corrupt as by corruption, fa
                  ••
               ehood,
and vntrueth, they had abuſed our
ſimplicitie, and ſuborned & withdrawne
vs from the obedience of our true and natural
Lords. For, in aſmuch as they are deriders

riders and contemners of God, in whoſe
name they haue dared to begin, and endeuoured
that the moſt abhominable fellony
that euer was, might be made manifeſt
to all, it can not be that wee ſhould looke
for any other thing of thē, but that hope
that they haue conceiued to entreate and
handle vs after the Turkiſh manner, with a
more deteſtable & daungerous inquiſitiō
then that which now raigneth vnder the
Spaniſh tyrannie. Let therefore euery perſon
diligently aud faithfully employ himſelfe
to ſerue our King and the Princes of
his bloud, whoſe cauſe we ought euē with
the price and venture of our liues to vphold,
to the end the ſtate of this Realme
being aſſured, at the leaſt our childrē may
liue peaceably vnder the obediēce of their
naturall Lords, who by that meanes ſhall
haue the greater occaſion to cherriſh and
entreate them well as they haue done vs,
remembring that with the grace of God
by our fidelitie & loyaltie they haue bene
preſerued in that greatneſſe and dignitie
wherein the diuine goodnes hath ſuffered
them to bee borne in this Realme to the
glorie of the King of Kings, to whom only
it be and remaine euerlaſtingly. So be it.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The names of the chiefe
Authors cyted in this
Apologie.
            
               ABbot of Vſpergue.
               Ado of Vienne.
               Aegn.
               Agathius.
               Aimoinus.
               Alexāder the Martir
               S. Ambroſe.
               Angeſ.
               Antonius.
               Appian.
               Aristotle.
               Auentinus.
               Auguſtin de Ancona.
               S. Augustin.
               Baldus.
               Bale.
               Benno.
               Blondus.
               Capitolinu.
               Caſſiodore.
               Charles Molins.
               Chron. of Chronikles.
               Chriſoſtome.
               Collenutius.
               Counſailes.
               Cromer.
               Decrees & Decretals.
               Demosthenes.
               Dyon.
               Dioniſ. of Hali
                     •
                  ar.
               Doctors ciuil, and Canonistes.
               Edmond Boulay.
               Euripides.
               Euſebius.
               Floart.
               Fulgentius.
               Gaguin.
               Garib.
               Geof. of Viterb.
               Geof. Ardoyn.
               Goth. Iornandes.
               Gratian.
               Grego. of Tours.
               S. Gregory.
               Guichardine.
               Guil. Occham.
               Guil. de Monte.
               
                  
Heman. Herodote.
               S. Hierome. Hillary.
               Hostienſis.
               Iames de Terano.
               Iohn Andrew.
               Ignatius.
               Illuſtrations of Gaule.
               Innocent 3. Pope.
               Io. Magnus.
               Iohn of Terrano.
               Irineus. Iſidore.
               Iustin. Iuuenall.
               Lawyers, Ciuill and
               Cannon.
               Maister of Sentences.
               Marianus Siculus.
               Martinus Polonus.
               Maſſaeus.
               Matthieu Zampin.
               Molinaeus.
               Munster.
               Nicephor
                     ••
                  
               
               Nice
                     ••
                   Vignier.
               Nicol. Aegidius.
               Nicol. de Vbald.
               Oldrad. Onuphrius.
               Optatus Milcuitanus.
               Oſorius.
               Otho. of Eriſingen.
               Paulus Diaconus.
               Paul Emile.
               Pauſanias.
               Platine.
               Plin. Jun.
               Plutarque.
               Polid. Virg.
               Procope. Regino.
               Renatus Chopinus.
               Richard of Waſſenbourg.
               Robert Cenalis.
               Rozieres.
               Salicke law.
               Sanctiones Pontif. Iuris
               Orient.
               Sanſouin. Sigiſbert.
               Socrates. Soſomenes.
               Strabo. Suetonius.
               Tacite. Tertullian.
               Tiraquell.
               Tite Liue.
               Tritemius. Turpin.
               Valere the great.
               Vgo Gemblac.
               Vigneus.
               Vincent Historial.
               Witichi
                     •
                  dus.
               Xiphilinus.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  ❧ THE CONTENTS
OF THE
firſt part of this Booke.
               1. The cauſes of the troubles of this
Realme.
               2. The Genealogie of the Lords of Lorrain
by Edmond Boulay.
               3. The true diſcent of the houſe of Lorrain
from the Counties of Louayn.
               4. The Salick Lawe taketh not place in
the Duchy of Lorrain.
               5. An Inhibition not to diſpute of ſucceſsion
during the kings life, decreed
by the Counſails.
               6. The Realme of France is ſucceſsiue
not hereditary.
               7. The nereſt male in blood by agnatiō
ſuccedeth in whatſoeuer degree.
               8. Realmes ſucceſsiue are more perfect
then electiue.
               9. Sainct Lewes the common ſtocke of
the houſe of Fraunce & Bourbon.
               10. Robert S. Lewes yonger Sonne. His
mariage with the heyr of Bourbon.

The cauſe of the name of Bourbon in
that family, & the erection thereof into
a Dutchy.
               The Countie Dauphin of Auuergne
in the houſe of Bourbon.
               11. The Alliance of the houſe of Sauoy &
Bourbon.
               12. The cauſe of diſcōtentmēt of Charles
of Bourbon.
               Baronage of Mercure, iſſued out of
the houſe of Bourbon.
               The erectiō of the Dutchy of Montpenſier.
               13. The Coūties of Vendoſme & Caſtres,
The principalitie of Conde & others
in the houſe of Bourbon.
               14. The firſt Alliance of the houſes of
Bourbon and Nauarre.
               Iames of Bourbon King of Naples.
               The erection of the Dutchy of Nemours.
               15 The alliance of the houſe of Boulogne
and Bourbon.
               16 The erection of the Dutchy and Pairry
of Vendoſme.
               Antoinet of Bourbon, wife to the L.
of Guiſe.
            
            
               
               A Catholicke Apologie againſt
the Libels, Declarations, Aduices,
and Conſulatations made, writen, and publiſhed
by thoſe of the League, perturbers of the quiet
estate of the Realme of France: who are riſen
ſince the deceaſe of the late Monſier,
the Kings onely brother.
               By E. D. L. I. C.
               1
               
                  IF wiſely we do conſider
the ambitiō of ſome that
are borne, nouriſhed and
brought vp in the greateſt
honors, wealth and
fauours of this Realme,
we ſhall as it were with
our fingers touch and euidētly perceiue, that
they reſemble ye ſame which the auncients doe
write concerning Vipers, who doe eate out
the entrailes of her that giueth them life, and
doe malitiouſly endeuour by ſuch ciuill wars
as they haue kindeled in this Eſtate within
theſe 25. yeres, to become, (as occaſion may
ſerue) maſters aud vſurpers thereof, by ſuch

ſleights wreſting the true French from that
bond and duetifull good will that they ought
to beare to their naturall Princes: For it is
moſt certain and vnfallible, that as the courſe
of the Water mainteineth the Riuer, ſo the
continuance of ciuill warres yeeldeth the bad
mindes of the people immortall: yet are wee
neuertheleſſe ſo blinded, vndiſcreet, and vnconſtant,
as neuer to haue had iudgement to
knowe our diſeaſe ſince the time we were firſt
afflicted with the condition of ſuch as can not
bee ſatiſfied with the Dominion of the whole
world, and who voluntarily doe hazard whatſoeuer
their owne aſſured, as welth, quiet, and
life, to make themſelues Lords of that which
they can conceaue no hope of, without merueilous
effuſion of blood and vtter ruine of
their Countrey: Whereunto vndoubtedly it
ſeemeth that time, through the diuerſitie of religion
among vs, hath inuited them: as alſo,
in that they ſee a number of our naturall
princes mainteine the one part, which is leaſt
plauſible and agreeable with the French nation,
much leſſe aucthoriſed by Princes and
forrein potentates, whoſe weapons they hope
to vſe when neede ſhall require.
               To the end alſo, with leſſe labor and greater
pretence to hoyſt vp the Ladder of their

driftes, they haue procured the writing of a
number of bookes, which within theſe fewe
yeres are come to euery mans hands, concerning
the diſcents of the Princes of Lorrain,
whome gladly they would bring aboord into
this quarrell, if poſſibly they could, meaning
with them in mens hartes to imprint & falſely
to perſwade, that our Kings and Princes
are no lawfull Succeſſors, but tyrants and vſurpers
of this crowne from thoſe of the auncient
race, of whome they would make the
Lorrains to be diſcended: ſo to procure them
to be Captains of their conſpiracie.
               2 But theſe Princes haue euermore ſought
to bee accompted too wiſe, iuſt, and vpright
dealers to haue their eares ſo tickliſh as to
let them ſelues be led with ſuch falſe inductions,
which could bring them no other but
ſpeedy ſhame, & perpetuall ignominie of their
race for doing as the huſbandmans Serpent,
who when hee had well refreſhed himſelfe
at his fier, would haue driuen him alſo
out of his houſe. As alſo to ſhewe, that they
neuer thought vpon ſo deteſtable a deede.
               That euery man therefore may knowe it
to be too euident an abuſe, to ſay that they be
come of the famely of Charlemagne, I will
vſe onely that Booke that themſelues did in

the yere 1549. to cauſe Edmond of Boulay
the chief Herault and King of Armes of their
houſe to publiſh: wherein with the common
opinion they doe mainteine that Charles of
Lorrayn, brother to Lothair King of France
the laſt of Charlemagnes poſteritie, of whom
the ſeditious do make ſo great accompt, left
a Sonne named Ottho, who was Duke of
Lorrain, and died without iſſue: ſo as in him
ended the males of Charlemagne. In deede
the ſaid aucthor ſaith, that Godfrey with the
beard Earle of Ardenne ſucceeded his Coſſen.
If then he were Couſen to the ſaid Ottho,
the ſame kindred might come by beeing
diſcended of a daughter of the ſaid Charles,
wife to Lābert Earle of Bergues, or Monts,
who was Merquize of the Empire, & Earle
of Brabant, & ſo conſequently by the Salique
Lawe vncapable of this Realme. By reaſon
whereof Pope Benedict the eight, beeing at
Pauy, with the Emperour Henry the ſecond,
and Robert ſonne to Hugh Capet, in the yere
a thouſand two hundred and three, declared
the ſayd Robert to be lawfull King and Lord
of the Crowne of Fraunce. Beſides, the Author
is forced to confeſſe that this Male ligne
of Godfrey Countie of Arden failed againe,Sigisbert in his Chron.
and fel into the perſon of Ide wife to Euſtace
                  
Countie of Bolongne on the Sea, the father
and mother to Godfrey of Bolōgne, King of
Hieruſalem: who in Lorrain ſucceeded his
v
                     •
                  kle by the mother Godfrey with the crouch
backe: ſo doe the Males of the houſe of Bologne
are by the ſame writer continued vntil
Lady Iſabell, the onely daughter and heire of
Charles Duke of Lorrein, who in the yeere.
1418. maried Rene of Aniew, pety ſonne to
King Iohn of Fraunce. Thus we ſee by the
domeſticall teſtimony of the Princes of Lorrein,
the third diſtaffe in the houſe of Lorrein
ſince the ſayd pretended Ottho Sonne to
Charles of France, of which the firſt had bene
ſufficient to depriue them of the Succeſſion
Royall, not withſtanding their aunceſters had
drawen their Orriginall from the Maſculine
houſe of the ſaide Charlemagne. For in reſpect
of the houſe of Aniew, extract out of
the royall ſtocke of Fraunce, and grafted into
the Dutchy of Lorrain by the marriage of
the ſaid Rene with Iſabell of Lorrain, the
ſame Lorrain Hiſtoriographer agreeth yt it
ceaſed in Nicolas Marquize of Pont ſonne
to Iohn the ſecond, that dyed in ye yere 1433.
whoſe ſucceſſion was gathered vp by his Siſter
Yolland, wife to Ferry of Va
                        •
                     demont,
who was the yonger of the auncient houſe of

                  Lorraine, ſonne to Antony, ſonne to Ferri,
brother to Charles, Father to the foreſaid Iſabell.
               3 I will, and that truely auowe, that the
houſe of Lorrain now being, is ſo farre from
being iſſued out of the race of Charlemagne
either by Male or Female, farre or néere, that
contrariwiſe the Dutchy of Lorraine hath
chaunged ſtock or family fower or fiue times
ſince the poſteritie of Charlemaigne. Firſt
in the houſe of the Counties of Ardenne,
when after the deceaſe of Ottho, Sonne to
Charles of France, in the yere 1005. Henry
the ſecond Emperour, gaue Lorraine to
Godfrey, the ſonne of Godfrey Earle of Ardenne,
whoſe ſeruice he had vſed againſt the
ſonnes by whome the Duke of Lorrain had
bene empriſoned,Sigisb. fol. 233. and ſoone after deceaſed
without iſſue. After hym ſucceeded his brother
Gothelo, in the yere 1019. in the time
of Robert King of France. Then in the yere
1033.Idem. fol. 595. 
                  Conrade the Emperour gaue to Gothelo
Moſele, after the deceaſe of Frederick
Earle thereof, ſo as hee grewe mightier in
Lorrain then before. Againſt this Gothelo
marched Odo Earle of Chāpagne, & ſeazed
vpon Bar, but the Lorrain gaue him battaile,
wherein the ſaid Odo deceaſed. Gothelo had

a ſonne named Godfrey,Idem. fol. 596. vnto whom the Emperour
Henry the fowerth refuſed to giue the
Dutchy of Moſele, and therefore hee would
not alſo be Duke of Lorrain, but in the yere.
1044. rebelled againſt the Emperour who
tooke him priſoner, and after releaſed him, taking
his ſonne for Hoſtage,Idem. fol. 597. who being dead,
the father reuolted again, & ſtirred vp Baldwin
Earle of Flanders to help him to warre
vpon him. And this Godfrey ſlew Albert, to
whom the Emperour had giued Moſele, for
which cauſe the Emperour inueſted Euerard
of Alſatie in Moſele, & Fredericke vnckle
to Baldwine of Flanders in the Dutchy
of Lorraine. Godfrey ſeeing him ſelfe ſo oppreſſed,
paſſed into Italie, and there maried
the daughter of Marquize Boniface, but was
by the Emperour ſoone after driuen out of
Lomberdie, wherefore he retired into Flanders,
and accompanied with the ſaide Baldwine,
beſieged Fredericke in Antwarpe, but
the Lorrains came to his ſuccour. This Godfrey
had a brother called Frederick, ſonne to
Gothelo,Idem fol. 599. who retourning from Conſtantinople,
became a Monck at Mount Caſſin, and
was after ye 157. Pope called Steuen, in the
time of Henry King of France. After the deceaſe
of Frederick of Flanders inueſted in

the Dutchy of Lorraine, Euerard of Alſatye
was Duke of Lorrain, but both the ſaid Godfrey
& Euerard being dead in the yere 1070.
the Emperor gaue Moſele to Deoderick ſon
of the ſaide Euerard,Idem fol. 601. and reſtored Godfrey
with the crooke back ſonne of Godfrey aforeſaid
to Lorraine. This man wholy deſtroyed
the Frizons, but was in the end ſlaine by Richarius
in the yere 1089. ſo as by his death
began the ſecond houſe of Lorrain in the perſon
of Ide ſiſter to the laſt Godfrey with the
crouche backe, and wife to Euſtace Earle of
Bolongne, whoſe Children were Dukes of
Lorrain, namely Godfrey of Buillon ſo called,Sigis. in his Chron.
for yt he was nurſed in the Caſtle of Buillō
which now y• Biſhop of Liege holdeth,Heman in his contraction of Chron. &
his brother Balduin: But theſe remayning
in the holy lande, the kingdome whereof fell
to them by the election made of the ſaid Godfrey,
the Emperour Henry the fowerth in the
yeere 1101.Idem Sigis. fol. 611. Idem fol. 612. gaue the Dutchy of Lorrain to
Henry Earle of Lembourg, whome after hee
had rebelled againſt him, he had taken againe
into fauour: And in troth this Henry of Lembourg
was a very bad man, for beſides infinit
other his miſdeedes, we find that at the prouocation
of the Pope thē being, he moued warre
betweene Henrie the fowerth and the fifth,

the father and the ſonne. The father gaue him
the Dutchy, yet he tooke the ſonnes part, and
then retourned to the fathers ſide,Idem fol. eodem. after whoſe
death hee went and fell at the ſonnes f
                     ••
                  te,Munſter. Coſmog. Sanſo in his Chron.
who committed him to priſon, and in the yere
1106. inueſted Godfrey, by ſome named
William, Earle of Louaine, in the Dutchy
of Lorraine,Vign. in the orig. of the French. whoſe ſeruice, while hee was at
Liedge, hee vſed in taking Mountfaucon a
hould, the Lorde whereof was very inſolent.
Of this Earle of Louain ſprunge that houſe
of Lorraine which yet continueth: for vnto
him ſucceeded Thierry, to Thierry, Thibault:
after Thibault, a certaine Matthewe
was Duke, and ſo ſucceſſiuely vnto the ſayde
Lady Iſabell wife to Rene of Aniew, as is
aforeſayd. So as it is an abuſe and manifeſt
deceit to ſearch the race of Charlemaigne in
the houſe of Lorraine, ſith it is 580. yeeres
ſince it vaniſhed and was quite loſt, euen after
that fower ſundry Famelies haue ſucceeded
one after another in the ſayd Dutchy of Lorrain.
One of the yongeſt of which houſe, who
was Graundfather to the Dukes of Guiſe,
and Maine now being, drawing into France
with very ſmal wealth, receiued (as alſo after
him his Children) ſo many benefites at the
hands of the Kings, Francis the firſt, Henry

the ſecond, and his poſteritie, that they haue
through the liberalitie of their Maieſties, encreaſed
their Patrimonie to a Million of
Frankes of Rent that they houlde in this
Realme, whereas their grandfather Claude
when he maried Lady Antoynet Bourbon,
daughter to the Duke of Vendoſme, had not
aboue 14. or 1500. beſides they haue bene honored
with the greateſt offices of ye Crowne,
as the office of great Maſter, which was wōt
to be in the houſe of Montmorencie, and other
of the moſt honorable: So as it might be hard
to thinke that nowe they would imitate the
Moyle, whoſe nature is to kicke and ſpurne
at his Mother when hee hath ſucked enough
of her Milke: either that they had ſo vnthāckfull
a minde, as to take weapon againſt the
Royall Famely whereunto they are indebted
in whatſoeuer they are, yea, and that vnder a
falſe perſwaſion, that they ſhould be diſcēded
from Charlemagne, which is contrarie to all
trueth.
               4 To verefie therefore that the Princes of
Lorraine neuer came out of the houſe of
Fraunce, it will be ſufficient to ſhewe that in
the ſucceſſion of the Dutchy of Lorraine they
obſerue not the Salicke lawe, as it was iudged
by the Fathers aſſembled at the Counſaile

of Baſill on the behalfe of Iſabell of
Lorrain wife to Rene of Anieow and daughter
of Charles of Lorraine againſt her Couſen
Antony of Lorraine the ſonne of Ferry
the yonger ſonne of Charles. Hereby it manifeſtly
appeareth that thus they declare the
Princes of Lorraine to bee no Frenchmen,
neither euer to haue bene of the bloud royall
of Fraunce or capable of the Crowne: for the
which and in the ſoueraigne ſucceſſion wherof,
the Salicke lawe hath of olde time euen
ſince Pharamond bene religiouſly obſerued:
and thereby not onely the daughters but the
males of them proceeding haue bene excluded
from the Realme of Fraunce, according
as the decree of the ſayde lawe importeth in
theſe words.leg. Salic. lib. p. ca. 26 
                  Of the Salicke landes the woman
ſhall chalenge no portiō, but the ſucceſſion therof
ſhall appertaine to the males. The reaſon of
this conſtitution is, becauſe our fathers did
horribly deteſt the gouernment of ſtraūgers,
which vndoubtedly muſt needes haue often
happened if the males of daughters that were
wiues to forraine Princes might haue bene
capable, as ſome would perſwade y• childrē of
Lorraine yt they may pretende, as wrongfully
as did Edward of England, whoſe cauſe was
ſolembly ended by the whole ſtates of Frāce.

for Philip of Vallois afterward King againſt
the ſayd Edward the ſonne of Lady Iſabell
daughter of Phillip ye faire, after that Prince
Robert of Arthois had openly made an Oration
to the Eſtates for the ſayd Phillip, and
had among other alleadged the reaſon aforeſayd,
the originall whereof he drewe from before
the Emperour Iuſtinian: and Paule Emilie
ſpeaking of the ioye and contentation
that the French conceiued, after this ſentēce
writeth thus. King Phillip making his entrey
into the chiefe Towne of his Realme, was receiued
with as great pleaſure,
                  Paul. Aem. in Philip. Valeſ. 
                  ioye, and triumph of
people, as euer was King of Fraunce, where was
a world of people crying, God ſaue the King.
The ſtreates were paued with Flowers according
to the ſeazon, and adorned with the moſt
triumphant Furniture that could at that tyme
be found. To bee briefe ſaith the Historie, the
people forgat no kinde of demonstration of their
contentation for the comming of this King to
the Crowne. He ſaith moreouer, yt the Towne
feaſted his Maieſtie, ye Princes of his bloud,
and Officers of his Crowne, prayſing & publickly
extolling him as the preſeruer and defence
of the French Maieſtie and the libertie
and dignitie of the Salicke law, whereby the
Frenchmē who were accuſtomed to preſcribe

lawes to Straungers were neuer ruled by
them. Then he endeth his ſpeech: ſaying, that
the moſt part of the night was put away with
the light of Bonfyers throughout ye Realme,
and the howers of ſleepe conſumed in daunſing,
ſinging, and all ſortes of honeſt and delectable
mirth: eſpecially at Paris y• townes
men marched in great troupes to congratulate
each other for the welcomming of this
King, whom they termed the Bulwarke and
preſeruer of the beſt of their lawes. Theſe
good fathers were no baſterdly French, as
are thoſe of our curſed world, and would haue
kept themſelues farre from informing, much
leſſe from begging thoſe meanes that might
bee imagined for the breach of this goodly
Salicke lawe, which is the onely Oracle of
France, and true rampier of the French dignitie:
which alſo, ſith it is euident that the
Princes of Lorrain haue not vſed, it is an vndoubted
demonſtration that they are not diſcended
of the race of our Princes, who haue
ſo highly commended it in their Empier and
ſoueraigne gouernement.
               5 In deed our deceiuers ſince conſidering
that this foundation was too raſhly propounded,
and might breede hatred in the King againſt
the Princes of Lorraine, whome they

would bring into this bad action, becauſe his
Maieſtie beeing iuſtly agrieued, hath power
enough and ready to chaſtize the Authors of
ſuch writings as guiltie of treazon, haue diſſembled
this meane and flatly diſaduowed the
miſerable wretches who for the publiſhing of
theſe vntrueths had hazarded their liues. But
returning into the path of their firſt entent
ſince the death of Mounſier the Kings onely
Brother, they haue perſwaded themſelues
that his Maieſtie may one day happen to dye
without iſſue. But howſoeuer it be, prouiding
long before for their affayres, they haue coaſted
and ſought to winne one of the firſt Princes
of the blood diſcended of the houſe of
Bourbon, the true and onely Heyre of the
Crowne, if it ſhould pleaſe God ſo farre to
puniſh vs as to depriue vs of our good King
without iſſue male: and haue gone about to
perſwade this Prince that it is he who ought
to be the lawfull ſucceſſor, and therefore that
he had neede preſently and alreadie to cauſe
the ſame openly and with effectual and ſtrōg
reaſons to be publiſhed.
               6 Wherein both the one and the other doe
highly offend the Kings owne perſon, in that
in his life tyme they diſpute of ſucceſſion,
(which if it might pleaſe God to ſende him a

ſonne to enioye it, ſhall neuer fall to them) beſides
that thus thei ſeme to cōſpire his death:
which in effect is as much as to league themſelues
againſt nature, againſt good maners,
againſt Chriſtian pietie, & againſt that good
will which we owe to our King, vnto whome
we are bound to pray for good, wiſh for good,
and prognoſticate good, and therfore to waite
for ſuch his hap and miſfortune is repugnant
to all lawes ciuill and naturall. Neither can
good men like, that againſt the Kings will
and during his life men ſhould argue or call
into queſtiō the doubt of his ſucceſſion, which
is nothing ſo long as it ſhall pleaſe God to
leaue him in the world. Vpon this cauſe did
the fifth Counſaile of Toledo in Spayne
which was holden during the Popedome of
Honorius the firſt,Concil. vol. 2. cap. 4. fol. 739. about the yeere 622. in the
tyme of Heraclius the Emperour and Chintillus
King of Spayne, by decree excommunicate
all ſuch as do enquire or ſeeme to haue
any care or doe ſeeke to vnderſtande who ſhal
be their King after him that hath the Scepter.
Becauſe then ſaith the text, it is repugnant
to pietie and daungerous to man to thinke vpon
vnlawfull matters to come, or to enforme themſelues
of the accidents of Princes, or in respect
thereof to prouide for the time to come: for it is

written. It is not for you to knowe the ſeazons
and tymes which the Lorde hath reſerued to
himſelfe: wee doe by this decree ordeyne, that if
there be any informer of ſuch matters, and who
during the Kings life respecteth any other in
hope of the Realme, or that allureth any vnto
him in that reſpect, that the ſame be by ſentēce
of excommunication baniſhed the companie of
the Catholickes. The ſame decree was reiterated
in the ſixt Counſaile holden in the ſayd
Towne of Toledo, whereto was added a very
conuenient reaſon whereby the Authors
of ſuch diſcourſes are reproued as men curious
of the tyme to come, whom God will not
peraduēture permit to attaine thereto: Mark
therefore how ſuch people who would bee taken
to be zealous of Catholicke religion and
the Commonwealth, do by making ſuch queſtions
offend God and his holy Church.
               7 Furthermore, this good Prince of whom
they ſeeke to make a buckler, is (if it pleaſe
him) to conſider that theſe alterations are
wouen for the ſubuertion of him and his famelie:
to the ende that beeing by the force of
the ſame diſunited and deuided, the Authors
of this faction may remaine Maiſters of both
partes, and by the loſſe of the one may more
eaſely diſperce the other. That this is ſo it appeareth

by that Lybell that ſecretly they diſperſt
abroade into our hands, wherein is one
of the moſt impudent maximes that they dare
ſet downe, namely: That no one of the Princes
of Bourbon (and doe expreſſely name the
perſon of the Cardinall, vnder whom neuertheleſſe
they would ſhroud thēſelues) is capable
of the ſucceſſion of the Crowne of Frāce,
becauſe now they are growne beyonde the
tenth degree of agnation to the royall houſe,
whereby onely enheritances and ſucceſſions
are by the Ciuill lawes deferred to the neereſt,
and beyonde the which alſo the heritage
beeing vacant ſhoulde come to the fiſck,
which in this cace is the aſſembly of the Eſtates
and Peeres of France, who are to proceede
to a newe election. But herein they doe
malitiouſly deceiue themſelues, becauſe the
royall title of the Crowne of Fraunce is not
ſimply a patrimoniall enheritance or feudal,
neither runneth by ſimple enheritance ciuill,
but the neereſt of the bloud royall is thereto
called by ſucceſſion and ſurrogation perpetuall,
without ende, after the order of conſanguinitie
or maſculine agnation, whether he
be or be not particuler heyre to the King deceaſed,
in his owne proper goodes. Alſo, ſay
our Maiſters this right of the Crowne is in

deede not hereditarie,I. vel agnatis ff. de relig. l. ius ſepulchri. C. cod. Ign. in diſput. an rex Franc. recog. ſnper Mol. in cōſ. pariſ. tit. p. ff. 8. Bald. in ff. vnic. de feud. March. Ioh. de Teran. in lib. cōt. reb. reg. Tract. p art. p. cōcil. 9. 10. 11. & 12. Guil. de Month. in tract. de ſuc. reg. Franc. but of the famelie and
of whom ſoeuer appertaineth thereto, notwithſtanding
no one of them might be heire
to the deceaſed. Wherevpon Balde & others
that haue particulerly written of the ſucceſſion
of this Realme, doe vpholde that therein
ſucceedeth the next of the Kings bloud being
come of the male although he were 1000. degrees
of, and that by the right of bloud and
perpetuall cuſtome of the Realme, therein
bringing for eſpeciall example the famelie of
Bourbon, which onely after the famelie now
raigning is to ſucceede in the Crowne of
Fraunce. Beſides that, returning to our purpoſe,
all the reaſons that may be alleadged in
the behalf of this Prince or of any other whoſoeuer,
except of the King of Nauarre, haue
ſo ſmall likelihood that euery one may ſoone
iudge that thoſe that haue ſet abroach this
matter are mere perturbers of the peace and
lawes of this Crowne, particuler enemies to
the houſe of Fraunce, but chiefly to the ſayde
Lord Cardinall of Bourbon, in that they endeuour
themſelues to ſhip him in this ſo vniuſt
a qu
                     •
                  rrell, and to perſwade him to leaue
ſuch a blemiſh to his memorie, that the poſteritie
maye ſaye that ſo great a Prince as hee,
wiſe and diſcreet, a Clergie man euen from

his youth, being now come to ye Graues ſide,
ſhould without reaſon bend hymſelfe againſt
his owne blood, and peraduenture be an occaſion
or inſtrument to the enemies of his Family
to depriue his blood of ſo faire, great,
and mighty a realme, which the lawes thereof
hath prouided them, if God ſhould not ſend
the King now raigning a ſone.
               8 Now to the end to lay open mine intent,
I willl ſay no more but the trueth, which is,
that among all ſuch as profeſſe obſeruing of
the eſtate and gouernment of auncient common
wealthes, this Realme of Fraunce will
appeare to be one of the moſt aſſured and beſt
ordered that euer was in the world: which alſo
through the Lawes and politicke gouernment
thereof, hath longer continued then euer
did any other Monarchie, howe auncient
or mightie ſoeuer, as beeing aboue 1200.
yeeres, ſince vnder one forme, and with one
kind of lawes it was gouerned vnder the maieſtie
and authoritie of Kings, of whom this
laſt race hath continewed 600. yeres. But among
the chiefeſt and moſt perfect ordinances
of this Crowne, that is moſt commendable
whereby the realme doth by ſucceſſion belong,
by vertue of the Salick law, to the next
Male of the deceaſed King, diſcending of the

Maſculine ligne: For in trueth our Kings
knowing that thoſe of their owne blood are
to ſucceede them, haue the greater cauſe to
keepe, houſband, and preſerue the eſtate and
demains of their Realme as their owne and
certaine Patrimonie: beſides that the ſucceſſors
of the Crowne that are nouriſhed and
brought vp in this greatneſſe doe neuer become
tyrants, becauſe euen from their mothers
wombes they are vſed to command, and
ordinarily doe become the better, more iuſt,
valeant, hardy and couragious, by repreſenting
to their owne view the greatneſſe, commendation
and maieſtie of their predeceſſors.
On the otherſide the ſubiects of the Realme,
that haue ſ
                     ••
                  e the birth, nouriſhing and bringing
vp of their Princes, do the better know
their humors and willes, and doe more freely
obey ſuch as are borne to rule their eſtate, thē
others that are newly elected, whom they remember
to haue knowen in the like calling
as them ſelues, without either preeminence,
authoritie or gouernment, ſo as there is nothing
ſo perfect as that which neereſt doth
imitate nature, and which ſeemeth to be altogether
immortall aud infinite by Succeſſion
from the Father to the Sonne. Beſides that
thereby the Kings ſubiects, howe wealthy or

mightie ſo euer, doe conteine themſelues in
duetie, humilitie and obedience to their ſoueraigne
Prince, when they remember that ſo
long as any of the royall blood doe ſuruiue,
the ſame be capaple to attaine to that marke,
and that purpoſing to attempt any bad matter
againſt the Eſtate and perſon of the
King, there remaine as many reuengers of
the iniurie offered to his Maieſtie as there be
Princes of his bloud.
               Herevpon doe I preſume yt in our France,
wherein this royall ſucceſſion hath time out
of minde bene ſtrictly obſerued, it was neuer
found, neither doe we reade, that the French
men did at any time enterprize or practize
aught againſt the perſon of their King, whether
in reſpect of that naturall affection that
alwaies they haue borne him, and whereof
they beare the bell among all other Nations
in Europe, or els becauſe God neuer permitted
the royall bloud of Fraunce to reſt onely
in one, whereby the preſumpteous conſpirators
might after the treſpaſſe committed eſcape
without puniſhment. This royall ſucceſſion
therefore reſting without doubt or cō
                  tradiction
in this Realme, the ſubiects thereof
doe well knowe, euen naturally and preſumptiuely
who is moſt likely to become

their King, ſo as now to call in queſtion this
ſucceſſion, is the only direct way to cauſe the
King yt holdeth the Scepter ouer vs to think
and with himſelfe to imagine that in his
Realme there are ſome, who for the ſatiſfying
of their ambitiō, could willingly wiſh to haue
his place, and for the ſame purpoſe do harken
after his ende. But ſith the bolde impudencie
of men is ſo great that they bluſh not, neither
are aſhamed to diſcloſe themſelues & to giue
all men to vnderſtande of their bad entents,
beſides that neceſſarily the Commune muſt
bee ſatiſfied, who otherwiſe might ſooner beleeue
the falſe then the true, before wee proceede
any further in aunſwering the chiefe
poynts of the Lybelles that they ſcatter abroade,
to the end to ſay that after the deceaſe
of the moſt Chriſtian King without iſſue
male, it is not the nowe King of Nauarre,
but his Vnckle the Lord Cardinall of Bourbon
that lawfully ſhould be King: or the better
to expreſſe their entents, that it is neither
the one ne the other, but that they muſt proceede
to a newe election and nomination of a
Prince, I will here proteſt that I neuer deſire
to ſee the aduenture of that ſubſtitution
which they pretende, but hartely doe wiſh to
the King my ſoueraigne Lorde a moſt long

and happie life, with as great number of iſſue
capable of this Crowne as there be Starres
in the Firmament.
               9 After which proteſtation, to come to the
purpoſe and ſucceſſion of the houſe of Frāce,
I will firſt ſpeake to thoſe yt are not brought
vp in the ſtate of this Realme, but onely haue
learned of their Fathers that the Famely of
Bourvon hath the honor to be iſſued from our
Kinges, therefore that the Princes thereof
may ſucceede, when God ſhall permit, to the
Crowne, by the Lawe of ſucceſſion of the
realme. Turning my ſelfe then to theſe commons,
I ſay that it is well knowen, that
King Lawes the ninth, canonized and called
ſaint Lewes, had two ſonnes, the elder Phillip
the bould, of whome are come our Kings
yet raigning, who alſo had two ſonnes, the eldeſt
Phillip the fayer who ſucceeded him, and
after him his three ſonnes, Lewes, Phil. the
long, Charles the fayer, & the yōger Charles
County of Valois, who begat Phillip of Valois,
who ſucceeded in the Realme after his
Couſen Charles the fayer. After Phillip ſucceeded
his ſoune Iohn, & after him Charles
the fifth called the wiſe, ſonne to Iohn. This
Charles had two ſonnes, the eldeſt Charles
the ſixth King of Fraunce, vnto whome ſucceeded

Charles the ſeuenth, Lewes the eleuenth
and Charles the eight his ſonne, petie
ſonne and petie Neuew. The yonger Lewes
Duke of Orleance, who by Lady Valentine
of Millan had two ſonnes, Charles the elder
father to Lewes the twelfth King of France
after his Couſen Charles the eight was deceaſed
without iſſue, and Iohn Earle of Angouleſme,
who was Father of Charles alſo
Earle of the ſame lande, and Grandfather to
king Francis the firſt, who ſucceeded his coſſen
Lewes the twelfth, of which King Francis
came Henrie his ſecond ſonne, and father
to Henry now raigning. Hetherto therefore
the branch of Phillip the bould, eldeſt Sonne
to Saint Lewes, neuer failed, & ſo muſt that
fable needes be falſe which the enimies of the
houſe of Bourbō haue ſought to root in mens
mindes, namely, that the diſcontentation of
the late King Frācis the firſt againſt Charles
of Bourbon that dyed at Rome was for
his pretence to the Crowne of France, which
ſince haue continued in al the Princes of this
houſe, and from whence ſhould be deriued the
troubles and Ciuill Warres of this realme
during the minoritie of the Kings, Francis
the ſecond and Charles the ninth, brothers to
the King nowe raigning. A matter vtterly

falſe, and falſely inuēted, to the ende more and
more to bring into the hatred of the people the
Princes of Bourbon, who neuer accompted
more deerely of any thing, or had greater delight
in ought then to acknowledge, obey and
faithfully ſerue the Maieſties of our Kings,
as their true and ſouereigne Lordes, hauing
the honor ſo neerely to be to them allyed, that
they are of the ſame Houſe and Armes without
difference, except that our Kings are extract
from the elder ſonne of Saint Lewes,
and the Princes of Bourbon frō the yonger.
               10 The ſecond ſonne of ſaid ſaint Lewes,
was Saint Robert of France, to whom his
father gaue for his maintenance ye Coūtie of
Clermont in Beauuoys. This Robert married
Beatrix daughter and Heire of Archembault
of Bourbon, and they two had iſſue, a
ſonne named Lewes, who ſucceeded his ſaid
father in the Countie of Clermount, and ſo
was alſo Earle of March, beſides that in the
right of his Mother hee enioyed the goods of
the ſayd Archembault of Bourbon, namely
the Lordſhip of Bourbō, which in reſpect of
the appertenaunces thereto was of ſuch accompt,
that King Phillip of Valois in the beginning
of his raigne, which was about the
yeere. 1327. erected the ſaid Landes into a

Dutchie, wherby the ſaid Lewes tooke vpon
him the name and ſtate of Duke of Bourbon,
which ſince hath continued in his poſteritie.
This Lewes had two ſonnes by whom
this ſtock was firſt deuided into two brāches,
the one was named Peter, the other Iames:
Peter is now quite worne out as concerning
the Maſculine ligne, neuertheleſſe wee will
briefly rehearſe his iſſue, and then retourne to
the poſteritie of Iames, who was the yonger
of whom is diſcended the houſe of Vandoſme
from whom the Princes of Bourbon now liuing
doe fetch their originall.
               Peter of Bourbou being the elder of this
houſe, as is aforeſaid, was of great credit and
authoritie in the time of King Iohn, and had
many daughters, among whom was one very
fayre, whome Charles the fifth couered to
marry, rather then Margaret of Flanders
who had three goodly Counties to her marriage:
Flanders, Artois and Henault, whom
he cauſed his brother Phillip the bould Duke
of Bourgondy to marry. An other named
Blanch, was maried to the King of Caſtile,
a third to the Duke of Sauoy, a fourth named
Catherin, to the Earle of Harcourt. He
had alſo a Sonne called Lewes who was of
great fame, as well toward ye end of Charles

the fifth, as in the beginning of Charles the
ſixth to whom he was appointed tuter, as alſo
to his brother Lewes Duke of Orleance,
togither with the Duke of Burgondy their
vnckle by their father. The ſaide Lewes of
Bourbon was Capteine and Leader of the
armie againſt the Turke in Affrike, in the
time of Charles the ſixth, and had to wife Lady
Anne Daulphine, who brought into that
houſe the Countie Dauphine of Auuergne,
and the lands of Cōbrailles, with the Lordſhip
of Mercure in the ſaid land of Auuergne,
and by her he had a Sonne called Iohn, who
maried Mary daughter to ye Duke of Berry.
To this man was giuen the Dutchy of Auuergne,
with the Dutchy of Bourbo and
Countie of Clermount.
               11 At Iohn, the ſayde principall braunch
bearing away the elderſhip, the Famelie began
to bee deuided, for he had two Sonnes
Charles and Lewes. Charles ſucceeded his
father in Bourbon, Clermont and Aunergne
and Lewes had Montpenſier, which in ye end
returned to his poſteritie. Charles marryed
Agnes of Burgondy ſiſter to Duke Phillip
of Burg. and they had iſſue principall two
ſonnes Iohn and Peter. It is ſayd they alſo
had two more of one name, viz. Lewes, of

whom the one dyed yong, the other was Biſhop
of Liedge and Abbot of Sainct Vaaſt.
Others doe ſaye that they had two Sonnes
Charles who was Cardinal and Archbiſhop
of Lyōs, & Iohn who was Biſhop of Liedge.
They had alſo ſundry Daughters, as Iane
married to the Prince of Orange: Iſabell to
the Duke of Burgondie, and Margeret to
the Duke of Sauoy, of whom are diſcended
Philibert Duke of Sauoy deceaſed without
iſſue, and Lady Loiſe of Sauoy married to
the Duke of Angoleſme, of whom came the
late King Frances the firſt. But to returne
to the ſaid Iohn and Peter, ſonnes of the ſaid
Charles of Bourbon and Agnes of Burgondie:
Iohn the eldeſt had his fathers goodes
and married Iane of Fraunce Daughter to
King Charles the ſeuenth & ſiſter to Lewes
the eleuenth, who neuertheleſſe in the warre
for the Commonwealth repoſed no cōfidence
in the ſayd Iohn of Bourbon, aſwell becauſe
he was come of a Daughter of Bourgondie,
as for that he had not bene payd his mariage
money. The ſayd Iohn had no children by either
Lady Iane of Fraunce or Lady Iane of
Bourgondie his Couſen whom he tooke for
his ſeconde wife, and ſo his whole ſucceſſion
fel to his brother Peter, who was called Lord

of Beauuiew. This Peter maried Anne of
France daughter to Lewes the eleuenth. He
was in great credite during Lewes raigne,
but in greater during Charles the eight, ſo
as in the voyage to Naples the ſayde King
left the ſayd Peter Regent of Fraunce. The
ſayde Peter alſo left no iſſue Male but one
Daughter called Suſan, who might haue
great controuerſies for the goodes of that famelie:
for the preuēting wherof it was wiſely
aduiſed to marrie her to a male of this houſe,
which was brought to paſſe as hereafter ſhall
be ſhewed.
               12 To Lewes of Bourbon of whom wee
ſpake before fell the Countie of Montpenſier,
and ſo continued the name and title ſo
long as the ligne of the ſayd Charles his elder
brother laſted. He married Gabriel of the
Tower, of whom came Gilbert of Montpenſier
Viceroy of Naples after that Charles
the eight had gotten it. He married Clare of
Bouſaigne of whom iſſued fiue children thrée
ſonnes and two daughters, Charles, Lewes,
and Frances, of whom the two laſt died without
iſſue. Charles ſucceeded his father, and
with the conſent of King Lewes the eleuenth
maried the aforenamed Suſan of Bourbon
his Couſen, whereby all the auncient goodes

of this houſe were left to them and confirmed
in their perſons, whereby alſo was exting uiſhed
a quarrell already framed for the ſayde
goods, which neuertheleſſe ſoone after brake
out againe more fiercely then before, becauſe
y• ſayd Suſan of Bourbō wife to her Couſen
Charles and heire of the elder houſe of Bourbon
dyed before her ſayde Huſband Charles
without leauing any iſſue of her bodie, and
therefore Lady Lewes of Sauoy mother to
King Frances the firſt and Regēt of France
entituled and bare her ſelf for heire to her ſaid
Couſen Suſan, and in deede was in degree
neerer to ſucceede her then the ſayd Charles
her Huſband: wherevpon the proceſſe & controuerſie
began, whereat it was ſayd that the
ſyd Charles tooke ſuch diſpleaſure that he
withdrew himſelf out of the Kings obediēce:
& therfore his Maieſtie had a decrée of iudgement
of his goodes and rightes by confiſcation.
Alſo ſince that tyme was a compoſition
made betwene the King and his ſayd mother
vpon condition that if hee deceaſed without
heires male then the ſayd goodes ſhould returne
into Lorraine. But his Maieſtie not
willing ſo rigorouſly to vſe his rightes and
coueting to deale fauourably with the ſiſters
of the ſaid Charles, he left to them part oft he

ſayd goodes: as to the Lady Dutches of Lorraine
the Baronage of Mercure, to the Lady
Loiſe married into the houſe of Roch-ſur-you
the Countie of Montpenſier and landes of
Combrailles: which in ſo doing he rected into
a Dutchy meete for the heires of the ſayde
Lady, who at this day do beare the ſame name
of Bourbon, and are extract out of the ſecond
principall braunch of this houſe which we left
of aboue vntill we had ended the firſt braunch
of the elder. And now to returne to the ſayde
Sir Charles, in him dyed the ligne male of
the principall ſtock of the houſe of Bourbon.
As for his two Siſters the one called Claude
was wife to good Duke Antony of Lorrain,
whoſe ſtocke yet remaineth. The other Loiſe
was maried into the other principall braunch
of Bourbon, who hath left iſſue of the name
of this houſe.
               13 Now let vs take the ſeconde braunch,
the firſt & chiefe partition of this race, which
is the ſtocke of the latter yonger borne, and
yet remaineth to this day, in the roume of the
eldeſt, and beareth the Name and full armes
thereof, as remayning alone after the default
and ending of the elder. Concerning y• males
this ligne beginneth againe in Iames of
Bourbon the yonger Sonne of Lewes firſt

Duke of Bourbon, of whom we haue ſpoken
before. This Iames was Conſtable of Frāce
after Charles of Spaine, who flew Charles
King of Nauarre in the time of King Iohn.
He had to wife Iehane of Saint Paule, and
was and ſo named himſelf Earle of Marche.
Of him came one onely ſonne named Iohn,
who ſucceeded hym and married Catherin
Counteſſe of Vendoſme and Caſtres, who
brought into this houſe thoſe two Counties
togither with the landes of Carcuecy, Lupe,
Conde, Eſpernon, Mōdoubleau and others.
Of theſe two iſſued three children Male, Iames,
Lewes, and Iohn: alſo three daughters,
Anne wife to ye Duke of Bauiere, Charlot
maried to the King of Ciprus, and Mary to
Robert of the Croſſes, who tooke his ſaide
wife by force and therfore fled, and it was ſaid
he was drowned: In his tyme hee gouerned
King Charles the ſeuenth. Now to retourne
to the iſſue male. Iames had to his protion
the Counties of March and Caſtres: Lewes
the Coūtie of Vendoſme. As for Iohn he had
the Lordſhip of Carcuecy, and maried a goſſip
of his called Margaret a Vandoſmois, by
whom hee had ſome Children, and got a diſpenſation
to haue her to Wife, notwithſtanding
the ſaid children were not aduowed into

this famely, neither ſucceded in his goods,
but by ſentence were declared illegitimate,
and which is more, the ſaid Iohn of Bourbon
the Father in his Teſtament willed great
giftes, and ſubſtitutions to the behoofe of his
other two ſonnes Iames & Lewes, in whoſe
perſons he planted him ſelfe, and raiſed the
firſt after bough and vnder twigge of this ſecond
principall branch.
               14 This Iames of Bourbon eldeſt ſonne
to Iohn, liued in the time of Charles the ſixt,
and had two wiues, the firſt Beatrix of Nauarre
the yōger daughter of the houſe of Nauarre,
which was the firſt alliāce of thoſe two
houſes. They two had iſſue a daughter named
Leonor. After the deceaſe of the ſaide
Beatrix, the ſaid Iames of Bourbon allyed
him ſelfe by marriage as it is pretended with
Iane Queene of Naples who had before (as
the ſpeech went) promiſed marriage to the
King of Arragon, and deceiued them both:
So as the ſayde Iames of Bourbon beeing
gone into the Realme of Naples was in the
ende forced to leaue the ſayd Iane and to retire
into Fraunce, where after his returne he
ſtill bare the title and name of King of Naples,
notwithſtanding the ſayd Iane had afterward
giuen it to others, and finally deceaſed,

leauing for his onely heire the ſayd Leonor
his Daughter, who ſucceeded him in the
ſayd Counties of Marche and Caſtres. She
maried Bernard of Armanack Earle of Pardiar
a yonger ſonne of the houſe of Armanack.
Theſe two had iſſue two ſonnes Iohn
Biſhop of Caſtres and Iames who ſucc
                     •
                  eded
in the ſayd Counties of his father & mother,
and beſides in the right of his ſayd mother
Beatrix of Nauarre layd claime to the
land of Nemours, which he procured to be erected
into a Dutchy, tooke poſſeſſion thereof
and enioyed it. He married the Daughter
of Charles of Anieow Earle of Mayn and of
Iſabell of Luxembourg his wife. This Iames
of Armanack at the beginning was in
fauour, but afterward fall into ſuſpition with
Lewes the eleuenth, and was executed at the
Halles in Paris the 24. of Auguſt 1147. he
left fower Children, two Sonnes and two
Daughters, Iames Duke of Nemours and
Lewes Earle of Guyze, the two Daughters
Margaret & Charlot married into the houſe
of Rohan, who deceaſed without iſſue of their
bodies, ſo as in them failed this vnder twigg
both male and female.
               15 Now remaineth to bee ſpoken of the
ligne of Lewes brother to Iames. He for his

part had the Countie of Vendoſme, and was
taken at the battell of Agincourt in the tyme
of Charles ye ſixt: He maried firſt Lady Iane
of Rouſſy, ſecondly Lady Iane of Lauall of
whom diſcended one only ſonne called Iohn
of Bourbon, who maried Lady Iſabell of
Beaumount: of theſe two were borne two
ſonnes, the one called Francis, the other Lewes:
They had alſo ſixe Daughters, Iane
wife to the Lord of Ioy
                     •
                  uſe, the ſcond Iane
firſt maried to Iohn Duke of Bourbon, who
was of the line of the elder of this houſe, and
ſecōdly to Iohn of the Tower Earle of Bologne,
of whome is iſſued Lady Katherine of
Medecis Queene mother to the king: Kitherin
wife to Sir Gilbert of Chabaues in Limoſin.
Charlot maried to Gilbert of Cleue,
of whō came the laſt Lord Duke of Neuers.
Rene Abbeſſe of Fronteuout, Iſabell Abeſſe
of Caen: as for the two Sonnes Francis
the Eldeſt ſucceeded in the Countie of
Vendoſme, Mondoublean, Eſpernon and other
Lands houlden of that famely, wherto
was added the Lordſhippe of Saint Calais.
Lewes the yonger was made Lord of Rochſur-yan,
and of the landes of Lupe and Conde
in Henault.
               16 Now becauſe concerning the queſtion

now to be delt in, wee are to argue of the ſucceſſion
of the elder, we will ſeeke out the fartheſt,
and will firſt ſpeake of the Branche of
Lewes the yonger ſonne, Prince of Roch ſuryen.
He maried Loiſe of bourbon who was of
the elder liue, and ſiſter to Sir Charles of
B
                     •
                  urboun the laſt. Of this mariage proceeded
two Sonnes and a Daughter, the elder
ſonne was Lewes who died but lately, bearing
the title of Duke of Montpēſier, by the
cōpoſition made in the time of the late Francis
the firſt after the deceaſe of Sir Charles
of Bourbon. Hee left one heire Male, named
Francis of Bourbon nowe Duke of Montpenſier
and ſundrie daughters. This Francis
hath of his mariage with the daughter of
the Marquize of Mezieres one onely ſonne
called Henry Prince of Dombes. The other
ſonne of Lewes Prince of Roch-ſur-you, and
of Lady Loyſe of Bourbon was Prince of
Roch ſur-you, who died within theſe fewe
yeres without iſſue. Wee muſt now then retourne
to the line of Francis the Elder, who
maried Lady Mary of Luxembourg daughter
to Sir Lewes Conſtable of France, who
brought great goods to that Famely in Picardy,
Artoys, Flanders, and other places.
Of theſe two iſſued diuers children, namely,

Charles, Frances, Lewes, Antoinet & Loyſe
of Bourbon. Charles the Eldeſt ſucceded in
the Countie of Vendoſme, and procured it to
be erected into a Dutchy and Pairry. Francis
had the Countie of Saint Paule, and maried
Lady Adriane of Touteuille daughter
and heire of a great famely. They had iſſue, a
daughter. Lewes was a Cardinall, Anthoinet
was maried to the Lord of Guyze, of whō
is diſcended the houſe of Guiſe now liuing.
Loiſe was abbeſſe of Fronteuault. Now the
ſaid Charl
                     •
                  s the eldeſt maried Lady Francis
of Alencon, ſiſter to the deceaſed ſir Charles
Duke of Alencon laſt deceaſed without children
in the yere 1524. of this mariage iſſued
Antonie, Francis, Charles, Lewes & Iohn.
Antony the Eldeſt and Heire of this family,
maried Iane of Albret Queene of Nauarre,
of whom came Henry of Bourbon now king
of Nauarre, who hath married Margaret of
France Siſter to the moſt Chriſtian King.
Francis was named Lord of Anguien, who
gat the victory at the iorney of Serizoles, &
died without iſſue. Charles the third is Cardinal
of Baurbon and Archbiſhop of Rouen.
Lewes was Lord Prince Conde, who when
he died, left fower ſonnes: Henry Prince of
Conde, Francis Prince of Contie, Charles

Cardinall of Vendoſme and Charles Countie
of Soiſſons. Iohn, who after the deceaſe
of Francis was entituled Lord of Anguyen,
died alſo without Iſſue. There were alſo
ſome daughters, of whom here we haue nothing
to ſay, as hauing in this argument to
treate onely of the Succeſſion of the houſe of
Frāce which can not diſcend but to y• Males
of this famely. The onely controuerſie therefore
and different that might through the
Counſaile of the miſchiuous be mooued, reſteth
betweene Henry of Bourbon King
of Nauarre, ſonne of Anthony the
eldeſt of that famely, and
Charles Cardinall of
Bourbon and
Archbiſhop of Rouen, his
vncle by the
father.
               The end of the firſt part.
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  ❧THE CONTENTS
OF THE SEcond
part of this Booke.
               1. Obiections moued againſt the King
of Nauarre.
               2. The mariage betweene Lady Iane of
Albret Princeſſe of Nauarre with
the Duke of Cleue diſſolued by the
Eccleſiaſtical ſentence & the Popes
diſpenſation, & auctorized in Parliament.
Alſo the marriage of the
ſayd Lady with Anthony Duke of
Vendoſme the eldeſt of the houſe
of Bourbon from whom is diſcended
the King of Nauarre.
               3. Marriage is by the Ciuill lawe voyde
being contracted before age.
               4. The holy decrees haue inhibited the
bleſsing of mariage of maidens before
twelue yeeres of age, & of men
before foretene, & the Eaſt Church
haue proroged the Matrimonie of
the man to fifteene, and of the woman
to thirteene.
               5. The honeſtie of Ciuill pollice forbiddeth
mariage before age.
               
                  
6. Examples of mariages diſanulled by
reaſon of the noneage of the contracted.
               7 The explication of humaine pollicie
wherefore hereticks are vncapable
of ſucceſsions.
               8. The right of Realmes is houlden immediatly
of God by the continuation
of the ſucceſsiue lawes of the
ſame: Neither can the Eſtates depoſe
a King vncapable or otherwiſe
diſabled. Or the people transferre
the right of their Lord vnto the perſon
of any other to whom it ought
not to be giuen.
               9. The office and duetie of the Clergie
towarde Kings and Princes. King
Henry the ſecond proteſted againſt
the Counſell of Trent.
               10. Why thoſe of the League would not
take the Catholicke Princes of the
blood therinto. Thoſe of the league
haue ſought to ſuborne thoſe of
the pretended reformed Religion.
               11. Kings are Stewardes of the Church
goods. The Church is in the Commonwealth,
not repugnant thereto.
Pollicie, Iuriſdiction, and collation

of Eccleſiaſticall functions apperteineth
to ſoueraigne Princes.
The Kings of Fraunce haue euermore
preſerued the ſtate of the perſons
and goodes of the Clergie in
their Crowne. The Clergie were in
olde tyme not capable to diſtribute
Church goodes.
               12. The King neuer dyeth in France becauſe
of the ſucceſsiue law thereof.
To what ende the Coronation of
Kings was inſtituted. The auncient
maner of the Coronations of heathen
Kings. How long it is ſince anoynting
was inſtituted and wherfore.
It is not neceſſary to annoynt
or crowne Kings in one only place.
               13. Antiquitie is no neceſſary argument
to auctorize common cuſtome.
               14. The Church neuer diſturbed the ſucceſsion
of Kings, no not for hereſie
               15. Whether it be likely the K. of Na. wil
force the conſcience of his ſubiect.
               16. The eſtate of Bearne and Nauarre.
               17. The cauſe of the proteſtatiō that the
King of Nauarre made the laſt yere
at Montauban.
               18. The King cannot infringe the ſucceſſiue

law of the Realme. The ſucceſſor
commeth not to the Crowne in
the qualitie of heire to the deceaſed
               19. The Popes reaſons whereby he pretendeth
aucthoritie to transferre
Kingdomes. The Popes haue euer
exempted France out of their wonderfull
power. Gods lawe without
polliticke confirmation is no ſanction
vpon earth. Prieſtes haue no
imperiall Iuriſdiction. Biſhops and
Popes haue acknowledged Kings
and Emperors for their Lords. The
puniſhment of heretickes is executed
by the ſeculer Magiſtrate.
               20. The opening of ſundry places of
Scripture concerning Eccleſiaſtical
iuriſdictiō. Wicked Emperors were
neuer depoſed. The Pope cannot
excommunicate any body politick
or Towne ſubiect to the King of
France. Appeales in cauſe of abuſe
from the Pope and other Clergie
men, obſerued in France.
               21. The Church cannot excommunicate
a Prince that is an euill liuer. Subiects
after the excommunication of
their Lorde are not diſcharged of

their dueties toward him.
               22. The ſentence of the excommunication
of a Prince cannot conteine any
clauſe of depriuation from his
Lordly rights.
               23. A Prince may lawfully arme himſelfe
againſt the Popes wrongful excommunication
and appeale therefore
as in abuſe.
               24. The K. of Nauarres reaſon to proue
him no Hereticke.
               25. The vſurpations of the Counſell of
Trent ouer the Crowne of France.
               26. Moſt daūgerous drifts of y• Leagued
in the reformation of the Realme.
               27. The wicked entent of the Leagued.
Alſo what enuy they beare to the
Duke of Eſpernon and others.
               28. The remembrances of Aduocate Dauid
now put in execution by the
Leagued. The Kings duetie in matter
of Religion.
               29. Forraine rule and gouernement is
wretched.
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               THE SECOND PART OF
the Cath. Apologie.
               1 SVch as miſlike the king
of Nauarres cauſe, doe
obiect againſt hym in
this libell fonre principall
points, wherof three
doe perticularly touche
the qualitie of his owne
perſon
                     •
                  , the fourth concerneth the auncient
controuerſie betweene the Vncle and the
ſonne of the elder brother. But we will ende
                  
                     •
                  our
to ſhewe that in all and throughout all
they haue but a weake foundation.
               Concerning the firſt, they aleadge that the
ſaid Lorde King of Nauarre is not borne in
lawfull matrimony of Anthony of Bourbon,
eldeſt ſonne of the houſe of Bourbon, becauſe
Ladie Iane of Albret mother to the ſaid lord
King was married to the Duke of Cleue
when ſhe ioyned with the ſaid Lord Anthony,
and ſo conſequently the King of Nauare diſcended
of the ſaid Anthonie of Bourbon, and
Iane of Albret is illegitimate and vncapable

to ſuccede in the Crowne of France, wherin
Baſterds did neuer ſucceede.
               2 This point is eaſie to bee anſwered by
the trueth of the matter, which is, that the late
King Francis the firſt deſirous to drawe to
himſelfe, and to diſunite from the Emperour
Charles the fifth the Duke of Cleue, vrged
& forced his ſiſter Lady Margaret of Frāce,
and Henry of Albret King of Nauarre father
and mother to the ſayd Iane who then was a
yong Princeſſe of eight or nine yeres of age
at the moſt to marry her to the ſayd Duke of
Cleue, with whom the ſolemnitie was accō
                  pliſhed
and the maiden conducted to the nuptiall
bed in the Towne of Chaſtelerauld: but
before the time of mariage was lawfully perfect
and accompliſhed in the ſaid Lady Iane,
ſhe complayned of this pretended marriage,
crauing the diſſolution thereof, which by the
ſentence of the Church and the Popes diſpē
                  ſation
afterward in the yeere 1541. enrowled
in the Court of Parliament was broken: After
all which acts, the ſaid Anthony of Bourbon
father to the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre
maried the ſayd Princeſſe.
               3 It followeth therfore that the pretended
mariage betweene the ſayde Duke of Cleue
and the ſayd Iane of Albret was voyde and of

no force or effect, as well by the Ciuill lawe
of the Romaines which ordinarily we do vſe,
as by the holie decrees of the Catholicke
Church.l. 9. ff. deſp. l. 32. parag. ſi quis ſpon ſam ff. de don. int. vir. Antiſtius Labeo and after him Papinian
& Vlpian gaue ſentence againſt Saluius
Ialianus: A maidē vnder twelue yeres
of age brought into her huſbands houſe, is
not ſo much as eſpouſed if the aff
                     •
                  ancing wēt
not before. In an other place Papinian arguing
whether the promiſe of dowrie eonteineth
in it a condition, if the marriage doe enſue,
ſetteth downe for an aſſured reſolution,l. 66. ff. de iur. dot.
                  That if a maiden vnder twelue yeeres of age be
brought into her huſbands dwelling houſe, hauing
there accompliſhed her lawful age ſhe may
as of age require her dowrie. Labeo vpon the
propo
                     •
                  itiō of donations by the huſband made
vnto his wife which in lawe are prohibited,l. 65. ff. de don. int. vir.
maintaineth that whatſoeuer the huſband giueth
to the pupill his pretended wife, is in Romaine
pollicie good and of force.
                  l. 30. ff. quand. die leg. ccd. In an other
place he ſaith: Whatſoeuer is bequeathed to a
pupill at her day of mariage, if ſhe cōtract matrimonie
before her perfect age,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . 10. ff. de cond. &. de monſt. 
                  the gift is deemed
vnprofitable, and the condition iudged not
to be performed: which Vlpian doth expreſſely
confirme. In an other place the ſame Author
repeateth the reſcript of the Emperour Seuerus

whereby the huſband is forbidden,l. 13. parag. ſi minor. ff. ad leg. iul. de adult. l. 4. ff. de rit. nupt. 
                  in
the qualitie of a huſband to accuſe his wife of
adulterie cōmitted during her noneage. Pomponius
hath left vs the generall rule of this
queſtion in writing, conteining, A maiden
vnder twelue yeeres of age ſhalbe a lawfull wife
when in her huſbands company ſhe hath atteyned
the ſayd age of twelue yeeres.
                  l. 17. & 18 ff. de bon. auth. iud. poſſid. Which likewiſe
Vlpian and Paulus doe repeate in their
diſcourſes vpon the priuiledges graunted to
the wife for the redemand of her dowrie.
               4 The holy decrees of the Cath. Church
are full of ſuch deciſions. Pope Euariſtus
who held the Sea of Rome about the yere of
Ieſus Chriſt. 110. confeſſeth that he had learned
of ye fathers his predeceſſors, that the inequalitie
and inſufficiencie of age doe make
the wife vnlawfull. Wee reade a decre of the
Counſaile of Foruile, holden vnder Charlemagne
and Pepin his eldeſt Sonne, concerning
this queſtion. Moreouer (ſaith the text.)
For the remedying of all, we forbid all perſons
to ioyne in matrimony before their ripe age, alſo
all ſuch as are of vnequall yeeres in any wiſe
to match together, but only thoſe who in reſpect
of equall birth beare like minde and conſent.
Pope Nicholas the firſt who ſat about the
yeere 858. to the ſame effect writeth, That

where conſent wanteth,
                  can. I. 30. q 2. cap. de ſponſ. imp. 
                  it is no mariage. Such
therfore as doe make alliances of their children
being yet in their cradles, do no whit bind thē,
vnleſſe the cōioyned, hauing atteyned the yeres
of diſcretion, doe allowe thereof, notwithſtanding
their parents would marrie them. Vpon
this text alſo Iohn Andrewe teacheth vs that
wee muſt enquire the willes of the pupilles
when they are of ripe age,can. illud 20. p. 1. can. de. his 28. diſt. therein following
that which Pope Marcel cōcurring with the
ſeconde decree of the Counſaile of Toledo
hath written of thoſe who before the tyme appoynted
doe make and promiſe the vowe of
Religion:cap. puberes de deſ. impnb. for although according to Iſidore
Puberes doe take that name of Pube,
                  l. fin. C. de teſt. milit. & that
ripe age appeareth in ſuch as are able to engender,
yet muſt wee not iudge this habilitie
by the onely naturall power in the act of generation,
but by the iudgemēt, counſaile and
diſcretion of the will, becauſe marriage is an
act of diſcretion, pollicie, and houſholdrye, euen
as the making of a Will. Which was
the cauſe why Pope Alexander the third declareth
that ſuch as before the age of diſcretion
are married both may and ought by the
cenſure of the Church to be ſeperated, conſidering
they haue not conſented, if when and
after they haue atteined ripeneſſe of iudgement

they doe not ratefie the ſame, or that
there haue beene no carnall knowledge betweene
them, in which caſe, Malice is ſayd to
ſupplye age. This the ſayd Alexander decreed
by the authoritie of the Connſaile of Lateran
holden in the yeere 1180. in the aſſembly
of 280.cap. de illis cap. acceſſit cap. à nobis extrade deſp. imp. Biſhops. Vrban the third writing
to the Biſhop of Mans, declareth that theſe
conſtitutions ought to bee obſerued, yea, notwithſtanding
the two conioyned had done
their endeuours to corrupt each others virginitie.cap. atteſtationis extra de deſp. imp cap. fin. exead.
Innocent the third alſo doth iudge ſuch
a pretended marriage to bee rather a ſimple
promeſſe to contract in tyme to come, then any
certaine or firme obligation for the tyme
preſent:c. noſtrates 30. q. 5. Vpon which reaſon alſo the aforeſaid
Pope Nicholas expreſſely forbiddeth the ceremonies
inſtitued by the Church, as the bleſſing
and others, before the age preſcribed and
ordeined for lawful mariage, leaſ
                     •
                   they ſhould
be miniſtred in vaine & then could not eaſely
be reuoked. This haue not bene obſerued in
the Weſt church only, but alſo ye Emperours
of the Eaſt haue cauſed their Subiects religiouſly
to keepe the ſame as a matter moſt
holy and Catholicke. As wee reade in their
nouel Cōſtitutions, wherein they haue moreouer
proroged the tyme of mariage vnto 13.

yeeres in the maiden and to 15. in the man,
expreſſely decreeing that the bleſſing giuen
before that age in ſuch coniunctions ſhall bee
of no effect or force to make the marriage indiſſoluble,leon nouel. 74. 89. & 109. nouel. 1 lex. cōm. cap. 2. Baſa mon. ad Phot. can. tit. 13. ca. 2.
but bee accoumpted as a ſimple
promeſſe or ciuill couenant. Furthermore, to
proue that the Eaſt Churches haue allowed
of theſe conſtitutions, Balſamen Patriarck
of Conſtantinople doth to the ſame purpoſe
repeate ſome decrées of Nicholas Patriarck
of Conſtantinople and of Simon Metropolitan
of Greece.In ſanct. Pontif. iur. Grient. Alſo among other the Eccleſiaſtical
aunſwers of the Pat
                     •
                  iarkes of Conſtantinople
is to bee ſeene this of Germanus
to the Biſhop of Ara, who enquired how he was
to proceed againſt a maiden that had bene bleſſed
and corrupted before her ripe age, alſo againſt
the Prieſt that had ministred theſe ceremonies.
Whereto aunſwer was made that the
maid ſhould be ſeperate and the Prieſt put from
his charge.
               
               5 As in trueth in all well ordered Commonwealthes
there haue euermore bene eſtabliſhed
a certaine age for the conioyning and
mariage of the Citizens of the ſame,Geneſ. 2. Mat. 19. 1. ad Corin. 7 ad Ephe. 5. Enlgent. Epiſt. p. ca. 3. Iſid. lib. 2. de off. eccleſ cap. de coning. lib. 7. de Rep. becauſe,
as ſaith Ful
                     •
                  entius, the lawe of mariage is
by the will of God ordeined f
                        •
                     r hauing of iſſue
it is meete that it be contracted at lawfull age:
                  
So as by the pollicie of ſome Citties,l. ſi maior C. de leg. haered. it was
conſidered that the tyme of generation doth for
the moſt part by nature ende in the man at the
70. and in the woman at the fiftie yeere. Ariſtotle
is of opiniō that after that age mariage
is not to be permitted. Whereto ſeemeth to
agree that which is found in the eſtabliſhment
of the Romaines. Among whom thoſe Citizens
were not iudged to haue ſatiſfied the lawe
Iulia which was made for mariages: who to
the ende not to be ſubiect to the penalties limitted
in deteſtation of vowed chaſtitie, did
contract matrimonie the man after ſixtie yeres
or the woman after fiftie. For Iuſtinian alſo
writeth that ſome accompted it almoſt a wonder
in nature to ſee a woman with childe after
ſhe were fiftie yeres of age: And it ſeemed ſuch
marriages were contracted not ſo much in
hope of begetting children into the Commō
                  wealth,
as in reſpect of ſome wealth or other
perticuler commoditie that the one hoped for
of the other, by which reazon wee reade that
Antigonus perſwaded his ſonne Demetrius
to marrie an old woman named Philla, vſing
the authoritie of Euripides which he altered
to his purpoſe, and in liew that the verſe ſaid

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , he
ſayd, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to the ende the ſence might

importe that for ſome benefite hee ſhould not
differ the mariage of a wife, though of a contrary
age. As on the other ſide alſo ouermuch
youth was neuer accoumpted meete for the
coniunction of mariage, becauſe therein generation
cannot bee but lame and vtterly vnperfect:
the mother in greater daunger at her
childbirth: the father more vndiſcreete in the
coniunction, and ſo the more hindered from
atteining to that perfection and force which
Nature reſerueth to their bodies: wherevpon
the auncients imagined that the Idoll of Apollo
gaue the Trezenians warning,Ariſt. lib. 7. de Repub. when
he had them beware of caſting their ſeede ouer
haſtely vpon the fieldes of their countrey.
               6 Finally, concerning this preſent argument
although the ſayd Lady Iane of Albret
had offended in marying with the late Antonie
of Bourbon Duke of Vendoſme, becauſe
ſhe had beene afore married to the Duke of
Cleue, yet were that no let why the King of
Nauarre now raigning ſhould not bee borne
of the lawfull mariage of the ſayd Antony of
Bourbon his father, who doing amiſſe & that
vpon ſimplicitie vnder the authoritie and in
the face of the Church with publicke credite
did ſolemnize the ſaid mariage: in which cace
there is no doubt but the Childrē of a putatiue

mariage,
                  c▪ ex tenore extera qui fil. ſine legit cap. fin. extra de re iud. 
                  as ſay the Canonistes, are legitimate,
becauſe in a doubtfull cace ſentēce muſt paſſe
in fauour of the marriage and of the children
borne in the ſame, the queſtion depēding vpō
the ſimple meaning & conſcience of him that
meaneth to marrie a wife:c. tanta, extra qui filij̄ ſint leg. Alex. in l. i. ff. ſolut. matr. & in caquod nobis qui fil. ſint legit. 
                  for by the lawes and
decrees of the Church, opinion hath the vpperhand
of trueth: ſo as by the common reſolution,
it is enough for the legitimation of children,
that either the one or the other of the cō
                  tracters
ment good faith in that coniunction,
beleeuing it to be a thing lawful for him.
                  Abbas in c de quarta, extra de praeſc. Thus
doe you briefly ſee how children borne of ſuch
mariages are legitimate. In our cace wee
haue moreouer aduowed that the pretended
marriage of Lady Iane of Albret, mother to
the now raigning King of Nauarre, was
voyd and of no effect, and for ſuch by all reaſon
iuſtly broken and diſanulled by the iudgement
of the Church, with whoſe authoritie
the ſayd Lady Iane was permitted to marie
where ſhe pleaſed, which was not done without
preſident. For wee reade in the auncient
Chronickles, that for the like cauſe the Emperour
Ottho the fourth was diuorſed from
Margaret Daughter to the Duke of Brabant:
& Lewes Daulphin of Viennois ſonne
to King Charles ye ſixt a litle before he dyed,

vſed, as ſome ſay, the like pretence to returne
Catherin daughter to ye Duke of Bourgondy
home again. In later tyme King Charles
the eight of Fraunce, in the yeere 1480. was
by his father Lewes the eleuenth, before hee
was foreteene yeeres old, affianced by words
preſent, and ſo by indiſſoluble marriage vnto
Margaret of Auſtrich, daughter to the Emperour
Maximilian, who being then but two
yeeres olde was conueyed into Fraunce and
there brought vp for the ſpace of ten whole
yeeres, after the which they were neuertheleſſe
diuorced by a diſpenſation from Pope
Innocent the eight, who alſo for the like reaſon
diſpenſed with Lady Anne of Brittaine,
and gaue her leaue to marrie where ſhe pleaſed,
notwithſtāding during her minoritie her
father Francis Duke of Brittaine had matched
her with the Emperour Maximilian,
& by proxye had celebrated the ſayd mariage.
Nicholas Duke of Lorrain, while his father
Duke Iohn liued, did in the yeere 1460. by
preſent words affiance Lady Iane of France
daughter to King Lewes the eleuenth, and
yet comming to the age of foreteene yeeres,
he did through the Popes diſpenſatiō betroth
Lady Mary of Bourgondy, Daughter to
Charles the laſt Duke of Bourgondy whom

he was going to marrie when death, euen during
the preparatiues of the ſolemnitie of the
mariage, preuented him. So the manifolde
decrees and iudgements paſſed in like matters,
doe manifeſt vnto vs the exceeding malice
of the enemies of the ſayd Lord King of
Nauarre.
               7 Their ſeconde obiection importeth that
the ſayd Lorde King of Nauarre is an Hereticke,
and therefore vnworthy to ſucceede in
the Realme of Fraunce, whoſe Kings are intituled
moſt Chriſtian, in reſpect of the oath
that they take at their ſacring in the hands of
the Archbiſhop of Rheimes: which is, that to
their powers they ſhall defende the Catholicke
Religion and faith: which the ſayd Lord King
of Nauarre cannot doe, as profeſſing an opinion
already condemned by the Church, and
ſo conſequently can not pretend aught in the
ſayd Crowne, neither may the ſubiects thereof
obeye him, according to the decree of the
generall Counſaile holden at Roome vnder
Innocent the third,3. Volum. Conc. cap. excōmuni. ext. de haeret. about the yeere 1215. repeated
out of the auncient conſtitutions of
Theodoſius the yonger, Valentinian the 3.
and Martian, all moſt Catholicke Princes,2 volum. Cōc. f. 136. 2. 15. 216. 530.
vpon the confirmation of the general Counſailes
of Epheſus and Chalcedon, and afterward

recited by Iuſtinian the firſt in the
fifth Counſaile of Conſtantinople,
                     
                        •
                     . Manichaeos, l. quicunque. l. fin. C. de haeret. about the
the tyme whereof he thereupon declared his
will, as is to bee gathered by the dates of the
ſayde Counſaile and the Emperours decree
inſerted into his laſt Code, and afterwarde
confirmed by ſundry the nouell conſtitutions
of the ſayd Prince, whereby hereticks are debarred
all right of 
                     •
                  ucceſſion.
               Aſſuredly this obiection at the firſt bluſh
beareth a great ſhewe: but we muſt therein of
neceſſitie reſolue two poyntes, the one of the
lawe, the other of the deede. In the firſt wee
are to diſpute whether an heretick may be depriued
of that Realme that falleth to him by
ſucceſſion, as this doth to the King of Nauarre.
In the other, whether in this preſent
action the King of Nauarre may bee termed
an Hereticke, and as ſuch a one bee depriued
of his ſucceſſion.
               8 For the firſt I ſaye and maintaine, that
thoſe Ordenances of Emperors, and Canonicall
decrees, which doe depriue hereticks
of ſucceſſions, are written and ſpeake onely
of particuler Chriſtians, whoſe goodes and
ſucceſſions are ſubiect to the politicke lawes
of the Magiſtrates of the land: but it is otherwiſe
in cace of Empires and Realmes, which

may not bee wreſted out of their handes that
are the true Lordes of the ſame either for hereſie
or other cauſe whatſoeuer,Prou. 8. becauſe they
be holden immediatly of the hand of almightie
God, and not of mē, as it was argued and
concluded in the Counſaile of Paris, holden
vnder Lewes the meeke & Lothair his ſonne,
Kings of France, and Emperours,Dan. 4. about the
yeere 829. which was ratefied vpon the ſaying
of the Wiſe man: Counſaile, equitie, wiſedome
& knowledge are myne, by me do Kings
raigne, and Counſailors publiſh their decrees in
righteouſneſſe:
                  Dan. 5 
                  of me are Empires holden. The
like is to be read in the propheſie of Daniell.
The ſentence is according to the decree of the
watch men, and according to the worde of the
holy one, to the ende the liuing may knowe that
the moſt high hath power ouer the kingdome of
men,
                  Cap. 7 
                  and giueth it to whomſoeuer he will, and
appointeth ouer it the moſt abiect among men.
The ſame Prophet ſoone after ſaith as much
to Balthazar King of Babylon, in repreſenting
to him the force of Nabuchodonozer the
Monarke of Aſſiria. The Prophet Ieremie
in his ſpeech of the King of Kings teacheth
vs alſo, I haue made the earth, and man and
beaſt vppon the face of the earth through my
force, and with my outſtretched arme, & haue

giuen it to whom it hath pleaſed me. So that

                     •
                  ubiects are not to ſearch into their Kings,
neither are borne but to obey and ſerue whatſoeuer
their Princes be, without any further
enquirie of their righteouſneſſe.Rom. 13. 
                  Feare the
King, and knowe that his election is of God,
ſaith the Apoſtle. And when any of them doe
commaunde or wield the Scepter royall, it
commeth of the fauour, goodneſſe and grace
that God purpoſeth to extende to his people,
in graunting them a good King endued with
pietie, iuſtice and Chriſtian Religion: the others
alſo are the ſcourges and roddes of his
wrath and iuſtice, whereof the Prophet Ozee
ſaith. In my wrath wil I giue thee a King. And
Iob:Of. 13. Iob. 34. 
                  Who maketh the hypocrite to raigne for
the ſinnes of the people: for Gods wrath being
kindled againſt vs, he will ſende vs a King,
ſuch a one as our offences ſhall deſerue, becauſe
as it is written in the ſame booke of
Iob: If wee haue a wicked King wee are yet
worſe then he. The place of Iſidore is very
fit to this purpoſe: It is (ſaith he) a hard matter
to make the Prince amend, if he be giuen to
vice,
                  in Decret, 
                  for the people ſtand in awe of the Magiſtrate,
but Kings, if they be not withholden by
the onely feare of God and dred of the torments
of hell, doe abandon themſelues to all libertie

and runne headlong into the bottomleſse pit of
ſinne. I ſay therefore that it is not for the people,
otherwiſe then with humilitie and obedience,
to controule the actions and qualities
of their King, but their duetie is onely to caſt
vp their eyes to heauen, and to conſider with
themſelues that by the wil of God the Scepter
is fallen into his handes and power that
beareth the Crowne, whether he bee good or
bad, eſpecially, being there to called by lawful
ſucceſſion, ſuch as is in our France, wherein
by the Monarchiall lawe the people haue not
onely referred al their power into the Kings
hand and might, but, which is more, haue alſo
tyed their owne hands, ſo as they can haue no
redreſſe ſo long as any male of the bloud royall
doe remaine, according to the lawe of the
Realme, being the neereſt male in agnation
to the deceaſed after the generall cuſtome of
France:l. 1. ff. de bon. poſſ. inf. l. fin. pa rag. tali. C. decur. fur. parag. fin. de haered. qual. Ioh. Ignae. in diſp. de Reg. Franc. col
                        •
                     . 3. & 8 yea, notwithſtanding he bee vnable,
vncapable, and do want diſcretion to gouerne
the Eſtate: in all which cauſes they may only
appoynt him a tutor and adminiſtrator of the
publicke affayres, the order wherof haue bene
practized in our Fraunce vpon Charles the
Simple, and Charles the ſixt. For notwithſtanding
the Realme, eſpecially ours, be not
properly hereditary, patrimoniall or f
                     •
                  udall,

yet it is ſucceſſiue,Cap. grandi de ſupp. negl. prael. vbi per innoced. & ca Bald. in vni de ſucc. feud. & in auth. hoc amplius C. defideic. and falleth to the neereſt,
not in qualitie of heire to the deceaſed, but as
to the next in bloud in maſculin ligne: ſo that
conſequētly what euer he be, he is called: and
whatſoeuer default be in his perſon, either of
age, iudgement, or what els ſoeuer, yet may
the Eſtates and Peeres of the Crowne do no
more but appoint a tutor to gouerne him, and
by counſaile to ſupply whatſoeuer his imperfections,
becauſe he was elected in heauen ſo
ſoone as he came into the world: All ſuch alſo
as ſhal reſiſt him who by ſucceſſion is lawfull
King, ſhall encurre the wrath and diſpleaſure
of almightie God, becauſe we are not to ſtād
in argument, or murmure againſt the deuine
wiſedome, who for the afflicting of his choſen
people and the houſe of Siō, did many times
ſuffer them to be gouerned by yong, wicked,
franticke, and vnfaithfull Kings, yea, meere
Tyrants: ſuch as in Iuda were Roboam, Ioram,
Ochozias, Amaſias, Achas, Ozias, and
others who were either Idolaters, or miſbeleeuers
in the true God of Abraham. Likewiſe
in Iſraell, Nadab, Baaza, Achab with
his wife Iezabell, Manaſſes, and the moſt
part of the reſt of their Kings, who raigned
with more Idolatrie and tyrannie againſt the
fauoured of God, then in mans opinion was

requiſite. With the like ſcourges alſo God
hath viſited his Church ſince y• time of grace,
wherin it pleaſed him to ſend his deare ſonne
into the world with his moſt precious bloud
to redeeme vs from our ſinnes, permitting to
ſit therein not onely many vnfaithful Emperours
and Kings, conſpired enemies to our
faith, and heretickes, but alſo particuler Paſtors
ordeyned for the feeding of the ſoules of
Chriſtians, euill liuers, and of pernicious example.
Conſtantine ſonne to great Conſtantine,
Valens brother to Valentinian the firſt,
and Zeno ſonne in lawe to Leo the firſt Emperours,
were Arriens. Anaſtaſe and Iuſtinian
the firſt of that name, were infected with
the error of Eutiches. Heraclius was a Monothelite.
The ſtories are ful of many Popes
of Rome, heretickes, adulterers, Magicians,
Sciſmatickes, and men confect in a filthie
quagmire of vice, who all neuertheleſſe did
peaceably by Gods will ſit in Moſes chaire,
to the ende to puniſh and afflict his flock as
he hath thought good by ſuch Tirants,cap. quod autem de iure patronat. c. Adibertūq. 17 whom
with his owne hand he choſe to be the executioners
of his iuſtice, and againſt whom the
people neither ought nor might conſpire: for
(ſaith Panormitan) ſith they are not free, but
ſubiect, they haue no power to transferre the iuriſdiction

or conferre the title,
                  Bald. in cap imperialem de prohib. feudor. alie. coll. x. did. in cap. cetede iudic. Abbas cōc. 3. in 2. part. 
                  neither is he accoumpted
to haue giuen, that hath no right to
giue. In an other place the ſame Canon Doctor
writeth, that the vaſſall cannot conſent in
the perſon of any other then his Lorde, no not
by prorogation of power, to that purpoſe alleadging
many other ſkilfull perſons opinions.
Howbeit all good Catholickes doe to their
great griefe knowe that moſt of the Eccleſiaſticall
perſons and Clergie of Fraunce doe
ſeeme to bee parties in the Conſpiracie that
long ſince haue bene deuiſed againſt the ſtate
of this Crowne: which neuertheleſſe I can
hardly beleeue, notwithſtanding I heare our
ordinary Preachers openly in the chaire of
trueth and humilitie, preach warre, bloud,
weapons, rebellion, and contempt of ye King,
and the Princes of his bloud, a matter deteſtable
and abhominable before God.
               9 My Maiſters, ye Biſhops, Prieſtes and
Doctors, what weene ye to doe? Is this the
commaundemēt of God? Is this the doctrine
that ye are bounde to plant in the Chriſtian
Church? Is this the light that you ſhewe to
the flocke which God hath committed vnto
you? Is this y• peace that you ought to teach,
and for the which the Church poureth foorth
her daylie ſupplications? What correction

may the people look for at your hāds, whiles
your ſelues are the authors of euill? Wil you
doe or ſay as Lucifer, I wil aſcend into heauen
and become like vnto the moſt high God? Will
you iuſtly haue the name to be the very enemies
of God, who commaundeth obedience
onely to the Kings and powers that he hath
eſtabliſhed, and who taketh no delight in any
thing more then in peace, hating all ſhedding
of bloud? Doth the way to cure the rage of
poore mortall creatures conſiſt in vnclothing
them of all humanitie? in thruſting into their
fiſt the ſword wherewith to make away them
ſelues? by the authoriſing of their furie with
your decrees? nay, which is more, by ſtirring
them thereto through your Sermons? May
wee not reproach vnto you that which Ieremie
propheſied in his tyme? The Prophetes
haue propheſied lyes, the Prieſts haue approued
thē, and the people haue embraced them? Muſt
we needes ſay of you as Ezechiel writeth of
your like? I will ſtretch foorth my arme ouer
their Prophetes that ſee lyes, and thoſe that tell
fables, or do not ſerue for diſcipline to my people
whom they haue ſeduced: ſaying, The peace of
God bee with you and yet it is not peace that
they ſeeke? My Maiſters, this is not the fruit
of the ſpirituall doctrine that you haue in cuſtodie:

beware it be not ſayd of you, that an euill
tree cannot bring foorth good fruite: you
preach warre, rebellion, diſobediēce: you contribute
to Conſpirators againſt your King
and the Princes of his bloud: you deliuer the
Townes to them and doe put your flockes
into their hands: you ſeeke out ſtraungers to
rule ouer you, and doe ſet them againſt your
King: where will you become? Is this the
Catholicke and Apoſtolick doctrine that you
doe ſowe? Knowe you not that Ieſus Chriſt
is the foundation of the Church, ſo that whoſoeuer
will lay any other ſhall deſtroye himſelfe
and whatſoeuer he dare vndertake? Is
not the doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt peace, humilitie,
obedience, and clemēcie? Is it not written
of you, Bee yee wiſe as Serpents and ſimple
as Doues? Are not you termed the ſault of
the earth, which beeing ſhed abroade, where
may wee gather it againe? I wote what you
will ſay: There be, ſay you, a number of heretickes
which muſt bee rooted out with the
ſword, becauſe their life is repugnāt to Gods
honor. No, no, my Maiſters, you are yet deceiued:
for you muſt firſt ſhewe how they bee
heretickes, and for ſuch cauſe then to be lawfully
condemned, which as yet you haue not
done: becauſe in 
                     •
                  rueth your pretended Coū
                  ſaile

of Trent whereby you haue condemned
them was not lawful, as the King of France
confeſſed euen while it was aſſembled, and
therefore did not onely forbid the Biſhops of
his Realme your predeceſſors to go thereto,
but alſo by his Embaſſadour did proteſt that
he could not accept it for a lawfull and generall
Counſaile, but onely for a particuler aſſembly
gathered together for the profite and
authoritie of the Pope and King of Spayne,
vnto whom they went about to giue the preſedence
aboue the moſt Chriſtian Maieſtie:
furthermore declaring that he ment not that
he or his ſubiects ſhould any way be bound to
the decrees thereof: but that contrariwiſe he
was determined, if neede were, to employ all
remedies neceſſarie which his predeceſſors
had in like cace vſed to procure the diſanulling
of the ſame. Beſides I ſaye vnto you
that weapōs are not the meanes to cure this
miſchiefe. Know you not that the doctrine of
Religion, either the error thereof is a diſeaſe
of the Soule and minde? ſeeke therefore for
your partes the ſpirituall Medicines wherewith
to heale the ſame, as admonitions, prayer,
faſting, & amendment of your liues which
are the true and onely Weapons of Gods
Church. But what? are you not content with

the extreeme diligence and care of our moſt
Chriſtian and Catholike Kings for the revnion
of their people into one only Apoſtolick
Romiſh Religion? what haue wee gotten by
ſo many fyers, ſo much blood, ſuch battailes,
and deſtructions within this Realme for the
ſame? Thoſe that nowe would rule you, are
they not the ſame perſons that led the armies
and practized y• occaſions of the paſſed wars?
haue they not ſufficiently proued, that neither
ſter nor ſword are meete remedies for this euill?
& that in one day of ſuch troubles Gods
Church is more hurt and offended through
the diſorder of one lewde Souldier, then in a
whole yeere of pacient tolleration, whereby
God may be deuoutly ſerued, the King honored,
the Clergie aſſured, the Lawe feared, the
gentry cheriſhed and the people eaſed? to bee
briefe, euery one by little and litle reduced into
the waye of good life? which to bee briefe
are the effectes and glorie of the militant
Church, and of the good Shepherdes of the
the ſame. Wee haue burned them quick, they
haue quenched the fiers with their blood: wee
haue drowned them, they haue Spawned in
the concauities of the water: we haue murdered
them al in their ſleepes, within few daies
they haue reuiued againe: We haue fought

with them and beaten them, but haue not caſt
them downe: To be brief, if we conſider how
we haue behaued our ſelues toward them, we
ſhall ſurely find that we haue left no more to
doe, but either to deſtroy our ſelues and periſh
all togither, whereby the one ſhall not
ſcorne the other, either els to let them liue among
vs one with an other in peace and libertie
of conſcience, and neuer be ſo deſirous
to driue them into heauen with the edge of the
Sword. But will you haue me tell you the
trueth? your pompe, your pride, your ambition
and the ignorance of yours is cauſe of al
this miſchiefe. Notwithſtanding you ſee the
the Church on a flame, who is there among
you (I will except ſome ſmall number) that
endeuoureth to amend his life, and to diſtribute
y• Church goods in ſuch ſort as he ought?
See wee not ſtill the Kinges Courtes, the
Townes and Country full of ſuperfluitie of
our Biſhops, and other Clergie men? ſuch a
number of Abbots called Commendatories,
who are of no profeſſed order of Religion,
but doe neuertheleſſe deuour the reuenues
that belong to the poore? ſo many beneficed
perſons with diuers Biſhoprickes, Abbayes,
Priories and Cures: ſome in title, others
in commendam, of the which they neuer

ſee ſo much as one, vnleſſe it were to the
ende to farme the ſame foorth? You may ſee
their Churches fall in decay, and the Prieſtes
whō themſelues haue annoynted begge their
foode, the reſt of the poore dye for hunger at
their gates. And in one word to ſay all, theſe
Maiſters haue no money to doe their dueties
wtall, no not ſo much as to procure preaching
which themſelues can not doe, or for performing
the deuine ſeruice, either to inſtruct the
youth. For euery one doth ſufficiently know
that the late King Charles the nineth, whom
God pardon, and King Henry the third now
raigning, viſiting and comming to thoſe
Townes wherein the principal Vniuerſities
of their Realme are planted, did ordeine that
the Clergie of certaine Dioceſes ſhould contribute
ſome ſmall portion toward the ſalaries
of the Doctors and Regēts of the ſame,
yet was it neuer poſſible for theſe poore people,
who are the ſeedes of iuſtice and vertue,
to reape any one penny. Our Maiſters haue
nowe money enough to helpe to maintaine
warre againſt the King vnder an imaginary
and falſe pretēce of defending the Catholicke
Religion. You deceiue your ſelues if you
hope to conuert others before ye make cleane
your ſelues, no neuer looke for it: for it will

ſtill be obiected vnto you that you can ſee a
mote in other mens eyes, but cannot take away
the whole blocke that blindeth your ſelues.
Why follow you not the example of Moſes,
who when he beheld and ſawe Gods people
offende the deuine Maieſtie with Idolatrie,
did not take the ſworde to put them to death,
but began to crye: O Lorde this people haue
ſinned, forgiue them, or els blot mee out of thy
booke which thou haſt written. Let vs liue
well, let vs reforme our ſelues, and let vs not
be ſo careful for the wealth of the world. We
haue ſo long cryed out againſt thoſe of the
pretended Religion concerning this poynt,
that now they can ſay of vs: The Doctor is
to blame, who reproaueth other for the fault
that himſelf hath. Yea they will ſaye worſe,
for ſtill they ſtand vpon the defenſiue, you are
the aſſailants: They haue euermore acknowledged
the Kings Maieſtie for their ſoueraigne
Lord, and neuer contemned the Princes
of his bloud, as the King himſelfe in his
Edicts hath not ſticked to confeſſe: but you
endeuour to enſtale Straungers againſt the
eſtate and dignitie of his Maieſtie, who both
before he was King and ſince hath prodigally
ventred his life and hazarded his Crowne for
the glutting of your deſires, and putting of

your ouer rude counſailes in executiō. What
reaſon therefore haue you now to match your
ſelues with the meere enemies to the peace
of the Church? enemies to your Commonwealth?
enemies to your King and the Princes
of his bloud? I ſaye to your moſt Chriſtian,
and Catholicke King, one that feareth
God, and one who hath (peraduenture) done
more then he ought for the getting by armes
that contention which you do wiſh for. I am
moued ſo to ſay, becauſe in trueth I beleeue
and experience hath taught vs that the more
we ſtirre vp this euill, the more it encreaſeth:
wherefore herein the beſt counſaile that wiſe
men haue left vs, were to reſolue our ſelues
that if this pretended reformed Religion bee
not by the decree and eſtabliſhment of Gods
worde, it will without any warres periſh and
vaniſh of it ſelf, as haue done ſo many former
hereſies: but contrariwiſe, if it be according
to the wil of the holy Ghoſt, we may crye out
at our pleaſures, but it will fulfill his worke.
               10 But my Maiſters, if you be not led by
malice, are you ſo blinde as to thinke that the
authors of this conſpiracie, which they terme
a holy League, bee ledde by any zeale of Catholicke
Religion? If that were their drift,
wherefore haue not they alſo called into the

ſame ſuch Lords Princes of the bloud, as ſtil
continuing Catholickes, and liuing according
to the Romiſh Church, were neuer ſo
much as ſuſpected to bee of the pretended reformed
Religion? We know very well that
the Lord Cardinal of Bourbon (whoſe yeres
they haue ſeduced, and whom vnder a vaine
hope of ſmoke they make to weare the knife
wherewith to embrue his hands in his owne
bloud, hauing wreſted from him the fayreſt
and moſt of his Benefices, whereof, by their
ſuggeſtion hee hath depriued his owne Nenewes)
before he altogether became vnnaturall,
& when they bounde him to this peeuiſhneſſe,
offering vnto him their fayned League
to ſigne, requeſted that his Neuewes the
Lordes Cardinall of Vandoſme, Prince of
Conty and Earle of Soiſſons might bee included
in y• ſame, wherto theſe our Maiſters
could not intend. Whereof doe they ſuſpect
the Lord Duke of Montpēſier, and the Lord
Prince of Dōbes his ſonne, both being moſt
Catholicke Princes? onely that they bee of
the houſe of Bourbon which they ſeeke to
roote out, and ſo doe make accoumpt to tranſferre
the Crowne into their owne handes,
trying themſelues onely vpon the ſayd Lord
Cardinall, a man worne and of ſmall continuance:

ſo contenting themſelues to make
him the ſtanderd whereby to eſtabliſh their
armes: neither would they auctorize the reſt
amōg their troupes, fearing leaſt they ſhould
haue better eyes then the ſayd Lorde Cardinall
to diſcouer their wicked entents: beſides
that if it ſhoulde ſo fall out that they ſhoulde
come to the drawing of l
                     •
                  ttes for the beane
in the cake, the people would rather haue recourſe
to theſe Princes as to the braunches
and ſprigges of their Kings, and thoſe who
onely in their degrees and order are capable
of the Crowne of France: either els leaſt the
Frēch Nobilitie ſhould bluſh for ſhame at the
preferring of the tirannous dominion of ſtrā
                  gers,
before their French Princes and lawfull
Lordes. This is not the firſt day that the
houſe of Bourbon haue bene ſubiect to the
enuie and malice of theſe Eſpaniolized conſpirators:
for it appeared more euidently whē
the Duke of Vendoſme father to the now
raigning King of Nauarre, maried the heire
of Nauarre, whom one of their predeceſsors
was very deſirous to match withall. The ſaid
Lord of Montpenſier ſhould be very blinde if
he could not (by the welcome that the parriſans
gaue him lately at Orleans with Cannon
ſhot) perceiue that it is not Catholicke

Religion that they fight for, but the rooting
out of the royall famelie. As alſo before whē
in his abſence while he was gone to accompanie
the late Monſier the Duke, brother to
the King into Brabant, they procured the taking
away of the gouernement of Brittaine
frō him, which now they clayme to be theirs,
ſome in the right of their mother and other of
their wife. But I hope the King ſhall be able
notwithſtāding they endeuour to diſpoſſeſſe
him, to make himſelfe whole, to ye and after to
heare them in their petitions, if hee finde the
ſame reaſonable. Moreouer to returne to you
my Maiſters of the Clergie, I will ſet you
downe moſt pertinēt demonſtrations of their
zeale to the Catholicke Church, and will tell
you that after they had fayled of their enterpriſe
againſt the Towne of Strauſ borowe,
(by the ſpoyle whereof they hoped for meane
ſufficient to demaunde Mets, Thoul, & Verdun,
and therewithall, together with other
the Townes vpon the ſhore of Rhine, which
eaſily they would haue forced, to haue proſecuted
their purpoſe for the reſt of the Realme
of Fraunce) they endeuoured to winne thoſe
of the pretended reformed Religion, vnto
whom they promiſed not only ſuch free exercize
of their religiō, as y• King now raigning

had permitted them, but alſo, if neede were,
with greater libertie and aſſurance, and to
the ſame ende offered to ſend their male children
and young Couſens for hoſtages into
Germany, vnder the pretence of learning the
Dutch tongue: perſwading the French of the
ſayd Religion, that they ſhould neuer liue aſſured
vnder the King: that by that which was
paſſed they might beleeue that he would enfringe
his Edicts of Pacification, vpon his
firſt oportunitie: that neither y• King of Nauarre,
neither the Prince of Condy had authoritie
ſufficient to defend them: to be brief,
that it was their beſt to offer themſelues into
their protection, who had both the men of
warre, the Clergie, and the gouernors of the
Prouinces at their deuotion. To the ſame effect
they alſo ſent the late Lorde of May, to
Duke Caſemire, to winne hym into this
League, and alſo to practize the ſame with
thoſe of the pretended reformed Religion, offering
to commit their forces into his hands:
beſides ſetting before him that he was diſcended
of the race of Charlemagne as well as
they: that they might make the one a great
Emperour, the other a great King: that the
Capeti
                     •
                  s had ouer long enioyed their inheritance,
and that they were reſolued no lōger

to ſuffer it. As in deede about the time of the
ſiege of Fere, the ſayd May practized all that
he perceiued diſcontented to ſigne the ſayde
conſpiracie, vntill he was woūded at the ſaid
ſiege: whereof when the chief of this drift had
notice, he poſted from Paris vnto him to get
from him the Articles of the League: as alſo
after the deceaſe of the ſayd May, hee ſent to
his houſe to make ſearch amōg al the papers
& remēbrances of the ſayd deceaſed. Beleeue
not therefore my Maiſters, that it is the loue
of God that leadeth them, either piety of Catholicke
Religion, but ſay boldly that it is no
other but ambition, a wicked and abhominable
entent to loſe and alter this Eſtate and to
get it into their handes, and ſo to make you
bondmen to their paſſions, or executioners of
their tyrannie. Wherefore I beſeech you to
call to minde the ſaying of Ioel. Awake (my
Maiſters) you that are dronken with your
Wine, weepe and lament, for all your ioye and
mirth is gone farre from you. Put on your
mourning weedes ye Prieſtes that ſerue at
the Aulter, for our land is become miſerable:
and our fieldes doe now weepe, ſith they are
become barren: our Wines withered, our
Oyle diminiſhed, and our labourers brought
into neceſſitie. And againe: weepe ye Clergie

that ſerue God, and in liew of other weapons
ſay, Lorde forgiue this people and forſake
not thy enheritance. As for your liues,
direct them after the example of the Apoſtle,
who ſayth:ad Theſſ. 
                  Wee are as young children among
you, or as the nurſe preſerueth her little ones, euen
ſo we doe merueilouſly loue you, and doe couet
not onely to teach you, but to offer our liues
for your preſeruation. Put awaye all hatred,
mallice, guile, emulation, enuie and backbyting:
feede vpon milke that we growe therein
to our ſaluation, for almightie God is mercifull.
My Maiſters, I pray you pardon me,
I knowe I might haue ſpoken more gently
vnto you, but to what purpoſe is it only with
the fingers to touch the wound, or to annoynt
onely the outſide thereof with too eaſie an
oyntment, when you ſee it is tyme to cruſh it
throughly: to expell all corruption that marreth
the whole body? What had I bene the
better to haue miniſtred a tent of lint, when it
wanted a ſharpe coroſiue. Take therefore in
good parte this that I ſay vnto you, for it is
the doctrine y• I haue learned in the Schoole
of the Catholicke Apoſtolicke and Romiſh
Church: the greateſt Doctors whereof without
humaine paſſions will graunt that al the
Sermons and Preachings wherewith you

ſtirre vp the people to take armes and ſhed
bloud, are no other then the deuilles Trōpets
and Drommes: as alſo ſurely if you ſeeke any
other weapons then clemencie and Chriſtian
pietie doe teach, and that with Tertullian
you ſay not you had rather be killed thē
kil, I do foreſhew vnto you the wrath of God
vpon you, and that vndoubtedly the propheſie
of Malachie will bee verefied in you in theſe
wordes: My wrath is kindled againſt the
Shepeheards, whom I will viſite among the
flockes.
               
               11 Much leſſe are we alſo to care for the
complaint that ſome of the vnwiſeſt of your
men doe lay vpon the King for exacting ſome
of your tenths, and vſing ſometimes, as the
neceſſitie of his Eſtate requireth, the temporalties
of his Churches, wherein they are
much to blame, and do ouergreatly abuſe the
libertie that the conniuence of Princes haue
tollerated in your predeceſſors, in reſpect of
their pietie and endeuours in the diſtribution
of their meanes, poſſeſſions and almoſes giuen
to the poore vnto whō the Church goods
doe appertaine, and not to you. Beſides that
I will by the way tell you that the wealth of
the Church is the onely poyſon thereof, for
that the greatneſſe thereof conſiſteth not in

temporall goodes and worldly pompe, as the
deuill hath perſwaded moſt of our Clergie,
but in the holy and commendable life of our
Paſtors, and in that heauenly foode that they
giue to their flockes ouer y• which they watch
night & day:Homil 84. in Matth. And as Chriſoſtome doth well
ſhewe you: the welth of the Church bringeth
you into ſuſpition among both rich, poore,
Theeues, and Slaunderers, that ſeeke your
ſpoyle, beſides that you are therby filled with
cares, lyings in waight, braules, ſtrifes, hatered,
feare, couetouſneſſe and perpetuall ſorrowe,
ſuch as the miſerie of our worlde can
teach vs, wherein it is true that the moſt part
of the Clergie haue no other minde, neither
doe moue warre for any other cauſe, but onely
for feare of loſing ſo great rents and reuenues,
which wrongfully they deuour out of
the goodes of the poore. Whereby wee may
perceiue that in ſuch men we haue no more
left but the ſhadow, remembrance, and be wailing
of the Chriſtian Church ſpringing and
floriſhing in pietie, for whoſe ſake the Apoſtles
would neuer poſſeſſe any thing: and before
Gods people nouriſhed the Leuites, widowes
and Orphans.Deut. i 2. & 1 4. For, when the Church
thought it good to haue & reteine any thing
for the reliefe of the poore, and of the Paſtors

thereof, it committed the diſtribution and ordering
thereof to ſuch among them as by the
Church were thereto elected, becauſe the people,
but eſpecially the Princes were either
ſworne enemies to the faith and perſecutors
of the Spouſe of Ieſus Chriſt, either at the
leaſt, weake, of ſmall zeale, or but meanly
grounded therein: wherevpon the treaſure
and common Storehouſe was vſually committed
to the cuſtody of the Biſhop, as vnto
hym that was accompted moſt glorious in
pietie and duetie in the holy diſtribution that
he made,Soſom. lib. 8. cap. 12. Socr. lib. 7. cap 25. whereof he reſerued onely ſufficient
for the neceſſitie of his owne liuing. Like as
Socrates writeth that Chriſantus daily reſerued
onely two Loues for his owne ſuſtenance.
Of this common ſtore committed to
the handes of the Biſhop, is it come to paſſe
that when hee began to ſerue him ſelfe, and
badly to employ to his priuat commoditie,
like a thiefe, that thing which to hym in the
qualitie of a ſteward onely ſubiect to render
accompt, was committed, he found him ſelfe
farre richer, more mightie, and better at eaſe
then the reſt of the Clergie, and therevpon by
the ſligtes of the Deuill, who had thruſt into
his hands ſo much wealth to corrupt the holines,
example and eminencie of the Church

of the ſonne of GOD through the euill houſbandry
of the heads thereof, began to bragge
aboue all other: But ſo ſoone as Princes began
to taſte of, and auctorize Catholick Religion,
they ſought alſo to become Stewards
and houſbanders of Church goods, as making
a part of their common wealthes, becauſe
as O
                     •
                  tatus Mileuitanus did verie
wiſely ſay.lib. 3. ad Parm
                        •
                     nian. 
                  It is certaine that the common
wealth is not in the Church, but contrariwiſe
the Church is in the common wealth vnder the
aucthritie whereof ſhe diſplaieth the Sunne
Beames of her fayre face. Herevpon doe wee
reade that the Emperour Conſtantine the
great, was the kéeper and diſpoſer of the treaſure
and goods of the Church, after the example
of the auncient kings of Iuda, of whome
among other it is found of Ioas, the he, by the
counſaile Ioiadas the Prieſt,4. Reg. 12. 2. Pa
                        •
                     al. 24 fearing leſt the
Prieſtes ſhould beſtow that money, which the
people had contributed towarde the reparations
of the Temple, amiſſe, commaunded it to
be put in a Cofer, and diſtributed in the preſence
of one of his men. And in deede at the
beginning the Church was vnder the authoritie
of Chriſtian Princes not only in reſpect
of the temporall goods thereof, but alſo as
concerning the inſtitution of the charge, Iuriſdiction,

gouernment and correction of the
maners of the Cleargie, by the ſayd reaſon of
the aforenamed Biſhop of Africke: whereof
I will ſeeke no better Teſtimony then that
which ſaint Auguſtine writeth,Epiſt. 68. who teacheth
vs that the notice of Eccleſiaſticall cauſes
was cōmitted to the Emperour Conſtantin:
ſaint Hierom alſo aleadgeth very good reaſons
in his Commentary vppon Hieremy,2. Reg. 23. d. 5. Deuter. 17. Bald. in prooem. de eret. Archid. eu c. lectis 63. diſt. Panor. in c. veniēs extra de accuſat.
whoſe opinion is confirmed by Gratian in
his Decrees. For in troth kings by this care
and diligence doe teſtifie their zeale and pietie
to Religion. In conſideration whereof
Gregory reporteth that the firſt Emperours
and Chriſtian Kinges did giue and conferre
the Churches: in which power the Cannon
Doctors, Bald. Archid. Panorm. and ſome
others are forced to graunt that by reaſon of
their Crowne they are grounded vpon common
Lawe. And before them Saint Ambroſe
in his Diſcourſe De tradendis Baſilicis
did maintaine the ſame. Neuertheleſſe ſuch
asdoe reade Hiſtories are not ignorant what
Tragedies the Popes within theſe ſixe hundreth
yeres haue for this article raiſed againſt
the Emperours of Germany, whome in the
end they haue driuen to giue ouer the game,
ſo as there remaineth but little of that former

aucehoritie Royall in Chriſtendome, ſauing
in the Maieſtie of the Flowerdeluce,
which God bee prayſed hath hitherto kept it
ſelfe hole and a Virgin, and ſo wil ſtil keepe
it ſelfe, if the good and naturall Frenchmen
would put to their helping hand as by y• oath
of Nature that they owe to the Dignitie of
this Crowne they are bound. For they muſt
vnderſtand that it is one of ye greateſt points
wherevpon the Pope is ſo importunate to publiſh
his pretended Counſaile of Trent in
Fraunce, through the aſſiſtance of the Spaniard,
by the miniſterie of his Proctors, the
vnthankfull Nourſe children of this Realme,
for the abaſing and deminiſhing of the dignitie
of our Crowne, which euermore thankes
be to God hath had ſoueraigne power, inſtitution,
iuriſdiction, and police ouer the Clergie,
and the Officers and Magiſtrates vnder
the Kings aucthoritie in his Parliaments &
greate Counſaile, euen ſince the planting
thereof, haue power and aucthoritie by appeale
of abuſe fallen before them by his Maieſties
Subiecs to breake, diſanulle and cut
of whatſoeuer ſhall bee found to haue bene
made, pronounced, decreed, adiudged, eſtabliſhed
and ordeined by the Pope, the Biſhops,
or other Delegates of the Eccleſiaſticall de-

audience againſt the holy Decrees, Lawes,
Edicts, and Ordenaunces of his ſayd Maieſtie,
or areſtes of y• ſayd ſoueraigne Courts,
becauſe in trueth the Prince is the guardian,
reuenger and reformer of Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline,
as the auncient Biſhops and Popes
more honeſt, and not ſo ambicious as the moſt
parte of ours,c principes ſeculi c. ad miniſtrato
                        •
                     res 23. 45. haue often openly confeſſed.
Yea, it ſo appeareth in the Epiſtle of Pope
Iohn the eleuenth, which beginneth Inter
claras, C. de Tri. written to the Emperour
Iuſtinian, at ſuch tyme as no doubt the
Church was vnder the dominion of the Emperour,c. vides c. quid autam c. fin 10. diſtinct.
as all men may perceiue by the firſt
booke of Iuſtiniās Code & by his nouell conſtitutions.
3. 5. 6. 16. 37. 56. 57. 58. 59. 67.
83. 117. 123. 133. 146. Alſo ſince by the edict
of Tiberius the ſeconde, Baſil, Leo the
Philoſopher, Alexis, and ſundry other Emperours
of the Eaſt. In our France the Pope
and Clergie cannot deny the ordinary collations
euermore made by our Kings, as teſtefieth
Gregorie of Tours, Aimonius, with the
reſt of the auncient Hiſtorographers of our
Natiō, neither the goodly orders & reformatiōs
of ye Church,Aimo. lib. 3. cap. 55. l. 4. cap. 83. Vinc
                        •
                     nt. made by Clouis in the Synode
that he called at Orleans, by Dagobert,
if we wil beleeue Floart, by Childebert, Pepin,

Charlemaigne,Paul. Diac. & les autres. Vincent li. 22. Ange ſ. in capit Carol. Màg. Clot. & Lud. pij c. Sanctorum 63. diſtinct. c. volumus xi. q 1 Platin. i n vita greg. 4. Lewes ye Meeke, & Lothaire,
as witneſſeth their goodly Chapters:
alſo by Phillip giuen of God, Saint Lewes
in his Pragmaticall ſanction of the yeere a
thouſand, two hundred, ſixtie eight, Phillip
the Faire in his Edict in the yere a thouſand,
three hundred and thirtie, Charles the ſeauenth,
in the yeere 1453. Charles the
nineth in the Eſtates of Orleans, and Henry
the 3. now raigning. Which alſo was moſt
learnedly declared to Lewes the eleuenth by
two Preſidents of Inqueſtes of the Court of
Parliament, in a treaty that vnto him they
exhibited in the name of all the cōpany. Yea,
wee doe perticulerly finde that the generall
Eſtates of France aſſembled in the Towne
of Tours in y• yere 1483. did deſire Charles
the eight to reforme the Clergie, as beeing
of his charge & authoritie, becauſe the Pope
had no Iuriſdiction ouer the Biſhoppes of
Fraunce, as by an Edict generall it was publiſhed
in the Parliament vnder Charles the
ſeuenth in the yeere 1407. and is to bee ſeene
in the Regiſters of the ſayd Court. Yea, that
Court hath ſo farre proceeded, as ſometimes
to decree that the Popes Buls and reſcripts
giuen out againſt the libertie of the French
Church and Maieſtie of our King, ſhould be

cancelled, broken and torne: Neither was it
lawfull for his holineſſe to ſend any Legate
into France, except with his Maieſties good
will, and without preiudice to the rightes of
his Crowne: as by an Areſt of Parliament
it was declared in the yeere 1484. After by
the ſame Court haue oftentimes the power
of the ſaid Legates ſent with the Kings conſent
bene reſtrained from al authoritie to enteprize
againſt the rightes of the Crowne of
France:In Epiſt de. Trad. Baſ
                        •
                     
                     lic. which limitations and liberties the
Popes neuer controuled. Sith therefore it is
the King that giueth you the Biſhoprickes,
Abbayes, and Eccleſiaſticall functions: that
your maners, orders and correction depēdeth
vpon the royall Maieſtie and rightes of his
Crowne, why wil you not ſuffer me with S.
Ambroſe, to auowe that he may ſell, diſpoſe,
and employe the temporalties of the Church
vpon the neceſſities of his Eſtate, without
procuring the liſence of the Pope of Roome,
alwaies prouided that his Maieſtie leaue ſufficient
for the ſuſtenance of the Prieſtes and
others that haue charge of the deuiue Seruice?
For you alſo doe know that whatſoeuer
you take more then for the neceſſitie of your
life onely, is theft, or meere robberie, and ſo
termed by the holy decrees founded vpon the

expreſſe commaundement of the Apoſtle,1. ad Tim. cap. fin. that
you ſhould be content with your food and ſuſtenāce:
and by the Canons you are ſtraightly
forbidden not to giue any portion to either
kinſman,c. Epiſco. 1. q. 2. c. Epiſcopus 12. q. 1. allie, or friend whoſoeuer. And in
deede ſo ſoone as the Church perceiued that
your Predeceſſors did abuze that too much
confidence which the firſt Chriſtian Emperours
had repoſed in their pietie touching the
diſtribution of Church goodes, which by litle
and litle through the conniuence of very zealous
Princes, who did too much aſſure them
ſelues of the honeſtie of Biſhops, they had recouered,
ſhe did againe take it from them. Alſo
in the fourth Counſaile of Charthage they
were forbidden to meddle therewith.
                     
                        •
                     p. 25. In the
generall Counſaile of Chalcedon holden vnder
the Emperour Martian, were Stewards
eſtabliſhed to ſuch purpoſes, who were neither
Prieſtes, neither Cleargie men. In the
ſeuenth generall Counſaile holdē vnder Iuſtinian
the firſt,e. eum ſcimus 9. q. 3. mouell. 6. 7. & 133. the ſame were renewed, and
it was decreed that the Archbiſhops onely
ſhould be called to their election, whereof Iuſtinian
maketh mention. Saint Iohn Chriſoſtome
cryeth out and greatly complaineth,
that in his tyme the Biſhops and Cleargie
would needes be the diſtributers, ſtewardes,

and huſbanders of Church goodes:1. ad Cor. 16. and therfore
ſaith this good father in his 86. Homely
vpon Mathew: They endeuour as much to rule
the Temporall as the Spirituall. The Apoſtles
would not diſtribute that money which they
had common among them. Our great Lawgiuer
& King Charlemaigne,lib. 1. c. 80. & 83. doth expreſſely
forbid them to conuert any to their perticuler
profite, or otherwiſe to employe it then vpon
the neceſſitie of the poore. It is well enough
knowne in what order and to what vſe
the Church hath decreed the diſpenſation of
the Reuenues thereof.Greg. in Regeſt. li. 12. cap. p. Sainct Gregorie reporteth
that oftentymes they were wont to
deuide it into fower partes, whereof one to
the Biſhop and his ſmall famelie: an other to
the poore Prieſts and officers of the Church:
the third to the reſt of the poore: and the laſt
was appointed to the reparatiō of the Churches.
But our Biſhops and Abbots doe well
enough keepe themſelues from proceeding
in any ſuch maner, for amōg themſelues they
retaine the aſſotiation of the Lyon, whereof
our lawes doe make mention and eaſily permit
the poore Prieſts and others to part with
as much as they liſt, ſo that themſelues be not
admitted in the exaction thereof: but contrariwiſe
if any Prince for his neceſſitie would

employ any part of their ſuperfluous aboundance,
they ſtraight ſpread rumours among
the people that the deuill hath carried away
one: that an other hath bene ſene in hell: that
an others body haue not bene to bee found in
his Tombe: with a number of ſuch fables,
wherewith our Chriſtian Hiſtories for theſe
ſeuen or eight hundred yeeres are poyſoned,
in liewe of quietly obeying the will of their
Kings and ſoueraigne Lordes, in whoſe Cō
                  monwealths
and vnder whoſe diſcipline they
are bound to liue ſimply and poorely, caſting
downe their high lookes in all Chriſtian humilitie
and obedience, taking their parts and
portions of the reuenues and Church goods,
and of that Aulter which they ſerue at the
handes of their Kings, yea and onely ſo much
as may ſuffice for their ſuſtenāce, and in liew
of yeelding parte to the neceſſities of their
Princes, to complaine, murmure, and arme
themſelues againſt them, becauſe they would
employe it to ſuch vſes as their affayres doe
require. I beſeech you therfore my Maſters,
ye Biſhops and Prelats of Fraunce, whome
many good men doe accuſe of countenancing
the wicked deliberations of Spaniards, Italians,
and Lorraines, that ſeeke to ſeaze vpon
the Crowne againſt the King and the Princes

of his bloud, remēber the exāple of Magnulph
Biſhop of Tholauze, repeated by Gregorie
of Tours, when one Godoald, terming
himſelfe ſonne of Clotaire the firſt,li. 4. ca. 27. and vpholden
by Diſier, and ſome others the perturbers
of the peace of the Realme, ſuch as our
pretended Maſcontents, required pertition
with Gontran, and Childebert, the children
of the ſayd Clotaire. For the hiſtorie importeth
that the ſayd Diſier and moſt of his partakers,
were letted by the exhortation of this
good Biſhop, who vſed this oratiō to the people.
Wee knowe Gontran and his neuewe to bee
the children of our Kings, but for Godoald we
wot not what he is nor from whence: Prepare
ye therfore ye Frenchmen, and if Diſier would
force you to doe this iniurie to your Kings, defend
your ſelues, & let him periſh as Sigulphus,
that he may bee an example to all other, to the
ende no ſtraunger doe preſume to violate and
taint the Maiestie of the Realme of France.
               
               12 To all the premiſſes, & to the diſcourſe
of the duetie and reſpect that ſubiects owe in
our cace to their Kings and Princes, the diſturbers
of the peace & lawes of this Realme
doe aunſwer perticulerly againſt the King of
Nauarre, y• he ſhal neuer be King of France,
before he bee after the auncient maner obſerued

(as they weene) euer ſince Clouis the
firſt Chriſtian King, conſecrated, annoynted,
and crowned: and that nature onely cannot
make him King, without the ordinary Ceremonies
obſerued at the comming in of a new
Prince. And ſo cōſequently they dare inferre
that, notwithſtanding al our former diſcourſe
be true, yet can it not bee applyed to the ſayd
Lord King of Nauarre, to whom the French
men cannot be boūd without his annointing
and coronation,1. proponebatu. ff. de Iudic. which the Catholickes will
neuer permit, vnleſſe he abiure the pretended
reformed Religion. Alſo that in cace they
ſhoulde withſtande him,c. ven rabi lēde clect. c. quoniam Abbas de off de leg c. ſi gratiosè de reſcript. in 6. Ruſae. in tract. de iur. reg. Guil. de Montſerrat. in c. act. de ſucc. reg. Franc. Bald. in l. generaliter parag. in his. C. de le cund. nupt. yet ſhould they not
thereby withſtand their King, but a pretender
to the Realm. But in trueth herein lyeth the
difficultie of the matter, wherwith they ſeeke
to deceiue the ignoraunt. For this they muſt
know, that in Realmes ſucceſſiue, as is ours,
the King liueth perpetually, and leaueth the
Realme to his neereſt by vertue of the law ſucceſſiue;
By reaſon whereof he is true and perfect
Lord before he bee crowned: neither doth
his coronation ſerue but for a declaratiō and
publication of the honor of the marke of his
calling, which was obteyned to him before,
both by nature and by the lawe of ſucceſſion,
which needeth no further declaration of the

ſucceſſor,
                  cap. 1 de fe
                        •
                     d. cog. vbi gl. B
                        •
                     ld. in l. cum antiputo. i
                        •
                     us C. de iur. del. Barb. in rub C. qui admit. ad hon. poſſ. poſfint. 
                  in that it is not ſimply hereditarie to
the deceaſed, but custumary and legitimate at
the very instant of the former Kings deceaſe,
which ſeazeth not the natural ſucceſſor of the
Lordſhip and royall power onely, but alſo of
the poſſeſſion and effectuall enioying of the
ſame. Wherevpon all our Interpretors doe
maintaine that in feudall cauſes and matters
the ſucceſſor is in a maner ſeazed in his predeceſſors
life tyme,
                  Guil. 2 rolhius in stil. parlam. in tic de feud. parag. item de conSuetudine. 
                  vnder whom he is halfe poſſeſſioner
without any further inuestiture: eſpecially
in our France, where it is obſerued without
contradiction. For that concerning the
Realme, the coronation enſuing is but the habite
and royall enſigne, and therefore al good
men will graunt that the King is annoynted
and crowned becauſe he is King: but contrariwiſe
that he is not king becauſe he is crowned:
for ſo theeues and Tyrants beeing the
ſtronger might become lawfull Kings, and
with ouer much facilitie alter the cauſe of their
poſſeſſion through that ceremonie. So was
the Emperour of the Romaines lawfull, after
he had beene elected and ſaluted, in teſtimonie
and for a proofe of which election only
he ſet a Crowne vpon his head, a Scepter of
Iuorie in his hand, and beeing apparelled in
a Purple robe, did alwaies walke forth with

fower and twentie Huiſſiers,Plutach. in Amax. euery one bearing
a Torch and an Axe. It was was moreouer
a cuſtome to carie fire before the Emperour,
after the auncient maner of the Kings
of Perſia, who went to Paſargades, that the
Prieſtes, might there conſecrate them in a
Temple dedicated to one of the Goddeſſes of
warres, where the Prince putting of his own
Robes, did put on the ſame that the auncient
Cirus vſed to weare before he was King: he
alſo did eate of a Cake made with Figges
and Turpentine, and drancke a potion made
of Vineger and Milke. The auncient Kings
of Greece, in liewe of a Diadem, were wont
to cary a Speare, or a Staffe, which the Grecians
termed 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .Iuſtin. lib. 43. Liu App. Tacit. Valer. libr. 5. cap. 7. The Romaines ſent
to him to whom they gaue the royal dignitie,
a Crowne of Golde, a Cuppe, and an Iuorie
ſtaffe, and afterward added the ſeate or chaire
faſhioned like a Chariot. Afterwarde, when
Chriſtianitie was planted in the hearts of the
people, hauing proceeded to the election of
the Emperour, and being agreed of his perſon,
the maner was to cauſe him to ſweare,
yea, ſometymes by his handwriting to ſubſcribe,
that he would ſtay himſelfe vpon the
doctrine confirmed by the Catholick Church
and the oecumenical Counſailes of the ſame,

and that he ſhould not raiſe any trouble in the
Church of God:Aimon. lib. 3. ca. 36. 49. after which proteſtation, the
Patriarke of Conſtantinople in the peoples
ſight ſet a Crowne vpō his head, girt a ſword
about him, preſented him a Scepter, and put
a gold Ring vpon his finger. The tokens of
the Germaine Emperours,c. venerabilē de elect. c. Roman. de iureiura are by the decree
of Charles the Great, a Scepter, a Sword,
a Speare, a Cloake, a Chaine, a Crowne, a
Croſſe like a Spheare, a Buckler, an Eagle
with 2. heads, & a purple Enſigne: all which
are deliuered to him by the Archbiſhoppes of
Cologne, Mentz, and Treues. Like as the
Archbiſhop of Toledo, doth the office at the
coronation of the King of Spayne: the Archbiſhop
of Canterbury, at the King of Englands:
the Archbiſhop of Mentz, at the Bohemians:
the Archbiſhop of Strigon, at the
Hūgarians: the Archbiſhop of Gueſne, at the
Polonians: the Archbiſhop of Vpſale, at the
Danes: the Archbiſhop of Tours, at the auncient
Kings of Armorica, which we cal Brittaine:
the Biſhop of Pampelune, at the King
of Nauarres, euen as in our France it is the
Archbiſhop of Rheimes, that crowneth and
annoynteth our King: although ſometymes
it is done in other places.Aimon lib. 3. cap. 61. As we reade of S.
Lewes, who was ſacred at Soiſſons, others

at Orleance: whom before the tyme of Chriſtianitie,
they vſed to proclaime by lifting thē
vp, and ſhewing them vpon a buckler. But it
hath ſince beene thought more expedient to
miniſter theſe ceremonies in the aſſembly of
the Church, there to call God to witneſſe of
that faith which the ſubiects vowed to their
Prince, and of that duetie wherein the King
bound himſelfe to his Eſtate: to the ende alſo
that afterward the people might knowe, that
from a priuat and perticuler man that he was
wont to be, he was now promoted to the Empire,
to the end to commaund. Thus did Atatolius
firſt deale with the Emperor Leo the
firſt in the yere of Ieſus Chriſt 461. and Euphemius
with the Emperour Anaſtaze in the
yeere 494. of whom hee exacted a perticuler
promeſſe in writing, becauſe both before and
at the tyme that he was proclaimed Emperour,
he had bene and ſtill was an Eutichean
hereticke, whoſe errors had bene condemned
by the decrees of the Counſaile of Chalcedō,
holden in the preſence of the Emperor Martian
in the yeere of Ieſus Chriſt 455. Of later
daies immediatly vpon the deceaſe of Iuſtinian
the firſt, they added that the Patriark
of Conſtantinople, ſhould after the example
and imitation of the Kings of Iuda, conſecrate,

annoynt, and crowne the Emperours
with a Crowne of Golde in the aſſembly of
the Church, which was firſt obſerued in the
Emperour Iuſtin the ſecond, and afterward
by Pope Leo the 3. tranſlated into the Weſt
to the behalfe of Charles the Great, before
whom, or not long before we doe not finde in
any Hiſtorie that the Kings of France were
euer annointed or conſecrated, but onely ſimply
crowned, as Gregorie of Tours maketh
mention in his hiſtorie: whereby it appeareth
that none of our Kings of the firſt famely did
euer obſerue this ceremonie.Greg Turon. lib. 2. The firſt then
that vſed it was Pepin, father to Charlemaigne,
whome Boniface Archbiſhoppe of
Mentz, did conſecrate, annoint and crowne
by the commaundement of Pope Zachary of
Rome: & that in my opinion, becauſe he was
the firſt of his race, who of a priuate and perticuler
perſon, was eſtabliſhed King againſt
the Merouingiens. After his deceaſe, Pope
Stephen the ſecond did the like to Charles
ſonne to the ſayd Pepin, when he was King
of France, whom alſo Pope Adrian againe
conſecrated, annoynted and crowned, when
he was declared King of the Lombards: and
finally Pope Leo the third did the like to him
with the Imperiall Diadem. And this ceremonie

haue euer ſince bene obſerued by our
Kings of France, not that thereby they bee
Kings, but to the ende it may ſeeme as a teſtimonie
that they are Chriſtians and Catholickes,
and of priuate perſons are become
Kings to commaund the people. So that in
conſideration hereof, the firſt French Emperours,
Lewes the Meeke, Lothaire, Lewes
the ſecond, and the reſt, who being by natural
ſucceſſion Kings, were promoted to the Empire,
did not vſe to take the title of Emperor,
at the day of their conſecration or coronation,
but at ſuch time as their father or former predeceſſor
thought good to nominate them for
their ſucceſſors, from which they began to
number the yeeres of their Empire, nothing
reſpecting the ceremonie or ſolēnitie of their
Coronation: as appeareth by many the auncient
Charters and documents of their daies.
Yea, the Hiſtories doe note, that Charles the
Fat, yongeſt ſonne to Lewes the Meek, was
the firſt that in his yeeres made mention of
the day of his Coronation, and tooke not vpō
him the title of Auguſtus, vntill the 8. Calendes
of Ianuary enſuing, in the yere 866.
on which day Pope Iohn the 8. anointed and
crowned him: which in ſubteltie he thought
good to note, as one that obteyned not the

Empire by ſucceſſion: for Lewes the ſecond,
his neuewe, laſt deceaſed, had not named nor
inſtituted hym his heire: much leſſe had any
choſen him: but the hiſtories doe affirme that
hee for a great ſumme of money bought the
Imperial dignitie of the Pope, becauſe there
were other more fitter for it then he, that layd
clayme thereto, as his elder brother Lewes
and his children Kings of Germany: ſo that
Charles, fearing leaſt (as reaſon and iuſtice
required) they ſhould be preferred before him,
thought good to aduance himſelfe, and to get
the Pope to conſecrate him. To conclude
therfore, it is moſt certaine that this ceremonie
doth make nothing to the right of the
Kings lawful ſucceſſion: neither is any more
then a ſimple token of honor in his behalfe,
whom nature and vſuall order hath cauſed to
be borne or ſuffered to bee elected to rule and
gouerne the Eſtate: ſo that to weene to perſwade
that he that is borne to be your lawful
King by the Lawes of the Realme, hath no
authoritie ouer you before he be conſecrated,
annointed and crowned, is a meere fallation.
               13 It followeth, ſith I haue proued vnto
you, that in this cace the ſayde King of Nauarre
(whom the deepe diſſemblers dare not
openly in their Libelles denye to be the neareſt

of the bloud) ſhould be your natural, true,
and lawfull King, let vs agree together that
it were meere wrong for you to withſtand or
reſiſt him. I ſay further, that in this Realme
there is neither lawe nor order that debarreth
him from lawfull raigne and the Crowne,
notwithſtāding he would remaine in his now
profeſſed Religion. But contrariwiſe, that
ſuch as are of and doe profeſſe the ſame, are
declared meete and capable of all kindes of
ſucceſſion, by infinite the Edicts, Decrees,
and declarations of our Kings, publiſhed, enrouled,
and dayly put in execution by the Arreſtes
of the ſoueraigne Courtes, and other
Magiſtrates, who vnder his Maieſties authoritie
doe miniſter Iuſtice in this Eſtate, &
whoſe common crye tendeth to obliuion and
perpetuall forgetting of the paſſed miſeries
and troubles. As alſo in trueth it is more then
a Catholicke paſſion to compare the Huguenot
with a Iewe or Turke. For beſides that
our Kings doe auctorize and permit the one,
and not the other, in trueth and without affection,
(for my ſelfe am a Catholick, and in the
ſame faith doe wiſh to dye) we all doe agree
in our faith, ſo as there remaineth no more
but to decide for the moſt part of controuerſie,
the inſtitution of outwarde ceremonies,

which either the tyme or the neceſſitie of the
peoples inſtruction haue procured to bee
brought into ye Church, & be not conteined or
authorized in the holy Scripture. Sith therfore
wee doe agree, that in the firſt times the
Chriſtians did liue and ſerue GOD without
them, we can not now leſſe doe then heare the
reaſons of thoſe that craue abolition before
we condemne or pronounce them Heretikes,
leaſt the condemnation goe before the proofe,
and ſo they haue greater cauſe to complaine,
(as already they doe) that wee haue iudged
them vnheard, and haue ended their Proces
vpon defaultes and contumacie. Wherefore
the
                     •
                   proteſt they are ready to pourge themſelues,
if we would graunt them free acceſſe
into the aſſembly of the church, and not ſtand
vpon the pointes of not receiuing them, groū
                  ded
vpon the long time that wee haue bene in
poſſeſſion of the obſeruing of theſe traditiōs,
from hand to hand receiued by the cōſent and
common agreement of the Church, becauſe
if we had no other argument, wee ſhould not
be able to deny, but that our fathers whē they
brought them in were men, and therefore ſubiect
to humaine frailtie, as in many other
things experience may teach vs. I will content
my ſelfe with one onely example to our

purpoſe.Auent. in Annal. Boiorum. 
                  Virgill Biſhop of Saltzbourg in a
Sermon about the yeere of our Lorde 755.
ſaying that there were Antipodes in ye world,
was for the ſame by Boniface Archbiſhop of
Ments, accuſed of Hereſie, becauſe by inducing
the Antipodes, it ſeemed he would alſo
bring in an other Chriſt. This matter was
debated before Vtilo King of Bauiere, who
at the commaundement of Zachary, denounced
the ſayd Virgilius to bee one of the moſt
abhominable Heretikes that euer was: So
great was the obſtinacie of the knowledge
conceaued in this age of the Antipodes or
Arteques, and yet ſince it hath bene verefied
for trueth: This neuertheleſſe I doe
not alledge, to the ende to reproue the inſtitution
of the ceremonies of the Church, with
which I doe dayly ſerue GOD, eſpecially
knowing, that in alteration of Lawes aud Orders,
neceſſity muſt be very apparent in the correction
of matters long before allowed, but onely
to admoniſh all men, that in as much as
they are men, it is no meruaile though ſome
will be inquiſitiue whether the authors of the
ſame were led by the will of God, or whether
therein they enterpriſed any thing repugnant
thereto, eſpecially, ſith the queſtion concerneth
the maintenance of the peace, liues, and

ſoules of ſo many millions of parſons, who
either might, or are already loſt vpon this quarell.
And this I will ſay more, that ſith the
fault hath proceeded of our Prelates, who
haue fallen a ſleepe, and haue not mainteined
the fare that they ought for the nouriſhment
of their Flockes, who being ignorant in the
moſt part of the principles of their religion,
haue gone out of their ranck, and doe perticulerly
require the reaſons thereof: it is moſt
neceſſary gently to giue them a taſte of the
ſame, without ſword or fire, vntil the condemned
bee at large heard in their defences and
lawfully conuict.
               14 Moreouer I dare aduowe, that in
Realmes and Empires natural Succeſſion,
receiued by the eſtates, is of ſuch force, that
the beſt and moſt Catholicke Parſons neuer
enterprized againſt y• progreſſe of the ſame,
as occaſions haue bene miniſtred, no not for
Hereſie, although it were condemned, and
with all ſolemnitie accurſed by the Church of
GOD: Notwithſtanding vndoubtedly by other
dealing, they might haue hoped for better,
and that they were in maner aſſured of
manifold afflictions at hand? Had not certein
Biſhops Arriens infected Conſtantius, whē
he ſucceeded his father, although he were very

yong? What was the cauſe that Zeno being
an heritick, was neuertheleſſe made Emperour
after his father in lawe Leo, but that
the Empire was atteyned for his wife AriadNe,
and little Leo ſonne to the ſaid Zeno,
whom his Grandfather had inſtituted to bée
his heire? in conſideration whereof the Chriſtians
were content to beare that affliction.
Conſtantine the third and the fifth, whē they
were called to the Empire were heretickes,
but yet in aſmuch as they were lawfull ſucceſſors
to the laſt deceaſed, the Church would
not meddle with them. When Anaſtaze the
firſt was choſen, no other cauſe moued ye Patriarke
of Conſtantinople and the people to
force a promiſe from him that afterward hee
ſhould be a Catholicke, or at the leaſt that he
ſhould not make any alteration or ſtirre vp
any broyle in the Church of God, but onely
becauſe he was then an Eutichian, who was
condemned by the Counſaile of Chalcedon:
and the ſame is the onely caution that you
may exact or require of your King, in cace he
were other then a Catholicke, ſith the Chriſtian
Church neuer deſired greater aſſurance
of the aforenamed then their faith and royall
promiſe. I might bee tedious if I ſhould rehearſe
vnto you an infinite number of other

examples, whereby euery one may manifeſtly
perceiue that the holy Primitiue Church neuer
accoumpted it ſo ſmal a matter to violate
the lawes of the Eſtate, or to habandon that
obligation that wee owe to ſuch a Prince as
is either lawfull ſucceſſor to the deceaſed, or
els ſolemnly elected. Who is he that wil not
thinke the Biſhoppes of thoſe former tymes
that I ſpeake of to haue bene farre more zealous
in their charge and better liuers thē the
moſt parte of ours? in reſpect whereof they
might euen with their credite only haue ſooner
perſwaded the people that thei gouerned,
for Religion and godlineſſe ſake, to haue expelled,
depoſed, and baniſhed thoſe hereticall
Emperours, aſwel as to haue admitted them
into that ſucceſſion that by the politick order
of the Empire was vnto them due, either to
obey, or yeeld them al fidelitie: was it want of
power, all the world being Chriſtian, euen in
the Prime of the Church about one hundred
yeeres after that the Temples of the Greeke
Idols had bene ſhut vp, whereby not ſo much
as the memorie of them remained among the
ſubiects of this great Monarchie? I will by
the way rehearſe vnto you a Decree of the
Church made for ye poſteritie of Kings, leaſt
you ſhuld thinck me either to be led by affection,

or to haue told you fables. Heare therfore
the wordes of the Fathers aſſembled in
a Counſaile. Like as the Inſolencie of wicked
Kings haue euermore bene odious and abominable
to the ſubiects, ſo haue the people alwaies
liked wel of the prouident foreſight of the good:
who therefore could ſuffer or beholde a Chriſtian
offending in that poinct, or that were deſirous
to expell the posteritie or ligne Royall from
ſuch rights and dignities as thereto doe apperteyne?
Such dealing doe we therefore expreſſely
forbid, & in fauour of the posteritie of the moſt
excellent Prince Chintillus, we doe renew and
cōfirme the decree that was made the laſt yere
at the Synode houlden in this Church concerning
the loue and good will that euery one is
bound to beare to the Kings ligne, and to the
defence and preſeruation which all ſubiectes of
the Estate doe owe thereto, to the ende the ſucceſſors
be not maliciouſly defrauded of the merites
of their predeceſſors in the augmentation
of their Crowne, or their great liberalitie toward
their ſubiects. Alſo that none doe enterprize
to hurt them, becauſe it is meete that by
the authoritie of a Counſaile we do graūt peace
to the ſucceſſion and poſteritie of thoſe by whoſe
meanes and vnder whoſe protection wee haue
aforetyme bene preſerued. Admit therfore that

the Church made this Decree in reſpect of
that obligation that ſhe deemed the ſubiectes
ought to the poſteritie of their Kings, either
for the loue and reuerence of thoſe that had
well gouerned their Commonwealths: euen
as GOD, who is the author and holder vp of
Monarchies, would neuer take the Scepter
wholy from Iuda, for his ſeruaunt Dauids
ſake: yet if our ſelues would but call to mind
ſo many good Kings of this race, eſpecially
the father of the houſe of Bourbon, the Lorde
S. Lewes, whō for his good life the Church
hath canonized, and whoſe memorie ought to
be vnto vs holy & honorable, we ſhould ſhewe
our ſelues moſt wicked, periurde, vnthankful
and diſloyall perſons, if wee ſhould ſeeke or
but make any countenaunce to thinke vpon
innouating any thing againſt this poſteritie.
               15 Good men are not ignorant of the pretences
that theſe great bucklers of the faith
doe take hold of: which are, firſt that the King
of Nauarre being King, would polute, ſubuert
& aboliſh Catholick Religiō in France,
and force his ſubiects to become huguenots.
But to ſay the trueth, this vizard is leſſe then
nothing: for his former behauiours will preſently
force vs to confeſſe the cōtrary: becauſe
our ſelues haue ſeene with what importunacie

he hath beſought our Kinges, as beeing
their ſubiect, and perſwaded them to ſuffer
him and his partakers to liue vnder their obedience
in all libertie of conſcience. Wherefore
then ſhould we thinke, that when he were
ſoueraign he would practize againſt his people
any enterprize repugnant to that lawe,
which himſelfe, being in their race, ſought to
enioye vnder the Kings, his Lords? Shal we
preſume that ſuch a Chriſtiā & wiſe Prince,
inſtructed in the feare of God, would become
a Tyrant & torment the ſoules of his ſubiects
againſt that Religion, which with vniforme
conſent haue ſo many hundred yeres bene receiued
in the Church? eſpecially conſidering
that himſelf could not abide to haue his owne
brought into bondage. Moreouer, with you,
ye trompets of ſedition, I doe agrée that then
he ſhould be no more able then now: that ſuch
as would perſwade him that the third part of
the French are Huguenots, are no good Arithmeticians:
alſo that for our preſeruation
in that eſtate wherein we now liue, we neede
no more but to ſet againſt him our walles. I
would therefore aſke you what cauſe you
ſhould haue to feare that he would endeuour
to force you to liue in any other Religion thē
the ſame wherein he find you and your ſelues

doe deſire, when in ſo doing he may happen
to haue but euill ſucceſſe, and therewithall
loſe the loue of the whole worlde? were not
this as much as (according to the Prouerbe)
to goe about to ſhaue an Egge.
               16 As alſo the obiection that they make,
namely that in the lands of Bearne and low
Nauarre where he is ſoueraigne, the Catholick
Apoſtolick Romiſh Religion is not permitted,
is in trueth full of ſubteltie, ſlaunder
and enuie: for hereunto he doth pertinently
(in my opinion) aunſwere, that in reſpect of
the land of Bearne, it was not he that forbad
it, neither are his aduerſaries able to proue any
inhibition thereof in his name, or frō him,
but contrariwiſe he aſſureth himſelfe that it
will appeare that immediatly or ſoone after
the deceaſe of the late Queene of Nauarre
his mother, his Maieſtie by the Lord of Grāmont,
diſpatched his Letters into the country
of Bearne, importing that his will was to reſtore
and therein to ſet vp againe the exercize
of the ſayd Religion: Vpon which commandement
the States being aſſembled, they denyed
to put the ſame in executiō, fearing ſuch
troubles and ſeditions as might enſue, the
people beeing haughtie, mutinous, and difficult
enough to bee contented, together with

ſuch ſmall ſtore of Catholickes in the ſayde
Countrey to proſecute the execution thereof
if need ſhould require. What would you then
haue him to doe more? He did not the harme,
but wēt about to cure it, there was none that
deſired to take his medicine. What more can
the Phiſition doe to his Patient but prepare
him the potion which may bee to his health,
and for want of the which if he loſe himſelf, is
he not rather to blame his owne obſtinacie,
then him that could not make him take his
appointmēt. For ſince that time, the Eſtates
beeing diuers tymes aſſembled in the ſayde
Countrey, did nener require his Maieſtie to
reſtore the ſayd Catholick Romiſh Religion,
which alwaies hee offered to doe, and ſtill ſo
long as he liue, wil, if they doe require it. As
for lowe Nauarre, the exercize of Catholicke
Religion is there moſt free: yea, which is
more, throughout that Countrey there is no
aſſembly of the pretended reformed Religiō,
but onely in two places, as is moſt euidently
knowne, neither hath his Maieſtie innouated
any thing at his cōming throughout the ſayd
lands of Bearne or Nauarre. But what, is it
meete for theſe feares and friuolous doubtes
of a matter that neuer can come to paſſe, to
deſtroye this poore Realme with immortall

warres? and ſo make vs miſerable before the
tyme? crye out before we be touched? and to
haſten and aduaunce the ſorowes of our pretended
miſchiefes? will you begin to crucifie
and tye vs to a Caucaſus for our whole life
tyme? or will you force vs here to begin our
hell? Is not the King (thankes bee to God)
yong enough, in good health, and of ſufficient
diſpoſitiō to ſee the raking both of the King
of Nauarre, and of the reſt of the Princes of
his age? why thē ſhould we miſtruſt the grace
of God?
               17 As for the Proteſtation that the ſayde
Lord King of Nauarre made the yere 1584.
in a Synode by the Miniſters of his Religiō
holden in the Towne of Montauban, wherby
he proteſted and declared that he would liue
and dye therein, and defend the ſame: I wot
not well why wee are ſo ſlye as for that cauſe
to blame him, or bee more vehement againſt
him then before, as in deede a number of perſons
too much ouerruled with vnreaſonable
paſſions, haue miſliked it, and haue thervpon
gathered ſome ſiniſter iudgement of the affection
of the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre to
the Catholickes, whome moſt hartely I beſeech
with me to conſider. Firſt, that his proteſtation
imported not the rooting of vs out,

neither together with vs the Religion of the
Romiſh Church, as the League doth him and
his partakers: ſo that his proteſtation is ſimply
defenſiue, and could not therefore be more
gentle, for the which wee are rather to commend
then to reproue him, ſith our ſelues are
bound daily to make the like profeſſion in the
Catholicke Apoſtolicke Romiſh Church: alſo
that euery faithfull Chriſtian is likewiſe
bound by the Sacrament of Baptiſme to
make the like declaration: eſpecially Kings
and Princes, who ought to be mirors & ſpectakles
to their ſubiects: yea, the confeſſion of
their faith ſhould ſerue for a publick example
in the aſſemblies made for the Eſtate of the
Church, ſuch as are ye Counſailes, Sinodes,
and other like, wherein it hath euermore bene
noted, that Emperours, Kings and Princes
thereat aſſiſtant, did make profeſſion of their
faithes, with proteſtation to defend the ſame.
Hereof wee haue for teſtimonie Conſtantine
the Great, in the Counſaile of Nice: Theodoſe
the Yonger, in the Counſaile of Epheſus:
Martian, in the Counſaile of Calcedon:
Iuſtinian the firſt, in the Counſaile of Conſtantinople:
Charlemaigne, in the Counſaile
of Francfort, with infinite other Chriſtian
and Catholicke Princes. Sith therefore the

King of Nauarre hath bene brought vp in
that Religion which he holdeth, and that the
King by his Edicts permitteth the free exercize
thereof throughout his Realme, why
ſhould wee miſlike that hee aſſiſting at an aſſembly
thereof, proteſteth to liue and dye in
the defence of the ſame? eſpecially ſeing that
it is no let, but that when by a lawfull Counſaile,
either generall or nationall, (which the
King and his Counſaile ſhall thincke moſt
ſufficient for that purpoſe) we ſhall haue perſwaded
him not to bee caried awaye without
reaſon, hee may immediatly returne and proteſt
that hee hath bene miſled, and that hee
weareth not the ſworde but for the defence of
the Romiſh Church, as now hee voweth the
vpholding of his owne. Moreouer, I would
that ſuch as are offended at the ſayd Proteſtation,
ſhould know that the occaſion that moued
the ſayd Lorde King of Nauarre to bee
preſent at the ſayd aſſembly at Montauban,
was not ſmall, neither of ſmall importance to
the reputation of him and his Eſtate: for it is
not vnknowne to all that his enemies had
raiſed a ſpeech aſwell among al forraine Nations,
and throughout Europe, as alſo perticulerly
in this Realme, that the ſayde Lorde
King of Nauarre, had put from about his perſon

the Miniſters of his Religion: that hee
went to Maſſe: to be briefe, that to the ende
by the death of the late Mounſier the Duke,
to inſinuate himſelfe further in his Maieſties
fauour, and to bee neerer vnto him he had determined
to al
                     •
                  er his Religion. Which was
a ſubtile? 
                     •
                  llicie both to bring him into ſuſpition
with his owne partakers, and into contempt
among the Catholickes: ſo as by that
meanes both parts might haue forſaken and
deſpiſed him, and ſo he might become a pray
to their fayned League, as a man light, vnconſtant,
and of ſmall ſtedfaſtneſſe, which is
one of the chiefeſt things that euery Chriſtiā
Prince ought to abhorre, eſpecially in cauſes
of Religiō, which we may not lightly chāge,
neither without great notice of the cauſe, and
the diſcourſe thereof publickly argued in the
Church of God, but eſpecially in our awne
conſciences. Wherefore good men neither
ought, ne cā miſlike that the ſayd Lord King
of Nauarre doth proteſt to liue and dye in his
Religion, permitted vnder the Kings authoritie
by his Maieſties Edicts, publiſhed euen
by ye decree of the States of the Realm: neither
are wee to terme him an hereticke or obſtinate
perſon, vntill wee haue lawfully by a
free vniuerſall or nationall Counſaile, (whether

ſhall ſeeme moſt expedient) condemned
that opinion which he holdeth. Will ye likewiſe
that I ſhewe you what miſtruſt the Catholickes
may conceiue of his goodneſſe and
ſinguler clemencie? Then would I pray the
moſt paſſionate to conſider and looke vpon
his famelie: They ſhall finde the ſame to conſiſt
for the moſt part of Catholicke Officers.
But of what ſorte? Euen ſuch as are neereſt
about his perſon, who haue him in their hāds
vpon their honors and conſciences, to whom
he committeth himſelfe, and vpon whom of
himſelf he doth depend, as vpon his keepers,
Maiſters of his Guardrobe, Stewardes, and
many others, who before his face with his liking
and contentation being in his trayne, do
ordinarely go to the Maſſe, & aſſiſt at the deuine
Seruice miniſtred after the maner of
the Catholick Romiſh Church. To be brief,
euen with this qualitie he acknowledgeth thē
for his good, faithfull and loyall ſeruants.
This could they not aſſure themſelues of, neither
yet ſerue him with good hearts, beeing
ſuch men of honor as they are, if in his behauiours
they could perceiue any miſtruſt
(which is the nource of hatred and mallice)
againſt the profeſſors of their Religion, or if
they could finde (which were eaſie to doe) that

he did euill entreate or forbid them to ſerue
God after their maner, and ſo ſought to bee
the tormentor of their conſciences. To conclude,
al theſe cōſiderations alledged againſt
the King of Nauarre, which are neither true
neither of any outwarde apparence, cannot
in ye cōſciences of good men, & truely Frēch,
debarre him from beeing ſufficient and capable
of the Crowne of France: yea further, I
ſay that the ſame notwithſtanding, he is your
true and lawfull King, to whome onely you
are bound to obeye in cace during his life, the
ſayde occaſion of ſubſtitution ſhould fall out,
which God forbid, and which alſo neither he
ne wee ought or ſhould deſire, if either wee
were Chriſtians, either els did beare any iot
of hartie good will or affection to our King.
               18 To proceede, let vs ſee whether a king
houlding the Scepter, or raigning ouer any
eſtate, eſpecially ouer ours, may appoint and
nominate any other ſucceſſor then him whom
nature and the Lawe of the Realme haue giuen
him. This queſtion I do not moue without
cauſe, for in trueth the perturbers of the
peace of this Crowne, and ſuch as iniuſtly do
pretend to ſet thereinto a foote, haue made a
League which they entitle Holy. but al good
med doe truely name Bloody with the Pope.

the Spanierd and the Sauoyan, the conſpired
enemies to France and the Royall blood
thereof, through whoſe helpe they hope to leauy
an Army, wherwith to come into the hart
of the Realme, onely, ſay they, ſimply to ſommon
the moſt Chriſtian King to name a ſucceſſor
at their deuotions. Oh what an execrable
miſchiefe! to ſeeke to force vs to enfringe
the ſucceſſiue lawe of this Realme, whereof
we haue ſo many worldes enioyed the bleſſed
good hap? What impudency thoſe that haue
not almoſt whereof to liue in their owne houſes,
to goe about to preuent and ouerthrowe
the order and Eſtate of ſo great an Empire?
This is a wonderfull bouldneſſe, to endeuour
to compell ſo mightie a Monarcke as
the French King, and their owne lorde being
yong, healthy, and ſuch a one as it if pleaſe
God, hee may graunt him the bleſſing of the
poſteritie of Abraham, to chooſe him a man to
be his Heir. But the French men doe aſſure
them ſelues, that they haue a King that is of
better bringing vp then ſo, one that is valeant,
feareth God, and is ielous of his honour,
yea ſuch a-one as would not for the getting of
the whole worlde make ſuch a breache in his
conſcience, reputation, vertue, and memory
that our, Children ſhould haue cauſe atro carbone

illum notare, ſaying that he had ſo farre
hated himſelfe and his owne blood, as to haue
corrupted the Lawes, whereby after his predeceſſors
he doth raigne euen ſince the originall
of the Monarchie, and to haue tranſferred
the Crowne out of his owne famely, for
the ſatiſfying of the raſhneſſe of thoſe, who
finding them ſelues in Armes, might haſten
his time, to the end, to cauſe him the ſooner to
leaue them his roume. For what dareth not
Ambition and deſire to Raigne vndertake?
Moreouer, I doe moſt humbly beſeech his
Maieſtie to pardon me, though I boldly ſhew
him, that it is a thing that hee may not doe:
Alſo that the Lawe of the Realme, whereby
him ſelfe is King, forbiddeth hym to meddle
therewith, becauſe the ſame taken order therin,
vnto whom it is commendable in the Maieſtie
of a Monarke to acknowledge him ſelfe
bounden. And thus was it iudged, declared,
and put in execution by the Parliament of
the Peeres of France for Charles the ſeauenth
againſt the treaty which king Charles
the ſixt in the yere 1420. made in ye towne of
Troye in Champagne at the Mariage of his
daughter Lady Katherin vnto King Henrie
the fifth of Englande, which imported the
graunt and minde of the ſayd King Charles

the ſixt, to be that the ſayd King of England
or his iſſue male comming of the ſayd mariage,
ſhonld be called to ye Crowne of France,
& the ſaid Charles the ſeueuth be thereof debarred
and diſinherited for euer.Bald. in l. ex hoc iur
                        •
                      fl. de Iuſt. & Iur. This is not
now, ſay our Maiſters, the firſt time that it
hath bene and perpetually ſhall be obſerued
by ye Salick law of this floriſhing Crowne,
which the King that houldeth the Scepter
cannot alter, becauſe he is but a tutor, protector,
collector and adminiſtrator thereof, ſalua
eius ſubstantia: itaque nec donare, nec perdere
poterit, neither otherwiſe diſpoſe of the proximitie
of his bloud then the law of the Realm
will beare, neither yet tranſferre it into any
other hand then that whereto it apperteineth,
although hee can haue no cauſe to loue the
ſame:Deuter. 21. 
                  A man hauing two wiues, the one loued,
the other hated, & that thei haue both brought
him ſonnes, aſwel the loued as the hated, & the
ſonne of the hated bee the firſt borne, when the
tyme commeth that he will deuide his inheritance,
he ſhall not make the ſonne of the beloued
his eldeſt to the preiudice of the ſonne of the
hated who is the firſt borne: but hee ſhall acknowledge
the ſonne of the hated for his eldeſt,
and he ſhall giue him two partes of whatſoeuer
he hath, for the ſame was the beginning of his

ſtrength, vnto whom the right of promogeniture
belongeth, ſaith the text: ſo that the nereſt
of the bloud is creditor: yea he is moreouer I
ſay factus dominus by the deceaſe of his predeceſſor,Ioh. And. in cap. licet de vor. Panor. conc. 3 Bal. in par. illud de proh. feud. alien. Iaſon in l. nemo ff. de leg. 1. Bened. in cap. Raim. verſ. in eodem teſtamento x. de teſtam. by the deceaſe of his predeceſſor,
& holdeth nothing of him: but whatſoeuer
hee hath hee holdeth by the vertue and
authoritie of the lawe of France. Thus doe
Ih. Andrew, Balde, Panorme, Iaſon, Wil.
Benedict, and all other Writers expreſſely
ſpeake of our Realme, ſo as who ſo would
take any other courſe and maiore vi corrupt
nature, it would be a blemiſh to his conſciēce
and ſoule, and thereof he ſhould aunſwere before
God: beſides that whatſoeuer hee ſhould
take in hand, ſhould be voyde and of no effect,
but ſubiect to reſtitution by publicke iuſtice,
to the preiudice of his reputation. All men
doe knowe what ſmall loue was betweene
Charles the eight and Lewes Duke of Orleance,
when hee was called to the Crowne
and bare the name of Lewes the 12. alſo the
ſtoute minde of Charles to haue put his will
in executiō againſt the other, if he could haue
found any argument or pretence to put him
backe: which notwithſtanding matters were
then ordered according to the rule of the law
of France. Now the King ſheweth ſufficient
demonſtration by that good will and care

whereby he hath honored ye King of Nauarre
ſo farre as to accompt him for his Brother in
lawe, that he both loueth and cheriſheth him,
and alſo will take him into his protection: ſo
farre is this good Prince from going about
to blemiſh his memorie with ſuch a deede, as
the perturbers of the Peace af this Realme
doe perſwade themſelues.
               19 Sith therefore the people and ſubiects
to this Crowne may not put to their handes,
neither diſpence vppon whatſoeuer occaſion
with the oath that they owe to their naturall
Princes: moreouer that the King can take no
other order then the foundation and lawe of
the Realme will beare: let vs ſee whether it
apperteyneth to the Pope of Roome, as head
of the Church, to meddle therein. I knowe
that the Pope worſhippers beeing more paſſionate
then the true Catholicks, do ſo thinck
and beleeue. Auguſtin of Ancona a Doctor of
Sorbonne, hath not forgotten it in his booke
that he ſent to Pope Iohn the 22. wherein he
excepteth not ſo much as ye Realm of Frāce:
as alſo doe not Iames of Terrano Chamberlaine
to Vrban the ſixt, in his treatize of
the Papall Monarchie, wherin they do maintaine
that vnto him belongeth all power both
Spirituall and Temporall, as being head of

the Church,cap. ſignificaſti extra de elect. euen aboue the generall Counſailes,
which ſaith Pope Paſcall are not to
commaund him: And in the explication of the
decretall of the ſayd Paſcal, the Canon Doctors
doe vphold that it lyeth in the Popes power
to reuoke ye decree of a Counſaile, ouer
the which he hath all authoritie, according to
the concluſion of all the adherents to the holy
Sea of Rome, which opinion was neuertheleſſe,
as hereticall, condemned in the general
Counſailes of Conſtance and Baſil, in the
preſence of Iohn the 23. and Eugenius the 4
then Popes:3. Volum. Conc. ſeſſ. 4. & 4. Volum Cōc. ſeſſ. 12. according to which Counſailes
the auncient Biſhoppes of Rome did proteſt
to denounce vnto the Church whatſoeuer
them ſelues could not remedie. And as for
Temporall iuriſdiction ouer al Emperours,
Kings,c. praecipuè xi. q. 3. and Monarcks of the earth, they haue
made leſſe difficultie, yea, they haue dared to
ſaye, that the Emperour, who is Lord of the
world, both did and ought to yeeld his oath of
fidelitte vnto them.c. omnes de maior. & obed. And faine would they
make vs beleeue that they tooke this principle
of Sainct Clement the third Biſhop of
Rome, who proteſteth, ſay they, that he learned
it of Sainct Peter.can. alius 
                        •
                     5. q. 6. They alſo perſwade
them ſelues that Pope Zachary depoſed the
King of France, the laſt of the Merouingian

race, although in trueeh it was but his aduice
or counſaile giuen to the Nobilitie of ye land,Quaeſt. 2. cap. 8.
as W. Occham very wel ſaith in his treatize
of the power of the Church. About a hundred
and fiftie yeeres after, Boniface the ſeauenth
endeuoured by Sacriledge and other bad hehauiours,
publickly to vſurpe this Tyrannie:
which Pope Gregorie the ſeuenth otherwiſe
named Hildebrand, durſt openly maintaine,
and withall put it in practiſe againſt the Emperour
Henry the fourth, to whom he oppoſed
Rodolph Duke of Sweue, groūding his
propoſition, not vpon ye fable of Conſtantines
donation, neither vpon the liberalities of Pepin,
Carlemaign, or Lewes the Méek Kings
of France, but vpon God himſelf and Sainct
Peeter: ſaying, that of them he had receiued
the two ſwords, the Spirituall and the Temporall.
In an other place vſing theſe wordes,
Paſce oues meas, for the depoſing of the Emperour.
He ſaid alſo that he bare Claues regni
Coelorum,
                  elem. vnic. de Iurejus. to vſurpe authoritie and enterprize
againſt all the Kings in the world: by which
his great cunning, hee became King of moſt
part of Italie, notwithſtanding the Emperour
Henry gaue him 62. Battailes:Abbas Vſ. pergen. in Henr. 4. Benno de vit. Pontif. therein
excéeding the great Marcellus that was termed
the ſword of the Romaines, and the inuincible

Ceſar: of whom the one fought two and
thirtie pitcht fieldes, the other two and fiftie.
The like did Paſcall the ſecond, and Calixt
the ſecond againſt Henry the fifth, Sonne to
the aforenamed, vpon the ſame reaſons: as did
alſo Adrian the fourth and Alexander the
third, who ſet his feete vpon the necke of the
Emperour Frederick Barberouſſe: Neither
was Innocent the third more modeſt in the
behalf of Philip ſonne to the ſaid Frederick,
againſt whom hee ſtirred vp Ottho, ſonne to
the Duke of Saxony, who after was Emperour
by the name of Ottho the fourth, after
that with moſt arrogant, proud, and commandatory
ſpeeches, grounded vpon theſe words:
Tues Petrus,
                  c. Venra. bilem ext. de elect. 
                  & ſuper hanc petram aedificabo
Eccleſiam meam, adding thereto the ſaying of
almightie God to Ieremy, Ecce constituit
                        •
                     
ſuper gentes, & regna: ſo comparing himſelfe
to the Sunne,Ierem. 1. and the Emperors and Kings
to the Moone, he had pronounced ſentence of
excommunicatiō and depriuation of his Empire
againſt him.In cap. ſolitae ext. de maior. & obed. So great alſo was the mallice
of the ſayd Innocent, againſt the Emperour
Phillip, that to ſpite him, he diſanulled
the election of Luipoldus to yt Archbiſhoprik
of Mentz: wherein ſayth the Abbot of Vſpergue,
he did moſt vniuſtly. Gregorie the 9.

as ſaith Sabellicus,c. bonae memoriae extaa de elect. and the ſayde Abbot, depriued
Fredericke the ſecond of his Landes
and Realmes for friuolous cauſes and of no
importāce:Aenead. 9. lib. 9. whoſe ſentence neuertheleſſe was
confirmed and againe publiſhed by Innocent
the fourth, ſucceſſor to the ſayd Gregorie, and
after by Boniface the eight,c. ad Apoſtolicae de re iud. in 9. inſerted into his
ſixt booke of Decretals: in which place he vſeth
theſe wordes of the Scripture, Quodcún
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
ligaueris &c. as an authoritie wherein
to ground the execution of his will. Bald alſo
and Iohn Andrew, very Catholicke Glozers,
doe confeſſe that in deede he ſeemed rather
a partie then a Iudge. Ni
                     •
                  holas the 3.
who followed ſoone after, ſeeking to take the
whole gouernement of the Towne from all
but the Pope, forbad yt neither King, Duke,
Earle, or Marquize, ſhould be eſtabliſhed, or
accept the authoritie of Senator, or Gouernour
therein: declaring that the Iuriſdiction
thereof belonged priuatly to the holy Sea,
before all other: not in reſpect of Conſtantines
donation, but through theſe wordes, In
omnem terram exiuit ſonus eorum:
                  c. Fundamenta de elect. in 6. and ſuch other
which hee interpreteth as hee thincketh
good. Which in effect are the very reaſons
whereupon Boniface the eight excommunicated
King Phillip the Faire of France, and

gaue his Realme for a praye to the firſt that
could ſeaze vpon it,extrauagā
                     ti vnam ſanctam de maior & obed. as we reade in his conſtitution
in deede extrauagant: in the which he
exempteth neither Emperour nor King from
his ſubiection, euen in Temporall cauſes, as
he ſaith.c. paſtoralisdereiud. in 6 in l. liberti C. de oper. liber. Alſo by vertue of that great power,
Clement the fifth diſanulled the ſentence giuen
by the Emperour Henry the ſeauenth of
Luxēbourg, againſt Robert King of Sicille:
after hee had procured the proyſoning of the
ſame Emperour by a Muncke, in miniſtring
to him the Euchariſt. Which Balde confeſſeth
to haue bene a preſumpteous and wrongfull
deede. Finally, by thoſe Tragedies that
Iohn the 22. Benedict the 12. and Clement
the 6. ſtirred vp throughout Chriſtiandome againſt
the Emperour Lewes of Bauiere: as
alſo in our daies Alexander the ſixt, and Iulius
the ſecond, did no leſſe, neither had any
other ground. We may ſee the cauſes whereby
the Popes do pretend authoritie to depoſe
Kings, ſubuert Realmes, and giue them in
pray to whomſoeuer they thinke good. True
it is, that ſuch of them as haue moſt diſſembled,
haue euer exēpted the Realm of Frāce.
Innocent the third, writing to the Prelates
and French Nobilitie for Iohn without land
King of England,c. no
                        ••
                     t ex 
                        •
                     ra de iudi. declareth that he will enterprize

nothing againſt the Maieſtie of the
French King. But Hoſtienſis, who knewe
the Storie, doth in this place write, that the
Proteſtation was contrary to the effect, becauſe
the ſayd Innocent went about to hinder
King Phillip Auguſte from vſing his
feudall right ouer the Dutches of Normandie,
Guyenne, and other the Lands holden by
the Engliſh, and fallē into the lapſe through
the murder committed vpon Arthur his elder
brothers ſonne. In an other decretal Epiſtle
the ſame Pope confeſſeth,c. per vene rabilcm ex tra qui fil. ſint legit. that the French
King in Temporall cauſes and gouernment
of his Realme acknowledgeth no ſuperiour.
Clement the fifth in his extrauagant, for appeaſing
King Phillip the Faire, who was
ſtirred vp by the inſolencie of Boniface the
eight, diſanulled, & reuoked his declarations
againſt the Realme of France,extrauagā
                     timeruit de priuil. and aduowed
the ſame not to be ſubiect to his Sea by vertue
of the ſayd conſtitution. The ſame Pope
alſo proteſted that the power which his Officers
vſed againſt the ſaid Kings ſubiects, during
his being in the Realm, was by the permiſſion
of the ſayd Lord King: as appeareth
by the proteſtation the ſame time enrouled in
the Court of Parliamēt: for in trueth it hath
euer more bene reſolued, and is a cace moſt

certaine that the King of France doth vpon
earth acknowledge no ſuperiour in whatſoeuer
cōcerneth the pollicie & gouernement of
his Crowne, neither was euer ſubiect to the
Romain Empire, from the which he wreſted
the Gaules with the point of the ſworde. And
although the French Kings were ſometimes
Emperours them ſelues, yet did they neuer
ſubmit this Crowne to the Diadem Imperiall:
whereupon the Kings Atorney general
would not ſuffer the Emperour Charles the
fourth, beeing in the Parliament, there to
make a Knight, without king Charles the 5.
his expreſſe permiſſion: As alſo the Emperor
Charles the fifth paſſing through Fraunce,
obteyned the good will of King Frances the
firſt, to pardon ſundry offenders, becauſe no
other then his Maieſtie hath power or authoritie
ouer the temporall cauſes of his Realm.
among which is vndoubtedly the puniſhing
of tranſgreſſions, yea, euen of hereſie, of the
which wee now ſpeake, the notice and Iuriſdiction
whereof haue euer more bene left, and
with good reaſon belongeth to the ſeculer
Magiſtrate: becauſe we ought to conſider the
lawe of God, firſt in this world, whereto the
politicke and temporall Magiſtrate, preſeruer
of the ſocietie of men, and earthly policie,

for the auoyding of confuſion and trouble,
forceth euery one to obeye. Secondly, in the
worlde to come, wherein God onely iudgeth
and puniſheth, not leauing in this worlde, in
reſpect of himſelfe, any Magiſtrate to be the
auenger of the iniurie to him done in y• tranſgreſſion
of his ordinances.Lu. 5. & 22 For the Prieſtes
who are the guardians and Schoolemaſters
of Gods lawe, are not cōſtituted Iudges, but
eaſie Phiſitions to the ſoule: and Gods commaundements
are no ſuch Sanctions as importe
puniſhment, but moſt louing doctrine
and admonitious: otherwiſe if by the ſworde
we ſhould be forced to the obſeruing of Gods
lawe, the deſert were ſmall. Vppon which
poynt the Apoſtle ſayd:2. ad Cor. cap. 1. 
                  Not that wee rulee ouer
your faith, but are helpers to your ioye. And
in an other place:2. ad Tim. cap. 3. 
                  All Scripture is inſpired frō
aboue, and is profitable to teach, to conuince, to
correct, and to instruct to righteouſneſſe.
                  in Dialog. de dignit. ſacerd. Hee
ſaith not to force, or to puniſh. Chriſoſtome very
carefully deuideth the royall power from
the miniſterie of the Goſpell, ſaying that the
miniſterie is a function committed by God,
to the ende to teach without weapons, alſo
that it is no power to giue or take awaye
Realmes, neither to make lawes for politick
gouernment. Our French Biſhop S. Hilarie

writeth as much to the Emperour Conſtantius:
alſo againſt Auxentius Biſhop of
Millan. And this the good Fathers learned
at the mouth of the Sonne of God our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt,Matth. 20. Luc 22. when he ſayd to his Apoſtles,
The Kings of the nations haue dominion ouer
them,
                  Math. 19. 
                  but it ſhall not be ſo with you.
                  Matth. 10. Luc 12 In an other
place hee promiſeth them that they ſhall
ſit with the Sonne of God, whē he ſhal come
in Maieſtie to iudge mankinde: but that contrariwiſe
ſo long as they remaine in ye world
exercizing their Miniſterie, they ſhall bee
brought before Kings and politicke Magiſtrates
for his ſake:Ioan. 6. ſo farre ſhall they be from
being Kings and Iudges themſelues.Ioan. 18. The
head of the Church, euen Ieſus Chriſt, fled
when they ſought to make him King, declaring
y• his Kingdome was not of this worlde,
wherfore he would not be iudge among thoſe
that were at controuerſie: yea, he ſubmitted
himſelf to the Kings of the earth,Luc. 12. paying vnto
them the tribute which was vnto thē due,
together with that which was aſſeſſed vponMatth. 17.
the heads of euery of his Apoſtles, euermore
referring the reward of his grace,Ioan. 18. & reuenge
of treſpaſſes againſt him committed, vnto the
kingdome of heauen: enioining his Apoſtles
to doe the like, and to imitate his example, as

they haue done.2. ad Tim. & 1. ad Cor cap. 6. The Apoſtle Sainct Paule
ſayd: Let no man that fighteth in the Lordes
warfare trouble himſelfe with the matters of
this life: Againe, The minister of the Lorde
ought to be louing to all men, meet to teach, paciently
bearing with the wicked, with modestie
reprouing ſuch as withstād the trueth. Briefly
in one word to ſay all: there be two kinds of
Iuriſdictions: the one earthly cōmitted into
the hands of Kings and Princes, to whome
euery one of whatſoeuer degree or calling,
Spirituall or Temporall,Rom. 12. Prieſtes, Biſhops
or high Prieſtes ought to obey, as it is written,
Let euery ſoule bee ſubiect to the ſuperiour
powers, vpon which place Chriſoſtome ſayth
the Apoſtle vſed this word euery, to ſhew that
there is no creature that may be exempt, whether
he be ſaith he, Apoſtle, Prophete, Euangeliſt,
Prieſt, Monk, or other whoſoeuer. We
alſo finde, that in the Primetiue Church, before
pride & Ambition tooke roote in the Biſſhops
hartes, that the Popes of Rome neuer
made any queſtion thereof. Wee haue alſo amoug
vs a requeſt exhibited by Boniface the
firſt to Honorius Emperour of the Weſt,
wherein hee beſeecheth him to decree, that afterwarde
the Biſhops and Popes of Rome
might not bee choſen by fauour, or any other

vnlawfull meane,c. Eccleſiae c. victo. 97. diſt. c. ſi duo 79. diſtinct. whereto the ſame moſt Catholike
Prince maketh an aunſwere worthie
ſuch a requeſt. In the time of Odoacer, King
of the Herules, who began to raigne at
Rome in the yeere 471. and ruled full 14.
yeres, after hee had put to death Oreſtes and
his Sonne Auguſtulus the laſt Emperour of
the Weſt vntill Charlemagne, there were
goodly decrees publiſhed and receiued in the
Church by the Clergie, vntill ſuch tyme as
Theodoricke the Wiſigot,c bene q
                        •
                     i de 96. diſt. whome Zeno the
Emperour of the Eeaſt ſent into Italy, had
ouerthrowen hym. Pelagius the firſt, made
confeſſion of his faith, and ſware in the hands
of Ruffin the Embaſſadour of of Childebert
King of France. Pope Leo the fourth ſware
and proteſted,c. ſatagendum 25. diſt. that he would and did intend to
obſerue the Lawes which the Emperour Lothair
the firſt, ſonne to Lewes the Meek, and
Neuew to Charlemagne, made at Rome in
the preſence of Pope Eugenius the ſecond,
whereof ſome are inſerted into the Booke of
Digeſtes,cap. Conſtitutio feudi dr Lotharij lib. 1. fud. the inſcription whereof do import
that the Emperour made them ante ianuas
beati petri ad limina, in atrio: which was the
place where the Chriſtian Emperours were
wont to make and publiſh their Edicts, if we
maye beleeue Caſſiodore, and others. The

ſaid Emperour alſo created certaine Magiſtrates
in the Towne to exercize the imperiall
Iuriſdiction.Caſſſod. lib. 9. Varior. Blōd. Sabell. Aegen. Platin. The ſame Leo doth ſufficiently
declare what reſpect the high Prieſts
of Rome did in thoſe daies beare to the Emperours,
when he ſued to the ſame Lothaire
and his ſonne Lewes the ſecond, to conferre
the Church of Rheatine or Tuſculum to one
Colonus a Deacon,c. Rheatina. 63. diſtinct. aſſuring their Maieſties
of his ſufficiency, and promiſing in the name
of the ſayde Colonus, that he ſhould praye to
God for them. This was the ſame Leo that
pleaded his cauſe and purged himſelfe of the
treazon whereof hee was accuſed before the
Emperour Lewes the ſeconde,c. de captulis c. fin. 10. diſtinctr ſonne to the
ſayd Lothaire, as appeareth in the decree of
Gratian. The like declaration did Pope
Iohn the eight make to the ſame Emperour
Lewes the ſecond,c. ſi nos incompetenter 2. q. 7. ſonne to Lothaire. By the
decretall Epiſtle of Honorius the third, who
liued about the yeere 1216. it appeareth that
as yet the remembraunce of the Emperours
lawes was not vtterly aboliſhed out of the
Catholick Church,c. 1. extra de Iuram. calum. and that the Prieſtes and
high Prieſtes had not as yet wholy ſhaken of
the yoke of y• ſame, no not in thoſe that they
terme Spirituall cauſes, as, if any queſtion
were moued of an oath in law for the deciſion

of proces,l. 1. C. de iure. calum. in which cace he reneweth the auncient
edict of Martian, and Iuſtiniā the firſt.
To cōclude, for the ſtopping of the mouthes
of thoſe that doe maintaine, that the Pope,
Biſhops, or other of the Cleargie, may eſtabliſh
any earthly Kingdome apart, which ſhal
not bee ſubiect to the Emperours and Kings
of this world, but rather ſuch a one as may at
pleaſure commaunde and ſupplant the ſame,
let them dilligently ſearch throughout the
whole Scripture, what authoritie the Kings
and Princes of Iſrael, had ou
                     •
                  r the Prieſtes
and Cleargie in Gods lawe, which ſince the
tyme of grace is not deminiſhed, and there
ſhall they euidently finde their great authoritie
ouer them, notwithſtanding it was neuer
lawfull for the Kings to execute the office
of the Prieſtes: for vndoubtedly the miniſterie
is one thing, and the orders & diſcipline
of the Cleargie is an other,c. ſiquidem c. ſicut. xi. q. 3. and meerely temporall.
The other head of Iuriſdiction is in
heauē, which we are to looke for at the iudgement
of GOD, and yet not to perſwade our
ſelues that the lawe of Ieſus Chriſt is lame
or vnperfect, becauſe in it it conteineth not any
puniſhment or earthly reuenge of treſpaſſes
againſt euill liuers, conſidering that
the ſame beeing heauenly and ſpirituall, it

will yeeld reward or puniſhment in the euerlaſting
world: ſo that (as ſayd Alexander Seuerus
of periury:l. i. C. de reb. cred. & iute iu
                        •
                     . 
                  Whoſoeuer offendeth againſt
God, hath God a ſufficient reuenger.) our good
God hath referred to himſelfe all the puniſhment,
to the end the ſinner may haue meanes
to acknowledge his offence, and repent the
ſame in this world.Mat. 28. 1 ad Tim. 3. an Tit. cap. 1. True it is, that if ye earthly
Magiſtrate hath in his pollicie taken any
order for ſuch cauſes, then is it his office to reuenge
the iniurie done to his edicts and decrees:
for ſo,c. principes. 23 q 5. c. fin. 2. q. 7. as ſaith Iſidore, The Kingdome
of God encreaſeth through the meanes of earthly
Realmes, to the ende ſuch as be of the body of
the Church, if they offende or blaſpheme, may
be puniſhed by the rigor of Princes, and ſo that
diſcipline whereto the Church can not binde
them, may neuertheleſſe bee preſerued through
the authoritie of Monarchies. The like wherof
haue bene vſed againſt heretickes by all
Chriſtian Princes, eſpecially in our France,
by an infinite number of lawes both olde and
newe of our moſt Chriſtian Kings.Lud 9. Feanc. 1. Henr. 2. Barol. 9. And in
troth, if the Biſhops or Prieſtes ſhould take
notice of the puniſhmēt of hereticks, it would
breede confuſion of Iuriſdictions and offices:
aſwell might the Goldſmith be iudge of the
golde that himſelfe had wrought: The Phiſition

of his owne cure: to bee briefe, euery one
ſhould pleade and decide his owne cauſe, contrary
to al reaſonable order. The example alſo
of the Apoſtle Sainct Paule,Act. 25. whome the
Iewes accuſed of hereſie, doth ſufficiently
teach vs, when by himſelf it appeareth that he
was brought before Feſtus the Emperours
Lieutenant, vnto whom the accuſed did confeſſe
that y• notice of his cauſe did apperteine,
and therefore required aſſignation for his accuſers
before the Imperiall Maieſtie. The
Emperour Honorius appointed the Prouoſt
Marcellus for Iudge & Arbitrator betwene
the Catholickes and Donatiſtes.Opt. in hiſt, Afr. Dulcius
alſo was Prouoſt of the Empire, who at the
purſuit of the Catholickes, was enioyned to
make vp the proceſſe of the ſaid Donatiſtes
in Affricke, as Sainct Auguſtin doth report:
and they required to haue them condemmed
by his ordenaunces,tract. 2. ad 3. cap. Ioh. as teſtifieth Gratian in
his decree: wherein in an other place is written
the opiniō of Pope Pelagius,c quando 23. q. 5. importing
that it were meete that hereticks were puniſhed
by the ſeculer power, according to which
reaſon Sainct Auſten alſo doth teſtifie that
the Emperour Valentinian ſent the Prouoſt
Dalmatius vnto him to aſſigne him in his
priuie Counſaile.Epiſt. 32. So as we are not to doubt

but that the puniſhment of heretickes apperteyneth
to the Princes temporall Iuriſdiction,l. nemo 
                        •
                     . de Apo. ſtat.
who by his decrees hath limited the puniſhments
which they may deſerue.
               20 In deede it is the duetie of the Prieſtes
and Biſhops to know,Mat. 18. 1. ad Cor. 5. and withall to declare
by the holy Scriptures, together with the
iudgement of the vniuerſal Church, who it is
that hath tranſgreſſed the will of God, and
being a Chriſtian, hath departed or diſunited
himſelfe from the body of the Church. Thoſe
bee the true kayes of heauen which God hath
put into their handes,Mpt. 16. and the two Swordes
that they beare, whereby the Prieſt ſheweth
and poynteth out ſuch as are ſoluti vel legati
ab Eccleſia: wherein onely conſiſteth his power
to bind or loſe in heauen: as S. Hierome
doth very well note in his opening of y• place
of Sainct Mathewe,Diſtinct 18. cap. 7. which concerneth this
authoritie: as alſo the Maiſter of Sentences
is of the ſame opinion: neither is this power
ſo ſmall that the faithfull Chriſtians ſhould
contemne it: For without doubt ſinne proceedeth
of offence, and ſo immediatly is brought
in the bond that thereby we make to Gods enemie,
which vnleſſe we doe reuoke, we muſt
of neceſſitie be driuen out of the Church, and
as rotten members of the ſame be giuen ouer

to Satan. Neuertheleſſe, he who by contrition
for his ſinnes, and confeſſion of the ſame
will reclayme himſelfe, doth immediatly recouer
three benefites repugnant to the other:
which are, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes: the cancelling
and diſcharge of the Obligation made
vnto the deuill, and reconſiliation to the Catholicke
Church:Magiſt. ſent lib. 4. diſtinct. 28. cap. 4. wherein conſiſteth the true
penance that the Prieſt or Biſhop doth miniſter
and enioine vs by vertue of his authoritie
to binde or loſe in heauen or in earth. So as
it is euident that the order of Prieſthood and
Eccleſiaſtical power, hath euermore bene neceſſary
in the Church of God to keepe, teach,
and maintaine our ſoules in the knowledge
of his holy will, to the ende thereby to obteine
his grace and fauour in the life to come. For
notwithſtanding man was created to the Image
of God, and of his euerlaſting Kingdome,
whereby he was perfect, and needed no
other inſtruction or Schoolemaiſter, yet after
his fall, and the corruption of our firſt father,
he ſtood in great neede to bee reſtored to
his former knowledge, and the fauour of his
Creator: for the obteyning whereof, hee was
enioyned to keepe ſundry precepts, and very
ſtraight lawes, vnder paine of deadly and euerlaſting
dānation, vntill the tyme of grace,

wherein it pleaſed God to breake and take away
the vayle and rigor of the auncient law,
and to forgiue our offences through the paſſion
of his deare Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, for the
enioying of the fruites whereof, he hath left
vs in pledge his holy Sacraments, for the adminiſtrations
and diſcipline of the which, he
hath cōmitted and ſent his Apoſtles, Prieſtes
and Doctors, the adminiſtrators and guardians
of the ſame: In ſuch wiſe that as the
ende and purpoſe of the Architect is the perfection
and finiſhing of his building & houſe,
ſo the onely end and office of the Cleargie, is
ſufficiently to teach vs thoſe things that appertayne
to our faith and beliefe, reforming
our actions by admonitions and gentle perſwaſions,
that thereby together with Gods
grace, wee may atteyne to euerlaſting ſaluation:
neither hath God giuen them any other
dominion ouer vs, but onely admonition and
inſtruction in his knowledge, ſetting before
vs the reward of well doing, and the reuenge
of wickedneſſe in the vniuerſall doome of the
heauenly Maieſtie.
               21 But in aſmuch as the people haue not
to deale therewith, alſo that the Biſhoppe of
Roome in that qualitie which he pretendeth,
hath no ſuch power, his authoritie beeing

meerely and ſimply Spirituall, and in no
poynt concerning the Realmes of the world:
what ſhal we then ſay if Emperours or other
ſoueraigne Kings were (as they are men and
ſubiect to corruption,) hereticks, or otherwiſe
euill liuers? were it not a marueilous offence
to ſee them raigne with all power, and be as
ſcourges and perſecutors of Gods Church?
In this queſtion I am to deſire the French
to weigh the aunſwer of that wiſe and great
perſonage Sainct Auguſtin. If Emperours,
ſayth he,Epiſt. 50. ad Bonif. 
                  be in error, and according to their error
do preſcribe lawes againſt the trueth, wherby
the righteous may be tryed and crowned, he
aunſwereth not that they muſt be expelled or
depoſed of their Empire,c. Imperatores xj. q. 3. but onely, wee muſt
not doe thoſe things that wickedly they commaund.
                  Iulianus xj. q. 3.
Neither doth Sainct Ambroſe finde
fault with the obedience that the Chriſtian
Souldiers yeelded to the Emperour Iulian
the Apoſtata: onely he warneth them to doe
nothing repugnant to the honor of God. S.
Peeter perſwaded not the Church to depoſe
Nero, the conſpired enemie of Ieſus Chriſt,
but contrariwiſe admoniſhed all Chriſtians
to honor and pray for him. The holy Legion
Fulminatory made no difficultie to go to the
Warres, and to venture their liues vnder the

Emperour M. Antonius the Philoſopher,l. 30. ff. de pen
                        •
                     
                   a
Prince that was but a bad Chriſtian, and ſuch
a one as contrary to the pietie of Religion
made a ſeuere Decree,Euſebe. lib 5. caeteri in M. Anton. vita. Tertul ad Scapul. the markes whereof
are yet to be ſeene in our Pandects, and Euſebius,
Capitolinus, Dion, Xiphilinus, and
others doe make mention of the ſame. Tertullian
in his Apologeticall treatize, ſufficiently
ſetteth downe the mallice of the Emperour
Seuerus againſt the Church of the
Chriſtians,In Apolog. and yet let vs mark what he writeth
of their affection to the Prince. Wee are
(ſaith he) diſcryed vnto the Emperours Maieſtie,
and yet were the Christians neuer proued
to bee Albinians, Nigrians, or Caſſians, who
were the conſpirators againſt the Emperors,
M. Antonius the Philoſopher, Commodus,
Pertinax, and Seuerus, each after other, but
contrariwiſe thoſe that lately tooke the oath &
condemned the Christians, haue bene found to
be the Emperours enemies: neuer a Christian
was there in that faction, as knowing that the
Imperiall Maiestie ordeyned of God, muſt bee
loued, reuerenced, and honored, whoſe prosperitie,
as alſo the welfare of the whole Romaine
Empire, they are to deſire, ſo long as the world
ſtandeth, for ſo long ſhall the ſame continue.
We doe therfore worſhip the Prince, according

as is lawfull and requiſite, his Maiestie beeing
ſecond after God, of whom he houldeth his authoritie,
and hath nothing greater thē the heauenly
power. Conſtantius, Valens, Zeno, Anaſtazius,
Iuſtinian the firſt and ſecond, Heraclius,
Leo the 3. Phillip Bardanes, Conſtantin
the 5. Leo the 4. and ſome other Emperours,
who were adiudged hereticks, were
neuer depoſed, notwithſtanding the Catholicke
Church condemned their errors, which
neuertheleſſe is permitted to excommunicate
Kings and Princes, Sectaries of falſe opinions,
or otherwiſe euill liuers, in cace the
ſame will not acknowledge their vice or trāſgreſſion:
which one onely Biſhoppe or high
Prieſt whatſoeuer may not doe without the
iudgement and notice of the Church, after it
hath heard the King or Prince in his exeptiōs
and defences: wherein vndoubtedly ought to
be ſtrictly obſerued all order of Iuſtice,c. praecipuè c. ſi epiſcopus c. ſiquis. presbiter. c. ſi quis epiſcopus xi. q. 3. in reſpect
aſwell of the grauitie of the cauſe as of
the qualitie of the perſon in queſtion, wherevpon
may depend the trouble and ſubuertion
of Chriſtiā policie, through ſuch ciuil warres
as might enſue, together with the bloud of
the poore faithfull, which the weapons of the
prouoked Prince might ſhed: as Sainct Auguſtin
to the ſame purpoſe doth confeſſe, and

diſcourſe vpon in his Gloſe vpon that precept
whereby wee are commaunded to obeye our
Kings. Moreouer, excommunication denoū
                  ced
contrary to the orders of the auncient fathers
obſerued in the Church,ad Rom. 131. ad Cor. 6. and without
the knowledge thereof, would proue vniuſt,
and vtterly voyde, and thereby not the taxed
but the taxer might take harme: as Gratian
teacheth, expounding a place of S. Hierome
vpō Leuiticus.c. ſiquis non rect. 24 q. 3. c. manet 24. q. 1. Pope Leo alſo affirmeth that
the priuiledge of Peter is in force whereſoeuer
iudgemēt is giuen according to his equitie.
Innocent the third, how zealous he was
of his authoritie, confeſſeth that if the excommunicated
pretende that vniuſtly hee was ſo
denounced, hee maye complaine and exhibite
the cace of his innocencie. In France by the
priuiledges of the Flowerdeluce,c. per tu
                        ••
                      extra de ſent. excom. it hath often
by arreſt of y• Court bene adiudged, yt the
King, his officers or ſubiects in body or communaltie,
cannot bee excommunicated by the
Pope, or any other Biſhop whoſoeuer Whervpon
Charles du Molin, a famous aduocate,
and one of the greateſt Lawyers of his time,
teſtified that he had to that ende an expreſſe
Bull of Pope Martin the 5.In. 4. part. ſtil. parl. extrauagā
                     ti frequentes de iudic. which was nothing
repugnant to the lawe by the Popes
commonly obſerued: for Iohn the 22. declareth,

that he may graunt priuiledge to ſome
one, that hee ſhall not bee excommunicated:
whereupon Pope Eugenius the fourth, concurring
with the Court of the holy Apoſtolick
Sea, graunted to the French that no Biſhop
whatſoeuer, ſhould entangle them in the
ſentēce of excōmunication. But we haue not
for this occaſiō to deale either with Bulls,extrauagāti diuina priuil. or
priuiledges of ye Church of Rome: for by the
rights, authority, & dignitie of the Maieſtie of
our king, it is not lawfull for the Pope, or any
Biſhop whatſoeuer, to excommunicate either
towne, or communaltie ſubiect to the Realm
of Fraunce. By reaſon whereof in the yeere
1488. the Atturney generall appealed as of
abuſe from the excommunication that the
Pope had laid vpō the Inhabitants of Gaūt,
becauſe they had dealt hardly with the Emperour
Maximilian their Earle, and Vaſſall
to the King of Fraunce, to whome onely hee
ought to haue had recourſe, as vnto his Lord,
for remedie: the Pope hauing no authoritie ouer
the ſubiects of this Crowne. To y• ſame
ende alſo Charles the fifth by an Edict verefied
in his Parliament in the yeere 1369. expreſſely
forbad all Biſhops, and Prelates, for
whatſoeuer cauſe, to lay the ſentence of excō
                  municatiō
vpon any Towne, Communaltie,

Colledge, or body corporate of his Realme,
the ſame beeing vnder the onely correction
and power of himſelfe, and of none other in
the world: which Edict was alſo renewed by
Lewes the 11. in the yeere 1467. whereof is
growne a cuſtome inuiolably obſerued in
France, as the Oracle of Apollo, of Appellations
as of abuſe in the Court of Parliament
againſt the Pope and his Cleargie: without
which remedy, the Prieſtes would in France
erect an other and more mightie Monarchie
then the Kings, for the maintenance and dignitie
of the which al good Frenchmen ought
rather to dye then ſuffer it to be diminiſhed.
So, that the Pope and Biſhops can proceede
no further, then to excommunication of perticuler
perſons, according to the order of old
tyme obſerued by the holy Decrees and Canonicall
conſtitutions. Thus to conclude,
you ſee how to proceede againſt Kings and
ſoueraigne Princes, Hereticks, or otherwiſe
offenſiue to the Chriſtian Church: which excommunicatiōs
(being by order of law euermore
obſerued in the floriſhing and Primitiue
Church) denounced, wee are to diſpute whether
by the ſame we bee diſcharged of yt faith
and oath, that by nature wee owe vnto them.
Wherein are but too euidently knowne the

conſtitutions of the Popes Gregorie the 7.
Honorius the 3. Lucius the 3. Innocent the
3. and others, by the which they doe not onely
declare the ſubiects of an hereticall or excommunicatec. iuratos c. nos ſancto rum 16. q. 7. cap. ad abolandam c. vergētis c. fin. X. de he ret c. fin. X. de pen.
Prince abſolued from their oath of
fidelitie: but, which is more, doe vpon the like
penaltie forbid the vaſſals to obey their Lord
after he is adiudged ſuch a one. Neuertheleſſe,
I thinke not but ſuch decrees proceeded
of a meruelous paſſion of the Popes of thoſe
daies againſt the Princes of their time: And
in deede Iohn Andrew, Innocent, Archidiaconus,
Panorme, & many other learned glozers
vpon the Decretals, being of a contrary
aduice, doe alledge great difficulties therevpon,
and in their hypotheſes doe perticulerly
expounde them, in cace by the ſentence of
excommunication it bee expreſſely ſet downe
that y• ſubiects ſhall be diſcharged of all right
of vaſſelage: otherwiſe they doe iudge the obligation
not to be extinct or diminiſhed by the
excommunication of their Lord, which laſt in
ſundry conſiderations full of Religion and
ciuill pietie ſeemeth to be of great apparēce
and too too true. Firſt, that we are bound to
obeye our Kings, whether good or bad, becauſe
they are choſen & giuē to vs by the hād
of God, euen ſuch as it pleaſe him to giue to

rule ouer vs. Secondly, that the excommunication
importeth no alteration or diminutiō
of the qualitie of the perſon, nec habetis capitis
minutionem, as the Lawyers doe ſaye, to
conteine or comprehend therein depriuation,
or publication of goodes,l 3. ff. de Senat. 
                  ſed motionem ab ordine,
& Christianorum coetu, as ſaith Modeſtin
of Senator, qui Senatu motus, capite minutus
non eſt, & Romae morari poteſt. Moreouer,
excommunication is a Spirituall diſcipline,
medicine, and admonition, and hath no participation
with worldly and temporall goodes
and meanes,2. ad Cor. cap 10. whether great or ſmall, as S.
Paule ſaith, The armors of our warres are not
carnall: therfore, ſith Realmes and Lordſhips
are for the moſt parte patrimoniall,l. in agris. ff. de acq. rer. dom. l. fin. ff. de calum. l. obligatio mum ff. de obl. & act or at the
leaſt tereſtriall, whoſe propertie and poſſeſſiō
doth no way concerne the kingdome of God,
the declaratiō of the loſſe of the one, bringeth
no conſequence for the depriuation from the
other. Paul the Lawier alſo teacheth vs, that
quod alicui debetur, certis modis deberi deſinit,
among which is not to bee found the excommunicatiō
of him to whom we acknowledge
our ſelues bound: for otherwiſe the vaſſal and
ſubiect ſhould reap benefite, commoditie, and
diſcharge, in the deſtruction and hinderance
of his Lorde: Beſides, that the excommunication

tendeth not in worldly matters to
impoueriſh the partie condemned, but onely
to depriue and declare hym vnworthy the fellowſhip
of men, or to be thought a member of
the Church of GOD. He is alſo denounced
ſuch a one, firſt to be an inſtruction and example
to all other the faithfull, when they ſhall
conſider the grauitie of the offence, and thereby
waie the publick ſlaunder ariſing thereof.
Secondly, to driue the condemned to call to
mind, abhorre, and be contrite for his offence,
ſeeing hym ſelfe deliuered into the handes of
his mortall ennemy Satan, and humbly to
craue reconſiliation at the catholick Church,
from whence he is baniſhed,Epiſt. 
                        •
                     . 
                  in exilio ſinitimo,
ſaid Alexander the Martir: which wee may
ſufficiently learne by the auncient forme of
ſatiſfaction, which the Primetiue Chnrch enioyned
to the parſon excommunicate, that is,
to confeſſe his fault before the Prieſts and aſſembly
of the faithfull,Luc. 7. 2. Reg. cap. 12. in whoſe preſence hee
was reproued, blamed and condemned to abyde
in a certaine place without the communion
aud aſſembly of the Church, with certaine
outwarde workes of a penetontiary as
well in habit and behauiour as eſpecially in
his dyet, in which forme he ſhould exhibit petition
and ſupplication, both to the Prieſtes,

and to the whole cōgregation,1. ad Cor. cap. 5. item 2. cap. 2. & 7. Ioſu
                        •
                     . cap. 7. to be forgiuen
and vnbound from his offence: whervpon the
Church by the aduice of the Miniſters thereof,
ſometimes condemned hym in greate amends,
and ſo by litle and litle receiued hym
againe as ſhe thought good: For at the firſt
he was onely admitted to heare the worde of
God: after that he was receiued to the prayers
of the Church:Itaen. ii
                        •
                     . 1 cap▪ 9. Tertul. de Euſeb. lib 5. cap. 28. lib. 6. cap. 25 Sozomen lib. 9. cap. 35. can. quudragema 
                        •
                     0. diſtinct. and ſo conſequently to the
Communion of the faithfull: finally by the
impoſition of the Prieſtes handes he was reſtored
to his former eſtate, and then was it not
lawfull for any to reproch vnto him what was
paſſed. So as by this forme of excommunication
and penance, or ſatiſfaction extract out
of the auncient Counſailes of Ancira, and
Nice, we may euidently iudge that it no way
concerned the temporall goodes, as of thoſe
that the Church hath not to diſpoſe of, neither
did it importe other then the exemplary
correction of the excōmunicated, for the ſ
                     •
                  aū
                  der
by his offence committed againſt the
Church, either els according to ye holy ſcripture,
for the ſubduing of the fleſh, whereby the
ſoule may be ſaued in the day of our Lord Ieſus.
Moreouer,1. ad Cor▪ cap. 5. it ſeemeth that Gregorie the
ſeauenth, Innocent the third, and other the
high Prieſtes did ſo vnderſtand it, whē in the

excommunication of the Lords, and of thoſe
that were conuerſant and had dealings with
thē, they would not include their officers, ſeruants
and others, who by neceſſitie doe owe
them obedience, as doe the vaſſalles and ſubiects
of the Crowne,can quoniā multos xj. q 3. cap. cū illorū x. de ſent. excō. who naturally and ciuilly
are bound to their Kings and Princes:
So that the neceſſitie of their bondage exempteth
thē by the iudgement of the Church,
out of the generall excommunication denoū
                  ced
againſt all other perſons that haue dealing
with the excommunicated. And perticulerly
Innocent the third in his decretall Epiſtle
written to the Doctors of Boulogne,c. inter aliù x. de ſent. ēxcō.
declareth that the debtes, letters, and obligatiōs
of excommunicated perſons are not called
in queſtion, neither are the debtors diſcharged
of the ſame: much leſſe to be blamed
for paying and ſatiſfying their creditors, conſidering
that the neceſſitie of their obligatiōs
doe thereto bind them.Ariſt lib. 2 Politic. And there is no doubt
but the priuate famelie and houſehold of euery
one is likewiſe a little Commonwealth,
aſwell as the Commonwealth is a great famelie,
whereof the King that ruleth it is the
father and defender, ſo elected and ordeyned
by God, as father of the houſehold among the
children. Innocent the third therfore exepted

out of the excōmunication of thoſe that were
conuerſant with the condemned, all ſuch perſons
as by neceſſitie of the lawes of houſhold
were bounde to yeelde their due obedience,
which ſhall neuer bee more ſtrickt, great, or
commendable in the children of the houſehold
ſeruants, toward the father of the houſehold,
then it ought to bee in the ſubiects towarde
their King or ſoueraigne Prince. And effectually
to ſhewe that the excommunication of
the King diſchargeth not his ſubiects from
their vowed faith, let vs call to mind the auncient
examples meete and commodious for
this argument.c. eū apud xj. q. 1. volū Conc. fol. 553. Nicepb. lib 13. ca. 34. can. praecipuè c. Theogal. dum xj. q. 
                        •
                     . The Emperour Theodoſius
the firſt was iuſtly excommunicated, for the
murder of the Inhabitants of Theſſalonica:
His ſonne Arcadius, for expelling and depoſing
S. Iohn Chriſoſtome from the Church
of Conſtantinople: Zeno, and Anaſtazius, for
being Eutichians: Lothaire the firſt, for his
adulterie committed with Gualdrade: which
notwithſtanding their ſubiects were not diſcharged
of their bondes and oathes whereby
they were to them bound, againſt the which
alſo they neuer made any difficultie to obeye
thoſe Emperours, as their lawfull Lordes.
Dagobert King of Fraunce who became a
Nero, and after the firſt yeres of his quiet and

Catholicke gouernement, began about the
yeere 637. to trouble the Churches, deſtroye
the Temples, baniſh the Cleargie, and commit
an infinite number of other inſolencies,
for the which Seuerinus Biſhop of Roome,
did greatly reprooue him, was not neuertheleſſe
driuen awaye by his ſubiects, who with
earneſt prayer, obteyned at the grace of God
that this Prince repented, and euer after ſerued
God faithfully all the dayes of his life.
When Pope Celeſtin the third had excommunicated
Phillip Auguſtus King of Frāce
in y• yere 1197. for forſaking without lawfull
occaſion his wife Iſambergue, ſiſter to King
Iohn of Denmarke, his States and ſubiects
did not neuertheleſſe expell him or denye to
acknowledge him to be their King and Soueraigne.
When Boniface the eight had caſt
foorth his poyſoned Bull againſt Phillip the
Faire: the Nobles & Prelates of the Realme
aſſembled at Paris decl
                     •
                  red that the Biſhop
of Rome had no authoritie ſo to doe. When
Pope Iulius the 2. excommunicated and interdicted
King Lewes the 12.Maſſaeus in Chron. whome iuſtly
wee terme father of the people, the Prelates
and Nobilitie aſſembled at Tours, proteſted
it to be lawful to cōtemne the ſaid Thunderbolt,
& the ſame notwithſtanding did ſweare

to him their due faith and homage. When
King Henry the 2. of England was by Alexander
the 3. excommunicated & interdicted
for baniſhing Thomas Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
whom after his death the Pope canonized,
yet was he not caſt out frō his kingdome,
neither did his ſubiects with earneſt
affection denye him their accuſtomed obedience.
Iohn without Land King of the ſame
Ile, was neuer diſpoſſed, neither did his ſubiects
moleſt him, in reſpect of the curſe that
Innocent the third had denounced againſt
him in the yere 1212. vntill he became a Tyrāt
and extreme oppreſſor of the people, who
then, beeing prouoked, vnder pretence of the
ſayd interdiction, did him ſome diſpleaſure:
Howbeit, ſo ſoone as hee ſeemed willing to
mend his maners toward the Engliſh natiō,
they fell at his feete, and expulſed Lewes of
Fraunce, whom they had ſubrogated in his
place, & ſo ſoone as the ſayd Iohn was dead
admitted his ſonne Henry. King Henry the
eight of the ſame Ile, was very faithfully obeyed
by his ſubiects, after that Pope Paule
the third had excommunicated, interdicted,
aggrauated, and reaggrauated the curſe againſt
him, wherby ſome were ſomewhat ſhaken
frō his obediēce. Su
                     •
                  noo King of Denmarke

about the yeere of our Lord 850.Iohn. Magn
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     hiſt. Goth. was
iuſtly excōmunicated by y• Biſhop of Roſcholech,
for becomming an Apoſtata, and procuring
to ſlay ſundry of the Princes of his blood
in the Church founded in the name of the holy
Trinitie in the ſame Towne of Rhoſcholech,
the entry into which Church this Biſhop
forbad him, together with the communiō
of the faithfull: but he did not neuertheleſſe
depriue him of his Crowne, neither did his
ſubiects refuſe him their faithfull ſeruice, although
Canutus and Wademarus, two of
his chiefeſt fauorites and priuy Counſailors,
who ſought to ſhare the Realme with Suercherus
King of Sueden, did thereto ſuborne
them. Brigerus King of Sueden, who raigned
about the yere 1300. was one of the moſt
wicked and cruell Kings that could be, eſpecially
againſt the Church and Churchmen,
but chiefly againſt Nicholas Archbiſhop of
Vpſale, whom together with the reſt of his
Biſhops he committed to priſon, wherevpon
they excommunicated him, and Turgillus
Canutus his Lieutenant general, and author
of his behauiours: neuertheleſſe the people,
though therby ſtirred vp againſt their King,
and hauing greater opportunitie to rebel and
ſhake of the yoke of his obedience, vnder the

conduct of Wademarus, and Henry his brothers,
who ſought no better occaſion to put
out their brother, would neuer hearken to thē,
neither hinder or become cruell to their naturall
Lord: ſo as the two brothers were forced
to employe their other friendes for the executing
of their intēts againſt Brigerus, whom
when they had taken priſoner, they were neuertheleſſe
compelled to force al the townes,
neither found they any one that would yeeld
to them: ſo greatly did the Subiectes of the
Realme accoumpt themſelues bound to the
ſeruice of their King, whom they knew to be
wicked, excommunicate, and an euill liuer:
beſides, a priſoner, and captiue in the power
of his brethren, whom in the ende they forced
to ſet him at libertie, & to ſubmit themſelues
to his obedience: Of ſuch force is the bond of
good people to their King, whatſoeuer he be.
In Poland Boleſ
                     •
                  aus a Prince of moſt wicked
life,Cromer. in hiſt Polon. a commō adulterer, an enemie to the
Church and Cleargie, after Staniſ
                     •
                  aus Biſhop
of Cracouy, had often admoniſhed him
to amend, was by him at length excommunicated,
whereat the King being offended did
put the ſayd Biſhop to death: for which cauſe
Pope Gregory the ſeuenth did confirme and
aggrauate the ſayd excommunication, with

a generall interdiction againſt the Realme,
about the yeere 1079. yet did he ſtill raigne
by the conſent and with the obedience of the
Polonians, ouer whom he ruled a whole yere
and more, vntill in his iourney to Ladiſlaus
King of Hungary, hee flewe himſelfe, peraduenture
through the iuſt iudgement of God.
The Emperour Sigiſmund and his faction
could neuer winne the Bohemians from the
due affection that they ought to his brother
Winceſlaus their naturall King, though vicious,
wicked & filthy, for the which offences
through the practiſes of the ſaid Sigiſmund,
he was often empriſoned and excommunicated
by the Biſhops of that coūtrey, yea by the
Electors depoſed from the Empire: ſo as in
the ende he dyed in Boheme, ſtill taking the
place, order, and qualitie Royall, through the
goodwill of his Subiects, who deemed, that
the ſame could not perticulerly conteyne any
diſpenſation to diſcharge the ſubiects therof
of the oath and faith that to him they ought: as
alſo they may not be diſcharged frō his bondage
but onely by death, or his owne liberall
ceſſion which he would make to an other: as
did Albert King of Sueden, about the yeere
1388. beeing priſoner to Margaret Queene
of Denmark and Norway, to whom he yeelded

whatſoeuer his right to the Crowne of
Gothland and Sueden: whereby the States
of the countrey ſware their faith and homage
to the ſayde Margaret, and after they had ſecretly
enquired of their King, & ſundry times
ſolemnly deſired him to ſhew them his mind,
or els to diſcharge them of the duetie wherein
they ſtood bound to him, although vndoubtedly
the Suedens had great cauſe to ſeeke
his miſhap: for all Hiſtories doe agree, that
neuer Prince committed ſo many outrages,
and wrought ſo many iniuries to his ſubiects
as had this Albert. It therefore remaineth
that by the lawe of Nations, the inuiolable
keeping of the obligation that the ſubiectes
doe owe to their naturall Prince, and not to
depart therefro at the appetite or ſentence of
others, haue euen among the moſt barbarous
people bene euermore obſerued, ſo as wee
ought, in reſpect of the bonde that wee owe
him, ſay of the King and his bloud, as of Matrimonie,
whom God hath ioyned together, let
no man put a ſunder.
               
               22 But let vs more perticulerly learne
whether the ſentence of excommunication,
were lawfully, vppon reaſonable cauſe and
exemplary occaſion, pronounced againſt a
King, and done by the iudgements of many

Popes of Roome within theſe fiue hundred
yeeres, againſt ſuch Kings and Emperours,
to whō they haue borne bad minds. Although
I thinke it not meete to ground any lawe vpon
the examples of theſe men, in troth, full
fraught with ambition, & more then humaine
affection: but it is requiſite to examine this
queſtion by the rules of Gods lawe and politicke
reaſon, eſtabliſhed for the preſeruation
of the ſocietie of mankinde. Herein therefore
I ſay yt the ſentence of excōmunicatiō denoū
                  ced
againſt a King, how iuſt ſoeuer the cauſe
bee, and conteyneth diſpenſation for the oath
and duetie that the ſubiects do owe vnto him,
this licence and tolleration vnto the people
graunted, is repugnant to the lawe of God,
and all mans reaſon. For, ſith the ſubiects
are by Gods commandement bound to obeye
their Princes whatſoeuer, without any further
enquirie of their conſciences and behauiours,Iohn. 8.
they cannot by any tradition or permiſſion
of man, either generall or perticuler,
be diſpenſed with:in can. ſicut 14. diſt c. ſunt quidā 25. q. 1. becauſe no man can enterprize
vpon Gods ordenances: and euery diſpenſation
ſo graunted is voyde, as beeing repugnant
to the deuine prouidence: As Pope
Leo and Vrban, haue very wiſely confeſſed.
Eſpecially ſith this diſpenſation cannot bee

put in execution without great ſclaunder and
ſhedding of bloud, by reaſon of ſuch warres
and quarels as will be rayſed through the rebellion
of the Subiects againſt their Prince
& their Kings reſiſtance, not onely in reſpect
of his conſcience, but alſo for his Eſtate, and
the defence of his Crowne. In ſuch neceſſities
therefore, Pope Gelaſius teacheth vs,
that we are eſpecially to beware of thoſe things
that cannot be receiued without great inconueniences.
                  c. elfi 
                        ••
                     ta 11 q. 7.
Beſides that the Iuriſdiction and power
of the Church, extendeth not to temporall
goodes or cauſes, but as all men knowe,
Caeſar ſhareth Empire with Iupiter: neither is
the Eccleſiaſticall power other then Spirituall,
concerning the Kingdome of heauen,
and therefore vnprofitably and wrongfully
they ſhould thruſt their Sythe into other mens
harueſt, and without authoritie or Iuriſdictiō
ſhould meddle with the gouernment of mās
policie, and the gouernments of Realmes or
earthly Empires, conſidering the kingdome
of God, whereof they are Stewards and doe
weare the keyes, is not of this world. As alſo
of ſuch diſpenſation would enſue to great iniuſtice,
becauſe that ſith the holy Church giueth
remiſſion for whatſoeuer ſinne, and receiueth
the excommunicated, after he hath

made ſufficient ſatiſfaction and done penance
worthy his miſdeede, it ſhould come to paſſe
that ſuch a King or Prince, notwithſtanding
he were reunited to the Church, and had ſatiſfied
the commaundement thereof, muſt neuertheleſſe
remaine baniſhed from his eſtate
already poſſeſſed by the firſt of his neighbors,
that ſhall haue receiued this rebellious people,
and of this trouble taken occaſion to become
maiſter thereof, at whatſoeuer price:
from whence it would be vnpoſſible to auoyd
him without warres and generall trouble ariſing
of ſuch diſpenſation: and ſo ſhould the
domage done to the excommunicate King
through the ſentence of excommunication,
which was layd vpon him only for correction
and admonition to cōfeſſe his fault, & to aſke
pardon openly of GOD and his Church, remaine
irreparable. To be briefe, of extreme
lawe would ariſe extreme iniurie, whereof this
poore, miſerable, excommunicate and deſperate
Prince finding himſelfe agrieued with
the permiſſion to his ſubiects to rebel, would
growe more obſtinate in his vice for feare of
loſing his Crowne: ſo in liew of vrging him
to penance and ſatiſfaction to the Church for
the offence ariſing of his ſinne, he ſhall waxe
worſe, and the Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline bring

forth no fruite, and thereby growe into contempt:
And vndoubtedly therein conſiſteth
the diſcretion of a Lawyer and Iudge, ſo to
make his lawes, & ſo well to order his iudgements,
that immediatly without difficultie,
how notable ſoeuer they be, they may bee put
in execution.
               23 Conſequently a queſtion may be propounded,
whether it be lawfull for a King or
Prince to appeale therefro as of abuſe, but
alſo by weapons to reſiſt and withſtande the
execution of ſuch a ſentence, becauſe it permitteth
the ſubiectes to ſhake of the yoke of
his obedience, & refuſe him the duetie of their
obligation: which is the ſame queſtion, which
Lewes the 12. of Fraunce moued to the Biſhops
aſſembled in Tours in the yeere 1510.
concerning the peeuiſh and raſh excommunications
layd vpon him and his confederates
by Iulius the ſecond: whereto the ſaid Biſhops
made aunſwere, that by all lawes the
ſayde King was permitted by whatſoeuer
meanes, yea euen by armes to withſtand ſuch
the Popes friuolous and wrongfull declarations.
Which aunſwere, in my opinion, is
founded vpon all reaſon aſwell naturall as
ciuill, becauſe it is certaine and euident, that
the clauſe of the ſentence of excommunicatiō
                  
of the King,l. vt vim. ff. de Iuſt▪ & Iur. which conteyneth permiſſion to
the ſubiects to r
                     •
                  bel againſt him, is a publick
force and violence, that the Pope wrongfully
employeth contrary to his function and authoritie,
and againſt the which the King may
oppoſe himſelfe and withſtande him with the
like or a greater power.I. 23. ff de iniur. l. 31 ff. de per. & com. rei ven. le. 26. ff. 7. ff. ad Secondly, it ought
not to be lawful for the Pope vnder pretence
of a Shepheard, and the care that hee ſhould
haue of the Chriſtians to enterprize or attēpt
any vnreaſonable thing to the iniurie of his
flocke: For if the Magistrate doth any thing
iniuriouſly, either as a perticuler perſon, either
vpon confidēce of his authoritie, he may be ſued
of iniurie. Beſides that wee haue before proued
that the ordering, Iuriſdiction, and notice
of worldly cauſes and Kingdomes belongeth
not to the Cleargie, to whom is committed
onely the publication of the ſpiritual and heauenly
ſ
                     •
                  orde,I. fin. C. 
                        •
                     i à non cōp. iud. l. f
                        •
                     . ff. de iuriſdi. om
                        •
                     . iud. and ſo conſequently ſentence
pronoūced by an incompetent Iudge, is voyd in
this head, neither is any man bounde to obeye
that Magistrate that hath iudged aboue his
authoritie. To this purpoſe Pope Gelaſius,
writing to the Biſhops of the Eaſt, doth confeſſe,
that if the iudgement be vniuſt, the leſſe
neede the condemned to care,
                  
                     
                        •
                     . cui eſt il lata xi. q. 3 
                  for that ſuch a
ſentence cannot make the cōdemned guiltie before

God and his Church.
                  c. nō debet xi. q. 3. And therfore he concludeth,
that he ſhould neuer ſue for abſolution,
beeauſe it hurteth him not. In an other place
Pope Gregorie confeſſeth, that he cannot incurre
canonicall paines that is not canonically
condemned. In the interpretation of which
place Iohn Andrew the gloſer doth teach vs,
that it is lawfull to withſtande the execution
of a iudgemēt knowne to be none, and giuen
by ſuch a one as hath no authoritie. The ſame
doth Celeſtin graunt whē he ſpeaketh of the
election of a Biſhop, againſt the minds of the
Cleargie of that Dioces where he ſhould ſit:l. denotat. C. de met. lib. x. c▪ nullus inuitis 61. diſtin. gl. in c. ex literis de off. deleg. innocent. in cap. ſi quando eo. & in ca. dilectè de exceſſ. praelat. l. ſi quis prouoca torum C. appell. nō recip. Paul. de Caſt. poſt Bald. in l. vt vim ff. de Iuſt. & Iur. so
                        •
                     n. in 443. fal. Cinus. in l. ab executore C. eod 
                        •
                     uor. appe
                        ••
                     . nō rec
                        ••
                     . & in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . C. vnd. vi clem. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
and the Gloſe expreſſely ſaith, that the ſuperiour
abuſing his power, willing & pretēding
by force to bee obeyed, it is not forbidden to
withſtande him, eſpecially in cace the hurt
be irreparable, as in this now in queſtion, becauſe
euery one naturally is permitted to
withſtand violence, yea euen againſt his ſuperiour.
In an other place wee learne that it is
for euery one in default of the Magiſtrate, to
doe himſelfe right, or to bend himſelfe againſt
the wrongful oppreſſion of an other. Infinite
are the examples of Emperours and Catholicke
Kings, who authorized by the Church,
haue made no difficultie to take Armes againſt
the biſhop of Rome and his adherents,

whenſoeuer he ſo farre forgat his duetie, as by
force to enterprize that which Princes could
not with reaſon graunt hym. When Pope
Iohn the eleuenth writ to the Hungarians,
and perſwaded them to rebel againſt the Emperour
Ottho the firſt, and the ſayd Emperor
being in Italy, this Pope togither with Albert
Marquize of Spolete rayſing warre againſt
him, the Biſhops and Prelates aſſembled
at Rome, depoſed the ſayd Pope, and hauing
ſurrogated Leo the fifth into his roume,
permitted the Emperour by Warres to purſue
him. When Henry the blacke vnderſtood
that Benedict the ninth, Silueſter the third,
and Gregory the ſixt Antipopes, ſought each
to thruſt other out of Italie, and to eſtabliſh
him ſelf by armes, he went ſpeedely to Rome
with a great power to decide the cōtrouerſie,
& with the aduice of a Coūſaile aſſembled by
his imperiall authoritie, theſe three Popes
were all depoſed and diſgraded, and in their
roume the Emperour eſtabliſhed Suidiger
Biſhop of Bambergue, who named him ſelfe
Clement the ſecond: When the Emperour
Henrie the fourth vnderſtood that Pope Gregory
the ſeauenth had forbidden the Biſhops
to require inueſ
                     •
                  iture of the Emperour, alſo
that he found, that y• wicked man ſtirred him

vp enemies, yea, procéeded ſo farre, as to cauſe
the ſonne to rebell againſt the father, againſt
whom he oppoſed Raoul Duke of Sueue, he
deſired the Biſhoppes to gather together at
Breſſe, where in their Sinode they excommunicated
and depoſed the Pope, and elected
Clement Biſhop of Rauenna to bee his ſucceſſor,
for whoſe eſtabliſhment the Emperour
tooke Armes and entered Italie. Henry the
fifth was forced to Warre againſt Paſcall,
who had mooued the Romaines to mutiny againſt
him, to the ende to haue ſlaine him, becauſe
he endeuored to mainteine the auncient
rightes of the Empire concerning the collations
of Biſhoprickes. Frederick the firſt vnderſtanding
the arrogant preſumption and
obſtinate reſolution of the Popes Adrian, Alexander
the third and Victor, importing that
it lay in them to giue the Empire to whome
they pleaſed, did ſeauen tymes enter Italie
with an army, where he fought a blooddy battell,
in the which dyed 12000. of Pope Alexanders
partakers, who therewith prouoked,
cauſed the liuely Picture of the 
                     •
                  ame Emperour
to be drawen,Bal
                        •
                     us in catal. ſcript. A
                        •
                     
                     gl. and ſent the Table to the
Soudan of Egipt, againſt whome the ſaide
Emperor was gone, withal aduertiſing him,
yt vnleſſe he procured his death by treaſon, or

otherwiſe he ſhould neuer haue peace: wherevpon
the Emperor recreating himſelfe a litle
from his Armye, was taken and brought before
this heathen, who ſhewed him the Popes
Letter, togither with his Picture: and yet
neuertheleſſe put him to his Raunſome, and
ſo ſent hym home honeſtly, as abhorring the
treaſon of the great Prieſt of the Chriſtians
againſt this Prince, who ventured his life for
the maintenāce of his Religion. Hereat was
the Emperour ſo offended, yt at his returne he
entered Italy againe, & forced ye Pope to flee
in counterfaite apparell, after yt the Biſhops
had in a Synode condemned him as a traitor
to the Empire, yea, which is more, as a conſpired
enemie to Chriſtian faith. Phillip, this
mans ſonne being by Innocent the 3. ſclaundered
amōg the Princes of the Empire, was
counſailed by the Biſhoppes of Germany to
haue his reuenge by armes. Ottho the 4. being
in Rome, was ſo ſ
                     •
                  arred by the driftes of
the ſame Innocēt, that he was driuen to haue
recourſe to force, in which conflict periſhed a
number of the Citize
                     •
                  s of Rome. Frederick
the 2. in whoſe time Innocent the 4. Honore
and Gregory the 9. did in Italy begin y• quarell
of ye Guelphes againſt the Gibelins, who
mainteyned them ſelues vnder the auncient

obedience of the Empire, was by the aduice
of al his Princes and Prelates, compelled to
oppoſe himſelfe againſt the practizes & conſpiracies
which theſe high Prieſtes wrought
againſt him. The Emperour Albert, & King
Phillip of France, doubted not to bend them
ſelues againſt the oppreſſion of Boniface the
eight, & to contemne his excommunications,
vntill King Phillip aſſembled the Prelates
of Fraunce, by whoſe ſentence he was declared
a Sciſmaticke, Hereticke, inuader of the
holy Sea, and a perturber of the peace of the
Church, as hauing moleſted all Italy, with
the factions of the Whites, and the Blackes.
Henry the 7. of the houſe of Luxembourg, to
the ende to withſtand Clement the third, the
mainteyner of Robert King of Sicill, a rebellious
vaſſall to the Empire, was driuen to
come to handy ſtrokes with him and his partakers:
the like did Lewes of Bauier againſt
Iohn the 23. and other ye Popes of his tyme,
who without either cauſe or reaſon had declared
him an Hereticke, becauſe hee would not
yeeld to them the Imperiall authoritie in Italy,
neither put the Empire into the ſubiection
of the Biſhop of Romes Sea. In our
tyme Lewes the 12. King of France, and the
Emperour Charles the fifth, how dealt they

moſt iuſtly with the Popes that would haue
diſpenſed with, and exceeded the boundes of
their duetie? To bee briefe, in other the Prouinces
of the Empire, infinite are the examples
of Kings and Princes, who with the aduice
of the Prelates and Nobilitie of their
Dominions, haue with armes withſtood the
ambitious and paſſionate practizes of the
Popes, in whom it had bene more ſeemely to
haue gouerned the Church and ſpiritual Hierarchy,
and not to haue thruſt their Sythes
into other mens harueſt: whereof is without
doubt proceeded the deſtruction and deformitie
of the Weſt Catholick Church, together
with the full fall of the Eaſt Church, into the
which by thoſe meanes is entered the Wolfe
that hath deuoured Gods flocke, whereof
they ſhall aſſuredly aunſwere.
               24 Now haue wee yet the ſecond queſtion
to enquire of, for our better inſtructiōs in this
matter: That is, whether the King of Nauarre
bee an Hereticke. His aduerſaries doe
ſay that his opinion of Religion was lately
condemned in the late oecumenicall Counſaile
holden at Trent.Molin. in Cōſ. ſupra Cōd Trid. Hereto he aunſwereth,
that the ſame pretended Counſaile was not
lawfully aſſembled, becauſe therein the Pope
executed the roume of both Iudge and party:

alſo that ſuch as proſecuted reformatiō in the
Church were not heard. To bee briefe, there
may be debating, and many nullities may be
alleadged, aſwell in the forme, as in the decrees
of the ſayde Counſaile, whereto neede
no more reſpect 
                     •
                  ee had then to the counſaile
of the wicked, of which the Pſalmiſt doth
ſpeak, or vnto thoſe that the Prophet termeth
Counſailes of vanitie: yea,Pſalm. 1. Pſalm. 26. Ioh. 4. and Sainct Iohn
writeth, Beleeue not euery ſpirite, but prooue
whether they be of God. Saiuct Hierome alſo
teacheth vs, that the doctrine of the holy Ghoſt
is the ſame which is ſet downe in the Canonicall
Scriptures, againſt which if the Counſailes
determine any thing, it ſhall be wicked.
                  Actione 3. cōc. Chal. 2. Valum. concil. l. nemo C. de ſumma Trinitare. Alſo
when the Emperor Martian in the Counſaile
of Chalcedon, forbad to diſpute or call
into queſtion ſuch thinges as had bene well
decreed in the ſame holy aſſembly, he thereby
ment not to graūt free libertie to Counſailes
againſt Gods worde: but he ſpeaketh onely
of ſuch thinges as were well and lawfully ordeined,
according to ye rule of the holy Scriptures:
by the which thoſe that vphold the ſame
opinion with the King of Nauarre doe pretend
to ſhewe, that the Cleargy, who were aſſembled
in the Counſaile of Trent alone,
haue greatly erred: which their inquiſition

and ſearch beeing by Gods owne mouth permitted
to the Church, may not well be refuſed.
Trye all (ſayth the Apoſtle) and hold that
which is good.
                  1. ad Theſſal. cap. 5. And in deede if the Counſayle
of Trent bee aunſwerable to the doctrine of
Ieſus Chriſt: If the trueth hath appeared
therein, then neede it not to feare the tryall at
the fire thereof, which is the true touchſtone
of humaine traditions. The worde of GOD is
pure,
                  Pſalm. 12. Tertul. in Apolog. 
                  and feareth not the fiery tryall: for it is a
true ſaying, The lawe that will not bee tryed,
may iustly be ſuſpected. After then that in a
generall and free Counſayle, all parties haue
bene heard, & that by the onely worde of God,
and without affection they haue debated their
cauſe, ſo that finally the opinion which the
ſayd Lord King of Nauarre holdeth, bee adiudged
hereticall, he is ſo Catholick and zealous
a Prince, and one that ſo feareth God,
that he wil not ſtick publickly in the Church
to confeſſe he hath ſtrayed and hether to bene
miſ
                     •
                  ed. In the meane tyme, and wayting for
the ſayd lawfull Counſaile, neither ye French
King, neither his Courtes of Parliament,
would euer in this Realm publiſh the decrées
of the aſſembly of Trent, neither doe any other
receiue them then the Cleargie, who are
the ſuppoſtes of the Popes Monarchy. But

contrariwiſe the late King Henry the ſecond
ſent Embaſſadours expreſſely to withſtande
the ſayd pretended Counſaile, alſo to declare
that he ment not in any wiſe to allowe thereof:
as in 
                     •
                  rueth it cannot be admitted without
infringing the rightes and authorities of the
King of France, the auncient decrees ordeyned
in the generall Eſtates of the Realme,
vnder the forme of a pragmaticall ſanction,
and the moſt holie liberties of the French
Church, whereby the Maieſtie of this floriſhing
Crowne is preſerued.
               25 Neither is it any newe matter to ſay
in Fraunce, that the King and his French
Church will not receiue the ſame Counſaile,
becauſe our Kings haue euermore vpholden
and preſerued aboue al other, the libertie and
franchize of their Church, and neuer bound
themſelues to the Popes cōſtitutions, or late
Counſayles, no further then the ſame were
conformable to the decrees of the vniuerſall
Church, & nothing derogatorie to the rightes
of their Crowne. For proof therof, we know
that the generall Counſaile of Vienna, was
neuer wholy receiued in this Realm. In that
of Conſtance, the libertie, franchizes, and priuiledges
of the French Church were admitted,
according to the declaration exhibited by

the Embaſſadours of the moſt Chriſtiā Maieſtie.
As for that of B
                     •
                  ſill, King Charles the
ſeuenth would not permit his ſubiects to appeare
at the concluſion of the ſame: after the
which at Bourges he aſſēbled al his Church,
by whom the decrees of the ſame Counſaile
were peruſed, and onely parte of them accepted
with ſuch qualifications as were thought
meete to that effect: whereupon was formed
the Pragmaticall ſanction, ſoone after publiſhed
in the Parliament, wherein theſe words
are often repeated. Item, our Synode accepteth
the decree following: thereby to ſhewe that in
France we are not bound to the Popes ordenances,
conſtitutions, or decrees, neither to
the aſſembly ſummoned by his authoritie,Vſurpatiōs & en
                     
                        •
                     reptiſes du Cōcile de Trēte ſur la Majeſtè du Roy de 
                        ••
                     ance.
which he calleth a Counſaile. And now may
we truely ſay, that neuer was there any holdē
that was more preiudiciall, or of greater miſpriſion
againſt the dignitie of this Crowne:
for if we ſearch narrowly into it, we ſhal finde
that a great parte of the decrees thereof doe
dyametrally oppoſe them ſelues againſt the
libertie of our Churches, and the Maieſtie of
the moſt Chriſtian King, againſt whom they
 were deuiſed. 1. Firſt, concerning the doubt
in this aſſembly made for the place and firſt
degree of honor which haue belonged to him

aboue all Chriſtian Kings, for theſe 1000.
yeeres: ſo that his Maieſtie allowing of this
pretended Counſaile, ſhould confeſſe a matter
very preiudicial vnto him,Concil. 418. 1. volum. becauſe as ſaith
Balde, he weareth y• Crowne of libertie and
glory. Secondly, as for reformation of the 
maners, pollicie, and Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline,
which euermore hath bene one of the
fayreſt flowers of his Crowne, who ſo ſhall
reade the ſeſſions of the ſayde Counſayle of
Trent, ſhall finde that thereby the ſame is
quite loſt, extinguiſhed, and tranſferred to the
Pope of Rome, for the fourth and ſeuenth decree
of the ſeuenth ſeſſion, doe import, that in
the election and making of Biſhoppes and
Prieſtes,c. ſacrorū 73. diſtin. c. vota ciuium 63. diſtinc. c. cler. 93. diſtinc. c. quāto 63. diſtinct. the conſent of the people and authoritie
of ye Magiſtrate are not neceſſary: which
is quite contrary to Gods lawe, the obſeruation
of the Primitiue Church, the auncient
Canons, the ordinances of Charlemaign, and
Lewes the Meeke: and more perticulerly, to
the determination of the three Eſtates of this
Realme, holden at Orleans in the yere 1360
and confirmed in the Court of Parliament,
where it was decréed that together with thoſe
of the Cleargie there ſhould bee 12. Gentlemen
for the Nobilitie, and 12. Burgeſes,
who ſhould be choſen out of the towne houſe,

                   and ſhould repreſent the third Eſtate. Alſo
in the ſecond part of the ſame ſeſſion, the ſayd
Counſayle attributeth to the Prelates the
notice of the reuenues and buildings of the
Churches, contrary to the auncient Edicts
of our Kings, namely againſt the ordenance
of King Charles the 6. who in the yere 1385
ordeyned that the Iuriſdiction of the buildings
ſhould apperteyne to the Iudges royall.
 In the ſame ſeſſion the Counſaile permitteth
the Biſhops to cut off parte of the reuenues
of the Hoſpitalles, whereby to make
themſelues fatter then they are, thereby manifeſtly
encroching vpon the authoritie of the
King and his high Amner, and againſt many
decrees both old and newe of King Frances
 the firſt and Charles the nineth. An other
abuſe and notorious enterprize againſt this
Crowne, conſiſteth in that the ſaid Counſaile
permitteth and decreeth monitions and excommunications,
not onely to the ende of reuelation,
but alſo for the recouerie of things
loſt, againſt an infinite number of areſtes of
the ſoueraigne Court of this Realme, whereby
the ſame haue bene condemned and declared
 to be abuſiue. It permitteth them to condemne
the Lay fee in fines of money, in ſeazure,
apprehenſion, and execution of their bodies

and goodes, aſwell by the Biſhops officers,
as their officialles, notwithſtanding in
France thei neuer had that authoritie, no not
ouer the Cleargie, and therefore it is meere
encrochment vpon the ſeculer power. It inhibiteth 
the Magiſtrate to forbid the Eccleſiaſticall
Iudge to excommunicate any perſon,
either to commaunde him to reuoke his
excommunication, although the Clergie doe
but ouermuch abuſe the ſame. It reuoketh 
the decree of Phillip the Faire, concerning
combats, receiued and enrowled in the Parliament:
and thereof depriueth Kings, Princes,
Dukes, Marquizes, and all other of their
Iuriſdictions, which is an intollerable abuſe
as wee haue aforeſayd. It admitteth promotion 
to the order of Prieſthoode, to Curates,
& other Eccleſiaſticall functions at 25. yeres,
although in y• decree of the States of France
before publiſhed, the age of 30. yeeres was
required. It permitteth profeſſion at 16.
yeeres accompliſhed, and therein correcteth
the decree of the ſayd States, which limited
the man at 25. and the woman at 20. It returneth 
the prouiſion of Biſhops & Prelates
to the Pope, contrary to the auncient ordenances
of Charlemaigne, and his children:
and contrary to whatſoeuer is conteyned in

the Pragmatical ſanction of Sainct Lewes,
inſerted into the ſtile of Parliament: yea, and
contrary to the defence made at the ſayde Eſtates
of Orleans. It permitteth Biſhops,
 and Archbiſhoppes by their Viccars, to viſite
their Dioces, contrary to that is conteined in
 the arreſt of the ſayd Eſtates. It permitteth
the Pope to vnite ſimple Benefices to the
Biſhopricks, contrary to that which was decreed
in the Counſailes of Conſtance & Baſill,
and contrary to many the arreſtes of the
Courts of Parliament of this Realme, wherby
the ſame vnions ought to bee made vpon
 the ſelfe place. By the ſame Counſaile ye tollerations
at the Kings requeſt graunted to
y• Court of Parliamēt: & to ſome Colledges
and Vniuerſities of this Realmes are abrogated,
as are alſo the conſeruators Eccleſiaſticall
of the Vniuerſities, together with the
 priuiledged of this Crowne. It forbiddeth
ſuch as haue made vowe of Religion, in any
wiſe to diſpoſe of their gotten goodes, whether
moueable or immoueable, contrary to
the ordinance of the States of Orleans, conformably
with the decree of the Counſaile of
Mogonce, holden in ye time of Charlemaign.
 It permitteth the begging Fryers to enioye
and poſſeſſe rents, landes, reuenues, and immoueable

goodes, contrary to the Counſaile
of Vienna, holden in the yeere of 1310. and
infinite auncient arreſtes of the Court. It 
taketh from the King the nomination in Couents,
and Monaſteries reguler, which to
him apperteyneth, alſo the Triennalitie of
Abbeſſes, and Prioreſſes appointed by the
ſayde Eſtates. It permitteth Munckes to 
meete and hold congregations and Chapters
generall, which in an Eſtate is perilous and
daungerous, and a matter whereby they bee
accuſtomed to withdrawe themſelues from
vnder the authoritie and power of the King,
and all other temporall Magiſtrates: in reſpect
whereof alſo ſuch aſſemblies haue by
the arreſt of the Court bene many tymes declared
abuſiue. It giueth the Biſhop authoritie
to inſtitute newe Feaſtes, which haue 
bene reproued by many arreſtes of Parliament,
namely by the prouinciall Counſayle
holden at Sens, in the yeere 1527. It encrocheth 
Lay patronages, if the patrones by
authenticall writings proue not the preſentations
continued and hauing taken effect 50.
yeeres together, and reiecteth al other kinde
of proofe. It giueth to the Eccleſiaſticall 
Iudge notice of the right and poſſeſſion of
the ſayd patronages obteyned by foundation,

donation, or conſtruction within theſe fortie
yeeres, which is a great intruſion vpon the
 King, and his Magiſtrates. It erecteth a
newe kind of Iudges delegate, whom it calleth
Apoſtolick, and authorizeth the Biſhops
to chooſe them, euery one in his owne Dioces,
without the Kings knowledge or authoritie,
which are ſo many creatures not ſubiect
 to that Maieſtie where-vnder they liue. It
declareth the Pope to be aboue him, and forbiddeth
Biſhops to humble and ſubmit themſelues
 to Kings and Lordes. It commaundeth
all Clergie hauing of right and cuſtome
voyce in the prouincial Counſaile, to receiue
this pretēded Counſaile, to ſweare obedience
to the Pope, and thereof to make publicke
 profeſſion. It enioyneth Vniuerſities not to
teach any thing but what ſhalbe conformable
to the decrees of the ſayde Counſaile, and to
take ſolemne and yeerely oathes to his holineſſe.
 It commaundeth all Lordes & Princes
to keepe the ſayd Canons, renewing the
auncient vſurpatorie Decretals of Boniface
the eight, and others heretofore abrogated in
Fraunce, as well by Edicts and ordenances
Royall, as by the arreſtes of the Courtes of
 Parliament and great Counſaile. By the
ſayd Counſaile the cauſes of our French Biſhops

are drawne to the Court of Rome and
Popes Conſiſtorie,c. ſiquis Epiſcopus 6. q. 4. c. ſi inter epiſcopos c. ſi epiſco. pus xi. q. 3. c. decer nimus. 3. q 6. contrary to the dignitie
of the royall Maieſtie and the auncient Canons
of the vniuerſall Church, whereby the
criminall cauſes of Biſhops, yea, in cace the
ſame concerned their depriuation or diſcharging,
did belong to the Biſhops of the Countrey
or Synodes prouinciall, and not to the
Pope: as by many the arreſtes of the Court
concurring with the generall Counſailes of
Conſtantinople and Carthage it doth appeare:
beſides that herein the ſayd Counſaile
greatly derogateth frō the Kings ſoueraigntie
and Iuriſdiction that euermore he hath
had ouer the Biſhops of his Realm, witneſſe
the examples of Giles Biſhop of Rheims: of
Pretextatus Biſhop of Roā: of Didier Archbiſhop
of Vienna, and many others, of whom
Gregory of Tours, Aimoinus, Ado, & Vincent
the Hiſtoriall, doe make mention. In 
brief to vſe few words, this pretended Counſaile
taketh away the moſt auncient liberties
of our Church, ſo to make a Proppe to the
Popes abu
                     •
                  ions. It alſo diſſolueth, reuoketh
and maketh voyde Mariages not contracted
in the face of the Romiſh Church: wherein
conſiſteth the Seede of a million of troubles,
Ouarels, Proceſſes, and ſtrifes in infinite families

of this realme, which vnder the authoritie
of the King with his good liking, and vnder
the protection of his Edicts of pacification
haue contracted Matrimony and begotten
Children, who thereby ſhould be declared
illegitimate, depriued of their Parents Succeſſions,
and their 
                     •
                  Wues denounced Concubines
& Harlots to their true Houſbands,
contrarie to all equitie, which in ſumme is as
much, as to bend themſelues againſt God: to
erect in other mens Realmes aſſemblies of
people not ſubiect to the ſame: to bring into
the Church a greater deformation: and to
make the King of Fraunce his Serieant or
executioner of his commaundements, yea,
ſuch a one as ſhould haue no authoritie to order
his Realme: So that thoſe which now ſo
earneſtly doe proſecute that publication of
the ſayd Counſaile ſhall neuer perſwade mee
that they are French men: but rather that
they ſhewe them ſelues Solliciters of the
Popes affayres and dignitie, rather his Seruants,
thē their Kings and ſoueraigne lords.
Thus doe you ſeee, howe by the aduice and
iudgement of the honeſteſt & greateſt French
Catholikes, liuing vnder the traditions of
the Romiſh Church, this Counſaile of Trent
may not be accompted other then a notorious

conſpiracie and coniuration againſt the authoritie
and dignitie of this Crowne, aud of
the Subiectes thereof, of whatſoeuer calling
that ſhall find them ſelues offended, and therfore
we ſhould greatly iniury any one of ours
of whatſoeuer eſtate, in calling him Heretick,
for not obeying, ſubmitting him ſelfe, or conſenting
againſt his Countrey, to the malicious
conſpiracies of the Pope, and ſtraungers
that doe enuie the greatneſſe of this Eſtate.
Eſpecially the King of Nauarre, whome the
matter chieflieſt doth concerne, ſhould haue
greateſt cauſe to be agrieued, in reſpect that
at this day he hath the Honor to be the principall
branch of the Royall tree of France, and
ſo conſequently more neerely bound then any
other to preſerue and mainteyne the rightes,
liberties and dignities of this glorious and
redoubtable Monarchie.
               56 Moreouer the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre
demaundeth of you, by vertue of what
doe you eſteeme hym an Heretick and obſtinat
parſon? For it is certaine, that he onely
may be tearmed an Heretick, who vpholdeth
a falſe doctrine contrary to the holy Scriptures
of the ould and newe Teſtament, beleeuing
amiſſe in any one of the Articles of
our faith, as did ye Manicheans, Neſtorians,

Sabellians, Arrians and their like. Now to
ſay trueth, they would perſwade vs, that the
opinion houlden by the ſaide Lorde King of
Nauarre was monſtrous: we haue bene hallowed
after them like Dogges: wee haue
bene forbidden their company as of infidels
and miſcreants. I beſeech you therefore, let
vs carefully looke into the confeſſion of their
faith, and we ſhall find them Chriſtians, ſuch
as agree with vs in the articles of our belief:
doe worſhip the ſame God: ſeeking ſaluation
in the ſame Ieſus Chriſt: Chrildren of the
ſame father: beleeuing the ſame Bible, aſſuring
them ſelues in the ſame Goſpell, as in
the ſame Buckler of their faith: requiring
part in the ſame inheritance and in vertue of
the ſame Teſtament, as we. The whole controuerſie
betweene them and vs conſiſteth in
that, that they finding many mens additions
and conſtitutions in the Church, and among
the ſimple and pure ordenances of the
Goſpell, doe craue pourging and reformation,
and in cace of refuſall thereof for feare
of their ſoules and deſire of ſaluation haue
withdrawn themſelues, as men content with
the ſimple forme ordeyned in the Primitiue
Church, & wee haue thought that ſauing our
conſciences wee may ſtay therein attending

neceſſary reformation. Either of vs ſeeke ſaluation
and tend to one ende, and by the ſame
meanes are all one and the ſame woorke of
Gods hand: all faithfull ſeruants in the faith
in one Baptiſme: all Grapes of one Vine:
yea, all braunches of one Grape: wee muſt
therefore knowe why one ſhould be an Hereticke
rather then an other, ſith wee are all of
like faith: vſe like bookes: & tend to like end.
This is it (in my iudgement) that cauſeth the
King of Nauarre to complaine, that wrongfully
he is termed an Hereticke, before his opinion
hath bene condemned in a free, holy,
and determined Counſaile, whereat euery
one may ſafely appeare. As for the obſtinacie
to him obiected, I would weete for what benefite
hee ſhould in this cauſe bee obſtinate?
what good? what aduancement? what peace?
what eaſe may he therein hope for? He hath
habandoned the Courte of his Soueraigne
Lord the King: he hath long through the ſubtelties
and ſlaunders of his enimies, bene out
of his fauour, which is the miſhap that with
greateſt impatience he hath borne: Hee hath
bene depriued of moſt of his houſes: alwaies
in the fielde: ſometimes badly prouided, armed,
enuironed▪ & his life in a thouſand daungers:
where as otherwiſe he had bene aſſured

at his Maieſties handes of all fauour, amitie,
honor, peace, and humaine felicitie. Any man
therefore of iudgement can neuer be perſwaded
that this Prince, whom in other matters
we know to be wiſe and diſcrete, would haue
choſen to haue ſpent the moſt parte of the flower
of his youth in miſerie and perpetuall
care, only vpon a contradictorie and obſtinate
mind, not proceeding other thē frō his affection
to the honor of God and the ſaluation of
his ſoule. Moreouer, beſides the infinite abuſes
of the ſayd Counſayle, whereby it is vtterly
none, it is not vnknowne to al men that
in France the King of Nauarre is not ſuch a
one, as by the policie of the Realme ought to
bee depriued of the ſucceſſion of the Crowne
when it ſhould fall to him: becauſe thoſe of
his partie liuing therein vnder the Kings
good liking and obedience are not incapable
to enter vppon all kinde of goodes and
inheritances which to them may apperteyne
either naturally, or ciuilly, according to the
lawes commōly receiued in this Monarchie,
by the ordenances of the generall Eſtates of
the ſame, as the ſubiects thereof doe knowe
& ordinarely it is adiudged in the ſoueraigne
Courts of France, therein enſuing the Edicts
made within theſe twentie yeres vnder

Charles the nineth, and Henry the third now
raigning: ſo as to eſteeme the ſayde Lorde
King of Nauarre, to bee in worſe eſtate concerning
ſucceſſion in the Realme, then the
meaneſt ſubiect thereof, and to his preiudice
to reſtrayne the publicke and generall lawe,
were vnder correction, beſides all reaſon, order,
or apparance,l. illud. ff. ac leg. Aquil. l. aē Titio. ff. de f
                        •
                     rt. ſith the cauſe both of one
and other is all one. Theſe bee the effects of
the reaſons, which euery one according to his
capacitie may extend, whereby the ſayd Lord
King of Nauarre ſayth and vphouldeth that
he is no Hereticke. Firſt, the lawe and decree
whereon the enemies ground their ſlaunder,
which is the Counſayle of Trent, is argued
of diuers nullities. That we muſt accoumpt
of it as of foreiudgements, for the force of law
is to be maeinteyned vntill the cauſe of Nullitie
be decided: with this exception, Quod praeiudicium
legis fiat. Eſpecially in France where
the moſt Chriſtian King and Soueraigne
Courtes did neuer approue the ſayde Counſaile,
as it is moſt certaine and euident. So
that although the nullities thereof might bee
couered vnder a conſequent approbation of
the Counſaile, yet could not that take place
in this Realme, which, by the teſtimonie of
the Popes themſelues is not bound to take

law or to accommodate it ſelf to the ſentence,
publication or pleaſure of any Prince or Potentate
whatſoeuer in the world. Let therfore
the Spanyard or Sauoian cōpell their ſubiects
to liue according to the decrees therof,
yet haue not the moſt Chriſtian King and his
Parliaments preſcribed it for a lawe to them
ſelues. Beſides, to come more perticulerly
thereto, the King of Nauerre, notwithſtanding
he bee a Chriſtian King and ſoueraigne
Prince, and ſo acknowledged by his aduerſaries,
eſpecially by the Pope, yet was he neuer
ſummoned or heard in the ſayde Counſaile,
ſo that conſequently the decrees and
iudgements there paſſed are not deemed againſt
him, to binde him, either to force him
to the obſeruing of the ſame. Againe, admit
hee had bene heard, alſo that the lawe of the
Coūſaile of Trent had bene lawfull, yet who
did euer heare that the ſentence of death or other
puniſhment was executed againſt thoſe
that ſinned or did tranſgreſſe the law, contrarie
to the order eſtabliſhed, but ye Magiſtrate,
Guardian, or Prieſt thereof had firſt examined,
heard, or conuinced them, at the leaſt, called,
ſummoned, & proclaymed thē to the outlawrie
or otherw
                     •
                  ſe, after exact obſeruing of
the ſolemnities of law. Doe ye vſe (my Maiſters)

to ſende euen the ranckeſt thiefe in the
worlde to the gallowes, without other forme
of lawe? Will ye then execute your paſſions
vpon one of the greateſt Chriſtian Princes
that Heauen hath permitted to bee borne, capable
of ruling you whenſoeuer it ſhal pleaſe
God to permit? or depriue him of that right
which Nature hath giuen him, without hearing,
or ſummons, either vnderſtāding of his
reazons? Is the maner to proceede in ſuch
cauſes, to come with the ſworde drawne and
force men to beleue you, at whatſoeuer price?
Wil you be his Iudges, that be his enemies,
and are armed to depriue him of his life and
goodes? Shall the Pope, whoſe reformation
is chiefly in queſtion, bee his partie? No, no,
Warres and weapons were neuer meanes
to atteyne to vnion. If one be in the darke,
mē vſe to light him and not to cut his throte:
If he be infected he muſt be waſhed, not drowned:
If he bee ſicke, tende him, ende him not:
Who ſo will reunite the Church, muſt ſeeke
to bring backe thoſe that are out of the way,
and to call againe ſuch as haue ſtrayed: for
on the other ſide, warre and rigour tendeth to
ſtay and roote them out, not to bring them againe,
but to make them to be no more at all,
which in deede is a remedie worſe then the

diſeaſe. For ſo mē may ſay we haue but a bad
cauſe in hand, when in liew of reaſon we haue
recourſe to force. But Chriſtians, what muſt
ye then do? as men capable of reaſon ye muſt
conuince the King of Nauarrre, and all that
be of his opinion by apparant reaſons. For
the vnderſtanding whereof, aſſemble the Catholicke
Church, & ſo conſequently the Chriſtian
Princes of the ſame: heare the parties:
cauſe the King of Nauarre to appeare: at the
leaſt ſummon him to come in in al aſſurance:
In ſuch an aſſembly denounce him an Hereticke:
excommunicate him: or deale otherwiſe
with him, according as the holy Ghoſt ſhall
thincke meete. Vntill you ſo doe, you are but
theeues, enemies to the Catholicke Church:
perturbers of Chriſtian peace: and very Atheiſtes,
in ſeeking to vſe Catholicke Religion,
which you doe leaſt reſpect, to eſtabiſh
your proſperitie withall.
               27 It is requiſite, ſaye you, to roote out
Heretickes. That is a good, godly, and Catholicke
Counſaile: I am of your opinion:
But marke, ye Frenchmen, the meanes, effects
and purpoſe which theſe zealous perſons,
theſe firme pillers of the Church, and
theſe bucklers of the faith doe goe about to
take herein: Weapons, fellonie, and depriuation

of our King both of his Scepter & life:
for if wee flatter not our ſelues, this is their
marke. We muſt giue almouſe to the poore:
but not by robbing the rich. We muſt puniſh
tranſgreſſors: but we muſt not proceede therto
by cutting the Magiſtrates throate, whom
we thinke ouerſlowe in perfecting the proceducers.
We muſt relieue the people: but neither
wee, nor you, nor any other muſt deale
therein or enterprize to do it, chiefly by rebellion
or warres againſt our King. This is not
the firſt tyme that the Commons haue complayned
of the Kings exactions, and yet did
they not thereupon take occaſion to oppoſe
thēſelues againſt their Maieſties good pleaſures:
neither was there euer found Cleargie
man, being the ſeruāt of God, who to the mutinous
would become a trompet of rebellion
againſt their Prince vpon ſuch conſideration
as theſe perturbers doe repreſent vnto vs the
Lord Cardinall of Bourbon, the Popes Legat
in France, and which is more, himſelfe a
Prince and of the race of the Kinges.Eſa. 1. & 3. The
Prophet Eſay complayned of theſe too great
exactions of his tyme.Ezec. 45. Amos 4. Ezechiel noteth them
and diſcouereth the vices of Princes. Amos
calleth them oppreſſors of the poore, & cruell
to the needie.Mich. 3. Micheas ſetteth before them

the reproach that God will lay vpon them, if
they flay the poore.Sopho. 3. Sophony doth bitterly
reproue them: yet doth it not appeare that euer
theſe men of God embraced conſpiraties
or entered League, to the ende vpon any ſuch
conſiderations to arme the ſubiects againſt
their Lord. The King, ſay our Cenſors, muſt
reforme himſelfe: but we muſt not tell him ſo
with weapons, reprouing and iniurying his
Maieſtie by worde, writing and deede, yea by
captiuating his affections, and forcing him
to hate that which he loueth, as if hee were
not a man capable of the loue of thoſe whom
perticulerly hee acknowledgeth for his faithfull
ſeruants. This were a miſerable ſtate for
a King, to be forced to hate where he loueth,
and to loue where he would hate: to bee able
to doe what he would not, and to deſire to doe
that he cannot: to be briefe, to be a ſlaue to the
enuies, ſtrifes and diuerſities of his ſubiects.
It is too much: euen the greateſt Ariſtarchians
cannot like of it. Whervpon I would
fayne aſke theſe reformers, what made them
ſo rich and mightie as now to vndertake to
raiſe warre againſt their King: but euen the
exceſſiue benefites of his Predeceſſors & him
ſelfe? What place doth or may the ſtatelieſt
of them hold in France, but of meane Gentlemen,

and ſuch as it hath pleaſed the King to
loue? Were they not our Kings that haue
aduanced them, and mainteined them in their
wealth? wherefore then doe they ſo much enuie
the good hap of thoſe who haue no other
beginning or aduauncement then ſuch as vrged
themſelues on? Why doe they ſo much
miſlike that the King ſhould loue the Lorde
Duke of Eſpernon, or any other, like as his
predeceſſors fauoured their aūceſters? Know
they not that all things haue their time, their
beginning, progreſſe, encreaſe, and end? what
further fauour doe they hope for at the ſucceſſor,
whom they would cauſe the King to nominate
by prouiſion? ſith in the meane tyme
they ſuborne his ſubiects, yea ſo farr to turne
them from receiuing any Garniſon on his
behalfe? and ſpread a brute among the people
that there yet remaine ſome of the race of the
aunciēt Gods worthy to rule ouer them? To
bee briefe, they take the courſe too truely to
fulfill the propheſie of the late King Frances
our Kings Grandfather, whom many honorable
perſons did many times heare ſaye,
that if they vſed the ſeruice of thoſe who now
ſet not a ſtrawe by them, they would doe their
endeuours to ſtrip his Children into their dublets,
and his people into their ſherts: and vnhappely

theſe Maſtiues haue ſo well learned to
barke, that now they ſeeke to byte their Lord.
Call to minde ye Frenchmen, a true ſaying
of Sainct Auſten, importing, that it is vnpoſſible
for that Counſaile to bee blameleſſe, whoſe
meanes, ende, and effects are vile, vicious, and
reprehenſible. Neither is it Religion or pietie
that ſtirreth them vp, but a South winde and
Spaniſh heate, wherwith they be driuen, that
kindleth them. For in troth, it is of more importance
for the King of Wiſigotes wholy to
ſubdue the King of Nauarre and to deſtroye
him, whatſoeuer it coſt, thē to loſe all his low
Countries, which by that onely meanes hee
might perpetually aſſure, together with not
onely the reſt of whatſoeuer hee wrongfully
nowe deteyneth of the Realme of Nauarre,
which ſeemeth to be already preſcript, but alſo
generally of the whole Spaynes, and moſt
of his other Lordſhips, whereof he might ſtand
in great feare, if GOD ſhould permit him to
haue ſo ſtrong and mightie an enemie as the
King of France. Let not therefore the moſt
Chriſtiā Maieſtie, and the King of Nauarre,
flatter themſelues, but bee aſſured that the
Piedmontain and the Pope with their partakers,
are determined to doe yt Spaniard that
good turne, and to employe whatſoeuer their

habilities to aſſure him on that ſide. Conſidering
that withall the purſe of the Romiſh
Court, which findeth great eaſe in the Frēch
Crownes, of the ſumme which often do paſſe
the Mounts by reaſon of the Annates renewed
in this Tridentine conſpiracie, & might
in tyme ſtray by the way, as by the auncient
Edictes of our Kinges, and arreſtes of our
Courtes of Parliament they haue hetherto
done, haue intereſt therein. For this cauſe
none neede to maruaile that the Pope will
not willingly forgoe ſo lickerous a morſell
and the beſt diſh on his table. Beſides, it is
moſt certaine that the ſubiects of Fraunce,
and others that are boūd to the Crowne, and
Maieſtie of our King, who haue riſen and doe
dayly riſe, are but the inſtruments and gates
whereby to make way for the loades of golde
which the Spanyard ſendeth to doe his buſineſſe
in this Realme, by the ſame meanes giuing
them occaſion to take holde of and vſe
the tyme to doe alſo their owne, and if they
may, to ſeaze vpon this Crowne, which they
haue leueled at euer ſince the deceaſe of the
late Henry the ſecond, without employing
themſelues in any other affaires then ſeeking
the meanes to atteyne thereto: yea euen partly
they giue out that it were better to conquer

the Realme of France, then to goe to Hieruſalem
to ſeeke for the ſucceſſion of Godfrey
of Buillon. I doe therefore moſt humbly beſeech
the Queene the Kings mother (whom
our Eſpaniolized Frenchmen doe call vpon
for their ſuccour) to be ware of being deceiued
in the faire pretences of theſe conſpirators,
but to aſſure her ſelfe, that notwithſtanding
whatſoeuer their flattering & ſweete tongue,
they will neuer bee ſatiſfied but with the life
and Scepter of her ſonne & her ſelfe. Moreouer,
I beſeech God to graunt the King the
wiſedome of Salomō whē his mother Bethſabe
came to deſire him to like of the mariage
of Adonias with Abiſag the Sunamite,3. Reg. cap. 2. who
had bene King Dauids Concubine in his
latter daies: vnder the pretence whereof he
had vndertaken with the helpe of Abiathar
the Prieſt, Ioab and Semei, to haue depriued
the King of life and kingdome: which this
fountaine of wiſedome ſpeedely perceiuing
after he had heard the petition of the Queene
his mother, in liew of graunting it, and conſidering
how this traytor vnder a falſe propoſition
had abuſed her, commaunded to put him
to death together with Ioab and Semei, and
depriued Abiathar of his Prieſtly office and
function.
               
               28 Know we not the occaſions of Dauid
the Aduocates (one of the wickedeſt men that
euer liued) iourney to the Pope and Court of
Rome, whoſe inſtructions theſe good Schollers
doe from point to point enſue? and thoſe
men that haue ſene the ſame, can tell whether
their beginning and the courſe that ſtill they
take, be not at large therein conteyned. Who
is he that perceiueth not the importāce of the
diſputation holden at Sorbonne, about three
or foure yere ſince, by a poore bachel
                     •
                  r drawē
in, who had dedicated his Theſes to the Abbot
of Cluny, the late Card. of Lorrains Baſtard.
Wherein hee did what in hym laye to
prooue that it was lawfull for the people to
depoſe, driue out, kill and murder tyrannous,
wicked, euill liuing and Hereticall Kinges?
whereat the King beeing moued, as at a moſt
daungerous and deteſtable propoſition, this
poore inſtrument of Satan was at the barre
of the ſayde Colledge of Sorbonne, ſlaine by
one who of late dayes haue withdrawen hym
ſelfe loaden with Spaniſh Piſtolets and Iewels,
and then cloked this goodly deede, leaſt
the author of this ſo vnchriſtian learning and
knowledge ſhould by his mouth haue bene
diſcloſed. Might not we haue noted what ſeruants
were procured to be placed abont Monſier

the Kings brother, and to what end, amōg
whom the forwardeſt had bene trayned vp in
the Schole of theſe perturbers of our peace,
as being their creature, witneſſe that nowe
he is with them, and then vſed all his endeuour
to plonge that yong Prince in all voluptuouſneſſe,
lechery and heate of youth: yea
hee did better his buſineſſe: for hee betrayed
him to the King of Spaine, & ſould the Spaniard
to the States, and the Huguenotes to
all others. Whereby hee made money of all
with the price of the honor, reputation and life
of his Maieſtie, or rather of all France. The
like did alſo three or foure other bad parſons,
who all had bene brought vp, and were giuen
to his highneſſe by one ſelfe hand, to the ende
to habandon hym for a praye, to the firſt miſchaunce
that might happen, among a greate
number that night and day they deuiſed for
the atteining to their entents: yea they went
ſo farre as to ſet him at debate with the King
his brother, and by meanes of ſome of theirs
that were neere to either of them, to cauſe nature
and bloud to liue in miſtruſt of it ſelfe, ſo
to procure the ruine and loſſe of one or the other,
or of both togither, and with them of this
miſerable Realme. During which their
ſleightes, they did neuertheleſſe perticulerly

thinck vpon the king, whom when they found
to be merueylous zealous in Catholike religion,
they began to practiſe ſome Spaniſh
workemen to drawe vnto him, and vnder the
vaile of Religion to bewitch him, and ſo wholy
endeuoured themſelues, if they could, to
haue caſt him headlong into ſome miſhap, as
great as the ſame wherein they ꝓlonged poore
King Sebaſtian of Portugall, who by ſuch
meanes ſerued for a warme breakefaſt to the
Spaniſh King, and got hym a faire corner of
lande through the ſubtelties of the Spaniſh
Ieſuites, concurring with the Portingal Ieſuites,
or peraduenture both cōſpired againſt
the eſtate of that poore yong King, ſo to cauſe
hym deſperatly to venture hym ſelfe, whether
he dyed, & with him the Scepter of Portugall,
which vndoubtedly God had long vſed
to the great benefite & bleſſe of all Chriſtiandome.
Theſe were the driftes of the good ſeruants
of our Kings, who (thanked bee God)
was more circumſpect and wary to put from
about him ſuch wicked ſpirites. Certainly it
is moſt neceſſary and expedient for a King to
be Chriſtian, deuout, zealous of Catholicke
faith, and to feare God: but withall it is moſt
daungerous for his perſon and Eſtate, if hee
become ſuperſticious and an hypocrite. Firſt

he thereby loſeth all iudgement to diſcerne
the enuious friends or enemies to his Scepter:
then he forgetteth the principall cauſe for
the which he is a King: which is the care and
gouernement of his people, for the exercize
whereof onely he is bound, choſen and bound
to ſerue God in that miniſterie: laſtly, in the
world that we liue in, amōg the moſt corrupt
ſoules that euer were, the whole worlde doth
miſtruſt and wonderfully ſuſpect him whom
they ſee make ſo great a ſhewe, whether for
enuy that euery one beareth to his more then
common zeale, either els for that in trueth it
often falleth out, that things of greateſt apparance
conteyne leaſt trueth. Now then,
theſe malicious perſons haue but one onely
ſubtile entent left, which alſo it is meete for
the people to knowe. For yet they goe reaſonably
gently about their matters, and doe
giue out that they require onely abolition of
the Edicts of pacification, and to procure the
exercize of one onely Religion in France, to
the ende vnder that pretence to embarke the
King, and almoſt to force him (as aforetyme,
fearing leaſt the ouer long peace of this
Realme ſhould cloſe vp the paſſed vlcers, they
had done) to breake off that amitie and good
wil which it pleaſed him to ſhewe to the King

of Nauarre, and thoſe of the pretended reformed
Religion, ſo that by ſuch meanes they
will cauſe him with the ſworde that he ſhould
holde in one of his hands to cut off the other:
wherof muſt enſue the loſſe and ſworne death
of the ſayde Lorde King of Nauarre, againſt
whoſe perſon perticulerly, as beeing their
principall mark, they are determined to arme
themſelues. After whoſe end alſo, if the King
(of whom they ſhall then ſtand no longer in
neede) will not in the meane tyme dye, either
through melancholy, or choller, & ſo ſpeedely
quit them his roume, they knowe in their
Italian League Articifers enough to ſende
him into Abrahams boſome: whereby they
ſhall for ſo many good and commendable ſeruices
done to our France, bee thought more
worthy to be crowned then now, notwithſtanding
at this preſent they cauſe ouer loude to
bee ſong their pretended merites by all the
Spaniſh pentioners, and feede Spyes in the
Court, at whoſe mouthes they ſet out their
woundes receiued in the waſting of this
Crowne, after the maner of the auncient Romaines,
who exhibited themſelues naked to
the people in beggiug the Suffrages of dignities
and offices. Thus when through their
wiſedome they ſhal haue killed the King and

the King of Nauarre, who are y• two thornes
that trouble their feete, for the one they will
procure the ſinging of a Deprofundis, and for
the other Te Deum laudamus, whereby, together
with an abſolution ſealed in leade in the
Cource of Roome, they ſhall bee whiter then
Swannes. For of the reſt of the Princes of
the bloud they make no accoumpt, neither
doe thincke them ſubiect ſufficient to put thē
in any chafe about the rooting of them out: ſo
greate is the furie of Sathan in theſe daies.
This is the whole ſtory which thoſe that loue
them are forced to confeſſe. Neuertheleſſe, it
ſeemeth that we ſleepe our our miſhap, or ratherthat
we make haſt to this fire, euen with
our backe burdens of woode to kindle it, in
ſtead of water to quench it withall.
               29 Hereafter I pray you what dignitie or
Maieſtie may reſtraine from vice, thoſe that
are ſo cruell to their King, as to take armes
againſt his perſon, againſt the peace of his eſtate
whoſe ſubiects they are, and againſt the
eſtabliſhment of his Realme? Neither Equitie,
Iuſtice, Cuſtome, Lawes, reſpect of land,
loue of their fellowe Citizens, or reuerence
to the Magiſtrate, can permit thoſe men
that contemne the ſoueraign authoritie of the
Maieſtie royall: and ſuch as without reſpect

to Iuſtice or publick honeſtie, doe ſhew them
ſelues more cruell and barbarous in procuring,
vnder pretence of reformation and zeale
to Catholicke Religion, the engendring in
France of an immortall warre, the mother of
all impietie, wrong, reuenge, ruine, deformation
and vtter ſubuertion of moſt mightie
Kingdomes and floriſhing Empires, to bluſh
for ſhame. What eminencie is the Church to
looke for among the execrable blaſphemies
and infinite ſacriledges that will be committed
in the warres? What power? what authoritie?
what light may wee attend of Iuſtice
when ſhe is ſnared, maſtered, become priſoner,
and ouerruled by the weapons of the moſt
vicious and corrupt perſons of this Realme?
What honour? what degree? what reſpect
may the Nobilitie hope for, beeing in perpetuall
hazarde to looſe life, children, wealth,
peace, and free cōmandement ouer their vaſſals
and ſubiects? What eaſe, what profite,
or what encreaſe may the ouertoyled laborer,
the venterous Marchant, the quiet Burgeſſe,
or any other whoſoeuer in this poore Realm,
buyld vpon? Euery one muſt prouide for famine,
peſtilence, fire, bloud, and ſpoyle: to be
briefe, for all the ſcourges that ſpring of the
diſorder, barbarouſneſſe, ambition, and inſatiable

deſire of thoſe, who, if they maye finde
aſſiſtance among the French, will neuer lay
downe weapons, but either by an eſtabliſhment
of a perfect tyrannie proceeding out of
their affections, more grieuous and inſpportable
to thoſe that ſhall remaine then warre
it ſelfe, or els by the ſelfe ruine and vtter extirpation
of their wretched followers, together
with moſt of the good men that ſhal haue
withſtoode them. Let vs not, O Frenchmen,
perſwade our ſelues that this miſchiefe will
be a matter of three or fower moneths onely.
For if it be Religion, for the which they ſeme
to bring you into the fielde, your ſelues doe
knowe that our Kinges haue not ſpared life,
ſtate, meanes, or friendes for the remedying
thereof within theſe fiue and twentie yeeres:
which notwithſtanding, what effect haue ſo
many murders, ſuch plentie of battailes, and
ſuch ſtore of bloud ſpilt, wrought? Weene you
that theſe who ſo long haue found meanes to
defend themſelues cannot withſtand you, but
muſt ſo eaſely yeeld vnto you? See you not
the ſtraunger that looke vppon you, and doe
prepare to haſten our deſtruction, if we bee ſo
fooliſh as to beate our ſelues? The authors of
this cōſpiracie, being now alone, are no ſtrō
                  ger
then when they fought ſo ſharply vnder

the authoritie of King Charles the 9. and the
King now raigning, and were vpholden by
the ſame meanes that now they aſſure them
ſelues of out of Spayne, Italy, and other places.
You know they were chiefe of their Maieſties
Counſaile, Leaders of their Armyes,
or rather, authors of all paſſed miſchiefes: enterteyning
the King in that will and opinion
wherein he then was, namely, that weapons
were ye inſtruments to appeaſe Gods wrath,
and to reunite vs in one onely Religion, vntill
his Maieſtie vpon better aduice confeſſed
the fruites and effects of the contrary, and by
the exāples of his neighbours did very wiſely
cōſider, that the diſeaſe of Religion is ſo rooted
in mans mynd, that he were farre better
to tollerate it, (ſith we all agree in one belief
and Creede of the Apoſtles,) then to hazarde
his whole Eſtate, by weening to heale vp a
wounde, which God willing, maye by daylie
conuerſation bee ſuppled: for vndoubtedly
ſome diſeaſes are of ſuch a nature, that it is
more expedient for the Patient to beare the
griefe thereof, then for his cure to vſe ouer
daungerous and doubtfull remedies, whoſe
tryall is more ſharpe and intollerable thē the
diſeaſe it ſelfe. With which counſaile, truely
royall, fatherly, and worthy a Chriſtian and

peaceable Prince, theſe zelators of their own
wealth, rather then of Chriſtianitie being offended,
doe now euidently ſhewe their bad
mindes, and do buyld their pretēces vpon the
diuerſitie of Religions, vpon the oppreſſions
of the people, vpon the deformations of Iuſtice,
and vpon the diſtribution of Dignities,
notwithſtanding all men knowe, that in reſpect
of the laſt they are better prouided, and
haue greater cauſe to praiſe the parting, then
to complaine of that honor that the King hath
done them. As for the reſt, themſelues are the
onely cauſe of all miſchiefe, engendred by ciuill
warres, which euer ſince the reſolution
vpon their forecaſt thei haue nouriſhed in this
Eſtate: becauſe it is certaine that peace is the
mother of pietie, eſtabliſhment of Iuſtice, and
the true ſpring of mans eaſe. Neither can we
denie the good, holy, and commendable affection
wherwith our moſt Chriſtian and peaceable
Prince ſet hand to the worke, ſo long as
it pleaſed God to let vs enioy peace: whether
in the example that he ſet vs in his Religion,
deſire that hee ſhewed in reformation of Iuſtice,
or in the eaſe that, ſo much as he might,
he procured to his good ſubiects. What is
there more to doe then, fellowe countrymen,
but againe to ſheath vp our weapons, and deuoutly

to pray to God to graunt vs peace, and
by meanes thereof to reunite vs in the Faith
and Religion of the Catholicke Church? ſo
to ſerue him faithfully, & with our good King
to ſet to our ſhoulders to helpe to ſupport the
burthen of commaunding in this Realme,
layd vpon him in heauen, yeelding our ſelues
pliant, ſimple, and obedient to his commaundements,
to the end altogether we may ſerue
and praiſe the deuine Maieſtie holily, and
peaceably, euery one according to his duetie:
the Prince in peaceable and wiſe gouernmēt
of vs, as hetherto through the grace of che holy
Ghoſt, he hath done: our ſelues in louing,
reuerencing, obeying, and faithfully ſeruing
his Maieſtie, as wee are bound vnder payne
of eternall damnation. For, ſo long as we are
in this world, if we doe otherwiſe, we ſhall reſemble
the Marriners that in the Ship quarrelling
with their Pilot, oppreſſed with the
tempeſt, and enuironed with the enemie, doe
in the ende finde themſelues forced to ſaile away
with ſome mercenary ſtraungers, who
will no longer haue any care of their ſafetie
then the commoditie and ſweetneſſe of their
wages ſhall continue. Surch ſurely will bee
the life that we ſhal leade, in caſe we become
ſo deteſtable as to diſunite our ſelues frō our

King, and the ſacred bloud of his Crowne:
abroade ſtanding in feare of the enemie, at
home, not onely of our fellowe Citizens, but
alſo of our domeſticall ſeruaunts, our allies,
our coſſens, our brethren, our parents, our
wiues, and our children, wherby we ſhal haue
warre with the ſtraunger, ſedition in the Citie,
and miſtruſt in the houſeholde, alwaies in
in feare, miſerable, needy, and ſtil paſt hope of
better: for the good will habandon vs as vnworthy
their ſuccour, and the bad will deuour
vs. What bleſſe then, what pleaſure, what
contentation may we hope for ſo long as vppon
earth wee leade this life? and bee led by
thoſe yt bely the forme, countenance, geſture,
ſpeech, and behauiour of the man that they
beare, no leſſe thē Satires, Apes, or Beares?
as alſo we may rightly terme them Wolues
and monſters borne in this Commonwealth,
for the nouriſhing and bringing vp of whom
I feare wee may bee called enemies to God
and our owne nature, which by companying
with theſe wilde beaſtes we doe corrupt. But
to returne to our purpoſe. Concerning the
hereſie falſly pretended againſt the King of
Nauarre, although the reaſons aforeſayd bee
moſt true, waightie, and ſuch as can haue no
contrary aunſwere vailable, yet as a Catholicke,

I do moſt humbly beſeech the ſaid King
of Nauarre, diligently to thinck vpon his affayres,
yea, although in his minde hee could
conceiue no other conſideration then the preſeruation
and peace of ſo much people (in that
he by whom the offence commeth is accurſed
of God) whether he ſhal not more grieuouſly
offende God and his owne conſcience, in being
a cloake and pretēce of ſo many miſeries
to his Countrey and the French nation, for
whoſe defence he is borne, then with his fathers
and common cuſtome of old receiued, in
erring, if there be any error therein. Let him
alſo iudge whether he bee not bound to aunſwer
before God, for the liues of ſo many perſons,
who through his occaſion ſhal periſh, alſo
for the blaſphemies that conſequently will
be committed. Let him aduiſe himſelfe whether
hee were not better to doe as the good
and gentle Houſeholder, who ſometimes omitteth
the ſeueritie of his age to play with
his children, and with clemencie giueth them
ſpace to meaſure the force of his amitie excuſing
their inſolent youth and bolde raſhneſſe,
ioyning and going cloſe with them: after the
example of the wiſe and well aduiſed Athenian,
when his people were moſt obſtinatly
reſolued to oppoſe thē ſelues directly againſt

his meaning. For my parte (Sir) I beſeech
your Maieſtie to giue mee leaue to tell you
that all good Frenchmen, true Catholickes,
and faithfull ſubiects to you & this Crowne,
doe euen in humaine reaſon greatly bewayle
the ſtate of our poore Fraunce, in ſeeing that
your enemies are ſo well at eaſe, or doe (peraduenture)
nouriſh about your Maieſtie ſome
ſuch perſons as keepe their vizarde from bee
plucked off. For in truth (Sir) it lyeth in you
through the grace of the holy Ghoſt, to yeeld
more fruite to the Church of GOD, (for the
aduauncement whereof you haue hetherto
thought to fight,) and more ouer to procure
your ſelfe to bee eſteemed more profitable,
commodious, and honorable to all, by planting
peace in time in this Realm, and giuing
an example to the reſt of Chriſtiandom, with
aſſurance to the King that raigneth ouer you
and his ſubiects who looke vpon you by your
good life, and gentle common conuerſation,
which in all other actions your aduerſaries
them ſelues doe ſeeme to confeſſe, then by any
other worldly meanes that you cā chooſe.
Beſides, that it is an vndoubted and political
maxime, miſlike it who will, that it is not for
Kings, who haue authoritie and gouernment
ouer ſo many ſeuerall braynes, which GOD

may reſerue vnto you, if it ſo pleaſe him, or he
be ſo determined in his priuate counſaile, notwithſtanding
all the Deuilles do rage, to ſet
other where then in their Cloſets, vpon any
of theſe extremities: becauſe it would bee vnpoſſible
to toyne and compoſe theſe together,
eſpecially in the world wherin you are borne,
wherein alſo your ſelfe doe well knowe, and
haue by domeſticall examples learned, that it
behoueth you and all other the Princes in
this world, to bow to make your ſelues to be
obeyed, & to preſerue your eſtates by meanes
more then artificial, and ful of humaine wiſedome,
in reſpect of the frowarneſſe, peeuiſhneſſe,
and bad nature of ſubiects. But more
perticulerly in this caſe, wherein our common
enemies haue for theſe 25. yeeres accuſtomed
the French nation to the vſe of weapons,
and the veryeſt fooles, (of whom there
are ouer many,) to contemne the Maieſtie of
their King, lawe, and Iuſtice, and to the contrary
haue ſuborned, flattered, and ſtolne away
the moſt of their hearts, vnder a falſe pretence
and zeale of Religion, which your ſeruants
do wiſh you to winne again, as it were
an eaſie matter to doe, being deſirous of your
quiet, honor, and to the aduancement of Gods
glorie, the peace of this Realme, and the encreaſe

of the Crowne of France, fearing leaſt
all Chriſtiandome ſhould ſwarme to the tearing
of it in an hundred peeces, or the mutinous
Rebelles that are within the Realme
ſhould rent and diſmember this goodly Kidney
of Europe, which without doubt is the
goodlieſt and moſt perfect Kingdome vpon
earth. At the leaſt, ſir, ſith theſe great Dukes
of fained Catholichiſine, who in a iolitie haue
declared themſelues your aduerſaries, doe
beare for their deuiſe the deſtruction & bloud
of the innocent Frenchmen, which by their
often murders they haue ſhed, and are not yet
ſatiſfied, as their Bugbearlike terrors that
they propound vnto vs, doe ſhew, I doe moſt
humbly deſire you to the contrary to bee the
Pelican, and to beare the ſame deuiſe that the
Great Alphonſus the 10. of that name King
of Spayne, from whom your predeceſſors the
Kings of Nauarre are diſcended, was wont,
viz. Pro lege, & grege, ſetting forth in your
actions, as many deſires of peace, clemencie,
fatth, honeſtie, and Chriſtian piette, as they
doe of violence, bitterneſſe, and perfidie, being
banded againſt the Iuſtice of God.
               The ende of the ſecond Booke.
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  ❧THE CONTENTS
OF THE THIRD
part of this Booke.
               1. The grauitie of Treaſon.
               For what cauſes a Prince of the bloud
may bee declared vncapable of the
Crowne.
               Abuſe of the crime of treaſon.
               The malice & ſuppoſition of the leagued,
againſt thoſe of the pretended
reformed religion.
               2. A true expoſition of the crime of treaſon.
The King neuer ſuſpected the K.
of Nauarre of treaſon. An infallible
argument of the King of Nauarres
pietie.
               3. The houſe of Nauarre diſcēded of the
houſe of France. The Originall of the
K. of Nauarres grandfathers by both
father and mother.
               4. The Capetz and Carliens come of the
ſame ſtocke as Clouis and the Merouingiens.
               5. The Capetz and Carliens are of one famely.
The originall proceſſe and genealogie
of the Capets.
            
            
               
               THE THIRD PART OF
the Cath. Apologie.
               
                  THE third obiection that
the ſeditious doe in their
Libells diſperſe againſt
the K. of Nauarre, importeth
him to be a rebel,
a traitor, and a protector
of Conſpirators againſt
the King, and therefore an ennemy to the
ſtate and common wealth, wherein hee is for
thoſe cauſes vnworthy to commaund.
               1 This obiection is not ſo ſmall, but that
being well conſidered as it ought, the grauitie
of the offence will ſurpaſſe the diſcourſe of
our ſences and vnderſtandings. For, for that
onely offence came death into the world,Gen. 2. 22. 23. and
Adam was baniſhed Paradiſe. Alſo by humaine
pollicy offenders therein, being thereof
conu
                     •
                  et and adiudged, are vnworthy all ſucceſſions,
eſpecially in Empires, Kingdomes,
or other dominions,Ioh. de Teri. in tract. 
                        •
                      tra rebel. 
                        •
                     . Reg. 1. tract. concluſ. 19. although the ſame ſhould
fall to them by the right of natural ſucceſſion
as doe ours. For in this cace, if the neereſt of
the bloud Royall ſhould be found vnthanckefull

and guilty, not only againſt the King his
Lord, but alſo againſt the Eſtate, commonwealth
and Maieſtie of the Crowne, hee and
his poſteritie may be attaint, conuict and adiudged
for euer vnworthy the ſucceſſion that
nature and bloud had gotten him. So was it
iudged by a Court of Peers of France in the
yere 1457. againſt Iohn the ſecond, Duke
of Alencon, in the preſence of King Charles
the ſeauenth in the towne of Vendoſme, notwithſtanding
the ſayde Sentence was afterward
aboliſhed, and the iudgement made void
by Letters of reſtitution from King Lewes
the eleuēth, entred, publiſhed and regiſtred in
the Court of Parliament, the Chambers aſſembled
by the conſent of the Kings Attorney
generall. Wherefore I can not with ſilence
ouer ſkip ſuch an accuſation againſt the perſon
of the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre, conſidering
alſo the enormitie of ſuch a ſcander againſt
the ſayde Prince, who neuer had his
owne life ſo deere or in ſuch recommendation
as the ſeruice, honor and wealth of the Maieſtie
of our Kings and this Crowne, as being
the man whome it neereſt concerneth, and
who hath greateſt intereſt of all worldly parſons
in the preſeruation of this Eſtate, as hauing
the honor to looke ſo neere thereto. But

ſurely by this deteſtable and ſclanderous diſcourſe,
I ſee the miſerie and calamitie of our
France, wherein withi
                     •
                   theſe 25. yeeres, during
the minority of our kings, the mutinous
ſeedes of quarels haue made, & at their pleaſures
forged Articles, heads of Rebellion,
and crimes of Treaſon as they haue thought
good, yt therein, as Tacitus ſaid of ye Empire
of Tiberius, might be the perfection of all accuſations,
imitating the continuall euill doings
of Princes Counſailers vnder the pretence
of their Maieſties ſeruice.Tacir. li. 1. Sue. in Tiber. cap. 53. For it is
found, yt in the tyme of the ſaid Tiberius, this
crime was comprehended vnder friuilous occaſions,
as, if any man had in ſelling of his
land ſould therwith the Image of Auguſtus,
or if hee had erected his owne Picture higher
then the Emperors, either had employed the
ſame in any Domeſticall vſage.Tacit. li. 3. Suet. in Nerone. Nero put to
death Caſſius, one of the moſt excellent men
of his time vnder ſuch a pretence, and becauſe
hee bare the Picture of Caſſius, one of the
murderers of Ceſar in his Armes: Caracalla,
ſo farre extended this crime, that euē thoſe
were accuſed who had made their Vrine in any
place where the picture of the Prince was
erected: and this licence extended ſo farre,
that it was offence to the Maieſtie, to beate

a ſlaue, or chaunge aparell before the picture
of the Emperour, either to carie the ſame into
any ſhameleſſe or foule place, veluti ſi latrinae,
aut lupanari intuliſset. To be brief, in thoſe
daies the crime of treazon was defined in
the cloſet, and ſecrete will of the Monarke, or
his flatterers, as Iuuenall teſtifieth.
               
                  Nil horū,Iuuenal. Sat. 10. verboſa, & grandis epistola venit
                  A Capreis: bene habet, nil plus interrogo.
               
               The like haue bene done in our miſerable
Realme, when the conſpired enemies of the
Princes of the bloud Royall, did gouerne the
affayres of Eſtate vnder Frances the ſecond,
and had afterward got holde of the perſon of
King Charles the nineth, whom they nouriſhed
in wonderfull and daungerous miſtruſt
of his ſubiects: whereof are proceeded ſo many
murders, maſſacres, troubles, and ciuill
warres, which wee haue ſeene, and too much
felt, to the ruine of the ſubiects of this poore
Fraunce, by reaſon their Maieſties haue by
theſe firebrands beene miſenformed, that the
King of Nauarres partakers conſpired againſt
their Eſtate, and refuſed to yeeld them
that obedience, which by Gods commaundement
they ought: and in reſpect thereof vnder
this pretence, did oftentymes cauſe them to
be proclaymed Rebelles, Traytors, enemies

to the Commonwealth. Moreouer, to make
this miſchiefe incurable, becauſe the innocencie
of this people, afflicted through the wrath
and indignation of their Kinges, was ſufficiently
knowne to their fellow coūtrymen, &
fellow Citizēs, theſe ſpirites of Satan haue
ſought to entāgle thē in partialities, & bādīg
one againſt an other, thereby to vrge thē into
irrecōſiliable hatred and perpetuall miſtruſt,
whereof they might neuer conceiue cauſe of
reunion, through ſuch exceſſe and iniuries as
the one ſhould doe to the other during the ciuill
warres: alſo that while the ſame continued,
themſelues might haue opportunitie to
practize the hearts of thoſe whom they ſhould
finde moſt meete to receiue the obiect of their
trayterous and diſloyall ambition: together
that by this meanes they ſhould diminiſh the
loue of the people to their King, perſwading
the moſt paſſionate that the fault was in him
why Fraunce had no greater peace, vnder
which pretence they haue ſpued forth and by
their creatures diſperſed abroade an infinite
number of diffamatorie Lybelles, and more
then ſclaunderous diſcourſes, to the preiudice
of the honor and reputation of our Prince,
whom neuertheleſſe they went about to perſwade,
that thoſe of the pretended reformed

Religion were the authors of theſe deceipts.
But the ende of their intents doe now ſufficiently
lay open the trueth, when vnder pretence
of withſtanding the King of Nauarre,
and hindering him from ſo much as the very
ſhadowe of any vayne hope of ſucceſſion, they
dare preſently take armes againſt our Kings
Maieſtie, and ſhake his Eſtate, ſo to make
themſelues Lordes vnder the couerture of a
ſacke dipped in a fewe Imaginary rights, as
perniciouſly as lightly inuented. For good
men will euer confeſſe that it is not propter
Ieſum that now they runne to armes, but rather
for the ſatiſfying of their inſatiable ambition,
whereof, how bad ſoeuer the intent be,
yet will the effects be more deteſtable, except
God take pittie vpon vs, and the people with
the Kings good ſeruants doe open their eyes
to ſee clerely into this matter, and to acknowledge
it to be the cataſtrophe or laſt act of that
Tragedie, which theſe wicked people haue
long played in this Realm, vnder the ſhadow
of zeale to Catholick Religiō, with the cloke
whereof they goe about to ſhroude the moſt
fooliſh, in an irreconciliable diuorce from the
King their ſoueraigne Lord, and the naturall
French Princes, and perticulerly againſt the
ſayde Lorde King of Nauarre, the neereſt in

bloud to his Maieſtie, whoſe deſtruction lieth
them more vpon then all the reſt.
               2 In his reſpect I will onely ſay, that the
crime of Treazon whereof falſly they accuſe
him, ought not to be iudged by the ſole occaſion
ſayth Modeſtin, for the reuerence of the Princes
Maiestie, but for the trueth. Plinie writing
in commendation of Traian, ſayth: The
crime of treazon was wont to bee ſinguler, and
almoſt peculier to him that could not bee charged
of any other matter: wherefore Traian aboliſhed
the ſame, as one that contented himſelf
with the force of other accuſations, this Prince
holding opinion, that ſueh Monarkes as were
ſo ieloux of their Maiestie, had none at all.
And for the ſame cauſe was this kinde of accuſation
likewiſe aboliſhed in the tyme of
Claudius, Adrian, Pertinax, Alexander, Seuerus,
and other good Princes, who deemed
other publick accuſations to be ſufficient for
puniſhment of euill liuers, how farre ſoeur
they ſhould forget themſelues. Howeſoeuer
the caſe ſtandeth, cōcerning the King of Nauarre,
he may yet more boldly ſpeake in the
preſence and face of his enemies, then might
Cruentius Cordus, beeing vnder Tyberius,
accuſed for ſaying that Caſſius was
the laſt Romaine, when he ſhewed the Senat

that they would puniſh him for his wordes,
becauſe his deedes were irreprehenſible: For
this Prince, thankes be to God, neuer offended
his King in worde, nor deede, neither can
his ſclaunderers either generally or perticulerly
taxe him of any action nere to rebellion
or diſobedience: yea, the whole pretence that
theſe trouble ſome perſons do take of his Religion,
is ſuppreſſed & beaten downe by their
owne ordinary and publick confeſſion, by the
Princes Edicts and declarations, and by infinite
other writinges, appro
                     •
                  ued in all the
Courts of Parliament of this Realme. And
in deede the whole rebellion & fellonie wherwith
they may charge him, is, that he would
not ſuffer the knife to cut his throate, but did
quietly withdrawe himſelfe out of the preaſe,
when he ſee that his enemies would force him
to beare infinite iniuries vnworthy his greatneſſe.
Otherwiſe, who can ſay that euer he refuſed
the duetie, faith, obedience, and ſubiection
which hee is bound to yeeld to the King
his ſoueraigne Lord? much leſſe then that he
hath cōſpired againſt his perſon? that he hath
ſought to make himſelfe King, or enterprized
any thing preiudiciall to the aduauncement
and peace of the French Commonwealth?
Shewed hee euer any token of deſire to bee

named his Maieſties heire or ſucceſſor? Hath
he chaunged his garment, or augmented his
Eſtate, for his approach to the King, through
the euill hap and miſfortune of this Realme
growne vpon the loſſe of the late Mounſier,
the Kings onely brother? Hath he called together
his friends, or craued the counſaile of
Atturneyes, to learne whether himſelfe bee
now the neereſt of the bloud Royall? Who
can ſhew that euer he vſed any confederacies
which iuſtly he might haue made, as King of
Nauarre, and ſoueraigne Lord of Bearne, or
did euer employ any other then to the ſeruice
of the King, and wealth of this Crowne? who
will bee ſo malicious, vnnaturall, and ſenceleſſe,
as to impute to fellonie, ye withdrawing,
and cheriſhing of his fellowe Citizens, the
profeſſors of the ſame Religion wherein hee
was borne, bred, and brought vp euen from
his cradle, when he found them in like miſfortune
as himſelfe, and oppreſſed with the force
of their aduerſaries, who vnder the cloake of
the Kings authoritie haue often endeuoured
to roote them out, either the withſtanding of
the ſtripes, and fortefying of himſelfe for the
ſafegarde of his life? Sith ſo ſoone as it hath
pleaſed his Maieſtie to ſtretch forth his arme
to them, and to offer them ſuch conditions of

peace as himſelf liked of, with libertie of conſcience,
he hath not onely together with them
vnarmed himſelfe, and yeelded his Houldes
into the handes and power of his Maieſtie,
and fallen downe at his feete, but which is
more, haue returned their whole power together
againſt thoſe that haue come to his and
their ſuccour, (witneſſe the ſiege of Newhauen)
and haue diſunited themſelues from all
confederaties and Leagues, which in reſpect
thereof they were entered into with ſtraungers,
and all this to the ende to ſubmit them
ſelues to the Kings good will, who hath liked
thereof, and ſo confeſſed in all his Edictes of
Pacification, with other the perticuler good
deedes and fauours, which the ſayde King of
Nauarre confeſſeth to haue receiued of the
hand and good will of his Maieſtie, who hath
freely and liberally for the wealth of his Eſtate,
permitted to thoſe of the ſayd Religion,
the free exercize thereof, notwithſtanding the
cōſpired enemies to this Crowne, and to the
Princes of the bloud, haue often gone about
to bring into ſuſpition the actions, not onely
of the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre, but alſo of
all other the Princes of Bourbon, who onely
of the Royall famelie doe remaine. Beſides,
I aſſure my ſelfe if any man would endeuour

(as it were neceſſary and meete) by effectual
reazōs debated in a lawful aſſembly of Gods
Church, to enforme the ſayde Lorde King of
Nauarre, that hetherto hee hath bene deceiued:
and that his bringing vp in his Religion
hath bene very bad, hee is not obſtinate, but
eaſely may be reduced and brought to ſubmit
himſelfe to ſentence giuen by force of Gods
worde. In the meane tyme, we cannot blame
him whō his mother hath nourſed & brought
vp in a certaine Religion, publickly permitted
by his Maieſties Edicts and ordenances,
for ſtanding firme in the ſame, and deſiring to
continue in that which he beleueth to belong
to his ſaluation. O Frenchmen, is it meete
the Kings Edicts ſhould ſtand the wicked in
ſtead of a bayt, to roote out, & with the ſword
or guile more then barbarous to deſtroye, the
hearts & liues of the Princes, whō God hath
graunted to bee borne ouer vs? Will wee
graunt that to force that belongeth to reaſon?
In my opinion, we deceiue our ſelues, if we
weene by weapons to wreſt any thing from
Mars: eſpecially in whatſoeuer concerneth
Religion, which among honeſt and the beſt
men goeth nearer, and is of greater efficacie
then all other humaine actions. So as to the
contrary, I doe ſtedfaſtly beleeue that wee

haue the more cauſe to hope well of the gouernment
of the ſaid Lord King of Nauarre,
if it ſhould happen: For ſith his enemies are
forced to cōfeſſe that of himſelf he is a Prince
wiſe, well taught, diſcreete, and reaſonable,
alſo that our ſelues ſee him aſſured and by
weapons in expugnable, in that which from
his infancie hee hath bene perſwaded to bee
good for him, in reſpect of yt feare that he hath
of God, how great a peece of the work ſoeuer
offereth it ſelf to his view, or whatſoeuer humaine
hazard there be any apparance that he
ſhould feare in the conſeruation of a mightie
earthly Kingdome, whereof as yet he is preſumptiue
heire, it is an inuincible argument
for vs to knowe, that hee loueth and feareth
God aboue all things. Let vs therefore giue
him a taſte of our reaſons, ſith he is ſo very capable,
to the ende we may at his hand winne
that we deſire, and which wee ought and may
ſpedely hope for, without perticulerly hating
his perſon: without offending him, without
prouoking him, and without encurring the
wrath of God, by procuring the ſhedding of
the innocent bloud of ſo many thouſands of
our brethren, and together with them the deſtroying
of our poore Countrey. As yet in
troth it is too great an abuſe to terme the ſaid

Lord King of Nauarre a Rebell, or Traytor
to the Kings Maieſtie, for keeping himſelfe
from being ſlayne, and for oppoſing to his enemies
the walles of thoſe, who being ſhadowed
in their owne houſes, did onely withall
inſtance, and moſt humble petition require
the King to permit them to liue in peace of
conſcience vnder his obedience, againſt the
which they did n
                     •
                  uer ſtriue, neither would euer
had recourſe vnto, or craued the ſaid Lord
King of Nauarres protection, whome they
know neuer to haue ſo much loued any thing
as to liue his Maieſties moſt humble & moſt
obedient ſubiect, whereof wee all in our conſciences
are eye witneſſes, neither neede we
any greater proofe for the iuſtification of him
who neither doth, neither euer did deſire of
the King his Lorde, any other thing then to
liue in his good fauour, and to bee of him accoumpted
a moſt humble, and moſt obedient
ſubiect and kinſman.
               3 For this cauſe, in this action let al good
Frenchmen cōſider, that the ſayd Lord King
of Nauarre is, as they, the Kinges good ſubiect,
a Chriſtian, one that feareth God, and a
louer of his Countrey, ſo as for his ſake wee
neede not take armes or beate our braynes,
as doe ſome that be perſwaded by the wicked

counſaile of theſe firebrandes: he is the ſonne
of the famely: he is not a Spaniard that commeth
to your walles, and to ye doores of your
houſes: he is a true Frenchman, one that deſireth
peace, and one that would obey the King
his Lord, in whatſoeuer lyeth in him: he is a
louer of the lawes of the Realme, a ſworne enemy
to the ſedicious, an oppreſſor of the wicked,
and a defender of the Commonwealth.
Beſides, he hath aboue all other the French
nation the honor to bee the firſt Prince of the
bloud royal, & heire apparant to the Crowne,
in caſe God ſhould cal our King without leauing
any iſſue male of his body. Let euery
one therefore conſider, that al his enemies obiections
are but meere cauillations: Let the
French nation iudge whether they haue not
more cauſe, or are not greatlier bound to loue
and acknowledge the King of Nauarre, then
and other next to the Maieſtrie of our ſoueraigne
Lord the King, ſeeing we haue choſen
for our tutors, gouernours, and lawfull adminiſtrators,
the moſt noble and couragious famelie
of the Capets, to bee our Kinges of
Fraunce, from whence is diſcended in right
maſculine ligne on the fathers ſide, the ſayde
Lord King of Nauarre, as is aforeſayde, alſo
that euery other way he hath thence taken his

originall: for his Grandmother on the fathers
ſide was Lady Frances of Alencon,
daughter to Rene Duke of Alencon, and ſiſter
to Charles laſt deceaſed, all diſcended in
right ligne of ye males of Charles of Valois,
who firſt tooke the name and title of Alen
                     •
                  ō,
and was brother to Philip of Valois King of
France, both ſonnes to Charles of Valois,
brother to King Philip the Faire, which two
were ſonnes to Philip ye Bould eldeſt ſonne
to S. Lewes, and his ſucceſſor in the Realm.
Againe, the ſayd King of Nauarres Grandmother
by the mother was Lady Margaret
of Fraunce, ſiſter to King Frances the firſt.
As for the Kings of Nauarre, whom by his
mother Iane of Albret, daughter and heire to
Henry of Albret King of Nauarre, whom he
hath ſucceeded, they alſo are diſcended from
father to the ſonne of the houſe of France, by
the interpoſition of daughters capable of ſucceſſion
in the Realme of Nauarre: for Henry
Earle of Champagne and Brye, by his mother
Blanch, King of N
                     •
                  uarr
                     •
                  , maried a
daughter of Robert Earle of Arthois, ſonne
to King Lewes the 8. of Franc
                     •
                   and brother
to S. Lewes: of which marriage was borne
Iane heire of 
                     〈◊〉
                   and wife of Phillip
the Faire King of France: of them two came

Lewes Hutin, ſucceſſor in the Realmes of
France and Nauarre: when he dyed, he left a
daughter Iane, who after her Vnkles Phil.
the Long, & Charles yt Faire, was Queene of
Nauarre: ſhe maried Phil. of Eureux, ſonne
to Lewes of Eureux, Sonne to Phillip the
bould King of France, and brother to Phillip
the fayre: Of their mariage iſſued among other
children Charles King of Nauarre, who
maried the daughter of King Iohn of Frāce,
and of them was borne a Sonne of the ſame
name, for whoſe ſake King Charles the ſixt erected
the lande of Nemours into a Dutchy.
At his deceaſe hee left two Daughters, of
which Blanch the elder ſucceeded in the ſayd
Realme, and of her and Iohn of Caſtile her
houſeband iſſued Eleoner, wife to Gaſton of
Foix, who ſeazed vpon the Succeſſion of the
realme of Nauarre and other great goods.
Of that mariage came Gaſton of Foix that
maried Magdalein of France ſiſter to King
Lewes the eleuenth, who had Frances Phebus
king of Nauarre, after his grandmother
Eleoner, and Catherin, who ſucceeded her
brother Phebus: ſhee maried with Iohn of
Albret, father to Henry of Albret, and grandfather
to Queene Iane late deceaſed at Paris,
mother to the ſaid King of Nauarre now

raigning. So as it adpeareth, that he is on
euery ſide true french, and iſſued of the bloud
royall of Fraunce. Let vs not therefore any
longer giue eare to theſe ſclauuders: but only
haue recourſe to God by hartie praier, that
if the ſayd Lorde King of Nauarre, or any other
of our Princes haue in hym any thing,
as hee is a man frayle and full of humanitie,
it may pleaſe him to touche his harte: Let vs
ſeeke peace, flye debate, aboue all ſerue our
God, honour our King whom he hath eſtabliſhed
ouer vs, and after him loue and regarde
the Princes of his bloud: Let vs call to mind
the miſhap and miſeries hapened in our time
through eiuil diſſentions, and let vs ſet before
our eyes the afflictions and oppreſſiōs which
we are vppon the poynt to beare if wee be ſo
wicked, periured and diſloyall, as to preferre
ſtraungers and enemies to our Crowne before
our naturall Princes, to whom we haue
ſolemnly ſworne our faith before God, & who
for theſe 600, yeres haue ſo gratiouſly gouerned
vs, which is a double preſcription to that
which Iephta Iudge of Iſrael obiected to
the Ammonites, who pretended by Armes
after 300. yeeres to recouer the Land which
the Iſraelites had conquered from them.
Quare tanto tempore nihil ſuper hac repetitione

tentastis? which we may reproch to thoſe
that falſly doe ſay, that our Kings haue vſurped
any thing of thoſe from whome they pretend
to be iſſued, and whereof they weene to
make a greate ſhewe, if wee had no ſtronger
defenſes wherewith to vphold the poſſeſſion
of our Kings.
               4 For contrariwiſe, our King and Princes
of Bourbon who are all of one bloud, diſcended
of the Capets, are the ſame who certeinly
are iſſued of the agnation and famely
of the ſame Charlemagne, from whēce theſe
Iuglers would faſty pretend the original of ye
Lorrains: euen as he alſo was of the race of
the Merouingians. Pope Innocent the third
writing to the Nobles & Prelates of Frāce,
about the yere 1200. eloquently teſtifieth the
trueth of this ſtorie, ſpeaking of Phillip Auguſtus
pettie neuewe to Hugh Capet, and
Grandfather to S. Lewes, whō he euidently
reporteth to be come of ye ſayd Charlemaign,
ſo as otherwiſe we muſt argue this ye Popes
decretall Epiſtle of falſhood. Moreouer, Regino
the Hiſtoriographer, who liued almoſt in
the ſame tyme, Ado of Vienne, Ottho of Friſingen,
Martin of Pole, Sigiſbert, Aimoinus,
& others, do name Robert great Grandfather
to Hugh Capet, Ottho his great Vnckle

by the father, and Robert his Grandfather,
Princes and Dukes come of the noble
ligne of Fraunce, of the which likewiſe, euen
of the Kings of Fraunce, Odo before he was
elected King, did beare the armes and blaſon
which were Flowerdeluces ſowed vpon an
azure field without number: which alſo were
not altered before the tyme of Charles the
ſixt, who reduced them to three. And certaine
it is, that Odo durſt not haue enterprized to
beare the armes of France if he had not bene
a Prince of the Royall famelie: The proofe
whereof is cleare of doubt, in that wee doe
moreouer knowe ye the ſayd Odo was by the
Eſtates of France, nominated for tutor and
gouernor to Charles the Simple in his minoritie:
which in this Realme is neuer graū
                  ted
to any but thoſe to whom the ſucceſſion
may likewiſe fall: as was adiudged after the
deceaſe of Charles the Faire in the yeere
1327. in fauour of Phillip of Valois, ordeyned
tutor to the wombe of the Queene then
great and the child to come: Againe, after the
deceaſe of Charles the 5. and Lewes the 11.
Alſo in our age the Eſtates offered the ſame
office to the late King of Nauarre, father to
the King now raigning, in reſpect of the minoritie
of Charles the 9. Finally, wee reade

that by a common conſent, the Frenchmen
declared the ſayd Odo King of France, and
after him his brother Robert: and after them
Raoule come of a brother to Hugh Capet,
who was the fourth of his famelie that bare
the title and name Royall, but the firſt peaceable
poſſeſſor of the Realme: ſo that ſith euery
man ſeeth by our auncient Hiſtories, with
what vertue and marueilous aſſurance our
Predeceſſors did euermore reſiſt the force of
ſtraungers that ſought to plant their name
in the Royal famelie, we may not, neither can
thinke them to haue bene ſo fainthearted, fooliſh,
and vnconſtant, as of their owne motion
and free will to haue choſen the Capets, if
they had not beene of the houſe and famelie of
their Kings, meer for ſucceſſiō in the Realm:
To whom, for the proofe and verification of
the contrary, wee doe finde they had recourſe
for the conſeruation of this law, ſo relligiouſly
euermore obſerued among them, and vpon
the which they haue ſtill accompted the libertie
& dignitie of this Realme wholly to depende.
Beſides, I would gladly deſire theſe
makebates of our tyme to ſhewe me any one
Hiſtorie that maketh mention of any, that euer
made difficultie or obiected to the Capets,
that they were no Princes of the bloud

of the Kings their predeceſſors, and meete to
ſucceede in the Crowne.
               5 But to take away all ambiguitie, and to
verifie the diſtent of our Kings and the Princes
of Bourbon, to be of the famelie not onely
of Charlemaigne, but alſo of Clouis, and
other the Merouingians of the firſt ligne,
whereof alſo was the ſayde Charlemaigne,
(as Matthew Zampin a moſt learned perſonage,
hath to y• purpoſe diſcourſed, who hath
not vſed falſified Chartres and Documents,
as hath De Roziers Archdeacon of Thoule,
in his genealogies of Lorrain, againſt whom
Nicholas Venier the true Treaſorer of the
Stories of France, hath argued falſhoode in
his treatize of the originall of Frenchmen,)
we muſt firſt vnderſtād that Dagobert King
or Duke of the Francons in the Eaſt Frāce
about the yere of Chriſt 306. had two ſonnes
Clodomer and Genebauīt, of which two brethren
diſcēded in direct ligne Clouis the firſt
Chriſtian King of Fraunce, and S. Arnoul
Marquize of the holy Empire, at Antwerpe,
afterward Biſhop of Metz. This appeareth
in the Chronickle of Chronickles, in the Illuſtrations
of the Eaſt and Weſt France, in
Robert Cenalis, Geofrey of Viterbe, & many
other good Authors. Now S. Arnoule,

before he tooke the holy orders of Prieſthood
had bene Mayre of King Clotaire the ſecōdsli. 5. ca. 5. lib. 4. ca. 17. li. 1. 2. part. hiſt. ann. 540
Pallace about the yeere 546. who made him
tutor of his ſonne Dagobert the firſt of that
name, as ſayth Otto Friſingen. Aimoinus,
Regano, Antoninus, and Vincent the Hiſtoriall,
who writeth that this Arnouldes Dutchie
lay neere to Flaunders toward Lorrain,
and Sigiſbert witneſſeth that hee married
Doda,Vgo Geblac. lib. 6. cap. 7. ann 649 who after became a Nunne at Treuers,
of which mariage iſſued three Children,
Anſegiſus, Walchiſus, and Clodulph. The
eldeſt otherwiſe called Anchiſes, was Mayre
of the Pallace to Clouis the ſecond, and maried
Begga daughter to Pepin the elder and
ſiſter to Grimoald, as ſayth Sigiſbert and
Paule Emilius, of whom came Pepin father
to Charles Martel, who of the fiſter of Childebrand
begat Giles Biſhop of Roan, Carloman
a Muncke, and Pepin father to Charlemaigne.
Walchiſus S. Arnouldes ſecond
ſonne had a ſonne called Wandragiſillus,ann 693
both, as ſayth Sigiſbert, Canonized, neither
was their poſteritie of any long continuance.
Clodulph the third, otherwiſe called Elodulphe,
was (as ſayth Sigiſbert and Tritehemius)
after his father Biſhop of Metz:lib. 1 in comp. but he
had before married Mary daughter to KingAnn. 640.
                  
Clotaire the 2. after ſome, but as others ſay,
Almabert daughter to Carloman Duke of
Brabant, of whom hee begat a ſonne named
Martin,Sigisb, 687. ſupplē. Aim. lib. 4. ca. 45. lib. 1 lib. 10. decad. 1. lib. 11. ca. 109. lib. 2. illuſt. Neuſt. lib. 3. who was Mayre of the Pallace of
Thierry King of Auſtraſy with Pepin ſonne
of Anſegiſus: and Paule Emilie calleth this
Martin Coſſen to Pepin the Fat: and Blondus
nameth him his brother. This Martin
left a ſonne called Childebrand, and a daughter
wife to Charles Martell, ſaith Paule Emile:
whervpon other writers doe terme this
Childebrand brother to Charles Martell, and
Vnckle to his Children, in reſpect of the alliance
that was betweene them. Nicholas
Giles calleth Childebrād, Vnkle to Charles
Martell,Chron. volum. 1. lib. 2. Waſſ. lib. 2 Richard of Waſſembourg nameth
him Lambert, he left a ſonne called Theodorie,
or Theodowald, who floriſhed vnder
Charlemaigne, and being in his youth in the
battaile of Ronceuaulx, was made gouernor
of Saxony,Paul. Ac mil. li. 2 about the yeere 780. and thereof
was termed the Saxon: he alſo led parte of
Charles Armie againſt the Huns, about the
yeere 791.Suppl. Aim. li. 4. cad. 82 Vrſperg ann. 792 Paule Emile, and others doe call
him Charles Coſſen, which cannot be but by
the ſayd Childebrand. In an other place, the
ſayde Paule ſayth, that this Theodorick had
the precedēce becauſe he was a Prince of the

bloud, before Geilo Conſtable of Fraunce.
Thierry maried ye daughter of Witichindus
a Prince of Saxony, who a little before was
Baptized, & this mariage was made to ye end
by the alliance of the bloud Royall, the Saxon
might bee kept in duetie and amitie with
the Eſtate of Fraunce, after the example of
Charles the Bould, toward Godfrey Duke
of the Normans, whom hee cauſed to marrie
Giles daughter to his neuew King Lothair,
and as Charles the Simple deit with Rollo
the Norman.Gaguin, l. b. 5. Of this marriage of Thierry
with the daughter of Witichindus, diſcended
Robert: In reſpect whereof the Abbot of Vſpergue,
ſpeaking of Odo the firſt Capet that
was crowned King of France, ſayth that his
father was called Robert,Sigisb. ann. 866 Otto li. 6. cap. 3. Reg. lib, 2 ann. 867. and his Grandfather
Witichindus: This man was Marquize
of Aquitaine againſt the Normans, who ſlew
him, and Ranulph Duke of Guyente, in the
tyme of Charles the Bould. Whereby wee
may learne that y• Princes of this houſe were
termed Saxons, either in reſpect of the gouernment
of Theodorick in Saxony, either
els becauſe of the alliance entered with Witichindus
the Saxon: whereof our deceiuers
being ignorant, tooke occaſion to thincke the
Capets originary Saxons & ſtraūgers,Regino lib. 2. notwithſtanding

in troth they were very Princes
of the bloud royall of France, Earles and
Marquizes of Anieow, in which Prouince
the Annales of the Countrey do teſtifie that
Thierry father to the ſayde Robert, deceaſed
at the age of 80. yeeres or more, and his ſayd
ſonne Robert after him: after whoſe deceaſe
the Countie of Anieow was committed to
to the cuſtody of one Hugh an Abbot, during
the minoritie of Odo,Nic. Vign. in Chron. Burgūd. Robert, and Thierry,
ſonnes to the ſayde Robert, to whom it was
rendered after the deceaſe of Hugh, whome
ſome doe make brother to the firſt Robert.
Thierry one of Roberts children, was Earle
of Bourgondie, & had a ſonne called Richard
Duke of Bourgondy, who begat Raoul, who
with the help of his Coſſen Hugh the Great,
was vppon the reſignation of Charles the
Simple, proclaymed King of Fraunce, and
was the third Capet that before Hugh bare
the name and title of King of this Crowne:
which ſtill fell out by the nomination and cō
                  mon
agreemēt and conſent of the Nobilitie:
which is a moſt ſufficient teſtimonie to proue
that the Capets were vndoubtedly Princes
of the bloud, ſith the Frenchmen, ſo ſore enemies
to forraine gouernmēt, had euen at once
reſpect to thoſe mē, and ſo often had recourſe

to their armes as to their naturall Princes.
Richard likewiſe begat Giſilbert Duke of
Bourgondie,Paul. Aemil. lib. 3 Vgo Gē
                     blac lib. 6. cap. 19. who had one onely daughter
that was wife to Ottho, brother to Hugh Capet,
to whome ſhee brought the Dutchie of
Bourgondie. Odo ſecond ſonne of Robert,
and Earle of Paris was tutor to Charles the
Simple,Gng. lib. 5. Sigisb ann. 890 Otho Friſ. lib. 6. cap. 18 and afterwarde beeing proclaymed
King of France, dyed without iſſue. Robert
the third ſonne was Conſtable of Frāce, and
admitted King after ye deceaſe of his brother,
whereby hee grewe into great hatered with
Charles the Simple, and finally dyed about
the yeere 922. leauing iſſue Hugh the Great,
Earle of Paris,Sigiſ. Abb. Vſ. perg. Vgo G
                        •
                     
                     blac. Duke & Conſtable of Frāce,
as ſayth Paule Emile. This man in reuenge
of his fathers death, endeuoured (as ſayth the
Abbot of Vſpergue) to make his Coſſen Raoule
Duke of Bourgondie King. He maried
Hauide daughter to the Emperour Henry,supplem Aim. lib. 5. cap. 43.
and ſiſter to Ottho the firſt, of which mariage
diſcended three ſonnes, Hugh Capet the firſt
peaceable enioyer of the Realme of France
of that famelie. Ottho, who by his wife was
Duke of Bourgondie, and Henry who alſo
after his brother Ottho was Duke of the
ſame land. Thus may you ſee the progreſſe
and true genealogie of our Kings diſcended

of the ſaid Capet: wherby appeareth the falſehood
of our ſclaunderrs liedgerdemain, who
giue out that the Capets beeing ſtraungers
did vſurp the Crowne of the houſe of Charlemaigne,
whereof neuertheleſſe I haue heretofore
ſhewed you that it is 580. yeeres ſince
that race was vtterly extinct: ſo farre are the
Princes of Lorraine from taking their originall
thereof: neither neede we beleeue the fable
of adoption inuented by du Rozieres, as
falſe as blockheaded, and doltiſh a Chronegrapher,
and Hiſtorigrapher, & a worſe Lawyer.l. fidei commiſſum ff. de cond. & demo.
For he ſhould haue knowne that his pretended
adoption made by ſome one of the
Carlians of that name, from whom he would
bring the diſcent of the Lorraines, could not
take holde in the Realme of France which is
ſucceſſiue, ſo long as any one Prince of the
bloud liued.l. uec eniml. nā ira. l. ſi pater ff. de adop. Beſides, that at all aſſaies it had
bene requiſite, euen in default of heires of the
Crowne, that this adoption with the notice
of the cauſe had bene made by the general Eſtates
of the Realme, ſo to haue made the adopted
capable of the ſucceſſion: as I could at
large ſhewe him, if there needed any confutatiō
of thoſe fables, which they would ſuppoſe
vnto vs in the vnderpropping of the pretences
of ſtraungers, our enemies, with a rotten

poſte: but I will content my ſelfe with the repreſentation
of the genealogie of the Capets
aforeſayd, wherby you ſee how they abuſe vs.
Wherfore let vs there leaue thē, and among
our natural Princes let vs put of all paſſion,
& iudge what is right, alſo what preeminence
the one may haue ouer the other, both by reaſon
and ciuil diſcourſe. If it were to any purpoſe
to lay open to the French, the rules of eſtabliſhment
of a Tyrant ſtraunger, an vſurper
of an Eſtate, there is no man (how greatly
ſoeuer affected to the fellonie which good
men doe finde to bee now conſpired againſt
the honor of the King, and the Princes of the
bloud Royal by theſe perturbers of the peace
of this Crowne,) but would abhorre euen to
heare the ſame ſpoken of. To conclude, therefore
I will now cōtent my ſelf with warning
euery one, to mark and conſider the meanes,
which ſuch alwaies as haue gotten the vpper
hand of a Lordſhip, whereto they had no other
right but habilitie haue houlden: and then I
hope they will thincke that the gouernment
of a naturall Prince is gracious, louing, and
fauourable, in reſpect of ye miſtruſtfull, ſuſpicious,
and tyrannous ſtraunger, vnto whom
not onely the deedes and wordes, but alſo the
geſture, behauiour, yea, the goodes and welth

of his Citizens are ſuſpected, becauſe he feareth
his owne ſhadowe. Remember the auncient
Fable of the Pigeons, who when they
had elected the Ringdoue to rule them, were
ſoone wearie of her courteous and gentle gouernment,
which they termed, ſoft and delicate,
and in her roume choſe the Kite, who in
liew of wel entreating of thē, did eate, beate,
and dayly teare ſome one among them in ſunder
with her beake and wings: whereat theſe
miſerable fooles being offended, could haue
bene cōtent to haue returned vnder the yoke
of their firſt election, but the Kites tyrannie
could neuer brooke it, whoſe ſucceſſors do yet
to this day practize their roine vpon them.
Once it fell out that the Frenchmen through
wicked counſaile, in liew and place of their
naturall Prince whom they bare ſomewhat
heauy, were ſuborned to elect one Giles a
Romaine, of whom they were ſoone wearie,
after they had caſted what it was to liue vnder
one whoſe humour and birth did not agree
with his ſubiects: and it fell our well for
them that their King was of power ſufficient
to reſume them againe into his protection.
               The ende of the third part.
            
         
         
            
               
               
                  ❧THE CONTENTS
OF THE FOVRTH
part of this Booke.
               1 The authorities of Doctors for the
preferment of the Neuewe before
the Vnckle.
               2 Examples of the preferment of the
Neuewe before the Vnckle.
               3 Reaſons in law for the Neuew againſt
the Vnkle. The Neuewe ſucceedeth
in the elderſhip of his father in proper
perſon as being ſubſtituted to
his late father.
               4 The right of elderſhip is tranſmiſsible
& perfect, wanting but execution.
               5 The right of elderſhip is legall, or cuſtumary.
               6 The Lord Cardinall of Bourbons acknowledgemēt
in the fauour of his
neuew the K. of Nauarres mariage.
               7 Anſwere to the examples of the Vnckle
alleadged againſt the neuewe.
               8 Anſwer to the Vnkles reaſons againſt
the neuewe. Subſtitutions and continuatiō
frō the father to the ſonne
in collaterall ligne by Iuſtinian.
               
                  
9 Succeſsiou once roored in a ligne, neuer
departeth the ſame vntill it be
finiſhed or worne out.
               10 The order of Tutorſhip, and the ſucceſsion
of free borne, & Libertines
is vnlike.
               11 The Kings youth neuer debarreth thē
from the Crowne. The opening of
the ſaying, that perſonall right is
not tranſmiſsible.
               12 Succeſsions made by ciuill lawe and
cuſtome, confeſsing the right of elderſhip,
are farre vnlike.
            
            
               
               THE FOVRTH PART OF
the Cath. Apologie.
               
                  IN the fourth Obiection
the King of Nauarres
aduerſaries doe oppoſe againſt
him the Lord Cardinall
of Bourbon, his
Vncle, as neerer by one
degrée, and nowe by the
deceaſe of the late Anthonie of Bourbon, Father
to the ſayd Lorde King of Nauarre, the
eldeſt of the houſe of Bourbon.
               1 This queſtion is one of the moſt toſſed
of all others,Lib. 1. cap. 26. and can not be decided by the arreſtes
of the Salicke Lawe that wee haue in
theſe words. De terra verò Salica in mulierem
nulla portio haereditatis tranſit, ſed hoc virilis
ſexus acquirit, hoc eſt, filij in ipſa haereditate
ſuccedunt, ſed vbi inter nepotes, & pronepotes
poſt longum tempus de Allode terrae contentio
ſuſcitatur, non per ſtirpes, ſed per capita diuidantur.
But the deciſion hereof we muſt ſéeke
in the Commentaries of our Doctors, which
Accurtius, Odofrede, Pope Innocent the

fourth, Durand, Ric. de Malumbris, Iohn,
Andrew, Alberick de Roſatis, Barth. Balde,
Paule de Caſiro, Angel. Aret. Martin. de
Lande, Iohn Faber, Pet. de Ancar. Barbat,
Felin, Auſrerius, Wil. Benedict. Caſſanee,
Lewes Bolognine, Matth. de Afflictis,
Andreas Sicul. Abbas Panormitanus, Bartholomeus
Soſinus, Iaſon, Alciatus, Tiraquel.
Lewes, Charond. Choppinus, and many
other haue concluded in fauour of the Neuewe
againſt the Vncle, who termeth himſelfe
eldeſt by his brothers deceaſe, either indirect
or collaterall lyne in ſucceſſions indeuided
as Realmes, Empires, Duchies, Coū
                  ties
and Marquiſates.c. Imperi alē ff. prae te. ea de prohib. fend. aliē Per Frid. coll. x. Yea, Decius imitating
Socinus, doth write, that amōg the Interpreters
of Ciuill & Canon law, hi qui pondere,
numero, & menſura praeualent, haue alwayes
conſulted and determined againſt the
Vnkle: ſo that by the authoritie of ſo many
ſkilfull perſons, the ſayd Lorde King of Nauarre
hath the better cauſe of the Cardinall
his Vnkle. Secondly, the foreiudgements
muſt be alledged for the deciſion of this controuerſie.
Balde ho
                     •
                  ldeth, that euermore it
hath ſo bene obſerued and decided in all contradictorie
iudgements of France and England.
And Paul maketh mention of the Spaniſh

law in this reſpect ſolemnly ſworne vnto
by the ſtates of the ſame lande, & in deede we
reade goodly examples both of theſe and many
others.
               2 Firſt in France, for the ſame houſe of
Bourbon in the time of Lewes the Fat, king
of France, about the yeere 1110. Hanno had
expulſed his Neuewe Arcembault,Paul. Ac 
                        〈◊〉
                     . in Ludou. Craſſo. a young
child, ſonne to his elder brother, pretending
that the Lordſhip perteined to him as being
entred into the Lawe of the elderſhip, by the
deceaſe of his elder brother: But the French
Nobility forced the vnkle to giue place to the
Neuew, whom they ſubſtituted in the roume
and place of his brother, reſeruing to Hanno
onely ſome portion of the goods, as to one of
the Children of the ſame houſe. An other example
we haue in the poſteritie of Henry the
ſecond K. of England, who had three ſonnes,
Richard Cordelion, Secondly Geffrey, who
had maried Conſtance, the Heyre of Brittaine,
and dyed in his Fathers time,P
                        •
                     lid. in hiſt. Ang Paul. Aem. in Philipp. Auguſt. leauing
his Wife great of Arthure, afterward
Duke of Britaine, and Iohn ſurnamed without
land: Soone after the fathers death dyed
Richard alſo without iſſue, whereupon Phil.
Auguſtus King of Fraunce, who raigned about
the yere 1141. adiudged the Dutchy of

Normandy, with other the Landes that the
ſaid Richard held in Fraunce, vnto Arthure
ſonne to G
                     •
                  ffrey his elder brother: but afterward
the ſayde Iohn made peace with Auguſtus
through the mariage of his ſonne Lewes
vnto Blanch. Neece to the ſayd Iohn by his
Siſter, wife to the King of Caſtile, togither
with ſome Lands that the ſaide Iohn habandoned
to the ſayd Phillip. So that Arthure
ſtill proſecuting his right, was ſlaine by his
vnkle Iohn, wherevpon the King of Fraunce
tooke occaſion for that fellony, to confiſcate
all thoſe landes as hauing alwayes fauoured
and aucthoriſed the cauſe of the ſayd Arthur.
The third iudgement paſſed in the tyme of
Charles the Fayre, King of Fraunce, about
the yeere 1331. for the Earle of Flaunders:
for Lewes of Neuers was by the Peeres of
the Realme declared Earle of Flaunders,
and preferred before his Vnckle, after the deceaſe
of Earle Robert, becauſe he was ſonne
to the elder who dyed afore his father. True
it is, that for entering vpon the ſayd Countie,
and taking vpon him the title of Earle,
before he had taken his oath & done homadge
to his Maieſtie, he was arreſted at Paris and
impriſoned in the Caſtle of Louure, from
whence he was ſoone after deliuered againe.

An other ſolemne arreſt paſſed in the tyme of
Phil.Idem in Philipp. Val. of Valois, about the yeere 1328. for the
Dutchie of Brittain, by reaſon of the deceaſe
of Duke Iohn, who dyed without iſſue, leauing
behind him his third brother Ih. Earle
of Montfort, and the daughter of his ſecond
brother Guy Vicountie of Limoges, then
wife to Charles Earle of Blois,Renat. Chop. de Doman. vnto whom
by ſentence of the Court the ſayd Dutchie
in the yerre 1341. was adiudged, becauſe
Charles of Blois ſhewed, y• by the cuſtumes
of Brittaine, the ſucceſſion belonged to the
eldeſt, thē to the ſecond, and laſtly to the third:
thereupon inferring that his wife, daughter
to the ſecond, did repreſent the ſame perſon.
But where the houſe of Montfort did afterward
enioye the ſame Dutchie, that came by
vertue of a certaine agreement afterwarde
made at the entrie of Charles the fifth in the
yeere 1364. An other ſentence paſſed in the
tyme of Frances the 1. in the yeere 1517. for
the Countie of Foix, and other the landes belonging
to the ſame famely, betweene Odet
of Foix Lord of Lautrect, and Villemur, and
Henry of Albret King of Nauarre, Grandfather
to the King of Nauarre now raigning:
for Gaſton of Foix, and Eleanor of Nauarre
had two ſonnes, Gaſton the eldeſt, and Iohn

Vicountie of Narbonne the yonger:Garib. in hiſt Nauar. li. 33 Gaſton
dyed before both father and mother, leauing
ſuruiuours by his wife Lady Magdalem of
Fraunce daughter to Charles the ſeauenth
two children, Philip Phebus and Ratherine,
whereupon their Vnckle Iohn Vicountie of
Narbonne, hauing maried the ſiſter of King
Lewes the 12. made ſuite againſt the ſayde
Phebus his neuewe, pretending elderſhip by
the deceaſe of his brother Gaſton: The cauſe
pleaded in the Court of Parliament, was by
the Counſaile compounded in the yere 1488
but ſoone after began againe by Gaſton of
Foix Duke of Nemours, ſonne to the ſayde
Iohn, being in great fauour with his Vnkle
King Lewes the 12. but becauſe hee dyed at
the battaile of Rauenna without iſſue, it ſeemed
this proceſſe might haue ended, but it fell
out otherwiſe, for Odet of Foix his Coſſen
and pretended heire, tooke the ſame cauſe in
hand againſt Katherin ſiſter to the ſayd Phebus
deceaſed, and proceeded ſo farre that by
arreſt of the Court in the yeere 1517. he was
put by, & the ſayd Coūtie together with other
the Lordſhips of the ſame famelic, adiudged
vnto Henry of Albret ſonne to the ſayde Katherine,
and his poſteritie, of whom, as is aforeſayd,
is diſcended the now Lorde King of

Nauarre.Polid. Verg. in hiſt. Ang. In England, after the deceaſe of
Edward the third in the yeere 1378. Richard
ſonne to Edw. Prince of Wales, was without
contradiction crowned, and preferred before
his Vnckles the Dukes of Lancaſter, of
Clarence, of Gloceſter, and Yorke: but aboue
twentie yeeres after for his euill behauiour
and miſgouernment,Phil. dec. cōc. 44. 2. part. 3. volum. Nicol. de Vbald. in tract. de ſucceſſ. ad inteſtat. numer. 62. he was depoſed, and his
Coſſen Henry ſonne to Iohn Duke of Lancaſter
ſet vp in his place. In Portugall King
Alphons the fifth had two children, Fernand,
and Henry, who beeing the elder deceaſed before
his father, leauing a ſonne named Iohn:
after the deceaſe of the ſaid Alphons, the ſaid
Iohn commonly called Iohn the ſecond, whō
the common Hiſtories doe falſly terme ſonne
to the ſayd Alphons,Garib. lib. 22. Oſor. lib. 1. hiſt. Luſit. did peaceable enioye the
Crowne from the yeere 1482. vnto the yeere
1495. when he dyed without iſſue, and then
his Coſſen Emanuell ſonne to Ferdinand
ſucceeded him. The ſayd Emanuell hauing
raigned 22. yeres, among other children left
his ſonne Iohn the third, who was crowned
after him, and Henry the Cardinal. Iohn the
3. during his raigne, had a ſonne of the ſame
name, who dyed before his father, leauing his
wife with childe of Sebaſtien, who after his
Grandfather Iohn the 3. was preferred before

his great Vnckle Henry,Tiraq. de Iur. primog. quaeſt. 4. numer. 5
                        •
                     . brother to the
ſayd Iohn the 3. notwithſtanding the ſayde
Sebaſtiens father was neuer King, and that
the ſaid Henry might haue obiected the ſame:
but he raigned not vntill the ſayd Sebaſtien
dyed and left no iſſue: which queſtion ſayth
Tiraquell, doth ſo reſemble ours, as one Bee
may an other. In Caſtile, King Alphons the
10. had two ſonnes, the elder Ferdinand who
maried Blanch daughter to S. Lewes, and
of her begat Ferdinand and Alphons. The
younger called Sanxi who ſeeing his elder
brother dead, and waying his neuewes right
to the Realme, could not tary the deceaſe of
his father the ſayde Alphons, but during his
life time raiſed warres to the ende to procure
himſelfe to bee declared heire: whereat this
good olde man was ſo wrath that he accurſed
him.Marian. Sicul. Beſides that the French King Phillip
the third Vnckle by the mother to the ſayde
yong Princes, after he had therevpon aſked
aduiſe of the wiſe men of his Realme, led an
armie vnto the frontiers of Spayne, and had
gone forward, had not the Popes Legat lingered
him with wordes, together with the aſſurance
which the ſayde Alphons made him
viz. that he would vpholde the right and cauſe
of his ſayd neuewes: which neuertheleſſe he

ſoone after he forgat, and ſent out his Letter
ſealed with gold, and his owne Image therein
grauen, to his ſubiects, repugnant to the
former, and by meanes of the ſame by forc
                     •
                  eſtabliſh
                     •
                  d
Sanxi his ſeconde ſonne, ſo as the
orphelins were not ouercome but with the
ſwor
                     •
                  , without any ſhewe of reaſon, as the hiſtorie
doe import.Iuſt. lib. 23. In Sicill, the like quarell
being moued betweene the ſonne and the neuewe
of Agathocles in the extremitie of his
ſickneſſe, the neuewe by the will and iudgement
of God, ouerthrew his ſayd Vnkle, and
remayning victor was King ouer the whole
Land.Witichind. lib 2. Sigis. in. Chron. circa. annū. 942. In Germany, vpon the like controuerſie
vnder Henry the 3. & after vnder Ottho
the Great, the hiſtories doe report that the
States of the Empire met and agreed that
this debate ſhould, as the cuſtome of that time
required, be ended by a cōbat, wherein the defendants
of the cauſe of y• neuew ſonne to his
brother yt would haue had his fathers roume
were conquerors, and thereupon the ſayd Eſtates
did ſo conclude and adiudge it. More
ſolemne alſo is the ſentence which Licurgus
the true Oracle of humaine wiſedome, gaue
in his owne cauſe, about the 17. Olimpiade, &
in the time of Numa King of the Romaines:Plut. īn Lycurg. Iuſt. lib. 3.
for wee reade that his father Enomus King

of the Lacedemonians had two ſonnes, Polidectes
and Licurgus: the firſt dyed before
his father leauing his wife with childe: Enomus
dead, Licurgus tooke the royall Diadem,
and kept it a fewe moneths, vntill at a
banquet among his friendes his neuewe the
after borne was offered vnto him, whome hee
named Charilaus, & withall ſet the Crowne
vpon his head. To this example hath relation
alſo the ſame iudgement that Pauſanius
writeth of the Senat of Sparta, aboue 400.
yeeres after Licurgus, concerning the children
of their King Cleomenes who had two
ſonnes,Pauſan. lib. 3. Cleonimus and Acrotatus the elder,
who dying beforr his father, and leauing his
ſonne Areus, the Realm came in queſtion betweene
them, where ſentēce paſſed for Areus
againſt Cleonimus, who was ſo wroth therewith,
that he called Pirrhus King of Epiro
ſonne to Earida, and cauſed him to enter the
land, whereupon he was declared enemie to
the Commonwealth. In Italy, Robert the
ſecond King of Sicill ſonne to Charles the
ſecond,Oldrad. cōc. 224 Bald. in l. liberti C. oper. libert. about the yere of Ieſus Chriſt 1310.
when there was controuerſie for the County
of S. Seuerin, betweene Thomas ſonne to
the elder, and Iames the younger, gaue ſentence
for the neuewe: ſo that the ſayd Robert,

whome our Doctors terme an other Salomon,Iohn. An dr. tn ad dir ad ſpecul. in tit. de feud.
being in Auignon accompanyed with a
number of Doctors, and other ſkilfull perſonages,
adiudged the ſayd Countie to him.
               Ottho of Friſingen rehearſeth the cuſtome
of Bourgondy, which ſaith he, was euermore
obſerued among the Gaules, concerning the
fathers ſucceſſion, which was adiudged to the
eldeſt and his poſteritie, vnto whom the reſt
as to their Lordes, ought to yeeld all reſpect,
honor, and duetie. Demoſthenes alſo maketh
mention of the Athenians lawe whereby brothers
children had parte in the ſucceſſion of
their Grandfather, as braunches and bodies
ſubſtituted in the Roumes of their deceaſed
parents. So as the great number of arreſtes
paſſed might at this day be reaſon ſufficient
to reſtrain the Lord Cardinall of Bourbon,
and thoſe who vnder pretence of fauouring
his cauſe, do practize their own aduancement
by the deſtruction of the Royall famelie:
eſpecially ſith theſe iudgements paſſed
not without great notice of the cauſe, ripe &
moſt ſound conſiderations, which learned
men ſhal conceiue, as drawne out of the fountaine
of the Ciuill and Cannon lawes, from
whence the beſt and moſt of our pollicie is taken.
               
                  
3 The firſt reaſon is, becauſe the father and
the ſonne, ſayth Iuſtinian, are natura, but one
perſon, ſo as the father ſeemeth not dead in
reſpect of the ſubſtitution that nature hath
made in the perſon of his ſonne, who is parte
of his fleſh and bones, and is therefore termed
ſonne of the houſhould, as the other father of
houſhould,
                  l. 1. C. de Priuil. dot. l. etiam ff. ſolut. ma trim. 
                  with the ſole difference of the title of
generation. And in Eccleſiaſtes it is written:
The father is dead, and in a maner not dead,
becauſe he hath left one like himſelfe. And after
the fathers deceaſe the ſonne purchaſeth
not a newe his rightes and ſucceſſion, but taketh
vpon him the adminiſtration and vſe of
the ſame,l. vt inteſtato C. de ſuis & legit. l. poſthumorū ff. de iniuſt. rupt. whereby the ſame matter that was
to bee conſidered in the father, is no doubt
tranſported to the perſon of the ſonne, how
perſonall ſoeuer the ſame be, and he is thereof
capable, as a ſtraunger enheritour cannot
be: in ſuch wiſe that the ſonne by nature and
ciuill lawe ſubſtituted in his fathers roume
and place, is to enioye all priuiledges, dignities,
and rightes that might to the deceaſed
haue apperteyned. This ciuill reaſon conformeth
it ſelfe to infinite examples of the lawe.
Firſt, wee knowe that the ſonne dying before
his father, the neuewe entereth the roume of
the deceaſed, and enioyeth the ſame rights as

his father, if he had liued, ſhould in his Grādfathers
ſucceſſion, as appeareth in the Counſaile
of Gallus Aquilius: by the law Vellea,
and other the heades of our wiſedome: ſo that
no reaſon can be alleadged why we ſhould otherwiſe
thincke in this deede, which dependeth
of the right obteyned by the father in reſpect
of ſeuioritie in the ſucceſſion of his predeceſſors:Paul de Caſt. cōc. 264. in 2. part. Oldrad. cōc. 224.
for although the ſonne of the deceaſed
elder doe maintaine the ſeuioritie to bee
his, by his owne right and perſon, yet is he as it
were ſubſtituted in the place and perſon of
his ſayd father, and admit the qualitie of ſenioritie
were by the fathers deceaſe dead and
extinct, yet the power & habilitie to ſucceede
thereby is not extinct and loſt,l. Lucius ff. de haered. inſt. l. 1. C. de condit. inſert. which beeing
diuers, and ſeperated from the elderſhip, is
continued and tranſported into the perſon of
the ſonne. Wherevpon in lawe we doe ſay,
that the ſame departing before the father, his
ſonne ſucceedeth in his poſſibilitie, becauſe the
ſame occaſion, if any dyeth without children, is
accompliſhed in the wiſe counſaile of the testator,
if there remaine any iſsue of the afore deceaſed
ſonne. Hereupon by the arreſt of the
Court in the yeere 1555. was the daughter
of the eldeſt ſonne of Thibault of Vitry preferred
before her Vnckles in the right of elderſhip,

to the landes and noble Lordſhips of
the ſaid Thibault. Secondly, it was determined
that the free borne childrē were not bound
to lay together their owne goodes in pertitiō
of their fathers, or if it happened the ſame
beeing vnder his fathers iuriſdiction to deceaſe,
leauing his ſonne alienated to ſome one
of his brethren of the ſame calling, the neuew
who in his owne perſon could not attend the
relation of his Vnckles proper goodes in the
ſucceſſion of his Grandfather, might neuertheleſſe
demaund the ſame in the behalfe and
as ſubſtitute to the perſon of his deceaſed father,
and therefore the ſame right that he had
in the ſame relation is adiudged to his ſonne,
who of himſelfe was vnperfect & badly groū
                  ded
in his demaund.Nouell. 
                        •
                     18. cap. 2. & nouel. 127. cap. 1. nuth. ceſſante C. de legit. h
                        ••
                     red. By our Lawes alſo the
brother by father and mother, is in the ſucceſſion
of his deceaſed brother, to bee preferred
before the reſt of his brethren of the ſame bellie,
or kinſmen: Let vs now preſuppoſe the
brother both waies were deceaſed, leauing
one ſonne. The ſonne is to take vp the inheritance
of his Vnkle, before the reſt of the brethren
of the deceaſed, beeing of one bellie, or
kindred: which hee cannot doe by his owne
right, becauſe he was not brother to the deceaſed,
and therefore neceſſarily he taketh it

in right of ſubſtitution and ſucceſſion to his
late father tranſported into his perſon, wherby
he not onely ſucceedeth with his Vnkles,
but which is more, excludeth them as might
his father haue done if he had liued.l. quae de tota ff. de rei vend. Moreouer,
that which is noted in parte, muſt take
place in the whole, and yet in the ſubſtitution
of the deceaſed fathers ſucceſſion, the children
of the deceaſed do take their part and portion
of their deceaſed Grandfathers goodes by
ſtocke, not by head, that is, in conſideration of
their fathers perſon, which wee call in stirpes
non in capita, which alſo concurreth with
Gods lawe, as wee may note in the portion
that Abraham gaue to his neuewe Lot the
ſonne of his brother Aram,Geneſ. 11. 13. & 13. Nouel. 118 ff. ceterùm. in the ſucceſſion of
their generall father Thare. In the collaterall
ligne, the text of Iuſtinians nouell ſaith,
that the neu
                        •
                     we ſonne to the brother ſucceedeth
in ſuch part as his deceaſed father might haue
done: why thē ſhould we not obſerue the ſame
in things wholly vndeuided, as in a Realme,
Empire, Dutchie, and ſuch other like, which
can haue but one maiſter? ſo that the neuewe
taking his fathers roume may exclude his
Vnckle, euen as his deceaſed father might
haue done, becauſe in ſuch ſucceſſions there
is place but for one? Moreouer, wee knowe

that the obligations wherein the father ſtand
charged to his ſonne, are in like force and vertue
in the perſons of his iſſue, and therefore
the Grandfather is bounde to endowe his
niepce for her fathers ſake,l. dedit dotem ff. de coll. bonor. ſo as the ſame
right whereby the Daughter maye force her
Grandfather to marrie her, is in conſideratiō
of his ſonne, becauſe, ſaith Celſus, the Grandfathers
duetie to his niepce, ariſeth of his fatherly
loue to his ſonne, and therby his children
ought to haue the ſame that to him had apperteyned,
if he had liued in the world. In an other
place the Emperours Zeno and Iuſtinian
haue decreed, that at the deceaſe of one
of the children of the firſt bed, the part that he
ſhould haue had in the giftes betweene his father
and mother at their mariage, cannot ariſe
to his brethren, but muſt (by their willes)
apperteyne to his children, if at his deceaſe
he left any during his fathers life. Pomponius
ſpeaking of a Libertine,l. ſi operarū l. à duob. ff. de oper. libert. 
                  who had promiſed
his endeuour to two Patrons, is of opinion,
that if the one dye, the ſame dueties belong to
his children, notwithſtanding the other do liue.
Which can not be, but in reſpect of the Obligation
wherein this boundman was bovnd to
their father. To be briefe, I might be tedious
in diſcourſing vppon infinite continuations

and ſubſtitutions of Children in the roumes
of their deceaſed Fathers. Neither is to any
purpoſe that aunſwere of thoſe of contrary opinion,
which alleadge, that whatſoeuer wee
haue ſayd taketh place only where the father
is of him ſelf perfect, and in his owne perſon
doth certainly obteyne: For I ſay moreouer,
that in cace there were no more but the onely
and ſometime vaine hope, yet were it lawfull
for the ſonne to vſe the ſame, and to ſeeke out
the effects that may come to hande, as it appeareth
in the father: Haereditatem non aditam,
ad quam nullum adhuc habet ius quaeſitum,
nec actionem ad liberos tranſmittit, quinimò
& conditionale fidei commiſſum, querelam
in officioſi teſtamenti non praeparatam, iudicium
operarum non contestatum, & ſuch like, wherein
doe very often conſiſt the power and force
of 
                     •
                  ature, although the children be not heires
to their father.
               4 The ſecond reaſon is meere ciuil, wherby
we ſaye the right of elderſhip is borne and
formed in the perſon of the Father at his firſt
entry into the world: Moſes termeth it, primogenita
tua, by a poſſeſſiue pronoune. The
Interpreter doe deſcribe it,e. quam periculgſum 7. q. 1. 
                  Ius prioris aetatis,
honorificum & vtile competens filio, quia primus
eſt in ordine naſcendi. So conſequently

he is of nature, and therefore tranſmiſſible.
whereby alſo during the Fathers life, the eldeſt
ſonne is called King, Duke, Earle, &c. of
his fathers qualitie, the hope of which ſenioritie
he may ſell,Geneſ. 36. Decius cō
                     cil. 443. in 2. 
                        •
                     arte. Abb. cōc. 85. Andr. Siculus concil. 10. l. emacipatum ff. fin. ff. de ſenat. l. diuo. C. de quaeſt. l. vt Iuriſ
                     
                        •
                      trandi ff. ſi liberis ff. de oper. libert. giue, diſpoſe, tranſferre and
reſigne to an other mans perſon: as Eſau did
to Iacob: eſpecially, becauſe he hath notable
intereſt therin, as in this matter in reſpect of
the natural affection he beareth to his ſonne,
and the deſire that nature hath planted in him
to leaue his ſonne ſubſtituted and ſucceſſor in
his roume: beſides that ſith elderſhip is an excellent
and notable dignitie, death or any other
miſhap of the father cannot bee preiudiciall
to the ſonne, who in this poinct is not
conſidered as inheritour to his deceaſed father,
but onely in the qualitie of a ſonne,Paul. de Caſt. cōc. 294 in 2. part. Oldr. conc. 224.
whereby all whatſoeuer his fathers rightes
are to him obteyned, and without difficultie
reſerued: It is not therefore properly tranſmiſſion,
whereby the ſonne ſucceedeth in his
fathers ſeniority,Bald. in l. cum antiquioribus C. de Iur. 
                        •
                     elib. but more truely it is termed
continuation, repreſematiō, and naturall ſubſtitution
in his owne perſon, and therefore deuided
from the fathers right and qualitie,
though extract out of the ſame: whereof it oftentymes
falleth out, according to the doctrine
of Barth. Aret. Alex. and Iaſon, that it

can not periſh by the death of the father firſt
borne,in l. is poteſt. ff. de acq. haered. for commonly we ſay when a perſon is
the onely cauſe of a priuiledge, he loſeth him
ſelfe and vaniſheth therein, otherwiſe if he be
brought forth of any qualitie ſeperate, and diuers
from the man, although reſident in him
as in a free birth,l. non ſolū ff. de reſt. in integr. l. haered. C. ap Vell l. minor. ff. fin. & l. ſeq. ff. de minor. in which caſe it is tranſmiſſible,
and may be obteined to his ſucceſſors, in
whoſe perſon he was reſident. Euen in this
caſe our interpreters doe vpholde that the
right of elderſhip, becauſe it is formed, and
wauteth no more but execution and full poſſeſſion,
may iuſtly be compared, Iuri acceſcendi,
& Iuri deliberandi, which are tranſmiſſible,
and doe extend to the heires.
               5 The third reaſon for the neuewe, is, that
the right of elderſhip is a conſtitution and decree,
or rather a legal and cuſtomary inſtitution,
eſtabliſhed in the fauour and benefite of
the firſt borne, to whom by the ſame order are
ſubſtituted the younger, in caſe the elder dye
before them. Now it is certaine that the lawe
is of like,l. non imp
                        •
                     ſſ
                        •
                     oile ff. de pact. or greater authoritie then compoſition
or contract betweene parties, by which
compact, whatſoeuer is to vs meerely or conditionally
due, is tranſmiſſible, and may bee
obteined for the ſucceſſors, or heires of the obteyner:
& ſo conſequently although the right

of elderſhip were not perfect, or fully obteyned
to the firſt borne, as it is, but had therein
any modification or naturall condition, yet
ſhould it together with all the qualities therof,
be obteyned,l. ſi pactum ff. de probat. and belong to the ſonne of the
elder, to whom the lawe hath had regarde, no
leſſe then they qui paciſcūtur, tam haeredibus,
quàm ſibi ipſis cauent: which is the reaſon of
the difference, wherby that which is to vs due
conditionally, by vertue of a later diſpoſtion,
cannot belong to our heires before the conditiō
accōpliſhed,l. vnic. ff. ſin autē C. de cad. toll. becauſe the deceaſed thought
not to giue it to any other then him whom he
named, but contrariwiſe contractors doc couet
to obteyne whatſoeuer their rightes to
their ſubſtitutes after their deceaſe. Beſides
that this ſubſtitution by cuſtome made of the
yonger to their elder brothers, cannot bee vnderſtood,
but in caſe the elder dye without iſſue:
as we ſay out of Papinians opinion, that
the ſubstitution of the father made vnto the
ſonne is ment, if this ſhould dye without iſſue.
The fourth is, that although the ſonne of the
elder be a degree further of then his Vnckle,
yet beeing ſubſtituted in his fathers roume
and place, hee muſt bee preferred, becauſe the
right of preferment is not obteined to vs onely,
but alſo by the right & perſon of an other:

ſo that ſo long as any portion or rellique of
this ſenioritie ſhall remaine,l. 1. C. de teſta. tut. l. ſi quis ſub cōditione ff. cod. no other cā take
place by any meane whatſoeuer: euen as wee
doe mainteine that how ſmall ſoeuer the tokē
of the former tutel be, it is in reſpect of the
ſonne ſufficient to hinder any other, or diuers
courſe of the ſame: and ſo conſequently the
ſonne, qui eſt portio viſcerum patris primo geniti
excludet ſecundò genitum.
                  l. 3. ff. vl. cſi ſeq. ff. de aſſign. libert. The fifth conſideration
is taken, ab exemplo patroni, qui vni
ex liberis aſſignauit libertum, to whom and to
his he is due, & illis extantibus, alteri non eſt
locus. So then the law, cuſtome, and publick
ordenāce hauing called the eldeſt, and to him
aſſigned yt right of the Realm, it cānot belōg
to any other but him or his being ſufficiēt, ſo
long as they ſhall remaine in the worlde, to
take vp that ſucceſſion, which the right of elderſhip
hath giuen him.c. 1. de natur. ſucc. feud. cap. 1. de ſucceſſ. feud. March. The ſixt reaſon ſhall
be that the ſame lawes and cuſtomes that are
obſerued in ſiefes and vaſſelag, are conſiderable
in Realmes and 
                     〈◊〉
                   ruling. And it is
certaine that in beneficio quod feudum appellant,
nepos ex filio, ſolus ſuccedit, and in default
of him onely the Vnckle is called to the ſayde
ſucceſſion, notwithſtanding our writer dare
falſly mainteyne the contrary, and alleadge
the textes that make ad literā, as they terme

it, againſt him. Why then ſhould wee not ſay
as much of the Realme and Crowne, which
is the rule and gouernment of the ſaid ſtefes?
Finally,l. 1. ff. ſi tabul. teſt. null. ex tab. l. 1. ff. de ſucceſſ. Edict. without doubt the right of elderſhip
is a qualitie that paſſeth to euery of the children,
from the firſt to the ſecond, from the ſecond
to the third, and ſo conſequently, as doe
the heades of ſucceſſion ordeyned by the pretors
edict, de liberis ad agnatos, & de his ad
cognatos: at verò certum eſt ſucceſſionem quae
fit de gradu in gradum, potiorem eſſe illa quae
fieri ſolet de capite in caput: ſo as poſt omnes liberorum
gradus vocantur agnati, poſt vniuerſos
agnatos cognati. Thus are the firſt borne
the firſt head, whoſe degrees are to bee conſidered
in their iſſue. The other head is of the
ſecond borne, whoſe degrees are to be obſerued
in his children. &c.
               6 Yet is there in this cauſe one eſpeciall
reaſon for the ſayde Lorde King of Nauarre,
which cannot bee aunſwered, that is, that his
ſayd Vnckle, the Lorde Cardinall of Bourbon
at the mariage of his neuewe the King of
Nauarre to Lady Margaret of Fraunce, acquited,
demiſſed, yeelded and tranſferred to
the ſayd Lord King, all and euery the rightes
& tles, voyces, and actions preſent & to come,
that any waye might to him apperteyne, as

comming of the houſe of Bourbon, expreſſely
acknowledging his ſayde neuewe the Lorde
King of Nauarre, for the true ſonne, heire,
ſucceſſor,l. 1. C. de pact. l. de fidei commiſſo. C. de trauſact. c. cum cō
                     tingat x. de jurejur. cap. ficet eodē in 6. cap. quāuis de pact. in 6. and in all and by all, repreſenter of
the ſenioritie of the ſayde houſe. To thincke
therefore now to goe againſt the ſayd renunciation,
made vnder a vaine hope of ſucceſſiō
in this Realme, comprized vnder this general
elderſhip of his late brother the Lord King of
Nauarre, there is no apparance, ſith ſpes fidei
commiſſi, & conditionis in certum remitti poterit,
yea, that iuſiurandum reuunciationi interpoſitum
tale eſt, vt obſeruari poſſit ſine ſalutis
aeternae diſpendio, alſo that by the Cannon
lawes a renunciation cōfirmed with an oath
can not be broken. Beſides that the renunciation
was a part of the donation in the cōtract
of Matrimonie, whereby the mariage of the
ſayd Lord King of Nauarre to the ſayd Lady
of Frāce, was more eaſily accompliſhed, and
by the reſtoring of the ſame, the childrē of the
ſaid Matrimony might be endamaged: which
may not be permitted, eſpecially becauſe the
ſayd Lorde Cardinall can alleadge no likelihood
of hurt through his minoritie, force or other
cauſes of reſtitution, againſt the ſayde
Lorde King of Nauarre his neuewe, who at
that tyme was yong, and vnder the ſayd Lord

Cardinalles authoritie.Dionyſ. Halic. lib. 1. On the other ſide, the
learned do for the ſaid Lord Cardinall, bring
in the example of Siluius King of the Latins,
who was preferred before Iulus his elder
brother Aſcanius ſonne: but in this matter
the argument is not alike, for Aſcanius
dyed not in his father Aeneas tyme, but had
worne the Crowne 38. yeeres, or there about
after his deceaſe, and when hee dyed the ſucceſſion
thereof was reſtored to Siluius, to
whom it rightly did apperteyne, as being the
true enheritance of his mother Lauinia. For
it is euident that Aeneas after the deſtruction
of Troy, landed in Italy with his ſonne Aſcanius,
and ſo well ordered his affayres, that
hee married Lauinia daughter to Latinus
King of Alba Longa, whom hee afterwarde
ſucceeded, & of that mariage begat Siluius:
ſo that Aſcanius raigne ouer the Latins in
Italy, was by tyrannie, and without any vailable,
or more apparant title then the ſworde:
for the Realme belonged to Siluius in the
right of his mother Lauinia. Secondly, they
alleadge a iudgement of the Senat of Sparta,Pauſan. lib. 3.
betweene Ageſilaus and his nenewe Leotichides,
ſonne to his elder brother Agis,
whereby the Vnckle was preferred and the
Diadē royall to him adiudged. But herein I

would alſo deſire thē to haue recourſe to y• reaſon
that Pauſanias yeeldeth for y• ſaide iudgement,
which was becauſe he was by his father
Agis denounced a baſtard, whom in ſuch caſes
the Ephores commonly beleeued, as appeareth
by a fore iudgement long before by
them giuen in the perſon of Demaratus,idem eodem libro. who
was driuen out of the Realme which hee did
enioye, becauſe of the like ſpeech vſed by his
father Ariſton, & in his place as vnſufficient,
was ſubſtituted his Coſſen Leotichides.
               Their third example hath yet leſſe apparence,Aimoin. Monach. lib. 3. cap. 62.
and is of Gontran King of Orleans, of
the ſonnes of Clotaire the firſt, who was preferred
before Childebert, ſonne to his brother
Sigiſbert King of Metz, in the ſucceſſion of
Cherebert King of Paris: for they ſaye not
that it was by force, either that the Realme of
the ſayd Cherebert was deuided, euen in the
life tyme of the ſayd Sigiſbert, father to the
ſayd Childebert, among all his brethren, and
yet that afterwarde the weapons of the ſayde
Gontran were the ſtronger, whē Fredegond
had procured the death of Sigiſbert, which
ſoone after Gontran repented, and hauing
no children adopted his neuewe Childebert,
who in the ende enioyed all his poſſeſſions.
               The fourth is of Honoricus ſonne to Giſericus

King of the Wandales,Procop. lib. 3. who was preferred
before Gondabundus ſonne to Genſon
the ſaid Gizericus eldeſt: but to this purpoſe
they ſhould withall haue ſet downe the words
of the ſayde Geſericus the fathers laſt will
and teſtamēt, importing, as ſaith Procopius,
that he would haue the eldeſt of his children
to ſucceede him: which peraduenture he had
learned of the auncient Nomades,Strabo lib. 16. among
whō, ſayth Strabo, the prerogatiue of yeres
was relligiouſly obſerued, in conſideration
whereof ſentence paſſed for Corbis the eldeſt
againſt Orſna his Coſſen,Liu. lib. 8. decad. 3. and ſonne to the
laſt King, whoſe controuerſie was decided by
a Combat. But in France we regard not the
age, but onely the order of ſenioritie, wherein
the neuewe continueth by ſubſtitution of him
in the roume and place of his father, the prerogatiue
of the ſonne. The like was obſerued
in Barnarde ſonne to Pepin, Charles the
Great eldeſt ſonne, before whom was preferred
to the Empire Lewes the Mecke, ſecond
ſonne to the ſayd Charles. But this example
may moſt eaſily be aunſwered, becauſe it was
the ſame Charles their common father, that
had deuided his Dominions among his children,
and had giuen Italy to Pepin his eldeſt
ſonne, which alſo was reſerued to the ſayde

Bernard his ſonne, and therefore after the
pertition made by the ſayd Charles, he could
pretend no further in ye ſucceſſion that might
come in queſtion: beſides that at that time the
Empire was not properly ſucceſſiue: for notwithſtanding
the neereſt in bloud to the deceaſed
Emperour did ſucceede, yet durſt hee
not ſo intitle himſelfe, vntill by the conſent of
the Romaines he had bene publickly annoynted
and crowned.Onuphr. de Comit. Impor. Much leſſe alſo was the
Imperiall dignitie ſucceſſiue after the creation
of the Princes electors of the ſame in the
tyme of Ottho the 3. of the houſe of Saxony,
or by the opinion of the ſkilfulleſt of our
worlde, in the tyme of Fredericke the 2. ſo as
there is no likelihoode to drawe an electiue
Empire into conſequence, with hereditarie
and patrimoniall Kingdomes. The 5. indgement
is of the Coūtie of Arthois,Paul. Acmi. in Philip. Pulch. which was
in ſtrife in the time of Philip the Faire King
of France, betweene Maude wife to Ottho
Earle of Bourgondie, daughter to Robert
Earle of Arthois, ſlaine at the battaile of
Courtray, and Robert the ſonne of Phillip,
who likewiſe was ſonne to the ſayd deceaſed
Earle Robert: in which caſe the aforeſayde
Countie of Arthois, was by the ſayd French
King adiudged to Maud, who was preferred

before her neuewe Robert, being yet in infancie.
And in troth the hiſtorie ſetteth downe no
other perticuler occaſion of this iudgement,
but yt it was giuen by the mere motion of the
ſayd King Phillip, Lord of the fief. Neither
is it ſayd that his Maieſtie tooke any other
aduice but of his owne will, & the neede that
then he had of Ottho the ſayd Maudes huſband:
together with the ſmall ſeruice that of
long time he might attend of the ſaid Robert
a yong childe,1. l. ff. de vſucap. and at that tyme there needed
a good warrier to be oppoſed againſt the Flemings,
to the ende to ſuppreſſe their boldneſſe
and cuſtomary rebellions. So as in reſpect
of the ſayd Roberts very youth, the ſayd King
Phillip thought it meete to infringe the law
and cuſtome vſually obſerued in like cauſes.
But God be praiſed, in whatſoeuer may happen
betweene the ſaid Lords the King of Nauarre,
and his Vnkle the Cardinall of Bourbon,
we cannot incurre that daunger, but rather
were to be feared the great yeeres of the
ſayd Lord Cardinall already olde, worne, and
by reaſon of his order eſtraunged from al vſe
of armes, in reſpect of the flouring tyme of
the King of Nauarre, a Prince brought vp in
the ſame, and in gonernment of Eſtates.
               The ſixt is for the Countie of Champagne,

betweene Henry the ſeconde ſonne of Earle
Thibault,Geofroy Ardoin du voyage de la terre ſaincte. & the daughter of the ſayd Earles
eldeſt ſonne wife to Erard of Breno, in which
caſe by arreſt of the Court of Parliament of
the Peeres of France, in the yeere 1216. the
ſayde Countie was adiudged to Henry the
Vnckle, againſt his neuewe, daughter to his
elder brother. But it may eaſely be anſwered,
the eldeſt ſonne of the ſayde Thibault going
into the holy Land, had expreſſely ordeyned
that in caſe he dyed in the ſayd expedition, or
otherwiſe without iſſue male, then that his
brother ſhould ſucceede in the ſayd Countie,
with endowing his daughter, wife to the ſaid
Breno with a competēt ſumme. The ſeuenth
happened betweene the children of Charles
the ſecond King of Sicil,Collenut. in hiſt. Neapol. ſonne to the brother
of King S. Lewes, who married the heire of
Hūgary, and of that mariage begat Charles
Martel and Robert. The father gaue and appointed
to the ſayde Martell the Realme of
Hungary, and in his life tyme cauſed him to
be thereof crowned, whereby he did a while
enioye it and then dyed, leauing his ſonne
Charles, to whom Charles the Grandfather
confirmed the donation of the ſayd Realme,
made to his father Martell: and to his ſecond
ſonne Robert he gaue the Realm of Naples.

So that by the truth of this hiſtorie, it appeareth
that this was a pertition by the ſaide
Charles the ſecond made betweene his children,
which they could not reſiſt, and whereof
neither ye ſayd Martel, nor his ſonne Charles
had cauſe to complaine: for the Realme of
Hungary was farre greater, more rich and
wealthy, then that of Naples, which was already
rent and diſmembred by the Arragōs,
as it is euident, by al hiſtories of thoſe times.
Our Interpretors doe yet more briefly aunſwere
this preferment of Robert the ſecond,Bald. in l. liberti C. de oper. liber. Oldr. conc. 224. Panor. conc. 3. in 2 parte.
before the ſonne of Martel his elder brother,
aleadging that Pope Clement the 5. pretending
authoritie ouer the Realme of Naples,
which hee aduowed to bee of the fiefe of the
Church, pronounced this ſentence lightly enough
therein, doing the office of a partie rather
then of a Iudge: beſides that of the ſayd
Realme in reſpect it was ſubiect to Sainct
Peters chaire, was not properly ſucceſſiue.
               The laſt example that they alleadge is of
Lewes Sforce,Guichard. lib. 1. hiſt. 
                        ••
                     al who was preferred to the
Dutchie of Milan, before the ſonne of Iohn
Galeas, but thei might rather ſay that he preferred
himſelfe by force, and through execrable
tyrannie which the ſayd Lewes exerciſed
againſt this poore orphan, vnder pretence of

gouerning and defending him. Beſides, it is
ſo farre from being our caſe, that it is certain
that the young childe enioyed his fathers Eſtate,
when this Tyrant his Vnckle ſeazed
thereon, and put him to death, as vniuſtly, as
in the ende God did iuſtly puniſh him, in cauſing
him to ende his daies in miſerie and captiuitie.
Hauing thus aunſwered ſuch examples
as they may alleadge,l. pater filiū ff. de in of. ff. 1. de leg. agn. ſucceſſ. let vs now conſider
whether the reaſons that they propounde
be ſufficient to cauſe vs to alter our aduice.
               8 Firſt in all Succeſſions it is a generall
rule, to call thereto the neereſt to hym whoſe
ſtate is in queſtion, ſo that it is by priuiledge
and extraordinarie licence, that we admit the
the Children of the deceaſed brother to ſhare
with their vnkle in ſuch goods onely as will
baare deuiſion. Which is the cauſe that our
Doctor alleadgeth Butr. in his Tree of the
ſucceſſion of the Realme of Fraunce in theſe
words.in ſue pratict. rit. de ſucceſſ. feud numer. 63. 
                  Succſſit ergo illi Carolo in regno Franc.
Philippus filius alterius Caroli, qui erat ei in 4.
gradu, nec ſucceſſit Robertus pronepos Roberti
Comitis Atrebatenſis quendam, quia ille erat
in 8. gradu, nec ſucceſſit Robertus nepos Caroli
Regis Siciliae, & Ieruſalem, quia ille erat in 7.
gradu, nec ſucceſſit Ludouicus nepos Beati Ludouici,
quia ille erat dicto Carolo decedenti in

quarto gradu.
                  l. filio quē pater. ff. de iniuſt. rup. Therefore, ſith otherwiſe the
Vncle retaineth ſtill the chiefe degree, the eſpeciall
regard that Iuſtinian had to the poſteritie
of the deceaſed brother, to make them
equall with their Vncles, can not ſerue them
in vndeuided matters, wherein can no roume
or place be found but for one, in which cauſe
it is more meete to preferre nature, that is to
ſay, the vncle, who naturally is neareſt rather
then the Neuew, who can not bee ſo accompted,
but by the fiction of the Emperours decree,
& the vnproper explication of the worde
proximus,
                  l. 3. C. de legit. haered. which is yet more odious, becauſe
it conteineth alteration of the Law, whereby
the neerer onely is admitted to ſucceſſion: and
in the ſame cauſe the Emperor Decius ſpeaking
to the ſiſter of the deceaſed, writeth, Vnto
thee rather, that art in the ſecond degree,
doth the inheritance belong, then to thy brothers
children, who are in the third: Becauſe
alſo, in cace of inheritaunce wee admit rather
the immediat cauſe, then that which is farther
of, according to y• that is argued, de eo qui filio
impuberi ſub hac formula ſubstituerat. Quiſquis
ſibi haeres eſſet. So that it was not in
vaine that the Emperours Theodoſius and
Valentinean the third ſaide,l. fi viua c. de bon. matem. 
                  that in this cace
the children ſhould not be made worſe then the

Neuewes, who are neerer then the elder brothers
Sonne in both age and degree. Thus
they ſhould be thought more capable, ſo that in
what ſo euer concerneth the Neuewe.l. commo diſſimè ff. da lib. & Poſth. 
                  The
cauſe of birthright ceaſing, the effect alſo ſhould
be none: becauſe a cace by Lawe omitted, is to
be adiudhed os omitted, otherwiſe this writer
addeth a trimme conſequence, which importeth,
that in the cace now in queſtion, the children
of the late Lord Prince of Conde, being
foure in number, ſhould deuide with their vnkle
the ſayd Lorde of Bourbon and the King
of Nauarre their couſen, whereby the ſucceſſion
of the Realme of France ſhould be deuided
into three partes or portions.
               The firſt heades of this Reaſon might bee
true, if we ſhould conſider the Neuewe onely
and in his owne perſon, but in this action we
regard him as ſubſtitute in the continuation
of his late Fathers right, and yet not by any
extraordinary fiction or priuiledge whatſoeuer,
as they ſay, but by the proper interpretation
of the Lawe, and mans naturall motion,
whereby the father is ſaid to liue ſo long as the
ſonne remeyneth, and the ſenne is termed the
naturall portion of his fathers body, ſo that it is
no odious explication, but by our men is called
an extenſiue interpretation by naturall reaſon

induced, which neuer was forbidden, but contrariwiſe
haue alwayes iuſtly bene receiued
in caces moſt ſtricely obſerued, and ſuch as
can not beare euen the leaſt alteration that
may be. Conſequently therefore, although
before Iuſtinians brothers childrē could not
concurre with their Vnckle in collaterall
ligne, (becauſe the auncients would not corrupt,
but ſo little as might bee the degrees
of kindered,) yet this Prince conſidering
that there is no greater reaſon to make
this ſubſtitution and paternall continuation
in direct ligue then in collaterall,Nouell. 118. ff. caeterùm. alſo that
nature of her ſelfe was each way alike, he did
iuſtly and natually in all ſortes of ſucceſſiue
lignes, continue the perſon of the father by
the ſubſtitution and ſucceſſion of his poſteritie:
which hath alſo bene imitated in feudall
cuſtomes,c. ad audi entiam c. cū dilectus de cler. non reſid. as is aforeſaid. So that to omit nothing,
ex eo nec prior aetate, nec gradu propior
patruus iudicari poterit: quin & cauſam
huius ſucceſſionis in nepote conſpicimus. The
effect whereof ſhould withall enſue, without
thinking this caſe omitted, ſith that by naturall
interpretation, an other like to the firſt
doth followe: or rather to ſay the ſame which
is conſidered of the father in the perſon of his
ſonne: whereof the ſecond brother cannot cō
                  plaine,

no more then he that hath promiſed or
conſtituted ſome reall ſeruitude for the benefite
of his neighbours land,l. 1. ff. penult. ff. de aqua plu. arcend. which afterward
was obteyned and fallen into the handes of
many and diuers heires: of whom euery one
vſeth that whole ſeruice, ſo as if the maner
thereby be ouer ſore charged, yet as is the Lord of
the ſeruing manor compelled to ſuffer it, as being
the nature of the thing. And merueilous
vnlearned is the conſequence that our Atturney
maketh, when he ſayth, becauſe the King
of Nauarre will haue like degree of proximitie
as his Vnckle, therefore the children of the
late Lorde Prince of Conds might ſaye as
much: for it is euident to all men that the
King of Nauarres reaſon hath no communitie
with the pretēce that this man imagineth
of others, becauſe the ſayd Lord King of Nauarre
repreſenteth the elder, and is ſubſtituted
in his roume & place, by vertue of which
ſubſtitution he excludeth not his Coſſens only,
beeing children to the yonger, but alſo the
ſayd Lord Cardinall, who had bene more capable
then they: whereby wee are come to the
rule,l. de a coeſ. ſionibus ff. de chuerſ. & tem. praeſcrip. 
                  If I ouercome him that ouercōmeth thee,
much more ſhall I ouercome thee, conſidering
that the Realme and ſoueraigne Lordſhip is
not yet ſubiect, iudicio familiae Herciſ. neither

can brooke the light of two Sunnes.
               9 Yet are we to annſwer the deduction of
Iames de Per. where he ſaith that the reaſon
why Robert King of Sicill, Lewes Duke of
Bourbon, and Robert Earle of Arthois ſucceeded
not Charles y• Faire King of France,
but that Phillip Earle of Valois, his Coſſen
germaine, obteyned it, was, becauſe hee was
found to be in the fourth degree to the deceaſed
King, and the Earle of Arthois in the 8.
and the King of Sicill in the 7. But immediatly
he cutteth off himſelf againe, when he
confeſſeth that the Duke of Bourbon was
alſo in the 4. and therefore by reaſon ſhould as
ſoone haue ſucceeded, not that we muſt deny
that the ſucceſſion of the Crowne of France,
non deferatur proximiori agnato, but I ſaye
firſt, that we haue more then ſufficiently verefied
that the ſayd Lorde King of Nauarre, is
not vlterior gradu, then the ſayd Lord Cardinall
his Vnkle, and that according to naturall
and ciuill reaſon. But I will moreouer add in
the example by this writer propounded, that
the proximitie of degrees was not the cauſe
of the alleadged iudgemēt in fauour of Phil.
of Valois, but it was becauſe certainly when
once the ſucceſſion of a Realme is entred one
ligne and progenie, the reſt of all that braunch

muſt faile before we may paſſe into an other, or
inhable the ſame, how neere ſoeuer it bee. The
reaſon is moſt euident, becauſe ſith the Kingdome
is gotten to their kinſman, they al are accompted
more capable then any other kindred,
feudorum exemplo, wherein to them onely, and
to all thoſe that are of the ſame ligne whereof
the deceaſed was, the commoditie doth apperteyne,
and that is it that is ſayd ad proximiores
deferri, becauſe theſe are accompted proximiores
in reſpect of other lignes. Theſe are the
wordes of the text in feudall caſes.
                     
                        〈…〉
                      50. This was
the reaſon why the King of Sicil, neither the
Earle of Arthois could pretende nothing in
the Crowne of France, which once obteined
to S. Lewes, excluded the ligne of the aforeſayd,
who diſcended of Robert Earle of Arthois,
and of Charles the firſt King of Sicil,
children to Lewes the 8. and brother to S.
Lewes. Likewiſe Lewes Duke of Bourbon
could not bee admitted to make chalenge to
the ſame Realme, becauſe hee was ſonne to
Robert of Fraunce, the yonger ſonne of the
ſayd S. Lewes, whoſe ſucceſſion was entred
into the ligne of Phillip the 3. ſurnamed the
Bould, his eldeſt ſonne, of whom came two
ſonnes, Phillip the Faire, who was King by
right of elderſhip, and Charles Earle of Valois,

father to the ſayd Phillip, true ſucceſſor
to his Coſſen Charles the Faire, ſonne of
Philip the Faire, who both were come of the
braunch of the ſayd Phillip the Bould, eldeſt
ſonne to S. Lewes. The like obſeruation
fell out after the deceaſe of Charles the 8.
King of France, to whom ſucceeded Lewes
the 12. ſonne to Charles Duke of Orleans,
& after him Frances the 1. ſonne to Charles,
& pettie ſonne to Iohn Earle of Angoleſme,
both diſcended of Lewes Duke of Orleans,
ſonne to Charles the 5. ſurnamed the Wiſe,
whoſe comming to the Crowne procured his
poſteritie to be by right preferred before all other
the Princes of Bourbon, then being, and
thoſe of Alencon borne in direct maſculine
ligne of Sir Charles of Fraunce, youngeſt
ſonne to Charles of Valois, and brother to
Phillip of Valois King of France..1. ff. proximus ff. vn. cogn. l. cùm ita ff. fin. ff. de leg. 2. The ſecond
conſideration is, becauſe by the lawe of
the Realme, the neereſt muſt ſucceede to the
Crowne: but be muſt be proximior at y• tyme
of deferring the inheritaunce,l. A
                        •
                     ethuſa ff. de ſtat. hom. and when the
ſucceſſion is open, as ſi familiae fidei cōmiſſum
debeatur, hi ad petitionem admittuntur, qui ex
nomine defuncti fuerint, eo tempore quo testator
moreretur, & qui ex his primo gradu procreati
ſunt: in which caſe hee is called prior,
                  
whom none preceedeth,l. 3. ff. ff de tracta ff. de nox. act. Bald. in l. 2. C. de iur. 
                        〈◊〉
                      phiteut. becauſe prius and poſterius
doe conſiſt in the tyme, & that the qualitie
(ſay our Maiſters) in a conioyned worde
muſt be expounded after the time of the word:
namely, it wee ſhould otherwiſe meane, and
would note elderſhip at the tyme of the birth,
there muſt enſue an euitable inconuenience,
which is, that y• eldeſt dying, the ſecond ſhould
neuer take his rouine, becauſe he firſt included
himſelf to the excluding of an other: which
in this argument is vtterly falſe, wherein by
the deceaſe of the elder, the ſecond is without
doubt made the firſt borne, for in effect, par eſt
talem eſſe, aut ex poſt facto talem fieri, neither
can this qualitie of ſenioritie beare any compariſon
betweene the elder deceaſed, and the
yonger ſuruiuing, whereof it followeth that
the dead being vnhable, as not being in rerū
natura, his ſome muſt haue the like barre, as
ſucceeding in the perſon of his father.
               Al theſe gay reaſons might take place and
were to be conſidered if the ſonne of the elder
non eſſet in medio, neither were the diſcourſe
of the ſame any hinderance, for by him and in
him pater primogenitus, cenſetur viuere tempore
delatae ſucceſſionis, and in troth, extante nepote,
incluſio primogeniti continet excluſionem
ſecundi, ſith that filius fratris fratr
                        •
                      aequiparatur,

& ita ſuccedit atque pater ſi viueret,
                  ff. caeterùm Nouell. 118. ſayth
Iuſtinian: alſo this new conſtitution, facta in
caſu vero, extenditur ad alterum vero aequiparatum,
after the opinion of Paule de Caſtro
in his explication of Sceuola, vpon y• Counſaile
of Gallus, together with many other
ſkilfull perſons: ſo that the father is not quite
extinct while his ſonne liueth,
                  l. cùm pater ff. haereditatem ff. de le. 2. 
                  though by a new
ſoule, he be a new man, neither ſaith Papinian
in totum falſum videri, quod veritatis primordio
adiuuaretur. So that though the Vnckle
cannot be termed yonger in reſpect of the elder
deceaſed, who neither in himſelfe, neither
in any qualitie yt wee may ſuppoſe vnto him,
is any way to bee regarded, yet when he ſhall
beholde his neuewe, the ſucceſſor, continuing
and making a part of his late father, he ſhall
finde a faire argument, and obiect of compariſon
of the others ſenioritie with his iunioritie.
Firſt, this principle is not alwaies true,
neither doth the habilitie or inhabilitie of the
father perpetually take holde of the children.
As for example, eius qui ante amiſſam patris
dignitatē natus fuerit: Againe, de liberis illius
liberti, qui in ſeruitutem redactus ſit. To bee
brief, herein we may ſay as Alphons teacheth
vs: The father taketh not from the children
thoſe things that kinde, Countrey, and nature

giueth them,
                  liqueritue l. de bon. ff bert. as is y• right of elderſhip, which
is truely ſet in the perſon of the father, being
eldeſt of the houſe, but it is graunted to him
and his by the lawe, cuſtome, and common order
of the Realme: and therefore is tranſmiſſible
to his children. Moreouer, the deduction
made by thoſe of the contrary opinion, might
be admitted, ſi per filium patri incapaci quippiam
quaerendum foret, and not otherwiſe, as
we find illius exemplo, qui ex haeredatus liberto
patris ſuccedere non poteſt, eius tamen filius
emancipatus non vetabitur.
                  ſupra in rat. nepo
                        •
                     . And in one word,
the incapacitie, or inhabilitie of the father,
might hurt the ſonne afterward borne, but not
him that were begotten before, to whom his fathers
calamitie can be no detriment: ſo that the
right of elderſhip being perfect, ſound, and to
the father obteyned in his life tyme, is continued
and tranſferred to his poſteritie.
               The third reaſon is, that the right which
is not obteyned, cannot in any whatſoeuer
qualitie, bee tranſported or tranſferred to any
heire whatſoeuer: and therefore wee doe vſually
ſay that haereditas nō adita, non tranſmittitur,
as doth not alſo the age, which is inſeparable
from the perſon, and which beeing in
queſtion, we haue no more reſpect to the ſucceſſor
then to his predeceſſor: now the right

of elderſhip proceedeth of the yeres,l. ca quae C. de tem por. in integr. reſtir. and precedent
light of the deceaſed father, who neuertheleſſe
did neuer obteyne the ſucceſſion
in his life tyme,l. ſi paterfam. ff. fin. ff. de dop. ff. mino tē de adopt. as not being open, & ſo it followeth
that the ſonne of the elder can pretēd
nothing, neither could the father obteyne to
him the right of his yeres, wherein the ſonne
were more to bee conſidered then the father
deceaſed, as Conſtantine writeth, ſi minor
minori ſucceſſerit, ex illis perſona restitutionis
tompus connumerari.
               
               To this obiection the aunſwer is eaſie, becauſe
we haue already ſhewed that the right
of elderſhip is perfectly obteined to the eldeſt
ſo ſoone as he ſeeth y• light of the world, and
is made man, and the §. pro ſecundo which is
alleadged to the cōtrary, hath relation to that
which preſently is not obteyned, neither in
hope, but may be altered by the onely changeable
will, euen vntill the death of him whoſe
goods are in queſtion. Therfore in this matter
wee argue not about the tranſmiſſion,
                     
                        •
                     iraquell. in tract. primoge
                     
                        ••••
                      numer. 109. or
tranſferring of the life and yeres of the elder
deceaſed into the perſon of his ſonne, but only
of the right and preeminence that his ſenioritie
hath brought him, which being in him
is according to the former diſcourſe cōtinued
in his poſteritie.
               
               The fourth obiection is taken of the vulgar
conſideration obſerued in the common
diſpoſitions of euery one, to call into the firſt
degree their owne children, and then their
neuewes after their degrees and order of nature,
which is euident in the coūſaile of Gallus
Aquilius,l. cū pater. ff. penult. ff. de leg. 2. and more expreſſely in the aunſwere
of Papinian in two places, wherein he
acknowledgeth, inter liberos ordine, gradu fidei
commiſſi praeſcriptos,
                  Paul. de Caſt. concil. 164. Oldr. cōc 224. 
                  ex ordinata affectione
defuncti, quae cadit inter perſonas ſub eadem alternatione
comprehenſas.
               
               This reaſon were hard to be decided, if we
would conſider the neuew onely in his owne
perſon and cauſe, but we haue often ſayd, that
in deede in his own right: but by his father ſucceſſiuely,
he cōtinueth the ſame right of elderſhip
that his deceaſed father had, for the which
as firſt borne, he is in the firſt degree and order
of ſucceſſion.
               10 The fifth reaſon is taken of that wee
knowe that the ſame degrees that are obſerued
in tutele, are likewiſe kept in ſucceſſion.
But it hath bene decreed of the ſonne and neuew
concurring together for the tutele of the
fathers libertine, the ſonne onely remaineth
tutor, and not the neuewe, ſonne to the deceaſed
brother the like therefore muſt bee obſerued

in matter cōcerning the ſucceſſiue right
of the one and the other. In this argument
the Doctors that make the obiection, doe not
note, that the ſame was firſt aduiſed, for the
benefite of the neuewe, ne oneri tutelae astringatur.
Secondly, that the reaſon of tutele is
perticuler for the wealth and benefite of the
pupille,Pano
                        •
                     m. conc. 32 pas Paul. de Caſtr. & Panor. in Conci. ſupra alleg l. 1. C. de haered. tur. to the ende the eldeſt of thoſe that are
capable of the ſucceſſion, may only be admitted
his gouernour. Beſides the qualitie of a
tutor reſembleth the procuration and preeminence
which are not trāſmiſſible to the heires
of whatſoeuer condition they be: wherof proceedeth
the reaſon,
                     
                        •
                     . ſi libertus ff. 1. ff. de bō. li. bert. whereby alio modo tenentur
tutores, aliter ipſorum haeredes conueniri ſolent.
Finally, ſith the ſucceſſion of the libertin
is in like ſort diſpoſed of, the like regard muſt
be had in the delation and decree of tutele: for
Iulian writeth, ſi libertus intestato deceſſerit
relictis patroni ſilio, & ex altero filio duobus ne
potibus, nepotes non admittētur, quandiu filius
eſſet, although it bee otherwiſe in ingenuorum
ſucceſſione, becauſe the right of patronage is
meere perſonall, itaque non tranſmittitur, at
verò in ingenuis: the naturall affection of the
father to the ſonne, or of the Grandfather to
the Neuewe hath cauſed this repreſentation
to be euer obſerued in the direct ligne, and afterward

in the collateral, ex cōstitutione principum.
And we alſo ſee that the goodes of the
deceaſed libertine, are parted by the number
of heades among the patrons neuewes, contrarie
to diſpoſition of common right in free
perſons, whoſe vnder Children doe diſtribute
the ſucceſſion of their Graundſire by ſtockes,l. cū pater ff. pluribus ff. de leg. 2. c. quibus 20 diſt c. fin. 84. diſtinct. c. ſciendum 26. b. 3.
in conſideration of their Fathers already deceaſed.
               11 Sixtly they obiect, that the gouernmēt
of y• ſayd Lord Card. is more neceſſary to the
realme, becauſe he is of more yeres, and therfore
better aduiſed, more prudent and capable
of publike knowledge in the worlde. But
this preſumption ſometime deceiptfull, taken
of the yeres of the ſucceſſor, muſt not bee
preiudiciall vnto the right obteined to a third,
eſpecially this third beeing capable of diſcretion
and iudgement as is the King of Nauarre,
who goeth now in the 33. yeere of his
age: but alſo more perticulerly in the ſucceſſion
of this realme wherein, ſo farre are wee
from preferring the eldeſt, that euē our ſelues
doe admit children in their Cradles and Infancie
to bee our lawfull Kings, as apeareth
by the Hiſtorie of Sainct Lewes, who was
conſecrated ween hee was but nine or tenne
yeres ould: of Iohn ſonne to Lewes Hutin,

borne after his fathers deceaſe,Puul. Aemil. in Ludon. 9. idem in Hut. idē in Carol. 8. who liued but
fifteene daies, and dyed in his Iorney toward
Rhemes to bee conſecrated: of Charles the
eight, who was crowned in his infancie, as
alſo was the late Charles the 9. in our tyme.
The like whereof haue bene very religiouſly
obſerued in all ſucceſſiue Realmes and kingdomes:
In Iudea and Hieruſalem, Dauid,
Salomon, Azarias, Manaſſes and Ioſ
                     •
                  as
were annointed in their youth. Auguſtulus a
yong childe was Emperour of the Weſt, although
in his nonage, whereof, ſaith Procopius,
he was named Auguſtulus. Athalaricus
was but eight yeres ould when hee ſucceeded
in the Realme of the Gothes, vnder the gouernment
of his mother Amaſaſiuntha: Baldatus
being almoſt in his Cradle, was King
of the Lombards. Sapor was declared Monarke
of Perſia in his Mothers wombe. Herodotus
rehearſeth the Hiſtorie of Aeropus
King of Macedonia, who being in his ſwath,
was caried in the Army againſt the Illiriās,
and preſented to the Souldiers, who ſeeing
him, were ſo embouldened, that they defyed
their ennemyes, and expelled them their coū
                  trie.
To be briefe: Agathius maketh mention
of the auncient Lawe of our French men,
whereby the children how yong ſo euer, were

called to their fathers Realme.
               Their ſeauenth obiection is drawen out of
a reſcript of Pope Innocent the third,edicet ext
                        ••
                      devot. wherein
he threatneth Andrewe, the ſecond ſonne
of Bela the third King of Hungary, that if
he fulfilled not his fathers vowe in going into
the holy land, he would traſport his crowne
to his ſecond brother: to which iniunction the
ſayd Andrewe obeyed very carefully, and after
for beating the Soudan of Babilon, was
ſurnamed Hieroſolomitan. But touching our
queſtion, it doth not in the text appeare that
there was euer a Neuew, ſonne to Andrewes
brother, that might reſiſt or make head againſt
the ſecond brother: ſo that this decretall
maketh nothing to the purpoſe, no more
then the diſcourſe of Pope Clement the fifth
againſt the Emperour Henrie of Luxembourg,c. lem. paſtoralis de re jud.
in fauour of Robert the ſecond King
of Sicile, whome vſually they alledge in the
proofe of their aduice.
               The eight reaſon by our Doctor alleadged,
is taken of the rule of auncient right,l. 68. ff. de reg. jur.
whereby wee ordinarely ſaye, that where the
condition of the perſon maketh place for the benefite,
when the one faileth, the other alſo periſheth.
But the age and perticuler forebirth
gaue this priuiledge to the late Antony of

Bourbon King of Nauarre: therefore his
Sonne cannot haue the like right, as, not hauing
the ſayd qualities: beſides that, when
the Lawe hath giuen any thing to the ſonne,
the ſame neuer paſſeth the wordes of the decree,
as ordinarely we ſay, tutorem datum, ne
potibus ordinatum non cenſeri.
               
               This reaſon conteyneth the ſame that the
former: and ſo to be aunſwered, that it were
to true, if the perſon were the onely cauſe of
the priuiledge, as appeareth in the conſulters
examples. But wee haue ſayd before, that in
our queſtion we regarde not ſo much the perſon
of the elder, as the qualitie in him reſidēt:
whereby the right and cauſe of ſucceſſion is
to him obteined, which is not extinct with the
perſon, ſith now it cleaueth to his cauſe and
goods, like as we ſay that it is the reaſon why
restitutiones in integrū adoleſcentibus conceſſae
haeredibus illorum competunt, quia laeſionis occaſione
minoribus indulgentur, eademque ratione
S. C. Vell
                        •
                     iani exceptio ſuccceſſoribꝰ quique
prodeſt. Item actionis funerariae priuilegiū
haeredi, ac caeteris ſucceſſoribus non denegatur,
& tempus iudicatis datum haeredibus proficit:
ſo that ſith this qualitie of elderſhip hath perfected
and obteyned this right and cauſe of
ſucceeding the deceaſed father, he ſhall ſeeme

to haue tranſferred the right that hee had in
his goods to his ſonne. Who alſo ſhall be capable
of a more perſonall priuiledge of his father:
for in trueth by the order of lawe, if any
thing reſteth in actions, petitions, proſecutions,
or lawe, it ſhall bee numbred with the
goodes. So that in this argument, ſith the
right and cauſe was in the father perfect and
abſolute, wanting no more but execution, it
will not bee amiſſe to ſay that the ſame right
may be ſaid to be comen to him, as in lege Julia,
that worde peruenit Vlpian taketh for accipiendum.
For notwithſtanding ſucceſſion
ſhould neuer fall or take effect in the perſon
of the eldeſt, yet hath the lawe made him during
his life poſſeſsor of ſucceſſiue poſſibilitie
and qualitie: ſo that he hath obteyned that
right to himſelf both vnweting and vnawares,
which proceeding of the authoritie and vertue
of the lawe is tranſmiſſible: and as depending
of the cauſe and matter, is to the ſonne
transferred, who is part and portion of his fathers
bowels, as we haue ſufficiently ſhewed,
and thereof it enſueth that the elder had not
this in his owne perſon onely, but rather illud
idem in perſona ipſius reſidebat,
                  l liberoaū ff. de ucrb. ſignif. 
                  ab ea tamē diuerſum
& ſeperatum, illudque idem eſt, acſi non
filio, id eſt, certae perſonae lex ipſa detulerit, ſed

liberis. i. genero, & cognato primogenito datu
                        ••
                     
fuerit,
                  ff. fin. de ſatiſd. apud inſtin. which may ſtand for an aunſwer to the
text before alleadged to the contrary, of him
qui filio tutorem dederat vt nepoti dediſſe non
videatur.
               
               12 The laſt reaſon is taken out of the text
of the cuſtumary of the towne of Paris, the
head Cittie of the Realme, whereby the vniuerſall
Eſtate thereof ſhould be ruled: Now
by the ſame it is expreſſely inferred that the
repreſentation can take no place in collateral
ligne,ff. placebat de legit. agn. ſucceſſ. Nouell. 118. & 127. except betweene the brother and the
brothers ſonne, in the pertition of their deceaſed
brother and vnckles goodes: neither hath
our writer forgotten to ſay that it is the order
of the Romaines lawe conteyned in the auncient
decrees of the Emperours, before the
which in the olde decemuirall law, there was
no repreſentation in collaterall ligne.
               
               Herevpon wee maye alleadge reaſon of
double difference, firſt in reſpect of the Ciuill
law, which hath had no conſideration at all of
enheritaunce vndeuided, and not ſubiect to
pertition amōg ſucceſſors, as alſo it hath not
reſpected ſenioritie or innioritie of the heires
of the deceaſed, but being in like degree, hath
equally acknowledged them in the ſucceſſion
to them fallen: whereupon it followeth, that

ſith contrary to our pollicie, moribus & ferè
iure gentium omnium instituta, require theſe
two qualities in the obteyning of a Realme,
that is, that onely one and he the neereſt: but among
thoſe of equall degree, the firſt borne bee
preferred: The ſame lawe, and obſeruation of
birthright, might and ought therein to haue
perpetuall place of repreſentation, which it hath
as is largely before diſcourſed: ſo that to
argue betwene the qualities of ciuill and Romaine
enheritances, and ours both politicall
and quite altered, there is, vnder correction,
no purpoſe, reaſon, or apparance.
               The other reaſon ſhal concerne the article
of the cuſtomary of Paris,cap. 1. parag. praeterea ducatus de proh. feud. alu
                        •
                     n. vbi Bald. which cannot bee
vnderſtoode of the ſucceſſion of the Realme,
becauſe therein the neereſt ſucceſſor to the
Crowne, is not therefore called heire of the
King laſt deceaſed, (to cauſe in this controuerſie,
the cōmon rules of ſucceſſors are to be
obſerued) but the Realm belongeth to him in
vertue of the common lawe thereof, whereby
the next male of the bloud Royall muſt ſucceede,
not in qualitie & as owner of the goods
of the laſt enioyer of the Crowne,Alexan conc. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Bald 
                        〈◊〉
                      digna 
                        •
                      deleg. but by his
birthright, although in troth, in whatſoeuer
concerneth Commonwealth and commoditie,
he bee bound to keepe and obſerue the couenants

and agreements of his predeceſſor,
and therein onely may he be accompted heire
to the King whom he hath ſucceeded.
               Theſe bee the ſtrongeſt reaſons that thoſe
of the contrary opinion can alleadge, which
alſo I haue further augmented then our writer,
leaſt it ſhould ſeeme to the learned Lawyers
(to whome onely in this laſt article I
meane to ſpeak) that I would omit or diſſemble
any thing that thei could imagine againſt
the trueth, which by this meanes I thincke to
haue layd ſo open, for that euery one may perceiue
it an eaſie matter to aunſwer all their
friuolous allegations, by the grounds of the
knowledge of the lawes, which both the one
and the other would vſe. Wherefore there is
no more for the Frenchmen to doe, but when
occaſion ſhall fall out, to reſolue vpon the moſt
certaine and reaſonable opinion for the ſayd
Lorde King of Nauarre, ſonne to the elder
brother, allowed by a great number of Doctors
both Canon, and Ciuill, euen by the two
notable lights of the Lawe, Innocent for the
Canon lawe, and Barthole for the Romaine
pollicie, who make no difficultie thereof, neither
is the doubt diſperſed ouer the Land to
any other ende, but to deſtroye both the one
and the other, and ſo to giue opportunitie to

a third, to become Lord of the Realme, vnder
whom this Eſtate will neuer floriſh, and the
tyrant, the inſtrument of the deuill, who durſt
enterprize the ſame, ſhall periſh miſerably
with all ſuch inſtruments as to that effect he
may haue vſed. Let therefore the perturbers
of the peace of this Realme, if they be, I ſay
not Chriſtians, but euen men, capable of naturall
reaſon, ponder, not the politick Iuſtice
of the ſocietie of this ciuill life, but onely the
hazard wherin they ſhal at once plunge their
memorie, honor, wealth, life and ſoule: and
they ſhall ſee, vnleſſe they will wilfully bee
blind, thoſe men that ſhal moſt employe them
ſelues in fauour of the deteſtable conſpiracie
now diſcouered by all good Frenchmen, remaine
alſo ouerwhelmed in the greateſt miſerie
and ruine, which ſhall leaue vnto them
more affliction without compariſon, then to
the verieſt clownes and pooreſt peſants in the
countrey, ouer whoſe bellies they ſhall ſo often
haue marched: becauſe at ye leaſt, the life,
peace of conſcience, and diuine vengeaunce,
ſhall ſtaye in fauour of theſe: when the others
may aſſure themſelues of the loſſe of the
loue of God, the light of the worlde, and their
good fame with ye poſteritie, for hauing tainted
their hands in the bloud of their Kinges,

Princes, and fellow countrymen, and for euil
entreating them, and aſſiſting the Tyrants,
tormentors of their conſciences, and abuſers
of the honors that they haue receiued of our
Kings, and the Princes of the bloud of the
houſe of France. Let them marke the miſerable
ende of Abſalon, and Achitophel his
counſaylor, againſt the Maieſtie of Dauid: of
Adonias, Athalia, and infinite others, who
with their conſpiraties haue dyed in confuſiō
and miſerie. Oh noble Frenchmen, will you
abide in the world, I will not ſay to looke vppon,
but which is more, to haſten and aduance
the curſed drift of the tranſlation of the ſcepter
of the Flowerdeluce, out of the hands of
your King, and the Princes of his houſe, to
whom only you doe owe your condition, your
welth, and your very life, not in courteſie, and
honeſtie onely, but by Gods expreſſe cōmandement,
who hath therewith burdened your
conſciences? Wil you more then villanouſly
forgoe that great commendation which all
nations in the world haue ſo greatly commē
                  ded
and honored in you, for being more faithfull
and ielous of the hononr and ſeruice of
your Kings, and Princes of their bloud, then
any nation that euer was vpon the face of the
earth? Will you ſtand as inſtruments, and

offer the ladder to thoſe y• wrongfully would
make them ſelues Kinges, and cauſe you to
commit the moſt abhominable fellonie that
euer was conſpired? Doe you not plainly ſee
that thoſe who doe ſollicite you, are not able
to vphoulde you, as hauing no other meanes
then ſuch as your enemies miniſter vnto thē,
to whom both you and they ſhall ſerue for paſture
the next day after? Is it not moſt certaine
that they cannot pretend, ſith God hath
giuen vs a King, (I will ſpeake without ſ
                     •
                  atterie,
as wanting the honor to bee knowne of
his Maieſtie,) of whom the leaſt of them can
not ſaye the pertinent occaſion of his diſcontentment?
but yet, when GOD ſhall haue
wrought his wil vpon him, are ye not certain
who ought to be his ſucceſſor? Liue you not
vnder a Chriſtian Monarchy, that hath lawes
eſtabliſhed for that purpoſe? Would you liue
to be called corrupters, and perturbers of the
foundations of the Crowne, vnder the which,
and by the ſucceſſion whereof your fathers
haue obteyned and left vnto you the name,
honor, and title of Nobilitie, which ye beare?
What weene you the curious poſteritie may
thinke of you, when they finde it written that
the French Nobilitie tooke Armes againſt
their King, to name vnto him a ſucceſſor, and

vnder the pretence thereof to depriue him of
all authoritie, reſpect, & honor vnto him due,
euen by him that ſhould ſucceede him according
to the Salick law, who with this declaration
ſhould ſtil be aſſiſted by theſe firebrāds
of this tyme, to the ende to make him withſtand
and ecclipſe the bright ſunne of his Maieſtie?
What opinion would you wiſh Chriſtian
Princes to conceiue of your fidelitie,
when they ſhall knowe that without regarde
of your bond to this Crowne, you ſhall haue
aſſiſted the enemies therof againſt your King
and the Lawes of the Realme? Would you
your King ſhould haue occaſion of ielouzy againſt
him whom they pretend to cauſe to be
nominated, who alſo by ſuch as ſhall haue aduaunced
him, might bee perſwaded to lift his
hornes ouer high, and ſo to become a cenſor
ouer his Lorde? To be briefe, I tell you the
world could neuer beare two Sūnes. What
greater recōpence may ye hope for of ſtraungers
that you knowe not, then of your naturall
Princes whō God by his holy wil hath eſtabliſhed
ouer you? Is it not felicitie enough
for you to bee borne men? to bee made Chriſtians?
to haue bene brought vp Frenchmen?
See ye not well enough, that the Lord Cardinall
of Bourbon is but the vizard and pretence

to runne into armes for the glutting of
their ambition? there is great zeale and likelihood
in their deedes, whē they would name
a ſucceſſor aboue 60. yeeres olde, broken and
crooked, to ſucceede a young King, healthie,
luſtie, moderate in his exercizes and maner of
dyet: yea, and all this contrary to Iuſtice and
the lawes, not onely of this Realme, but alſo
of all other the beſt ordered Eſtates that euer
were, whereby together with infinite reaſons
I haue ſhewed you, that it is the King of Nauarre
to whom the ſame ſhould apperteyne.
Shall I with Cicero ſpeaking of Ceſar and
Pompey, tell you all? They here offer vnto
vs ye Image of the Lord Cardinall of Bourbon,
but would ſet vp their owne: They will
with that good man arme them ſelues, and
become more Kings then he, whō they make
ſhew to loue more then any other, and yet doe
they loue themſelues better, euen to the preiudice
of your honor, life, memorie, and reputation,
if ye take not heede: ſo that God will
vndoubtedly ſuffer them to be ſwallowed vp,
when they haue bene the occaſions of infinite
murders, robberies, and ſpoyles. For the letting
whereof, as alſo of all other miſhap, or
deſtruction, that wee attende of ſuch ciuill
warres, as vnder this contention are brewed,

let vs withdrawe our ſelues to God, and moſt
humbly beſeech him to order our hearts in
one conſent according to his holy will, to the
ende, according thereunto wee may acknowledge
and embrace our King, who is the ſame
to whom next after God we owe al, and after
the diuine power ought to bee vnto vs aboue
all. Let vs alſo weete, that next vnto him we
are bound to haue reſpect vnto him, whom it
hath pleaſed God to cauſe to be borne into the
world to gouerne vs in the Royall dignitie,
whenſoeuer it ſhould pleaſe him to call away
our king without iſſue capable of ye Crowne:
and together with him, whom for vs he hath
elected and bleſſed in his mothers wombe,
let vs with one heart and minde crye,
peace, peace, bee among vs, glory
to the Lorde on high, and
peace and good will
vnto men. Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   