
      
         
            
            
            THE FRENCH ACADEMIE, wherin is diſcourſed the inſtitution of maners, and whatſoeuer els concerneth the good and happie life of all eſtates and callings, by preceptes of doctrine, and examples of the liues of ancient Sages and famous men:
            
               By PETER de la PRIMAVDAYE Eſquire, Lord of the ſaid place, and of Barree, one of the ordinarie Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber: dedicated To the Most Christian King Henrie the third, and newly tranſlated into Engliſh by T. B.
            Imprinted at London, by Edmund Bollifant for G. Biſhop and Ralph Newbery.
            1586
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS AND WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMAN, AND HIS SINgular good friend Maiſter IOHN BARNE Eſquire, T. B. C. wiſheth grace and peace in this life, and euerlasting happines in the life to come.
            
            
               SIR, hauing at length finiſhed the Tranſlation of this French Treatiſe of Morall Philoſophy, I preſume the rather to recommend it to your Worſhips fauour, bicauſe your ſelfe did firſt commend it vnto me for the varietie of excellent ſayings and examples wherewith it is repleniſhed. And ſurely I perſwade my ſelfe, that howſoeuer for want of a skillfull Tranſlator it hath loſt much of that grace, which otherwiſe it might haue had, yet by reaſon of the matter it ſelfe, & good diſpoſition obſerued throughout the whole booke, it will be of ſome account with ſo many as preferre the ſoundnes of ſubſtance before the ſwelling froth of curious phraſes. True it is, that many words vſed by the Author, and retained by me, are almoſt the ſame with the originall toongs from whence they were deriued, and peraduenture will ſound harſh at the firſt in their eares that neuer heard them before; but if

they will haue patience a while, and let them paſſe to and fro vpon the file of their teeth, no doubt but in ſhort time they will be as ſmooth as other Greeke and Latine words which now are taken for meere Engliſh. I might heere alleadge reaſons to prooue the neceſſitie of retaining ſuch words in tranſlating: namely, that many of them are proper names and words of Arte, that as all occupations and handicrafts haue their ſeuerall names of inſtruments belonging to their ſcience, ſo is it with Philoſophy, and with euery part thereof: but I make no doubt of finding the Reader fauourable in this point, conſidering that it tendeth to the enriching of our owne language, and hath beene practiſed by the learned of all nations that haue gone before vs, as is euident to ſuch as are skilfull in the toongs. Concerning the profite of this booke, I referre the Reader either to the title thereof, which promiſeth no more (in my opinion) than is performed with aduantage in the bodie of the ſame, or elſe to the Authors Epiſtle to the Reader, wherein he ſetteth downe a ſummarie of that doctrine, which is afterward handeled more at large. Wherein howſoeuer he hath very excellently behaued himſelfe, and (as I am perſwaded) gone farre beyond thoſe that haue handled the ſame matter before him, yet conſidering each mans infirmitie to be ſuch, that he attaineth not to perfection in any worke, neither ſpeaketh all things that are to be ſpoken of the ſame thing, nor yet is free from error in thoſe things which he ſpeaketh or writeth, I exhort all that ſhall peruſe this Treatiſe following, ſo farre onely to approoue euery ſentence and example of life, as it may be prooued out of the records of holie Scripture. Moreouer, as many as are deſirous to be bettered by the reading of this booke, they muſt thinke ſeriouſly vpon that ende vnto which this Author had regard when he penned it, which was the ſame that Ariſtotle had Ariſt. lib. 2. Eth. cap. 2.
               in writing his Ethicks or booke of Manners: namely, the practiſe of vertue in life, and not the bare knowledge and contemplation thereof in braine. And, leaſt any man ſhould haue that

opinion of theſe Morall precepts, which all men haue of Platoes Common-wealth, or of Ariſtotles Felicitie, of Tullies Orator, or of Moores Vtopia, that they containe in them rather an Idaea of good life, than ſuch a platforme as may be drawne from contemplation into action, he hath ioined works with words, practiſe with precept, and the fruits of rare examples with the faire flowers of Philoſophicall inſtructions. But many are ſo farre from conceiuing any ſuch excellencie in them, that ſo ſoone as they heare the name of Philoſophy, they thinke they haue ſufficient cauſe to condemne as hurtfull, all the writings of Philoſophers, alleadging that ſentence of S. Paule: Beware least there be any man that ſpoile you through Philoſophy: not conſidering that the Apoſtle doth in the very next wordes expound himſelfe, and ſheweth that he meaneth nothing els but the deceitfull concluſions of mans reaſon, diſagreeing from the doctrine of Chriſt reuealed vnto vs in his word. I grant that the word of God is onely perfect, and containeth in it an abſolute rule both of pietie towards God, and humanitie towards men, but it followeth not therefore, that we may not vſe the benefit of humane precepts, or tread in the ſteps of heathen men, ſo farre foorth as their learning and liues diſſent not from the truth of holy Scriptures. Will any man refuſe pearles bicauſe they are offered him in baſe veſſels? Or not vſe a light bicauſe it is not put into a ſiluer candleſticke? And ſhall we paſſe ouer without profite, ſo many good precepts and woorthy examples of learned men, bicauſe they proceede from the twilight of naturall knowledge, and not from the cleere ſunne-ſhine of the word of God? Let vs rather harken to S. Auguſtine in his ſecond booke of Chriſtian doctrine, where he hath theſe words agreeing very fitly to this matter. As for thoſe (ſaith he) that are called Philoſophers, if they 
               Aug. lib. 2. de doct. chr. cap. 40.
               
               haue vttred any truth agreeable to our faith & doctrine (eſpecially the Platonists) we are not onely not to feare it, but rather to challenge it from them as from vniust poſſeſſors thereof. For as the Egyptians had not onely idols and heauy burdens, which the people of
               
               Iſraell were to detest and flye from, but alſo veſſels and ornaments of gold, ſiluer and raiment, which that people at their departure out of Egypt challēged couertly to themſelues for better vſes, although not of their owne authoritie, but by the commandement of God, &c. So the doctrine of the Gentiles hath not onely counterfet and ſuperſtitious forgeries and heauy packs of needeles labour, which euery one of vs departing from their ſocietie vnder our Captaine Christ, ought to detest and ſhun: but alſo liberall Arts meete to ſet foorth the truth by, and certaine profitable precepts of manners, yea ſome true points concerning the worſhip of one onely God. What their knowledge was concerning themſelues, and their dutie one towards another, the whole Treatiſe following expreſſeth at large, vnto which I had rather referre you, than vſe any needeles repetition in this place. And as for that other point concerning the knowledge of one only God, it is moſt certaine, that from the light of Nature holpen with induſtrie, ſtudie, and education, (according to the wiſedome and diſpenſation of God) many notable concluſions proceeded from ſundry of them, as Auguſtine him ſelfe ſheweth by a long diſcourſe in his eight booke De Ciuitate 
               Aug. lib. 8. de ciuit. Dei, cap. 6. 7. 8. &c.
               Dei, where among other he alleadgeth theſe out of Plato: That God is a ſpirite, and of a farre more excellent nature than the ſoule of man, or any other ſpirite whatſoeuer: that God is one and the ſame, and alwaies like vnto himſelfe: that God is the light of our minds, wherby we attaine to all our knowledge and vnderſtanding: that no man is therefore bleſſed and happy, bicauſe he hath abundance of wealth, honor, ſtrength beautie, or of any externall thing, nor yet for any gift of the mind, but bicauſe he enioyeth God the ſoueraigne Good. How diuinely doth Ariſtotle write of God, and of his fatherly prouidence, in his tractate De Mundo dedicated to Alexander? I know that many with force of reaſon carying them thereunto, haue vehemently ſuſpected, that this peece of worke came neuer out of his ſhop. Which although it be granted for true, yet the book it ſelfe doth euidently declare, that the Author thereof was a meere heathen man, and directed onely by his pure Naturals when he wrote it: which being ſufficient to ſhew

how farre the darkenes of nature doth comprehend the light and knowledge of heauenly things, is as much as I Aristotle de Mundo.require. This treatiſe being wholy occupied in theſe two principall points: namely, in the deſcription of the vniuerſall frame of the world, and in the declaration of the nature of God the workemaiſter thereof, I will briefly ſet before you the ſumme of the laſt part, which the Philoſopher painteth out vnto vs very notably in liuely and orient colours. Firſt he acknowledgeth, that all things are of God, that they conſiſt and haue their being by his power, that no nature whatſoeuer is able to continue, if it be not maintained and preſerued by him. And in ſetting out the manner of working whereby this mightie power of God is forceable in the gouernment of all things, he goeth beyond the common reach of naturall men, affirming, that although God be preſent euery where, yet not by any bodily or locall preſence, as the common receiued opinion then was, That all things whatſoeuer we perceiue by ſight, hearing, or any other ſenſe, were full of Gods, and as Seruetus blaſphemouſly taught of late yeeres, That God was an eſſentiall part of euery creature, but that he gouerneth all things by his power and vertue, whereby he effecteth whatſoeuer pleaſeth him. Againe, as he ſubſcribeth to the almightie power and prouidence of God in the being and rule of all things, ſo he laboureth to make knowne the great wiſedome of God by the contemplation of the excellent courſe of nature, which is certaine without inconſtancie, beautifull without blemiſh, & diuers without diſorder. For what can be more certaine than the ordinarie courſe of the Sunne, Moone, & Starres, which haue continued in their appointed race from time to time, and from one age vnto another? What greater certaintie than that which to our comfort appeereth in the mutuall turnes and returnes of times and ſeaſons, of Sommer and Winter, Spring and Autumne, day & night? In regard of which conſtant continuance of the irreuocable order appointed by God in this whole frame, the world is called by the Hebrewes gnolam: and in the Epiſtle

to that people, it is expreſſed by this word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , (which many times ſignifieth perpetuitie) Heb. 1. 2. & 11. 3. Concerning the beautie and glorious ſhew thereof, what thing more beautifull than the glittering face of the heauens, decked and adorned with ſtarres both great and ſmall, as it were with iewels and pretious ſtones of all ſorts? And for this ſelf ſame cauſe it receiued that name of 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                from the Grecians, and of Mundus from the Latines. Laſtly, if we looke either to the variable motions of the Spheres in the ethereall region, or to the contrary qualities of the elements in the aerie and lower part of the world, or to the varietie of foules, fiſhes, beaſts, plants, graine, ſtones, mettals, &c. and conſider withall what a ſweete harmonie ariſeth from all theſe, as it were from a well tuned inſtrumēt that hath ſtrings of all ſorts, or like to a liuely picture that hath all kinds of colours mingled in it, or to a well ordered citie compounded of ſundry occupations, callings, & conditions, of poore and rich, yoong and old, bond and free, we may ſee if we haue but halfe an eie, and feele if we be blind, that in this rare peece of worke and frame of the world, there is moſt excellent conueiance without confuſion, great varietie concurring in vnitie, and diuerſitie of all kinds without diſorder. All this and much more is attributed by the Author of that booke De Mundo, (be he Ariſtotle, or ſome other heathen Philoſopher) to the onely working of the power of the inuiſible God, of whome (ſaith he) we muſt thus conceiue, that for his power he is most mightie, for his beautie most excellent, for his life immortall, and for his vertu
                     •
                   moſt abſolute: and therfore he cannot be ſeene of any mortal creature, but is notwithſtanding known by his works. For all accidents in the aire, in the earth, and in the water, may truly be called the works of God, who containeth and preſerueth this world, of whome (as Empedocles ſaith) proceeded,
               
                  All things that were, that are, and ſhall be here,
                  Plants, Men, Beasts, Birds, and fiſh in waters cleere.
               
            
            But this Philoſopher not contenting himſelfe with this conſideration and view of God in his works, entreth into

a deeper meditation of his nature, by ſetting downe a very good expoſition, and as it were a Commentarie vpon thoſe names and titles, which vſually were attributed in his time vnto God, thereby to make his powerful gouernment ouer all the world more knowne vnto men. Although (ſaith he) that God be but one, yet we call him by many names, as 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               and 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , bicauſe we liue by him: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , bicauſe he is of an immutable nature: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , bicauſe nothing is done by chāce, but according to his moſt certaine decree: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , bicauſe no man can poſſibly auoide him, or flie from him: 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , bicauſe he abideth for euer. And as for that fable (faith he) of the three ſisters of destinie, I meane of Clotho that ſpinneth of Leacheſis that draweth out to a 
                     •
                  uſt length, and of Atropos that cutteth off the threed of mans life, it is to be vnderstood of God onely, who (as it was ſaid in old time) is the beginning, midst, and end of all things. To conclude, there is a iustice that is neuer ſeparated from God, which is the reuenger of al tranſgreſſions committed againſt the law of God, wherin euery one muſt be well instructed that would be partaker of humane felicitie and happines. Now iudge, I pray you, whether a Chriſtian may not with profit enter into this ſchoole of nature, and reape commoditie by this little light of naturall knowledge, which as it ſerued to make them without excuſe that were endued therewith, bicauſe they knowing God, did not glorifie him as god, neither were thankfull, but became vaine in their imaginations: ſo it is to be feared, that thoſe ſelfe ſame men ſhal riſe vp in iudgement againſt vs that profeſſe Chriſtianitie, and condemne vs in that great and terrible day. For how many of vs want that knowledge of the eternall power, diuinitie, & prouidence of God, which was in Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle, & others, endued onely with the light of nature, whereby they were led from the view of the creatures, to the conſideration of the inuiſible things of God? And if we looke into the liues of men in theſe daies, & conſider what neglect there is of thoſe mutuall duties which God commandeth vs to exhibite one to another, we ſhall ſoone ſee, that many a million of carnall Goſpellers come farre ſhort euen of

thoſe ciuill apparant and halfe vertues of the Heathen, &Lib. 6. Strommat. may therefore be ſent backe to learne holines of Socrates, iuſtice and innocencie of Aristides, charitie of Cymon, vpright dealing of Phocion, fidelitie in perfourming promiſes of Regulus, moderation of Camillus, parſimonie of Curius, grauitie of Cato, & what not of Heathen men, whoſe ſight in theſe thinges was better at midnight, than ours is at mid-day. But my meaning is not to approoue that Apocriphal tradition of Clemens Alexandrinus, who ſaith, that as the Lawe was a ſchoole-maiſter to the Iewes to leade them to Chriſt: ſo Philoſophy was to the Grecians to bring them to ſaluation. Now, although this erronious doctrine be as contrary to truth, as darkenes is to light, and as hel is to heauen, yet did Andradius defend it in a booke ſet foorth by him at their inſtigation (as himſelfe proteſteth) who were of greateſt authoritie in the late Tridentine Councell. Doth not the Lorde by the mouth of Eſay tell vs, that there is no light in them that haue not recourſe to the Lawe and to the teſtimonie, and ſpeake not according to his word? Eſay 8. 20. Dooth not our Sauiour Chriſt ſende vs to the Scriptures for euerlaſting life? Iohn 5. 39. Howe then dare anie profeſſing Chriſtianitie, affirme, that Philoſophers by the light of nature, and knowledge of Philoſophie, without the direction of the written word of God were made partakers of the righteouſnes that commeth by faith, and ſo conſequently of eternall happines? But to let this blaſphemous mouth paſſe, let vs make that account of the writings of men which they deſerue, and reape that commoditie by them, which we may without preiudice to the written word. For my meaning is not in commending Philoſophie, to giue greater credite vnto it, or further to allow the vſe thereof, than may ſtand with the maieſtie of the holy and ſacred Scripture, which being the Miſtres of all humane arts and diſciplines, vſeth them as hir handmaids to ſerue and obeie hir. Therefore as it is vnſeemly for a maid-ſeruant to go before hir Miſtres, to ſpeake before ſhe be ſpoken vnto, or to vſe three words for hir one, eſpecially in

companie where ſeruice and modeſtie is moſt required: ſo it beſeemeth not the ambaſſadors of Gods word (vnto whom indeed the knowledge of toongs and humane arts is a ſingular helpe) to vſe theſe gifts otherwiſe than as handmaids in their ſtudies and meditations to ſetue the Scripture to the more plaine and pure expoſition of it, ſeeing they are ſent to edifie others, and not to ſet our themſelues. Now when they ſtuffe a great part of their ſpeech with poeticall philoſophicall ſayings and examples (as alſo they are woont to alledge Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine ſentences to draw men into admiration of their great learning) they ſet the Miſtres behind, and giue the firſt and chiefeſt place vnto the handmaidens. Is not this To make the croſſe of Christ of none effect? I. Cor. I. 17. To vſe that kind of preaching that ſtandeth in the inticing ſpeech of mans wiſedome; and not in plaine euidence and power, is it not to build faith vpon the wiſedom of men, and not vpon the power of God? I. Cor. 2. 4. 5. If diſagreement of matter and forme be vnſeemely, how vndecent is it in ſpirituall doctrine to vſe a carnal and humane kind of teaching, I. Cor. 2. 13? to alay the ſtrength of the word of Chriſt with the wateriſh ſayings & fables of men? to put vpon the naked and glorious face of God the beggerly clokes of Poets & Philoſophers? When the Lorde hath ſanctified, not the corruptible ſeede of the ſayings of men, but the incorruptible ſeede of his owne moſt holy worde to the begetting of faith, are not theſe new begetters aſhamed to bring in another way of regeneration? When Gods will is to haue his children nouriſhed with the ſincere and vnmingled milke of his worde, dare man vſe the infuſion of water, to the weakening of them whome he ought to confirme? When the King hath appointed for his ſonnes and daughters the pureſt and fineſt wheate, ſhall the Steward, as if they were ſwine, prouide Acornes for them? But I detaine you too long from entering into the pleaſant walks of this Platonical Academie & Schoole of Moral Philoſophy, which being hewen out of the choiceſt

timber of all Countries, was raiſed vp, and ſet togither in France, and is newly rough-caſt (as you ſee) by an Engliſh workeman: whoſe earneſt deſire is to haue this ſmall labour of his knowne to other, and receiued of you as a monument of his gratefull mind towards your Worſhip, for the manifold benefits which he hath from a child receiued at your hands. In conſideration whereof I am bold or rather bound, to offer my ſelf togither with theſe my firſt fruits vnto your good liking, beſeeching him that turned your bountifull hart towards me, to knit it ſo neere vnto himſelfe, that he may be your chiefe riches in this life, & your only happines in the world to come. Thus commending you and that good Gentlewoman your wife with all yours, to the grace of God, I take my leaue of you this 17. of October.
            
            
               Your Worſhips euer bounden in the Lord,
T. B. C.
            
         
         
            
            FIDELI SVO AMICO, T. B. C. GALLICAE Academiae 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            SIquis in natiuo ſolo collocatus, honestis quibuſuis circumfluēs voluptatibus, nec vlla neceſſitate eò impulſus, ſe tamē amicorum hortatu in turbulentiſſimas maris tempeſtates conijceret, vt pretioſam margaritam à ſuis multū deſideratam cōparareticertè & laudanda foret eius in tantis laboribus ſubeundis alacritas, & postquā ſecundo vento vſus ſit, ſumma cū laetitia excipiendus illius reditus. Peregre, vt mihi viſum eſt profectus es aliquantiſper (chariſſime amice) & licet ea fuit vitae tuae cōditio, vt bonis literis te oblectans, in ijs tanquā in tua patria conſistere potuiſſes: voluiſti tamē amicorū rogatu fluctibus te obijcere, & per aliquos ſcopulos velut in Gallicam regionē nauigare, vt hanc ſplendidiſſimā gemmam, Academiam nempè florentiſſimā, nobis etiam amicis tuis communicare poſſes. Appuliſti tandem ad portū, ſyrtes omnes praeteruectus es, exoptatā margaritā tuo opere aſſequuti ſumus: nō poſſumus ergo quin & tuam in istis laboribus ſuſcipiendis voluntatē libenter agnoſcamus, et in ijſdē exantlandis foelicitatē liberè praedicemus. Quamuis verò mul
                  •
               orum in oculis vileſcere coepit Philoſophia, cuius abditos the ſauros in lucē protulisti
                  •
               eiuſmodi tamen ſunt, quorum autoritas propter hominum leuitatem nullius est momenti, & quos verè perſtringit illud ſermone tritum prouerbiū, Scientia non habet inimicum niſi ignorantem. Quis in Maronem Bathyllo atrocior? Quis in Vlyſſem Therſite acerbior? Quis Dialecticis arg
                  •
               tijs Epicuro infestior? Et quales, quaeſo▪ ſunt, qui canino latratu impetunt philoſophiā, niſiqui huius Reginae aedes ne à limine ſalutarunt? Siergo apud istos forſitā ſordeſcant tuae vigiliae, ne demittas tamen animū. Ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                enim tam acre est eorum iudicium, vt iam pertimeſcas, nec lingua adeò virulenta, vt vel minimam labeculam tuo nomini aſpergere poſſit. Ne ſolis quidem lumen caeco iucundum eſt: ſaluberrima pharmaca ab imperitis conculcantur: pretioſiſſimae gemmae à gallo Aeſopico ſpernuntur: & ipſ
                  •
                philoſophia, vitae lucerna, ment is medicina, gemma lucidiſſima, à caecis, ſtolidis, brutis contemnitur. Si aut cum Neoptolemo apud Ennium philoſophandum ſaltem putaſſent, licet paucis; aut cum Diuo Paulo 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                duntaxat 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                reieciſſent; nos minimè repugnantes habuiſſent: Quum vero vnà cum Apollonio philoſophiam ludibrio habeant, eám
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ab omni vetuſtate constitutam cum Arceſila penitùs labefactent, nullo modo audiendi, aut ferendi ſunt. At ſicut Dicaearchus & Aristoxenus, quia

difficilis erat animi quid aut qualis eſſet intelligentia, nullum omnino animum eſſe dixerunt: Ita isti, quorum obtuſa acies philoſophiae inſignes fructus aſpicere nequit, nullum eſſe omnino philoſophiae vſum clamitant. Verum enimuerò, hab eat philoſophia ſuam laudem, ſit vitae dux, morum magistra, virtutis columna, & ei tanquam reginae ſolium ſuum tribuatur. Tuae tamen laudes nullae erunt, nullae 
                  •
               e manebit laurea, nullum hic est tuum inuentum, nullum tui acuminis ſpecimen, niſi velis tanquam ignauus miles de ſpolijs aliorum ſudore partis gloriari, & latronum more aliorum bona, alijs impreſſis notis, tanquam tua venditare. Siccine vero? quid ita tandem? noui ego (mi amice) animi tui indolem, nullám
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                (vt ingenuè dicam, quod long a me docuit experientia) 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in te contemplari potui: & quamuis nulla benefacta lucem reformident, ea tamē ſemper laudabiliora duxisti, quae ſine venditatione & populo teste facta ſunt, nullúm
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                theatrum virtuti conſcientia maius indicasti. Cuius rei vel hoc vnicum ſatis est argumenti, quod non (ſicut illi philoſophi de contemnendâ gloriâ ſcribentes ſua nomina libris appoſuerunt) voluisti hoc tuum opus tuum in fronte nomen gerere▪ ſed publicum potiùs commodum quàm priuatam gloriam reſpiciens, incerto maluisti librum prodire authore, quàm nos certâ carere vtilitate. Gloria autem indiuidua virtutis comes, vide, vt te quamuis fugientem ſequatur. Neque enim nihili est tua industria aestimanda, quamuis alterius vestigijs institisti, nec parui ducendae ſunt tuae vigiliae, licet alterius opere prius elucubrata fuit ista Academia. Aurum & argentum alunt ipſa terrae viſcera: illis tamen nonnihildebemus, quorum ſudore ista metalla effodiuntur. Omne ferè genus mercaturae aliquibus in locis ſuâ ſponte naſcitur; ſuo tamen honore minimè ſpoliandi ſunt mercatores, quorum cum periculo vitae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                crebrâ iacturâ, tanta nobis bona comportata ſunt. Sit itaque Primaudayi aurea ista Academia, illius ſit pretioſiſſima haec ſupellex; tibi tamen aliquid interea laudis relinquâtur, cuius industria niſi ſeſe opportunè interpoſuiſſet, Anglis nostris nihil inde emolumenti redundaſſet. Neque est quòd quiſpiam agrè ferat, ſiphiloſophia Graecâ ac Romanâ veste vt plurimum induta, iàm incipiat Britannico quoque vestitu incedere. Bonum enim (vt pulchrè philoſophus) quò communius, eò melius: & philoſophiaipſa, ſoli haud diſſimilis, in omnes terrarum orbes radios ſuos diſſeminare cupit. Argiuorumres gestae celebres factae ſunt primòab Homero: neque tamen luſit ſuam operam Virgilius, cùm eaſdem ſuo carmine

celebrauit. Philoſophia diu Graeciae regionibus & ſeptis incluſa manſit; nunquam tamen conſeneſcet Ciceronis laus, qui eam ipſam Latinis literis illustrauit. Et grata (vti ſpero) memoria tuos labores proſequentur omnes, quibus factū est, vt Academia ista, Gallicis antea circumſcripta terminis, Anglis iamtandem innoteſcat. Macte igitur virtute (chariſſime amice) & maiores tibi addant ſpiritus istae primitiae ad maiora, ſi iusta ſe offerat occaſio, ſuſcipienda. Spero etenim aliquando euenturum, vt, ſicut in philoſophico certamine vires tuae ſe exeruerint, ita etiam in Theologico puluere pari ſaltem foelicitate exſpatientur. Interim bene vale. 13. Octobr.
            
               Tui ſtudioſiſſimus,
G. I.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING OF FRANCE AND POLONIA, HENRIE the third of that name.
            
            
               SIR, if we credit the ſaying of Plato, Commonwealths begin then to be happy, when Kings exerciſe Philoſophie, and Philoſophers raigne. The wiſe man ſpeaking more d
                  •
               uinely, exhorteth kings to loue and to ſeeke after wiſdome, that they may raigne vpon earth rightcouſly, and in heauen eternally. And truly from wiſedome and philoſophie, as from a liuely fountaine, floweth the gift of gouerning by good lawes and good example, of defending by proweſſe, and of nouriſhing by wiſedome and prouidence, which are the bands of all perfection requiſite in an excellent and abſolute prince, that deſireth to gouerne his kingdome according to pietie and iuſtice. Theſe three great and excellent gifts depending of God, as euerie other grace doth, one of thoſe meanes whereby he vſeth moſt commonly to inrich them that haue the raines of worldly gouernment in their hand, is to imprint in their harts a loue and deſire of learning and ſciences. But bicauſe they cannot ſo perfectly vnderſtand them, by reaſon of their great and burden ſome charge, as priuate men may, who quietly enioying the fruit and benefit of their kings labors, addict themſelues to no other profeſſion, their maieſties are ſo much the more pricked forward to loue, to inquire after, and to honor ſuch their ſubiects, as are beſt able to ſet before their eies thoſe vertuous and learned inſtructions that are drawen out of the fountains of arts and diſciplines. This mooued Antigonus king of Macedonia to write thus to Zeno the philoſopher: I am aſſured that I excell thee in the goods and fauour of fortune, and in the renowne of ſuch things, but I know withall, that thou art far aboue me, and goest beyond me in that true felicitie, which conſisteth in the knowledge and diſcipline of ſtudies. Therefore I deſire earneſtly that thou wouldest come vnto me: wherein I pray thee denie me not, that I may enioie thy conuerſation and companie, as well for mine owne profit, as for the profit of all the Macedonians my ſubjects. For he that instructeth a prince, doth alſo profit as many as are vnder his charge. This ſelfſame loue of knowledge was the cauſe, that all the feſtiuall ornaments of that great louer of vertue Ptolomie Philadelphus king of Egypt, were graue queſtions as well of pietic

as of phloſophic, which he propounded to be handled and concluded by thoſe learned men, whom he ordinarily maintained in his traine. Sir, the example of theſe two noble kings ſhining wholy in you, who greatly loue and fauour learning, and the profeſſors thereof, and open the gate of that holie and vertuous diſcipline, which was ſo much cheriſhed by ancient men, that they might daily be inſtructed the better in the dutie of their charges, doth promiſe to your good ſubjects and vaſſals, that by the grace of God they ſhall ſee vnder your raigne, the euill of thoſe ſiniſter effects defaced, which haue iſſued from theſe long troubles and ciuill wars. Whereof all men haue conceiued a more certaine hope, bicauſe they ſee, that you labor with a holie zeale and good affection, to reſtore pietie and iuſtice to their former ſtrength and beautie, which were in a maner buried in France: and that you haue gloriouſly crowned that worke, which that great king Francis your grandfather did happily begin, to the end that arts and ſciences might flouriſh in this kingdome. The diner of that prince of famous memorie, was a ſecond table of Salomon, vnto which reſorted from euerie nation ſuch as were beſt learned, that they might reape profit and inſtruction. Yours, Sir, being compaſſed about with thoſe, who in your preſence daily diſcourſe of, and heare diſcourſed many graue and goodly matters, ſeemeth to be a ſchoole erected to teach men that are born to vertue. And for my ſelfe, hauing ſo good hap during the aſſemblie of your Eſtates at Blois, as to be made partaker of the fruit gathered thereof, it came in my mind to offer vnto your Maieſtie a diſh of diuers fruits, which I gathered in a Platonicall garden or orchard, otherwiſe called an ACADEMIE, where I was not long ſince with certaine yoong Gentlemen of Aniou my companions, diſcourſing togither of the inſtitution in good maners, and of the means how all eſtates and conditions may liue well and happily. And although a thouſand thoughts came then into my mind to hinder my purpoſe, as the ſmall authoritie, which youth may or ought to haue in counſell amongſt ancient men: the greatnes of the matter ſubject, propounded to be handled by yeeres of ſo ſmall experience: the forgetfulnes of the beſt foundations of their diſcourſes, which for want of a rich and happie memorie might be in me: my iudgement not ſound ynough, and my profeſſion vnfit to ſet them downe in good order: briefly, the conſideration of your naturall diſpoſition and rare vertue, and of the learning which you receiue both by reading good authors, and by your familiar communication with learned and great perſonages that are neere about your Maieſtie (whereby I ſeemed to oppoſe the light of an obſcure day, full of clouds and darknes, to the bright beames of a very cleere ſhining ſunne, and to take in hand, as we ſay, to teach Minerua) I ſay all theſe reaſons being but of too great waight to make me change my opinon, yet calling to mind manie goodlie and graue ſentences taken out of ſundry Greeke and Latine Philoſophers, as alſo the woorthie examples of the liues of ancient Sages and famous men, wherewith theſe diſcourſes were inriched, which might in delighting your noble mind renew your memorie

with thoſe notable ſayings in the praiſe of vertue and diſpraiſe of vice, which you alwaies loued to heave: and conſidering alſo that the bounty of Artaxerxes that great Monarke of the Perſians was reuiued in you, who receiued with a cheerfull countenance a preſent of water of a poore laborer, when he had no need of it, thinking it to be as great an act of magnanimitie to take in good part, and to receiue cheerfully ſmall preſents offered with a hartie and good affection, as to giue great things liberally, I ouercame whatſoeuer would haue ſtaied me in mine enterpriſe. For I aſſured my ſelfe thus much of your bountifull & roiall greatnes (which I craue in moſt humble maner) that you would meaſure the gift and offer of this my ſmall labor, not according to the deſert thereof, or by the perſon of one of your baſeſt ſeruants and ſubjects, who preſenteth in vnto you, but according to the excellencie of thoſe things, which you ſhall ſee handled in this Academie, and according to the ſeruiceable and moſt affectionate deſire, wherewith I dedicate and conſecrate both goods and life to your ſeruice. I beſeeth God, Sir, to preſerue your Maieſtie in great proſperitie, increaſe of honor, and continuance of a long and happie life. At Barre in the moneth of Februarie, 1577.
            
               Your most humble and most obedient ſeruant and ſubject,
Peter de la Primaudaye.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
            
               THE PHILOSOPHERS teach vs by their writings, and experience doth better ſhew it vnto vs, that to couet and deſire is proper to the ſoule, and that from thence all the affections and deſires of men proceede, which draw them hither and thither diuerſly, that they may attaine to that thing, which they thinke is able to lead them to the enioying of ſome good, wherby they may line a contented and happie life. Which felicitie, the most part of men, through a falſe opinion, or ignorance rather of that which is good, and by following the inclination of their corrupted nature, do ſeeke and labor to finde in humane and earthlie things, as in riches, glorie, honor, and pleaſure. But for a ſmuch as the enioying of theſe things doth not bring with it ſufficient cauſe of contentation, they perceiue themſelues alwaies depriued of the end of their deſires, and are constrained to wander all their life time beyond all bounds and meaſure, according to the raſhnes and inconstancie of their lusts. And although they reioice for a little while at euerie new change, yet preſently they loath the ſelfeſame thing, which not long before they earnestly deſired. Their owne estate alwaies ſeemeth vnto them to be woorst, and euerie preſent condition of life, to be burdenſome. From one estate they ſeeke after another, ſo that now they withdraw themſelues from the ſeruice of princes, and miſlike publike charges, and by and by they blame the priuate life, labouring that they may be imploied. They forſake one countrie to go and dwell in another, and ſuddenly they deſire to returne againe into their former waies. They that haue neither wiues nor children, ſeeke and wiſh for them, and when they haue them, they deſire oftentimes nothing more than to be rid of them: and ſoone after ye ſhall ſee them married againe. Haue they heaped vp great ſtore of wealth, and increaſed their reuenues by halfe ſo much more? they deſire notwithstanding to make it altogither as much. The ſoldier ſeeketh to be a captain: from a captaine to be maister of the campe: from maister of the

campe to be lieutenant to the king: then he would gladly make himſelfe king. The ſeelie Priest would be a Curate: from a Curate, Biſhop: from a Biſhoppe, Cardinall: from a Cardinall, Pope: and then would commaund Kings and ſoueraigne Princes. Kings are not contented to raigne ouer their owne ſubiects, but bende themſelues alwaies to enlarge their limits, to make themſelues (if they can) the onely Monarchs. Briefly, all men whoſe harts are ſet vpon worldly goods, when they are come to this estate of life, they would attaine to that: and being come thereunto, ſome other neae deſire carieth them farther, ſo that this miſchiefe of continuall, vncertaine, and vnſatiable lustes and deſires doth more and more kindle in them, vntill in the ende death cut off the thred of their inconstant, and neuer contented life. This commeth to paſſe, bicauſe the alteration of an Estate and condition of life plucketh not out of the mind that, which preſſeth and troubleth it: namely, the ignorance of things, and imperfection of reaſon. But they, who through the ſtudie of wiſedome are furniſhed with skill and vnderstanding, and know that all humane and earthlie things are vncertaine, deceitfull, ſlipperie, and ſo many allurements vnto men to drawe them into a downe-fall and destruction, they I ſay, doe laie a farre better and more certaine foundation of their chiefe Good, contentation, and felicitie. For they are ſo farre off from being caried away, as worldlings are, with the deſire of greatnes, riches, and pleaſure, that they rather deſire leſſe than they haue, contemne them, and ſo vſe them as though they had them not. And deliuering their ſoules by the grace of God, from all thoſe perturbations, which beſiege them in the priſon of their bodies, they lift vp their wiſhes and deſires, yea they refer al the endsof their intents & actions to this only marke, to be vnited and ioined to the last end of their ſoueraigne Good, which is the full & whole fruition of the eſſence of God, that their holy affections might be at once fulfilled and ſatisfied, by enioying that diuine light, through a moſt happie & immortal life, when they ſhal be vncloathed of this body of death, & of all concupiſcences & paſſions, & reioice in ſuch a felicitie, as neither eie hath ſeene, nor eare heard, nor euer entred into the hart of man. Moreouer we ought to know, if we haue neuer ſo litle iudgmēt & reaſon, that in al worldly things how great & goodly ſoeuer they ſeeme to our carnall

eies & ſences, there is ſuch a mixture of bitternes & diſlike ioined with the fruition of them, that if we could diuide the euil from that which of the ignorant ſort is called good, & weigh them one against another, there is no doubt but the bad part would eaſily weigh down what goodnes ſoeuer could be found amongſt them. But how ſhal we call that good, which is ſo mingled with euill, which oftentimes hurteth more than it profiteth, and which being poſſeſſed abundantly, cannot yet keepe the poſſeſſor thereof from being wretched and miſerable? What contentation can a man find therein, ſeeing that ſuch a Good commonly ſlippeth away as ſoone as it is receiued, and alwaies worketh an vnſatiable deſire thereof? What felicitie ſhall we expect and looke for in the fruition of that thing, which waxeth old and periſheth, and which men are alwaies afraid to looſe? Now I pray you, who can doubt iustly, but that the qualitie and nature of riches, of glorie, of honour and pleaſure is ſuch? Whereupon we muſt conclude, that man can finde no goodnes, contentation or happines, in any thing that is earthly and mortall. Beſides, who knoweth not ſufficiently the poore estate of mans life, which in the fairest of his race commeth to nothing in the twinkling of an eie, ſo that all his bodily ſhewe and brightnes turneth ſuddenly into putrefaction? Who doth not try more than he would, how full his life is of ſharpe griefes, and pricking miſeries, and how it is aſſaulted with continuall troubles? With how many percing cares doth it abound, and what griping griefes doe purſue it? Briefly, as a wiſe Grecian ſaid, hauing but the bare name of life, it is in effect and truth a continuall paine. And truly that thing hath no beeing in deede, which changeth without ceaſing, as the nature of man doth, which neuer continueth in the ſame estate, no not the least moment that is. I would gladly aske of thee who readest this, or doeſt meane to reade it, what day, or what hower thou haſt paſſed, or now paſſest ouer, ſince thou hadst any iudgement or knowledge, wherein thy body hath not felt ſome griefe, or thy hart ſome paſſion? As there is no ſea without tempest, warre without danger, or iourney without trauell: ſo there is no life without griefe, nor calling without enuie or care: neither did I euer ſee or know that man, who hath had no cauſe to be grieued, or to complaine. Doth not experience daily teach vs, that no man liuing can make choiſe of any eſtate void of all trouble, or flie one inconuenience, but that he is in

danger to fall into another? Is it not alſo most certaine, that a ſudden ioy or proſperitie, is but a fore-warning or ſigne of ſome griefe & heauie calamitie at hand? But what? Shall we for all this think man ſo miſerable, that ſailing all his life time in ſtormes and tempests, he cannot poſſibly attaine to any ſafe hauen against the rage of them? Shall we in ſuch ſort depriue him, (during the time of his being in this world) of all Good, contentation and happines, as if there were no meanes to auoid, or at leaſtwiſe to mollifie the miſhaps and miſeries of mankind, that he faint not vnder the heauy burden of them? Wherefore then do wiſe men by ſo many learned writings inuite vs diligently to ſeeke after, and with a burning zeale to embrace holy vertue, ſaying, that by hir alone a man may liue happily and contentedly in euery calling, and may enioy therein the ſoueraigne Good, through the tranquillitie and reſt of his ſoule, purged of perturbations by Philoſophy? Was it in vaine and fruitles, that an infinite number of famous perſonages, whom Histories, the mother of antiquitie ſet before our eies, imploied ſo great trauell, paſſed infinite watchings, for ſooke and contemned riches, pleaſures, honors, and worldly commodities, to get and treaſure vp vertue only? And why do we, after their example, deſpiſe all theſe things, and ſpend that which we account moſt pretious, I meane time, that we may be adorned and cloathed with vertue, if it cannot make vs hit that marke, which euery one ſo much deſireth and ſeeketh after with ſuch great paine and labour, namely, that they may enioy ſome chiefe Good in this world, and lead thereby a contented and happy life? Be not ouertaken (friendly Reader) with this ſmal difficultie, which perhaps might cauſe a groſſe and feeble head not well inſtructed in wiſedome, to ſtagger and depart out of the right way. Now, although the heauenly word onely hath the perfect and ſound knowledge of wiſedome, bicauſe he is that eternall wiſedome it ſelfe, yet man being his workmanſhip, & aided with his grace must not leaue of to ſeeke for, & to require earnestly of him that gift of the knowledge & participation of the ſecrets of that incomprehenſible truth, (ſo farre foorth as he may and ſhall be neceſſary for him) that his ſoule thereby may obtaine hir permanent and lasting happines. Moreouer, albeit our ſoueraigne & chiefe Good, our perfect contentation and abſolute felicitie be onely in heauen in the enioying of that diuine light, yet we must not in the meane while, (albeit we

cannot fully poſſeſſe that) leaue of to ſeeke without ceaſing, or giue ouer in any ſort to keepe and follow that good and infallible way of vertue, which cauſing vs to paſſe ouer quietly, and to ſustaine with ioy of ſpirite the miſeries of mankind, and appeaſing the perturbations of our ſoules, from whence proceed all the euils that torment vs, and making them void of all damnable effects, will teach vs to lead a pleaſant, peaceable & quiet life, & to effect all things woorthy & beſeeming this certaine hope, that we ſhal one day (by the grace of God) be framed a new in that eternal, moſt happy, & contented life. Let vs therefore account this world, and all the riches thereof, as a thing belonging to an other, as a ſtraunger and nothing appertaining to thoſe men, who beyng regenerated by the ſpirite of grace haue profited well in the ſchoole of wiſedome. Let vs not ſeeke for friendſhippe vpon earth: let vs not couete after riches, glory, honour and pleaſure, which none but fooles doe extoll, deſire and wonder at. Wee are not of this worlde, but ſtraungers onely therein, and therefore let vs ſet all worldly things behinde vs, and account them vnwoorthie the care of our immortall ſoules, if we meane not to periſh with the worlde by ioyning our ſelues there-unto. Let vs forſake it, I ſay forſake it boldly how precious ſoeuer it bee, that we may aboundantly treaſure vp that great, This commendation of vertue is chiefly to be vnderſtood of faith the roote of all good vertues.ſweete and durable wealth, I meane vertue, which is honoured, loued, and deſired for it ſelfe onely, which is the true and wholeſome medicine for diſeaſed ſoules, the rest of the mynde oppreſſed with care, the cauſe (by the will of GOD) of that chiefe Good wherein the principall ende of the ſoule conſisteth, and the onely aſſured guide which leadeth to the Hauen ſo much deſired of euery one, namelie, the contentation of minde. Which thing this preſent Academie doth not onely ſet before our eyes, but alſo doth ſaue and keepe vs beyng already entered into this Hauen of ſafetie, agaynst all tempestes, if wee will our ſelues, and not ſpare our labour to reape profite of thoſe learned and wiſe instructions that are here giuen vnto vs by the preceptes of doctrine, and examples of the lyues of auncient, vertuous, and famous men. For first of all wee ſhall learne hereby to know our ſelues, and the ende of our beyng. Secondly, wee ſhall bee instructed in good maners, and taught how we may liue well and happily in euery estate and condition of lyfe whatſoeuer. Yea we ſhall finde

in the baſest and lowest estate, which of the ignorant and common ſort of people is oftentimes called miſerable, as much ioy and happineſſe, as a Monarch can be partaker of in the fruition of his greatneſſe, yea much more than he, if he bee wicked: bicauſe vice in all Estates maketh the poſſeſſour thereof wretched, and contrarywiſe, Vertue maketh euery condition of life happy. Moreouer wee ſhall ſee in this Academie, that euery one louyng and fearing GOD may obtaine this inestimable Good of vertue, and thereby remayne a Conquerour ouer the perturbations of his ſoule, which breede all his miſerie, remembring this poynt alwayes, ſo farre foorth as the fraile nature of man, ayded by the Author of all goodneſſe can attayne to this perfection. Wee ſhall learne here how we ought to gouerne our ſelues wiſely and duetifully in all humane actions and affaires, and in all charges and places whatſoeuer, either publique or priuate whereunto we ſhall be called. We may note here cauſe of the ſubuerſion and ruine of many Empires, Estates and Common-wealths, and of the glittering ſhew and glory of infinite others: as alſo the cauſe of the wretchedneſſe and destruction of a great number of men, and what hath lift vp others, and crowned them with honour and immortall prayſe. We ſhall bee taught here the gouernement of a houſe and familie, the maner of the education and instruction of children, the mutuall duetie of married couples, of brethren, of masters and ſeruauntes, how to commaund, and how to obey. We ſhall ſee here the order and establiſhment of policies and ſuperiorities: what is the duetie of the Heads of them, of Princes and Gouernours of nations, as alſo what the duetie of their ſubiectes is. Briefly, both great and ſmall may drawe out from hence the doctrine and knowledge of thoſe things which are most neceſſarie for the gouernement of a houſe, and of a Common-wealth, with ſufficient instruction how to frame their life and maners in the moulde and paterne of true and holy vertue, and how by meanes thereof, (the grace of GOD woorking in them) they may runne the race of their dayes in ioy, happineſſe, rest and tranquillitie of ſpirite, and that in the middest of greatest aduerſities, which the vncertaintie and continuall chaunge of humane things may bring vpon them. Nowe bicauſe the ſequele compounded of the ſundrie treatiſes and diſcourſes of this Academy,

will ſufficiently instruct thee in all things aboue mentioned, as it promiſeth in the fore-front and title thereof, I will not dilate this matter any farther, but only deſire of thee (Reader) patiently to heare theſe Academicall ſtudents, from the first of their diſcourſes vnto the last. Their intent was only (as thou maieſt vnderstand more at large in the entrance of their aſſembly) to teach themſelues, and next euery one according to their abilitie, the institution of good maners, and rule of good lining, for all ordinarie and common estates and conditions of life in our French Monarchie, to the ende that euery member of this politike body (brought thus low with euils, and beaten with tempestuous ſtormes) might ſomewhat helpe and profite it by their counſels and instructions. And this thou mayest do (friendly Reader) if thou takest payns to read well, to vnderstand better, and (which is best of all) to follow the precepts, instructions and examples, which thou ſhalt find here: as alſo, if thou bringest hither a good will and cheerefull diſpoſition, voyd of all malicious enuy, which at this day is commonly practiſed by most men of this our age (who like to malicious Cenſorers) buſie themſelues rather in ſeeking out what to bite at, and to reprehend in other mens workes, than to draw out, and to commend that which is good, or to aſſay to make them better. Beſides, thou ſhalt haue ſomewhat to commend in the order of theſe diſcourſes, and in the maner of teaching which is in them. For after the handling of that knowledge which is eſpecially neceſſary for man, all thoſe vertues follow which he ought to imbrace, and thoſe vices which he is to ſhun. Next, he is instructed in that which concerneth houſe-keeping: then in that which hath reſpect to estates and policies, & last of all how he may die well, after he hath liued well. As for the maner of teaching, which is diligently obſerued by theſe Academikes, thou ſhalt ſee that first they prayſe that vertue, or diſprayſe that vice which they propound to themſelues to diſcourſe vpon, that they may mooue and frame mens minds as well to hate the one as to deſire the other. Then they define that wherof they diſcourſe, that the end of the preſent ſubiect may be better knowen. Afterward, they giue precepts to find out the means wherby to attaine to that which is Good, and to eſchew the euil. Lastly, they adde examples, which are liuely reaſons, and of great waight to mooue men with delight to embrace vertue and to flie vice. Now if thou thinkest that too

litle is ſpoken, conſidering the goodly and large matter here propounded, it is not bicauſe they knew not that the excellencie of euery thing put foorth here is ſo great, and the reaſons ſo aboundant that a man might well make a booke therofby it ſelfe, as many learned men haue done, but the chiefe ſcope and drift of theſe Interſpeakers, was to diſcourſe briefly of ſuch things as are neceſſarily required in the institution of maners, and of a happy life. Neuertheleſſe it may well be, that that which thou findest not ſufficiently folowed in one place may be learned in another, if thou lookest vnto the end. Moreouer they who are here named, and who mind to retaine alwayes the name of diſciples, neuer purpoſed or preſumed to ſet downe reſolutions, or to appoint lawes which are neceſſarily to be kept, and may not be changed in any wiſe by thoſe that are cleereſighted, according to the occurrence & benefit of the estate of this Monarchie, but grounding their counſels and instructions vpon the ſoundest and most approoued opinion of the writings of learned men, both of auncient and late times, and vpon ſuch as drew neereſt to the infallible rule of the holy ſcriptures according to the ſmall meaſure of graces giuen them from aboue, they haue left to euery one (following therein the ancient ſchoole of the Academikes) libertie to compare the motiues of the one ſide, with the reaſons on the other, that the truth of all things might be diligently ſearched out and inquired after, that none through any head-strong conceit ſhould be wedded to priuate opinions: and that afterward choiſe might be made of the best, and of ſuch as are most certain, therby to order and rule all intents and actions, and to referre them to the perpetuall glory of that great Lord of Hierarchies, who is the onely cauſe and chiefe fountain of all Good, contentation, and happineſſe.
            
               Spe certa quid melius?
            
         
         
            
            The Contents of the ſeuerall chapters of this Booke.
            
            
               Chap. 1 Of Man. Page. 10
               2 Of the body and ſoule. 19
               3 Of the diſeaſes and paſſions of the body and ſoule, and of the tranquillitie thereof. 27
               4 Of Philoſophie. 38
               5 Of Vertue. 51
               6 Of Vice. 63
               7 Of Sciences, of the ſtudie of Letters, and of Hiſtories. 72
               8 Of the Spirit, and of Memorie. 83
               9 Of Duetie and Honeſtie. 92
               10 Of Prudence. 103
               11 Of want of Prudence and of Ignorance, of Malice and ſubtletie. 115
               12 Of Speech and Speaking. 126
               13 Of Friendſhip and of a Friend. 136
               14 Of Reprehenſion and Admonition. 148
               15 Of Curioſitie and Noucitie. 159
               16 Of Nature and Education. 170
               17 Of Temperance. 179
               18 Of Intemperance, and of Stupiditie or blockiſhnes. 189
               19 Of Sobrietie and Frugalitie. 198
               20 Of Superfluitie, Sumptuouſneſſe, Gluttonie, and Wallowing in delights. 209
               21 Of Ambition. 223
               22 Of Voluptuouſnes and Looſeneſſe of life. 234
               23 Of Glory, Praiſe, Honour, and of Pride. 245
               24 Of Shame, Shamefaſtnes, and of Diſhonor. 256
               25 Of Fortitude. 265
               26 Of Timorouſnes, Feare, and Cowardlines: and of Raſhnes. 277
               27 Of Magnanimitie and Generoſitie. 288
               28 Of Hope. 298
               29 Of Patience and of Impatiencie: of Choler and Wrath. 308
               30 Of Meeknes, Clemencie, Mildnes, Gentlenes and Humanitie. 319
               31 Of good and ill Hap. 328
               32 Of Proſperitie and Aduerſitie. 338
               33 Of Riches. 350
               34 Of Pouertie. 358.
               35 Of Idlenes, Sloth and Gaming. 367
               36 Of an Enimie, of Iniurie and of Reuenge. 378
               37 Of Iuſtice. 390
               38 Of Iniuſtice, and of Seueritie. 402
               39 Of Fidelitie, Forſwearing, and of Treaſon. 413
               40 Of Ingratitude. 424
               41 Of Liberalitie, and of the vſe of Riches. 434
               42 Of Couetouſnes, and of Prodigalitie. 444
               
                  
43 Of Enuie, Hatred, and Backbiting. 457
               44 Of Fortune. 467
               45 Of Mariage. 478
               46 Of a Houſe and Familie, and of the kinds of Mariage: of certaine ancient cuſtomes obſerued in mariage. 484
               47 Of the particular dutie of a Husband towards his wife. 500
               48 Of the dutie of a Wife towards hir Husband. 513
               49 Of the dutie of the Head of a familie in other partes of the houſe, namely, in the Parentall, Maſterly, and Poſſeſſorie part. 523
               50 Of the dutie of children towards their Parents: of the mutuall loue that ought to be among brethré: of the dutie of ſeruants towards their maſters. 536
               51 Of the Education and inſtruction of Children. 549
               52 Of the diuiſion of the ages of Man, and of the offices and duties that are to be obſerued in them. 561
               53 Of Policie, and of ſundry ſorts of Gouernments. 573
               54 Of the ſoueraigne Magiſtrate, and of his authoritie and office. 584
               55 Of the Lawe. 593
               56 Of the People, and of their obedience due to the Magiſtrate, and to the Lawe. 603
               57 Of a Monarchie, or a Regall power. 615
               58 Of diuers kinds of Monarchies, and of a Tiranny. 627
               59 Of the Education of a Prince in good maners and conditions. 640
               60 Of the office and dutie of a King. 652
               61 Of a Councell, and of Counſellers of Eſtate. 675
               62 Of Iudgements and of Iudges. 689
               63 Of Seditions. 703
               64 Of the cauſes that breede the change, corruption, &c. of Monarchies and Policies. 716
               65 Of the preſeruations of Eſtates and Monarchies, and of remedies to keepe them from ſedition. 730
               66 Of the Harmonie and agreement that ought to be in the diſſimilitude or vnlike callings of ſubiects, by reaſon of the duty and office of euery eſtate. 743
               67 Of Peace and of Warre. 754
               68 Of the ancient Diſcipline and order of Warre. 764
               69 Of the office and duty of a Generall. 772
               70 Of the choiſe of Souldiors, of the maner how to exhort them to fight, and how victory is to be vſed. 783
               71 Of a happie Life. 794
               72 Of Death. 804
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               THE FIRST DAIES WORKE of this Academie, with the cauſe of their aſſemblie.
               
                  WHen GOD by his infinite and vnſpeakable goodnes, beholding with a fatherly, bountifull, and pitifull eie our poore France (which moſt cruel againſt it ſelfe, ſeemed to run amain moſt furiouſly to throw it ſelf headlong into the center of ſome bottomleſſe gulfe) had ſent from heauen the wiſhed-for newes of peace in the midſt of ciuill and domeſticall armies, (which a man might ſay were of purpoſe prepared for the finall ouerthrow of this French Monarchie, that hath floriſhed ſo long time) ſparing by his heauenlie grace and fauor, and that in deſpite of them, the bloud of thoſe men, who held foorth their right hand to cut off the left, among manie, who touched with the loue of their countrie, and with true zeale to pietie, reioiced at this ſo well liking and healthfull newes, fower yong gentlemen of Aniou, who came togither to ſerue their Prince, and to ſacrifice their liues, if need required, for the welfare and ſafetie of the Common wealth, were none of the laſt that ſought out one another, and met togither to teſtifie ech to other (as their mutuall kindred and ſworne frendſhip did inuite them) the ioy, which filled their ſouls, ariſing of ſo happie and vnlooked for ſucceſſe and alteration of affaires: to the end alſo that they might giue glorie and praiſe to him, who for the benefit of his, knoweth wel how to take order euen in thoſe things, which according to the iudgement of men are deſperate and paſt recouery. And that which gaue them greater occaſion to reioice for this peace, and ſo diligently to ſeeke out one another was this, bicauſe contratie to hope, they ſaw the meanes offered

them to returne home, and to continue an exerciſe that greatly pleaſed them, which not long before the laſt fal of France into troubles they had happily begun. Now to let you (readers) vnderſtand what this exerciſe was, theſe fower gentlemen being of kin, and neere neighbors, and in a maner of one age, were by the care and prudence of their fathers brought vp and nouriſhed togither from their yoong yeeres in the ſtudie of good letters, in the houſe of an ancient wiſe gentleman of great calling, who was the principall ſtocke and roote of theſe fruitfull buds. This man by reaſon of his manifold experience, and long abode in ſtrange countries, knew that the common corruption of French youth, of it ſelfe inclined to pleaſure, proceeded chiefly from the ouer great licence, and exceſſiue libertie granted vnto them in the Vniuerſities of this Realme, as well through the fault and negligence of the gouernors and tutors in them, as alſo bicauſe of the euill gouernment of the townes at this day. He knew alſo that they were no leſſe abuſed, who thinking to auoide this dangerous downe-fall at home, did ſend their children to ſtudie abroad amongſt ſtrangers, where the traffike and merchandiſe of miſchiefs is more common and eaſie to be made, bicauſe they feare not that newes will preſently, or ſo ſpeedily be caried to their parents, as if they were neere vnto them. Oh how well woorthie of eternall praiſe is the prudence of this gentleman, bringing to my remembrance Eteocles one of the moſt noble Ephories of Lacedemonia, who freely anſwered Antipater asking fiftie pledges, that he would not giue him children, leaſt if they were brought vp farre from their fathers, they ſhould change the ancient cuſtome of liuing vſed in their owne countrie, and become vicious: but of olde men and women, he would giue him double the number, if he would haue them. Wherevpon being threatened by this king, if he ſpeedily ſent him not of the youth: we care not (quoth he) for threatenings. For if thou command vs to do things that are more greeuous than death, we will rather chooſe death: ſo carefull were the men of old time, that the dreſſing

and trimming of theſe yoong plants ſhould not be out of their preſence. But let vs go on with our matter. This good and notable old man hauing ſpent the greater part of his yeeres in the ſeruice of two kings, and of his country, and for many good cauſes withdrawen himſelfe to his houſe, thought that to content his mind, which alwaies delighted in honeſt and vertuous things, he could not bring greater profit to the Monarchie of France, than to lay open a way and meane to preſerue and keepe youth from ſuch a pernicious and cancred corruption, by offering himſelfe for example to all fathers, and ſhewing them the way to haue a more carefull eie in the inſtruction of their children, and not ſo lightly to commit them to the diſcipline of vices, by the hands of mercenarie and hired ſtrangers. And this was begun vpon theſe fower yoong gentlemen, whom he tooke to his owne houſe, by the conſent of their parents, offering himſelfe to the vttermoſt of his power, to helpe their gentle nature, which appeered in them woorthie their anceſtors, by training it vp, firſt in the feare of God, as being the beginning of al wiſedome: ſecondly, in humane learning and knowledge, which are neceſſarie helps to liue well and happily, to the benefit of the ſocietie of men. To this end, after that he himſelfe had ſhewed them the firſt grounds of true wiſedome, and of al things neceſſarie for their ſaluation, according to the meaſure of grace giuen him from aboue, and as their age could conceiue them, he labored earneſtly to haue in his houſe ſome man of great learning, and wel reported of for his good life and conuerſation, vnto whom he committed the inſtruction of this yoong Nobilitie. Who behaued himſelfe ſo wel in his charge, that not greatly ſtaying himſelfe in the long degrees of learning, which being ordinarie, and vſuall in our French Colledges, are often more tedious (beſides loſſe of time) than profitable to youth, after he had indifferently taught his ſchollers the Latine toong, and ſome ſmackering of the Greeke, he propounded for the chiefe part and portion of their ſtudies the morall philoſophie of aucient Sages and wiſe men, togither

with the vnderſtanding, & ſearching out of hiſtories, which are the light of life: therein following the intent and will both of him that ſet him on worke, and alſo of the parents of this Nobilitie, who deſired to ſee their children, not great Orators, ſuttle Logitians, learned Lawiers, or curious Mathematicians, but onely ſufficiently taught in the doctrine of good liuing, following the traces and ſteps of vertue, by the knowledge of things paſt from the firſt ages vntill this preſent: that they might refer all to the glorie of the diuine maieſtie, and to the profit and vtilitie as well of themſelues as of their country. And yet in the meane while theſe noble & toward youths were not depriued of other exerciſes meete for them, which (as the diuine Plato ſaith) are very profitable for this age, and helpe much to quicken the ſpirits of yoong men, and to make their bodies which are weake by nature, more ſtrong and apt to ſuſtaine trauell: as namely, to ride horſes, to run at the ring, to fight at barriers, to applie themſelues to all kind of weapons, and to followe the chace of beaſts. All which exerciſes this wiſe and ancient Knight did intermingle with their earneſt ſtudies by way of recreation, himſelfe ſtanding them in ſteade of a maiſter. For in ſuch exerciſes he was as fully furniſhed as is to be wiſhed in a man of valure and actiuitie, inſomuch that he was more expert than many of our time, who make no other profeſſion. Now this ſchoole hauing been continued for the ſpace of ſixe or ſeauen yeeres, to the great profit of this nobilitie of Aniou, the fower fathers on a day tooke their iournie to viſite this good old man, and to ſee their children. And after the vſuall welcome, which is betweene kinſfolks and friends, they diſcourſed togither of the corruption, which then was in all eſtates of France, wherevpon they foreſawe (as they ſaid) ſome great ſtorme at hand, if euerie one did not put to his helping hand for the correction and reformation of them, but chiefly the ſecular power authoriſed of God for this purpoſe. They alledged for witnes of their ſaying many examples of ancient eſtates, common-wealths and kingdoms,

which were fallen from the height of glorie and excellencie into a generall ſubuerſion and ouerthrow, by reaſon of vices raigning in them vnpuniſhed. And thus continuing their ſpeech from one thing to another, they fell in talke of the corrupt maners that might particularly be noted in all, and thoſe maintained by authoritie and with commendation, inſomuch that both great and ſmal endeuored to diſguiſe vice with the name of vertue. In fine they were of opinion to heare their children diſcourſe heervpon, that they might know and iudge, whether they had profited ſo wel in the inſtitution of good maners (the rule of good life) by folowing of vertue, and by the knowledge of hiſtories (the patterne of the time paſt for the better ordering of the time preſent) as their maiſter, who was preſent at the diſcourſes of theſe ancient gentlemen, did aſſure them, by intermingling the praiſes of his ſchollers in the midſt of their graue talke, and vaunting that they were well armed to reſiſt the corruption of this age. For truly vertue purchaſed and gotten by practiſe, is of no leſſe power againſt all contagion of wickednes, than preſeruatiues well compounded are of force in a plague time to preſerue in good helth the inhabitants of a countrie, and as heeretofore that famous phyſicion Hippocrates preſerued his citie of Coos from a mortalitie that was generall throughout all Grecia, by counſelling his countrymen to kindle many fires in all publike places, to the end thereby to purifie the aire: euen ſo whoſoeuer hath his ſoule poſſeſſed, and his hart well armed with the brightnes and power of vertue, he ſhal eſcape the dangers of corruption, and eſchew all contagion of euill maners. But returning to the intent and deſire of our good old men, bicauſe they had ſmall skil in the Latine tong, they determined to haue their children diſcourſe in their owne naturall toong, of all matters that might ſerue for the inſtruction and reformation of euerie eſtate and calling, in ſuch order and method, as themſelues with their foreſaid maiſter ſhould thinke beſt. For this purpoſe they had two howers in the morning granted vnto them, wherein they

ſhould be heard, and as much after dinner, which was to each of them one hower in a day to ſpeake in. You may gheſſe (gentle readers) whether this liuely youth did not beſtow the reſt of the day, yea oftentimes the whole night vpon the well ſtudying of that which they purpoſed to handle, and with what cheerfulnes of hart, and willingnes of mind they preſented themſelues before the honorable preſence of their fathers, who were ſo greatly delighted in hearing them, that for the moſt part in ſtead of fower howers a day before mentioned, they beſtowed ſixe or eight. For after they had heard the two firſt diſcourſe one morning, they had not the patience to refer the reſt of that matter vnto the afternoone, when the other twain of their children ſhould be heard, but commonly commanded them preſently to enter the liſts, and to proceed, as being iealous ouer their glorie in regard of their companions. In this commendable maner of paſſing their time they continued certaine daies. But the ſudden and ſorrowfull newes of the laſt frantike returne of France into ciuill war brake vp their happie aſſemblie, to the end that theſe noble youths, betaking themſelues to the ſeruice due to their prince, and to the welfare and ſafetie of their countrie, might make triall of their firſt feates of armes, wherein they wanted neither readines, nor valure of hart, which being naturally in them was alſo increaſed by the knowledge of philoſophie. The ſtudie whereof reſembling (as Plato ſaith) to a ſeparation of the ſoule from the bodie, ſtandeth wiſe men in ſtead of an exerciſe to die without feare, when dutie requireth it, and cauſeth them to eſteeme of death, as of the cauſe of the true and perfect good of the ſoule. For which reaſon, Socrates, Xenophon, Architas, Thucidides, Thales, Epaminondas, and a million of other famous men, learned philoſophers, and hiſtoriographers hauing charge of armies, neuer doubted, or feared in any ſort to offer themſelues cheerfully vnto all perils and dangers, when the queſtion and contention was for publike benefit and ſafetie, and in a iuſt war, without which a wiſe man neuer ought to fight. Yea I dare boldly ſay, that the

greateſt, and moſt famous exploits of warfare, were atchieued for the moſt part by them and their like. Which ſerued well for a ſpurre to our yoong Angeuins to cauſe them to vndertake this iournie with ioy and cheerfulnes of ſpirit, being reſolued to follow with all their might the examples of ſuch great and notable perſonages, as hiſtories, the treaſurie of time, did call to their remembrance. When they were in the campe, each of them according to his particular affection ranged himſelfe vnder ſundry cornets of great Lords and good captaines. But, as we ſaid in the beginning, after news of the peace proclaimed, which was ſo greatly looked for, and deſired of all good men, they labored foorthwith to meete togither, knowing that their ioint-returne would be acceptable to their friends, eſpecially to that good olde-man by whome they were brought vp. Moreouer they deliberated with themſelues as ſoone as they were arriued at the old mans houſe, to giue their fathers to vnderſtand thereof, to the end they might be certified from them, whether it were their pleaſures to haue them reiterate and continue in their preſence the morall diſcourſes begun by them, as we learned before, that they might bee refreſhed with the remembrance of their ſtudies, and thereby alſo keepe faſt for euer thoſe good inſtructions, which by the daily trauell of ſo manie yeeres they had drawen out of the fountaine of learning and knowledge. As it was deuiſed by them, the execution therof followed, ſo that all theſe good old-men being aſſembled togither, taking vp their firſt order, and conferring anew of the ſame matters, daily met in a walking place couered ouer in the midſt with a goodly green Arbour, alotting for this exerciſe from eight to ten in the morning, and from two to fower in the afternoone. Thus they continued this exerciſe for the ſpace of three whole weekes, which make eighteene daies works, beſides the three Saboth daies, ſet apart by them, that they might reſt and ceaſe from their ſtudies, and attend the better to the chiefe point of that holie daies inſtitution, which is to the contemplation, and conſideration of the works of God,

of his law, and of his praiſes. During which time it was my good hap to be one of the companie when they began their diſcourſes, at which I ſo greatly woondred, that I thought them worthie to be publiſhed abroad, as well to enrich our French toong with an infinit number of graue ſentences, and ſpeeches worthie to be remembred, being drawen out of the fountaine of Greeke and Latine arts and diſciplines, through the incredible labour of theſe youths, louers of vertue, as alſo to awake and ſtirre vp by their example all the Nobilitie with a ielouſie and emulation of glorie, gotten by the ſame vertue. For onely vertue is able to guide and conduct gentlemen to honor, for the obtaining whereof (as they ſay) they contend and fight ſo often, and can alſo reſtore them to the fruition of their firſt rights of authoritie, and goodlie priuileges, whereby (as we read of the ancient Romans) ſuch as were moſt worthie amongſt the Nobilitie were choſen to attend vnto theſe three things: namely, to the ſeruice of God, which is to gouerne, as the ſcripture ſpeaketh: ſecondly to the adminiſtration of lawes and iuſtice, which is the piller of kingdoms: and laſtly to the tuition and defence of the Common-wealth by armes, which is the aſſurance therof againſt all practiſes and aſſaults of the enimie. Of which three excellent adminiſtrations, neceſſarie for the eſtabliſhing and maintenance of all eſtates and common-wealths, the moſt part of our Nobilitie retaineth the laſt onely, which likewiſe they ſeeme to deſpiſe in a maner, ſubmitting to their great ſhame, by reaſon of their ignorance and weltring in delights and pleaſure, their conſcience, honor, goods, and life, to the opinion and iudgement of thoſe whom nature and right had ſubiected to them. But marke how we deuiſed to proceed in our diſcourſes: to wit, that three of vs one after another ſhould vtter ſome ſentence or memorable ſaying, in the praiſe of that vertue, or diſpraiſe
of that vice, whereof we were reſolued to ſpeake, and that the fourth ſhould make a whole diſcourſe of that matter. Which being ended, he ſhould begin the firſt propoſition of the ſecond treatiſe, and two

others ſhould followe him therein: then the laſt ſhould make the ſecond whole diſcourſe for that morning. Likewiſe in the afternoone, the ſame partie was to lay open that matter, which was to be intreated of, and two others continuing it, one of thoſe, who in the morning did onely propound, ſhould diſcourſe in his turne: and then giuing vnto his companions new matter ſubiect, he which as yet had not diſcourſed at all, was to handle it, and ſo to make an end for that day. And thus all fower of vs followed the ſame order daily, vntil euerie one in his courſe had intreated according to appointment, both by the precepts of doctrine, as alſo by the examples of the liues of ancient Sages and famous men, of all things neceſſarie for the inſtitution of maners, and happie life of all eſtates and callings in this French Monarchie. But bicauſe I knowe not whether, in naming my companions by their proper names, ſuppoſing therby to honor them, as in deede they deſerue it, I ſhould diſpleaſe them, (which thing I would not ſo much as thinke) I haue determined to do as they that play on a Theater, who vnder borrowed masks and diſguiſed apparell, do repreſent the true perſonages of thoſe whom they haue vndertaken to bring on the ſtage. I will therefore call them by names very agreeable to their skill and nature: the firſt, ASER, which ſignifieth Felicity: the ſecond, AMANA, which is as much to ſay as Truth: the third, ARAM, which noteth vnto vs Highnes: and to agree with them as well in name, as in education and behauior, I will name my ſelfe ACHITOB, which is all one with Brother of goodnes. Further more I will call and honor the proceeding and finiſhing of our ſundrie treatiſes and diſcourſes with this goodlie and excellent title of Academie, which was the ancient & renowmed ſchoole amongſt the Greeke Philoſophers, who were the firſt that were eſteemed, and that place where Plato, Xenophon, Polemon, Xenocrates, and many other excellent perſonages, afterward called Academiks, did propound & diſcourſe of al things meet for the inſtruction and teaching of wiſedome: wherin we purpoſed to followe them to our power, as the ſequele

of our diſcourſes ſhall make good proofe. Begin then (gentle readers) to heare that which we ſpake concerning Man in the firſt daies worke, vſing theſe or the like ſpeeches.
               
                  Aſer, Felicitie:
                  Amana, Truth:
                  Aram, Highnes:
                  Achitob, Brother of goodnes.
               
            
            
               Of Man. Chap. 1.
               
               
                  WHen I direct my flight now and then (my companions) euen vnto the heauens, and with the wings of contemplation behold their wonderfull greatnes, their terrible motions, being contrarie and without ceaſing, the liuely brightnes, rare beautie, and incomparable force of the ſun and moone, their vnchangeable courſe, one while cauſe of light, and by and by after of darknes, the infinite number of goodlie ſtars, and of ſo many other celeſtiall ſignes: and from this excellent and conſtant order of all theſe things, as one rauiſhed and amaſed, when I withdraw my ſpirite lower into the elementarie region, to admire and wonder at the ſituation and ſpreading of the earth amidſt the waters, both of them making one round maſſe or lumpe, which in the midſt of this great firmament occupieth the roome but of a pricke or tittle in reſpect thereof: beſides, when I acknowledge in this earth and water as many ſundrie and moſt beautifull plants, and kindes of earthie and waterie creatures, as there are graines of ſand on the ſea banks: and when I delight my ſelfe in the varietie of minerals & pretious ſtones, conſidering the forme,

qualitie, and vertue of each of theſe things: briefly, when I admire the diuerſitie of times and ſeaſons, the continuall ſpring of fountaines, the certaine courſe of riuers, and generally, ſo manie wonderfull works vnder the cope of heauen, I cannot maruell enough at the excellencie of Man, for whom all theſe things were created, & are maintained and preſerued in their being and moouing, by one and the ſame diuine prouidence alwaies like vnto it ſelfe.
               
                  AMANA.
                  There is nothing more certaine than this, that all things whatſoeuer either the eie can behold, or the eare heare, were created for the benefit, profit, and vſe of man, and that he was made excellent aboue all things to rule ouer them: yea the very Angels are ſent to miniſter for their ſakes, which ſhall receiue the inheritance of Hebr. 1.ſaluation.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Oh vnſpeakable and heauenlie goodneſſe, which haſt created man little lower than thy ſelfe, and crowned him with glorie and worſhip. But tell vs I pray Pſalm. 8.thee (ACHITOB) more particularly, what this great and principall worke of nature, Man, is, to what end his being was giuen him, and how he hath ſhewed foorth the fruits thereof. For it 
                        ••
                     ſt needes be, that there is ſomething All things were created for man.in him greatly to be woondered at, ſeeing all things were created to ſerue and obey him.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     To knowo our ſelues is true wiſedome. Truely yee haue reaſon (companions) to begin our happie aſſembly with that knowledge, which we ought to haue of our ſelues, as being the ſtorehouſe of all wiſdome, and beginning of ſaluation: wherof we may haue an aſſured teſtimonie from that father of Philoſophie Socrates, who beholding the firſt precept written at Delphos in that temple of Apollo, which was ſo renowmed throughout Graecia, namely, Know thy ſelfe, was foorthwith driuen into a very deepe cogitation, and being rapt with contemplation of ſpirit, he began from that time forward to doubt and to inquire of himſelfe. Wherupon contemning that way, which all the Philoſophers of his time, who buſied themſelues about nothing, but onely in finding out the cauſes of naturall things, and in diſputing

curiouſly of them, he gaue himſelfe wholie to the The ſoule is truly man.knowledge of himſelfe, I meane of his ſoule, which he maintained to be in deed man, and by diſputuation to intreat of the ſoueraigne good thereof, and of vertue. By which meanes the gate of wiſedome was opened vnto him, wherein he profited in ſuch ſort, that according to Socrates was called the father of Philoſophie.the oracle at Delphos, he was called of all men the wiſe, the iuſt, the prince of Philoſophers, and father of Philoſophie. And ſurely out of his ſayings, which being more diuine than humane, were written by his diſciples, all other Philoſophers haue drawne their knowledge. Heraclitus another excellent man, minding to giue out in ſpeech that he had done ſome notable act, woorthy of himſelfe, ſaid: I haue ſought my ſelfe. Which beginning truely is verie necaſſarie for man, as being a guide to leade him to the true knowledge of God, which is a heauenly gifte of God, and peculiar to his. And this is learnedly taught vs by the ſame Socrates, where he ſaith, that the dutie of a wiſe man is to ſeeke out the reaſons of things, that in the ende he may finde that diuine reaſon wherby they were made: and hauing found it, may worſhip and ſerue it, that afterward he may enioy it, and 
                     Socrates ſaid that the knowledge of God and of our ſelues muſt be ioined together.
                     reape profite thereby. Moreouer he addeth, that the perfect knowledge of ones ſelfe, which conſiſteth in the ſoule, is in ſuch ſort ioined with the knowledge of God, that the one without the other cannot be ſincere and perfect. And for the ſame reaſon, Plato, his diſciple, who for the excellencie of his writings was Wherin the dutio of man conſiſteth.ſurnamed the Diuins, ſaith, that the perfect dutie of man is, firſt to know his owne nature: then to contemplate the diuine nature: and last of all to beſtow his labour in thoſe things, which may be moſt beneficiall to all men. Ignorance of a mans ſelfe (ſaith Ignorance of our ſelues the cauſe of much euill.
                     Lactantius) and the want of knowledge wherefore and to what end he is borne, is the cauſe of error, of euill, of leauing the right way to follow the crooked, of wandring out of the plaine way to walke in the ragged and vneeuen way, or vpon a dangerous and ſlipperie mountaine: and laſtly, of forſaking the light to walke in darknes. Now if we account it a ſhamefull thing to be ignorant of thoſe things which belong to the life of man, ſurely the

not knowing of our ſelues is much more diſhoneſt. Let vs then conſider what man is, according to that meane knowledge, which by the grace of God we are endued withal, not ſtaying in thoſe curious definitions, which the Philoſophers haue made. Man is a creature made of God What man is. Gen. 1. Col. 3.after his owne image, iuſt, holy, good and right by nature, and compounded of ſoule and body. I ſay of ſoule, which was inſpired of God with ſpirite and life, and of a perfect naturall bodie, framed of the earth by the ſame power of God. In this ſort man had his beeing of the eternal workmaſter of the whole world, of whom he was created by his incomprehenſible goodnes, to be made partaker of his immortalitie and permanent felicitie, for this onely ende to ſet foorth the glorie of his Creator, and to ſpeake The ende of mans being.and do thoſe things that are agreeable vnto him, through the acknowledgement of his benefits. From which ende man being fallen of his own free wil through ingratitude and diſobedience, was bereaued of all thoſe ornaments, which he had receiued before of God, and in ſteede of righteouſnes and holines, all iniquitie, filthines and vncleannes entred into him: wherby he was made the ſlaue of ſinne and of death, from whence all thoſe miſeries had their beginning, wherewith the life of man is ouerwhelmed. His ſoule alſo, was wrapped with infinite hurtfull paſſions, and perturbations, which worke in it a continuall diſquietnes, and his body became ſubiect to innumerable trauailes, and violent vntowardnes. Of which corruption the ancient Philoſophers had great and aſſured knowledge, but the firſt and true cauſe therof, which was ſinne, and the voluntarie fall of man, with his reſtoring vnto grace by the vnſpeakeable goodnes and mercie of his Creator, from whence he was fallen, were alwaies hidden from them, (as we ſhall ſee anon) as alſo from an infinite number of men, who liuing holily according to the world neuer had the perfect knowledge of God in his eternall ſonne. As for any good thing whatſoeuer they vttered, or found out, it came through earneſtnes of ſtudie, by diſcourſing and conſidering in the reaſonable part

of their ſoule, of thoſe things which offred themſelues to their minde. But foraſmuch as they were not wholy ouerwhelmed in euery part of reaſon, and yet had no knowledge of the heauenly word Ieſus Chriſt, they vttered many things contrarie one to another: and in the midſt of their great and woonderfull skill (according to that ſaying of the Scripture, who hideth his ſecrets from the prudent and reueleth them to babes) they had a continuall troubled ſpirit, wandring here and there aſwell in the ſeeking out of themſelues and of the cauſes of naturall things, as of thoſe things which are aboue nature. And truely, the reaſon of man, naturally ingraffed in his hart, which ſo farre foorth as he is man, and according to his habilitie and There is a double reaſon in man.maner of life he imitateth and followeth, is diuers from that which by ſpeciall grace from aboue commeth to the elect, accompanieth them, and helpeth them in all their actions. This is full of faith, and of vndeceaueable aſſurance of eternal promiſes: the other, weake, troubled and woonderfully hindred, wherin a man can neuer haue any certaine reſolution. This is that which cauſed Aristotle, who was Platoes diſciple, and prince of the Peripatetike ſchoole, to ſay, that the more knowledge a man hath, the greater occaſion of doubting was offred. Neither can we
Heraclitus wept continually. iudge otherwiſe but that the ſame reaſon of trouble and doubting mooued the aboue named Heraclitus that great Philoſopher, to ſpend his life in continuall weeping, howſoeuer he alleageth wiſely, that it was for the compaſſion he had of mans nature, both for that the life of men conſiſted in nothing but in miſeries, as alſo becauſe all the labours wherein they exerciſed themſelues, ſeemed vnto him to be woorthy of great commiſeration and pitie: namely, ſeeing that they being farre wide of iuſtice, did yet through too greedie deſire make themſelues ſlaues Democritus alwaies laughed.vnto all couetouſnes and vainglorie. This alſo was an argument of inconſtancie and wauering in Democritus, who neuer came abroad amongſt men, but he laughed vnmeaſurably at all their works and deeds. Howbeit herein he ſaid truely, that the life of man was vanitie and follie, and

that all their luſtes and deſires were fonde, and woorthy to be laughed at. But ſuch extremities of laughter and weeping are not ſeemely in him, who is well inſtructed in the ſtudie of Philoſophie, and in the certaine knowledge The iudgement of Philoſophers concerning the nature of man.of himſelfe: which thing theſe Philoſophers ſo earneſtly laboured to attaine vnto, as we ſhall ſee anon, after we haue learned what other ancient men haue thought of the nature and ſtate of man. What other thing (ſaith Pindarus) 
                     Pindarus.is man, than the ſhadow of a dreame in ones ſleepe? Whereby he ſheweth the vanitie of man by an excellent manner of ſpeaking, verie ſignificantly vttering his meaning. For what thing is leſſe than a dreame, yea than the ſhadow of a dreame? Homer hauing compared mortall Homer.creatures together, both in reſpect of their continuance, as of the maintenance of their life, crieth out, that of all thoſe which walke on the earth and draw breath, there is not one more miſerable than man. Timon the Athenian Timon.deteſting much more than al theſe the imbecility of mans nature, vſed and imploied all his skill to perſwade his countrimen to abridge and ſhorten the courſe of their ſo miſerable life, and to haſten their end, by hanging themſelues vpon gibbets, which he had cauſed to be ſet vp in great number, in a fielde that he bought for the ſame purpoſe, vnto whoſe perſwaſions many gaue place. Plinie rehearſing Plinie.the great miſeries wherewith man commeth into this world, and the manifold labors wherin he liueth, ſaide, that it were good for a man not to be borne at all, or elſe ſo ſoone as he is borne, to die. It was a cuſtome amongſt The cuſtome of the Scythians.the Scythians to weepe at the birth of their children, and to reioice, and make a ſolemne feaſt at the death of their parents. Now as the opinions of theſe philoſophers heere named by vs, who being deſtitute of the light of God, and of true religion had no other foundation but their owne humane and weake diſcourſes, are to be reiected for incloſing all mankind in ſuch a vile and abiect eſtate, ſo on the other ſide we muſt take heed, that we enter not into that preſumptuous opinion of many others, who endeuour to lead man to the conſideration of his

dignitie and excellencie, as being endewed with infinite graces. For they perſuade him, that through the quicknes of his vnderſtanding, he may mount vp to the perfect knowledge of the greateſt ſecrets of God and nature, and that by the only ſtudie of philoſophie, he may of himſelfe, following his owne nature become maiſter of all euill paſſions and perturbations, and attaine to a rare and ſupreme kinde of vertue, which is void of thoſe affections: that being thus exempted and freed from all vice, he may lead a moſt happy and perfect life. This did the Stoike philoſophers The preſumptuous opinion of the Stoiks.with one conſent maintaine and teach, ſaying: Whoſoeuer receiued their doctrine, if in the morning he were very wicked, in the euening he ſhould become a very good man: & if he laid himſelfe downe to ſleepe, being ignorant, vicious & poore, the next morning he ſhould ariſe wiſe, vertuous, rich, happie and iuſt. Zeno, Seneca, Diogenes▪ Chryſippus, and infinite mo, otherwiſe endewed with moſt fruitful doctrine, as we ſhall vnderſtand heerafter, were of this opinion. Inſomuch that Chryſippus ſaid, that Dion the chiefeſt man for knowledge in Syracuſa, was no leſſe vertuous than his god Iupiter, to whom they attributed perfect diuinitie. Seneca alſo boaſted that he had receiued life by the benefit of God, but to liue wel, from himſelfe. Thus whileſt they granted to mans power ſuch an excellent and diuine diſpoſition, they lift him vp in a vaine preſumption, in pride and truſt in himſelfe, and in his owne vertue, which in the end cannot but be the cauſe of his vtter vndoing. We therefore holding the meane betweene theſe two contrarie opinions (as the perfection and goodnes of all things conſiſteth in mediocritie) and continuing to ſpeake of man as we haue alreadie begun, do ſay, that the knowledge of himſelfe is very neceſſarie for him, and that The end of the knowledge of our ſelues.hauing perfectly attained therunto, he hath cauſe both to be humbled greatly, as alſo to glorie and reioice. Firſt to humble himſelfe through the ſence and feeling of his vanitie, peruerſnes & corruption, in which reſpect he ought to hate and be diſpleaſed with himſelfe, bicauſe he beholdeth his deſtruction and condemnation ingrauen in his

conſcience. Secondly, he is to glorie in the knowledge of God, which inſeparably followeth the other, after he hath learned this, that in the mercie of God he may recouer that which is wanting in himſelfe, hauing once beene made and faſhioned of God, who is altogither pure, wiſe, true, good and almightie, to the end he might be partaker of his glorie. For the obtaining heerof, he had giuen vnto him from the beginning (as truſtie guides) godlines, holines, and religion: godlines, to the end he might knowe thereby, that he had God for his father: holines, to yeeld vnto him continuall glorie and praiſe: and religion, to keepe him in a continuall meditation of his grace and benefits, and to ſerue him for an indiſſoluble bond to knit him to his Creator, who threatened him with death, if he did the contrarie. But our firſt father through ingratitude The wilfull fall of man.and diſobedience, forſaking thoſe heauenlie guides to follow his owne free-will, depriued himſelfe and all his poſteritie of that promiſe of eternall life, that was made vnto him. Whereupon being dead to his firſt life, which was moſt happie and innocent, through his offence and peruerſnes of his ſin, he began from that time forward to liue a mortall life, ſo that his bodie and ſoule became ſubiect to infinite miſeries and damnable infirmities, which draw vpon them the condemnation of eternall death. Notwithſtanding God, whoſe goodnes and mercie are endles, reeſtabliſhed and aſſured the ſucceſſion of his immortall inheritance vnto thoſe, whom it pleaſed him by The reſtoring of man.grace to make dead to ſin and aliue to himſelfe, through the ſatiſfaction of his wrath made by the innocencie of his eternall ſonne, purging them in his bloud, and opening vnto them by him the gates of heauen, after he hath renewed them in righteouſnes, holines and innocencie, that they may follow after godlines and religion. And knowing that man ſo fraile and weake, might eaſily fall downe vnder the heauie burden of thoſe miſeries and calamities, whereunto the corruption of his nature made him ſubiect, and wherein by reaſon of hereditarie ſinne he ſhould remaine during this mortall life, as alſo that thoſe

furious and continuall paſſions, which are mingled togither in his ſoule, being ioined to the common infirmities of his bodie, would be of too great force to throwe him againe headlong into deſtruction, this infinite mercie of God appointed, that from the beginning there ſhould remaine All men naturally haue ſome loue and liking of the truth.in the ſpirite of man a little ſparke of light, which driueth him to a naturall loue of the truth, and to a deſire to inquire after it, yea which pricketh and prouoketh him not to ſleepe altogither in his vices. This weake inſtinct being awaked ſtirred vp, holpen and diſpoſed by the pure grace, vertue and power of the author of all goodnes, Effects of Chriſtian regeneration.draweth and moueth a Chriſtian, regenerated by the holie Ghoſt (after knowledge of himſelfe, and hatred of that which is in him) to ſeeke after and to couet with a ſpeciall hartie deſire, that goodnes and righteouſnes whereof he is void, and that glorious libertie of which he depriued himſelfe. Furthermore, the ſame heauenlie grace bleſſing this holie deſire of the man regenerate, cauſeth him to draw out of the doctrine of holie ſcriptures that wherewithall he may, if not heale perfectly his wicked inclinations, yet at the leaſt containe and repreſſe them in ſuch ſort, that they breake not out into any damnable execution. He teacheth him alſo to receiue the infirmities of his fleſh as fatherly chaſtiſements for his ſin, and as neceſſarie means to exerciſe him, and to keepe him in awe. And laſtly, for the vpſhot and perfection of all happines and felicitie in this world, he inſtructeth him how he may lead a quiet and peaceable life in beholding the woonderfull works of the diuinitie, which he is to adore and honour, and in the amendement and correction of his maners naturally corrupted, by ſquaring them after the patterne of vertue, that ſo he may be made worthie and fit to gouerne humane affaires, for the profit of manie: and at length attaine The perfection of a wiſe mans life.to the perfection of a wiſe man, by ioining togither the actiue life with the contemplatiue in the certaine hope and expectation of a ſecond, immortall and moſt bleſſed life. Whereunto alſo the precepts and diſcourſes of learned and ancient philoſophers, may ſerue for-our

inſtruction and pricking forward: as alſo the examples (which are liuely reaſons) of the liues of ſo manie notable men, as hiſtories, the mother of antiquitie, do as it were repreſent aliue before our eies. And this in my iudgement is ſufficient generally to vnderſtand of Man, ſeeing we are heerafter to diſcourſe more particularly of both his principall parts, the bodie and the ſoule.
               
               
                  Of the bodie and ſoule.
                  
                     ACHITOB.
                     THe bodie and ſoule are ſo knit and conioined togither, that nothing can ſeparate them but death the deſtroier of all, which through ſinne, and for the iuſt puniſhment thereof entred into the world. And this is no ſooner done, but that whatſoeuer we ſee of man vaniſheth from before our eies: the earthie part returning into the maſſe of earth frō whence it came, according to that ſaying of Aristotle, that All things are reſolued into thoſe things whereof they are compounded: likewiſe, that which is ſpirituall and inuiſible goeth into an eternall immortalitie from whence the being thereof proceeded.
                  
                  
                     ASER.
                     Truly this knitting togither, and coniunction of the bodie and ſoule is a moſt wonderfull thing in nature, yea, as manie of the philoſophers ſay, againſt nature: ſeeing the ſoule, which is light, is contained within the The wonderfull coniunction of the bodie and ſoule.bodie being heauie: that which is of celeſtiall fire, within that which is cold and earthie: that which is inuiſible within that which is palpable: that which is immortall, within that which is mortall. But what? Where is the ſence of man, which is able to comprehend the reaſon of the doings of that great Maiſter-builder of the vniuerſall frame? Yea there is more. For during this coniunction, as all things that mooue within this generall globe are maintained by agreeing diſcords, euen ſo of neceſſitie All things are preſerued by agreeing diſcords.there muſt be ſuch a harmonie betweene the bodie and the ſoule, that by the helpe of the one, the other ſubſiſteth

and abideth, and that through their continuall ſtriuing ſometimes the one, and then the other be in the end obeied.
                  
                  
                     AMANA,
                     Thou telleſt vs heere of a wonderful ſtrange thing, that that which is ſpirituall and immortall ſometime obeieth that which is mortal, and made of a corruptible lumpe. But I vnderſtand thee well. This proceedeth of the imperfection and imbecillitie of our nature. For (as Socrates ſaid) if we were perfect philoſophers we would neuer agree with our ſelues, but reſiſt continually. Now following this matter, make vs to vnderſtand more particularly (ARAM) what the bodie and ſoule are, what properties they haue, and what is the excellencie both of the one and the other.
                  
                  
                     ARAM.
                     With a good will my companions, and firſt I The definition of a bodie.will begin at the definition of a body. A body (as the Philoſophers ſay, ſpeaking generally of all things that haue bodies) is that which may be deuided and meaſured after three ſorts, in length, in breadth, and in deapth. Or according to others, a bodie is a maſſe or lump, which, aſmuch as lieth in it, reſiſteth touching, and occupieth a place. A body (ſaith Plato) is that which being in his proper place is neither heauie nor light, but being in a ſtrange place firſt inclineth ſomewhat, then is driuen and caried forward either with heauines or lightnes. Hereupon, both he and other Philoſophers diſcourſe, learnedly and profoundly of the particular nature of al bodies, of the earth, of the fire, of the aire, of the water, and of all other both ſimple and compound bodies, and of their contrarie motions. But ſeeing all thoſe diſcourſes are at this preſent without the compaſſe of our Academy, let vs ſimplie with more profite, and that according to the ſcripture, define the body, which we haue vndertaken to handle. We ſay Gen. 6. Rom. 8. Gal. 5. The works of the fleſh.then, that the body is fleſh, that euery affection of the fleſh
is deadly, and that the works therof are vncleannes, pride, fornication, enmity, debate, wrath, contention, enuy, murder, gluttonie and ſuch like: and therfore that the bodie is made of mortall matter, of as ſmall continuance as a

veſſell of earth, ſinning without ceaſing, and endeuoring that that which is ſhut vp within it, ſhould pleaſe it. Notwithſtanding we ought not to neglect and contemne the woonderfull frame of this heauenly plant, as Plato calleth it, ſaying, that the roote thereof is in the head drawing towards heauen: ſeeing, as in a little world, we may behold Man is a little world.therein the excellencie of the woonderful works of God, and that in ſo great meaſure, that the wiſeſt and moſt eloquent men could neuer ſet them foorth ſufficiently. And if we cal to minde how by his almightie power he framed him at the firſt of a peece of earth, we ſhall not neede to Gen. 3.ſtand long heere to inquire and ſearch out, how he could be ingendred and faſhioned in his mothers wombe, how he receaued nouriſhment and life, and laſtly, how he came into the light. As for example, how the ſixe firſt daies after Of the conception and faſhioning of man.his conception, he is nothing but milke: the nine following, blood: twelue daies after, fleſh: and howe in the eighteene next enſuing, he is faſhioned, at what time the fruite beginneth to liue, and to haue ſence, which is the fiue and fortieth day after he was conceaued. Theſe are ſecrets of nature, which may ſeeme as incomprehenſible, and beyond the capacitie of man, as his firſt creation. For what greater maruell can there be, than that of a little drop of mans ſeed there ſhould be engendred bones, ſinewes, vaines, arteries, ſimilar and inſtrumentall partes, skinne and fleſh, and that all theſe ſhould be framed in that kinde, figure, and ſimilitude, which we daily ſee in men, who are all created after that maner? What neede we then to make an anatomy of all the chiefeſt partes of the body of man, when as the conſideration of the leaſt of them, which peraduenture may be found to be moſt neceſſarie, will ſuffice to rauiſh vs with admiration? What Of the excellencie of the bodie, and of all the parts thereof.ſuperfluous thing can be noted in the bodie? What ſmall parcell is there, which the nobleſt part may want conueniently, and which is not partaker of euerie euill diſpoſition thereof? What thing is there in the whole nature thereof, which doth not ſatisfie that dutie verie profitably, whereunto it is borne and appointed, which mooueth

not of it ſelfe, which either doth, ſuffereth or diſpoſeth of it ſelfe otherwiſe than is moſt expedient and meet for it owne benefite, and for the reſt of the frame of man? The progreſſe and growth thereof from day to day, from houre to houre, and that of all the parts together of this principall worke at one inſtant, euen from the firſt houre of his being vntil his whole perfection, are they not more heauenly than humane things? What is more woonderfull vnder the cope of heauen, than the coniunction and ſubiection of the naturall ſences vnto the bodie, I meane, of the ſight, ſmelling, hearing, taſte and touching, whereby (ſaith Plato) the common ſence, which is as it were a generall receptacle, conceaueth al outward things? What an excellent propertie in man is it, to voide from him a profitable ſuperfluitie of his nouriſhment, from whence the cauſe of the preſeruation of mankinde proceedeth? Great ſecrets of nature.The articulate and diſtinct voice, proper to him onely, is it not woorthy of great maruell? What greater ſecret of nature could rauiſh the minde of man more with admiration than amongſt the infinite multitude of men in the world, to conſider the variety of their geſtures, and diuerſity of their countenances, that hauing al but one and the ſame forme, yet not one almoſt reſembleth another? And when in ſo great varietie, two are found reſembling in all points one another, as we read of ſome, euen of ſundry nations, who haue been taken indifferently one for the other, is it not a ſtranger matter? How maruellous is it, that all men hauing a toong wherewith they ſpeake and ſing, yet we ſeldome ſee that the ſpeaking and ſinging of The diuerſitie of mens voices and writings.one reſembleth the ſpeech and tune of another, wherupon it commeth to paſſe, that friends and familiars oftentimes acknowledge and vnderſtand one another by their ſpeech and voice before they ſee ech other? Who will not admire this great ſecret in the hand of man, that a hundred thouſand writers may write the ſame thing, with the ſame inke and like pen, and that with three and twentie letters, which haue each his owne figure and ſhape, and yet the writings ſhall not reſemble one another ſo, but

that euery writing may be knowne by his hand that wrote it? Briefely, what is there in the whole body of man, that is not full of rare beautie? This is ſufficient for the matter in hand, now let vs come to the ſoule, which is much The ſoule is infuſed not 
                              〈◊〉
                           .more noble, and infuſed into the body by God the Creator, without any vertue of the generatiue ſeed, when as the parts of the body are alreadie framed and faſhioned. This alone can lead vs to the knowledge of God and of our ſelues, or rather as Socrates ſaid, we ſhall neuer vnderſtand perfectly what the ſoule is, except we firſt know God, and behold it in him, as in a true glaſſe, who onely can repreſent it vnto vs. Let vs then ſee what the ſoule is, according to the ſayings of the ancient Philoſophers. Thales Mileſius, one of the ſages of Graecia, who floriſhed in Athens in the time of Achab king of Iuda, was the firſt The definition of the ſoule.that defined the ſoule, affirming it to be a nature alwaies moouing it ſelfe. Pythagoras (the light of his time, and the firſt that tooke vnto himſelfe the name of a Philoſopher, Pythagoras was the firſt that was called a Philoſopher.bicauſe all thoſe, who before him were addicted to the contemplation of the diuinity, & of the ſecrets of nature, cauſed themſelues to be called by the name of Mages and wiſemen, which he would not haue ſpoken of himſelfe, ſaying, that this diuine and lofty title of Wiſe, was proper to God onely, and that it farre paſſed all humane ability) I ſay this excellent man Pythagoras affirmed that the ſoule was a number moouing it ſelfe. Plato ſaith, that it is a ſpiritual ſubſtance moouing it ſelfe by harmonicall number. Aristotle ſaith, that the ſoule is the continuall act or moouing of a naturall and inſtrumentall bodie, that may haue life. Or elſe, according to others, it is the light of the ſubſtance, and in perpetuall motion. They diui
                           •
                        e it likewiſe diuerſely, and make many parts therof. The ſoule (as The diuiſion of the ſoule.
                        Pythagoras ſaid) is compounded of vnderſtanding, knowledge, opinion and ſence, from which things all knowledge and Arts proceed, and of which man is called reaſonable, that is, apt to diſcourſe by reaſon. Plato ſaith, that Plato maketh ſixe parts of the ſoule.there are three vertues in the ſoule belonging to knowledge and vnderſtanding, which for this cauſe are called

cognitiue or knowing vertues: namely, reaſon, vnderſtanding and phantaſie. Vnto which three others are anſwerable appertaining to appetite: namely Will, whoſe office is to deſire that which vnderſtanding and reaſon propound vnto it: Choler or Anger, which followeth that, that reaſon and phantaſie offer vnto it: and Concupiſcence, which apprehendeth whatſoeuer phantaſie andAriſtotle diuideth it in two parts. ſence obiect vnto it. Aristotle maketh another diſtinction of the ſoule, ſaying, that one part of it is voide of reaſon in it ſelfe, and yet may be guided by reaſon: and that the other part is of it ſelfe partaker of reaſon. And in another place this Philoſopher ſaith, that there are three thinges from whence humane actions proceed, namely ſence, vnderſtanding and appetite. Many others both ancient and late writers make foure parts of the ſoule: Vnderſtanding,Foure parts of the ſoule. reaſon, anger & deſire. The vnderſtanding lifteth the ſoule vp to heauen to the contemplation of diuine & intellectual things. Reaſon guideth the ſoule by prudence in all her functions. Anger is ruled and moderated by the vertue of magnanimitic: and deſire is gouerned by temperance. Of theſe a very harmonicall Iuſtice is framed, which giueth to euerie part of the ſoule that which belongeth vnto it. But the moſt ſenſible, common and true opinion, which the wiſeſt amongſt the Philoſophers hadThe beſt diuiſion of the ſoule. of the ſoule, is that which diuideth it into two parts onely, vnder which all the reſt are compriſed: the one being ſpiritual and intelligible, where the diſcourſe of reaſon is: the other brutiſh, which is the ſenſuall will, of it ſelfe wandring and diſordred, where all motions contrarie to reaſon▪ and all euill deſires haue their dwelling. Amongſt all the philoſophical diſcourſes of the ſoule, written by theſe great perſonages, this error is verie great, when they attribute ſuch a ſtrength and power to reaſon (which they ſay is reſident in the ſoule as a lampe to guide the vnderſtanding, and as a queene to moderate the will) as that by it alone a man may wel and iuſtly gouerne himſelfe. Now although we know that this reaſon of man is of it ſelfe, wholy depraued & corrupted, yet we may ſay wel enough,

that the ſoule, which is ſpirit and life cannot be diuided, being immortall: bicauſe whatſoeuer is diuided, diſſolueth and parteth a ſunder, and whatſoeuer is diſſolued, periſheth. Neuertheles it may be ſaid to be compounded and made ſubiect (during the coniunction thereof withThe ſoule cannot be diuided but is made ſubiect to two parts. the body) to theſe two principall parts, of vnderstanding and will. The vnderſtanding ſerueth to conceaue and comprehend all things propounded vnto vs, and to diſcerne and iudge what we ought, either to approoue and allow, or what to refuſe and reiect. The will is that which executeth and bringeth to effect, whatſoeuer the vnderſtanding iudgeth to be good, and contrariwiſe flieth from that, which it reprooueth and condemneth. And herein we agree with the Philoſophers, that the vnderſtanding, vnder which we comprehend the ſence, is as the gouernour and captaine of the ſoule, and that the will dependeth of it. But withall we ſay, that both the one and the other are ſo corrupted and altered from their nature, (the vnderſtanding being obſcured and dimmed with the clouds of darknes, by reaſon of the firſt mans ſinne deſcended vponBoth parts of the ſoule are corrupted. all his poſteritie through hereditarie and naturall filthines, and the will in ſuch ſort corrupted by this diſobedience, and ſo weakened and made feeble to all goodnes) that if there be none other guide comming from aboue to teach the vnderſtanding, and to direct and leade the will, I meane, regeneration by the ſpirite of God, both of them cannot but do euill, drawing the ſoule with them to vtter ruine and perdition, by cauſing her to conſent to the law of her members, which are the bodie and fleſh, fulRom. 7. 23. of ignorance, of obſcure darknes, of frowardnes, miſerie, calamitie, ignominie, ſhame, death, and condemnation. Notwithſtanding, if in the corruptible, heauie and groſſe lumpe of the bodie, within which the ſoule is contained, we found matter of praiſe and of the contemplation of heauenly things, what ſhal we ſay of that which is immortal,The properties of the ſoule. which in a moment in hir diſcourſes and cogitations, goeth through the whole heauen, compaſſeth the earth about, ſaileth all ouer the ſea, without which the body

mooueth not at all, and all the beautie thereof turneth ſuddainly into putrefaction? This onely can make a man happie both in this and in the other life, by reaſon of the treaſures of wiſedome, the vnderſtanding whereof is proper vnto it: yea this is the onely inſtrument whereby a man may behold the diuine nature. This is inuiſible, and cannot be perceiued by any naturall ſence: this is contemplatiue and actiue at one and the ſame time: this beholdeth vniuerſall things, and practiſeth particulars,The actions of the ſoule. vnderſtanding the one, and feeling the other. This hath for the actions and operations of her eſſence and nature, Will, Iudgement, Senſe, Conceauing, Thought, Spirite, Imagination, Memorie, Vnderſtanding and Reaſon: andThe beautie of the ſoule. for her incomparable beautie, ſhe hath Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude and Iuſtice, without which the excellent order of all humane things would be changed into diſorder and confuſion. This is that moreouer, which being illuminatedGal. 5. 22. 23. with wiſedome, bringeth foorth the fruites of loue, ioy, peace, long ſuffering, gentlenes, goodnes, faith, meekenes, temperancie. Briefely, to conclude our preſent ſpeech, we may well ſay that the ſoule is ſo great and diuine a thing, that it is a verie hard matter to comprehend it by reaſon, but altogither incomprehenſible by the outward ſence: and that all mans felicitie, as well preſent as to come, dependeth of the ſoule, when, being regenerated (as hath been ſaid) and made free and voide of al wicked perturbations (as neere as the nature of man can approchThe true delight of the ſenſe. to perfection) her humane contentation and delight is onely in vertue, and in the hope and certaine expectation of a more ſound and perfect vertue, by the renuing and changing of this mortall life into that which isPhil. 4. 4. immortall and moſt bleſſed: as S. Paule exhorteth vs hereunto, ſaying, Let vs reioice in the Lord: both bicauſeLuke. 10. 20. our names are written in heauen (as Chriſt ſaith) and that our modeſty, meeknes and goodnes may be knowne to all men. Moreouer let vs learne that in the woonderfull compoſition, coniunction and diſpoſition of the ſoule & bodie, there is matter whereby to draw man greatly to

the conſideration of the chiefe ende, for which he was firſt placed in the world, namely to glorifie his Creator in godlines, holines and religion. He ought therefore both to ſerue him with all the parts of his body, not abuſingHow a man ought to vſe both body and ſoule. them in any ſort, but keeping them pure and cleane, to be made members of the glorious body of his eternall Sonne in the reſurrection, and alſo to praiſe and glorifie him with all the gifts and graces of his ſoule, not defiling it with vncleannes and vice, that ſhe may, by the ſame diuine grace, returne vnto the full fruition of that moſt happy eſſence and nature from whence ſhe had her being. In the meane while let vs learne that as the bodie vſeth many inſtruments wherof it is compounded, and which are proper vnto it, ſo the ſoule, being much more noble, excellent and diuine ought to vſe the bodie and all the parts therof: and that the ſoule is the organ and inſtrument of God whereby he worketh in vs, and lifteth vs vp to the contemplation of his diuine nature.
                  
               
            
            
               Of the diſeaſes and paſſions of the bodie and ſoule, and of the tranquillitie thereof. Chap. 3.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     Nothing woorſe to man than man himſelfe. ONe of the ancient philoſophers vſed to ſay, that no liuing creature was worſe to man than man himſelfe, bicauſe, albeit he hath dominion ouer all things, yet he cannot rule himſelfe, nor his deſires. Experience cauſeth vs but too much to knowe the truth of this ſaying. For who can doubt in any ſort heerof, ſeeing bleſſed S. Paule himſelfe confeſſeth,Rom. 7. 18. 19. that he did not the good thing which he would, but the euill, which he would not, and that in his fleſh there dwelt no goodnes? So vndoubtedly we haue both bodie andThere is no good thing in the fleſh of man. ſoule compaſſed about with ſo many pernitious paſſions, that it is very hard, yea altogither vnpoſſible, that what good thing ſoeuer is in vs ſhould not faint and ſinke vnder their heauie waight without a ſpeciall and diuine grace.
               
               
                  
                  ACHITOB.
                  Truly this is no vaine ſpeculation, nor vnprofitable to man: as alſo for a man to know, that he is as it were tied in this world to all vncertaine things, which he, being mortall by nature, cannot any way ſhun and auoid, without the helpe of God. He which is in health expecteth ſicknes: he that is ſicke, health. Doth any one deſire in his mind any thing? Before he enioyeth it, his deſire is often changed into another. In a word, no man abideth ſtill in one and the ſame eſtate. And therfore Plato 
                     Man is a mutable creature.calleth man a mutable creature, as if he meant to ſay, that he is eaſily altered and changed.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  The change which this diuine philoſopher meant (if I be not deceiued) hath relation principally to the conditions of the ſoule, which, being filled with infinite Pleaſure and griefe the cauſe of paſſions.perturbations, faſtened in the midſt of it with the naile of pleaſure and griefe, is carried away with inconſtancie and vncertaintie into a ſtreame of troubleſome paſſions, which if they be not cut off and maiſtred by reaſon, draw a man into vtter deſtruction. But giue vs to vnderſtand (AMANA) more at large of theſe paſſions of the ſoule, and of the way to remedie them: and if you thinke good, you may ſpeake ſomewhat of thoſe of the bodie.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Amongſt the innumerable euils, which the deſire of pleaſure and feare of griefe, ingrauen in the moſt ſecret parts of our ſoule by our firſt corruption, bring to man, this is the greateſt and moſt pernitious, that they make ſenſible things more euident and plaine vnto him than things intelligible, and conſtraine the vnderſtanding to iudge more by paſſion than by reaſon. For vſing, through the ſence o
                        •
                      pleaſure or trauell, to attend to the erronious, vncertaine, and mutable nature of the bodie, as to that which is ſubſiſting and ſubiect to ſight, he remaineth blind, and looſeth all knowledge of that which truly is and ſubſiſteth, namely, of the light of the ſoule, which is diuine and immortall. Moreouer, applying himſelfe wholie to the ſenſuall and vnreaſonable will, which is that part of the ſoule that proceedeth of the corruption thereof, he laboureth with all his might to quench and

choke that weake inſtinct of the ſoule, which aſpireth vnto the true Good, from whence ſhe perceiueth hir ſelfe to haue fallen. And this he doth with ſuch force and power, that if God ſtrengthen not the ſoule, and reaſon the diuine guide, accompanie hir not, without doubt ſhe yeeldeth to ſuch mightie enimies: and then (as we haue ſaid) ſtaying himſelfe wholy in things ſubiect to ſight, he appeereth too carefull and curious in ſeeking to decke that, Manis more carefull of his body then of his ſoule.which belongeth to the bodie: but as for the ſoule (wherof all humane felicitie dependeth) bicauſe ſhe is inuiſible, and not ſeene of him, it is the leſt of his cares to furniſh hir with that which ſhe ſeeketh and deſireth, and which is neceſſarie for hir. Wherupon in the end it commeth to paſſe that the leſt ouerthwarts and diſcommodities of his fleſh ſeeme very greeuous and burthenſome to a man, but as for the incurable diſeaſes, which ouerwhelme his ſoule, he doth not ſo much as feele them. Now to the end we may vnderſtand more particularly that which is heer propounded vnto vs, we will handle in order, and as briefly as we may (this matter being very large) the diſeaſes and paſſions of the bodie and ſoule, with the remedie which we are to deſire and ſeeke after. And firſt we will ſpeake a word of the diſeaſes of the bodie, next of the naturall and neceſſarie paſſions thereof, albeit we will intreat of the paſſions of the ſoule, as of our chiefe matter ſubiect. Concerning the maladies and euill diſpoſitions of the bodie, one Hippocrates, one Galen, nay infinite others skilfull in phyſicke, are not able to deſcribe them exactly, much leſſe preſcribe certaine and ſure remedies. But ſeeing it is not my purpoſe or profeſſion to ſtay long heere, neither yet neceſſarily belonging to the cauſe of our aſſemblie, I will content my ſelfe to ſpeake theſe few words by the way, The ende, cauſe, and remedie of bodily diſeaſes.that we ought to take euerie bodily infirmitie as a fatherly chaſtiſement of our ſins, and as a neceſſarie meane to awaken vs, to warne vs of our dutie, and to keep vs in awe. Beſides, one principall cauſe of all bodilie diſeaſes proceedeth ordinarily from vices, which are the proper inheritance of man, and with which we defile our ſelues continually.

Therefore if we heale our ſoules, we may cure our ſelues of the moſt of them: and as for others, which come by defect of nature, or by ſome other hidden cauſe, we haue the counſell and helpe of phyſicions, whom willingly Naturall paſſions.and diligently we ſeeke after. There are beſides theſe, certaine naturall and neceſſarie paſſions in the body, properly belonging vnto it, euen from the firſt creation therof, which are not to be condemned, neither can be taken away, but with the aboliſhing of mans nature: as the deſire of drinking, eating, ſleeping, & ſuch like, which onlie by the direction of reaſon are to be freed from all ſuperfluitie. But it ſtandeth otherwiſe with the diſeaſes and paſſions of the ſoule, deriued from our firſt corruption, and driuen forward by ſinne, being plentifull and rich, which without compariſon are far more dangerous than thoſe of the bodie, more hard to be perceiued & knowen, more headſtrong and vneaſie to cure, and which is worſe, man is very ſlothfull in ſeeking out a remedie for them. And for the moſt part thinking that he hath found ſome remedie, through want of skill and ignorance he falleth into a worſe eſtate than he was in before, and as we commonly ſay, from a gentle ague into a peſtilent and burning The definition of paſſion.feuer. But firſt we will generally define this word, Paſſion, according to the opinion of thoſe philoſophers, who were endewed with greateſt light. Paſſion is euerie naturall and actuall motion in the ſoule. This motion is of two ſorts: the one weake, good and holie, aſpiring and reioicing in that which is truly good: the other verie ſtrong, euill and pernitious, coueting with a diſordered deſire, and delighting with an immoderate ioy in a good falſly ſo imagined. The matter of theſe motions are opinions, affections, and inclinations, which being conſidered in their owne nature, are through ſinne wicked and corrupt throughout the ſoule, yea the bloſſome and roote of them proceed from our owne ſubſtance, to the end (as Plato ſaith) that no man ſhould thinke God to be the cauſe of euill. Now albeit theſe paſſions thus defined by the philoſophers are many in number, yet drawing neerer

to the truth we may comprehend and diuide them all into two principall kinds. The firſt kind ſhall be that which The diuiſion of paſſions.we beleeue by faith: the other according to our opinions and affections. Vnder the firſt we comprehend that which euerie one beleeueth, thinketh, and deſireth concerning diuine and heauenlie things, as of true righteouſnes, of the immortalitie of the ſecond life, and of the iudgement to come. Vnder opinions and affections is comprehended whatſoeuer reſpecteth and concerneth earthlie things, this life, maners, gouernment of a houſhold, of a common wealth, and generally al humane inclinations and actions. As touching that which we beleeue by faith, we are led thereunto, and ſtirred by the weake inſtinct and feeling of All men haue naturally a deſire of happines.the diuine nature imprinted in euery ſoule, which after a ſort mooueth man to aſpire vnto, and to deſire the true and ſouereigne good, and which, being more power-full, and of greater efficacy in ſome than in others, cauſeth the better ſort to delight alſo in the ſame good. Neuertheles it is proper to euery mans vnderſtanding, not to hold a No man by nature can finde out the right way that leadeth to happines.ſtedfaſt and ſure way in ſeeking out the truth, but to wander aſide into diuers errors (as a blind man that walketh in darknes) and to fill it ſelfe rather with lies, and with a continuall deſire and curioſitie of new, vnprofitable, and ſuperfluous things, than to content it ſelfe ſimplie with the truth, inſomuch that finally it miſſeth of all. But to the The word of God ſheweth vs the right way to happines.end we be not of this number, we ought to hold faſt the infallible rule of the holie ſcriptures: which gift we are to aske, hope, wait, and ſeeke for in the onely grace and mercie of that Spirit which indighteth them, and to looke for the full opening of theſe treaſures in the ſecond and eternall life. As for the ſecond kind of our paſſions, properly called perturbations according to the philoſophers from whence all the euils and miſeries of mankinde proceed, and whereof we minde chiefely to ſpeake, they are but affections and inclinations, which come from our will, corrupted by the prouocations and allurements of Of the perturbations of the ſoule.the fleſh, and which wholy reſiſt the diuine nature of the reaſonable part of the ſoule, faſtening it to the bodie (as

                     Plato ſaith) with the naile of pleaſure. Which paſſions the mind of man commonly beholdeth cleerly enough, when it applieth it ſelfe thereunto, if it be not altogither peruerted and depraued: yea by the grace and helpe of God, the mind is able to confirme it ſelfe againſt any paſſion through the diſcourſe of reaſon before it be in force, and during the vehemencie thereof, to fortifie it ſelfe againſt The ſcope of our paſſions.it. And although the paſſion be contrarie to reaſon, and haue (for hir onely ſcope) pleaſure, and the feare of griefe, which can preuaile greatly with man, yet reaſon by the meanes of Gods grace, can both eaſily conſtraine, maiſter and compell all paſſions in ſuch ſort, that they ſhall take no effect, and alſo bring to paſſe, that whatſoeuer is raſhly deſired, ſhall be ouercome by the diſcourſe of prudent counſell. And for this cauſe we ſay, that the firſt motions are not in our power, but that the euent and iſſue of them is in ſome ſort. Likewiſe reaſon doth not wholie quench and extinguiſh all paſſions, which cannot poſſibly be performed in the nature of man, but repelleth and hath the vpper hand of them, as the precepts of doctrine, and infinite examples of the liues of ancient heathen and pagan The ancient heathen may riſe vp in iudgement againſt many Chriſtians in theſe daies.philoſophers do learnedly teach vs. Which thing as it ought to cauſe many at this day to be aſhamed, who vaunt themſelues of the name of Chriſtians, ſo it condemneth them in a fault not to be excuſed before the iuſt iudgement of God, bicauſe thoſe men, being deſtitute of the perfect knowledge of God, which they ſay they haue, far excelled and ſurpaſſed them in the bridling, ouercomming and killing of ſo many peſtiferous paſſions as compaſſe the ſoule about, as we may handle elſewhere, and ſee examples thereof worthie of eternall remembrance, when we ſhall diſcourſe particularly of vertues and vices. In the meane while we may learne of Cicero (the father of Latine eloquence, whoſe skill in ioining philoſophie with the art of Rhetorike, was excellent, and who, in my iudgement, handleth this our preſent matter more profitably than any other of the ancients) that all the aboue named euill paſſions are perturbations, which if they be not maiſtered

by reaſon, depriue man of the ſoueraigne good of the The originall, nature and effects of perturbations.ſoule, which conſiſteth in the tranquillitie therof. Moreuer he ſaith, that through ignorance & baſenes of minde, they proceed onely of the opinion of good or euill, either preſent or to come, which we imagine to be in the vnperfect and tranſitorie things of the world, and which are accompanied vnſeparably either with good or euill. In reſpect of good things, we are caried away with a vehement deſire or coueting of them, beſides an immoderate ioy in them: in regard of euil things, we are oppreſſed with feare and ſorrow. And theſe are the foure ſprings of all vices & All perturbations are contained vnder theſe foure heads, Deſire, Ioy, Feare, Griefe.ſins wherein men plunge themſelues during this life, and vnder which all perturbations are comprehended, which fill the ſoule with endleſſe trouble and diſquietnes, cauſing man to liue alwaies vncontented, and to finde euery preſent kinde of life burthenſome, and ſo to ſeeke after and to deſire another. But as fearefull men, (ſaith Plutark, 
                     An excellent compariſon.that excellent philoſopher, & ſchoolemaſter to that good Traian) and they that are at ſea, ſubiect to caſting, thinking they ſhalbe better in one place than in another, go from the ſterne to the ſtem, then to the bottom of the ſhip, afterward to the higheſt part, frō thence go into the skiph, and in the end returne into the ſhip, without any amendment of their euil, becauſe they carrie alwaies about with them both feare & griefe: ſo the alteration of life, & of worldly conditions and eſtates into others, doth not purge, but rather increaſe the perturbations & diſeaſes of the ſoule, if firſt the cauſe of them, I meane ignorance of The cauſe of the diſeaſes of the ſoule.things, & the imperfection of reaſon, be not taken out of it. Theſe are the miſchiefes, which trouble both rich and poore: theſe are the miſeries, which wait vpon great and final, bond and free, yoong & old. Thus is the ſpirit of ſick perſons vexed, and that continually. One while the wife is troubleſome, the phyſition vnskilfull, the bed vneaſie, the friend that viſiteth importunate, he which viſiteth not, proud: but being once healed, they finde that whatſoeuer was irkſom vnto them before, now pleaſeth them. But that which health doth to the diſeaſed body, the

                     Reaſon is the medicine of the ſoule. ſame thing reaſon worketh in the ſoule of a prudent man, by curing the paſſions and perturbations thereof, and by cauſing him to reſt ioyfull and contented, in what eſtate and condition ſoeuer he be. Let vs note moreouer, (which we touched in the beginning of this preſent diſcourſe) that all theſe paſſions of the ſoule are much more dangerous than thoſe of the bodie, bicauſe the moſt hurtfull paſſions of the bodie, are firſt ingendred of thoſe in the ſoule. For the bodie yeeldeth it ſelfe ready to ſerue the deſires, appetites, and pleaſures of the ſoule, which being ouercome and in the power of fleſhly prouocations, procureth in the end deſtruction to them both. But contrariwiſe, the ſoule being ruled by reaſon, reſiſteth mightilie all corporall paſſions, and is nothing at all, or verie little made partaker of their euill diſpoſitions: whereas on the other ſide the bodie is conſtrained to alter and change with euery infirmitie of the ſoule. If the minde be troubled, what cheerefulnes can be ſeene in the face? The diſeaſes of the bodie hinder not the ſoule from effecting all good & vertuous actions: yea many haue brought forth the fruits of wiſe philoſophers and great captaines, when they were vexed with diſeaſes, which they could neuer do, at leaſt verie few of them, that were corrupted and defiled A ſound ſoule correcteth the naughtines of the bodie.in ſoule. And therfore Democritus ſaid very well, that it was much more conuenient and meet for a man to haue care of his ſoule, than of his bodie. For if the ſoule be perfect, ſhe correcteth the naughtines of the body, whereas the ſtrength & diſpoſition of the body without the vſe of reaſon, hurteth both the ſoule and it ſelfe. Moreouer, that the paſſions of the ſoule are harder to be perceiued and knowne, and conſequently more vneaſie to be cured, who doth not eaſily feele it, being greeued but in the leaſt part of his bodie? yea what griefe doth not of it ſelfe ſufficiently appeere, either by ſome inflammation, or by the colour of the viſage, or by ſome other outward ſhew? But how many do we fee, whoſe ſoules are extreemly ſicke, ſpoiled and corrupted with vice, and yet being depriued of all feeling they thinke themſelues to be the ſoundeſt men in

the world? And that they are headſtrong and vneaſie to The paſſions of the ſoule are headſtrong and hard to be cured.be cured, we may know by this, that the body is in the end ſo farforth obedient, that if reaſon be vrgent vpon it, ſhe forceth euen the naturall paſſions of hunger, thirſt and ſleepe, & findeth out beſides a thouſand remedies to help it ſelf. But when the paſſions of the ſoule haue once beene grounded and rooted within it, without reſiſtance they haue ſuch pearcing pricks, that oftentimes they preſſe & ouerwhelme all reaſon, which is their onely medicine and preſeruatiue. And yet to fill vp the meaſure of all miſerie, ſuch is the froward nature of man, that he is much more ſlothfull to ſeeke out this remedy of the ſoule, than that of the bodie, as we touched in the beginning of this preſent diſcourſe. Moreouer, the iudgement of reaſon being oftentimes diſeaſed within him, is the cauſe, that when he thinketh to finde health, he encreaſeth his euill, and falleth into thoſe inconueniences, which he deſired moſt of all to eſchew. Example hereof we haue in thoſe, who, being The paſſions of men commonly bring foorth effects contrarie to their purpoſes.led onely with a deſire of glory and honor, obtaine nothing by their dooings, if we conſider them well, but ſhame and diſhonor. The like may be ſaid of all the other diſeaſes of the ſoule, which commonly are accompanied and followed with effects contrary to their endes and deſires. What remaineth then, ſeeing we perceiue the dangers to be great, which follow al the perturbations of the ſoule, but that, knowing it to be more eaſie not to receiue them, than to driue them out being receiued, we preuent them, and hinder them from taking liuely roote within our ſoules, by making reaſon (which, as Heſiodus ſaith, is Reaſon, is wiſedome inſpired from heauen.a diuine guide, and wiſedome inſpired from aboue) ſo ſtrong and powerfull, that it may be able, by the grace of God, to reſiſt al the aſſaults of vnbrideled deſires, and the froward affections of this fleſh? But behold yet a better A remedie againſt paſſions.and more certaine remedie: namely, that being aſſured, that all perturbations are but opinions drawne from our will, through a iudgement corrupted with the affections of this fleſh, we labor by good and ſound reaſons to ouerthrow and confound theſe falſe and erronious opinions,

perſwading our ſelues that whatſoeuer we imagine to be good or euill in the world (which is the cauſe that our minds are depriued of their reſt and quietnes) is indeede neither good nor euill, and ſo conſequently, that it ought not in any ſort to breed paſſions within vs. Hereof the ſequele of our diſcourſes ſhall (by the helpe of God) giue vs to vnderſtand more at large, and furniſh vs with examples of pernicious effects, which proceed from all the paſſions of the ſoule. We will here by the way note their force, hauing learned out of Hiſtories, that they haue oftentimes ſet vpon the harts of men in ſuch violent maner, that ſome through deſire, ſome for ioy: thoſe by feare, others by 
                     Examples of death by ouergreat ioy.
                     griefe haue ended their liues. Diagoras the Rhodian, and Chilon hearing that their children had wonne the price at the games of Olympus, felt ſuch a motion in them of the Herennus died for feare.ſpleene, that they were ſtifled with laughter. Herennus the Sicilian, as he was led priſoner, for being a copartner in Plautius through griefe.the conſpiracie of Caius Gracchus, was ſo aſtoniſhed, & oppreſſed with the feare of his iudgement to come, that he fell downe ſtrke dead at the entrie of the priſon. Plautius the Numidian looking vpon his dead wife tooke it ſo to hart; that caſting himſelfe vpon the dead body, he aroſe no more, but was there ſtifled with ſorrow. As for extreme deſire or coueting, there is nothing that ſo greatly mooueth or carieth away the minds of men, or that commeth neerer to their deſtruction, than this fooliſh paſſion The effects of deſire.indangereth their life. Galeace of Mantua ſaying oftentimes to a damſell of Pauia whom he courted and made loue to, that he would ſuffer a thouſand deaths for hir ſeruice, if it were poſſible, was in ieſt commanded by hir to caſt himſelf into the riuer: which he preſently performed, & was drowned. But we ſhal alleadge more fitly ſuch teſtimonies of the fond effects of deſire, and of all the perturbations of the ſoule, when we diſcourſe more particularly of euery vice that proceedeth from them. In the meane time I would gladly aske this queſtion of him, that is moſt ignorant, vicious, and carnall, whether he will not grant vertue to be a good of the ſoule. There is none ſo impudent

whoſe conſcience would not compell him to confeſſe the ſame. And yet no man is caried away with too Vertue is alwais without exceſſiue paſſion.great a deſire of vertue, neither doth any reioice therein too exceſſiuely, after he hath obtained it. Likewiſe there is none that feareth ſo vehemently, leaſt he cannot obtaine hir, as that the feare thereof driueth the ſoule out of his place and reſt. For no man can fall into this feare, leaſt he ſhould not becom vertuous, except he be very deſirous to be ſo indeed: and none can haue this deſire, except reaſon, guided with heauenly light, and doing her dutie in him, had wrought the ſame: but reaſon thus qualified muſt needs be an enimy to all perturbations. Thus we ſee that no man, through feare of not being vertuous, is ouertaken with perturbations. The like may be ſaide of ſorrow. For albeit a man be greeued bicauſe he is not vertuous, yet his minde is not exceſſiuely diſquieted, ſeeing this deſire is neuer in him, but when reaſon commandeth according to hir diuine nature, by cauſing vs to knowe our ſelues. Whereby we perceiue that perturbations neuer ariſe in vs for that which is the true good of the ſoule, but onely for that which fooles do falſely call good, and which the philoſophers call the goods of the bodie and of fortune. But theſe being naturally ſubiect The nature of worldly goods.to corruption, and, as we haue alreadie ſaid, inſeparably accompanied with vehement deſire, vnbrideled ioy, feare and griefe, (as we ſhall ſee more at large when we handle them hereafter) are vnwoorthy to be cared for by the immortall ſoule neither may or ought they to be called goods bicauſe they are poſſeſſed, much leſſe euils, when they are wanting. If we be thus perſwaded, we ſhall be maſters ouer all perturbations, not eſteeming that which is mortall and fraile, woorthy to be either wiſhed for, or delighted in. Hereof it will come to paſſe, that our ſoule and ſpirit ſhall be quiet, and reaſon, which knoweth how diſcerne good from euill, wil deale with vs as a good husbandman, and vine dreſſer dealeth with his tree and vine, when he cutteth off the dead branches and vnprofitable twigs, to the end that all noiſome ſap and moiſture

may be taken away. And thus ſhall we be taught to deſire and do that, which we ought, and euery contrarie inclination ſhall be weakened, not taking effects, and the ſoule ſhall fulfill hir dutie, in commanding abſolutely ouer all the prouocations of the fleſh, and in quenching them ſo foone as they do appeere. For as they that haue healthful A wiſe ſoule gouerneth the affections.bodies, (ſaith Epictetus) eaſily indure both cold and heate: ſo they that haue a ſtaied and ſetled ſoule, haue the dominion ouer anger, griefe, ioy, and all their other affections. What it is to liue happilie.Then ſhall we liue happily, not being terrified with any feare, nor vexing our ſpirits with any longing or tedious deſires, nor being tormented with any luſtes and diſordred affections, and laſtly, not ſuffering our ſelues (being drunken with ſugred poiſon) to be ouer come and bound vnder the yoke of pleaſure. This ſhall we learne by the ſtudie of Philoſophie, which is a certaine remedie, and a ſound medicine for euery vice and paſſion, and is able to inrich and cloath vs with reaſon, which is ſuch a beautifull, perfect and profitable ornament.
               
            
            
               Of Philoſophie. Chap. 4.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  THe life of man (ſaid Pythagoras) is like to that generall aſſemblie of Graecia at the Olimpyan games, where manie carried with glorie and ambition, preſented themſelues at thoſe exerciſes, that they might beare away the crowne and prize: otehrs led with couetouſnes, came thither to traffike, ſelling and buying merchandiſe: and a third ſort of men, more praiſe worthie and noble came thither alſo, who ſought not after vaineglorie, or couetouſnes, but carefully marked whatſoeuer was done in that aſſemblie, that they might reape profit and commoditie thereby. So men comming The common drife of men.into this world, as into a faire or mart, ſome giue themſelues to ambition and vaineglorie, others to couetouſnes, and to heape vp treaſure. But they that are of a more diuine nature, ſequeſtring themſelues from worldlie affaires,

meditate vpon heauenlie things, and thereupon faſten the ſcope of their intents, deſires and wils. Diuine Plato, ioining action with contemplation in a happie and perfect life, ſaith, that next to the glorie of God we muſt What men ought chiefly to leuell at.haue regard to do that which is profitable for the Common-wealth. Which excellent opinions of theſe two philoſophers are comprehended vnder this onely word of practiſing philoſophie, and that art, which giueth vs the precepts thereof, is called philoſophie, whoſe worke and effect (as Seneca, Neroes ſchoolmaiſter ſaid very well) is to find out, and to knowe the truth both of diuine and humane The worke of philoſophie.things. Iuſtice, pietie, religion, yea the whole companie of vertues neuer depart from hir. She teacheth vs to adore and ſerue God, and to loue men.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Surely philoſophie is the mother and continuall ſpring of all good knowledge. For ſhe teacheth vs to knowe good and euill: ſhe prouoketh vs by the vprightnes of reaſon to flie this thing, & to do that, cauſing vs to liue as wiſe and prudent men, ioyfull and contented in euery eſtate, whereupon ariſeth the ſound reſt of the ſpirit. Moreouer, the excellencie of this knowledge (as Plato ſaith) is ſo great, that it is but one and the ſame thing to be a king, a gouernor of a Common-wealth and a philoſopher: bicauſe the roiall, ciuill, and philoſophicall arts are compounded of the ſame matter, namelie, of iuſtice and prudence.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Philoſophie cannot ſufficiently be praiſed, ſeeing that whoſoeuer obeieth hir may paſſe his daies without tediouſnes. For the true ſcope thereof is to ſeeke The proper end and ſcope of Philoſophie.to glorifie God in his woonderfull works, and to teach a man how to liue well, and to helpe his neighbor. Which perfection cannot be attained vnto without a ſpeciall and heauenlie grace, and that after the knowledge of the ſountaine from whence all goodnes commeth. And this hath beene the cauſe, as I thinke, why ſo many great philoſophers, knowing certainly wherein the true and perfect felicitie of man liuing in this world conſiſted, namely, in the tranquillitie of the ſoule, and labouring continually to

roote out, or at leaſt to weaken al the perturbations therof by the vprightnes of reaſon, and to engraffe vertue therein, yet could neuer perfectly enjoy this ſouerigneWhy the philoſophers could neuer attaine to the ſouereigne good in this life. good, which they ſo much deſired, bicauſe they were ignorant of the fountaine from whence it proceeded, which is, the grace and mercie of our God in his beloued ſonne. And albeit their life was maruellouſly quiet, and void of many vices, yet it ſtandeth vs in hand (if we be Chriſtians in deed) to lead, without compariſon, a more happy, contented and excellent life, and to exerciſe philoſophie according to that true wiſedome, which our Lord Ieſus Chriſt teacheth vs. But I thinke ASER is prepared to ſpeake of this matter, and to diſcourſe thereof more at large vnto vs. Let vs harken then what he will ſay.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  That which preſently offereth it ſelfe to bee handled, requireth truely a farre better ſpirit than mine. Notwithſtanding, that I ſeeme not to ſhun thoſe liſts, into which we entered willingly, I purpoſe according to my weake iudgement, to tell you firſt what philoſophie is, what good commeth vnto vs by it, the meanes to learne it, and to profit thereby, how a man may know he hath it, and how he muſt ſhew foorth the fruits thereof: and laſtly how we ought to contemne all things that we may obtaine it, after the example of ſome ancient Sages, whomThe definition of philoſophie. we will alledge. Philoſophie is a loue or deſire of wiſedom. Or otherwiſe, it is a profeſſion, ſtudie, and exerciſe of that wiſedome, which is the knowledge of diuine and humane things, and which properly belongeth to him, who onely is ſufficient of himſelfe, and is wiſedome it ſelfe, namely, to God. Pythagoras was the firſt that gaue the name to philoſophie, which being diuided as well by him, as by otherThe di
                           •
                        iſion of philoſophie. ancient philoſophers into diuers and ſundrie arts and ſciences, we may diſtinguiſh into two generall parts onely: into the Contemplatiue part, and into the Morall, which ſom call Actiue. We will make two kinds of the Contemplatiue,
                     Of diuine philoſophie. 
                     Diuine, and Naturall. As touching the diuine part, it is that higheſt and moſt vnchangeable knowledge, whereunto we muſt wholy refer the end of our being, and the ſcope

of all our purpoſes, ſtudies, and actions, namely, to be able to know and to glorifie the Creator and preſeruer of the whole world. Of this eternall knowledge, which Socrates called Wiſedome, we ſay with Iustin, who was both a philoſopher and a martyr, that all louers of Chriſtian faith ought to endeuor not to be ignorant, no not of any pointHow we muſt behaue out ſelues in ſearching our the ſecrets of God. belonging to the knowledge and perfect keeping of God his commandements, but eſpecially they muſt haue in ſingular recommendation his ſeruice and true worſhip. As touching the abſolute and perfect knowledge of heauenlie myſteries, they ought to deſire the vnderſtanding of them ſo far foorth as they are able, and according to the gift and meaſure of graces, which ſhall be giuen them from aboue. But if the eie of their ſoule dazell in the conſideration of them, it ſhall be ſufficient to honor and admire them with due reuerence, and to beleeue them ſtedfaſtly, knowing that mans vnderſtanding is not able to attaine to the exquiſite knowledge of ſo high myſteries. Naturall philoſophie conſiſteth chiefly in the Mathematiks,Of naturall philoſophie. which are diuided into many parts and particular ſciences, of which the moſt of them ſeeme to manie not greatly neceſſarie, as that which intreateth of the nature of the heauens, of the ſunne, of the moone, of their motions, meaſures, & of the naturall cauſes of al things. Which oftentimes ſerueth rather to content the curioſitie of hawtie ſpirits, than to make them better, inſomuch 
                        •
                     hat ſometimes, by ſpeculations, and by vaine and friuolous queſtions, they ſeeke out the naturall cauſes of things ſo curiouſly, that in the end they ſtriue to finde out another beginning of all things than God: whereby at length they remaine deceiued and confounded in their knowledge, as both the writings of ſo many ancient philoſophers, and alſo the life of many in our time do proue vnto vs. Neuertheles, there are ſome parts of the Mathematiks neceſſarie to be knowen for the great profit that may come vnto vs by them, as Phyſicke, Atithmetike, Geometrie, and others. But the ſubiect of our Academie will not ſuffer vs to handle all theſe ſciences at this preſent. I will

ſay thus much onely by the way, that we ought ſo to rule and direct the profeſſion of all naturall philoſophie, thatA
                           •
                        ule to be kept in naturall philoſophie. we vſe it not before we haue been well and ſufficiently inſtructed in the feare and knowledge of God, and of all things that concerne a good and happie life, and that vaineglorie ſhould not be the end of that ſtudie, but that it ſhould rauiſh vs more and more in the contemplation of the works of that great maiſter-builder of the whole frame, to the end to glorifie him in greater meaſure. And yet we muſt aboue all things beware, that we fall not into that curſe of the prophet, which he denounceth againſt thoſe, who being deſtitute of Gods grace by reaſon of their ſinnes, giue themſelues to ſoothſaying, and to ſeekeAgainſt ſorcerers, magitians and birth-gazers. after ſorcerers, magitians, and calculators of natiuities, which things we ſee are too common amongſt vs: inſomuch that he is iudged as it were miſerable, that knoweth not his Horoſcope, from whence ſo many abuſes, inuocations, and curſed charmes haue proceeded by little and little. Let vs ſhun ſuch vaine knowledge, proper to infidelsThe iſſue of all things is to be referred to the prouidence of God. and Atheiſts, and refer our euents and iſſues (which albeit we knew before, yet could we not aſſure our ſelues that we ſhould auoid them) to the onely prouidence and direction of God. It remaineth now to intreate of the other part of philoſophie, called Morall. Of this, I thinkeOf morall philoſophie. 
                     Socrates the wiſe man meant to ſpeake, when he ſaid, that philoſophie conſiſted not in learning manie things, or in medling with many arts, but in the perfect knowledge of iuſtice, prudence, and of all other morall vertues. He addeth further, that this philoſophie worketh two things in our mind, the one in purging it as well of perturbations, as of falſe opinions, and the other, in cauſing it to returne into the right way by reaſons and exhortations drawen from earthly and ſenſible formes to ſuch as are ſpirituall, which are incloſed within our ſoules, that by them weGod the Idea of all good. may be led to God, the Idea and paterne of all good. This is that morall philoſophie, which we haue vndertaken to handle in all our diſcourſes, and which is ſo neceſſarie for the life of man. For as the vntamed horſe by reaſon of his

ouer-great wildnes is not profitable for any thing: ſo he that is drawen away by his affections (which philoſophie onely can moderate) is vnprofitable and vnworthie of all companie, and of all gouernment either publike or priuate. It is philoſophie that teacheth vs the doctrine ofThe benefit that commeth by philoſophie. good life, and cauſeth vs to know our miſeries, and the meanes whereby we may be deliuered from them. She it is that frameth in our vnderſtanding the iudgement of reaſon, and learneth vs to lead a life agreeable to doctrine: ſhewing vnto vs what true honeſtie is, what perfect beautie, and what in truth and in deed is profitable. She repreſſeth all euil paſſions and perturbations of the ſoule, appeaſeth the vnſatiable deſires therof, deliuereth it from all feare, and from all earthlie carefulnes, filling it with tranquillitie, conſtancie, aſſurance, magnanimitie, and ſufficiencie. She purgeth pride, preſumption, ambition, choler, reuenge, couetouſnes, iniuſtice, and in a word, ſhe it is, that (by the meanes of reaſon guided by the heauenly ſpirit, which teacheth vs reaſon, and giueth it vnto vs for a law) frameth all the maners and behauior of man according to the paterne of vertue, by ingraffing it in his ſetled ſoule, as his onely permanent good, and by cauſing him to do that willingly, which others (as Xenocrates ſaid) do by compulſion, and for feare of lawes. We are by philoſophie inſtructed at large in that dutie and obedience, which we owe to our parents, ſuperiors, and lawes: and taught how much we ought to loue and honor one another, our wiues, our children, our brethren, yea al thoſe that are not of our bloud. She it is (ſaith Cicero) that containeth the diſcipline of vertue, of dutie, and of good life: ſhe is alſoPhiloſophie is the art of life. the art and miſtreſſe of life. Briefly, by philoſophie we are taught that perfection, which concerneth all the actions and dealings of men, euen from thoſe who are placed in the gouernment of monarchies, kingdomes, commonwealths, cities, and nations, vnto the leſt that liueth vnder them. For ſhe teacheth the one ſort how to command well, and the other to obey well, and to maintaine themſelues vpright in euerie eſtate and condition of life, in the

alteration either of proſperitie or of aduerſitie, yea euen to ſhew themſelues conſtant in contrarie things, by ſhunning pleaſure & ſuſtaining griefe, by deſpiſing glorie and enduring contempt. And to this effect, one of the wiſe Hebrew interpreters, being demanded by Ptolemie Philadelphus 
                     What it is to play the philoſopher.king of Egypt, what it was to exerciſe philoſophie, anſwered, that it was to reaſon well and directly, to reape great profit by all things that happen, not to be carried away by luſt, to contemn all vanities proceeding of worldly pleaſures, and to be guided in euery action by a certaine mediocritie. Now ſeeing it is out of queſtion that the fruit and commoditie of morall philoſophie is ſuch and ſo great, let vs in the next place conſider where and Where and how philoſophie is learned.how we may learne it, that we may put it in practiſe. There is nothing more true than this, that it dependeth in ſuch ſort of the former, which we called contemplatiue and diuine, or rather is ſo ioined vnto it, that without this, it can neuer but be vnperfect in man, ſeeing the feare and knowledge of God is the beginning and perfection of all wiſedome. True philoſophy is to be found in the word of God.Moreouer, it is ſo well and perfectly taught vs in the word of God, that nothing more may be added or deſired. Neuertheles the doctrine ioined with examples, which we may draw out of hiſtories, and from the liues of wiſe men, by things that haue beene done in deed, is of great force and efficacie in the ſoule to draw and moue it with delight to ſeeke to reſemble them. For when as man, naturally deſirous of glorie and immortalitie, ſhall ſee, that philoſophers and vertuous men, who were ſo much commended and renowmed, are as it were reuiued againe in theſe daies, after ſo many ages paſt, he will be thereby awakened and pricked forward by this ielouſie of glorie, which by nature is in him, to deſire and bring to paſſe all great matters woorthie to be remembred, to the end he may deſerue the like praiſe and commendation. Therfore we ſhall reape no ſmall profit heereby, yea it will be vnto vs as an entrie to a happie and holie life, and as a guide to ſacred contemplations, if we earneſtly imbrace and exerciſe our ſelues in the reading and ſtudie of good authors,

who teach vs the precepts of good life: to whom (as Alexander the great ſaid, ſpeaking of his maiſter Aristotle) we How much we owe to good authors.find our ſelues no leſſe boūd & beholding, if we throughly taſte their doctrine, than to our owne fathers (without offence vnto them be it ſpoken) of whom we haue onely our life and being. But bicauſe the excellencie & highnes of this part of philoſophie, called morall (which is for the correction of life and maners) is ſuch and ſo great, that the ſound and perfect knowledge therof is very hard, and ſeeing that good beginnings in all great matters are alwaies the difficulteſt part of them, we muſt lay a good ground of our enterpriſe, if we meane to attaine thereunto, and then aſcend vpward from one degree to another. The The chiefe foundation of al philoſophie.chiefeſt and moſt neceſſarie foundation muſt be a perpetuall and feruent loue of the truth, and of eternall things, ioined with the ſeparation of lies, and of the deſire of temporall things far from vs. Secondly, theſe particulars are Neceſſarie points for a philoſopher.(as Plato ſaith) very neceſſarie for vs: a liuely and ſharpe wit, a nature apt to cōtemplation, likewiſe graue, prompt, hardie to execute, and prouident of publike commoditie. But aboue all things the knowledge of the true God is infinitely neceſſarie for him that will be a philoſopher, bicauſe that, as all things without the enioying of their vſe and goodnes, are poſſeſſed without profit: ſo to haue knowledge of arts and ſciences without the vnderſtanding of the true God, is friuolous and vnprofitable. Yea no man can do any thing that good is, whether it be in priuate or publike affaires, if by reaſon he knoweth not what that is, which ought to be called good. But in this thing we ſhall be well inſtructed (God willing) by the ſequele of our diſcourſes. Thirdly, we muſt continue without ceaſing the ſtudie of this morall knowledge, as Cicero the father of eloquence doth familiarly teach vs, ſaying, We muſt learne alwaies.that in our ſtudies we are to vſe ſome intermiſſion onely, for the recreation both of bodie and mind in all honeſt ſort, but we muſt neuer leaue and forſake them altogither. Neither ought theſe intermiſſions to be of any long continuance, bicauſe vice alwaies watcheth to ouer-run vs ſo

ſoone as we let our ſelues looſe vnto idlenes, to the end to ſtir vs vp through the intiſements of the fleſh, to followe Againſt preſumption and ſelfe liking.our naturall imperfections. Much leſſe ought we, through preſumption of our ſelues, and confidence in our owne vertue and ſufficiencie, altogither to forſake the profeſſion of this ſtudie, as they do, who thinke themſelues ſuch great doctors, that nothing may be added to their knowledge. Of theſe men we may truly ſay, that they neuer had the true knowledge of this morall philoſophie, wherein the more we profit, the more we ſhall deſire to learne: and whether we be yoong or old (as Socrates ſaid) we ſhall alwaies find what to learne, and be occaſioned to diminiſh all vaine opinion of our ſelues, ſeeing this is one of the moſt notable effects thereof, to purge all pride and preſumption. A fit compariſon.For as thoſe veſſels (ſaith Plutarke) wherin we put liquor, do let out the void aire according to the meaſure of that which goeth in: ſo when the ſoule filleth it ſelfe with certaine and true goods, vanitie voideth and giueth place. This is that which Plato ſaith in theſe words: The more reaſon a man getteth by philoſophie, the more pride and 
                     Antiſthenes, an example of great loue to knowledge.
                     arrogancie he looſeth. We haue a notable teſtimonie hereof in Antisthenes, who after he had heard Socrates diſpute, tooke ſo great pleaſure, and found ſuch deepe skill therein, that albeit he was very learned, and had a great number of ſchollers, yet he willed them to ſeeke another maſter, becauſe he purpoſed to learne himſelfe. And by reaſon of the diſtance of place where he dwelt, he came twice a day aboue three miles on foote to heare Socrates. 
                     Plato.Likewiſe Plato ſhewed well how ſmally he preſumed of his exceeding great knowledge, when not contenting himſelfe therewith, after the death of his maſter Socrates he made a voyage through Egypt, and after into Italy, to heare and conferre with the beſt learned of thoſe countries, and to learn that which he knew not before. Which zeale of his and burning deſire vnto wiſedome being ſo laudable, God ſo recompenced, that none of the Ethniks (except Socrates) euer came neere vnto his diuine knowledge of eternall things. We ſee then how we muſt be the

diſciples of philoſophie all our life time. Now as there is nothing, wherin a maſter builder reioiceth ſo much, after he hath laid a good foundation of ſome great worke, as to ſee the progreſſe and proceeding thereof: ſo after we haue laid our firſt happie reſolution (as is ſaid) of attaining to the knowledge of philoſophie, and haue taſted of the firſt principles of hir holeſome fruits, it will turne to our great contentation, and occaſion of proceeding, when we ſee and perceiue that we profite and amende by this ſtudie. This will appeare vnto vs by the conſideration How we may know whether we profit in philoſophie.of our preſent works and actions, being compared with the former, and by the diminiſhing and qualifiying of our wicked paſſions and naturall inclinations, which the profeſſion of this ſcience will vndoubtedly worke in vs. For as we take it for a good ſigne when a diſeaſe remooueth into ſome parts of leaſt account: ſo when our vices are changed into more meeke and ſoft paſſions, it putteth vs in hope that we ſhall wholy deface them afterwarde. The right and perfect way hereunto is to enter deepely into our ſelues, and to take a perfect and ſound knowledge of our naturall, hurtfull and moſt vehement inclinations by comparing one with another. Next, as a good and expert Phiſition before he dealeth with dangerous diſeaſes, beginneth A good way to ouercome great faults.with gentle preparatiues, we are firſt to correct leſſer faults, that after we may the eaſier ouercome the greateſt. For it is certaine, that by ſuch an exerciſe and cuſtome of keeping our ſelues from things that are after a ſort excuſable, yea that are permitted and lawfull, it will be farre more eaſie for vs afterward to amend & abſtaine from vnlawfull things. After we haue thus reformed our ſelues, we ſhall wholy forſake ſmall imperfections (which will be eaſie for vs to do) and make no more reckoning of little offences, as thoſe which we ſhall auoid altogither. From thence we ſhall come to conſider and to diſcouer better the nature and cauſe of our greater and more hurtfull paſſions, together with their vglines and deformitie. Then labouring to diminiſh their force by eſchewing prudently the cauſes of them, and by cutting oft one branch

now, and then another, we ſhall in the end woonder to ſee how reaſon perfecteth in vs hir office of commanding abſolutely ouer all the perturbations of our ſoule, I meane ſo farre foorth as humane frailtie aided by God, can (as I When we may be called Philoſophers.ſaid before) attaine to perfection. Then may we truely call our ſelues Philoſophers, when by our owne example we make it knowne, that the life of man at all times, in al places, in all paſſions, and generally in all affaires receiueth the vſe of Philoſophie. Now after we haue well profited through ſo great diligence & watchfulnes, through ſuch induſtry of minde and continuall ſtudie, I meane after we are become better than we were before, by reaſon of the tranquillitie of our ſoules purged from perturbations, we muſt be carefull that this our commoditie redound alſo to others, as the commandement of God and natural dutie binde vs thereunto. Then (I ſay) we ſhall haue attained The perfection of Philoſophie.to the perfection of this goodly knowledge, when we are ſeruiceable to our neighbors, brethren and countrimen, not of vaine glory, or for terreſtriall riches, but for the loue of vertue onely, which of it ſelfe is a goodly recompence for it ſelfe, being ioined with a happy expectation of heauen. But let vs note farther for the laſt point of our diſcourſe, (whereof I haue already briefely ſpoken) that one of the ſureſt meanes, which we can take to come to a true knowledge of Philoſophie, is, not to eſteeme at all, but rather to contemne whatſoeuer is ſubiect to corruption, and is in the power of variable fortune, as the Philoſophers vſe to ſpeake: namely, vainglory, worldly wealth, and other earthly goods, foraſmuch as the deſire of getting, keeping and increaſing them is that which carrieth vs away moſt, and which hindreth euery other good and The contempt of worldly goods neceſſary in a Philoſopher.vertuous inclination. Therefore let vs freely forſake all ſuch things, let vs withdraw our mindes from all bythoughts, and diſpiſe all earthly diſcommodities: yea let vs patiently ſuſtaine all greefe, that we may yeelde our ſelues wholy to the ſtudie of Philoſophie, which is the Crates.cauſe of ſo many good things. Crates the Theban forſooke his patrimonie of eight talents (which according to the

common computation amounteth to foure thouſand, eight hundred crownes) that being deliuered from the Notable examples of loue to Philoſophie.care of houſ-keeping, and of guiding his goods, he might follow the ſtudie of philoſophie with greater libertie. Anaxagoras.
                     Anaxagoras for the ſame cauſe ſuffered his lands to lie waſte, and after long ſtudie returning to his houſe, and finding it altogether fallen into ruine and deſolation, he ſaid, if theſe things had not periſhed, I had periſhed: as if he had ſaid, that he ſhould neuer haue gotten the treaſure of knowledge, which was the ornament of his minde, if he had giuen himſelfe to gaine and to gather goods. Democritus 
                     Democritus.
                     Abderita, being verie rich (as may be gathered by the feaſt which his father made to that innumerable armie of Xerxes who came into Graecia, which conſiſted, as Herodotus writeth, of more than two millions of fighting men) gaue all his patrimonie to his countrey, reſeruing to himſelfe but a little ſome of money to liue withall, that he might haue the more leaſure to ſtudie philoſophie, for Euclide.which cauſe he went to dwell at Athens. Euclide, of the towne of Megara, being verie deſirous to heare Socrates dwelling at Athens, betweene which two cities the warre was ſo cruel, that no Citizen of the one citie durſt be ſeen in the other, without ineuitable danger of death if he were knowne, had notwithſtanding ſo great loue to wiſedome, that although he were an Ethnick, and doubted of a ſecond life, yet he preferred the deſire of knowledge before the care of his life, and being apparailed like a woman, went once in two daies to Athens and abode there all night to heare Socrates, who commonly ſpent the moſt part thereof in diſcourſing of wiſedome, and then returned againe about the break of the day. Now to conclude our preſent treatiſe, we will hold this, that onely philoſophie can giue vs certaine knowledge, & teach vs how we Philoſophie only teacheth vs to know our chiefe good.may inioy in this life our onely & ſoueraign good, which is the reſt and tranquillitie of our ſoules. Yea ſhe is vnto vs in ſtead of a guide to lead vs to the eternall fruition of our ſupreame and euerabiding good, which is promiſed, and purchaſed by the blood of the immaculate Lamb in

that ſecond and moſt happie life. And, as Plato ſaid, ſpeaking by the mouth of Socrates, that they onely ſhal attaine to the kingdom of heauen with God, who end their daies in this life purged by philoſophie, ſo ſhall it be by the vnſpeakable loue of this eternall wiſedome, that we ſhall be purged, clenſed and ſaued. Yea through the expectation of this bleſſed felicitie we may a great deale more perfectly than did all thoſe great and ancient philoſophers, lead a contented, ioyfull and quiet life, void of all perturbations and feare, for aſmuch as they knew the iuſtice of God onely, and not his mercy, which is aſſured vnto vs in his beloued ſonne. Moreouer they were ignorant (notwithſtanding their philoſophie) of the chiefe point of his iuſtice, namely of the beginning of all things and of their The true cauſe of ioy and tranquillitie in a Chriſtian ſoule.end, which the word of God teacheth vs together with the truth of that permanent happines of the ſoule, whereof they had but a ſhadow in their life. Heerof our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe hath left good and ſure pledges in the depth of our harts, ſaying that he gaue and left his peace with vs, his peace (I ſay) in our ſoules, and not with the world. Therefore it appeereth ſufficiently, that nothing is ſo much to be deſired, whether we regard profite to our ſelues, or ſeruice to the whole bodie and ſocietie of our brethren and countrimen, as the ſtudie of philoſophie, which is the knowledge of life, and the true medicine and tillage of the ſoule whereby all vertue is taught vs.
               
            
            The end of the first daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE SECOND DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Vertue. Chap. 5.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     AMongſt the infinite number of them that were honoured with this faire name and excellent title of Philoſopher, What this word Philoſopher meaneth.which is as much to ſay, as a louer of wiſedome, there were three principal ſects, that contended together by generall rules; but eſpecially about the ſouereigne good and felicitie of man: namely, the Academiks, the Peripatetiks, and There were three chiefe ſects of philoſophers.the Stoiks. The beſt of them all, and they which came neereſt to the knowledge of the truth were the Academiks, whoſe firſt authors were Socrates & Plato, who, as we heard yeſterday, alwaies taught, that our true good conſiſted in the tranquillitie of the ſoule, void of all perturbations, & in ſtead of them adorned and enriched with all vertue, which is the proper ſubſtance and matter of philoſophie, & therfore called the onely permanent good of the ſoule.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  I can not but greatly commend this paradox of the Stoiks, that There is no good but vertue, nor euill but vice, which is the contrarie vnto it. And to go a little further, following their opinion and the opinion of many ancient wiſe men, I ſay, that The vertuous man onely is free and happie, 
                     Who are happie and who vnhappie.yea although he were in Phalaris bull: and that The vicious man onely is a bond-man and vnhappie, albeit he had the riches of Craeſus, the empire of Cyrus, and the glorie of Alexander. For great callings are nothing where the mind is not content, and where the hart pricked with deſire troubleth the tranquillitie of the ſoule.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Riches (ſaith Pythagoras) are no ſure pillers, and glorie is leſſe certaine. Likewiſe beautie, and the diſpoſition of the bodie, magiſtracies and honors are all of Worldlie goods are of no force.no force: but Prudence, Magnanimitie, and Iustice are ankers

of greateſt ſtay, which cannot be plucked vp by any tempeſt. For it is the will and law of God, that vertue onely ſhould be mightie and firme, all other things being but toyes and fooleries. But we muſt now learne of thee ACHITOB, that which is neceſſarie for vs to know concerning this excellent diſpoſition of the ſoule.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  The diſputation concerning the good of man hath indeed alwaies been great amongſt the learned, ſo that as well their diuers opinions, as their arguments would ſtay vs heere with too long a diſcourſe, eſpecially ſeeing they are vnneceſſarie for vs, who ſeeke onely to be inſtructed in the truth. Now that we may attaine heerunto, and to the perfect vnderſtanding of that matter, which is heere propounded vnto vs, we will heere ſet downe this Maxime, or principle, confeſſed of al the greateſt and moſt ancient philoſophers, and agreeable to that truth, which is taught vs in the holie ſcriptures, that There
                     Two ſorts of goods. 
                     are two ſorts of goods, the one which is the last end, the other is the meanes to attaine thereunto. The firſt is the ſouereigne, ſupreme, moſt perfect, and eternall good, which we expect and hope for in the immortalitie of the ſecond life, when we ſhall enioy that true and abſolute felicitie, which neither eie hath euer ſeene, nor eare heard, neither hath entredVertue is the effect of regeneration. at any time into the hart of man. That which we call the meanes whereby we come to the firſt is vertue onely, whereof we are now to ſpeake, and which is the proper effect of our regeneration by the ſpirit of God dwelling in vs. Firſt then let vs conſider what vertue is, alſo the diuiſion, ſountaine, incomparable excellencie, and inuincible force thereof, with thoſe woonderfull effects which it worketh in him that poſſeſſeth hir: wherein alſo we will ſee ſome notable examples of ancient men. Vertue (as theThe definition of vertue. philoſophers ſay) is a diſpoſition and power of the reaſonable part of the ſoule, which bringeth into order and decencie the vnreſonable part, by cauſing it to propound a conuenient end to it own affections and paſſions, wherby the ſoule abideth in a comely and decent habit, executing that which ought to be done, according to reaſon.

But to ſpeake more briefly, Vertue is a proportion and vprightnes of life in all points agreeable to reaſon. The diuiſion thereof is altogither like to that of philoſophie. For they are ſo linked togither, that it is all one to be vertuous, and to be a philoſopher, the one being the matter and ſubſtance of the other. Vertue therefore is diuided into Contemplatiue and into Morall. The eternall Wiſedome by the operation of his ſpirit, guideth and lifteth vp the contemplatiue vertue to hir proper end, which is that happie and immutable knowledge, that concerneth the maieſtie of God. This did Socrates call Religion, and the greateſt vertue, ſaying further, that the contempt thereof brought vpon men a curſed ignorance, and that no man ought to perſuade himſelfe, that he could finde amongſtSocrates called religion the greateſt vertue. the race of men any greater vertue than religion and pietie towards God, whoſe honor is the foundation of euerie good worke, which if it be ouerthrowne, the other parts are as ſoone diſperſed as the peeces of a ruinous building. Yea religion is not onely the head of iuſtice and vertue, but alſo is as it were the ſoule to giue vigor and ſtrength vnto it. From this ſupreme ſcience floweth prudence,The dutie of prudence. which is a worke thereof, appointed to gouerne, rule, and moderate by the meanes of morall vertue, the paſſions and affections of the vnreaſonable part of the ſoule in all mediocritie, by cutting off all exceſſe and defect of thoſe paſſions, and by moderating them between too little and too much, thereby to 
                        ••
                     epe men from erring. As for example, ſhe holdeth a man within the limits of prowes and valure, leaſt he ſhould caſt away himſelfe through raſhnes or cowardlines: ſhe cauſeth him wiſely to vſe liberalitie, bicauſe he ſhould not be ſpoiled by couetouſnes, or fall into prodigalitie. And that he ſhould not be caſt downe too much in aduerſitie, nor lift vp beyond meaſure in proſperitie, ſhe keepeth him vpright and conſtant both in the one and in the other. Thus doth vertue generally teach a man, by following the reaſon of true prudence, to rule all his inclinations and actions as well for his owne priuate good, as for the profit and vtilitie of humane ſocietie.

Whereby it appeereth ſufficiently vnto vs, that the foundationThe foundation and ſpring of all vertue. of all vertue is that diuine reaſon, which floweth into our ſoules from the free goodnes of our God, and which taketh liuely roote by care, ſtudie, and diligence, when the ſelfe-ſame grace bleſſeth our labour. For without this we can do nothing, ſo that all our meditations and purpoſes to liue vprightly, continently, and temperately become vaine and friuolous before his maieſtie. In this maner, of that excellent reaſon and wiſedome, wherewith the eternall wiſedome enricheth vs, that we might know good and euill, prudence is ingendred, which is moſt neceſſarie for the gouernment of earthlie things (whereof we will intreat heerafter) and whereby man is enriched with morall vertue, as with an infallible rule of all his works and actions, to the end that fully enioyingWherein humane happines conſiſteth. humane felicitie, which conſiſteth in good maners, qualities and conditions of the ſoule, he may bring foorth the fruits and effects thereof to the profit of many. We ſay then, that all vertue conſiſteth in mediocritie, as vice doth in exceſſe or in defect, in regard wherof ſhe is in the midſt, albeit in reſpect of hir ſelfe, I meane of hir perfect and abſolute excellencie ſhe is extreme, and ſtandeth not in need of any increaſe or diminution. Now as all the imperfections of the ſoule are called vices and paſſions, ſo all their contraries, which ſerue for remedies vnto them, are named vertues. And although vertue be alwaies one, ſo that he which hartily imbraceth one part of it is deſirous of them all, yet may ſhe be called by diuers names, euen by ſo many, as there is alwaies in euery good action ſome particular vertue, that maketh it eminent, and to be ſeene aboue others. Moreouer, according to the diuers ſubiects wherein ſhe is, ſhe bringeth foorth diuers effects, conforming hir ſelfe in ſome ſort to the maners, conditions, and naturall inclinations of thoſe which poſſeſſe hir. Heereof it commeth, that ſome are more apt and conſtant in ſomeThe gifts and graces of God are diuers in men. one vertue than others are (for all can not do all things) and that one practiſeth it after one faſhion, and an other otherwiſe. Now it followeth, that I handle heereafter

diſtinctly and in order, the pluralitie of vertues, with their ſeuerall properties. But in the meane while, to ſpeake generally of this pretious and ineſtimable riches, I meane of vertue, and of the great, worthie, and wonderfull effects, which ſhe bringeth forth in men, firſt, ſhe is theThe excellencie and propertie of vertue. onely proper and true good of the ſoule, that can not by any accident be violently taken and caried away. She alone maketh hir poſſeſſor happie, cauſing him to finde euery kinde of life that is ſweet, pleaſant, and acceptable, contained in hir. Vertue alone, is the onely matter of reſt and tranquillitie in the mind, being by reaſon purged of feare, of trouble, of worldly deſire and ioy. Of this liuely fountaine ſpake Democritus, when he ſaid that ioy was ingendered in mens harts, of the mediocritie of pleaſure, and of a moderate and temperate harmonie of life. Vertue (ſaid Thales) is the profitableſt thing in the world, bicauſeEuerie thing is made profitable through vertue. it maketh all other things profitable, by cauſing men to vſe them well. Yea we may ſay further, that all other gifts and riches remaine vnprofitable and hurtfull, without the ornament of vertue. Cicero prooueth by many goodlie reaſons, that onely vertue is of it ſelfe ſufficient to cauſe men to liue well and happily. And ſurely euery good and vertuous man of what calling ſoeuer he be, is ſo happie, if he haue grace to know it, that he need not to wiſh for any thing with paſſion or trauell in this life, but rather is content of himſelfe in regard of men, and contemneth the care of worldly things, not iudging any thing euil, which neceſſitie of nature, or rather the ordinance of God bringeth vpon him. And where miſeries are doubled, there vertue ſheweth hir effects moſt wonderfully, giuing vs therby to vnderſtand, that ſhe conſiſteth in ſuch things as are moſt rare and difficult. For which cauſe hir ſtrengthVertue compared to a palme tree. is compared to the date tree, which the more it is pulled downe, the more it returneth vpward: ſo when vertue is moſt oppreſſed of hir enimies ſhe ſhineth moſt gloriouſly. Onely vertue appeareth woonderfull to the minde that is cloathed therewith, and keepeth it from coueting that which others commonly worſhip, namely, great callings,

riches, pleaſures and glory. She deſpiſeth the praiſe & flatterie of men, wherunto ſo many others make themſelues The reward of vertue in the life to come is of the free mercie of God.ſlaues, & remaineth alwais free in hir ſelfe, & free to euery one, without any other hope of reward, then to be accepted of God, & to effect things meete tobe rewarded eternally in the next life by the liberalitie of God. If we compare worldly goods with vertue (calling that good which vſurpeth that name, & is ſubiect to corruptiō) firſt, as touching thoſe which the philoſophers cal the goods of fortune, & namely nobility, wherin at this men ſtay ſo much, what is it but a good of our anceſtors? Riches are eaſily loſt, yea cauſeth the poſſeſſor of them to be ſooner loſt: & as for the glorie of the greateſt, yea of al principalitie, it is Compariſon of worldly goods with vertue.no leſſe vncertaine. Concerning the goods of the bodie, beauty & comelines is but a flower of ſmall continuance: helth, which is ſo precious, ſoon changeth: ſtrength is loſt by infinit inconueniences. Al bodily pleaſure is vnperfect, & followed of perturbations. But vertue is that onely diuine & immortall qualitie in vs, which, (as Heſiodus ſaith) Nothing hath power ouer vertue.is a ſtable & ſure poſſeſſion both to the liuing and to the dead: ouer which neither fortune, ſlander, ſicknes, old-age nor aduerſitie haue any power: and as for length of time, which diminiſheth all things, it alwaies addeth ſomewhat to vertue, & encreaſeth it. All the other goods aboue rehearſed, are from without a man, working oftentimes deſtructiō to their poſſeſſors, & commonly coming to thoſe that are leaſt woorthy of them. Onely vertue is the proper inheritance of the ſoule, worketh the hapines therof, and maketh a man alwaies worthy of true glory & praiſe, cauſing him to be honored & eſteemed euen of his enimies. In a word it cannot (as Cicero ſaith) be vttered how much Vertue cannot be valued.vertue ſurmounteth all other things in glorie & excellencie. And if all other goods of men (ſaith Socrates) were laid by thēſelues they would amount in value but to one mote in reſpect of the price of vertue. Plato his diſciple ſaith, that the difference of vertue compared with other goods, is ſo great, that if they were put into one skale of the balance, & vertue into the other, this would aſcend vp to heauen,

and the other would touch the earth. Moreouer, he wrote foure & fiftie books or dialogues, which did all intreat of vertue, out of which men may reape infinite profite, eſpecially out of thoſe that intreat of a common-wealth, or of lawes. In theſe books that he might not ſeeme vngratefull Why Plato in his works bringeth in Socrates ſpeaking.towarde his maſter Socrates, who would neuer write any thing, he bringeth him in rehearſing that, which at other times he had heard him ſpeake. Stilpo the philoſopher, being in his citie of Megara when it was taken & ſpoiled by Demetrius king of Macedonia, who fauouring him, asked if he had loſt any thing that was his, made this anſwer: No ſir (quoth he) for war cannot ſpoile vertue. And indeede this is that riches wherwith we ought to furniſh our ſelues which can ſwim with vs in a ſhipwrack, and which cauſed Wherein the happines and greatnes of a king conſiſteth.
                     Socrates to anſwere thus to one, who asked him what his opinion was of the great king, whether he did not thinke him very happy; I cannot tell (quoth he) how he is prouided of knowledge & vertue. Who may iuſtly doubt whether vertue alone is able to make a man happie, ſeeing it doth not onely make him wiſe, prudent, iuſt & good, both in his doings & ſayings, but alſo commonly procureth vnto him honor, glorie and authoritie? It was through hir What it was that procured to Alexander the ſurname of Great.meanes, that Alexander deſerued the ſurname of Great, by that experience which ſhe gaue him in warre, by his liberalitie in riches, by his temperance in all his ſumptuous magnificence, by his hardines and conſtancy in fight, by his continency in affections, by his bountie and clemencie in victorie, and by all other vertues, wherein he ſurpaſſed all that liued in his time. Yea the fame and renowme of his vertues procured a greater number of cities, countries and men to ſubmit themſelues willingly vnto him without bloweſtriking, than did the power of his armie. Wherein this ſentence of Socrates is found true, that whole troupes of ſouldiers, and heapes of riches, are conſtrained oftentimes to obey vertue. What ſaid Darius, monarche of the Perſians, when he vnderſtoode both what continencie Alexander his enimie had vſed towards his wife, who being exceeding beautifull was taken priſoner

by him, and what humanitie he ſhewed afterward in hir funerals when ſhe was dead? The Perſians (quoth he) neede not be diſcouraged, neither thinke themſelues cowards and effeminate becauſe they were vanquiſhed of ſuch an aduerſarie. Neither do I demand any victorie of the gods, but to ſurmount Alexander in bountifulnes. And if it be ſo that I muſt fall, I beſeech them to ſuffer none but him to ſit in the royall throne and ſeat of Cyrus. Will we haue teſtimonies of the inuicible force of vertue, and of hir powerfull and praiſewoorthy effects in moſt ſiniſter and vntoward matters? Hiſtories declare vnto vs, that amongſt all the vertuous acts, which procured praiſe and renowme to the men of old time, thoſe were the notableſt & moſt commended, which they ſhewed foorth Examples of the force and effects of vertue, in aduerſitie.at ſuch time as fortune ſeemed to haue wholy beaten them downe. Pelopidas, generall captaine of the Thebans, who deliuered them from the bondage of the Lacedemonians, Pelopidas.is more praiſed and eſteemed for the great and notable vertue, which he ſhewed being priſoner in the hands of Alexander the tyrannous king of the Phereans, then for all his victories gotten before. For at that time his vertue was ſo farre from yeelding any iot to his calamitie, that contrariwiſe with an vnſpeakeable conſtancie he recomforted the inhabitants of the towne, that came to viſite him, exhorting them to be of good courage, ſeeing the houre was come, wherin the tyrant ſhould be at once puniſhed for his wickednes. And one day he ſent him word, that he was deſtitute of all iudgement and reaſon, in that he vexed his poore citizens, & cauſed them to die in torments who neuer offended him, and in the meane time ſuffered him to liue in reſt, of whom he could not be ignorant, that eſcaping his hands he would be reuenged of him. The tyrant maruelling at his great courage, asked why he made ſuch great haſte to die. To this end (quoth he) that thou being yet more hated of God and men than Philocles.thou art, mighteſt the ſooner be deſtroied. Philocles, one of the moſt famous Athenian captaines of his time (who cauſed this law to be made, that the right thombe of all

priſoners taken in war from that time forward ſhould be cut off, that they might not handle a pike any more, but yet might ſerue to rowe with an oare) being taken priſoner with three thouſand Atheniens in one battell, which Lyſander admirall of the Lacedemonians obtained againſt him, and al of them being condemned to die, was demanded of Lyſander what paine he iudged himſelfe worthie of for counſelling his country-men to ſo wicked and cruell a thing. To whom he made this onely anſwere with an vnmoueable vertue, Accuſe not thoſe who haue no iudge to hear & A moſt conſtant death.
                     know their cauſe. But ſeeing the gods haue ſhewed thee this fauour to be conqueror, deale with vs as we would haue done with thee, if we had ouercome thee. Which being ſaid, he went to waſh and bath himſelfe, and then putting on a rich cloke as if he ſhould haue gone to ſome feaſt, he offered himſelfe firſt to the ſlaughter, ſhewing the way of true conſtancie to his fellow citizens. Anaxarchus the philoſopher, Anaxarchus.being taken priſoner by the commandement of Nero, that he might know of him, who were the authors of a conſpiracie that was made againſt his eſtate, and being led towards him for the ſame cauſe, he bit his toong in A woonderfull magnanimitie.ſunder with his teeth, and did ſpit it in his face, knowing well that otherwiſe the tyrant would haue compelled him by all ſorts of tortures and torments to reueale & diſcloſe them. Zeno miſſing his purpoſe, which was to haue killed the tyrant Demylus, did aſmuch to him. But what is more terrible than death? Notwithſtanding when did vertue better ſhew hir greatnes and power, then when death laboured moſt to ouerthrow hir, as being reſolued of that ſaying of Cicero, that all wiſe men die willingly, and without care, A wiſe man dieth willingly.but that the vnwiſe & ignorant are at their wits ende for feare of death? If many, who haue not knowne the true and perfect immortalitie of the ſoule, and ſome, onely led with a deſire of praiſe & worldly glorie, others touched with duty and kindled with a loue towards their countrey, haue ſhewed the increaſe of their vertue in the horrors and pangs of death, what ought they to do, who expect certainely an euerlaſting life? Phocion, after he had

beene choſen generall captaine of the Athenians foure and fortie times, and done infinite ſeruices to the common-wealth, being at length through certaine partakinges and diuiſions ouercome with the weakeſt ſide which he had mainetained, and being condemned to drinke poiſon, was demaunded before he dranke, whether he had no more to ſaye. Whereupon ſpeaking to his ſonne, he ſaide, I commaunde thee to beare the Athenians no rancor and malice for my death. And a little before this ſpeech, beholding one of thoſe that were condemned to die with him, to vexe himſelfe through impatiencie, what meaneſt thou poore man, The feare of death doth not aſtoniſh the vertuous.(quoth he to him) doeſt thou not thinke thy ſelfe happie that thou maiſt die with Phocion? The feare and appreheuſion of death doth aſtoniſh, as we commonly ſay, the ſtouteſt, but not the moſt vertuous. For they know (as Plautus 
                     Callicratides.ſaith) that he dieth not, who for vertues ſake is put to death. Callicratides, Generall of the Lacedemonians, being readie to giue battell to his enimies, the ſoothſaier, after ſacrifice done to the gods ſaid vnto him, that the intrals of the ſacrifices promiſed victorie to the armie, but death to the captaine. Whereunto he anſwered as one without all feare; although he beleeued it as an oracle from heauen, Sparta conſisteth not in one man. For when I ſhal be dead my countrie ſhall be nothing leſſened, but if I recule now and draw backe, the reputation thereof will be diminiſhed. Whereupon ſubſtituting in his place Cleander, as ſucceſſor in his office, he gaue battell, wherein it happened vnto him as the ſoothſaier had told him. If we deſire infinite ſuch examples, hiſtories are ful of them, euen of thoſe who loued rather to kill themſelues (which a Chriſtian neuer ought to do, but onely to ſuffer death patiently, if it be offered vnto him) than to commit any thing vnwoorthie their vertue. Themistocles being vniuſtly baniſhed Themiſtocles loue to his countrie.from Athens, retired to the king of Perſia, whoſe great fauour and benefits receiued, cauſed to ſay to his children, We had beene vndone, if we had not beene vndone: as alſo to promiſe, that he would imploy himſelfe in his ſeruice.

Notwithſtanding when he ſaw the war begun againe betweene this king and the Athenians, wherein he was offered a great charge, he choſe rather to haſten his death by a poiſon which he tooke, than to ſeeme to be pricked or prouoked with malice againſt his vngratefull countrie-men, leaſt thereby he ſhould obſcure and blot the glorie of ſo many goodly exploites, triumphes, and victories, which he had obtained. Nowe if death can not ſtoppe the courſe of vertue, how much leſſe can any other weaker. accident do it? Old-age, which diminiſheth Age hath no power ouer vertue. Ageſilaus.
                     and conſumeth all the ſtrength of the bodie, coulde not weaken the great vertue of Ageſilaus king of Lacedemonia, who being fower-ſcore yeeres of age, and ſeeing the glorie of his countrie brought to nothing by that victorie, which the Thebanes had obtained againſt him, withdrewe himſelfe into the ſeruice of a king of Egypt, and tooke the charge of a captaine vnder him, that through the good ſeruice he ſhould do him, he might deſerue (whereof he aſſured himſelfe) to haue ſuccour of him for his owne countrey affaires. Enuie (ſaith Thucidides) is heard to be ouercome, and followeth great eſtates and potentates. Honour, glorie and riches, are but firebrandes to kindle it. Notwithſtanding the excellencie of vertue oftentimes triumpheth ouer it, ſo that the enuious are conſtrained to ſpeake well of vertuous men. We ſee then cleerely, and haue better experience thereof in our ſelues if we be decked with vertue, that ſhe is of an inuincible force, and that all things are tamed by hir. For who can doubt that through hir, great empires, monarchies, commonwealths, eſtats and cities haue much more floriſhed, than through force and might of armes? The Vertue cauſeth kingdoms to floriſh.ſequele of our diſcourſes ſhall furniſh vs with examples hereof. Now to conclude our preſent matter, knowing that vertue deſerueth ſo great praiſe in regarde of hir fruits, and of hir woonderfull great effects, we ſay, that Vertue is the onely honeſt, profitable, and pleaſant good.ſhe is the onely good both for honeſtie, profite and pleaſure, between which there is ſuch a coniunction, that they

cannot be ſeperated one from another, (as hereafter we may intreat more at large) ſo that the ſeuering of theſe three things to attribute them to other earthly and periſhing goods, is the fountaine of all vice, deceit, and miſchiefe. If then, trouble, loſſe, hazard or danger are to be found in the practiſe and exerciſe of this holie and ſacred vertue (as euen the greateſt worldly happines is counterpoiſed with euill and difficultie) ought we not to diſpiſe all ſuch things, yea death it ſelfe for that happie recompence, which is aſſured vnto vs, not onely of immortall glorie and praiſe (which the men of old time promiſed to themſelues) but alſo of life euerlaſting, whereof the moſt of them were ignorant? Let vs not be like to a little child (for he that is a child in minde differeth nothing from a childe in age) who ſeeing a trifle wherewith he plaieth taken out of his hand, caſteth away for anger that which he holdeth in his other hand, although it be ſome daintie thing and good to eate. But let vs with feruent zeale and burning affection, alwaies imbrace this ſo precious and chaſte beautie, I meane vertue, which alone filleth the life of man, with true, ſound and perfect contentation. Let all things come behinde vertue, after the example of ſo many excellent and ancient perſonages, who ought to make vs bluſh for ſhame, when we conſider, that the care of Anacharſis forſooke a kingdome that he might the better obtaine vertue.earthly goods hath the firſt place amongſt vs. Anacharſis a Barbarian, being led with the onely loue of vertue, left the kingdome of Scythia to his yoonger brother, & went into Graecia, where he profited ſo well with Solon, that he deſerued to be placed in the number of the ſeauen Sages. Three things neceſſarie for the obtaining of vertue.Now if three things (after we haue asked them of him who only can and will giue them vnto vs) meete togither in vs, namely, Nature, Reaſon, and 
                        Ʋſe, we may by them being directed, illuminated, and guided by the ſpirit of God, attaine to the top of humane perfection in this rich vertue, which being thus grounded (like to a ſtrong and liuely plant) will take ſure footing and roote within vs. If ſhe meet with a good and well diſpoſed nature, that is able to endure labor, & that is tilled by reaſon with the precepts

of philoſophie, whereby it is made firme, mightie, and fruitfull, then vſe and exerciſe will bring foorth the fruits thereof, as well for our owne, as for the common profit of men.
               
            
            
               Of Ʋice. Chap. 6.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     The knowledge of goodnes muſt go before the loue of it. AS he that is ignorant of goodnes cannot loue it, or boaſt (except it be falſly) that he ſeeketh after it, and if he ſhould find it, yet he could not acknowledge it, or reape any profit thereby: ſo he that knoweth not euill, can neuer hate it ſufficiently, much leſſe ſhun it, or keepe himſelfe from falling into the ſnares and ambuſhes thereof, where it lieth in continuall watch to ſurpriſe and ouertake men. Ye ſhall haue very few, but ſay, that they are enimies to euill, and that they labour to driue it as far from them as they can. But what? As they neuer knew what goodnes meant, ſo they knowe as little of the contrarie. Now hauing by our laſt ſpeech declared ſufficiently, that vertue is the onely true good of the ſoule, it is out of queſtion, that vice, which is altogither Vice is the onely euil of the ſoule.contrarie vnto it, is the onely euill thereof, and the fountaine of al the miſeries of man, as wel earthly as eternall. Which, that we may more ſurely auoid, and marke better the excellencie and beautie of vertue, by the lothſomnes and deformitie of vice (bicauſe contraries ſet one by another, as blacke neare to white, ſhew themſelues a great deale better) I thinke it will not be to wander beſides the matter, if we beſtow the reſt of our mornings worke in the handling thereof.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  There is no euill in man (as the philoſopers ſay) but vice, if we take that for euill which is offenſiue. Neither What we ought to call euill.doth any thing offend and make a man woorſe, but that which endammageth his ſoule. And in this maner vice onely and ſinne is hurtfull vnto him, yea (as Plutarke ſaith) is ſufficient of it ſelfe to make a man miſerable.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  As vertue (ſaith Plato) is the health and

                     Vertue is the health, and vice the ſicknes of the ſoule. forceable vigor of the ſoule, ſo vice is the ſicknes and imbecillitie thereof, which hauing gotten a habit, maketh a man vicious and corrupt. For it is certaine that if men had ſufficient force and conſtancie to reſiſt vice (which we haue by inheritance) they would follow after vertue. But being ouercome by the looſenes of their ſenſualitie they are led captiues, as it were in a triumph, vnder the yoke of ſin. Let vs then hearken to ARAM, who, I thinke, will not forget to paint out vnto vs this pernitious Hydra with all hir colors, that ſhe may be ſo much the more odious vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  I haue alwaies learned of wiſe men, that this ſaying of an ancient man is moſt true, That there is a hundred times more paine in doing euill, than in well doing: Vice is like a dropſie.and that vice hath the ſame effect in the ſoule, which the dropſie hath in the bodie. For both of them do plant in man a continuall deſire of that which breedeth his greateſt bane. Whereupon moſt miſerably he ſeeketh after his owne perdition and ruine with paine and trauell, wheras he might paſſe through felicitie in this life, into that life which is eternall and moſt happie. One chiefe occaſion heerof, as I thinke, may be attributed to the ignorance of euill. For what wicked man is ſo dull of vnderſtanding, that, if he knew certainly what vice were, would not with all his might ſeparate himſelfe as farre from it, as for the time he drew neere vnto it? By a ſtronger reaſon it foloweth, that he which truly knoweth it, before it be growen When we begin to hate vice.to a habit within him, wil ſhun it more diligently: bicauſe we begin then to hate vices (as Plutarke ſaith) when by reaſon we vnderſtand what ſhame and harme commeth of them. Therefore it muſt needs be very profitable for vs to vtter heerin that, which we haue learned by the ſtudie of philoſophie, and that briefly for this preſent, hoping heerafter to intreate more particularly of the principall parts of vice. Firſt we will define it, then conſider the pernitious effects thereof in the ſoule, and the fruits which it bringeth with it: thirdly, declare how it neuer eſcapeth vnpuniſhed: and laſtly, ſhew how we muſt fortifie our

ſelues againſt the priuie watchings and ſnares of ſuch a dangerous and mightie enimie. Vice is an inequalitie and The definition of vice.iarring of maners, proceeding from mans naturall inclination to pleaſures and naughtie deſires. This inclination not being reined with the bit of reaſon, guided by the ſpirit of grace, nor ruled by the wiſe declarations thereof, cauſeth a man by little and little to giue ouer himſelfe to all wicked paſſions (the end of one being the beginning of another) whereby he becommeth moſt vnhappie, yea more wild and ſauage than any brute beaſt. Chryſippus a Stoike philoſopher, called vice the proper eſſence of vnhappines. And ſurely it is a very perfect workmaiſter of wretchednes, diſpoſing and framing men to all kinde of miſchiefe and miſerie. For after it hath once taken hold of the ſoule, it will neuer forſake it vntill it hath wholie bruſed, ouerwhelmed, and deſtroied it, filling it daily with The effects of vice.perturbations and new paſſions, with voluptuouſnes, rancor, enmities, reuenge, murders, anguiſh, feare, fruitleſſe repentance, ambition, couetouſnes, and with all other luſts, which are incurable diſeaſes of the ſoule, after they haue once taken roote therein. For the more they waxe, the more they will grow, vice being (as Plato ſaith) of an Vice is of an endles ſtocke.infinite and endles race. And therefore the aboue named Chryſippus ſaid not without reaſon, that to auoid ſo dangerous an enimie, and one that ought to be ſo odious vnto Although we are to hate vice with a perfect hatred, yet we muſt not kill our ſelues to be 
                           〈◊〉
                         of it.vs, it were better for vs to caſt our ſelues headlong into the ſea, than to ſuffer it to raigne ouer vs. Plato alſo writeth, that it is far better for a man not to liue at all, than to liue wickedly, or in ignorance. For ſuch a life can haue no fitter name, than to be called a true ſhadow of death, I meane of eternal death, which followeth the wicked euen at the heeles. Bias, one of the Sages ſaid, That no man could iuſtly be termed a captiue, although he were loden The vicious man onely is a captiue.with irons, except alſo he were compaſſed about with vices. Moreouer, we ſee that neither ſword nor fire doth carie away a man ſo violently as vice doth. Many haue ſuffered a thouſand outrages and puniſhments with ſuch conſtancie, that tyrants were ſooner wearie of perſecuting

them, than they of ſuffering. Beſides, they had ſo great power ouer themſelues, that in the midſt of torments they were able to ſtay their voice altogither: inſomuch that one would haue either iudged them to be ſenſeleſſe, or els think that in ſeeing them he did not ſee them. But vice alwaies diſcouereth it ſelfe, and euery where appeereth Nothing more hurtfull than vice.ſhamefull, infamous, and hurtfull. Thales called vice the hurtfulleſt thing in the world, bicauſe that where it is, it marreth and deſtroieth all. Moreouer, it maketh thoſe things, which otherwiſe ſeeme honorable and magnifical, lothſome and vnpleaſant, when it is mingled with them: yea it appeereth ſo much the more infamons, as the nobilitie Vice ioined with authoritie is more hurtfull.and authoritie whereunto it is ioined is greater, bicauſe then it diſcouereth better what pernitious and damnable effects it hath. For taking a ſwift courſe by the high way of power, and driuing forward euery wicked affection to execution, it cauſeth choler to be turned preſently into murder, loue into adulterie, couetouſnes into confiſcation, and ſo in other paſſions. But as the vices of the greater ſort are more dangerous, ſo no doubt, ſhame and diſhonor are likewiſe doubled vpon them, bicauſe they are better ſeene and noted, whereby they become more odious and contemptible to euery one. Beſides, their reward lieth at their gate in great meaſure, which will not be long from them. For to whom more is giuen, of him more ſhall A good leſſon for great men.be required. And I pray you what greater cauſe of ſhame and bluſhing can that man haue, who being borne to command men of all eſtates and conditions, doth himſelfe obey ſuch vile and abiect things, as are ſenſualitie, ignorance, concupiſcence, & other like paſſions wrought by vice, which being without reaſon, are made to obey and to be ruled by reaſon? Neither are we more to be excuſed than the greater ſort when we follow after ſuch things, bicauſe we are but of meane and ſmall calling. For euery one is borne to command himſelfe, whereunto our chiefe ſtudie and labour ought to tend. We haue further to note diligently, that vice is not onely hurtfull to him that is infected therewith, but alſo that it vſeth him as a

miniſter and inſtrument to corrupt and ſpoile others. For The propertie of the wicked.you ſhall neuer ſee any wicked man, that laboureth not to make others like himſelfe: which if he cannot do, yet he will ſo thinke of them, and ſeeke to perſuade all others, that they are ſuch, or rather worſe than himſelfe. Wherby it is eaſie ynough to iudge, that this is that, which vndoeth and deſtroieth communalties and Commonwealths, townes and cities, when the gouernors and magiſtrates of them are miniſters of vices. The change of monarchies, eſtates, and kingdoms proceeded alwaies of vice. Roboam 
                     The alteration of kingdoms commeth of vice.through want of prudence, Sardanapalus through intemperancy and luxuriouſnes, the laſt French king of the race of Clouis through retchleſnes, Perſes of Macedonia thorough raſhnes, with infinite others, whoſe examples we ſhall ſee heerafter, loſt their kingdoms through vices. But that we may yet haue greater occaſion to hate and ſhun this horrible monſter of nature, let vs know that vice chaſticeth it ſelfe. Which is not done onely by mans law, out of which the mightier ſort (as Anacharſis ſaid) eſcape as great flies that breake through the ſpiders web, the puniſhment Offences are neuer without paine.alſo of which may oftentimes be auoided for a time, but euen the paine followeth the offence ſo neere, that it is equall vnto it both for age and time. For from that very inſtant wherein wickednes is committed, ſhe frameth for and of hir ſelfe hir owne torment, and beginneth to ſuffer the paine of hir miſchieuous deede through the remorſe thereof. This is that worme that continually gnaweth the conſcience of a malefactor, and accompanieth his miſerable life with ſhame and confuſion, with frights, perturbations, anguiſh, and continuall diſquietnes, euen to his very dreames, ſo that all his life time he is deſtitute of all tranquillitie and reſt of ſpirit, wherein only humane felicitie conſiſteth. And therefore one of the Hebrew interpreters well and truly anſwered king Ptolemie, who asked him how he might be in reſt when he dreamed: Let pietie (quoth this wiſe man vnto him) be the How a man may haue continuall quietnes.ſcope of all thy ſayings and doings. For by applying al thy diſcourſes and works to excellent things, whether thou

ſleepeſt or wakeſt, thou ſhalt haue quiet reſt in regard of thy ſelfe. Truly that man feareth nothing, whoſe ſoule being free from all notorious crimes, followeth the will of God, who directeth all counſels to good. But (as Plato ſaith) there is nothing that maketh a man ſo fearefull, as the remembrance of his life paſſed in ſhame. Yea preſently The force of conſcience in the wicked.after the offence (ſaith Iustin Martyr) the conſcience of a wicked man is vnto him in ſtead of an accuſer, a witnes, a iudge, and a hangman. This is that, which the ſcripture Leuit. 26. 36.teacheth vs in Leuiticus, ſaying, that the wicked ſhal tremble at the fall of the leafe of a tree, & that they ſhall be as if their life hung by a thread. We ought to be perſuaded that this violence of mans conſcience commeth frō God, who cauſeth his enimies to feele his iudgement and furie in ſuch ſort, that they cannot abide it, but are conſtrained to condemne themſelues. And if our hart condemne vs, God is greater than our hart. Now although the word ſhould wholie faile in this, yet we haue the teſtimonie of nature imprinted with ſuch characters in our harts, that it did euen compell the ancient poets to finde out and to faigne Furies, as reuengers of our ſins, which are nothing elſe but the torments of euill conſciences. This is that Eſay. 66. 24.worme wherof Eſaie ſpeaketh, which dieth not, but gnaweth Examples of tormented conſciences in the wicked.and deuoureth them without ceaſing. Caligula, a moſt cruell Emperor, neuer had ſecure and quiet reſt, but being terrified and in feare, awoke often, as one that was vexed and caried headlong with wonderfull paſſions. Nero, after he had killed his mother, confeſſed that whileſt he ſlept, he was troubled by hir, and tormented with Furies, that burned him with flaming torches. Let vs not then ſuppoſe A wiſe man is aſhamed to attend before himſelfe.that, although a wicked act may be hidden and kept cloſe from men, therefore the torment is the leſſe, (which a wiſe man neuer thinketh of, knowing that he ought to be in more reuerence of himſelfe than of others) but rather more greeuous within vs, not for the only feare of worldly ſhame or puniſhment, but for the apprehenſion of the iuſt iudgement of God, from whom nothing is hid. He purſueth the wicked hard at the heeles for the moſt part,

and knoweth how to take vengeance of their iniquitie in due time. And if he defer the puniſhment, it ſerueth but to Why God deferreth his vengeance vpon the wicked.aggrauate their condemnation ſo much the more vpon their heads, and to make the puniſhment more horrible, whereof we ought to ſtand in greater feare, than of any bodily paine, bicauſe the dolor thereof abideth for euer. He that would go about to repeate heer ſeuerally al thoſe vices wherewith men may be infected, and wherein we ſee them commonly wallow, ſhould find their number very great, yea infinite. But (as Democritus ſaid) let vs onely lay open that which is within vs, and we ſhal find there a heap and conſerue of many, diuers, and different euils, which haue their originall beginning from thence. For as ſhadowes follow bodies, ſo paſſions and vices follow ſoules. Heerafter we may diſcourſe more particularly of the greater part of them, and of their proper and peculiar effects, with that iuſt puniſhment, which commonly followed them. In the meane time we may learne this, that if cuſtome be of ſo great force, that (as we ſay) it ouercommeth nature, it is chiefly to be ſeene in vice and diſſolutenes, which is a gulfe wherein a man may very eaſily caſt himſelfe Cuſtome in ſinning is dangerous.headlong, but it is a very difficult matter, yea vnpoſſible to withdraw himſelfe againe. And (as a wiſe Romane ſaid) moſt horrible and execrable offences through vſe and cuſtome are made ſmall faults, and are commonly practiſed. For it is the propertie of vice to be head-ſtrong and contentious, ſeeking to defend it ſelfe by reaſons, which, although they be altogither vaine and friuolous, yet of great waight in regard of the weake fleſh of man, which eaſily ſuffereth it ſelfe to be bound vnder the yoke of ſinne. Therefore we are to take good heed, that we ſuffer not our ſelues to be ſurpriſed by ſo dangerous an enimie, nor giue him any acceſſe or entrance into vs: I mean that he ſhould not dwell in vs (for otherwiſe we know that perfect righteouſnes is in God onely) but rather let vs exerciſe How we ſhould fortifie our ſelues againſt vice.all thoſe things that are contrarie to vice, accuſtoming our ſelues in ſuch ſort to maiſter our common and ſmall imperfections (which are but too abundant in the

iuſteſt men) that they take no effect, howſoeuer of themſelues they may ſeeme excuſable. By this meanes we ſhall labor euermore to make choiſe of the beſt in all indifferēt things: which will ſtand vs in ſtead of a ſure rampire againſt the tyrannicall raigne of this enimie to vertue. We read of Pythagoras, that he accuſtomed himſelfe to abſtain from crueltie and iniuſtice euen towards brute beaſts, by The humanitie of Pythagoras euen towards brute beaſts.requeſting fowlers, after they had taken birds to let them flie againe. And when he came amongſt fiſher-men he bought their draughts, and after cauſed all the fiſh to be caſt againe into the ſea. Moreouer, he forbad all his diſciples to kill a tame beaſt at any time. After his example let vs abſtaine from all things that may procure vice, and neuer ſuffer ſuch ſpeeches as theſe to paſſe from vs: What good will this do if that be wanting? Now I will deale in this maner, another time I will do better. Oh how ſlipperie are ſuch waies, how eaſily doth vice glide away like a ſtreame vnder An excellent compariſon teaching vs not to ſuffer any vnlawfull thing.ſuch pretences? For as a wedge maketh but a ſmal cleft in the beginning, yet afterward the rift being greater ſundereth al in peeces: ſo the ſufferance of vnlawful things how ſmall ſoeuer it be, leadeth men by little & little to an vnmeaſurable licentiouſnes. Moreouer, who can aſſure himſelfe of tomorrow, yea of a quarter of an hower? The oracle of Apollo anſwered thoſe of Cyrrha, that if they would liue in peace among themſelues, they ſhould make continuall war with their neighbors ſtrangers. So, that we may paſſe the courſe of our ſhort daies in peace, reſt and tranquillitie of ſpirit, and that we fall not into the cruell paw of this aduerſarie to all goodnes, we muſt daily fight againſt We muſt neuer harken to the heralds of vice.him, and neuer giue eare to his heralds and ambaſſadors of peace, which are pleaſures, neglect of dutie, and ſuch other baits, which he preſenteth to vs, to deceiue and beguile vs withal. It is moſt certaine, that vice putteth How vice deceiueth men.on a viſard, and goeth diſguiſed and couered with goodly ſhewes that belong onely to vertue, and chalengeth falſely vnto it ſelfe thoſe goods, which indeed and truth man ought to deſire. And being thus clothed, with the helpe of corruptible pleaſures that lightly paſſe away, it

yoketh baſe minded men, whoſe care is onely ſet vpon the deſire of earthly things, which it ſetteth before their eies as their felicitie, impudently imputing to vertue all thoſe euils that are in it ſelfe. But they that haue ſufficiently profited in philoſophy through the knowledge of that which is good, and of ſuch things as are truly faire and beautiful, neuer harken to ſuch hurtfull allurements, but rather do The prudence of the ſerpent.as the ſerpent doth, that ſtoppeth hir eares with hir taile, to the end ſhe may not heare the charmes and ſorceries of the inchanter. But if through the neglect of all good admonition, we giue place amongſt vs neuer ſo little to the baits of vice, they may eaſily in the end (as thornes and thiſtles growing neere to good ſeed, do oftentimes choke it) darken all that good inſtinct of nature that ſhall be in vs. Diogenes the Cynike, walking one day through that Why Diogenes asked his almes of images.ſtreet in Athens, wherein there were many images of ſuch ancient men, as had beſt deſerued of the Common-welth, asked his almes of them all one after another. Whereat ſome maruelling and demanding of him the cauſe why: I learne (quoth he to them) to take deniall patiently: euen ſo when we can ſo far command our ſelues, as to ſhun all vaine & vnprofitable buſines, wherin this age delighteth, and which ſerue but for allurements and baits to nicenes and pleaſures, let vs not be aſhamed not to follow them, but rather let vs ſay, that we learne to contemne that which is contemptible, and to make choice (according to that ancient precept of Pythagoras) of the beſt kind of life that is, to the end, that cuſtome may by little and little make it eaſie and pleaſant vnto vs. To conclude therefore our preſent matter, we ſay that vice, being inſeparably accompanied with a thouſand miſeries, and with vnſpeakeable and exceeding miſchiefs, which draw man into vtter ruine and eternall perdition, may be truly called the onely euill of the ſoule, as that which of it ſelfe is able and ſufficient to make him vnhappy, who receineth it for a gheſt. And as ſuch a hurtfull thing, we ought to hate and to flie from it, by the meanes of vertue that is contrarie vnto it, labouring by all meanes to haue our ſoules pure and

cleane from all wicked deeds, wils, and counſels, and our maners vndefiled, not being troubled or infected with any euill perturbation, wherewith vice alwaies aboundeth and is rich.
               
            
            
               Of Sciences, of the ſtudie of Letters, and of Histories. Chap. 7.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  IT is a vſuall ſpeech in the mouths of men altogether ignorant of the beautie and profite of Sciences, That the ſtudie of Letters is a bottomeles 
                     The ſpeeches of ignorant men touching the ſtudie of ſciences.
                     gulfe, and ſo long and vneaſie a iourney, that they which thinke to finiſh it, oftentimes ſtay in the midway, and many being come to the end thereof finde their mindes ſo confuſed with their profound and curious skill, that in ſtead of tranquillitie of ſoule, which they thought to finde, they haue encreaſed the trouble of their ſpirit. Vnder this goodly pretence, the moſt part ſay, that it is better not to know much, yea nothing at all: attributing the cauſe of mans imperfection, vnto ſcience. Being thus perſwaded, if they haue alreadie any beginning and entring in learning, they draw backe, and ſeeke to hinder and to turne Why many fathers ſet not their children to ſchoole.others aſide from following them. For this cauſe manie fathers ſet not their children to learning, or elſe bicauſe they finde this way of preferment too long and coſtly, & haue other more ſhort and profitable meanes now a daies whereby to inrich them. But both the one and the other are greatly to be condemned, bicauſe we are to ſpare no labor and trauel, that we may get the treaſures of the ſoul indued with reaſon, which are ſciences, wherin al humane felicitie conſiſteth, and which neuer breed vexation of ſpirite. But all wits are not fit and apt to comprehende and conceiue them. Neither doth the corruption of our nature better appeare, than in this, that we loue rather to inrich our ſelues and our children with wicked and periſhing goods, than with true certain and immortal goods, the happie knowledge wherof ſciences and arts do bring

vnto vs. Now hauing through the grace of God receiued this benefit by your liberalitie (moſt honorable fathers) as to haue beene inſtructed in the beſt and moſt neceſſarie points of knowledge, we thought it would not be tedious vnto you to heare vs diſcourſe, that we might ſtirre vp the memorie of our ſtudies, and that the beautie and commoditie of ſciences might worke in our affections a lyking and deſire to continue and to finiſh them.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Man (ſaith Ariſtotle) was created to vnderſtand Man was created to vnderſtand and to do.and to do. For it is neceſſarie that inſtruction go before working. Knowledge begetteth iudgement, and by iudgement men execute all good and vertuous actions. Whereupon it followeth, that the ſtudie of letters is rich, and vndoubtedly giueth vs the knowledge of things. Moreouer nothing may be compared to ſciences, which comfort vs in our life time and cauſe vs to liue after death.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  O ſcience (ſaith Plato) how would men loue thee if thou wert knowne? Fire and aire are not more neceſſarie for life, than is the art and rule of good liuing, which is ſhewed vnto vs by learning. And as health is the conſeruation of the bodie, ſo is doctrine the ſafegarde of the ſoule. But we are to vnderſtand more amply of thee (AMANA) what is the greatnes and beautie of ſciences.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Whatſoeuer is profitable, not onely for a houſe and familie, for a citie and nation, but generally for all mankinde, may well be accounted deere, precious and woonderful, & as ſo excellent a thing ought to be bought with all that a man hath: eſpecially if it be the true ſubſtance of all happines and felicitie, and the efficient cauſe of prudence, which is an excellent guide for mens actions to make them woorthy of an immortality. What can one deſire more than profite, pleaſure and honor, which are thoſe things wherewith all men are commonly led? The treaſure of Arabia and India may well bring ſome pleaſure to man, but yet alwaies vnperfect: ſeeing all riches is of it ſelfe blind, & bringeth no light to the ſoule, but receiueth hir brightnes from the ſoule when it is framed

according to vertue. Great and proud armies may by notable victories procure to themſelues renowm and glory, but blame woorthy: a title of honor, but forced and vniuſt, if their enterpriſes are not grounded vpon equitie & iuſtice. The marchant ſailing on large and terrible ſeas, may reape profite by his trafficke, but bought with the perill of his life, and hazard of his certaine patrimonie. Neither can this be done, except he haue firſt laide a good ground of his voiage vpon a ſure diſcourſe of reaſon, and vpon the direction of a good and wiſe pilot. Now of all theſe things, thus poore of themſelues, and begging all their ornaments elſe where, what certain ioy, true honor, or great profite may a man chalenge to himſelfe and not rather looke for a ſodaine change of them into a woorſe eſtate than they were in before, through the inconſtancie and vncertaintie of mans nature? Where then ſhall we ſeeke for theſe great and rare properties, to finde that which of it ſelfe will be vnto vs profitable, pleaſant, and The benefits which come by knowledge.honorable altogither, and that not for an inſtant, but for euer? Truely in ſcience or knowledge, which firſt is able to mollifie mans nature, being before ſauage and wilde, and to make it capable of reaſon: ſecondly, frameth and ſetleth his iudgement, that he may paſſe the courſe of his daies in al tranquillitie of minde to the profite of many: laſtly, cauſeth him to die in honor, with certaine aſſurance of eternall life and happines. It is knowledge that maketh man prudent, (for doctrine bringeth foorth prudence) The proper worke of the ſpirit of man.and worketh vnſpeakable pleaſure in his ſoule. For the ſearching out of the truth is the proper worke and perfection of the ſpirite, neither doth any delight come neere to that which a man taketh in learning. It is ſcience which guideth mens iudgements, whereby their chiefeſt deliberations and counſailes are executed, aſwell in feats of war, as in the eſtabliſhment and preſeruation of lawes, kingdoms, monarchies, commonwealths, cities and peoples: likewiſe in the regiment and gouernment of all worldlie affaires, either generall or particular, which are well or ill guided, according as he that manageth or gouerneth

them is inſtructed. To this purpoſe Seneca ſaide, that they, who being deſtitute of knowledge, did learne It is long ere men without knowledge become good magiſtrates.onely by experience to gouern publike affaires, although they were borne with a diuine and happy ſpirit, yet both late, and to the detriment of their common-wealth, they would in the end become good gouernors of the people. As contrariwiſe, they that ſhould come thereunto being garded with the precepts of knowledge, (ſo they caried a good minde) woulde quickely and without paine become woorthy of their charge. O wiſedome (ſaith Cicero) 
                     The praiſe of wiſedome.the guide of our life, the onely cauſe of vertue, and enimie tovice, what ſhould, not we only, but euen all the life of men be without thee? Thou haſt builded townes: thou haſt gathered together diſperſed and wandering men that they might liue in a ſocietie of life, and in common friendſhip. Thou compelleſt them to come togither, firſt by keeping all in a houſe and by mariage: then by the common vſe of words and ſpeech. Thou haſt beene the inuentreſſe of lawes, and the miſtres of maners and diſcipline. We haue no recourſe but to thee in our afflictions: we craue aide and ſuccour of thee: we put our ſelues wholy into thine armes. Truely one day well and iuſtly ſpent according to thy holie precepts, is to be preferred before an immortalitie of time conſumed in wickednes and vice. With what riches ſhall we furniſh our ſelues rather than with thine, which haſt liberally giuen vs the meanes to obtaine tranquillity in this life, and haſt taken from vs all feare and terror of death? Briefely, we may be aſſured, that ſcience is the onely diuine and immortall qualitie in vs, and that infallible rule, which bringeth both peace and warre to their perfect proportion: without which whoſoeuer goeth about to frame any glorious or happy building, doth aſmuch as if he ſhould vndertake to ſarle in the midſt of the ſea without a rudder, or walke through vnknowne places without a guid. Now the ancients knowing the greatnes & difficultie of knowledge, and that it cannot be obtained (as it falleth out in all great matters) without great paine and trauell, that

their labor might become profitable vnto vs, they I ſaie, who had ſpent their life euen with ſweating, in ſeeking out the ſecrets of nature, and were deſirous to eaſe mans ſtudie, who otherwiſe is inclined from his youth to pleaſure & reſt, haue diuided ſcience for vs into diuers parts. Which they did to this ende, that ſtep by ſtep, according to the nicenes of our ſpirits (euen as our bodies are firſt nouriſhed with milke and then with ſtronger meats) we might finde therein apt and conceiueable foode, and in the ende be made partakers of the ſecrets of perfect wiſedome, euery one according to his capacitie and need, expecting the full vnderſtanding thereof in the immortality of that ſecond and moſt happie life. Firſt then al arts and The diuiſion of ſciences.ſciences handled by reaſon, were diuided into three principall kinds: into Philoſophie, Rhetoricke and Mathematicke. Afterwards, ech of theſe ſciences was diuided into three other parts and kinds, Philoſophie into Moral, Logicall and Phyſicall or Naturall. Rhetoricke, into Demonſtratiue, Deliberatiue & 
                        •
                     udiciall. Mathematick, into Arithmetick, Muſick and Geometry. Since that, for greater facilitie, and that it might be more eaſie to learne, all humane philoſophie hath beene reduced into art, as we haue it at this day, from whence the name of liberall arts came, bicauſe they are woorthy & beſeeming a free man. Grammer. Rhetorick.Their names are theſe: Grammer, which is the entrance and beginning of all knowledge: Rhetoricke, which is the art of fine ſpeaking, and of perſwading: Dialectick or Logick.Logick, which is to learne the truth of all things by diſputation: Phyſick.Phyſick, which is the ſtudie of naturall things: Metaphyſick.
                     Mathematick and the parts thereof, as, Arithmetick.Metaphyſick, which is of ſupernaturall things: Mathematike, which hath many members, whereof Arithmetick is the firſt, which is the ſcience of numbers, and the foundation of all the other parts of Mathematicke, without which ſcience of Arithmetick, Plato denied that any Geometry.man could be either a philoſopher or captaine generall. Next to that is Geometry, that is to ſaye, the art of meaſuring the ground, very neceſſarie likewiſe for a captaine, and for many other martiall affaires. Then followeth

Coſmographie and Geography, to know the ſituation Coſmography.of the whole world, euen from the tower of the higheſt heauen, called the firſt moouer, vnto the center of the Geography.earth, and likewiſe of the diuers regions therof with their particular temperatures. After that is Aſtronomie, the Aſtronomy.ſcience that teacheth vs to know the courſe of the ſtarres and planets, which thing practiſe onely might teach vs, I meane ſo much as is neceſſarie for vs, as our firſt fathers were a long time content therewith, vntill the curioſitie of men inuented theſe names of Saturne, Mars, & others, attributing natures vnto them according to their imaginations, and alſo power ouer our bodies: yea thoſe things that ſhall periſh and are without life, are ſaid to haue power ouer our immortall ſoules. And from thence proceeded iudiciall Aſtronomy, wherewith ſo many good wits are deceiued, and of which ſo many abuſes haue their beginning. Next, Muſick is ſet downe alſo for a member of Muſicke.the Mathematicks, as being a ſcience drawne from numbers, bicauſe that by them harmonicall proportion was found. Laſtly followeth Poetry, which is attributed to Muſick. In this ſhort diſcourſe the woonderfull greatnes Poetry.ofſcience appeereth ſufficiently, as alſo how hard, yea vnpoſſible it is, to attaine to the perfection thereof through the ſound knowlege of all the parts thereof. Wherefore Thoſe ſciences are firſt to be learned, that are moſt neceſſarie.we are firſt to ſeeke after thoſe that are moſt neceſſarie, and then to deſire a meane vnderſtanding of them all according to the gifts and graces of God beſtowed on our ſoules. But aboue all things we muſt ſhunne that idlenes and rechleſnes which is in many, who by reaſon of the difficultie, which they heare ſay is in ſciences, and diſtruſting themſelues for euer comming neere the skill of ſo many good wits, as haue gone before them, remaine as buried in ignorance, and vnprofitable amongſt men. The greatnes of Alexander ſtaied not his ſucceſſours from trying the iſſue and euent of all ſorts of noble enterpiſes. And the woonderfull knowledge of Plato could not keep Aristotle from handling philoſophie as he thought good. He that diſtruſteth his wit and the inuention thereof,

ſheweth himſelfe too vngratefull. For it ſeemeth he will condemne nature the mother of all things, as though ſhe had put all hir gifts and graces in ſome men, and euer after purpoſed to be idle and barren, hauing no more ſtrength to bring foorth any thing woorthy commendation. We muſt not therefore in this ſort be diſcouraged in the ſearching out of euerie good diſcipline, knowing that thoſe things alſo, which draw neere to perfection are great. But yet for the chiefe part of all our ſtudies, let vs take Morall philoſophie, whereof we haue alreadie diſcourſed, that we may frame our maners according to vertue, and lead and direct our ſelues to that ende, which we deſire, euen to liue well and happily. So let vs practiſe that What kinde of knowledge is eſpecially required in a philoſopher.diuine ſaying of Plato ſpeaking by the mouth of Socrates, That more vertue and pietie is required in a philoſopher than knowledge: and that all ſcience, which is to be required in him, is, that aboue all thinges he worſhip and reuerence God the onely true maſter of wiſedome, and authour of whatſoeuer may be knowne: and that he endeuour to ſeparate his ſoule from his bodie, as much as may be, by contemning pleaſures, ambition, vaineglory and riches, that ſo he may lay hold of the treaſures of immortall life. This we may learne by reading books & writings, which are the inſtruments of wiſedome, and are left vnto vs by learned men for a rule and for inſtruction. By the ſtudie hereof we ſhall attaine to that knowledge of the true and perfect good of man, which conſiſteth in vertue and veritie, the onely nouriſhment, reſt and tranquillitie of the minde. But will we know further what profite we may receiue by the doctrine of ancient men? Let vs onely read Anacharſis letter to Craeſus touching the ſtudies of Graecia.that which Anacharſis wrote to Craeſus king of Lidia. Know (quoth he to him) that in the ſtudies of Graecia we learne, not to command, but firſt to obey: not to ſpeake, but to keepe ſilence: not to reſiſt, but to humble our ſelues: not to get much, but to content our ſelues with a little: not to reuenge our harmes, but to pardon iniuries: not to take from others, but to giue our owne: not to take care to be honored, but to labour to be vertuous.

Laſtly, we learne to deſpiſe that which others loue, and to loue that which others deſpiſe, that is pouertie. Behold the faire fruits of ſcience, and of the ſtudie of theſe ancient Sages, to which no treaſures of worldly riches are in any ſort comparable, and which we ought to deſire aboue The praiſe and proſite of 
                           〈◊〉
                        .all things. Moreouer, by this ſtudie of letters, we ſhall be taught to ſearch out diligently the vnderſtanding of hiſtories, which are the treaſury of things paſt, the patterne of thoſe that are to com, the picture of mans life, the tuchſtone of our dooings, the workmaſter of our honor, and as Cicero calleth them, the witnes of times, the light of truth, the life of memorie, the miſtres of life and the meſſenger of antiquitie. Hiſtories cauſe vs to beholde that without danger, which ſo many millions of men haue tried with the loſſe of their liues, honor and goods, that we may be made wiſe by their perill, and ſtirred vp to follow the vertue of others, which hath brought them to the top of all felicitie and glorie. Now if we thinke to learne by our owne experience theſe excellent inſtructions which we may draw out of hiſtories, in ſtead of ſo rare treaſures we ſhall know but few things, and thoſe with loſſe & perill amongſt a thouſand aduerſities, from which the vnderſtanding of that which is paſt, ſaueth & deliuereth vs. Prudence gotten by experience is too perilous, and ſo long a comming, that very often a man dieth before he haue obtained it, ſo that he had need of a ſecond life to imploy about it. But we muſt haſten it forward by the ſearching out of things, which haue come to paſſe both before and ſince our time, in the ſtudie both of philoſophie, which is rich and plentifull in worthy examples, and alſo of hiſtories, which are a ſingular gift of God, whereby he would haue his woonderfull works continued in the How a man may become happie.memorie of men. For this cauſe Zeno, being demanded how a man might become happie, anſwered, if he drew neere vnto and haunted the dead: meaning thereby, if he read hiſtories, and endeuored to learne their good inſtructions that haue gone before vs. Ptolemie alſo asking one of the wiſe interpreters, wherein a king ought to exerciſe

himſelfe, In the knowledge (quoth he) of things which haue been done, and in reading books of things which Wherein kings ought moſt to exerciſe themſelues.daily offer themſelues, or which are fit for preſent affaires, and laſtly in ſearching out whatſoeuer is written for the preſeruation of kingdoms and correction of maners. And truly they that are exerciſed in the vnderſtanding of hiſtories, although they be but yoong, yet in knowledge of worldly matters they become like to the aged and grayheaded: as contrariwiſe they that are ignorant of things done and paſt before their being, remaine alwaies children, and euen within their owne countrie where they were borne, they are in the ſame eſtate in reſpect of knowledge that forreners are. If we yet deſire more teſtimonies from amongſt the ancients, of the honor, loue, zeale, and ardent affection, which they bare towards the ſtudie of good letters, and how the chiefé glorie of all their heroicall and noble acts doth of dutie belong to ſcience, we The ſaving of Philip at the birth of Alexander.read of Phillip king of Macedonia, that when Alexander was borne to him, he gaue thanks to God, not ſo much bicauſe he had this ſonne, as bicauſe he was borne in the time of ſo wiſe a philoſopher as Aristotle was, whom he made his ſchoolmaiſter. Of him Alexander learned many goodly ſciences, as well in philoſophie as in phyſicke, and namely, thoſe Acroamaticall ſciences, that is, ſpeculatiue, and ſuch as could not be learned but by hearing a teacher. Of which Sciences this great Monark was iealous, and taken with ſo greedie a deſire, that hearing how Ariſtotle had publiſhed certaine bookes, he wrote a letter vnto Alexanders letter to Ariſtotle.him in this maner: Alexander ſendeth greeting to Aristotle. Thou haſt not done wel to publiſh theſe bookes of ſpeculatiue ſciences: foraſmuch as we ſhall haue nothing aboue others, if that which thou haſt taught vs priuately come to be publiſhed and communicated to all. For I would thou ſhouldeſt know, that I loue rather to excell others in the vnderſtanding of high and notable things, than in power. How greatly this excellent prince alwaies loued knowledge, appeereth ſufficiently by the exceeding liberalitie and gifts, wherewith he honoured the maiſters

and teachers thereof (as we may ſomewhat touch it heerafter) as alſo in that he alwaies caried Homers Iliads about His loue to learning.him, which vſually he laid vnder his pillow, naming it the nouriſhment and preſeruer of warlike vertue. Caeſar in the Iulius Caeſar.midſt of his campe had his commentaries in his boſome, and that time which he ſpared from fighting, he beſtowed in reading and writing, holding a launce in the left hand, and a pen in the right. We ſee in theſe two mightie and ſacred princes, and in infinite other great perſonages both Greekes and Romanes, the woonderfull effects of knowledge, which conducted them to the top of all honor, felicitie, and proſperitie. Xenophon, the diſciple of Socrates 
                     Xenophon.ſerueth for another witnes, who being guided by an vnſpeakable prudence and prouidence gotten in the ſtudie of philoſophie, brought an armie of a thouſand footmen out of Perſia into Greece, going ouer the foords of fiftie riuers, and through the midſt of a hundred thouſand enimies purſuing him, and yet his aray was neuer broken, albeit he fought with them ſundry times. Beſides, if we are deſirous of teſtimonies of the incredible delight, which the ſtudie of any ſcience worketh in mens ſoules touched with the zeale of knowledge, we read of Nicias 
                     Nicias.the painter, how he tooke ſuch great delight in his works, that oftentimes he inquired of his ſeruants whether he had dined or no. Archimedes drawing his geometricall figures Archimedes.vpon a table, was as it were by force drawne away of his ſeruants, that he might annoint himſelfe with oile (according to their cuſtome) before he did eate: and during the time of his annointing, he would trace new figures vpon his bodie. Socrates was ſeene ſtanding a whole ſummers day for the ſpace of 24. houres continually in Socrates concluſion drawen out of 24. howers contemplation.contemplation and diſcourſing in his mind: which was when he drew this concluſion out of his thoughts, that There was but one only God, and that the ſoule was immortall. The Emperor Charles the fourth going on a day to a College 
                        Charles 4.in Praga, to heare the diſputations of vertue that were there, remained aboue fower howers on foote in hearing them. And when his courtiers, to whom he was weariſom,

                     Robert king of Sicilia.told him that it was time to ſup, he anſwered, that It was no more time for him, and that he had ſupped. Robert king of Ieruſalem and Sicilia, a very learned prince, was ſo affectionated to letters, that he oftentimes ſaid, that if he were to loſe either his kingdoms or his learning, he would chooſe rather to be depriued of them than of knowledge. What greater teſtimonie of loue toward Science can one deſire Ptolemie Philadelphus.than that of Ptolemie Philadelphus, that vertuous king of Egypt, who with incredible charges gathered togither into his librarie fiue hundred thouſand bookes, and purpoſely cauſed ſeuentie and two of the moſt learned and religious men of Iudea to come and tranſlate the holie Bible out of Hebrew into Greeke? And ſurely we ſhould be too vngratefull towards our princes, if amongſt ſo many famous men we ſhould leaue no place for that great Charlemaine.Emperor and king Charlemaine, who was skilfull in the Greeke and Latine toongs, and who in fauor of thoſe toongs, and of the louers of knowledge, erected the Vniuerſitie at Paris, and that at Pauia, according to the patterne of thoſe places of learning which were at Athens. 
                        Francis 1.
                     Francis the firſt, a prince of moſt famous memorie, ſo loued and fauored letters, and the profeſſors of them, that he deſerued the name of the reſtorer of ſciences and good arts, ſparing neither care nor meanes to aſſemble togither bookes and volumes of ſundry ſorts, and of all languages for the beautifying of his ſo renowmed a librarie, which was a worthy monument of ſuch a magnificall monarke: whoſe praiſe-worthy qualities we ſee reuiued in our king, treading in the ſelfeſame ſteps. Now to conclude our preſent diſcourſe, we learne heereby to deſpiſe all earthly goods for the obtaining of knowledge, which of it ſelfe is truly profitable, delectable, and honorable altogither, and whereby we are taught how to liue and die well and happily. And bicauſe that arts and ſciences conſiſt of many parts, let vs apply our minds to the ſtudie and contemplation of thoſe which togither with delight do alſo draw vs to that which is our proper and peculiar good, namely, to the knowledge of truth and vertue, which worke in vs alwaies

an affection and zeale to follow them, and cauſe all arts and ſciences teaching other things to be eſteemed baſe, mechanicall, and vnbeſeeming good wits. This did Antiſthenes giue one to vnderſtand, who greatly commended Antiſthenes ſaying touching a flute plaier.
                     Iſmenius for an excellent plaier on the flute: it is true (quoth he to him) but otherwiſe he is good for nothing. For elſe had he not been ſo good a minſtrell. So, euerie one applying himſelfe to ſome baſe and vaine art, produceth for witnes againſt himſelfe that labor, which he hath beſtowed about vnprofitable matters, to prooue that he hath beene idle and ſlothfull in learning honeſt and profitable things. And for the laſt fruit and vſe of our ſpeech we ſee heere what great occaſion we haue all our life time to become the diſciples of knowledge, which is ſo high and profound, and to diminiſh all pride and preſumption of our skill, after the example of that wiſe man Socrates, who although he were the learnedeſt of his time, and ſo The modeſtic of Socrates touching his owne skill.iudged to be by the oracle at Delphos, yet alwaies ſaid, that he knew nothing. And when he was demanded any thing, he would neuer anſwer reſolutely, as if he would haue been beleeued, but doubtingly vſed to ſay, I thinke ſo, or, It may be ſo. Being therefore deſirous to learne with all modeſtie, let vs endeuor to ſeeke out more and more by trauell and ſtudie, the aſſurance and knowledge of veritie and vertue.
               
            
            
               Of the Spirit and of memorie. Chap. 8.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  HAuing now diſcourſed of the greatnes, beutie, and profit of knowledge, I thinke, that if we were to wiſh for two helps very neceſſarie for the attaining vnto it, thoſe ought to be a ſpirit or mind ready to conceiue, and memorie, firme to retaine: without which two things we ſhall profit our ſelues little, and much leſſe a great many.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Thoſe two things, which thou propoundeſt vnto vs would ſeeme woonderfull if they were togither.

                     Quicke wits commonly want memorie. For we commonly ſee, that they who haue a readie and quicke wit, for the moſt part want memorie: and they that learne with greateſt difficultie and paine, do beſt retaine and keepe that which they haue once learned.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  This talke of the ſpirit, whereunto you attribute the propertie of comprehending (and yet ſpeake not of the ſoule) is vndoubtedly worthie of great conſideration. For euen when we ſpeake of a yong infant, we ſay by and by, that his ſpirit or wit will grow with his bodie, and of a crooked old-ſire, we ſay that his ſpirit waxeth old with him, which in many we ſee oftentimes becommeth altogither dul and vnfit for the ordering & gouernment Pſal. 102. 26.of affaires. Now that which waxeth old draweth to an end, as the ſcripture it ſelfe teacheth vs concerning times and ſeaſons, which wax old like to mens garments, and are to take end. And yet we know that the ſoule is immortall, and therefore waxeth not old. So that one would thinke, that the ſoule and ſpirit are two diſtinct things, although we ſee euery where the one taken for the other. But let vs heare ASER diſcourſe of this matter, and ſo we ſhall learne what the ſpirit is in the ſoule.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  As the works of the diuine power are altogither incomprehenſible to the outward ſence of man, and It is very hard for a man to know himſelfe.very hard to be comprehended by reaſon guided & conducted by grace from aboue, ſo we are not to think much if the knowledge of a mans ſelfe, which is moſt neceſſary, be ſo hardly found out by him, ſeeing his compoſition farre paſſeth all the works of nature, that are viſible and ſubiect to ſight. Now if a man cannot know himſelfe, how ſhould he hope to comprehend greater matters, which are ſupernaturall and hidden in the heauens? And who can rightly boaſt, that he hath the true and perfect vnderſtanding of the chiefeſt part and moſt powerfull beginning of himſelfe, namely of his ſpirite? Who am I, ſaide Socrates opinion concerning man.
                     Socrates? Am I a ſubiect compounded of ſoule and body? Or rather a ſoule, that vſeth the body, as a horſeman doth a horſe? Or, is euery one of vs that principall part of the ſoule, whereby we vnderſtand, diſcourſe and do, and all

the other parts of the bodie but inſtruments of this power: Or if there be no proper ſubſtance at all of the ſoule by it ſelfe, but that it is onely a temperature and complexion of the bodie ſo framed that it hath power to vnderſtand and to liue, am I not a ſauage beaſt, more crafty, bold and furious than euer was the ſerpent Typhon? Or elſe, am I a meeker and ſimpler creature, pertaker of a better eſtate, and voide of pride? All the excellenteſt philoſophers that euer were handled this ſelf ſame matter aſwel as Socrates, with incredible trauel and paine, that they may attaine to this knowledge of the nobleſt part in the, which is the ſoule and ſpirite, taking indifferently the one for the other. But firſt of all this wiſe Socrates ſpake excellently of the dignitie and immortalitie of the ſoule, ſaying, that in truth the ſoule is man, and not this mortall The ſoule is 
                           〈◊〉
                         man.maſſe and lumpe of the bodie, which of it ſelfe is no more than a ſimple and baſe inſtrument is in regard of the moſt cunning workeman of any art of ſcience. And for this cauſe giuing vp the ghoſt amongſt his diſciples, and being asked by Clito where he would be buried: As for Socrates 
                     Socrates anſwer touching his bur
                           •
                        all.(quoth he to him) take thou no thought or care. For thou canſt not ſtay him, whoſe tombe hath beene from all time readie for him. But concerning that which he leaueth here below, it is not woorthy to be cared for by him. The greateſt thing (ſaid Periander) that may be ſaid to be contained Periander.in a little place, is the ſoule in a mans bodie. Empedocles 
                     Empedocles.ſpeaking of the generation of the ſoule ſaith, that neither bloud, nor the vitall ſpirit congealed haue giuen vnto vs the ſubſtance of the ſoule, and the beginning of life. The bodie onely is compounded earthlie and mortall. But the generation of the ſoule is heauenly, being Of the generation of the ſoule.ſent here below as a paſſenger, and ſtranger, or as one that is baniſhed and ſent out of his countrey. Whereupon ſhe continually ſigheth, groneth, and as it were drieth away, (like to a good plant tranſlated out of a good plot of ground into a bad) vntill in the end ſhe returne, and be receiued into hir immortall habitation, after ſhe hath changed hir preſent life, which is vnto hir but as a vaine

illuſion of ſome dreame; in reſpect of a true, certaine and permanent life. Surely theſe philoſophicall ſpeculations are not vaine and friuolous, but very neceſſarie to lead vs to that happie end of our being, which we ſeeke for. For if we be well inſtructed concerning the great and honorable place and condition, which the ſoule enioieth aboue the bodie, as well in hir immortall generation, as in hir contemplation and action, as alſo that of hir happines dependeth (as before we handled it) the felicitie of the whole frame of man, will we not apply all our principall care, ſtudie and diligence in prouiding ſuch things for hir as ſhe deſireth, and which are meet and healthfull for hir? But we haue further (thanks be giuen to the author of all good) a ſecond & more perfect vnderſtanding of the ſoul, than had all theſe notable heathen men, both in reſpect of the bleſſed immortalitie and alſo of the cauſe thereof. We know alſo that ſo long as ſhe is detained in this mortall priſon of the bodie, & that we are become new creatures The ſoule is diuided into the ſpirit and the fleſh.by the grace of God, ſhe is diuided into theſe two partes, the ſpirit and the fleſh, betweene which there is a perpetual combat. Yea the fleſh continually offereth to the ſpirit a thouſand temptations, to delight it withall. For the bodie and fleſh conſiſting of mortall and corruptible matter, are but a lumpe of ſinne, and full of wicked deſires, The ſpirit of the godlie both by creation and regeneration is enimie to vice.whereas the ſpirit of it ſelfe vertuous and good, and of an immortall eſſence, is of it owne nature enimie to vice and iniquitie: ſo that being ruled and guided by the ſpirite of God, it loueth and deſireth eternall happines, and reioiceth in iuſtice, puritie and holines. And yet the ſoule is not ſo freed from the ſlauerie of ſinne, but that there remaineth in hir many ſteps of the earthly man, ſo that ſhe alwaies carieth about with hir the relickes of the The fight betweene the ſpirit and the fleſh.fleſh, whereby hir libertie is ſo much diminiſhed. This is that fight whereof the true children of God haue dailie experience, when they are lifted vpward by the ſpirit, and by the fleſh turned downeward: by the ſpirit they bend with an ardent deſire towards immortalitie, by the fleſh they are caried aſtray into the way of death: by the ſpirit

they thinke to liue iuſtly, by the fleſh they are ſtirred foreward to iniquitie: by the ſpirit they contemne the world, by the fleſh they deſire wordly delights. But in the ende the grace of God cauſeth the ſpirit to remaine ſuperiour, Rom. 8 7.ſo that his children walke not according to the fleſh, but according to the ſpirit. Whereas if we be left of God to What we are being left to our ſelves.our owne corrupt and peruerſe nature, we haue not ſufficient ſtrength to reſiſt the temptations of this wicked fleſh, but in ſteade of commanding it, we obey it with ſhame and confuſion. And then accuſtoming our ſelues to ſinne, and to conſent to the deſires of the fleſh, the diuine part of the ſoule is ſo weakened, that ſhe hath no more ſtrength or feeling of hir eſſence, which is enimie to vice, but hauing forſaken God, he forſaketh hir, and giueth hir ouer into the power of carnal deſires. So that by this long dwelling in ſinne, being as it were altogither dead, ſhe taketh no more counſaile of reaſon, but followeth after deteſtable vices, and ſuch as are againſt nature. But on the contrarie ſide being guided by the grace of God, after we haue laboured by faſting, watching and praier, to reſiſt the vnpure deſires of the fleſh, al the concupiſcences therof wil at length be ſo tamed and forced, that the ſoule ſhal execute hir office in commanding ouer them abſolutely, and in choaking them ſo ſoone as they ſhall ſpring vp. Therefore it commeth from the ſpirit, that we aſpire continually to our laſt and ſoueraign good, that with a ſinguler deſire of hart, and with all our affection we ſtudie to ſeeke and finde it out, euen with teares and ſighes, by reaſon of thoſe continuall impediments, which the fleſh laieth before vs in following our courſe. Moreouer the ſpirit cauſeth vs to imploy all our might in the ſeparation of the ſoule from the bodie, and in diſpiſing pleaſure, ambition, vainglorie and riches, that we may offer an acceptable preſent, by yeelding vnto him the ſoul, which he hath giuen vs. Which thing cannot be done (ſaith Plato) but by keeping it, as much as may be, purged & cleanſed from earthly ſpots, that ſhe may be knowne and acknowledged aboue amongſt hir companions, conſidering that

no defiled thing ſhall enter into the kingdome of heauen. In this diſcourſe of the ſoule and of the ſpirit thus intermingled, I thinke we may here ſet downe ſome ſpecial difference betwixt them, although vndoubtedly the one is taken indifferently for the other, without any abſurditie,The difference betweene the 
                           〈◊〉
                         and the ſpirit. yea they are one and the ſame thing. The difference may be made in this ſort, if we ſay, that the ſoule is common to all things that haue life, as we vſe to ſay, that all beaſts are animated, and haue ſenſitiue ſoules: but that the ſpirite, which is immortall, and capable of reaſon & knowledge, is proper and peculiar to man onely. And it ſeemeth that Sophocles would teach vs this diſtinction, when he ſaith, that The ſpirit is the ſame thing to the ſoule, which the eie is to the bodie. Socrates alſo putting a difference betweene the ſoule and the ſpirit, ſaide, that as eucrie ſeditious man is to be baniſhed out of a well gouerned citie, ſo a ſpirit enclined to all miſchiefe is to be remooued from that ſoule, which we would ſaue. Or elſe we may ſay otherwiſe (not diuiding any thing) that the ſpirit is the firſt and principallThe three parts of the ſpirit. part of the ſoule, wherein the Minde, the Ʋnderstanding, and the memorie are contained, which are moſt neceſſary for the direction of all good and vertuous actions, and which ſtand in need of preſeruation, nouriſhing, and exerciſe, and therfore they are ſaid, (not without reaſon) to increaſe & decreaſe in the minde of man. The minde is as a white paper, wherein as a man groweth in age & iudgement, he writeth his cogitations and thoughts, which the ſtudie of letters and learning do affoord him. Vnderſtanding is framed by the knowledge of reaſon, and laſtlyOf Memorie. memorie followeth & preſerueth it, being the mother of the muſes, and the treaſorie of knowledge. Plutark calleth it the hearing of deafe things, and the ſight of the blinde. There is nothing, that ſerueth ſo much to beget and preſerue learning and knowledge, as memorie doth, whereof we haue many examples among the ancients. We readeMithridates. of Mithridates king of Pontus, who was a great enimie to the Romaines, that he had vnder his dominion two & twentie nations, ſpeaking diuers languages, all which he

learned and anſwered their ambaſſadours in their owne toongs. Which thing he could neuer haue comprehended without an excellent and happy memorie, which alſo was the cauſe, that Themiſtocles knew perſonally and could name all his countrimen, by their proper names. The emperor Frederick the 11. ſpake the Greeke, Latin, Hebrew,Frederick. Arabian, Morisko, Almaigne, Italian and French toong. In our time there was an interpreter of Sultan Solymaus,
                     Genuſbey. named Genuſbey, borne in Corfou, endued with the richeſt memorie that euer was. For he ſpake perfectly the Greek toong, both vulgar & learned, the Turkiſh, Arabian, Mooriſh, Tartarian, Perſian, Armenian, Hebrew, Ruſſe, Hungarian, Sclauonian, Italian, Spaniſh, Almaign,P. Craſſus. Latin and French. It is recorded of Publius Craſſus, that at one inſtant he heard fiue ſundry languages ſpoken, and anſwered ech of them in the ſame toong. Whereby we ſee that he was endued with an excellent and quicke ſpirite, apt to conceiue, and with a firme memorie, able to retaine them altogither: and this may be ſeene in many. But theFrom whence iudgement proceedeth. perfection of theſe two great gifts of nature, is a good & ſound iudgement, proceeding from pondering, and from a firme diſcourſe of reaſon lightned by the ſpirit of God, and by the ſame ſpirit purged from error, illuſion, and all vaine opinion, which are vſuall in man, and hinder him from iudging aright of the truth. But to continue our ſpeech of the woonderfull effects of memorie ſo much eſteemed of Plato, that he writeth, that we ſhuld leaue of to be men, & become like to the gods, if our memory could retaine and keepe ſo much as the eies can read and ſee. We muſt not here forget to make mention of Iulius Caeſar,
                     Iulius Caeſar. that great monarke, of whom Hiſtoriographers report, that at one time he cauſed his Secretaries to write vnto foure ſeuerall perſons of ſundry matters, and that oftentimes he would indight a letter to one of his Secretaries, read in a booke, and heare another ſpeake all at one time. Seneca rehearſed two thouſand ſundry names, hauingSeneca. onely heard them pronounced before, beginning at the laſt and continuing to the firſt. By theſe examples we

ſee the greatnes of memorie, wherby we may eaſily indge how profitable it is for the inriching of the minde with all things neceſſarie to the gouernment of mans eſtate. YeaA good 
                           •
                        ſe of memorie. it is vnto vs a helpe requiſite to ſaluation, as that whereby we keepe in remembrance the gifts and graces, which we daily receiue from the goodnes and fauor of God▪ to this end, that we ſhould not be vngrateful, but yeeld vnto him glorie and praiſe without ceaſing. Nowe bicauſe one of you (my companions) touched this, that they which haue a ready and quick wit, commonly want memorie, & that they which hardly learne, retaine and keepe better that which they haue learned, I will giue you this reaſon with Plutark, that hardnes of belecfe ſeemeth to be the cauſeReaſons why quick eſt wits haue woor
                           •
                        t memories, and con
                        
                           •••
                        wiſe why men comprehend ſlowly. For it is very euident, that to learne, is to receiue ſome impreſſion: whereupon it followeth, that they which reſiſt leaſt, are ſuch as ſooneſt beleeue. And therefore youth is eaſier to be perſwaded than old folks, ſick than ſound, women than men: and generally the weaker that thing is, which diſcourſeth and doubteth, the eaſier may a man put and adde vnto it, what he will, as likewiſe the ſelfe ſame thing is ſooner loſt and let ſlip away. Some others (as Iuſtine Martyr ſaith) haue rendred this reaſon of the quicknes or ſlownes of mans wit, ſaying, that it commeth of the good or immoderate mixture & temperature of the elements, of which our bodies are compounded and framed, and of the ſymmetrie and proportion of the organicall or iuſtrumentall parts ioyned togither in him. And ſurely theſe ſeeme to giue the true reaſon therof. For we ſee many, who in their beginning and firſt age ſhew that they haue a prompt and ſharp wit, but when they come to old age are changed, & become ſlow and dul to conceiue. Which is a great token and argument that a good or bad complexion and conſtitution of the body, is the cauſe of ſuch a diſpoſition, either in quicknes or ſlownes of ſpirit, as the difference of yeeres doth affoord them. Beſides, doe we not perceiue, that they which haue the head ouergreat and ill fanored, whom we cōmonly call great blockheads, (bicauſe there

is not an equall ſymmetry and moderate proportion betweene that and the other parts of the bodie) are naturally vnapt to conceiue, and to bring foorth any ſenſible and wittie thing? But the reſolution of al this ſpeech ſhall be, that all gifts of the ſpirit are from aboue, & that amongſt1. Cor. 12. all ſorts of men, there are ſome found, that are prompt & wittie to comprehend great and diuine things, by a ſpeciall grace and fauour, which God hath beſtowed vpon them. Some by the gift of the holie Ghoſt haue wiſedom, others knowledge and vnderſtanding of things, and all giuen to euerie one for the profiting both of himſelfe and of his neighbor. Knowing therefore by this preſent diſcourſe, according to the weakenes of our iudgement, the creation and nature of the ſpirit, which is the principall and moſt noble part of vs, and that whereof dependeth and proceedeth all our happines, reſt and felicitie, let vs be carefull and diligent to ſearch it out, and to prouide ſuch things as it deſireth of vs, as helps to that effect, beſtowing all our care, labour and ſtudie, to adorne and deck it with righteouſnes and holines, according to the holie deſire therof, wherin conſiſteth life and peace. And let vs beware that we ſeeke not to feede it with ſtrange meats, which may make it ſorrowfull, and with which our fleſh aboundeth to hir death and deſtruction. But mortifiengRom. 8. 1. all the deadly deſires and affections thereof, let vs labour not to walke any more according to the fleſh, but according to the ſpirit, and let vs know that all weariſomnes and tediouſnes which troubleth the tranquillitie and reſt thereof, proceedcth from the want of experience in affaires, from the want of good diſcourſing, grounded vpon a reſolute and ſetled iudgement, and from the want of skill fitly to apply our ſelues to preſent occaſions. And this is that which troubleth all ſorts and conditions of life, as well rich as poore. But the way to preſerue the ſpirite in reſt and quietnes, is to nouriſh and exerciſe it in the ſtudie of wiſedome, where it learneth reaſon, which of it ſelfe can cure it of all ſorrow, anguiſh and greefe through wiſe diſcourſing, and worke in it a like inclination

and conſtant behauior in euerie alteration of life, cauſing man to liue happie throughout the whole courſe of his life, not without the hope and certaine expectation of a bleſſed immortalitie.
               
            
            The end of the ſecond daies worke.
         
         
            THE THIRD DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Dutie and Honestie. Chap. 9.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     The end of the creation of all things. 
                     ALthough all things were created of diuers natures and properties, and manie of cleane contraries, yet by an incomprehenſible wiſedom they were appointed to refer themſelues to one onely certaine and common end, namely, to ſhew foorth the infinite power and greatnes of their worke-maiſter, ſufficient in the leſt of his works with admiration to rauiſh man, to whom he hath made al things ſubiect. But as in him alone the treaſures of his heauenly graces haue been without compariſon more liberally vnfolded, and that in all fulnes and bountie, as well in regard of the goods and commodities of this life, which he draweth from heauen, from the earth, from the aire, from the water, from beaſts and plants, and generally from all things contained vnder the cope of the firmament, as alſo in reſpect of that vnſpeakable happines and eternall felicitie, which by the ſpeciall grace of God is purchaſed and aſſured to him onely in the immortalitie of the ſecond life, ſo alſo hath God from the beginning

vntill this preſent and for euer, reſerued to himſelfe a particular What homage we owe to God.homage, and that not for a time, or for certaine yeeres of his life, but to continue without intermiſſion from time to time, namely, loue teſtified by obedience, which we may comprehend vnder this onely word of Dutie, called by the philoſophers, the welſpring of all vertuous and laudable actions, and the foundation of honeſtie. Therefore I propound this matter to you (companions) to be diſcourſed vpon.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Which is the cheefe end of our being. The dutie of a good man conſiſteth in his good behauiour towards the chiefe and onely end of his being, compounded of theſe two things, the glorie of his Creator, and the loue of his neighbour. But the laſt vndoubtedly dependeth of the firſt. For without the feare of God, men wil neuer preſerue equitie and loue amongſt themſelues: as contrariwiſe the honoring of his maieſtie teacheth them to liue vprightly one with another.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  We ought not to aſſure or fortifie our ſelues with any other bulworke, than to do, to counſell, and to vtter al good and honeſt things, according to dutie, wherunto we are called by nature, not onely for our ſelues, but alſo for the benefit and profit of many. Therefore of thee (ACHITOB) we ſhall vnderſtand more at large what Dutie and Honestie is.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  No treatiſe in philoſophie (ſaith Cicero) is ſo neceſſarie as that of Office and Dutie: foraſmuch as no part of mans life, whether it be in publike or priuate affaires, or in what action ſoeuer it be, either ought or may be deſtitute therof. For therein conſiſteth all honeſtie of life, and, if it be neglected, all infamie. And albeit moſt part of the ancient philoſophers comprehended duty and honeſtie vnder vertue, affirming them to be one and the ſame thing, yet following the opinion of that great orator and philoſopher, who hath handled morall philoſophie in very good order, we may diſtinguiſh them after this ſort, ſaying, that dutie is the end whereunto vertue tendeth, namely, when in all our actions we obſerue honeſtie and comlines. In which diſtinction we ſee neuertheles

ſuch a coniunction of theſe three things, Vertue, Dutie, and Honeſtie, that the one is the end of the other, the perfection thereof conſiſting in all three togither. Dutie then What 
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        ie is.is that, which bindeth the ſoule, cheerfully and willingly without force or conſtraint to giue to euery one that which belongeth vnto him: honor, to whom honor: reuerence, to whom reuerence: tribute, to whom tribute: The diuiſion of dutie.and ſuccor, to whom ſuccor belongeth. This dutie is diuided into two generall kinds: the one is that which appertaineth to the perfect and ſouereigne good: the other concerneth the preſeruation and ſafetie of the common ſocietie of men, and conſiſteth in morall precepts, according to which the behauior of al ſorts of life may be ſquared. What dutie we owe to God and therefore.As touching the firſt, no doubt but all men are beholding and bound vnto God, both for their being and preſeruation thereof, as alſo for that abundance of goods neceſſarie for this life, which he powreth forth moſt liberally, both on the good and on the bad. Moreouer, Chriſtians are further tied and bound vnto him for the certaine hope of their ſaluation in his eternall ſonne. For all which things he asketh nothing of vs but loue and goodwill, teſtified by honor, reuerence, and ſeruice according to his holie ordinance, euery one after the meaſure of gifts and graces, which he hath from aboue: knowing that more is to be required of him to whom more is giuen. Obedience to Gods law is the mother of all vertues.This obedience being grounded vpon that rule of perfect righteouſnes, which is giuen vnto vs in the law of God, is the mother and preſeruer of all vertues, yea the What our dutie towards our neighbour is.beginning and roote of al goodnes. The other part of dutie, which reſpecteth our neighbor, and whereof we are chiefly to intreat in this our Academie, is nothing but charity & loue of our like, as of our ſelues, which is greatly recommended vnto vs in the ſcripture, as being very requiſit vnto ſalúation. This is that dutie, whereby we are bound not to do any thing againſt publike lawes, equitie, and profit, but to be alwaies conſtant in the perfect exerciſe and vſe of vertue, by doing honeſt and ſeemely things for their owne ſakes, and not of neceſſitie and conſtraint.

We are not onely borne (ſaith Cicero) for our ſelues, but our countrie, parents, and friends both will and ought to reape ſome commoditie by our birth. For whatſoeuer is vpon earth was created for men, and they for themſelues, Man created for man.that one might aide and helpe another. So that if we will follow nature, we muſt imploy our goods, trauell, and induſtrie, and whatſoeuer elſe is in our power, in the behalfe of common commoditie, and in the preſeruation of humane ſocietie: yea, that man liueth moſt happily, who, as little as may be, liueth to himſelfe. And on the other ſide, no man liueth more diſorderedly, than he that liueth to himſelfe, and thinketh on nothing but his owne profit. This is that dutie, which requireth that for the ſafetie of our parents, friends and countrie, we ſhould offer our ſelues to all perils, not reſpecting our owne profit or commoditie. Neither ought we to eſteeme any thing iuſt and Profit 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         be ſeparated from honeſtie.profitable, except honeſtie: which are ſo linked togither, (as the philoſophers ſay) that they can no more be ſeparated than whitenes and cold from ſnow, and heate and light from fire. So that if any man be perſwaded, that the rule of honeſtie and profit is not one and the ſame, he will neuer be without fraud or wickednes. For thinking thus with himſelfe, this indeed is honeſt, but that is profitable for me, he will not feare to breake and rent a ſunder all equitie ordained and appointed either by diuine or humane lawes. And this diuiſion is the fountaine of all vice, falſhood, and miſchiefe. A good man (ſaith Plato) may not ſlander, ſteale, or lie for his owne commoditie. Is there any thing then in this world of ſo great value, any treaſure ſo pretious, that ought to cauſe vs to looſe the name of vertuous and iuſt? We ought rather to turne profit towards honeſtie, and that in ſuch ſort, that howſoeuer the words ſeeme to differ one from another, yet we ſhould make them but one thing. Moreouer, the ſame diuine philoſopher ſaith, that the true beautie of the ſoule, which is honeſtie, is nothing elſe but the brightnes of that perfect and chiefe good that appeereth in thoſe things, which may be knowen by the eies, eares, and mind, whereby it is

cauſed to returne towards the Idea and paterne of goodnes. Wherby this excellent man meaneth no other thing, than to giue vs to vnderſtand, that whatſoeuer goodnes and honeſtie is in vs, commeth from God, as from the fountaine thereof, vnto which by the ſame vertue it returneth, leading the ſoule with it to liue eternally. Beſides, from him and by him commeth the beginning and proceeding of our good works: yea it is he that maketh vs to go forward according to true dutie, which conſiſteth in Two things requiſite in euerie good worke.theſe two points: firſt, that the intention and end of our actions be rightly framed: ſecondly, that the like meanes to attaine to that end be found out. For theſe two things may agree or diſagree one from another, as we ſee ſometimes the end well propounded, and yet men erre in the meanes to attaine vnto it: and contrariwiſe, it falleth out oftentimes, that the meanes are good, and the end propounded, bad. So that it is from this liuely and euer-flowing fountaine, which is the cauſe of al good, from whence we are to looke for the perfect knowledge of our dutie, and the ends and meanes whereby to execute it, to the glorie of God, and to the good and profit of our like. And from this generall vertue, and fountaine of honeſtie and Fower riuers iſſue out of the fountaine of dutie.dutie, fower riuers iſſue and ſpring, called morall vertues: namely, Prudence, which is as a guide to the reſt, and knoweth what is profitable for it ſelfe, for others, and for the common-wealth: Temperance, the miſtres of modeſtie, chaſtitie, ſobrietie, and vigilancie, and of all order and mediocritie in all things: Fortitude, which maketh a man conſtant, patient, couragious, hardie, and readie to enterpriſe high, great, profitable, and holie things: and Iustice, which is the bond and preſeruation of humane ſocietie, by giuing to euery one that which belongeth vnto him, by keeping faith in things promiſed, by ſuccoring gladly the afflicted, and by helping euery one according as abilitie ſerueth. Which vertues are the true and certain goods of the ſoule, whereby all actions are directed according to dutie, as we ſhall ſpeake particularly thereof heerafter. In the meane while let vs enter into the examples of the ancients,

and ſee how exactly and inuiolably they obſerued all points of dutie, chooſing rather to ſacrifice their liues, than to infringe, and breake any of them, much more contemning all other weaker occaſions, wherwith lewd and baſe-minded people ſuffer themſelues to be eaſily corrupted. And firſt, touching the firſt point of dutie naturally Examples of the zeale of the ancients in the ſeruice of there god.imprinted in the ſoules of the greateſt infidels, which is to acknowledge ſome diuinitie, with what zeale (although inconſiderate and raſh) did the ancient heathens and pagans preciſely obſerue their paganiſme, euen to the ſacrificing and cheerfull offering vp of their owne children to their gods, as we read of the Carthaginians? What ſay I, their children? yea oftentimes themſelues, whereof Calanus an Indian Gymnoſophiſt ſerueth for a Calanus.witnes, who ſeeing himſelfe old, after he had offered ſacrifice to the gods, bad Alexander the Great farewell, with whom he came to Babylon, and tooke his leaue alſo of all his other friends. Then lying along (according to the cuſtome of his countrie) vpon a little pile of wood, which he had prepared for that purpoſe, he cauſed fire to be put vnto it, and ſo burned himſelfe for a burnt-offering to his gods, not ſtirring at all, but continuing with ſuch a wonderfull conſtancie, that Alexander, who was preſent, confeſſed himſelfe to be vanquiſhed of him in greatnes of hart, and magnanimitie of courage. Who will not admire the ſtrict obſeruation of the ancient religion of the Egyptians, Graecians, and Romans, mooued with a deſire of yeelding the dutie of their being to the honor of a diuine nature? But for ſhortnes ſake, and not to wander farre from the ſubiect of our aſſemblie, I paſſe it ouer with ſilence. Heere I will onely alledge one notable example of the Iewes, who were more zealous profeſſors of their law, The zeale of the Iewes to their law.than euer were any people. Caius a Romane emperor, ſent Petronius into Syria with commandement to make war with the Iewes, if they would not receiue his image into their temple. Which when they refuſed to do, Petronius ſaid vnto them, that then belike they would fight againſt Caeſar, not weighing his wealth, or their owne weakenes

and vnabilitie. We will not fight (quoth they) but had rather die than turne from the lawes of our God. And foorthwith caſting themſelues on the ground, and offering their throtes, they ſaid, that they were readie to receiue the blow. In this eſtate (as Ioſephus reporteth it) they remained for the ſpace of fortie daies, letting ſlip the time which then was, of ſowing their grounds. Which cauſed Petronius to defer the execution of his charge, and to ſend the declaration of theſe things vnto Caeſar, whoſe death rid Of the loue which a man oweth to his countrie.the Iewes out of danger. Now we are to conſider with what burning affection the ancients imbraced common benefit and ſafetie, ſeeking to profit all men, according to the true dutie of a good man, but eſpecially their countrie, in whoſe ſeruice they thought it great happines to loſe their liues. For truly beſides the ſweet affection, which nature hath imprinted in our harts towards our countrie, and the conformitie of humors, which commonly is found in our bodies with that heauenly aire wher we haue our firſt breathing, which ſeemeth to be a mutual and naturall obligation, the reaſon of all humane right, and the religion of diuine equitie, beſides the dutie of conſcience, bind all perſons to ſerue the publike wealth of their countrie, to the vttermoſt of their power: and that ſo much the rather, bicauſe that vnder it, the life, honor, and goods of euery particular man are comprehended. This reaſon Cato of Vtica.cauſed Cato of Vtica, a Conſul and noble Romane, to anſwer one of his friends, who was come to giue him thanks for defending him in iudgement from a falſe accuſation, that he was to thanke the Common-wealth, for whoſe loue onely he did, ſpake, and counſelled all things. This alſo made him to vndertake the ſute for the office of Tribuneſhip of the people, that he might reſiſt the faction of In what caſe a good man may ſue for an office.
                     Pompey, by whom he ſaw Metellus ſet on worke to ſue and ſeeke for the ſame office, for the aſſurance of his affaires and ſtrengthening of his league. Now is the time (quoth Cato to his friends) wherein I muſt imploy and beſtow the power of ſuch an office, and of ſo great authoritie, as a ſtrong medicine, in time conuenient, and vpon neceſſarie

cauſes, and either ouercome, or die honorably in the defence of common libertie. So likewiſe he oppoſed himſelfe as much as he could, againſt all nouelties and alteration of affaires betweene Caeſar and Pompey. And when the ſelfeſame Pompey, being deſirous to win him to himſelfe, ſought to bring it to paſſe by alliance, and thereupon demanded two of his neeces in marriage, one for himſelfe, and the other for his ſonne: Cato, without any longer deliberation, anſwered him preſently (as being netled) that caried backe the meſſage, that he ſhould returne to Pompey and tell him, that Cato was not to be taken by the meanes of women. Which was not bicauſe he would not haue him eſteem greatly of his friendſhip, which he ſhould alwaies find in him to be more ſure and certaine than any alliance by marriage, ſo that he onely ſought after and did things honeſt and iuſt, but at this time he would not giue hoſtages at Pompeies pleaſure againſt the Common-welth. Afterward the affaires of Rome being brought to ſuch neceſſitie through corruption of monie, and by vnlawfull and forceable meanes in procuring publike places of authoritie, many Senators being of opinion, that Pompey was to be choſen ſole and onely Conſul, Cato alſo was of the ſame mind, ſaying, that men ought to chooſe a leſſe euill to meete with and to redreſſe greater miſchiefs: and that it were better willingly to bring in a kind of monarchie, than to defer it ſo long, vntill the iſſue of preſent ſeditions ſhould by force and conſtraint eſtabliſh one. And it may be (quoth he) that Pompey will haue a longing deſire to preſerue the Common-wealth, when he ſhall ſee, that it is ſo liberally and freely committed to his fidelitie. This election being approoued and ratified, Pompey ſent to ſeeke Cato, and hauing hartily thanked him for that honor, which he had done him, requeſted him to be a daily aſſiſtant and Councellor vnto him in his office. To whom this graue man made anſwere, that he did neuer oppoſe himſelfe heeretofore againſt him for any ill will he bare him, neither gaue this laſt counſell for any good he meant towards him, but all for the good and profit of the Common-wealth.

And as touching his priuate and particular affaires, he ſaid, he would giue him the beſt counſell he could, whenſoeuer he asked his aduiſe: but for publike matters, he would alwaies ſpeake what he thought were beſt, although he neuer asked him any thing. Thus did Cato behaue himſelfe al his life time as a good citizen, and as an vpright and iuſt man, free in ſpeaking for the truth, and altogither void of corruption. Metellus a Senator of Rome left vs a notable teſtimonie, that he eſteemed of Dutie, as of a ſacred and inuiolable thing, when he would not ſweare to the people to obſerue and keepe that, which was to be ordained and eſtabliſhed concerning a law put vp by one of the Tribunes againſt all right and equitie, notwithſtanding that the Conſul with the reſt of the Senators through conſtraint and feare, which they had of the people, had ſworne vnto it, and giuen their Metellus.promiſe. Then Metellus departing from the aſſemblie, ſaid, that it was too eaſie a matter to do ill, as alſo a common thing to do well where no danger is, but to do well when perill is certaine and ſure, that was the proper dutie of an honorable and vertuous man. For this cauſe being baniſhed, and making light account of the matter, he vſed theſe or the like ſpeeches: When things ſhall be amended, the people repenting them of their error, will cal me back againe: but if the affaires continue ſtill in the ſame ſtate, wherein they now are, it will be beſt for a man to keepe Lycurgus.himſelfe a farre of. Lycurgus after his lawes were giuen to the Lacedemonians fained that he had ſome thing elſe whereof to take counſell with Apollo concerning their eſtate, and therefore at his departure from Lacedaemon to go to Delphos, he cauſed his citizens to ſweare and promiſe, that they would keepe his lawes inuiolably vntill his returne, either dead or aliue. This done he went to the ile of Candie, where he remained in perpetuall and voluntarie baniſhment, and commanded that after his death, the aſhes of his bodie, being burnt ſhould be caſt into the wind, that by this meanes the Lacedaemonians might neuer be abſolued of their oth, but that his countrie might

alwaies receiue the fruit of his labors, for deſire whereof he had freely forſaken it altogither. Marcus Otho the emperor Marcus Otho.hath left behind him a more woonderfull example of the great loue he bare towards his countrie, for the benefit whereof he died willingly. For after he had loſt a battell againſt 
                        Ʋitellius and Cecinna, fighting for the empire, he was ſolicited by the reſt of his armie, which was yet of great ſtrength, to trie fortune once againe, and to vſe them and their perſons as long as they had one drop of blood, and life in their bodies. And at the ſame time a ſimple ſoldier, hauing his ſword in his hand, ſpake thus vnto him: Know, O Caeſar, that all my companions are The couragious mind of a ſoldier.determined to die thus for thy ſake, and therewithall he ſlue himſelfe before him. Then Otho caſting his eies all about, ſpake vnto them in this ſort: I account this day more happie to me (Companions) than that other wherein ye did chooſe and pronounce me your emperor, beholding you ſo wel affected in my behalfe, and receiuing ſuch honor from you with ſo great a demonſtration of friendſhip. And if I haue been worthie to hold the empire of Rome by your election, I muſt now ſhew it, in not ſparing my life for the good and ſafetie of my countrie. I knowe well that the victorie is not yet wholie mine enimies: and I haue receiued newes of ſuch and ſuch forces (which he named particularly vnto them) that are readie to ioine with vs. The Senate is on our ſide, and the wiues and children of our enimies are in our hands. But what? This war A notable example againſt ciuill war.is not againſt a Hannibal, or a Pirrhus, or againſt the Cymbrians, that we ſhould fight for the poſſeſſion of Italie, but it is againſt the Romans themſelues: ſo that in this warre both the conqueror and conquered ſhall offend and hurt their countrie, bicauſe, whatſoeuer ſerueth for the benefit of him that ouercommeth, turneth to the dammage of the Common-wealth. Beleeue me, I know better how to die than to raigne, eſpecially conſidering that I ſhall not ſo much profit the Romans, although in the end I ſhould remaine the ſtronger, as now I can by ſacrificing my life for the peace, vnion, and concord of my countrimen. This

done, he tooke order for the Senators and others of his armie to retire and ſaue themſelues: and ſaid to a nephew of his whom he had adopted, I command thee my ſonne, as the laſt admonition which I can giue thee, not to forget altogither, nor yet to print it too much in thy memorie, that thou haſt had an vnkle, who was emperor. Then laying him downe to reſt, the next morning very early he tooke his ſword, and turning the point thereof with both his hands againſt his ſtomacke, he fell vpon the top of it, without ſhewing any other token or feeling of griefe, and ſo died, being onely ſeuen and thirtie yeeres of age. Codrus 
                     Codrus.king of Athens did no leſſe for his countrie. For hauing vnderſtood, that the Oracle had promiſed and aſſured the victorie to the Thracians, who were enimies to the Athenians, if they ſaued their king aliue, he went into their campe diſguiſed like a handicrafts man, and ſlue one of their men, whereupon he was preſently ſlaine of others, not being knowen what he was. And thus were the Thracians depriued of the hope of victorie, which before they accounted certaine, and in a maner gotten of the Athenians. M. Curtius.
                     Marcus Curtius a knight of Rome, who being Conſul wan a notable battell againſt the Cymbrians, threw himſelfe headlong into a deepe gulfe, which was made in the midſt of Rome by an earthquake, and which had greatly dammaged the citie. The reaſon moouing him ſo to do was, bicauſe the Soothſaiers had giuen out, that the gods would not be pacified and appeaſed towards the citie before the gulfe had ſwalowed a man on liue. Curtius being deſirous to procure the benefit and eaſe of the Common-wealth, would ſerue himſelfe for this ſacrifice. And ſo it came to paſſe: for preſently this gulfe cloſed vp to the great aſtoniſhment of all the people. How ſhal we thinke that theſe, and ſo many others, as hiſtories ſet before our eies, who haue freely offered their liues for the ſafetie of many, and choſe rather to vndertake any danger, than to turne aſide in any thing from that which they knew to be the dutie of a good man, how (I ſay) ſhall we thinke that they would haue fainted or yeelded through the enticements

of honor, grace, fauor, & riches, whereby the greatnes of their courage, limited onely with the bounds of right and iuſtice, might haue beene weakened? But hoping that the ſequele of our diſcourſes will furniſh vs with more ample teſtimonies both of this and of all the other parts of dutie, which reſpect euery particular action, and fearing leaſt I haue been ſomewhat too long in the examples alreadie alledged, we will conclude our preſent matter with this generall inſtruction, that vnto what eſtate, qualitie, or condition ſoeuer men are called, they ought to propound to themſelues in all their actions, Dutie and Dutie and honeſtie are to be propounded in all our actions.
                     Honestie, ſearching for them in the holie ſcriptures, and in the precepts of good life conformable thereunto, which are left vnto vs by the ancient Sages and wiſe philoſophers, to this end, that being wel inſtructed in true pietie, we may firſt of all giue honor and glorie to God, and then be beneficiall, helpfull, and profitable to his creatures. Theſe graces we may, by the direction and bleſſing of God, draw out of thoſe fower riuers which proceed and flow from this generall vertue and fountaine of Honestie, of which we are to diſcourſe particularly heerafter, namely, of Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Iustice, which are thoſe morall vertues whereby all good and vertuous actions are brought to paſſe.
               
            
            
               Of Prudence. Chap. 10.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  THere is one only wiſe, ſouereign Creator of al things, the almighty, ſtrong, and terrible, who ſitteth vpō his throne, frō whom commeth Ecclus. 1. 18.al wiſedom, which alwaies hath been, and is for euer with him, and which he hath powred out vpon all works, and vpon all fleſh according to his liberalitie, and giueth hir abundantly to them that loue him. She teacheth the doctrine of God, and cauſeth vs to chooſe his works. She decketh vs with prudence, iuſtice, and courage, giuing vs the knowledge of the time paſt, and iudgement of that

which is to come. The multitude of thoſe which are endued with theſe gifts & graces are the gard of the world, and a prudent king is the aſſurance of his people. The ſequele therfore of our ſpeech leadeth vs to the handling of Prudence, the firſt riuer of the fountaine of Dutie.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Wiſedome raineth downe knowledge, and wiſe Ecclus. 1. 23.vnderſtanding, and bringeth to honor thoſe that poſſeſſe hir. Of hir therefore we are to ſeeke for true Prudence, a neceſſarie guide to all our actions, but we muſt hate the prudence of the fleſh, which is follie before God, and maketh all the thoughts of the wiſe of this world to become vaine and fooliſh. Moreouer, Cicero ſaith, that no man can be prudent but he muſt be good.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  O how learnedly hath Socrates taught vs to know and marke this true and heauenly Prudence, proceeding from the loue and feare of the higheſt, from that earthlie Prudence, which is full of darknes, when he ſaith, What prunence is.that Prudence is the generall vertue, the princeſſe and guide of morall vertues, and that wherein the knowledge of our ſouereigne good, and of the end of our being conſisteth, as alſo the choice of thoſe waies wherby we may come vnto it. But let vs heare ARAM diſcourſe more largely of the great, woorthie, and wonderfull effects of this rich vertue.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  All the life of men expreſſing a worthie end of their being, conſiſteth in contemplation and action. For knowing that the thoughts of all mortall men are vnſtable, and their inuentions vncertaine, bicauſe the bodie and the affections thereof oppreſſe the ſoule, and caſt downe the ſpirit loden with care, they lift vp their harts towards the brightnes of the eternall light, who of his meere grace prepareth their ſoules, lighteneth their vnderſtandings, and directeth their paths to the knowledge of that true and perfect Idea of Good, from whence Prudence floweth, that ſhe may gouerne their actions according to Gods will, and to the profit of humane ſocietie. The effects of the vertue of prudence.Therefore it is from knowledge and reaſon gotten in the ſtudie of wiſedome by the grace of God, from whence the vertue of Prudence proceedeth, which is that rule of all

the actions of man, whereby through good and ſage aduice he diſcerneth and chooſeth good from bad, that which is profitable from the contrarie, to the end he may ſhun the one and practiſe the other. This is that which Aristotle ſaith, that the office of Prudence conſiſteth in skill to conſult and to chooſe, to the end to execute that which vertue commandeth, namely, Honeſtie and decencie, and that for no other reſpect than for the loue thereof. And The difference betweene ſcience and prudence.therfore wiſe men haue put a difference betweene Science and Prudence, ſaying, that Science is a dead knowledge of things, which of it ſelfe cannot change the will in ſuch ſort, that it may imbrace and follow the knowen good, or auoid the euill: which is euident in wicked men endued with knowledge. But Prudence is a beame proceeding from that true ſunne, which doth not only illuminate and lighten the vnderſtanding, but alſo warmeth and kindleth the affection. This vertue (ſaith Bias one of the Sages of Prudence compared to the ſight.Graecia) is amongſt the reſt of the vertues, as the ſight is amongſt the fiue ſenſes of mans bodie: thereby giuing vs to vnderſtand, that as the eie, of al the other ſenſes is moſt beautifull, ſubtill, and pearcing, ſo the vertue of Prudence by hir quicke and cleere light directeth and conducteth al vertues in their good and commendable operations. It is by hir that man is alwaies clothed with a milde and ſetled diſpoſition, whereof he ſtandeth no leſſe in need, than a ſhip floating on the ſea doth of the preſence of a pilot, that he may prudently vndertake, & wiſely execute whatſoeuer he knoweth to be good, after mature deliberation, and conſideration of all the circumſtances of the fact. Morall philoſophers attributed three eies to this vertue Prudence hath three eies.of Prudence, namely, Memorie, Vnderſtanding, and Prouidence: which three things Cicero calleth the parts of Prudence. With the firſt ſhe beholdeth the time paſt: with the ſecond, the time preſent: with the third, the time to come. Moreouer, a prudent and wiſe man, by the conſideration of things paſt: and of that which hath followed ſince, iudgeth of that, which in the like caſe may fall out in the time following. And after long deliberation, he expecteth

the times, waigheth the dangers, and knoweth the occaſions: and then, yeelding now and then to the times, but alwaies to neceſſitie, ſo it be not againſt dutie, he boldly ſetteth his hand to the worke. For this cauſe Iſocrates ſaid, that a prudent man ought to remember things paſt, to vſe things preſent, and to foreſee things to come. A prudent man (ſaith Demosthenes) accounteth it a point of follie to ſay when a thing is com to paſſe, Who would haue thought it could haue beene? Now Prudence is apparant in him that poſſeſſeth hir, firſt by the rule and gouernment of his perſon, whether it be in things within him, as in his maners and conditions, or in outward things concerning his bodie, as in ſobrietie of diet, comely intertainment, good houſe-keeping, commendable vſe of his ſubſtance and riches. Of which perfections and other praiſe-worthie effects, that flow from Prudence vnder the name of ſundrie vertues, we are to intreat particularly heerafter, as alſo how a prudent man being adorned with them may firſt become a good Oeconomiſt, that is, a gouernor and father of a familie, and after attaine to that great vertue of politicall knowledge, which is the art of skilfull gouerning & ruling a multitude of men. And then although he doubt not, but that it is an act of Prudence to know what is good and profitable for the Common-wealth, yet that he may knowe howe to execute that office with a perfect and abſolute vertue, he ſeeketh for all occaſions to profit the ſame, and vnto what place of authoritie ſoeuer he be The praiſe-worthy effects of prudence.called, he alwaies ſheweth foorth dutifull effects of a good man. He neuer giueth or taketh but good counſel, and alwaies vttereth the ſame freely. He is able (ſaith Plato) to diſcerne the good from the bad. He helpeth innocencie, and correcteth malice. He is not aſtoniſhed for any feare, nor altereth his mind for diſpraiſe or commendation: he is not diſcouraged through violence or falſe accuſations, neither is preſſed downe with ſorrow, or puffed vp with proſperitie. And as one not ignorant of the vncertaintie of worldly things, he abideth conſtant in all changes, and like to himſelfe, knowing how to chooſe the leſſe euill in

all inconueniences, as the better. He ſheweth himſelfe valiant in all things. He is maiſter of his pleaſures, & knoweth how to command himſelfe. He can reape profit by moſt ſiniſter accidents, yea by his greateſt enimies, and yet hurt them not. The conuerſation of the prudent is alwaies healthfull and profitable. His quips, his laughters, his ſports are not without ſome fruit, hauing in them a certaine power to correct and moue thoſe that do amiſſe. He beleeueth not (ſaith Heraclitus) any thing lightly, but is a ſeuere examiner of the truth. To be ſhort, Prudence cauſeth a man to refer all his actions both priuate and publike to the beſt end, which is, to ſerue God, and to profit his neighbor. This did Socrates teach very well, ſaying, that All the deſires and inclinations of our ſoule guided by prudence tende to happines. Wherin we may note The coniunction of all the vertues.the indiſſoluble coniunction of all the morall vertues, of which no one can be had perfectly, but with hir companions, albeit ech of them haue hir particular & proper dutie. But prudence is eſpecially neceſſarie in them all, as it will yet better appeere in the further handling therof, albeit the effects hereunder mentioned of this firſt vertue being narrowly conſidered, may giue vs ſufficient proofe thereof. Now to incite and ſtir vs vp to imbrace it with greater zeale and affection, and to ſeeke after all meanes of obtaining it, either by good inſtruction, or by long vſe of things, let vs call to mind certaine examples of the ancients, thereby to marke what woonderful fruits this vertue of Prudence hath brought foorth in them. If we conſider all the heroicall facts of the worthieſt captaines and generals of armies that euer were, we ſhall finde that they brought them to paſſe more by prudence, than by any other force and meane. Which thing Alexander the great, and firſt Monarke of the Graecians knowing very well, whenſoeuer any ſpeech or compariſon was made before him of Vertue or Science, he alwaies had this verſe of Homer in his mouth: In counſell wiſe, and valiant in the fight: as if he would haue ſaid, that of all vertues Prudence was moſt prince-like, and that proweſſe was practiſed by

meanes thereof. And indeed he being richly endued therwith, vndertooke the conqueſt of the Perſian empire, yea of all the world, when he had but thirtie thouſand footemen, Of the prudence of Alexander.and fower thouſand horſemen, with monie and victuals to furniſh them onely for thirtie daies. But what? The meanes wherunto he truſted was Prudence, followed of Patience, Valure and Temperancie, wherewith the ſtudie of philoſophy had furniſhed him for his voiage. In this iourney he did not onely in two battailes ouerthrowe Darius monarke of the Perſians, who had aboue twelue hundred thouſand men, but alſo brought vnder ſubiection fifteene ſundry nations, and tooke fiue thouſand cities and townes, and laboured to put in reall execution & practiſe that forme of gouernment of eſtate, which was ſo greatly eſteemed of Zeno the Stoick philoſopher, & tended in effect to this end, that all men generally might liue togither, not being diuided by townes, peoples and nations, nor ſeparated by particuler lawes, rightes & cuſtomes, but that we ſhould take all men for our countrimen and fellow citizens: that as there is but one world, ſo there might be but one kinde of life. Thus did this prudent and vertuous monarck giue out that he was ſent from heauen to be a common refourmer, gouernour, and reconcilour of the whole world, ſo that he imploied all his might to reduce and bring to ciuilitie barbarous kings, to plant Graecian cities, that they might liue ciuilly amongſt the vntamed and ſauage nations, and eſtabliſhed euery where lawes and a peaceable kinde of life, euen amongſt vnbrideled people, who neuer heard word ſpoken either of peace or lawes. Thoſe whom he could not aſſemble together by perſwaſion of reaſon, he conſtrained by force of armes, ſo that he cauſed them all to drinke as ye would ſay, in the ſame cup of loue & friendſhip, by intermingling their liues, maners, mariages and faſhions of liuing. He commanded that al men liuing ſhould account the whole habitable earth for their country, and his campe, for their caſtle and tower of defence, and that all good men ſhould be of kin one to another, and the wicked onely ſtrangers.

Moreouer, he willed, that the Graecian and Barbarian ſhould no more be diſtinguied by their garments, but that the Graecian ſhould be knowne and diſcerned by vertue, and the Barbarian by vice, accounting all vertuous men Graecians, and all vicious men Barbarians. Therefore Plutark ſaid very well, that they who were tamed and brought vnder his yoke were a great deale more happie than thoſe that eſcaped his power, bicauſe theſe men had none to cauſe them to leaue of from liuing miſerablic, and the other were compelled by the conqueror to liue happily. Whereby he deſerued no leſſe the name of a great philoſopher, than did Pythagoras, Socrates and others, who although they wrote nothing, yet were ſo called, for their maner of life, and for that which they ſpake, did and taught. In all which things Alexander approching next vnto them, went alſo beyond them in this, that they taught men of good vnderſtandings, namely ſuch as were Graecians as well as themſelues, and that without great paine and trauell: but this monark ſuſtaining infinite labor, and cheerefully ſheading his bloud did change into a better eſtate, and reformed the rude maners of innumerable ſauage people, euen of ſuch as were brutiſh by nature. Now let vs ſpeake of Caeſar the firſt Romaine Emperour. Was it not prudence eſpecially that prepared Of the prudence of Pulius Caeſar.the way for him to ſo mightie an empire, firſt by reconciling together Craſſus and Pompey, two of the greateſt Romaine Senators, by whoſe fauor he obtained afterwardes the dignitie of Conſulſhip? When he was placed therin, being deſirous to win the good wil of the people & knowing that he was alreadie well vnder propped of the Senatours, he preſerred many lawes in their behalfe. Beſides he was very ſumptuous and popular, if euer any Romaine was, not ſparing any coſt vpon plaies, turneies, feaſtes, largeſſes, and other baits to curry fauor with the meaner ſort of the people, and to gaine the honor and credire of a man that is gratious and charitable towards the poore. And when he was ſent to take vpon him the gouernment of the Gaules, he warred there ten yeeres, being guided

by an vnſpeakable prudence, that was accompanied with diligence and forecaſt: ſo that by vſing all occaſions wiſely & to purpoſe, he ſubdued there three hundred ſundry nations, tooke eight hundred townes & in manie battels diſcomfited three millions of men. The commentaries which he wrote himſelfe, declare ſufficiently that his own vertue wrought more exploits than all his armie. Of this alſo he gaue proofe enough in the beginning of the ciuill warre betweene him and Pompey, wherein he vſed ſuch diligence, that comming out of Fraunce he made himſelfe maiſter of all Italy in threeſcore daies, without any effuſion of bloud, and droue away his enimy. And Cicero, who (as ſome ſay) conſpired his death, in an epiſtle calleth him Caeſar noted two faults in Pompey.a monſter of prudence and of incredible diligence. Was it not prudence whereby he noted two faults in Pompey, which after were the cauſe of his ouerthrow? The firſt in an incounter of their armies, wherein Caeſar being at that time the weaker had the woorſt. And when he perceiued that his enimy purſued him not, but retired to his campe, he ſaid. The victorie this day was in the power of our enimies, but their captaine could not perceiue it. The other fault which he noted was at the battel of Pharſalia, where Pompey was quite ouerthrowne, becauſe he charged his ſouldiers being ranged in battell to ſtand ſtill in their places, and ſo to attend their enimies. Then Caeſar ſaide, that in ſo dooing Pompey tooke from his ſouldiers the vehemencie and violence of giuing the onſet, which is as a ſpurre vnto them in their race, beſides the heate of courage which this ſpeedie running forward worketh in thē. We ſee then how neceſſarie this vertue of prudence is in Ageſilaus.feats of warre, which cauſed Ageſilaus king of Lacedemonia, after great loſſes ſuſtained by the violence of Epaminondas, the generall captaine of the Thebanes, to ſay to his men, that they ſhould not greatly care for the multitude of their enimies, but bend all their force againſt Epaminondas onely, bicauſe none but wiſe & prudent men were valiant, and the onely cauſe of victorie. And therefore if they could beate him downe, they ſhould vndoubtedly

haue the reſt at their deuotion. As indeed it came to paſſe in that battell which they fought togither, wherein the Lacedemonians halfe diſcomfited, one of thoſe that fled being purſued by Epaminondas, turned back and ſlew him: The loſſe of a capt
                           •••
                        e is commonly cauſe of the ruine of an am
                           •
                        e.wherupon the reſt tooke ſuch courage, and the Thebans were ſo diſmaied, that the victorie remained with Ageſilaus. Now if in warfare prudence beareth ſuch a ſtroake, who doubteth but that in ciuil and politike gouernment ſhe is as neceſſarie, or rather more? Diuine Plato in his booke of a common-wealth ſaith, that if a man woulde do notable acts woorthy of perfect praiſe in the adminiſtration of the common-wealth, he muſt haue prudence and iuſtice, followed of power and fortune. But we may further ſay, that onely prudence hath ſet aloft and preſerued many great eſtates from ruine and ſubuerſion. The Athenians being diuided and banded into three contrarie The prudence of Solon.parts and factions, Solon being very prudent and wiſe, would not ioine himſelfe to any of them, but kept himſelfe indifferent to all, practiſing & ſpeaking whatſoeuer he could deuiſe to ioine & reconcile them togither again. Wherein he behaued himſelfe ſo well, that being choſen by them all for the onely paciſier and reformer of their eſtate, he placed it in greater glorie than euer it was in before, by his prudent and wiſe lawes which were receiued The prudence of Lycurgus.as inuiolable. The prudence of Lycurgus, the reformer and lawmaker of the Lacedemonians, was the cauſe of the maintenance of their eſtate aboue fiue hundred yeeres, ſo that it was the chiefeſt in all Graecia both for glorie and excellencie of gouernment, from whence they fell not vntill ſuch time as they wholy neglected thoſe goodly ordinances and lawes which he left them. A prudent man alwaies gineth good counſalle, and vttereth the ſame freely, being alſo a good and willing helpe to innocencie. Phocion ſpeaking his minde one day in the counſell chamber Phocion.of the Athenians, againſt the enterpriſing of a certain war, and ſeeing that his aduiſe ſo greatly diſpleaſed them, that they would not giue him leaue to vtter his minde, he ſpake freely vnto them in this maner: Ye may perad
                        ••
                     nture

(O Athenians) force me to do that which ought not to be done, but ye can not conſtraine me to ſpeake any thing contrary to my opinion that ought not to be ſpoken or counſailed. Demosthenes knowing the innocencie of a poore woman drawne into iudgement with danger of being ouerthrowne, ſaued hir by his great prudence. The prudence of Demoſthenes in defending the innocencie of a poore woman.For two ſtrangers hauing giuen hir a good ſumme of money, to keepe with this condition, that ſhe ſhould not reſtore it to the one except the other were alſo preſent, within a while after one of them came very ſorrowfull faining that his companion was dead, and bringing ſome counterfeit token therof with him. Wherupon he ſo perſwaded this poore woman, who ment ſimply plainely, that ſhe reſtored the monie to him. Afterwards the other came, & demanding the money alſo, brought this woman before a iudge, who being without hope of eſcaping, Demosthencs anſwered for hir, that ſhe offred to giue him the money ſo that he brought his fellow, bicauſe, as himſelfe confeſſed, ſhe ought not to giue it to the one without the How a prudent man may reape benefit by his enimies, and by miſhaps.other. The profite which a prudent man draweth from his enimies is in this, that he knoweth and taketh them for ſpies, for enuiers at his life, and ioint-labourers with him for honor and glory: wherupon he is the more carefull that his dooings may be blameles. And to this purpoſe Diogenes anſwered wiſely to one, who demanded how he might be auenged on his enimie: By making thy ſelfe (quoth he) a vertuous and good man. Moſt finiſter accidents likewiſe turne to the profite of a prudent man. For being long time before prepared for all euents, the woorſt that happen confirme him further in the knowledge of the vncertaintie of humaine things, and lift him vp ſo much the more to the contemplation of heauenly things, that he may deſire nothing but the bleſſed immortalitie Anaxagoras.of the ſoule. Anaxagoras hearing newes of his ſonnes death, ſaid nothing but this, that he knew he had begotten him a mortall creature. The foreſight of prudence The prudent foreſight of 
                           〈◊〉
                        .maketh it alſo to be greatly admired. Marcus Cato, when he ſaw that Pompey ioined himſelfe in league with

                     Caeſar, told him, that he did put Caeſars yoke vpon his own necke, which then he perceiued not, but that ſhortly it would weigh heauy vpon him, and then ſhould he finde himſelfe taken and tied. A prudent man is not amaſed through feare either of blame or of falſe accuſation, but alwaies goeth with his head vpright, truſting to his innocencie, and to his owne vertue. Scipio Africanus being accuſed of many things by the Tribunes of the people, anſwered nothing to the crimes laid againſt him, but onely ſaide thus: In ſuch a day as this is, ſirs, I ouercame both The prudence of Scipio in anſwering to an vniuſt accuſation.Carthage and Hannibal, and therefore I am now going to the Capitoll to ſacrifice to Iupiter the beſt and greateſt God, and to giue him thanks for the victory. In the meane while if any man long to proceed againſt me in iudgement, let him do it. After he had ſo ſaid, he went towards the Capitoll, being followed of his friends, and of the greater part of the Senators. When the people ſaw this, they likewiſe accompanied him, ſo that in ſtead of condemning him, they cauſed him in a maner to triumph againe. Emilius Scaurus being alſo accuſed of a certaine Emilius Scaurus.crime by Varius, made this onely anſwer: O ye Romanes, 
                        Ʋarius affirmeth this crime laid againſt me to be true, and Scaurus denieth it: whom will ye rather beleeue? By this wiſe and couragious anſwere he made the accuſation of no effect, bicauſe his honeſtie was well knowen to euery one. The conuerſation, aſſemblies, laughters, quips, and paſtimes of prudent men are neuer without ſome profit. Plato in his booke intituled Conuiuium, that is, a feaſt, diſcourſeth of the laſt end of mens actions, and of the ſouereigne and chiefe good of man, but yet in very familiar ſpeeches, by certaine examples, and pleaſant fictions, and deuiſes fit for the time and place, and not with ſerious and graue words, as he vſeth to do in his other writings. Moreouer, learned deuiſes are the ſports and delights of The ſports of prudent men.wiſe men, who account all other paſtimes vaine and vnbeſeeming them, and as hinderances and lets rather of their pleaſure, than occaſions of any recreation. Notwithſtanding, wiſely applying themſelues to places & perſons,

they can in their ſerious diſcourſes intermingle ſome honeſt paſtimes, but yet not altogither without profit. As Plato in his foreſaid feaſt interlaceth certaine comicall ſpeeches of loue, how beit all the reſt of the ſupper there was nothing but wiſe diſcourſes of philoſophie. A Lacedemonian Pleaſant ſayings ful of doctrine.being asked of a certaine matter by an other, anſwered cleane contrarie to the truth. And when the other told him that he lied, behold (quoth he againe) what a foole thou art to aske me that, which thou knoweſt well ynough. Diogenes in a great aſſemblie of people, purpoſely going backward, and ſeeing that euery one laughed at him, asked them alowd if they were not aſhamed to mocke him for going backward when he walked, whereas they did ſo all their life time. And as Aristippus on a time beheld him waſhing of coleworts for his ſupper, he ſaid vnto him: If thou didſt know (Diogenes) how to obey kings, and to ſeeke them out, thou wouldeſt not waſh coleworts. And thou Aristippus (quoth he) if thou kneweſt how to waſh coleworts, thou wouldeſt not ſerue kings, but liue at libertie. What profitable doctrine may a man draw out of theſe philoſophicall diſports and ieſts? Further, A prudent man doth not ouerlightly beleeue any thing.a prudent man neuer beleeueth any thing ouerlightly, but laieth aſide all reputation and credit of him that ſpeaketh, and examineth the ſpeech by it ſelfe: ſo far is he from giuing credit to an ignorant or naughtie fellow. Neither will he be dazeled with fine and eloquent ſpeech, but (as Zeno ſaid) conſidereth whether his ſpeech be tempered with ſenſe and reaſon, that ſo he may iudge foundly of the truth, and take order thereafter. O what number of examples to this purpoſe might be alledged of the great harme that hath followed the credulitie and light beliefe of magiſtrates, gouernors, and heades of monarchies and nations. Alas, our poore France hath but too great experience thereof to hir confuſion and and deſtruction. But this matter may offer it ſelfe heerafter to be more amply handled, as alſo other effects of Prudence, which I haue briefly touched. In the meane while we will conclude, that Prudence is an excellent gift

of God, that it is the guide and light of all the morall vertues, from whence all good and noble actions haue their being and beginning, and that without it a man can do nothing that is excellent and praiſe-worthy.
               
            
            
               Of want of prudence and of Ignorance, of malice and ſubtiltie. Chap. 11.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  NO man (ſaith diuine Plato) can be hurt or deceiued but by himſelfe. Which propoſition at the firſt ſight may ſeeme ſomwhat abſurd. But if, being well inſtructed in philoſophie, we wil follow the opinion of the ancient Sages, that Whatſoeuer 
                     How none can be hurt but by himſelfe.
                     we ſee of the bodie ſubiect to ſight, is not man, but that the ſoule onely, which is inuiſible and immortall, is that which truly ought to be called man, and that whereby we liue, and for which we ought to liue, it is out of doubt, that none can hurt our ſoules but our ſelues. The kniues wherewith we hurt our ſoules are either want of prudence, or Malice, which are as pernitious things, as can come to man, ſeeing by them he committeth all ſinnes and offences whatſoeuer, and by them hurteth himſelfe onely, when as oftentimes he thinketh to offend another. As then in our former diſcourſe we haue ſcene the laudable effects of Vertue and Prudence, ſo let vs now conſider my Companions of the dangerous fruits of theſe two vices, which are altogither contrarie vnto it.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  If the blind lead the blind both will fall into the pit: and he that knoweth his maiſters will, and doth it not, ſhall be much more chaſticed than the ignorant. So that both want of prudence and malice are two plagues in the ſoule greatly to be feared: and therefore Bias ſaith, Be neither ſimple nor ſubtill.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Herillus the Chalcedonian affirmed, that Science was the ſouereigne good. But we ſee contrariwiſe many excellent men for skill and doctrine, who liue moſt wickedly. So that in my opinion if it be not accompanied

with vertuous deedes, it ought rather to be called the chiefeſt euil: foraſmuch as he that ſinneth through ignorance, is more excuſable than the malitious, who ſinneth Vertuous actions are to be ioined with knowledge.wittingly. And for defence of my ſaying, beſides the authoritie of the ſcripture, I haue Plato, who ſaith, that Science without the knowledge and practiſe of that which is good, is very pernitious. But let vs harken to AMANA, who will diſcourſe vnto vs more at large of theſe two vices, want of diſcretion, and malice or ſubtiltie.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  All vertue being in the midſt of two vices, the one of them is cleane contrarie vnto it, and the other being more dangerous, ſeeketh to couer it ſelfe with hir name, and it is called of the philoſopher a falſe follower of vertue. For this cauſe they placed want of prudence, which vice is in the defect, at the right hand of prudence: and at the left hand, Malice or Craft, which is the exceſſe, and cauſeth a man to ſinne, not through ignorance, but by deceit and ſubtiltie, and that vnder the name of Prudence. Firſt then let vs conſider of want of prudence or vnskilfulnes, and of the effects thereof in the ſoule. Vnskilfulnes What want of prudence is.proceeding, or rather being the ſame thing that ignorance is, cauſeth a man (as Ariſtotle ſaith) to iudge euil of things, to deliberate worſe, not to know how to take the aduantage of preſent good things, but to conceiue ill of thoſe things that are good and honeſt in mans life. And as Prudence is the knowledge of that which ought to be done or left vndone, ſo vnskilfulnes is the ignorance of thoſe ſelfe ſame things, and is alwaies followed of incontinencie, of want of ciuilitie, and of forgetfulnes. Briefly, want of prudence is ſo contagious and peſtilent a thing in the mind of man, that all other infirmities of the ſpirit, wherewithall it is commonly moleſted, and all euill actions ſeeme to proceed from the ſame. And truly whereſoeuer it is, there neither God can be truly honored and ſerued, nor vice auoided, nor any action, either publike or priuate can be orderly, and according to dutie executed. For as a weake and diſeaſed ſight cannot behold the light of the ſunne, ſo an vnskilfull ſoule cannot know the truth,

Vnskilfulnes cauſeth a man to fall into ſeueritie, when he The pernitious effects of ignorance.thinks to exerciſe iuſtice. If he would be liberall, he becommeth prodigall. If he thinketh to auoid ſuperfluitie, he falleth into couetouſnes. If he haue any apprehenſion of the diuine nature, he conſumeth his ſoule with a confuſed feare through ſuperſtition. If his mind cannot conceiue that there is a moſt happy and bleſſed nature, forthwith he iudgeth, that there is none at all: and thus guided by ignorance all his deſires and inclinations tend to wretchednes and miſerie. Moreouer, Plato ſaith, that ignorance taketh away the ſight of the mind from thoſe that are tainted therewith, as blindnes taketh away the ſight of corporall eies from thoſe that lacke their ſight. And further he teſtifieth, that the ignorant mind is vile and wretched, and that it is more expedient not to liue at all, than to liue in ignorance. But if we giue credit to Cicero, he onely liueth indeed and poſſeſſeth a ſoule, who ſetling himſelfe to ſome good matter, ſeeketh after renowme by ſome notable fact, or by ſome good art. It is good (ſaith Socrates) to leaue off altogither the vſe of that thing wherof we haue no skill to vſe it well. And ſo for thoſe that know not how to vſe their eies, eares, and whole bodie, it were more profitable neither to ſee, heare, or helpe themſelues any way with their bodie. In like maner it were better for him that knoweth not how to uſe his ſoule, to haue none at all, than to liue. And if he muſt needs liue, being borne, he ſhould be happier in the eſtate of a ſlaue than of a free man. The ſpeech of this wiſe philoſopher expoundeth it ſelfe ſufficiently, as tending to no other end than to giue vs to vnderſtand, that it is better not to be, yea neuer to haue been borne, than through ignorance to follow vice: and further, that it is more dangerous when a man may freely do ſo without feare of any greater than himſelfe. For as droonkennes engendreth rage and madnes, ſo (ſaith Aristotle) ignorance ioined with power begetteth inſolencie and furie. And it is all one (as Plato ſaith) to place an ignorant man in authoritie, as to lay a great burden vpon the ſhoulders of a man halfe dead

through weakenes. All theſe things make me iudge an ignorant man to be, I will not onely ſay, like an image or blocke of wood, but in a maner nothing differing from brute beaſts. This cauſed the ancients to vſe this ſaying: All ignorant men are euill.that Euery ignorant man was euill. And Terence going yet further ſaith, that The earth beareth nothing worſe than an ignorant man. And in truth what miſchiefs do we not ſee to come of ignorance? If a man be of a meane or baſe The effects of ignorance both in rich & poore.eſtate, it maketh him good for nothing, fearfull, ſuperſtitious, vnprofitable, needie, vnciuill, ſlothfull, and vnfit to euery good thing. If he be mightie and rich, beſides that he may fall into the ſaid miſeries through the ſame imperfection, he will ſo much the ſooner become arrogant, cruell, raſh, talkatiue, couetous, vnconſtant, giuen to voluptuouſnes, and vniuſt. In a word, the more meanes he ſhall haue to exerciſe vices, the richer in them will he grow to be through ignorance: and ſo not being able to gouerne himſelfe, he muſt needs be vnwoorthie to intermeddle at all either in politicall or Oeconomicall gouernment. If an ignorant man poſſeſſe any great benefit or felicitie, he can neuer know ſo much, before he hath loſt it againe. Moreouer, this miſchiefe followeth him, that he can neuer make his profit of any good counſell, bicauſe of the preſumption of his owne opinion, which he alwaies thinketh better than any other: yea he ſuppoſeth that nothing can be well done except he put to his helping hand. For (as Menander ſaith) nothing is ſo raſh as ignorance. And the more that an ignorant man is lift vp vnto ſome excellencie of dignitie or riches, the more vnſufferable he is, as one that knoweth not how to vſe them: ſo that he is puffed vp with pride aboue meaſure, and not content with his eſtate, but driuen with ambition, he preſumeth oftentimes to vndertake things againſt all reaſon and equitie. And contrariwiſe if fortune change, he abaſeth himſelfe out of meaſure, ſhewing nothing but abiection of mind, inconſtancy and impatiencie, and that with ſo great trouble and diſquietnes of ſpirit, that oftentimes he is wholie beſides himſelfe. Now theſe are but ſmall fruits of ignorance,

namely, to make a man importunate: to cauſe him Common effects of ignorance.to ſtay another that hath great affaires, ſaying, that he hath many things to communicate vnto him, when in truth they will do him but ſmall pleaſure: to deſire one that hath loſt his ſuite to beſtow a dinner vpon him, promiſing to tell him a way how he may recouer it againe: to ſpeake ill of women, when he is inuited to weddings, or in their companie: to requeſt him to walke that hath alreadie gone a great way: when he ſeeth a thing ſold to bring a chapman to the ſeller, who would haue giuen a great deale more for it: to repeate one thing oftentimes: to ſhew himſelfe readie to do that which a man would not haue him to do, and yet dare not well denie it him: to woonder at all things, and to ſpeake all in a word, an vnskilfull man is alwaies in all places and in all affaires vnciuill and impertinent. The examples of theſe foreſaid effects are but too familiar amongſt vs. And firſt concerning theſe of ſmall and meane eſtate and condition, how many millions of men haue there been in the ages paſt, and do liue yet among vs, whoſe life being ignorant of euery good cauſe and reaſon, is not much vnlike, and in The ſpring of all errors.many things worſe than that of brute beaſts. The originall of ſo many errors, fooliſh opinions, and impieties, hath it not had paſſage through the midſt of their ſoules, bicauſe they had no true knowledge of the end of their being, nor of his will by whom they liue? From thence it commeth, that the beſt aduiſed among them exerciſe baſe handicrafts, not being deſirous to learne further: that ſome lead a ſeruile and contemptible life, bringing their bodies and ſoules in ſubiection to the luſts and wicked deſires of the greater ſort: that others remaine idle and vnprofitable ſeeking to maintaine their liues by vnlawfull meanes: that all through a blockiſh ignorance depriue themſelues of all preſent and eternall felicitie. Now albeit theſe poore men, who haue no great meanes to execure their wicked deſires, may after a ſort ſeeme tollerable and excuſeable to mans iudgement, bicauſe their ignorance doth not greatly hurt any but themſelues, yet it falleth

out far worſe with thoſe that haue wealth at will, and authoritie to command others, who not knowing how to vſe their goods well by vertuous deeds, abuſe them to all vice, diſſolutenes, and pleaſure: whereby for the moſt part they caſt themſelues headlong into infidelitie and Atheiſme, bicauſe they neuer had true vnderſtanding of the perfect diuinitie, nor yet conſidered the perfection of his works both in heauen & earth. O pitifull calamity The reaſons which mooued the heathen to beleeue that there was a diuinitie.abounding in this our age more than euer it did. A thouſand millions of Pagans and heathens conſidering that there was nothing to be miſliked in the heauens, neither any negligence, diſorder, or confuſion in the moouing of the ſtars, nor in the ſeaſons of the yeere, nor in their reuolutions, nor in the courſe of the ſunne about the earth, which cauſeth the day and the night, no not in the nouriſhing and preſeruation of all ſorts of liuing creatures, nor in the generation of yeerly fruits, and for a thouſand other good conſiderations, beleeued and worſhipped one ſupreme eternall eſſence, which gouerneth all things. And ſhall they that carie the name of Chriſtians, to whom the vnſpeakable treaſures of the heauens haue been opened and offered with innumerable graces, ſhall they, I ſay, doubt, yea impudently denie that there is a God? But let vs returne to our matter. It is moſt certaine, that the higher that ignorant men are aduanced, ſo much without queſtion are their faults greater than thoſe of meaner eſtate, bicauſe they are hurtfull to many. Yea oftentimes it hath come to paſſe, that one onely fault of ſuch a man hath been the loſſe and deſtruction of an infinite number of Nicias feared an eclipſe of the moone.men. Nicias the general captain of the Athenians, through the feare which he had conceiued of the darkness of an Eclipſe of the moone, and not knowing the cauſe thereof, ſtaied ſo long vntill his enimies had incloſed him round about: whereupon he was taken aliue of them, and put to death, beſides the loſſe of fortie thouſand Athenians Caligula and Domitian.that were taken and ſlaine. Who doubteth but that ignorance draue Caligula & Domitian into ſuch pride & crueltie, that whilſt they ſought to be worſhipped in ſtead of

the true God, they were the cauſe of the death & deſtruction of more than a hundred thouſand men? In the time Otho 1.of Otho the firſt there fell a ſtone from heauen, which aſtoniſhed all Germanie, and turned them from proſecuting an enterpriſe of great waight and importance for the benefit of their countrie. If they had knowen it to be a naturall thing, and ſuch as had come to paſſe long before, as Aristotle affirmeth, they had not been ſo fearfull, nor receiued that dammage to the detriment of the Common-wealth, which came to them afterward. That ſpeech of Anaxagoras a Greeke philoſopher, agreeable heerunto, is worthie to be remembred, when he ſaid, that a man ought Anaxagoras ſaying againſt the ſuperſtitious feare of celeſtiall ſignes.to driue out of himſelfe, and to tread vnder his feete all ſuperſtitious feare of the heauenly ſignes and impreſſions of the aire, which worke great terror in them that are ignorant of their cauſes, and that feare the gods with a forlorne and amaſed feare, bicauſe they want that certaine knowledge that philoſophie bringeth, which in ſtead of a trembling and alwaies terrifying ſuperſtition, engendreth true deuotion, accompanied with an aſſured hope of good. Let vs looke a little into our Chronicles, and conſider what profit our kings receiued by their ignorance, when they were called Simple, when they ſtood but for images, and were ſeene of their ſubiects but once a yeere. They ſuffered their wiſe maiſters of the palace to take knowledge of, and to order and rule all things, who depriuing them as vnworthie of all authoritie, tooke poſſeſſion in the end of their crowne. And ſurely it is no leſſe pernitious for the greater ſort to aduance ignorant men to charges and places of honor, and to vſe their counſell, than to be ignorant themſelues. For (as we ſaid) ignorance cauſeth him that is aduanced to forget himſelfe, and lifteth him vp into all pride. There are amongſt vs too many examples of the ambition and preſumption of many ignorant men, who, contrarie to Torquatus that refuſed the Conſulſhip, bicauſe of his diſeaſed eies, altogither blind as they are, deafe, dumbe, and deſtitute of all natural light, of prudence and experience to guide themſelues, are not

contented to manage the ſailes and tacklings, but deſire to haue the rudder of the Common-welth in their hands. And it is greatly to be feared, that ſuch vnskilfull and ambitious Cleander a traitor to Commodus his Lord.men will in the end ſhew themſelues both in will and practiſe to be imitators of one Cleander an outlandiſh ſlaue, who being preferred by Commodus the emperor to goodlie offices and great places of honor, as to be great maiſter of his men of war, and his chiefe chamberlaine, conſpired notwithſtanding againſt his Lord, ſeeking to attaine to the imperiall dignitie by feditions, which he ſtirred vp in Rome betweene the people and the ſoldiers. But through good order taken, his enterpriſe tooke no effect, except the loſſe of his owne head, and deſtruction of his houſe. Although oftentimes it falleth out cleane contrarie through the iuſt puniſhment of God, for the ignorance and impietie as well of the monarks themſelues, as of their people. Now if fortune turne hir ſelfe about, and ſet hir ſelfe neuer ſo little againſt an ignorant perſon, he is ſtraightway ouercome with a thouſand perturbations, and vrged with deſpaire, as being only grounded before vpon the vaine and weake hope and confidence in externall and vncertaine goods. Perſes, king of Macedonia, and one of the ſucceſſors of Alexander the great in his The haſe mind of Perſes being ouercome of Emilius.great conqueſts, but not in his vnſpeakable vertues, was ouercome in battel by Paulus Emilius, chiefe captain of the Romans, & was led towards him. Emilius, as ſoon as he ſaw him, aroſe from his ſeate, and went forward to receiue and honor him, as being a great perſonage, and fallen into that miſhap by the hazard of fortune. But Perſes, being wholie beaten downe through faintnes and baſenes of mind, caſt himſelfe at his feete vpon the ground with his face downeward, vſing ſuch abiect requeſts and ſupplications, and ſo vnbeſeeming the vertue of a king, that the Conqueror could not abide them, but ſaid thus vnto him: Alas poore ignorant man as thou art, how doſt thou by diſcharging fortune accuſe thy ſelfe in this ſort to be the onely cauſe of this ill ſucceſſe that is befallen thee, ſeeing thou neuer deſeruedſt that honor, which thou haſt had

heeretofore, bicauſe of thy baſe mind within thee, which hath made thee an vnwoorthy aduerſary of the Romans? And truly a man cannot iuſtly be called through the benefit of fortune, but by knowing how to vſe hir well and wiſely both in proſperitie & aduerſitie. As for an ignorant & baſeminded man, the higher that fortune lifteth him vp in great eſtate where he ſhal be viewed of many, ſo much the more ſhee diſcouereth, deſcrieth & diſhonoreth him. For great calling, & riches are no more able to lift vp the hart of a baſe minded fellow, than pouerty can abate and leſſen the great courage of a noble hart. I could here alleadge many mo examples of the pernicious effects that are (as we haue ſaid) wrought in the ſoule by ignorāce, but hereafter they will come in more fitly, when we ſhall diſcourſe particulerly of vices. Onely I ſay here with Plato, that arrogant ignorance hath now more than euer ſeazed vpon the minds of men, & filled them with euils, as being the roote and ſpring of them: that it peruerteth al things, & cauſeth him that poſſeſſeth hir to taſte in the ende of a moſt bitter fruite. Nowe to come to malice and crafte, What malice and craft are.which is the exceſſe of prudence, it is that which leadeth a man through wilfull ignorance, to oppoſe himſelfe againſt that which he knoweth to be dutifull and honeſt, cauſing him vnder the counterfaite name of prudence to ſeeke to deceiue thoſe that will beleeue him. This vice is the chiefe cauſe of ambition and couetouſnes, which moſt men ſerue in theſe daies: but aboue all things it is an enimie to iuſtice, cauſing all their actions to tende to the ouerthrow thereof. To this purpoſe Cicero ſaith, that the craftier and ſubtiler a man is, the more he is to be ſuſpected and hated, as one that hath loſt al credite of goodnes. All knowledge ſeuered from iuſtice ought rather to be called craft and malice than ſcience and prudence. Neither is the onely act of malice (as the ſame author ſaith) euill & wicked, but alſo the deliberation therof although it take no effect, yea the onely thought thereof is vile and deteſtable: ſo far is it, that any couering or cloake can excuſe a fault committed of malice. Alſo he ſaith, that in deliberating,

                     Vertuous men ſeeke after honeſt, not ſecret things.all hope of concealing and hiding the fact muſt be taken away, foraſmuch as vertuous men ought to ſeeke after honeſt, not ſecret things. Moreouer it is the propertie of a malicious man to chooſe hypocriſie and diſſimulation for his companions. Beſides he hath for his firſt author and father, ſathan, who by his ſubtiltie and Satan the father of malice and ſubtiltie.craft abuſed the ſimplicitie of our firſt mother to the ouerthrow of all mankind. Amongſt many we may note here the example of Nero a moſt cruell emperor, who being inſtructed from his youth by that wiſe man Seneca his ſchoolemaſter, in the beginning of his empire counterfaited ſo great bountifulnes and clemencie, that when he was to ſet his hand to the condemnation of one adiudged to die, he cried out and ſaid, Would to God I had no learning, then ſhould I be excuſed from ſubſcribing to The malice of Nero.any mans death. Notwithſtanding within a while after he diſcloſed his deteſtable impiety and cruelty, by putting to death his mother, his tutor and a great number of honeſt men againſt all right and iuſtice. Moreouer he purpoſely cauſed fire to be put into all quarters of Rome, forbidding vnder paine of death that any ſhould quench it, inſomuch that more then halfe the citie was cleane conſumed. Afterward, to the ende he might haue ſome coulor to perſecute the chriſtians, he laid to their charge the kindling of the fire, & ſo put a great number of them Tiberius.to death. Tiberius alſo in the beginning of his raigne behaued himſelfe ſo wiſely, vertuouſly and gently, that he ſeemed to be (ſaith Suetonius) a ſimple and plaine citizen. And yet ſoone after he became as deteſtable a tyrant as euer was, for crueltie and filthy pleaſures. True it is that one may attribute the cauſe of ſuch ſodaine alteration of humors to the ſoueraigne authoritie and power of commanding, which commonly hath his propertie to make him that ſeemed good to become wicked: the humble to be arrogant: the pittifull cruell: the valiant, a coward. But it is alwaies more likely that a prince changing his nature ſo quickly vſeth to counterfeit and to diſſemble, and to put a goodly vizard vpon his face, as hiſtoriographers

write, that Tiberius could behaue himſelfe cunningly in that ſort. Now that we may profite by this diſcourſe, Math. 10. 16.let vs learne to be prudent and ſimple as the ſcripture ſpeaketh, eſchuing all ſhameles and damnable malice and deceit, al want of prudence and ignorance, which procure the loſſe of ſoule and bodie, whereof a man may accuſe none but himſelfe. For ignorance (ſaith Menander) is a voluntarie miſcheefe. And although the knowledge of good & euill is moſt neceſſarie of all others, yet is it moſt eaſie. For the obtaining whereof, and auoiding (through the grace of God) of that condemnation, which is to fall vpon the blinde, and vpon the guides of the blinde, let vs neuer be aſhamed to confeſſe our ignorance in thoſe things whereof we want inſtruction: following therein that precept of Plato, That we muſt not be aſhamed to learne, leaſt happily we be hit in the teeth to our confuſion with that ſaying of Diogenes to a yoong man whom he eſpied in a tauerne, who being aſhamed to be ſeene there, ſpeedilie fledde further into the ſame. The more thou runneſt in (quoth this wiſe man to him) the further thou art in We muſt not denie or hide our ignorance.the tauerne. Euen ſo we ſhall neuer cure our ignorance by denying or hiding it, but the wiſer we ſeeke to be accounted, the more ignorant we ſhall remaine: not vnlike to poore men, who being deſirous to ſeeme rich, in the ende finde themſelues poorer than before, by reaſon of their vaine and fooliſh expenſes. But the ignorant man that ſearcheth for wiſedome and inquireth after hir, ſhall be in ſome ſort eſteemed wiſe, and that inquirie ought to be taken for an argument of his wit and prudence: as contrariwiſe he that taketh himſelfe for a wiſeman and preſumeth too much of his skill, falleth often into ſhame and diſhonor, being reprooued of many. Therefore let vs daily accuſe our ſelues of too much ignorance, knowing that euen the ſharpeſt ſighted do ſee but through a cloud and miſt, I meane the inſtruments of our bodie, from which we ſhall not be deliuered vntill we haue put of this mortall to be clothed with that which is immortall in the enioying of the bleſſed life. So that it will be alwaies

neceſſarie for vs during this life, to learne and to profite in the knowledge of the truth, which is an enimie to ignorance.
               
            
            
               Of ſpeech and ſpeaking. Chap. 12.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  HAuing ſpent all this day in diſcourſing of Prudence, and of thoſe vices that are contrarie vnto it, I thinke that to finiſh this daies worke, we ſhall do well to take in hand againe, and to follow that which was too briefely handled cōcerning the commendable effects of this vertue of prudence in the ſoule of a wiſe man. This appeareth no leſſe in ſpeech than in any other action thereof, foraſmuch as of the abundance of the hart the mouth ſpeaketh. But it is a great vertue to ſpeake little and well. The diſcourſe of this matter I leaue to you my companions.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Surely the ſpeech of man is a diuine worke, and of great admiration. And therefore we ought to account it ſacriledge to pollute and defile ſo holie a thing Math. 12. 35.with filthy and vile talke. A good man alwaies draweth good things out of the treaſure of his hart, and a wicked man euill things. Therefore I greatly commend that ſaying of Plutark, that ſpeach is as it were the nouriſhment of the ſoule, which is corrupted, and becommeth odious through the wickednes of men.
                  
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  He that hath knowledge (ſaith the Pro. 17. 27. 28.wiſe man) ſpareth his words: euen a foole, when he holdeth his peace is counted wiſe, and he that ſtoppeth his lips, prudent. If any man long after life, and to ſee good daies, let him refraine his toong from euill, and his lips 1. Per. 3. 10.that they ſpeake no guile. For euery one ſhall eate of the fruite of his mouth to ſaluation, or to condemnation. But we will heare Aſer diſcourſing more at large vpon this matter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  In the writings of the learned we finde mention made of a double ſpeech or reaſon: the one internall,

or of the minde, called the diuine guide: the other A double ſpeech or reaſon.vttered in ſpeech, which is the meſſenger of the conceits and thoughts of man. The ende of the firſt is friendſhip towards a mans ſelfe. For reſpecting onely the marke of vertue, through the inſtructions of philoſophie, it maketh a man to agree alwaies with himſelfe, it cauſeth him to complaine neuer, to repent him of nothing, it maketh him full of peace, full of loue and of contentation in his owne vertue, it healeth him of euery rebellious paſſion that diſobeieth reaſon, of all contention betweene will and will, and of the contrarietie of diſcourſes. O rare excellencie, which floweth from wiſedome into the ſoules of bleſſed men! The ende of the other reaſon or vttered ſpeech, is friendſhip towards others, which cauſeth vs to ſpeake and teach whatſoeuer is fruitefull and profitable for euerie one, and carieth with it great force to perſwade. Of this ſpeech we purpoſe here to intreat, as of that which occupieth no ſmall place, but euen verie great amongſt the ſecrets of nature, and which ought to rauiſh vs into an admiration of his works who is author thereof. The philoſophers, diligent ſearchers out of the reaſon How ſpeech is framed.of all things, ſaid that ſpeech is made by the aire beaten and framed with articulate and diſtinct ſounde. But howſoeuer it is framed, the reaſon thereof is hard to be comprehended of humane ſence. And we ought to be ſo much the more deſirous to know for what cauſe it was giuen vs, and to feare leaſt we make it vnprofitable, or wickedly imploy ſo great, woonderfull and diuine a thing. Democritus ſaide that words were the ſhadowe of works. Themistocles compared ſpeech to a rich cloth of tapiſtrie, Words are the ſhadow of works.figured & ſet foorth with ſtories, bicauſe that both in the one and the other thoſe things that are faſhioned and repreſented are then ſeene when they are opened and diſplaied, and are not ſubiect to ſight, neither bring any delight or contentation, when they are folded vp and hidden. When a wiſe man openeth his lips (ſaith Socrates) we beholde as it were in a temple, the goodly ſimilitudes & images of the ſoule. Vertue (ſaith Plutarke) hath no inſtrument

ſo gratious or familiar as ſpeech, which being followed of works, is of great efficacie and force, and woonderfully pricketh forward thoſe that heare vs, cauſing them to giue credite to our ſayings, and working in them a deſire to reſemble vs. And AEſchines ſaide verie well, that it is not ſo neceſſarie, that the Orator and the Law ſhould agree in one and the ſame thing, as it is requiſite, that the life of a philoſopher ſhould be conformable and agreeable with this doctrine and ſpeech. Moreouer a wiſe man ought to take euery word he ſpeaketh for a voluntarie and particuler lawe, laide vpon himſelfe, ſeeing that philoſophie is a profeſſion of ſerious, graue & waighty matters, & not a play or prittle prattle, vnconſtanly vttered to obtaine honor onely. Whereby we ſee that all talke ought to haue reaſon for a foundation, and the loue The foundation and ſcope of all ſpeech.of our neighbor for a marke to aime at. This is that which Agapetus would teach vs, when he ſaith, That the toong is a ſlipperie instrument, and bringeth great danger to thoſe that neglect it: but if we direct it with a religious vnderſtanding, it wil ſing vs a ſong tuned with al the concords of a true harmony of vertue. Plutark ſaith that ſpeech ought to be like gold, which is then of greateſt price and value, when it hath leaſt droſſe in it: ſo a fewe words ought to comprehende great ſtore of ſubſtantiall matter and inſtruction. Such was the ſpeech of the ancient Graecians, as the ſentences vttered by them do teſtifie: namely, Know thy ſelfe, Nothing too much, Nothing more than enough, and other ſhort ſpeeches full of great and profitable doctrine. Wherupon Of Laconicall ſpeech.this prouerbe aroſe, Laconical ſayings, that is, ſhort and ſententious, which reſemble ſtreams running through a narrow ſtraight, where the water is ſo preſſed togither, that one cannot ſee through it. And ſo truely it was verie hard without skil and great labor to comprehende the deapth of the ſence & vnderſtanding of their words, which were full of ſententious grauitie. And when they were to anſwere any thing propounded on a ſodaine, auoiding all ſuperfluous ſpeech, their anſwers were verie witty and wel contriued, their words very ſignificant and ſhort, hauing

in them both grace and grauitie ioined together. As when Philip king of Macedonia wrote vnto them, that if he entred within Laconia, he would ouerthrowe them topſy turuy: they wrote backe vnto him onely this word, If. And another time, as Demetrius one of his ſucceſſors, being angry with the ambaſſadour which they ſent vnto him, asked if he came alone from the Lacedemonians to him, the ambaſſadour made this onely anſwere, One to one. Pittacus 
                     A pretie ſaying of Pittacus.vſed to ſay, that a dry and thirſtie eare muſt be waſhed with a ſentence that is good to drinke, & that ſpeech grounded vpon reaſon onely, is able to content and ſatiſfie the hearing. Notwithſtanding that we may the rather and the more profite others, we are not to neglect, if it may be, the ioining of graue doctrine with ſweet gratious and eloquent ſpeech, mingled with ſome pleaſure, grace, and delight, but voide of all diſſolutenes. For (as Euripides ſaith) that is the goodlieſt aſſembly in the world, where Of graue and eloquent ſpeechthe graces and muſes meete togither. Right and reaſon are inuincible, being well vttred; bicauſe the ſoule is therby induced eaſily to beleeue the good reaſons ſhe heareth, through the delight that is ioined with them. Examples alſo being vttred fitly, and with a good grace, profit no leſſe than the other, bicauſe with the force of perſwading, which is in the nature of the example, there is ioined the vertue of delighting. But we muſt carefully auoide all ſubtiltie of ſpeech, all proude, ſuperfluous and vnprofitable talke, leaſt that be iuſtly obiected vnto vs, which Phocion replied to Leosthenes, who laboured to perſwade the Athenians to warre by an eloquent and verie loftie oration. Thy words (quoth he to him) yoong man and my friend, may fitly be compared to Cypres trees. For they are great and tall, but beare no fruite woorth any thing. Or elſe that may be obiected vnto vs, which Ariſtotle 
                     Againſt prating pleaders.anſwered to a great pleader of cauſes, who at euerie ſentence he rehearſed, asked him if that were not a ſtrange thing. Not that, (replied he) but this is a greater maruaile, that any man hauing two legs can abide thy babling. And to another, who after a long diſcourſe ſaid vnto

him, I haue troubled thy head philoſopher: not a whit (anſwered he) for I thought not vpon it. Such bablers, whom Plato verie aptly calleth theeues of time, are cōpared by Plutark to emptie veſſels, which giue a greater ſound than they that are ful. So he that is poore in reſpect of the goods of the ſoule, hath alwaies ſome fond ſpeech in his mouth. But we muſt aboue all things ſhunne this The toong is the beſt and woorſt thing that is.vice of intemperancie of the toong, which Bias called the beſt and woorſt thing that was. It ſerueth vs to profit and inſtruct others, and by the ſame alſo we hurt and corrupt others. And as a little fire conſumeth a great wood, ſo this little member, which is a fire, yea a world of iniquitie, defileth all the bodie, and ſetteth on a flaming fire the whole world, if it be not extinguiſhed and repreſſed. It ſeemeth that nature would teach vs this by fortifiing the toong better than any other part of the body, and by ſetting before it the bulworke of the teeth, that if it wil not obey reaſon, which being within ought to ſerue in ſteade of a bridle to ſtay it from preuenting the thought, we might reſtraine and chaſtice the impudencie thereof with blouddy biting. And becauſe we haue two eares and two eies, it ought to ſerue vs for inſtruction, that we muſt heare and ſee much more than we ſpeake. Do we not alſo ſee, that ſight and hearing go before ſpeaking, and that of neceſſitie, an infant muſt firſt vnderſtand before he can be Iſocrates appointed two times of ſpeaking.able to ſpeake? Iſocrates appointed onely two times to ſpeake in: the one, when the matter is neceſſarie: and the other, when a man ſpeaketh that which he knoweth. And this we may put in practice without blame in this maner. As touching the firſt point, it is lawfull and ſeemly for vs to ſpeake when we ſtand in need of any thing: ſecondly when our ſpeech ſhall profit any: alſo to delight and recreate one another with pleaſant deuices, void of diſſolutenes, to mollifie and to eaſe the trauell of our affaires, or elſe to reliſh our reſt the better, and to induce vs thereby to giue glorie to God. All ſpeech not grounded vpon one of theſe three cauſes were better reſtrained than vttred. Moreouer we ought to obſerue inuiolably the

ſecond point of not ſpeaking that which we know not, except it be in ſeeking and asking after inſtruction: remembring that which Apelles once ſpake to Megabyſes a great Perſian Lord, who comming into his ſhop to ſee him, intermingled Apelles ſpeech to a Perſian lordſome talke of the art of painting. So long (quoth Apelles to him) as thou wert ſilent, thou ſeemedſt to be ſome man of great account, by reaſon of thy chains, carquenets of gold and purple gowne: but now there is not the leaſt of theſe boyes that grinde oker, who doth not mocke thee, hearing thee ſpeak that which thou knoweſt not. By which ſaying we may note, that great men How great men ought to ſpeake.ought to weigh well, and to conſider of that which they ſpeake in publike places, and to vſe graue and ſententious words of another phraſe than that of the vulgar ſort, or elſe to hold their peace if they haue not this gift of ſpeaking. Or at the leaſt they are to ſpeake but little, ſeeing the verie words, geſture and countenance of a prince, are oftentimes taken for lawes, oracles, and decrees. Tiberius alſo brought vp this cuſtome of ſpeaking to the prince by writing, and of his anſwere by the ſame, to the ende that nothing ſhould eſcape his mouth that was not well conſidered of before. But to continue our matter, as the aboue named painter had ſet foorth a table of his owne for all men to behold, and had hid himſelfe behinde it, that he might heare what could be reprehended, a ſhooemaker eſpied a fault in the faſhion of the latchet, which Apelles afterward corrected. And hauing the next morning hung Apelles ſpeech to a ſhoomaker.it out again to be viewed, this ſhooemaker paſſing by, and ſeeing that his opinion was followed, entred further to ſpeake againſt other lineaments. But the painter not able to beare his boldnes came from behinde his table and ſtopped his mouth with this ſaying, That a ſhoomaker ought not to iudge of greater matters than of the ſhoo. This is the meaning of that common prouerbe, to go about to teach Minerua: which is ſo intollerable a thing in men of honor, and ſo pernitious in the ſimpler ſort that are light of beliefe, Alexander gaue money to a poet to hold his peace.that for this cauſe Alexander the great gaue money to Cherillus an ignorant poet to holde his peace and to

leaue writing. And ſeeing we are entred into this matter, we muſt know that we ought to be much more ſtaied and Nothing ought to be written without great deliberation.aduiſed in writing any thing, than in bare ſpeaking: bicauſe a raſh and inconſiderate worde may be corrected preſently, but that which is once ſet down in writing can no more be denied, or amended but with infamy. As therfore a man had need of a readie and quicke wit to be able to ſpeake wel: ſo great wiſedom is very neceſſarie to write well: yea the ſame rules and precepts that belong to ſpeaking, agree alſo to writing. Beſides, writing is called of many, a dumb ſpeech, which ought to be ſhort and full of inſtruction. Caeſar in a letter which he ſent to Rome frō 
                     Notable and pithy letters of ancient men.the Perſian battaile wrote but theſe three words, Veni, vidi, vici, that is to ſaie, I came, ſawe, and ouercame. Octanian writing to his nephew Cains Druſus, ſaid thus: For aſmuch as thou art nowe in Illyria remember that thou deſeendeſt of Caſars, that the Senate hath ſent thee, that thou art yoong, my nephewe and a citizen of Rome. Plato writing to Dionyſius the yoonger, vſed theſe words onely: To kill thy brother, to double thy tributes, to force the people, to forget thy friends, to take good men for thine enimies, are the works of a tyrant. Pompey writing to the Senate from the eaſt parts, ſaide thus: Fathers of the Senate, Damaſcus is taken, Pentapolis ſubdued, Syria, Aſcalonia and Arabia are confederates, and Paleſtina is vanquiſhed. We ſee then the maner of writing vſed by the ancients, for which breuitie they were as much eſteemed, as the great diſcourſers of theſe tiems after inſt occaſion of correction. But to returne againe into the pathway of ſpeaking, we haue in Cicero a notable inſtruction A good precept for ſpeaking.for this matter. Let our ſpeech (ſaith he) be ſweet and pleaſant, not headſtrong: and when we diſcourſe, let vs not be ſo long that we hinder others from ſpeaking. For ſpeech of all other things ought to be mutuall and equall. Moreouer we muſt haue reſpect to that thing whereof we ſpeake. If a man diſcourſe of graue matters he muſt adde a certaine ſeueritie, but if he ſpeake of delectable things, a pleaſant and gratious behauior. Aboue

all things we muſt take heede, that our ſpeech diſcouer not ſome vice to be in our manners, which commonly falleth out when we ſpeake euill of a man in his abſence, either to mooue laughter or to his ſhame and reproch. We muſt alſo remember, if our ſpeech vpon ſome occaſion comming betweene intermit the firſt diſcourſe, that it returne againe in conuenient time. But that is as thinges fall out. For all take not pleaſure in the ſame things, nor at all times. And as we haue begun vpon ſome occaſion, ſo we muſt end by ſome meanes. Now bicauſe in euery action of our life, the perturbations of the ſoule are to be eſchewed, we muſt be carefull that our ſpeech be voide thereof: namely, that it be without choler, without extreame affections, alſo without careleſnes, and other ſuch like imperfection. Eſpecially we muſt ſtriue to make it knowne, that we loue & reuerence thoſe with whom we ſpeake. Further we muſt know that ſilence in due time The praiſe of ſilence.and place, is profound wiſedome, a ſober and modeſt thing, and full of deepe ſecrets. This cauſed Archidamus, when he ſaw that Hecatus the orator was blamed for not ſpeaking one worde at a banquet, to anſwere for him, that they which knowe how to ſpeake well, know alſo the time of ſilence. Hyperides likewiſe being at a feaſt Hyperides.amongſt a great aſſemblie, verie full of noiſe & pleaſure, and being asked why he ſpake nothing, anſwered thus: It is no time now to diſcourſe of thoſe things for which I am fit: and as for thoſe things, which the time nowe requireth, I am vnfit. Bias being mocked of a babler bicauſe he ſpake nothing all a ſupper while, anſwered him thus: How is it poſſible that a foole ſhould holde his peace at the table? The ambaſſadours of the king of Perſia being at a feaſt with a citizen of Athens, and ſeeing Zeno the great philoſopher ſay nothing, they began to flatter him, and to drinke to him, ſaying, what ſhall we tell the king our maſter concerning you, maſter Zeno? Nothing elſe (quoth he) but that you ſaw an olde man, who knew wel how to holde his peace at the table. And truly no ſpeech vttred did euer ſo much good, as many kept in haue profited:

and that which is reſtrained may be ſpoken at any time, but a worde giuen out can no more be called backe againe. For words (as the poet ſaith) haue wings, and are preſently diſperſed euery where: and manie repent that they haue ſpoken, but neuer that they held their peace. How many examples do hiſtories ſet before our Examples of miſchiefes cauſed by the intemperancie of the toong.eies of men, who through the intemperancie of their toongs, haue throwne themſelues headlong into infinite calamities, & of mightie cities and great eſtates deſtroied and ouerthrowne through the diſcloſing of ſome ſecret? The citie of Athens was taken and deſtroied by Sylla the Romane dictatour, who by his ſpies was admoniſhed of the pratling of certaine old men in a barbars ſhop, where they talked of a certaine place of the town that was weakeſt, and woorſt defended. The ouermuch talke of one only man was the cauſe that Rome was not deliuered from the tiranny of Nero. For ſeeing one of the priſoners that was taken by the tirant to be diſmaid bicauſe he ſhuld be put to death, he willed him to pray to God, that he might eſcape but vntil the morrow onely, & then he ſhould haue cauſe of reioicing. Wherupon the priſoner thinking with himſelfe, that it were better for him to chuſe a certaintie than to expect an vncortainty, and to prefer a ſafe way to ſaue his life, before a iuſt, diſcloſed this ſpeech to Nero, who knew wel how to remedy the conſpiracy. The gentleman of Normandy who in his confeſſion told a Franciſcan frier, that he was once minded to haue killed king Fraunces the firſt, may wel be placed amongſt theſe ouermuch ſpeakers. For the king being aduertiſed hereof by the Franciſcan frier, ſent the poore penitentiarie to the court of parliament, where he receiued ſentence of death. Thoſe that are nobly & roially brought vp (ſaith Plutark) learne firſt to hold their peace, & then to ſpeake. Therfore Antigonus the great being demanded by his ſon, at what houre the campe ſhould diſlodge: art thou afraid (quoth he to him) that thou alone ſhalt not heare the trumpet? Of concealing a ſecret.He truſted not him with a ſecret matter, to whom the ſucceſſion of the empire was to come: teaching him thereby

to be more cloſe and ſecret in ſuch matters. Euerie particuler man likewiſe ought to be no leſſe aduiſed in vſing great diſcretion when the queſtiō is of vttring any thing, which a man would haue concealed. For he (ſaith Plato) to whom one diſcloſeth a ſecret getteth the others libertie. Now in this laudable ſilence which we commend here, we haue this to marke wel, that when the queſtion is of ſpeaking a truth, or of profiting another, we ought not to doubt in any caſe, what pretence ſoeuer there be, to ſpeak vtter, maintaine & freely to giue counſaile in that thing, which concerneth the dutie of a good man, or the charge wherunto we are called. The ſages & vertuous men heretofore haue alwaies ſhewed themſelues to be ſuch in their free counſailes & wiſe declarations, as hereafter we may handle more largly. In the meane time we may haue here Demaratus for an example of this commendable libertie Examples of the commendable freedome of ſpeech.of ſpeech, who comming from Corinth into Macedonia, when Phillip was at variance with his wife & with his ſon, was demanded by the king whether the Graecians did agree wel among themſelues. Truly ſir (quoth he to him) it becommeth you wel to inquire after the concord of the Athenians & Peloponeſians, & in the meane while to ſuffer your owne houſe to be ful of diuiſion and domeſticall diſcord. Diogenes alſo being gon to the camp of the ſame Phillip, at the ſame time that he returned from making war againſt the Grecians, & being led before him, the king aſked him if he were not a ſpy. Yes truely anſwered the philoſopher, I am a ſpy & com hither to eſpy thy impudency & folly, who not conſtrained by any, doſt ſet downe as it were on a dicing boord in the hazard of one houre, both thy kingdome & life. Demoſthenes being demanded of the tirant Epemetes why he wept ſo bitterly for the death of a philoſopher, a cōpanion of his, ſeeing it was a ſtrang matter to ſee wiſemē weepe, yea altogither vnbeſeeming their profeſſion: know (ſaid he to him) that I weepe not for the death of this philoſopher, but bicauſe thou art aliue. For I tel thee that in the Academies we are more ſorrowfull for the life of the wicked, than for the death of good men. Let

vs learne then by your preſent diſcourſe, that talke being the meſſenger of thought diſcloſeth our maners a great deal more than the lines & draughts of our face do. And as that tree whoſe root is drie can haue no greene leaues: ſo from a vicious and corrupted ſoule nothing but vile & filthy ſpeeches can proceede, which a wiſe man ought wholy to ſhunne, bicauſe to make ſmall account of euill words leadeth a man by litle and little to diſhoneſt deeds. Let all vaine ſpeech alſo be baniſhed from vs, and let vs take great heed, that we neuer ſpeake, either in ſport or earneſt, any one word that is not tru: knowing that to be true in word is the beginning and foundation of a notable vertue. Moreouer let vs know that truth is not onely betraied of thoſe that ſpeake falſely, and maintaine a lie, but alſo of thoſe that dare not confeſſe and defende it publikely. Let vs know that aboue all things we muſt dedicate The conſtancie of Gordius.our voice and ſpeech to ſing the praiſes of God, remembring the ſaying of that holy man Gordius, who, as he was led to the place of puniſhment was exhorted by ſome to leaue his opinion, and ſo ſaue his life. To whom he anſwered, that the toong ought to vtter nothing that is iniurious to the Creator thereof. Laſtly let vs know that we muſt refer euery word to the glory of his name, and to the profit of our neighbors.
               
            
            The end of the third daies worke.
         
         
            THE FOVRTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Friendſhip and of a friend. Chap. 13.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     MAn being a reaſonable creature borne for ciuill ſocietie to obſerue lawes and iuſtice, and to exerciſe in the world all duties of gentlenes and goodnes, the faireſt and moſt fruitfull ſeede that God hath infuſed and ſowne in his ſoule, and that

draweth him to this ende, is loue and charitie towards his like. But as euerie action of mans life ſtandeth in need Prudence requiſite in a friend.to be guided by the vertue of Prudence, whereof we diſcourſed yeſterday, ſo in truth ſhe is verie neceſſarie in euerie good and vnfained friendſhip. For this cauſe I thinke (companions) that we ſhall obſerue the order of our diſcourſes, if we begin this daies worke with the handling of friendſhip, and of the true and perfect dutie of a friend.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     No outward thing is to be preferred before friendſhip. Nothing that ſeemeth to be profitable, whether it be honor, riches, pleaſure, or whatſoeuer elſe is of this kinde, ought to be preferred in any reſpect before friendſhip. Yea a man is to make more account of friends (as Socrates ſaid) then of any other mortall thing.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Perfect friendſhip (ſaith Aristotle) is to loue our friend more for his benefit than for our owne: and therefore a friend is alwaies profitable and neceſſary. But he is greatly deceiued (ſaith Homer) that ſeeketh for a friend in the court, and prooueth him at a feaſt. But let vs heare ACHITOB diſcourſe hereupon.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Rare things are commonly moſt eſteemed amongſt men, & the more pretious they are of their owne nature, ſo much the more are they had in requeſt. This we may very aptly apply to a friend, ſeeing there is Nothing more rare or excellent than a friend.nothing ſo rare as one that is vnfained and ſtedfaſt, neither any thing ſo excellent and perfect as he is, if he be a good and prudent man. And for this cauſe the philoſophers accounted friendſhip to be the chiefeſt and moſt excellent good of fortune, as being leaſt of all ſubiect to hir, and moſt neceſſarie for man. But bicauſe the wickednes of men is ſo great in theſe daies, that nothing is ſo ſacred and holy which is not violated, corrupted & brought to confuſion, no maruell if men impudently abuſe this name of a friend (ſo much reuerenced in olde time) that ſome take it to themſelues being altogither vnwoorthie thereof, and others as freely, although to their loſſe and ſhame, grant them this excellent title, and eſteeme them for ſuch in truth towards them, as they falſely vaunt themſelues to be. But that we be not deceiued with the greater

number, which is not alwaies the ſureſt marke, let vs briefly conſider what friendſhip is, what fruits ſpring from hir, who may rightly challenge this title of a friend, what maner of one we ought to chooſe, how we muſt trie him before we take him for ſuch a one, then the meanes whereby to keepe him, and laſtly what mutuall dutie friends are to vſe one towards another. Firſt we ſay with Socrates, that The principall cauſe and end of all true friendſhip.true friendſhip cannot be framed but by the helpe and grace of God, who draweth like to the loue of his like: that euerie perfect friendſhip is to bee linked with the bond of charitie, and ought to be referred to God, as to our ſoueraigne good and cheefeſt friend: and therefore that true friendſhip cannot be ſetled betweene the wicked, who being at diſcord within themſelues, can haue no concorde and agreement one with another. Moreouer, there is to be found in friendſhip whatſoeuer men thinke woorthie to be deſired, as honeſtie, glorie, tranquillitie of minde, and pleaſure: and conſequently a happie life, which cannot bee amongſt the What friendſhip is.wicked. Friendſhip is a communion of a perpetuall will, the end whereof is fellowſhip of life, and it is framed by the perfect habit of a long continued loue. Whereby wee may perceiue, that there is a difference betwixt The difference betwixt friendſhip and loue.loue and friendſhip: bicauſe loue is a deſire of the thing loued, and a beginning of friendſhip, but friendſhip is an inueterate and ancient loue, wherein is more pleaſure than deſire. To loue (ſaith Cicero) is nothing elſe but to be deſirous to profit and pleaſure another without hope of recompence. For otherwiſe friendſhip would bee a meere merchandiſe, whereas it ought to be as free as charitie. Socrates alſo ſaid, that the end of friendſhip was, that of two ſoules one ſhould be made in will and affection, and that none ſhould loue himſelfe better than his friend. For there is a meane to be kept in all things, except in conuerſing with a friend, in regard of whom this ought to be reſolued vpon, that he is either wholie to be forſaken, or wholie to be truſted. What ſhall I hide from my friend (ſaith Homer) or what

letteth why I may not thinke my ſelfe alone when I am with him? Whereby it appeereth vnto vs, that a friend is a ſecond ſelfe, and that whoſoeuer would take vpon him What things are requiſite in friendſhip.this title in regard of another, he muſt transforme himſelfe into his nature whom he purpoſeth to loue, and that with a ſtedfaſt and ſetled mind to continue ſo for euer. Heereupon one of the ancients ſpeaking of him that loueth perfectly, ſaith, that he liueth in another mans bodie. Friends therefore ought of neceſſitie to haue a coniunction and conformitie of maners, of deſires, of paſſions, of ſpeech, of ſtudies, of pleaſures, of inclinations, of intermiſſions, if they mind to profeſſe perfect friendſhip. Whereby we may eaſily gheſſe, that he which entertaineth many friends, depriueth himſelfe of the name of a true and ſtedfaſt friend, bicauſe it is altogither vnpoſſible for a man to faſhion himſelfe to all patterns, and to apply himſelfe to all natures, ſo diuers in euery one: eſpecially conſidering that he ſhall very hardly find himſelfe like affected in all things to one alone. Now after we haue found ſuch a diſpoſition and conformitie in him that offereth himſelfe to bee our friend, wee muſt enter further into the knowledge of him, by ſounding out the depth of his hart, that wee may be certaine and ſure of his good diſpoſition. For to ſee outwardly a reſemblance of our maners and conditions in another, is not ſufficient to prooue them ſuch in deede without diſſimulation, vnleſſe they bee grounded vpon a good and vertuous nature, which is ſimple, vpright, and vnfained. For otherwiſe we ſee that many (like to Proteus taking diuers ſhapes) are ſo ſubtill, that when they would currie fauour with any man to deceiue him, they diſguiſe themſelues, and for a while applie themſelues to all his humors. This is practiſed chiefly by flatterers The common practiſe of flatterers.towards great men, who will counterfait rather than they will not imitate the naturall vice of the prince: ſo that as ſoone as euer they ſee him laugh, they betake themſelues to laughing, albeit they know not wherfore. And namely wee reade that Alexander the great,

and Alphonſus king of Arragon, hauing ech of them ſomewhat a wry necke, this by nature, the other through cuſtome, the flatterers and courtiers held their necks on the What maner of man we muſt chooſe for our friend.one ſide, to counterfeit their imperfection. To the ende therefore that the ſugred poiſon of ſuch fained friends deceiue vs not, we muſt make choiſe of an honeſt, prudent & wiſe man for our friend, whoſe fidelitie (as Cicero ſaith) integritie, conſtancie and liberalitie are approoued of euerie one, and whom we ſhall perceiue to be led and poſſeſſed with the ſame zeale to vertue that our ſelues are, to the ende we may be aided and furthered by them in all good and laudable actions. For (as Plato ſaith) friendſhip is giuen by nature for a helpe to vertue, not for a companion of vices. To this effect Pythagoras ſaith, that it is not good to ioyne hands with euery one. Dicearchus alſo would giue vs to vnderſtand the ſame when he ſaith, that we muſt make all men our well willers if it be poſſible, but onely good men our friends, who are not obtained but after a long time, and that by vertue. And as when we paſſe by a bramble or a burre that taketh hold of vs, we caſt it farre from vs, but contrariwiſe ſeeke for the oliue and the grape: ſo we ought to ſeeke after their friendſhip, that deſerue it, whoſe minds haue ſufficient matter in them to cauſe them to be loued, but to forſake, yea to reiect ſuch as are vnwoorthy, and vicious, ſenſuall and diſordred, although they fawne vpon vs: bicauſe their conuerſation marreth and corrupteth euery good nature. Therefore Bias ſaid verie well, that a wiſeman receiueth not euerie one vnto his friendſhip. Hauing thus choſen him whom we deſire to entertaine for our friend, & laid the chiefe foundations of friendſhip vpon his agreement of manners with vs, and vpon his good diſpoſition (which we may know by familiar conuerſation with him, and by diligent inquirie) before wee can aſſure our ſelues or boaſt that we haue a true friend, we muſt prooue his ſtedfaſtnes and conſtancie, and not truſt to offers and promiſes, whereof men are verie prodigall now a daies. But this is cleane contrarie to the dutie of a true friend,

whoſe propertie is to be ſparing in ſpeech, and prodigall in deedes, bicauſe great proffers are meete to be vſed towards ſtrangers, and good deeds towards true friends. Now to proue a friend, we muſt not ſtay vntill need and neceſſitie vrge vs, leaſt ſuch triall be not onely vnprofitable and without fruit, but alſo very hurtfull and dangerous vnto vs, bicauſe at ſuch a time as neceſſarily requireth friends, we make trial of him, who in truth is no ſuch man. How we muſt prooue a friend.But we are rather to gouerne our ſelues with prudence and foreſight, as we vſe to do in the receipt of gold and ſiluer. For before we haue need to imploy it, we conſider whether it be currant, that we may be ſure it will ſerue the turne when neceſſitie requireth. To this purpoſe Theophraſtus ſaid, that we ought to prooue ſtrangers to loue them, and not loue them to prooue them. Therefore albeit the true and right triall of a friend is in aduerſitie, as of fine gold in a fornace, yet that is to be vnderſtood of him, who is ſuch a one indeede. For if we ſhould expect the firſt triall vpon our ſelues in time of certaine danger, thereby to be aſſured and out of doubt, if then he ſhould faile vs it would bring vs in great perill: ſo that we were better to trie him when we ſtand not in need, requeſting him notwithſtanding, as if we were vrged, and ſtood in need of his helpe and aſſiſtance in a matter of importance. If then he go forward with a ſound zeale and readie affection, we are aſſured of him againſt another time. But if he ſtagger, and do it coldly, or turne away his face & refuſe it, beſides that we haue no hurt or hinderance, we ſhall alſo gaine much by withdrawing ſuch a friend gently, and by little & little How we muſt ſhake off a falſe friend.from our table, and from our proſperitie: alwaies wiſely obſeruing that this friendſhip be ſimplie forſaken, and no enmitie vndertaken. For it is not good or ſeemly to quarrell with him, with whom we haue liued familiarly. Moreouer, we muſt note heere, that triall is to be made in an honeſt, not in a wicked matter. For we muſt not do, as we read that Alcibiades did, who, being deſirous to knowe whether he had ſo many friends as he thought he had, called How Alcibiades tried his friends.them vpon a day one after another into a darke place,

and ſhewed vnto them an image of a dead bodie, ſaying, that it was a man whom he had killed, and requeſting them to helpe to carie it away. But amongſt them all he found none except Callias that would harken thereunto. This kind of proouing a friend maketh vs vnwoorthie of ſuch a name, and occaſioneth euery good man to withdraw himſelfe from our friendſhip. If we do all things (ſaith Cicero) both good and bad for our friends, ſuch friendſhip may more truly be called a conſpiracie of euill men, than a confederacie of good men. But, as we haue ſaid, we muſt gaine another mans friendſhip by vertue, and not by vice, as alſo trie a friend in iuſt and reaſonable cauſes: as if we be oppreſſed vniuſtly, if affliction and aduerſitie follow hard at our heeles, if need or any other humāne accident betide vs, into which the beſt men commonly The meanes to keepe a friend.fall. After we are ſure that we haue a friend (which truly is very great riches) there is nothing that we ought to deſire more than to preſerue and keepe him. And firſt the mutuall opinion, which ought to be in euerie friend of the vertue of his companion ſerueth very much for this matter. For as Cicero ſaith, The opinion of vertue is the fountaine of friendſhip, and it is proper to vertue to win mens harts, to draw them vnto it ſelfe, and to preſerue their friendſhip. Next, the coniunction of maners and wils keepeth backe all riot and contentions, when as the will and mind of the one ſhall no ſooner be declared, but the other preſently putteth to his helping hand to bring it to paſſe. Thirdly, we are to obſerue this firſt law of friendſhip inuiolably, not to require our friend to do any thing that is not iuſt, or not in his power to performe, but to content our ſelues with the vſe and ſeruice of that which he hath, without further ſeeking his hinderance, after the example of the induſtrious and painfull bee, which draweth honie out of flowers, and hurteth not the fruit. Aboue all things we muſt hold this for a generall rule, which we haue alreadie touched, that true and perfect friendſhip ought to be Friendſhip muſt be free.free, as charitie is, from whence ſhe hath hir beginning: I meane, that it ought to exerciſe it ſelfe not for hire or recompence,

but onely for his loue, who is beloued of vs. For the one is proper to a friend, the other ſauoreth of a hireling. True it is that friends in theſe daies are like to crowes, which fly not but towards thoſe places where there is ſome thing to feed vpon: euen ſo they commonly viſit not mens houſes except it be for profit, neither reuerence a friend longer than they ſee him in proſperitie, or may reape ſome commoditie by him. But we muſt ſhun ſuch paraſites, who are but ſaluting and table friends. Moreouer, we muſt reioice and delight in the companie and conuerſation of our friend, as in that wherein the ſweeteſt and moſt pleaſant fruit of friendſhip conſiſteth. And for want of this benefit, friends muſt often communicate togither by letters, thereby to ſhew that they liue in remembrance one of another. For by the letter of a true friend the ſpirit is refreſhed, the eies delighted, friendſhip confirmed, and the mind contented. Beſides we muſt haue our vertues, ſpirits, proſperitie, yea acquaintance, and all common togither, and nothing ſecret or hidden. Laſtly we muſt yeeld to our friend all duties and ſeruices of ſincere friendſhip, and that in all honeſt and profitable things according to right & iuſtice, which are the bounds and limits of an holie loue, deſiring the like of him towards vs. Aboue all things his affliction or aduerſitie, and all iniurie offered him, ought to be common to vs with him, wherein we are to aſſiſt and helpe him with all ſuccor and ſweet conſolation, which is as ſouereigne and fit a remedie as can be applied vnto him, eſpecially when good doctrine is ioined with our ſpeech. Heerof Phalereus confeſſed Phalereus.very well that he had good experience when he was baniſhed from his kingdome, ſaying that his meeting with Crates the wiſe man had taken from him all care and thought of his miſerie. And if friendſhip can greatly diminiſh the greefe that commeth by aduerſitie, no doubt but it can adde as much grace and pleaſure to proſperitie. We may effect all dutie whatſoeuer we owe to our friend, by How many waies we owe dutie to our friend.ſuccouring him with fower things: namely, with our perſon, with our goods, with comfort, and with counſell.

Which we may alſo comprehend vnder theſe two duties, of releeuing the neceſſitie of our friend, and of comforting him in his tribulation. Now bicauſe, what perfection ſoeuer is in our friend, as likewiſe in our ſelues, it cannot be but there will be alwaies ſome imperfection mingled therewith (mens doings being neuer without ſome euill) we muſt not preſume to be able to build ſuch a perfect friendſhip as ſhall be void and free of all vice. And therefore How we muſt beare with the imperfections of our friend.we muſt gently ſupport and beare with all wants and diſcommodities of our friend, and oftentimes frame our ſelues to many paſſions, ſo they be not directly contrarie to vertue, but ſuch as proceed from the imbecillitie and frailtie of nature common with vs. Neuertheles againſt ſuch imperfections we muſt in time conuenient and to purpoſe, vſe free and gentle admonitions, which are ſo neceſſarie in friendſhip, and worthie of ſuch conſideration, that in my opinion we ſhall do well to make a ſeuerall diſcourſe thereof. Now if it come ſo to paſſe, that ſome diſpleaſure or iar happen betweene vs, then is the time wherin we ought moſt of all to ſtudie and labour how we may do ſome profitable or honorable thing to our friend: and not harken to ſlanderous toongs, which watch for ſome ſmall and light occaſion to powre out the poiſon of diſcord, thereby to rent and breake a ſunder our good and ſure friendſhip. To ſuch paraſites, and ſcrap-gatherers at free-coſt feaſts, who ſeeke for nothing but their own gain by the diſagreement of others, we muſt neuer giue eare, but driue them as far from vs, as they thinke to come neer vs. And to the end we may be the better affected and diſpoſed heerunto, we muſt often call to remembrance, what benefit and happines commeth to ſuch men as are linked togither by true and vnfained friendſhip: as namely, in thoſe affaires at which we cannot be preſent our ſelues, the fidelitie of a friend ſupplieth our place. From whence we will draw this concluſion, that he which violateth friendſhip, ſetteth himſelfe againſt the common ſuccour and aide of all men, and as much as in him lieth, ouerthroweth humane ſocietie. For we cannot do all things

our ſelues, and therefore friendſhips are ioined togither, that by mutuall duties one may profit another. Now conſidering that all the aboue named things are both neceſſarie and alſo very hard and difficult to be obſerued and kept in true friendſhip, a man may eaſily iudge that this ſo excellent a ſympathie and fellow feeling of two friends is very rare, and not eaſily found: and by a more forcible reaſon it followeth, that it is altogither impoſſible that Againſt the plurality of friends.many ſuch friends ſhould be linked togither. So that whoſoeuer goeth about any ſuch matter can neuer attaine to a certaine and durable friendſhip. For it muſt needes follow, that he which beginneth new friendſhip cannot but diminiſh and waxe faint in affection in regard of his former friendſhip, wherein he was in a maner ſetled. Yea, how can he obſerue all dutifull points of a ſtedfaſt friend, as well in mutuall conuerſation and communication of all things, as in helping his friend in all his affaires, if he haue many friends to looke vnto, who may all ſtand in neede of him at one and the ſame time? It is certaine that in ſeruing one he would be wanting to the other, and peraduenture to both, whilſt he doubteth which to helpe firſt. But there is yet a further matter in it. Do we not take him for our enimie, who is enimie to our friend? It is moſt certainly ſo: as the wiſe man Chilon very fitly ſignified ſo much to one who boaſted, that he had neuer a fo. Then haſt thou neuer a friend, quoth Chilon, ſeeing it is He that hath neuer a fo, hath neuer a friend.impoſſible, by reaſon of the wickednes of men, that two perſons ſhould liue in the world without enimies. Whereupon Plutarke ſaith, If thou ſeekeſt for a ſwarme of friends thou conſidereſt not that thou falleſt into a waſps neaſt of enimies. Heereof it is that hiſtories, when they ſet before vs examples of true and excellent friendſhip make The beſt and moſt excellent friendſhip is betweene one couple.mention onely of two perſons: as of Ionathan and Dauid, whoſe friendſhip could not be hindered by the wrath of the father of the one, no not although he knew, that his friend ſhould raigne ouer him, notwithſtanding he were by inheritance to ſucceed next in the kingdome. So we read of one Achilles and Patroclus, of whom the one falſified

his oth, which was that he would neuer fight, to the end he might reuenge the death of the other. There was but one Orestes and Pylades, both of them calling themſelues by the name of Orestes who was condemned to die, thereby to ſaue the life of his companion. Neither was there any mo than one Ephenus and Eueritus, and one Damon and Pythias, two of which being condemned to die by Dionyſius the tyrant of Siracuſa, had their pardon granted them by reaſon of the conſtancie and ſtabilitie of the friendſhip that was between them and their companions, whereof they ſhewed this proofe. The two condemned perſons beſought Dionyſius to licence them to go vnto their countrie, that they might take ſome order for their houſhold affaires before they died. The tyrant ſcorning at this, asked them what pledges they would pawne for their returne. Whereupon the two other friends willingly offered themſelues for pledges, and ſo ſix moneths ſpace being granted, they were ſet at libertie. When the end of this time drew nie, many mocked theſe poore cautions: but they nothing aſtoniſhed made anſwer, that they were certaine and ſure their friends would not in any caſe faile of their promiſe. And indeede they arriued the laſt day that was granted vnto them. Whereat the tyrant wondering, forgaue the condemned parties, and praied them to receiue him for a third man into their friendſhip. So great force had vertue, that it could pacifie choler and crueltie in his hart, whoſe vertue conſiſted in nothing elſe but in Piſistratus letter 
                           〈◊〉
                         his nephew.vice. We read of a letter written by Piſistratus, prince of the Athenians, ſeruing for a notable example of the force of friendſhip, which oftentimes is greater than all conſanguinitie. For hauing intelligence, that Thraſillus his nephew was of a conſpiracie againſt him, he wrote vnto him in theſe words: Nephew Thraſillus, thou ſhouldſt haue called to remembrance, not that I brought thee vp in my houſe, that thou art come of my blood, that I haue communicated my ſecrets with thee, that I haue giuen thee my daughter to wife with the halfe of my goods, but aboue all things, that I loued thee as a friend. Thou art become

a traitor towards me, which I would neuer haue ſuſpected, conſidering that I neuer deſerued any ſuch thing at thy hands. And therefore I would gladly I had ſo much authoritie ouer my ſelfe, that as I can ſhake off this alliance, ſo I could alſo falſifie our friendſhip, which I can neither do, nor determine of, my fidelitie ſaued. For the conſanguinitie that I haue with thee may be ſeparated, as being within the veines: but the loue I beare thee cannot, ſeeing it is within my hart. A thouſand other examples of couples ioined in friendſhip are to be found in hihiſtories. In the meane while we haue to note, that although we meaſure friendſhip heere by the number of two, yet our meaning is not to exclude others altogither. For we know, that true charitie extendeth it ſelfe vnto euery one, that we are bound to loue euen our enimies, and to do good to all, but yet amongſt all we may chooſe one onely friend to loue, and to be loued againe of him in perfection. Neuertheles we muſt labour by a thouſand good duties to get the good will of all men, and in what place ſoeuer we be to follow the wiſe counſell of Polybius giuen to Scipio Africanus, that he ſhould neuer depart from the publike place of authoritie before he had gotten vnto himſelfe ſome new friend and well willer. This belongeth to them eſpecially that haue wealth at wil, and are in publike offices, and fauored of the mightier ſort: and therefore are ſo much the more bound thereunto, as alſo to take delight in doing good to manie, not ſparing any of their ſubſtance. We haue famous examples heereof amongſt the ancients. That great Romane captaine and Conſul Titus Flaminius, who deliuered and freed all Graecia Titus Flaminius.from bondage, and twiſe in battell ranged diſcomfited Philip king of Macedonia, is exceedingly commended of hiſtoriographers, not onely bicauſe he was readie to pleaſure euerie one, but alſo bicauſe he tooke ſuch delight therein, that he would alwaies remaine well affected euen to thoſe whom he had once pleaſured, as if himſelfe had receiued the benefit: inſomuch that he was alwaies ready to do them more good. Wherby he ſhewed himſelfe truly

zealous of vertue, which is neuer ſet on work for the hope of any earthly recompence, ſeeing the price and reward of a vertuous deed ought onely to be the doing thereof. Therefore Cicero ſaid very well, that no Commonwealth can either with too little, or too late recompence hir natiue countriman. Now to conclude our preſent diſcourſe, we ſay, that friendſhip is ſo excellent a thing, that there is no compariſon betweene it and any other worldly good: that it is vertue, which frameth and vniteth togither perfect friendſhips, and that if they be once forſaken, they cannot longer continue. Therefore honeſtie (as Cicero ſaith) is to be placed aboue friendſhip and profit, and religion, iuſtice, and fidelitie are to be preferred before the vniuſt requeſts of our friends, howſoeuer they might be profitable for this life, either to them or to our ſelues. We ſay, that whileſt we labour to make all men our well-willers by doing them good, according to the duty of a good nature, if we meete with one ſure and certaine friend amongſt them all, we haue gotten a great and incomparable Nothing better than to liue with a vertuous man.treaſure: ſeeing there is nothing more fit for life, or more commodius for a good and happie life, than to liue with a vertuous man and our friend, whoſe fidelitie, integritie, and conſtancie are ruled by charitie. Laſtly we ſay, Three things neceſſarie in friendſhip.that three things are very requiſite and neceſſarie for the foundation and aſſurance of this friendſhip: namely, vertue, as that which is honeſt: Conuerſation, as pleaſant and agreeable: Profit, as helpfull. Which is as much to ſay, as, that we muſt receiue a friend after we haue knowen and prooued him, that we muſt reioice in his companie, and vſe him in our need, as we deſire him to do the like by vs. So that he which can boaſt of ſuch a friend is very happie.
               
            
            
               Of Reprehenſion and Admonition. Chap. 14.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  DIuine Plato writing a letter to Dionyſius the tyrant of Syracuſa in the behalfe of Helicon the Mathematician, after many and

great commendations ſpoken of him, addeth this, that he wrote theſe things of a man, that is, of a liuing creature, Man is mutable.by nature mutable and ſoone changed. The like alſo he ſpake of thoſe that were well brought vp and inſtructed in Athens. I feare yet (quoth he) that being men, and the ofſpring of other men they will make knowen the great infirmitie and frailtie of mans life, which truly, being compaſſed about, and as it were beſieged with infinite miſeries, is ſo eaſily troubled, that the wiſeſt ſtand alwaies in need of inſtruction, and ought to be awakened and admoniſhed of their dutie. Whereunto the free reprehenſion, and ſweete admonition of a friend doth not a little profit. Wherefore my counſell is, that we handle it preſently, without departing from the matter of our former diſcourſe.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  True friends (ſaith Socrates) muſt not through flatterie ſeeke to gaine the fauour of their friends, but reprooue them rather, that for their benefit they may reduce them to a better way.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  To admoniſh and to be admoniſhed (ſaith Seneca) are proper to true friendſhip. And Cicero ſaith, that a man may deſpaire of his ſafetie, whoſe eares are cloſed vp againſt the truth, and cannot abide reprehenſion. Let vs therefore heare ARAM handle this ſubiect.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  One of the greateſt, moſt profitable and neceſſarie fruits, which ſpring out of euery good and holie friendſhip, and are noted and reaped by the acceptable One of the greateſt fruits reaped in friendſhip.and long conuerſation of a prudent & wiſe friend, is that free reprehenſion and ſweet admonition, which ought to be mutuall betweene all true friends: ſeeing the fraile inconſtancie of man is ſuch, that euen the iuſteſt man (as the ſcripture ſaith) ſinneth ſeuen times a day. But man hauing pride and preſumption naturally rooted in his ſoule, howſoeuer he ſeeth a mote in his brothers eie, yet he perceiueth not the great beame that cloſeth vp his owne eies. This maketh him bold (as it is the propertie of vice to be headſtrong) to defend and maintaine, that he hath alwaies done well, and not eaſily to harken to his reaſons

that reprooueth him, were it not that the mightie and inuiolable bond of friendſhip, as of a ſecond-ſelfe did conſtraine him to lend his eare to his friend through the opinion which he hath conceiued of him and his vertue. True it is, that if there were amongſt vs ſuch a reformation of life and maners, and that loue ioined with obedience A notable cuſtome of the Lacedemonians.might take place now, as it did long ſince amongſt the Lacedemonians, (who obſerued this cuſtome inuiolable, to puniſh him that did not reprooue anothers fault committed in his preſence, with the ſame puniſhment which was inflicted vpon the offender himſelfe, & ſharply to chaſtice him that reſiſted, or was angry at the reprehenſion) we ſhould not ſee ſo great winking at vices and imperfections, nor ſuch impudent reſiſting and ſhameles contempt of all good admonition as raigneth now a dais amongſt vs, who vnskilfully terme this friendſhip, not to correct one another, but rather to couer & to winke at all faults. But ſeeing our age is ſo greatly corrupted, we may eaſily know what a pretious and neceſſarie thing it is, to haue found a prudent and wiſe friend, who knoweth how to vſe wholeſome and ſharpe reprehenſion, as a preſeruatiue medicine, that ſaueth the patients life, being miniſtred in conuenient time, and to purpoſe. Which thing if it be not wiſely obſerued herein (as in all other things) it greatly hurteth, and depriueth the admonition of profite and efficacie. Therefore a friend being oppoſite to a flatterer, who ſtudieth for nothing but to pleaſe, to do and to ſpeake to his liking whom he flattereth (which is enough to ouerthrow friendſhip, whoſe ſtrength is onely in vertue) A friend compared to a muſitiō.ought to deal as a skilful muſitian, who in the tuning of his inſtrument ſetteth vp ſom of his ſtrings, and letteth downe others. So a prudent friend yeeldeth vnto ſome things, but refuſeth and contrarieth others, changing his minde as honeſtie and profit require. He is not afraide ſometime to make his friend ſad with intent and purpoſe to profit him, not to breake friendſhip. Likewiſe he is not greatly to care although he ſee his friend angred, ſo that he be bettred, conſidering that anger may better be tollerated

than vice. Ageſilaus king of Sparta ſaid, that he liked Ageſilaus.well to be praiſed of ſuch friends as would not ſpare him at all, but were ready to blame him alſo whenſoeuer he gaue them occaſiō ſo to do. To this effect Epictetus ſaid, that as a woolfe in ſome ſort reſembled a dog, ſo a flatterer was like a friend: and therefore that we ought to beware, leaſt in ſtead of good dogs for ſafegard, we receiue vnto vs moſt pernitious & hurtfull woolues. For it is better (as Antisthenes ſaid) to ſtand at the curteſie of crowes than of flatterers, ſeeing the one deuoure dead carkaſſes, and the other liuing men. Now let vs conſider of the meanes how to vſe aptly and to purpoſe this ſo healthfull medicine in friendſhip, I meane reprehenſion and admonition. Sometimes it is neceſſarie (ſaith Cicero) for vs to rebuke How we muſt vſe reprehenſion.our friends, wherein we are to vſe a more auſtere countenance and vehement ſpeech: but too great ſeueritie and ouermuch ſadnes ought to be far from vs. For although grauitie be a vertue, yet friendſhip is more familiar, free and pleaſant. We muſt alſo take heed that it appeere not we be in choler, but rather that we com againſt our wils to do this dutie, as ſurgeons do to cut off and to burne, and that very rarely, when there is no way to finde or vſe any other receit. Moreouer if one behold his friend in ſome great affliction, knowing it to be the nature of aduerſitie to make men of troubled & vexed ſpirits, ſoone cholerike and vnwilling to heare, and at ſuch a time to be offended at good and true ſpeeches (euen as honie although it be ſweet, yet breedeth greefe when it is applied to vlcers) I ſay a friend well aduiſed ought then to beware that he vſe no ſharp or biting words, which are apt to prouoke him to anger, that is preſſed with aduerſitie. And this did Pythagoras meane to teach vs learnedly by that enigmaticall precept or riddle, which forbiddeth vs to Stirre vp the fire with a ſword. A man ought rather in ſuch a caſe to miniſter ſome ſuch ſweet and gratious ſpeech of comfort, as yeeldeth and giueth place a little to the iuſt greefe of his friend, and from whence he may draw ſome eaſe of his euill, whether it be in talking thereof togither

with him, or otherwiſe in lamenting the ſame. And this muſt be done before any mention be made of a remedie, or any other conuenient matter of talking with him be ſought after. In this ſort for a man to comfort himſelfe is no leſſe difficult a matter (as Thales ſaid) than it is for a phiſition to cure himſelfe. Aboue all things we muſt be verie circumſpect when we ſee our friend lately angred by reaſon of ſome pregnant and notable iniurie or wrong receiued from another. For then in ſteade of being importunate with him preſently to forgiue the iniurie, or of ſeeking to perſwade him to thinke it a ſmall fault, thereby endeuoring at the firſt daſh to bring him to reaſon, we muſt intreat him gently to deferre the puniſhment, and after by little and little, and by degrees to pacifie and appeaſe him. For it is verie certain, that when wrath is much kindled and the hart inraged, a man cannot eaſily receiue comfort, nor ſo ſodainly conceiue and vnderſtand reaſon. And therefore Plutark amongſt other things gaue this Time bringeth as many things to good order as reaſon doth.counſaile to the emperor Traian to be patient towards furious folks, conſidering that time moderateth as manie things, as reaſon doth change. Notwithſtanding when the queſtion is of reſtraining a diſordinate pleaſure, of repreſſing choler or peeuiſhnes that paſſeth the bounds of all reaſon, of bridling inſolencie, which is gone too farre out of ſquare, of hindring ſome notable couetouſnes, or of ſtaying ſome fooliſh motion, or ſuperfluous paſſion, then is the time wherein a prudent and good friend ought to be vehement and earneſt, and to double the ſpeech of his admonition: yea to frame himſelfe ſo, as if the imperfection proceeded from himſelfe, & as though his own vtter vndoing lay thereupon. In ſuch a caſe he is to follow that good Graecian captaine Phocion, who, when his friend would haue caſt away himſelfe, ſaid that he would not ſuffer him, bicauſe he was made his friend for that purpoſe. Therefore whenſoeuer any ſuch occaſion is offred, a man is not to ſtay vntill the fault be committed, that he may then giue his friend ſome good inſtruction. For then it would come to late, and no leſſe vnfitly, than that Porters

warning, who after he had hit Cato, bad him beware. What (anſwered Cato) wilt thou giue me yet another blowe? Moreouer we muſt take good heed that all reprehending of one friend by another be done (as we commonly ſaie) betweene two priuate wals, that is, ſecretly when the doore is ſhut: bicauſe the diſcouerie of any ſinne or vice (euen as of ſom foule diſeaſe) is alwaies ſhamefull. The example of theſe two ſages, Socrates and Plato, will fitly agree to this matter. Socrates being ſomwhat more earneſt than his cuſtome was with one of his familiar friends before a great companie, Plato could not containe himſelf but ſaid vnto him: Had not this beene better ſpoken priuately apart? And had not your ſelfe (quoth Socrates) done better, if you had told me priuately of this which now you vtter? Whereupon we may further learne this leſſon, that it is alwaies eaſie enough to reprooue another, but that al our reprehenſions are blame woorthy, if we reape not this inſtruction thereby, to correct, or to auoide the like errors in our ſelues. Thus doth the ſelfe ſame Plato teach vs ſaying, that we muſt deſcend into our inward parts, & ſay euerie one with himſelfe, Am not I ſuch an one? Otherwiſe We muſt correct in our ſelues thoſe faults which we reprehend in others.a man might truly reproch vs with that ſaying taken out of an olde Tragedie, Ech wounded wight doth ſeeke to ſalue the ſores that others haue. But as we ſee our owne eies ſhine within the apples of our neighbours eies, ſo ought we in the life of other men to lay our owne before vs, and to purge them of thoſe vices which we reprehend. For as Lyſander made this anſwere to a Megarian, who thruſt himſelfe foreward to ſpeake aloud for the liberty of Graecia in a generall aſſemblie of counſell, That ſpeech my friend had need of a mightie citie: ſo may it be ſaide to euerie one that vſeth freely to reprehend others, that his maners had need to be well reformed. Therefore Plato ſaid that he corrected Speuſippus by the example of his life. In like ſort, Xenocrates caſting his eie vpon Polemon, who in diſſolute Sundry inſtructions how to admoniſh wiſely.apparell was entred into his ſchoole, changed and reformed all by his onely lookes. This alſo will be a good and honeſt way to make our reprehenſion both profitable &

well liked of, when we infold our ſelues in that fault, which we reprooue in others: as that wiſe man Socrates vſed to do, when he checked and taught yoong men, ſaying that himſelfe was not deliuered from ignorance, but had need to be inſtructed with them in vertue, & to ſeeke out the knowledge of the truth. For when one accuſeth himſelfe as ſubiect to the ſame faults that his friend is, & proteſteth that his meaning is to correct and reprooue him, as if he were himſelfe, it cauſeth him that reprehendeth to be loued and reuerenced, and procureth greater credite to his ſayings. Let vs further obſerue this, that euerie reprehenſion betweene friend and friend ought to be pure, and voide of all priuate paſſions. Inſomuch that if we perceiue our ſelues contemned, and after a ſort deſpiſed, yet muſt we teſtifie our ſincere and louing affection in ſpeaking freely in the behalfe of others that are likewiſe deſpiſed, but not framing our talke in any ſort for our owne defence. Euerie admonition thus grounded as I haue ſaid, cannot but be profitable and well liked of our friend, as that which cauſeth the offender both to reuerence him that gaue it, and to bluſh for ſhame, not daring once to lift vp his eies againſt it. But foraſmuch as naturally we hate to be reprooued and blamed, as we learned in the beginning of this diſcourſe, we muſt know that to cure ſuch a pernitious inclination, nothing can profite vs ſo much as to beleeue, that the beginning of good life is Reprehenſion is the beginning of good life.to be blamed and baited at. For man, by nature inclined more to vice than to vertue, can neuer hate euill before he vnderſtand what miſerie it bringeth. So that when he ſinneth if his friend lay the infamie and ſhame of his offence before his eies, vnleſſe he be altogither paſt ſhame, and fraught with impudencie, he muſt needs giue place to the truth, which is inuincible, and ſo with ſhame not to be diſcommended, he is induced to reforme his life according to the patterne of comlines and honeſtie. Therefore Plato ſaid, that we are greatly beholding to them that tell vs of our faults, and ſhew vs what way we muſt keepe: bicauſe it is better for vs to amende by being corrected of

another, than to vndoo our ſelues by fooliſh perſeuerance. Moreouer as all true and perfect loue ought to be generall, and to extend it ſelfe indifferently vnto all without exception of perſons, ſo likewiſe euerie one according to his ſeuerall place ought to admoniſh and to correct thoſe that do amiſſe as often as occaſion is offred vnto them, & cheefely they that are neere to great men are bound to do it, but with diſcretion and great deliberation. Thus much did Solon ſignifie to one, who by way of admoniſhment Solons good aduice for counſailors to princes.told him, that princes were either not to be approched vnto, or elſe to be pleaſed: Nay contrariwife (ſaid the wiſe man) either they are not to be come neere vnto, or elſe the truth is to be told them. We may obſerue infinite examples amongſt the ancients woorthy to be remembred, of the great freedome, which they vſed in reprehending and ſhewing the faults not onely of their familiar friends, but generally of all others: and eſpecially of their kings, princes and magiſtrates, who bicauſe they ſee and heare for the moſt part by other mens eies & eares, ought neceſſarily to haue ſuch friends, counſailors and ſeruants about them, as will freely tell them the truth, as hereafter we may diſcourſe more at large. This cauſed Plutark to Philoſophers ought to be conuerſant with princes.ſay, that a philoſopher ought cheefely to keepe companie with princes and great lords, and that it was the point of a wiſe man, and of one that is wel affected to the common wealth to be endued with common loue, and to inquire after, or to accept & intertaine ſuch a friendſhip, as might be commodious and beneficiall to many in particuler, & much more in generall to them all. And truely they that company with priuate men, and labor to inſtruct them, may well make them contented, milde and gratious in themſelues, and profitable to them onely: but he that taketh away an euill qualitie from a lord and magiſtrate, or directeth his wil and intention, as it ought to be, plaieth the part of a philoſopher in the behalfe of common commoditie, and correcteth that mould and patterne according to which all the ſubiects are framed and gouerned. This kind of free admonition Solon vſed towards Croeſus,
                     
                     Solons counſell giuen to Craeſus. whom he perceiued to be blowne and puft vp with pride, through an opinion of earthly and vncertaine felicity, admoniſhing him to expect what the ende would be. The Gods (quoth he to him) haue giuen to vs the reſidue of the Graecians all things after a meane ſort, and namely a baſe & populer wiſedome, not roiall or magnificall: which as it giueth vs to vnderſtand that the life of man is ſubiect to infinite changes, ſo it forbiddeth to truſt or glorie in the goods of this world, or to make great account of any mans felicitie, that is yet in danger of alteration. For time daily bringeth many ſundry accidents to man, wherof he neuer thought before. But when the gods continue the proſperous eſtate of a man vnto the ends of hisWhy Plato went into Sicilia to Dionyſius. daies, then will we account him happie. The deſire, which Plato had to profite many cauſed him to ſaile from Graecia into Sicilia, that by graue diſcourſes & wiſe inſtructions he might ſtay and contain within the bounds of reaſon the yoong yeeres of Dionyſius, prince of that countrie, who through vnbrideled libertie, and power not limited, waued hither and thither without reſtraint. Afterward when he began to be in loue with the beautie of learning, he left of by little and little his droonkennes, maskings, and whoordoms, wherein before he gloried, inſomuch that his court was wholy changed vpon a ſudden, as if it had been inſpired from heauen. But within a while after. Dionyſius giuing eare to flatterers, baniſhed Plato, to whom when he tooke his leaue of him, the tyrant ſaid, I doubt not, Plato, but thou wilt ſpeake ill of me when thou art in the Vniuerſitie amongſt thy companions & friends. Whereunto the philoſopher ſmiling, and obſeruing that freedome of ſpeech, which he had alwaies vſed towards him, made this anſwer, I pray God, Sir, there may neuer be ſo great want of matter to ſpeake of in the Vniuerſitie, that we need to ſpeake of thee. He was no ſooner ſhipped from Sicilia but Dionyſius returned to his former faſhions, and called backe againe dancers, minſtrels, baudes, and ſuch like vermin, where of commonly there is want about great perſonages, ſo that preſently your might haue

ſeene his court, yea all the reſt of his people, ouerwhelmed in al delights and pleaſures. Such great force hath a prince to alter and change at his pleaſure the harts of his ſubiects, but yet alwaies rather to vice and follie than to vertue. And to go on with our matter of the free and bold admonition of great men, the ſelfe ſame Plato vſed it very fitly towards Dion, who had driuen Dionyſius out of his iuriſdiction, and that at ſuch time as the ſaid Dion was in the greateſt glorie of al his proſperitie. Amongſt other thingsArrogancie dwelleth in the end with ſolitarines. he willed him to beware of arrogancie, as of hir that dwelt with ſolitarines: that is to ſay, which in the end was forſaken of all the world. The ſame kind of admonition Speuſippus followed, writing to the ſame Dion, willing him not to perſume or waxe proud of himſelfe, bicauſe he heard women and children vtter his praiſes and commendation,Notable counſell for princes. but to haue regard onely to this, that Sicilia might be adorned with religion and pietie towards God, with iuſtice and good lawes towards men, and that the Vniuerſitie might alwaies be had in honor and eſtimation. O counſel full of Chriſtian inſtruction, and woorthie to be daily ſet before the eies of Chriſtian princes, who may alſo learne of Demetrius king of Macedonia to take in good part, toDemetrius. reape commoditie, and to reward thoſe that reprehend and admoniſh them of their dutie. After he had taken the citie of the Athenians, who had rebelled againſt him, and ſtood in great need of victuals, he cauſed a generall aſſemblie of the people to be made, wherein he declared, that he gaue them freely a great quantitie of corne. In which oration it fell out ſo, that he committed an incongruitie of ſpeech, whereat one of the inhabitants ſuddenly ſtood vp, and pronounced the word aright as he ſhould haue vttered it. For this correction (quoth Demetrius) I giue thee beſides fiue thouſand meaſures of wheat. The example of good Traian writing to his maiſter Plutarke, ought eſpecially to be imitated of great men. I aduertiſe thee (quoth he) that hence forward I will not vſe thy ſeruice to anyTraians letter to Plutarke. other thing, than to counſell me what I ought to do, and to tel me of thoſe faults, wherinto I may fall. For if Rome

take me for a defender of hir Common-welth, I make account of thee as of the beholder of my life. And therefore if at any time. I ſeeme vnto thee not well pleaſed when thou reprehendeſt me, I pray thee maiſter, not to take it in ill part. For at ſuch a time my griefe ſhall not be for the admonition thou vſeſt towards me, but for the ſhame IHow Philoxenus corrected Dionyſius tragedie. ſhall haue bicauſe I offended. Philoxenus the poet may alſo ſerue for a witnes of free correction, void of all flatterie in regard of great men. For when Dionyſius prince of Syracuſa ſent vnto him a tragedie of his owne making, that he ſhould read and correct it, he ſent it backe againe vnto him all raſed and blotted from the beginning to the end, bicauſe he found it in no reſpect worthie to be publiſhed. Neither doth antiquitie onely affoord vs ſuch examples of bold reprehenſion by word of mouth, vſed by wiſe men in old time, but there hath been alſo in our ages woorthie examples of baſe and contemptible men, yet full of good learning. For profe heer of may ſerue that quip, which not long ſince a peaſant gaue vnto an Archbiſhop of Cullen, who was well accompanied with armed men according to the cuſtome of Almaigne. This countrie-fellow beginning to laugh, and being demanded by the prelate theThe free gird of a peaſant giuen to an Archbiſhop. cauſe therof; I laugh (quoth he vnto him) at S. Peter, prince of prelates, bicauſe he liued and died in pouertie to leaue his ſucceſſors rich. The Archbiſhop being touched therewith, and deſirous to cleere himſelfe, replied that He went with ſuch a companie, as he was a Duke. Wherat the peaſant laughing more than before ſaid, I would gladly know (Sir) of you, where you thinke the Archbiſhop ſhould be, if that Duke of whom you ſpeake were in hell. Neither may we omit the anſwer which a poore Franciſcan Frier made to Pope Sixtus the fourth, who from the ſame order being come to that great dignitie, ſhewed him his great wealth and riches, ſaying, Frier, I cannot ſay as S. Peter did, I haue
                     The like giuen to Pope Sixtus the 4. by a Frier. 
                     neither gold nor ſiluer. No truly (anſwered the Franciſcan) no more can you ſay as he ſaid to the impotent and ſicke of the palſie, Ariſe, and walke. Now concluding our preſent diſcourſe we learne, that free reprehenſion and gentle admonition

grounded vpon reaſon and truth, and applied fitly, are of ſuch vertue and efficacie with men, but eſpecially with a friend, that nothing is more neceſſarie or healthfull in true and perfect friendſhip: and therefore ought to be ioined inſeparably therewith, according to that ſaying of the wiſe man, that Open rubuke is better than
                     Prou. 27.5. 
                     ſecret loue, and that The wounds made by a louer are faithfull, but the kiſſes of him that hateth, dangerous. In the meane time we muſt (as S. Paule ſaith) reſtore thoſe that fall with theGal. 6. r. ſpirit of meeknes, conſidering our ſelues, and neuer betraie the truth for feare of the mightier ſort.
               
            
            
               Of Curioſitie and Noueltie. Chap. 15.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  MAn hauing by nature imprinted in his ſoule an affected and earneſt inclination to his ſoueraigne good, is drawen as it were by force to ſearch it out in euerie thing, which he eſteemeth faire and good in this world. And from hence proceed all thoſe his affections which carrie him hither and thither, cauſing him to reioice in and to deſire greatly all varietie and noueltie. But the ignorance of things, and imperfection of reaſon, which abounde in him, bicauſe of his corruption, make him for the moſt part to labour and take delight in euill rather than in goodnes, if he be not by other means called to the knowledge of the truth: which ought to be the principal and moſt woorthy obiect of our minds, eſteeming all other knowledge vaine and vnprofitable being compared to this, which is ſo great and diuine. And in this reſpect curioſitie tending to vnderſtanding, (albeit in many things it be verie hurtfull, eſpecially being left vnto it ſelfe) is alſo verie profitable and neceſſary, when it is directed and guided by the grace of God to the beſt end. Wherefore I thinke my companions, that it will not be vnprofitable, if in this matter we diſcourſe of theſe two things, Curioſitie and Noueltie, which ſeeme to proceed from one and the ſame fountain,

and about which the vertue of prudence ſheweth great and woorthy effects.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Curioſitie indeed deſireth in part to know and learne much, which cannot be condemned. Neuertheles we muſt wiſely beware that we imploy it not vpon euil and vile things, but rather teſtifie alwaies, that we are of a graue and contented nature, which is enemie to all noueltie, and to ſuperfluous things that are without profite.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Noueltie cauſeth vs through error of iudgement to eſteeme thoſe things wherewith we are not acquainted, greater, and more to our liking, and ſo to buy them dearer than better things that are common and familiar. It is the verie guide of the curious, cauſing them to contemne their owne climate, and to hazard what good thing ſoeuer they haue, to poſſeſſe that which belongeth to others. But let vs heare AMANA who will handle this matter more at large.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Amongſt thoſe learned precepts belonging to good life, which were written in the temple of Apollo in Graecia, this was in the ſecond place. Nothing too much. 
                     Mediocritie muſt be vſed in all actions.
                     Solon ſaid, Nothing more than enough. Pittacus, Do all things by a mediocritie. Theſe ſayings are verie ſhort and of one matter, but yet comprehend all prudence neceſſarie for the gouerning of mans life, aſwell for the preſeruation of the tranquillitie of the ſoule, and of the ſpiritual gifts therof, as of all humane goods, called by the philoſophers, the Goods of the bodie and of fortune. The ancients being deſirous to make vs vnderſtand this the better, propounded vnto vs euerie vertue betweene two vices, teaching vs thereby, that we cannot decline neuer ſo little either to the right hand or to the left, but we ſtep aſide from the right way of vertue, which is our onely & true good: and that al difference The difference of good and bad conſiſteth in mediocritie.betweene good and bad conſiſteth in a certaine moderation and mediocrity, which Cicero calleth the beſt of all things. If men had from the beginning contained themſelues within the limits of theſe diuine precepts, it is certaine they would not ſo lightly haue abandoned the

ſimplicitie and firſt modeſtie of their nature, to feed their minds with a vaine curioſitie and ſearching out of things ſupernaturall, and incomprehenſible to the ſence and vnderſtanding of man. Which things the more they thought to know, the greater occaſion of doubting they found in them, ſo that for all their labour and vnderſtanding they could neuer carrie away any true knowledge, or certaine reſolution. And euen as that man, who not contenting himſelfe with the abundant light of the ſunne beames, but Againſt curioſitie in knowledge.ſeeking with his eies to pearce through the brightnes therof euen vnto the midſt of the circle of the body, muſt queſtionleſſe become blind: ſo falleth it out for the moſt part to thoſe, who go about too curiouſly to inquire after that which is not lawfull to be knowen. The ill ſucceſſe of our age affoordeth vs too manie miſerable teſtimonies, wherin at this day we ſee nothing but contrarieties of opinions and vncertainties, through their ſubtilties & bold curioſities, who haue ſought to plucke (as a man would ſay) out of heauen the ſecrets hid from the angels: yea, which is worſe, haue boaſted that they haue attained vnto the knowledge of them, filling our times with trouble and confuſion vnder that falſe pretence. There are others alſo no leſſe hurtful, who haue binne ſuch curious Inquiſitours of the cauſes of all naturall things, that through friuolous and vnprofitable queſtions they haue fallen into that impietie, as to ſeeke for another beginning of all things, than God. Whereupon this prouerbe, which is too true, aroſe, Of three Phyſitions one Atheist. This kinde of curioſitie, is of all others moſt pernitious. But foraſmuch as it is without the compaſſe of our Academie, we let it paſſe with this ſhort mention thereof, and with this onely addition, that God commonly puniſheth the pride of ſuch men by thoſe fruits, which we ſee them bring foorth, and by taking from them their vnderſtanding in principall and moſt neceſſarie matters, wherein notwithſtanding they thinke themſelues to be woonderfull and iolly fellowes aboue all others. As touching this point the example of Socrates is very memorable, and to be imitated,

who being demanded what the world was, anſwered, that A notable ſaying of Socrates.ſince he had any iudgement he gaue himſelfe to ſeeke out the true knowledge of himſelfe, which yet he could neuer find. But ſo ſoone as he had attained thereunto, then he would ſeeke for other things that would do him no ſeruice or pleaſure. Aristotle (as Iustin Martyr writeth) who for the excellencie of his skill in naturall philoſophie was The death of Ariſtotle and Plinie through too much curioſitie.called the god of the earth, burned with ſuch a deſire of curioſitie in vnderſtanding the cauſes of naturall things, that bicauſe he could not know and conceiue the cauſe and nature of Euripus, which is in Chalcis a citie of Eubaea, I meane of the flowing & ebbing of the ſea, which turneth & compaſſeth about that place, nor giue a ſufficient reaſon thereof, he died for very ſhame and greefe which he conceiued thereupon. Plinie alſo, who wrote the hiſtorie The burning of Aetna.of naturall philoſophie, was choked with the flames and vapors of the mountaine Mongibel in Sicilia, whileſt he ſought to find out the cauſe of them, and from whence that great fire came, which ſpoiled the countrie round about in the time of Titus the emperor: inſomuch that ſeuen or eight townes were burned, and many perſons trauelling by land, and ſailing on the ſea were ſtifled with the aſhes therof, caried about by the vehemency of the winds. But let vs leaue theſe curious ſpirits, and ſpeake of two Two generall kinds of curioſitie.other generall kinds of curioſitie, which reſpect chiefly our morall philoſophie, and from whence all corruption of good maners proceeded. The firſt kind concerneth our ſelues onely, and the other our brethren and countrimen. To ſpeake therefore of the firſt, it bringeth foorth pernitious effects after diuers ſorts and maners, but amongſt vs Frenchmen they appeere principally in that Againſt the curioſitie of ſeeing ſtrange nations.burning deſire, which inflameth vs to trauell into ſtrange nations, and in our carking and caring for the nouriſhment, clothing, and decking of our bodies, and for the ſetting foorth and trimming vp of our houſes with curious and vnprofitable moueables, wherein we exceede all the ſuperfluitie of other countries. When the ancients ſpeake of the felicitie that accompanied the golden age,

amongſt the good conditions, and commendable maners, which they noted in that holie and firſt ſimplicitie, they neuer forgat this, that the men of that good time tilled and manured their grounds, and cared not what ſtrangers did in farre countries. Moreouer, ſince the time that men made light account of their owne climate, through a curious and vnſatiable deſire of appropriating vnto themſelues the inheritance and labour of others, beſides the crueltie, violence, and murders, which prepared a way to their miſerable platformes, all corruption of good maners at home, and all baſtardlike attire haue followed thereupon. We might heere note infinite teſtimonies of antiquitie, and eſpecially of our ancient progenitors the Gaules, who were verie warlike, and liued within their bounds in al ſimplicitie of maners, and frugalitie of life. But our owne example, to our vnſpeakeable ſhame and miſerie, is ſo euident before our eyes, that I neede no better proofe of my ſaying than that experience which we feele by our owne perill. For One euident cauſe of the ruin of Fraunce.the ruine and deſtruction of this french monarchy proceedeth of no other ſecond cauſe (our iniquitie being the firſt) than of the mixture, which we haue made of ſtrangers with our ſelues. Wherein we are not contented to ſeeke them out vnder their roofes, vnleſſe we alſo draw them vnto vs, and lodge them vnder our roofes, yea preferre them before our owne countrimen and citizens in the offices and honorable places of this kingdome, againſt the law and right of euerie good and well eſtabliſhed policie. Beſides we adore and reuerence all their nouelties and ſubtill inuentions, and that ſo ignorantly, or rather blockiſhly, that ſuffring them to ſucke vs euen to the verie bowels, in ſteade of all our riches and ſpoiles, which they for their part haue drawne from vs, they haue left vs nothing but new maners and faſhions of liuing in all diſſolutenes and pleaſure, except this one thing alſo, that we haue learned of them to diſſemble, and withall to frame and build a treaſon verie ſubtillie. Such is the prouiſion wherewith our french youth is commonly furniſhed

by their Italian voyages. To this purpoſe Gueuara, Chronicler to the emperor Charles the firſt, writeth that from forraine countries men commonly bring newes to prattle of, and ſtrange cuſtomes to practiſe: and that few come out of Italie, that are not abſolute and diſſolute.Lycurgus for-bad traffick with ſtrangers.
                     Lycurgus by his lawes commanded the Lacedemonians not to go out of their kingdome, nor to conuerſe with ſtrangers, ſaying, that although by their trafficke with them they might be inriched, yet on the other ſide they would grow poore in regard of their owne vertues. Titus Liuius, Macrobius, Salustius and Tully curſed and bewailed the conqueſts and victories, which Rome had in Aſia, ſaying that if the Romanes brought the Perſians, & Medes vnder ſubiection by force, yet the ſelfe ſame Aſians ouercame the Romans with their vices and delights. This dothFiue vices brought out of Aſia by the Romanes. 
                     Cicero teſtifie writing to Atticus, where he ſaith that theſe fiue vices, namely, to make glorious ſepulchers, to weare rings of gold, to vſe ſpice in meates, to alay wine with ſnow, and to carrie about with them perfumes and ſweet ſmels, were ſent to the Romanes for a preſent from the Aſians, as a reuenge for the cities which they had taken from them, and for the bloude which they had drawne of them. And which was woorſt of all, he ſaith, that theſe vices would alwaies remaine with them, but the country conquered, for a little time. Experience telleth vs, that no countrey is ſo poore, which is not ſufficient and able, all ſuperfluitie cut off, to nouriſh and maintaine thoſe men that are bred in it with things neceſſarie for them. Whervpon a man may eaſily gheſſe, that want of prudence, and ambitious deſires firſt inuented the art of Nauigation & ſailing into farre countries. Fabatus the conſul in ſeauenty yeeres which he liued, departed not once from his village of Regio to go to Meſſana, which was but two miles offWhy Fabius would neuer go on the water. by water. And when one asked of him the cauſe why, The barke (quoth he) is fooliſh, for it alwaies ſtirreth vp and downe: the mariner is fooliſh, for he neuer abideth in one opinion: the water is fooliſh, for it neuer ſtandeth ſtil: the winde is fooliſh, fo
                        •
                      it runneth continually. Now if we vſe

to go from a foole when we meete him vpon the land, what reaſon were it for me to hazard my life with foure fooles vpon the ſea? But whatſoeuer my ſpeech hath bin hetherto, my meaning is not to finde fault with the right vſe of hoſpitalitie, which ought to be maintained & kept inuiolable in euerie well eſtabliſhed common wealth. In this reſpect Fraunce hath beene commended aboue all nations for intertaining and receiuing all ſorts of people: prouided alwaies that they be not preferred before our own children, and that they be contented to obey & liue according to the common lawes of the country. Neither do I reprehend that traffick and trade with ſtrangers, which ſerueth for a bond of humaine ſocietie, & whereby the commodities of one to another are communicated togither with common profite: prouided alwaies that ſuperfluous and vnneceſſarie things be left and forſaken. But ere we enter too farre in with them, it were good for vs not to vndertake ſuch voyages to gather wit and experience (as the moſt ſay) before we haue profited well in the knowledge of vertue, and are garded with good and commendable maners, which are able to reſiſt all new & ſtrange corruption: wherby otherwiſe the nature of man deſirous of diuerſitie and noueltie, ſuffreth it ſelfe eaſily to be ouercome, making marchandiſe amongſt them of naughtines rather than of goodnes. As hitherto experience ſheweth vs, that from this fountaine hath proceeded the curioſitie of ſuperſluous apparell, of gold, of ſilke, tapiſtrie, pictures, veſſels, perfumes, painting of faces, delicaſie of meate, and all prouocations of voluptuouſnes, whooredome, gluttonie, and of other filthy diſſolutenes, and infamous vices, too much knowne amongſt vs, wherof we haue heertofore made mention, and will heerafter continue the particular diſcourſe of them. Nowe after we are well armed at all points with good doctrine and vertue, we may according to the example of Plato, of Apollonius
                     Plato and Apollonius were great traueller
                           •
                        . 
                     Thyaneus, and of many other notable men, ſeeke after thoſe that are beſt learned in ſtrange countries, that we may profite and be inſtructed by them. Plato after he was

well inſtructed by Socrates ſought out the Mages and wiſe Men of Egypt, by whoſe means he ſaw the books of Moyſes. Then he went into Italy to heare Architas Tarentinus, the moſt renowmed philoſopher of that country. Apollonius, who matched in learning all the philoſophers of his time, trauelled ouer three parts of the world to ſee and to conferre with all the skilfull men of his age: and being returned into his country, and inriched with woonderful knowledge, he diſtributed all his goods, whereof he had great abundance, amongſt his brethren, & to the poore: and withdrawing himſelfe into the fields, he liued with bread and water onely, that he might haue his minde free for the contemplation of heauenly things. Now let vs come to the other kinde of curioſitie, which as we ſaide,Of curioſitie in ſeeking to know other mens imperfections. concerneth our brethren and countrimen. This is that which Plutark calleth a deſire to know the wants and imperfections of other men. It is commonly ioined with enuie and euil ſpeaking, and is by that excellent philoſopher compared to adulterie, which may be called a curious inquirie after another bodies pleaſure. Moreouer curious folkes through an ouerweening incontinencie, ſeeke to violate and to diſcouer their neighbors greateſt ſecrets, eſpecially thoſe which are blamewoorthy, that by publiſhing & blabbing them out, they may nouriſh the intemperancie of their toongs. For as venemous ſerpents ſeeke after infected and ſtinking places: ſo curioſitie delighteth in finding out euill things, but deſpiſeth thoſe that are good and commendable. If there be any one imperfection in a ſtock or kindred, if any infamy, fault, error, or euil gouernment in a houſe, any quarelling, any thing to be miſliked or loathed therein, it is the delight of curious folks to learne that throughly, that they may ſport themſelues, and tell long ſtories of them, by that meanes vſing their memorie for a loathſome regiſter of other mens vices, and yet neither ſee or know any fault of their owne. This cauſeth them all their life time to be the diſciples of ignorance & not of philoſophy, which teacheth vs, not other mens faults, but our owne, as alſo the meanes how

we may be deliuered from them. Diogenes beholding one of his ſchollers in a publike place talking very earneſtly with a yoong man that was thought to be ſubiect to his pleaſure, demanded what talke they had. To whom the diſciple anſwered, that the other rehearſed vnto him a notable tricke of youth, which he had plaid the night before. Then Diogenes ſaide to them both, My will and commandement is, that ech of you haue fortie ſtripes with a whippe, within the Amphitheater, or playing place: Thou (quoth hee to his ſcholler) for giuing eare vnto him, and he for the follie committed, bicauſe a philoſopher deſerueth as much for harkening to follie recited, as doth the vagabond that rehearſeth it. What puniſhment thinke you would this wiſe man haue iudged them worthie of, who harken and inquire ſo curiouſly after other mens faults and imperfections? And yet a man may truly ſay of the moſt of theſe men, that they will neuer looke vpon, or conſider their owne liues, which is a very vnpleaſant ſpectacle vnto them, nor yet returne and looke backe with reaſon, as with a light, vpon themſelues. But their ſoule being full of all ſorts of euil, and fearing that which ſhe feeleth within hir ſelfe, leapeth foorth and wandereth heere and there in ſearching other mens doings, thereby feeding and fatting hir owne ill nature, and vſing curioſitie as an eie to looke vpon other men.The curious are more profitable to their enimies than to themſelues. Heerof it commeth, that a curious man is more profitable to his enimies than to himſelfe, bicauſe he diſcouereth, manifeſteth, and ſheweth vnto them from what they are to beware, and what to correct: and yet in the mean while he ſeeth not the moſt part of that which is within himſelf, ſo greatly is he dazeled by beholding that which is without in other men. He openeth all euen to the very wals of ſtrange houſes, and pearceth like a wind into the midſt of thoſe things that are moſt ſecret. His mind is both vpon the pallaces of the rich, and cotages of the poore. He ferretteth out euerie thing, and inquireth many times after the affaires of the greateſt, which is the cauſe of his ouerthrow, when he buſieth himſelf too far in them. This was

wiſely noted by Philippides, when Lyſimachus the king asked Curioſitie in princes affaires is perilous.him what part of his goods he would haue imparted vnto him. What you pleaſe ſir, quoth he, ſo it be no part of your ſecrets. Now if we deſite to diuert and to quench the heate of this vicious paſſion of curioſitie, which is too familiar amongſt vs, and vnſeemlie in a prudent and vertuous How we muſt cure curioſitie.man, we muſt ſometimes abſtaine from inquiring after lawfull things, though otherwiſe not neceſſarie. In the exerciſe and practiſe of iuſtice, it is expedient ſometime to leaue vntaken that which a man may lawfully take, thereby to accuſtome himſelfe to abſtaine more eaſily from taking any thing vniuſtly. Likewiſe it is good for a man ſometime to abſtaine from his owne wife, that he may attaine to the vertue of temperancie, and ſo be neuer mooued to deſire another mans wife. In like maner, if in ſtead of ſhewing our ſelues to be of the number of theſe diligent and curious inquirers after vnprofitable newes, we ſignifie rather to him that commeth to tell vs of ſome newes, that he ſhould pleaſe vs better if he had ſome good and profitable, matter to ſpeake, than ſhould we thereby giue teſtimonie of a ſtaied and ſetled nature deſpiſing curioſitie. Examples againſt curioſitie.This was noted in Alexander the great, who ſeeing a meſſenger running apace towards him with a ſmiling countenance, ſaid vnto him (not ſhewing himſelfe to bee mooued at all, or deſirous to vnderſtand what he would ſpeake) what good newes canſt thou bring me my friend, vnles thou didſt come to tel me that Homer is riſen again? And truly he had great reaſon to thinke that no more excellencie could be added to his valiant acts and deeds, except it were to haue them conſecrated to immortalitie, by Againſt lightnes of beleefe.the writings of ſome learned and notable wit. The example of Phocion deſerueth well to be heere alledged againſt curious folks, who are commonly light of beliefe. For as ſoone as the Athenians receiued newes of Alexanders death, they purpoſed preſently to alter their eſtate, and to ſhake off the yoke of the Macedonian alliance. But Phocion being of a contrarie opinion ſaid vnto them, If this newes be true to day, it will be true alſo to morow. And therfore

(my Lords Athenians) make no haſte, but deliberate leiſurely, and looke ſafely to that which ye haue to do. It is certaine, that if we vſe in this ſort to ſhew our ſelues ſtaied in ſuch things, and in all other things of ſmal importance, wherein our naturall inclination would prouoke vs to be curious, as namely, to breake off good communication Faults whereinto curious men commonly fall.begun vpon the receit of a letter, to forſake companie to run and meet a meſſenger onely to know what newes he bringeth, and a thouſand ſuch like ſudden motions proceeding of lightnes and curioſitie, I ſay by auoiding ſuch things we ſhould prepare a way to the reſtraining of al curioſitie in greater matters, which otherwiſe may procure blame. As for example, to open another bodies letter, to intrude our ſelues into the ſecret counſels of our neighbors, to ſeeke out their faults and imperfections, to inquire buſily after that, which may greeue our familiar friends, or to aske them of that, which they like not of, neither is grounded vpon any good cauſe or reaſon, leaſt peraduenture the anſwer of ſome wiſe man ſhould turne more to our ſhame, than be framed according to our deſire. Thus dealt Demaratus with a curious & importunate Wittie anſwers made to curious queſtions.fellow that had oftentimes asked of him, who was the honeſteſt man in Sparta: He that reſembleth thee leſt, quoth he vnto him. The anſwer alſo of an Egyptian was not vnfitly made to one that aſked him what he caried there folded. It is wrapped vp (quoth he) bicauſe thou ſhouldſt not know what it is. Now by that which hath been hitherto diſcourſed, it appeereth ſufficiently, that al kind of curioſitie is hurtful, hateful, and greatly to be blamed in euerie one, if it be not bounded and limited by the reaſon of true prudence, which guideth and ſtirreth vs vp to ſeeke after good, honeſt, and profitable things, either in heauen, in earth, in the aire, or in the ſea, according to the gift and capacitie of our vnderſtanding and iudgement, which may be neceſſarie for vs to know, or may helpe vs to liue well and happily. For whatſoeuer is more, we ought to account it vnprofitable and ſuperfluous. Let vs learne then, not to know more than we ought, but vnto ſobrietie, containing Rom. 12. 3.
                     
our ſpirits within the limits of mediocritie, ſimplicitie, and modeſtie. Let vs forſake all ſophiſticall curioſitie, and worldlie wiſedome, which is meere fooliſhnes before God, that we may imbrace a ſimple, popular, and Academicall kind of knowledge, which will teach vs to know our ſelues and our dutie, whereby we ſhall be led to that happy end, which we ſeeke for and deſire. Let vs not admire any more the merchandiſe and outward ſhewes wherewith ſtrangers feed the eies of curious folks, but let vs wonder at vertue onely: ſaying with the comicall poet, where he ſpeaketh of thoſe that couered their bedſteads with gold and ſiluer, what great follie is it to make ſleepe ſo deere, which God hath freely giuen vnto vs? So to ſeeke for that of ſtrangers with ſuch great expences which we may haue at our owne hauen better & more cō
                     modiouſly, were all one, as if we ſhuld leaue the ſubſtance, & run after the ſhadow, or that which is certain for an vncertaintie. We may haue in France (if our blockiſhnes ſtay vs not) Vniuerſities and ſchooles for all honeſt exerciſes meet for our nobilitie without ſtrangers. And if we think that in ſome places amongſt them, they haue better teachers than we haue, let vs firſt ſeeke amongſt our ſelues for thoſe inſtructions that are moſt neceſſarie, namely, for the knowledge of good letters, and inſtitution of vertue, and then if we thinke good, we may heare their teachers and maiſters, without infecting our behauiour with the corruption of their maners. Beſides by the ſame ſtudie we ſhal learne to ſhun al curious inquiry into other mens imperfections, that we may diligently looke into our owne.
               
            
            
               Of Nature and Education. Chap. 16.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  SEeing that in the entrance of our former treatiſe, we began with that naturall inſtinct of man, which mooueth and diſpoſeth him to deſire and to ſeeke after his good, we may in continuing the ſame matter find more profitable inſtruction, by conſidering his nature more narrowly, as alſo what commeth

vnto him by good education, which, that I may ſo ſay, ſtandeth him in ſtead of a ſecond nature. To you therfore (my Companions) I leaue this matter to be intreated of.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  The nature of man is like to a paire of ballance. For if it be not guided with knowledge and reaſon vnto the better part, of it ſelfe it is caried to the woorſe. And although a man be well borne, yet if he haue not his iudgement fined, and the diſcourſing part of his mind purged with the reaſons of philoſophie, it will fall often into groſſe faults, and ſuch as beſeem not a prudent man. For in thoſe men that are not indued with vertue ruled by certaine knowledge, nature bringeth forth ſuch fruits as naturally come from the ground without the manuring and helping-hand of man.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  That which commonly cauſeth men to will euill rather than good, proceedeth chiefly of this, that they haue no knowledge or experience therof. And therfore Socrates ſaid, that as bringing vp maketh dogs fit for hunting, ſo good inſtruction cauſeth men to become profitable in the managing of a commonwealth. But it commeth to thy courſe, ASER, to diſcourſe vpon this matter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  This hath been alwaies a great queſtion among the skilfull and diligent inquiters after the perfection of nature, whether learning or nature teacheth vs to know our ſelues. Iuſtice (ſaith Cicero) is naturally planted in vs from our birth, as alſo religion, pietie, grace, dutie, and Natural vertues according to the Philoſophers, who had no knowledge of mans fall.truth. Whatſoeuer is according to nature (as the philoſophers ſay) is certainly ordained and appointed, bicauſe nature is nothing elſe but order, or rather the effect of order. But diſorder, like to Pindarus ſand, cannot be comprehended in any certaine number: neither can that which is againſt nature be defined, bicauſe it is infinite. When they ſpeake generally of nature, they make two The diuiſion of nature.principall kinds: the one ſpirituall, intelligible, and the vnchangeable beginning of motion and reſt, or rather the vertue, efficient, and preſeruing cauſe of all things: the other, ſinſible, mutable, and ſubiect to generation and corruption, reſpecting all things that haue life, and ſhall

haue end. Aristotle ſaith, that nature in one reſpect is ſaid to be the firſt & chiefe matter ſubiect of euery thing that hath being, namely, of thoſe things which haue in them the beginning of their own moouing & mutation: and in another reſpect, it is called the form of any thing. But leauing the infinite diſputations and curious inquirie made by the philoſophers concerning this excellent matter, whereof we haue not heere vndertaken to intreat, we ſayWhat nature is. with Iustin Martyr, that Nature (in which the ſteps of the diuinitie ſhine and are liuelie repreſented) is that ſpirit or diuine reaſon, which is the efficient cauſe of naturall works, and the preſeruing cauſe of thoſe things that haue being, through the onely power of the heauenlie word, which is the workmaiſter of nature, and of the whole world, and hath infuſed into euery thing a liuely vertue and ſtrength, wherby it encreaſeth and preſerueth it ſelfe by a naturall facultie. Or to ſpeake more briefly, Nature is the order and continuance of the works of God, obeying the deitie, and his words and commandements, and borrowing hir force and ſtrength from thence, as from hir fountaine and originall. In this nature thus defined, which reſpecteth all things created, we haue heere to conſider of and to handle particularly, according to our meaning at the firſt, the nature of man onely, which naturall philoſophers call the inſtinct and inclination of euerie ones ſpirit.The propertie and light of nature. There is nothing more true, than that nature of hir ſelfe leadeth men in ſome ſort to that which is decent and honeſt: neither is learning able to ſhew any thing, which is not to be found in nature, whether we go about to teach the end of man, which the philoſophers call, the action of vertue, or whether we ſeeke out the cauſes and beginnings of other ſciences. For other is no man ſo barbarous or wicked in all the world, who is not touched with honeſtie, and who retaineth not ſomewhat of the light of nature. Which may be cleerely perceiued by this, that a vertuous action pleaſeth him, ſo that he is euen conſtrained to commend it. And if he might taſte thereof neuer ſo little, not being fore-poſſeſſed with other diſordinate

deſires, no doubt but he would become ſuch a one, as might purchaſe and deſerue praiſe and commendation. But here we muſt acknowledge the firſt corruption of ourThe corruption of nature. nature whereby it is inclined to pleaſure, and to eſchew labour, which are the welſprings of vices and of infinite euils. And if our nature ſhould be ſuffered to runne with the bridle at libertie, whether ſoeuer it is driuen by carnal deſires, hauing none of them cut off by wiſe admonitions and liuely perſwaſions, there is no beaſt ſo vntamed or ſauage, that would not be milder than man. Whereupon it followeth that nature muſt of neceſſitie be tamed, and as it were mollified by the ſtudie of good letters, & by the inſtruction of good philoſophicall reaſons, which as they ſerue for nouriſhment and food to our minds, ſo by them our maners and actions are framed and guided according to vertue and prudence, and we made able to learne how, by the compaſſe of reaſon, to attain to mediocritie, wherin perfection conſiſteth, and to reiect exceſſe, which is alwaies dangerous. A good plaier on a lute or violl toucheth no other ſtringes than thoſe that are touched by him that is moſt vnskilfull. Notwithſtanding being taught in the beginning, he knoweth afterward through vſe what ſtrings make that ſound, which the earc iudgeth by the harmonie and agreement of ſound to be delectable, whereupon he is taken for his craftſ-maſter. Euen ſo a perfect vertuous man vſeth onely naturall gifts, but reaſon and practiſe bringeth them to their perfection. EueryThree things nece
                           ••
                        arie for the perfection of 
                           〈◊〉
                        . good beginning commeth vnto vs by nature, the progres and growth by the precepts of reaſon, and the accompliſhment by vſe and exerciſe. Nature without learning & good bringing vp is a blinde thing. Learning without nature wanteth much, and vſe without the two former is vnperfect. It is true (as Plato ſaith) that ſome may be found, that are of a ſtrong and forceable nature, and therby indued with reaſonable good ſence and iudgement (which is in man as the rudder in a ſhip) ſo that they make ſhewe of great vertues. But thoſe men are not without manie great vices alſo, if they want good education & learning:

not vnlike to a good fat ground, which bringeth foorth many good and bad hearbes togither, if it be not well dreſſed. Now if this good nature be ill brought vp, without doubt it will ſpoile it ſelfe and become verie pernitious. Scipio and Catiline were both high minded and couragious by nature, but foraſmuch as the one was alwaies obedient to the lawes of his common-wealth, & vſed his vertue as reaſon required, he was accounted vertuous, & the other wicked and wretched for doing the contrarie. You aske of me (ſaith Socrates in Xenophon) whether courage or greatnes of hart proceed of nature or of learning. For my part I think, that as we ſee ſome borne with ſtronger bodies than others are, ſo by nature we haue mindes more fit to ſuſtaine perils & aduerſities than others haue. And that this is ſo, we ſee many brought vp with the ſame maners, and inſtructed vnder like lawes, and yet ſome of them more hardie and bold than the reſt. Notwithſtanding there is no doubt but the goodnes of nature is holpen by learning and inſtitution. It is certaine (ſaith Plutark)
                     The difference between philoſophers and the common people that there is in all men ſome light of good and right iudgement, but yet the difference between philoſophers and the common ſort of men is great: bicauſe philoſophers haue their iudgement more ſtaied and aſſured in dangers, whereas the vulgar ſort haue not their harts fortified and defended with ſuch anticipations and reſolute impreſſions aforehand. Albeit therefore many notable men (as Cicero ſaith) haue atchieued many braue and vertuous exploits being guided by their naturall iudgement onely, and by daily experience in affairs, yet infinite faults may be noted in them, eſpecially in their behauiour and maner of life, which might haue been amended and corrected by the knowledge of letters. Moreouer the iudgement of man wauereth too eaſily to ſettle and reſolue it ſelfe vpon any thing: yea it is driuen by a thouſand occaſions from the ground of hir former diſcourſes, if it be not built and laid vpon certaine knowledge & reaſon, which the ſtudie of wiſedome teacheth vs. And as for that prudence, which is gotten onely by vſe, and by a mans owne

experience, it is too long, dangerous and difficult, bicauſe it is not able to make vs wiſe but after our owne perill: & oftentimes whilſt we ſeeke it, death maketh haſte to preuent it, or elſe followeth it ſo neere, that we had neede of a ſecond life to beſtow about it. Thus we ſee that if thereThree things co
                           •
                        cur
                           •
                        e in perfect vertue. be any want in any one of theſe three, Nature, Reaſon and Vſe, vertue alſo muſt needes faile and be vnperfect in that point. True it is, that a good naturall inclination deſerueth more praiſe being without learning, than learning doth without it: bicauſe euen knowledge ſerueth many times for an occaſion to the wicked, who abuſe it maliciouſly, to further their vnpure purpoſes. Neuertheles, we can accuſe nothing but their peruerſnes, which by reaſon of their ignorance, would not haue ſtaied it ſelfe from vttering ſuch pernitious effects in them, and peraduenture worſe. For in what meaſure ſoeuer it be, yet (as Socrates ſaid) they that haue been well brought vp and inſtructed, are in ſome ſort forced to moderate themſelues. Beſides, they that are not altogither well borne, yet beingThe defect of nature is holpen by good education. holpen by good training vp and exerciſe of vertue, they may after a ſort repaire and recouer the defect of nature. Idlenes (ſaith Plutarke) annihilateth and corrupteth the goodnes of nature, but diligence in good education correcteth the naughtines thereof. And as we ſee, that drops of water falling vpon a hard ſtone make it hollow, and that iron and copper conſume and weare only with handling, and ground that is more vneeuen and ſtonie than it ought, yet being manured and dreſſed, beareth faire and goodlie fruit, and contrariwiſe good ground becommeth vnfruitfull, and waxeth worſe and worſe the more it is left vnlabored: euen ſo good maners and conditions are qualities, which in long proceſſe of time are imprinted in the ſoule, and morall vertues are attained vnto throughThe weaknes of our naturall inclination to goodnes. care, diligence, labor, and long exerciſe. Therefore although nature hath this propertie in al men, that it is in perpetuall motion through a weake inſtinct, and that in ſome ſtronger, in others weaker, which cauſeth hir to aſpire vnto and to deſire the excellencie of hir firſt perfection,

whereof ſhe knoweth hir ſelfe void, yet if ſhe be not alwaies holpen and driuen towards the better part, ſhe will ſoone ſuffer hir ſelfe to be caried to the worſe. They are but little ſparks (ſaith Cicero) which through vice and corrupt maners are ſo eaſily quenched, that the light of them A ſimilitude.appeereth not. And as the heate buried in the veines of a flint, ſeemeth rather dead than aliue, if the ſparkles be not drawen foorth by the ſteele: ſo this immortall portion of celeſtiall fire, being the fountaine and firſt motiue of all knowledge, remaineth without any profit or commendable action, if it be not ſharpened and ſet on worke. We are no ſooner borne, and taken in hand to be brought vp, as Plato ſaith, but we follow after wickednes, as if we had ſucked iniquitie togither with our nurſes milke. Afterwards being comitted by our fathers to the hands of teachers, we ſo inwrap our minds with errors, that thoſe weake ſeedes of vertue, which are in vs by nature, muſt needes giue place to vanitie, and to opinion. But if good wits find good bringing vp, then they grow alwaies vp from better to better. Whereupon in my opinion that old prouerbe was not ſpoken without reaſon, that education goeth beyond nature. Which thing when Lycurgus was deſirous to let the Lacedemonians vnderſtand, he nouriſhed two dogs of one & the ſame litter, vſing the one to hunt, Lvcurgus example of two dogs.and bringing vp the other in the kitchen. And when the people were gathered togither, he ſpake vnto them in this maner: It is a matter of great importance (O ye Lacedemonians) to ingender vertue in mens harts by education, cuſtome, and diſcipline, as I will let ye ſee, and ſenſibly perceiue out of hand. Then he cauſed both the dogs to be brought, and caſting off a hare on the one ſide, & ſetting a platter of broth on the other, he let looſe his dogs, of which the one followed after the hare, & the other ran to the broth. Thus fareth it (quoth he) with men, who may be made more vertuous by good education, than by nature. Neither will it profit them at all to deſcend of Hercules race, if they practiſe not thoſe works whereby in his life time he grew to be moſt famous in the world, and if they

exerciſe not themſelues all the daies of their life in honeſt and vertuous actions. Furthermore if we deſire examples of this, that learning, inſtitution and education auaile greatly to conforme and frame our harts and wils to vertue, yea to alter and make them better, Socrates confeſſeth Socrates and Themiſtocles were by nature vicious, but by education vertuous.in Plato, that by nature he was inclined to vices, and yet philoſophy made him as perfect and excellent a man as any was in the world. Themiſtocles in his youth (as himſelfe confeſſed) for want of diſcipline was caried away by his deſires like to a yoong vnbridled colt, vntil that by Miltiades example, who was then famous amongſt the Grecians, he cauſed the viuacitie & quicknes of his ſpirit, and the ambition, which naturally was in him to attende vpon vertue. Beſides, education and cuſtome haue power to change not onely the naturall inclination of ſome particuler men, but alſo of whole countries, as the hiſtories of moſt nations in the world declare vnto vs: and namely of the Germaines, who in the time of Tacitus had neither The Germaines much changed by inſtitution.law, nor religion, nor knowledge, nor forme of commonwealth, whereas now they giue place to no nation for good inſtitution in all things. Let vs not then be diſcouraged or faint by knowing our naturall imperfections, ſeeing that through labor and diligence we may recouer that which is wanting: but happie is that man, and ſingularly beloued of God, to whom both good birth and like bringing vp are granted together. It followeth now to diſcourſe particulerly of the maner of good education and inſtruction of youth: but this will come in more fitely, when we ſhall intreat of Oeconomy. And yet ſeeing we are in the diſcourſe of mans nature, I thinke it wil not be from the purpoſe, nor without profite, if (to make vs more ſeuere cenſurers of our owne faults) we note, that although our behauior be cheefely known by the effects, A mans naturall inclination may be eſpied in a ſmall matter.as a tree by the fruit, yet many times a mans naturall inclinatiō is better perceiued in a light matter, as in a word, in a paſtime, or in ſome other free and priuate buſines, wherein vertue or vice ingrauen in the ſoule may be ſooner eſpied, than in greater actions and works done publikely:

bicauſe in theſe matters ſhame or conſtraint commonly cauſe men to vſe diſſimulation. Howbeit this alſo is true, that the more power and authoritie a man hath, when he may alleadge his owne will for all reaſon, the inward affection of his hart is then beſt diſcouered. For ſuch an vnbrideled licence mooueth all, euen to the verie depth and bottome of his paſſions, and cauſeth all thoſe ſecret vices, that are hidden in his ſoule to be fullie and Great men ought eſpecially to learne vertue.euidently ſeene. Whereupon it followeth that great and noble men ought aboue all others to learne vertue, and to ſtudie to liue well, eſpecially ſeeing they haue all thoſe requiſite helps and commodities, through want of which moſt men are hindred from attaining thereunto. Let vs therefore learne by our preſent diſcourſe to knowe, that the nature of all men, by reaſon of the corruption of ſin, is ſo depraued, corrupted and vnperfect, that euen the beſt men amongſt many imperfections carry about them ſome enuie, ielouſy, emulation and contention againſt ſome or other, and rather againſt their verie friends. This did Demas a noble man and greatly conuerſant in matters of eſtate, declare vnto the councel in the citie of Chio, after a ciuill diſſention wherin he had followed that part which ouercame. For he perſwaded thoſe of his ſide not to baniſh all their aduerſaries out of the city, but to leaue ſome of them after they had taken from them all meanes of doing more harme: leaſt (quoth he vnto them) we begin to quarrel with our friends, hauing no more enemies to contende withall. For this cauſe we muſt fortifie our ſelues with vnderſtanding and knowledge through labor and ſtudie of good letters, that we may reſtraine and repreſſe ſo many pernitious motions mingled togither in our ſoules. Let vs know moreouer, that ſeeing our nature is aſſaulted and prouoked by a vehement inclination to do any thing whatſoeuer, it is a very hard matter to withdrawe and keepe it backe by any force, no not by the ſtrength or feare of any lawes, if in due conuenient time we frame not within it a habite of vertue, hauing firſt wiſhed to be well borne. But howſoeuer it be, let vs endeuor

to be well borne through cuſtome and exerciſe in vertue (which will be vnto vs as it were another nature) vſing the meanes of good education and inſtruction in wiſedome, whereby our ſoules ſhal be made conquerors ouer all hurtfull paſſions, and our minds moderate and ſtaied, that in all our doings, ſayings and thoughts we paſſe not the bounds of the dutie of a vertuous man.
               
            
            The ende of the fourth daies worke.
         
         
            THE FIFT DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Temperance. Chap. 17.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     THe diuine excellencie of the order, of the equall & wonderful conſtācie of the parts of the world, aſwell in the goodly and temperate moderation of the ſeaſons of the yeere, as in the mutuall coniunctiō of the elements, obeying altogither with a perfect harmonie the gratious and ſoueraigne gouernment of their creator, was the cauſe that Pythagoras firſt called all the compaſſe of this vniuerſal frame by this name of World, which without ſuch The Greeke word 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         vſed by Pythagoras, and tranſlated of the Latins M
                              •
                           ndus, and of vs World, ſignifieth a comely order.an excellent diſpoſition would be but diſorder & a world of confuſion. For this word world, ſignifieth aſmuch as Ornament, or a well diſpoſed order of things. Nowe as a conſtant and temperate order is the foundation thereof, ſo the ground-worke and preſeruation of mans happie life, for whom all things were made, is the vertue of temperance, which conteineth the deſires and inclinations of the ſoule within the compaſſe of mediocritie, and moderateth all actions whatſoeuer. For this cauſe, hauing

hitherto according to our iudgment ſufficiently diſcourſed of the firſt riuer of the fountaine of honeſtie, I thinke we ought to ſet downe here in the ſecond place (although it be contrarie to the opinion of manie philoſophers) this vertue of Temperance, ſaying with Socrates that ſhe is the ground-worke and foundation of all vertues.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     No vertue can be without temperance. As a man cannot be temperate if firſt he be not prudent, bicauſe euerie vertuous action proceedeth of knowledge: ſo no man can be ſtrong and valiant, if he be not firſt temperate, bicauſe he that hath a noble and great courage without moderation, will attempt a thouſand euils and miſcheefes, and will ſoone grow to be raſh and headie. Likewiſe iuſtice cannot be had without temperance, ſeeing it is the cheefe point of a iuſt man, to haue his ſoule free from perturbations. Which cannot be done except he be temperate, whoſe proper ſubiect the ſoule is.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Heroicall vertue (ſaith Plato) is made perfect by the mixture and ioyning together of Temperance and fortitude, which being ſeparated will at length become vices. For a temperate man that is not couragious, eaſily waxeth to be a coward and faintharted: and a noble hart not temperate, becommeth raſh and preſumptuous. Let vs then heare ACHITOB diſcourſe of this Temperance, ſo excellent and neceſſarie a vertue.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Agapetus a man of great skill, writing to the emperor Iustinian, amongſt other things had this ſaying: The true marks and ornaments of a king.We ſay that thou art truly and rightly both emperor and king, ſo long as thou canſt command and maſter thy deſires and pleaſures, and art beſet and decked with the crowne of Temperance, and clothed with the purple robe of Iuſtice. For other principalities end by death, whereas this kingdome abideth for euer: yea others are manie times the cauſe of perdition to the ſoule, but this procureth a certaine and an aſſured ſafetie. When we haue conſidered well of the woorthie effects and fruits of this vertue of temperance, no doubt but we will ſubſcribe to this wiſe mans opinion, and to as many as haue written of the praiſes and roialties of that vertue. Temperance (ſaith

                     thagoras) is that light, which driueth away round about What temperanceis.hir the darknes and obſcuritie of paſſions. She is (ſaith Socrates) the wholeſomeſt vertue of all. For ſhe preſerueth both publikely and priuately humane ſocietie, ſhe lifteth vp the ſoule miſerably throwen downe in vice, and reſtoreth hir againe into hir place. Temperance (ſaith Plato) is a mutuall conſent of the parts of the ſoule (from whence ſpringeth continencie) cauſing all diſordered and vnbrideled deſires to take reaſon for a rule and direction. Temperance (ſaith Cicero) is the mother of all dutie and honeſtie. It is the propertie of iuſtice not to violate the right of another man, and of Temperance, not ſo much as to offend him. In Temperance a man may behold modeſtie, with the priuation of euery perturbation in the ſoule, as alſo away how to frame al things according to that which is decent or ſeemely, which the Latins call Decorum, being What Decorum, or comelines i
                           •
                        
                     a conueniencie meet for the excellencie of man, and that wherein his nature differeth from other liuing creatures. For as bodily beautie mooueth and reioiceth the eies, by reaſon of the goodly and ſeemely compoſition of all the members, wherin all the parts with a certaine grace agree togither: ſo this decencie, which is honeſtie and ſeemelines, ſhining in mans life by his good order, conſtancie and moderation both in deed and word, mooueth and draweth the harts of thoſe amongſt whom we liue. This vertue The definition of temperance.then of temperance is a ſtedfaſt and moderate rule of reaſon ouer concupiſcence, and ouer other vehement motions of the mind. But ſhe commandeth cheefly ouer thoſe two perturbations of the ſoule, grounded vpon the opinion of good, I meane, Vnbridled deſire, and vnmeaſurable ioie, whereof heertofore we made mention. Thus we ſee, that no man can find out any thing that is ſo excellent and What paſſions are ruled by temperance.wonderfull as temperance, the guide and gouernor of the ſoule, which bicauſe of hir exceeding great light cannot be hid in darknes: which compelleth vs to follow reaſon, bringeth peace to our minds, and mollifieth them as it were by concord and agreement. She ſerueth for a bridle to reſtraine all pleaſures, and in the midſt of them maketh

man good and vertuous. She ſerueth for a knife to cut off all ſuperfluous, vaine, and vnneceſſarie deſires as well of the ſoule as of the bodie: and is as it were a rule directing naturall and neceſſarie deſires by fit choice of times, and by temperate vſe of mediocritie. Wherefore we may ſay, that this vertue of temperance comprehendeth in it all the other vertues: that through hir a harmonie, concordance, and coniunction of them all is made: that ſhe miniſtreth vnto them all occaſions of beginning, and being begun confirmeth them by a firme and ſtedfaſt ſafetie. Breefly, temperance (as Plato ſaith) is a generall ſurname of thoſe vertues, whereby a man moderateth his owne affections, and frameth his geſture and behauiour in ſuch ſort, that no effeminate or looſe maners, no clowniſh or vnciuil faſhions are ſeene in him. O (ſaith Euripides) how is temperance to be eſteemed, which is the cauſe of ſuch great glorie and honor amongſt men? This vertue is diuided Fower parts of temperance.into fower principal parts, into Continencie, Clemencie, Modestie, and Order. Continencie is that part, whereby concupiſcence and deſire are gouerned by counſell and reaſon. Clemencie is that, whereby the minds of men, raſhly caried away with the hatred of any one, and with deſire to hurt him, are kept backe by gentlenes. Modeſtie is that, whereby honeſt ſhame and baſhfulnes purchaſeth good and due deſerued renowne. Order is a diſpoſition of all things in their conuenient place. All theſe vertues are vndoubtedly ioined with temperance, and conſiſt as well in action, as in the diſcourſing of the mind. For by ioining a certaine mediocritie and order vnto thoſe things that belong to this life, we preſerue honeſtie and dutie. Euerie vertue (ſaith Iamblicus, a notable man) deſpiſeth whatſoeuer is fraile, mortall, and momentanie, but temperance more than the reſt: bicauſe ſhe contemneth, and through chaſtitie beateth downe all thoſe delights and pleaſures, whereby the ſoule (as Plato ſaith) is faſtened vnto the bodie as it were with a naile. Therefore if temperance rooteth out whatſoeuer ſhe findeth vnperfect and ſubiect to perturbations, how ſhal ſhe not therewithall make vs perfect?

This is the meaning of that which the poets would giue vs to vnderſtand vnder that fained fable of Bellerophon, who being aided by modeſtie put to death that Chimaera, and all other cruel and ſauage monſters. But as long as the immoderate force of our affections raigneth in vs, it ſuffereth not men to be men, but draweth them to the il fauoured nature of beaſts void of reaſon. Contrariwiſe, this holie moderation, whereby pleaſures are contained within certaine bounds, preſerueth families togither, and cities: and which is more, draweth vs in ſome ſort neere to the diuine nature. Thus we ſee that ſhe is the foundation and ornament of all good things. If we ſhould endeuor to rehearſe heere al thoſe excellent praiſes, which philoſophers giue to this vertue of temperance, bicauſe of hir worthie effects and wholeſome fruits, which ſhe bringeth foorth in the ſoule, we were not able to performe it, although we ſhould beſtow this whole daies worke about it. But bicauſe in the ſequele of our diſcourſes, as well in the handling of vices as of vertues, we may conſider further how neceſſary temperance is, and what profit it bringeth to the whole life of man, we will content our ſelues to learne of Plato, that temperance is the piller of fortitude, The commendation of temperance.the helmet and ſhield againſt luxuriouſnes, the keeper and guide of the eies, the preſeruer of good will, the raſor of euill thoughts, the corrector of vntamed deſires, an enimie to the diſordered will of the ſoule: that it ſhunneth naturall deſires, hindereth diſhoneſt actions, breedeth continencie, mollifieth mens harts, and giueth reaſon for a rule in all things. Now let vs note out amongſt the ancients, ſome examples of the force and greatnes of this vertue of temperance, which hath made many excellent Woonderfull examples of temperance. Scipio Africanus.
                     men worthie of eternall renowme. Scipio Africanus generall of the Romanes, at the taking of the citie of Carthage had a yoong damſell to his priſoner, of rare and excellent beautie. And when he vnderſtood of what great calling ſhe came, and how hir parents not long before had betrothed hir to a great Lord of Spaine, he commanded that he ſhould be ſent for, and reſtored hir vnto him, without

abuſing hir in any reſpect, although he was in the flowre of his age, and had free and ſoueraigne authoritie. Moreouer, he gaue for a dowrie with hir the monie that was brought vnto him for hir ranſome. An act no doubt of great continencie in a victorious captaine towards his captiue, whereof Aulus Gellius, ioining it with that whichAlexander. we read of Alexander the great, maketh this queſtion, whether of the twaine behaued himſelfe more vertuouſly. For Alexander hauing vanquiſhed in battell king Darius, and retaining as priſoner his wife, which excelled al the dames of Aſia in beautie, and was withall but yong in yeeres, the victorious Monarke being but yong alſo, and hauing no ſuperior aboue him to whom he was bound to giue an account of himſelfe, had notwithſtanding ſuch great knowledge how to command himſelfe, that albeit by his acquaintance and friends he was ſufficiently certified of the excellent beautie of this Ladie, yet hee bare no ill thought towards hir, but ſent to comfort hir, and cauſed hir to be intertained and attended on with no leſſe honor and reuerence, than if ſhe had been his owne ſiſter. And to auoid all ſuſpicion and occaſion of euill, he would not ſee hir, nor ſuffer hir to be brought before him. The temperanceCyrus. of Cyrus king of Perſia is alſo very famous amongſt the hiſtoriographers. For when one of his minions ſtirred him vp to go and ſee faire Panthaea, ſaying that hir rare beautie was well woorthie to be ſeene: that is the cauſe (anſwered this yong prince vnto him) why I will altogither abſtaine at this preſent from beholding hir at thy perſuaſion, leaſt ſhe hir ſelfe heerafter ſhould induce me through the remembrance of hir perfection to go to hir, and ſo cauſe me in the meane time to let ſlip many affairesArchitas. of great importance. Architas was ſo temperate, that he would not ſo much as vtter one filthie word: and if he were driuen to declare it vpon ſome iuſt occaſion, then he wrote it, ſhewing by this ſilence, how diſhoneſt a thing it was to commit that, which being onely vttered ought toXenocrates. cauſe a man to bluſh. Xenocrates was indued with ſuch a great gift of continencie, that Phryna a very faire and notable

courtiſan laid a wager with certaine yoong men, that if ſhe lay with him, ſhe would cauſe him to breake his temperance. But Xenocrates, hauing granted hir the halfe of his bed, for example ſake to thoſe youths, was nothing more mooued for any thing ſhe could do. Whereupon Phryna being verie angrie made anſwere in the morning to thoſe that demanded the wager of hir, that ſhe laie not with a man but with a blocke. Iſaeus the philoſopher beingIſaeus. asked of one that looked vpon a verie faire woman, whether ſhe ſeemed not vnto him to be faire, made this anſwer. My friend, I am not diſeaſed any more in my eies: and ſo would not behold hir at all. Caius Gracchus the Romaine,C. Gracchus. as long as he gouerned Sardinia, would neuer ſuffer a woman to ſet foote in his houſe, except it were to demand iuſtice. Antigonus king of Macedonia, hearingAntigonus. that his ſonne was lodged in a houſe where there were three verie faire daughters, made an edict, that no courtier ſhould lodge in any matrons houſe that had daughters, if ſhe were vnder fiftie yeeres of age. Pompeius wouldPompeius. neuer ſpeak to the wife of Demetrius his freeman, bicauſe ſhe was ſo faire, that he feared leaſt he ſhould be in loue with hir. In the number of theſe ancient, famous and vertuous men, that great captaine Francis Sforce duke of MillanF. Sforce. deſerueth to be placed, whoſe continencie was woonderfull, euen when he was yet yoong, and generall of the Florentine armie, at the taking of Caſanoua. For as certaine ſouldiers had taken a maide of an exccellent beautie, and at hir intreatie and earneſt requeſt had brought hir before him, Sforce asked the maide why ſhe deſired ſo earneſtly to come before him. To this ende (quoth ſhe) that thou mighteſt deliuer me from the ſouldiers, & that I might pleaſe thee. Sforce ſeeing hir to be verie faire, accepted of hir, and at night cauſed hir to lie with him. But as he would haue drawne neer vnto hir, the maide caſt hir ſelfe on both hir knees before him without the bed, and beſought him to ſaue hir virginitie, and to reſtore hir to him vnto whome ſhe was made ſure. Whereupon Sforce willingly agreed, beholding the abundance of hir teares,

which were teſtimonies of the chaſtitie of hir hart. Will we haue examples of this vertue of temperance in other circumſtances of hir effects? Ambition truly is the moſt vehement and ſtrongeſt paſſion of all thoſe wherewith mens minds are troubled, and yet many notable and vertuous men haue ſo maſtred it by the force of their temperance, that oftentimes they accepted of offices and eſtats of ſupreame authoritie, as it were by compulſion & with greefe: yea ſome altogither contemned and willingly forſookeThe temperance of Pompey againſt ambition. them. Pompey receiuing letters of abſolute authoritie from the ſenate to conduct the warre againſt the two kings Tygranes and Mithridates, cried out: O God, ſhall I neuer come to the ende of ſo many trauels? Shall enuie alwaies hold me in ſuch ſort as hir ſlaue, that newe and great charges daily laying hold vpon me, I cannot rid my ſelfe of theſe ſnares, to the end I may liue ſweetly with my wife and children at my houſe in the countrey? Pittacus
                     Pittacus. one of the Sages of Graecia, being conſtrained to take vpon him the charge of an armie, accepted it with great greefe, ſaying before them all: O how hard a matter it isPedaretus. to be a good man! Pedaretus the Lacedemonian hauing eſcaped to be elected one of thoſe three hundred ſenators, which gouerned the eſtate of Sparta, returned from the aſſembly verie ioifull, ſaying, that it was an eaſie matter to finde in that citie three hundred better and moreScipio. honeſt men than himſelfe. What did Scipio, of whom we haue already ſpoken, after he had performed a thouſand glorious facts for the greatnes of the Romaine empire? He forced the nature of ambition, which is alwaies caried with a deſire of new glorie, and changed the reſt of his life into quietnes: and abandoning the affaires of eſtate,Torquatus & Fabritius. he went and dwelt in the countrey. Torquatus and Fabritius abſented thēſelues from Rome, the one bicauſe he would not haue the dictatorſhip, and the other the conſulſhip. It is not long ſince Aimaeus duke of Sauoy willingly gaueAimaeus. ouer his duchy into his ſons hands, & became an hermit: and after that being choſen pope, he gaue vp the ſeat willinglyAmurathes. to another. Amurathes, the ſecond of that name,

emperor of the Turks, after he had obtained infinite victories, and vanquiſhed the king of Hungarie, became a monke of the ſtraighteſt ſect amongſt them. That great emperor Charles the fift, did he not reſigne his empire into
                        Charles 5. the hands of the princes electors, and withdrewe himſelfe into a monaſterie? But what need we maruell at the knowledge of theſe examples, which ſhewe the effects of this vertue of temperance againſt ſtrange paſſions ariſing in vs, proceeding of our nature corrupted with ſinne, and ruling in vs through the ignorance of that which is good, when we may ſee, that temperance doth not onely ſerue for a good guide and ſchoolmaſter to our paſſions and to our naturall and neceſſarie deſires and pleaſures, that are borne with man from the beginning to rule them with mediocritie and reaſon, but alſo compelleth them oftentimes to ſubmit themſelues, thereby triumphing ouer their neceſſitie, although (as Thales ſaid) it be inuincible? And then how much more eaſie wil it be to reſtraine, yea, wholy to ouerthrow the fooliſh deſires of vanitie? Soüs
                     Soüs. a captaine of great renowne, and king of Lacedemonia, being beſieged in a narrow ſtraight, & very craggie place void of water, after he had endured the neceſſitie of thirſt to the vttermoſt, he offred to the Clitorians his enemies, to reſtore vnto them al their land, which he had wonne of them, ſo that he and all his companie might drinke of a fountaine neere vnto them. Which being thus agreed vpon betweene them, he led al his men thither, and ſaid vnto them, that if any one would abſtaine from drinking, he would reſigne his royaltie of Lacedemonia vnto him. But none would accept thereof, inſomuch that all dranke except himſelfe, who going laſt downe into the fountaine did nothing but refreſh himſelfe, and wet his mouth a little on the outſide, in the preſence of his enemies, not drinking one drop thereof. By meanes whereof he maintained, that he was not bound at all vnto his promiſe, bicauſe all dranke not: and ſo he continued the warre to the great honor & aduantage of his country. Lyſimachus,
                     Lyſimachus. one of Alexanders ſucceſſours in the empire, had not ſo

great power ouer the like paſſion. For being compelled by thirſt, he diliuered himſelfe and all his armie to the Getes his enemies. After he had drunke, being priſoner, O God (quoth he) how faint-harted am I, that for ſo ſhort a pleaſure haue depriued my ſelfe of ſo great a kingdome! Cato.
                     Cato the yoonger, trauelling ouer the deſerts of Lybia, endured verie ſore thirſt. And when a ſouldier offered him a little water in his morion, he threw it vpon the ground in preſence of them all, to the end his armie might knowe, that he would be in no better eſtate than they. Truely a woorthy example for all captaines: for by ſo doing, that which would hardly haue quenched the thirſt of one, reſtrained Rodolphus.it in a whole armie. The emperor Rodolphus, who of baſe eſtate attained to this dignitie by his vertue, vpon the like occaſion made an anſwere woorthy to be remembred. For when a full cup of beere was brought vnto him in the warre which he had againſt Octocarus king of Bohemia, at what time he was in a place where his whole army was greatly troubled with thirſt, he would not receiue it, but ſaid vnto the bearer thereof, that his thirſt was for all his armie, and not onely for himſelfe, & therfore that cup of beere was not ſufficient to quench it. We read of Socrates 
                     Socrates.that whenſoeuer he felt himſelfe very thirſty, he would not drinke before he had ſpilt and caſt away the firſt pitcher of water, which he drew for himſelfe out of the well, to this ende (as he ſaid) that he might acquaint his ſenſuall appetite to expect the conuenient time of reaſon. Seeing therefore by ſuch examples and infinite others contained in hiſtories we haue certaine and aſſured proofe of the force of temperance ouer naturall and neceſſarie paſſions, how credible is it, that ſhe may haue farre greater power ouer thoſe other paſſions that came from without vs, after we fell from our firſt creation? Let vs therefore conclude by our preſent diſcourſe, that the vertue of temperance is verie neceſſarie and profitable for a happie life, as that which hath this propertie belonging vnto it, to be skilfull in chaſing a mediocritie in pleaſures and greefes, in keeping that which is honeſt & vertuous,

and in ſhunning of vice, eſpecially of carnall pleaſures, although ſhe ſerue alſo to moderate all the actions of our life. And if a prudent man auoideth diſhoneſt things in publike places, a temperate man goeth farther, eſchewing them in ſolitarie and obſcure corners. If iuſtice ſuffereth no violence to be vſed, or wrong offered to any, temperance further permitteth none to offend any: and therefore is verie well called of the philoſophers, the mother of all dutie and honeſtie.
               
            
            
               Of Intemperance, and of Stupiditie or blockiſhnes. Chap. 18.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  BEing inſtructed in the vertue of temperance, which, as well as hir fellow vertues, conſiſteth in mediocritie, we are now to conſider of hir extremities and vices that are in exceſſe and in defect. Intemperance is cleane contrarie vnto it, which as Cicero ſaith, inflameth, prouoketh, and troubleth the tranquillitie of the ſpirit: but concerning the defect, I find no proper name giuen vnto it by the philoſophers. But I leaue the handling of this matter vnto you my Companions.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Intemperance (ſaith Plato) was ſo called of the ancients, bicauſe that peruerſe, cruell, great and variable beaſt Lust, exerciſeth therein more power than it ought, Predominant paſſions in intemperance.as alſo diſordered ioy doth the like. Whereupon it commeth, that intemperate men enioying the pleaſure of their ſenſes, imagine falſely that true felicitie accompanieth them therein. But truly whoſoeuer obeieth bodilie pleaſures, ſerueth moſt cruell tyrants.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Nature (ſaid Architas) hath giuen no plague more pernitious & hurtful than the pleaſure of the body. For wheras God hath beſtowed vpon man nothing more excellent than the ſoule and reaſon, there is none ſo great an enimie to this heauenlie gift as voluptuouſnes: bicauſe where luxuriouſnes and concupiſcence raigne, there temperance can haue no place: yea, all vertues are baniſhed

out of their kingdome. But let vs heare ARAM diſcourſe of theſe vices heere propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     Some ſinnes are puniſhments of other ſinnes. I red in Plato not long ſince, that there were many ſins, which ought rather to be called puniſhments of other ſins going before, than ſinnes. According to the courſe and ſequele of his ſpeech, if my memorie be good, I thinke his meaning is, that men ſuffering themſelues to be ouertaken of vice in the beginning, as it were in ſport, neuer take heed vnto themſelues, vntill they be wholie abandoned and giuen ouer (as S. Paule ſaith) to their vile affections, Rom. 1.and pleaſures of their harts, in all vncleannes and turbulent paſſions of ignominie and reproch. Inſomuch that after they haue opened the gate to their concupiſcences, and to the deſires of the fleſh, of whooremongers, couetous perſons, reuengers of their owne wrongs, belly gods, gluttons, and from other leſſe imperfections, being notwithſtanding foule and beaſtly, they become Sodomites, Church-robbers, parricides, Epicures, Atheiſts, and full of all execrable villanies, which are comprehended What intemperance is.vnder this word of intemperance. Intemperance is very well defined of the philoſophers to be an ouerflowing in voluptuouſnes, forcing and compelling all reaſon in ſuch ſort, that no conſideration of loſſe or hinderance is able to ſtay or keepe backe him that is through long cuſtome infected with vice, from betaking himſelfe of ſet purpoſe, and as a man would ſay, willingly and deſperately, to the execution of all his deſires and luſts, as he that placeth his ſole and ſoueraigne good therein, ſeeking for no other contentation than in that thing, which bringeth to him and to his ſenſes delight and pleaſure. For this cauſe Aristotle diſtinguiſheth betweene intemperance and incontinencie The difference betweene an incontinent and an intemperate man.(albeit many take them indifferently one for an other) ſaying, that an incontinent man chooſeth not, neither conſulteth when he offendeth, as one that knoweth full well that the euill he committeth is euill, and had reſolued with himſelfe not to follow it, but being ouercome with perturbations, yeeldeth thereunto. Whereas the intemperate man committeth euill of election and ſetled

purpoſe to follow it, accounting it a good thing, & to be deſired. And this commeth through a long cuſtom & habit of vice, which is the cauſe that he neuer repenteth him of the fact, but taketh pleaſure therein: whereas on the contrarie ſide the repentance of an incontinent man followeth hard at the heeles of his ſinne and tranſgreſſion. In this maner then proceedeth intemperance, vntill men are wholie addicted and giuen ouer to vice. This is the cauſe why the ſenſuall and vnreaſonable part of the ſoule contendeth no more with reaſon, which then is as it were ſtarke dead, and ſuffereth it ſelfe to be caried to vgly and vnnaturall vices, and to all fleſhly deſires: bicauſe the diuine part of the ſoule is weakened in ſuch ſort, that ſhe hath no more ſtrength, nor feeling of hir eſſence, which is an enimie to vice. And thus accuſtoming hir ſelfe to follow nothing but the will of the bodie, ſhe forſaketh God altogither, who ſeeing himſelfe forſaken, leaueth hir to hir concupiſcences, from whence is ingendred this exceeding luxuriouſnes euen againſt nature, this mortall, venemous, and bloodie enuie, this furious and barbarous crueltie, this inſatiable couetouſnes, this bloud-thirſtie ambition, and other incurable diſeaſes of the ſoule, too wel knowen amongſt vs, whereof the ſequele of our diſcourſes will affoord a more ample knowledge vnto. Thus we ſee that intemperance (as Cicero ſaith) is the mother of all the perturbations in the ſoule, and cauſeth man (as Socrates ſaid) to differ nothing from a beaſt: bicauſe he neuer thinketh vpon that which is beſt, but onely ſeeketh how to ſatisfie and content the vnbridled deſires of pleaſure and luſt, hauing no more vſe of reaſon than beaſts haue. Intemperance (ſaith Euſebius) corrupteth the ſoule, and deſtroieth the bodie, bicauſe it conſtraineth a man, for loue of pleaſure, and deſire to ſatisfie it, to do that which he knoweth well is diſhoneſt and vile. And as the winds torment and A fit ſimilitude.toſſe that ſhip, which they haue ſeazed vpon now heere now there, and will not ſuffer it to be guided by hir maiſter: ſo intemperance moouing and compelling the ſoule to diſobey reaſon, ſuffereth hir not to enioy tranquillitie

and reſt, which is an aſſured hauen of harbour from all winds. Intemperance (ſaith Aristotle) is a vice that proceedeth from the coueting part of man, whereby we deſire to enioy vnlawfull pleaſures. It is hir propertie to chooſe the fruition of hurtfull and vile pleaſures, ſuppoſing none to liue happily, but ſuch as paſſe away their life in them.The companions of intemperance. This vice is vnſeparably accompanied with the troubling of all Order, with impudencie, vnſeemlines, luxuriouſnes, ſloth, negligence, and diſſolutenes. In a word, intemperance remooueth and troubleth all tranquillitie of the mind, and leadeth men to all kind of wickednes, the end of one vice being the beginning of another: which Socrates called the puniſhment of ſinne, that doth not cleanſe but kill the malefactor. There is no kind of diſſolutenes wherein the intemperate man plungeth not himſelfe, no wickednes or crueltie, which he executeth not for the ſatisfying of his vncleane deſires and vnſatiable luſts, no feare or imminent danger, which can draw him backe. And further, he laboreth oftentimes to procure, that glorie and honor ſhould be giuen to his moſt curſed and execrable miſdemeanors, imagining and fanſying with himſelfe dreames anſwerable and agreeable to that he moſt deſireth. Wherein he reſembleth mad men, who haue alwaies before their eies thoſe Ideas and ſhapes, whichIntemperate men reſemble mad folks. worke the apprehenſion of their furie, and hold them in the viſion and inward view of that which moſt troubleth their diſeaſed braine. But to make this vice of intemperance more odious vnto vs, and to moue vs more earneſtly to flie thoſe cauſes that nouriſh it, labouring to cut off all thoſe branches and hurfull fruits, which it bringeth with it, as ſuperfluitie, gluttony, ambition, pride, and other exceſſes in all kind of delight, wherof we will intreat more particularly heerafter, let vs call to mind examples of ſuch pernitious effects, as it hath brought foorth in them that voluntarily ſubmitted themſelues vnder hir tyrannous gouernment. Although we ſhould ſearch throughout all ancient hiſtories, yet hardly could we alledge a more euidentHeliogabalus. teſtimonie, than the life of Heliogabalus: bicauſe there

is no kind of curſed miſchiefe, of deteſtable luſt, of iniuſtice, & of crueltie wherwith he was not defiled. Yea, he fel into ſuch a furious frenſie of vice, that ſeeking to become a woman, and to be maried to one of his minions, thinking in that ſexe better to ſatiſfie his beaſtlines, he apparelled himſelf after ſuch a faſhion, that he was neither man nor woman. And knowing it impoſſible for him by reaſon of his impietie and corrupt life, to eſcape a miſerable end and violent death (which ought rather to haue been vnto him an occaſiō of amendment) he was ſo bewitched with intemperance, that he prepared poiſons ready at hand to poyſon himſelf withall, if he perceiued himſelfe preſſed of his enimies. And to make his death luxurious according to his deſire, he kept his poiſons in veſſels made of precious ſtones. He prouided alſo ſilken halters to hang himſelf withall, if he ſaw that more expedient for him, than to be poiſoned: or if he ſhould thinke it better to murder himſelfe, he kept for that purpoſe kniues made of precious mettals. Likewiſe he cauſed a high tower all gilded to be built, & all 
                        〈…〉
                      his death as fitteſt occaſion ſhould be offred. In the meane while he gaue not ouer that execrable kind of life, which through Gods iuſt iudgement he ended, being depriued of all thoſe means wherwith he deſired to ſerue his owne turne in his death. For he was ſtrangled by the ſouldiers of his gard, who trailed him inNero. that maner through all places of the citie of Rome. Nero, one of his predeceſſors, was little better than he. For he ſlew a Romane Conſul called Atticus, that he might haue the free vſe of his wife: and pleaſed himſelfe ſo much in his crueltie, that he was the murderer of his own mother, brother, ſiſter, & of two wiues which he had, named Octauia and Poppea. Likewiſe he put to death his ſchoolemaſter Seneca, and many other good men. But his end diſſembled not his life. For beyng hated of all and ſought for toCommodus. be ſlayne, he killed himſelfe. Commodus an other emperor, not finding wherwith to ſatiſfie his intemperance in three hundred concubines, & three hundred buggerers, which he kept in his palace, committed inceſt with his owne ſiſters.

                     Caligula. 
                     Caligula alſo did the like, but the one of them wasProculus. ſlain by his wife, & the other by his concubine. Proculus a Romain emperor, was ſo much giuen to luſt, that he bragged how in fifteene dayes he had gotten with child a hundred virgins of Sarmatia, which he had taken priſoners in
                        Chilpericus 1. the warre. Chilpericus the firſt, king of France, to the end he might the better enioy a whore called Fredegonda, whō afterwards he maried, compelled his firſt wife named Andeuora, to become a religious woman, and put to death two children which he had by her through the counſaile of his ſayd concubine. Then hauing in his ſecond mariage taken to wife Galſonda daughter to the king of Spaine, he cauſed her to be ſtrangled, and maried Fredegonda, who perceiuing afterward that he noted in himſelfe this looſeneſſe of life, and offenſiue kind of gouernment, cauſed him to be ſlain. A iuſt puniſhment ſuffred by God for hisXerxes. intemperance. Xerxes, monarch of the Perſians, was ſo intemperate and giuen to luſt, that he propounded rewards for thoſe that could inuent ſome new kind of pleaſure. And therfore comming into 
                        〈…〉
                      infinit number of men to ſubdue it, he was ouercome and repulſed by a ſmall number, as being an effeminate and fainthartedEpicurus. man. Epicurus a learned philoſopher was ſo intemperate, that he placed the ſoueraigne Good and Felicitie in pleaſure.Sardanapalus. 
                     Sardanapalus monarch of Babylon, the firſt of the foure Empires, was ſo addicted to luſt and intemperance, that he ſtirred not all day long from the company of women, being apparelled as they were, and ſpinning purple. Whereby he became ſo odious, that two of his lieutenants iudging him vnworthy to command ouer Aſia, and ouer ſo many good men as were vnder his Empire, raiſed his ſubiects againſt him, and ouercame him in battell. Wherupon diſpairing of his ſafetie, he cauſed a great Tabernacle of wood to be ſet vp in a ſure place within the cloiſter of his palace, and compaſſed it round about with great ſtore of dry wood. Then he cauſed his wife and his concubines whom he loued beſt to enter into it, and all the wealth he had to be brought thither. This done, ſhutting

himſelfe within it, his Eunuches and ſeruants according to the othe which he had taken of them, put fire to the ſaid frame, and ſo this miſerable king of the Chaldeans and Aſſyrians, with all that was with him, was ſuddenly conſumed with fire, and ended his monarchie, which his victorious lieutenants diuided betwixt them, the one taking himſelf for king of Babylon, the other of Medea. Antonius, one of Caeſars ſucceſſors in the Empire,Antonius. procured his own ruine through intemperance & looſenes, and ſtirred vp againſt himſelfe, the enuie and murmuring of the Romans for his retchleſneſſe of feats of Arms in that warre ouer which he was generall againſt the Parthians. For to the end he might quickly return to his concubine Cleopatra Queene of Egypt, he hazarded all in ſuch ſort, that without doing any thing worthy his firſt reputation, he loſt more than twentie thouſand of his own men. Afterward, Octauius his companion in the Empire, beyng armed againſt him, that he might reuenge the iniurie which he had done him in forſaking his ſiſter whom he had wedded, to liue in his vncleannes, gaue him battell: wherein Antonius ſeeing his friend Cleopatra flie, who had born him company in that warre, folowed her with three skore of his owne gallies, albeit the fight was yet equal, & the victorie doubtful. Thus he betraied thoſe that fought for him, to follow her, who already had begun his deſtruction, to the end ſhe might accompliſh the ſame, as in deed it fel out after. For being beſieged within Alexandria by the ſaid Octauius, and without hope of ſafetie, he thruſt himſelf through the body with his ſword, wherof he died: and Cleopatra alſo procured her own death by the biting of the ſerpent Aſpis. Boleſlaus the ſecond king of Polonia,
                        Boleſlaus 2. being giuen to all vncleannes and filthines, made no dout to take women by violence from their husbands. Whereupon the biſhop of Cracouia often admoniſhed him therof, and when, by reaſon of his obſtinate perſeuerance, he proceeded againſt him euen with excommunication, he was caried headlong with ſuch fury, that he killed this holy man. After that, his ſubiects comming againſt him, he

was conſtrained to flie into Hungarie, where falling mad, Adrian.he ſlew himſelf. The emperor Adrian tooke ſuch glory and pride in al execrable vices, that he commanded a Temple with a ſumptuous tombe to be made for a naughtie man named Antinoüs, whō he had miſerably abuſed in his life. Iohannes a Caſa.In our time Iohannes a Caſa Archbiſhop of Beneuento, and Legate in Venice, wrote a booke in praiſe of the abominable vice of Sodomitrie. Sigiſmundus Malatesta, lord of a part of Romaignola a prouince of Italy, ſtriued to haue carnal knowledge of his ſonne Robert, who thruſting his poinado into his fathers boſom, reuenged that great wickednes. By theſe examples and infinit others whereof hiſtories are full, it appeereth ſufficiently, that man burning with intemperance, careth not at what price, with what ſhame, hurt or hinderance, he may come to the execution and practiſe of all ſuch pleaſure & delight, as he propoundeth to himſelfe. As if he purpoſe to haue his fame continue for euer, he will not ſtick to do it, although it be by ſome notable wickedneſſe. And thus we read of him The Temple of Diana was burnt by Eroſtratus.that burnt the Temple of Diana, which was accounted the fift wonder of the world, & was two hundred & eight and twentie yeeres in building by the Amazones within the citie of Epheſus in Aſia. The planks thereof were all of Cedar wood, and the doores and garniſhing of the wals, of Cypres. This wretched caitife confeſſed, that he put fire to that ſumptuous building for no other cauſe, than to leaue his fame and renowne behind him in the world: but commandement was giuen that none ſhould fet down his name in writing. Neuertheleſſe he is named Erostratus, by Solinus and Strabo: from whence came that prouerb, This is the renowne of Erostratus, vſed when any man ſeeketh to be famous by a wicked act, which we may alſo apply to all intemperate men. As touching the defect of Temperance, wherof mention was made in the beginning of our preſent diſcourſe, and which hath no proper name, but Or Stupiditie.vnproperly is called by ſome Stupiditie orſenceleſnes, it is rarely found amongſt men, who by nature are giuen to pleaſure, and caried away with all kinds of deſires & luſts.

For where ſhal we find any ſo dul & blockiſh, that hath no feeling of pleaſure, and that is not mooued with glory and honor? Such a man may be truly taken and accounted as one void of ſence and feeling, & like to a blocke. Neither doth it belong to temperāce to be depriued of all deſires, but to maſter them. For that man (as Cicero ſaith) that neuer had experience of pleaſures and delights, neither hath any feeling of them, ought not to be called temperate, as he that hath done nothing which may teſtifie his continencie and modeſtie. Thus ye ſee we haue no matter offred wherabout to beſtow time in reproouing this vice of defect, frō which men are too carefull to keep themſelues. But to come to the concluſiō of our diſcourſe, we ſay with Aristotle, that concupiſcences and deſires change the bodie, and make the ſoule outragious: that ſo many as are infected with ſuch a pernicious and damnable vice as intemperance is, are no mē, but monſters in nature, leading a life altogether like to that of brute beaſts, which being deſtitute of all reaſon, know nothing better or more honeſt than pleaſure: & hauing no knowledge of the iuſtice of God, neither reuerencing the beautie of vertue, beſtow al the courage, craft & force that nature hath giuen them, to ſatiſfie and to accompliſh their deſires. So that if death brought with it an end of all ſence and feeling, and an vtter aboliſhing of the ſoule, as well to men as to beaſts, intemperate folks ſhould ſeeme to gaine much by enioying their deſires and luſts during their life time, and to haue good cauſe to waxe old, and euen to melt in their foule & filthie pleaſures. But ſeeing we know (for truely he that doubteth hereof, is very ignorant & moſt miſerable) that ſence and feeling remaine after death, and that the ſoule dieth not with the body, but that puniſhment, yea euerlaſting payne is prepared for the wicked, let vs be careful to do the will of our father which is in heauen, whileſt we haue time, that in the triumphing day of his eternal ſonne, we may not heare to our confuſion, that ſentence of his mouth, Depart from me ye workers of iniquitie. At which time, the iuſt ſhall ſhine as the ſunne in the kingdome of Luke 13. 27.
                     
God, and the wicked ſhall be caſt headlong into euerlaſting fire, where ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth.
               
            
            
               Of Sobrietie and Frugalitie. Chap. 19.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     SOcrates vſed to diſpute earneſtly and grauely of the manner of liuing, as of a thing of great importance. For he ſaid, that continencie in meate and drinke, was as it were the foundation and beginning of skill. And truely the minde is much more prompt to comprehend all good reaſon, when the operations of the braine are not hindered by vapours, which the ſuperfluitie of meates ſend vp thither. I am of opinion therefore, that we handle this vertue of ſobriety, which dependeth of temperance, and is contained vnder the firſt part thereof, namely vnder continencie.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  To liue well and frugally (ſaith Plato) is to liue temperately: and (as Epictetus ſaith) there is great difference betweene liuing well, and liuing ſumptuouſly. For the one commeth of temperance, frugalitie, diſcipline, honeſtie, and moderation of the ſoule, contented with her owne riches: and the other of intemperance, luſt, and contempt of all order and mediocritie. In the end, the one is followed with ſhame, and the other with true and laſting praiſe.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  We can not well vſe our ſpirite (ſaith Cicero) when we are ſtuffed with meate. Neither muſt we gratifie the belly and intrailes only, but alſo the honeſt ioy of the mind. For that which is contained in the other parts, periſheth: but the ſoule ſeparated from the body, abideth for euer. Let vs then harken to AMANA, of whome we may vnderſtand howe neceſſary ſobrietie is for a happie life.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     The cauſe of the long life of our Elders, and of the ſhortnes of ours. If we ſet before our eies the long and happy life of the Ancients, ſo long as they obſerued ſobrietie and frugalitie: out of doubt we will attribute one principall cauſe of our ſo ſhort life, and ſo full of infirmities, to

the riot, ſuperfluitie, and curioſitie of diet, which at this day are ſeene amongſt vs. The life of our firſt Fathers, was it not maintained a long time with fruits, milke, honie, and water? Who euer came neere their long and happie daies, ſince thoſe times? What preparation of exquiſite victuals did thoſe ſix hundred thouſand Iſraelites thinke to find, that came out of Egypt to go into a new land, walking fortie yeeres through the wildernes, drinking nothing but water, and many times wanting that? After thoſe firſt ages, the Grecians and Romanes loued ſobrietie, more than all other nations. And as the Hebrewes vſed to eate but once a daye, which was at dinner, ſo the Grecians onely ſupped. For this cauſe we read that Plato, being demanded whether he had ſeene any new or ſtrang thing in Sicilia, anſwered, that he had found a monſter of nature, which did eate twice a day. This he ſpake of Dionyſius 
                     Dionyſius a monſter, and why.the tyrant, who firſt brought vp that cuſtome in his countrey. In the time of Iulius Caeſar the Germaines, a ſtrong and warlike people, liued onely of milke, cheeſe and fleſh, not knowing what wheate and wine were, nor yet what it was to labour the ground, or to ſowe. Yea how many millions of men are there at this day in the Weſt regions and Ilands, who know not what all this ſuperfluitie and daintines of fare meaneth, and yet liue long and healthie in all frugalitie, the greateſt part of them vpon herbs and rootes, whereof they make cakes in ſteede of wheate, and others of raw fleſh? Whereby it is eaſie to iudge, that ſobrietie is the preſeruation and maintenance of health, and of naturall ſtrength and vigor, and ſo conſequently of the life of man. But when we looke higher, and with The ſobrietie of old time, and corruption of ours, compared togither.the eies of our mind marke the excellent glorie and immortall praiſe, deſerued by ſo many Camilli, Scipiones, Fabriti
                           •
                        , Metelli, Catones, and by a thouſand other famous families, which executed ſo many woorthy acts by their owne vertue, and yet in the meane while kept ſuch a ſimple and ſober diet, that the moſt of them were contented with bread, herbs, and water, endured and tolerated cheerefully all iniuries of weather, went but homely araied, and altogither

contemned gold and ſiluer: out of queſtion we will iudge thoſe men very blind, and farre from the white of ſuch glorie and honour, who imbrace nothing but diſſolutenes, ſuperfluitie, luſt, dronkennes, pride, and all ſuch like imperfections, that beare ſway amongſt vs, who behold Vice mounted ſo high, that men muſt in a manner bluſh as much to ſpeake of Vertue, or to be vertuous in a thouſand companies, as in that happy time of the Ancients, they were aſhamed of vice, or to be vitious. And truly I thinke that theſe men being paſt ſhame, care but little for the glorie that hath beene in many ages, ſeeing they liue for the body onely, after a brutiſh impietie, without all regard of the foule, or of the ſecond life. What ſay Sobrietie preſerueth health.I for the body? Nay rather they are the deſtroiers thereof, ſeeing it cannot be denied but that ſobrietie is a great benefit, and helpe to preſerue health and bodily ſtrength, and to expell diſeaſes, and is to be vſed as a good foundation to attaine to a happy old age. The experience heereof is well knowne to euery one, although there were no other proofe but this, that we ſee the ſimple ſort of people, that labor and trauell to liue with bread and water, grow old in health, whereas our Princes and great Lords being delicately brought vp in idlenes, die yoong men, tormented with infinite diſeaſes, eſpecially when they grow a little in yeeres. Further, let ſuch diſſolute men as make pleaſure the ende of their deſire, know, that ſobrietie leadeth thoſe that follow her, to farre greater and more perfect There is more pleaſure of the creatures in ſobrietie, than in ſuperfluitie.pleaſures, than incontinencie and ſuperfluitie doe. For theſe exceſſiue fellowes neuer expect hunger, or thirſt, or any other pleaſure of the bodye, but through intemperance preuent them, and ſo enioy ſcarce half the pleaſure. But ſober and temperate men, forbearing the fruition of their deſire a long time, haue a farre more perfect taſte of them, bicauſe (as Cicero ſaith) the pleaſure of life conſiſteth rather in the deſire, than in the ſatietie thereof. And if mediocrity be not obſerued, thoſe things that are moſt acceptable and pleaſant, become moſt vnpleaſant. Do we not alſo ſee, that when the body is not ouercharged with

meate and wine, it is better diſpoſed, and more temperate for euery good action? And as for the ſpirite, for which we ought chiefly to liue, it is more ready and nimble to comprehend and conceiue what right, reaſon, and true honeſtie are. For (as Ariſtotle ſaith) ſobrietie cauſeth men to iudge better and according to truth, of all things, and in that reſpect is very neceſſary for the attaining of Philoſophye. Likewiſe ſobrietie retaineth that in a wiſe mans thought, which a foole without diſcretion hath in his mouth. And therefore (ſaith Cares) we muſt ſtriue by all The belly is an vnthankfull beaſt.meanes to reſtraine our belly, bicauſe that only is alwaies vnthankfull for the pleaſures done vnto it, crauing continually, and oftener than it needeth: ſo that whoſoeuer is not able to command ouer it, wil daily heape vp miſchiefe vpon miſchiefe to himſelfe. But frugalitie and ſobrietie are the miſtreſſes of good counſell, and the badges of chaſtitie. For this cauſe Titus Liuius commendeth more the barrennes and ſterilitie of a countrey, than fertilitie and fruitfulnes, ſaying that men borne in a fat & fertile ſoile, are commonly do-littles, and cowards: but contrariwiſe, the barrennes of a countrey, maketh men ſober of neceſſitie, and conſequently carefull, vigilant, and giuen to labor: as the Athenians were, being ſituated in a very vnfruitfull place. We make great account (ſaith Paulonius) of frugalitie, not bicauſe we eſteeme the creatures themſelues vile, and of ſmall value, but that by meanes thereof we may encreaſe the greatnes of our courage. And if the greateſt & chiefeſt benefit that could come to man, were (ſaid Solon) to haue no need of nouriſhment, it is very manifeſt, that the next to that is to haue neede but of a little. But amongſt ſo many good reaſons of ſuch excellent mē, the counſell of Epictetus is wel woorth the marking, where The counſell of Epictetus concerning eating.he ſaith: then when we would eate, we muſt conſider that we haue two gueſts to entertain, the body and the ſoule, and that whatſoeuer ſhall be put into the body, departeth away quickly, but what good thing ſoeuer entreth into the ſoule, abideth for euer. To this effect Timotheus a Grecian captaine, hauing ſupped with Plato in the Academie

at a ſober and ſimple repaſt (for the greateſt feſtiual dainties were oliues, cheeſe, apples, colewoorts, bread & wine) ſaid, that they which ſup with Plato, feele the benefit therof How wiſe men in old time feaſted one another.the next day, yea a long time after. For theſe wiſe men met togither at bankets void of exceſſe, not to fill their bellies, but to prepare and dreſſe their minds, & to learne one of another by their goodly diſcourſes of Philoſophie, whereof a vertuous ſoule hath better taſte, than the body of a well reliſhed and delicate meale. Such were the feaſts of Pythagoras, Socrates, Xenocrates, and of other Sages of Grecia, where the diſcuſſing of good and learned matters there handled, brought through the remembrance of them great pleaſure, and no leſſe liked commoditie, and that of long continuance to ſuch as were preſent at them. And as for the pleaſures of drinking and eating, they iudged the very remembrance thereof to be vnwoorthie and vnbeſeeming men of honor, bicauſe it was to paſſe away Againſt vaine delights in feaſts.as the ſmell of a perfume. Neither would they ſuffer that men ſhould bring into their aſſemblies the vanitie of fooliſh delights, as of the ſound of inſtruments, of enterludes, or of any other paſtime, which a wiſe man ought rather to eſteeme as a hinderance of delight, than any pleaſure at all. For hauing within themſelues ſufficient matter of recreation and reioicing, through their learned diſcourſes, it were meere follie to beg ſtrange and friuolous delights from without them. And Plutark ſaith, that The bellie a feeding beaſt.the brutiſh part of the ſoule, depending of the feeding beaſt, and vncapeable of reaſon, is that which is pleaſed, brought to order, & ſatiſfied by ſongs and ſounds, which are ſung and tuned vnto it: euen as with the whiſtling of lips or hands, or with the ſound of a pipe, ſheepeheards cauſe their ſheepe to ariſe, or lie downe, bicauſe they vnderſtand not an articulate or diſtinct ſpeech, that hath ſome pith in it. Therefore I commend Euripides, for reprehending ſuch as vſe the harpe, ſo long as a feaſt laſteth: When muſicke is moſt conuenient.for (quoth he) muſicke ought rather to be ſent for, when men are angrie, or mourne, than when they are feaſting or making merry, thereby to make them giue more libertie

to all pleaſure, than before. I ſuppoſe the Egyptians The cuſtome of the Egyptians at bankets.did better, who vſed in the midſt of their bankets to bring in the Anatomie of a dead bodie dried, that the horror thereof might containe them in all modeſtie. For this cauſe the memorie of the Emperour Henrie the third, greatly recommendeth it ſelfe, who baniſhed all pompe and vanitie from his wedding, and draue away the plaiers & ieſters, cauſing a great number of poore folke to come in their place. The cuſtom which the Lacedemonians obſerued, The cuſtome of the Lacedemonians.when they liued vnder Lycurgus lawes, is alſo worthie to be remembred: which was, that no torches or lights ſhould be brought vnto them, when they departed from feaſtes at night, that it might be an occaſion vnto them to feare drunkennes, and ſo to auoid this ſhame, that they onely could not find out their houſes. Now in thoſe happie times vines were planted and dreſſed, that wine might be drunke rather in time of ſickenes, than of health: inſomuch that it was not ſold in Tauernes, but onely in Apothecaries ſhops. Thoſe ancient Sages commonly meaſured their drinking by that ſaying of Anacharſis, 
                     The manner of drinking in old time.that the firſt draught which men drunke, ought to be for thirſt, the ſecond for nouriſhment: and as for the third, that it was of pleaſure, and the fourth of madnes. Pythagoras being much more religious in this matter, and liuing onely of herbs, fruite, and water, ſaid: that the vine brought foorth three grapes, whereof the firſt quencheth thirſt, the ſecond troubleth, and the third altogither dulleth. He neuer dranke wine, no more did that great Orator Demoſthenes, nor many other famous men, of whome hiſtories make mention. The kings of Egypt were forbidden wine, which they neuer dranke, except on certaine daies, and then by meaſure. And truly it bringeth with it pernitious effects, aſwell to the ſoule, as to the bodie. For from it proceedeth the chiefe and moſt common cauſe of bodilie diſeaſes, and of the infirmities of the ſoule. But to continue the examples of loue, which the Ancients bare The ſobrietie of Alexander.to the vertue of ſobrietie, this was it that cauſed Alexander the Great to refuſe thoſe Cookes and Paiſterers, which

                     Ada Queene of Caria ſent vnto him, & to ſend her word backe againe, that he had better than they were: namely, for his dinner, early riſing, and walking a good while before day: and for his ſupper, a little dinner. Notwithſtanding, in the ende the Perſian delicacies and riches (which alwaies is the propertie of ſuch goods) cauſed this vertuous monarke to change his commendable cuſtomeAgainſt exceſſiue drinking. of liuing, and to approoue and like of exceſſe in drinking: to which vice, that he might giue greater authoritie, he propounded ſix hundred crownes for a reward to him that dranke moſt, and called a great cup after his owne name. Which cup, when he offered to Calliſthenes one of his fauorits, he refuſed, ſaying: that he would not for drinking in Alexander, ſtand in need of Eſculapius. With which the King perceiuing him ſelfe touched, was ſo incenſed againſt him, that he cauſed him to be put in a cage with dogs, where he poiſoned himſelfe, being impatient of his captiuitie. Wherein we may note how ridiculous their blockiſhnes is, who for feare, not of ſuch an entertainment as this wiſe man receiued, but of being taken and reputed as void of good fellowſhip, and vnciuill, caſt themſelues into the danger of a ſore ſicknes, rather than they will refuſe to drinke carouſe, when they are inuited thereunto. Hereby alſo thoſe men ſhew their want of iudgement, and of conuenient matter to talke of, who cannot entertaine their friends without dronkennes and gluttonie. And the other, if they knew how to make denial fitly, and in good ſort, beſides the profit which they ſhould receiue thereby, their companie would be moreCyrus. deſired, than it will be for their dronkennes. Cyrus, Monarke of the Perſians, from his childhood gane great teſtimonie, that he would one daye become a very ſober man. For being demanded by Aſtyages his grandfather, why he would drinke no wine, he anſwered, for feare leaſt they giue me poiſon. For (quoth he) I noted yeſterday when you celebrated the daye of your natiuitie, that it could not be, but that ſome bodie had mingled poiſon amongſt all that wine, which ye then dranke: bicauſe in

the winding vp of the table, not one of all thoſe that were preſent at the feaſt, was in his right mind. Afterward this vertuous Prince alwaies liued very frugally: for proofe whereof may ſerue his anſwer made one day to Artabazus, as he marched in warre, who asked of him what he would haue brought vnto him for his ſupper: Bread, (quoth he,) for I hope we ſhall finde ſome fountaine to furniſh vs with drinke. Porus a noble king of India, liuedPorus. with water and bread onely. Phaotes alſo king of the ſamePhaotes. countrey, did the like: and the greateſt feaſtes which he made, or ſuffered his Courtiers to make, was onely with a kind of veniſon. Alphonſus king of Arragon, and Cocilia,Alphouſus. a very ſober man, was demanded of certaine of his Princes, why he dranke no wine: bicauſe (quoth he) wiſdome is hindred through wine, and prudence darkned: which two things onely are able to make a king worthy of that name he beareth. Ageſilaus king of Lacedemonia, hauingAgeſilaus. beene alwaies brought vp in the diſcipline of Lycurgus, who had baniſhed all riot and ſuperfluitie from that citie, by the vtter defacing and aboliſhing of gold and ſiluer, became very woonderfull, by reaſon of his ſimplicity and plainnes, in feeding and clothing his bodie, and in behauing himſelfe as the meaneſt of his ſubiects. He vſed to ſay (which he likewiſe put in vre) that he which commanded and ruled many, ought to ſurpaſſe them, not in dainties and delicacie, but in ſuſtaining labor, and in nobilitie of hart. The benefit which (as he ſaid) he reaped thereby, was libertie, whereof he aſſured himſelfe, that he could neuer be depriued by any alteration and change of fortune. And as he paſſed with his armie by the countrey of the Thaſians, they ſent him certaine refreſhing of ſloure, & of daintie cates, as comfits, and other daintie deuices made of paaſt: but he would take nothing ſaue onely the floure. And being vrged of others to receiue all, he ſaid: Well, if ye thinke it good, diuide the reſt amongſt the Ilots, (who were their ſlaues) for it agreeth not with them that make profeſſion of manlie fortitude and powers, to take ſuch iuncates. For that which allureth and inticeth

                     Good cheere keepeth ba
                           •
                        e 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         on men of a ſlauiſh nature, ought not to be acceptable to thē that are of a franke & free courage. But is there any thing now a daies, I pray you, that ſo much allureth and keepeth baſe minds in the ſeruice of great men, as the daintines of their table, And ſurely the Ancients did not vnfitly apply the name of Tyrant to a rich man, keeping a ſumptuous table, as to one that compelleth men to follow & to obey him. Neuertheles, a courageous hart ſuffreth not it ſelf to be takē with ſuch baits: but let vs continue the examples
                        
                           •••
                        peius of ſobrietic. Pompey the great, hauing all his life tyme loued modeſtie and frugalitie, gaue yet a more certain teſtimonie thereof, when, by reaſon of a lingring diſeaſe, he had loſt his appetite to meate. His Phyſition appointing him to eate of a Blackbird, he was giuen to vnderſtand by his ſerunats, that becauſe they were out of ſeaſon, it would be a hard matter to get any, except it were of Lucullus, who kept ſome all the yeere long, and would willingly giue him ſome. What (quoth he then) if Lucullus were not a daintie and nice glutton, could not Pompey liue? No, no, let me haue ſomthing made ready that may eaſile be gotten.M. Cate. 
                     Marcus Cato after he had ouercome Spaine, and triumphed of notable victories, albeit he was now old and very rich, yet he would adde nothing to his ancient maner of liuing, which was very auſtere, but dranke almoſt nothing but water, and for the moſt part did eat nothing but bread and biefe, laboring in the field in time of peaceEpaminondas. as much as the meaneſt of his ſeruants. Epaminondas the greateſt captain & philoſopher of his time, liued ſo thriftily and temperately, that being inuited by a friend of his to ſupper, and ſeeing great ſuperfluitie and ſumptuoſnes, he returned very angry, ſaying, that he thought he had been requeſted to ſacrifice, and to liue honeſtly together, and not to receiue reproch by being entertainedC. Fabritius. like a glutton. Caius Fabritius a notable Romain captaine, was found by the Samnite embaſſadors that came vnto him eating of reddiſh roſted in the aſhes, which was all the diſhes he had to his ſupper, and that in a very pooreScipio. houſe. Scipio Aemilius kept a very honourable table for his

friends (for in his time riot had alredy begun to enter into Rome) but going aſide himſelf, he would eate nothing but bread. Maſiniſſa king of the Numidians, was of ſo greatMaſiniſſa. ſobrietie, that euen at ninetie yeeres of age he would eate but once a day, and then vpon homely meates without ſauce. Mithridates king of Pontus, being very old, neuerMithridates. ſate downe at the table to eate, and liued very frugallie. Hannibal fed vpon no other meat, than did the meaneſt ofHannibal. his ſouldiers. The reaſon why I ſtay longer in the examples of this vertue of ſobrietie, is to ſhew the beaſtlines of men in our age, to whom it ſeemeth an impoſſible, vayne and contemptible thing, to liue in ſuch ſparing and auſteritie of life: ſaying, that there were none but certain fooliſh Philoſophers (for that is the Epithite, which the ignorant ſort giue to vertuous men) & ſome ſimple Hermites, who liued after that maner. Therefore that they may vnſeele their eyes, let them behold here, how in all ſorts and conditions of men, euen in the greateſt, the vertue of temperance, frugalitie and ſobrietie, did appeere and ſhine. The emperor Veſpaſianus one day in euery moneth vſed toVeſpaſianus. eate nothing. The prieſts of Egypt, the ſages of India and Perſia, and Iupiters prieſts ſeruing falſe gods did neuer eate any fleſh, nor drinke wine. Notable examples for thoſe that haue the firſt places in the Church, who ought to be as a lampe in the midſt thereof. Neither may they take example by Ethnikes and Pagans onely, but alſo by many holy men, who had in them the true loue and feare of God. Daniel and his companions neglecting the KingsDaniel. table, liued with pulſe and water onely. S. Iohn Baptist paſſedIohn Baptist. ouer the greateſt part of his age in the deſert, cating nothing but Locuſts and wilde hony. S. Hierome maketh mention of one Paul an Hermite, who liued from ſixteen yeeres vnto ſixtie, of Dates onely: and from ſixtie yeeres vnto the age of ſixe skore and fiue yeeres (when he died) he was fed with a litle bread brought daily vnto him by a Crow. Maxentius biſhop of Poytiers, liued alwayes withMaxentius. barly bread and water. But to the end we may reape profit by all that hath been here ſpoken, let vs learne of Socrates,
                     
that the ſoule which hath gotten the habite of frugalitie, and is contented with her eſtate, paſſeth away her dais in this world, as he that in the ſpring time taketh ſmall & eaſie iournies in a pleaſant and fruitful region, with great contentation of mind and litle labour. And let that notable and diuine precept of Empedocles ſound often in our eares,

                        Behaue thy ſelfe full ſoberly, and free from all offence.
                     
Let vs adorne and decke our life with this good and rare vertue of ſobrietie, which wil teach vs to renounce worldly vanitie, and to content our ſelues (next vnto God) in vertue onely, and in heauenly riches. And although delicacie of fare be ſo common amongſt vs Frenchmen, and maintained with ſuch impudencie, that we permit amōgſt vs, and ſtudie kitchin Commentaries, as much as any good Science, ſo that it may ſeem a very difficult matter to take it away, and baniſh it from amongſt vs, yet is it not altogether impoſſible, as many thinke. But let vs follow that ancient precept of Pythagoras, To chuſe the best kinde of life, and no doubt but cuſtome will by litle and litle make it eaſie & pleaſant vnto vs. And if we be deſpiſed & rebuked of others, we may anſwer as Socrates did, who being Socrates feaſt.reprooued becauſe he had made no greater preparation of meat in a feaſt wherunto he inuited many of his friēds, ſayd, If they be vertuous, there is enough, and if they be not, there is too much. So let vs not ſeeke to pleaſe and to imitate the moſt part of men, but the beſt and ſmalleſt number: neither let vs looke vnto cuſtome, but to that which is decent and honeſt. But if we perſeuer in our diſſolutenes & ſuperfluitie, as if we were Chriſtians in name and ſect onely, but Epicures in life, we are to feare that in the end need and neceſſitie will force vs to forſake it. And as it fell out to king Darius, who after he had liued a long Darius in his thirſt, iudged puddle water to be good drinke.time in all abundance of delights, and neuer knew what hunger or thirſt meant, as he fled from the battell gotten by Alexander was very thirſtie: and after he had drunke puddle water proceeding from a riuer tainted with dead bodies, he burſt foorth into this ſpeech, that in all his life

he neuer dranke better drinke: ſo likewiſe after we haue been tamed with miſeries and calamities, we muſt confeſſe, but too late, and peraduenture (O dangerous downfall) without hope of recouerie, that our eſtate is yet better (albeit moſt miſerable) than our offences haue deſerued, euen then when God for our diſſolutions ſhall withdraw his bleſſing wholy from our grounds & poſſeſſions. This he hath already begun to performe in ſome meaſure, Tokens of the wrath of Godby cauſing the ground to bring foorth vnto vs thiſtles and thornes, in ſteed of good graine and fruite, and by continuing amongſt vs wars and hurly burlies, which are accompanied with peſtiferous diſeaſes, that he may ouercharge thoſe with the ſcourges of his iuſt vengeance, who will not humble themſelues vnder the ſweetnes of his word.
               
            
            
               Of Superfluitie, Sumptuouſnes, Gluttonie, and wallowing in delights. Chap. 20.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  SEeing we haue ſummarily vnderſtood the excellencie and profit of the vertue of ſobrietie, that it may yet better appeere by the contrarie, and that we may be ſo much the more induced to deſire it amongſt vs, I thinke we ſhall do well to intreat of ſuperfluitie, ſumptuouſnes, and gluttonie, whoſe fruits are The chiefeſt cauſe of deſtruction to Common-wealths is exceſſe in delights.weltring in delights, which is the principall cauſe of deſtruction (as Plato ſaith) to Kingdoms, Monarchies, and Common-wealths. Therefore I propound theſe vices to you my companions to diſcourſe vpon.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Whatſoeuer is deſired more than that which is neceſſarie for the life of man, is ſuperfluitie, which cauſeth ſo many fooliſh and exceſſiue expences amongſt vs, that, beſides the ruine and decaie of many good houſes, the deſtruction of the bodie, and, which is more to be feared, of the ſoule alſo, doth for the moſt enſue thereupon. Therefore Eraſmus ſaid very well, that nothing is more abiect and hurtfull, than to liue as a ſlaue to the pleaſure of the mouth and bellie.
               
               
                  
                  ACHITOB.
                  Thoſe men (ſaith Plato) that are addicted to the ſeruice of their bellies, and care nothing for the foode of their minds, are like beaſts, who neuer enioy true pleaſures. Which thing alſo may be ſaid of them that like fooles depend more of opinion than of reaſon. But it belongeth to thee ASER to handle this matter here expounded, more at large.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Good things (ſaid Lycurgus) are contrary and enemies to him that abuſeth the gifts of nature: as if a valiant man ſhould loue rather to be a theefe, than a ſouldier: or a beautifull perſon an adulterer, rather than a maried man. So is it with the goods of Fortune, as we terme them, the poſſeſſion of which giueth occaſion to thoſe that are vnwoorthie of them, to commit many follies. Amongſt which we may note ſuperfluitie for a verie pernitious vice, hauing this propertie in it to draw the wils of men ſecretly, & to induce them to couet delights. Wherunto after they haue once addicted themſelues, they buſie their mindes with nothing but to make prouiſion of friuolous, exquiſite, and ſumptuous things, taking ſmal care, yea forgetting eaſily thoſe things that are profitable and neceſſarie, whereof afterwards they perceiue themſelues Pleaſure the end of ſuperfluitie.to ſtand in great need. Now the end of all ſuperfluities, wherein men plung themſelues after diuers manners, is pleaſure, which chiefly and for the moſt part they ſeeke in ſuch a riotous and delicate life, as cauſeth the bodie without labor to enioy all his deſires, luſtes, and delights: or elſe in the fruition of worldlie glorie, wherein through vnprofitable and ſuperfluous expences, they ſtriue to excell, or at leaſtwiſe to match thoſe that are greater than themſelues. Concerning the marke whereat they aime, there is nothing more hurtfull to man, than pleaſure and delight, which (as Plato ſaith) ſerueth for a baite and allurement to draw him to commit wickednes, as hereafter we may diſcourſe in more ample manner thereof, as alſo of that luxurious life, whoſe deſire and contentation is in whoredome. And that I may begin to handle the other two general points, wherein they that are giuen to ſuperfluitie

and coſtlines, ſeeke delight, namely the delicate life and curioſitie of expences: let vs conſider of the fruites that iſſue and proceed from them. Firſt, when men ſuffer Of the delicate life.themſelues to be ouertaken with the Epicures doctrine, and appeere ſo carefull to ſerue their bellie, nouriſhing it in exceſſe, daintines, gluttonie, and dronkennes, is it not from this headſpring from whence diſeaſes and euill diſpoſitions of the bodie proceed? We are ſicke (ſaith Plutark) of thoſe things wherewith we liue, neither is there any The ſeed of diſeaſes.proper and peculiar ſeed of diſeaſes, but the corruption of thoſe things within vs, which we eate, and the faults and errors which we commit againſt them. Homer going about to prooue, that the gods die not, groundeth his argument vpon this, bicauſe they eate not: as if he would teach vs, that drinking and eating do not only maintaine life, but are alſo the cauſe of death. For thereof diſeaſes gather togither within our bodies, which proceed no leſſe of being too full, than of being too emptie. And oftentimes a man hath more to do to conſume and digeſt meat put into his bodie, than he had to get it. Phiſitions (ſaith Of the ſhortnes of mans life.
                     Seneca) cry out, that life is ſhort, and art long: and complaint is made of nature, bicauſe ſhe hath graunted to beaſts to liue fiue or ſix ages, & appointed ſo ſhort a time of life for men, who are borne for many great things. We haue no ſmal time, but we loſe much time, and life is long enough, if it be well imploied. But when it paſſeth away through exceſſe and negligence, and no good is done therein, in the end through conſtraint of extreame neceſſitie, although we perceiue it not going, yet we feele it is gone. Moreouer a man may reckon greater ſtore of griefs than pleaſures, that come to him frō his nouriſhment: or to ſpeake better, the pleaſure of eating is but ſmall, but the toile and trouble that men haue in prouiding it, is great. It were hard to repeate the ſhamefull paines and toileſome labors wherewith it filleth vs. Many a mans The ſoule of gluttons com-Pared to a milſtone.ſoule (ſaith Solon) is ouerwhelmed, and as it were clothed with feare, leaſt it ſhould ſtand in need within the bodie, as it were in a mill, and turning alwaies about like a milſtone,

it ſeeketh after nouriſhment. Heereupon it remaineth void and deſtitute of feeling, and deſire of all honeſt things, and attendeth onely to the inſatiable luſtes of the fleſh, which is neuer contented, bicauſe need and neceſſitie The cuſtome of the Egyptians.are alwaies ioined with deſire of ſuperfluitie. The ancient Egyptians vſed this cuſtome to cleaue in ſunder the bodie of a dead man, to ſhewe it to the ſunne, and to caſt the guts and intrailes into the riuer, and being thus clenſed, to imbaulme the reſt. And in very deede thoſe inward parts are the pollution and defiling of our fleſh, and are properly the veric Hell of our bodies. But, which is worſe, is it not the ſtuffing and filling of the bellie that maketh the mind for the moſt part dull and vncapeable of any ſcience or reaſon, whereby the diuine part of man is oppreſſed and ouerwhelmed through the waight and force of that part, which is mortall? A wiſe ſoule is a cleare brightnes, ſaid Heraclitus. O how hard a matter is it (ſaith Cato) to preach to the bellie, which hath no eares, and which will take no deniall, howſoeuer the caſe ſtandeth: And as when we behold the ſunne through thicke clouds and vndigeſted vapours, we ſee it not cleare, but with a pale and wanniſh light, and as it were plunged in the bottome of a cloud: ſo through a troubled and defiled bodie, heauily loaden with food & ſtrang meates, the brightnes and clearnes of the ſoule muſt needes become pale, troubled, and dimmed, not hauing ſuch forceable light, as to be able thereby to pearce through vnto the contemplation of thoſe things that are great, heauenlie, ſubtil, exquiſite, and hard to diſcerne. I thought in my hart (ſaith the wiſe man) to withdrawe my fleſh from wine, that I might bend my mind to wiſedome, and eſchew follie, vntill Prouerb. 31. 4. 5.I knew what was profitable for the children of men. It is not for kings, it is not for kings to drinke wine, nor for princes ſtrong drinke: leaſt he drinke and forget the decree, and change the iudgement of all the children of affliction. Prou. 23. 29. 
                           •
                        0.To whom is woe? To whom is ſorow? To whom is ſtrife? To whom is murmuring? To whom are wounds without cauſe? And to whome is the rednes of the eies?

Euen to them that tarie long at the wine: to them that go and ſeeke mixt wine, which in the beginning is pleaſant, but in the end pricketh like a ſerpent, and poiſoneth like a Cockatrice. And in another place, the wiſe man ſpeaking of gluttonie, faith: that it drieth the bones, and that more die by it than by the ſword. We ſee that beaſts fatted vp languiſh through ſloth and idlenes: neither do beaſts faint through labor onely, but alſo by reaſon of the maſſe and heauie weight of their owne bodies. Furthermore, the vice of gluttonie and drunkennes is neuer alone, but draweth with it a thouſand other exceſſiue and diſſolute faſhions. For (as Plato ſaith) it ſtirreth vp luſt, griefe, anger, and loue in extremitie, and extinguiſheth memorie, opinion, and vnderſtanding. Brieflye, it maketh a man twiſe a childe. And in another place, the ſame Philoſopher ſaith, that gluttonie fatteth the bodye, maketh the minde dull and vnapt, and which is worſe, vndermineth reaſon. Wine hath as much force as fire. For as ſoone as it hath ouertaken any, it diſpatcheth him. And as the North or Southwind tormenteth the Lybian ſea, ſo, and much more doth wine vexe a man. For it diſcloſeth the ſecrets of the ſoule, & troubleth the whole mind. A drunken gouernor and ruler of any thing whatſoeuer, bringeth all to ruine & ouerthrow, whether it be a ſhip, or a wagon, or an armie, or any other thing committed to his keping. We ſee by the goodly ſentences of theſe Authors, how many diſcommodities & miſchiefs come as wel to the body as to the ſoule, by this exceſſiue ſuperfluitie and curioſitie of nouriſhment, whether it be in drinking or eating. We ſee alſo that from this ſelf ſame ſpringhead proceed thoſe vnmeaſurable and looſe behauiours in all kind of delights, in carding and dicing, in dauncing, masking and mumming, in loue of maidens and adultery with wiues, the filthines whereof is ſo ſhameful, and diſcouereth it ſelf ſo much, that I ſhall not greatly need to looſe time in reproouing thereof. For it is moſt certaine, that all ſuch inuentions are meerely heatheniſh, or rather diueliſh, when men commit ſuch reprobate actions with publike

                     Againſt masks & mummeries. libertie and licence. Eſpecially we haue to note this well that concerneth masks and mummeries, ſo common amongſt vs, and the cauſe of infinite offences, that foraſmuch as the face was appointed and ordeined of God to be ſeen openly, and the mouth to ſpeake, we deſtroy the ordinance of God, as much as lieth in vs, and become contrary vnto him, when we take vnto vs a falſe face, and depriue our ſelues of ſpeech. It may be ſayd, that manie thinke no harme when they doe theſe things. But that which of it ſelf is euil, cannot be excuſed, and no faſhion of liuing taken vp and practiſed through the onely motion of our ſenſualitie (ſuch are theſe delights & pleaſures) can be maintained, neither hath it any good and lawfull defence. Now let vs conſider ſome examples of thoſe pernitious effects which proceed from this Epicurian vice of intemperance. Eſau fold his birth right through a gluttonous The Iſraelites.deſire. The ſelf ſame cauſe mooued the Iſraelites to murmure many times againſt God. The drunkenneſſe of Lot.
                     Lot cauſed him to commit inceſtwith his daughters. Alexander 
                     Alexander.the great darkned the glory of his valiant acts with this vice. For being ouertaken with wine, he ſlew Clitus one of the valianteſt captains he had, to whom he was beholding for his own life. Afterward, when he was come to himſelf, he would oftentimes haue murdered himſelf, and Dionyſius.wept three days togither without meat and drink. Dionyſius the yonger, was ſomtime more than nine dayes togither drunken: and in the ende he loſt his eſtate. Cyrillus ſonne in his drunkennes wickedly ſlew that holy man his father, and his mother alſo great with child. He hurt his two ſiſters, and defloured one of them. Ought not this to cauſe the haire of our head to ſtand vpright, as often as any occaſion is offred vnto vs, whereby we might fall into Lucullus.ſuch inconueniences? Amongſt the Romanes Lucullus, a man of great dignitie, and commended of Hiſtoriographers for many braue exploits of warre which he did in Armenia, and for his bountie, iuſtice, and clemencie, is yet greatly blamed, becauſe towards the end of his dais, omitting all intermedling with the gouernment of publike affaires,

he gaue himſelf to all kind of exceſſiue ſumptuouſnes, & ſuperfluous waſting of that great ſubſtance which he had. Whereof this only teſtimonie recited by Plutarke, ſhall ſerue for ſufficient proofe. Cicero and Pompey meeting him one day in the citie, told him that they would ſup with him on this conditiō, that he ſhould prepare nothing for them but his owne ordinarie diet. At the leaſt wiſe (quoth he vnto them) giue me leaue to bid my Steward make ready ſupper in my hall of Apollo: and by that he beguiled them. For his ſeruants vnderſtood therby what coſt he would haue beſtowed thereupon: in ſo much that a ſupper of fiftie thouſand drachmes of ſiluer, which amount to fiue thouſand crownes, was prepared for them. This was ſo much the more wonderfull, bicauſe ſo great and ſumptuous a feaſt was made ready in ſo ſhort a time. But this was his ordinarie diet which he cauſed manie times to be prepared for himſelfe alone. And as his men asked him on a day who ſhould dine with him, ſeeing he commanded them to make readie ſuch a great feaſt; Lucullus (quoth he) ſhall dine with Lucullus. This ſuperfluous The ſumptuouſnes of a Franciſcan Frier.pompe & magnificence, wil not be thought verie ſtrange, if we compare it with that which not long ſince a ſimple Franciſcan frier called Peter de Ruere made, after he had attained to the dignitie of a Cardinal through fauour of the Pope his kinſman. For within the ſpace of two yeeres which he liued in Rome, he conſumed in feaſts and banquets the ſumme of two hundred thouſand crownes, beſides Philoxenus.his debts, which came to no leſſe ſumme. Philoxenus the Poet wiſhed that he had a necke like a Crane, to the end he might enioy greater pleaſure in ſwalowing downe wine and meat: ſaying, that then he ſhould longer feele the taſt thereof. We read of the emperor 
                        Ʋitellius Spinter, 
                     Vitellius.that he was ſo much giuen to ſuperfluitie and exceſſe, that at one ſupper he was ſerued with two thouſand ſeuerall kinds of fiſhes, and with ſeuen thouſand flying foules. But within a very litle while after he changed his eſtate, being executed publikely at Rome at the purſuite of Veſpaſianus, who was choſen emperor in his place. In our time Muleaſſes 
                     Muleaſſes.
                     
king of Thunes, was ſo drowned in pleaſure and delight, that after he was baniſhed from his kingdom bicauſe of his whoredom, in his returne out of Almaign, being without hope that the emperor Charles the fift would helpe him at all, he ſpent one hundred crownes vpon a pecock dreſſed for him, as Paulus Iouius rehearſeth: and that he might take the greater delight in muſike, he couered his eyes. But the iudgement of God was ſuch vpon him, that his owne children made him blind with a bar of hote iron. Concerning exāples of the miſerie that followeth & accompanieth riot & delight in playing, dancing, & mumming, we ſee daily that a thouſand quarrels, blaſphemies, loſſe of goods & whoredoms proceed frō thence. And oftentimes God ſuffreth the puniſhment therof to be notorious, euen by vnlooked for & ſtrange means: as not long ſince it hapned to Lewes Archb. of Magdeburg, who dancing Lewes Archbiſhop.with gentlewomē vntil midnight, fell down ſo fiercely vpon the ground, that he brake his neck with one of the women which he led. Charles the 6. being clothed like a 
                        Charles 6.wild mā with certain of his familiar friends, & dancing by torchlight, was alſo in great peril of burning, if a gētlewoman had not caſt her cloke vpō his ſhoulders. And I think it wil not be from the matter, if we ſay that it is a ſhameful thing to ſuffer amongſt vs, or to looſe time that ought to be ſo precious vnto vs, in beholding & in hearing plaiers, Againſt plaiers.actors of Interludes and Comedies, who are as pernitious a plague in a common wealth as can be imagined. For nothing marreth more the behauior, ſimplicitie and natural goodnes of any people than this, bicauſe they ſoone receiue into their ſoules a liuely impreſſion of that diſſolutenes and villanie which they ſee and heare, when it is ioyned with words, accents, geſtures, motions & actions, wherewith players and iuglers, know how to inrich by all kind of artificiall ſleights, the filthieſt and moſt diſhoneſt matters, which commonly they make choice of. And to ſpeake freely in few wordes, we may truely ſay, that the Theater of players is a ſchoole of all vnchaſtnes, vncleannes, whoredom, craft, ſubtletie and wickednes. Now let

vs ſpeake of thoſe that propound (as we ſaid) vnto themſelves Againſt the curioſitie of ſuper fluous expences.the vainglory of outward ſhew among the beſt, and men of great calling, through friuolous, vnprofitable and ſuperfluous expences, as in ſumptuous and coſtly apparel, precious and rich moueables, goodly furniture and trapping of horſes, great traine of ſeruing men, dogs, birds, & other vanities, gifts and preſents ſent to ſuch as are vnwoorthie, thereby to obtaine the good will of them that are moſt wicked in authoritie, to the end to prepare a way vnto high callings, and to preferments vnto offices. Beſides the waſting of their goods hereupon to their ſhame and confuſion, which they ſhould imploy vpon charitable works, they ſpend many times other mens goods, euen the ſubſtance of the poore, which they craftily get by vnlawfull meanes. This is that which at length (as Crates 
                     The beginning of ciuil warres.the Philoſopher ſaid very well) ſtirreth vp ciuill warres, ſeditions, and tyrannies within cities, to the end that ſuch voluptuous men, and ambitious of vaine glorie, fiſhing in a troubled water, may haue wherewith to maintaine their fooliſh expences, and ſo come to the ende of their platformes. Heerof we haue many examples in the ciuil wars amongſt the Romanes, as namely vnder Cinna, Carbo, Marius, and Sylla. Likewiſe in the conſpiracie of Catiline & his complices, who being of the chiefe families in Rome, and perceiuing themſelues to be brought to the eſtate of bankrupts, as we commonly ſay, ſought by all meanes to proſecute their firſt deliberation, which was alwaies to ſeeme great and mightie. Thus dealt Caeſar in procuring to his countrey that ciuill warre, which he made againſt Pompey, after he had indebted himſelfe in ſeuen hundred and fiftie thouſand crownes, to get the fauor and good liking How Heraclitus diſſwaded ſuperfluitie.of the people. This is that which Heraclitus meant to teach his countreymen, when, after a ſedition appeaſed and quieted, being asked what waie were beſt to be taken, that the like ſhould not fall out againe: he went vp into that place from whence orations were made to the people, & there in ſteed of ſpeaking, began to eate a morſell of browne bread, and to drinke a glaſſe of water.

Which being done, he came downe againe, and ſpake neuer a word. Heerby he would ſignifie, that vntill daintines of fare were baniſhed the citie, and immoderate expences cut off, and ſobrietie and modeſty brought in their place, they ſhould neuer be without ſedition. If this counſell were euer requiſite in a Monarchie, it is certainly moſt neceſſarie at this preſent for ours, wherein all kind of ſuperſluitie, riot, and weltring in pleaſures, curioſitie in apparell, tapiſtrie, and pictures, veſſels, perfumes, and painting of faces, aboundeth in greater meaſure than heertofore it did amongſt the Perſians, which was the cauſe of their finall ſubuerſion, and of Alexanders greatnes, who ſubdued them. That which for the ſpace of fiue hundred yeeres and more, maintained the Lacedemonian eſtate, being the chiefeſt in Grecia for glory and goodnes of gouernment, Lycurgus baniſhed all ſtrange wares from Lacedemonia.was the cutting off and aboliſhing of all ſuperfluitie in diet, apparel, moueables, and of all ſtrang wares, which Lycurgus baniſhed. Whereby alſo forraine merchants (the cauſe of corruption) baniſhed themſelues, as they that ſeeke not after others but for gaine, by ſelling their nouelties very deere vnto them. Neither did the Romane Commonwealth floriſh more at any time, than when thoſe men that caried about them perfumes and ſweeteſmels, and thoſe women that were found ſwilling like drunkards, were corrected with the ſame puniſhment. This cauſed Cato, being the Cenſurer of the election of Why Cato would not chuſe Publius General of the warre.two captaines, that one of them might be ſent as General of the Pannonian warre, to ſay with a loud voice, that he would diſmiſſe Publius his Allie, bicauſe he neuer ſaw him returne wounded from the war, but had ſeene him walke vp and downe the citie of Rome perfumed. What would he haue ſaid of our Courtiers, ſo finely curled, ruft, and perfumed? The Kings and Magiſtrats of thoſe ſo happie times, were the principall obſeruers of their owne lawes and edicts, reforming themſelues before all others, and liuing ſo auſterely, that their example conſtrained their ſubiects more to follow them, than all the puniſhments which they could haue deuiſed to propound vnto them.

We haue a notable teſtimonie heereof in Agis king of Agis.Sparta, who in his returne from the warre wherein he had ouercome the Athenians, being deſirous to ſup priuately with his wife, ſent into the kitchen that was appointed for his band and company (for they liued all in common, being ſeuered into quarters) to haue his portion. But this was denied him, and the next morning for this fact he was fined by the Ephories, who were ioined in ſoueraigne authoritie with the kings, for the maintenance of lawes and of iuſtice: in which ſentence and iudgement of theirs, he willingly reſted. But to returne to our matter, Againſt exceſſe in apparell.how ought we to bluſh for our riot and exceſſe in apparell, which we maintaine with ſuch glorie? What follie is it to imploy the induſtrie of the ſoule, ordained for heauenlie things, in trimming, decking, and gilding hir enimie, hir priſon, and if I may ſo ſpeake, hir poiſon, the bodie? Exceſſe of apparell (ſaith Eraſmus) is an argument of the incontinencie of the ſoule, and rather whetteth the eies of the beholders thereof to wicked deſires, than to any honeſt opinion and conceite. Decke not thy houſe (ſaith Epictetus) with tables and pictures, but paint it with temperance. For the one is to feede the eies vainely, but the other is an eternall ornament, and ſuch a one as can neuer be defaced. If we make account of things of ſmall importance, we deſpiſe thoſe that are of great weight: but in not caring at all for little things, we make our ſelues woorthie of great admiration. That great Monarke Auguſtus 
                     Auguſtus.
                     Caeſar ware no other garments than ſuch as his wife and daughters made, and thoſe very modeſt. Ageſilaus 
                     Ageſilaus.king of Lacedemonia, neuer had but one kind of garment for winter and ſommer. Epaminondas Generall Captaine Epaminondas.of the Thebanes, was contented with one onely gowne al the yeere long. Further, if we looke vnto their ſimplicitie and modeſtie in their traine and followers, truely it was woorthie of reuerence, being without pride, pompe, or ſuperfluous magnificence. Scipio Africanus that great Captaine, going as delegate into Aſia, to compound and end certaine contentions that were betweene the kings of

                     Examples of moderate traine of ſeruing men. that countrey, was accompanied but with two of his friends, and with ſeuen ſlaues. Cato the elder, viſiting the prouinces of his gouernment, tooke but three ſeruants with him. Nowe a daies we ſee, that the leaſt accounted gentleman amongſt vs, thinketh it a cracking of his credite to ride ſo ill furniſhed. And yet the moſt part euen of the greateſt, neuer make any great inquirie how their traine defray their charges. But howſoeuer they may ſay, that they know not of the exceſſe and riot committed vnder their authoritie, and in their ſeruice, yet they are not thereby excuſed. For we ought carefully to beware, that no man abuſe our name. Now, if princes and gouernours A good leſſon for Princes and Magiſtrats to learne.of Commonwealths in ſteede of abridging ſuperfluous charges, take delight therein themſelues, from thence proceedeth the neceſſitie of charging and ouercharging their people with impoſts and ſubſidies to maintaine their exceſſe, and in the end commeth the ouerthrow and ſubuerſion both of the one and the other. But they ought rather both to abſtaine from ſuch vanities themſelues, and alſo to ſeeke by all meanes to baniſh them from their ſubiects: and where their owne example and bodilie puniſhments are not ſufficient for this purpoſe, there ought Commendable impoſts for Princes to lay vpon their ſubiects.they to lay great impoſts vpon all ſuch things as ſerue but to ſpill and corrupt their ſubiects. Such things are all exquiſite dainties and prouocations of appetite, all ſorts of toies and trifles, perfumes, cloth of gold and ſiluer, ſilkes, ſypers, networks, lace, wouen works, & all works of gold, ſiluer, and inammell: all kind of ſuperfluous apparel, with colours of skarlet, crimſon, and ſuch like, the forbidding whereof hitherto hath profited little. For the nature of men is ſuch, that they find nothing more ſweete and acceptable, than that which is ſtraightly forbidden them: ſo that the more ſuperfluities are prohibited, the more they are deſired, eſpecially of fooliſh men, & of ſuch as are vainely brought vp. Therefore it were good to raiſe the price of theſe things ſo high by meanes of impoſts, that none but rich men and daintie folks may vſe them. And ſuch ſubſidies would aſmuch ſet forward the glorie of

God, the profite of the common wealth, the deſire of good men, and reliefe of the poore, as many others now vſed are quite contrary hereunto. Then theſe ſpeeches would no more be ſo common amongſt vs, as now we heare them daily vttered by our Courtiers: We will (ſay they) keep company and be ſeen amongſt the greateſt, & be eſteemed thereafter. If we ſpend not freely, men will make no account of vs. It is our honor and greatnes, and the way to procure glory and renowne to our houſes and families. But I would gladly tell a great number of them, that they would be very much troubled to make anſwer to a law made by Amaſis king of Egypt, and after eſtabliſhed A good law to cut off the occaſions of idle expences.in Athens by Solon, whereby it was enacted, that euery one ſhould yeerely make it appeere vnto his Prouoſt or Bailie how he liued, and if he approoued not his maner & trade of life to be iuſt and reaſonable, he was condemned to die. If in like caſe theſe great ſpenders were to giue an account from whence they receiue wherewith to ſatiſfie their pride and vanities, a man ſhould find that their purchaſe (as we ſay) is far better vnto thē than their rents, & that they commit a thouſand wrongs and deteſtable vices to make ſupply to their lauiſh expences. As for them that haue goods lawfully gotten, yet in ſpending of them waſtfully, they giue ſufficient teſtimonie, that they care & ſeeke for nothing but a vaine and vaniſhing glory, which oftentimes, contrary to their expectation, is waited vpon with great infamie, and with the certaintie of perpetual puniſhment. And in the meane while they neglect that glorie which is eternall and always profitable, which they ſhould enioy by well vſing, and not by miſpending their goods, whereof they are but Gardians and Stewards, & muſt one day yeeld vp an account of them. O witleſſe man (ſayd one of the ancient Sages) what will the remembraunce of vaine glory profite thee, if thou art tormented and vexed where thou art, and praiſed where thou art not. This deſerueth a longer continuance of ſpeech, but we may hereafter diſcourſe thereof more at large. In the meane tyme let vs note an other miſchief, which commonly followeth

                     Pouertie ſo
                        
                           •
                        oweth ſuperfluous expences. ſuperfluitie of expences, namely pouertie, whereinto many rich men fall before they be aware, and are then verie much grieued therewith, and not able to beare it. But the ſhame and reproch thereof is yet greater, becauſe they fell into it by their own folly and miſgouernment. Therefore to the end we walke not in ſuch a ſlipperie way, which in the beginning is large and pleaſant, but yet leadeth the trauailer vnto a down-fall frō which he can neuer eſcape, let vs leaue and forſake the diſcipline and life of Epicures, Our pallate muſt not be more ſenſible than our hart.and beware that our pallate and toong be not more ſenſible than our hart. Let vs lead a life woorthy an honeſt Academie, and beſeeming the doctrine of the ancient Sages, that is, a ſimple, ſober, and modeſt life, adorned with temperance and continence, knowing that diet and decking of the body ought (as Cicero ſaith) to be referred to health and ſtrength, not to pleaſure and delight, and that all outward exceſſe is a witneſſe of the incontinencie of the ſoule. And for the perfection of all that laſting and ineuitable miſerie which belongeth to them that are giuen to voluptuouſnes and ſuperfluitie, let vs heare that ſentence of ſcripture, and feare leaſt we be comprehended vnder the iudgement thereof, Continuall miſerie and 
                     Iames 5. 1. 5.
                     mourning be vpon you that haue liued in pleaſure on the earth, and in wantonneſſe, and haue nouriſhed your harts as in a day of ſlaughter.
                  
               
            
            The ende of the fift daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE SIXT DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Ambition. Chap. 21.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     AS often as I remember the ſtrāge tragedie of the Romane Emperors, ſince the time that the Empire was mounted vp to the verie top & height of hir greatnes vntill hir declination, according to the vncertaintie of all humane things, and how within the ſpace of one hundred yeeres, wherein there were three skore and 73. Emperors of Rome within 100. yeeres.thirteene emperors, onely three of them died of ſickneſſe in their beds, & all the reſt by violent death; I cannot ſufficiently admire (conſidering the inconſtancie and ſhort continuance of ſo great a gouernment, which cannot but be well known to euery one) the folly of men, which commonly affecteth them with an vnmeaſurable deſire to rule, whereby they are all their life time ſlaues to ambition, which is one point of the vice of intemperance whereof we ſpake yeſterday. And thus in my opinion we are to begin our days worke with the deſcription of this pernitious paſſion.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  It is natural in man, the greater his ſtomack is, the more to labor to excel others, which is accompanied with an exceeding deſire to rule: whereupon he is eaſily driuen forward to do vniuſtly, if by wiſdom he be not moderated.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Ambition and contention for honour (ſaith Cicero) are miſerable. And many forget iuſtice, after they are fallen into a deſire of glory, empires and honors. Go to then Achitob, let vs vnderſtand of thee more at large what are the effects of this vice.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Eudoxus a Greeke Philoſopher deſired of the gods that he might behold the ſunne very neere, to

comprehend the forme, greatnes, and beautie therof, and afterwards be burnt of it, as the Poets report, that Phaeton was: ſuch a hardie and bold paſſion to vndertake moſt The force of deſire to enioy any pleaſure.difficult & dangerous things, is the deſire of enioying any pleaſure whatſoeuer. This may chiefly be ſpoken of ambition, which is the moſt vehement, ſtrongeſt, & moſt diſordred paſſiō of all thoſe deſires which ſo ſore trouble mens minds, and fil them with an inſatiable greedines of glory, Two kinds of ambition.and with an vnbrideled deſire to rule. But to handle it more profitably, we will make two kinds of ambition, the one reſpecting priuate mē only that liue vnder the power and gouernment of heads, of eſtates and pollicies: the other ſhal be of the heads themſelues, of monarchs and gouernors of peoples and kingdoms. In the meane time we What ambition is.may thus generally define ambition, calling it an vnreaſonable deſire to enioy honors, eſtates, & great places. Further it is a vice of exceſſe, and contrary to modeſty, which is a part of temperance. For that man (as Aristotle ſaith) is modeſt, who deſireth honor as he ought, and ſo farre foorth as it becommeth him: but he that deſireth it more than he ought, and by vnlawful means, is ambitious, and The effects of ambition.caried away with a perturbation of intemperance. Ambition neuer ſuffreth thoſe that haue once receiued hir as a gueſt, to enioy their preſent eſtate quietly, but maketh them always emptie of goods, and full of hope. It cauſeth them to contemne that, which they haue gotten by great paines and trauel, and which not long before they deſired very earneſtly, by reaſon of their new imaginations and conceites of greater matters, which they continually barke foorth, but neuer haue their minds ſatiſfied & contented. And the more they growe and increaſe in power and authoritie, the rather are they induced and caried headlong by their affections to commit all kind of iniuſtice, and flatter themſelues in furious and frantike actions, that they may come to the end of their infinite platformes, and▪of that proud and tyrannicall glory, which, contrary to all dutie they ſeeke after. Theſe imperfections happen vnto them, bicauſe from the beginning they ſtudied

to hoord, and heape vp externall, mortall and hurtful riches, before they had laid a good foundation of reaſon The cauſe of ambitious deſires.through knowledge and learning, thereby to direct aright their purpoſes and doings, according to comelines and honeſtie. And therfore oftentimes they are deceiued and miſſe of their intent, and euen looſe that which they might haue had, becauſe they ſought ouer boldly to laie hands on that which they could not ſo much as touch. So that we may wel ſay with Timon, that the elements & matter of miſchiefs, are ambition & auarice, which are found both together for the moſt part in the ſame perſons. But to enter into a more particular conſideration of the nature Enuie a note of an ambitious man.of euery ambitious mā, he hath commonly this propertie, to enuie the glory of others: whereby he becommeth odious, and ſtirreth vp againſt himſelf the enuy and ill will of euery one. Moreouer this his ielouſie ouer another mans glory, is ſo much the more hurtfull vnto him in that he might, being ſet in high eſtate and authoritie, vſe the helpe and company of ſuch as are vertuous and noble minded in the execution of great matters, if in ſtead of taking them for his aduerſaries in the purſuite of vertue, he fauored them, and drew them neere vnto himſelf. Whereby we may iudge, that there is none ſo pernitious a plague for the ouerthrow of vertue, as ambition, bicauſe it is neuer without contention for glory and honor, euen againſt the greateſt friends, from whence in the end proceed the greateſt enmities. Cicero alſo ſaith very well, that whatſoeuer hath this qualitie, that many things of the ſame kind cannot be excellent, thereof ariſeth for the moſt part ſuch ſtrife, that it is a very hard matter to obſerue holy ſociety. For equitie is not eaſilie kept inuiolable, when one deſireth to be greater than all the reſt. It commeth through Sedition a fruit of ambition.the fault of ambition (ſaith Aristotle) that many ſeditions ariſe in cities. For the mightier, not the vulgar ſort, contend for honors and promotions. But if, as Plato writeth, there were a Common-wealth of good men, you ſhould ſee as great ſtrife for the auoiding of offices, as now men contend to command and rule. Alſo the honor of a good

man (ſaith Plutark to Traian) conſiſteth not in that eſtate or office which he preſently inioieth, but in his former deſerts; ſo that it is to the office wherunto men giue new honor, as for the perſon he hath but a painful charge. Out of the ſayings of theſe great Philoſophers, we will draw this concluſion, that we muſt labor more to deſerue eſtates & honors, than dare to procure them, and account that thing vnwoorthie and vnbeſeeming vs, which is obtained by vnlawfull meanes. Now, as the ambitious man is intollerable in all his actions, ſo eſpecially he bringeth himſelfe in deriſion and reproch, through this burning deſire of glorie and praiſe, which he looketh that others ſhould yeeld vnto him, and wherein he taketh vnmeaſurable delight. Now, if he perceiueth that he cannot be commended Ambitious men full of ſelfe-praiſe.for his doings that are vnworthie of honor, the thirſt of glorie wherewith he pineth away, compelleth him to borow of himſelfe by his owne commendation againſt all ſeemelines: which is neither more nor leſſe, than if the bodie of a man in time of famine, not receiuing nouriſhment elſewhere, ſhould take of it owne ſubſtance againſt nature. Further, if we ſhould go about heere to make recitall of thoſe notable euils and miſchiefs, which the ambition of ſome particular men hath brought vpon Monarchies, cities, and Commonwealths, and generally vpon all thoſe perſons which were vnder their bloudie raigne, the whole life of one man would not ſuffice to deſcribe them. But to touch this point briefly: we may note in all ancient hiſtories, that the greateſt plagues of flouriſhing Ciuill warres a fruite of ambition.eſtates, and oftentimes their vtter ſubuerſion, came from ciuill warres and diſſentions ſtirred vp by ambitious men, deſirous to command, and to be preferred before others. What did at any time procure the ruine of Grecia, flouriſhing in armes and ſciences, ſo much as the ambition of thoſe men who ſought to bring the publike offices into their owne hands, as Leoſthenes, Demoſthenes, and many others did, who were not afraid to kindle the fire of domeſticall diuiſion, not caring what would be the iſſue of their damnable enterpriſes, ſo they might make waie for their

deuiſed platformes? How many miſchiefs did Alcibiades 
                     Alcibiades.procure to his countrey, being an enimie to peace, and giuen to all kind of nouelties and ſeditions? Who vſed to ſay, that a noble hart ought to labor but for one thing in this world, namely, to be great among his owne countreymen, and to purchaſe fame & renowne among ſtrangers. Which had been well ſpoken, if he had added, by Iuſtice, and 
                        Ʋertue. Was it not from the ſame fountaine of ambition, that ſo hurtfull wars to both thoſe Common-wealths of the Lacedemonians and Athenians, the one being maiſters of the ſea, and the other of the land, tooke their beginning, and thereby were both brought to ruine in the end? Was it not the ſame cauſe of ambition in certaine particular men, which procured the ſpeedie returne of that good king Ageſilaus, to redreſſe the ciuill diſſentions of Grecia, when he was in Aſia continuing thoſe goodlie victories, which he had againſt the Barbarians, for the comfort and libertie of many Grecian cities? O yee Grecians (ſaid that wiſe Prince, being then verie ſorowfull) howe many more miſchiefes doe yee procure to your ſelues, than were procured vnto you by the Barbarians banded togither for your ouerthrow, ſeeing yee are A very fit admonition for France.ſo vnhappie as to ſtaye with your owne hands that good ſpeede, which conducted you to the top of felicitie, and to turne backe into your owne entrailes, thoſe weapons which were ſo well guided againſt your enimies, by calling backe the warre into your owne countrey, from whence it was ſo happily baniſhed? The great and large ſcope of the Romane Empire ouer three partes of the Caeſar & Pompey.world, could not ſatisfie the ambition of Caeſar and Pompey, whileſt the one could abide no equall, and the other no ſuperior: inſomuch, that they omitted and forgat no meanes to increaſe their greatnes, although it were with the charges of the Common-wealth. As we may read among other things of Caeſar, who, to ground & vnderprop his power well for continuance, gaue at one time to Paulus the Conſul, nine hundred thouſand crownes, for feare leſt he ſhould oppoſe himſelfe againſt his enterpriſes: and

to Curio the Tribune he gaue fifteene hundred thouſand crownes, that he ſhould take his part. After the death ofThe Triumuirate. theſe two Princes, that great dominion could no better content the Triumuirate, namely, Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus, who by force of armes ceaſed not to put their countrey to ſword and fire, vntill the ſoueraigne authoritie became reſident in one alone. But why ſhould we ſeeke among the Ancients, or amongſt our neighbours for examples of the pernitious effects of this vice, ſeing we haue ſo many at our owne gates? Who kindled that fire in France, which had taken hold of all the parts thereof, andThe ambition of the Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy. almoſt conſumed it vtterly vnder the raigne of the Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy, who ſtroue togither for the gouernment of the kingdome? Were there not vpon the ſame occaſion more than foure thouſand men ſlaine in one daye within Paris, the moſt of them being men of name, at the inſtigation and procurement of the Duke of Burgundy, who had taken poſſeſſion thereof? But alas the continuall and preſent remembrance of our late and vnſpeakeable miſeries, procured chiefly from the ſame fountaine of ambition, and knowne to women and children, ſtaieth me from ſeeking farther for teſtimonies of this our preſent matter. Yea, I feare greatly, that we ſhall ſhortly ſee (I would to God I might be deceiued) the finall and intire ruine of our Monarchie, which hath flouriſhed as long as euer any did, and continued longer vnuanquiſhed of ſtrangers. For we ſee hir owne children bathing their hands in hir bloud, and ſeeking to plucke outAmbitious men can be no good counſellers to Princes. hir hart and intrailes, and to caſt them as a pray before hir enimies. O how would Princes chaſe farre from them all ambitious perſons, if they were well inſtructed in vertue, and in the knowledge of thoſe euils which ſuch men procure! ſeeing it is impoſſible that any good counſell ſhould proceed from them, but onely ſuch as tendeth to the aduancement of their priuate greatnes. Now if ambition be the mother of ciuill warres, is it not the ſame alſo of all other warres, which are daily bred betweene Kings & Princes, through the deſire of increaſing their bounds,

of ſeazing vpon other mens territories, to the treading downe, oppreſſion, and ruine of their poore ſubiects, and oftentimes of their owne eſtats? Is it not ambition which blindeth men ſo, that they are not content to be chiefe among a million of others ouer whom they command, vnles they be equal or ſuperior to one or two of thoſe whom they know to be greater than themſelues? The deſire of hauing more (ſaith Plutark) is a vice common to PrincesEffects of ambition in great men. and great Lords, which, by reaſon of ambition and deſire to rule, bringeth foorth in them oftentimes an vnſociable, cruell, and beaſtly nature. And as Ennius ſaith, there is no faith or aſſured ſocietie in kingdomes. For they, whoſe greedines neither ſea, nor mountaines, nor inhabitable deſerts can ſtaie, and whoſe inſatiable deſire of hauing, cannot be limited with thoſe bounds, which ſeparate Aſia from Europe, how will they content themſelues with their owne, and not ſeeke to vſurpe that which belongeth to another, eſpecially when their confines and borders touch one another, and are ioined ſo neere togither, that nothing is betweene them? It is impoſſible. And in truth, how ſoeuer they diſſemble, they purpoſely warre one with another, watching continually for meanes to ſurprize and ouerreach each other. But in outward ſhew they vſe theſeThe names of Peace and Warre abuſed much by Princes. two words of Peace and Warre, as a peece of monie, according as it ſhall make beſt for their purpoſe, not for duties ſake, or vpon reaſon and iuſtice, but for their owne profite and aduantage, wickedly diſguiſing in that manner the intermiſſion and ſurceaſing from the execution of their ill will and purpoſe, with the holie name of iuſtice and amitie. Princes therfore muſt not thinke it ſtrange, if ſomtime priuate men (howbeit that doth not excuſe them) find the like dealing profitable vnto them, according as it falleth out for their purpoſe. For in ſo doing, they do but imitate and follow them that are their maiſters in all diſloialtie, treaſon, and infidelitie, thinking that he beſtirreth himſelfe, who leaſt of all obſerueth that which equitie and iuſtice require. This did Dionides the pirat fitly giue Alexander the Great to vnderſtand, when he asked of him why

                     Dionides anſwer to Alexander. he troubled the whole ſea, and robbed euery one. Know (quoth he to him) that thou and I are of one diſpoſition and calling, except in this, that I am called a Pirate for skouring the ſeas with a few men, and thou a prince, bicauſe thou inuadeſt and ſpoileſt euery where with great & mightie armies. But if thou wert Dionides and I Alexander, it may be I ſhould be a better prince than thou a good pirate. With which free ſpeech Alexander was ſo delighted, that in ſtead of a guiltie man brought before him to be puniſhed, as was Dionides, he made him one of his great captains. But to continue our matter, if Right (ſay Ambitious men) may be violated, it is to be violated for a kingdom. O ſpeech ful of all impietie, yea ſuch as wil cauſe thē
                     Examples of the fruits of ambition. to buy the violating of ſo holy a thing very deerly, ſeeing they ſpare not him who calleth himſelf equitie & iuſtice it ſelfe. Further, if (as hiſtories teach vs) ſome haue been ſo wretched & miſerable, as to giue themſelues to the Art of Necromancie, and to contract with the deuill, that they might come to ſoueraigne power and authoritie, what other thing, how ſtrange ſoeuer it be, will not they vndertake that ſuffer themſelues to be wholy caried away with this vice of ambition? It is ambitiō that ſetteth the ſonne againſt the father, and imboldeneth him to ſeeke his deſtruction of whom he holdeth his life. Henry the fift by force depriued his father from the Empire, & cauſed him
                        Fredericus. 3. to die miſerably in priſon. Fredericke the third, after he had raigned thirtie yeeres, was miſerably ſtrangled by Manfroy his baſtard ſonne, whom he had made prince of Tarentum. And after he had committed this Parricide, he poiſoned his brother Conradus, lawfull inheritor to Fredericke, that he might make himſelfe king of Naples. Antoninus & Geta, brothers & ſucceſſors in the Empire to Seuerus their father, could not ſuffer one another to enioy ſo largeAntonius and Geta. Solyman. a Monarchie: for Antoninus ſlew his brother Geta with a dagger, that himſelf might rule alone. Solyman king of the Turkes, grandfather to him that now raigneth, when he heard the loud acclamations and ſhoutes for ioy which all his armie made to Sultan Mustapha his ſonne, returning

out of Perſia, after he had cauſed him to be ſtrangled in his outward chamber, and preſently to be caſt out dead before his whole armie, he made this ſpeech to be publiſhed with a loud voice, that there was but one God in heauen, and one Sultan vpon earth. Within two dayes he put to death Sultan Soba, bicauſe he wept for his brother, and Sultan Mahomet his third ſonne, bicauſe he fled for feare, leauing one onely aliue to auoid the inconueniencie of many Lordes. Theſe are but of the ſmaller fruits of this wild plant of ambition, in reſpects of thoſe that cauſe men to put innocents to death, that themſelues may take ſurer footing to growe vp and encreaſe. And no doubt but for the moſt part, iuſt puniſhment for example to mē, foloweth ſuch an ambitious paſſion, whereof there are infinite examples both in the Greeke and Latin hiſtories. Marcus
                     Marcus Craſſus iuſtly puniſhed for his ambition. 
                     Craſſus a Romane Conſul, and the richeſt man in his time, not contenting himſelf with many goodly victories gotten by him, but burning with an exceſſiue ambition and deſire of new triumphes, and being iealous of Caeſars glory, obtained by his great feats of armes, preſumed at the age of three ſcore yeeres to vndertake the warre agaynſt Arſaces king of the Parthians, contrary to the will of the Senate, feeding himſelfe with vaine hope, which led him to a ſhameful death ioyned with publike loſſe and calamitie. For being ouercome and his armie diſcomfited, he was miſerably ſlaine with twentie thouſand of his men, & tenne thouſand taken priſoners. Marius hauing paſſedMarius. through al the degrees of honor, and been ſix times Conſul, which neuer any Romane before was, not content with all this, would notwithſtanding take vnto himſelfe the charge of the warre againſt Mithridates, which fell to Sylla by lot, euen then when he was weakened with olde age, thinking with himſelfe to get the Conſulſhip the ſeuenth time, and to continue that ſoueraigne authoritie in his owne perſon. But this was the cauſe of his vtter ouerthrow, & of that ſlaughter, wherby all Italy & Spaine were imbrued with bloud by Sylla, & the popular eſtate brought in the end to extreme tyrannie. Spurius Melius a Senator S. Melius.
                     
of Rome, was murthered for his ambition, and his houſe raſed by Cincinnatus the Dictator, becauſe he ſought by meanes of a certain diſtribution of wheate, to make himſelf M. Manlius.king of Rome. Marcus Manlius was alſo vpon the like occaſion throwen downe headlong from the toppe of a rocke. Therefore it appeereth ſufficiently vnto vs how pernitious this vice of ambition is in the ſoules of great men, and worthy of perpetuall blame. And although the matter be not of ſo great waight, when they that follow this vicious paſſion are but meane men and of ſmall account, yet we are to know, that all they depart farre from dutie and honeſtie, who, for the obtaining of glorie and renowne, ſhew themſelues inflamed and deſirous to excel others in all thoſe things which they ought to haue common How and wherin we may ſeeke for honor.together for the mutuall aide and comfort of euery one. Onely we muſt ſeeke, without pride and enuie, after excellencie and preferment in that which is vertuous, and profitable for humain ſocietie, contenting our ſelues notwithſtanding with that, which we are able to performe, & ſo we ſhall neuer be blamed: but iuſtly may we be condemned, if we vndertake that which is aboue our ſtrēgth. Eſpecially let our deſires and paſſions giue place to the Cretes and Hermias.benefit of the Common-wealth, as heretofore Cretes and Hermias, two great men of Magneſia, delt one towards an other. Their citie being beſieged by Mithridates, & themſelues hauing before been at great ſtrife for honor & preheminence, Cretes offered Hermias to let him haue the charge of captaine generall, in the meane time he would depart the citie, or if he had rather depart, that he ſhould leaue that office to him. This offer he made, leſt if both of them ſhould be together, their ielouſie might breed ſome miſchief to their countrey. Hermias ſeeing the honeſt offer of his companion, and knowing him to be more expert in feats of war, willingly ſurrendred the authority of cōmanding vnto him. Now to end our preſent diſcourſe, let vs learne to know their outragious folly, who for imaginarie honors, and thoſe of ſo ſmal continuance, that the wiſe mā compareth them to ſmoke diſperſed of the wind,

deſire nothing more than to run out the race of their days in continuall miſeries and calamities, trauels and cares, depriuing themſelues of all libertie, and which is worſe, pawning their ſoules to an eternall and moſt miſerable thraldome. Thus let vs deteſt ambition, which is an infinite euil and companion of pride, ſo much hated of God and men. Let vs conſider a little that point of Philoſophy which we find written by Traian to Plutarke. I enuie (ſayd Traians letter to Plutarke.this good prince) Cincinnatus, Scipio Africanus, and Marcus Portius, more for their contempt of offices, than for the victories which they haue gotten: bicauſe a conqueror is for the most part in fortunes power, but the contempt and refuſall of offices and honours conſisteth onely in prudence. Let vs marke well the example of the emperor Flauius Veſpaſianus, who being admoniſhed by his friends to beware of one Metius Pompoſianus, (bicauſe Veſpaſianus.it was a common rumor that he ſhould one day be emperor) was ſo farre from procuring him any harme or diſpleaſure, or from hating or enuying him, (as it is the propertie of ambitious men, to feare aboue all things leaſt their eſtate be touched, bicauſe they would raigne alone) that contrarywiſe he made him Conſull the next yeere. Whereat his familiar friends wondring, and diſſwading him from it, My meaning is (quoth he to them) that he ſhould one day remember this good turne. Let vs alſo propound to kings and princes that ſentence of Titus the emperor, who making a feaſt one day with a cheerful countenance to the contentation of euery one, in the ende of the banquet ſtrake himſelfe on the breſt at the table, and fetched a great ſigh withall: Wherupon his fauorites demanding the cauſe why, I cannot (quoth he) keepe my ſelfe from ſighing 
                     A notable ſaying of Titas.
                     and complaining, when I call to mind that this great honor which I haue, dependeth vpon the will of fortune: that my estates and dignities are as it were in ſequestration, and my life as it were laid in pawne & pledged vnto me. Let the ſaying of that good prince Another of Philip king of Macedonia.
                     Philip king of Macedonia be well noted of great men, who on a day falling all along in that place where wreſtling was exerciſed, and beholding the faſhion of his body printed in the duſt, Good Lord (quoth he) how little ground must we
                     
                     haue by nature, and yet we deſire all the habitable world. According to his example let vs all humble our ſelues in the acknowledgement of our imbecillitie and poore humain eſtate, and let vs moderate our vnruly affections through the contempt of thoſe things which worldly men deſire and ſeeke after, iudging them an vnwoorthy reward for vertue. Let euery one of vs content himſelf with his eſtate and calling, ſo that it tendeth to the right end, namely, to his glory that gaue it vnto vs, and to the benefit and profit of his creatures, and let all be done according to that meaſure of graces which he ſhall beſtow vpon vs.
               
            
            
               Of Ʋoluptuouſnes and Lecherie. Chap. 22.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  AMong thoſe faults which men commit, being led with deſire and pleaſure that is naturally in them, we noted a little before, luxuriouſnes and whoredome. But bicauſe we then reſerued it to a more ample handling of Voluptuouſnes, and of a luſtfull life, which is the chiefe worke therof, & whoſe deſire and contentation is in lecherie, to the end we may the better diſcouer that ſugred poiſon, which lurketh vnder theſe deteſtable vices, I am of opinion that we muſt begin to enter into this large field, ſo fruitfull for thornes and thiſtles, which to ſicke eyes many tymes ſeeme faire bloſſoms of ſome goodly fruits: propounding to the ſight of euery one, the nature and effects of the tyrannical power of pleaſure, a mortall enemie to the raigne of Vertue.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Pleaſure (ſaith Plato) is the hooke of all euils, bicauſe men are taken thereby as fiſh by a hooke. For it Pleaſſure the hooke of all euil.quencheth the light of the ſoule, hindreth all good counſell, and through inticements turneth men aſide from the way of vertue, throwing them downe headlong into the gulfe of confuſion, which is luxuriouſnes and whoredom, a moſt wicked & abominable vice aboue all others, wherby all vertue is hurt and offended.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  He that is giuen to pleaſure (ſaith Cicero)
                     
iudgeth all things, not according to reaſon, but according to ſence, eſteeming that beſt, which moſt delighteth him: ſo that he eaſily ſuffreth himſelfe to be kindled with the burning fire of luxuriouſnes, which is hurtfull to euerie age, and extinguiſheth old age. But let vs heare ARAM vpon this matter.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  It is no new opinion, that many iudging according to their ſenſualitie, and being altogither ignorant of the true nature and immortality of the ſoule, haue placed their ſoueraigne Good in pleaſure, and in the enioying of thoſe things which moſt of all tickle the ſences. Ariſtippus 
                     Who they were that placed their chiefe Good in pleaſure.and all the Cyrinaiks, Epicurus, Metrodorus, Chryſippus, and many others, who falſly tooke vnto themſelues the name of Philoſophers, laboured to prooue it by many arguments, cloking their wickednes with graue and loftie words, ſaying: that none could perfectly attaine to pleaſure, except he were vertuous and wiſe. But that which Cicero alleadgeth againſt them, is ſufficient to diſcouer the maske of their impudencie, and to conuince them of lying: namely, that we muſt not ſimply looke to mens ſayings, but conſider whether they agree in their opinions. For how is it poſſible, that he which placeth his chiefe Good in the pleaſure of the bodie, and in neuer-feeling griefe, ſhould make account of, or imbrace vertue, which is an enimie to delights and pleaſures, and commandeth vs rather to ſuffer a cruell and dolorous death, than to ſtart aſide againſt dutie? It is certaine, that he which placeth his chiefe. Good in pleaſure, hath no regard to do any thing but for his priuate profit. Whereby he declareth ſufficiently, that he careth not at all for vertue, eſpecially iuſtice, which commandeth nothing ſo much, as to leaue our owne particular pleaſure and profit, and to imbrace, though with our perill & loſſe, the publike welfare. Moreouer, how could he be couragious, if he thought that grief were the extreameſt and greateſt euill, or temperate, ſuppoſing pleaſure to be perfect felicitie? Beſides, what can be more vnbeſeeming man, appointed for all great and excellent things, than to take that for his chiefe Good,
                     
whereof brute beaſtes haue better part than we, and to leaue the care of that which is diuine and immortal in vs, to attend to that which is mortall and ſubiect to corruption? But theſe erronious and falſe opinions, being contrarie to themſelues, are ſo abſurd and full of blockiſh ignorance, that we neede not here looſe much time in confuting them, and conuincing them of lies. Notwithſtanding, it being ſo common a thing with men, to imbrace pleaſure as the principall end of their actions, bicauſe naturally they deſire pleaſure, and ſhun griefe: it will be eaſie for vs to ſhew, that ignorance only guideth them, when being depriued of the knowledge of that Good which is to be wiſhed for, and is pleaſant and acceptable, they ſeeke after, through an euill choice, the greateſt miſchiefe of all, I meane pleaſure, vnſeparably followed of griefe, which men labour moſt of all to eſchew. Let vs then ſee what What pleaſure is.pleaſure is, and what fruites ſhe bringeth with hir. Voluptuouſnes or pleaſure (ſaith Cicero) is properly called that delight, which mooueth and tickleth our ſences, which ſlideth and ſlippeth away, and for the moſt part leaueth behind it occaſions rather of repentance, than of calling it again to remembrance. For many through wicked and vnneceſſarie pleaſure haue fallen intogreat diſeaſes, receiued great loſſes, and ſuffred many reproches. It alwaies (ſaith Plato) bringeth damage and loſſe to man, ingendring in his mind ſorow, ſottiſhnes, forgetfulnes of prudence, and inſolencie. Whereſoeuer ſweete is (ſaith The fruits of pleaſure.
                     Antipho) there preſently followeth ſowre. For voluptuouſnes neuer goeth alone, but is alwaies accompanied with ſorow and griefe. Pleaſure (ſaith Plutark) reſolueth mens bodies, mollifieng them daily through delights, the continuall vſe of which mortifieth their vigor, and diſſolueth their ſtrength, from whence abundance of diſeaſes proceedeth, ſo that a man may ſee in youth the beginnings of the weakenes of old age. Voluptuouſnes is a cruell beaſt, making men hir ſlaues, and chaining them (as Sophocles ſaith) with diamond chaines. She is ſo much the

more odious, by how much the more ſhe hideth hir venom, putting vpon hir the garment of good liking, betraying vertue, and killing a man euen when ſhe flattereth him. When pleaſures come (ſaith Eraſmus) they flatter vs with a diſguiſed viſage, and when they depart, they leaue vs full of ſorow and ſadnes. Which Xenophon very wittily The ſundry profers which Vice and Vertue made to Hercules.deuiſed vnder the name of Hercules, ſaying: that as he went one day into the fields, in a certaine threefold highway he met Vertue and Vice, both of them being in the ſhape and apparell of women. Vice being clothed in a ſtately, delicate, gorgeous and laſciuious gowne, with a ſmiling, painted, and coloured countenance, which did woonderfull allure by reaſon of the ſweetnes and flouriſhing beautie that ſeemed to be in it, offred her ſelfe ſuddenly vnto the ſaid Hercules, ſaying: that if he would follow hir, ſhe would cauſe him to lead his whole life in delight and pleaſure. But Vertue with a ſorowfull, leane, and diſmaied face, and clad with a long and plaine robe, without any decking of hir ſpeech, vſed theſe words: If thou wilt come to me Hercules, thou ſhalt be indued, not with bodilie ornaments, nor with vading and vaniſhing beautie, but with certaine other riches which are more worth, and indure for euer. For whoſoeuer beleeueth me, forſaking that which ſeemeth faire, & cleauing to thoſe things which outwardly appeere auſtere and hard, he receiueth in the end an eternall felicitie. Let vs vncloth voluptuous men (ſaith Plutark) and conſider their doings. They are drunkards, whoremongers, ſluggiſh in all waightie matters, neglecting the benefit of the Common-wealth, of their parents and of their friends. But of all kind of voluptuouſnes, Lecherie is moſt defiled, filthy, vile, and pernitious, whereof eſpecially we are now to diſcourſe, being What whoredome is.properly called of the Philoſophers a furious paſſion, which corrupteth the ſence of man, and a burning fire that conſumeth him. All vnmeaſurable pleaſure, which men take by their fiue ſences, is vile and diſhoneſt: but the Grecians after a ſpeciall manner called thoſe men incontinent and immoderate, who exceeded in taſting and

touching. And Hippocrates ſaid, that he ſuppoſed copulation to be a part of that foule diſeaſe, which we call the Epilepſie The effects of immoderate copulation.or falling ſicknes. And truly there is nothing more certaine, than that immoderate vſe of the venereous act ſpoileth beautie, defileth the bodie, drieth it vp, and cauſeth it to ſtinke, maketh the face pale, wanne or yellow, weakneth the members and ioints, ingendreth Sciaticke goutes, collick paſſions, griefes of the ſtomacke, giddines of the head, or dimnes of ſight, the leproſie and pocks. It Oſey. 4. 11.ſhortneth life, taketh away the vnderſtanding, darkeneth the memorie, and as the Prophet Oſey ſaith, taketh away the hart. Moreouer, how odious all whoredome ought to be vnto vs, ſo that it be not ſo much as once named amongſt vs, the onely curſe that is laid vpon it of God, ought ſufficiently to perſuade vs, ſeeing thereby he condemneth it both with temporall and with eternall death. But we haue beſides, many goodlie ſentences and notable examples of Ethnicks and Pagans, and namely of the iuſt puniſhment, which for the moſt part followed this deteſtable vice hard at the heeles, and which ought to ſtir vs vp to hate it, and to flie from it with all our might, eſpecially when adulterie is ioined therwith, which is when The effects and end of concupiſcence.the ſacred knot of mariage is violated and broken. Concupiſcence (ſaith Ariſtotle) changeth mens bodies, and breedeth madnes in their ſoules. The end thereof is luxuriouſnes, from whence proceede a thouſand wrongs, violences, inceſts, murders, poiſonings, and innumerable other impieties. Is it not then a ſigne of great looſenes and baſenes of mind, for a man to ſubiect himſelfe to carnall concupiſcences, which are diſordered deſires contrarie to reaſon, and whoſe office and practiſe is to chuſe euill for good? Let vs heere giue eare to Socrates diſputation with Enthydemus, being very fit for our preſent matter. Socrates diſputation againſt incontinencie.Tell me O Euthydemus, doeſt thou thinke that libertie is a good, great, and profitable poſſeſſion, whether it belongeth either to a man, or to a citie? Verie great. Therefore whoſoeuer ſerueth the pleaſures and vnbrideled deſires of the bodie, ſo that for loue of them he cannot execute

that which he knoweth to be very good, Doeſt thou thinke that he is free? No. It may be thou iudgeſt it a thing woorthy a free man to be able to put in practiſe whatſoeuer he taketh to be good, and contrarywiſe, to be hindred from ſo doing, to be ſeruile and ſlauiſh. So it is. Thou beleeueſt then that no incontinent men are free. Yea truly, and that iuſtly. Thinkeſt thou that incontinent men are hindred frō doing that which is honeſt, or compelled to commit vicious things? I thinke they are as much compelled to do the one, as hindered from practiſing the other. But what maiſters doeſt thou thinke them to be, who forbid well doing, and conſtraine men to embrace euill? In good truth, very wicked. And doeſt thou not thinke that bondage of all others moſt troubleſome, when one ſerueth moſt wicked and naughtie maiſters? Yea. Then incontinent men are of all others moſt miſerable, of what eſtate or condition ſoeuer they be. Beſides, he that neuer thinketh vpon goodnes, but ſeeketh by all means to fulfill his vntamed deſires of pleaſure and luſt, hath no more vſe of reaſon, than beaſts haue. This wiſe Philoſopher teacheth vs ſufficiently how hurtfull and pernitious a thing it is to ſuffer the deſires of the fleſh to raigne in vs, conſidering that they draw vs vehemently to the practiſe of them, to our owne deſtruction: eſpecially The fruits of whoredom.whoredom, which bringeth with it all kind of miſchiefe, diſſolueth and weakneth the body, and offendeth all the vertues and goods of the ſoule. Through hir it commeth that men abaſe themſelues ſo lowe, as to ſubmit both their bodies and ſoules to the inconſtant will and vnrulie deſire of a fooliſh woman. For we ſee ſome men ſo bewitched with a harlot, that if neede be, and ſhe commaund it, they will hazard their honour and credit, and oftentimes make themſelues an example to a whole country vpon an open ſcaffold. And then they labor to couer their folly with this goodly name of Loue, which is better termed of Euripides by the name of Furie & madnes in men. For true & good loue, which is the fountain of friēdſhip, is alwais grounded vpō vertue, & tendeth

to that ende: but this ſlipperie and looſe loue, is a deſire founded vpon the opinion of a Good, which in deede is a moſt pernitious euil. And if adulterie follow vp̄ it (which The miſerable effects of Adulterie.according to Aristotle is a curious inquirie after another mans loue) the vice is two fold more deteſtable and wicked, bicauſe that he which committeth it, ſeeketh againſt all dutie of nature to take away another mans honor and reputatiō, ſpoileth him of that which he accounteth moſt precious, namely, of the loue and friendſhip of his wife, breaketh the peace of a houſe, cauſeth the wife to looſe hir ſoule, who otherwiſe peraduenture would not haue yeelded, if he had not corrupted hir. In a word, it is the cauſe of infinite miſeries & offences which we daily ſee come to paſſe. Amongthe Auncients this vice was ſo odious, that it was narowly ſought out, and chaſticed with very grieuous puniſhments. In ſo much that Iulius Caeſar cauſed one of his captains to be beheaded, bicauſe he had diſhonoured the miſtreſſe of the houſe where he lodged, not ſtaying vntill one accuſed him, and without any complaint made vnto him by hir husband. There was a law among Zaleucus law againſt adulterie.the Locrians, eſtabliſhed by Zaleucus, which condemned all thoſe that were conuicted of this vice of adulterie, to haue their eyes puld out. This lawe was afterward ſo well kept, that his ſonne being taken with the fact, and all the people intreating for him, Zaleucus would neuer ſuffer the puniſhment to be any thing leſſened. And yet to ſatiſfie their importunitie in ſome ſort, he cauſed one of his own, and another of his ſonnes eyes to be plucked out, chuſing rather to beare halfe the puniſhment allotted for the offence, than that it ſhould remaine vnpuniſhed, & the law The law of lulia againſt adulterers.violated. Augustus Caeſar made the law Iulia, intituled of Adulteries, wherein is declared, how proceſſe ought to proceed againſt thoſe that are attainted of it, and how ſuch as are conuicted thereof are to be puniſhed, euen to permit the father to kill his daughter being taken in the fact with the adulterer. After that Fabius Fabritius was ſlain by his wife through trecherie, to the ende that ſhe might haue greater libertie to commit adulterie, one of his yonger

ſons whē he came to age ſlew his mother with the adulterer, & was abſolued therof by the Senate. We read alſo The puniſhment of adulterers vſed among the Egyptians.that the leſt puniſhment vſed by the Egyptians againſt adulterers, was to cut off the womās noſe, & the priuy parts of the man. Briefly, we ſhall find, that in all nations where honor and ciuilitie is neuer ſo little regarded, this vice of adulterie hath been grieuouſly puniſhed, and greatly hated of all noble minds. Herein the example of Alexander 
                     Alexander hated adulterie.is woorthy to be remembred, who, when a woman was brought vnto him one euening, demanded of hir why ſhe came ſo late: to whom ſhe anſwered, that ſhe ſtayed vntill hir husband was gone to bed. Which he no ſooner heard, but he ſent hir away, being very angry with his men, bicauſe they had almoſt cauſed him to commit adultery. He would not ſo much as touch his friends Concubine, although he loued hir: and he tooke on wonderfully with Caſſander, bicauſe he would by force kiſſe a minſtrels maid. So farre off was he from beyng willing to ſuffer his courtiers to force any wiues or daughters of his ſubiects, or to induce them to ſuborne any for him. But contrary wiſe, we ſee now adayes, that they are moſt eſteemed of great Anthonie duke of Venice.men whoſe skill is greateſt in corrupting of women. Antonius Venereus duke of Venice may be vnto them an example worthy to be folowed, who cauſed his owne ſonne to die in priſon, bicauſe he had rauiſhed a maid. But let vs Teſtimonies of Gods wrath againſt whoredome.note a litle the eye witneſſes of Gods wrath, who neuer, or very ſeldome ſuffreth whoredome to go without preſent payment meete for ſuch peruerſe wickednes. The reading of holy Scriptures doth furniſh vs with notable examples, Numb. 25. 9. This ſinne of Dauid was in numbring the people, as appeereth, 2. Sam. 24. 1.in the death of foure and twentie thouſands Iſraelites for whoredome: in the puniſhment of the ſame ſinne committed by Dauid, with the death of more than threeſcore thouſand men in Iſrael: in the puniſhment of the ſame ſinne in Salomon vpon his ſonne, who was depriued of ten 1. King▪ 12.parts of his kingdome: in the ouerthrow of the Cities of Gen. 19.Sodomah and Gomorrah, and in many other places. Whē Sathan ſeeketh for a readie way to cauſe men to fall, he commonly vſeth whoredom. When Balaam taught Balaac
                     
that ſubtill practiſe to cauſe the Iſraelites to commit idolatrie, it was by meanes of the faire women of his countrey, thereby to cauſe them to fall into the wrath and indignation of God. Concerning hiſtories written by men, the number of examples of Gods wrath vpon whoremongers is infinite, of which we will heere alleadge ſome, making mention of violent puniſhments, and of the depriuation and ſubuerſion of flouriſhing eſtates, which The danger that dependeth vpon the looſenes of a Prince.haue proceeded from the ſame cauſe of whoredome. And truly it is more dangerous for a Prince in regard of his eſtate, than any other vice, yea than crueltie it ſelfe. For crueltie maketh men fearefull, and ſtriketh a terror in the ſubiects, but whoredome draweth with it hatred and contempt of the Prince: bicauſe euery one iudgeth an effeminate man vnwoorthie to command a whole people. Tarquinius.
                     Tarquinius king of Rome, for his loftines ſurnamed the proud, was depriued of his kingdome, bicauſe of the violence which one of his ſonnes offered to Lucretia, a Romane Ladie. And although he gathered togither great forces, thinking thereby to reenter into his eſtate, yet he could neuer attaine therunto. Since which time the name of a king hath beene ſo odious among the Romanes, that they would neuer ſuffer any to beare that title amongſt them, but from that time forward, changed the gouernment of a Monarchie into a Democraty or popular eſtate, aboliſhing all lawes appertaining to a king. In place of which they ſent to the Athenians for Solons lawes, which afterward were obſerued by the Romanes, and called the Appius Claudius.lawes of the twelue Tables. Appius Claudius, one of thoſe ten that had all authoritie in the gouernment of the Romane eſtate, bicauſe he would haue rauiſhed Virginia, daughter to Virginius a Citizen of Rome, who ſlew hir to ſaue hir honor, was baniſhed with all his companions in that office, and their manner of gouernment changed into the authoritie of Conſuls. What was like to haue befallen Caeſar.that mightie Caeſar, after he had conquered France, Almaigne, England, Spaine, Italy, and Pompey himſelfe, but a ſhamefull death, by reaſon of a fooliſh loue, which

cauſed him to go into Alexandria in diſguiſed apparell to enioy Cleopatra, where an Eunuch and a child had almoſt ſlaine him, if he had not caſt himſelfe from a high tower into the ſea, and ſo ſaued himſelfe by ſwimming to his Teundezillus.campe vnder the gallies of his enimies? Teundezillus king of Spaine was, for committing violent adulterie with a ladie of a noble houſe, depriued both of life and kingdom. Caracalla.
                     Marcus Antonius Caracalla Emperour, being caried away with intemperate luſt, maried his mother in law: and within a while after he loſt both his empire and life. Childericus 
                     Childericus.the firſt of that name, king of France, after he had raigned a long time, was driuen out of his kingdome for Iohn Earle of Arminack.his whoredome. Iohn, Countie of Arminack, maried one of his owne ſiſters, and being therefore excommunicated of the Church, was depriued of his eſtate and life by the Emperor Charlemaigne. Rodoaldus king of Lumbardy being Rodoaldus.taken in adultery, was ſlain by the womans husband, Roderigo.whome he abuſed. Roderigo king of Spaine, was depriued of his kingdome and life by the Sarraſins, who were called in by an earle named Iulian, that he might be auenged of Galeatius Duke of Millan.his king, who had forced his daughter. Galeatius Maria Duke of Millan being at maſſe, was ſlaine by a Citizen, who ſtroke him into the ſtomack with a dagger, faining that he would haue ſpoken with him. The chiefe cauſe heerof was for a ſuſpition which he had conceiued, that this Prince intertained his wife. In the time of Philip the Two brothers flaied aliue.faire, king of France, two knights that were brothers, named d'Aunoy, were flaied aliue for their whoredomes committed with a Queene of Nauarre, and with the Counteſſe of March, daughter to the Countie of Burgundie, which twaine alſo were condemned to perpetuall priſon. Not long ſince, Peter Lewes Duke of Placentia, was murdred Peter Lewes.for his inceſts, and incredible whoredoms. Among other things, it is written of him, that he forced Coſmes Chers biſhop of Valentia, whome he cauſed to be held by his men, and after poiſoned him, leaſt he ſhould haue accuſed him to the Emperour. Alſo not long ago, the cities Almendine and Delmedin.of Almendine & Delmedine, were cut off from the kingdome

of Fez, and brought vnder obedience to the Portingales, bicauſe a yoong woman was taken away by force from hir husband, by the Gouernor of them, who was afterwards Abuſahid.ſlaine. Abuſahid alſo king of Fez, was murdered with ſixe of his children by his Secretarie, whoſe wife he had abuſed. This is ſet downe by Leon in the deſcription of Africke. In our time, and euen amongſt vs, too many ſuch examples of the pernitious fruits of whoredom haue fallen out. Neuertheles, it beareth ſuch ſway in this deſolate The whoredom of Frenchmen.France, that they are accounted the gallanteſt men, who are the greateſt pillers of whoredome. Yea, the greater ſort, that ought to be paterns of chaſtitie to others, are bold in the practiſe thereof, thinking to couer their ſhame, to cloke and diſguiſe their whoredome with the maske of vertue, accounting it a point of glorie and honor to be the chiefeſt and moſt expert in that ſchoole. But let vs know that this viſard is but to make them altogither without excuſe before him, from whom nothing can be hidden, and who abhorreth all maliciouſnes and ſhameles impudencie, wherwith whoremongers ſet forth their face. And ſeeing that he, whoſe mercie is endles, ſupplieth the want and infirmitie of his creatures, this vice of whoredome is without all colour of excuſe before him, bicauſe he hath giuen vs a holie and honourable remedie againſt it, which is mariage, permitted to euery one, but yet deſpiſed of all whoremongers, to their ruine and eternall confuſion. And if they were not wholly blinded The ſcourges hat France 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     through continuance in vice, the ſcourges of ciuill warre, of hereſie, of famine, and of rebellion, which Fraunce at this day ſuffereth, would be more than enough to vnſeele their eies, that they might acknowledge the wrath of the Almightie, readie to deſtroy them both bodie and ſoule. Therefore let vs that are better inſtructed by our Academie, learne of Socrates, that a wiſe man ought to paſſe by pleaſures as by the Syrens, if he long to attaine to vertue, his moſt happie countrey and dwelling place. And for a Good counſell againſt whoredome.good helpe heerunto, let vs take the counſell of Epictetus, ſaying: When thy ſpirite is drawne with ſome deſire of pleaſure,
                     
                     beware thou tumble not into ſome downefall: and meditate a litle, conſidering diligently, that after thou haſt beene ouercome of pleaſure, there remaineth nothing but repentance, and thy hatred againſt thy ſelfe. Where as if thou abſtaineſt, a ſtedfaſt and aſſured ioy poſſeſſeth thy hart, which wholy driueth away ſorow. Thus let vs endeuor to decke our ſelues with puritie, chaſtitie, and vprightnes, hating in ſuch ſort voluptuouſnes and lecherie (the deere and coſtlie pleaſure whereof paſſeth away as the winde, and leaueth behind it a ſhamefull remembrance) that following the will of our law-maker, we ſhun all diſſolutenes tending that way, whether it be immodeſt garments, vnchaſt geſtures and countenances, or vile and filthie words, which may induce others to euill. Let vs remember in good time what Archelaus, a Greek Philoſopher ſaid to a yoong man clothed with ſuperfluous apparell, that it was all one in what part ſoeuer of his bodie he declared his vnchastnes, and that it was euermore to be condemned. But aboue all things let that diuine ſentence ſound without ceaſing in our eares, that no whoremonger hath any inheritance 
                     1. Cor. 6. 9. Epheſ. 5. 5.
                     in the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt. And if, being naturally giuen to loue pleaſure, and to feare griefe, we would delight our ſoule with a ioy that is both profitable and pleaſant: let vs lift it vp in the meditation of thoſe vnſpeakeable and endles riches, which are promiſed vnto it in that happie immortalitie: and ſo we ſhall weaken and make fruitles that deſire of worldlie pleaſure, which is borne togither with vs.
               
            
            
               Of glorie, praiſe, honor, and of pride. Chap. 23.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  MEn hauing their eies couered with ignorance, vſe commonly to ſay, that he hath a great loftie and noble mind, who aſpireth to honors, eſtats, riches, and other worldlie vanities. The iudgement of ignorant men touching noblenes of mind.Albeit truly, if we narrowly looke vnto the end wherefore they direct their intents and actions that way, we ſhall ſee nothing els in them but a deſire of vaine-glorie & praiſe,

thereby to feede their pride and naturall paſſions, which are ſo pernitious in the ſoule, that if they be not ruled by temperance and mediocritie, and grounded vpon vertue, which is the fountain of honor, they will bring foorth very dangerous effects, cleane contrary to mens deſires.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  They (ſaith Seneca) that would make How we ſhould make choice of a happy life.choice of a happy life, muſt not follow the faſhion & maner of life vſed by the multitude and greateſt part of men, but ſuch a one as is altogither contrary therunto. And this we ſhall do, if we deſpiſe the glory, honor, praiſe and pride of the world, and iudge nothing woorthy to be cared for of vs, but onely vertue, which is able to bring vs to the fulneſſe of true glory, and of euerlaſting felicitie.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  The glory (ſaith Pindarus) that a man taketh to ſee himſelfe in honor and credite, maketh pains to ſeeme pleaſant, and trauell tollerable. It is the propertie of a ſtone (ſaith Cicero) not to haue any feeling of the difference that is betweene praiſe and diſpraiſe: but it belongeth to a wiſe man not to be ſo mooued with all theſe things, as that they ſhould cauſe him to draw backe from duetie. Let vs thā heare AMANA diſcourſe more at large of the matter which is here propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     The common down fall of the paſſions of the ſoule.Moſt certain it is, that commonly nothing affecteth a man more than the coueting of glory, of praiſe and of honor, whereof he is by nature deſirous. But as all the paſſions and diſeaſes of the ſoule are for the moſt part folowed with thoſe inconueniences, which men pretend moſt of all to eſchew, ſo oftentimes they that glaunce at honor, as if that were vertue it ſelfe, leauing behind them the path of that vertue from whence honor ought to proceed, and which is able of it ſelfe to adorne & decke men, fall into the ſame reckoning that Ixion did, who (as the Poets ſay) had to do with a cloud, ſuppoſing it to haue been the goddeſſe luno, whereupon the Centaures were engendred. Euen ſo worldly men embracing vaine-glory onely, which is but a falſe ſhadow of true vertue, all their doings deſerue ſo ſmall commendation, that if they were well waied, they ſhould rather be found worthy of blame

and diſhonor, than of that honour, which they ſo greatly ſeeke and aske after. For this cauſe the ancient Romanes built two Temples ioined together, the one being dedicated The Romanes built two Temples, the one to Vertue, & the other to Honor.to Vertue, and the other to Honor: but yet in ſuch ſort, that no man could enter into that of Honor, except firſt he paſſed through the other of Vertue. But ſeeing the way of vertue is ſo litle frequented at this day, no maruell (as Heſiodus ſaith) if ſo great a heape of wickednes be diſperſed through the world, that all ſhame and honor haue forſaken and abandoned the life of man. Now if an honeſt man preferre the loſſe of his honor before his owne life, to the ende he be none of thoſe that content themſelues with a deceitful Idea and platforme, in ſtead of the thing it ſelf, let him learn aboue all things to know wherin true glory and honor conſiſt, and from whence he may deſerue praiſe: which firſt is in Goodnes and Iuſtice: Secondly, in guiding all humane actions prudently according to duetie, comelines, and honeſtie. Theſe are the only meanes to get durable and eternall honour, glory, and praiſe, which always folow vertue as the ſhadow doth the body, hauing this propertie to make men wiſe, iuſt, good and prudent, and to bring them to the beſt, excellenteſt, and moſt diuine habite that can be in men, which is the vprightnes of reaſon and iudgement, and to the perfection (next after God) of the reaſonable nature, which is ſuch a diſpoſition of the ſoule as conſenteth and agreeth with it ſelfe. Therfore that goodnes and excellencie which proceedeth of wiſedome and good inſtruction is the firſt ſtep The firſt ſtep to Honor.to come to honor, bicauſe from that as from a liuely fountain floweth euery vertuous and praiſe-woorthie action, practiſed by a prudent man. For (as Cicero ſaith) no man can be prudent, but he muſt needs be good. Now this is cleane contrary to the common opinion of thoſe that run ſo ſwiftly now adays after honor and reputation, who, being ignorant of euery good cauſe and reaſon, and hauing corrupt and wicked conditions, imagine in their mindes, that ſo long as they do ſome act well liked of great men, Wherin worldlings place honor.and for which they may be noted out by them to be men

of valure, making good penywoorths of their skin, and of their conſcience alſo, whether it be in fight, or in the execution of ſome other commandement of theirs, they ſhal haue cauſe to thinke themſelues worthy of great honour, and to be preferred before other men. For they ſuppoſe that honor ought to be meaſured by that good wil and liking which men conceiue of thē, although they thēſelues be moſt wicked, and not by the triall of the worke whether it be good or euil in it ſelfe. But I wonder at their follie. For ſeeing they haue no goodneſſe in them, how can they iudge what ought to be done or left vndone, according to equitie and iuſtice? And what honor wil they deſerue in all their actions, being guided onely with a deſire of worldly glory, which (as Quintilian ſaith) is the chiefe & principal euil? Do not they alſo propound to themſelues as a recompence of their paine and trauell, aduancement to high eſtates and dignities, that they may the better enioy worldly pleaſures? Whereby they become ſlaues to mortall goods and riches all their life time, and depriue themſelues of that precious libertie of the ſoul, for which a noble hart ought to fight & to ſuffer death. But a good man adorned with goodnes and iuſtice, propoundeth vnto The White at which euerie good man ought to aime.himſelfe a farre other end. For admiring nothing but vertue, he ſeeketh not to be honored but in obeying hir, in following hir ſteps, and in referring all his doings to the infallible rule thereof. He knoweth (as Seneca ſayth) that glory is to be followed, not to be deſired: that it is gotten by ſuch a noble courage as meaſureth al things by conſcience, not doing any thing for oſtentation and vanitie. The price and reward which he expecteth in this life for euery laudable action, is to haue done it: and yet he depriueth not himſelfe of glory, which remayneth immortal vnto him among good men for his iuſt & vertuous deedes, neither careth he at all what the wicked or ignorant ſort think or ſpeake of him. Hauing layd this ground and foundation of all his intents and purpoſes, he looketh not to the moſt beaten way, nor to the preſent ſtate of things, that he might apply himſelfe to the tyme, as

though he feared that he ſhould be left behind, but deſireth rather to abide vnknown in his ſimplicitie, than with the hurt and detriment of his ſoule, to intrude himſelfe among the greateſt. And if he vndertake, or execute any thing, he hath iuſtice and prudence alwaies for his guids: and then neither feare nor danger is able to driue him from his determinate purpoſe, which, how ſoeuer it falleth out, is alwaies no leſſe woorthie of honor and praiſe, than their actions, who do nothing but for worldlie glorie, deſerue blame and diſpraiſe, which they feare moſt of all, and labor to auoid. True it is, that theſe men, who ambitiouſly ſeeke after vaine glorie and greatnes, may ſay vnto me, that things go farre otherwiſe than I ſpeake of, and that their doings, who apply themſelues to the pleaſure and liking of the greater ſort, without ſparing their liues, are as much extolled, as the others that reſpect the vprightnes of cauſes, are ſet light by and contemned. But I anſwer them againe, that it is the dutie of a prudent man, The iudgement of the beſt, not of the moſt, is to be preferred alwaies.rather to feare the iudgement and opinion of a few wiſe men, than of an ignorant multitude. Neither ought he to leaue his conceiued purpoſes grounded vpon reaſon for the praiſe of men. For they that do otherwiſe, declare euidently, that they liue not but for the world, hauing no care of the principall and chiefe end of their being. Bion compared ſuch men very fitly to veſſels with two handles, which are eaſily caried by the eares whetherſoeuer a man will. So theſe men being praiſed and much made of, vndertake all things boldly: yea, the burning heate of glory oftentimes carieth them ſo farre, that they praiſe & commend their owne doings to no purpoſe. Which is ſo vnſeemelie a thing (as Aristotle ſaith) that it is more blamewoorthie than lying, which commonly goeth with it, and is alſo a great argument of an inconſtant mind. But as Plutark ſaith, the more reaſon a man hath gotten by Philoſophie, the more he looſeth of his pride and arrogancie, and they that haue nothing before their eies, whereunto they aſpire, but vertue and dutie onely, vſe the occaſion, time, and ſequele of their affaires, without caring for any

other praiſe than that which proceedeth from the nature, iudgement and conſent of all good men. It is true, that A good man may ſometime praiſe himſelfe.ſometime it is tollerable in good men, yea neceſſarie for the benefit of others, to commend themſelues in ſome ſort, by ſpeaking of themſelues to their aduantage. As if laboring to be beleeued, we rendred a reaſon of our vertue and goodnes by our former effects, that ſo hauing meanes to continue our vertuous actions to the benefit of many, we may, as it were againſt their wils, worke their Themiſtocles did ſo.ſafetie, and compell thoſe men to receiue a good turne, who ſhun all occaſions thereof. This cauſed Themistocles to vſe thoſe ſpeeches in the Councell of the Athenians, whome he perceiued to be wearie of him. O poore men (quoth he to them) why do ye oftentimes receiue benefits of the ſame parties? And another time he vſed theſe words. In rainie and ſtormie weather ye haue recourſe to me, as to the ſhelter of a tree, but when faire weather returneth, ye ſnatch euery one a 
                     And Neſtor.
                     branch, as ye paſſe by. Homer bringeth in Nestor rehearſing his prowes and valiant acts, to incourage Patroclus & the other nine knights to vndertake the combat againſt Hector man to man. Moreouer, exhortation hauing the teſtimonie of works readie at hand, and examples ioined with the pricke of emulation, are liuely, and woonderfully whetteth men on: yea they bring togither with courage and affection, hope of abilitie to attaine to the end of that The effects of pride.thing, which is perceiued not to be impoſſible. But in this caſe, as in euery other action, let vs aboue al eſchew pride, hated of God and men, and the cauſe of the corruption and tranſgreſſion of mans nature. Yea, it cauſeth that worke to become wicked, which of it ſelf is good: ſo that humble ſubmiſſion is better than the proud boaſting of our good deedes, which cauſeth a proud man oftentimes to fall into more deteſtable vices than he was in before. Now in requiring firſt and chieflie thoſe praiſes that proceede of bountie and iuſtice, my meaning is not that we ſhould contemne, but rather ſearch diligently after thoſe that procure vnto vs immortall glorie by noble and couragious acts, prouided alwaies that they paſſe not the

bounds of equitie and iuſtice. For otherwiſe they cannot The works of fortitude muſt be grounded vpon equitie and iuſtice.but falſly be called works of fortitude and generoſitie, as heerafter in our diſcourſes vpon theſe vertues we may vnderſtand more at large. Therefore it is the ielouſie of glorie gotten by vertue, after the examples of our predeceſſors that liued well, which ought to pricke forward euery noble hart, to build for himſelfe an eternall monument through heroicall deedes, when dutie and reaſon inuite vs thereunto. Thus did that good and valiant captaine Mattathias behaue himſelfe, who, denying obedience to the tyrannicall edicts of Antiochus, after he had ſubiected and ſubuerted Ieruſalem, and taking armes with his fiue ſonnes, went into the fields out of a poore village where he dwelt, and called vnto him ſuch as would follow him to recouer againe their liberty. And after many victories obtained by him, when he perceiued that he drew neere to death, he exhorted his ſonnes to follow his iuſt and holie deliberatiō without feare of any danger. True it is (quoth Mattathias exhortation to his ſonnes.he to them) that our bodies are mortall, and ſubiect to the ſame decree that others are, but the memorie of excellent deedes procureth to it ſelfe an immortalitie, whereunto I would haue you aſpire in ſuch ſort, that ye thinke not much to die in behauing your ſelues valiantly. Thus it is lawfull for vs to be touched, and ſtirred vp with the ielouſie of a good glorie, ſo that it be without enuying the How ielouſie of glorie is tollerable.proſperitie and preferment of others, but onely ſo farre foorth as it may ſerue for a ſpur vnto vs to vndertake and to effect all vertuous and commendable things. As for example: Themistocles hearing of the great victorie that Themiſtocles.
                     Miltiades had obtained in the plaine of Marathon, ſaid: that that newes would let him take no reſt: meaning thereby, that he ſhould neuer be quiet, vntill by ſome other act of vertue he had deſerued as much praiſe, as did T. Flaminius.this excellent Captaine Miltiades. Titus Flaminius a Romane Conſul, who deliuered Grecia from bondage, and twice in battell ranged, ouerthrew Philip king of Macedonia, ſhewed himſelfe likewiſe touched greatly with a deſire of glorie and honour, not to be blamed, but

to be practiſed of all excellent and noble natures, by putting too his helping hande whenſoeuer he coulde, with the firſt, yea, ſometimes alone, to euery matter and exploit of importance. He kept company oftner and more gladly with thoſe that ſtood in neede of his helpe, than with ſuch as were able to aide him in well doing, accounting theſe men to be his competitors in the purchaſing of honor and glory, & the others to be matter whereupon he might exerciſe his vertue. It was an argument of yong yeeres, which ſeemed to promiſe much, and to be borne to all great enterpriſes, when Iulius Caeſar being yet very yong, and beholding the image of Alexander the Caeſar wept at the ſight of Alexanders image.great at foure and twentie yeeres of age, fell to weeping, and ſaid: Am not I miſerable that haue done nothing woorthy of memorie, and yet this prince at theſe yeeres had executed ſo many notable things? Moreouer, we may obſerue among the Ancients infinite woorthy examples quite contrary one to another, in that many great & famous men haue altogether deſpiſed the honor of vaineglory, which is neuer without preſumption and pride: & contrary wiſe, others being led with pride and arrogancie, haue fowly abuſed their authoritie and greatnes, purchaſing to themſelues more blame and diſhonor, than praiſe Cyrus.and honour. That great Cyrus Monarch of the Perſians, was of ſo meeke and gentle a nature, and ſo little deſirous of vainglory, that he would neuer prouoke his equals in age to any exerciſe wherin he perceiued himſelf the ſtronger, but thoſe rather, who were better practiſed than himſelfe, to the end he might not diſpleaſe them by bearing away the price from them, as alſo that he might reape this benefit to learne that which he could not do ſo well as others. O right noble hart, giuing euident proofe of the contempt of baſe and vile things, to treaſure vp thoſe that are great and excellent! But now adayes where about do we ſtriue moſt? namely, who can moſt cunningly ſtrike with the ſword, run at the ring, or ride and manage horſes. And I would to God we did no worſe. But as for excelling others in vertue, theſe times require no ſuch matter.

We read of an Indian, who being commanded by Alexander 
                     A notable hiſtorie of an Indian.the Great to ſhoote before him, bicauſe he had heard that he was very excellent in that art, would do nothing. Wherupon the Monarch being incenſed, condemned him to death, if he would not obey him. The Indian going to execution, told one of thoſe that led him, that he had been in deede heeretofore a very good Archer, but bicauſe he had of long time intermitted that exerciſe, he feared that he had forgotten it: and therefore had rather die than looſe the reputation, which he had once obtained. To this fellow we may compare thoſe of whome we haue alreadie ſpoken, who glorie in nothing but in this, that they are taken of the greater ſort for valiant men, &, as they vſe to ſay, for ſuch as make profeſſion, that they carie about them a ſharpe ſwoord for their ſeruice. Theſe men had rather die in a naughtie quarrell, with the danger of looſing their ſoule, than to fal from this their reputation, which they deſire to carie with them. But let vs follow Examples of the contempt and deſire of 
                           〈◊〉
                         glorie.our examples of the contempt of vaine-glorie, and of certaine others ledde away with an ouerweening pride. Pompey the Great, ſhewed a notable argument that he Pompeius.was not touched with vaine-glorie or pride, when, after he had vtterly vanquiſhed Tigranes king of Pontus, and made him his priſoner, he choſe rather to ſet him againe in his kingdome, and to make him an allie and confederate of the Romanes, than to reſerue and lead him in maner of a triumph into Rome, according as they vſed then to deale with enimies, and with their ſpoiles: ſaying like a vertuous Monarch, that he much more eſteemed the glorie Tamberlane ſeueritie towards Baiazet the great Turke.of a whole age, than of one day. The Great Tamberlane being puffed vp exceedingly, bicauſe of a Peaſants ſonne he attained to ſo great a Monarchy, vſed farre greater and more barbarous ſeueritie towards Baiazet Emperour of the Turks, whome, after he had ouercome him, and made him his priſoner, he cauſed to be ledde about with him in a cage, whereſoeuer he went, feeding him onely with the crums that fell vnder his table: and whenſoever he tooke horſe, he vſed his bodie for an aduauntage. After

                     Saphors towards Valerianus. the ſame maner 
                        Ʋalerianus the emperor was handled by Saphor king of Perſia, by whom he was diſcomfited in a battell, which this Barbarian had wonne of him. He that Pope Alexanders towards Friderike.trode vpon the emperor Friderike Barbaroſſa his necke, and puſht him twiſe with his foote when he had him at his deuotion, ſhewed himſelf more proud, cruell, and arrogant, in that he vſed for a pretence and cloke of his pride & wickednes, Pſal. 91. 13.that text of Scripture, Thou ſhalt walke vpon the Lion and Aſpe, the yong Lion and the Dragon ſhalt thou tread vnder foote, as if it had been ſpoken to him. That heathen mā 
                     Agathocles.
                     Agathocles king of Sicilia, left behind him a farre more notable example of the contempt of glory, that we ſhould not be lift vp too much, nor forget our ſelues by reaſon of the greatnes of our eſtate. For being come to that eſtate by his vertue, bicauſe he was borne of a poore Potter, he cauſed himſelfe to be ſerued ordinarilie at his table with earthen veſſels, intermingled with his cups of gold, ſaying thus to thoſe that came to ſee him, thereby to inflame them with a deſire of weldoing: Behold what it is to perſeuer in trauel & in taking of pains to become vertuous and courageous. Heretofore we made theſe pots of earth, and now we make theſe of gold. Further we muſt know, that when fortune (if it be lawful for vs vnder this word to vnderſtand the ordināce of God) lifteth vp men of low degree vnto great and honourable The honor of great men dependeth of their vertue, not of their dignitie.places through their valure and deſert, and exalteth alſo many men that are vnwoorthy, letting vs ſee how proudly and wickedly theſe men behaue themſelues in abuſing their authoritie, and contrarywiſe how the other ſort vſe it wel, ſhe doth thereby ſo much the more honor, and recommend vertue vnto vs, as the onely thing whereof all the greatnes, glory and honor of men dependeth, and not of the dignitie wherin they are placed. Now how greatly hautineſſe of mind is hated both of God and men, among infinite teſtimonies which we haue, that of Herodes.
                     Herode Agrippa king of the Iewes, ought well to be marked. For being gone vp into the pulpit appointed for Orations, and reioycing bicauſe the people cried out to his praiſe, That it was the voice of God, and not of man, he was ſuddenly

ſtroken from heauen: ſo that when he perceiued himſelf to conſume away with Vermine, he cried out to the people, ſaying: Behold how he dieth now with intollerable griefs, whō not long ſince ye called God. Diocleſianus the emperor Diocleſianus.was ſo puft vp with pride, that he called himſelfe brother to the Sunne and Moone, and made an Edict whereby he would haue all men to kiſſe his feete, whereas his predeceſſors gaue their hands to the Nobilitie, and their knees to the ſimpler ſort: but God ſuffered him to die a mad man. Moreouer we ſee daily, that proud men become odious to euery one, and are in the end contemned, yea, that oftentimes it coſteth them their life. The puniſhment that Philip king of Macedonia laid vpon Menecratus the Menecratus finely puniſhed for his pride by Philip.Phyſition was more gentle, yet pleaſant, and woorth the noting. This fellow bicauſe he was excellent in his Arte, cauſed himſelfe to be called Iupiter the Sauior. The good prince minding to correct him for his arrogancie, inuited him to a feaſt, and made a table to be prouided for him by himſelfe, whereof at firſt he ſeemed to be very glad. But when he ſaw that in ſtead of meat they gaue him nothing but incenſe, he was greatly aſhamed, and departed from the feaſt in great anger. Now for the concluſion of our diſcourſe, we ſay with Solon, that to name a preſumptuous Euery vain-glorious man is a foole.and glorious man in right termes, is to call him a foole, as contrarywiſe, curteſie and meekenes is the foundation of wiſedom and of a quiet life. Whereunto that we may attaine, let vs learne, that whoſoeuer beholdeth with the eyes of his mind the eſtate of mans nature, and conſidereth the baſenes of his condition, together with the ſhortnes of this preſent life, ſubiect to an infallible decree, and marketh alſo the foule pollutions that are ioyned with the fleſh, he ſhall neuer fall in that headlong downfall of arrogancie and pride. And thus deteſting all preſumption and loue of vanitie, let vs ſeeke for honor by the means of Vertue onely, which as Euripides ſaith, is alwayes either followed or preuented with glory and praiſe. And let vs not greatly care for the praiſes of men, but onely do thoſe things that are woorthie of commendation. Let vs rather

reioyce and glory that we excell and go beyond others in all good duties towards them, than in any other aduantage, either of worldly glory, or of our priuate profit. Laſtly let vs rather loue to abide always as it were vnknowen to the world, than by ſeruing vanities to turne aſide from one onely iot of the duetie of goodnes and iuſtice, which by the grace of God may procure vs a perpetuall praiſe among good men, & make vs acceptable before him, who euermore lifteth vp the humble, and beateth downe the proud.
               
            
            
               Of Shame, Shamefastneſſe, and of Diſhonor. Chap. 24.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  HItherto we haue briefly intreated of thoſe principall points, which reſpect the vertue of Temperancie, and the vice of Intemperance, contrary vnto it. Neuertheleſſe for the finiſhing of our dayes worke, I thinke we are to conſider what ſhame and ſhamefaſtnes are, which, as the Philoſophers ſay, are ioyned with this vertue of Temperance. For the more we loue glory and honor, the more we feare, and labor to eſchew ſhame & diſhonor. Now ſeeing we haue been taught where to ſeek for true glory and honor, we ſhal receiue no Shame is the keeper of all vertues.leſſe profit, if we learne wherein we ought to feare ſhame and diſhonor.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  There is (ſaith Cicero) a certain ſhame & baſhfulnes in Temperance, which is the gardian of all the vertues, & deſerueth great commendation, being alſo a moſt goodly ornament to the whole life, as that which faſhioneth it according to the patern of decencie & honeſtie.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Two things (ſaith Plato) are very wel able to direct his life that is to liue vertuouſly, namelie, ſhame of diſhoneſt things, & deſire of thoſe things that are good & vertuous. Let vs therfore heare ASER diſcourſe more amplie of that which is here propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  As we ſee that a good ground, although it be fat and fertill, bringeth foorth notwithſtanding naughty and wild plants: ſo a good nature, although it be endued

with many great perfections, is yet neuer without ſome ſhame. And this of it ſelfe ſeemeth to be a hurtful paſſion in the ſoule, albeit it may eaſily by the means of vertue be dreſſed and made profitable, if we cure it of all feare of How ſhame may be made profitable in a man.reproch, by doing that which is good, decent and honeſt; and contrarywiſe ſuffer it to augment, and to ſtrengthen it ſelf more and more, when occaſion, either of doing ill, or of ſpeaking, approouing, and counſailing any thing that is againſt the dutie of a good man, ſhal be offred. Honeſt ſhame and ſhamefaſtnes (ſaith Quintilian) is the mother of all good counſaile, the right Gardian of dutie, the miſtreſſe of innocencie, well liked of hir neereſt friends, in all places, & at all tymes courteouſly intertained of ſtrangers, as that which hath a fauorable countenance. Honeſt ſhame, being (as Cicero ſaith) the moderator of concupiſcences, procureth vnto vs a ſtedfaſt and commendable authoritie amongſt al men. Heſiodus calleth it the hoſteſſe of iuſtice. Of this Socrates ſpake, when he ſayd, that vertuous ſhame beſeemed youth. I looke for ſmall goodnes of a yong man (ſaith Seneca) except of ſuch a one as bluſheth after he hath offended. For he that bluſheth (ſaith Menander) is not voyd of all good nature. Therefore ſhamefaſtnes is to be nouriſhed and much made of. For ſo long as it remaineth in any mans ſpirite, there is good hope to be conceiued of him. Many haue ſhrunke through feare of ſhame, with whom no reaſon or torment could in any ſort preuaile. A wicked mā (ſaith Euripides) hath no ſhame in him. Shamefaſtnes (ſaith one of the Ancients) is ſiſter to continencie, and companion of chaſtitie, yea by means of hir ſocietie and fellowſhip, chaſtitie is in greater ſafetie. A fault is leſſened through ſhame, as it is made greater by contention: and ſhame mollifieth the hart of a Iudge, but impudencie prouoketh him to anger. He that is touched to the quicke through a ſharpe reprehenſion for the reformation of his maners, and yet is nothing reſtrayned thereby, nor full of ſweate and bluſhing for ſhame, which cauſeth heate to aſcend into the face of euery one well borne, but remaineth inflexible and vnmooueable, ſmiling

and ieſting thereat, ſuch a one I ſay, giueth a great argument of a very blockiſh and ſenceles nature, which is aſhamed of nothing, by reaſon of his long cuſtome and Sinne is naturall in man.confirmation in doing of euill. To ſinne (ſaith Diodorus the Athenian) is a thing naturally ingrafted in men: neither was there euer any law ſo rigorous, that could ſtaie the courſe thereof, although new paines and puniſhments were dailye added to offences, to ſee if men might bee drawne from vice through feare of them. But ſome gather boldnes through pouertie; others becauſe of their riches become inſolent, ambitious, and couetous; and others haue other paſſions and occaſions which mooue and induce them to do ill. Now to turne theſe aſide, & to make them fruitles, there is no better way than deepely to imprint How we muſt auoid and repreſſe ſinne.in our ſoules the feare of perpetuall ſhame and infamie, which are the inſeparable companions of all wickednes and corrupt dealings. And as often as we commit any fault through frailtie, we muſt togither with repentance imprint in our memorie a long remembrance thereof: yea we muſt lay it often before our eies, as alſo the ſhame and diſhonor that might haue enſued thereof vnto vs, to this end, that afterward we may be the better kept backe, and more aduiſed in the like matters. Heerin let vs follow the example of wayfaring men, that haue ſtumbled againſt a ſtone, and of Pilots that haue bruſed their ſhips againſt a rocke, who, being mindfull of their miſhap, are all their life time greatly afraid, not onely of thoſe ſtones and rocks, which were the cauſes of their euils, but alſo of all ſuch as reſemble them. There was a prohibition (as A notable cuſtome among the Romanes.
                     Aulus Gellius writeth) that no yoong Romane ſhould dare to enter into a ſtrumpets houſe, but with his face couered: and if it ſo fell out, that any man was ſo ſhameles as to come out of that place vncouered, he was as ſeuerely puniſhed, as if he had committed ſome forced adulterie. And truly when one is aſhamed that he hath offended, we are to hope well of his amendment. Now, as ſhame of euill, ſeruing for a bridle to vice, is commendable, ſo that ſhame wherein want of prudence and of wiſedome beareth

ſway, is euil and very hurtfull, not onely to thoſe that What kind of ſhame is very hurtfull.are touched therewith, but oftentimes procureth great euils to Comminalties and Common-wealths. Whereof thoſe men haue too great experience that liue vnder ſuch Gouernors, Magiſtrats, and Iudges, as of a fooliſh baſenes and cowardlines of mind, either for feare to diſpleaſe the greateſt, or to be blamed and reprooued of an ignorant multitude, bow and bend to another mans becke againſt right and equitie, as though they were aſhamed to do wel. Whereupon thinking to eſchew a light and ſmal reproch, they fall into a perpetuall note of infamie and diſhonor, not beeing able to declare more plainly the ſmalnes of their courage (which fitly reſembleth a weake temperature of the bodie, vnable to reſiſt heate and cold) than in conſenting to euill, bicauſe they dare not gaineſay leaſt they ſhould be miſliked. But Seneca ſaith, that he is no meete ſcholler of Philoſophie, who cannot contemne a fooliſh ſhame. And this cauſeth farre greater miſchiefes, when the ſoueraigne Princes of any eſtate are intangled therwith. Which may be verified of them, if through ouer great bountie and ſimplicity void of prudence, they wholy giue ouer themſelues to their pleaſure that haue them as it were in poſſeſſion, & dare not gaineſay or deny them in any matter. For heer of it commeth, that flatterers, brokers, and ſuch as are moſt wicked, carie away offices, charges, benefices, gifts, and waſtfully conſume the publike treaſure: ſo that a man may behold an impunitie and libertie of vices, and of execrable offences, bicauſe a ſimple and baſhfull king dare not deny a requeſt. And thus vnder ſuch a Prince publik welfare is turned into priuat wealth, and all the charges fall vpon the poore people. But not to ſtray farre from our purpoſe, hauing ſo neerely touched a matter worthie of a large diſcourſe, I thinke we ſhall reape no ſmall profit, if we call to mind heere certaine notable inſtructions, which Plutark giueth vs, to teach vs to repell How we muſt learne to reſiſt all naughtie ſhame.farre from vs all fooliſh and dangerous ſhame: namely, that ſo ſoone as yeers of diſcretion worke in vs any knowledge of goodnes, we ſhould exerciſe our ſelues in thoſe

things, which of themſelues are eaſie enough to practiſe, being without feare that any thing can (as the prouerbe ſaith) hang or take hold of our gowne. If at a feaſt (ſaith that great Philoſopher) thou art inuited to drinke more than reaſon, or thy thirſt requireth, be not aſhamed to refuſe to do it. If any babler or ignorant fellow ſeeke to ſtay and keepe thee by diſcourſing of vaine and redious matters, be not afraid to rid thy ſelfe of him, and to tell him freely that another time thou maiſt come and viſite him, not hauing at that time any leaſure to keepe him companie any longer. If thy friend, or any other man, communicate with thee any act or purpoſe of his, wherein thou knoweſt ſomewhat, though neuer ſo little, that is to be reprehended, tell him thereof hardly. If any man be importunate with thee by requeſts & intreaties, neuer promiſe more than thou art able to performe, and bluſh not bicauſe thou canſt not do all things, but rather bluſh to take vpon thee things that are aboue thy abilitie. If any man aske thee a queſtion of any matter whatſoeuer, confeſſe freely that which thou knoweſt not, to the end thou maiſt receiue inſtruction. Now, if we exerciſe our ſelues in this ſort, honeſtly to refuſe, to depart, to breake off, to ſpeake freely, and to ſubmit our ſelues after a comelie manner, ſo that no man can lightly complaine of vs, or blame vs, but vpon very ſlender occaſion, we ſhall be in a readie way to accuſtome our ſelues not to be aſhamed in matters of greater waight, and ſuch as are neceſſarie for the preſeruation of dutie. For otherwiſe, if we are afraid to put backe a glaſſe of wine, which ſome one of our acquaintance in drinking doth offer vnto vs, howe will we reſiſt the requeſt of a Prince, which is as much as a commandement, or the importunate ſuite of a whole people, in an vniuſt and vnreaſonable matter? If we are aſhamed to be rid of a babler; if, as flatterers vſe to do, we commende one contrarye to our opinion, whom we heare praiſed of many; or if wee feare to tell our friende of ſome ſmall fault of his, howe will we ſet our ſelues courageouſly againſt thoſe ſlaunderers of the truth, and

maintainers of lies, that are placed in authoritie? Or how ſhall we dare to reprooue notorious faults boldly, beyng committed in the adminiſtration of a magiſtrate, and in ciuill and politicall gouernment? This is that which Zeno 
                     Zeno.very well taught vs, when meeting with a familiar friend of his that walked heauily by himſelfe, he asked him the cauſe thereof: I ſhun (ſaid the other) a friend of mine, who requeſteth me to beare falſ witneſſe for him. What (quoth Zeno) act thou ſo fooliſh, that ſeeing him voyd of ſhame and feare to request vniust and wicked things of thee, thou hast not the hart to deny him & to put him back vpon iuſt & reaſonable conſiderations? Ageſilaus may be vnto vs a good Scholemaſter in this Ageſilaus.matter. For being requeſted by his father to giue ſentēce againſt right, he was not aſhamed to deny him graciouſly with this anſwer. You haue taught me (O Father) frō my youth to obey the lawes, and therefore I will now alſo obey you therein by iudging nothing against the lawes. Pericles being likewiſe requeſted Pericles.by a friend of his to ſweare falſly for him, ſayd, I am a friend to my friends vnto the aultars: as if he would haue ſayd, ſo farre as I offend not God. The ſame reaſon was the cauſe that Xenophanes being called a Coward at a feaſt Xenophanes.bicauſe he would not play at dice, anſwered without feare of being accounted voyd of ciuilitie and good fellowſhip, I am in deed a coward and feareful in diſhonest things. Now beſides all thoſe pernitious effects of fooliſh and naughtie ſhame that are already touched by vs, oftentimes it maketh the ſences of a man ſo brutiſh through a long cuſtome, that he neglecteth the care of that which concerneth Other pernitious effects of fooliſh ſhame.his ſafetie and priuate benefit, yea ſometimes of his owne life. I will not here ſtand to ſpeake of thoſe that ſay they are aſhamed to aske their due, or by way of iuſtice to purſue ſuch as deuour the ſubſtance of their poore families, whereby they make it knowen, that they haue neither vertue, hart nor courage. To this agreeth fitly that which we read of one named Perſeus, who being to lend monie Perſeus.to a very friend of his, went with him to the common place of bargaining, calling to mind that precept of Heſiodus, who ſaith:

                        
                        Euen when thou doſt diſport with thine owne brother,
                        Let preſent be ſome witnes one or other.
                     
His friend thinking this ſomewhat ſtrang, ſaid: what, ſo orderly by law? Yea quoth Perſeus, that I may haue it againe of thee friendly, and not be compelled to demand it againe by order of law. But what ſhall we ſay of ſo many great perſonages as are mentioned in hiſtories, who vnder pretence of a fooliſh ſhame badly grounded vpon this conceit, that they would not diſtruſt them whome they tooke for their friends, offered themſelues euen to Dion.the ſlaughter? Dion endued with great perfections, and one that deliuered from tyrannie and freed from thraldome the citie of Syracuſa, although he was aduertiſed that Calippus whom he tooke for his Hoſt and friend, watched opportunitie to ſlaie him, yet he went to that place whether he had inuited him, ſaying: that he had rather looſe his life, than be compelled to diſtruſt his friends, and to keepe himſelfe aſmuch from them as from his enimies. And in deed it fell Antipater.out ſo, that he was ſlaine there. The like befell Antipater, being bidden to ſupper by Demetrius. It ſeemeth alſo that I. Caeſar.
                     Iulius Caeſar aſwell as they, was in ſome ſort the cauſe of his ownemiſhap, bicauſe hauing had many aduertiſements, ſuſpicions, and forewarnings of the miſerable death that was intended againſt him, yet he neglected them all, as appeereth by that ſpeech, which he vſed the euening before he was murdered, being at ſupper with Marcus Lepidus. For a controuerſie ariſing amongſt the gueſts about this What death Caeſar thought beſt.propoſition, What kind of death was beſt, euen that ſaid this Monarch, which is leaſt looked for. True it is which may be ſaid, that deſtinie may poſſibly be better foreſeene than auoided. But this were an euill concluſion thereupon, that we muſt let goe all care of keeping thoſe Goods, which God giueth vs as a bleſſing proceeding from his grace. For it is the dutie of a good and ſound iudgement to conferre that which is paſt, with the preſent time, to the end to foreſee in ſome ſort, and to determine of that which is to come, which is alwaies doubtfull and vncertaine vnto vs. Moreouer, to reſume our former matter of honeſt

ſhame and ſhamefaſtnes, which is the guide of our life to decencie and vertue, we may ſee amongſt the an ients infinite examples, how it hath been recommended and preciſely obſerued, and what ſtrength it hath had in right noble mindes. The Perſians brought vp their youth in How the Perſian youth was inſtructed.ſuch ſort, that they neither did nor ſpake any thing that was diſhoneſt, putting him to death that ſtripped himſelf ſtarke naked in the preſence of another. Yea they iudged, euery vnciuill action how litle ſoeuer, committed before others, to be great wickednes. The Parthians would neuer ſuffer their wiues to come among their feaſtes, leaſt wine ſhould cauſe them to doe or to ſpeake any diſhoneſt thing in their preſence. Hippocratides as he was walking, Hippocratides ſaying to a yong man that bluſhed.met with a yong man in a wicked mans company, & perceiuing that he began to bluſh, ſaid thus vnto him. My ſonne thou muſt goe with ſuch as will not cauſe thee to bluſh: but be of good cheere, for thou maieſt yet repent thee. Blind Eutichus was ſet without the aray of the battel Eutichus.by Leonidas, but being aſhamed to leaue his fellowes in danger, he cauſed a ſlaue to lead him to the place where they fought, and there wonderfully doing his endeuor, he was ſlain. The Romans were ſo ſhamefaſt amongſt themſelues, The ſhamefaſtnes of the Romanes.that the father would not bathe himſelfe with his ſonne, nor the ſonne in law with the father in law. They ſo greatly eſteemed honeſt ſhame and baſhfulnes, that when Philip king of Macedonia was accuſed before the Senate of many crimes, the ſhamefaſtnes of yong Demetrius his ſonne, who bluſhed and held his peace, ſtood him in greater ſtead than the ſhameleſſe boldnes of the eloquenteſt Orator in the world could haue done. The ſonne of Marcus 
                     Cato his ſonne.
                     Cato the Cenſor, beyng at that battell wherein Perſes was diſcomfited, and fighting with a iaueline, his ſword fell out of his ſcabberd, wherof he was ſo aſhamed, that alighting on foote in the midſt of his enemies, & doubling his courage and ſtrength, he tooke it vp and mounted againe, fighting on horſebacke as before. The ſonne of Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, hauing abandoned and giuen Scaurus his ſonne.ouer the keeping and defence of the countrey of Trenta

committed to his charge, was ſo aſhamed thereof, that not daring to returne againe to his father, he ſlew himſelf.Parmenides.
                     Parmenides taught his Diſciples, that nothing was terrible to a noble mind but diſhonor, and that none but children and women, or at leaſt, men hauing womens harts, are afraid of griefe. When ſpeech was miniſtred at the banket of the ſeuen Sages, concerning that popular gouernment which was happieſt, wherein all haue equallCleobulus. authoritie, Cleobulus affirmed, that that citie ſeemed vnto him beſt guided by policie, wherein the Citizens ſtood inA notable hiſtorie of the ſhamefaſtnes of the Mileſian maidens. greater awe of diſhonor than of the law. Plutark rehearſeth a very noteable hiſtorie of the force of honeſt ſhamefaſtnes in the Mileſian maidens, who were fallen into ſuch frenzie and perturbation of ſpirite, that without any apparant cauſe to be ſeene, they were ſuddenly ouertaken with a longing to die, and with a furious deſire to hang themſelues. Which thing many of them had alreadie put in practiſe, ſo that neither reaſons, nor teares of fathers and mothers, no comfort of friends, no threatnings, pollicies, or deuices whatſoeuer, could preuaile with them, vntill ſuch time that a wiſe Citizen by his aduice procured an edict to be made by the Councell, that if any heerafter hung hir ſelfe, ſhe ſhould be caried ſtarke naked in the ſight of all men, through the market place. This edict being made and ratified by the Councell, did not onely repreſſe a little, but wholy ſtaied the fury of theſe maidens that longed to die. Inſomuch, that a ſimple imagination and conceit of ſhame and diſhonor, which yet could not light vpon them before they were dead, did preuaile more with them than all other deuiſed meanes could do, yea, than death it ſelfe, or griefe, which are two of the horribleſt accidents which men commonly ſtand in feare of.Honeſt ſhame is alwaies commendable. To conclude therefore our preſent diſcourſe, that honeſt ſhame and ſhamefaſtnes, are alwaies commendable and beſeeming all perſons that purpoſe to obſerue modeſtie in their words, geſtures, countenances, and actions. We learne alſo that ſpirits well brought vp, are more eaſily wonne by ſhame, than by feare, according to that

ſaying of Quintilian, that ſhamefaſtnes is the propertie of a free man, and feare of a bondman. Further, we learne that euery temperate man ought to be more aſhamed of himſelfe, when occaſion of doing ill is offered, than of any other: that he muſt ſhun all euil, exceſſiue and pernitious ſhame, proceeding from the want of diſcretion, bicauſe it hindereth men from effecting all good, wholeſome and honeſt things, inſomuch that of it ſelfe it is able to procure vnto vs loſſe, diſhonor, and infamie.
               
            
            The ende of the ſixt daies worke.
         
         
            THE SEVENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Fortitude. Chap. 25.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     MAN endued with reaſon, & ſeeking to imitate aſmuch as lieth in him the author of his being: who, albeit ſimply & abſolutely he ſtandeth not in neede of any thing whatſoeuer, yet doth woonderfull workes without ceaſing, for the benefit of his creatures, feeleth himſelfe touched to the quicke in his ſoule, with a deſire to profit all thoſe among whome he liueth, by all high, great, laudable, and laborious meanes, not fearing any perill, nor forcing any paine. Moreouer, meditating & weighing the dignitie of the immortalitie of his ſoule, he careth not for earthly and mortal goods, nor ſtandeth in feare of the contrarie: and whether it be for the hauing or not hauing of them, his minde is nothing at all the leſſe quiet, neither doth he thinke that any good vpon earth can be taken from him. All which great and rare excellencies flowe into him from the third riuer ofFortitude is the third riuer of Honeſtie. the fountaine of Honeſty, whereof we are now to ſpeake:

namely, of the vertue of Fortitude, which (as Cicero ſaith) cannot be forced by any force.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  This vertue (ſaith Seneca) is very great, being able to reſiſt and to fight againſt extreame miſeries. Which is the propertie of Fortitude, that guideth a noble nature through hard and difficult things, that he may attaine to the end of his iuſt deuices.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     Fortitude is the cauſe that neither for feare nor danger we turne aſide from the way of vertue and iuſtice. And as Plato ſaith, it lifteth vp our minds to attend to that which is moſt excellent, laudable, beſt, and moſt profitable. Therefore let vs heare ACHITOB diſcourſe of the woonderfull effects of this great and woorthie vertue.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Whatſoeuer is done manfully, and withWherein the perfection of euery worke conſiſteth. a great courage, appeereth very decent, and beſeeming a man. But the perfection of euery work conſiſteth in this, that it be done by a ſtaied and conſtant reaſon, which reacheth vs, that there is nothing after God, but honeſtie, which we are to admire, to make account of, & to deſire: and that we ought not in any ſort to ſhrinke and yeeld vnto perturbations, or to any other humane accident whatſoeuer. Which opinions being well imprinted in our minds, pricke vs forward to enterprize thoſe things that are moſt excellent, difficult, and fulleſt of labors & perils. For being free from all earthly care, and void of feare or ſorow, we contemne euen death it ſelfe, and are in ſuch ſort prepared againſt all griefes, that our contentation lieth heerin, that the greateſt and moſt exceeding paines will not continue long, that the leaſt will vaniſh away of themſelues, and that we ſhall be maiſters of the middle ſort. This is that which the Philoſophers by infinite learnedFortitude is a Good of the ſoule, not of the bodie. writings required to be in the vertue of Fortitude, with which the force and ſtrength of the bodie hath nothing common, as that which is a Good that belongeth to the bodie. But this is an immortall Good of the ſoule, conſiſting in the power and direction of the ſpirite, being fortified and confirmed through the ſtudie of Philoſophie,

and cauſing man of his owne accord to make choice of, and to perfect all honeſt things for their owne ſakes. Fortitude then (as Cicero ſaith) is that part of honeſtie, which is knowne by the excellencie, greatnes, and dignitie of the hart, which after aduiſed counſell and good conſideration, cauſeth man to vndertake without feare, all perillous matters, and conſtantly to endure all kind of trauell. For conſtancie and dignitie are neuer farre from Fortitude in greateſt diſtreſſes: bicauſe it adorneth him that poſſeſſeth hir with the contempt of griefe and of death, cauſing him to eſteeme nothing vntollerable that can happen to man, neither any thing euill that is neceſſarie. And ſo it is the preſeruation of a firme & ſetled iudgement in things that ſeeme terrible & full of danger, ſeeing it is the knowledge of that which a man ought to indure. Plato alſo calleth it the knowledge of all good and euill: as though he would ſay, that nothing can come to a valiant and noble minded man, againſt his expectation, although it may be contrarie to his will, bicauſe he is ſetled and prepared to vndergo all euents, as if he had certainly foreſeene them. Ariſtole ſaith that Fortitude is a mediocritie betweene fearing and enterprizing. Moreouer, it maketh a man fit for all occaſions of dangers and trauels, and holdeth him betweene theſe two extremities of cowardlines and raſhnes, which vices are very hurtfull to a happie and commendable life. The ſame Philoſopher ſaith, that whoſoeuerThe Properties that are required in a valtant man. will be ſtrong and valiant, muſt be free from all feare of death, conſtant in aduerſities, void of feare in perils, choſing rather to die honeſtly, than to ſaue himſelfe vilan ouſly. He muſt endeuor to build noble enterpriſes, hauing for his companions hardines, greatnes of hart, good confidence and hope, beſides induſtrie and patience. Then he commeth to ſet downe many kinds of Fortitude. Cicero agreeing well with him, ſaith: that Magnificence, Conſidence, Patience, and Perſeuerance, are the parts of Fortitude. Magnificence ſheweth it doing great & excellent things: Confidence in this, that a valiant man conceiueth good hope of the euent of them: Patience in a voluntarie and

continuall ſuffering for the loue of honeſtie and vertue: and Perſeuerance in a perpetual conſtancie, and in a firme and ſtedfaſt abiding in his purpoſes and reſolutions vndertaken with good conſideration following reaſon.Fortitude fighteth for iuſtice onely. Moreouer, Fortitude (as the Stoicks ſaid very well) is a vertue that fighteth for equitie and iuſtice. And therefore neither they that ſuffer for vniuſt matters, nor they that fight for their priuate commodities, not being led onely with zeale of publike benefit, can boaſt (except falſly) that they are decked with this pretious vertue. For theſe latter ſort of men are rather to be called cruell, barbarous, mercenaries, and hired hangmen, deſtroying all humanitie: and the others impudents, ſhameles, and deſperate, yea ſo much more woorthie of blame, as guiltie of wilfull madnes, in that they ſhew themſelues conſtant in doing euill. But thoſe men are valiant & of great courage, who thinke that no action whatſoeuer, no time or ſeaſon ought to be void of iuſtice, who deliuer the oppreſſed, and thoſe that are wronged, who build all their deuiſes vpon vertuous works. They (ſaith Aristotle) are void of generoſitie, who fight either for feare of reprehenſion, or by conſtraint, or being ſtirred vp with other mens ſpeech, or of choler, or through ignorance of dangers. And this was Platoes meaning,All hardie men are not valiant. when he ſaid that all ſtrong and valiant men were hardie, but not all hardie men, valiant: bicauſe hardines commeth to men either by arte, anger, or pollicie: but Fortitude is ingendred in the ſoule by nature and holie education. And therefore this vertue ſtandeth not in need either of choler, rancor, ambition, pride, or of any other euill paſſion, whereby to bring to paſſe braue and glorious effects, but is rather an vtter enimie vnto them, becauſe it proceedeth from a mature and ripe conſideration and election of reaſon, which cauſeth a man boldly to put in execution whatſoeuer he knoweth to belong to dutie and honeſtie, according to that place whereunto he is called. And this alſo is the cauſe that he neuer taketh any thing in hand raſhly, what pretence ſoeuer it hath, neither is he kept backe by any feare in thoſe matters which offer

him good occaſion of putting to his hand, what hazard or imminent danger ſoeuer ſeemeth to threaten him. But (according to that ſentence of Socrates, that the hardest things ought to be taken in hand and executed with greater conſtancie and valure of hart) after he hath well and prudently grounded his enterpriſe vpon a certaine knowledge, and firme diſcourſe of reaſon, neither reproches, nor praiſes, neither promiſes nor threatnings, or torments, neither pleaſures nor griefs, are able to cauſe him to breake off, orThe reſolution of valiant man is alwaies commendable and vnchangeable. in any ſort to alter and change his reſolution, which remaineth alwaies praiſe-woorthie, and is neuer ſubiect to repentance, the matter falleth out: bicauſe we are not to iudge of enterpriſes by the euents, which are altogither out of our power, but by the ground-worke and foundation wherupon they were built. And further, when the greateſt dangers are, then is the time wherein a valiant man being nothing at all abaſhed, moſt of all ſheweth his ſtrength & prowes, neuer taking himſelfe to be ouercome as long as his vertue is free and at libertie to giue him new ſupplie of meanes to ſet forward againe his matters, otherwiſe in a deſperate caſe. Briefly, to ſpeake in a word, Fortitude is the cauſe, that neither for feare nor danger we turne aſide from the path waie of vertue and iuſtice, neither yet repent vs of well doing for any torment. And thus it belongeth properly to this vertue, to command chiefly ouer theſe two perturbations grounded vpon the opinion of euill, namely, Feare and Griefe: as before we ſaw that Temperance exerciſeth hir power ouer vnbrideled deſire, & exceſſiue ioy. Furthermore, bicauſe they that naturally haue greater ſtomacks, and more excellent ſpirits, are deſirous and greedie of honors, power, and glorie, and ſeeing that an exceſſiue deſire to rule and to excel others, commonly groweth with the greatnes of the hart, it is neceſſarie that this vnrulie affection ſhould be moderated by the contempt of ſuch things as are common to all men by nature. And this alſo is a propertie belonging to this vertue of Fortitude, which deſiring the greateſt and beſt things, deſpiſeth thoſe that are baſe and abiect, aſpiring

                     Fortitude contemneth mortal things. to celeſtiall and eternall things, ſhunneth humane & mortall things, and iudgeth honors, riches, and worldlie goods, an vnwoorthie recompence for his valiant acts. Which is the who cauſe, that whoſoeuer hath this vertue of Fortitude perfectly (if ſo great happines could be among mortall wights) he remaineth free from all perturbations of the ſoule to enioy a bleſſed tranquillitie, which togither with conſtancie, procureth vnto him dignitie and reputation. For this cauſe Cicero teacheth vs, that they which giue themſelues to the gouernment of affaires,Magiſtrates ought to make leſſe account of worldlie goods than Philoſophers. ought (at leaſt aſmuch as Philoſophers) to make light account of temporall goods, from whence proceedeth all the reſt of our mindes: yea, they ought to ſtriue to that end with greater care and labor than Philoſophers do, bicauſe it is eaſier for a Philoſopher ſo to doe, his life being leſſe ſubiect to Fortune, & ſtanding in leſſe need of worldly Goods, than doth that of Politicks. And if any miſhap befall them, it toucheth the Philoſopher a great deale leſſe. But whether it be in war, or in ruling a Common-wealth, or in the gouernment of a houſe, there are alwaies means enough to exerciſe the works of Fortitude: & many times this vertue is moſt neceſſarie in things that ſeeme to be of ſmalleſt account. Beſides, that honeſty which we ſeeke after,Of bodily force. is perfected by the forces of the ſoule, of which euery one hath great need, not by thoſe of the bodie. I will not ſay, that the firme knitting togither of the members, and the good diſpoſition of nature to ſuſtaine manfully the iniuries of wether, & al kind of paine & trauel without ſicknes, is not a good helpe towards the execution of noble enterpriſes: only I ſay, that it is not ſo neceſſarie, but that many being troubled with a thouſand ill diſpoſitions in their perſons, eſpecially ſuch as were placed in offices of Captaines and Conductors of armies, haue executed infinite great and glorious exploits, ſurmounting all weakenes of their bodies, through the magnanimitie of their hart. Yea, oftentimes they haue as it were conſtrained their bodies to change their nature, that they might be made fit to execure whatſouer their wiſe ſpirite iudged

to belong to dutie. Was there euer any Captaine among the Romanes greater than Iulius Caeſar? Yet was he of aIulius Caeſar was ſickly. weake and tender complexion, ſubiect to great headaches, and viſited ſomtimes with the falling ſicknes. But in ſteed of vſing the weaknes of his bodie for a cloke to liue nicely and delicately, he tooke the labors for warre for a fit medicine to cure the vntowardnes of his bodie, fighting againſt his diſeaſe with continuall labor and exerciſe, liuing ſoberly, and lying for the moſt part in the open aire, which made him to be ſo much the more admired and loued of his ſouldiers. As it may appeere by that which is reported of him, that being one daye by reaſon of great ſtorme and tempeſt greatly vrged with want of lodging in a plaine, where there was but one little cottage belonging to a Peaſant, which had but one chamber, he commanded that Oppius, one of his Captaines, who was il at eaſe, ſhould be lodged there: as for himſelfe he laye abroad with the reſt, ſaying that the moſt honorable places were to be appointed for the greateſt, and the moſt neceſſarie for ſuch as were moſt diſeaſed. What ſhall we ſay of thoſe, who being impotent in ſome part of their members, did notwithſtanding not diminiſh in any ſort, but augment the glorie of their doings? Marcus Sergius, a Romane Captaine,Marcus Sergius lacked his right hand. hauing loſt his right hand in a battell, practiſed ſo well with the left hand, that afterward in an armie he chalenged foure of his enimies, one after another, and ouercame them: ſuch force hath a good hart, that it can doe more in one onely little member, than a man well made and faſhioned in all points, that hath but a cowardly hart. We might heere alleadge infinite examples, whereof hiſtories are full, of all thoſe effects, which we ſaid were brought foorth by the vertue of Fortitude in noble minds: but we will content our ſelues to touch certaine generals that were of notable and politike prowes and valure, and conſtant in their reſolutions, aſwell for ſhortnes ſake, as alſo bicauſe heereafter we ſhall haue further occaſion to bring others in ſight, when we handle more at large the parts and branches that proceed from this happie ſtalke

                     Fabius the Greateſt. of Fortitude. Fabius the Greateſt commeth firſt to my remembrance, to prooue that the reſolution of a courageous hart grounded vpon knowledge and the diſcourſe of reaſon, is firme and immutable. This Captaine of the Romane armie being ſent into the field to reſiſt the furie and violence of Hannibal, who being Captaine of the Carthaginians, was entred into Italy with great force, determined for the publike welfare and neceſſitie to delay and prolong the warre, and not to hazard a battell but with great aduantage. Whereupon certaine told him, that his owne men called him Hannibals ſchoolemaiſter, and that he was ieſted at with many other opprobrious ſpeeches, as one that had ſmall valure and courage in him, and therfore they counſelled him to fight, to the end he might not incurre any more ſuch reprehenſions and obloquies. I ſhould be (quoth he againe to them) a greater Coward than now I am thought to be, if I ſhould forſake my deliberation neceſſarie for the common welfare and ſafetie, for feare of their girding ſpeeches and bolts of mockerie, and obey thoſe (to the ruine of my countrey) whom I ought to command. And in deed afterward he gaue great tokens of his vnſpeakeable valure, being ſent with three hundred men onely to encounter with the ſaid Hannibal, and ſeeing that he muſt of neceſſitie fight for the ſafetie of the Common-wealth, after all his men were ſlaine, and himſelfe hurt to death, he ruſhed againſt Hannibal with ſo great violence and force of courage, that he tooke from him the diademe or frontlet, which he had about his Pompey the Great.head, and died with that about him. Pompey, who by the renowme of his high enterpriſes got to himſelfe the ſurname of Great, being readie to ſaile by ſea, and to paſſe into Italy, whether he was to cary a certaine quantitie of wheate to meete with a famine, according to the commiſſion giuen him of the Senate, there aroſe a very great tempeſt, inſomuch that the mariners made great doubt to weigh vp their anchors. But his reſolution beeing well made before, and grounded vpon the dutie of a noble hart, he tooke ſhipping firſt of all, and cauſed the ſailes to

be ſpread in the wind, ſaying with a loud and cleare voice, It is neceſſarie that I go, but not neceſſarie that I liue. Caius 
                     C. Marius.
                     Marius, who was ſix times Conſul, being in war againſt the Allies of the Romanes that were reuolted, incloſed himſelfe one day with trenches, and ſuffered a thouſand iniuries and vaunting ſpeeches, both of his enimies and of his owne men, but yet cared nothing at all for them, nor went from his deliberation, which was that he would not fight at that time. And when Publius Sillo, one of the chiefe captaines of the enimie cried vnto him, ſaying: If thou art ſuch a great Captaine, Marius, as men report of thee, come out of thy campe to battell: Nay, doe thou, (quoth he againe vnto him) if thou art a great Captaine, compell me to come out to battell in deſpite of my teeth. Afterward this Marius ſhewed himſelfe to be one of the moſt valiant and courageous men of his time, aſwell in the diſcomfiture of the ſaid enemies, as in two other battels which he wan againſt the barbarous Cimbrians and Flemings, who were entred into Italy to inhabite there: in one of which battels about a hundred thouſand fighting Agis.men were ſlaine in the field. Agis king of Lacedemonia, being reſolued to fight his Councellors told him, that there was no reaſon ſo to doe, bicauſe his enemies were ten againſt one. It muſt needs be (quoth this courageous Prince) that he which will command many, muſt fight alſo againſt many. We are enough to put naughtie men to flight. The Lacedemonians vſe not to aske what number there is of the enemies, but onely where they are. The anſwer which Dienecus 
                     Dienecus.made to one that told the Councell of Grecia, that the multitude of the Barbarians was ſo great, that their arrowes couered the ſunne, commeth neere to the courageous ſaying of king Agis. For concluding with their opinion who perſwaded to fight, Dienecus made this anſwer: Thou telleſt vs very goodnewes. For if the multitude of the Medes is ſuch, that they are able to hide the Sunne, they will offer vs the meanes how to fight in the ſhadowe, and not in the heate of the Sunne. We may not heere paſſe ouer with ſilence the teſtimonie of inuincible Fortitude,
                     
which alwaies findeth meanes to effect hir glorious purpoſes, Themistocles.giuen by Themistocles, when he ſaw the ſundrie opinions of the Chieftaines of the Grecian armie vnder the leading of Euribiades the Lacedemonian, touching the place where they ſhould fight with Xerxes fleet. The greateſt part determined to forſake Salamis, where they were at that time, and to retire to Peloponneſus, fearing the great force of their enimies, who were about twelue hundred veſſels, whereas they themſelues had but three hundred. But Themiſtocles ſent Sicinnus his childrens Schoolemaiſter ſecretly in a Sciffe towards the Perſians, aduertiſing them of the reſolution which the Grecians had taken to flie, faining (as he made Xerxes beleeue) that he fauored their ſide. Vpon this watchword Xerxes ſent part of his armie to the other ſide of Salamis. Whereupon the Grecians conſidering that they were enuironed, reſolued and ſetled themſelues as men conſtrained to fight, and in deed the victorie remained on their ſide, to the confuſion & ouerthrow of their enemies, who departed out of Grecia, which otherwiſe would haue been greatly ſhaken, had not Themistocles vſed this notable ſtratageme, thereby to Damindas.ſtaie the ſhamefull flight of his Countreymen. It was this vertue of Fortitude, which cauſed Damindas the Lacedemonian to make this anſwer to one who told him, that the Lacedemonians were in danger to ſuffer much miſchiefe, if they agreed not with Philip, who was armed againſt the Grecians. O my friend (quoth he) that art halfe a woman, what euill can he cauſe vs to ſuffer, ſeeing we make Dercyllides.no account of death it ſelfe? Dercyllides being ſent from Sparta towards king Pyrrhus, to know wherefore he marched with his armie vpon their borders, and vnderſtanding of him, that he commanded them to receiue againe their king Cleonymus, whome they had baniſhed, or elſe he would let them know, that they were not more valiant than others alreadie ſubdued by him, made this anſwer: If thou art a God we feare thee not, bicauſe we haue not offended thee: but if thou art a man, thou art no better than we. The anſwer which certaine Polonian Embaſſadors

made to Alexander the Great, who threatned their A notable anſwer of certaine Polonians.countrey, ſheweth alſo the excellencie of their courage. We are afraid (quoth they to him) but of one only thing, namely: leaſt the skie ſhould fall vpon vs. Thunder (as Plato ſaith) terrifieth children, and threatnings fooles. Anaxarchus 
                     Anaxarchus.being likewiſe threatned by the ſame Monarke that he ſhould be hauged: Threaten this (quoth he) to thy Courtiers, who feare death: for my part, I care not whether I rot in the ground, or aboue ground. Socrates alſo anſwered thus to Socrates.one that asked him whether he were not aſhamed to commit any thing that would procure his death: My friend, thou doeſt not well to thinke that a vertuous man ought to make any account either of danger, or of death, or to conſider any other thing in all his actions, than this; whether they are iust or vniust, good or bad. If we deſire to ſee farther what effects Fortitude bringeth foorth in the greateſt and moſt ſiniſter dangers, Marcus Craſſus ſhal ſerue vs for ſufficient proofe. M. Craſſus.When he was three skore yeeres of age, albeit he had receiued the foile in a battell againſt the Parthians, wherein the greateſt part of his armie was deſtroied, and his ſonne being Captaine of a thouſand men, was ſlaine, whoſe death ſeemed more to aſtoniſh the reſt of his men, than anye other danger, yet he ſhewed himſelfe in this miſhap more vertuous than euer before, & went through all his bands crying aloud in this manner: It is I alone, 
                     A notable oration.
                     my friends, whome the ſorow and griefe of this loſſe ought to touch. But the greatnes of the fortune, and glorie of Rome remaineth whole and inuincible, as long as ye ſtand on your feete. Notwithſtanding, if yee haue any compaſſion of mee, ſeeing mee looſe ſo valiant and vertuous a ſonne, I praye you ſhewe the ſame by changing it into wrath againſt your enemies, to take vengeance of their crueltie, and be not abaſhed for any miſhap befallen vs: for great thinges are not gotten without loſſe. Patience in trauels, and Conſtancie in aduerſities, haue brought the Romane Empire to that greatnes of power wherein it is now placed. With ſuch ſpeeches he fought vnto the death. Will wee haue other examples of woonderfull

                     Iudas Macchabeus. prowes and courage? Iudas Macchabeus, after many victories obtained by him againſt the Lieutenants of Antiochus, and againſt thoſe of Demetrius, was ſet vpon and aſſailed with two and twentie thouſand men (others ſay two and thirty thouſand) hauing himſelfe but eight hundred, or a thouſand with him. And being counſelled to retire into ſome place of ſafetie, God forbid (quoth he) that the Sunne ſhould ſee me turne my backe towards mine enemies. I had rather die, than ſtaine the glorie which I haue gotten by vertue with an ignomintous and ſhamefull flight. In this reſolute perſwaſion he greatly weakened his enemies, Leonides.and yet died more through weariſomnes, than of blowes or woundes which he had receiued in fight. Leonides king of Sparta, hauing with him but three hundred naturall Lacedemonians, fought and put to flight at the ſtrait of Thermopylis, three hundred thouſand Perſians: but L. Dentatus.he and all his died of the woundes which they receiued in that fight. Lucius Dentatus a Romane, was endued with ſuch Fortitude and Generoſitie, that one writeth of him, that he was in ſixe skore battels and skirmiſhes, and eight times came away Conquerour from fighting hand to hand: that he had receiued of his Captaines by waye of rewarde, and in token of his valure, eighteene launces, twentie bards for horſes, foure skore and three bracelets, and ſixe and thirtie crownes: and laſtly, that by his meanes nine Emperours triumphed in Rome. Eumenus.
                     Eumenus a Macedonian Captaine, hauing beene put to the woorſt by Antigonus, retired into a ſtrong hold, where being beſieged, and brought to parly through neceſſitie of victuals and munition, it was ſignified vnto him from his enemie, that reaſon would he ſhould come and ſpeake with him vnder his faith and promiſe without Hoſtages, ſeeing he was both greater and ſtronger. But Eumenus made him this anſwer, that he would neuer thinke any man greater than himſelfe, as long as he had his ſword in his owne power. And therefore demanding of him no woorſe conditions, than as one that thought himſelfe to be his equall, he ſailed foorth vpon his enemies with ſuch valure

and courage, that he ſaued himſelfe out of their handes, and afterward greatly troubled Antigonus. Aristomenes 
                     Ariſtomenes.the Meſſanian, being taken by the Lacedemonians, and deliuered faſt bound to two ſouldiers to be kept, he drew neere to a fire, and burned aſunder his bands with a litle of his fleſh: afterward comming ſuddenly vpon his keepers, he ſlew them both, and ſaued himſelfe. Lyſimachus 
                     Lyſimachus.being caſt to a Lion by Alexander, bicauſe he gaue to Calisthenes the priſoner that poiſon wherewith he killed himſelfe, fought with it, and ſtretching foorth his arme and hand all armed into his throte, he tooke hold of his toong and ſtrangled him. Whereupon the Monarch euer after greatly eſteemed and honoured him. By this ſmall number out of infinite examples, which I could heere mention, we ſee the great and woonderfull effects of this vertue of Fortitude, which are no leſſe in euerye part thereof touched in our diſcourſe, as heereafter I hope we ſhall declare at large. Wherefore we may well ſay, that this vertue is very neceſſarie to liue well and happily, and to lead vs to the end of our being, which is to referre both our life and death to the onely exerciſe of dutie and honeſtie: that by it we enioy the true reſt of the ſoule, which is nothing elſe (as Cicero ſaith) than a peaceable, ſweete, and acceptable conſtancie, which vndoubtedly alwaies followeth Fortitude, being crowned with theſe two ineſtimable rewardes, the contempt of griefe, and of death, whereby we forſake that which is mortall, that we may imbrace heauenlie thinges in the hope and certaine expectation of that happie immortalitie.
               
            
            
               Of Timorouſnes, Feare, and Cowardlines, and of Raſhnes. Chap. 26.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  WE may call to remembrance that ſaying of Plato before mentioned, that a temperate man, not indued with the

vertue of Fortitude, falleth eaſilie into cowardlines & baſenes of mind, which is the defect of that vertue, which euen now we deſcribed: and likewiſe, that a ſtrong and valiant man without the direction of Prudence and Temperance, is eaſily caried away with temeritie and boldnes, which is the exceſſe of the ſame vertue. Which two vices are ſo hurtfull in the ſoule, that he which is infected with them, holdeth much more of the nature of a beaſt, than of that eſſence wherein he was created. Let vs then conſider what theſe imperfections are, that through the horror of that infamie which followeth them, we may be more zealous to follow that which is decent and honeſt.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  We muſt take good heede (ſaith Cicero) leaſt through feare of peril we commit any thing that may iuſtly argue vs to be timorous and fearfull. But withall we muſt beware that we offer not our ſelues vnto dangers without cauſe, than which nothing is more fooliſh and blame-woorthie.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  It is not ſeemely for a man (ſaith Plato) to commit any cowardly act to auoid perill. Temeritie alſo ſetteth foorth it ſelfe with courage, and contempt of dangers, but vnaduiſedly and to no purpoſe. But let vs heare ARAM, who will handle this matter more at large.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Albeit there is no greater diſgrace than to be iuſtly reproched with a cowardly and faint hart, eſpecially for youth to be called effeminate, yet is that feare good, which turneth vs away from diſhoneſt things, and maketh man ſtaied and wel aduiſed. This is the cauſe why the Ancients Two kinds of feare.ſpeaking of feare, made it twofold, the one good & neceſſarie, the other euill and hurtfull. The firſt, which they grounded vpon a good diſcourſe of reaſon & iudgement, was ſo eſteemed and honored of them, that in the citie of Sparta, which for armes & arts flouriſhed moſt among A Temple dedicated to feare.the Grecians, there was a temple dedicated & conſecrated to this feare: which, as they affirmed, better maintained and preſerued the eſtate of Common-wealthes, than any other thing whatſoeuer, bicauſe thereby man was led to ſtand more in awe of blame, reproch, & diſhonor,

than of death or griefe. Which thing maketh him both apter & readier to vndertake & to execute all vertuous & laudable matters, whenſoeuer good & iuſt occaſion ſhall be offred, & alſo more ſtaied againſt euerie raſh & vniuſt enterpriſe that might procure dammage to the common-wealth. And this was the occaſion of that Prouerbe, Feare alwaies accompanieth ſhame. Another reaſon alleadged by theſe wiſe men, whie they honoured in ſuch ſort this The feare of neighbour enimies is the ſafetie of a Common-wealth.fained goddeſſe, was, bicauſe to doubt and feare nothing was more hurtfull to Common-wealths, than their verie neighbour enimies, the feare of whome was their ſafetie and aſſurance. The other naughtie and pernicious feare Two ſorts of pernicious feare.ſtandeth of two kinds. The firſt beeing deſtitute of all good reaſon and aſſured iudgement, is that which we call Cowardlines and Puſillanimitie, alwaies followed of theſe two perturbations of the ſoule, Feare and Sadnes, and is the defect of the vertue of Fortitude, which wee purpoſe chiefly to handle at this preſent. The Grecians called it by theſe two words 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      the one ſignifieng troble, the other a band; as if they would haue ſaid, that it held the ſoule bound, and wholie troubled. They affirmed alſo, that this feare was as it were a giddineſſe and alienation of the mind from the right ſenſe, making the ſoule idle, dead, void of euerie good exploit or effect whatſoeuer. The laſt kind of feare is that which worketh in the wicked a feare of paine and puniſhment appointed for offences, wherby they are as it were with a bridle kept backe and reſtrained from preſuming to commit their villanies and damnable purpoſes. Now as the firſt kind of feare ſaid to be good and neceſſarie, is a great token of a commendable and vertuous nature, as that which for good cauſe is grounded vpon the feare of reproch and infamie, and vpon a deſire to effect whatſoeuer belongeth to dutie: ſo the one of theſe two laſt kinds teſtifieth a vile, contemptible, and abiect nature; and the other a wicked & corrupt diſpoſition. Plutark ſpeaking of this good Of the good feare.feare calleth it one of the Elements & grounds of vertue, ſaying, that it is chieflie requiſite and neceſſarie for thoſe

that haue authoritie ouer others, who ought to feare rather to practiſe euil, than to receiue puniſhment for the ſame, bicauſe the firſt is the cauſe of the latter, not onelie to themſelues, but to ſo manie as wallow in wickedneſſe, which is neuer without recompenſe. Therefore a prudent and well aduiſed man ought to haue this feare alwaies It is ioined with the true loue of God.before his eies, I meane this childlike feare, which is vnſeparably ioined with the true loue we owe to our common father, and is the beginning of all wiſedome, wherby we are induced to honour him. And looke how much the more the ancient Pagans were kept in awe by this It cauſeth vs to reſpect the good of our countrie.good feare, ſo much the more ſhall our condemnation be doubled, if we deſpiſe it. The dutie alſo of this profitable feare is, to haue an eie vnto the good and ſafetie of our countrie, and to cauſe vs faithfully to diſcharge euery charge committed vnto vs, to the end we incurre not perpetuall ſhame and infamie among all good men. It cauſeth vs to feare onelie the diſhonor of an vnaduiſed counſel or action, and to account it very ſeemelie & honorable to be blamed and euil ſpoken of for well dooing, which Alexander the great ſaid did well become a king. This Phocion.good feare made Phocion, who for his deſert and valure was choſen generall of the Atheniens fiue & fortie times, to ſaie, that he would neuer counſell, but hinder to the vttermoſt of his power that enterpriſe of war, which they would haue concluded againſt Alexander. For (ſaid he) although the Athenians would caſt awaie themſelues, yet I will not ſuffer them to doe ſo, bicauſe I haue for that intent & purpoſe taken vpon me the charge of a Captain. And when Demosthenes, who perſuaded this warre, ſaid vnto him, the people will kill thee if they enter into a furie: Phocion replied, Naie they will kill thee, if they be Antigonus.well in their wits. Antigonus the ſecond, king of Macedonia, declared what benefit commeth of this good feare neceſſarie for the foreſight of a wiſe and experienced captaine in warre, when retiring once from before his enimies who came to aſſaile him, and being told by certaine that he fled, he anſwered, It is cleane contrarie. For I

looke backe to that profit wich is behind me. As touching the opinion of the ancients alreadie mentioned, that to ſtand in feare of nothing is more hurtful to Common-wealthes than foraine enimies: it is that which Scipio 
                     Scipio Naſica.
                     Naſica a Romane Senator meant to ſignifie, when vpon the hearing of ſome, who ſaid that Rome was in ſafetie, if Carthage were laid waſt; he replied, that it was farre otherwiſe. For (ſaid he) we are in greater danger now than euer, bicauſe we ſtand no more in awe of anie: whereby he wiſelie inferred, that too great and vnlooked for proſperitie The effects of too great proſperitie in Commonwealths.of cities is commonly the cauſe of raiſing ciuill wars in them & ſecret diuiſions, or elſe of bringing into them ſo great idlenes, that by it a gate is opened to all vices, as in truth it fell out with the Romans. For then beeing in the top of their felicitie and greatneſſe, by reaſon of the deſtruction aſwell of the Carthaginians by Scipio the yonger, as of the Macedonians vnder Perſeus and Antiochus, the people began to abuſe their authoritie, preferring vnto eſtates and places of honour, not the beſt and iuſteſt citizens, but ſuch as flattered them moſt in their vices and diſſolutenes, and wan their hearts with prodigall and ſuperfluous feaſts and diſtributions, to whome they ſolde their publike voices. Whereupon in the end, thoſe ciuill wars aroſe, which was the cauſe of their finall ouerthrow, and of the alteration of their popular eſtate into a tyrannie, afterwards called a Monarchie. But this diſcourſe being the matter of another Subiect, let vs come to the defect of the vertue of Fortitude, which is a feare voide Of that feare which is the defect of Fortitude.of reaſon and aſſurance, and argueth a faint and cowardlie hart, cauſing a man through want of ſenſe and vnderſtanding to account this the ſureſt waie, to doubt all things, and to diſtruſt euerie one. Of this feare one of the ancients ſaid, Feare taketh awaie memorie and all good effects from euerie art and industrie. Yea ſometimes ſome haue beene found ſo faint-harted, that as ſoone as this feare ſeazed vpon them, they gaue vp the ghoſt, not beeing oppreſſed with anie other euill or violence. It is in this paſſion that Feare and Greefe fullie practiſe their power,

being grounded vpon a falſe opinion of euill, and ſworne enimies to all reſt and tranquillitie, gnawing and conſuming life as ruſt doth ſteele or yron. Neither is this feare without an vnrulie deſire and immoderate ioie in things that are worldlie, baſe, and contemptible, whereupon the ſoule is continuallie carried hither and thither, with pernicious and immoderate paſſions, which depriue hir of the excellencie of hir immortalitie to attend to the mortall and corruptible affections of the fleſh. Alexander ſpake of ſuch as are poſſeſſed with this feare, when he ſaid, that no place is ſo ſtrong by nature and ſituation, which fearefull men iudge ſafe enough. Therefore the Satyricall Poēt ſaid verie well, that Fortune alwayes maketh 
                     Timorous men are alwaies litle.
                     timorous men little. For although they be borne bigge of ſtature, yet the ſmall courage of their hearts maketh them ſo much the more contemptible, bringing foorth worſe and more dangerous effects, and making them vnwoorthy of all intermedling with matters of eſtate, of policie, or of warre. In this number, among many whom hiſtories Claudius Caeſar.mention, we may heere reckon Claudius the firſt of the Caeſars, who was ſo faint-harted, baſe-minded, & blockiſh, that his mother ſaid often of him, that Nature had begun, but not finiſhed him. And truly a hartles-fellow, or one of litle-hart, is nothing els but a bodie without a ſoule. The memorie of ſuch men (of whome we ſee but too many examples among vs) ought to be buried in obliuion, and during their life time they ſhould remaine vnknowne aſwel The feares of faint-harts.for their owne honor, as for the good of the common ſocietie of men, to which they could not but be offenſiue and hurtfull. For the moſt part they are not onely afraid of men, of the hazards of warres, of troubles & ſeditions, of the dangers of long voyages, of the loſſe of their goods, of diſeaſes, of dolors, yea, of the leaſt diſcommodities and aduerſities that can befall men: the euent of all which, cauſeth them vſually to forget all reaſon and dutie, but they are alſo frighted with dreames, they tremble at ſights and viſions, they credite falſe abuſing ſpirits, and with a forlorne feare they ſtand in awe of the celeſtiall

ſignes. Briefly, vpon the leaſt occaſions that may be, and ſuch as are vnwoorthie the care of a prudent and valiant mind, they fall oftentimes into ſuch vexation of ſpirite, that they looſe it altogither, and become mad and inraged: inſomuch, that many haue haſtened forward with their owne hands, the end of their ſo miſerable daies. As we read of Mydas king of Phrygia, who being troubled Mydas.and vexed with certaine dreames, grew to be deſperate, and died voluntarily by drinking the bloud of a Bull. Aristodemus alſo, king of the Meſſenians, being in warre againſt his ſubiects, it happened that the dogs howled like woolnes, which came to paſſe by reaſon of a certain herbe called Dogſteeth, growing about his altar at home: Wherupon vnderſtanding by the Southſayers that it was an euill ſigne, he was ſtroken with ſuch a feare and conceit thereof, that he ſlue himſelfe. Caſſius the captaine Caſſius.had a better hart when he anſwered a Chaldean Aſtrologian, who counſelled him not to fight with the Parthians vntill the Moone had paſſed Scorpio; I feare not (quoth he) Scorpions, but Archers. This hee ſpake bicauſe the Romane armie had beene put to the worſt before in the plaine of Chaldea by the Parthian archers. Neuertheles that which we ſpake of Midas and Aristodemus is ſeldome Baſe minds ſtand in great feare of death and griefe.followed, yea is rarely found amongſt cowards, and baſe minded fellowes, who commonly flie from temporall death as much as may be, as alſo from griefe, which they feare in ſuch ſort, that contemning all vertue and iuſtice, they labour for nothing more, than to preſerue their liues togither with their carnall commodities, for the obtaining of which they ſeeme to liue cleane without all care of their ſoule, as if hir portiō were in this world, & ſhould end togither with the bodie. The effects of this feare of death are ſufficiently felt of euerie one in particular, the number of them being verie ſmall, who would not willingly make (as we ſay) a ſluce to their conſciences, that they might be deliuered thereof. Let vs then confeſſe our ſelues to be fearefull and faint-harted, and not boaſt of Fortitude and generoſitie of hart, which will not ſuffer vs

to ſtand in feare, no not of certaine death in an holie and honeſt cauſe: ſo farre is it from fearing and forſaking dutie through doubt of an vncertaine death. That which Speron rehearſeth in his dialogues of a gentleman of Padua ſufficiently ſheweth what maruellous force is in the apprehenſion and conceit of death, which extendeth it ſelfe not onelie vpon the ſpirites of men, but alſo changeth the nature of their bodies, who want conſtancie toA ſtrange alteration of a Gentlemans haire in one night.beare and ſuſtaine a ſmall and light griefe for the inioieng of eternall goods. This yoong gentleman being put in priſon vpon ſome accuſation, it was tolde him, that of a certaintie his head ſhould be cut off the daie following. Which newes altered him in ſuch ſort, that in one onelie night hee was all white & greie-headed, whereof before there was no ſhew or appearance, and ſo he liued long time after. Beſides, experience daily miniſtreth vnto vs ſufficient proofe of the miſchiefes which proceed of want of courage and faint-hartednes, eſpecially in matters of eſtate, gouernment, and publike offices, wherein a fearefull and ſoft man, for euerie reproch, diſlike, or euill opinion of the world, yea of ſuch as are moſt ignorant, and much more for the leaſt dangers of his perſon, and for feare and threatnings of the greater ſort, yeeldeth eaſilie againſt all dutie, and ſuffereth himſelfe to be drawne to the error of the wicked and common ſort. As for the middle and leſſer ſort, wherefore ſerue they being void ofAgamemnon diſpenſed with a rich coward. reaſon and aſſurance? Homer ſaith, that king Agamemnon diſpenſed with a rich Coward for going to warre perſonally, for a Mare which he gaue him. Wherein truly he had great reaſon, bicauſe a fearefull man hurteth much and profiteth little, not onely in warre, but euen in euery good and vertuous action. This cauſed that great captaine Paulus Aemilius to ſay, that magnanimitie and courage were for the moſt part reuerenced in euery enimie of theirs, but that cowardlines, although it had good ſucceſſe, yet was it alwayes and of all men deſpiſed. I might here mention ſundry vices, which ordinarily growe and are nouriſhed of cowardlines and puſillanimitie, as namely, crueltie, treaſon,

breach of promiſe, impatiencie, idleneſſe, ſlouth, couetouſnes,What vices proceed of cowardlines. enuie, backbiting, and all iniuſtice, were it not that I hope the ſequele of our diſcourſes will offer vs matter and occaſion to handle theſe vices particularly, our houre not affording vs time and leaſure to enter vpon ſo many things togither. There remaineth yet a word to beOf ſeruile feare ſpoken of that feare which I ſaid did accompany the froward and wicked many times, being called by the Poet a ſeruile feare, which through the onely horror of puniſhment holdeth them backe from practiſing their wicked purpoſes. Of them ſpake Pythagoras when he ſayd that he which careth not for doing of euill in any other reſpect, but onely bicauſe he would not be puniſhed is very wicked. Now although ſuch feare is accurſed, and to be condemned in all, yet is it neceſſarie for the preſeruation of humane ſocietie. For otherwiſe, all things would run to confuſion through the ſhameles malice of the wicked, of whom the earth is full. And it is a great deale better, that through ſuch feare they ſhould be reſtrained from their wicked deſires and wils, than that they ſhould without all feare abandon themſelues to put them in execution: albeit they are no way excuſable before God, who requireth to be ſerued with hart and ſpirit. Neuertheleſſe, ſuch feare doth not alwayes ſtay them from putting their malice in effect, but the more they are retained, ſo much the more are they inflamed and kindled with a deſire to ſatiſfie their corrupt will, which in the end is conſtrained to burſt foorth, and euidently to ſhew that miſchiefe which they kept ſecret a long time. But if the commō ſort (ſaith Seneca) be ſtaied by lawes from committing euil, the Philoſopher contrarywiſe hath reaſon for all lawes, doing good not bicauſe the law commandeth it, and abſtaining frō euil not bicauſe it forbiddeth it, but bicauſe he knoweth the one to be honeſt, and the other vile and wicked. Hauing now ſeene that vice which is cleane contrary to Fortitude, and knowing that euery vertue hath a counterfeitOf raſhneſſe & of the effects thereof. follower thereof, no doubt but raſhneſſe is that vice which falſly ſhrowdeth it ſelfe vnder the title of Fortitude
                     
and valure. For this vertue eaſily ouerthroweth it ſelfe if it be not vnderpropped with good counſaile, and the greater abilitie it ſuppoſeth to haue in it ſelfe, the ſooner it turneth aſide to wickedneſſe, if prudence gouerne it not. This is that which Iſocrates ſaith, that Fortitude ioined with Prudence is auaileable, but otherwiſe it procureth more euill than good to the poſſeſſors thereof. If Fortitude (ſaith Lactantius) without neceſſarie conſtraint, or for a diſhoneſt matter hazardeth hir ſelfe into daungers, ſhe chaungeth into raſhneſſe. He that doth anie thing at all aduentures (ſaith Aristotle) not conſideringWho is a vertuous man. how well he doth it, ought not to be called vertuous: but onely if he put it in execution, after knowledge, conſultation and election. Therefore as it is a noble acte to make ſuch account of vertue, as for the loue thereof, not to feare the loſſe of life, otherwiſe very deare; ſo is it a point of raſhneſſe and follie to contemne life vpon a ſmall and light occaſion. Raſhneſſe than is that which cauſeth a man with ioy of hart, and for a vaine and friuolous matter, to caſt himſelfe into certaine & vndoubted daungers, and to deſire earneſtly to fall into them, to vndertake all things vnaduiſedly, and vnconſtrained to expect thoſe perils which he knoweth will fall vponCato. him. The Elder Cato hearing certaine men to commend one openly who deſperately hazarded himſelfe, and was bold without diſcretion in perils of warre, ſaid vnto them, That there was great difference betweene much esteeming of vertue, and little waighing of life: as if he would haue ſaid, that it is a commendable thing to deſire life to be vertuous. And truely to liue and die are not of themſelues good, but to do both of them rightly and in a good matter. So that to ſhunne death, if it proceed not from a faint hart, is not to be reprehended. But raſhneſſe is eſpeciallie to be condemned in Captaines and Heads of Armies, as that which procureth great dammage to kingdomesIphicrates compariſon of an armie to a mans bodie. and monarchies, and to ſo manie as march vnder their conduct. This is that which Iphicrates an Athenian captaine would haue vs learne, who compared in an armie

the Scoutes lightly armed to the handes: the Horſemen to the Feete: the battaile of Footemen to the Stomacke and breaſt: and the Captaine to the Head of a Mans bodie. For (ſayde he) the Captaine that hazardeth himſelfe too much, and throweth himſelfe into daunger without cauſe, is not retchleſſe of his own life onely, but alſo of all thoſe whoſe ſafetie dependeth vpon him: and contrarywiſe, in taking care for the ſafegard of his owne perſon, he careth therewithall for all thoſe that are vnder him. Iſadas the LacedemonianThe raſhneſſe of Iſadas. ſeeyng Epaminondas with the Thebane armie at hand agaynſt the Spartanes, readie to force and take their Citie, vnclothed himſelfe ſtarke naked, puttyng off his Shirte and all, and taking a Partiſane in one hand, and a ſworde in the other, he went with might and mayne agaynſt his enemies, where he ſhewed great proweſſe and valure. For which behauiour although he had a Crowne giuen him by the Seignorie according to the cuſtome that was amongſt them, yet he was fined, bicauſe he hazarded his lyfe ſo raſhly. We ſee daylie among vs but too manie examples of great miſchiefes which befall men through their raſhneſſe, led with ambition and deſire of vayne-glorie. Therefore to conclude, and to drawe ſome profite out of our preſent diſcourſe, we ſay that we ought to feare the incurring of blame and diſhonour for filthie and vnhoneſt matters, and for euill deeds, and are to ſhun all feare proceeding of want of courage, of puſillanimitie, and of a depraued and corrupted nature: this laſt, as proper and peculiar to the wicked, and the other, as that which maketh a man vnapt to all good and commendable thinges. And as it is an acte of Prudence and Fortitude to prouide for a tempeſt and for ſtormes to come, (when the ſhippe is ſtill in the Hauen) and yet not to be afrayd in the middeſt of ſtormes: ſo is it a point of raſhneſſe for a man to throw himſelfe wittingly into an euident danger, which might be auoyded without any breach of Vertue and Iuſtice.

Therefore Plato ſaith, that timorous and raſh men feare & enterpriſe vnaduiſedly, whatſoeuer they take in hand, How a man may be valiant.but that noble minds do all things with prudence. This alſo is that which Seneca ſaith: thou maiſt be valiant if thou caſt not thy ſelfe into perils, nor deſireſt to fall into them as timorous men do: neither abhorreſt or ſtandeſt in feare of them, as being timorous. But following the ſage aduice of Cicero, before we enterpriſe any thing, we muſt not onely conſider whether it be honeſt and commendable, but alſo whether there be any like meane to execute it, that neither throgh cowardlines we giue it ouer, nor through greedie deſire and preſumption, we purchaſe to our ſelues the reputation of raſh men: obſeruing moreouer in euery matter of importance this Maxime of eſtate, that before we begin any thing, we muſt diligently prepare and foreſee whatſoeuer is neceſſarie thereunto.
               
            
            
               Of Magnanimitie and Generoſitie. Chap. 27.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  WHen that ſaying of Ariſtotle cōmeth to my remembrance, that Fortitude isa mediocritie in fearing & enterpriſing, but that Magnanimitie conſiſteth in great things, I am ſomewhat troubled in the vnderſtāding of this ſentēce: bicauſe it ſemeth he would put a difference betweene Fortitude and Magnanimitie, as if this latter had more excellencie and perfection in it than the other. For this cauſe my Companions, hauing intreated this morning of the vertue of Fortitude, I propound now vnto you to diſcourſe vnto vs what Magnanimitie is.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Among mortall and periſhing things, there is nothing (as the Philoſophers ſay) that ought to trouble the Magnanimitie of a noble hart. But I find that they propound vnto vs in this word ſuch a wiſedome, as cannot be in him that remaineth all his life time ſubiect to affections and perturbations. For this they would not haue in true Magnanimitie, which notwithſtanding is wel

able to bring foorth infinite wonderfull effects out of a noble mind, cauſing it to be neuer vnprouided of a good reſolution to be put in execution according to the ouerthwarts that happen vnto him.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  The propertie of a noble ſpirit (ſaith Cicero) is not to be turned aſide through ingratitude from the deſire of doing good to all men, euen to his enemies, as alſo to leaue carking for that which is mortall, that he may imbrace celeſtiall things. But we ſhall vnderſtand more at large of thee AMANA, how theſe marueilous effects are works of true magnanimitie.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Although the vertue of Fortitude be neuer perfected without Magnanimitie, (which is as much to What Magnanimitie is.ſay, as generoſitie or noblenes of hart) as that which vndoubtedly is comprehended vnder the firſt part of Fortitude, which Cicero calleth Magnificence, or a doing of great & excellent things, yet notwithſtanding it ſeemeth that this word Magnanimitie carieth with it ſome greater and more particular Empaſis, & that a man may ſay, that the wonderful effects thereof appeare principally in three points, whereof I purpoſe here to diſcourſe. The firſt concerning Magnanimitie conſiſteth in three things.extreme and deſperate matters, as when a man is paſt all hope of ſauing his life, wherein perfect magnanimitie always knoweth how to find out a conuenient remedie and wiſe conſolation, not ſuffering himſelfe to be vexed therewith. The ſecond reſpecteth dutie towards enimies, againſt whom generoſitie will in no wiſe ſuffer a man to practiſe or to conſent to any wickedneſſe, vnder what pretence ſo euer it be, nor for any aduantage which may be reaped thereby. The third cauſeth a noble minded man to contemne and to account that thing vnworthy the care of his ſoule which others wonder at, & labor by all means to obtaine, namelie, ſtrength, health, beauty, which the Philoſophers call the goods of the bodie: and The goods of the body and of Fortune.riches, honor, and glory, which they ſay are the goods of fortune: and likewiſe not to ſtand in feare of their contraries. Amongſt the woorthy and famous men of olde time, whoſe names and glorious factes crowned with an

immortall Lawrell, are ingrauen in the temple of Memorie, we find no praiſe woorthie of greater admiration, or that ought to awaken and ſtirre vs vp better in Chriſtian dutie, than the effects of this vertue of Magnanimitie, vpon theſe three occaſions preſently touched. Whereof one The firſt effect of Magnanimitie.effect is, that we yeeld not againſt reaſon, nor paſſe the limits of duty by fainting vnder that heauy burthen of extreme diſtreſſes, which the horror of death bringeth with it: but that euen in the midſt of greateſt agonie which ſeemeth intollerable in mans iudgement, we ſhew ſuch grauitie and woorthines, that we depart not in any ſort from the peace and quietnes of our ſoules, but with conſtancie and cheerefulnes of ſpirit, meditate vpon the ioy of that hauen of ſaluation, which we behold with the eyes of our ſoule, whereinto through a happy death at hand, we ſhall The ſecond effect.ſhortly be receiued. Another effect is, that we accompliſh (ſo farre as our frailtie can approch to perfection) the commandement of the diuine will by louing our neighbors as our ſelues, and by abſtaining, euen in regard of our greateſt enimies, from doing, procuring or conſenting, yea by hindring that no treacherie or treaſon ſhould be wrought them, nor any other thing vnbeſeeming that naturall loue, which ought to be in euery one towards his like, and further by procuring them all the good and profit The third effect.that may be. The third effect of this great vertue, no les wonderful thā the reſt, is in that a noble minded man ſolong as he liueth, wholy withdraweth his affection from worldly and corruptible things through a ſtedfaſt & conſtant The common remedie of the Ancients in deſperate caſes.reaſon, and lifteth it vp to the meditation and holy deſire of heauenly and eternal things. The remedy which theſe great perſonages deſtitute of the right knowledge of the truth moſt commonly vſed when their affaires were paſt all hope of mans helpe, was death, which they choſe rather to bring vpon themſelues by their owne handes, than to fall into the mercy of their enimies, whereby they ſuppoſed that they committed a noble act, woorthie the greatnes of their inuincible courage. And if peraduenture they were ſurpriſed, and forced in ſuch ſort by their

enemies, that they were compelled to become their priſoners, they neuer deſired them to ſaue their liues, ſaying, that it beſeemed not a noble hart, and that in ſo doing they ſhould ſubmit both hart and bodie to him, who before Cato of Vtica.had but the bodie in his power. Cato the yoonger being brought to ſuch extremity in the towne of Vtica, that by the aduice of all thoſe that were with him, he was to ſend Embaſſadors to Caeſar the Conqueror, to practiſe an agreement after ſubmiſſion to his mercie, yeelded therevnto in the behalfe of others, but forbad that any mention ſhould be made of himſelfe. It belongeth (quoth he) to thoſe that are ouercome, to make requeſt, and to ſuch as haue done amiſſe, to craue pardon. As for me I will account my ſelfe inuincible ſo long as in right and iustice I ſhall be mightier than Caeſar. He it is that is now taken and ouercome, bicauſe that which hitherto he denied to take in hand againſt the Common-wealth, is at this preſent ſufficiently teſtified against him, and diſcouered. Neither will I be beholding or bound to a Tyrant for an vniust matter. For it is a point of iniustice in him to vſurpe the power of ſauing their liues (like a Lord) ouer whome he hath no right to command. After many other ſpeeches of Philoſophie vſed by him, & ſtanding much vpon that Stoicall opinion, that onely a wiſe and 
                     The opinion of the Stoicks.
                     good man is free, and that all wicked men are bond men and ſlaues, he went alone into his chamber, and ſlew himſelfe with his ſword. Sylla the Dictator hauing condemned to death all the inhabitants of Perouza, and pardoning none but his Hoſt, he alſo would needes die, ſaying: that he would not hold his life of the murtherer of his countrey. Brutus, 
                     Brutus.after the battel loſt againſt Augustus Caeſar, was counſelled by certaine of his friends to flie: I must flie in deed (ſaid he) but with hands, not with feete. And taking them all by the hand, he vttered theſe words with a very good and cheerfull countenance: I feele my hart greatly contented, bicauſe none of my friends haue for ſaken me in this buſines: neither complaine I of fortune at all, but onely ſo farre foorth as toucheth my countrey. For I esteeme my ſelfe happier than they that haue vanquiſhed, as long as I leaue behind me a glorie of vertue for hazarding all liberally, to free from bondage my brethren and countreymen.
                     
                     Which praiſe our conquering enemies neither by might nor money can obtaine, and leaue to posteritie: but men will alwaies ſay of them, that being vniuſt and wicked, they haue ouerthrowne good men to vſurpe a tyrannous rule and dominion, that belongeth not vnto them. After he had thus ſpokē, he tooke his ſword, and falling vpon the point thereof, gaue vp the ghoſt. Caſſius alſo his companion, cauſed his owne head to be cut off by one of his ſlaues, whom he had made free, and kept A notable hiſtorie of the Numantines.with him long time before for ſuch a neceſſitie. The hiſtorie which we read of the Numantines, commeth in fitly for this matter which we handle heere. For after they had ſuſtained the ſiege of the Romanes fourteene yeeres togither, and were in the ende incloſed by Scipio with a very great ditch of two and fortie foote in depth, and thirtie in breadth, which compaſſed the citie round about, the Conſul ſummoned them to commit themſelues to the clemencie of the Romanes, and to truſt to their promiſe, ſeeing all meanes of ſallying foorth to fight, and of recouering any victuals were taken from them. To whome they made this onely anſwer, that foraſmuch as they had liued for the ſpace of 338. yeeres in freedom, they would not die ſlaues in any ſort. Whereupon, ſuch as were moſt valiant, aſſembled togither and ſlew thoſe that were moſt growne in yeeres, with women and children. Then they tooke all the riches of the citie, and of the temples, and brought it into the midſt of a great hall, and ſetting fire to all quarters of the citie, each of them tooke the ſpeedieſt poiſon they could find: ſo that the temples, houſes, riches, and people of Numantia ended all in one day, leauing to Scipio, neither riches to ſpoile, neither man or woman to triumph withal. For during the whole time wherin their citie was beſieged, not one Numantine yeelded himſelfe priſoner to any Romane, but ſlew himſelfe rather than he would yeeld. Which Magnanimitie cauſed Scipio to bewaile the deſolation of ſuch a people, in theſe words: O happie Numantia, which the Gods had decreed ſhould once end, but neuer be vanquiſhed. Now albeit theſe examples and infinite other like to theſe, are ſet foorth vnto vs by

Hiſtoriographers, as teſtimonies of an excellent Magnanimitie, whereby they would teach vs both to be neuer diſcouraged for the moſt tedious trauels and irkeſome miſeries of mans life, and alſo to ſtand ſo little in awe of death, that for feare thereof, much leſſe for any other torment or griefe, we neuer commit any thing vnbeſeeming a noble hart: yet notwithſtanding, no man that feareth No man ought to haſten forward the end of his daies.God, and is willing to obey him, ought to forget himſelfe ſo much, as to haſten forward the end of his daies for any occaſion whatſoeuer. This did Socrates knowe very well, when he ſaid, that we muſt not ſuffer our ſoule to depart from the Sentinell wherein ſhe is placed in this bodie, without the leaue of hir Captaine: and that ſo waightie a matter as death ought not (as Plato ſaith) to be in mans power. But if it be offred vnto vs by the will of God, then with a magnanimious hart, void of al ſtarting aſide in any thing againſt dutie, we muſt ſet free this paſſage, being ſtaied and aſſuredly grounded vpon that conſolation, which neuer forſaketh a good conſcience, not onely through the expectation of a naked and ſimple humane glorie, which moſt of the Heathen propounded to themſelues, but of that life which abideth for euer: following therein the conſtancie of Alcibiades, a great Captaine of Alcibiades conſtancie and courage in death.Grecia, who hearing the ſentence of his condemnation to death pronounced, ſaid: It is I that leaue the Athenians condemned to die, and not they me. For I go to ſeeke the Gods where I ſhall be immortall, but they ſhall remaine ſtill amongſt men, who are all ſubiect to death. Socrates alſo hauing a capitall accuſation Socrates ſpeech at his arraignment.laid againſt him wrongfully, directed his ſpeech to the Iudges, and ſaid vnto them, that his accuſers by their falſe depoſitions might wel cauſe him to die, but hurt him they could not: adding further, that he woulde neuer leaue his profeſſion of Philoſophie for feare of death. I 
                           •
                        m per ſwaded (quoth he in Plato) that this my opinion is very good, namely: that euery one ought to abide constantly in that place and trade of life, which either he hath choſen himſelfe, or is appointed him by his ſuperior: that he muſt account that for the beſt, and hazard himſelfe therein to all dangers, without feare either of
                     
                     death or of any other thing whatſoeuer. And therfore I ſhould erre greatly, if, obeying the Generall of warre which ye appointed vnto me in Potidaea, Amphipolis and Delos, and abiding in that place wherein he ſet me without feare of death, I ſhould now for feare of death, or of any other thing, forſake that rancke wherein God hath placed me, and would haue me remaine in, as I alwaies beleeued & thought: namely, that I ſhould liue a ſtudent in Philoſophie, correcting mine owne and other mens vices. Now, if I ſhould do otherwiſe, I might iuſtly be accuſed for calling my ſelfe a wiſe man, not 
                     What it is to feare death.
                     being ſo indeed: ſeeing to feare death, is to thinke that to be, which is not. But neither I, nor any other man, ought to do all that we may either in iudgement or in warre, to the end to auoid death. For it is very certaine, that he who would in time of battell caſt downe his armour and flie away, might by that meane auoid death (and the like is to be vnderſtood in al dangers & perils) if he were not afraid of infamie. But conſider (O countreymen) that it is no very hard matter to auoid death, but farre more difficult to eſchew wickednes and the ſhame therof, which are a great deale ſwifier of foote than that is. O ſpeech woorthie of eternal praiſe, and ſuch a one as inſtructeth a Chriſtian notably in a great and noble reſolution: namely, to run the race of his ſhort daies in that vocation, wherunto God hath called him, and that in the midſt of tortures, torments, & all agonies of death. From which, whileſt we expect a happie paſſage, we ought to be no more deſtitute of an apt remedie in all thoſe things, which according to the world are moſt irkeſome and deſperate, but ſuſtaine them with like conſtancie and woorthines, not departing from the tranquillitie and reſt of our ſoules, which is a more noble act, than to haſten forward the end of our daies, that we may be deliuered of them. But howſoeuer it be, let vs alwaies preferre a vertuous and honeſt death, before any kind of life, be it neuer ſo pleaſant. And ſeeing that one and the ſame paſſage is prepared aſwell for the coward as the couragious, (it being decreed, that all men muſt once die) the louers of vertue ſhall do well to reape to themſelues ſome honor of common neceſſity, and to depart out of this life with ſuch a comfort. Now to come to the ſecond commendable effect

of this vertue of Magnanimity, wherof Heroical men Examples of the ſecond effect of Magnanimitie.were ſo prodigall heeretofore for the benefit and ſafetie of their enemies, we can bring no better teſtimonie than Fabritius.the courteous fact of Fabritius the Romane Conſul towards Pyrrhus, who warred againſt him, and whoſe Phyſition wrote vnto him, that he offered himſelfe to murder his maiſter by poiſon, and ſo to end their ſtrife without danger. But Fabritius ſent the letter vnto him, and ſignified withall, that he had made a bad choice of friends, aſwell as of enemies, bicauſe he made warre with vpright & good men, and truſted ſuch as were diſloiall and wicked: whereof he thought good to let him vnderſtand, not ſo much to gratifie him, as leaſt the accident of his death ſhould procure blame to the Romanes, as if they had ſought or conſented to end the warre by meanes of treaſon, not being able to obtaine their purpoſe by their vertue. Camillus a Romane Dictator, is no leſſe to be commended Camillus.for that which he did during the ſiege of the citie of the Fallerians. For he that was Schoolemaiſter to the chiefeſt mens children amongſt them, being gone out of the citie, vnder colour to 
                        〈◊〉
                      his youth to walke, and to exerciſe themſelues along the wals, deliuered them into the hands of this Romane Captaine, ſaying vnto him, that he might be well aſſured the Citizens would yeeld themſelues to his deuotion, for the ſafetie and libertie of that which was deereſt vnto them. But Camillus knowing this to be too vile and wicked a practiſe, ſaid to thoſe that were with him, that although men vſed great outrage and violence in warre, yet among good men certaine lawes & points of equitie were to be obſerued. For victorie was A good leſſon for a Generall to learne.not ſo much to be deſired, as that it ſhould be gotten and kept by ſuch curſed and damnable meanes: but a Generall ought to warre, truſting to his owne vertue, and not to the wickednes of others. Then ſtripping the ſaid ſchole maiſter, and binding his hands behind him, he deliuered him naked into the hands of his ſchollers, and gaue to ech of them a bundle of rods, that ſo they might carye him backe againe into the citie. For which noble act the Citizens

yeelded themſelues to the Romanes: ſaying, that in preferring iuſtice before victorie, they had taught them to chooſe rather to ſubmit themſelues vnto them, than to retaine ſtill their libertie: confeſſing withall, that they were ouercome more by their vertue, than vanquiſhed by their force and power. So great power hath Magnanimitie, that it doth not onely aduance Princes to the higheſt degree of honor, but alſo abateth the hart of the puiſſant and warlike enemie, and oftentimes procureth victorie without battell. Truly we may draw an excellent doctrine out of theſe examples, which make all thoſe without excuſe, that ſpare nothing to attaine to the end of their intents and deuices, making no difficultie at the deſtruction of innocents, but exerciſing all kind of crueltie, ſo they may ouerthrow their enemies by what meanes ſoeuer: vſing commonly that ſaying of Lyſander, Admirall of the Lacedemonians, that if the Lions skin will not ſuffice, the Foxe 
                     Treaſon and crueltie neuer find place in a noble hart.
                     his skin alſo is to be ſewed on. But let vs reſolutely hold this, that treaſon neuer findeth place in a noble hart, no more than the bodie of a Foxe is not found in a Lions bodie. Further, it is notoriouſly 
                        〈◊〉
                      that the Ancients ſtriued to procure all good and profit to their enemies, vſing clemencie and humanitie towards them, when they had greater occaſion and meanes to be reuenged of them. Heereof we may alleadge good examples, when we diſcourſe heereafter particularly of thoſe vertues that are proper to a noble minded man, who ought to hate crueltie Of the third effect of Magnanimitie.no leſſe than treaſon. We are therefore to looke vnto the laſt effect, and ſound proofe of Magnanimitie & Generoſitie heere propounded by vs, which we ſaid, conſiſted in the contempt of earthlie and humane goods. Wherein truly reſteth the very perfection of a Chriſtian, who lifteth vp his deſires to his laſt and ſoueraigne Good in heauen. Now, becauſe there are but few that loue not themſelues too much in thoſe things that concerne the commodities of this life, and fewer that ſeeke not after glorie & honor, as a recompence of their excellent deeds, and that deſire not riches earneſtly to ſatisfie their pleaſure,

in theſe three points alſo a noble minded man cauſeth his vertue to appeere more wonderfull, bicauſe he doth not iudge thē to be a worthie reward for the ſame, but rather altogether vnwoorthy the care of his ſoule, for which principally he deſireth to liue. This is that which Cicero ſaith, that it is not ſeemely that he ſhould yeeld to couetouſnes and concupiſcence, who could not be ſubdued by feare, or that he ſhould be ouercome by pleaſure, who hath reſiſted griefe: but rather that theſe things ought to be ſhunned by all poſſible means, togither with the deſire of money, ſeeing there is nothing more vile & abiect, than to loue riches, nor more noble than to deſpiſe them. This alſo is that which Plato ſaith, that it belongeth to the duetie of a noble hart not onely to ſurmount feare, but alſo to moderate his deſires & concupiſcences, eſpecially when he hath libertie to vſe them, whither it be in the pleaſure of the bodie, or in the ambitious deſire of vain glory, honour and power. In this ſort then, he that hath a right noble and worthie mind, will no more waigh greatnes among men and eſtimation of the common ſort, than he doth griefe and pouertie, but depending wholie vpon the wil of God, & contēting himſelf with his works wrought in him, he will not that any good thing vpon earth can be taken from him. And bicauſe he aſpireth to thoſe things that are beſt, higheſt, and moſt difficult, he abideth free from all earthly care and griefe, as being long before prepared for all dolors, through the contempt of death, which bringing an end to the greateſt and moſt exceſſiue pangs, ſerueth him for an entrance into eternall reſt. We haue already alleaged many examples of ancient men fit for this matter which now we ſpeake of, and the ſequele of our treatiſes will furniſh vs with mo when we ſhall come to intreat of riches and worldly wealth, whereof we are to ſpeake more at large. But here we will propound Aristides onely to be imitated, who was a woorthy Aristides.man among the Athenians, whoſe opinion was that a good citizen ought to be alwayes prepared alike to offer his body & mind vnto the ſeruice of the common wealth,

without hope or expectation of any hired and mercenary reward either of money, honor, or glory. And ſo with an vnſpeakeable grauitie and conſtancie, he kept himſelfe always vpright in the ſeruice of his countrey, in ſuch ſort, that no honor done vnto him could cauſe him either to be puffed vp in hart, or to be more earneſt in imploying himſelfe: (as it is the maner of ſome to do ſeruice according as they are recompenced) neither could any repulſe or deniall which he ſuffred, abate his courage or trouble him, or yet diminiſh and leſſen his affection and deſire to profit his common wealth. Whereas now adayes we ſee that the moſt part of men with vs vpon a ſmal diſcontentment, labor to make publike profite to ſerue their deſires and paſſions, in ſtead of giuing themſelues to the good & benefit of their countrey. Now concluding our preſent Magnanimitie is inuincible.diſcourſe, we learne that true and perfect Magnanimitie and Generoſitie is inuincible and inexpugnable, bicauſe vpon this conſideration, that death is the common end of mans life, and that happy paſſage to life euerlaſting, ſhe deſpiſeth it altogither, and maketh leſſe account thereof than of bondage and vice: ſuſtaining alſo with a great & vnappalled hart, moſt cruel torments, not being mooued thereby to do any thing that may ſeem to proceed of the common weaknes and frailtie of mans nature. Further we learne that this vertue maketh him that poſſeſſeth hir, good, gentle, and curteous, euen towards his greateſt enimies, againſt whom it ſuffereth him not to vſe any couin or malice, but keepeth him alwayes within the limites of equitie and iuſtice: cauſing him further to make choice of and to finiſh all honeſt matters of his owne will, and for their loue, not caring at all for mortall and corruptible things, that he may wholy apprehend and take hold of thoſe things that are diuine and eternall.
               
            
            
               Of Hope. Chap. 28.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Wherin the perfectiō of a wiſe mans life conſiſteth. COnſidering that the perfection of a wiſe mans life conſiſteth in the practiſe of great

and excellent things, he that is borne to vertue feeleth himſelfe touched to the quicke with deſire to bring them to paſſe. But the inſtabilitie and ſmall aſſurance which he knoweth to be in that which dependeth vpon the doubtfull euent of euery high enterpriſe, oftentimes cooleth his vertuous intents, if a certaine confidence and good hope did not make eaſie vnto him the means of attaining thereunto. Likewiſe, when he feeleth the ſharpe pricking that proceedeth from the ouerthwarts and miſeries of man, which ſequeſter themſelues very little from his life, he is ſoone daunted with ſorow and care, if he haue not this hope that comforteth him with expectation of ſpeedie redreſſe. Of you therfore (my companions) we ſhall vnderſtand the excellencie of this Good that belongeth to the ſoule and is ſo neceſſarie for a happy life, I mean Hope, which dependeth of the vertue of Fortitude, whereof we haue diſcourſed all this day.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Learned men (ſaith Bias) differ from the ignorant ſort in the goodnes of hope, which truly is verie profitable, ſweete and acceptable to a prudent man. But euil hope leadeth carnall men, as a naughtie guide, vnto ſinne.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  As good hope ſerueth to increaſe ſtrength in a man, ſo raſh hope oftentimes beguileth men. But it belongeth to thee ASER to handle this matter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Alexander the great being by the ſtates of all Alexander reſerued hope only for himſelfe.Graecia choſen generall captaine to paſſe into Aſia, and to make warre with the Perſians, before he tooke ſhip he enquired after the eſtate of all his friends to know what means they had to follow him. Then he diſtributed and gaue to one lands, to another a village, to this man the cuſtome of ſome hauen, to another the profit of ſome Borough towne, beſtowing in this maner the moſt part of his demeans and reuenues. And when Perdicas one of his Lieutenants demanded of him what he reſerued for himſelfe: he anſwered, Hope. So great confidence had this noble monarch, not in the ſtrength of his weapons, or multitude of good warriors deſirous of glory and honor, but

                     Properties requiſite in a Generall. in his owne vertue, being content and ſatisfied with a little, in his continencie, beneficence, contempt of death, magnanimitie, curteſie, gratious intertainment, being eaſie to be ſpoken with, hauing a free diſpoſition by nature, without diſſimulation, conſtant in his counſels, ready and quicke in his executions, willing to be the firſt in glorie, and alwaies reſolute to do that which dutie commanded. From this Hope thus ſurely grounded, he neuer ſhrunke, vntill the laſt gaſpe of his life: which cauſed him to make this anſwer to Parmenio, who counſelled him to accept of the offers which Darius made vnto him for peace: namely, ſixe thouſand Talents, beeing in value ſixe Millions of gold, and the halfe of his kingdome, with a daughter of his in mariage; If I were Parmenio, I would accept of his profers. Beſides, he ſent word to Darius, that the earth could not beare two Sunnes, nor Aſia two Kings. Neither was he deceiued of his good hope, which led him to ſuch a perfection of worldlie glorie and felicitie, that he was the firſt and laſt that euer approched neere vnto it. This Hope was that foundation whereupon ſo many great and excellent Heathen men and Pagans built their high and noble enterpriſes.The definition of confidence. For proofe heerof may be alleadged that definition, which Cicero giueth of Confidence, being the ſecond part of Hope, affirming it to be that vertue, whereby the ſpirite of man putteth great truſt in waightie and honeſt matters, hauing a certaine and ſure hope in himſelfe. And elſewhere he ſaith, that he ſhall neither reioice, nor be troubled out of meaſure, that truſteth in himſelfe. But weOur hope muſt be grounded vpon the grace of God. know that this Hope is weake and vncertaine, if it be not ſetled and grounded vpon a ſure expectation of the helpe and grace of God, without which we can neuer proſper. Now this is out of doubt, that we can not hope and waite for that grace, vnles our counſels and enterpriſes haue reaſon for their guide, and right and equitie for theirOf vaine hope. bounds. For (as an ancient man ſaith) that man hopeth in vaine that feareth not God, and they onely are filled with good hope, whoſe conſciences are cleane and pure. So that all they that are led with ſundry euill paſſions, either

of ambition, of vainglory, or of any other vnbrideled deſire, can neuer haue that happy and good hope, which neuer deceiueth men. And in deed they miſſe oftentimes of their intent, yea, are depriued of that which was their owne and certaine, bicauſe they are deſirous to get vniuſtly another mans right, being alſo vncertaine. The ſelfe ſame thing falleth out to thoſe that truſt and ſtay in ſuch ſort vpon their owne ſtrength, vertue and conſtancie, that fearing in no reſpect (as they ſay) the greateſt calamities that can come to man, aſſure themſelues in their proſperitieWho are ſooneſt throwen downe with aduerſitie. to be inuincible in their reſolutions, and preſume that nothing is able to pull them downe, or to cauſe them to change their opinion: and yet, ſo ſoone as the wind of aduerſitie bloweth, they are the firſt that are throwen to the ground, and ſooneſt ſhew foorth the inconſtancie & imbecillitie of mans nature left to it ſelf. As contrarywiſe, they to whom God giueth eyes to acknowledge themſelues, are then humbled, ſo that they reuerence the ordinance of God, who derideth all the enterpriſes of men. The practiſe hereof was well knowen to Wencelaüs king ofWencelaüs. Hungaria, being driuen out of his kingdom, and forſaken of his owne, who oftentimes vſed to ſay, The hope I had in men hindred me from putting my trust in God: but now that all my confidence is in him, I aſſure my ſelfe that he will helpe me by his diuine goodneſſe. As in deed it fell out ſo vnto him, being reeſtabliſhed agayne in all his eſtates and dignities. But to the end we confound not togither that which is ſimplie diuine, with that which is humaine, I thinke we ought to make a double hope: the firſt, true, certaine, and vnfallible,The diuiſion of hope. which concerneth holy and ſacred myſteries: the other doubtful, reſpecting earthly things only. As touching the firſt, we know things to come by the aſſurance thereof, as well as if they were already done. We are taught in the holy ſcripture what is the vndoubted certaintie ofOf the true and infallible hope. this hope, which through faith ought to be ſo imprinted in our harts, that by the ſtrength, power, & vertue therof, we ſhould run the race of our ſhort daies in all ioy, happineſſe and peaceable tranquillitie of our minds, expecting

without doubting the perfect and abſolute enioying of thoſe goods that are immortall, vnutterable and endleſſe in the ſecond and eternall life. Without this hope grounded vpon the free goodneſſe of the almightie, let vs aſſuredly perſwade our ſelues, that mans eſtate is more miſerable than that of brute beaſts, ſeeing this is the only way of his ſaluation. The other hope which concerneth this preſent life only in all ſuch things as we propound to our ſelues for the benefit and contentation thereof, hath ſuchOf earthly hope. neede to be ruled, guided, and referred to the happie end of the firſt excellent and heauenly hope, that otherwiſe it cannot but be doubtfull, inconſtant, & raſh, what humane reaſon ſoeuer we can alleage to perſwade the poſſibilitie of attaining to the end of our pretended deuiſes, which in one moment may be quite ouerthrown, the occaſions whereof being for the moſt part ſecret and hid from vs. Moreouer the imperfection of whatſoeuer men commonly moſt eſteeme vpon earth is ſo great that togither with their continuall vncertaintie, the perturbations which hinder the tranquillitie of the ſoule redouble and abound ſo much the more, as the enioying of theſe earthly commodities increaſe and augment, leauing in man a continuall deſire to multiply them, and a feare to looſe them. As touching this hope therefore of humane things which we wiſh might alwayes proſper with vs, we may wel hope what we will, but withall we muſt prepare and ſettle our ſelues to ſupport conſtantly whatſoeuer falleth out, that that which commeth vnto vs againſt our will, may not be altogither againſt our expectation: and that we neuer vſe ſuch repinings as theſe, vnbeſeeming a wiſe mā,Speeches vnbeſeeming a wiſe man. 
                     I would neuer haue thought it: I looked for another matter: I would neuer have ſuppoſed that ſuch a thing could haue happened. In the meane while we muſt not omit to Hope the beſt alwayes in our croſſes and calamities, bicauſe nothing lenifieth ſo much the ſharpneſſe of preſent aduerſities as the hope of future benefit, the certaine expectation whereofThe fruit of hope. as it were ſtealeth away our labours, and cauſeth all feare of perill to vaniſh away. This is that which Apollodorus
                     
ſaith, that we muſt neuer be diſcouraged for aduerſities, but always hope for better things. The calamities of mortall men (ſaith Euripides) in the end leaue of themſelues: and as the winds do not alwayes blow vehemently, ſo happy men are not euer fortunate. The one flieth from the other: but he is a good man, who is alwayes full of good hope▪ 
                     Pindarus calleth it the nurſe of old age. Thales ſaid, that nothing in all the world was more common than Hope, bicauſe it abideth with them alſo that haue no other goods. The Elpiſtick Philoſophers affirmed, that nothing better maintained and preſerued the life of man, than Hope. And truely without hope, which eaſeth the burthen of mans miſeries, the world were not able to ſuſtaineOur life would be inſupportable without hope. life. For it greatly helpeth man to liue contentedly and happily, if, as we ſaid, it haue reſpect to the beſt ende, vnto which all our deſires and inclinations ought to be referred, and ought to be gouerned thereby according to reaſon and iuſtice. Otherwiſe it is certaine that a man can neuer peaceably and to his contentation, enioy his preſent eſtate and condition, but alwayes ſome new hope of better things to come, wil cauſe him to neglect that wherof he is aſſured, and to run after an vncertaintie, vntill in the end being often deceiued and miſſing of his purpoſes & enterpriſes, he be ouerthrown quite through his great hopes. Therfore Plato writeth, that fortune is more contrary to that mā whō ſhe ſuffreth not to enioy that which he hath, than to him whom ſhe denieth to graunt that which he demandeth of hir. This gaue occaſion to Cineas
                     Cineas talke with I'yrrhus concerning his great hope. (a very wiſe man, and ſo excellent an Orator, that one writeth of him, that he brought more townes in ſubiection to his maiſter Pyrrhus by his toong, than himſelfe did by his valure) when he ſaw that although this king might enioy a happy peace and quietnes, if he would be contented to raigne peaceably ouer his ſubiects, yet he burned with deſire to vndertake warre againſt Italy; to enter into talke with him, and to aske of him this queſtion. If Sir, the gods ſhew vs this fauor, that we ſhould remaine Conquerors in this warre, what good would the victory do vs? We might

afterward (anſwered Pyrrhus) eaſily ſubdue the Graecian and Barbarian cities bordering vpon that Country. Wel, when this is done, replied Cineas, what ſhall we doe afterward? Cicilia (anſwered Pyrrhus) will of it ſelfe yeeld vnto vs. Shall Cicilia then (quoth Cineas) ende our warre? What will ſtay vs after (quoth this monarch) from paſſing into Afrike and to Carthage, and from the recouerie of the kingdom of Macedonia with eaſe, that ſo we may commaund all Graecia without contradiction? Wherunto Cineas replied, when all is in our power, what ſhall we do in the end? Pyrrhus beginning to ſmile, ſaid, we will reſt vs at our eaſe, my friend, liuing in all pleaſure, and as merily as may be. Then Cineas hauing brought him to that point which he deſired, ſaid vnto him: And what ſir, letteth vs from reſt at this preſent, and from liuing in ioy and pleaſure, ſeeing we haue all things requiſite and neceſſarie, without ſeeking it with ſo much effuſion of mans bloud, beſides infinite hazards and dangers, and that in ſuch places where it is vncertaine whether we ſhal find it? Theſe wiſe ſpeeches ſooner offended Pyrrhus than cauſed him to change his mind. And although this Prince could not doubt at all what happineſſe and great felicitie he forſooke, yet was it vnpoſſible to take the hope of that which he deſired out of his mind. Wherefore Antigonus king of Pyrrhus compared to a Dice-plaier.Macedonia compared him very fitly to a Dice-player, to whom the Dice ſpeake faire by giuing vnto him good chances, but yet ſo that he cannot caſt the ſame againe to ſerue his turne. For he loſt that by hope, which he had gotten in deede, deſiring ſo earneſtly that which he had not, that he forgate to make that ſure which was already in his poſſeſſiō. And in deed it fell out very vnhappily with him in the ende. For after he had fought proſperouſly a certaine time, he was diſcomfited by the Romanes, & being after beſieged, was ſlaine with a tile which a woman let fall vpon his head. Was there euer monarch who ought rather to haue contented and delighted himſelfe peaceably Caeſar was led continually with new hope.in the enioying of his vnſpeakable proſperities than Iulius Caeſar? And yet not being ſatiſfied with the Romane

Empire, which he had obtained by ſo many trauels and innumerable dangers, he made preparation (whileſt the conſpirators ſought his death) to go himſelfe in perſon to warre againſt the Parthians. So that as long as he liued, the hope of that which was to come, cauſed him to contemne the glorie gotten by his former deeds, and to depriue himſelfe of that commendation, which he ſhould haue no leſſe deſerued in preſeruing himſelfe, and in the good gouernment of his great eſtate, than he did in conquering the ſame: whereof he reaped no other benefit, but onely a vaine name and glorie of ſmall continuance in his life time, which procured him the enuie and hatred of his countreymen, ſo that he was murdred with 23. blowes of the ſword on his bodie, after he had ouerliued Pompey (who was vanquiſhed by him) foure yeeres onely, or little more. Hiſtories are full of ſundrie ſuch alterations, which commonly follow them that are not content with their eſtate: from whence wiſe men and of good iudgement may drawe this inſtruction, to limit their thoughts and deſires. For as Diodorus the Athenian ſaid, Two things hurtfull to men.theſe two things are very hurtfull to men, Hope and Loue, of which the one leadeth, and the other accompanieth them, the one ſeeketh out the meanes to execute their thoughts, and the other perſuadeth them with good ſucceſſe. And although theſe two things are not ſeene with the eie, yet are they mightier than viſible puniſhments. Heerof came that old prouerb, that proud men fat themſelues with vaine hope, which by little and little choaketh them, as naughtie fat doth mans bodie. And if we be willing to keepe our ſelues from ſo dangerous a downefall, let vs cure our ſoules of all hurtfull hope, and let reaſon and dutie (as we haue alreadie ſaid) lead and limit all our affections and enterpriſes, conſidering wiſely their beginning, namely, that we ground them vpon right and equitie only, knowing We muſt not judge of enterpriſes by the euent.that they ought not to be iudged of by the euent and end of them, which oftentimes ſeeme to fauor vniuſt coū
                     ſels and doings. And this offreth ſome colour & occaſion to the wicked to proſecute their dealings, hauing no care

of violating right and iuſtice. But how ſoeuer it be, a miſerable end bringeth them an ouer late repentance. Neither let vs perſwade our ſelues, that the iſſue of our imaginations and enterpriſes, although they be well grounded, ſhall certainly fall out according to our meaning, (for this is that hope, which greatly hurteth, and moſt of all troubleth men) but let vs know, that as in al things which grow, there is alwaies ſome corruption mingled in them (it being neceſſarie that all mortall ſeedes ſhould preſently Ill hap is more common than good.be partakers of the cauſe of death) ſo from the ſame fountaine ill hap floweth vnto vs in great meaſure, yea ſooner and more abundantly than good ſucceſſe. Which thing Homer willing to giue vs to vnderſtand, fained that there were two veſſels at the entrie of the great Olympus, the one being full of honie, the other of gall, of which two mingled togither, Iupiter cauſeth all men to drinke. And Plutark ſaith, that men can neuer purely and ſimply enioy the eaſe of any great proſperitie, but whether it be fortune, or the enuie of deſtinie, or elſe the naturall neceſſitie of earthlie things, there eaſe is alwaies intermingled in their life time with euill among the good, yea in the like miſhap that which is woorſe, ſurmounteth the better. All theſe things being conſidered of vs, they will make vs more aduiſed and ſtaied in all our counſels and deuiſes, & in ſuch ſort affected and prepared with true prudence, fortitude, and magnanimitie, that whatſoeuer hapneth vnto vs, we ſhall not be troubled or further mooued, but Seneca aduiſeth vs to prepare our ſelues to all cuents.receiue it, as hauing long before expected and looked for it. This doth Seneca very learnedly teach vs, ſaying: that we ought not to be aſtoniſhed or maruell at vnlooked for chances that light vpon vs, but prepare and conforme our harts to all euents that may come vnto vs, premeditating and thinking aforehand, that we are borne to ſuffer, and that nothing commeth to paſſe, which ought not to be. Deſtinie (ſaith he) leadeth thoſe that are conſenting, & draweth gain-ſayers by force. Neither ought we, through doubt of that which is to come, to neglect good, heroicall, and farre remooued hopes of excellent things, hauing thus

grounded them as we haue ſaid. For wiſe and famous perſonages, deſirous of honor and glorie, were alwaies of opinion, that they ought to be intertained and kept in a ſound and ſetled reſolution of the mind, bicauſe of the varietie of accidents, which daily happen contrary to the common opinions of men: wherein experience teacheth vs, that according to the direction of a good ſpirite, and the good ſucceſſe that followeth and accompanieth it, whatſoeuer concerneth the managing of worldlie affairs, is changed; and turneth about with the moouing of fortune, What the author vnderſtandeth by the word Fortune.if it be lawfull for vs vnder this Heathen word to vnderſtand the ordinance of God. Therefore to ende our preſent diſcourſe, we will note this, that firſt we are to defend our ſelues by the grace of God, with that happie and certaine hope which can neuer deceiue or confound any, being a certaine guide to keepe vs in this long and tedious pilgrimage from going aſtray out of the way of ſaluation. Secondly from this, the prop, ſtaie, and comfort of mans life againſt all miſeries and calamities will flow and iſſue. Thirdly and laſtly, we ſhall be ſtirred vp to all great and noble works, for the good and common profit of euery one, referring the euents of them to the woonderfull counſell of the prouidence of God, and receiuing them as iuſt, good, and profitable.
               
            
            The ende of the ſeuenth daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHT DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Patience, and of Impatiencie: of Choler and Wrath. Chap. 29.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     IF vertue conſiſteth in hard matters, if that which commeth neereſt to the diuine nature, and is moſt vneaſie and leaſt of all vſed of all men, better beſeemeth a valiant and noble minded man, than any other thing whatſoeuer; no doubt but Rom. 15. 5. Exod. 34. 6.patience is the very ſame thing: whereof the Scripture teacheth vs, that God is the author, and that he putteth it in dailie practiſe among his creatures, deferring the full puniſhment of their faults by expecting their repentance. Further, this vertue ſo much reſembleth Fortitude, wherof we diſcourſed yeſterday, that we may ſay with Cicero, that Fortitude is borne of hir, or els with hir, ſeeing there is nothing ſo great and burthenſome, which ſhe can not eaſilie ſuſtaine and ouercome, euen the violenteſt & moſt common paſſions of mans nature, as impatiencie, choler, and anger, which commonly procure the vtter ruine of the ſoule. Therefore let vs (my Companions) begin our daies worke with the handling of the effects of this great vertue of Patience, and of the vices that are cleane contrarie vnto it.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Patience a ſalue for all ſores. Patience (ſaith Plautus) is a remedie for all griefes. Endure patiently, and blame not that which thou canſt not auoid. For he that is able to ſuffer well, ouercommeth. But this vertue is ſo rarely found among men, that moe will offer themſelues to death, than abide griefe patiently. Neuertheles, it is the point of a wiſe man (ſaith Horace) to ſet a good face vpon that which muſt needes be done.
               
               
                  
                  ARAM.
                  By patience (ſaith Cicero) we muſt ſeeke after that, which we cannot obtaine by fauour: and if we endure, all the inconuenience will turne to our profite. But learned men, whileſt they reſiſt not their perturbations, trouble and ouerturne with a ſuddain vehemencie thoſe things which they had begun with a quiet ſpirit & mind, throwing down at one blow whatſoeuer they had builded with long labour. But of thee ACHITOB we ſhall vnderſtand the prayſe and propertie of this vertue of Patience, with the contrary effects thereof, namelie, Impatiencie, Choler and Anger, and the meanes to ſhunne and auoid them.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Among all the ancients, the Stoike Philoſophers were moſt zealous and preciſe obſeruers of all points concerning this vertue of patience, which they grounded vpon the fatall cauſe of neceſſitie, requiring Of the Stoicall patience.ſuch exactnes and perfection thereof in men, that they would haue a noble hart to be no otherwiſe touched with aduerſitie than with proſperitie, nor with ſorowful things than with ioyfull. For this cauſe Aristo ſaid, that vertue onely was to be wiſhed, and therefore that it was all one to be ſicke or ſound, poore or rich: briefly, that in all other humane and neceſſary vſes of nature, there was no more euil in one kind, than in another. Whereby it ſeemeth that theſe Philoſophers delighted in painting out a picture of ſuch patience, as neuer was, nor ſhal be among men, except firſt they ſhould be vnclothed of all humaine nature, or become as blockiſh and ſenceleſſe as a ſtone. For ſo long as man remaineth in this life, he cannot be void of affections and perturbations that draw the ſoule to care and to prouide for the body, which continually crieth out againſt her for feare of griefe and of wanting that which belongeth vnto it. But it is the dutie of a wiſe man to moderate all paſſions in ſuch ſort, that in the end reaſon remaine miſtreſſe. Moreouer we ſay that vertue Vertue is neither without affection nor ſubiect to affections.which is a habite of comelines and mediocritie in affections, ought neither to be without hir motions, nor yet too much ſubiect to paſſions. For the aboliſhing of deſire maketh

the ſoule without motion, & without ioy euen in honeſt things: as on the other ſide ouer vehement motions thereof altogether trouble hir, and cauſe hir to be as it were beſide hir ſelfe. Further, we ſeeke after the common practiſe of men, not for that perfection which they wiſh for, and whereunto they ought to aſpire: and we deſire that affection ſhould ſhew it ſelfe no otherwiſe in vertue, than a little ſhadow of a hidden cloud, or a line in a picture. Of true patience.Therfore true patience which we ought to imbrace in all things, not as compelled and of neceſſity, but cheerfully and as reſting in our welfare, is a moderation & tolerance of our euils, which, albeit we ſigh vnder the heauie burthen of them, clothe vs in the meane while with a ſpirituall ioy, that ſtriueth ſo well and maſtreth in ſuch ſort the ſence of nature which ſhunneth griefe, that in the end it worketh in vs an affection of pietie & godlineſſe, ioyned with a free & cheerful mind, vnder the yoke & obedience of the iuſt & rightfull will of God, through a certain expectation of things promiſed, and cauſeth vs to iudge impatiencie to be contumacie and rebellion to this diuine wil, The definition of patience.and ſufficient of it ſelfe to make a man to be called wretched. Patience (ſaith Plato) is a habite that conſiſteth in ſuſtaining ſtoutly all labours and griefes for the loue of honeſtie. The law ſaith, that it is a very good thing to keep the tranquillitie of our ſpirit as much as may be in aduerſities, and not to complaine of that which is vncertaine: bicauſe men know not whither that which is light vpon them be good or euil for them, as alſo bicauſe ſorow can not helpe that which is to come, but rather hindreth the curing of the euill: and laſtly, bicauſe there is nothing in humane matters, wherof any great account is to be made. But if I muſt needs ſupport them, my deſire and labour is to do it nobly, honeſtly, and courageouſly. It skilleth not what we endure, but how we endure it. And then doth patience preuail moſt, when we know that whatſoeuer we haue done, was executed of vs for godlines ſake. The conflict The fruits of patience.of Patience (ſaith Euripides) is ſuch, that the vanquiſhed is better than the vanquiſher. And let vs not thinke

that there is any calamitie which cannot be ſuſtained by the nature of man armed with patience, which is an inuincible tower. Patience (ſaith Cicero) is a voluntarie and long ſuffring of labours, calamities, trauels, and difficult matters, for the loue of honeſtie and of vertue. And when all things are ouerthrowen, and counſaile wil do no more good, there is but this one only remedy, to beare patiently whatſoeuer ſhall come vpon vs. Patience ſerueth vs for a meane to attaine to great matters, ſtaying men from fainting in dangers and trauels. By patience whatſoeuer is diſordred, may be brought againe to good order, as that wiſe emperor Marcus Aurelius would giue vs to vnderſtand, when he ſayd that patience had no leſſe holpen him in the gouernmēt of his eſtate than knowledge. Likewiſe it is for the moſt part followed of curteſie and gentlenes, which make him well liked of that is adorned therewith, and ſooner draw good wil, the cauſe of mens obedience, then force or violence doth. He that is ſlowe to anger (ſaith the wiſe man) is better than the mightie man, Prou. 16. 32.and he that ruleth his owne mind, is better than he that winneth a citie. True patience loueth the afflictions which ſhe ſuffreth, cauſing him that poſſeſſeth hir to giue prayſe to God in the midſt of aduerſities, and to ſubmit himſelf to his iudgement when he is preſſed with diſeaſes: neither can pouertie keep him backe from cōmending highly his bountie and goodnes. To be ſhort, as a pearle ſheweth hir beautie euen in the midſt of a puddle: ſo a patient man cauſeth his vertue to appeere in al aduerſities. Moreouer this patience which we ſhew in aduerſities, mooueth thoſe to compaſſion and pitie that ſee vs ſuffer. Which thing as it greatly comforteth in affliction, ſo oftentimes it cauſeth others to reape ineſtimable benefite when they behold vs to ſuffer vniuſtly. For it ſerueth to awaken and to ſtrengthen the weake in the knowledge of their duetie, that they ſuffer not themſelues to be deceiued with the poiſonfull ſweetnes of worldly goods and commodities. In a word the vertue of patience is ſo neceſſarie for a good and happy life, that no part or action of mans life can be

guided to their proper end without hir. And as ſhe is a branch of Magnanimitie, Fortitude, and greatnes of courage; ſo Impatiencie is a weakenes and imbecillitie of a Of impatiencie, choler, and wrath.baſe, vile, and contemptible nature, wherin choler, and in the end wrath, are eaſily ingendred, which are two very pernitious paſſions in the ſoule, and differ nothing from furie (as the elder Cato ſaid) but onely in this, that they continue a leſſe time, and this a longer. This is that which The definition of anger.
                     Poſſidonius teacheth vs, ſaying: that Anger is nothing elſe but a ſhort furie. Aristides called it the inflammation of blood, and an alteration of the hart. Cicero ſaith, that that which the Latines call Anger, is named of the Grecians deſire of reuenge. And Solon being demanded to whome a man fraught with Anger, might be compared, anſwered: to him that maketh no account of loſing his friends, and careth not although he procure enemies to himſelfe. But beſides the ſayings of all theſe Sages, experience ſufficiently ſheweth vs, that Choler and Anger are enemies to all reaſon: and (as Plutark ſaith) are no leſſe proud, preſumptuous, and vneaſie to be guided by another, than a great and mightie tyrannie: Inſomuch that a ſhip giuen ouer to the mercie of the windes and ſtormes, would ſooner of it ſelfe receiue a Pilot from without, than a man caried headlong with wrath and choler, would yeeld to the reaſon and admonition of another. For an angry man (like to thoſe that burne themſelues within their owne houſes) filleth his ſoule in ſuch ſort with trouble, chafing, & noiſe, that he neither ſeeth nor heareth any thing that would profit him, vnles he make prouiſion long time before to ſuccour himſelfe with reaſon through the ſtudie of wiſedome, whereby he may be able to ouerthrow his impatiency and choler, which argue and accompanie for the Who are moſt giuen to impatiencie and choler.moſt part a weake and effeminate hart. And that this is true, we ſee that women are commonly ſooner driuen into choler than men: the ſicke than the ſound: the olde than the yoong: all vitious, gluttonous, iealous, vaineglorious, and ambitious men, than thoſe that vnfainedly hate vice. Whereby it is euident enough, that choler proceedeth

from the infirme and weake part of the ſoule, and not from the Generoſitie thereof. Neither doth it make againſt our ſaying, to alleadge the opinion of Aristotle, & of al the Peripateticks, who maintained that we ought to moderate the affections and paſſions of the ſoule: but otherwiſe that they were neceſſarie to pricke men forward to vertue. Yea Ariſtotle ſaid, that choler was as a whetſtone to ſharpen and ſet an edge vpon Fortitude and Generoſitie. Ariſtotle contrary in opinion to the Stoicks.The Academicks and Stoicks contend greatly againſt this opinion, and namely Cicero and Seneca, who ſay, that foraſmuch as choler is a vice, it cannot be the cauſe of vertue, ſeeing they are two contrary thinges that haue nothing common together. And conſidering that Fortitude proceedeth from an aduiſed conſultation and election of reaſon, which perfecteth the worke, whereas choler hindreth and troubleth it in ſuch ſort, that an angrie man cannot deliberate, it is not poſſible that it ſhould ſtand him in any ſteed in the performance of excellent actions. And this is an inuincible reaſon, bicauſe vertue commeth not of vice. Now, this being the end of all Philoſophie for a man to know his vices, and the meanes how to deliuer himſelfe from them, and ſeeing that the infamie and diſcommoditie which accompanie impatiencie and choler, cannot but be knowne vnto vs, yea are notwithſtanding ſo common amongſt vs, that the perfecteſt are infected therewith, let vs looke for ſome helpe and meane to cure How impatiencie and choler may be cured.our ſelues thereof. Firſt let vs know, that although men may be mooued to wrath and choler for diuers cauſes, yet vnto all of them, the opinion of being contemned and deſpiſed is commonly ioined. And therefore the true and ſoueraigne remedie for this, (that ſo we may auoid ſuch a cold and ſlender occaſion of entring into choler againſt our neighbours, altogither vnbeſeeming the loue we owe them) will be to put from vs as much as may be, all ſuſpition of being deſpiſed and contemned, or of brauerie and boldnes, and to lay all the fault either vpon neceſſitie or negligence, vpon chance, vntowardnes, lacke of diſcretion, ignorance, or want of experience, which are oftentimes

in them that offend vs. This will ſeeme very ſtrict counſell, and hard to practiſe, yea hatefull to many of our Frenchmen, chiefly to thoſe of the Nobilitie, who are ſo curious in the preſeruation of their honour, with which title they would diſguiſe the deſire of worldly glory, whervnto What the wicked iudge of patience.they ſhew themſelues ſo much affectionated. But they teſtifie ſufficiently, that they neuer knewe wherein true honor conſiſteth, which is no more ſeparated from vertue, than the ſhadowe from the bodie: alſo that they know not what patience is, accounting it rather to be fainthartednes, and cowardlines, than a part and daughter of the vertue of Fortitude and Generoſitie, yea iudging it a diſhonor to a man that is contumeliouſly handled, not to render the like againe. But contrariwiſe we are to know, that to ſupport and indure wrong & iniurie patiently, and euen then when we haue moſt meanes to reuenge our ſelues, is a note of a moſt abſolute, noble, and excellent vertue. Yea, it beſeemeth a Chriſtian moſt of all, and ſuch a one as hath thoſe words of the Scripture well Leuit. 19. 18. Deut. 32. 35.engrauen in his hart, Thou ſhalt not auenge, nor be mindfull of wrong againſt the children of thy people, but ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe: I am the Lord, vengeance and recompence are mine. But I hope that heerafter we ſhall diſcourſe of this ſubiect by itſelfe, which deſerueth to be handled more Whereof choler is bred.largely. Following therefore our matter, we muſt vnderſtand, that choler is bred of a cuſtome to be angrie for ſmall things, and afterward becommeth eaſilie a fire of ſudden wrath, a reuenging bitternes, and an vntractable ſharpenes, making a man froward and furious, diſliking euery thing. Wherefore a wiſe man ought preſently to oppoſe the iudgement of reaſon to euery little anger, and to ſuppreſſe it. This will helpe to make the ſoule firme and of power to reſiſt and beate backe all fiercenes of choler in matters of greater weight and conſequence. For he that nouriſheth not his anger in the beginning, nor inflameth it himſelfe, may eaſily auoid, or at leaſt ſcatter A good way to remedie choler.it. Moreouer, this will be a great meane to ouercome our choler if we obeye it not, nor giue credite vnto it

from the very firſt inſtant wherin it beginneth to appeere, imitating Socrates therein, who, whenſoeuer he felt himſelfe ſomwhat more egerly mooued againſt any man than he ought (like to a wiſe Pilote that getteth himſelfe vnder the Lee of ſome rocke) let fall his voyce gently, ſhewyng a ſmiling countenance and more curteous looke, thereby ſetting himſelfe directly againſt his paſſion. Beſides, it wil greatly helpe vs, if when we are mooued with anger, we ſtay our toong a certaine ſpace, and delay a litle while our owne reuenge. For it is very certaine that a man promiſeth, ſpeaketh and doth many things in his anger, which afterward he wiſheth had neuer been in his thought. Vnto this fitly agreeth that counſaile which Athenodorus taking The counſaile that Athenodorus gaue to Auguſtus.his leaue, gaue to Augustus the emperor to ſtay the pernitious effects of quicke and ready choler. This Philoſopher minding to teach ſome remedy to be oppoſed at the very inſtant when this monarch ſhould feele himſelfe ouertaken with anger, whereunto he eaſily ſuffred himſelfe to be caried; willed him to rehearſe the foure and twentie letters of the Greeke Alphabet before he did any thing in his anger. But knowing this that it is a ſpeciall propertie of mans imbecillitie to be ſtirred vp to anger and to be troubled, let vs follow that commandement of the Scripture, Not to ſinne in our anger, neither to let the ſunne go downe 
                     Eph. 4. 26.
                     vpon our wrath, leaſt we ſhew our ſelues to haue leſſe vertue and curteſie, than the Ethnike Pythagorian Philoſophers, who albeit they were neither of kinne, nor allied, yet kept this cuſtome inuiolable, that if peraduenture they were entred 
                     A notable cuſtome of the Pythagorians.
                     into ſome contention and choler one against another, before the ſunne went downe they appointed a meeting where they imbraced and ſhooke hands one with another. Further we haue carefully to auoyd all occaſions which we know might induce and Cotis brake his glaſſes to auoyd occaſion of wrath.prouoke vs to choler. As Cotis king of Thracia wiſely behaued himſelfe, when one brought him a preſent of many goodly veſſels curiouſly made and wrought, but very brittle, and eaſie to breake, bicauſe they were of glaſſe. After he had well recompenced the gift, he brake them all for feare leaſt through choler, whereunto he knew himſelfe

ſubiect, he ſhould be mooued with wrath againſt any of his ſeruants that ſhould breake them, and ſo puniſh him too ſeuerely. And of this matter we may alſo draw a goodMagiſtrates ought not to puniſh any in their choler. inſtructiō for all thoſe that are placed in authoritie aboue others, namely, that they beware leaſt they correct or puniſh any body in their choler, but only when they are void of all vehement paſſions, conſidering the fact in it ſelfe aduiſedly, and with quiet and ſetled ſences: knowing that as bodies ſeeme greater through a miſte, ſo doe faults through choler, which for the moſt part carieth Princes headlong to commit execrable and curſed cruelties. Among many examples we may note that of the emperorAs Theodoſius did. 
                     Theodoſius, who being mooued with anger againſt thoſe of Theſſalonica for a commotion which they made, & for ſtaying his lieutenant, ſent his army thither, with commā
                     dement that they ſhould be vtterly rooted out: whereupon fifteene thouſand were ſlaine, neither women nor children being ſpared. Of which fault repenting him, but too late, he made a law afterward whereby he willed that the execution of his letters Patents and Commaundements ſhould be held in ſuſpence and deferred, thirtie days after ſignification and knowledge of them, namely, when any were to be puniſhed more rigorouſly than of cuſtome he vſed. Neither is it leſſe dangerous in an eſtate that the adminiſtration of publike charges ſhould be committed to ſuch as ſuffer themſelues to be ouer-ruled with wrath, ſeeing there are not in a maner fewer matters which are to be winked at and diſſembled, than to be puniſhed & corrected. And although Magiſtrates haue authoritie & iuſt cauſe to puniſh vices, yet haue they no licence to ſhew thē
                     ſelues to be paſſionated. But this being a matter of Policie, let vs continue our morall inſtructions, and note that which we read of Plato, deſeruing to be conſidered of here, who being very angry with a ſeruaunt of his for a great fault committed by him, and ſeeing Xenocrates to comePlato refuſed to correct his ſeruant in his anger. towards him, requeſted him if he were his friend to correct that ſeruant of his, bicauſe at this preſent (quoth he) anger ſurmounteth my reaſon. Whereby this wiſe Philoſopher

declared ſufficiently, that if the firſt motions are not at all in our power through the imperfection of our nature, yet at the leſt reaſon may ſerue for a bridle to hinder euery naughtie execution: teaching vs likewiſe, that we ought to vſe and exerciſe our power and authoritie ouer others without any extreme paſſion. Further, that we may haue ſuch imperfections in greater hatred, we are to note that choler hath been the ouerthrow of many great men, as it was of the emperor Aurelianus, who was enduedAurelianus anger was the cauſe of his death. with notable vertues, but otherwiſe eaſilie mooued to anger, whoſe wrath was ſuch, that their death with whom he was diſpleaſed, was the onely remedie to appeaſe it. For being one day incenſed againſt Mnesteus his Secretarie, he knowing his maſters diſpoſition, for the ſafegard of his life deuiſed to write (counterfaiting the emperors hand) in a litle ſcroule the names of the principall captaines of his army, putting himſelfe in the number of thoſe whom he had fully purpoſed to put to death, and bearing it vnto them, ſayd, that he ſaw this bill fall out of the emperours ſleeue. Whereat they being aſtoniſhed, and giuing credit thereunto, reſolued with themſelues to preuent it, and ſo falling vpon him, ſlew him. Moreouer it is well known to euery one, that choler may greatly hurt health, whereof men are for the moſt part deſirous enough. It was cauſe of the emperour Valentinians death, who through cryingValentinian in his anger brake a veine, and died thereof. out in his choler, brake a veine in his neck. From this vice proceedeth another deteſtable imperfection, which is ſwearing, a thing directly contrary to a wiſe mans life, and condemned by the lawe both of God and man: whereofAgainſt the infamous vice of ſwearing. we might eaſilie be cured by cuſtome, if firſt we deſtroied Impatiencie and Choler, which prouoke blaſphcmie. The Romanes obſerued an auncient decree, which expreſly commaunded, that when yong men would ſweare by the name of ſome God, they ſhould firſt go out of the houſe wherin they were. Which was a commēdable meanA notable decree of the Romanes. both to retain & keep them frō ſwearing lightly & vpō the ſuddain, & alſo that they might haue good laiſure & ſpace to bethink thēſelues. This would be very profitable for vs

towards the correction of this vice, the vnmeaſurable licence whereof ought to be kept backe and chaſtiſed by ſome better meanes. Yea, it were very expedient and neceſſarieS. Lewes his law againſt ſwearing to renew and put in practiſe that law of good king S. Lewes, that all blaſphemers ſhould be marked in the forehead with an hot iron, yea, puniſhed with death, if they would not be corrected otherwiſe. Such contemners of the name ofCarilaüs. God ought to learne their leſſon of Carilaüs the Ethnicke and Pagan, who being demanded why the images of the Gods in Lacedemonia were armed, to the end (quoth he) that men might feare to blaſpheme the Gods, knowing that they are armed to take reuengement. Concluding therefore our preſent diſcourſe, let vs learne to decke our liues ſo well with patience, (which is ſo profitable and neceſſary to ſaluation,1. Theſ. 5. 14. and to a good and happie life) that we be patient towards all men in all things, to the end we may obey theHeb. 10. 36. will of God, and reape the fruite of his promiſes, as the end of patience is the expectation of things promiſed. And let vs know, that the learning and vertue of a man is knowne by patience, and that he is to be accounted to haue leſſe learning and vertue, that hath leſſe patience. Further, let vs learne that the office & dutie of a prudent and noble minded man is to winke at many things that befall him, to redreſſe other things, to hold his peace at ſome things, and to ſuffer much, ſo that he follow reaſon alwaies, and flie opinion. Laſtly, we are to know, that he which endureth euill patiently, ſhall know alſo how afterward he may eaſily beare proſperitie: and that euery chriſtian offereth an acceptable ſacrifice to God, when he yeeldeth vnto him dailie thanks in the midſt of infinite troubles and vexations: which benefit will worke in vs the vtter ouerthrow of all impatience, choler, and wrath, ſworne enemies to all reaſon and vertue.
               
            
            
               
               Of Meekenes, Clemeneie, Mildnes, Gentlenes, and Humanitie. Chap. 30.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  A Philoſopher in a great aſſemblie of people taking a lanterne and a candle lighted at midday, and going into an high place in all their ſight, was demanded what he ment to do with all: I ſeeke (ſaid he) for a man, but can ſee none, no not one. And trulyThis word Man is in Latin H
                              •
                           
                           mo, frō whence is deriued hum
                              •
                           
                           nitas, which ſignifieth curte fie or gentlenes. it is a very rare and excellent thing to find one that in deed is a Man, which is as much to ſay, as courteous, or made of meekenes and gentlenes: for which cauſe Plato calleth him a ciuill creature, and ſociable by nature. Now therefore let vs vnderſtand of you my companions, what woorthy effects this vertue of meekenes bringeth foorth in man.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Mercie (ſaid Plato,) ought no more to be taken away from the nature of man, than the altar out of the Temple. And euery noble hart ought to be ſo courteous and gratious, that he be reuerenced more than feared of his neighbors.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  There is no nation ſo barbarous, which loueth not meekenes, curteſie, beneuolence, and a thankfullNo nation voyd of curteſie. ſoule: and contrariwiſe, which hateth and contemneth not proud, wicked, cruell, and vngratefull perſons. But it belongeth to thee ARAM to diſcourſe of this matter vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Sinne hauing depriued man of the perfection of graces, wherewith the image of God in him had inriched and beautified him: namely, with perfect goodnes and holye righteouſnes, there remained nothing in his ſoule but a weake deſire to aſpire to that ſoueraigne Good, of which ſhe felt hir ſelfe ſpoiled. For further confirmation whereof, this incomparable beautie of the viſible ſhape of the bodie was left vnto him, to the end that in this principall worke, as in a rich picture, he might find large matter to mooue him to contemplate and to admire the excellencie and greatnes of his Creator, who is able to ſet him againe in his former glorie and brightnes.

By means of this knowledge a man feeleth himſelfe effectually mooued and touched with the loue of his like, imprinted in euery nature, which deſireth vſually to ſhew foorth the effects thereof to the profite of many, if it be Reaſons to mooue vs to loue our neighbours.not wholy depraued and accurſed. This loue ought to be ſo much the greater & more perfect in man, by how much the neerer he approcheth to the vnderſtanding of the incomprehenſible ſecrets of the diuinitie. For what thing ought more to ſtirre vs vp, and to mooue vs with zeale to do good to our neighbours, than the conſideration both of their creation after the image of God, whereunto we owe all honor, loue, & obedience, and alſo of their roeſtabliſhment into the ſame image by his pure grace & mercie: beſides the contemplation of the excellent compoſition and building of this frame of man? Theſe things being well conſidered in our minds, whom ſhall we take for our enemie, for a ſtranger, as contemptible, vnwoorthy, and of no account, ſeeing this brightnes and grace of God ſhineth in euery one, and eſpecially in thoſe whom the world deſpiſeth? Moreouer, when we know by his word that Man is ſubſtituted of God in his place, that we ſhould acknowledge towards him the ineſtimable benefits which we haue and daily receiue from the helpe and goodneſſe of our common Father, who promiſeth to accept as done to himſelfe, what good thing ſoeuer we procure to his creatures, ſo that it be done with a gladſome and cheerfull countenance, and with a ſweete and curteous kind of beneficence, void of arrogancie, contumelie, or reproch, ſhal any thing ſtay vs from exerciſing towards euery one all duties of humanitie? We read in Macrobius 
                     A Temple dedicated to Mercie.that long ſithence there was a Temple in Athens dedicated to Mercie, into which none was ſuffered to enter except he were beneficiall and helpfull, and then alſo with licence from the Senate. In ſo much that through a deſire which the people had to haue acceſſe into it, they ſtudied earneſtly to exerciſe workes of pitie and pietie. Yea, the greateſt reproch which an Athenian could vtter to his neighbor, was to hit him in the teeth, that he was neuer in

the Academie of the Philoſophers, nor in the Temple of Mercie, girding him by this only reproch with two ſhamefull things, the one of ignorance and want of prudence, the other of crueltie & inhumanitie. Now if among thoſe of olde time the onely naturall ſeede of the loue of their like, which alſo is ſeen in beaſts, was ſo ſtrong and powerfull, that it brought forth in them (notwithſtanding they were deſtitute of the heauenly light) fruites woorthy of perpetuall memorie, as they that had nothing in greater eſtimation than to ſhew themſelues meeke, gentle, curteous, helpfull and gratious towards others, euen towards their enemies. What ought they to do, that ſay they are all members of that one head, who recommendeth ſo expreſly vnto them, meeknes, mildnes, gentlenes, grace, clemencie, mercy, good-will, compaſſion, and euery good affection towards their neighbor? All which things are cō
                     prehended vnder this only ſacred word of Charitie, which What Charitie is.is the indiſſoluble band of God with vs, whereby we are inflamed with the loue of him for that which we owe vnto him, and thereby alſo are induced to loue our neighbours for the loue of God. But let vs conſider how the ancients hauing but the ſhadow of this perfect Charitie, prayſed & eſteemed this vertue of Meeknes, from which they knew how to draw ſo many good commodities for the profite and ſuccour of euery one, that after we may note here certain woorthy examples to ſtirre vs vp ſo much the more vnto our dutie. Meeknes (ſaith Plato) is a vertue that belongeth The definition and effects of Meekenes.to the courageous part of the ſoule, whereby we are hardly mooued to anger. Hir office and dutie is to be able to ſupport and endure patiently thoſe crimes that are layd vpon hir, not to ſuffer hir ſelfe to be haſtily caried to reuenge, nor to be too eaſily ſtirred to wrath, but to make him that poſſeſſeth hir, mild, gratious, and of a ſtayed and ſetled mind. Meeknes and gentlenes (as he ſayth elſe-where) is that vertue whereby a man eaſily appeaſeth the motions and inſtigations of the ſoule cauſed by choler, and it ſtandeth him in ſtead of a moderate temperāce of the ſpirit, decking him with mildnes & curteſie, which

draweth vnto him the loue of ſtrangers, and good ſeruice of his owne. Whereby it appeereth, that whoſoeuer is mild and courteous to others, receiueth much more profit and honor than thoſe whome he honoreth. They are not to be credited (ſaith Cicero) who ſay that a man muſt vſe crueltie towards his enemies, eſteeming that to be an act proper to a noble and courageous man. For nothing is more commendable or woorthie a great and excellent man, than meekenes and clemencie. It ſeemeth alſo that liberalitie, beneficence, iuſtice, fidelitie, and many other good deedes, wherof many men taſte, and which procure to a man greater good will of euery one, are proper to mildnes and meekenes, called by an ancient man the characters of an holie ſoule, which neuer ſuffer innocencie to be oppreſſed, & as Chilo ſaid, which lead noble harts ſlowly to the feaſts of their friends, but ſpeedily to the ſuccouring of them in their calamities. This vertue of meekenes is truly moſt neceſſarie for a valiant man. For without it he ſhould be in danger to commit ſome actions which might be iudged cruell. And ſeeing that a noble minded man commeth neere to the diuine nature, he muſt alſo reſemble it as much as may be in gentlenes and clemencie, which adorneth and honoreth thoſe eſpecially that are lift vp in dignitie, and haue power to correct others. True it is alſo, that they are deceiued that commend, and as it A medioeritie muſt be kept betweene mildnes and crueltie.were adore the bounty of great men and Magiſtrats, who of a certain ſimplicity without prudence, ſhew themſelues gratious, gentle, and courteous towards all men. Which is no leſſe pernitious to an Eſtate, than is the ſeueritie and crueltie of others. For of this ouer-great lenitie, among many other inconueniences, an impunitie of the wicked is bred, and the ſufferance of one fault quickly draweth on another. Therefore the mildnes of thoſe that haue power and authoritie, ought to be accompanied with ſeueritie, their clemencie mingled with rigour, and their facilitie with auſteritie. This is that which Plato learnedly teacheth vs, ſaying: that the noble and ſtrong man muſt be courageous and gratious, that he may both chaſtice the wicked, and alſo
                     
                     pardon when time requireth. And as for thoſe offences which may be healed, he muſt thinke that no man is willingly vniuſt. Therefore Cicero ſaith, that it is the property of a noble minded man ſimply to puniſh thoſe that are moſt in fault, & the authors of euill, but to ſaue the multitude. And thus the rigour of diſcipline directing meekenes, and meekenes decking rigour, the one will ſet foorth and commend the other: ſo that neither rigour ſhall be rigorous, nor gentlenes diſſolute. By the learned ſentences of theſe Philoſophers, it is very euident, that the vertue of meekenes is not onely a part of Fortitude, which can not be perfect without it, but hath alſo ſome particular coniunction with all the other vertues, yea is as it were the ſeede of them, and induceth men to practiſe all dutie towards their neighbours. But bicauſe the order of our diſcourſes wil offer vs matter and occaſion to intreat particularly heereafter aſwell of iuſtice, and of reuenge of wrongs and ininries which a man receiueth of his enemy, as alſo of other vertues heere briefly mentioned, we will now come to certaine notable examples of meekenes, gentlenes, mildnes, and goodnes of nature. The firſt that Philip a Prince of a good and mild nature.commeth to my remembrance is Philip king of Macedonia, who giueth place to none in the perfection of theſe gifts and graces. When it was told this good Prince, that one Nicanor did openly ſpeake ill of his maieſtie, his counſellors being of opinion that he was to be puniſhed with death: I ſuppoſe (quoth he to them) that he is a good man. It were better to ſearch whether the fault commeth not from vs. And after he vnderſtood that the ſaid Nicanor was a needy fellow, and complained that the king neuer ſuccoured him in his neceſſity, he ſent him a rich preſent. Whereupon afterward it was told Philip, that this Nicanor went vp and downe ſpeaking much good of him. I ſee well (ſaid he then to his Councellors) that I am a better Phiſition for backbiting than you are, and that it is in my power to cauſe either good or euill 
                     Antigonus.
                     to be ſpoken of me. The good diſpoſition of Antigonus king of Macedonia, commeth in here not vnfitly vpon the like occaſion. For hearing certaine ſouldiers ſpeake ill of him

hard by his tent, who thought not that the king could ouerheare them, he ſhewed himſelfe, vttering theſe onelie words without farther hurting of them: Good Lord, could you not go further off to ſpeake ill of me? And to ſay truth, ſuch gifts and graces become a noble Prince very well: yea, he cannot more woorthily and more beſeeming himſelfe giue place to any wrongs, than to thoſe that are done to Oh that Princes would conſider this.his owne perſon. As contrariwiſe thoſe men are vnwoorthie their ſcepters, who cruelly reuenge their owne iniuries, & pardon ſuch as are done to others, yea ſuch faults as are directly againſt the honor of God. A Prince wel inſtructed in vertue (ſaith Xenophon in his Cyropaedia) ought ſo to behaue himſelfe towards his enemie, as to thinke & conſider that at ſome time or other he may be his friend. Was there euer Monarch more feared of his enemies than Alexander.
                     Alexander the Great, inuincible in all things he tooke in hand, inſomuch that he would not onely force al humane powers, but alſo times & places themſelues, and yet who hath left greater proofes of meekenes and curteſie than he? As he was on his voyage vndertaken for the conqueſt of the Indians, Taxiles a king of thoſe countries came & deſired him that they might not warre one againſt another. If thou (ſaid this king vnto him) art leſſe than I, receiue benefits, if greater, I will take them of thee. Alexander greatly admiring and commending the grauitie and courteous ſpeech of this Indian, anſwered thus: At the leaſt we must fight and contend for this: namely, whether of vs twaine ſhall be 
                     A commendable combat.
                     moſt beneficiall to his Companion: ſo loath was this noble Monarch to giue place to another in goodnes, mildnes, and courteſie. Heereof he gaue a great argument, after he had vanquiſhed Porus a very valiant Prince, of whome demanding how he would be intertained of him, this king anſwered, Royally. Neither would he giue him any other anſwer, albeit Alexender vrged him thereunto. For he ſaid that all was contained vnder that word. As in deede the Monarch ſhewed that he was nothing ignorant thereof. For he did not onely reſtore his kingdome vnto him, but inlarged it alſo, wherein he ſurmounted his victorie, and

procured to himſelfe as much renowne by his clemency, as by his valure. Had he euer any greater enemie than Darius vanquiſhed and ſubdued by him? And yet when he ſaw himſelfe letted from vſing towards him any bountie Beſſus cruelly put to death for killing Darius.worthy his greatnes, bicauſe Beſſus one of his captains had ſlaine him, he was ſo diſpleaſed therwith, that he cauſed the murderer to be puniſhed (albeit he was one of his familiar friēds) with a moſt cruel death, cauſing him to be torne aſunder with two great trees bowed down by main ſtrength one againſt another, vnto each of which a part of Beſſus his body was faſtened. Then the trees beyng ſuffered to returne backe again to their firſt nature, with their vehement force rent aſunder the body of this poore and Iulius Caeſar.miſerable wretch. Iulius Caeſar was of ſuch a curteous diſpoſition, that hauing conquered Pompey and all his enemies, he wrote to his friends in Rome, that the greateſt and moſt pleaſant fruit which he gathered of his victory, conſiſted in ſauing daily the liues of ſome of his countrymen who had borne armes againſt him: as in truth he did ſo. And for a great proofe of his meekenes and gentlenes, that ſpeech may ſerue, which he vttred when he vnderſtood that Cato retiring into the towne of Vtica after the loſſe of the battell had killed himſelfe. O Cato (ſayd this monarch beyng then very penſiue) I enuy thee this thy death, ſeeing thou haſt enuied me the glory of ſauing thy life. I neuer yet denied clemencie (ſayd that good emperor M. Aurelius.
                     Marcus Aurelius) to him that demaunded it of me, much leſſe haue I euil intreated or offred diſhonor to any that truſted in me. Neither can any victory be called a true and perfect victorie, but that which carieth with it ſome clemencie. To ouercome is a humane thing, but to pardon, is diuine. Hereof it is (ſaid the ſame vertuous prince) that we eſteeme the greatneſſe of the immortall gods not ſo much for the puniſhment, as for the mercie which they vſe. The clemencie and bountie of Dion the Dion.Syracuſian is woorthy of perpetuall memory. For hauing brought to ruine the tyrannie of Dionyſius the yonger, & recouered the libertie of his countrey, one of his greateſt

enemies named Heraclides, being a very pernitious felow, fell into his hands: whereupon all his friends gaue him counſail to put him to death. Vnto which Dion wiſely anſwered, that other captains and heads of armies vſed commonly to imploy moſt of their ſtudie in the exerciſe of armes and of warre, but as for himſelfe he had long ſince ſtudied and learned in the ſchooles of the Vniuerſitie to ouercome anger, enuy and euery euill affection and will: the proofe whereof conſiſted not onely in behauing himſelfe well towards his friends, and towards good men, but alſo in pardoning, and in the exerciſe of gentlenes and humanitie towards his enemies, ſo that he had rather excell Heraclides in bountie and curteſie, than in power & worldly glory. And although (quoth he) mens lawes auouch it to be more iuſt to reuenge an iniurie receiued, than to offer All priuate reuenge commeth of frailtie.it to another, yet nature teacheth vs, that both the one and the other proceed of the ſame imbecillitie: and how ſoeuer that man is hardly altered, who hath gotten an habite of wickedneſſe, yet are there few men of ſo brutiſh & vntamed a nature, or ſo ſauage in reclaiming, that their peruerſnes cannot in the end be wel ouercome by beneficence, when they ſee that men returne good turnes againe and againe into their boſome. By theſe learned diſcourſes it appeareth that Dion forgaue Heraclides, and beſtowed Lycurgus.vpon him great benefits. Lycurgus the reformer of the Lacedemonian eſtate, by whoſe meanes that common-wealth ſo long tyme floriſhed, doth yet paſſe all thoſe before alleadged through the goodnes and mildnes of his gentle nature. This graue and gratious perſonage hauing receiued ſuch a blow with a ſtaffe, that one of his eies was put out in a ſedition ſtirred vp againſt him in the citie, bicauſe of the rigor of thoſe lawes which he had eſtabliſhed there, after the ſedition was appeaſed, had the offender deliuered into his handes to puniſh him as he thought good. But he not hurting or diſpleaſing him at all, kept him in his houſe, and inſtructed him in all vertue & good diſcipline, and within the yeeres ende, he brought him foorth into the publike aſſembly, being no leſſe vertuous

and well nurtured than before he was vicious: vſing theſe words vnto the people: Behold I restore him vnto you, beyng mild, gratious and fit to do you ſeruice, whom ye gaue to me proud, outragious and diſſolute. O acte beſeeming the ſoule of a chriſtian rather than of an Ethnike! which ought to make thē greatly aſhamed, who for the leaſt wrong receiued of another, would not ſtick to ſlay not one mā only, but a thouſand, yea ten thouſand rather than their worldly honour ſhould be hurt or touched: which pretence of honour they vſe verie often to colour their brutiſhneſſe withall. Now leauing here the ancients, of whom we haue a million of teſtimonies in the reading of hiſtories, I thinke we ſhall do well to propound here vnto our princes beyng too much inclined to reuenge iniuries, the clemencie of king Lewes the 12. who ſucceeding Charles the 8. in the Lewes the 12.kingdom, would neuer reuenge himſelfe of any outrage or iniurie done vnto him, euen than whē he was but duke of Orleance. In ſo much that beyng incited by ſome to puniſh one that was his great enemie during the life of his predeceſſor, he anſwered: That it would not beſeeme a king of France to go about to reuenge iniuries offered to a duke of Orleance. Neither ought we to let paſſe in ſilence the goodnes and clemencie of that great king Frances, who goyng in perſon to chaſtice the rebellion of the Rochelers, forgaue them, and put not one to death, ſaying: That albeit he had no leſſe occaſion to reuenge this iniurie than the Emperor Charles, who puniſhed very cruelly thoſe of Gaunt, yet he had rather encreaſe his prayſes by preſeruing than by destroying his ſubiects. After his example king Henry the 2. hauing giuen in Henry the 2.commiſſion to the duke of Montmorencie Conſtable, to chaſtice the rebellion of the countrey of Guyen, and eſpecially the inhabitants of Burdeaux, afterward gaue out a generall abſolution, and forgaue the racing of the Townhouſe, the paiment of two hundred thouſand pounds, & the defraying of the charges of the armie wherein they were condemned. And truly as it belongeth to the ſun to lighten the earth with his beames: ſo it appertaineth to the vertue of a prince to haue compaſſion vpon the miſerable.

Yea ſo many as ſtand in need of mercy, and beyng woorthy therof craue for it, ought to find harbour in the hauen of his excellencie. Now to come to the end of our preſent diſcourſe, if by ſo many examples which we haue touched, and innumerable others, of which hiſtories are plentifull, we may note amongſt the famous, noble and courageous men of old tyme, ſuch effects of meekeneſſe, gentlenes, bountie, mildnes, clemencie and humanitie towards their enemies, no doubt but they endeuored to do much more for their friends, brethren and countreymen, for whoſe ſafetie they feared not many times to die, as heretofore we haue ſeene examples thereof, and may ſee more hereafter. And how much leſſe would they haue failed to ſuccor them in all other duties and charitable offices? So that if we be men and not monſters in nature, let vs learne what are the fruits not onely of true Chriſtians, but alſo of true humanitie, and of nature not being wholy depraued and corrupted: to the end that framing our maners, mild, gentle, and gratious, to the ſuccor, benefite, and profite of euery one, and following the ſteps and traces of the vertue of Fortitude and Magnanimitie, which is neuer churliſh, idle or proud, we may liue a happy life directed to hir proper end, expecting our renewing in that life which is immortall and euerlaſting.
               
            
            
               Of Good and Ill hap. Chap. 31.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  THere hath beene alwayes men of great humaine learning, but voyd of the ſincere knowledge of the truth, that haue maintained one of theſe two opinions: ſome, That all things were gouerned by nature: others, that they were ruled by fortune. They that acknowledge nature for the firſt cauſe of all things The Stoicks.did attribute vnto hir a conſtellation, which through the ſtrength and efficacie of the ſtarres gouerned the counſaile The Epicures.and reaſon of men. The other ſort acknowledging fortune, maintained that all things were done at aduenture

and by chance. Now albeit there are too many at this day that follow this error, yet is it ſo abſurd a thing, that in the writings of Ethnicks and Pagans, a thouſand inuincible reaſons are found of ſufficient force to conuince ſuch opinions of meere lying and ouer-great ſottiſhnes, and to conſtraine thoſe that are moſt impudent and ſhameles to acknowledge an infinite almightie power to be the creator of nature, and of all things moouing therein, and to diſpoſe and order them with an eternall and euerlaſting prouidence. True it is that I would not abſolutely deny the maruellous effects which many haue noted in heauenlie bodies throughout nature: neuertheles I hold this for certaine, that as all their vertue dependeth of one onely God, ſo he withdraweth from them his power when and as ſoone as it pleaſeth him. Of this I inferre, that they greatly deceiue themſelues, who thinke that the ſeeking out of the ſtarres, and of their ſecret vertues diminiſheth any thing from the greatnes and power of God: ſeeing that contrariwiſe his maieſtie is much more famous and woonderful in doing ſuch great things by his creatures, as if he did them himſelfe without any meane. Nowe that which I haue touched heere my companions, is not to offer any occaſion to diſcourſe of the Mathematicks, or of any part thereof, which would be to depart out of thoſe bounds which we appointed to our Academy. But ſeeing nothing is ſo common amongſt vs as to vſe, or rather to abuſe theſe wordes of Good and Ill hap, by attributing vnto them ſome power and vertue ouer our doings: inſomuch that we commonly ſay there is nothing but good or ill lucke in this world, I thinke it wil not be without fruite to conſider narowly what we ought to thinke of theſe words, and wherein we are to ſeeke and deſire good hap, and wherein to feare and flie ill lucke. Now therefore let vs be inſtructed of you touching this matter.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Good hap conſiſteth in that contentation which proceedeth from the perfection of the ſubiect therof, being adorned with a perfect habit and intire poſſeſſion

                     Wherein good and ill hap conſiſt. of all kind of Goods, in the priuation whereof all ill hap conſiſteth. This cannot be verified of the paſſions and affections of men, nor of their worldly affaires, which are alwaies intermingled with diuers & ſundry accidents, turning one while on this manner, by and by after an other, and carying the ſoule continually vp and downe Who is happie in Socrates iudgement.with theſe two perturbations, Deſire and Griefe. Therefore if there be a happie man in this world (ſaid Socrates) it is he that hath a pure and cleane ſoule, and a conſcience defiled with nothing. For the mysteries of God may be ſeene and beheld of him onely.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  A temperate and conſtant man that knoweth how to moderate feare, anger, exceſſiue ioy, and vnbrideled Who is happie.deſire, is very happie, but he that placeth other vading Goods in his felicitie, ſhall neuer haue a quiet mind. Let vs then heare of AMANA, wherein we ought to iudge that happines or vnhappines conſiſteth.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  The continuall alteration & ſudden chang of one eſtate into another cleane contrary, which might alwaies be noted in the nature, diſpoſition, and euents of mens actions, counſels & deſires, gaue occaſion to ſome of the ancient Philoſophers to thinke the ſicke more happie than the ſound: bicauſe (ſaid they) ſicke folks looke for health, whereas the healthie expect ſicknes. For this The cauſe why Amaſis forfooke his alliance with Policrates.very conſideration it ſeemeth that Amaſis, almoſt the laſt of thoſe kings that raigned peaceably in Egypt, ſhoke off the alliance and league with Policrates king of Samos, who was ſo happie in worldlie reſpects, that do what he could, yet could he not know what ſorow meant, but all things fel out vnto him better than he deſired. For proofe wherof may ſerue that which happened vnto him, after he had caſt into the ſea a ring of great value, which he loued exceedingly. Now, although he did ſo of purpoſe, to the end he might taſte of ſome ſorow and griefe, yet he found it quickly againe in the bellie of a fiſh taken by Fiſhermen, and bought for his kitchen. Whereupon this wiſe Egyptian iudged it a thing altogether impoſſible; but that ſome great miſerie was to follow hard at the heeles of ſo great happines: and therefore he would not be partaker therof,

as of neceſſitie he ſhould haue beene, if he had continued ſtill that league which before was betwixt them. Neither was Amaſis any thing deceiued in his opinion. For within a while after Policrates was depriued of his kingdome, and ſhamefully hanged, ſeruing for a common and notable example of the inſtabilitie and variablenes of mans eſtate, as alſo to ſhew that it is a very abſurd thing to place happines in ſo vncertain felicity. And yet among infinit imperfections borne with man, this is common in An ordin arie imperfection in man.him to looſe quickly the remembrance of a benefit receiued, but to retaine a long time the memorie of a calamitie fallen vpon him. Which is the cauſe that he alwaies ſuppoſeth his miſhaps to be without compariſon greater than all the good hap that he can haue: ſo that he complaineth continually of his miſeries and calamities, not remembring the innumerable benefits which are daily offred & preſented vnto him from the grace and bountifulnes of God. Notwithſtanding, if all men (as Socrates ſaid) aſwell rich as poore, brought their miſhaps, and laid them in common together, and if they were in ſuch ſort diuided, that euery one might haue an equall portion, then ſhould it be ſeene, that many, who thinke themſelues ouercharged & oppreſſed, would with all their hartes take againe vnto them their fortune, and be contented withall. Wouldest thou (ſaid Democritus) auoid the griefe of thy miſerie? Behold the life of the afflicted, and by the compariſon A meane to auoid the 
                           •••
                        re of our 
                           〈◊〉
                        .thereof with thine thou ſhalt ſee that thou haſt cauſe to thinke thy ſelfe very happie. He that will meaſure his burthen (ſaith Martial) may well beare it. Now, with this common complaint in men of their eſtate and condition, this cuſtome alſo is ioined, to lay the cauſe of that which they ſuffer vpon cruell and intollerable deſtinie, accuſing that, An other imperfection.to excuſe their owne fault. Wherefore we cannot more aptly compare them than to blind folks, who are angrie, and oftentimes call them blind that vnawares do meete and iuſtle them. But if we deſire to cure our ſoules of ſo many miſerable paſſions, which depriue vs of true reſt & tranquillitie neceſſarie for a happie life, let vs be carefull

to learne how to diſcerne true happines from miſhap, that we may reioyce in that which is good, and as readily giue thanks to the author thereof, as naturally, through a falſe opinion which we haue of euill, we ſuſtaine humaine miſeries and croſſes vnpatiently. Firſt then let vs heare the Notable opinions of good and ill hap.ſundry and notable opinions of many ancient men touching good and ill hap. If thou knowest all that ought to be knowen in all things (ſaid Pythagoras) thou art happy. Let them be accounted very happy (ſaid Homer) to whom fortune hath equally wayed the good with the euill. The greatest miſerie of all (ſaid Bias) is not to be able to beare miſerie. That man is happie (ſaid Dionyſius the elder) that hath learned from his youth to be vnhappy. For he will beare the yoke better whereunto he hath been ſubiect and accustomed of long tyme. Demetrius, ſurnamed the Beſieger, ſaid, That he iudged none more vnhappy than he that neuer tasted of aduerſitie: as if he would haue ſayd, that it was a ſure argument, that fortune iudged him to be ſo baſe & abiect, that he deſerued not that ſhe ſhould buſie hir ſelfe about him. That man (ſaith Cicero) is very happy, who thinketh that no humane matters, how grieuous ſoeuer they may be, are intollerable, or ought to diſcourage him: iudging alſo nothing ſo excellent, wherby he ſhould be mooued to reioyce in ſuch ſort, that his hart be puffed and lift vp thereby. Yea, he is very happy, who fitly and conueniently behaueth himſelf in all things neceſſary for him. Nothing is euil (ſaith Plutarke) that is neceſſarie. By which word Neceſſarie, both he and Cicero vnderstand whatſoeuer commeth to a wiſe man by fatall destinie: bicauſe he beareth it patiently, as that which cannot be auoyded, thereby increaſing his vertue ſo much the more: and ſo 
                     Solon ſayd that happines conſiſted in a good life and death.
                     no euill can come to a good man. Solon drawing neerer to the truth of ſincere happineſſe, ſayd, that it conſisted in a good life and death: and that to iudge them happy that are aliue, conſidering the danger of ſo many alterations wherein they are, were all one, as if a man ſhould before hand appoint the reward of the victorie for one that is yet fighting, not beyng ſure that he ſhould ouercome. Socrates ſpeaking The doctrine of Socrates and of the papiſts is all one touching the hope of eternall life.rather with a diuine than a humane ſpirite, ſayd, that when we ſhall be deliuered from this body wherein our ſoule is incloſed as an Oyster in his ſhell, we may than be happy, but not ſooner: and that felicitie cannot be obtained in this life, but that we
                     
                     must hope to enioy it perfectly in the other life, as well for our vertues, as by the grace and mercy of God. Not the rich (ſaid Plato) but the wiſe and prudent auoyd miſerie. They that thinke (ſayth Aristotle) that externall goods are the cauſe of happines, deceiue themſelues no leſſe than if they ſuppoſed, that cunning playing on the harpe came from the instrument, and not from Arte: but we must ſeeke for it in the good and quiet estate of the ſoule. For as we ſay not that a body is perfect bicauſe it is richly arayed, but rather bicauſe it is well framed and healthfull: ſo a ſoule well instructed, is the cauſe that both hir ſelfe and the bodie wherein ſhe is incloſed are happy: which cannot be verified of a man bicauſe he is rich in gold and ſiluer. When I conſider all the aboue named wiſe opinions of theſe Ethnikes and Pagans, I cannot ſufficiently maruell at the ignorance and blockiſhnes of many The common opinion of men concerning happines and vnhappines.in our age touching Good and Ill hap, bicauſe they labor to make theſe words priuate, and to tie them to the ſucceſſe of their affections in worldly matters: which if they fall out according to their deſire and liking, behold preſently they are rauiſhed with extreme ioy, boaſting of thē
                     ſelues, that they are moſt happy. But contrarywiſe, if they miſſe of their intents, by and by they diſpaire, and thinke themſelues the vnhappieſt men in the world. Do we not alſo ſee that moſt men iudge them happy that poſſeſſe riches, pleaſure, delight, glory and honour, and thoſe men miſerable that want, eſpecially if after they had aboundance, they looſe it by ſome miſhap, the cauſe wherof they commonly attribute either to good or ill lucke, which Whereat Apollonius maruelled moſt.they ſay ruleth all humaine affaires? We read that Apollonius Thianaeus hauing trauelled ouer al Aſia, Afrike and Europe, ſayd that of two things whereat he maruelled moſt in all the world: the firſt was, that he alwayes ſawe the proud man commaund the humble, the quarellous the quiet, the tyrant the iuſt, the cruel the pitifull, the coward the hardie, the ignorant the skilfull, and the greateſt thieues hang the innocent. But in the meane while who may doubt whether of theſe were the happieſt? that the good were not rather than the wicked? if happines according to the ancients, & to the truth, be perfected in good

                     Notable reaſons to ſhew that no worldly thing can be called good, and that happines cannot be perfected by any ſuch thing. things, then it is certain, that whoſoeuer enioieth al good things ſhall be perfectly happy. Now nothing can be called good but that which is profitable, and contrary to euill: ſo that whatſoeuer may as ſo one be euill as good, ought not to be called good. Moreouer it muſt be the poſſeſſion of ſome firme, ſtedfaſt and permanent Good that maketh a man happy. For nothing ought to wax old, to periſh or decay of thoſe things wherin a happy life conſiſteth, ſeeing he that feareth to looſe them cannot be ſayd to liue quietly. Therefore neither beautie, nor ſtrength, and diſpoſition of body, neither riches, glory, honour or pleaſure can be truely called Goods, ſeeing oftentymes they are the cauſe of ſo many euils, waxe old, and vaniſh away many times as ſoone as a man hath receiued them, and laſtly, worke in vs an vnſatiable deſire of them. How many men are there to whom all theſe things haue been the occaſion of euill? And how can we call that good, which being poſſeſſed, and that in abundance, cannot yet keep the owner thereof from being vnhappy and miſerable? Wherfore we may ſay, that happines cannot be perfected by the poſſeſſion of humane and mortall things, neither vnhappines through the want of them: but that Wherein true happines conſiſteth.the true felicitie which we ought to deſire in this world, conſiſteth in the goods of the ſoule, nouriſhed in the hope of that vnſpeakable & euerlaſting happines, which is promiſed and aſſured vnto it in the ſecond life. And ſo we Who are vnhappy.ſay, that none are vnhappy but they, who by reaſon of their peruerſneſſe, feele in their conſcience a doubting of the expectation of eternall promiſes: as alſo they that giue ouer themſelues to vice, whoſe nature is to corrupt, deſtroy, and infect with the venom that is alwayes about it, all things whereof it taketh hold. As for the common miſeries of mans life they cannot in any ſort make him vnhappy, whoſe naturall diſpoſition & maners beyng framed and decked with vertue, are able to giue & to impart to euery condition of his life, whether it be poore or rich, proſperous or aduerſe, honourable or contemptible; happineſſe, ioy, pleaſure and contentation, which

flowe in his ſoule aboundantly from that fountaine and liuelie ſpring which Philoſophie hath diſcouered vnto him in the fertile field of Graces and Sciences, whereby he enioyeth true tranquillitie and reſt of ſpirit, as much as a man may haue in this mortall life, moderating the perturbations of his ſoule, and commaunding ouer the vnpure affections of the fleſh. And than as the ſhoe turneth with the faſhion of the foote, and not contrarywiſe, The happineſſe of man commeth from within him.ſo the inward diſpoſition of a wiſe and moderate man cauſeth him to lead a life like vnto the ſame, that is, mild, peaceable and quiet, being neuer caried away with vnreaſonable paſſions, bicauſe ſhe neuer enioyeth or reioyceth immoderately in that which ſhe hath, but vſeth well that which is put into her hand, without feare or repining if it be taken away: following therein the ſaying of Democritus, that whoſoeuer mindeth to liue alwayes happilie, must propound to himſelfe and deſire things poſſible, and be content with things preſent. Therefore ſeeing the fountaine of all felicitie and contentation in this life is within vs, let vs cure and cleanſe diligently all perturbations which ſeeke to hinder the tranquillitie of our ſpirites, to the ende that externall things which come from without vs agaynſt our will and expectation, may ſeeme vnto vs friendly and familiar after we know how to vſe them wel. Plato compared our life to table-play, wherein both the Our life compared to tableplay.dice muſt chance wel, & the plaier muſt vſe that wel which the dice ſhal caſt. Now of theſe two points the euent & lot of the Dice is not in our power: but to receiue mildly and moderatly that which falleth vnto vs, & to diſpoſe euerie thing in that place where it may either profite moſt if it be good, or do leaſt hurt if it be bad, that is in our power, & belongeth to our dutie if we be wiſe men. Fortune (ſaith Plutarke) may well caſt me into ſickeneſſe, take away my goods, bring me in diſgrace with the people, but ſhe can not make him wicked, a coward, ſlouthfull, baſe-minded or enuious, that is honeſt, 
                        •
                     aliaunt, and nobleminded, nor take from him his ſetled and temperate diſpoſition of Prudence, which maketh him to iudge,

that no tedious, grieuous or troubleſome thing can befall him. For being grounded, not vpon vaniſhing goods, but vpon Philoſophicall ſentences, & firme diſcourſes of reaſon, he may ſay, I haue preuented thee fortune, I haue cloſed vp all thy chances, and ſtopped the wayes of entrance in vpon me: and ſo led a ioyfull life as long as vertue, and that part which is proper to man are ſtrongeſt. And if peraduenture ſome great inconuenience happen vnto him againſt all hope, which humaine power is not able to ouercome, than with ioy of ſpirite he conſidereth that the hauen of ſafetie is at hand, wherein he may ſaue himſelfe by ſwimming out of the body as out of a Skiffe that leaketh, departing boldly and without feare from the miſeries of the world, that he may enioy abſolute and perfectAlexander and Crates oppoſed one againſt an other.happines. Alexander the great hauing vnder his dominion more than halfe the world, when he heard the Philoſopher Anaxarchus diſpute and maintaine that there were innumerable worlds, he began to weepe, ſaying, Haue I not good cauſe to be ſorowful and to mourne, if there be an infinite number of worlds, ſeeing as yet I haue not been able to make my ſelfe Lord of one? But Crates the Philoſopher being brought vp in the ſchoole of wiſdome, and hauing in ſtead of all wealth but an old cloke and a ſcrip, neuer wept in all his life, but was always ſeen mery, and paſſing ouer his dayes cheerfully. By which two kinds of life contrary one to an other, it appeereth ſufficiently that it is within our ſelues, and not in outward things, wherein we muſt ſeeke for the foundation of a certaine ioy which is watered and flouriſheth in ſtrength by the remembrance of good and vertuous actions proceeding from the ſoule guided by rightAgamemnon. knowledge and reaſon. Homer bringeth in Agamemnon complaining greatly bicauſe he was to command ſo great a part of the world, as if he had an intollerable burthen vpon his ſhoulders. Whereas Diogenes when he was to be ſold for a ſlaue, lying all along, mocked the Sergeant that cried him to ſale, and would not riſe vp when he commanded him▪ but ſcoffingly ſaid vnto him, If thou wart to ſell a fiſh, wouldeſt thou make it ariſe? Cry this rather, that
                     
                     if any man want a maister, he ſhould buy me: for I can ſerue his turne well. Wherby we may fitly note this, that all the happines, reſt, and contentation of man dependeth of vertue onely, and not of worldlie greatnes and glorie. For this reaſon the ſelfe ſame Diogenes beholding a ſtranger come from Lacedemonia, more curiouſly decked on a feſtiuall day than he was woont, ſaid vnto him: What? Doth not an honest man thinke that euery day is festiuall vnto him? And truly there is nothing that ought to mooue vs ſo much to ſhew all outward ſignes of ioy, or that breedeth ſuch ſerenitie and calmenes againſt the tempeſtuous waues of humane miſeries and calamities, than to haue the ſoule pure and cleane from all wicked deedes, wils, and counſels, & the manners vndefiled, not troubled or infected with any vice. For then acknowledging the eſtate of mortall and corruptible things, we iudge them vnwoorthie the care of our ſoules, that we may wholy lift them vp to the contemplation of heauenlie and eternall things, wherein our happines and perfect felicitie conſiſteth. Heereby we learne, that in the ſecond life onely we are to ſeeke for andWhere we muſt ſeeke for true happines. to expect the fruition of true happines, which can neuer increaſe or be diminiſhed. For as no man can make a line ſtraighter than that which is ſtraight, and as nothing is more iuſt than that which is iuſt: ſo he that is happie can not be more happie. Otherwiſe vntill a man had gotten all that might be had, his deſires would neuer be ſetled, & ſo no man ſhould be called happie. But felicitie is perfect of it ſelfe. Cicero knew it well enough, when he ſaid: that no man ſtanding in feare of great things, could be happie: and in that reſpect no man liuing can be ſo, but to ſpeake in deed of a happie life, that is it which is perfect and abſolute. To the end therefore that we may reape ſome profit by our preſent diſcourſe, let vs neuer thinke that any man may be called happie or vnhappie, bicauſe he is aduanced or diſgraced, with honors, goods, and worldlie commodities, or bicauſe he is partaker either of proſperitie or aduerſitie throughout his whole life. But he onely ought toWho is happie in this world. be eſteemed happie in this world, that knoweth in reſt &

quietnes of ſoule how to vſe both eſtates, and neuer ſuffereth himſelfe to be caried away or troubled with vncleane deſires, but with all his hart ſeeketh for the poſſeſſion of a firme, ſtedfaſt, and abiding Good, being aſſured, as we ſaid, that not one of thoſe things wherein a happie life conſiſteth ſhall waxe old, periſh, or fall to decay. To conclude, he is happie that ſheweth in all the workes and actions of his life a patterne of honeſtie and vertue, being moderate in proſperitie, & conſtant in aduerſitie. A man thus affected and diſpoſed, will behaue himſelfe without reproofe in the time preſent, will call to mind with ioy & pleaſure the time paſt, and wil boldly and without diſtruſt draw neere to the time to come, euen with a cheerefull & ioifull hope of better things, and with a ſtedfaſt expectation of that vnſpeakeable and endles happines, which is prepared for the elect.
               
            
            
               Of Proſperitie and Aduerſitie. Chap. 32.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  BEing in our former diſcourſe entred into the diuers and contrarie effects which the nature and condition of worldlie affaires draw with them, whereof euery one in his particular place may dailie haue good & ſufficient teſtimonies: & ſeeing through the malice and corruption of our age, all things are at that point, as if they ment to lay more hard and difficult croſſes vpon vs to ſuſtaine, I thinke we ſhall not depart from our matter, if we ſeeke for ſome inſtruction whereby to gouerne our ſelues prudently in proſperitie and in aduerſitie, conſidering the effects both of the one and the other, to the end we may auoid thoſe that are moſt pernitious, and retaine ſtill with vs that conſtancie and woorthines that is required in the vertue of Fortitude, whichA pretie compariſon. teacheth a man how he ought to behaue himſelfe nobly in euery eſtate and condition of life. For as gold transfigured by the workeman, now into one faſhion, and then into another, is transformed into ſundrie kinds of ornaments,

and yet remaineth alwaies that which it is, without any alteration of ſubſtance: ſo it behooueth a wiſe & noble minded man to cōtinue alwaies the ſame in things that are contrarie and diuers, without any alteration and change of his conſtancie and vertue. But I leaue the diſcourſe of this matter to you my Companions.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  As a man (ſaith Scipio) deliuereth ouer his horſes (which bicauſe they haue beene in many skirmiſhes, are become reſtie, furious, and vntractable) to the yeomen of his horſes, to bringA ſimilitude. them into good order againe: ſo men that are growne to be vnrulie through proſperity, must be brought as it were to around circle, that they may conſider of the inconstancie of worldlie things, and of the variablenes of wretched fortune.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  In proſperitie (ſaith Euripides) be not lift vp too much, and in aduerſitie hope the best alwaies. And as in a fireA ſimilitude. 
                     (ſaid Socrates) it is good to behold a cleare brightnes: ſo is a moderate ſoule in felicitie. But let vs heare ASER, who wil handle that which is heere propounded more at large.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  As men prouide bulwarks and banks againſt a riuer that vſeth to ouerflow: ſo he that deſireth to liue happily, muſt fortifie himſelfe with powerfull and conuenient vertues, to reſiſt the hurtfull aſſaults which the vnlooked for ſucceſſe of humane affaires make vpon him continually, both in proſperitie and in aduerſitie. ForCommon effects of the fraile nature of man. queſtionles nothing is hardlier kept within compas, than he that hath all things according to his harts deſire: neither is any thing ſo much caſt downe, or ſooner diſcouraged than the ſame man, when he is afflicted and miſſeth of his purpoſe. All mindes are not reſolute and conſtant enough from ſlipping beſide themſelues, and beyond the limits of reaſon, neither in great proſperity, which puffeth and lifteth vp mens harts, eſpecially theirs that are baſe by nature, nor yet in vnloked for aduerſity, which through the heauie burthen thereof oftentimes aſtoniſheth and amazeth them that are thought to be beſt ſetled and aſſured. But if we conſider apart the pernitious effects which iſſue from theſe two contraries, when reaſon doth not guide and gouerne them, we ſhall find nothing but pride

in the one, and faintnes of hart, baſenes of mind, and oftentimes Proſperity more hurtfull than aduerſitie.deſpaire in the other. Notwithſtanding we may well note this, that proſperitie hath alwaies beene the cauſe of farre greater euils to men than aduerſitie, & that it is eaſier for a man to beare this patiently, than not to forget himſelfe in the other. Whereof I thinke we may not vnfitly alledge for a reaſon that which Menander ſaith: that man of all other liuing creatures is apteſt to fall ſuddenly downe from high to low, bicauſe he dareth vndertake the greatest matters, although he be weakeſt. Whereupon being as it were naturally ſubiect to falling, it is not ſo ſtrange vnto him being better furniſhed for that, (ſeeing he is or ought to be prepared thereto long before) then when againſt his naturall diſpoſition he aſcendeth to ſome greatnes not hoped for. Now, whether it be for this reaſon, or bicauſe vice is his proper inheritance, the memorie of the time paſt aſwell as of the preſent time, furniſheth vs with ſufficient teſtimonies, ſeeing fewe are found that forgat not themſelues in their proſperitie, whereas many haue behaued Plato was requeſted by the Cyrenians to giue them lawesthemſelues wiſely, and taken occaſion to be better in their aduerſitie. Which being vnderſtood of Plato, when he was requeſted by the Cyrenians a people of Grecia, to write downe lawes for them, and to appoint them ſome good forme of gouernment for their Common-wealth: he anſwered, that it was a very hard matter to preſcribe lawes to ſo rich, happie, and wealthie a people as they were. For commonly thoſe cities which in ſhort time come ſuddenly to great felicitie, grow to be inſolent, arrogant, and vneaſie to raunge in order: neither is there any thing for the moſt part prouder, than a poore man made rich: as contrariwiſe none are ſo readie to receiue counſell and direction, as he whom fortune hath ouerrun. He that is preſſed greatly with aduerſitie, is ſeldome puffed vp with pride, or vanquiſhed of luſt, or drowned in couetouſnes, or ouertaken with gluttonie, or lift vp with deſire and worldlie glorie: all which imperfections happen commonly to thoſe vpon whome fortune too much fawneth. That felicitie (ſaith Seneca) which hath not beene

hurt, cannot indure one blow: but when it hath had a long and continuall combat with diſcommodities, and hath hardued it ſelfe by ſuffering and bearing iniuries, then doth it not ſuffer it ſelfe to be ouercome with any euill. Now one of the greateſt benefits that a man may haue in this life, is, neither to be changed by aduerſitie, nor lift vp with proſperity, but to be as a well rooted tree, which, although it be ſhaken with ſundrie winds, yet can not be ouerthrowne by any of them. And truly it is very ridiculous that that which commeth to all worldly things by an ordinarie and naturall courſe, euen by the ſequele of cauſes linked togither and depending one of another, changing the eſtate of mortall things, ſhould haue power to alter or to make any mutation in reaſon and wiſedom, which ought to abide ſtedfaſt in the mind of man. For this cauſe Plato ſaid, that there was nothing but vertue could tame it, and that men furniſhed therewith behaued themſelues conſtantly and courageouſly in both kinds of fortune. Vertue (ſaith Cicero) abideth calme and quiet in the greateſt tempeſt, and although ſhe be driuen into exile, yet ſhe ſtirreth not out of hir place and countrey, but ſhineth ſo alwaies of hir ſelfe, that ſhe cannot be ſoiled with the ſpots of an other. This excellent Orator and Philoſopher giueth vs alſo wholeſome counſell to oppoſe againſt Good counſell for thoſe that are in proſperitie.the dangerous effects that are to be feared in proſperitie. When we are (ſaith he) in beſt eſtate, we muſt vſe the counſell of our friends more than we do commonly, and as long as it continueth we are greatly to beware that we open not our eares to flatterers, who are the plague & deſtruction of the greater ſort, bicauſe all their labor is to propound vnto vs occaſions & meanes to enioy delights and pleaſures, and to ſhew out ſelues to be proud and arrogant, during the time of our proſperitie: to the end we ſhould put good men farre from vs, and reſerue to them onely that authority wherein they are ſetled. Whereas on the contrarie ſide our true friends would lead vs backe to conſider the inconſtancie of humane things, to the ende that we abuſe not our felicitie, but behaue our ſelues as a

wiſe Pilote doth, who alwayes feareth a ſmiling calmneſſe in the maine ſea. Which conſideration maketh a mā conſtant and reſolute to beare and indure all ſiniſter chaunces, and not ſo ready and eaſie to be deceiued, bicauſe he always feareth and diſtruſteth fortune. Let vs now come to examples of that which we haue here alleaged. As touching the pernitious effects of ouer great proſperitie, they Alexander.may well be noted in Alexander the great, who although he was indued with notable and rare vertues, yet could not vſe moderately the great good ſpeed and happy ſucceſſe of all his enterpriſes, but being conquered of the Perſian delights, gaue himſelfe ouer to commit many inſolencies, and then filled with prefumption and pride, Iulius Caeſar.would haue been worſhipped. Iulius Caeſar being aſcended into the higheſt degree of fauourable fortune that he could deſire, and lending his eare ouer freely to flatterers, would be called and declared a king, (which name was moſt odious to the Romanes ſince the time that Tarquinius was baniſhed, as we mentioned before) and retained alwayes to himſelfe the authoritie and power of a Dictator, which before continued but a certaine time. He beſtowed the publike offices and places of honor vpon whō he thought good, whereof proceeded the ill will of his ſubiects, and in the end his deſtruction. The greatneſſe of Pompey.
                     Pompey was that which afterward ouerthrew him. For imploying his credite to fauour others vniuſtly, it fell out to him as to cities that ſuffer their enemies to enter euen into their ſtrongeſt places, diminiſhing ſo much of their own forces, as they adde to others that wiſh them no good. Which thing Sylla the Dictator did very notably giue him to vnderſtand, when he ſawe that Pompey by his countenance and fauour had brought Lepidus a wicked man to the dignitie of Confulſhip. I ſee well (quoth Sylla to him) thou art very glad bicauſe thou haſt preuailed in this ſuit; and ſure thou haſt great cauſe ſo to be. For it is a goodly matter, and the point of a noble man to be ſo gratious with the people, that through thy fauour Lepidus the wickeddeſt man in the world hath caried away the Conſulſhip

before Catullus the honeſteſt man in all the citie. But A wiſe foreſight of Sylla.I aduiſe thee to beware of ſleeping now, and to haue a vigilant eie to thy buſines, bicauſe thou haſt armed & made ſtrong an aduerſarie againſt thy ſelfe. Wherof Pompey had experience afterward in thoſe warres which Lepidus raiſed, againſt whome he was ſent by the Senate, and in the end obtained the victorie. But the fauour he bare to Caeſar, entring vpon the gouernment of publike affairs, came not to that paſſe. For he was afterward ouerthrowne by the ſame meanes wherewith he had ſtrengthned Caeſar againſt others. Out of which we may draw an excellent doctrine for all that are placed in authoritie, or that haue the eares of great men at commandement, that they neuer cauſe the wicked to be aduanced. For as the worme that is bred at the foote of a tree, groweth with it, and in the end deſtroieth it: ſo a wicked man aduanced by the fauour of one greater than himſelfe, becommeth afterward vnthankfull and treacherous vnto him. This mooued Archidamides the Lacedemonian to anſwer in this ſort one that commended Charilaüs king of Sparta, bicauſe he ſhewed himſelfe alike courteous to all. But how deſerueth that man praiſe, who ſheweth himſelfe courteous towards the wicked? Now to returne to our ſpeech touching the effects of proſperitie, not ruled by the reaſon of true prudence, what is more hatefull, or hath at any time beene more hurtfull to men than pride? Which (as Plato ſaith) dwelleth with ſolitarines, that is to ſay, is ſo hated, that in the end it is forſaken of all the world? And whereof is it bred ſooner than of proſperitie? Which that wiſe man & excellent Romane captaine Paulus Aemilius knowing ful well, after the victorie gotten by him againſt Perſes king of Macedonia, being deſirous to admoniſh the men of warre that were in his armie, and to keepe them within the compaſſe of their dutie, he vſed theſe or the like ſpeeches An excellent oration of P. Aemilius to his ſouldiers.vnto them. Is there any man now my friends and companions, that ought to waxe proud, and to glorie in the profperitie of his affaires, if he hath lucke to his liking, and not rather to feare the ficklenes of fortune, who euen at this preſent ſetteth before our eies
                     
                     ſuch a notable example of the common frailtie of man, ſubiect to the ordinarie courſe of fatall deſtinie, which turneth about continually? You ſee how in the moment of an houre we haue beaten downe and put vnder our feete the houſe of Alexander the Great, who was the mightiest and moſt redoubted Prince in the world. You ſee a King not long ſince followed and accompanied with ſo many thouſands of fighting men brought to ſuch miſerie, that being priſoner he muſt receiue his meate and drinke at the hands of his enemies. Ought we to truſt more to our good hap, and to thinke it more firme and aſſured? Truly no. And therefore let vs learne to humble our ſelues, and to reſtraine this fooliſh arrogancie & proud inſolencie, wherewith our youth ſeemeth to be ouercome by reaſon of the victorie obtained by vs: and let vs expect to what end and 
                     M. Aurelius.
                     iſſue fortune will guide the enuie of this preſent proſperitie. Marcus Aurelius after he had vanquiſhed Popilion, Generall of the Parthians, ſpake thus vnto him: I tell thee of a truth that I ſtand in greater feare of fortune at this preſent, than I did before the battell. For ſhe careth not ſo much to ouertake the conquered, as to ſubdue and vanquiſh the Conquerors. This ſelfe ſame conſideration Philip king of Macedonia.cauſed Philip king of Macedonia, after he receiued newes of three great and ſundrie proſperities in one day, to vtter this ſpeech: O fortune (ſaid he) (holding vp his hands towards heauen) I pray thee ſend me for a counterbuffe ſome meane aduerſitie. Likewiſe after he had ouercome in battell the Athenians at Cherroneſus, and by this victorie obtained the Empire of Grecia, he commanded a little Page to cry vnto him thrice a daye, Philip remember that thou art a man: ſo greatly did he feare leaſt through arrogancie ariſing of his proſperitie, he ſhould commit anie Archidamas.thing that did not beſeeme him. The ſame thing did Archidamas the ſonne of Ageſilaus very well and wiſely teach him, to whome Philip after he was a Conqueror had written a very ſharpe and rough letter: If thou meaſureſt thy ſhadow (anſwered Archidamas) thou ſhalt find that it is not waxen greater ſince thou didſt ouercome. The proſperitie which Cyrus 
                     Cyrus.Monarch of the Perſians alwaies had in all his enterpriſes, was the cauſe that truſting too much thereunto, he would not giue eare to the counſell of Craeſus, when he diſſwaded

him from that warre, which he purpoſed to vndertake againſt Tomyris Queene of the Scythians, (which fell out hardly for him) vſing theſe words: Knowe that all worldly things haue a certaine courſe, which doth not ſuffer them to end happily that haue alwaies had fortune proſperous, which he might well ſpeake by experience in him ſelfe. But Cyrus hauing alreadie ſubdued all Aſia, part of Grecia, the kingdome of Babylon, with infinite other places, and beholding his armie to conſiſt of ſixe ſcore thouſand men, thought he could not be vanquiſhed. Whereupon giuing battell to Tomyris, he loſt his life, togither with the renowne of ſo many goodlie victories, (being now ouercome by a woman) his whole armie alſo being hewen in peeces. And truly as one puffe of wind cauſeth the goodlieſt fruites, The inſtabilitie of humane things.which beautifie the whole Orchard, to fall from the tree: ſo a little diſgrace, a ſudden miſhap in one inſtant bringeth to nothing, and pulleth downe the greatnes, wealth, and proſperitie of men. And when we thinke to lay a ſure foundation of proſperitie, euen then is all changed, and the order of our conceits peruerted & turned into an vnlooked for diſorder and confuſion. Now let vs come to conſider particularly of the effects of aduerſitie. There are The common effects of aduerſitie.few folks (if they be not deſtitute of all good iudgement) that are ignorant and vnderſtand not what belongeth to their dutie, ſo long as proſperitie laſteth: but fewe there are, who in great ouerthwarts and ſhakings of fortune, haue harts ſufficiently ſtaied to practiſe and imitate that which they commend and make account of, or to flie from that which they miſlike and reprehend. Nay rather they are caried away, and through cuſtome of liuing at eaſe, togither with frailtie and faintnes of hart, they ſtart aſide, and alter their firſt diſcourſes. This is that which Terence meaneth, where he ſaith, that when we are in good health, we giue a great deale better counſaile to the diſeaſed, than we can take to our ſelues when we ſtande in neede thereof. Notwithſtanding he that is beaten downe and humbled by affliction, eaſilie ſuffereth himſelfe to bee directed, gladlie receiueth and harkeneth to the

aduice of good men, and if there be any little ſeed of vertue in him, it encreaſeth daily, whereas proſperitie would ſoone choke it. And if he hath profited well in the ſtudie The fruits of the ſtudy of Philoſophie.of wiſdome, he doth as Bees do, which draw the beſt and drieſt hony out of time, although it be a very bitter herb. So out of moſt troubleſome Accidents he knoweth how to reape benefit and commoditie, reſoluing with himſelfe and taking counſell according to the miſhaps that light vpon him. He doubteth not of this, that it is the duetie of wiſe and vertuous men not onely to deſire proſperitie in all things, but alſo to indure aduerſitie with conſtancie & modeſtie. He knoweth that as the fruition of proſperitie is for the moſt part full of ſweetneſſe, when it is not abuſed, ſo the conſtant ſuffring of aduerſitie is always repleniſhed and accompanied with great honour. And ſuch a one may truely be called noble and courageous, yea, he ſheweth himſelfe a great deale better to be ſo in deed whē he yeeldeth not, nor fainteth in afflictions, than if he were in proſperitie, which puffing vp the harts of cowards and baſe minds, cauſeth them ſomtimes to ſeem courageous, when as they are lift vp by fortune into a high degree of honour and felicitie, whereas in truth there is no ſuch Craeſus.matter in them. Craeſus King of the Lydians beyng throwen from his eſtate & made priſoner to Cyrus, ſhewed greater vertue and generoſitie of hart at that time, than he did all the while he enioied his great wealth, through which being puffed vp with pride, he would haue had Solon iudged him moſt happy. For being vpon a block ready to be burned, and both remembring and fitly applying to himſelfe thoſe wiſe diſcourſes which he heard Solon make vnto him concerning the ſmall aſſurance that we haue in worldly felicitie, and how no man ought to be called happy before the houre of his death, he reſolued with himſelfe to die conſtantly and cheerfully. And calling to mind this benefit which he receiued by the means of that wiſe man, whereupon he felt his ſoule filled with ioy, he repeated aloud three times the name of Solon, vſing no other words. Whereof Cyrus asking the cauſe, he vttered

vnto him the ſelfe ſame diſcourſes, which touched the hart of this monarch in ſuch ſort, that preſently changing the ill will he bare to Craeſus, he fully reſtored him to the fruition of his kingdom, and kept him neere vnto himſelf The Romanes were wiſe and conſtant in aduerſitie.for one of his chiefe and principall counſailors. The Romanes (as Polibius ſaith) neuer obſerued their lawes more ſtraightly, neuer cauſed the diſcipline of warre to be kept more ſeuerely, and were neuer ſo well aduiſed & conſtant, as after the Carthaginians had obtained of them the third victorie at the battell of Cannas. And contrarywiſe, there were nothing but part-takings and factions in Carthage, lawes were neuer leſſe eſteemed, magiſtrates neuer leſſe regarded, nor maners more corrupted than at that time. But within a little while after, they fell from the higheſt degree of their felicitie, into vtter ruine, and the Romanes reſtored their owne eſtate into greater glory than it was in before. Vertue is always like to the Date tree. For the The propertie of Vertue oppreſſed.more ſhe is oppreſſed and burthened, the higher ſhe lifteth vp hir ſelfe, and ſheweth hir inuincible power and ſtrength, ouer which fortune can nothing preuaile. And although aduerſitie ſomewhat troubleth a vertuous man, yet is it not able to alter his noble courage, but remaining firme and conſtant, he knoweth how to take all things as exerciſes of his vertue, which, as an ancient man ſaid, withereth and looſeth hir vigor without aduerſitie. It is euidēt therfore that the effects of aduerſitie are not ſo pernitious to a mā, as thoſe which proſperitie commonly bringeth vnto him. For this latter is of a proud and preſumptuous nature, always enuied, and as commonly it is not freely admoniſhed, ſo it giueth eare vnto and receiueth as litle: but the other is plaine and ſimple, folowed of compaſſion, and ready to receiue counſell. Beſides, it awaketh a Chriſtian and ſtirreth him vp to humble himſelf before the maieſtie of God, to cal vpon him, and to truſt wholy to his onely grace and vertue. Now if ſome (as I haue ſayd) are ſo faint harted, that they ſuffer themſelues to be ouerwhelmed vnder the burthen of turmoiles and calamities, let vs attribute the cauſe thereof to ignorance, and want

of good iudgement, which depriueth them of learned & ſound cogitations and diſcourſes that tend to a conſtant diſpoſition, wherein the happines of this life conſiſteth. As for vs if we deſire to approch neere to that perfection, which is required by the Sages, let vs propound to our ſelues their examples to folow, that we may be temperate and conſtant in euery eſtate and condition of life. We The wonderful conſtancie of Socrates.read of Socrates that one and the ſame countenance was noted in him all his life time, that it was neither ſadder nor pleaſanter for any thing that happened vnto him. He changed it not when he heard the ſentence of his death pronounced, no not when he dranke the poiſon, folowing P. Rutilus.therein the contents of his condemnation, albeit he was then aboue three-skore yeeres of age. Publius Rutilus a Romane, being vniuſtly baniſhed, neuer changed his coū
                     tenance or behauiour, neither would put on any other gowne than that he vſed to weare, although it was the cuſtome of ſuch as were baniſhed, to alter the ſame. Neither would he leaue off the marks of a Senator, nor requeſt the iudges to abſolue him, but led the reſt of his dayes with the ſame greatnes, grauitie and authoritie that he vſed before, not ſhewing himſelfe any thing beaten down with Q. Metellus.ſorow for the ſtrange alteration of his firſt eſtate. Quintus Metellus ſurnamed Numidicus, bicauſe he had ſubdued that countrey of Numidia, being driuē into exile through a popular faction and ſedition, went into Aſia, where, as he beheld certaine players, he receiued letters from the Senate, whereby he was certified that the Senators & people with one common conſent had called him backe againe. Which good newes he bare with the like modeſtie that he did his baniſhment, not departing from the Theater before the ſportes were ended, nor ſhewing his letters to any of his friends that were round about him before he had aſſembled them togither in his lodging to deliberate Diogenes.of his returne to Rome. The ſame grauitie and conſtancie cauſed Diogenes when he heard one hit him in the teeth with his baniſhment from Pontus by the Synopians to make this anſwer: And I haue bounded them within the
                     
                     countrey of Pontus. We muſt account the whole ſcope of the firmament for the bonds of our countrey as long as we liue here. Neither ought any man within thoſe limites to eſteeme himſelfe either baniſhed, or a ſtranger: ſeeing God gouerneth all things by the ſame elements. Therefore Socrates tooke the whole world for his countrey.
                     Socrates ſaid, that he tooke not himſelfe to be either an Athenian or a Graecian, but a worldling. And how ſhal we thinke that they who ſuſtained ſo courageouſly their baniſhment from their countrey (which was ſo deere vnto them that they preferred the benefite thereof before the ſafetie of their life) their depriuation & abſence from their families, friends and goods, would not much more vertuouſly haue ſuffred all leſſe aduerſitie? Therefore to end our preſent diſcourſe, let vs learn that nothing belonging to this preſent life hath neither more euill nor good in it, than according to the end which befalleth it, & that it is our dutie to keep our ſelues moderate, conſtant, and vpright, both in proſperitie and in aduerſitie, which is the propertie of true magnanimitie and greatnes of courage. Let vs not lift vp our ſelues aboue meaſure for any temporall felicitie, nor be too much diſcouraged bicauſe we are viſited with aduerſitie, but wiſely expect what will be the end of both, which a good and vertuous man ſhal always find to be happy when he changeth his mortall eſtate for a life that is certain and euerlaſting.
               
            
            The ende of the eight daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE NINTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Riches. Chap. 33.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     YEſterday we beſtowed the better part of the day in diſcourſing of good and ill hap, of proſperitie and aduerſitie, which with a ſwift pace following each other, ſeeme to change, to turne, and to ouer-turne inceſſantly the dealings and deſires of men. Now foraſmuch as we made mention of the ignorant multitude which placeth happines & felicitie in the vading goods of the world, & affirmed to the contrary, that this felicitie was very miſerable, bicauſe it maketh a man more inſolent and arrogant, & giueth him greater occaſion to bewaile, than to reioice in his fortune, I think we ought to conſider more neerely of the nature of ſuch goods as are no goods, beginning with Riches whereunto men are ſlaues, more than to any other thing, albeit they procure them the greateſt euils.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Riches (ſaith Epictetus) are not in the number of goods. For they ſtirre vs vp to ſuperfluitie, and pull vs backe from temperance. And therfore it is a very hard matter for a rich man to be temperate, or for a temperate man to be rich. As a man cannot vſe a horſe (ſaith Socrates) without a bridle, ſo he cannot vſe Riches without reaſon.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  It is almoſt impoſſible (ſaid Diogenes) that vertue ſhould dwell in a rich citie or houſe. For riches The fruits of riches.bring with them pride to him that poſſeſſeth them, exceſſiue deſire in gathering them, couetouſnes in keeping them, all filthines & diſſolutenes in the enioying of them. But let vs heare ACHITOB, who will handle this matter more at large.
               
               
                  
                  ACHITOB.
                  As children of three or fower yeeres of age haue no other care or thought, but how they may play and paſſe their time with the hauing of dailie foode according to their appetite, not conſidering or taking any care for the meanes which they might haue, and which would be neceſſarie for the nouriſhing of their old age: ſo it ſeemeth to me that the men of our time behaue themſelues, when through a more than childiſh ignorance they labor without ceaſing, to gather & to increaſe wealth, which will do them ſeruice but a little while, not caring in the meane time for certaine and immortall goods which wil nouriſh them for euer. And yet the ſoule created according to the image of God, cannot better preſerue and ſhew foorth hir diuine nature in this mortal bodie, than by contemning all earthlie, humane, and vading things. But to the end we be not of the number of thoſe that fill themſelues with ſuch paſſions, to purchaſe their owne deſtruction, let vs conſider by the teſtimonies Of the nature, qualitie, and effects of riches.of the ancient Sages, of the nature and qualitie of riches, and of the viſible effects which they dailie bring foorth in thoſe that ſerue & poſſeſſe them: next, we will behold ſome examples of theſe famous perſonages, that we may be induced thereby to contemne ſuch pernitious goods. Men ought to make great account of riches (ſaid Socrates) if they were ioined with true ioy, but they are wholy ſeparated from it. For if rich men fall to vſing of them, they ſpoile themſelues with ouergreat pleaſure, if they would keepe them, care gnaweth and conſumeth them within, and if they deſire to get them, they become wicked and vnhappie. It cannot be (ſaith Plato) that a man ſhould be truly good, and very rich both togither, but he may well be happie and good at one time. And it is a verie miſerable ſaying to affirme that a rich man is happy: yea it belongeth to children and fooles to ſay ſo, making them vnhappy that beleeue and approoue it. Slouth and ſlug giſhnes grow of riches, and they that are addicted to heape them vp more and more, the greater account they make of them, the leſſe they esteeme vertue. So that if riches and rich men are greatly ſet by in a Common-wealth, vertue and good men will be much leſſe regarded: and yet great matters are brought to paſſe,
                     
                     and Common-wealths preſerued by vertue, and not by riches. Riches (ſaith Iſocrates) ſerue not ſo much for the practiſe of honestie as of wickednes, ſeeing they draw the libertie of men to looſeneſſe and idleneſſe, and ſtirre vp yong men to voluptuouſnes. Men (ſaid Thales) are by nature borne to vertue, but riches draw them backe vnto them, hauing a thouſand ſortes of ſorceries to allure them to vices, and through a falſe opinion of good to turne them from thoſe things that are truly good. They ſuffer not him that hath them to be able to know any thing, but draw him to external goods. They are paſſing arrogant & most feareful. If they vſe themſelues, they are riotous, if they abstaine, miſerable. They neuer content their Owners, nor leaue them void of ſorow and care: but as they that are ſicke of the dropſie, the more they drinke, become the thirſtier, ſo the more that men abound in wealth, the more they deſire to haue. Riches of themſelues breed flatterers, who helpe to vndoe rich men. They are the cauſe of infinite murders and hired ſlaughters: they make couetous perſons to contemne the goods of the ſoule, thinking to become happy without them. They prouoke them alſo to delicacies and to gluttony, whereby their bodies are ſubiect to diſeaſes and infirmities. Briefly, riches greatly hurt both bodie and ſoule. They ſtirre vp domesticall ſedition, and that among brethren. They make children worſe in behauiour towards their fathers, and cauſe fathers to deale more hardly with their children. Through them it commeth that friends ſuſpect each other: for a true friend is credited no more by reaſon of a flatterer. Beſides, rich mē are angry with good men, ſaying, that they are arrogant bicauſe they will not flatter them: and in like maner they hate ſuch as flatter them, thinking that they keepe about them onely to robbe them, and to diminiſh their wealth. Theſe are the cuils, which may be ſaid to be commonly in riches. But theſe alſo accompany them, being execrable diſeaſes, namely, preſumptiō, pride, arrogancie, vile and abiect cares, which are altogether Riches of them ſelue, are the good gifts of God, but the euils wrought for, or by thē, come frō the corrupt nature of man.earthly, naughtie deſires, wicked pleaſures, and an inſatiable coueting. Beſides, if they were not pernitious of thē
                     ſelues, ſo many miſchiefs would not take their beginning from them. For men commit a thouſand murders for gaine. They robbe churches, fidelitie is loſt and broken, friendſhip is violated, men betray their country, maidens

are looſely giuen: brieflie, no euils are left vnexecuted through the deſire of riches. They that giue them ſelues (ſaid Bion) to gather riches, are verie ridiculous, ſeeing fortune giueth them, couetouſnes keepeth them, and liberalitie caſteth them away. Men must haue rich ſoules (ſaith Alexides) as for ſiluer it is nothing but a ſhew and vaile of life. It is a naughtie thing (ſaith Euripides) but common to all rich men, to liue wickedly. The cauſe thereof as I take it, is this, bicauſe they haue nothing but riches in their mind, which being blind, ſeele vp likewiſe the eies of their vnderſtanding. I pray God neuer to ſend me a wealthy life, which hath alwaies ſorow and care for hir Companions: nor riches to gnaw my hart. Speake not to me of Pluto, that is to ſay, of riches: for I make 
                     The Poets fained Pluto to be the God of riches, appointing Hell for his kingdome.
                     no great reckoning of that God, who is alwaies poſſeſſed of the most wicked vpon the earth. O riches, you are eaſie to beare, but infinite cares, miſeries, and griefs keepe you companie. He (ſaith Democritus) that woondereth at ſuch as haue great riches, and are eſteemed of the ignorant multitude to be happie, will ſurely through a deſire of hauing, commit and vndertake wicked things, and thoſe oftentimes againſt the lawes. As drunkennes (ſaith Aristotle) begetteth rage and madnes: ſo ignorance ioined with power, breedeth inſolencie and furie. And to thoſe whoſe minds are not well 
                     The euill diſpoſition of the mind is the true cauſe of the hurt that commeth by riches.
                     diſpoſed, neither riches, nor ſtrength, nor beautie, can be iudged good, but the greater increaſe ariſeth of them, the more harme they procure to him that poſſeſſeth them. Moreouer, do we not ſee that the moſt part of rich men, either vſe not their riches, bicauſe they are couetous, or abuſe them, bicauſe they are giuen ouer to their pleaſures, and ſo they are all the ſeruants either of pleaſures, or of trafficke and gaine, as long as they liue. But he that would be (as Plato ſaith) truly rich, ought to labor not ſo much to augment his wealth, as to diminiſh his deſire of hauing, bicauſe he that appointeth no bounds to his deſires, is alwaies poore and needie. For this cauſe the libertie of a wiſe mans ſoule, who knoweth the nature of externall goods belonging to this life, is neuer troubled with the care of them, being aſſured (as Plutark ſaith) that as it is not apparell which giueth heate to a man, but only ſtaieth and keepeth in naturall heate that proceedeth from the man himſelfe, by hindring it from diſperſing in the aire: ſo no man liueth more happily or contentedly, bicauſe he is compaſſed
                     
                     From whence happines and contentation commeth. 
                     about with much wealth, if tranquillitie, ioy, and rest, proceed not from within his ſoule. Heape vp (ſaith the ſame Philoſopher) ſtore of gold, gather ſiluer togither, build faire galleries, fill a whole houſe full of ſlaues, and a whole towne with thy debtors: yet if thou doeſt not maister the paſſions of thy ſoule, if thou quencheſt not thy vnſatiable deſire, nor deliuereſt thy ſoule of all feare and carking care, thou doeſt aſmuch to procure thy quietnes, as if thou gauest wine to one that had an ague. Life of it ſelfe (ſaith Plato) is not ioyfull, vnles care be chaſed away, which cauſeth vs to waxe grayheaded, whilest we deſire but meane ſtore of riches. For the ſuperfluous deſire of hauing, alwaies gnaweth our hart. Whereupon it commeth to paſſe, that oftentimes amongſt men we ſee Great madnes in coueting monie.pouertie to be better than riches, & death than life. And truly there is great madnes in the greedy coueting of monie. For they that are touched with this maladie, follow after riches with ſuch zeale, as if they ſuppoſed that when they had gotten them, no more euill ſhould come neere them. And then alſo they ſet ſo light by thoſe which they haue, that they burne with the deſire of hauing more. How then ſhall we call that good, which hath no end or meaſure? Or that which being gotten, is the beginning of a further deſire to haue more? A horſe (ſaith Epictetus) is not ſaid to be better, bicauſe he hath eaten more than another, or bicauſe he hath a gilt harneſſe, but bicauſe he is ſtronger, ſwifter, and better made: for euery beast is accounted of according to his vertue. And ſhall a man be esteemed according to his riches, ancestors, and beautie? If any man thinke that his old age ſhall be borne more eaſilie by the meanes of riches, he deceiueth himſelfe. For they may well cauſe him to enioy the hurtfull pleaſures of the bodie, but cannot take from him ſadnes, horror, and feare of death: nay rather they double his griefe, when he thinketh that he must leaue and forſake them. In this ſhort diſcourſe taken from ancient men, the vanitie of riches appeereth ſufficiently vnto vs, as alſo the hurtfull effects that flow from them, if they be not ruled by the reaſon of true prudence. Heereafter we are to ſee how we may vſe thoſe riches wel, which God putteth into our hands, being iuſtly gotten by vs: which is a part of iuſtice, whereof we are to intreat. In the

meane time, that we faſten not our harts to ſo friuolous and vaine a thing, let vs call to mind ſome examples of Examples of the contempt of riches.wiſe and famous men, woorthie of immortall renowne, who haue altogither contemned, eſchewed, and deſpiſed the couetous deſire and hoording vp of riches, as the plague and vnauoidable ruine of the ſoule. We read of Marcus Curius a Romane Conſul (the firſt of his time that M. Curius.receiued thrice the dignitie of triumphing for the notable victories which he obtained in the honor of his countrey) that he made ſo ſmall account of worldlie riches, that all his poſſeſſion was but a little farme in the countrey ſoryly built, wherein he continued for the moſt part when publike affaires ſuffered him, labouring and tilling himſelfe that little ground which he had there. And when certaine Embaſſadors vpon a day came to viſite him, they found him in his chimney dreſſing of reddiſh for his ſupper. And when they preſented him with a great ſumme of monie from their Comminaltie, he refuſed it, ſaying: that they which contented themſelues with ſuch an ordinarie as his was, had no need of it: and that he thought it farre more honorable to command them that had gold, than to haue it. Phocion the Athenian being viſited with Embaſſadors from Alexander, they preſented him with a hundred Talents (being in value three ſcore thouſand crownes) which this Monarch ſent vnto him for a gift. Phocion demanding the cauſe why, ſeeing Phocion.there were ſo many Athenians beſides him, they anſwered: bicauſe their maiſter iudged him onely among all the reſt to be a vertuous and good man. Then (quoth he) let him ſuffer me both to ſeeme and to be ſo in deede, and carie his preſent backe againe to him. Notwithſtanding, he was needie, as may be prooued by the anſwer which he made to the Athenian Councell, who demanded a voluntarie contribution of euery one towards a ſacrifice. And when there were no moe left to contribute but he, they were verie importunate with him to giue ſomewhat. It were a ſhame for me (ſaid he vnto them) to giue you monie, before I haue paied this man: and therewithall he ſhewed one vnto them that had lent him a certaine ſumme of monie. Philopaemen
                     
                     Philopaemen. Generall of the Achaians, hauing procured a league of amitie betweene the citie of Sparta, & his owne, the Lacedemonians ſent him a preſent of ſixe ſcore Talents, which were woorth three ſcore and twelue thouſand crownes. But refuſing it, he went purpoſely to Sparta, where he declared to the Councell, that they ought not to corrupt and win honeſt men, or their friends with monie, ſeeing in their need they might be aſſured of thē, and vſe their vertue freely without coſt: but that they were to buy and gaine with hired rewards, the wicked, & ſuch as by their ſeditious orations in the Senate houſe vſed to raiſe mutinies, and to ſet the citie on fire, to the end that their mouthes being ſtopped by gifts, they might procure leſſe trouble to the gouernment of the Common-wealth. A great Lord of Perſia comming from his countrey to Athens, and perceiuing that he ſtood in greatCimon. neede of the aid and fauour of Cimon, who was one of the chiefe in the citie, he preſented vnto him two cups that were both full, the one of Dariques of gold, the other of ſiluer Dariques. This wiſe Grecian beginning to ſmile, demanded of him whether of the twaine he had rather haue him to be, his friend, or his hireling? The Perſian anſwered, that he had a great deale rather haue him his friend. Then (ſaid Cimon) carie backe againe thy gold and ſiluer. For if I be thy friend, it will be alwaies at my commandement
                     Anacreon. 
                     to vſe as often as I ſhall neede. Anacreon hauing receiued of Polycrates fiue Talents for a gift, was ſo much troubled for the ſpace of two nights with care how he might keepe them, and about what to imploy them beſt, that he caried them backe againe, ſaying: that they were not woorth the
                     Xenocrates. 
                     paines, which he had alrcadie taken for them. Xenocrates refuſed thirtie thouſand crownes of Alexander, ſent vnto him for a preſent, ſaying: that he had no neede of them. What (quoth Alexander) hath he neuer a friend? For mine owne part, I am ſure that all king Darius treaſure will ſcarce ſuffice me to distribute
                     Socrates 
                     among my friends. Socrates being ſent for by king Archelaüs to come vnto him, who promiſed him great riches, ſent him word, that a meaſure of floure was ſold in Athens

for a Double, and that water coſt nothing. And althoughFiue Doubles in France make a peny of our coine. it ſeemeth (quoth this Philoſopher) that I haue not goods enough, yet I haue enough, ſeeyng I am contented therewith. What is neceſſarie (ſayd Menander) for the vſe of our life beſides theſe two things, Bread and Water? Bias flying out of his citie which he foreſawe would be beſieged without hope of reſcue, would not lode himſelfe with his wealth as others did. And being demaunded the cauſe why, I cary (quoth he) all my goods with me: meaning the inuiſible gifts & graces of his mind. Truly gold and ſiluer are nothing but duſt, and precious ſtones but the grauell of the ſea. And (as Pythagoras ſaid) we ought to perſwade our ſelues, that thoſe riches are not ours which are not incloſed in our ſoule. According to which ſaying, Socrates when he ſaw that Alcibiades waxed arrogant bicauſe of the great quantitie of ground which he poſſeſſed, ſhewed him an vniuerſall Map of the world, and asked him whether he knew which were his lands in the territorie of Athens. Whereunto when Alcibiades anſwered, that they were not deſcribed nor ſet downe there. How is it then (quoth this wiſe man) that thou braggeſt of that thing which is no part of the world? One meane which Lycurgus vſed, and which helped him much in theLycurgus abrogated the vſe of gold and ſiluer coine. reforming of the Lacedemonian eſtate, was the diſanulling of all gold and ſiluer coine, & the appointing of iron money onely to be currant, a pound waight whereof was woorth but ſixe pence. For by this meanes he baniſhed from among them the deſire of riches, which are no leſſe cauſe of the ouerthrow of Common-wealths than of priuate men. This mooued Plato to ſay, that he would not haue the princes and gouernors of his Common-wealth, nor his menne of warre and ſouldiours, to deale at all with gold and ſiluer: but that they ſhould haue allowed them out of the common treaſurie whatſoeuer was neceſſary for them. For as long gownes hinder the body, ſo do much riches the ſoule. Therfore if we deſire to liue happily in tranquillitie and reſt of ſoule, and with ioy of ſpirit, let vs learne after the example of ſo many great men to

withdraw our affections wholy from the deſire of worldly riches, not taking delight & pleaſure (as Diogenes ſaid) in that which ſhall periſh, and is not able to make a man better, but oftentimes woorſe. Let vs further know thatLuke 16. 13. (according to the Scripture) no man can ſerue God and riches togither, but that all they which deſire them greedily,1. Tim. 6. 9. fall into temptations and ſnares, and into many fooliſh and noiſome luſtes which drowne men in perdition, whereof we haue eye-witneſſes daily before vs. This appeereth in that example which the ſelf ſame word notethLuke 12. 16. vnto vs of the rich man that abounded in all things, ſo that he willed his ſoule to take hir eaſe, and to make good cheere, bicauſe ſhe had ſo much goods layd vp for many yeeres: and yet the ſame night he was to pay tribute vnto nature, to his ouerthrow and confuſion. Being therefore inſtructed by the ſpirite of wiſedome, letWhat riches we ought to treaſure vp. vs treaſure vp in Ieſus Chriſt the permanent Riches of wiſedome, pietie, and iuſtice, which of themſelues are ſufficient through his grace to make vs liue with him for euer.
               
            
            
               Of Pouertie. Chap. 34.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  NOw that we haue ſeen the nature of riches with the moſt commō effects which flow from them, and ſeeing the chief & principall cauſe that leadeth men ſo earneſtly to deſire them, isThe chief cauſe why riches are ſo earneſtly deſired. the feare of falling into pouertie, which through error of iudgement they account a very great euill, I am of opinion, that we are to enter into a particular conſideration thereof, to the end that ſuch a falſe perſwaſion may neuer deceiue vs, nor cauſe vs to go aſtray out of the right pathe of Vertue.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Pouertie (ſaid Diogenes) is a helpe to Philoſophy, and is learned of it ſelfe. For that which Philoſophie, ſeeketh to make vs know by words, pouertie perſwadeth vs in the things themſelues.
               
               
                  
                  AMANA.
                  Rich men ſtand in need of many precepts, as, that they liue thriftily and ſoberly: that they exerciſe their bodies: that they delight not too much in the decking of them: and infinite others, which pouertie of hir ſelfe teacheth vs. But let vs heare ARAM diſcourſe more at large of that which is here propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  If we conſider how our common mother the earth, being prodigall in giuing vnto vs all things neceſſarie for the life of man, hath notwithſtanding caſt all of vs naked out of hir bowels, and muſt receiue vs ſo agayne into hir wombe, I ſee no great reaſon we haue to cal ſome rich, and others poore, ſeeing the beginning, being, and end of the temporall life of all men are vnlike in nothing, but that ſome during this litle moment of life haue that in abundance and ſuperfluitie, which others haue onely according to their neceſſitie. But this is much more abſurd, and without all ſhew of reaſon, that they whom weAgainſt thoſe that think poore men leſſe happy than the rich. call poore according to the opinion of men, ſhould be accounted, yea commonly take themſelues to be leſſe happy than rich men, and as I may ſo ſay, baſtard children & not legitimate, bicauſe they are not equally and alike partakers of their mothers goods, which are the wealth of the world, for the hauing whereof we heare ſo many complaints and murmurings. For firſt we ſee none, no not the needieſt and pooreſt that is (except it be by ſome great & ſtrange miſhap) to be ſo vnprouided for, that with any labour and pains taking (which is the reward of ſinne) he is able to get ſo much as is neceſſary for the maintenance of his life, namely, food and raiment, neither yet any that for want of theſe things, howſoeuer oftentimes he ſuffer and abide much, is conſtrained to giue vp the Ghoſt. But further, as touching the true, eternall, and incomparable goods of our common father, their part and portion is nothing leſſe thā that of the richeſt. Yea many times they are rewarded and enriched aboue others, in that beyng withdrawen from the care & gouernment of many earthly things, they feele themſelues ſo much the more rauiſhed with ſpeciall and heauenly grace (if they hinder it

not) in the meditation and contemplation of celeſtiall things: from whence they may eaſily draw a great and an aſſured contentation in this life, through a certaine hope that they ſhall enioy them perfectly, bicauſe they are preparedA pretie compariſon. for them in that bleſſed immortalitie of the ſecond life. For nothing is more certaine than this, that as the Sunne is a great deale better ſeene in cleare and cleane water, than in that which is troubled, or in a miry and dirtie puddle: ſo the brightnes that commeth from God ſhineth more in minds not ſubiected to worldlie goods, than in them that are defiled and troubled with thoſe earthlie affections which riches bring with them. This is that which Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe hath taught, ſpeaking to him that demanded what he ſhould do to haue eternallMatth. 19. 21. 23. life: If thouwilt be perfect (ſaith he) ſell that which thou hast, and giue it to the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in heauen: adding beſides, that a rich man ſhall hardly enter into the kingdome of heauen. If a father diuiding his ſubſtance among his children, ſhould leaue to one as to his eldeſt or beſt beloued, the enioying of his principall mannor by inheritance, and to the reſt their mothers goods, which are of much leſſe value, and that only for terme of life, what folly were it to iudge that theſe laſt were more preferred, andNo compariſon between worldlie and heauenlie treaſures. had better portions than the other? And I pray you what compariſon is there betweene the greateſt worldlie and tranſitorie riches that can be, and the permanent treaſures of heauen, ſeeing thoſe cannot be compared but to a thing of nought, than which they are weaker, beeing moreouer accompanied with innumerable hurtfull euils, as we haue alreadie ſhewed? What happines and felicitie can wealth adde to rich men aboue the poorer ſort, that theſe ſhould be accounted miſerable and wretched? Take away (ſaith Lactantius) inſolencie and boaſting from rich men, and there will be no difference betweene a poore man and a rich. And if he that made the condition both of the one & the other, and that prouideth nouriſhment for vnreaſonable creatures, doth diſtribute vnto vs as much as he knoweth in his eternall preſcience and foreknowledge to be needfull

for vs, whereof ſhall we complaine, except, as inheritors, of that damnable vice of ingratitud from the firſt man, we forget ſo many benefits receiued, as alſo thoſe that are dailie profered and promiſed vnto vs of his heauenlie goodnes and grace? In a feaſt (ſaid Epictetus) we content our ſelues with that which is ſet before vs, thinking it an impudent and vile part to aske any other thing of him that entertaineth vs. And how can we be ſo impudent and ſhameles in this world, as to aske thoſe things of God, which he will not giue vs, and not content our ſelues with the vſe of that which he hath liberally & freely beſtowed vpon vs? But there is a further matter. For if we would conſider the great, yea vnſpeakable fruits whichThe fruits of pouertie. pouertie bringeth with hir, & whereof ſhe is able to make vs partakers in this life, without doubt ſhe will be found to be a thouſand times more happie than riches. Pouertie (ſaith Aristophanes) is the mistres of manners. Pouertie (ſaid Archeſilaus) ſeemeth to be ſharpe, hard, & troubleſome, but ſhe is nurſe to a good linage, as ſhe that acquainteth hir ſelfe with frugalitie and abstinence. In a word ſhe is a ſchoole of vertue. Wealth is full of wickednes (ſaith Euripides) but pouertie is accompanied with wiſedome, and all honeſt men are contented with neceſſarie things. And if they offer ſacrifice to the Gods with a little incenſe in the paulme of their hand, they are for the most part ſooner heard than they that kill many beastes for ſacrifice. For (as Menander ſaith) the poore are vnder the protection of God, and it is better to poſſeſſe a little wealth with ioy, than a great deale with fadnes. To deſire but a little (ſaid Democritus) maketh pouertie equall with riches: and if thou deſirest not many things, a little will ſeeme to thee to be very great. Pouertie (ſaid Anaximenus) maketh the ſpirite more ſharpe, and men more excellent in all things belonging to this life. For ſhe is a very good mistres of knowledge and skill. The life of poore men (ſaid Aristonymus) is like to a nauigation made alongſt the ſhore of ſome ſea: but the life of rich men to that which is in the maine ſea. For the firſt ſort may eaſily caſt anchor, come a ſhore, and ſaue themſelues, whereas the others cannot do ſo, bicauſe they are no more in their owne power, but in fortunes. Flie not from pouertie (ſaid Hipſaeus) but from iniustice and wrong.
                     
                     For no man was euer puniſhed bicauſe he was poore, but many bicauſe they were vniuſt. Neither is a mans life commended bicauſe he is rich, but bicauſe he is iuſt. Hunger (ſaith Plutark) neuer engendreth adult erie, nor want of monie, lust: ſo that pouertie is a ſhort kind of temperance. If thou wert borne among the Perſians (ſaid Epictetus) thou wouldeſt not wiſh to dwell in Grecia, but to liue there in a happie estate. Art thou not then a very foole, bicauſe thou ſeekeſt not rather to liue happily in pouertie, ſeeing thou art borne therein, than to ſtriue with ſo great labor for riches that thou maist liue? As it is better to lie downe in a very little bed with health, than in a great and large bed, being ſicke: ſo is it a great deale better to liue in reſt with a little wealth, than in trauell and care with aboundance. For neither pouertie procureth trouble, nor riches driueth away feare: but reaſon is that which cauſeth men neither to deſire riches, nor to feare pouertie. If other things (ſaith Bion the wiſe) could ſpeake aſwell as we, and were licenced to diſpute with vs, might not pouertie iustly ſay vnto vs after this manner?
                     An excellent defence for pouertie. 
                     O man wherefore fighteſt thou againſt me? Why art thou become my enemie? Haue I robbed thee of any thing? Haue I beene the cauſe that thou hast receiued any iniurie, or haue I depriued thee of any good thing? Haue I taken from thee either Prudence, Iustice, or Fortitude? But thou fearest least neceſſarie things ſhould faile thee▪ What? Are not the waies full of herbs and fruits, and the fountaines of water? Hast thou not as many beds as the earth is great, and as many couerlets and mattreſſes as there are leaues? Hast thou not a good Cooke by my meanes, that maketh good ſauce for thee in hunger? And he that is a thirst, doth he not take very great pleaſure in drinking? Doest thou thinke that a man ſhall die for hunger, bicauſe he hath no tart, or for thirst, if he haue not very delicate wine cooled with ſnow? All ſuch things are but for delicacie and nicenes. Doest thou want a houſe, when there is ſo many goodly Churches in cities? What anſwer could be made to pouertie, if ſhe ſhould ſpeake thus? Truly he that hath vertue poſſeſſeth all goods, bicauſe that alone maketh men happie: which may be ſpoken aſwell of a poore man as of a rich. For they (ſayd Thales) that thinke pouertie hindreth Philoſophie, and that riches are a helpe vnto it, greatly deceiue themſelues. For proofe that it is not ſo, how many moe haue withdrawne themſelues

from ſtudie through riches, thā through pouertie? Do we not ſee that the pooreſt ſtudy Philoſophy beſt, which the welthy bicauſe of their mony & many matters cānot do? For this cauſe Theognis ſaid very well, that many mo haue periſhed through ſurfetting than through hunger. And to let you know that pouertie is more happy, & better eſteemed of than riches, conſider the example of Ariſtides ſurnamed the Iuſt, who being very poore, was choſen to leuie and to gather tribute before all the rich men in Athens. And Callias the richeſt man of all the Athenians, ſought byExamples to ſhew that pouertie was more eſteemed of than riches. all means to haue his friendſhip, whereas the other made no great account of him. Epaminondas was not called half a God, nor Lycurgus a Sauiour bicauſe they abounded in wealth, and were ſlaues to their paſſions, but bicauſe they profited their countrey exceedingly, and were content with their pouertie. Therefore we may gather out of the ſayings of ſo many great and vertuous men, an aſſured teſtimonie of the benefit and profit that commonly foloweth the condition of poore men. And for inuincible proofes, haue we not the examples of the liues of infinite Sages and learned Philoſophers, who willingly forſaking, & wholy contemning riches, went to the Academy, commonly called the Schoole of Pouertie, there to enioy the treaſures of wiſdome and vertue? Yea, which is more, we find that pouertie hath been the only and principal cauſe of enriching many with this vnſpeakable treaſure, according to that ſaying of Aristotle, that calamitie is oftentimes the occaſion of vertue. Zeno founder of the StoicallZeno. Academic, after he had poſſeſſed much wealth, and ſuffred many loſſes, had no more left but one ſhip of merchandiſe, which being caſt away, he vttred this ſpeech: thou doest well Fortune to bring me to the ſtudie of Philoſophie, wherein he continued euer after. The exile & baniſhment of Diogenes
                     Diogenes. driuen from his countrey, was the cauſe and beginning of his ſtudie of Philoſophie. And if any man thinke it a difficult and ſtrange matter that a poore man ſhould be skilfull, ſeeing that whileſt he ſtudieth, he muſt haue wherewith to nouriſh his body, let vs ſee what Cleanthes 
                     Cleanthes.
                     
anſwered to Antigonus king of Macedonia, who asked him if he turned the milſtone always: Yea ſir (ſayd he) I turne it yet about to get my liuing, but forſake not Philoſophie for all that. How great and noble was the mind of that man, who after his labour wrote of the nature of god and of the heauens, with the ſame hand wherwith he turned about the milſtone? Others ſay, that he got his liuing by drawing water for a gardiner: about which he beſtowed the night onely, that he might ſpend the day in hearing the Philoſophers diſpute. This man calleth to myMenedemus & Aſclepiades. remembrance two other Philoſophers, named Menedemus and Aſclepiades, who being accuſed before the Areopagites the chief iudges in Athens, as idle perſons hauing no goods in poſſeſſion, and being willed to declare how they liued, their anſwer was, that inquirie ſhould be made of their Hoſte who was a Baker. This man being called, ſaid, that they beſtowed the whole day in the ſtudy of letters, and the night in ſifting and boulting his meale, for which he gaue each of them a peece of money whereof they liued. But what? Theſe ancient Sages wanted but few things to liue withall, ſeeing the moſt of them contented themſelues with bread and water, and many times withPythagoras kept a ſpare diet. herbes and fruites in ſtead of bread, and ſo Pythagoras always liued. And yet they found ſo great contentation andPhiloxenus. felicitie in ſuch a life, that one Philoxenus hauing as yet but taſted of the firſt fruits of this profeſſion of ſtudy, and being of that number which was ſent by the Athenians to inhabite a new citie in Sicilia, wherein a good houſe with great commodities to liue at eaſe, fell to him for his part, and ſeeing that delicacie, pleaſure and idlenes, without any exerciſe of letters raigned in thoſe quarters, he forſook all & returned to Athens, ſaying, by the gods theſe goods ſhall not deſtroy me, but I will rather deſtroy them. All theſe fruits which are noted to be in pouertie, gaue occaſion to an ancient man to ſay, that it was a vertue of Fortitude to ſuſtaine pouertie patiently, but to deſire it was the praiſe of wiſedom. Now foraſmuch as it will be very hard if not altogither impoſſible, notwithſtanding all reaſon

that can be alleaged to men, to diſpoſſeſſe them of the hatred and feare of pouertie, which naturally they ſhun, let vs learne of the ancients who ought to account himſelfe poore, that we abuſe no more this word Pouertie. Diogenes was vpon a time viſited by Alexander, who ſaydWho ought to be eſteemed poore. vnto him, I ſee well Diogenes that thou art poore, and hast need of many things, therfore aske of me what thou wilt, and I will giue it thee. Whereunto this excellent Philoſopher deſpiſing ſuch offers of goods whereof he ſtood not in need, anſwered: Whether of vs twaine Alexander, ſeemeth to thee to haue most need, and therfore poorest, either I that deſire nothing but my pile
                     Diogenes ſuppoſed Alexander to be poorer than himſelf. 
                     of wood and a litle bread, or thou, who being king of Macedonta doest hazard thy ſelfe to ſo many dangers to inlarge thy kingdom, in ſo much, that the whole world will hardly ſuffice to bound thy ambition, and to content thy couetouſnes? The Monarch ſo greatly admired the magnanimitie of this man, that he vttered theſe wordes with a loud voyce, If I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes. Marius a Conſul of Rome diſtributing land among his countreymen, gaue to euery one fourteen Acres onely. And vnderſtanding that ſome were not contented therewith but demanded more, I would to God (quoth he then) that no Roman would care for any more land than would ſuffice to nouriſh him. So goodly and commendable a matter was it eſteemed of theſe wiſe men to be content with a litle, & with that which is ſufficient, rather than to thinke thoſe men onely rich that were furniſhed with ſtore of wealth. And to ſay truth, ſeeing God alone ſimply and abſolutely ſtandeth not in need of any thing whatſoeuer, it may eaſily be preſuppoſed, that the moſt excellent vertue of man, and that which commeth neereſt to the diuine nature, conſiſteth in cauſing a man to ſtand in need of feweſt things. This is that which Socrates ſayd, That to deſire nothing (meaning worldly things) is in ſome ſort to reſemble God. And how can we call him poore whoſe ſoule is inriched with ſo many great and rare perfections? Cicero writing to Atticus, ſayd, That a friend was bound to wiſh but three things vnto his friend, namely,
                     A friend is to wiſh 3 things to his friend. 
                     That he be healthie, that he be well accounted of, and that he be
                     
                     not needie. Now that all theſe things are found in a temperate and noble minded man, we may learne by the effects of Sobrietie, whereof we haue heretofore diſcourſed, and by thoſe of honor, which is neuer ſeparated from vertue, no more than the ſhadow is from the body. And as for the neceſſarie vſe of foode and raiment, it is not wanting to them that ſtand moſt in need thereof, as we haue alreadie touched it in our preſent ſpeech: & ſo a vertuous mā cannot be called poore. But let vs yeeld a litle to the commō opinion of worldlings, that pouertie and want of earthly riches is odious and contemptible, yet that pouertie onely,What pouertie is odious. which proceedeth of ſlouth, idlenes, and ignorance, or otherwiſe of fooliſh expences, of riot and ſuperfluitie may be ſaid to be full of reproch and ſhame, and is to be ſhunned. For when pouertie is found in an honeſt, painfull, diligent, iuſt, valiant and wiſe man, it ſerueth for a great proofe of his magnanimitie and greatnes of courage, bicauſe he hath ſet his mind vpon great and high matters, and not vpon ſuch ſmall and vile things as the riches of the world are. Amongſt many others of this number weAristides. may ſay, that Aristides was, being captaine and gouernor of the Athenian eſtate, as we haue alredy mentioned, who after many excellent & great offices which he bare to the good of his countrey, was ſo ſmally enriched therby, that being dead, all his goods would not ſuffice to bury him. He vſed to ſay that none ought to be aſhamed of pouerty, but they that were poore againſt their wil: & that it was a rarer matter, & worthy of greater praiſe to ſuſtain pouerty vertuouſly and with a noble mind, than to know how to vſe riches well. And ſo pouertie is neuer accompanied with ſhame, except it be to them that fall into it through negligence, or miſgouernment of thoſe goods which God hath put into their hands, that they ſhould be faithfull keepers and diſpoſers thereof in charitable workes. This is that which Thucidides ſaith, that it is no ſhame for a man to confeſſe his pouertie, but very great to fal into it by his owne default. Therefore to reape profite by that which hath beene heere diſcourſed, let vs put off that old error

which hath continued ſo long in mens braines, that pouertie is ſuch a great and troubleſome euill, whereas it is rather the cauſe of infinite benefits: and let vs ſay with Pythagoras, that it is a great deale better to haue a quiet and ſetled minde, lying vpon the ground, than to haue much trouble in a golden bed. Moreouer, let vs knowe,Where the fulneſſe of riches is to be ſought. that to poſſeſſe ſmall ſtore of earthlie goods, ought not to be called pouertie, bicauſe all fulnes of wealth aboundeth in the knowledge and aſſurance of the fatherlie grace and goodnes of the Author and Creator of all things, which he offereth liberally to all without accepting either of pompe or greatnes. And further, when as, continuing the care which it pleaſeth him to take of vs, he giueth vs although in trauell and ſweate, wherewith to feede and to cloth vs in all ſimplicitie and modeſtie, and that according to our neceſſitie, we ſhould be vnthankfull and altogither vnwoorthie the aſſiſtance of his helpe and fauour, and of his eternall promiſes, if not contented, nor glorifieng him for our eſtate, we complained, or wondred at, & deſired the calling of other men, offering thereby in will and affection our birthrights through a gluttonous deſire, whereas we ought to preſerue to our ſelues the poſſeſſion of that heauenlie inheritance, wherein conſiſteth the perfection of all glorie, reſt, and contentation.
               
            
            
               Of Idlenes, Sloth, and Gaming. Chap. 35.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  TWo things being the cauſe of all paſſions in men, namely, Griefe and Pleaſure, theyGriefe & pleaſure the cauſes of all paſſions in men. alwayes deſire the one, but flie from and feare the other. But the occaſion of the greateſt euil that befalleth them, is, bicauſe theſe deſires and affections being borne with them from the beginning, do alſo grow & encreaſe a long time before they can haue any iudgement framed in them through the right vnderſtandyng of things. Whereupon as well by nature, which of it ſelfe is more inclined to euill than to good, as through a long

continuing in vice they are eaſily drawen to follow the appetite and luſt of their ſenſualitie, wherein they falſly iudge that pleaſure conſiſteth, and thinke it painfull not to pleaſe it. Being thus guided by ignorance, and walking like blindmen, they haue experience for the moſt part of ſuch an end as is cleane contrary to their purpoſes. As we may ſee in thoſe men, who purpoſing with themſelues to liue at their eaſe in ioy, reſt, and pleaſure, giue ouer all intermedling in ſerious matters, and ſuch as beſeeme the excellencie of vertue, that they may liue in idlenes: wherwith being bewitched they are partakers of many falſe pleaſures, which procure them a greater number of griefs and miſeries, all which they thought to auoyd very well. And this we may the better vnderſtand, if we diſcourſe of Idlenes, the enemie of all vertue, and cleane contrary to Perſeuerance, which is a branch of Fortitude. Therefore I propound the handling of this matter to you my Companions.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Although we haue not a ſingular excellencie of ſpirite, yet we muſt not ſuffer it to be idle, but conſtantly follow after that which we haue wiſely hoped to obtaine. For (as Eraſmus ſaith) that which is often done & reiterated, and continually in hand, is finiſhed at last.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  They that do nothing (ſaith Cicero) learne to do ill, & through idleneſſe the body & minds of men languiſh away: but by labour great things are obtained, yea trauail is a worke that continueth after death. Let vs then giue eare to AMANA, who will handle more at large for our inſtruction that which is here propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  As we admire and honour them with very great commendation, in whom we may note as we think, ſome excellent and ſingular vertues, ſo we contemn them whom we iudge to haue neither vertue, courage, nor fortitude in them, and whom we ſee to be profitable neither to themſelues nor to others, bicauſe they are not laborious, induſtrious, nor carefull, but remain idle and ſlouthfull. And to ſay truth, the maners, conditions, and natural diſpoſition of ſuch men, are wholy corrupted, their conuerſation

is odious, vnprofitable, and to be auoided, ſeeing Idlenes is the mother & nurſe of all vice.that Idlenes is the mother and nurſe of vice, which deſtroieth and marreth all. Therefore it was very well ordained in the primitiue Church, that euery one ſhould liue of his owne labor, that the idle and ſlothfull might not conſume vnprofitably the goods of the earth. Which reaſon brought in that ancient Romane edict, mentioned by Cicero in his booke of Lawes, that no Romane ſhould goe through the ſtreets of the city, vnles he caried about him the badge of that trade whereby he liued. Inſomuch that Marcus Aurelius ſpeaking of the diligence of the ancient Romanes, writeth: that all of them followed their labor and trauell ſo earneſtly, that hauing neceſſarie occaſion one daye to ſend a letter two or three daies iournie from the towne, he could not find one idle bodie in all the citie to carie it. That great Orator and Philoſopher Cicero, minding to teach vs how we ought to hate Idlenes, as being againſt Idlenes is againſt nature.nature, ſheweth that men are in deede borne to good works, whereof our ſoule may ſerue for a ſufficient and inuincible proofe, ſeeing it is neuer ſtill, but in continuall motion & action. And for the ſame cauſe he greatly commendeth Scipio was neuer idle.
                     Scipio, who vſed to ſay, that he was neuer leſſe quiet than when he was quiet. Whereby he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that when he was not buſied with waightie affaires of the Common-wealth, yet, his owne priuate matters, and the ſearching after knowledge, were no leſſe troubleſome vnto him, ſo that euen then in his ſolitarines he tooke counſell with himſelfe. It ſeemeth (ſaith this father of eloquence) that nature doth more require of a man ſuch actions as tend to the profit of men, than ſhe doth the perfect knowledge of all things: ſeeing this knowledge and contemplation of the workes of nature ſhould ſeeme to be maimed & vnperfect, if no action followed it, whereas vertuous deedes are profitable to all men, for which end nature hath brought vs foorth, which ſheweth ſufficiently that they are better and more excellent. So that vnles the knowledge of things be ioined with that vertue, which preſerueth humane ſocietie, it will

ſeeme to be dead and vnprofitable. Therefore Chryſippus the Philoſopher ſaid, that the life of thoſe men that giue To what end we muſt ſtudie Philoſophie.themſelues to idle ſtudies, differed nothing from that of voluptuous men. So that we muſt not ſtudie Philoſophie by way of ſport, but to the end we may profit both our ſelues and others. Now, if action muſt of neceſſitie be ioined to ſtudie and contemplation, to make a happie life, ſo that otherwiſe it is as it were dead and idle: what ſhall we ſay of that life that is void both of ſtudie and action, but that it is more beaſt-like than humane? And how many millions of men are there in the world, who liue in this ſort, and more in France than in any other nation? Yea, howe many are more idle and leſſe carefull than brute beaſts, neglecting the prouiſion euen of things neceſſarie for this preſent life? Amongſt the obſcure precepts which Pythagoras precept againſt Idlenes.
                     Pythagoras gaue to his Diſciples, this was one: Take good heede that thou ſit not vpon a buſhell: meaning, that Idlenes and Sloth were eſpecially to be eſchewed. Likewiſe, when we ſhall enter into the conſideration of thoſe euils that iſſue from idlenes and ſloth, no doubt but we will flie from them, as from the plague of our ſoules. They are greatly to be feared in a Common-wealth, bicauſe they open a gate to all iniuſtice, and kindle the fire of ſedition, which ſetteth a floate all kind of impietie. Furthermore, they are the cauſe of the finding out of infinite falſe and pernitious inuentions, for the rele
                        •
                     uing of pouertie, which for the moſt part floweth from the ſame fountaine of idlenes. This mooued the wiſe and ancient kings of Egypt, to imploy Notable examples of the redreſſe of Idlenes.their idle people in digging of the earth, and in the drawing foorth & building of thoſe Pyramides, the chiefe of which is by the Hiſtoriographers placed among the ſeuen woonders of the world. It could not be perfectly finiſhed before the ſpace of twentie yeeres, albeit that three hundred and three ſcore thouſand men wrought about it continually. The Captaines and Heades of the Romane armies fearing the dangerous effects of idlenes, no leſſe in their hoſt, than in their townes, cauſed their ſouldiors to trauell in making of trenches, when they were not vrged

of their enemies, as Marius did alongeſt the riuer of Rhone. The Emperor Claudius enioying an aſſured peace, Claudius.cauſed the chanell Fucinus to be made, that Rome might haue the commoditie of good waters: about which work thirtie thouſand men were daily imploied for the ſpace of twelue yeeres. Adrianus ſeeing a generall peace within his Adrianus.Empire, continually vndertooke new and long iournies, one while into Fraunce, another while into Germanie, ſometime into Aſia, & into other ſtrange countries, cauſing his men of warre to march with him: ſaying, that he did for feare, leaſt they being idle ſhould be corrupted, & forget the diſcipline of warre, and ſo be the cauſe of nouelties. Scipio Naſica.And it ſeemeth that this was the cauſe why a wiſe Romane councelled the Senate not to deſtroy Carthage, leaſt the Romanes being in ſafetie by the vtter ſubuerſion thereof (which onely at that time made head againſt them) ſhould become idle. But now we may iuſtly ſay of them, that through a lazie and cowardlie idlenes, they haue loſt the dignitie and vertue of their forefathers. The Ephoryes, who were Gouernors of the Lacedemonian eſtate, The Ephoryes of Lacedemoniabeing mooued with the ſame reaſon with which the Romane Scipio Naſica was touched, after intelligence had of the taking & ſacking of a great towne into which their men were entred, ſaid: that the armie of their youth was loſt. Whereupon they ſent word to the Captaine of the armie, that he ſhould not after the ſame manner deſtroy another towne, which he had beſieged, writing theſe words vnto him: Take not away the pricke which ſtirreth forward the harts of our yoong men. Gelon king of Syracuſa Gelon.led his people oftentimes into the fields, aſwell to labor the ground, and to plant, as to fight, both that the earth might be better being well dreſſed, as alſo bicauſe he feared leaſt his people ſhould waxe woorſe for want of trauell. So greatly did theſe ancient wiſe men feare the pernitious effects of idlenes and ſloth, which bring to nothing and corrupt the goodnes of nature, whereas diligence & exerciſe in good educatiō correcteth the naughtines thereof. For as cloſe waters (ſaith Plutark) putrifie A ſimilitude.
                     
quickly, bicauſe they are couered, ſhadowed, & ſtanding: ſo they that buſie not themſelues, but remaine idle, albeit they haue ſome good thing in them, yet if they bring it not foorth, neither exerciſe thoſe naturall faculties that were borne with them, they corrupt and deſtroy them vtterly. And which is woorſe, as concupiſcence (ſaith Plato) and luxuriouſnes are quenched with great, ſharpe, and continuall labor, ſo are they kindled through idlenes. Aretchles and ſlothfull man can find out nothing that is eaſie. But there is nothing (ſaith Seneca) whereunto continuall labor is not able to attaine, & through care and vigilancie men come to the end of most difficult matters. Fortune (ſaith a Poet) helpeth and fauoureth them that boldly ſet their hand to the worke, but giueth the repulſe to fearefull and baſe-minded men. Let vs beleeue (ſaid Pythagoras) that laborious and painefull things will ſooner lead vs to vertue, than thoſe
                     Sweat is placed before vertue. 
                     that are nice and delicate. And (as Heſiodus ſaith) the Gods haue placed ſweate before vertue: and the way that leadeth vnto hir is long, difficult, and craggie. A good Pilot ſeeing a tempeſt at hand, calleth vpon the Gods, that they would graunt him grace to eſcape it: but in the meane while he taketh the helme into his hand, he vaileth the foreſaile, and bringing about the maine ſaile, laboureth to come out of the darke ſea. Heſiodus commaundeth the Husbandman to make his vowes to Iupiter, and to Ceres, before he either ploweth or ſoweth, but he muſt do it with his hand vpon the plow taile. Plato writing his lawes, forbiddeth a man to fetch water at his neighbours houſe, before he hath digged and delued in his owne ground euen to the clay, and that it be perceiued that no water ſpringeth there. In like ſort, lawes muſt prouide for neceſſitie, and not fauour ſloth and idlenes. By ſloth we looſe that which we haue alreadie well gotten, but by diligence we attaine to that which we haue not, and which may be neceſſarie for vs. I
                     Prouerb. 24. 30. 31. 
                     paſſed (ſaith the wiſe man) by the field of the ſlothfull, and by the vineyard of the man destitute of vnderstanding: and lo it was all growne ouer with thornes, and nettles had couered the face thereof, and the ſtone wall thereof was broken downe. It is ſloth and negligence that cauſeth a man through want of good vnderſtanding

and iudgement not to care for the getting of that which is needfull for him, bicauſe he feareth leaſt he ſhould looſe it. Whereupon this would follow (which is a very abſurd thing) that nothing how deare and precious ſoeuer it be ought to be ſought for or deſired, ſeeing all things are ſubiect to chaunge, yea knowledge through great diſeaſes, and other inconueniences may be leſſened and loſt. Idleneſſe and ſlouth doe not hurtIdlenes decaieth the health of the body. the ſoule onely, but impaire alſo the health of the bodie. Yea that reſt which a man taketh by negligence, is much more hurtfull vnto him, than painfull exerciſe. And they which thinke that health needeth neceſſarily a continuall reſt to preſerue it well, vſing that goodly pretence bicauſe they would not be troubled with mo matters thā needs they muſt, eſpecially with thoſe which concerne publike commoditie, as alſo bicauſe they would not take paines in the ſtudie of wiſedome, they cannot be better compared than to ſuch as will not vſe their eies in beholding any thing, that they might keepe them the better, neither will ſpeake at all to preſerue their voyce well. Euery kind of life hath both ſickneſſe and health, but a ſound man cannot take a better courſe to preſerue his health, than to imploy himſelfe in the practiſe of many good and honeſt duties of humanitie. Yea, we muſt yet go farther, and ſay with Socrates, that diſeaſed men ought not to be ſo carefull of their health, that they leaue the ſtudie and exerciſe of vertue, ſeeing we are to make but ſmall account of death it ſelfe. And therefore Plutarke is very earneſt againſt this Epicurian ſentence, Hide thy life: which wasNo man ought to hide his life. ſet downe by Neocles brother to Epicurus, meaning thereby to perſwade them that would liue happily, not to intermeddle with any publike matter. But contrarywiſe (ſaith this Philoſopher) it is diſhonest to liue ſo that no man may know any thing. Art thou vicious? ſhew thy ſelfe to thoſe that are able to admoniſh, to correct & to cure thee, that ſo thou mayſt amend & repent. If in the knowledge of nature thou hast learned by ſongs to prayſe God, his iustice, and heauenly prouidence: or in moral knowledge to commend the law, humane ſocietie, the gouernment of the
                     
                     common-wealth, and therein to reſpect honour, not profite, hide not this talent, but teach it others, and giue thy ſelfe an example vnto them of well doing, and of profiting euery one. O diuine counſail, proceeding out of the mouth of an Ethnike, as neceſſarie to be practiſed at this day, as we ſee it contemned of ſo many wiſe worldings, who ſay they haue the abſolute and ſound reformation of our eſtates of France in their head, but that as yet there is no time to ſpeake of it. Thus ſome liue idlely and like to Recluſes bicauſe they will take no paine, and others do worſe in maintaining the corruptiō of the eſtate, and in cleauing wittingly to the deſtruction thereof. But let vs proceed to looke vpon the fruits of idlenes. It is of that fountaine whereof curſed ignorance drinketh and maintaineth hir ſelfe, and from thence flow all pleaſures folowed with bitternes & griefe, which withdraw vs from all vertuous occupations, to imploy our ſelues about all kinds of trifles, that are neither good, honeſt, nor profitable, but rather hurtfull and very pernitious.Of gaming, and of the effects thereof. Of which number we may note gaming, which is as common amongſt vs, and as blame-worthie, as any other imperfection, ſeeing hir foundation is laid vpon lucre and couetouſnes, or els vpon the loſſe of time. Thoſe curſed effects which it bringeth forth daily, as quarels, murders, blaſphemies, cogging, ouerthrow of houſes and families, do ſufficiently teſtifie vnto vs the infamous nature thereof. Likewiſe it hath bin ſo abhorred of the ancient Sages,Chilon refuſed to make a league with dicers. that Chilon being ſent from Lacedemonia to Corinth, to intreat of a league between thoſe two peoples, & finding the rulers playing at dice, returned back again, and would not ſpeake of his commiſſion, ſaying, that he would not ſtaine the glory of the Spartanes with ſo great an ignominie as to ioine thē in ſociety with dice-plaiers. How many happy ages haue our forefathers paſſed ouer, & yet neuer heard word of ſo vnhappy an exerciſe? And ſome ſay thatThe occaſion that mooued the Lydians to inuent games. the Lydiās were the firſt inuēters of games, but it was whē their countrey was brought into great neceſſitie of victuals: to the end that by playing, they might find ſome help and meane to ſuſtaine and to reſiſt hunger the better, by

ſpending euery other day in gaming without any meate. Which they continued for the ſpace of twentie and eight yeeres, preſeruing their country by that means from a generall famine through the great ſparing of their prouiſion. But now a daies we ſee, that men are ſo farre from recompencing the fault of ſo vile an occupation by faſting, that contrary wiſe it is followed with all kind of diſſolutenes, gluttonie, riot and ſuperfluitie. And this is ſeene too much in theſe new faculties of careleſſe men, who haue taught vs this goodly prouerbe, That a man were better looſe than be idle. But if they knew their ineſtimable loſſe, not of mony which they abuſe, but of the richeſt and moſt precious thing that may be ſpent, and which can neuer be recouered, I meane of time, they would ſpeake cleane contrary, That to looſe is worſe than to be idle, bicauſe it is ioined with a naughtie action, which of neceſſitie turneth to the detriment of himſelfe or of his neighbor, & oftentimes of both. Among many goodly and holy ordinances, which Alphonſus ſonne of Ferdinando king of Spaine,Alphonſus decree againſt play. cauſed thoſe knights to obſerue, which he made of the order of the band, (himſelf and all his children being of the ſame order) this was ſtraightly kept, that no knight ſhould preſume to play for any money at cardes or dice, or giue his conſent to any ſuch play in his houſe, vpon paine of forfeiting his wages for one moneth, and himſelfe to be forbidden another moneth and a halfe from entring into the kings palace. But bicauſe the nature of man is not able to abide continuall labor, and occaſion of buſineſſe is not alwaies offred, it ſhall be lawfull for vs, according to the precept of Plato his Academie, to beſtow our leaſureHow we may recreate our ſelues. vpon ſome honeſt paſtime and game of moderate pleaſure, that is not far ſeparated from ſtudy or vertue, which will not be blame-worthie in vs, ſo we vſe it as we do reſt or ſleepe, after we haue diſpatched and ended graue & ſerious affaires according to the gift and facultie of our ſpirits. Moreouer let vs propound to our ſelues for example the liues of ſo many famous and graue men, who both in youth and age laboured to do good and to profit euery

one, eſteeming it great honor to end their daies in ſuch a commendable exerciſe: according to that ſaying of Eraſmus:
                     Of perſeuerance 
                     That in vaine men follow that which is good, and ſtriue to do well, if they ſtand ſtill before the end of their daies. For that man looſeth his time in running ſwiftly, who fainteth before he come to the end of his race. Nothing will be vnpoſſible to thee (ſaith the ſame author) ſo that thy hart faint not. Not to go forward in the way of the Lord, is all one with turning backeward: yea, it were better neuer to begin, than not to perſeuer vnto the end. This alſo is that which Cicero teacheth vs, that it is not ſufficient to know what ought to be done, but we muſt abide firme and ſtedfaſt in that wherin vpon aduiſed & good counſell we are once reſolued. And though we are out of hope of attaining to perfection, yet we muſt ſtriue to come vnto it. Many (ſaith he) that are weakened with diſpaire, will not vndertake that thing which they feare they ſhall neuer be able to finiſh: but they that would obtaine great things, and ſuch as are moſt to be deſired, muſt try euery way. And if any man hath not this excellencie of ſpirite and greatnes of hart by nature, neither yet the knowledge of euery good diſcipline, let him take that courſe which he is able to attaine vnto. For it is great praiſe to him that followeth after the excellenteſt & beſt things, to ſtaie in the ſecond and third place, if he can doe no better. Thoſe things are great, which are next to perfection. It is our dutie therefore to abide firme and conſtant in that good and commendable kind of life, which we haue choſen from the beginning, ſo that the end therof be to liue well. And let vs ſhun idlenes in ſuch ſort, as to ſay with Cato, that this is one thing whereof we ought to repent vs moſt, if we know that we haue ſpent a whole day, wherin we haue neither done nor learned ſome goodAn excellent precept of Phocylides. thing. Phocylides minding to inſtruct vs in this matter, ſaid that in the euening we ought not to ſleep, before we haue thrice called to our remembrance whatſoeuer we haue done the ſame day, repenting vs of the euill, and reioicing in our well doing. Apelles the beſt painter that euer was, would not ſuffer one day to paſſe without drawing of

ſome line, meaning thereby (as he ſaid) to fight againſtExamples againſt idlenes. idlenes, as with an arrow. Aeleas king of Scythia ſaid, that he ſeemed to himſelf to differ nothing from his horſekeeper, when he was idle. Dionyſius the elder being demanded if he were neuer idle, anſwered: God keepe me from that: for as a bowe (according to the common prouerbe) is marred and breaketh by being too much bent: ſo is the ſoule through too much idlenes. This is that which Maſiniſſa the Aphrican would learnedly teach vs, of whome Polybius writeth, that he died when he was foure ſcore and ten yeeres of age, leauing behind him a ſonne that was but foure yeeres old. A little before he died, after he had diſcomfited the Carthaginians in a maine battell, he was ſeene the next day eating of courſe browne bread, ſaying to ſome that maruelled thereat, that as iron is bright and ſhineth
                     An excellent compariſon. 
                     ſo long as it is vſed by the hand of man, whereas a houſe falleth into decay when no man dwelleth therein, (as Scphocles ſaith) ſo fareth it with this brightnes and glistering light of the ſoule, whereby we diſcourſe, vnderſtand, and remember. The ſame reaſon mooued Xerxes father to ſay to Darius, that in perillous times and dangerous affaires, he increaſed in wiſedome. Likewiſe politicall knowledge, which is ſuch aHow politicall knowledge muſt be preſerued. prudence, ſetled mind, iuſtice, and experience, as knoweth full well how to make choice of, and to take ſit oportunitie in all things that happen, cannot be maintained but by the practiſe and managing of affaires, by diſcourſing & iudging. Now to conclude our preſent treatiſe, ſeeing we know that we are borne to all vertuous actions, let vs flie from idlenes and ſloth, the welſprings of all iniuſticeThe fruits of idlenes. & pouertie, the ſtirrers vp of infinite paſſions in the ſoule, and the procurers of ſundrie diſeaſes in the bodie, euen to the vtter deſtruction of them. And let vs imbrace diligence, care, trauell, & ſtudie, which are ſure guides to leadThe end of our life. vs to that end for which we ought to liue, that is, in glorifieng God to profit our ſelues in honeſt things, and alſo all thoſe with whome we liue, wherein conſiſteth all the happines and contentation of the life of good men. And let vs not doubt but that all time otherwiſe ſpent, is loſt

time: knowing that all times in reſpect of themſeluns are alike, but that which is imploied in vertue is good in regard of vs, and that which is vnprofitably waſted, and in vices is naught. Further, let vs learne neuer to giue ouer the effecting and finiſhing of that which we once know toMatth. 10. 22. belong to our dutie, ſeeing that without perſeuerance neither he that fighteth can obtaine the victorie, neither the conqueror the garland, but he that continueth to the end ſhall be ſaued. Therefore let vs be carefull to make profit of that talent which is giuen vs to keepe, that we beMatth. 12. 36. not found euill and vnprofitable ſeruants before him, to whome we muſt yeeld an account euen of euery idle and vaine word.
               
            
            
               Of an Enimie, of Iniurie, and of Reuenge. Chap. 36.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  HAuing hitherto in three daies workes diſcourſed (according to our iudgement) of all the parts of the vertue of Fortitude, and of thoſe commendable effects that iſſue from it, to the correcting of many vices & imperfections, which abound in mans nature, I thinke that to end this afternoone, we are yet to reſume and to continue the ſpeech already begun by vs (as alſo we then promiſed) of one principall point concerning true magnanimitie, and greatnes of courage, which reſpecteth our enimies, thereby to know more particularly both our dutie towards them, and alſo what good may come to vs from them, if we ſuſtaine and beare courageouſly their iniuries, forſaking all deſire and luſt to reuenge.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     A pretie compariſon. As induſtrious Bees gather the drieſt & moſt pearcing honie of bitter time: ſo a wiſe and vertuous man (ſaith Xenophon) knoweth how to drawe profite and commoditie from his enimies, vpon whome we muſt beware of reuenging our ſelues, leaſt (as Theophrastus ſaith) we hurt our ſelues more than them.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  It is the propertie (ſaith Cicero) of famous perſonages and noble harts to contemne iniuries offered vnto them

by knowen wicked men, whoſe commendation of a man importeth ſome diſhonestie in him. Now then ASER teach vs ſomwhat of this matter wherein we haue ſo great neede of inſtruction.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  The Cynick Philoſopher ſaid, that if a man would be in ſafetie and partaker of happineſſe, he muſt ofGood friends or ſharp enimies are neceſſarily required to a happy life. neceſſitie haue good friends or ſharpe enimies, that the firſt ſort by good and wiſe admonitions, and theſe by notable iniuries, might withdraw him from doing of euill. And truely if we conſider the profite and commoditie which may come vnto vs from him that voluntarily without occaſion giuen him (as it is our dutie not to offend any) is become our enimie, by gouerning our ſelues therin with the reaſon of a true Academical prudence, beſides that we ſhall ſhew foorth the effects of that title which we beare, and of the end of our being, we muſt be ſo farre off from hating an enimie, that we ſhould rather thinke our ſelues beholding and bound vnto him for that great good which he procureth vnto vs. That this is ſo, is not this one propertie of vice to make vs more aſhamed before our enimies when we haue committed a fault, than before ourWhy men are beholding to their enimies. friends? Do we not take our enimie for a ſpie and enuier of our life? If any imperfection raigne in vs, who wil more freely giue vs to vnderſtand thereof than he that hateth vs, who will not be ſlacke to publiſh it euery where? For this reaſon Plutarke calleth an enimie a Schoole-maſter that coſteth vs nothing, of whom we learne that which may greatly profite vs, and which we know not. To this effect he maketh mention in his Apophthegmes of an Athenian captaine who complained to Aristo chief captain of the Lacedemonians, that his ſouldiers blazed abroad the maners of the Athenians. If the Athenians (ſaid Aristo vnto him) did looke well to their doings; they ſhould not neede to care what the Spartanes could ſay of them. Theſe things being well conſidered by vs, if we haue enimies they will be a meane to make vs more fearefull and reſtrained from offending, and more earneſt and diligent to order well our behauior, to direct our doings, and to

                     How men behaue thēſelues now adays towards their enimies. correct our imperfections. But let vs marke a litle how the noble and courageous youths of the world behaue themſelues now adaies. The reproofes and iniuries of an enimie, may peraduenture be tolerated in ſome ſort by the skilfuller ſort of thoſe that boaſt themſelues to be ſo curious obſeruers and ready defenders of their honor, ſo that they be not vttred in their preſence: bicauſe they ſay that they cannot be offended at that which is ſpoken of them in their abſence, and that they which ſpeake ſo, will not auouch that ſlander before their faces, which they rayſed behind their backes. According to theſe weake reaſons they would haue other men iudge of reproch and iniurie, either to credite or to diſcredite them according to their power, and not as the truth of the fact it ſelfe requireth: whereupon alſo they paſſe that ouer without profite and amendment of their life, which they knew was miſliked in them. There are others, who vpon a bare report made vnto them, thinke themſelues greatly miſuſed & harmed by thoſe that ſpake ill of them, ſo that preſently they purpoſe to be auenged of them. But herein they agree al, that if any man voluntarily offereth iniurie to another, they would haue the ſword preſently to decide the controuerſie. What ſay I, for an iniurie? Nay, for a yea or a nay, they forthwith thinke that the lie is giuen them, and that they are out-faced: ſo that nothing but the death of the one, or of both together, and oftentimes of their deareſt and beſt friends is able (as they thinke) to repaire the preiudicate and ſuppoſed offence, and all for this vaine honour of the world. O deteſtable furie, not to be found in moſt cruel beaſts, which ſpare the bloud of their ſexe. It is not conuenient, that any time ſhould be loſt in reproouing the ſame, being of it ſelf ſo odious, that it cannot ſo much as be once named but with ſhame, trembling and horror. For no man is ſo dull of vnderſtanding, but he knoweth Murder forbidden.that effuſion of bloud is forbidden by God, and that outrage being in no ſort permitted, much leſſe may a chriſtian forget himſelfe ſo farre as to kill another, except it be through neceſſitie in defending his owne body, or in the

ſeruice of his prince and country in a iuſt warre. Amongſt all the ſententious ſayings of Socrates the wiſe, & the wonderfull workes of Plato his ſcholer, I find none more diuine, or woorthie of greater praiſe than that ſentence ſo often repeated by them, That reuenge is not in any ſort to be 
                     A notable ſentence.
                     vſed. It is not iuſt (ſaid the ſame Socrates) to offend any, although he had offred vs wrong. For a good man neuer ought to do euil
                           •
                         yea, it is a great deale better to ſuffer, than to offer contumelie, to be ſlaine than to ſlay, bicauſe the one bringeth no detriment to man, who is the ſoule, but the other procureth the vtter ruine and deſtruction therof. This will ſound very ill in many mens eares. But if they will iudge without paſſion, and had eies to ſee, and eares to vnderſtand the end of their being & calling, as alſo the reaſon of true prudence & generoſitie taught vs in the ſtudie of Philoſophie, no doubt but they would ſubſcribe to the opiniō of theſe wiſe Philoſophers, agreeing very well with that which is taught vs by the ſpirite of God, who condemneth the murderer, and him that offereth Leuit. 24. 17.wrong and iniurie to another: but calleth himſelfe Pſal. 9. 9. 16.the defender of innocencie, and ſuch a one as returneth a Matth. 5. 10.double reward and recompence to thoſe that ſuffer for righteouſnes and equitie. Who may therfore doubt but that it is farre better to receiue than to do euil, to be killed than to kill, ſeeing by the one the good houre of our perpetuall reſt and felicitie is haſtened forward, & by the other we are vtterly fruſtrated thereof, and throwen into a hell of eternall fire? So that if we endeuor to ſhew forth the effects of true magnanimitie and greatneſſe of hart, there is no doubt but to beare and to endure with al modeſtie To ſuffer iniurie patiently, is a badge of a moſt abſolute vertue.and patience the outrages and wrongs of our enimies, is the marke of that vertue which is moſt abſolute and perfect. That it is ſo, doth it not appeere in this, that vertue conſiſteth in difficult things? And that vertue that commeth neereſt to the diuine nature, which is hardeſt to be obtained, and leaſt familiar with men, is it not more woorthie and beſeeming a noble and valiant man, than all the reſt? Vnto which may we attribute better this marke than to the vertue of patience, whereof we haue alreadie

intreated? We ſee no man vpon earth of ſo baſe eſtate, no woman ſo feeble and weake, no liuing creature ſo litle, but if they be ſtriken, they will reuenge themſelues very willingly as wel as they can. How greatly then ought this vertue to be accounted of, which forceth this natural luſt of reuenge, bred in al liuing creatures, and how noble muſt the mind of that man needs be, which is able to maſter ſuch a violent paſſion, ſo common to all men, thereby procuring to it ſelfe the name of a mild and gratious ſpirit, and readie to forgiue, which is proper and peculiar to the diuine nature? Therfore that great monarch Alexander ſaid, That a man wronged had need of a more noble hart to forgiue his enimie, thā to be reuēged of him & to kil him. Behold the ſaying of as noble a prince as euer the earth bare: What can the Courtiers of theſe times ſay to the contrarie? It is a great vertue (ſaith Epictetus) not to hurt him of whom thou 
                     A commendable kind of reuenge.
                     art miſuſed. It is a very commendable thing to pardon him whom thou mightest hurt, and it is a praiſe-woorthie kind of reuenge to let them go in peace that are ouercome. Therefore Pittacus the Sage hauing one in his power that had dealt contumeliouſly with him, he ſuffered him to depart vnharmed, ſaying, That pardon was better than reuenge, the one being proper to the ſpirit of a man, the other of a cruel beast. But further, although it were onely in reſpect of our own benefit during our life, we ought to ſhunne all motions of iniurie, and all deſire of reuenge: foraſmuch as we cannot either determine or execute the ſame, but with a thouſand perturbations, which cauſe vs to want the reſt and tranquillitie of our ſoules, wherein all our happineſſe and felicitie conſiſteth. Good counſaile of Seneca.And therfore Seneca ſaith, If he that wronged thee be weaker than thou, forgiue him: if he be mightier, ſpare thy ſelfe. For whoſoeuer nouriſheth his neighbors anger, whoſoeuer prouoketh & incenſeth him more, when he ſeeth him vehement and importunate againſt him, he committeth two faults. Firſt he hateth himſelfe by procuring his owne trouble and griefe: Secondly, his brother, bicauſe he maketh We muſt do nothing in choler.him ſad, and vexeth him. Moreouer prudent men (as Theophrastus ſaith) ought to doe nothing in choler.

For that vnreaſonable part of the ſoule being mooued, foreſeeth nothing wiſely, but being driuen forward with a contentious deſire, ſuffereth it ſelfe to be caried hither and thither, as if it were drunken. Alſo we muſt take great heed, that we do not alwaies put in execution whatſoeuer we haue a mind vnto, but onely that which moderate reaſon commandeth vs. Wherein we ſhal deſerue the praiſe of true Magnanimity, if I ſay, we can command our ſelues and all vehemencie of choler, which driueth men forward to be auenged on their enimies, & is an act that ſauoureth more of a vile and abiect hart, drawing neere to brutiſh fiercenes, than of a noble mind, which deſpiſeth whatſoeuer is earthlie, mortall, and vading, that it may thinke of nothing but of heauen and immortalitie. This is that which the ſtudie of our Philoſophie teacheth vs: & euen as expert Phiſitions knowe how to draw medicines apt for the preſeruation of life out of ſerpents, poiſons, & other deadly and venemous things: ſo we ought to draw An apt ſimilltu le.from our enimies, not their life, which ought to be onely in the power of God and of his iuſtice, but profit & commoditie by their backbitings, reproches, and iniuries. Which will eaſily be done, if we make ſmall account of How a man may profit by the backbiting of his enimies.their intent, and conſider narrowly the fact which they ſpeake ill of, to the end that if we be guiltie of that which they condemn in vs, we may purge and correct our ſelues. And if ſo be they harme vs wrongfully, their impudencie will cauſe their reproches and iniuries to be turned back, and ſent againſt themſelues, togither with that ſhame and dammage, which they thought to procure vnto vs, wheras we ſhall be no leſſe honeſt and vertuous men than before. So that the beſt reuenge and moſt honorable victorie, which we can carie away from our enimies, will be to The beſt kind of reueng.ſurpaſſe them in diligence, bountie, magnanimitie, goodturnes, and in all vertuous actions: whereby they wil ſooner perceiue and confeſſe them ſelues vanquiſhed & conſtrained to ſtop their mouth, and to repreſſe their toong, than by any other force, which we can oppoſe againſt them. Then may we ſay, that as he who enterpriſed to kill

                     Prometheus the Theſſalien gaue him ſo great a blowe with a ſword vpon an apoſtume which put him in danger of death, that by lancing it he ſaued his life contrary to his meaning: ſo the iniurious ſpeeches of our enimies vttred in wrath & of ill will to hurt vs, haue been the cauſe of curing many euils in vs whereof we made no account, and of making vs much better than we were before. But bicauſe iniurie ſeemeth ſo hard and vneaſie to be tolerated by the imbecillitie of mans nature, which is ſo ſoone offended, and by the hart of man being full of reuenge, let vs yet ſee whether we can find any remedie, if not to cure that which is incurable, at leaſt wiſe to purge and to clenſe How many wayes a mā may receiue iniurie.the Accidents of this euil. Iniurie is offered either to the goods, to the honour or to the perſon of a man. As touching the firſt and laſt, namely, the ſpoiling of our goods, and violence offred to our perſon, what other reuenge either by the lawe of God or of man can we haue, than to repulſe force with force, I meane, when we are conſtrained thereunto, or elſe by way of the prince his Iuſtice, which is open to euery one? If any haue robbed thee, muſt thou become a thiefe or ſatiſfie thy ſelfe by thine owne ſtrength? Much leſſe oughteſt thou to ſet thy ſelfe againſt him that is not faultie, as many do. If thou being the weaker art ouertaken, hurt and wronged, oughteſt thou to vſe new force, violence and murder to reuenge thy ſelfe, and to repaire thy iniurie receiued? The ſword is in the hands of the king and of the magiſtrate that repreſenteth his perſon: and it belongeth to him onely to vſe it againſt them that trouble publike tranquillitie and ciuil ſocietie: to the end there ſhould be no ſhew, that any other either would or durſt meddle with the ſoueraigntie, whoſe greatneſſe and preſeruation conſiſteth in the adminiſtration of iuſtice. Yea the lawes haue alwaies ſo abhorred violence and priuate force, that they haue reſtored Men muſt not take the law into their owne hands, although it be not rightly executed.thieues and robbers into thoſe places which they vniuſtly poſſeſſed, if they had been driuen from them by violence. But ſome man will ſay, that theſe things ought in deed to be dulie conſidered of if Iuſtice were executed,

and had not forſaken the earth to dwell in heauen. And how then canſt thou execute it, ſeeing thou art not called to do, but to demand iuſtice? Tarie, and the iuſt Iudge wil returne double that which hath been vniuſtly taken from thee, which thou haſt ſuffered, or which hath been denied thee, euen then when thou ſhalt haue greater neede than now that thy daies are ſo ſhort: and then thou ſhalt liue for euer of that which thou haſt reaped in this poore and miſerable life. Concerning honor, the iniurie whereof we Of the offence done to honor.feare more than of the other, let vs know, that it cannot be hurt in a good man, bicauſe vertue, which is inuincible, protecteth and defendeth it. But now a daies we fetch it not ſo farre off. For we will haue our honor tied to the vaine opinion of the world, which reiecteth and contemneth thoſe men as cowards and baſe-minded, that haue but once put vp the leaſt iniurie offered by another: but honoreth as noble and courageous thoſe that can luſtilie kill their enimies. This is the cauſe why many, who would willingly forget an iniurie receiued, dare not do it for loue of their friends: as alſo bicauſe they ſee, that it would rather be imputed vnto them as a tokē of a faint hart, than of a deſire to followe reaſon. But let all theſe blood-ſuckers, enclined to reuenge & to murder, couer their beaſtlie The excuſe of quarrellers.crueltie aſwell as they can, yet haue they no other reaſon to diſguiſe it but this, that it is a vſuall kind of behauiour now a daies amongeſt men, to the ende they may be welcomed, praiſed, and fauoured of Kinges, Princes, and great Lords, otherwiſe they muſt take a Coole, and ſhut vp themſelues in ſome cloiſter. But they muſt needes affirme this withall, that they had rather vndoe and condemne themſelues with the multitude, ſo they may haue worldlie honour, than be ſaued with the ſmall number of honeſt men: except peraduenture they will ſay, that they knowe no other life but this, & that they liue onely for the world, without beleefe or hope of a ſecond and eternall life. And albeit they confeſſe a ſecond life with their mouth, yet their deeds declare ſufficiently, that they are altogither ignorant of the nature and happines of the other life, and

that they care not greatly to come vnto it. But let vs that Socrates void of reuenge.are better inſtructed imitate Socrates, who, being counſelled to reueng a wrong receiued, made this anſwer: What? If a Maſtie had bit me, or an Aſſe giuen me a blow, would you haue me ſerue writs vpon them? So let vs behaue our ſelues towards them that are froward & vitious, making a great deale leſſe account of their iniuries, than of a blow that hurteth: which they cannot do at all to our honour. As for good men we ſhall neuer be hurt by them. Now, if we draw neere, although neuer ſo little, to the perfection We muſt not be mooued with mocks.of ſuch a nature, much leſſe ought we to be prouoked & ſtirred vp through any laughter or gibing, which cannot touch or offend any, but thoſe that are troubled and caried away with paſſions. Thus much did Socrates wiſely giue one to vnderſtand, who told him that certaine mocked him: I do not (quoth he) thinke that I am mocked. Heereupon I remember a notable anſwer made by one Ptolemaeus 
                     Ptolemaeus.king of Egypt, who was counſelled to puniſh a Grammarian. The king demanding of him by way of gibing, who was father to Peleus, he made this anſwer, that he deſired firſt to knowe who was Lagus his father, noting thereby that the king was borne of baſe parentage. If it be vnſeemly (quoth Ptolemaeus to his friends) for a king to be mocked, it is alſo as vndecent for him to mocke another. Now although it be our dutie to tread vnder foote all deſire of reuenge, & to make no account of iniuries and mocks, yet is it lawfull How a man may repulſe a mockefor vs ſometime, if we be diſpoſed, and no greater offence ariſe thereof, to ſtop the mouths of ſuch as are iniurious & impudent, with a little ſhort replie: not in wrath or choler, but with a certaine meekenes and graue ſmiling, and ſomewhat nippingly, ſo that it paſſe not the Cato.bounds of modeſtie. Cato knew well how to behaue himſelf after this ſort, who being iniuriouſly dealt with all by one that had alwaies liued wickedly, ſaid thus vnto him: I am not able to deale with thee in this manner by contending with iniuries. For thou haſt throughly vſed thy ſelfe both to vtter reproches freely, and to ſuffer with eaſe when any man offereth thee wrong or iniurie. But as for me, I delight neither in hearing, nor in
                     
                     vttering them. Likewiſe Demosthenes anſwered another in Demoſthenes.this ſort: I will not enter into this combat with thee, wherein the vanquiſhed is better than the vanquiſher. Plato alſo being touched Plato.with iniurious ſpeeches, ſaid: Go on to ſpeake ill, ſeeing thou didſt neuer learne to ſpeake well. Lyſander, Admirall of the Lyſander.Lacedemonians, being reuiled with many bitter ſpeeches, ſaid to him that offered the iniurie: Spue out boldly my friend, ſpue out boldly and often, and ſpare not, to ſee if thou canſt emptie thy ſoule of that euill and wickednes wherewith it is repleniſhed. Shall we thinke now, that theſe famous men, making ſo ſmall account of iniuries & wrongs, had any other bound than right and iuſtice onely in the hatred of the vices of The limits that are to be vſed in hating the wicked.wicked men, or that they would haue ſought by any other way for the ſatisfieng of thoſe wrongs, which they receiued? Let vs conſider how Scaurus behaued himſelfe towards Scaurus.his enimie Domitius, againſt whome he was to put vp a complaint by way of iuſtice. There was one of Domitius his ſeruants, who before iudgment was giuen of their proceſſe, came to Scaurus, and ſaid, that he would diſcloſe vnto him a matter of great importance againſt his maiſter, which vndoubtedly would cauſe him that was his aduerſe partie to gaine his ſuit. But he not minding to heare him any further, tooke order that he ſhould be ſtraightly bound, and ſo ſent him to his maiſter. The meanes which Ageſilaus vſed to make his enimies his friends, in ſteede of reuenging himſelfe vpon them, are woorthie of eternall How Ageſilaus made his enimies his friendspraiſe, and ought to mooue vs greatly to correct our naturall imperfections, ſo much inclined to reuenge. For when he could come to the knowledge of them without any further ſhew, he thruſt them into publike offices and charges. And if it fell out ſo that they committed any offence wherby they were drawn into iudgement, he holpe them as much as he could, by that meanes winning the friendſhip of euery one. For although we commonly ſay, that as one and the ſame ſunne ſofteneth the waxe, and hardeneth the clay: ſo good deeds win the harts of good men, but prouoke the wicked, yet there is no man of ſo peruerſe a nature, whome a man cannot make his friend

by plying him often with benefits, and when occaſion is offered, by binding him with ſome notable good turne. Auguſtus.For this cauſe Augustus, after the conſpiracie of Cinna was diſcouered, notwithſtanding that he had him in his power, being conuicted by his owne letter, yet he did not onely forgiue him, but taking him alſo by the hand, ſware friendſhip with him, and beſtowed vpon him great eſtates and dignities, wherein Cinna afterward ſerued him faithfully. The Venetians.And it ſeemeth that for the ſame reaſon the Venetians hauing taken the Duke of Mantua their deadly enimie, in ſteed of taking his eſtate from him, they made him their Generall captaine: ſo that euer after he abode their Pontinus.faithfull friend. Pontinus alſo an ancient captaine of the Samnites, ſaid, that they were either freely to ſet at libertie the Romane armie, which was ſurprized in the ſtraights of the mountaine Apenninus, and ſo make them loyall friends through the bond of ſo great a good turne, or elſe to put them all to death, thereby to 
                     The prudence of Dionyſius in puniſhing euill ſpeakers.
                     take from the enimie a great part of his ſtrength. Neither may we heere let go in ſilence the diſcretion of Dionyſius the elder, king of Syracuſa, in puniſhing an iniurie. Which example ought to cauſe all them to bluſh, who in furie and choler, after an iniurie receiued, or after ſome report therof, ſeeke preſently for ſome cruell reuenge. This king being told that two yoong men as they were drinking togither, had ſpoken many outragious words of him, he inuited them both to ſupper. And perceiuing that one of them, after he had taken a little wine into his head, vttered and committed much follie, and that contrariwiſe the other was very ſtaied, and drunke but a little, he puniſhed this fellow as one that was malitious, and had been his enimy of ſet purpoſe, but forgaue the other, as being drunken, and mooued by the wine to ſpeake ill of him. Concluding therefore our preſent diſcourſe, let vs learne that it is the propertie of a great and noble mind to be mild, gratious, and readie to forgiue, and that it is a greater point of Magnanimitie to ſurmount the common nature of men by a woonderfull diuinitie of the ſoule, than to follow after that which beaſts are able to do better than

we. For many of them in this earthly generoſitie, whereof many men make ſo great account, excell & ſurpaſſe the beſt of them all. In all debates & controuerſies with our enimies, let vs retaine (as Cicero counſaileth vs) grauitie & conſtancie, and chaſe awaye all choler: bicauſe nothing that is done through perturbation can be done conſtantly, or be approoued of any. Let vs not be afraid 
                     Antiſthene▪ counſaile.(ſaid Antisthenes) to wiſh all the good in the world to our enimies, except valure, which may make them raſh to venture vpon our life: and let vs giue ouer all will to procure them any hurt or diſpleaſure, or any maner of reuenge. Let vs rather deſire not to be ſpared of them in thoſe things which are blame-woorthie in vs, that ſo we may be more readie to amend and correct them. Let vs 
                     Math. 5. 44.
                     loue our enimies, bleſſe them that curſe vs, do good to them that hate and perſecute vs, ouercomming euill with good, and leauing 
                     Rom. 12. 19.
                     all vengeance to him that hath reſerued it to himſelfe, who by his power directeth the nets, ſwords, hatchets, instruments and ſcourges of his wrath, all which are our enimies for the amendment of our life: and then ſhall we ſhew foorth thoſe true effects of the vertue of Fortitude & Magnanimitie, which our heauenly Father requireth of vs.
               
            
            The ende of the ninth daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE TENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Iustice. Chap. 37.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     
                        TRue Philoſophie (ſaith Socrates) 
                     What true Philoſophie is.
                     is to know and to practiſe both priuately and publikely thoſe things that are honeſt & iust. This is that Prudence which teacheth vs well and nobly to gouerne both domestical and ciuill affaires, the name whereof is Temperance and Iustice. By which ſpeech this wiſe Philoſopher taught vs the ſtraight and vnſeparable coniunction and knot of the foure Morall vertues, being neuertheleſſe diſtinguiſhed by their proper and particular effects. Which hauing hitherto offred vs matter wherein to reioice our ſpirites about the three firſt riuers flowing out of the fountaine of Honeſtic, there remaineth now for vs to conſider of the laſt of them, which although it be but one particular, yet in truth it is the very perfection of all dutie, and is called Iuſtice: the precepts whereof if we keepe diligently, we ſhall truly become images of God his eſſence, & be made according to his likeneſſe. Let vs then begin my companions, to intreat of this great and heauenly vertue.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Iustice (ſaith Cicero) is the mistreſſe of all the The fruits and effects of Iuſticeother vertues, and as it were their Queene. She is the groundworke of euerlasting glory and renowme, and without hir nothing can be praiſe-woorthie. She putteth a difference between the good and the bad, which being taken away (ſaith Seneca) nothing foloweth but confuſion. For to reward the wicked and not the good, to afflict the vertuous, and not to chaſtice the euill man, is to make a gallimaufrey of vice and vertue.
                  
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     What Iuſtice is. What is Iustice but godlineſſe (ſaith Lactantius) and what is godlineſſe but the knowledge of God our Father? Notwithstanding in reſpect of vs, Iustice is commonly taken for an equall

distribution of right and of lawes. But of thee (ACHITOB) we ſhall preſently vnderſtand the greatneſſe and riches of this precious vertue, and the vnſpeakeable fruites which ſhe diſtributeth liberally for the profit of all men.
                  
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     No kingdome, common-wealth, or citie (ſaith Plato) can be either well ruled or instituted in the beginning, or 
                     Three things neceſſary in euery common-wealth.
                     preſerued and kept in a happie eſtate without diuine or humane Iustice, without the counſaile of the aged, or without the fauor of the heauenly wiſdome. Now that is diuine iuſtice (as Lactantius ſaith) whereby we are ioyned to God by deuotion and good will: and humane Iuſtice knitteth vs vnto men by mercie and humanitie. Whereby we ſee that the foundation The ground of all Iuſtice.of all Iuſtice is grounded vpon that honor & ſeruice which we owe to God, whereupon we are induced to be dutifull to our neighbors according to charitie. Therfore we muſt aboue all things loue Iuſtice, and apply all our ſtudie thereunto, ſeeing it is the firſt and principal point that concerneth the direction of a Chriſtian mans life, yea mo are partakers of the fruit thereof, than of any other vertue. Iustice (ſaith Seneca) is the law of God, and the bond of humane ſocietie. For auoiding therfore of confuſion in this matter, we ſay with Plato, that Iuſtice obſerued and kept The diſtinction of Iuſtice.towards God, taketh vnto it the name of pietie. But we will enter into the handling of that Iuſtice onely, which hath reſpect to our dealings with men, being by the ſame Plato called an equall diſtribution towards all the world, according to the deſerts of euery one, and a ſure foundation of cities and common-wealths. He ſaith alſo, that Iuſtice requireth vpright dealing throughout a mans calling and charge, and that nothing is more like to the greatnes of God, than a man perfectly iuſt. Aristotle calleth Iuſtice Whoſoeuer hath Iuſtice perfectly, hath all the vertues.a generall vertue, bicauſe he that hath hir perfectly, may boaſt that he hath within him all the other vertues. For he could not know what were iuſt and vniuſt, nor make choice of the one and flie from the other, if he were not prudent, to which vertue that thing doth properly belong. Neither could he exerciſe the precepts of Iuſtice, if by temperance he knew not how to moderate all his paſſions

and priuate affections, not ſuffering himſelfe to be ouercome either with wine, gluttonie, luſt, couetouſnes, or with any other deſires and motions, which hinder the vſe of reaſon. Beſides, he could not practiſe one principall & diuine point of iuſtice, which is to ſuccour with all his might the afflicted and oppreſſed, and to prouide that no man be wronged, if it lie in his power, notwithſtanding any danger whereinto he may fall, although it be certaine loſſe of life, and of all earthlie and tranſitorie goods, I ſay he could not practiſe this, if through Fortitude and Generoſitie he contemne not death, the earth, and whatſoeuer ſauoreth of the world, that he may be (ſo farre foorth as his humane nature will ſuffer) a follower of the diuinitie. Iuſtice (ſaith Cicero) is a conſtant and perpetuall will and deſire to giue to euery one his right. She is the proper vertue of a noble minded man, bicauſe ſhe is profitable to others, but to hir ſelfe fruitles, laborious, and perilous. Yea that man onely may be called iuſt, that profiteth as many as he can, but hurteth none, that is alwaies at agreementThe praiſe of Iuſtice. within himſelfe, and is a friend to God, to men, and to himſelfe. Iuſtice (ſaith Diogenes) worketh great tranquillitie and perfect felicitie in our ſoules. For to be afraid of none, and not to bluſh at the ſight of any mans perſon, bringeth with it great contentation, and is as it were the perfection of life, which is proper onely to a iuſt ſoule. Iuſtice (ſaith Heſiodus) is a chaſt and reuerent virgine, not violated or defiled, but lodged alwaies with ſhamefaſtnes, chaſtitie, and ſimplicitie. Pindarus calleth hir the Queene of all the world. Pythagoras teaching by his riddlelike precepts, how a man ought to beware of tranſgreſſing Iuſtice, ſaith: Go not beyond the ballance. If we purpoſeReſpect of perſons is not to be vſed in the practiſe of Iuſtice. (ſaith Plato) to exerciſe Iuſtice perfectly, we muſt make no differēce of men in regard either of their friendſhip, kindred, wealth, pouertie, or dignitie. This vertue (ſaith Cicero) requireth of vs the forſaking of our pleaſures and priuate commoditie, that we may procure the benefit of the Common-wealth, although it be to our perill and loſſe. And thoſe men command and gouerne very

wel, who forbid vs to do any thing wherof we doubt whether it be iuſt or vniuſt: bicauſe equity is ſo cleere of it ſelf, that when we doubt of any thing, we may be aſſured that there is ſome iniuſtice in it. Aristotle and Cicero deuide IuſticeThe diuiſion of Iuſtice. The difference between Commutatiue and Diſtributiue Iuſtice. into theſe two partes, Distributiue and Commutatiue. Diſtributiue Iuſtice conſiſteth in giuing to euery one according to his deſert, whether it be honor and dignitie, or puniſhment. Commutatiue Iuſtice is in keeping fidelitie and in cauſing it to be kept in promiſes and contracts, & in behauing our ſelues no otherwiſe to another, than we would be delt withall. Many parts and particular dueties are alſo attributed by the Philoſophers to Iuſtice, as Liberalitie and ſundry other, whereof we will particularly diſcourſe hereafter. But we muſt here learne, that the end ofThe end of Iuſtice. all Iuſtice tendeth to the preſeruation of the common ſocietie of men. For the preſeruation of the lawes (which are the Gardian and Tutor of good men, and a mortall enimie to the wicked) is ſo neceſſarie for euery eſtate and condition of life, that (as Cicero ſaith) the very Pirates,The neceſſitie of Iuſtice. thieues & robbers could not liue together without ſome part thereof. If we deſire to know more of hir vnſpeakeable fruits, let vs conſider that which Paulus the Pythagorian hath written, ſaying, Iustice among men ought in my opinion to be called the Mother and Nurſe of all the other vertues. For without hir no man could be either temperate, valiant or prudent: the profite wherof will be very euident if we conſider all hir effects.
                     Diuers names agree to Iuſtice in diuers reſpects. 
                     For the prouidence of God is that Iustice which gouerneth the world, and hath the principalitie ouer it. In cities and townes Iustice is rightly called Equitie and Peace: in particular houſes betweene the huſband and the wife, Vnitie and Concord: in reſpect of ſeruants towards their masters, Good will: of masters towards their ſeruants, Humanitie and Gentleneſſe: and in mens bodies Health and perfection of the members. Thus you ſee that Iuſtice is the beginning and perfection of all the vertues. By theſe ſhort ſayings of ancient and graue perſonages, the excellencie of this holy and ſacred vertue Iuſtice appeereth ſufficiently vnto vs. Yea it is ſo earneſtly commaunded by the ſpirit of God vnto Magiſtrates in theſe words

                     Ierem. 21. 12. & 22. 3. of exerciſing Iudgement and Iustice, ſo often repeated, that whoſoeuer infringeth and violateth it, can not auoid the curſe and wrath of the Almightie, which will both light vpon their owne heads, and alſo worke the deſtruction of them that are committed to their charge. It belongeth toWhat Iuſtice and Iudgement are. Iuſtice, to receiue the innocent into protection and ſafegard, to maintaine, defend, ſuſtaine, and deliuer them, and to Iudgement, to reſiſt the boldnes of the wicked, to repreſſe their violence, and to puniſh their offences: bicauſe Magiſtrats are therefore armed with the ſword and with power, that publike peace ſhould not be diſturbed. This alſo is that which Solon meant to teach vs, when he ſaid: that the greatnes and preſeruation of all Common-wealths conſiſted in two things, in the reward of the good, & in the puniſhmēt of the wicked: which being taken away, the whole diſcipline of humane ſocietie muſt needes be diſſolued and come to nothing. For there are many that haue no great care to do wel, if they ſee not vertue recompenced with ſome honor: although this beſeemeth not a noble-minded man, who ought to do nothing but onely for the loue of vertue. And againe, the malice of the wicked cannot be brideled, if they ſee not vengeance and puniſhment prepared for offenders. All theſe aboue ſpecified conſiderations did ſo greatly recommend Iuſtice to the men of old time, and cauſed them to eſteeme ſo much of it, that whenſoeuer occaſion was offered to maintaine and execute it, it was preferred before all things: inſomuch that the father did not pardon his owne ſonne. The Egyptians were theThe Egyptians were zealous of Iuſtice. How they painted Iudges. ancienteſt Lawmakers, as Hiſtoriographers report, and were very carefull and diligent obſeruers of Iuſtice. In their cities they painted Iudges without hands, and the Preſident or chiefe Iuſtice with his eies blind-folded: to teach, that Iuſtice ought not to be either a briber, or reſpecter of perſons, that is, ſhe muſt neither take any thing, nor iudge for any fauour. The kings of their countrey obſerued this order, to cauſe Iudges when they were inſtalled by them in their offices, to ſweare, that albēit they were commanded by them to iudge vniuſtly, yet they

ſhould not obey them. Since their time, the ancient GreciansThe Grecians and Romans. and Romanes ſhewed themſelues great, true, and zealous followers of this vertue of Iuſtice, and that towardes their greateſt enimies. They iudged it a very noble act to accuſe the wicked, ſo it were not vpon any priuate occaſion or paſſion: they delighted greatly to ſee yoong men by way of Iuſtice to purſue tranſgreſſors, as grayhounds well fleſht follow after wild beaſts. This cauſed Solon being demanded what citie ſeemed to him beſtWhat citie is beſt gouerned. gouerned, to anſwer: that city wherein they that are not wronged, do as egerly follow after ſatisfaction in the behalfe of another man wronged, as if themſelues had receiued the iniurie. For the truth is (quoth he) that they which violate and breake lawes, do not offend one man alone, but the whole Citie and Common-wealth: therefore euery one ought to deſire and ſeeke after iuſt puniſhment. Moreouer, the ſeueritie which the Lacedemonians obſerued in their iudgements, procured ſuch a publike ſafety, that for a long time they vſed not to put either lockes to cofers, or barres to gates. Aristotle maketh mention of a certaine countrey, where the inhabitants were to aſſure the ſafetie of the waies, and to repay vnto paſſengers that loſſe, which they had receiued by theeues and robbers. Neither is it long ſince the like ſtatute was obſerued in many places of Italie. But I ſtand greatly in doubt, that at this day it is ilfauoredly kept. O happie, yea an hundred times happy was the golden age of thoſe famous men, full of heauenlie ſpirite, bicauſe vnder their gouernment Iuſtice was had in ſuch honor and reuerence. But let vs rub vp the memorie heereof by ſome notable examples. If any thing cauſethExamples of the loue of Iuſtice. Magiſtrates to commit iniuſtice, it is chieflye the fauour which they beare, & the bond wherewith they are bound more to ſome than to others. Therefore Cleon the LacedemonianCleon. minding to deale in publike affaires, gathered all his friends togither, and told them, that he renounced & diſcharged himſelf of all their friendſhip, bicauſe friendſhip many times cauſed men to yeeld, and to ſtep aſide from their good and right purpoſes in matters of iudgement.

True it is that when we haue none but good men to our friends, who are mooued and poſſeſſed with the ſame zeale to vertue that we are, as before was mentioned, we ſhall neuer fall into theſe inconueniences. The example Ariſtides.of Aristides the Athenian his loue vnto Iuſtice, is woorthie of ſpeciall remembrance. For calling into the law an enimie of his, after he had ſet downe his accuſation, the Iudges were ſo mooued againſt the accuſed party, for the impietie of the fact in controuerſie, that they would haue condemned him vnheard: ſo greatly did they truſt to the honeſtie of the accuſer, that he had ſet downe nothing but the very truth. But Aristides, who for his great and rare vertue had before deſerued the ſurname of Iuſt, went with the accuſed partie and caſt himſelfe at the Iudges feete, beſeeching them, that he might be heard, to iuſtifie and to defend himſelfe, according as the lawes commanded. Further, one writeth of him, that when he was vpon a time Iudge betweene two parties that pleaded before him, one of them ſaid: my aduerſarie hath done thee great wrong Aristides. But he foorthwith interrupting his talke, made this anſwer: My friend, declare only whether he hath wronged thee. For I am heere to do thee right, and not my ſelfe: ſhewing thereby, that Iuſtice ought to be executed without any priuate paſſion, reuenge, or choler, I. Brutus.wherewithall many at this day are ouercome. Iunius Brutus Conſul of Rome, condemned his two ſonnes Titus & Tiberius to be beheaded, being conuicted for conſpiring the reentrie of Tarquinius race vnto the kingdome of Rome, from whence they had been vanquiſhed for wickednes and whoredome. Truely a notable example, and cleane contrarie to thoſe that are fauourers and accepters Phocion.of perſons. Phocion refuſed to helpe his ſonne in law Charillus in iudgement, being accuſed for taking certaine monie vniuſtly, ſaying vnto him: that he had made him his 
                     Alexander.
                     Allie in all iuſt and reaſonable matters onely. Alexander the Great vſed this commendable cuſtome as he ſate in place of Iuſtice to heare criminall cauſes pleaded, that whileſt the accuſer declared his accuſation, he ſtopped one of his

eares with his hand, to the end he might keepe it pure & vpright, not admitting thereinto (as he gaue them to vnderſtand) any preiudicate or falſe impreſſion, that ſo he might heare the accuſed partie ſpeake in his own defence and iuſtification. Truely an example meete for kings and princes, that they ſhould not lightly beleeue ſlaunderers, nor giue ſentence of execution preſently vpō their report and perſwaſion: bicauſe they ought not to take pleaſure, or to glut themſelues as it were, with ſome pleaſant paſtime, in the corrections and puniſhments of men, which is the propertie of a tyrant. Neither ought they, after the puniſhment is inflicted, to repent them thereof, which is a token of ignorance, and baſeneſſe of mind: but Iuſtice muſt ſee execution done when reaſon and iudgement require, and that without either griefe or pleaſure. Auguſtus▪
                      
                     Augustus.
                     Caeſar knowing that Aſprenas a very familiar friend of his, was accuſed in iudgement, and fearing that if he went to the place where the matter was to be heard, he ſhould offer wrong to Iuſtice, as alſo that if he went not, he ſhould ſeeme to abandon his friend, as iudging him culpable: he asked counſail of the Senate, with whom he reſolued to be preſent at the iudgement of his friend, but to ſpeake nothing, bicauſe in ſo doing he ſhould neither do him wrong, nor violate iuſtice. Ageſilaus king of Lacedemonia Ageſilaus.deſerued likewiſe great praiſe for this vertue, albeit he were a very aſſured friend to his friend, and of a gentle nature, readie to imploy himſelfe in the behalfe of all them that ſtood in need of him. Neuertheleſſe, when a friend of his contended with him about a matter, which he deſired to obtaine of this prince, ſaying, that he had made him a promiſe thereof: If the thing (quoth he) be iuſt, I haue promiſed it; but if it be vniuſt, I haue not promiſed, but onely ſpoken it. He vſed alſo to ſay, that he eſteemed Prowes without Iuſtice is worth nothing.Iuſtice as chiefe of all the vertues, and that valure was of no valew if it were not ioined therwith, yea, would be needleſſe if all men were iuſt. And when certaine men who were ſent vnto him to conferre about ſome agreement, ſaid one day vnto him, that the great King would

haue it ſo: wherein (quoth he vnto them) is he greater than I, if he be not more iuſt? Whereby he iudged verie well, that the difference between a great and a little king The difference between a great and a little king.ought to be taken from iuſtice, as from a kingly meaſure and rule, according vnto which they ought to gouerne their ſubiects, ſeeing they were at the firſt eſtabliſhed to do iuſtice, as Herodotus ſpeaking of the Medes, and Cicero of the Romanes, make mentiō. This is that which a poore Phillip.old woman ſignified to Phillip king of Macedonia, when ſhe came to him to haue hir complaint heard. To whom when the king made anſwer that he had no leaſure at that time to heare hir, ſhe cried with a loud and cleere voyce, Be not then king, Whereupon this meeke prince (by which name he ſaid he had rather be called for a long time, than by the name of Lord for a little while) was ſo touched at the hart with the conſideration of his dutie, that he returned preſently into his pallace, where, ſetting aſide al other affaires, he gaue himſelfe many daies to heare all their cō
                     plaints and requeſts that would come before him, beginning firſt with the ſaid poore woman. Another time being ouertaken with ſleepe, and not well hearing the iuſtification and defence of one Machetas, he condemned him in a certaine ſumme. Whereupon the ſaid partie cried out aloud, that he appealed to Phillip after he ſhould be throughly awake. Which being noted by the ſaid Prince, he would needes heare him againe: and afterward declared him not guiltie, paying notwithſtanding with his own money that ſumme wherein he had before condemned him, that ſo he might keepe inuiolable the authoritie of Traianus.his ſentence. The emperor Traian is iuſtly commended of Hiſtoriographers, bicauſe he alighted from his horſe, as he was going to warre, only to heare the complaint which a poore woman was about to make vnto him. And truely nothing doth ſo properly belong vnto, or is ſo well beſeeming a prince of a good and gentle nature, as the practiſe and exerciſe of Iuſtice. Therefore when the Hebrews aſked 
                        
                           •
                        . 
                           •
                        am. 8. 5.a king of Samuel, they added this, To iudge vs like all nations. Yea theſe heads which had the ſoueraigntie ouer thē
                     
before were only in the nature of Iudges. It is Iuſtice only, What cauſeth kingdoms to flouriſh.which through the grace of God cauſeth kingdoms & monarchies to flouriſh: as Archidamus did very well ſignifie to one, who asked of him what were thoſe gouernours of the Lacedemonian common-wealth, by whoſe means it was maintained in ſuch and ſo great glory as was then to be ſeen. They are (ſaid he) the lawes firſt, and next the magiſtrates obſeruing the lawes. Moreouer the law muſt be the rule of Iuſtice, as Iuſtice is the end of the law. In ſome other place we ſhall vnderſtand more at large by the grace of God, what the law is, and how we are to obey it, where alſo we will conſider particularly of the duetie of magiſtrates, and of their dignitie. In the mean time let vs mark well for our inſtruction the notable ſayings and examples of ancient men here mentioned of vs, which do ſufficiently teſtifie vnto vs how greatly they recommended the preſeruation of this vertue of Iuſtice. Whereof if we beleeue (as the truth is) that God is the author, that he doth continually God is the author of Iuſtice.exerciſe the ſame amongſt vs by viſible teſtimonies, and that he will bring it to a full periode and perfection at the appointed time, which is only known to him, let vs take good heed that we neither contemne nor violate it. Let ſuch as are decked with diademes for the adminiſtration of Iuſtice, who neuertheles commit this dutie to others vnder them, make choice of ſufficient and able men to beare ſo heauie a charge, I meane able, both What maner of men magiſtrates ought to be.for their learning, and alſo for their good example of life. Otherwiſe let them be ſure, that this great Iudge will require at their hands the wrong that is offred to innocēcy. One meane wherby the abuſe of Iuſtice may be taken away.To meete with which inconuenience, & to take away the cauſe of ſo many abuſes & naughtie dealings, which now a daies are knowen to ſuch as are moſt ignorant, to the vtter ouerthrow of a million of poore families, I thinke that this is one of the beſt and ſureſt means, not to leaue Iuſtice, which is ſo precious a thing, to the licence of any whoſoeuer will take it vpon him, whereby it is ſet to open ſale, as it were ſome merchandiſe of ſmall account. Which dealing (that I may ſpeake my mind freely) giueth occaſion,

                     The inconuenience that commeth by ſetting offices to ſale. Exod. 18. yea conſtraineth thoſe men to take bribes, and to be couetous, who (according to the counſaile of Iethro giuen to Moſes) ought to be fartheſt from it. For ſo long as the places of iudgement ſhall be vendible, and beſtowed vpon him that offreth moſt, we ſhall alwayes ſee that for mony, ſuch as are moſt ignorant, worſt liuers & vnworthieſt will be the firſt & chiefeſt. Now what iuſtice can be hoped for of ſuch men? For after they are once placed therin, the chiefeſt reſpect is to reape gaine, profit and aduantage, according to that valew & rate of money which they laid out vpon it. Did my office coſt me ſo much? than it muſt be thus much worth vnto me. For if I had imployed my money elſe-where, I might haue had thus much of reuenues and inheritance. Truly this ſaying full of impietie neuer cauſed them to bluſh that haue vttered it ſundrie times, although it hath wrought the ſame effect in manyThe ſaving of Alexander and Lewes the 12. that haue heard it. The Emperor Alexander, and after him Lewes the 12. vſed this ſpeech long ſince by way of prophecie, That buyers of Offices would ſell by retaile as deare as they could that which they bought in groſſe. And for this cauſe a wiſe Politician of our time hath written very learnedly, that they which ſet to ſale eſtates, offices and benefices, ſell withall the moſt ſacred thing in the world, which is Iuſtice. They ſell the common-wealth, they ſell the bloud of the ſubiects, they ſell the lawes: and taking away the reward of honor, of vertue, of knowledge, of godlineſſe, of religion, they open a gate to thefts, to bribes, to couetouſnes, to iniuſtice, to ignorance, to impietie: in a word, toAgainſt buyers of offices. all kind of vice and filthines. Neither do I doubt but that they which buy them are as greatly to be reprooued and blamed, as thoſe that ſell them: bicauſe they miniſter life and nouriſhment, as much as in them lieth, to this monſtrous Hydra of couetouſneſſe and lucre, which ſucketh vp and deuoureth the ſubſtance of the poore. But they will ſay, if we lay not out our money hereupon, others wil do it that are as well prouided with coine, and yet peraduenture are not ſo zealous of Iuſtice as we are. What? wilt thou doe euill for feare leaſt another ſhould do it before

thee? Beſides, if thou conſidereſt thy ſelfe well, what leadeth thee hereunto but ambition or couetouſnes? And if peraduenture ſome one among an hundred is touched with a good deſire to profite and to ſerue his countrey, what can he do alone amongſt ten that are corrupted? But let this be ſpoken without offence to good men, who for the moſt part bewaile their eſtate and condition being in ſuch company. And let not ſuch buiers of offices thinke, that bicauſe of their bought eſtates they deſerue any honor, (if for other reſpects they are not worthie) which is the reward of vertue only: but rather let them know, that they deceiue themſelues no leſſe than thoſe men did, who thought to flie with the golden wings of Euripides: making that thing of the heauieſt matter that could be, which ought to be moſt light. The Emperor Aurelianus was ſoAurelianus. fearfull of placing an vnworthie man in the ſeat of iudgement, that he neuer preferred any to the dignitie of a Senator, but with the conſent of the whole Senate. But to end our ſpeech, we will hold this, that nothing is more neceſſarie to guide and to order the life of man to hir proper & happy end, than the vertue of Iuſtice: which being taken from amongſt vs, all other vertues ſequeſter themſelues far from vs, giuing place to the perturbations of our ſoules, which draw vs into ruine and confuſion. AndA meane to preſerue policies. when as the greater ſort being well inſtructed in their dutie, beſtow the adminiſtration of Iuſtice vpon thoſe men only that deſerue it, opening that gate vnto them only for their vertue, then do they put in vre the firſt point requiſite for the preſeruation of their eſtates, namely, the recompenſing of good men. This will cauſe euery one to ſeeke out the way that leadeth to vertue, whoſe propertie it is to bring men to honor. And frō this good beginning will proceed the other point no leſſe neceſſary, being the intire ornament and preſeruation of Iuſtice, namely, the puniſhment of the wicked: ſo that all things ſhalbe maintained in good order, to the benefit, reſt, profit and greatnes of this French monarchie.
               
            
            
               
               Of Iniustice, and of Seueritie. Chap. 38.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     A pretie compariſon. AS there is but one onely waye to hitte the white, and many to miſſe it, by ſhooting either higher or lower than is requiſite: ſo fareth it with our actions, which cannot be good but after one ſort, but are euill many waies. This is that whichEuerie vertue is in the midſt of two vices. we noted before in diſcourſing of three principal vertues, called Morall, which conſiſt in the midſt of two vices, namely: too little and too much. And this may alſo be noted in the fourth of thoſe vertues, whereof we intreated euen now, whoſe defect and contrarie vice is Iniustice, and hir exceſſe and counterfet follower is Seueritie. Of which vices, according to the order begun by vs, we are now to diſcourſe. This matter therefore I leaue to you my Companions.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  They make themſelues guiltie of great Iniuſtice, who being appointed of God to perſecute the wicked with the ſwoord drawne, will (forſooth) keepe their hands cleane from bloud, whereas the wicked in the meane while commit murder, and offer violence vncontrouled. But it is no leſſe crueltie to puniſh no offence, than not to forgiue any in whomſoeuer it be: the one being an abuſe of clemencie, the true ornament of a ſoueraigne: and the other, to turne authoritie into tyrannie. Neuertheles Magiſtrats in the execution of Iuſtice ought to take great heed, leaſt by ouer-great ſeueritie they hurt more than they heale.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  As a Goldſmith can make what veſſel he will, when the droſſe is taken from the ſiluer: ſo when the froward man is taken away from the kings preſence, hisHow the thrones of kings may be eſtabliſhed in iuſtice. throne ſhal be eſtabliſhed in Iuſtice. Notwithſtanding the ſeate of a Iudge that is too ſeuere, ſeemeth to be a gibbet alreadie erected. But we ſhall vnderſtand of thee ARAM, the nature and effects of theſe vices, Iniustice, and Seuerity.
                  
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  None are ſo peruerſe, nor giuen ouer ſo much to the deſires and concupiſcences of their fleſh, that they can vtterly deface through obliuion the knowledge of

good and euill, or the inward apprehenſion of ſome diuineAll men haue ſome knowledge of good and euill, and ſome inward ſence of a diuine nature. nature, both which are ioined together in all men. Inſomuch that by reaſon of that which vrgeth them within their ſoules, they are conſtrained to confeſſe themſelues culpable for their vniuſt deedes before the iudiciall throne of this Deitie. Therfore with what impudencie ſoeuer the wicked outwardly gloze their corrupt dealings, as if they gloried in them, yet ſeeing they haue, aſwell by the teſtimonie of their conſcience, as by proofe and experience, this knowledge euen againſt their wils, that Iniuſtice is vnfruitful, barren, and vngrateful, bringing foorthThe fruits of Iniuſtice in the wicked. nothing woorthy of any account, after many great labors and trauels which it affoordeth them, the remembrance of their vnpure deedes abateth their courage, & maketh it full of trouble and confuſion. So that although a corrupt and naughty man, during the ſway of his vitious paſſion, perſwadeth himſelfe, that by committing a wicked & execrable deed, he ſhal enioy ſome great and aſſured contentation, yet the heat, thirſt, and fury of his paſſion being ouerpaſſed, nothing remaineth but vile and perilous perturbations of Iniuſtice, nothing that is either profitable, neceſſarie, or delectable. Moreouer, this troubleth his mind, that through his diſhoneſt deſires he hath filled his life with ſhame, danger, diſtruſt, & terror of the iuſt iudgement of God. For theſe cauſes the Philoſophers ſpeaking of Iniuſtice, ſaid very well, that there was no vice whereof a man ought to be more aſhamed than of that, bicauſe it is a malice and naughtines that hath no excuſe. For ſeeing men haue this inward ſence and feeling, that their very thoughts do accuſe or abſolue them before God, they ought to make account thereof, as of a watchman that watcheth & prieth into them to diſcouer all thoſe things which they would gladly hide if they could. This cauſed Cicero to ſay, that it is more againſt nature to ſpoile another man, and to ſee one man to increaſe his riches by the hurt of another, than either death, or pouertie, or griefe, or any loſſe of goods, belonging either to the bodie or to fortune. And if a good man neither may nor ought for

                     Vertue is to be preferred before all worldlie things. profit ſake, to ſlander, deceiue, lie, or execute any ſuch like thing: it is certaine, that there is nothing in this world of ſo great value, no treaſure ſo pretious, which ſhould mooue vs to forgo the brightnes and name of vertuous Iniuſtice is a generall vice.and iuſt. Now, as we learned before, that Iuſtice was a generall vertue, ſo Iniuſtice alſo comprehendeth all thoſe vices whereinto men commonly fall. For this is Iniuſtice, not to giue to euery one that which belongeth vnto him. In reſpect of God it taketh the name of Impietie, in regard of men, of deniall of rights and lawes. Our diſcourſe is of this latter, which bringeth foorth pernitious effects after diuers manners, deſtroying all duties of honeſtie. But not to ſtay ouer-long in the kinds of Iniuſtice, we will note How many waies a man may be vniuſt.this, that we are ſo many waies guiltie of Iniuſtice, as we deny to our neighbours thoſe duties which we owe vnto them, and which our vocation requireth of vs: as alſo when we ſeeke to inrich our ſelues by their hinderance, whether it be openly, or by ſiniſter and ſuttle meanes againſt chriſtian ſinceritie, which ought to ſhine in all our dealings. Let vs ſee how the Ancients hated this vice, and ſpake of the pernitious effects thereof. No man (ſaith Socrates) ought to commit any vniust act, how ſmall ſoeuer it be, for any treaſure, wealth, or profit, which he may hope to reape thereby: bicauſe all the treaſures of the earth are not to be compared to the leaſt vertue of the ſoule. For this cauſe all men iointly ought to haue this one end and intent, that when they profit themſelues, they ſhould alſo be beneficiall to euery one. For if all men ſhould haue reſpect but to their owne, their vnitie would ſoone be diſſolued. And although it were ſo (ſaid Cato) that Iniustice did procure no perill to him that doth practiſe it, yet would it to all others. Plato calleth it a corruption of the ſoule, and a ciuill ſedition which neuer looſeth ſtrength, no not in thoſe that haue it onely within themſelues. For it cauſeth a wicked man to be at variance within himſelfe. It vrgeth, troubleth, and turmoileth him continually, vntill it haue plunged him in the gulfe of all vices: whereupon afterward he eaſily ouerfloweth in all impietie, not caring for any thing but to ſatisfie his vnbrideled

deſires. And if it fall out that they who haue the ſword in hand to correct Iniuſtice, do either authorize or practiſe it themſelues, then is the gate of all miſeries opened vpon euery one, through the vnrulie licence of the wicked, who wallow in all kind of crueltie: from whence all diſorder and confuſion proceedeth, to the vtter ruine and finall ſubuerſion of moſt floriſhing townes and cities, and in the end, of empires, kingdomes and monarchies. Thus doth Iniuſtice diſanull the force of lawes, which are the foundation of euery eſtate: it is an enimie to good men, and the Gardian and Tutor of the wicked. Briefly, it bringeth foorth all effects contrarie to thoſe which we mentioned to be the fruits of Iuſtice, and is the welſpring of the other vices that hinder dutie. Is it not Iniuſtice that The effects of Iniuſtice.giueth authoritie to murders, robberies, violent dealings, & to other damnable vices, which at this day are vnpuniſhed, and are the cauſe that of many great, goodly, & welthy families, poore widowes only and orphanes quite vndone, do remaine, crying for vengeance, and expecting it from aboue, for the wrong that is offered to their innocencie? How many ſuch are ſet before our eies by hiſtories, which are the light of truth? But alas the vnhappines of our age is growne to greater meaſure. How many of the greater ſort, I meane of the Gouernors & Magiſtrats of this deſolate kingdome, may iuſtly challenge that praiſe, whereby Pericles, Captaine and Gouernor of the Pericles.Athenians, thought himſelfe more honored, than by all his braue exploits done in his life time, either in warre, or in politike gouernment, wherein he was the chiefeſt of his time, and which his friends laid before his eies, being readie to die, thereby to aſſure him, and to cauſe him to reioice in a true immortalitie of glorie? O my friends (ſaid he vnto them) Fortune hath had hir part in thoſe exploits: but I make greater account of this, that I neuer cauſed any of my Countreymen 
                     A notable example for euery ciuil Magiſtrate
                     to lament, or to weare a mourning gowne, which onely thing ought to be attributed to my vertue. O excellent and honorable praiſe, which euery good man ought to ſeeke after, and to deſire: namely, to be no cauſe of bringing ſorrow

and griefe to the common-wealth through any acte of Iniuſtice. Moreouer this vertuous Athenian died willingly and without repining, taking delight in an acceptable remembrance of thoſe good turnes, which he had done to his countreymen. But contrarywiſe it will be a very hard matter for others, who haue been the cauſe of many euils to their countrey, and for all thoſe that delight in committing iniuſtice, not to die in great feare, horror, and trembling, tormented with remorſe of conſcience for Why the life of the wicked cannot be happy.their life paſt. The whole courſe whereof cannot be much more happy, ſeeing euery wicked act ingendring it owne torment from the very inſtant wherein it is committed, through the continuall remembrance thereof filleth the ſoule of the malefactor with ſhame and confuſion, with freights and perturbations, with repinings and terrible diſquietnes of ſpirit. This is that which Plutarke ſaith, That euery wicked man committing a treſpaſſe, is the priſoner of Iustice as ſoone as he hath done it. This life is his priſon, out of which he hath no meane to depart, or to flie, but is to receiue the execution of that ſentence which is giuen againſt him by A compariſon.the ſoueraigne Iudge. And if in the meane time he feaſt it out, ſend preſents and gifts, yea if he ſolace himſelfe with ſundry ſports, delights and pleaſures, it is all one as if condemned men that were priſoners ſhould play at dice and cardes, and vſe other paſtime, with the halter ouer their heads wherwith they muſt be ſtrangled. But there are many men that cannot be better compared than to litle children, who ſeeing men worth nothing, to dance and play vpon a Theater, apparelled with cloth of gold and ſiluer, A compariſon.or with other rich garments, and crowned with precious ornaments, haue them in great eſtimation and admiration, and thinking them happy, vntill in the end they ſee them pearced through with great thruſts of a ſpeare, or hewen in pieces with ſwords, or behold fire comming out The wrong conceit which men haue of the wicked that proſper.of thoſe goodly precious robes of gold, which conſumeth them. The ſelfe ſame thing is done by them, who when they ſee many wicked men, either placed in great authoritie and dignitie, or deſcending of good & famous houſes,

they honor, admire, and eſteem them the happieſt men & moſt at eaſe in the world: neuer conſidering that they are chaſticed & puniſhed for their offēces, before they ſee thē either put to death, or elſe quite fallē from the height of their fortune. Now ſeeing it is a thing flatly confeſſed of thoſe that haue any knowledge of our Philoſophie, and prooued ſufficiently by our former diſcourſe, that nothing can be called honorable or profitable which proceedeth of iniuſtice, or of malice, that excuſe, which men giuen ouer to vice, do commonly alledge to cloke their impietie withall, namely, that Iniuſtice bringeth with it very ripe and readie fruit, and that the puniſhment if there be any, commeth very late, and long time after the delight taken by the offence, hath no more any ſhew of reaſon in it. For, as we haue alreadie learned, the puniſhment of any ſin is equall with it both for age and time. Furthermore God The puniſhment of ſinne is equall with it both for age and time.permitteth oftentimes his diuine iudgement to be publikely knowen and ſhewed vpon the vniuſt: yea he declareth himſelfe ſo much the more openly, by how much the leſſe men exerciſe Iuſtice and vpright dealind. And yet in reſpect of his maieſtie, we muſt not look vnto time, which is alwaies one and the ſame to him, and not future or paſt: yea the whole continuance of mans life is as nothing vnto All things are preſent with God.him, and leſſe than the preſent inſtant. But if according to our carnall ſences, we deſire examples of the greatnes and ſwiftnes of his wrath, iuſtly kindled ouer our heads for our execrable impieties, contrary to the nature of his gentleneſſe and benignitie, which mooued him to waite for vs a long time, who can be ignorant of them in the vnſpeakable affliction of this poore France, wherein it were very hard in mans iudgement to diſcerne, whether is moſt lamentable, either iniuſtice, or the miſerie and calamitie, which by the vengeance of God followeth it, the horrible puniſhment whereof the fautors of iniquitie both haue & daily do feele vpon their heads? Thoſe common-wealths (ſaith Cicero) which are readie to be ouerthrowen, & haue all things forlorne and deſperate in them, fall into this A ſure token of a deſperate common-welth.miſerable iſſue, that they whom the lawes condemne are

reſtored, and iudgements giuen are reuoked and broken. And when ſuch things come to paſſe, let none be ignorant of this, that deſtruction is at hand, neither can any man iuſtly conceiue hope of ſafety. What other thing canThe miſerable eſtate of France. I ſay of France (I would to God I were deceiued) ſeeing that all Iuſtice is turned topſie turuie therein, the wicked are placed in authoritie, & good men driuen away: ſuites in law are commenced againſt euery one more vpon knauerie than equitie, corruption than integritie, fauor than vprightnes? But to the end that the greater ſort, and euery particular man may open his eies and behold this ſhipwracke that threatneth vs: let vs conſider in our Anceſtors, through the reading of hiſtories, the like cauſes of the ruine, alteration, and ſubuerſion of many very flouriſhing Eſtates, proceeding from the raigne of Iniuſtice, which being the daughter of tyrannie (as Dionyſius the elder ſaid) muſt needes be of the ſame nature: namely, that by vſurping an vniuſt and intollerable dominion, it muſt of neceſſitie fall ſpeedily into a miſerable and wretched end. We haue in all our former diſcourſes alleadged ſundrie examples of vices, which (as we ſaid euen now) take their beginning, or at leaſt wiſe are inſeparably ioined with Iniuſtice, and heerafter we will make mention of others, when we handle certaine points, which properly depend of this ſelfe ſame originall. In the meane time weThe deniall of Iuſtice dangerous. Phillip.
                      will heere note that the deniall of Iuſtice hath procured to many their death or vndoing. Phillip the firſt, king of Macedonia, was ſlaine by Pauſanias a meane Gentle-man, bicauſe he would not let him haue Iuſtice againſt Antipater,
                     Demetrius who had offered him wrong. Demetrius the beſieger, hauing receiued many requeſts and ſupplications of his ſubiects, threw them all into the water, as he went ouer the bridge of a riuer: whereupon his ſubiects conceiued ſuch hatred againſt him, that within a while after his army forſooke him, and yeelded themſelues to Pyrrhus his enimie, who draue him out of his kingdome without battell.Henrie king of Sweathland. In our time, Henrie king of Sweathland, ſtriking with a dagger a Gentle-man that asked Iuſtice of him, ſtirred vp

the Nobilitie and people in ſuch ſort againſt him, that putting him into priſon, where he is at this preſent, they elected his yoonger brother to be their king, who nowe raigneth. But for a more woonderfull matter, we might heere rehearſe, how God, to ſhew vnto vs his deteſtation of Iniuſtice, hath ſometimes ſuffered his iudgement to fal out in that very howre and time, which ſuch as were vniuſtly condemned did aſſigne to their vniuſt Iudges. In the liues of the kings of Caſtile, we finde that Ferdinando theA notable hiſtoric of the death of Ferdinando the 4. fourth of that name, putting two knights to death more through anger than iuſtly, one of them cried aloud in this ſort: O vniuſt king, we cite thee to appeere within thirtie daies before the tribunall ſeate of Ieſus Chriſt to receiue iudgement for thy Iniuſtice, ſeing there is no other Iudge in earth to whome we can appeale from thy vniuſt ſentence. Vpon the laſt of which daies he died likewiſe. True it is, ſome man may ſay, that death is ſo naturall, and the hower thereof ſo vncertaine, although determined, that no other cauſe thereof ought to be ſuppoſed, but onely neceſſitie. But yet when it followeth ſo neerely ſome notable wickednes committed, and ſome diſquietnes and torment of mind is mingled therewith in the ſoule, as it commonly falleth out, we may take ſuch a death for a teſtimonie and beginning of the Iuſtice of God, who will not ſuffer the vniuſt man to rule any longer, but exerciſeth his iudgements diuerſly in due time and ſeaſon, vpon thoſe that are not to giue an account of their doings to men like themſelues. And as for ſuch as are of meaner eſtate, and lower in degree, God ſuffreth alſo many times their puniſhment to be notorious, and that ſometime by ſuch as are not much better than themſelues. Heereupon Apollonius that great Philoſopher ſaid, that in his peregrination ouer three parts of the world, he maruelled moſt at two thinges, whereof the firſt was, that he alwaies ſawe the greater theeues hang the leſſe, and oftentimes the innocent. And thus it fell out in the time of king Phillip theNotable Iniuſtice committed by a Prouoſt of Paris. long, wherein a Prouoſt of Paris, named Henrie Lapperell, cauſed a poore man that was priſoner in the Chaſtelet to

be executed, by giuing him the name of a rich man, who being guiltie and condemned, was ſet at libertie by him. But his reward followed him hard at the heeles: being for the ſame accuſed, conuicted, hanged, and ſtrangled. Not long after a Preſident of the Parliament, named Hugues
                     Hugues of Crecy. of Crecy, met with the ſame fortune, for a certaine corrupt iudgement giuen by him. Therefore let euery one of vs learne to flie from this pernitious vice of Iniuſtice: namely, from euery action repugnant to the dutie of chriſtian charitie, and deſtroying the bond of humane ſocietie, through the vtter ſpoiling of the riuers that flow from the fountaine of honeſtie. And let vs be afraid through ſuch impietie to fal into the indignation and wrath of the Almightie, to whome onely (as to the author of Iuſtice, and to whome all time is as nothing) it belongeth to define and to determine thereof, when, after what ſort, and how farre it ſtandeth with reaſon, all which things are vnknowne to vs. If he deferre ſometime the puniſhment of Iniuſtice, let vs know, that it is for their greater and more greeuous condemnation, who multiplie and heape vp daily vpon their heads iniquitie vpō iniquitie. And for an example, which great men ought to follow, and not ſuffer Iniuſtice to be practiſed according to euery mans fancie, or vnder any other pretence whatſoeuer, we wil propound vnto them the fact of a Pagan king, who ſhall riſe vp inArtaxerxes. iudgement againſt them, if they do otherwiſe. The Prince I meane is Artaxerxes, ſurnamed Longhand, and king of the Perſians, who being requeſted by a Chamberlaine of his whome he greatly fauoured, to do ſome vniuſt thing, & hauing by his diligence found out, that he vndertooke this ſuit for another, who had promiſed him thirty thouſand Crownes, called of them Dariques, he commanded his Treaſurer to bring the like ſumme vnto him, and then ſaid vnto his Chamberlaine, Take this mony which I giue thee. For in giuing it vnto thee, I ſhall be neuer the poorer, whereas if I had done that which thou requiredſt ofAlexander Seuerus. me, I ſhould haue beene more vniuſt. Alexander Seuerus the Emperour handeled after another faſhion, yea more

iuſtly, a ſeruant of his, who vſed like a horſe-leech of the court to ſucke their bloud that had to deale with his maſter, by thruſting himſelfe forward, and profering his means to fulfill their requeſt for a good reward, by reaſon of the fauour which he bare him: which turned to the great diſhonor of his imperiall maieſtie, bicauſe a Prince ought not to make greater account of any thing, than of the grace and fauor of his gifts and benefites. This monarch cauſed him to be tied to a poſt and choked with ſmoke, making this proclamation by ſound of trumpet,The puniſhment of one who ſold his maſters fauor▪
                      
                     That they which ſell ſmoke, ſhould ſo periſh with ſmoke. Now to enter into the laſt point of that matter which is here propounded vnto vs, we muſt diligently note, that as it is the dutie of all Magiſtrates, and of ſuch as haue authoritie ouer others to chaſtice & to puniſh euery malefactor, ſo likewiſe they muſt beware leſt vnder pretēce of exerciſing Iuſtice they fall into another kind of Iniuſtice through ouer-much rigor, which is as hurtfull or rather more than that vice whereof we diſcourſed euen now, namely, into Seueritie, which cauſeth them to be miſliked for crueltie,Of Seueritie. and belongeth rather to a beaſtly and ſauage nature, than to the nature of man. For clemencie and compaſſiō neuer ought to be ſeparated from a good & iuſt ſentence, which is to hold ſmal faults excuſed, or but lightly to puniſh thē, prouided alwayes that Iuſtice be not violated. Clemencie
                     Clemencie preſerueth a prince his throne. Prou. 20. 28. (ſaith the wiſe man) is the true preſeruation of the roial throne. And therefore one of the ancients ſaid, that it was ill to be ſubiect to a prince vnder whom nothing was tolerated, but worſe when all things were left at randon. We may alleage here for an example of ouer-great ſeueritie, the fact of Manlius Torquatus a Conſull of Rome, who cauſed hisM. Torquatus▪
                      ſonnes head to be cut off, bicauſe he fought agaynſt his enimie bodie to bodie, contrary to the Edicts, and out of his ranke, albeit he came away victor. The act of Auſidius
                     Auſidius. the Romane was more cruel & barbarous than iuſt, when he ſlew his ſonne for withdrawing himſelfe to take part with Catiline: vttring this ſpeech vnto him: I did not, wretch as thou art, beget thee for Catiline, but for thy countrey. Such

murders and cruelties deface all the commendation of Iuſtice, whoſe waies ought to be ordinary and vſuall, ruling rigor with gentlenes, as the rigor of diſcipline ought to moderate gentlenes, that the one may be commended by the other. Seneca rehearſeth a crueller fact than any of the former, committed by Piſo the Proconſul, who ſeeyng a ſouldior returne alone to the campe, condemned him toMoſt cruell ſeucritie of Piſo. withſtanding he affirmed that his fellow came after him. At the very inſtant of the execution his companion came, whereupon the captaine that had charge to ſee the condemned partie executed, returned to the Proconſul with both the ſouldiors. But Piſo being offended therwith, put them all three to death: the firſt, bicauſe he was condemned: the ſecond, bicauſe he was the cauſe of the condemnation: and the captaine, bicauſe he obeied not: ſo that he put three to death for the innocencie of one man, abuſing his authoritie and power in moſt cruell maner, what ſoeuer rigor was vſed in thoſe times in the ordinaunce of warlike diſcipline. Now to take from vs all taſte of ſuchAugustus Caeſar. barbarouſneſſe, let vs cal to mind an act of Auguſtus Caeſar worthie of eternall praiſe, who would not condemne one that was accuſed of ſeeking his death, bicauſe the arguments and proofes were inſufficient, but left him to the iudgement of God. Let vs learne therfore for the concluſion of our diſcourſe to hate all kind of Iniuſtice in ſuch ſort, that euery one of vs ſeeke to profit his neighbour, rating at an high price (as Euripi▪
                      ſaith) the violating of right, which is holy and ſacred. And thus through the good order of magiſtrates, and reformation of euery one by himſelfe, the wicked ſhall haue no means to rob, to ſpoile by force, to take bribes, and to deceiue others, when breakers of iuſt lawes ſhall be puniſhed. Then will the effect of thoſe two ſentences take place which are taken out of the holy ſcriptures, and written in a table in the great chamber of the palace belonging to the head citie of this kingdome, and which ought to be well engrauen in the harts of all Iudges: the firſt ſentence is conteined in theſe

words, Execute iudgement and righteouſneſſe: or otherwiſe I
                     Ier. 22. 3. 5. 
                     haue ſworne by my ſelfe (ſaith the Lord) that this houſe ſhall be waste. The other ſentence is this: O ye Iudges, take heed what
                     2. Chr. 19. 6. 
                     ye do: for ye execute not the iudgements of man, but of the Lord:
                     Matth. 7. 2. 
                     and with what iudgement ye iudge, ye ſhalbe iudged. For truely the crowne of praiſe and immortall glory is kept and prepared for them that walke in truth and righteouſnes, but ſhame and diſhonor, with eternall fire for thoſe that perſeuer in vnrighteouſnes.
               
            
            
               Of Fidelitie, Forſwearing, and of Treaſon. Chap. 39.
               
                  ARAM.
                  SVch is the corruption of our age, wherin impietie and malice are come in place of ancient innocencie, that vertue ſeemeth very vnfit to be receiued and imploied in affaires, ſeeing the gateOf the corruption of our age. is quite ſhut vp againſt hit. So that a man might aptly ſay, that whoſoeuer ſhould thinke to bring backe agayne, amidſt the peruerſe liues and corrupt maners of this preſent time, the vprightneſſe and integritie of ancient behauior, he did as much as if he offered fruites out of ſeaſon,When vertue ſeemeth to be out of ſeaſon. which being faire in ſight, were notwithſtanding vnfit to be vſed. Neuertheleſſe we muſt not doubt to bring hir in ſight, and to maintaine hir with all our power, who knoweth how to cauſe hir enimie Vice both to reuerence and feare hir, and in the end alſo to triumph ouer him, mauger all the power and vnder-propping, which he receiueth from the wicked. In the middeſt therfore of ſo many trecheries and treaſons, wherof men glory now adaies, let vs not be afraid to paint them out in their colors, therby giuing honor to Fidelitie, which is a part of Iuſtice, or rather Iuſtice it ſelfe: which I leaue to you my companions to make plaine vnto vs.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  It is impietie to violate faith. For God who is truth, deteſteth all lying: and is a terrible reuenger of the contempt of his name. To loue or to hate openly
                     
(ſaith Cicero) doth better beſeeme a noble hart, than for a man to hide and to diſſemble his will and affection.
                  
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Guile and fraud (ſaith Seneca) are meete weapons for a cowardly and baſe-minded man. Therefore we muſt take good heed (as Pittacus ſaid) That fame ſpeake not euill of vs to them vnto whom we haue given our faith. But it belongeth to thee AMANA to handle this matter.
                  
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Amongſt the famous and great perſonagesWhat Faith and Fidelitie is. of olde time, no vertue was more commended, or ſtraightlier kept and obſerued than Faith and Fidelitie, which they affirmed to be the foundation of Iuſtice, the indiſſoluble bond of friendſhip, and the ſure ſupporter of humane ſocietie. Of this Faith we mind now to ſpeake, not touching at all that religious and ſacred faith, concerning the holy myſteries of true pietie, which is a ſingular gift of God his ſpirit, and peculiar to thoſe that appertain to his eternall election. This therfore which reſpecteth the mutuall conuerſation and promiſes of men, hath been always kept vnuiolable of honorable men, & ought to be ſo amongſt vs: bicauſe he that giueth his faith, layeth to pawne whatſoeuer is moſt precious & diuine in his ſoule.Of the violating of faith. So that if he forget himſelfe ſomuch as to breake and violate the ſame, he committeth manifeſt impietie, ſhewing that he careth not to offend God by abuſing his name toLeuit. 19. 12. Deut. 5. 11. colour his lying. It were a great deale better neuer to take God to witnes, than to forſweare him in mockerie: ſeeingMatth. 5. 34. the Scripture ſo often forbiddeth vs to take his name in vaine, to ſweare falſly by it, or in any ſort to defile the ſame. It is true that this queſtion hath alwaies beene, and is at this daye more than euer in controuerſie: namely, whether a man is bound to performe that which he hathWhether a forced promiſe is to be kept. promiſed and ſworne to by compulſion, or no? And this ſentence is receiued & approoued of many, that nothing but our Will bindeth vs to performe thoſe things, which neceſſitie forceth vs to promiſe. But to ſpeake according to truth, and without any particular paſſion, we ſay, that true and perfect magnanimitie ſuffereth vs not to promiſe any thing, and to pawne our faith thereunto, except

we were willing to performe it: bicauſe no vertuous andA wiſe man muſt neuer promiſe any thing againſt dutie. wiſe man ought to forget himſelfe ſo farre, as to do or to promiſe any thing contrary to his dutie for any neceſſity, no not for death it ſelfe. Neither is there any thing wherby a foole is ſooner diſcerned from a wiſe man, than by promiſes: foraſmuch as an vndiſcreete man lightly promiſeth whatſoeuer you will, and oftentimes more than is required of him: but a man of good iudgement weigheth his ſpeech with ſence and reaſon, before he gage it to any bodie, and hauing once giuen his word, he reuoketh it not, what loſſe or dammage ſoeuer may inſue thereof, as he that eſteemeth a great deale more of the honour of truth and fidelitic, than of his owne life, being touchedPſal. 15. 4. with vntruth and periurie. And if it were lawfull for euery one to alleadge neceſſitie or conſtraint, thereby to cloake the breach of faith, to whome might a man truſt in any matter? Who doubteth but that all agreements made betweene men, whether in time of warre or of peace, or in any particular affaires betweene partie and partie, are grounded vpon a benefit, which euery one ſuppoſeth to be neceſſarie and profitable for himſelfe, and ſo conſequently that they ought not to be kept? Who doubteth but that the breach of them may eaſily be coloured with the like neceſſitie, and ſo vnder this goodly pretence of falſe right and equitie ſhould be allowed? But what? May we be iudges for our ſelues, and in our owne cauſe? Firſt our aduerſe parties to whom we are bound muſt be called, and muſt agree with vs of Iudges to determine of our promiſes, whether they were lawfull or vnlawfull, forced and neceſſary or no: according to the law, which releaſeth a man of his promiſe if it be vniuſt or vnreaſonable, or if it be too burthenſome vnto him, or if he were circumuented by deceit, fraud, error, force, iuſt feare, or grieuous hurt. But when we are both iudge and partie, and in ſtead of iuſtice ſeeke after force and violence, it is ſoone ſeene, that all ſhew of excuſing the breach of faith giuen, is onely grounded vpon malice and ſubtiltie. This did Lyſander
                     Lyſander a forſworne and deceitfull man. admiral of the Lacedemonians vſually practiſe, who

made no reckoning of Iuſtice but when it was profitable, accounting onely profit to be honeſtie, and ſaying, that children muſt be deceiued with the play of cock-all, and men with othes. Which kind of dealing argueth a man to be in truth worſe in behauior towards God, than towards his enimies: bicauſe he that beguileth his enimie through the means of fidelitie ſworne vnto him, doth ſufficientlie teſtifie, that he feareth him, and dares not diſcouer vnto him that which lieth hid in his hart: and yet in the mean time he hath no reuerence or feare of the diuine maieſtie from which nothing is hid, but vſeth that for a couering We muſt keep promiſe with our enimie.and maske of his wickednes. We must (ſaith Cicero) keepe that promiſe vnuiolable, which we haue made to our enimie, albeit the miſhaps of warre haue constrained vs to yeeld vnto it. How much leſſe therfore ought we to breake our faith giuen to Of the neglect of fidelitie commeth a cuſtom of lying.our friends, and to thoſe of whom we neuer receiued any thing but profite and pleaſure? Through this neglect of faith we fill our ſoules with lying, nouriſhing and delighting them therein, and ſeparating them far from the truth (the fountaine of all goodnes) to lie vnto our neighbors, to deceiue and beguile them in thoſe things, which we are able to performe, thereby deſtroying the bond of humane ſocietie, yea of nature it ſelfe, which bindeth vs both to will and to procure their good. This is that which Epenetus the Lacedemonian would teach vs, when he ſayd, that liers were the cauſe of all the ſinnes and crimes in the world. And therfore Plutarke alſo ſaith, That to lie is a ſeruile vice woorthy to be hated of all, and not to be pardoned in any, no not in ſlaues themſelues. All they (ſaith Cicero) that ſpeake one thing, and meane another, ought to be taken for faithleſſe, wicked and malicious men: whereas a good man will neither faine nor diſſemble in any ſort, either to buy better cheape or to ſell deerer. It is not the point of a plaine, open and ſincere man, or of him that is iuſt and vertuous, to conceale from the buyer the It is wickednes to conceale the fault of that which a man ſelleth.fault of that thing which he ſelleth, but rather of a malicious, deceitfull, crafty, ſuttle, and wicked man. And if this be a vice and ſinne, not to declare the fault of that thing which is ſold, how ſhall they be termed, who vſe a thouſand

wordes and lies to ſet foorth their merchandice? Whereas good men haue always been very ſcrupulous & preciſe in keeping the truth from all kind of pollution, as that which ought to be as wel in the hart as in the mouth, in the works as in the words of euery honeſt man. But if Lying in a prince is moſt odious.lying procure blame and diſhonor to al men, it doth much more to kings and princes. For ſeeing they are placed in ſuch authoritie, that they may doe what pleaſeth them, what need they to lie? If Machiauell and his followers, fauorers of tyrannie, had well waighed that which we read in infinite places of ſcripture, that God will ouerthrowe diſſemblers and liers, with all their lies & ſubtilties, hardly could they commend diſſimulations, deceits, trecheries, and ſuch like pranks, wherewith they ſeeke to poiſon the noble minds of good princes, to cauſe thē to degenerate both from their natural diſpoſition, & from the ſteps of ſuch vertuous men as haue gone before them. And to this purpoſe I remember a deciſion of right concerning princes, which deſerueth to be grauen in letters of gold within their lodgings & palaces: namely, That if the prince go against his promiſe, it ought to be reckoned amongst the caſes that fall out by chance, neither may any man ſuppoſe the contrary. For the obligation is double: the one in reſpect of naturall equitie, which wil haue couenants and promiſes kept: The promiſe of a prince is tied with a double bond.the other in regard of the Prince his faith, which he muſt obſerue inuiolable, although he receiue loſſe thereby, bicauſe he is the formall Warrantie vnto all his ſubiects, of that fidelitie which is amongſt themſelues: ſo that no fault is more deteſtable in a Prince than periurie. For if he that is debter and pledge for iuſtice be diſloiall, there is no more truſt to be giuen to him in all his othes: but if he be vpright, his bare word ought to be vnto him for a Of the word & faith of a princelawe, and his faith for an Oracle. God himſelfe (ſaith the maſter of the ſentences) is bound by his promiſe. Gather togither (ſaith he) all the nations of the earth, that they may iudge betweene me and my people, if there be any thing which I ought to haue done, and haue not performed it. What is he then that will call in queſtion, whether

a Prince is bound to that which he hath ſworne to and promiſed, ſeeing all ſoueraigne power is no leſſe bound to the lawes of God and of nature, than the ſimpleſt that is ſubiect thereunto? If faith ought not to be kept with enimies, it is not to be giuen vnto them: and if it be lawful to capitulate with them, it is as neceſſarie to keepe promiſe. Yea we may further adde, that periurie is not to be reuenged or called in queſtion, after that peace and agreement togither is made: otherwiſe there would neuer be any aſſurance of peace, or end of periurie. From the ſelfe ſame fountaine of the profanation of faith, and cuſtome in lying (it being the propertie of vice to ingender another vice for a puniſhment of it ſelfe) proceedeth that pernitious Of Treaſon.plague of kingdomes and Common-wealths, I meane Treaſon, hated of God and men, wherewith periured perſons being bewitched, feare not to betray themſelues, ſo they may betray others alſo, and their countrey. Whereupon they become odious to euery one, euen to thoſe who vſed them to ſerue their owne turnes in diſloyall and wicked actions, and in the end they receiue the reward due to their execrable impieties. For this is the common affection that men beare towards ſuch people, ſo to ſeeke them out (which notwithſtanding is not the propertie of a noble hart) when they ſtande in feare of them, as they that want gall, or the poiſon of ſome venemous beaſts: afterward to giue them ouer and to reiect bicauſe of their wickednes. If a man be called ſlothfull, he may become diligent: if talkatiue, hold his peace: if a glutton, temperate himſelfe: if an adulterer, abſtaine: if furious, diſſemble: if ambitious, ſtay himſelfe: if a ſinner, amend: but he that is once called a traitor, there is no water to waſhe him cleane, nor meane to excuſe himſelfe. Notable examples.Nowe, let vs come to the examples of the Ancients, and know what zeale they bare to fidelitie and hatred, to periurie and treaſon, as alſo what recompence commonly followed and accompanied ſuch things, and with what reward noble-minded men did requite thoſe that were A. Regulus.diſloiall and traiterous. Attilius Regulus, a Romane of

great credite, being taken priſoner in the Carthaginian warre, and ſent to Rome vpon his faith to intreat about a peace and the exchange of captiues, ſo ſoone as he arriued, gaue cleane contrarie aduice in the Senate: ſhewing that it was not for the profit of the Common-wealth to make ſuch an agreement. Afterward, hauing reſolued with himſelfe to keepe faith with the enimie, he returned to Carthage, where he was put to death very cruelly. For his eie-lids being cut off, & himſelfe bound to an engine, he died with the force of waking. Demaratus king of Sparta, Demaratus.being in Perſia with the king, againſt whome a great man of Perſia had rebelled, was the meanes of their reconciliation. Afterward this barbarian king hauing his ſaid Vaſſaile in his power, would haue beene reuenged of him, thinking to put him to death. But the vertuous Lacedemonian turned him from it, declaring vnto him, that it would redound to his great ſhame, not to know how to puniſh him for his rebellion when he was his enimie, and now to put him to death being his ſeruant and friend. A reaſon truly well woorthie to be marked, but very ſlenderly put in vre at this day. Auguſtus hauing made proclamation Auguſtus.by ſound of trumpet, that he would giue 25000. Crownes to him that ſhould take Crocotas ringleader of the theeues in Spaine, he offered himſelfe to the Emperor, and required the ſumme promiſed by him, which he cauſed to be paid him, & pardoned him withall, to the end no man ſhould thinke that he would take his life from him, thereby to fruſtrate him of the promiſed recompence: as alſo bicauſe he would haue publike faith and ſafetie kept to euery one that came according to order of Iuſtice: although in truth he might haue proceeded and giuen out proceſſe againſt him. Cato the elder being in warre againſt Cato.the Spaniards, was in great danger by reaſon of the multitude of enimies, who ſought to incloſe him round about. And not being then in poſſibilitie to be ſuccored of any but of the Celtiberians, who demanded of him 200. Talents (which are 120000. Crownes) in hand for their wages, the Councell tolde him, that it was not by anie

meanes to be gotten preſently, but yet promiſed to furniſh them with ſuch a ſumme, and that within any time which they would appoint: otherwiſe that it was more expedient not to meddle with them. But this wiſe and wel aduiſed captaine vſed this occaſion to very good purpoſe, by reſoluing with himſelfe and with his ſouldiers, either to ouercome their enimies, or elſe to die, (after they had agreed with the Celtiberians) that the Romane glorie ſhould not be ſtained by the falſhood of their promiſes. For (quoth he to his ſouldiers) if we get the battell, we will pay them, not of our owne, but at the charges of our enimies: but if we looſe the victorie, none will be left aliue either to pay, or to demand any paiment. There was no talke among the Councell of theſe noble Romanes, how they might deceiue their enimies, or thoſe whoſe ſeruice they were vrged to vſe, but they determined rather to die, than to be wanting in their promiſe. Likewiſe we may note, that as their enterprizesPeriurie and faithles perſons haue alwaies had ill ſucceſſe. thus grounded had good ſucceſſe, ſo periurie and violating of right were through the vengeance of God purſued for the moſt part with vnhappie effects, contrarie to the platformes and deſires of periured and faithles men: or at leaſtwife that themſelues were ſpeedily puniſhedTiſſaphernes. for their wickednes. And therefore when Tiſſaphernes, Lieutenāt to the king of Perſia had broken a truce, which he had made with the Grecians, they gaue him thankes by his owne Herald, bicauſe he had placed the Gods, in whoſe name the truce was ſworne, on their ſide. And in deede he ſmally proſpered after that in his enterprizes.Cleomenes. 
                     Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia, hauing taken a truce for ſeuen daies with the Argians, aſſaulted them the third night after, knowing that they were in a ſound ſleepe, and diſcomfited them: which he did vnder this craftie ſubtletie, bicauſe (forſooth) in the foreſaid truce mention was made of the day onely, and not of the night. Whereupon the Grecians noted this as a iuſt iudgement of his periurie and breach of faith, in that he was miraculouſly fruſtrated of his principall intent, which was, by the meanes of that ouerthrow to haue ſuddenly taken the citie of Argos.

For the women being full of wrath and iuſt griefe for the loſſe of their husbands, by the cowardly treacherie of this Lacedemonian, tooke thoſe weapons that were in the ſaid towne, and droue him from the wals, not without great murder and loſſe of the greateſt part of his armie. Whereupon within a while after he became furious, and taking a knife he ript his bodie in ſmiling manner, and ſo died. Caracalla the Emperor, trauelling with his armie towardesCaracalla. the Parthians, vnder pretence of marying the daughter of Artabanus their king, who came for the ſame purpoſe to meete him, he ſet vpon him contrary to his faith, and put him to flight, with an incredible murder of his men. But within a little after being come downe from his horſe to make water, he was ſlaine of his owne men: which was noted as a iuſt puniſhment ſent from God for his vnfaithfulnes. The Corinthians ſaw before their eiesThe Corinthians. their cities raced to the ground, bicauſe they had offered violence to the Romane Embaſſadors, contrarie to the lawe of nations. The Emperour Iuſtinian receiued infiniteIuſtinianus the Emperor. loſſes and dammages for breaking his faith with the Barbarians, and for violating the peace which he had made with the Bulgarians. Which thing procured him ſo great hatred of his owne ſubiects, by reaſon of the vnluckie exploits of warre which followed after, that being returned to Conſtantinople, Leontius vſurped the kingdome vpon him, ſending him into baniſhment after he had cut off his noſethrils. Raſtrix Duke of Cleaueland, hauing falſifiedRaſtrix Duke of Cleaueland. his faith with Lewes king of Germanye, was put to the woorſt and vanquiſhed: and being priſouer, his eies were put out for a marke of his faithles dealing. But what need we ſearch in antiquitie for teſtimonies of the fruits which commonly proceede from the breach of faith, ſeeing examples are daily before our eies to our coſt? What do we behold at this day but a doubling, yea a heape of all miſeries,The cauſe of the preſent miſerie of France. bicauſe faith, which is ſo pretious & exquiſite a thing that it admitteth no compariſon, hath ſo often beene valued at ſo ſmall a price? The hiſtorie heereof is but too common, and the truth too apparant (to the great hurt

of euery one) to ſtand vpon the proofe thereof, whereas it ought rather to be buried from all memory, if it were poſſible, as well to deface all ſpots of infamie, for which we are blamed of nations fartheſt of, as to take away the diſtruſt that one hath of an other, which is ſo great amongſt vs, that it hath been one principall cauſe of kindling the fire of diuiſion ſo often in this deſolate kingdom. But to leaue ſuch a pitifull matter ſubiect, let vs conſiderExamples of the entertainment which the ancients gaue to traitors. Lasthenes.
                      what honor and entertainment men in old time gaue to traitors, who are now adaies ſo welcome to the greateſt. Lasthenes hauing holpen Phillip king of Macedonia to become maſter of the citie of Olynthum whereof he was an inhabitant, and complaining to the king, that certain called him traitor, he receiued this only anſwer: that the Macedonians were naturally rude and groſſe, calling a ſpade a ſpade, and all things els by their proper name. WhenRymetalces. 
                     Caeſar Augustus heard Rymetalces king of Thracia (who had forſaken Antonius to ioyne with him) boaſt of his fact, the monarch drinking to others, ſaid with a loud voyce: I loue treaſon well, but I loue not traitors. And in truth what man of any good iudgement will truſt him? He that betraieth his prince, his benefactor, his citie, his countrey, his kinſfolks and friends into their hands to whom he is nothing ſo much bound, how may not he betray them alſo anotherAgis. time? This did Agis, ſonne of Archidamas king of Sparta very well ſignifie to the Ephories, who had commanded him to take the yong men of the citie with him, and to go to the countrey of one whom they would make knowen vnto him, who had promiſed to guide and bring them within the caſtel of his citie. What (quoth he vnto them) is it a reaſonable matter to commit the ſafetie andPauſanias. life of ſo many valiant yong men to one that betraieth his countrey? Pauſanias, captaine of the Lacedemonians hauing receiued 500. talents of gold of king Xerxes, promiſed to betray the citie of Sparta vnto him. But his enterpriſe being diſcouered, Ageſilaus his father purſued him into a temple where he thought to haue ſaued himſelfe, and cauſing the gates thereof to be walled vp, ſuffred him

to die there of hunger: and afterward his mother caſt his bodie to the dogs, and would not burie it. The like befell to Caſſius Brutus, who would haue ſold Rome: his father handling him after the ſame ſort. Darius king of Perſia, cauſed the head of his ſonne Ariobarzanes to be cut off, bicauſeAriobarzanes. he ſought to betraie his armie to Alexander. Brutus did the like to his children, who had conſpired againſt their countrey, that king Tarquinius might reenter into Rome. Mahomet hauing taken Conſtantinople through the cowardlines and treaſon of Iohn Iustinian of Genua,Iuſtinian a Gen
                           •
                        an cauſe of the taking of Conſtantinople. after he had made him king according to promiſe, he cut off his head within three daies. A meete recompence for ſuch a wretch, who was the cauſe of ſo great a plague to Chriſtendome, whereby the Emperor Constantius, the Patriarke, and all the Chriſtians were ſlaine. The Empreſſe with hir daughters, and with the nobleſt damſels ſhe had, were led before Mahomet, and after a thouſand vilanies offered vnto them, their bodies were cut in peeces. True it is that Hiſtories are diuers touching this fact of Iustinian. For ſome ſay, that perceiuing himſelfe to be hurt in fight, he fled: whereupon moſt of the men of warre were diſcouraged: and that after he had ſaued himſelfe in the Ile of Chios, he died, either of his wound, or for griefe & ſorow, bicauſe he was the chiefe cauſe of ſo great a miſchiefe to Chriſtendome. Neither may we paſſe ouer in ſilence the heroicall fact of Sultan Solyman the laſt that died,A famous and heroicall fact of Sultan Solyman. but propound it to Princes as a paterne of the hatred and puniſhment of periurie and treaſon. For ſending a Baſcha of his into Valona to paſſe into Italy both by ſea and land, this Generall landed at the hauen of Caſtro, where at the inhabitants being aſtoniſhed, yeelded themſelues vnto him vnder his othe and fidelitie, whereby he promiſed that they ſhould depart, their liues ſaned, with bag & baggage. Neuertheleſſe this Barbarian ſlew them all, except thoſe whome he ſaw were fit to ſerue for ſlaues. But after his returne to Conſtantinople, the great Seignior being aduertiſed of his diſloialtie, cauſed him to be ſtrangled, & ſent backe all his priſoners with their goods

into Italy. Truly an act woorthie ſuch a Prince, who, if he had beene endued with the true knowledge of God and of his Church, deſerued the firſt place amongſt the great ones of his time. Now to end our diſcourſe, let vs learne to know the excellency of faith, which is ſuch a thing, that whoſoeuer laieth it in pawne, bindeth his ſafetie, his honor, and his ſoule to him, vnto whome he giueth it, and committeth manifeſt impietie againſt God, whē he breaketh and violateth the ſame: vnles he had vowed it for the performance of ſome wicked deede, with which both diuine and humane law diſpenſe. Let vs know alſo, that it is the beginning and foundation of a great and notableCato commended for his truth vertue to be giuen to truth, that it was of ſuch credite amongſt the Ancients, that in Cato his time, when any man rehearſed a ſtrange thing and hard to be beleeued, this prouerbe went of him, (bicauſe he was knowne throughout the whole courſe of his life to be a louer of truth) This is not credible, although Cato himſelfe ſhould ſpeake it. And thus by the examples of ſo many famous men, let vs in ſuch ſort be ſtirred to hate lying, whereof Satan is the fatherEpheſ. 4. 25. Luk. 10. 37. and author, that following the counſell of S. Paule, we ſpeake the truth euery one to his neighbour, who is euery one that needeth our helpe, and let all faining and diſſimulation be baniſhed from vs, and all roundnes and integritie of hart and manners appeere in all our actions: let vs hate periurie and treaſon, periured and traiterous perſons, knowing that faith being taken away, the whole foundation of Iuſtice is ouerthrowne, al bonds of friendſhip broken, and all humane ſocietie confounded.
               
            
            
               Of Ingratitude. Chap. 40.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  AS the remembrance of an euil is kept a long time, bicauſe that which offendeth is veryThe memorie of euill things is fruitfull, but of good things barren. hardly forgotten: ſo we commonly ſee, that the memorie of benefits receiued is as ſuddenly vaniſhed & loſt, as the fruite of the good turne is perceiued. Which

thing doth ſo ill beſeeme a man well brought vp and inſtructed in vertue, that there is no kind of Iniuſtice, which he ought more to eſchew. And therefore my Companions, I thinke that according to the order of our diſcourſe, we are nowe to ſpeake of the vice of Ingratitude, that knowing the ignominie therof, and the pernitious effects which flowe from it, we may beware of ſpotting our life therewithall.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  An vngratefull perſon can not be of a noble mind, nor yet iuſt. And therefore (as Sophocles ſaid) a man is to remember him often of whome he hath receiued curteſie and pleaſure. For one good turne begetteth another, and euery gentle hart eaſily pardoneth all iniuries, except vnthankfulnes, which it hardly forgetteth.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Ingratitude maketh men impudent, ſo that they dare ioine togither to hurt thoſe that haue been their friends, and them to whom they are bound both by blood and nature. Let vs then heare ASER diſcourſe more amply of this pernitious vice.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  If man had not ſhewed himſelfe vnthankfull for the vnſpeakeable benefits which he had receiued ofIngratitude the cauſe of the ſin and death of man. his Creator, by eating of the fruite of the tree of life at the perſwaſion of Satan, contrarie to his expreſſe commandement to whome he owed all obedience, it is certaine that neither ſinne nor death, neither through them any kind of miſerie and calamitie ſhould haue had any power ouer him. But as by his Ingratitude he neglected his obedience to his Lord and Creator, ſo it ſeemeth alſo that his puniſhment was according to the manner of his offence. For his owne members, which before were in ſubiection to the will of his ſpirite, rebelled againſt it, and that with ſuch force, that they led him often captiue into the bondage of ſinne. Now although we are neceſſarily and iuſtly made inheritors of the ſame curſe both of ſinne & death, yet how become we ſo dull of vnderſtanding, as to deſire with cheerefulnes of hart, and without conſtraint, to ſucceede him in the cauſe therof, I meane Ingratitude, which we ought to hate in greater meaſure, and to ſlie from it

more than from death it ſelf, by reaſon of the euils whichNo mans life void of Ingratitude. it hath brought vpon vs? Notwithſtanding, if we looke narrowly into the iuſteſt mans life that is, it will be a hard matter, yea altogither vnpoſſible, to find it purged and exempted of this deteſtable vice, aſwell towards God as towards his neighbours. But this is farre woorſe, to behold the greateſt part of men to nouriſh and feede their ſoules with Ingratitude, as if they tooke ſingular delight therein, by accuſtoming their mindes to keepe very diligently the memorie of the aduerſities and iniuries which they ſuffer, and to let the remembrance of thoſe graces and benefits which they receiue, ſlip away incontinently, euen as ſoone as the pleaſure of them is paſt. Whereas dutie bindeth all perſons to eſteeme as a great benefit, all fauour, how little ſoeuer it be, which the heauens or mer impart vnto them, and to preſerue it in perpetuall memorie, as in a moſt ſafe Treaſurie, wherein they may keepe & lay vp thoſe good things which they receiue. But contrariwiſe, vnthankefull men ſuffer the remembrance of their greateſt felicities to ſlide away ſuddenly: which is the cauſe that they are alwaies void of happines, of reſt, and tranquillitie, and full of vnquietnes & vncertaine deſires, which is an argument of the imperfection of their reaſon, and of their ignorance of that which is good. This is thatThe life of the ignorance is vnthankfull. which Seneca ſaith, that the life of the ignorant is vnthankful, wauering, & vnſtaied in things preſent, through the deſire of things to come. And as it is the propertie of an ignorant man to be alwaies troubleſome to himſelfe, ſo from Ingratitude and the forgetfulnes of our proſperitie, proceede cares & melancholie paſſions to no purpoſe, which conſume men, & pull on age vpon them more than yeeres. For it is vnthankfulnes that cauſeth vs to be neuer contented with our preſent eſtate, but to complaine and murmure, in ſteede of giuing praiſe (as it becommeth vs) to him that ſendeth vs far better things than we deſerue. Vpon the leaſt touch of affliction, the Ingratitude for a million of graces receiued before, cauſeth vs to cry out that we neuer had any thing but miſhap: whereas rather

we ought to take aduerſitie for a bleſſing and teſtimonie of the loue of God towards vs, being aſſured that by IuſticeGod diſpoſeth all thi
                           •
                        gs by Iuſtice. rightly ordeined, he diſpenſeth pouertie and riches, health & ſicknes, honor and contempt, according as he ſeeth it expedient for euery one of vs. Yea, it is neceſſarie, by reaſon of the intemperancie of our fleſh, which is redie to caſt off the yoke of the Lord when he handleth vs ouergently, that he ſhould reiue vs in hard with the bridle, and keep vs within the compaſſe of ſome diſcipline, leaſt we wholy giue ouer that ſeruice & obedience which we owe vnto him. But to vexe our ſelues vpon euery occaſion, and as often as things fal out contrary to our inconſtant & rebellious will, which for the moſt part is ignorant of that which belongeth vnto it, is that which Pythagoras ſayd, To eat our hart, or to offend & wound our ſoule and ſpirit, by conſuming them with cares & griefs: as alſo not to know that one cauſe which moſt of all troubleth this miſerable life, is the ſuddain entrance of ſorowes and irkſomnes into the hart, which afterward will not depart out of it but by litle and litle. Theſe are melancholy paſſions voyd of reaſon, which (as Plato ſaith) proceed from naughty fumes and bitter vapors gathered togither within vs, and which aſcend and mingle themſelues amidſt the paſſages of the ſoule. Euen as our ſtrange and vnwoonted dreams teſtifie & ſignifie, that there is within vs repletion of groſſe & gluiſh humors, & perturbations of the vital ſpirits: ſo are thoſe euil vapors which darken our ſenſes, & dim the eies of ourThe vapors wherwith the eyes of the mind are dimmed. ſoule: namely, ignorance, rebellion, arrogancie, murmuring, vnſatiable deſires & other inward corruptions which ingratitude ſtirreth vp and nouriſheth, and which hinder vs from acknowledging the benefits that God beſtoweth vpon vs, either towards him by thankſgiuing, or towards his creatures by good deeds, which he accepteth as done to himſelf. For only God needeth nothing, neither asketh any thing for himſelf, but only willeth vs not to be vnthākful for that which it pleaſeth him to giue vs. And through this ſelf ſame fountain of the corruptions of our ſoule we are bewitched with vnthankful forgetfulnes of thoſe good

turns which we receiue from our like: yea vpon the leaſt diſlike of them, which either with, or without reaſon we forge in our braines, we ſay, that neuer any did vs good. The vaſſaile, for the leaſt deniall or hard countenaunce which he receiueth of his lord, forgetteth all the good turnes, furtherances and fauours, which before that time he had done vnto him. The ſonne complaineth of the father, the brother of the brother, the friend of the friend, the ſeruant of the maſter. Alas we ſee but too many ſuch vngrateful wretches in France, who euē betray & ſel daily them, of whom they hold all their aduancement & greatnes. And if vnthankfulnes be familiar with the meaner ſort, let vs not thinke that it is farther off from thoſe ofOf the ingratitude of great men. higher calling. For vpon euery light occaſion, eſpecially if a man frame not himſelfe to that vice which they haue in greateſt recommendation, they eaſily forget all the ſeruice that hath been done vnto them by reaſon of ſome new-come gueſt, who will ſhew himſelfe a ſeruiceable miniſter of their pleaſures. This commeth to paſſe ſooneſt, when they grow vp and increaſe in calling and greatnes, bicauſe commonly as they mount vp in calling (not being well inſtructed in vertue) they waxe worſe and worſe in behauior. But let them boldly take this for an infallible rule, that an vnthankfull prince cannot long retaine a good man in his ſeruice. For the hope of reward (ſaith Plutarke) is one of the elements and grounds of vertue, and of that honor, bountie and humanitie, wherwith the prince recompenceth vertuous men, thereby prouokingReward and honor nouriſheth vertue & Artes. and alluring them to ſeeke the welfare of his eſtate. This alſo is that which procureth the proceedings of Artes and Sciences, and that which bringeth foorth notable wits: as contrarywiſe, all theſe things languiſh that are extinguiſhed by litle and litle through the ingratitude and couetouſnes of thoſe that rule. The ancients ſaid not withoutImpudencie & Ingratitude are companions. cauſe, that impudencie was the companion of ingratitude. For if no beaſt (as they ſay) is ſo ſhameleſſe as anThe deſcription of impudencie. impudent, who is he that may be ſaid to haue leſſe ſhame, than an vnthankful body? Impudencie (ſaith Theophrastus)
                     
                     is a contempt of glory, wrought in a man through the deſire of vile and filthie gayne: and that man is impudent that boroweth ſome thing of him whome he purpoſeth to deceiue. Are not theſe the proper effects of the vice of Ingratitude, which ſeeketh nothing elſe but to drawe away the commoditie and profite of euery one, being vnwilling to doe good to any, or to requite a pleaſure receiued, neither caring for true glory and immortall honor, which followeth euery vertuous action grounded vpon dutie and honeſty? And truly it is a very hard matter for them to be anſwerable to their honor, who ſeeke their owne profit as much as may be. For we muſt know that in equitie and reaſon there is a difference betweene duetie, and that which we commonly call profit: yea they are diſtinct things, and ſeparatedDutie and profit are two diſtinct things. one frō the other, as honeſtie is from ſuch earthly commoditie. This latter maketh men voyd of feare to breake a ſunder and to diſſolue whatſoeuer was ordeined and ioyned togither both by the law of God and man, ſo that they may gaine thereby. But the other cleane contrary, cauſeth them to imploy liberally their goods, trauell, induſtrie, and whatſoeuer elſe is in their power, that they may profit euery one, and that without hope of any recompence: albeit they that receiue good turnes are bound to returne againe the like to their benefactors according to their abilitie, and to acknowledge their kindnes. For this cauſe amongſt the lawes of Draco eſtabliſhed among the Athenians, there was a commandement, that if any man had receiued a benefit of his neighbor, and it were prooued againſt him long time after, that he had been vnthankfull for it, & had ill acknowledged the goodA law against vnthankful perſons. turne receiued, I ſay, that ſuch a one ſhould be put to death. And although no hiſtories are able to ſhew vnto vs any kings or princes, which ſurmounted, yea, which matched Alexander the great in munificence and liberalitie, or Iulius Caeſar in pardoning iniuries, yet we read of them, that when they had knowledge of an vngratefull perſon, Alexander neuer gaue vnto him, nor Caeſar euer forgaue him: ſo greatly haue vertuous men alwayes hated

                     The Storke a gracefull bird. ingratitude. It is reported of the Storke, that as often as ſhe hath yong, ſhe caſteth one out of the neaſt for the hire of the houſe, and reward of him that lodged hir. O barbarous ingratitude, to behold him that hath been lodged, ſerued, and brought vp in a houſe, and that with the ſweate and labor of another, to ſeeke and to endeuor the ſpoil of all that is therin, euen to the honor, & oftentimes the life of his hoſt! Is it not the ſame vice of vnthankfulnes that ſoweth diſſentions and quarels between the childrenThe fruits of ingratitude. & the father, between brethren, kinffolks & friends, and all for want of acknowledging one towards another, that bond of nature wherewith we ought to be tied, and that ſecondary ſupply of good turns, which knit vs vnſeparably, and make vs daily beholding vnto them, if we conſider exactly the nature of our eſtate, which cannot ſtand without the ſuccor and aide of many, how great ſo euer we be? But what? We ſee by experience that which one of the Ancients ſaid, That all humane things growe to be old, and come to the end of their time, except Ingratitude. For the greater the encreaſe of mortall men is, the more doth vnthankfulneſſe
                     Examples againſt ingratitude. Pyrrhus.
                      
                     augment. And yet we may note many examples in hiſtories againſt this vice, which ought to awaken vs in our dutie. Pyrrhus is exceedingly commended by Hiſtoriographers, bicauſe he was gentle, and familiar with his friendes, ready to pardon them when they had angred him, and very earneſt and forward in requiting & recompencing thoſe good turnes which he had receiued. Which cauſed him to be grieued aboue meaſure for the death of a friend of his: not (as he ſaid) bicauſe he ſaw that befall him which is common and neceſſarily incident to the nature of man, but bicauſe he had loſt all means of acknowledging vnto him thoſe benefits which he had receiued: whereupon he reprooued and blamed himſelfe for delaying and deferring it ouer-long. For truly money lent may well be reſtored to his heires that did lend it: but it goeth to the hart of a man that is of a good, noble, and excellent nature, if he cannot make the ſelfe ſame man that benefited him, to feele the recompence of thoſe pleaſures

which he receiued. This cauſed the ancients not onely to feare the note of ingratitude towards their friends, but alſo to contend with their enimies which of them ſhould do moſt good, and ſhew greateſt curteſie to his companion, as the ſame Pyrrhus did behaue himſelfe towards the Romanes, who had giuen him intelligence of a treaſon that was in hand againſt him. For he to acknowledge this good turne, ſent backe vnto them a great number of priſoners taken in warre, which were then in his cuſtodie, and would not let them pay any raunſome. But the Romanes, being vnwilling that he ſhould excell them in any kind of beneficence, as alſo bicauſe they would not giue occaſion that any ſhould thinke they meant to receiue occaſion that any ſhould thinke they meant to receiue a reward for not conſenting vnto a wicked act, ſent him as many priſoners of his for a counter-change. Circerius
                     Circerius. who had been ſecretarie to the great Scipio, when he perceiued that he was a competitor, and ioint-ſuter for the Pretorſhip with the ſonne of the ſame Scipio, he feared ſo greatly leaſt he ſhould be noted with ingratitude towards his ſonne, vnto whom he was ſo greatly bound, and of whom he had receiued his aduancement, that putting off the white garment which they vſed to weare that ſued for offices, he became a ſollicitor for Scipio, and procured him that honourable eſtate wherewith himſelfe might haue been furniſhed, preferring immortal renowne before that, as one that would not ſhew himſelfe vnthankful towards them vnto whom he was beholding. We read of a barbarous Turke, by countrey an Arabian,A notable hiſtorie of an Arabian Turke. and Admiral of the Infidels in their warre againſt Baldu in king of Ieruſalem, who not willing to ſuffer himſelf to be ouercome in beneficence, much leſſe to beare the name of an vnthankfull body towards the ſaid prince, who had once ſet him & his wife at libertie when they were his priſoners, went by night vnto him into a towne whither he was retired after the loſſe of a bartell, & declared vnto him the purpoſe of his companions: wherupon he led him out of the town, and conducted him vntil he had brought him out of all danger. Moreouer as concerning that which we

haue alreadie touched, that great men ought to haue ſpeciall regard to this, that they be not vnthankfull, but reward liberally men of deſert, foraſmuch as this point belongeth principally to the vertue of liberalitie, which ſubiect is ſufficient for a ſeuerall diſcourſe, we wil content our ſelues without any further addition, with the propoundingBaiazet. of a notable example of Baiazet, emperour of the Turkes touching this matter. This man being aduertiſed at the taking of the town of Modona from the Venetians of the valure of a yong Ianitſarie of the age of 22. yeeres, who was the firſt that mounted vpon the wall, wherupon 30000. Ianitſaries mo being mooued therewith were imboldned to doe the like, gaue him preſently an office of Sangeat, which is one of the greateſt & richeſt eſtates next to the Baſchas, and is valued at 10000. duckats in yeerely reuenues. Now if we deſire to follow to the vttermoſt of our power, the noble courage of theſe famous perſonages, that ſo we may not fall into the ſhamefull vice of ingratitude, this will helpe vs greatly, if we alwais eſteeme the benefit which we receiue of another, greater than itA mean to keep vs from ingratitude. is: and contrarywiſe, repute that leſſe than it is, which we giue. For thereby we ſhall feele our ſelues vrged, and as it were bound voluntarily to continue to doe good to our like, and ſo preſerue the bond of humane ſocietie inuiolable. Neither let vs (as proud and vain-glorious men do, who vaunt that they ſtand in need of none) diſdain to receiue a pleaſure of our friends, although they be of leſſe calling than we, when they deſire our friendſhip. For if it be an honeſt thing to do good to all, it cannot be diſhoneſt to receiue likewiſe of all, bicauſe a receiuer is as needefull as a giuer for the accompliſhing of aAnother meane for the ſame. good turne. Furthermore, this will be another great occaſion of preſeruing the common & mutuall bond, wherby we ſtand bound one to another, and of baniſhing all ingratitude from amongſt men, if we obſerue this pointArtaxerxes thankfully accepted a litle water. alwais, to requite double if we can that good turne which we receiue of another. Artaxerxes king of Perſia diſdained not the water which a poore handycraftſman, as he

ſaw him paſſe by, brought from a riuer in his hands and gaue him, but receiued it with a ſmiling and cheerefull countenance, meaſuring the grace of the gift, not according to the value of the preſent, but according to his good will that offered it. He thought it no leſſe an acte of magnanimitie and kinglie bountie to take ſmall preſents in good part, and to receiue them with a good countenance, than to giue greater. Againe, we are to know, that a good man muſt neuer giue ouer to do good to all, notwithſtanding any pretence of Ingratitude wherwith they may be noted, whome he hath alreadie bound vnto him. For (as Plato ſaith) that is true vertue, which ſetteth it ſelfVertue is a ſufficient recompence to it ſelfe. on worke, in reſpect of no other end than of it ſelfe: yea vertue is a very ſufficient recompence vnto it ſelfe. So although a man haue occaſion to be grieued at an vnthankfull perſon, yet he hath no libertie to repent him of the good turne which he hath done him. Yea the vnwoorthier he is that receiueth a benefit, the more is he to be commended from whome it commeth. And we may aſſure our ſelues that that thing onely is giuen, which is giuen without any reſpect. For if there be hope of recompence, the benefactor deſerueth not at all the name of a liberall man, but of one that giueth out to vſurie. Therefore Cicero miſliketh the rehearſing of duties done one to another, ſaying: that thoſe men are odious which vpbraid the good turnes they haue done, the remembrance of which the receiuer ought to retaine, and the giuer muſt paſſe them ouer in ſilence: ſeeing the greateſt contentation, which an excellent and noble-minded man can take in his glorious deedes and actions, is to ſee himſelfe adorned with that vertue which is profitable to others, but to it ſelfe is fruitles, painfull, and perillous. To the ende therefore that we may reape profit by all that hath beene heere diſcourſed, ſeeing we knowe by ouer-many experiences vnto what miſchiefe Ingratitude hath made vs ſubiect, let vs awakenThe ſleepe of the ſpirite is woorſe than death. our ſpirits out of the deepe ſleepe of ignorance, which hath ſo long time poſſeſſed them, conſidering that (as Pythagoras ſaid) the ſleepe of the ſpirite is worſe than death.

Therefore let vs watch in ſpirite, that both with hart and voice we may ſing and ſet foorth the vnſpeakeable benefits that are daily offered vnto vs by the goodnes of God, whereof we ſhall be made partakers through his grace, if our frowardnes be no let vnto vs. Let our ioy, contentation and pleaſure be in them that deſtroy and driue farre from vs all irkeſomnes, and ſad melancholie, and let vs take ſingular delight in profiting one another by good turnes and benefits: yea let vs ſhewe that we haue ſuch noble minds, that no Ingratitude can turne vs aſide from the deſire of doing good to all. Laſtly, let vs recompence double, & reward withoutreckoning thoſe good turnes, which we receiue of others, rather fearing leaſt we ſhould be ouercome in beneficence, than in worldly reputation and glorie.
               
            
            The ende of the tenth daies worke.
         
         
            THE ELEVENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Liberalitie, and of the vſe of riches. Chap. 41.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     DIuine Plato handling good and euill things, ſaith: That Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, & Iuſtice, are good things, and that their contraries are euill, namely: want of Prudence, Intemperance, Cowardlines, and Iniustice. As for the goods of Fortune, and of the bodie, as riches, glorie, friends, & honor, beautie, health, ſtrength, and dexteritie, he calleth them meane or indifferent things, which of themſelues

are neither good nor bad, but become either the one or the other, as they are vſed with prudence, or abuſed by imprudence and want of diſcretion. Nowe ſeeing we entred yeſterday into thoſe points that depend of Iuſtice, I thin ke the ſequele of our matter requireth of vs the handlingWhat Liberalitie is. of Liberalitie, which is nothing elſe but an excellent vſe of thoſe meanes which God putteth into our handes for the ſuccouring of many: which vertue (as Cicero ſaith) is altogither ioined to Iuſtice, and ought to be guided by moderation and reaſon. Nowe my Companions, I leaue the diſcourſe of this matter to you.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  The vnſtable riches of earthly treaſure (as Agapetus wrote to Iustinianus) imitate the courſe of theRiches 
                           〈…〉
                         the waters. floating waters. They abound for a little while to ſuch as thinke they haue them, and ſuddenly they returne backe againe and go to others: but the treaſure of Liberalitie and largeſſe, onely abideth ſtill with him that poſſeſſeth it.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  The habite of Liberalitie is a garment that neuer waxeth old, and charitie towards the poore is an incorruptible ornament. Diligence is ſufficient to make a man rich when meanes are offered, but nobility of mind is requiſite in the beſtowing of great riches vpon commendable things. To this purpoſe Plato ſaith, that a niggard ſometime is not wicked, but neuer good. Now then ACHITOB, inſtruct vs ſufficiently in this goodly matter.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Seeing Liberalitie is a vertue betweene theſe two vices, Couetouſnes, and Prodigalitie, and ſeeing the iudgement of reaſon ought to be the director and maiſter of giuing, and of free Liberalitie, that it be not abuſed in delights, or fauour of the wicked, but vſed with a prudent and ripe deliberation; Where, When, and Aſmuch as ought to be, I am of opinion that we may not vnfitly appropriate the effects of this vertue of Liberalitie, to the good vſe of Riches, which of themſelues are not able to make a man better or more happy, as we were before ſufficiently taught: but if they be ioined with the knowledge of true honeſtie, and perfect goodnes, they offer How riches may be well vſed.
                     
meanes vnto him whereby he may the better execute his good and honeſt inclinations, to the profite and reliefe of all them that ſtand in neede. Heereupon we muſt beſtow onely whatſoeuer we haue more than neceſſarie: firſt vpon them that are of our blood and kindred, then vpon all indifferently that want our helpe. And this is ſuch an excellent and commendable deede, that Aristotle and allAriſtotles opinion concerning a happie life deſtitute of bodilie and outward goods. the Peripatecians maintained this opinion, that a happie life which conſiſteth in the perfect vſe of vertue, could not be in all reſpects abſolute, if it wanted the aſſiſtance of bodilie and externall goods, which are as inſtruments to further a man in the good and vertuous execution of his honeſt deſires. But we ſhewed heeretofore by good reaſon, and according to the opinion of the Academicks and Stoicks, that vertue onely is ſufficient of it ſelfe to make a man liue happily, and that his vertue cannot be either more honored, or diſgraced through the abundant hauing or not hauing of the goods of fortune, and of the bodie, ſeeing all other things receiue their glorie from vertue, and are not able to adde any thereunto. And therforeA poore man may be liberall. a poore vertuous man is not kept from any perfect vſe of vertue, no not of Liberalitie, which conſiſteth not in waſting much wealth, but in ſuccouring the afflicted willingly, and in helping euery one according to abilitie. For this cauſe the poore womans mite was eſteemed of God for a greater gift, than were all the preſents of the rich, bicauſe they gaue of their abundance, and ſhe of that litle which ſhe had. In this manner then euery good man may iuſtly deſerue the name of liberall, neither may any man excuſe himſelfe for not practiſing liberalitie according to his abilitie. But chiefly rich and mightie men are bound thereunto by that commandement giuen vnto them inLuke 16. 9. the ſcripture, to make them friends with the riches of iniquity. They muſt take good heede that they paſſe not the bounds of this vertue of Liberalitie, but ſtrictly obſerue thoſe three points alreadie touched by me, namely: that they be liberall, Where, When, and Aſmuch as is requiſite. For when Princes beſtow eſtates, offices, or monie, vpon

vnwoorthie perſons, they giue where, and more than theyHow princes paſſe the limites of liberalitie. ought. And if in time of warre, or calamities of their people, they giue to flatterers, dancers, and miniſters of their pleaſures, and conſume much vpon feaſts, playes, Turneis, and Masks, they ſpend when and where they ought not, deſeruing therby the name of prodigall men, and louers of riot and ſuperfluitie, howſoeuer flattering courtiers labor to diſguiſe ſuch waſtfull ſpendings with the name of largeſſe and liberalitie. But ſuch ſuperfluous expences bring foorth effects contrary to the vertue and dutie of a king, cauſing princes to leuie extraordinarie taxes and tributes vpon no iuſt neceſſitie, which is wholy to ouerthrow the vſe of liberalitie. And this is done alſo by men of meanerWhen the inferior ſort paſſe the bounds of liberalitie. calling, when in their actions and expences they propound to themſelues an other ende than good workes grounded vpon the loue of their neighbors according to charitie. Cicero giueth vs a very good precept againſt the opinion of many in our time, who giue out in ſpeech, that they are borne to do great things, namely, to practiſe liberalitie, and being poore of worldly goods, ſeeke to inrich themſelues by vnlawfull and vniuſt meanes, that they may bring to paſſe their loftie deſires: thinking afterwards through good-deeds and great liberalitie to make amends for that fault which they haue committed. But (as that father of Philoſophie ſaith) our goods and patrimonie muſt be iuſtly gotten, not by diſhoneſt and hateful gaine: ſecondly, we muſt profite as many as we can, ſo that they be worthie thereof. Moreouer a man may and ought to increaſe it by reaſon, diligence, and ſparing, but to maintaine liberalitie rather than to miniſter vnto luſt, voluptuouſnes, or heaping vp of treaſures. And yet now a daies theſe are the principall occaſions for which riches are deſired, which as they increaſe, ſo we will haue our traine augmented, and our table to be anſwerable thereunto. Then although ouer-great abundance remaine, yet we exerciſe very coldly the true works of liberalitie, which are to ſuccor the needie. But this is to be farre ſeparated from the commendable end, and good vſe of riches, wherof

all that we haue ouer and aboue our neceſſitie ought toAbout what we are to beſtow the ouerplus of our wealth. be imploied in the ſeruice of the common-wealth, in relieuing the poore, diſeaſed, afflicted, and priſoners, in procuring the good bringing vp of youth, and generally in exerciſing all other deeds of pietie: accounting it great gaine to helpe the poore, ſeeing God is the rewarder therof. Amongſt the ancient Romanes there was a law keptA notable law amongſt the Romanes. inuiolably, That no man ſhould preſume to make a publike feast, except before he had prouided for all the poore of his quarter. And they accounted it a great ſhame and offence to the common-wealth to ſee any man beg in the ſtreets. Therefore Plato ſaid, that where there are beggers in a towne, there are alſo thieues & church-robbers. Now if we that beare the name of Chriſtians, and acknowledge the poore to be members of Ieſus Chriſt, are not aſhamed to banquet and feaſt, when as in the meane time the needy crie at our gates, and almoſt die of hunger, doe we not thinke that theſe Heathen men ſhall riſe in iudgement before that great and iuſt Iudge, to accuſe and condemne vs as thieues and church-robbers, and chieflie them that maintaine their delights and pleaſure with the goods of the poore, towards whom the liberall diſtribution of our owne wealth eſpecially ought to be extended both by the lawe of God and man? We muſt feede the poore, and not kill them: but to denie them nouriſhment, or toHow Epaminondas compelled a rich man to be liberall. driue them from vs, is to kill them. For this cauſe Epaminondas captaine generall of the Thebanes, hauing knowledge of a very rich man that had no care of the poore in the towne, ſent a poore needie fellow vnto him, and commanded him vnder great penaltie to giue preſently without faile 600. crownes to that poore man. The citizen hearing this commandement, came vnto him to know the occaſion and cauſe thereof: It is (quoth Epaminondas) bicauſe this man being honest is poore, and thou which hast robbed greatly the common-wealth, art rich: compelling him thereupon to be liberall in deſpite of his teeth. So carefull were the ancients to helpe them that had need, and to ſhew thēſelues enimies vnto them that made no account of the poore.

But if we ſhould diligently ſearch all hiſtories and deeds of famous men, yet could we not find a more notable example,Cimō a notable paterne of the true vſe of riches. or worthy to be folowed than that of Cimon the Athenian, who hauing gottē great wealth honorably, both for himſelf and his country, by the taking and ouerthrow of many Barbarians and townes belonging vnto them, knew neuertheleſſe how to beſtow it liberally with greater glory and honor, by relieuing all his poore countreymen to whom his houſe was as an hoſpitall wherein they were all nouriſhed and fed at an ordinarie that was common to ſo many as would come thither, which was furniſhed, not with daintie and delicate fare, thereby to occaſion rich folks to ſeeke it out, but with many common ſorts of victuals in all plentie and abundance, and that for a great number of perſons. This he did chiefly, as he ſayd, to the end that poore honeſt men might haue the more leaſure to imploy themſelues about the affaires & ſeruice of the common-wealth, and not be diuerted from that through trauell and care to get their liuing by the exerciſe of handicrafts. Beſides, he cauſed all the incloſures, hedges and ditches of his lands and inheritance to be taken away, that ſtrangers which paſſed by, and his owne countreymen that wanted, might take of the fruits that were there according to their neceſſitie. Now if this vertue of liberalitie be praiſe-woorthie in all perſons that vſe it well according to their abilitie, it is moſt of all neceſſarie, honorable and profitable for kings and princes, headsLiberalitie moſt neceſſarie for princes and great men. and captains of armies, gouernours of eſtates and common-wealths, as that which procureth vnto them, more than any other thing, the good will of euery one, wherein the chiefe ſtrength and ſtay of their greatneſſe conſiſteth. But withall they haue great need of prudence and iuſtice, eſpecially ſoueraigne princes, to diſtribute liberally and according to harmonicall proportion their giftes, graces, and good turnes, whether they be eſtates, offices, benefices, knighthoods, exemptions, freedoms, and other recompences due as rewards to their ſubiects, according as euery one deſerueth. It belongeth principally to them to

                     The lawes of liberalitie. keep religiouſly and from point to point the lawes of liberalitie, marking well to whom they giue, how much is giuen, at what time, in what place, to what end, and their owne abilitie that giue. Moreouer a ſoueraigne muſt looke that recompence go before gift, by rewarding firſt thoſe that haue deſerued, before he giue to thē that haue deſerued nothing: and aboue all things he muſt meaſure his largeſſe at the foote of his power. But when the iuſt rewards of ſubiects and honeſt men are diſtributed amongſt the vicious, ſtrangers, and vnwoorthy perſons, this is that which oftentimes ſetteth floriſhing eſtates onA common miſchief which foloweth the greater ſort. fire. There is neuer any want of flatterers and of impudent crauers about kings, whoſe onely drift is to ſup vp the bloud, gnaw the bones, and ſucke the marow of princes and their ſubiects, to ſatisfie their fooliſh & vnprofitable expences, which are ſuch and ſo great, that a man is well at eaſe to giue them any thing, they are alwais ſo needie and monyleſſe, and ſticke not to ſay that they neuer receiue good of their maſters. In the meane while, they that haue beſt deſerued of the common-wealth, are commonly remooued furtheſt from their maieſties: which commeth to paſſe both by the ignorance of the greater ſort, who make but a bad choice of ſeruants worthy their fauour, as alſo bicauſe the honor & credite of good men forbiddeth them by flattery and begging to ſeek after the rewards of vertue, which ſhould be offred vnto them. But not to wander farre from our matter ſubiect, let vs now conſider of ſome notable examples of the Ancients concerning this wherof we haue here diſcourſed. It was by hisThe liberalitie of Alexander, magnificall and incomparable liberalitie, that Alexander the great made a way for his noble plat-formes, whereby he became monarch of three parts of the world, diſtributingTo the Macedonians, liberally all his demains amongſt the Macedonians, as before we mentioned. But what a notable teſtimonie of this his liberalitie did he giue a freſh, when during theTo all debtors in his armie, warre he cauſed this to be publiſhed in his armie, that all they that were indebted vpon any occaſion whatſoeuer, ſhould bring their creditors vnto him, and he would diſcharge

all their debts? Which thing he likewiſe performed. Moreouer, who will not admire the liberality which all his life time he exerciſed towards the learned men of his time? We read that he gaue at one time to his maiſterTo Ariſtotle. 
                     Ariſtotle, 800. Talents, which amount to 480000. crownes, as a reward for his paines, trauels, and expences which he had beene at in deſcribing the nature and propertie of liuingTo Anaxarchus. creatures. He ſent to Anaxarchus the Philoſopher 50. Talents, which are 30000. Crownes, but he refuſed them, ſaying: that he knewe not what to doe with ſo great a ſumme. What (ſaid Alexander then) hath he no friendes to pleaſure, ſeeing all king Darius wealth will not ſuffice me to diſtribute
                     To Perillus. 
                     amongſt mine owne? Perillus beſought him to giue him ſome monie towards the mariage of his daughters, whervpon he gaue to him alſo 50 Talents. And when he told him that it was too much by halfe, he replied thus: If half be enough for thee to take, yet is it not enough for me to giue. LikewiſeTo an Egyptian. he gaue to a poore Egyptian asking his almes, a rich and populous citie, & when the other all aſtoniſhed ſuppoſed that he mocked him: Take (quoth he to him) that which I giue thee: for if thou art Biace that demandeſt, I am Alexander
                     Caeſar a liberall Prince. 
                     that giueth. The firſt Monarch of the Caeſars, is he not alſo exceedingly praiſed of Hiſtoriographers for the liberalleſt Prince of his time, and for ſuch a one as ſhewed in deede, that he loued not riches in warre, that afterward he might at his pleaſure liue in delight, or abuſe them about his owne pleaſures, but that they were the common price and reward of vertue, which he laid vp to recompence valiant and honeſt men withall? Of which reward he ſaid he would haue no part, but only diſtribute it to eueryAntonius a magnificall Prince, but voluptuous. one according to his deſert. Antonius one of his ſucceſſours, ſought to imitate him in this bountifull liberalitie. For proofe heereof may ſerue that commandement, which he gaue to his Treaſorer to double the halfe of 2500. Crownes, which he had giuen to one of his fauorits, whereas his Treaſorer that brought him the ſaide ſumme, when he beheld it, thought that he ſhould haue diminiſhed the gift. But he ſtained this vertue with a perpetuall

blot and infamie, which cauſed his deſtruction, in that he applied it to the ſeruice and maintenance of his delights and pleaſures, and abuſed it in the fauor and behalfe of the wicked, which is al one in great men as if theyArchelaus gaue not to the vnwoorthy. themſelues were authors of vice and iniquitie. Archelaus king of Macedonia, may ſerue vnto them for a notable example, whereby they may learne to keepe themſelues in their eſtates from ſuch a pernitious euill. This king being requeſted by a Minion of his Court to giue him a cup of gold wherein he dranke, deliuered it to his Page, commanding him to beare and giue the ſame to Euripides, who was there preſent, and then ſaid to the other: As for thee, thou art woorthie to aske, and to be denied alſo: but Euripides
                     How Antigonus denied one that was importunate. is woorthie of gifts, although he aske not. Antigonus the elder being importunately deſired by one that was good for nothing, and that counterfaited the Cynick Philoſopher, to giue him a drachma, which might be in value about foure pence halfepenie, made anſwer: that it was no meete gift for a king. And when the other replied, that he ſhould then giue him a Talent, he anſwered: it isTitus a good & liberall Prince. no preſent for a Cynick. Titus the emperor was ſo greatly in loue with liberalitie all his life time, that remembring one euening with himſelfe, that he had giuen nothing the ſame day, he cried out: O my friends we haue loſt this day. He vſed to bleſſe thoſe daies wherein the poore came vnto him, or when he ſought after them to do them good,A notable precept of Phocylides. putting in practiſe that precept of Phocylides, which ſaith: Sleepe not at night before thou hast thrice called to mind thy works that day, and repent thee of the euill, but reioice in that which was well done. For this great good nature Titus was loued whileſt he liued, and bewailed after his death, and vpon his Tombe was written this Epitaph: The delights of mankind
                     Ptolemaeus the Thebane. 
                     are ended. Ptolemaeus the Thebane, Captaine ouer a great armie, had ſo acquainted himſelfe not to denye any that ſtood in neede of his liberalitie, that when a poore ſouldior demanded his almes of him, he hauing at that preſent nothing to beſtow vpon him, gaue him his ſhooes, ſaying: My friend, make thy profit of this, ſeeing I haue no better thing to
                     
                     giue thee. For I had rather go bare-foote, than ſee thee ſuffer ſo much. Denys the elder, entring into his ſonnes lodging, andDenys the elder beholding there great ſtore of rich iewels of gold and ſiluer, and of incredible treaſure, ſaid vnto him: My ſonne, I did not giue thee theſe riches to vſe in this ſort, but to impart of them vnto thy friends. For thou muſt know, that no man in all the world is ſo rich as he that is liberall, who with his liberalitie preſer
                        
                           •
                        eth his friends, and mollifieth his enimies. This is that which Cyrus by experience ſhewed vnto Croeſus, and how ſmallyCyrus. thoſe gifts which he had beſtowed vpon woorthy perſons had impoueriſhed him. For ſending to euery one of them to ſuccour him with monie, they ſent him altogither as much as they had receiued by gift from him, beſtowing moreouer great rewards vpon the bearer of his meſſage. So that the wealth which proceedeth from liberalitie is vnconſumeable, as that which is gotten by giuing, and byPertinax. ſcattering abroad is gathered togither. Pertinax, who ſucceeded Commodus in the Empire, ſurpaſſed all the Emperors that euer were for exceeding liberalitie, which he vſed to the benefite and profite of all his ſubiects. For firſt he gaue freely all the waſte and deſolate ground in Italy, and in other his prouinces, to them that could and would till them, and to the labourers thereof he gaue freedome and exemption from al taxes and ſubſidies for ten yeeres, with perpetuall aſſurance that they ſhould not be troubled in their poſſeſſion. He forbad alſo that his name ſhould be ſet in any caſtell or place within his dominion, ſaying: that his lands were not proper to him onely, but common to all the people of Rome. He aboliſhed all cuſtoms, tributes, and toles laid vpon the hauens of riuers, at the entries into townes, waies and paſſages, which he called inuentions of tyrannie to get monie, & placed all ſuch things in their ancient liberties. Which actions beſeemed rather a father of the countrie, than a lord and maiſter: and there are few Princes that vſe to doe ſo, but many to whome their owne will ſeemeth to be a moſt iuſt law. But contrariwiſe let them know, that they ought to be ſubiect to the eternall law, namely, to right, reaſon, truth, and iuſtice, which

are the proper will of God onely, whoſe people they muſt rule with right and equitie, by comforting them through beneficence, and continuall good turnes. Let vs learne then by our preſent diſcourſe to decke our ſelues with this vertue of Liberalitie, euery one according to thoſe meanes that are giuen vnto him from aboue, and are iuſtly gotten by him: taking good heede, that we abuſe it not in any kind of voluptuouſnes or vice, neither yet vpon the wicked, as though we purpoſed to nouriſh and maintaine their impieties. For this is vtterly to deſtroye Iuſtice, and conſequently the bond and preſeruatiue of humane ſocietie. But if we, being well inſtructed by the Matth. 25.ſpirite of wiſedome, feede the hungrie, giue drinke to the thirſty, lodge them that want harbour, and clothe the naked, ſowing in this manner by the works of pietie that talent which is committed to our keeping, we ſhall reape abundantly in heauen the permanent riches & treaſures of eternall life.
               
            
            
               Of Couetouſnes, and of Prodigalitie. Chap. 42.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  IF that diuiue rule of Cicero were aſwell written in our hart, as he deſired to haue it ſetled in his ſonne, that onely that thing is to be iudged profitable 
                     No wicked thing ought to be iudged profitable.
                     which is not wicked, and that nothing of that nature ſhould ſeeme profitable, we ſhould not behold amongſt vs ſo many curſed acts, as are daily committed through the vnbrideled deſire of the goods of this world. For that which moſt of all troubleth men, is when they thinke that the ſin which they purpoſe to practiſe is but ſmall in reſpect of the gaine, thereby craftily ſeparating profite from honeſtie, and ſo ſuffering themſelues to be ouercome of couetouſnes, which is the defect of liberalitie, whereof we diſcourſed euen now, whoſe exceſſe alſo is Prodigalitie, of which two vices we are now to intreat.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Every one that coueteth treaſures (ſaid Anacharſis, one of the wiſe men of Graecia) is hardly capable of good coū
                     ſell

and instruction. For the couetous man commonly murmureth at that which God permitteth and nature doth, ſo that he will ſooner take vpon him to correct God, than to amend his life.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  It is a hard matter (ſaid Socrates) for a man to bridle his deſire, but he that addeth riches therunto, is mad. For couetouſnes neither for ſhame of the world, nor feare of death, will not repreſſe or moderate it ſelf. But it belongeth to thee ARAM, to inſtruct vs in that which is here propounded.
                  
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Since the greedie deſire of heaping vp gold and ſiluer entred in amongſt men, with the poſſeſſion of riches, couetouſneſſe folowed, and with the vſe of them pleaſures and delights: whereupon they began to ſaile in a dangerous ſea of all vices, which hath ſo ouerflowen in Couetouſnes hath ouerflowen all.this age of ours, that there are very few towers how high ſo euer ſeated, but it hath gone vp a great deale aboue them. For this cauſe I ſee no reaſon why men ſhould eſteeme ſo much, or iudge it ſuch a happy thing to haue much goodly land, many great houſes, and huge ſummes of readie money, ſeeing all this doth not teach them, not to be caried away with paſſions for riches, and ſeeing the poſſeſſion of them in that maner procureth not a contentation void of the deſire of them, but rather inflameth vs to deſire them more through an inſatiable couetouſnes, which is ſuch a pouerty of the ſoul, that no worldly goods can remedie the ſame. For it is the nature of this vice to make a man poore all his life time, that he may find him ſelf rich only at his death. Moreouer it is a deſire that hath this thing proper and peculiar to it ſelfe, to reſiſt and to refuſe to be ſatiſfied, whereas all other deſires helpe forward the ſame, and ſeeke to content thoſe that ſerue thē. Couetouſneſſe (ſaith Aristotle) is a vice of the ſoule, whereby a 
                     Couetouſnes will neuer be ſatiſfied.
                     man deſireth to haue from all partes without reaſon, and vniustly with-holdeth that which belongeth to another. It is ſparing and skantie in giuing, but exceſſiue in receiuing. The Poet Lucretius calleth it a blind deſire of goods. And it mightily hindereth the light of the ſoule, cauſing the couetous man to be neuer contented, but the more he hath, the more to deſire and wiſh for. The medicine which he ſeeketh, namely,

gold and ſiluer, encreaſeth his diſeaſe, as water doth the Conetouſnes like to a dropſie.dropſie: and the obtaining thereof is alwaies vnto him the beginning of the deſire of hauing. He is a Tantalus in hell, who between water and meat dieth of hunger. Now it is very ſure, that to ſuch as are wiſe and of ſound iudgement, nature hath limited certaine bounds of wealth, which are traced out vpon a certaine Center, and vpon the circumference of their neceſſitie. But couetouſneſſe working cleane contrary effects in the ſpirit of fooles, carieth away the naturall deſire of neceſſarie things, to a diſordinate appetite of ſuch things as are full of danger, rare, and hard to be gotten. And which is worſe, compelling the auaritious to procure them with great payne and trauell, it forbiddeth him to enioy them, and ſtirring vp his deſire, depriueth him of the pleaſure. Stratonicus 
                     Stratonicus derided the ſuperfluitie of the Rhodians.mocked in olde ryme the ſuperfluitie of the Rhodians, ſaying, that they builded as if they were immortall, and ruſhed into the kitchin as if they had but a little while to liue. But couetous men ſcrape togither like great and mightie men, and ſpend like mechanicall and handy-crafteſmen. They indure labour in procuryng, Couetous men compared to Mules.but want the pleaſure of enioying. They are like Mules that carie great burthens of golde and ſiluer on their backes, and yet eate but hay. They enioy neyther reſt nor libertie which are moſt precious, and moſt deſired of a wiſe man: but liue alwayes in diſquietneſſe, being ſeruauntes and ſlaues to their richeſſe. Their greateſt The miſerable life of couetous men.miſerie is, that to encreaſe and keepe their wealth, they care neither for equitie or iuſtice: they contemne all lawes both diuine and humane, and all threatnings and puniſhmentes annexed vnto them: they liue without friendſhip and charitie, and lay holde of nothyng but gayne. When they are placed in authoritie and power aboue others, they condemne the innocent, iuſtifie the guiltie, and finde alwayes ſome cleanly cloke and colour of taking, and of excuſing (as they thinke) their corruption and briberie, making no difference betweene duetie and profite. Wherfore we may well ſay in a word, That couetouſnes
                     
                     is the roote of all euill. For what miſchiefs are not 1. Tim. 6. 10.procured through this vice? From whence proceed quarels, The fruits of couetouſnes.ſtrifes, ſuites, hatred and enuie, theftes, pollings, ſackings, warres, murders, and poiſonings, but from hence? God is forgotten, our neighbour hated, and many times the ſonne forgiueth not his father, neither the brother his brother, nor the ſubiect his Lord, for the deſire of gaine. In a worde, there is no kind of crueltie that couetouſneſſe putteth not in practiſe. It cauſeth hired and wilfull murders (O execrable impietie) to be well thought of amongſt vs. It cauſeth men to breake their faith giuen, to violate all friendſhip, to betray their countrey. It cauſeth ſubiectes to rebell againſt their princes, gouernours and magiſtrates, when, not able to beare their inſatiable deſires, nor their exactions and intollerable ſubſidies, they breake foorth into publike and open ſedition, which troubleth common tranquillitie, whereupon the bodie politike is changed, or for the moſt part vtterly ouerthrowen. Moreouer, the exceſſe of the vertue of liberalitie, which is prodigalitie, may be ioyned to couetouſneſſe, and than there is no kind of vice but raigneth with all licence in that ſoule that hath theſe two gueſtes lodged togither. And bicauſe it is a thing that may ſeeme hard to conceiue, how two vices ſo diſagreeing by nature, may be found to agree in the ſame ſubiect, we will ſoone beleeue it, if we ſay with the ancients, How prodigalitie and couetouſnes may in ſome ſort be linked togither in one ſubiect.that it is the point of couetouſneſſe to gripe, and to take, Where and When it ought not: and that this dealing is put in practiſe neceſſarilie vpon one of theſe two occaſions, eyther of niggardlineſſe and ſparing, or for prodigalitie, as they do that vniuſtly ſeeke for meanes to ſatiſfie their fond deſires, and their vnprofitable and ſuperfluous expences. The common opinion is, that they who put to no vſe the richeſſe which they gette ſo couetouſly, are more miſerable than thoſe that abuſe them after they haue obtayned them by ill meanes: bicauſe manye maye reape profite by theſe, but of the other none, no not their

                     Couetous men compared to hogs. onely heires receiue more benefit than they do of hogs, which is after their death. But it falleth not out ſo altogither with kings and princes, whoſe couetouſnes ioined with prodigalitie is more hurtfull to their ſubiects than that which is ioined with ſparing. For this latter, althogh it maketh them commit much iniuſtice, and polling of their people to fil their treaſuries, yet when any need hapneth to the common-wealth, either of forraine warre, or of any other calamitie, a good ground-work is laid in the bottome of their cofers for to redreſſe the ſame. But the other maintained with the like iniuſtice, leaueth nothing behind for prodigall princes, wherewith to helpe themſelues in time of neceſſitie. Whereupon oftentimes proceedeth the finall ſubuerſion of their eſtate, weakened by exactions, to the ouerthrow and vndoing of many who would haue been the ſinewes of their ſtrength: and all to inrich a few who then will ſtand them in ſmall ſtead, or els bicauſe they waſted it vpon riot and ſuperfluities, wherby the warlike vertues both of themſelues and of their ſubiects become degenerate & baſtardlike. Of this we note, that after a prince groweth to be prodigall and deſirous of ſuperfluitie and fooliſh expences, no riches he hath will euer ſuffice him: ſo that to ſatiſfie his ſpending, he muſt needs become couetous and vniuſt. The like happeneth many times to the meaner ſort, and to men of all eſtates, that they are couetous and prodigal both togither, namely, when they gather wealth by vnlawfull meanes, & ſpare to ſpend it in the workes of pietie, that they may ſowe it plentifully vpon delights and pleaſures. But the humor ofCouetous men compared to rats and cundit pipes. niggardlines and neerneſſe is moſt common in couetous men, whom Plutarke compareth to rats and mice that are in gold mines, which eate the golden oare, and yet nothing can be gotten from them but after their death. Likewiſe he compareth them to pipes through which water being conueied into a ceſterne nothing remaineth for them. So couetous men heape vp treaſures to leaue them to their heires, that they alſo may afterward leaue them to their heires as their predeceſſors did: and ſo neither the

one nor the other reape any good or benefit by them, vntill in the end either ſome Tyrant take all away by violence from that hold-faſt, or els ſome one that is the worſt of the race ſucceedeth, ſpending all diſſolutely vpon pleaſures. This cauſed Diogenes, ieſting at couetous men, to ſayIt is better to be the ſheepe than the ſonne of a couetous man. that he had rather be their ſheepe than their ſonne, bicauſe they are very carefull to giue their cattell meete paſture, but in ſteede of feeding their youth with conuenient and profitable nouriſhment, through good and vertuous education, they marre, ſpill, & corrupt them, by grafting couetouſnes in the ſoules of their children, as if they ment to build within them a ſtrong fort wherein to keepe their ſucceſſion ſafely. Whereas contrariwiſe they ſhould learne of Cicero, that the glory of vertue, and of praiſworthie and honorable deeds, is the greateſt riches which fathers can leaue to their children, and more excellent than any other patrimonie whatſoeuer. Socrates called a yoong man brought vp in ignorance, and rich withall, a golden ſlaue. And that ſeruant anſwered not vnfitly, when, being demanded what his maiſter did, (who was a couetous man, and one that hauing great quantitie of good wine, ſold it to others, and ſought for ſowre wine in Tauernes for his owne drinking) he ſaid: Albeit he hath great ſtore of good, yet he ſeeketh for euill. But let vs now conſider of ſome notable examples, ſhewing foorth the pernitiousExamples of the fruites of couetouſnes and of prodigalitie. Muleaſſes.
                      effects, which, as we ſaid, proceed from theſe two vices, Couetouſnes, and Prodigalitie. Muleaſſes king of Thunes, had his eies put out by his ſonne, that he might ſeaze vpon his treaſures. Priamus king of Troy, fearing the taking of his citie, ſent Polydorus his yoongeſt ſonne to his ſonne in law Polymestor, with a great quantitie of gold and ſiluer: butPolymeſter. he being deſirous to poſſeſſe the ſame, ſlew the child his brother in law, for which afterward he receiued his deſerued hire. For Queene Hecuba comming vnto him, and taking him aſide into a chamber, not ſhewing countenance of any diſcontentment, with the helpe of hir women put out his eies. The Emperor Caligula was ſo much touchedCaligula. with couetouſnes, that there was no kind of lucre, or

meane to get monie by, how vnlawfull and wicked ſoeuer it were, which he ſought not out: inſomuch that he laid a tribute vpon vrine, and ſold his ſiſters gownes, whome he had violated and ſent into baniſhment. And yet in one yeere of his 
                        •
                     aigne he ſpent prodigally 67. Millions of gold, which Tiberius his predeceſſor had gathered togither.Nero. 
                     Nero vſing great crueltie, polling, exaction, and confiſcation towards his ſubiects, gaue to the miniſters of his tyrannie in thoſe fifteene yeeres wherein he raigned, the value of 55. Millions of Crownes. He cauſed a very ſtately gilt pallace to be built, which tooke in compaſſe a great part of Rome, but it was ouerthrown after his death, that the memorie of ſuch a cruell tyrant might be rooted outAgainſt the ſuperfluitie of ſumptuous buildings. of the earth. A notable example for ſuch as thinke to get a vaine glorie by buildings that are more ſtately than neceſſarie, and yet leaue behind them a notorious marke of their tyrannie, and a perpetuall teſtimonie to poſteritie, that they haue raiſed their houſes with the blood of their ſubiects. Henrie the ſeuenth Emperour, a Prince indewedAn Italian Monke. with moſt excellent vertues, was poiſoned with an Hoſt, which an Italian Monke corrupted with monie cauſed him to take. But what neede we ſeeke for ſuch examples of ancient men to know the fruites of couetouſnes, when as the vnhappines of our age daily affoordeth vs new before our eies, wherein we heare nothing almoſt ſpoken of, but poiſonings and murders hired with monie, and all committed to this ende, that the authors of them may haue their goods whome they kill, for the ſatisfieng ofA cruell murder of a Gentlewoman and of hir houſhold. their inſatiable couetouſnes? Amongſt many other, who hath not heard of the cruell wilfull murder of a Gentlewoman of a good houſe, and of hir men and maides, by hir owne brethren in law, done a few daies paſt? A crueltie exceeding that of the Cannibals, who yet ſpare domeſticall blood. But God the iuſt Iudge would not that ſuch an execrable wickednes ſhould be long concealed & vnpuniſhed. For when it could not be found out by any inquirie of man, one of the murderers touched with the hand of God, and taken with an extreame ſickenes, being

as it were mad, and as Cain was in times paſt, diſcloſed his ſinne of himſelfe, the hainouſnes whereof ſo troubled him, that he ſaid he could hope for no mercie. Afterward recouering his health, he was taken vpon his owne confeſſion, and being conuicted of the fact, accuſed all the authors thereof, of whome ſome are executed, and the reſt expect no better euent. That couetouſnes cauſeth ſubiects to rebell againſt their couetous Princes, and that oftentimes to their ouerthrowe: we haue an example in Mauritius the Emperour, who was depriued of the Empire,Mauritius depriued of the Empire for his couctouſnes. and had his head cut off, beſides the death of his fiue children, & of his wife, by reaſon of the ill will of his people and men of warre, which he had purchaſed, who could beare no longer his couetouſnes, whereby he was mooued to winke at ſpoiles and murders, and to keepe backe the pay of his ſouldiors. In the time of S. Lewes the king, the people of fiue cities & fiue villages of high Almaigne, which at this day we call Switſerland, raiſed ſuch a greatThe Nobilitie of Switſerland deſtroied for the ſame cauſe. tumult & ſedition, that they put to the edge of the ſword all their Princes, Lords, and Noble-men, the chiefe cauſe therof was their couetouſnes, which made them oppreſſe their ſubiects with vniuſt exactions. The niggardlye ſparing of king Lewes the eleuenth, mooued ſtrangers greatly
                        Lewes 11. to contemne him, and was in part the cauſe of the rebellion of his ſubiects. For hauing put away in a maner all the Gentlemen of his houſhold, he vſed his Tailor alwaies for his Herald of Armes, his Barber for Embaſſador, and his Phiſition for his Chancellour: and in deriſion of other kings, he ware a greaſie hat of the courſeſt wooll. We find in the chamber of accounts a bill of his expences, wherein is ſet downe 20. ſouſe for two newe ſleeues to his olde dublet, and an other clauſe of 15. deniers for greaſe to greaſe his bootes. And yet he increaſed the charges of his people three millions more than his predeceſſour had done, and alienated a great part of his Demaine. Sparing may well be vſed, (which at this daye is more neceſſarye than euer) and yet the maieſtie of a king nothing diminiſhed, neither the dignitie of his houſe, and without the abaſing

of his greatnes. Likewiſe thoſe men, who after they haue hoorded much treaſure, are ſo beſotted and blinded with a couetous loue of their wealth, that they will not vpon any neceſſitie imploy it, can no more auoidCalipha. their deſtruction, than the other before mentioned. This doth the hiſtorie of Calipha king of Perſia, teach vs, who hauing filled a Tower with gold, ſiluer, iewels, and pretious ſtones, and being in warre againſt Allan, king of the Tartarians, was ſo ill ſuccoured of his owne people, bicauſe he would not giue them their pay, that he was taken in his towne, and by Allan committed priſoner in the ſaid Tower, with theſe words: If thou hadſt not kept this treaſure ſo couetouſly, but diſtributed it amongſt thy ſouldiors, thou mighteſt haue preſerued thy ſelfe, and thy citie. Now therefore enioy it at thy eaſe, and eate and drinke thereof, ſeeing thou haſt loued it ſo much. And ſo he ſuffered him to die there of hunger, in the midſt of his riches.How Dionyſius puniſhed a couetous wretch. The puniſhment which Dionyſius the elder, king of Syracuſa, laied vpon a rich couetous ſubiect of his, was more gentle, but woorthie to be well noted, being full of inſtruction. For being aduertiſed that he had hid great ſtore of treaſure in the ground, he commanded him vpon paine of life to bring it vnto him: which he did, although not all of it, but retained part, which he tooke with him, & went to dwell in another citie, where he beſtowed his monie vpon inheritance. When Dionyſius vnderſtood thereof, he ſent for him, and reſtored all his gold and ſiluer, ſaying vnto him▪ foraſmuch as thou knoweſt now how to vſe riches, not making that vnprofitable, which was appointed for the vſe of man, take that, which before thou waſt vnwoorthie to enioy. And to ſpeake the truth, there is no reaſon wherewith the couetouſnes of ſuch men may be coloured. For if they ſay, that they ſpend not bicauſe they care not for ſpending, it is a point of great follie in them to labour to gather more wealth than they want. But if they deſire to ſpend, and yet dare not for niggardlines do ſo, nor enioy the fruite of their labour, they are a great deale more miſerable. Whereby it appeereth vnto vs what

a goodly and commendable thing it is to be content and ſatiſfied with a little, which freeth vs from the deſire of vnneceſſarie things. Now if we are to take thoſe things for ſuperfluous, which we will not vſe, we ought, for the reaſons already ſet down, to make no leſſe accoūt of thoſe which we would abuſe in riot and ſuperfluitie. The couetouſnes of Darius, king of the Perſians, was beguiled and laughed to ſcorne through the ſubtile inuention of Nitocris Queene of Babylon (ſome attribute it to Semiramis)
                     How Darius his couerouſneſſe was beguiled. who, being deſirous to welcome hir ſucceſſors that were touched with auarice, which ſhe abhorred aboue al things cauſed a high ſepulcher to be erected ouer thoſe gates of the citie through which there was moſt paſſage, with theſe words ingrauen therein: If any king of Babylon that ſhal come after me find want in his treaſurie, let him open this tombe and take as much as he will. Otherwiſe let him not open it, for it will not be best for him. After many ages were paſt, and none of the kings of Babylon had touched the ſaid ſepulcher, Darius conquering the kingdom cauſed the coffin to be opened, thinking to find there that which was promiſed. Neuertheleſſe he found nothing there but a dead body, with this writing: If thou wert not inſatiable and very couetous, thou wouldest not haue opened the tombe of the dead. Moreouer, that couetouſnes oftentimes blindeth men ſo farre, as that it cauſeth them to take away their owne life without feare of condemning their ſoules, many examples thereof are left in memorie: of whom ſome through griefe for ſome great loſſe of goods, others to leaue their children rich, haue voluntarily procured their own death. Caſſius Licinius
                     C. Licinius ſtrangled himſelfe to leaue his goods to his children. was of this number, who being accuſed, attainted, & conuicted of many thefts and briberies, and beholding Cicero Preſident at that time, about to put on the purple gowne to pronounce ſentence of confiſcation of goods, and of baniſhment, he ſent word to Cicero that he was dead during the proceſſe and before condemnation: and preſently in the field he ſmothered himſelf with a napkin, hauing no other meaning therein but to ſaue his goods for his children. For then the lawes concerning the puniſhment

of ſuch as had robbed the common-wealth, or of ſuch as being preuented ſlew themſelues, were not made: ſo that they that were accuſed might ſaue their liues by forſaking their goods, yea by paying ſo much only as their accuſers demanded. But there are ſome of a cleane contrary diſpoſition to Licinius, who being readie to giue vp the ghoſt, would gladly cary their wealth with them, as we read ofHermocrates bequeathed his goods to himſelfe. 
                     Hermocrates, who by his wil made himſelf heire of his own goods. Athenaeus maketh mention of another, who at the houre of his death deuoured many pieces of his gold, and ſewed the reſt in his coate, commanding that they ſhould be all buried with him. Valerius Maximus telleth of one, who being beſieged within the town of Caſſilina by Hannibal, preferred the hope of gaine before his owne life. ForA ratte ſold for 200. pence. he choſe rather to ſell a ratte which he had taken, for 200. Romane pence, than to ſatiſfie his hunger, whereof he died quickly after: and the buier being the wiſer man, ſaued his life by that deare meate. Craſſus Conſul of Rome is likewiſe noted by Hiſtoriographers to be extreme couetous, which cauſed him to ſwimme between two factionsCouetouſnes cauſed Craſſus to play on both ſides. diuided for Caeſar and Pompey, ſeruing his owne turne by them both, and chaunging many times from one ſide to another in the adminiſtration of the common-wealth. He ſhewed himſelfe neither a conſtant friend, nor a dangerous enemy, but ſoone forſooke both amitie and enmitie, when he ſaw it would be profitable to him, wherof the encreaſe of his ſubſtance gaue great proofe. For when he firſt began to entermeddle in affaires, his riches amounted but to 300. talents, which according to our money came to about 180000. crownes: but after when he purpoſed to go from Rome to warre with the Parthians, he would needes know how much all his wealth came to. And firſt he offred to Hercules the tenth of all his goods: ſecondly, he made a publike feaſt for all the people of Rome of a thouſand tables: and thirdly, he gaue to eueryWonderfull riches. citizen as much wheate as would finde him three moneths. Notwithſtanding all this, he found that he was worth 7100. talents, which amounted to foure millions,

two hundred and three-ſcore thouſand crownes. He vſed to ſay, that he accounted no man rich, except he were able of his owne charges to hire and maintaine an armie: bicauſe, as no man can ſet downe a readie reckoning of the expences of warre, as king Archidamas ſayd, ſo the riches that is to ſuſtaine it, may not be limited. But in the ende his couetouſneſſe and ambition, which commonly are not farre ſeparated one from another, led him to a violent death, as we declared elſe-where. Now as Craſſus was blamed for couetouſneſſe, ſo Pompey was as muchPompey abhorred couetouſnes. commended and well thought of, bicauſe he abhorred & contemned it. Whereof he gaue good proofe, as alſo of great piety at the taking of the city of Ieruſalem from the Iewes. For when he entred into the Temple, & beheld the great riches thereof, the table of gold, the golden candleſticke, a great number of veſſels of gold, with great abundance of good & exquiſite ſpice for ſmels, & knew moreouer that there was in the treaſurie about two thouſand talents of ſacred ſiluer, yet he would not touch it in any wiſe, nor ſuffer any thing to be taken from it. We that ſay we are chriſtians, follow a farre off the pierie of theſe heathen men, whē as both great and ſmall watch for nothing more than how to intrappe the goods of the Church to make them ſerue our delights and pleaſures. Moreouer we ſee that this curſed plant of couetouſnes groweth as much in the houſe of prayer, as in the courts of kings and princes. The corruption alſo that hath folowed the ſame, is knowen ſufficiently in thoſe men, who to ſatiſfie their vnſatiable deſires call themſelues protectors of this Hydra Ignorance, to the deſtruction and perdition of their own ſoules, and of ten thouſand mo for whom they are to anſwer. Iouian Pontanus rehearſeth a pleaſant hiſtory of a cardinallThe great couetouſnes of a cardinall. named Angelot, who was well puniſhed for his couetouſnes. This cardinal vſed when his horſe-keepers had in the euening giuen oates to his horſes, to come downe all alone without light by a trap doore into the ſtable, & ſo ſteale their oates and cary it into his garner wherof he kept the key himſelfe. He continued his goings and commings

ſo often, that one of his horſe-keepers not knowing who was this thiefe, hid himſelfe in the ſtable, and taking him at the deed doing, (being ignorant who it was) beſtowed ſo many blowes on him with a pitchforke, that he left him halfe dead, ſo that he was faine to be caried by foure men into his chamber. Iohn Maria Duke of Millan,The cruel puniſhment of a couetous curate. chaſticed very iuſtly, but ouer-ſeuerely, the couetouſneſſe of a Curate, who denied the ſeruice of his office in the burying of a dead body, bicauſe his widow had not wherewith to pay him the charges of the buriall. For the Duke himſelfe going to the funerals of the dead, cauſed the prieſt to be taken and bound to the corſe, and ſo caſt them both into one pit. A crueltie no leſſe deteſtable than the vice of thoſe wretches that ſell the gifts of God, and make merchandiſe of that, which they ought to giue freely to the people. Now to end our matter, we maintaine this,1. Tim. 6. 10. that couetouſnes and vnlawful deſire of riches, is the root of all euill, miſerie and calamitie. Moreouer it is more to be miſliked in great men when it followeth riot and prodigalitie, than if it be ioyned with niggardlines, as wel for the reaſons before touched, as alſo bicauſe niggardly and couetous princes vſe more carefully in their eſtates and dignities to prouide ſuch men as are prudent and ſtaied, for the preſeruation of their ſubiects, knowing that their owne ruine dependeth of their vndoing. Which thing voluptuousWhat magiſtrates are beſt liked of couetous princes. princes neglect, bicauſe they dreame of nothing but of their pleaſures, and ſo prouide none but ſuch as will ſerue their humor therein, and flatterers, or elſe ſuch as will giue them moſt money wherewith to maintaine their delights. And let vs further know, that all couetous men go aſtray from the right way of truth, and infold themſelues in many griefs and miſeries, and become odious to euery one. Beſides, not being content with their daily bread, when contrarywiſe their deſire is infinit, they euidently mocke God as often as they make that petition: bicauſe they labour to conceale and to diſſemble before him that knoweth all things, their couetous & greedie affection, whereas true prayer ought to declare

and to open the inward meaning of the hart. Let vs therfore1. Tim. 6. 6. Matth. 6. 19. that are better inſtructed learne, that godlines with contentation is great gaine: and let vs not wearye our ſelues in the heaping vp of treaſure, which the ruſt and moath may conſume and eate, and the theefe ſteale, butWe muſt renounce vniuſt riches. let vs renounce riches and the world, ouer which Satan beareth rule, leaſt in that terrible day he accuſe vs before the great Iudge, and conuince vs of taking ſome thing of his, and then the Iudge being vpright and iuſt, deliuer vs into his hands to throw vs into darknes, where there ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth for euermore.
               
            
            
               Of Enuie, Hatred, and Backbiting. Chap. 43.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  THe mind of man, which of it owne nature is created ſociable, gratious, and ready to helpe euery one, yea, which by the force of charitie working togither with it, feeleth it ſelfe as it were conſtrained to mourne with thoſe that weepe, and to reioice with them that laugh, is able to ſhew nothing moreNothing more vnwoorthie the ſpirite of man than enuie. vnwoorthy it ſelfe, than to be ouercome of enuie, which is a wild plant in the ſoule, bringing foorth cleane contrary effects to that good wil which we owe to our neighbor, & comprehending in it all iniuſtice generally, & all wickednes of men: as we may ſee if you think good (my companiōs) to ſearch more narowly into the nature of this vice.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Enuie proceedeth of a naughtie diſpoſition, and prouoketh light braines (as Pindarus ſaith) to reioice in beholding the aduerſitie of ſome, and to be vexedThe nature of Enuie. at the happie ſucceſſe of others: cauſing men alſo to delight in backbiting honeſt men, eſpecially ſuch as are praiſed. But take heede (ſaith Pittacus) leaſt, ſeeking to auoid enuie, thou becommeſt miſerable.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Hatred and Illwil are the companions of Enuie. Glorye and vertue (ſaith Virgil) are alwaies enuied: which vice is commonlye accompanied with Hatred and Ill-will, whereby men are driuen forward to detract and ſlander others. But hee that keepeth his mouth (ſayth the wiſe man,) keepeth his ſoule. Let vs then heare AMANA,
                     
                     who will inſtruct vs more at large in this which is heere propounded vnto vs.
                  
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  That wicked and ſuttle enimie of mankind, not being able to abide the glorie whereunto God had called men, of which he depriued himſelfe throughWhat execrable ruits enuie hath broughtf oorth. his pride, was driuen with enuie to tempt our firſt parents: whoſe ingratitude conceiuing ſinne in the ſoule of man, the firſt fruite brought foorth by this curſed plant, ſeemeth likewiſe to haue beene enuie, with which Adams eldeſt ſonne being mooued, ſlew his onely brother. Oh curſed and furious enuie, oh fruitfull branch of execrable euils, ſeeing by thee man was firſt beguiled, and induced afterward to admit murder into his hart, and to water the earth, being yet virgine-like, with his brothers blood: whereby he began his chiefe worke vpon innocencie, to the end that wicked men might from father to ſon haue this prerogatiue to oppreſſe the good! Is there any vice then amongſt vs which we ought to hate and flie from more than from enuie, which hauing nothing of hir firſt euill nature diminiſhed, leadeth men to moſt vniuſt and deteſtable actions? Neuertheles, to what paſſion are we more inclined, or do we nouriſh more willingly than this? Let euery one enter into himſelfe, and vndoubtedly he ſhall find there a thouſand enuies, which are neuer without hatred and rancor, grafted in the ſecreteſt place of his ſoule. True it is, that enuy according to the ſubiects which it meeteth withall, bringeth foorth more pernitious effects in ſome, and leſſe hurtfull in others. But how ſoeuer it be, this paſſion is alwaies blame-woorthie, and ought to be eſchewed of euery good and vertuous man, whoſe deſire is, not to wander out of the path of dutie and honeſtie.What Enuie is. We ſay therefore that Enuie is a griefe ariſing of another mans proſperitie, and that malignitie is commonlyMalignitie is defined of ſome to be the effect of that malice which one man beareth to another. ioined with it, whether it be the fountaine therof, as ſome ſay, or one part thereof, as others will haue it. This malignitie is a delight & pleaſure takē in another mans harme, although we receiue no profit thereby: and it ſeemeth to be accidentall, that is, procured by hatred or ill will, ariſing

of ſome euill affection that one man beareth to another. For this cauſe Plutark diſtinguiſheth hatred from enuie, ſaying: that hatred is bred in our harts through an imaginationThe difference betweene hatred and enuie. and conceit which we haue, that he whome we hate behaueth himſelfe wickedly, either towards all men generally, or particularly towards vs: but that men enuie onely thoſe whome they know to be in proſperitie. And ſo it ſeemeth, that enuie is indefinite and not limited, much like to ſore eies, that are offēded at euery cleernes and light, but that hatred is limited, being alwaies grounded and ſtaied vpon ſome certaine obiects in regard of it ſelfe. Moreouer, no man hath iuſt cauſe to enuie another mans proſperitie. For he doth no man wrong, bicauſe he is happie: whereas on the contrarie ſide many are iuſtly hated for their vices and impieties, and oughtTo hate the wicked is a propertie of a good man. to be ſhunned of good men: which hatred of the wicked is a propertie that belongeth to good men. But the hatred that is borne towards good men, is a paſſion not much ſeparated from enuie. And thus may theſe two paſſions, reſembling two plants, be ſaid to be nouriſhed, preſerued, & increaſed by the ſelfe ſame meanes, albeit they ſucceed one another. The ſame Plutark being deſirous to teach vs,Enuie compared to ſorcerie. how we ought to abhorre enuie, calleth it ſorcerie: bicauſe through the poiſon thereof, it doth not onely fill the enuious bodie with a naughtie and hurtfull diſpoſition, but the infection diſperſeth it ſelfe alſo through the eies, euen vpon them that behold it, ſo that they are touched therewith, as it were by ſome poiſonfull influence. Likewiſe he compareth it to the flies called Cantharides.To Cantharides For as they alight eſpecially vpon the faireſt wheate, and moſt blowne roſes: ſo enuie commonly ſetteth it ſelfe againſt the honeſteſt men, and ſuch as haue moſt glorie & vertue. Power, honor, ſtrength, riches, are but brands toThe firebrands of enuie. kindle the fire thereof. Therefore Thucidides ſaith, that a wiſe man deſireth to be enuied, to the ende he may doe great things. Bias ſaid, that enuie and an old houſe oftentimes light vpon a man, and neuer knocke at his gates.Enuie moſt of al hurtfull to the enuious perſon. But if enuie be hurtful to others, it is much more noiſome

to him that poſſeſſeth it, tormenting him within continually with a thouſand turbulent paſſions, which ſhorten his daies, diminiſheth powers of his bodie, and are a great deale more pernitious to his ſoule. For it will not ſuffer him to taſte or conceiue any good ſpeech, or ſound inſtruction, from whomſoeuer it commeth: but cauſeth him to reiect and ſpeake againſt it, as if he were iealous and enuious of his owne good. The occaſion whereof is the ill will which naturally he beareth againſt all them that deſerue more than himſelfe, whereupon he ſtriueth rather to blame, or to wreſt in ill part whatſoeuer was well meant, than to reape any profite thereby. And if he heare a man commend other mens deuices, or any of his owne doings contrary to his mind, he thinketh that he hath ſo many blowes giuen him with a cudgell. Thus we ſee, that enuie wiſhing well to none, doth no leſſe torment and hurt his ſoule that is infected therewith. And to ſpeake in a word, it comprehendeth the generall iniuſtice, which is all kind of wickednes, and deſtroieth all duties of humanitie, cauſing men to hurt thoſe whom they ought to loue and ſuccour. Of this wild plant of enuie, backbiting is a branch, which delighteth and feedeth it ſelfe with ſlandering and lying, whereupon good men commonly receiue great plagues, when they ouer-lightly giue credite to backbiters.Of backbiting. Therfore Diogenes the Cynick being demanded whatWhat biting of beaſts is moſt dangerous. biting of beaſts was moſt dangerous, anſwered: of furious and wild beasts, the backbiters; and of tame beasts, the flatterers. To the ſame purpoſe Themistocles the Thebane ſaid, that it was the greatest griefe in the world, to ſee the honor of a good man in the mercie of a venemous toong, and wronged with ſlanderous ſpeeches. For ſeeing good fame and credite is more pretious than any treaſure, a man hath no leſſe iniurie offeredWhen backbiting hurteth moſt. him when his good name is taken away, than when he is ſpoiled of his ſubſtance. But backbiting and ſlandering do then bring foorth moſt pernitious effects, when Princes are ready to heare ſlanderers, of whome they themſelues are in the end corrupted. For the enuious & backbiting perſon doth as a naughtie painter did, who hauing

ilfauoredly painted certaine cocks, commanded his boy to driue the naturall cocks farre from his picture: ſo he laboureth as much as may be to withdraw good men frō thoſe whom he would gouerne. But bicauſe he cannot do it openly, fearing their vertue whom he hateth from his hart, he will ſeeme to welcome, to honour, and to admire them, and yet vnder hand, and behind their backs he will caſt abroad and ſow his ſlanders. And if ſo be that his priuie and ſecret reports, which pricke behind, do not preſently bring forth the end of his intent, yet he keepeth in memorie that which Medius vttred long ſince, who was as it were the maſter and captaine of the whole flock of flatterers, banded togither about Alexander againſt all the honeſt men in the court. This fellow taught, that theyA peſtilent precept of Medius giuen to backbiters. ſhould not ſpare to nippe boldly and to bite with ſtore of ſlanders. For (quoth he) although he that is bitten ſhould be cured of the wound, yet the skarre at the leaſt will ſtill remaine. And by ſuch skars of lies and falf accuſations, or rather to giue them a better name with Plutark, by ſuch fiſtuloes & cankers Alexander being gnawen, vniuſtly put to death Callisthenes, Parmenion, and Philotas, giuing himſelfe ouer to the wil and poſſeſſion of three of foure flatterers, of whom he was clothed, decked, ſet foorth and adored as it were a barbarian image. Such is the force & efficacie of lying ioyned with flattery ouer that ſoule, which hath no ſound iudgement of reaſon to diſcern truth from falſehood, or a good nature from a malicious. True it is, that this comfort cannot be taken away from good men,The comfort which cannot be taken away from good men. namely, to be perſwaded that the ſleights of backbiters and ſlanderers are able to preuaile but litle againſt the inuincible tower of ſacred vertue, & of an aſſured hope well grounded, which, whatſoeuer commeth to paſſe, triumph alwaies, and victoriouſly hold enuy and backbiting vnder their feete. And although theſe vices by reaſon of their force cauſe them to ſuffer ſometimes, yet patience keepeth them from being ouercome, ſo that they neuer ſinke downe vnder aduerſities, but euen then lay handes vpon the hauen of their deliueraunce. So that if princes would

                     Good counſell for princes againſt flatterers. not fall into thoſe inconueniences, nor be deceiued as this great Macedonian monarch was, they muſt, vpon the reports of backbiters, throughly and with reaſon waigh all things, and not ſuffer themſelues to be perſwaded by ſlanderers, but diſcerne their words with a ſound iudgement. Further let vs note, that they which lend their earesWe muſt not lend our eares to ſlanderers. to their lies and detractions, are no leſſe to be blamed and reprehended, than the ſlaunderers themſelues, bicauſe they are both touched with the ſame imperfection, I meane, of taking delight in the euill report of another. And as the ſlanderer hurteth by accuſing thoſe that are not preſent, ſo doth he that ſuffereth himſelfe to be perſwaded before he hath learned the truth of things. Moreouer, they that accuſtome themſelues to heare willinglyWho delight moſt in reading of fables. reports and lies, commonly alſo take more pleaſure in reading and learning fables and dreames, faults and vices noted in peoples and nations, than in true narrations and goodly ſentences made & written with good iudgement and diligent ſtudie, or in peruſing the honors, heroicall facts, and commendations giuen to vertuous and famous men, which doth touch and grieue them no leſſe than it doth the enuious and backbiter: whereas they ought to accept of thoſe things as of ſpurres to driue them forward vnto vertue. Therefore whoſoeuer conſidereth well all thoſe pernitious effects that are procured through backbiting, he ſhall know that it is a great point of modeſtie, and moſt neceſſarie for him that hath profited well in Morall Philoſophie, not to ſuffer any man to be blamed and euill ſpoken of in his preſence, although he were hisA ſubtill practiſe of enuious men. capitall enimie. We ſee alſo that this crafty & ſubtill kind of wickednes is vſually practiſed of backbiters and enuious perſons, when they perceiue that they cannot cauſe themſelues to be accounted as honeſt mē as they are whō they purpoſe to ſlander, then they labour to prooue that theſe men are not ſo honeſt, as ſome others whom they commēd & preferre, ſeeking by that means to couer their hatred & il-will, and to get credit to their ſlander by that praiſe, which they giue indirectly to others. They ſpare not

the dead many times, neither is there any let in them why through their enuy they drawe them not out of that reſt wherin they are, which is deteſtable impietie. Now ſeeing we know what euil proceedeth from theſe wild & naughty plants of enuy, hatred & backbiting, & that naturally, as inheritors of the vice & ſin of our firſt parents, we cary in our harts, I know not what enuy, ielouſie & emulation againſt ſome one or other, let vs beware that we noriſh not ſuch vicious paſſions, but weaken their force, & make thē
                     A meane to reſiſt enuy and hatred. altogither vnable to cauſe vs to depart from dutie: let vs accuſtome our ſelues not to enuy the proſperitie of our enimies, neither to backbite them in any ſort. And if it be poſſible, let vs not be ſparing in giuing vnto them their praiſe & honor, whenſoeuer they do any thing that deſerueth iuſtly to be commended: bicauſe that alſo bringeth greater praiſe to him that giueth it. For thē if it fall out ſo that he reproueth ſomwhat in his enimy, his accuſatiō carieth more credite and force with it, as that which proceedethEquitie and Iuſtice are the only bounds of a good mans hatred. not from the hatred of his perſon, but from a diſlike of his doings, therby declaring that equitie & iuſtice only are the bounds of his hatred. Beſides we ſhal reape a greater benefite than is hitherto rehearſed. For when we accuſtome our ſelues to praiſe our enimies for well doing, and are not grieued when any proſperitie befalleth them, we ſhall vtterly driue from vs the vice of enuy and iealouſie ouer the good ſucceſſe of our friends & acquaintance, when they attain to honor. Whereas on the contrary ſide if we acquaint our ſelues and take delight in enuying the welfare of our enimies, we ſhall do the like many times to our friends: as we ſee experience thereof in many at this day, who are ſo touched with this vice, that they reioice at the euil which happeneth to their wel-willers, and to ſuch as are the occaſion of their good & preferment. But if we be deſirous to diſcharge our duetie towards our neighbours for whoſe profite we are borne, let vs ſeeke to practiſe that ſentence of Cicero, that an honeſt man & good citizen neuer ought to be moued with hatred or enuy vpō ſuppoſed crimes, no not towards his enimy, wiſhing to die rather thā to offend againſt
                     
                     Iustice, which is an vtter enimie to that vice. This alſo will be a good helpe and meane to keepe vs from backbiting, ifWhat ſcoffing is, and how it is to be auoided. we eſchew al kind of ſcoffing, which (as Theophraſtus ſaith) is nothing elſe but a cloſe and coloured reproofe of ſome fault, which by little and little inureth him that mocketh to back bite another openly and vntruly. This great imperfection of gibing is very familiar amongſt vs, although it be as vnſeemely for an honorable perſonage as ſome other more infamous vice. But to the end we may haue better occaſion to keepe vs from it, let vs know that manyA ſcoffe is many times woorſe taken than any other iniurious ſpeech. times a man is more mooued with a gibing gird, than with an iniurie: bicauſe this latter proceedeth commonly from the vehemencie of ſudden choler, euen againſt his will that vttereth it, but the other is more taken to hart, as that which ſeemeth to come from a ſetled wil and purpoſe to offer wrong, and from a voluntarie malitiouſnes without any neceſſitie. If we be diſpoſed to be merie,How mirth is commendable. as ſometimes opportunitie, place, and perſons inuite vs thereunto, let it be done with a good grace, and without offence to any. Now although enuie and backbiting, by reaſon of their pernitious effects, are ſo odious to all honorable and vertuous perſonages, yet no other reuenge is to be ſought or deſired, than that puniſhment which followeth and groweth with the vice it ſelfe, which neuer ſuffereth him that is touched therewith, to enioy any reſt in his ſoule, as we haue already learned. Neither is there any great care to be had for the matter, ſeeing enuious perſons and backbiters are no waies able to bite the deſerts of good men. But if we would haue their puniſhmentA notable way how to be reuenged vpon the enuious. augmented and doubled, there is no better way, than to ſtudie ſo much the more to do well, as we ſee them labor more earneſtly to enuie and to condemne our dealings. For as the Sunne being directly ouer the top of any thing whatſoeuer, if it leaue any ſhadow at all, yet is it but ſhort and little, bicauſe the light thereof is diſperſed round about the ſame: ſo the excellencie of vertue, glorie, & honor, in the end conſtraineth the venemous toong to drinke and to ſwallow downe hir owne poiſon, not daring

to bring it againe in ſight, whereby enuie and blame are as it were wholy extinguiſhed, and vnable to hurt good men any more. This reaſon cauſed Phillip king of Macedonia to make this anſwere to certaine, who told him, that the Graecians ſpake ill of him behind his backe, notwithſtanding he did them much good, and therefore willed him to chaſtice them: What would they do then (quothPhillip tooke occaſion through backbiting to do better. this noble and gentle Prince) if we ſhould doe them any harme? But they make me become a better man. For I ſtriue dailie both in my wordes and deedes to prooue them lyars. And another time, as his friendes counſelled him to put to death, or to baniſh a Gentleman of Macedonia, who continued in ſlandering him, he would not doe either of both, ſaying: that it was no ſufficient cauſe to condemne him to death: and as for baniſhing him, he ſayd: that it was a great deale better if he ſtirred not out of Macedonia, where all men knewe that he lyed, than if he went amongſt ſtrangers to ſpeake ill of him, who bicauſe they knewe him not well, might peraduenture admit his ſlander as true. Whereby this vertuous Prince at one tyme ſhewed foorth the effectes of three excellent vertues: firſt, of Clemencie, in that hee would not put him to death, of whome he had receiued great iniurie: then of Magnanimitie, in contemning iniurie: and laſtly, of woonderfull Prudence, in that he did not baniſh him. And in deede he was of ſuch a gentle nature, that he would neuer puniſh them that gaue him an euill report, but rather tooke away the occaſion thereof, as heeretofore we haue in part mentioned it. And for a greater teſtimonie of the goodnes of this Monarch, the anſwere he made to them that counſelled him to deſtroy the citie of Athens, deſerueth well to be heere ſet downe. I doe all thinges (quoth he to them) for glorie, how then ſhould I destroy Athens, which by reaſon of learning, is the Theater of glorie? The example of Demetrius Phalerius,
                     Athens the Theater of glorie. a Prince of immortall renowne, ſerueth fitly to teach vs what ſmall account we are to make of the dealings of enuious men, ſo farre ought we to be from caring either

for their dooings or ſayings. When word was brought to this Prince, that the Athenians, mooued with enuie againſt him, had broken downe thoſe three hundred images, which were before erected in their ſtreete of Ariopagus to his honour, and thereupon was prouoked by his Councel to be reuenged of them, he ſaid: The Athenians may well throw downe my images, but they are not able to abaſe my vertues, for whoſe ſake my images were heeretofore erected for a publike ſpectacle. And truely thoſe actes of Princes, which, being done in their lifeThe beſt monument for a Prince. time, are woorthie of memorie, may ſerue them for an euerlaſting monument, and not Images & Tombs made with mens hands, which length of time, beſides a thouſand other accidents may bring to pouder. Neither are they depriued of the ſame glorie that liue vnder the gouernment of great men, when, according to their places and callings, they direct their actions to the benefite and ſafetie of the Common-wealth. For whenſoeuer enuie laboureth to hurt them with ſuppoſed crimes, their innocencieInnocencie is a tower of braſſe againſt ſlanderers. (as Horace▪
                      ſaith) will be vnto them in place of an inexpugnable tower of braſſe: ſo that being aſſured of that, they neede not ſtand in any feare of the cruell teeth of ſlanderers. Therefore Socrates being reprooued by Hermogenes, bicauſe he did not once dreame of defending himſelfe when he was accuſed, made this anſwere: I haue dreamed of that all my life time, by ſtriuing to liue well. To conclude then our preſent diſcourſe, let vs learne to vncloath our hartes of all enuie and hatred, which procure ſo many turbulent and hurtfull paſſions in the ſoule, and ouerthrowe all that charitie and loue, which we ought to beare towards euery one. Let vs feare1. Iohn 3. 15. this ſentence pronounced by the holie ſpirite, that whoſoeuer hateth his brother is a man ſlayer. And if we ſee that vice and imperfections raigne in our like, let vs hate their euill manners, and loue the welfare of their ſoules, by endeuouring to bring them backe againe into the path way of vertue, vntill we ſee that all hope of remedie is taken away by reaſon of their long ſetled habite and continuance

in vice: for then we are to ſhunne altogither the hurtfull conuerſation of ſuch forlorne men. Let vs take heede that wee pleaſe not our ſelues in detracting and backbiting, or in ſpeaking raſhly of any without aduiſement taken of whome, to whome, and what we ſpeake. Let vs not be giuen to lying, or to harken to ſlanderers, but following the counſell of the Scripture, let vs laye aſide1. Pet. 2. 1. 2. all malitiouſnes, and all guile, and diſſimulation, and enuie, and all euill ſpeaking, and as newe borne babes deſire the milke of vnderſtanding, which we may as it were boaſt that we haue in the true and right knowledge of Iuſtice, which is to render to God that which is due to him, according to pietie, and to our neighbours whatſoeuer belongeth to them, according to the dutie of charitie,1. Cor. 13. 4. which is gentle, not eaſily prouoked to anger, nor enuious, nor reioycing in iniquitie, but alwaies in the truth.
               
            
            
               Of Fortune. Chap. 44.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  IF I bee not deceiued (my Companions) wee haue hitherto ſufficientlye diſcourſed of the foure Morall vertues, being riuers that flowe from the fountaine of dutie and honeſtie, as alſo of all the partes that belong vnto them, and of their contrarie vices. Therefore from hence foorth we are to make choice of ſome other matter, and to applie that which we might haue learned in the diſcourſes of our Morall Philoſophie, vnto Eſtates, charges, and conditions of life, whereunto euerie one of vs may be called during this life: yea, let vs aſſaie to giue aduice and councell to ſuperiours, according to the meaſure of our iudgement. But bicauſe, as I thinke, the entrie to ſo high a matter, requireth ſome leaſure to thinke vppon it, I am of opinion, that we were beſt to deferre this point vntill the next dayes worke: and in the meane tyme, for the ſpendinge of the reſte of this after-noone,

looke out ſome matter ſubiect, apt, and fit to recreate our ſpirites withall: which, bicauſe naturally they delight in varietie and diuerſitie of thinges, cannot haue a more conuenient matter, than to make ſport with the diuers and ſundrie effects of Fortune, which, according toFortune is conſtant in hir inconſtancie. the ſaying of the Ancients, is very conſtant in hir inconſtancie. Further, let vs conſider howe we may vſe this word of Fortune, which is ſo common amongſt vs, and not abuſe it.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  To him (ſaith Cicero) whoſe hope, reaſon, and cogitation dependeth of Fortune, nothing can be ſo certaine or aſſured vnto him, that he may perſwade himſelfe it will abide by him, no not one day. But he is moſt happie that is of himſelfe ſufficient in euery reſpect, and that placeth the hope of all his affaires in himſelfe, in regard of men.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  I am ſhe (ſayth Vertue, ſpeaking in Mantuan) that ſurmounteth Fortune, and the ſcourge that puniſheth ſinnes. Vice and Vertue (ſayth Plutark) haue no maiſters to rule ouer them: and they are very blind, who, calling Fortune blinde, ſuffer themſelues to be guided and ledde by hir. But we muſt learne of thee (ASER) what we are to thinke of this counterfet Goddeſſe.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  If we are perſwaded, that he who is Iuſtice it ſelfe, and the eſſentiall truth, maketh Princes contemptiblePſal. 107. 40. 41. (as it is ſaid in the Scripture) and cauſeth them to erre in deſert places out of the way, raiſing vp the poore out of miſerie, and making him families like a flocke of ſheepe, there is no doubt but that Fortune being an Epicurian worde, rather than an Heatheniſh, is nothing elſeWhat Fortune is. but a fayned deuice of mans ſpirite, and an imagination without truth: vpon which (as Plutarke ſayth) a man can not ſettle his iudgement, nor yet comprehend it by the diſcourſe of reaſon. So that we muſt confeſſe, that all things are guided & gouerned by the prouidence of God,God ordereth caſuall things neceſſarily. who knoweth and ordereth caſuall thinges neceſſarily. Which albeit we eaſily cōfeſſe with the mouth, as alſo that

proſperitie and aduerſitie depend onely of the will of God, yet we may daily note in many of vs, effects cleane contrarie to the worde, in that, when we deliberate about our affayres, we preſently caſt our eie vpon humaneHumane meanes are but ſecond cauſes. meanes, to come to the ende of them, although they are but ſecond cauſes, caſting behind our backes that helpe, which is from aboue. And when we want the bleſſing of God, through his anger and iuſt indignation, (which we care not to appeaſe) and ſo for the moſt part ſtumble vpon the cleane contrarie of all our platformes and goodly enterpriſes; then we accuſe, not our ignorance and ingratitude towardes his Maieſtie, but the vnfortunate miſhap and chance of humane thinges, which through the common error of men, we attribute to Fortune. Nowe,Acts. 17. 28. Rom. 11. 33. knowing that we liue, and mooue, and haue our being in God onely, that his myſteries are great and woonderfull, and ſuch, that if we ſhould go about to ſound the bottom of them, it were all one as if we ſought to pearce the heauens, after the manner of the Giants, ſet foorth vnto vs by the Poets: that our way is not in our power, and thatIer. 10. 23. Exod. 21. 13. Deut. 19. 4. 5. Prou. 16. 33. of our ſelues we cannot direct our ſteps: that it is the Lorde that offereth a man into his handes, who vnwittingly killeth him with the heade of his Axe ſlipt from the helue: that lots caſt at aduenture, fall out according to his iudgement, and that generally all things are done by the ordinance of God, I ſay, knowing all theſe things, yet bicauſe the order, reaſon, ende, and neceſſitie of thoſe thinges which are ſo ſtrange, vncertaine, and mutable in the world, are for the moſt part hidden in the counſell of God, and cannot be comprehended by theHow we may vſe theſe words of Fortune and Chance. opinion and reach of man, we may well call them caſuall and chancing, in reſpect of our ſelues. The like we may both conceiue of all future euents, holding them in ſuſpence, bicauſe they may fall out either of the one or the other ſide, (and yet being reſolued of this, that nothing ſhall come to paſſe which God hath not ordained) and alſo note them out by this worde Fortune, not attributing thereunto any power ouer the inconſtancie and

continuall alteration of humane things: eſpecially ſeeing they are ſo changeable, that it would be a verye hard matter (ſpeaking after the manner of men) to comprehend them vnder a more proper and fit word. The definition alſo, which the Ancients gaue of Fortune, is very agreeable to the effect of the thing ſignified, and of that wherof we haue daily experience: namely, that there is no other final end of chang & alteration in man, than that ofThe opinions of ancient Philoſophers touching Fortune. his being. Plato ſaith, that Fortune is an accidentall cauſe, & a conſequence in thoſe things which proceed from the counſell of man. Ariſtotle ſaith, that Fortune is a caſuall & accidental cauſe in things, which, being purpoſely done for ſome certaine end, haue no apparant cauſe of their falling out otherwiſe: ſo that a man may well ſay, that ſuch a thing came to him by Fortune, which falleth out beſides his thought, when he vndertaketh any worke with deliberation. Epicurus ſaid, that Fortune was ſuch a cauſe, as agreed neither to perſons, times, or manners. Theophrastus ſpeaking of Fortune, ſaith, that ſhe looketh not whereat ſhe ſhooteth, that oftentimes ſhe delighteth in taking away that, which is gotten with very great paine, but eſpecially in ouerturning thoſe felicities, which, as men think, are beſt ſtaied and aſſured. Iuuenal ſaith, that when it pleaſeth hir, ſhe maketh a Conſul of a Rhetoritian: & likewiſe cleane contrary, hauing this propertie in hir to reioice greatly in the varietie of chances, & to deride all the deuices of men, oftener lifting vp into the place of ſoueraigne authoritie ſuch as are vnwoorthy thereof, than thoſe thatThe Romanes gaue great honor to Fortune. deſerue the ſame. Amongſt the Ancients, the Romanes honoured Fortune more than all the reſt, eſteeming of hir (ſaith Pindarus) as of the patron, nurſe, & vpholder of the citie of Rome. They builded for hir many ſumptuous Temples, wherein ſhe was adored vnder ſundry names, & honorable titles for a Goddeſſe of ſingular power: inſomuch that they thought themſelues more beholding to hir for the greatnes & proſperity of their Empire, than to vertue. Sylla hauing attained to the ſoueraigne authoritie of a Monarch, and of Dictator, yeelded himſelfe & all his

actions to the fauor of Fortune, ſaying, that he reputedSylla ſurnamed himſelfe Happie.
                      himſelfe to be Fortunes child, and thereupon tooke vnto him the ſurname of Happie. Which opinion ſeemeth to haue preuailed greatly with him, in cauſing him, after he had committed infinite proſcriptions, murders, & cruelties, voluntarily & without feare to giue ouer the Dictatorſhip, to lead the reſt of his yeeres in all aſſurance & quietnes, & as a priuate man to paſſe & repaſſe through all Italy without any gard, euen in the midſt of them whome he had ſo much offended. We read alſo, that when Mithridates king of Pontus wrote vnto him concerning the war, which he had vndertaken againſt him, ſaying, that he maruelled how Sylla durſt buckle with his great fortune, eſpecially knowing that ſhe had not deceiued him at any time, whereas ſhe neuer knew Sylla Conſul, he returned this anſwer. For this ſelfe ſame reaſon thou ſhalt now ſee, how Fortune doing hir dutie, will take hir leaue of thee to come to mee. Iulius Caeſar gaue a certaine argumentI. Caeſar. of the aſſurance he had in Fortune, when, entring vpon the ſea in a little Fregate in a very tempeſtuous weather, and the Pilot making ſome doubt of waighing vp the Anchor, he ſayde thus vnto him: Be not afrayde my friende, for thou carieſt Caeſar and his Fortune. Augustus
                     Auguſtus. his ſucceſſour ſending his Nephew to the warre, wiſhed that he might be as valiant as Scipio, as well beloued as Pompey, and as fortunate as himſelfe: attributing to Fortune, as a principall worke, the honour of making him ſo great as he was. To this purpoſe alſo it is reported, that great acquaintance and familiaritie growing betweene Augustus and Antonius his Companion in the Empire, they often paſſed away the time togither with ſundrie ſortes of plaies and paſtimes, wherein Antonius alwayes went away vanquiſhed. Whereupon one of his familiar friendes well ſeene in the arte of Diuination,A true foreſight of a Soothſayer. tooke occaſion many tymes to vtter his mind vnto him in theſe or the like ſpeeches. Sir, what do you ſo neere this yoong man? Separate your ſelfe farre from him. Your fame is greater than his, you are elder than

he, you command moe men than he, you are better exerciſed in feates of Armes, you haue greater experience: but your familiar ſpirite feareth his, and your fortune, which of it ſelfe is great, flattereth his, and if you ſequeſter not your ſelfe farre from him, ſhe will forſake you and goe to him. Thus we ſee what great eſtimation the Romanes had of Fortune, yea they ſtood in ſo great awe of hir power,P. Aemilius. that Paulus Aemilius that great Captaine ſayd, that amongſt humane things, he neuer feared any one of them, but amongſt diuine things he alwaies ſtoode in great feare of Fortune, as of hir in whome there was ſmall truſt to be placed, bicauſe of hir inconſtancie and mutable varietie, whereby ſhe neuer vſeth to gratifie men ſo liberally, or to beſtow ſuch abſolute proſperitie vpon them, but that ſome enuie is mingled withall. Oh deceitfull Fortune (ſaid Demetrius) thou art eaſily found, but hardly auoyded! They that haue laboured moſt in paintingThe deſcription of Fortune. out this fained Goddeſſe, ſay, that ſhe hath a ſwift pace, a loftie mind, and a hawtie hope. They giue hir light wings, a globe vnder hir feete, and in hir hand a horne of abundance, full of all ſuch heauenlie and earthlie things as are exquiſite and pretious, which ſhe poureth foorth liberally, when and where ſhe pleaſeth. Some put a wheele into hir hands, which ſhe turneth about continually, whereby that part which is aboue is preſently turned downeward:What is meant by Fortunes wheele. therby giuing vs to vnderſtand, that from hir higheſt preferment ſhe throweth downe in one inſtant ſuch as are moſt happy, into the gulfe of miſerie. In a word, we may well compare hir to a glaſſe, which, the brighter it is, the ſooner it is broken & daſht in peeces. Hiſtories, the treaſurieExamples of the contrary effects of Fortune. of antiquitie, ſet before our eies innumerable examples of common and contrary effects, which are wrought by this inconſtant Fortune, and thoſe oftentimes practiſed vpon the ſame perſons, whome of ſmal ſhe hath made very great, and after taken them downe lower, yea made them more miſerable (if I may ſo ſpeake) than they wereHannibal. at their beginning. Hannibal, that renowmed Captaine of the Carthaginians, that redouted enimy of the Romanes,

after notable victories obtained ſundry times againſt thē, was in the ende vtterly ouerthrowen and compelled to flie hither and thither, and to haue recourſe to forraine princes, into whoſe armes he caſt himſelfe for the ſafetie of his perſon: and after long wandring, being old & ſpent,Flaminius or
                           •
                        
                        tion againſt Hannibal. he ſetled himſelfe with the king of Bithynia. But Titus Flaminius whom the Romanes had ſent embaſſador to that king, required to haue him, that he might put him to death. For (quoth he) as long as he liueth he will be a fire for the Romane empire, which wanteth but ſome one or other to kindle it. When he was in the vigor and ſtrength of his age, neither his hand nor his body had procured ſo great damage to the Romanes, as his good vnderſtanding and ſufficiencie in the arte of warre had done, being ioined with the hatred he bare them. Which is nothing diminiſhed through old age, neither yet through the alteration of his eſtate and fortune: bicauſe the nature and qualitie of maners continueth alwaies. Hannibal being aduertiſed of this requeſt of Titus, ſtieped poiſon in a cup of drinke which he had kept a long time againſt an extremitie. But before he dranke thereof, he vttred theſe wordes. Go to, let vs deliuer the people of Rome from this greatWhat ſpeech Hannibal vſed before he poiſoned himſelfe. care, ſeeing it lieth ſo heauy vpon them, and the time ſeemeth vnto them ouer-long to ſtay for the naturall death of this poore old man, whom they hate ſo extremely. And yet Titus ſhall not obtaine a victory greatly honorable, or woorthy the praiſe of the ancient Romanes, who, euen then when Pyrrhus their enimy warred againſt them, and had wonne battels of them, ſent him word to beware of poiſon that was prepared for him. Thus did this great & vertuous captaine finiſh his daies, being vtterly ouerthrowen, and trode vnder foote by fortune, which for a time had placed him in the higheſt degree of honor that could be. Eumenes a Thracian, one of Alexanders lieutenants,Eumenes. and one that after Alexanders death had great wars and made his partie good againſt Antigonus king of Macedonia, came to that greatneſſe and authoritie from a poore Potters ſonne: & afterwards being ouercome and

taken priſoner, he died of hunger. But ſuch preferments of fortune will not ſeeme very ſtrange vnto vs, if we conſiderPertinax. how Pertinax came to the Empire, aſcending from a ſimple ſouldier to the degree of a captaine, and afterward of Gouernour of Rome, being borne of a poore countrywoman. And hauing raigned only two moneths,Aurelianus. he was ſlaine by the ſouldiers of his gard. Aurelianus fromProbus. the ſame place obtained the ſelfe ſame dignitie. Probus
                     Maximianus. was the ſonne of a gardiner, and Maximianus of a blackſmith.Iustinus. 
                     Iustinus, for his vertue ſurnamed the Great, from a hogheard in Thracia, attained to the empire. Wil you haue a worthy exāple agreeable to that ſaying of Iuuenal which
                        Gregory 7. we alleaged euen now? Gregory the 7. from a poore monke was lift vp to the dignitie of chief biſhop of Rome: & Henry
                     
                        Henry 4. the 4. emperor, was brought to that extreme miſerie by wars, that he asked the ſaid Gregory forgiuenes, & caſt him ſelfe down at his feete. And yet before this miſerable monarch could ſpeake with him, he ſtood 3. days faſting and barefoote at the popes palace gate, as a poore ſuppliant waiting whē he might haue entrance & acceſſe to his holynes.Lewes the Meeke. 
                     Lewes the Meeke, emperour, & king of France, was conſtrained to giue ouer his eſtate, & to ſhut himſelf vp in a monaſterie, through the conſpiracie of his own childrē.Valerianus. 
                     Valerianus had a harder chaunge of his eſtate, ending his days whileſt he was priſoner in the hands of Sapor king of the Parthians, who vſed the throte of this miſerable emperor whenſoeuer he mounted vpō his horſe. But was not that a wonderful effect of fortune, which hapned not long ſince in Munſter, principal towne in the country of Weſtphalia▪
                     Iohn of Leiden. wherin a ſillie botcher of Holland, being retired as a poore baniſhed man from his country, called Iohn of Leiden, was proclaimed king, was ſerued & obeied of all the people a long time, euen vntil the taking & ſubuerſion of the ſaid town after he had born out the ſiege for the ſpaceMahomet. of 3. yeeres. Mahomet the firſt of that name, of a very ſmal and abiect place, being enriched by marying his miſtres, and ſeruing his own turne very fitly with a mutinie raiſed by the Sarraſins againſt Heracleus the emperor, made himſelf

their captain, tooke Damaſcus, ſpoiled Egypt, & finally ſubdued Arabia, diſcomfited the Perſians, and became both a monarch & a prophet. Wil you ſee a moſt wōderful effect of fortune? Look vpon the procedings of that great Tamburlane, who being a peſants ſon & keping cattel, corruptedTamburlane. 500. ſheepheards his companions. Theſe men ſelling their cattel, betook them to armes, robbed the merchants of that country, & watched the high ways. Which when the king of Perſia vnderſtood of, he ſent a captaine with a 1000. horſe to diſcomfit them. But Tamburlane delt ſo with him, that ioining both togither they wrought many incredible feates of armes. And when ciuil warre grew betwixt the king and his brother, Tamburlane entred into the brothers pay, who obtained the victory by his means, & therupon made him his lieutenant general. But he not long after ſpoiled the new king, weakened & ſubdued the whole kingdom of Perſia. And when he ſaw himſelfe captain of an army of 400000. horſmen, & 600000. footmē, he made warre with Baiazet emperor of the Turkes, ouercameBaiazet. him in battel, and tooke him priſoner. He obtained alſo a great victorie againſt the Souldan of Egypt, and the king of Arabia. This good ſucceſſe (which is moſt to be maruelled at and very rare) accompanied him always vntill his death, in ſo much that he ended his days amongſt his children, as a peaceable gouernour of innumerable countries. From him deſcended the great Sophy who raigneth at this day, and is greatly feared and redoubted of the Turke. But that miſerable Baiazet who had conquered before ſo many peoples, and ſubdued innumerable cities, ended his dayes in an iron cage, wherein being priſoner, and ouercome with griefe to ſee his wife ſhamefully handled, in waiting at Tamburlanes table with hir gowne cut downe to hir Nauell, ſo that hir ſecrete partes were ſeene, this vnfortunate Turke beate his head ſo often agaynſt the Cage, that he ended his lyfe. But what neede we drawe out this diſcourſe further to ſhewe the ſtraunge dealinges, and maruellous chaunges of fortune in the particular eſtates and conditions of men,

which are to be ſeene daily amongſt vs, ſeeing the ſoueraignOf the foure ſoueraigne Empires. Empires of Babylon, of Perſia, of Graecia, and of Rome, which in mans iudgement ſeemed immutable and inexpugnable, are fallen from all their glittering ſhew and greatnes, into vtter ruine and ſubuerſion, ſo that of the laſt of them, which ſurpaſſed the reſt in power, there remaineth onely a commandement limited and reſtrained within the confines of Almaigne, which then was not the tenth part of the rich prouinces ſubiect to this Empire? Is there any cauſe then why we ſhould be aſtoniſhed, if litle kingdoms, common-wealths and other ciuill gouernments end, when they are come to the vtmoſt, & ful point of their greatnes? And much leſſe if it fal out ſo with mē, who by nature are ſubiect to change, and of themſelues deſire and ſeeke for nothing elſe but alteration. Being aſſured therefore, that there is ſuch vncertaintie in all humane things, let vs wiſely prepare our ſelues, and applyWe muſt prepare our ſelues for all euents. our will to all euents, whoſe cauſes are altogither incomprehenſible in reſpect of our vnderſtandings, and quite out of our power. For he that is able to ſay, I haue preuented thee O fortune, I haue ſtopped all thy paſſages, and cloſed vp all thy wayes of entrance, that man putteth not all his aſſurance in barres or locked gates, nor yet in high walles, but ſtaieth himſelfe vpon Phyloſophicall ſentences and diſcourſes of reaſon, whereof all they are capable that imploy their wils, trauell and ſtudie thereupon. Neither may we doubt of them or diſtruſt our ſelues, but rather admire and greatly eſteeme of them, beyng rauiſhed with an affectionate ſpirite. He that taketh leaſt care for to morow (ſaith Epicurus) commeth thereuntoWho taketh greateſt ioy in outward goods. with greateſt ioy. And (as Plutarke ſaith) riches, glory, authoritie and credite, reioyce them moſt, that ſtande leaſt in feare of their contraries. For when a man ſeeketh after any of them with an ouer-burning deſire, whereby alſo too great a feare of looſing them is imprinted in him, the pleaſure which he hath by enioying the ſame, is verie weake and vnſtable, much like to a flame blowen vp and downe with the winde. But as for the power of fortune

(ſaith the ſame Philoſopher) it bringeth downe thoſe men that of their owne nature are cowards, fearefull and of ſmall courage. Neither muſt we attribute cowardlines toOf the power of fortune. miſfortune, nor valure and prudence to fortune, who is not able to make a man great without vertue. For what good will weapons doe a man without experience, riches without liberalitie, victorie without bountie and clemencie, fighting without valure and boldneſſe: briefly all fortunes goods without knowledge how to vſe them well? Let vs learne alſo that it is too great blockiſhneſſe to attribute the cauſe of the change of monarchies, commonwealths, eſtates, of battels loſt, and generally of all caſuall miſhaps, both generall and particular, to certaine ſecond cauſes: one while accuſing the ambition of ſome, the ignorance or negligence of others, the ſmall courage, want of money, of men, or of munitions. But we muſtWhether we muſt looke in the change and ſucceſſe of things. looke higher, and turne towardes him who vſeth ſuch meanes in the execution of his wonderfull counſell, when he mindeth to chaſtiſe and to puniſh men for their offences. Example hereof we haue in thoſe great monarchies of Babylon, of Perſia, and of Graecia, whoſe markes are no more to be ſeene, than the pathe of a ſhip in the water, or way of a bird flying in the aire. And yet they were ouerthrowen and vanquiſhed by ſuch as had a thouſand times leſſe humane force and chiefe ſinewes of warre, as treaſure, men, munition and other furniture, than their monarches and emperours had, who abounded euery way. But God purpoſed to puniſh their pride and iniquitie. Let vs therefore ſtand in awe, not of the goddeſſe fortune, which is but the dreame of man, and cannot (as Cicero ſaith) greatly hurt him, that iudgeth hope grounded vpon vertue more firme, than that which is built vpon hir forces, but let vs feare him who directeth and diſpoſeth in wiſdome all things created to their proper end,The proper end of all things. which is the glorie of his name, and ſaluation of his elect: albeit the order which he obſerueth, the cauſe, reaſon, and neceſſitie of them, are for the moſt part hid in his ſecret counſell, and cannot be comprehended by the

ſenſe of man. And yet not ſo hid, but that we ought prudently to conſider of thoſe means which he offreth vnto vs for our vſe, after we haue endeuoured to mitigate and to appeaſe his wrath and anger through the amendment of our life, and haue called for aide and helpe of him in all our enterpriſes grounded by reaſon vpon dutie.
               
            
            The ende of the eleuenth daies worke.
         
         
            THE TWELFTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Mariage. Chap. 45.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     IT is greate perfection (as Seneca writeth) for a man to take in hand and deſire toA wiſe man is not deſirous of many things. obtain but one only thing. But no man is one and the ſame, except a wiſe man: all other men are of diuers formes. Who knoweth not with how great diſquietnes the mind of man is ſet on fire, with what lightnes it is caried hither & thither, and with what ambition and deſire it is ſtirred vp to take holde of many ſundry thinges atDiſtinctions of callings appointed from the beginning. Gen. 4. 2. once? Notwithſtanding we muſt diligently marke, how the heauenly wiſdome hath made a diſtinction of eſtates and kindes of life amongſt men from the beginning, appointing that of Adams two firſt children, the one ſhould be a husbandman, the other a ſheepheard. Since that, theEuery one muſt abide in his calling. 1. Cor. 7. 20. ſelfe ſame prouidence hath alwayes commaunded, that euery one of vs ſhould looke vnto his calling in all the actions of his life, accounting therof as of a ſtation aſſigned

vnto vs by his maieſtie, and as of a perpetuall rule whereby we muſt direct the ende of our intents, and following the will of God, ſtriue to continue ſuch men to the ende of our dayes, as we once purpoſed with our ſelues to be. For we may aſſure our ſelues, that there is no worke ſo ſmall and contemptible, which doth not ſhine and appeere precious before the heauenly throne, if we do it inAll things done in faith are pretious in Gods ſight. faith according to our calling, and giue glory to the Eternall for our whole condition and ſtate of life. Nowe we know that after God had created man by his almightie power and vnſpeakable goodneſſe, to make him partaker of his glory, and to rule ouer the earth, the ſea, and all things contained in them, he gaue him preſently the woman for a faithfull companion, and ſweete ſolace to his life, and for the preſeruation of his kinde, inſtituting andGen. 2. 24. ſanctifying mariage from that tyme forward. Therefore I thinke my companions, that we ought to handle this firſt, bicauſe it is the firſt calling of man, moſt common, and moſt honorable: to the end that we may, as we ſayd yeſterday, begin to apply the actions and practiſe of the vertues, of which we haue hitherto intreated, to eſtates and conditions of life, whereunto eche of vs may be called.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  If we could (ſaith Plato) behold with bodily eyes the beautie that honeſtie hath in hir, we wouldHoneſtie is always beautiful. be farre in loue with hir: but ſhe is to be ſeen onely with the eyes of the minde. And truely with the ſame eyes we may behold it in mariage, if we conſider narowly the honeſtie of the coupled life, when it is in euery reſpect abſolute, than the holy bond whereof, the earth hath nothing more beautifull or honeſt.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     Mariage is honorable among all. Heb. 13. 4. Prou. 18. 22. Mariage (as the ſcripture ſaith) is honorable among all, and the bed vndefiled. He that findeth a wife, findeth a good thing, and receiueth fauour of the Lord. Therefore of thee (ACHITOB) we deſire to vnderſtand more at large what thou haſt learned concerning this matter diſcuſſed with ſo many contrary opinions both old and new.
               
               
                  
                  ACHITOB.
                  Nature hauing brought vs foorth toMan borne to liue in ſocietie. liue in ſocietie, and not alone, like to brute beaſts, it muſt needes be (ſaith Aristotle) that he which liueth ſolitarily,The definition of ſocietie. is either a very beaſt, or more than a man. Now a ſocietie is an aſſemblie and agreement of many in one, ſeeking after ſome good thing that is profitable, pleaſant, and honeſt, atleaſt that ſeemeth to be ſo: or elſe labouring toThe end of ſocietie. flie from and to eſchew ſome euill. Euery ſocietie reſpecteth the maintenance and preſeruation of Monarchies, Kingdomes, and Common-wealths. But bicauſe no one whole and generall thing can be knowne (as the Philoſophers ſay) except the parts thereof be firſt knowne, it agreeth very fitly with the cauſe of our meeting togither, and is alſo very neceſſarie for vs, to learne what the ſocietie of wedlocke is, which being the ſeminarie and preſeruationThe definition of wedlocke. of all ſocieties, is nothing elſe but a communion of life betweene the husband and the wife, extending it ſelfe to all the parts that belong to their houſe, of whichThe author and antiquitie of mariage. we are to conſider heereafter. The originall and antiquitie of this ſocietie, called Mariage, is eſpecially woorthie of memorie, bicauſe God himſelfe was the author thereof.The end therof. For he had no ſooner created the firſt man, but he purpoſed to giue him a wife, for a faithful companion, a comfortreſſe of his life, and a helpe like vnto himſelfe. Which he performed, as ſoone as he thought vpon it: foraſmuch as with him to will, is to be able, and to do: as likewiſe toAnother end. be able and to do, is to will. Furthermore, he inſtituted this diuine myſterie for the generall increaſe of mankind, and lawfull propagation of nature, euen in the time of innocencie before man had ſinned, ſanctifieng it at the ſame time with his bleſſing. Vnto which neceſſitie of mariage, man had made himſelfe a great deale more ſubiect through the curſe of ſinne, which hath giuen place in hisThe neceſſitie and third end of mariage. ſoule to the concupiſcences of the fleſh. Whereby it appeereth that we haue need of this remedy in two reſpects, namely: in regard of the end and condition of our firſt nature, as alſo by reaſon of ſin, which came in afterward, except in thoſe to whome God hath granted the ſpeciall

grace and gift of continencie, which is as rare a thing asContinencie a rare gift. any other whatſoeuer. Notwithſtanding there hath alwais been a thouſand contrary opinions as touching this matter, namely, whether mariage is to be deſired & ſought after, or rather to be hated and eſchewed, neither part wanting reaſons, oftentimes more glorious in ſhew than forceable to conclude for the defence of their ſaying. Among the Philoſophers, Pythagoras the firſt of them, wasThe varietie of opinions touching mariage. one of the greateſt enimies of mariage, as may be proued by that which is written of him. For being requeſted to be at the mariage of a friend of his, he excuſed himſelfe, ſaying:Pythagoras opinion of mariage. 
                     that he was neuer deſirous to go to ſuch a feast, or to be at ſuch a funerall: iudging that it was all one for a man to marrie a wife, and to wed a coffin, and to put himſelf into a tomb, or to take a ſheet for the beginning of his burial. Many other Philoſophers were of his opinion, yea they ſaid, that nature appointing a contrary to euery liuing creature, hath alſo giuen to man (to whom all other things are ſubiect) the woman for his contrary, whoſe malice is a ſworn enimie to the reaſon of man. Secundus was of this ſect, whoSecundus opinion of a wife. being demanded what a wife was, the contrary (quoth he) of a huſband. Moreouer they ſaid, that a womans nature was ſuch, that although ſhe had continued 30. yeeres with hir husband, yet he ſhould daily find in hir new fanſies, and ſundry ſorts of behauior: ſo that nature ſeemed a ſtepmother to men rather than to beaſts, bicauſe theſe know and ſhun their contraries, but man is naturally led to loue and to ſeek after his enimie. His miſerie therfore is very great in that ſo weake fleſh is able to force a hart that is at libertie, cauſing a man oftentimes to procure to himſelfe that which doth him hurt, and to make great account of that which he contēneth, as experience ſheweth the ſame in regard of womē. Thales one of the Sages of Graecia, mindingThales iudgement of mariage. to ſhew that it was not good for a man to marry, whē one asked him why he maried not being in the flower of his age, ſaid, that it was not yet time. Afterward, being growen to further age, and demaunded the ſame queſtion, he anſwered, that the time was paſt. Marius the Roman aſked

                     Metellus would not giue away himſelf to a wife 
                     Metellus, being a mā alſo of great credit, why he would not take his daughter to wife, ſeeing ſhe was beautifull in body, ſtaied in countenance, eloquent in ſpeech, noble by race, rich in dowrie, happy in good name, & adorned with vertues? To whom he replied, That he knew all this to be true, yet (quoth he) I had rather be mine own than hirs. They that folow this opinion now touched, & abhorre mariage, alleage cōmonly theſe or the like reaſons: that although the name of husband be ſweet and honorable, yet whoſoeuerReaſons againſt mariage. wil wel conſider of it, ſhal find it ful of great and intollerable burthens: & that the time is yet to come, wherin many thorns are not found amidſt the roſes of mariage, and wherein great ſtore of haile falleth not togither with that ſweet raine. Who is able (ſay they) patiently to abide the charges of mariage, the care of children, the want which is ſometimes in the houſe, the imperfections of ſeruants, but eſpecially the inſolencie and arrogancie of Wiues, and the yoke of ſo vnperfect a ſexe? Who is able fully to ſatiſfie,Women compared to ſhips. either their fleſhly luſt, or their inſatiable pompe? Doth not the olde prouerbe ſay, that women and ſhippes are neuer ſo well rigged, but that ſtill there remaineth ſomething to be amended? Whereupon I would conclude willingly, that if a maried man neuer loath his eſtate, yet he tireth himſelfe at the leaſt. Riches breede care, pouertie griefe, ſayling terrifieth, eating hindreth, walking wearieth. All theſe troubles are (we ſee) diſperſed or diuided amongſt many, but maried men haue them altogither. For if we marke a maried man, we ſhall ſeldom ſee him, but either penſiue or ſadde, or wearie, or hindered, and ſometime amazed or afrayd of that which may befall him, or may peraduenture be committed by his wife. Concerning good aduiſe and choice for the obtainingHow hard a matter it is to marry well. of a good mariage. If thou takeſt a poore wife, ſhe will be contemned, and thy ſelfe leſſe eſteemed: if thou takeſt hir rich, ſhe wil looke to commaund thee, and of a free man to make thee a ſlaue. So that whē thou thinkeſt to take an equall companion to wife, thou ſhalt wed an intollerable miſtres, I know not whether I ſhould ſay,

a ſhe deuil. If thou marieſt a faire woman, thou putteſt thy ſelfe in great danger, leſt thy round head become forked, which would be a fearefull metamorphoſis and alteration, if it were viſible and apparant. Euery caſtle is hard to keep, how wel ſoeuer it be watched, when it is aſſaulted by many: and his victory is in a deſperate caſe, who being alone, is compelled to fight againſt many. What ſhall I ſay more? Wealth maketh a woman proud, beautie ſuſpected, and hardnes of fauor lothſom. Is there any thing (as Plutarke ſaith) more light than the toong of an vnbrideled woman? more nipping than hir iniuries? more raſh than hir boldnes? more execrable than hir naughtie diſpoſition?An vnruly woman is full of all euil. more dangerous than hir fury? Theſe euil ſpeakers of women further inrich their ſayings with a thouſand hiſtories & examples, as teſtimonies of the infinite miſeries & inconueniences which haue been procured by them Firſt they alleage the deceiuing of the firſt man by his wife, wherupon ſin & death, and through them all miſeries entred into the world. Samſon betraied by Dali
                           •
                        a, Salomon becameExamples of miſerable euents procured by women. brutiſh through his concubines, Achab rooted out through Ieſabel, Marcus Antonius ſlue himſelf for the loue of Cleopatra, the deſtruction of Troy bicauſe of Helena, the Pandora of Heſiodus, the pitifull death of Hercules by Deïanira, and many other miſerable euents procured chiefly by womē, & plentifully declared in hiſtories. Neither do theyTwo good days in mariage. forget the ſaying of Hipponactus, That of one mariage only two good dayes are to be hoped for, namely, the mariage day, and the day of the wiues deth. They ſay that the wedding day (according to Alexandreïdes ſpeech) is the beginning of many euils: that in no eſtate fortune ſheweth hir ſelf more in conſtant, & leſſe faithful in performing hir promiſe thā in mariage, as Polyhistor ſaith: bicauſe there is not one to be found, wherin there is not ſome deceit, or ſome occaſion of complaint giuen to the man. They ſay as Philemon ſaid, That a wife is a neceſſary and perpetual euil to hir husband: that (as Diphilus ſayd) nothing is hardlier found in all the world than a good wife. Wherunto that old prouerbe agreeth, that a good wife, a good mule, and a good goate, are three naughtie Three euil beaſts.
                     
beaſts. The anſwer alſo made by a noble Romane, is not forgotten of theſe ſcuere Cenſorers of women, to whom when ſome of his acquaintance and friends ſaid, that he had great cauſe to hold himſelf happie and contented, bicauſe he had a wife that was faire, rich, and come of noble parentage, he ſhewed them his foote, ſaying: My friends you ſee that my ſhoe is very new, faire and well made, but none of you
                     Alphonſus opinion of a perfect mariage. 
                     can tell whereabout it pincheth me. Likewiſe the ſaying of Alphonſus king of Arragon is alleaged by them that blame mariage, namely, that if a mā would ſee a perfect and wel agreeing mariage, the husband must be deafe, and the wife blind, that he may not heare his wiues brawling, nor ſhe ſee hir husbands faults. He that truſteth to a woman (ſaid Heſiodus) is as ſafe as he that hangeth by the leaues of a tree in the ende of Autumne when the leaues begin to fall. I remember yet three things which I haue heard vttered in contempt of mariage: the ſaying of a mery conceited man, the deed of another, and the anſwer of a good fellow that was in talkThree mery conceits. of a certaine mariage. They haue reaſon (quoth the firſt) who ſay, that when a yong man is to be maried, he muſt be arreſted. For truly I thinke we ſhould flie vp to heauen, if this arreſt kept vs not backe. The ſecond hearing this preached, that whoſoeuer will be ſaued, muſt beare his croſſe, ran to his wife & laid hir vpon his necke. Thirdly, when one ſaid to a good fellow that he ſhould tary vntill his ſonne were wiſe before he maried him. Be not deceiued my friend (quoth he to him) for if he once grow to be wiſe he wil neuer marry. Theſe & ſuch like reaſons are cō
                     monlyNotable reaſons in the defence of mariage. alleaged by them that miſlike mariage. But now marke what we ſay to the contrary. Firſt we haue to conſider the beginning and antiquitie of mariage, the place where it was inſtituted, and who was the Author thereof, and that in the time of innocencie, of which things we haue alreadie ſpoken. Moreouer we muſt remember,Chriſt honored a wedding with his preſence, and with a miracle. that the heauenly worde honoured with his preſence, and ſet foorth a wedding feaſt with a miracle, euen with the firſt which he wrought in this world. Can any thing then be found more holie, than that which the holy

of holies, the father and creator of all things hath eſtabliſhed, honored and conſecrated with his preſence? But what greater equitie can we vſe thā to leaue to our ſucceſſors that which we hold of our predeceſſors? By wedlocke copulation we came into the world, and by the ſame we muſt leaue others behind vs, to continue that propagatiō which hath endured frō our anceſtors vnto vs. Can there be any greater want of conſideration than to ſeeke to flie from that, as prophane which God hath taken for holy? as euill, which he hath reputed good? As deteſtable, which he eſteemeth holy? Is there any greater inhumanitie, than to reiect the fountain of humanitie? Is there any greater ingratitude thā to deny to thoſe that are to come, that which we hold of thē that are paſt? When God created woman, not of the ſlime of the earth, as he did mā, butWherfore the woman was created of the rib of man. of his bone, did he not ſhew thereby that he ſhould haue nothing faſter cleauing, neerer ioyning, or ſurer glued to him than his wife, eſpecially when he added theſe words, that it was not good for man to be alone, as though he had ſayd,Gen. 2 18. that his life would be miſerable, irkſom & vnpleaſant, if he had not giuen him a wife for a faithful companion? How dare we ſay, that we know better what is meet for vs, than he that made vs, & knew all our life before we came out of the bowels of our mother? then he that honoured the bond of matrimonie ſo far as to ſay, that a man ſhal leaue his father & mother, and cleaue to his wife? Is there any thing more holy than that honor which we owe to them that haue begotten vs? And yet the fidelitie of wedlock is preferred before fatherly and motherly honour, that itThe great preheminence of mariage. ſhould be kept & preſerued euen to the laſt gaſpe of life. Further we ſee how the ſpirit of God ſpeaking by his prophetPſal. 45. honoreth mariage ſo far, as to vſe it for a ſimilitude and repreſentation of that holy & ſacred vnitie, which he hath with his church. What could any mā ſay more to extoll the dignitie therof? That which God hath begun, only death endeth: what God hath conioined, death only ſeparateth: what God hath made ſure, man cannot ſhake: what he hath eſtabliſhed, man cannot aboliſh. Oh what &

                     Mariage euer vſed and receiued of all nations. how great is the dignitie, preheminence, & prerogatiue of mariage? Again, do we not ſee how it hath been continued throughout all ages paſt vntill this preſent, receiued & approued of all nations, both Hebrews, Greeks, Latins & Barbarians, ſo that there is no nation vnder the cope of heauen, how barbarous ſoeuer it be, & far from ciuilitie, which ſheweth not great ioy & delight at wedding feaſts? Beſides, who ſhal defend common-welths without armor and weapons, and who ſhal weare armour if men be wanting? If that be not ſupplied by generation which through death neceſſarily endeth, how can the linage and race of mankind endure? The lawes of the Romans (who were the patern of vertue to all nations) with rigor puniſhed ſuch as would not marry, forbidding thē all publike dignities, & depriuing them of thoſe which they had obtained. AndThe Romans had lawes in fauor of mariage. to inuite them the rather to marry, they appointed priuiledges for thē that had children, ſo that he was moſt benefited and preferred to publike honors that had moſt children. Whē 
                     Auguſtus Caeſar was Cenſor, inquirie was made by his authoritie of a Roman knight that had broken the law and would not marry, wherupon he ſhould haue been puniſhed, but that he prooued that he had been father ofAuguſtus his care to repreſſe the vncleannes of his ſubiects. 3. children. The ſame Augustus being come to the empire, & deſirous to correct the deteſtable vnclennes of his ſubiects, & to compel them to contract matrimony, leuied an impoſt by way of a fine, vpon their legacies & windfals cō
                     ming by the death of others that did not marry after 25. yeeres of age, or that had no children. Wherby he greatly chaſtiſed whoredoms, adulteries & ſodomitrie: & furniſhed Rome with good citizens which then was greatly deſtitute of them by reaſon of ciuil warres. What is the cauſe
                     Why the dowries of women haue alwais had great priuiledges. (ſaith Vlpianus the lawyer) that womens dowries had ſuch great priuiledges? It was for no other reaſon, then bicauſe of the profit that commeth to al common-wealths by mariages. He that had 3. childrē amongſt the Romans could not be cōpelled to cary a meſſage, or publike embaſſage: he that had 5. was exempted frō perſonal charge: & he that had 13. from al charge. And in our time in the common-welth

of Florence (as Raphael Volaterani
                           •
                        
                      reherſeth in his Philologie)The priuiledges of them that had children. 
                     Euery▪citizen that is father of 5. children either males or females, is exempted, freed, & diſcharged of all publike taxe, loane, & ſubſidie. If nothing be more bleſſed, nor happines more to be deſired than immortalitie, line all propagation maketh vs immortal through the continuing of kind. Wherupon we may inferre by way of concluſion, that no greater happines can come to man & wife in this world, than to leaue iſſue as a teſtimony to poſteritie, that once they were in the world, & haue left behind them a token of their life. It was enacted by Lycurgus lawes, that no citizen preferring the eſtate of continencie before that of mariage, ſhould be at publike playes: which at that time was a note of great ignominie. We account not him a good gardiner that painfully dreſſeth thoſe fruitfull trees which he hath in his garden or orchard, if he haue no care to plant and graft new,
                     A compariſon between a good gardiner and a citizen. 
                     therby to ſubstitute others in their place, which by ſucceſſion of time waxe old & die. And how ſhal we take him for a good citizen, and ſuch a one as zealouſly ſeeketh the good of the common-welth, that 
                           •
                        ontenteth himſelfe with thoſe citizens that are aliue, and neglecteth the ing endring of new in good and lawfull matrimonie, wherby to ſupply the want of ſuch as daily decay? Further, if I ſhould go about to reherſe here the happines, pleaſure & contentatiō which mā & wife liuing holily togither, & according to the duty of their vocation, do mutually receiue one of another, who doubteth that a whole day would not ſuffice me? What greater ſolace in the whole world can be found than for a man to liue with hir vnto whom he is coupled,The happines, pleaſure and contentation in mariage. not by good wil only, but alſo by a mutuall cōmunication of bodies? If we take great delight to conferre with our friends & familiar acquaintance about our ſecret affaires, ſhall we not receiue greater ioy without cōpariſon to diſcloſe our thoughts to hir vnto whom we ſpeake as ſafely as to our ſelues, who is alſo partaker as wel of our aduerſity as proſperity, and accounteth our weale or woe to be hir owne? We are ioined to our friends by good will and liking onely, but to our wife we are conioined and linked by ſoueraigne charitie, by bodily commixtion, by ſacred confederacy, & by an inſeparable felowſhip & ſociety in al

                     The neere coniunction of maried couples. weathers. If the man abound in tēporal goods, the wife wil keep them faithfully for him, and encreaſe them by hir induſtrie and labor If he be poore & perſecuted by fortune, ſhe will comfort him. If through feare, ſicknes, or any other miſhap he be conſtrained to ſhut vp himſelfe in his houſe, his wife will take away that irkeſomnes from him, which otherwiſe would ſeaze vpon him being ſolitarie. If he go abroad, he is glad that he hath left that partie in his houſe which he moſt truſteth. In youth ſhe is a ſweete and amiable companion, & in old age a very conuenient comforterMariage encreaſeth friends and kinsfolks. and ſolace. Moreouer, by mariage a man encreaſeth his friends, allies, kinsfolks & neighbours, which is a very great benefit and inuincible ſtrength. Brethren & ſiſters, nephews & nieces are doubled. Peace is many times procured between monarchs & princes by mariages, and infinit quarels & diſſentions appeaſed. But what vnſpeakable pleaſure doth euery father take to ſee his liuely picture ingrauen in the face of his children, and that ſo neere the quick, as neither Lyſippus, Mentor, Polycletus, Phidias, Praxiteles, Zeuxis, Apelles, nor Parrhaſius had euer the skil to graue or paint ſo wel? Againe, what ioy receiueth he by hoping, that when his children ſhall waxe great, they will be the ſtaffe of his age, the ſtay of his weakenes, the pillar of his houſe, and that ouerliuing him according to the courſe of nature, they ſhall cloſe vp his eies, and cauſe ſuch funerals & ceremonies to be done for him as are requiſite in that caſe? For the concluſion therefore of this preſent matterMotiues to mariage. we ſay, that no man can iuſtly blame mariage, vnto which all lawes both diuine and humane exhort vs, nature prouoketh vs, honeſtie draweth vs, infinite commodities inuite vs, all nations ſhew vs the way thither, and laſtly, neceſſitie of continuing our kind conſtraineth vs. And briefly to anſwere the grounds alleaged to the contrary, they may be ouerthrowen by one onely dictinction, which is, that moſt of them that diſpraiſed mariage were heathens, and blinded in their vain wiſedom, or to ſpeake better, in their folly, wanting then that knowledge of the truth, which God of his grace hath ſince reuealed vnto vs.

And no maruell if they erred in diſpraiſing Mariage, ſeeing they could neuer attaine to the knowledge of the true and ſoueraigne good of man, as we haue handled already. But yet it can neuer be found that Socrates, Plato, and ſuchThe beſt Philoſophers praiſed and vſed mariage. as were moſt excellent amōg the Philoſophers, blamed it, but rather honoured & commended it, the moſt of them alſo being maried, as namely, Socrates, Plato, Ariſtotle, Seneca, Plutarke, and others. As for their ſtrongeſt reaſon that miſlike mariage, namely, the deceiuing of men by women, the fault ought to be imputed rather to the men, than to the women, bicauſe men, according to the perfection of their ſexe, ought to be wiſer than women, who are by nature more changeable by will, and more fraile in counſell, although all are not ſo. So that if there be any imperfection, it ought not to be obiected to them by way of reproch, but rather to nature than to them. And they that vpbraid them therewith, ſhew that they wander out of the path of reaſon, are deſtitute of all good ſence, and are vnworthie that women ſhould haue conceiued them, brought them into the world, giuen them ſucke, and nouriſhed them.
               
            
            
               Of a houſe and familie, and of the kinds of mariage: of certaine ancient customes obſerued in mariage. Chap. 46.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  IN the beginning of my preſent ſpeech of mariage, I noted this, that the communion of the husband and wife extendeth it ſelfe vnto all the parts that depend of their houſe. Therefore I ſuppoſe (my Companions) that for the ſequele and vnderſtanding of that matter which we haue propounded to our ſelues to intreate of, I meane Oeconomie or gouernment of a familie, we muſt ſeeke after a more ample and large declaration of a houſe, which conſiſteth not in many ſtones, and long peeces of timber ioined togither withA houſe conſiſteth in liuing ſtones. great cunning, but in ſtones that haue life, and are partakers

of reaſon, tending to the benefite and profite of the houſe, as to their end. Alſo if you thinke it good, and our howre giue vs leaſure, we may enter into the conſideration of the ſundry ſorts of mariages, and of certaine ancient cuſtomes obſerued therein, which I touched not in my diſcourſe, bicauſe I would not be ouer-long.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Firſt, it is neceſſarye (ſaith Ariſtotle) to ioine thoſe togither, which can not be the one without the other,What aſſēblies are moſt neceſſarie for the inſtitution of a familie. as the male and female for generation. Next, he that is able to execute the commandements of his maiſter by the ſtrength of his bodie, is a ſubiect and ſlaue by nature. And of theſe two aſſemblies a houſe or familie is firſt inſtituted.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     The definition of a houſe. A familie or houſe is an aſſemblye framed by nature, to communicate daily togither: and they are called of the Grecians 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſuch as liue of the ſame prouiſion, or 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſuch as vſe the ſame Chimney. But we ſhall vnderſtād of thee ARAM the whole diſcourſe of that which is heere propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  When I conſider of the excellencie & greatnes of Plato his skil, who was greatly admired of the Grecians, as he that for vertue & honeſty of life, for eloquencePlato eſtabliſhed a communitie of al things in his Common-wealth. of ſpeech, & perſwaſion by true and learned Philoſophie, went far beyond all other Philoſophers, I cannot ſufficiently wonder, how, amidſt ſo many good lawes & profitable ſtatuts for a common-wealth, which we haue receiued from him, he imagined to eſtabliſh therein the communitie of goods, wiues, & children, amongſt his Citizens, not ſuffring them to haue any thing proper & peculiar: to the end (as he ſaid) to baniſh from his citie theſe two words, Thine & Mine, which in his opinion were the cauſe of all euils & deſolations that befall Common-wealths. The NicholaitesThe Nicholaites reuiued Platoes communitie. reuiued the ſame error in the primitiue Church, & many others haue labored by friuolous reaſons to defend & maintaine it, chiefly to roote out (as they ſay) vtterly frō within the ſoule, thoſe humane affections, which commōly cary men rather towards their wiues, children, & goods, than to other things. Which affections ſo long

as they beare ſway amongſt the Citizens, cauſe them oftentimes to turne aſide from their duty towards the common-wealth, whereby it is made weaker, & of leſſe continuance. Now among many grounds confuting this error,The confutation of this error. (which being receiued, would fil all with diſorder & confuſion, to the ouerthrow of humane ſocietie) this is moſt certain & cannot be impugned, that foraſmuch as the lawful diſtributiō of goods, & maner of mariages, are the ordinance of God (as it is manifeſt) & ſeeing the ordinance of God may not be altered by any counſell of man, it followeth, that aſwell the diuiſion of goods, as of wiues and children, are immutable, and conſequently, that the communitie of goods, wiues, & children, is a thing flatly gainſaying the inſtitution of God, & therfore to be reproued. Moreouer, if goods were common, an infinite multitude of do-litles, of idle & negligent perſons, borne (as Horace ſaith) onely to deuoure & to conſume the benefits of the earth, being vnwilling to labor, & reſembling waſpes that eate the honie of the Bees, would feede and cloath themſelues with their goods, who get their liuing with great ſweate of their bodies, & vexation of their minds. Which is againſt the expreſſe commandement of God, who will haue vs eate our bread in the ſweat of our face. But what greater ſhame & offēce, vtterly defacing all honeſty of life, can there be amongſt men, than the community of wiues, whereby all fornications & adulteries would be maintained by authority? This ſheweth plainly, that we are not to looſe time in confuting ſuch an opinion of theirs, who ſeeke to take away from amongſt men all marks of a Cō
                     mon-wealth. For there would not be any publike thing, if nothing were priuate, nor cōmon, if nothing were peculiar. Yea Plato afterward did wiſely leaue that opiniō, & quietly renounced his firſt Cōmon-wealth, to giue place to a ſecond. And the Heralds of Gods word condēned this error, when it was raiſed vp in the Apoſtles time by an archheretik called Nicholas of Antioch, who maintained this opiniō, that goods, wiues, & childrē, ought to be cōmon amōg chriſtians, & for example to others, cōmunicated his

wife to whoſoeuer would, albeit ſhe was yoong and very beautifull. Thus following the order eſtabliſhed of God, and continued alwaies through ſo many ages, vntill ourThe definition of a houſe. time, and hauing ſeene the firſt inſtitution of mariage, we muſt alſo containe it within the houſe, which is a ſocietie and communion of life betweene the husband and the wife, the maiſter and the ſeruant, for daily profit. Heſiodus putteth the Oxe in ſteede of the ſeruant, ſo farre foorth (faith Ariſtotle) as the Oxe being fit to labour, is to poore men in the place of a ſlaue. This houſe thus deſcribed is ſimple, but when children are contained therein, it is abſoluteThe diuiſion thereof. and compleate. Therefore a houſe that is perfect and accompliſhed, may be diuided, according to the ſaying of Philoſophers, into theſe foure parts: into Matrimoniall, Parentall, Lordly or Maiſterlie, and Poſſeſſorie part. The Matrimoniall part comprehēdeth the husband & the wife: the Parentall containeth the father, mother, & children: the Lordlie hath vnder it the maiſter, men-ſeruants, and maid-ſeruants: the Poſſeſſorie part includeth within it mooueables, immooueables, and chattels. Now to follow our matter already begun, and to diſcourſe of things in order, we haue heere to handle and to obſerue diligently this firſt part of a houſe, called the coniugall or wedlocke part, and the ſequele of our diſcourſes ſhall inſtruct vs in the other parts. He that hath taſted of learning, and
                        
                           •
                        oure kinds of mariage. beene well inſtructed in the ſtudie of wiſedome, ſhall find that there are foure kinds of coniunctions and mariages, namely, the mariage of honour, the mariage of loue, theThe mariage of honor is of three ſorts. mariage of labour, and the mariage of griefe. The mariage of honour is diuided into the higheſt, middlemoſt, and loweſt degree. The higheſt is that ſupernaturall mariage, whereby God and mans nature meete togither, euen by a myſterie, which ouerpaſſeth the vnderſtanding of all humane capacitie. We ſaw the effect and truth therof in the incarnation and natiuitie of the eternall ſonne of God. The middlemoſt mariage of honour is, when God and the ſoule meete, and are ioined togither by grace and glorie. The loweſt degree of the mariage of honour

is when God and the Church are coupled togither, and are made one myſticall bodie. Theſe three ſortes of mariages are ſupernaturall, and appointed of God after an vnſpeakeable manner: but the cauſe of our aſſemblie requireth not that we ſhould ſpeake any more of them. Now to come to the other kinds of coniunctions, which2. The mariage of loue. reſpect onely the eſtate of mankind: the mariage of loue, is that which is betweene an honeſt man and a vertuous woman, linked togither by God for the preſeruation of the linage of man. It may be called a charitable coniunction, vnitie, and ſocietie of them that are good, being made by grace, peace, & concord. Of this mariage ſpake that wiſe lewe, ſaying: that three things among others,Ecclus. 25. 1. were approoued of God and men, the concord of brethren, the loue of our neighbour, and the husband and wife that agree well togither. And to ſay truth, it is one of the greateſt benefits, yea one of the rareſt felicities in the world, when a mariage is well and duly kept, when both the husband & wife feare God, and keepe their promiſe one to another: accordingEcclus. 26. 1. to that ſaying of the wiſe man: Bleſſed is the man that hath a vertuous wife: the wife alſo being no leſſe happy that hath a good husband. The other kind of mariage,The mariage of labour. namely of labour, is that which is commonly practiſed in our daies, wherein many, yea almoſt all, marie for couetouſnes, not for the vertue, chaſtity, or good report, whichPlautus would haue a man chuſe his wife by the eares, not by the fingers. they heare of women and maidens. Plautus the comicall Poet ſaid, that in mariage a man muſt take his wife by the eares, and not by the fingers: that is to ſay, for hir good report, not for hir dowrie, which is told with hands. Lycurgus being deſirous that his Citizens ſhould put the ſame in practiſe, eſtabliſhed a law, which forbad all giuingLycurgus forbad all dowries. of dowries with maidens in mariage, to the end that euery maide ſhould labour to endow hir ſelfe with vertue: for loue wherof, and not of riches, they ſhould be demanded in mariage. The ſame reaſon mooued Themiſtocles, whenThemiſtocles. two men required his daughter in mariage, to preferre the honeſt man before the wealthie: ſaying, that he had rather haue a man to his ſonne in lawe without goods,

                     Olympias. than goods without a man. We read that Olympias the mother of Alexander, hearing of one that had maried a very faire woman, but ſcarce chaſt, being rauiſhed with bir loue, ſaid, that he was a braineles man, otherwiſe heWe muſt not marie by the luſt of our eies, nor by the report of our fingers. would not haue maried by heare-ſay, nor by the luſt of his eies. We may ſay aſmuch of them that marie by the report of their fingers, counting vpon them howe much their wiues bring to them by mariage, not conſidering before whether they bee ſo qualified, that they may liue with them. But let vs know, that euery mariage made through couetouſnes, eſpecially where there is inequalitie of riches, as namely, when the husband is poore, and the wife rich, will be alwaies riotous, and very hardly will there beMenander. any peace betweene them. Which thing Menander deſirous to teach vs, ſaid, that when a poore man marieth a rich wife, he giueth himſelfe in mariage to the woman which he weddeth, and not the woman to him. And the Satyricall Poet ſaith, that nothing is more intollerablePittacus anſwer to a yoong man that asked his aduice in mariage. than a rich wife. This cauſed a yoong man to go to Pittacus, one of the Sages of Grecia, and to aske his counſell, ſaying: I haue two wiues offered me, the one is equall to me in goods and parentage, the other goeth farre beyond me, which of them ſhal I take? Marke (ſaid this wiſe man) where children are readie to play at fence, go to them, and they will counſell thee. He did ſo, and as he drew neere, they began to ſet themſelues one againſt another to skirmiſh. And when they ſaw this yoong man comming, who exceeded them in ſtrength and bignes, and ſuppoſed that he would make one amongſt them, they ſaid aloud, let eueryEuery one muſt marie his equal. Martia.
                      one go to his match. Whereby he learned what he was to doe concerning his mariage. Martia, a noble widow, being demanded why ſhe maried not againe, ſeeing ſhe was rich, and as yet in the floure of hir youth, made this anſwer. I can find none (ſaid ſhe) that loueth not my goods
                     Venda Queene of Ruſcia. 
                     more than my perſon. The ſame reaſon moued Venda Queene of Ruſcia to throw hir ſelfe into the water, thereby to reuenge hir ſelfe of them that made warre with hir, to haue hir in mariage, ſeeing they could not win hir by gentlenes.

For ſhe knew well, that they deſired hir for hit kingdome, and not of any good wil they bare vnto hir: as it is the cuſtome of Princes to reſpect onely their alliance and profite, marying often-times by ſubſtitutes and proxiesAgainſt mariage by ſubſtitutes and proxies. Elizabeth Q of England. thoſe whome they neuer ſaw but by picture. But I finde that Elizabeth that wiſe Queene of England, was of a better iudgement, when ſhe wrote to Henrie Prince, and ſince king of Sweathland, who demanded hir in mariage, that he was the onelie Prince in the world, whome ſhe ought to loue most, bicauſe he required hir when ſhe was a priſoner: but ſhe was reſolued neuer to marie any man before ſhe had ſeene him. The like anſwere ſhe ſent to the Archduke of Auſtria, which was in part the cauſe why neither of them would come vnto hir, fearing belike, that if they were not well liked, they ſhould be ſent backe againe into their countrie. Of this that hath beene hitherto diſcourſed, togither with the experience which is daily ſeene, we may infer, that mariages made through couetouſnes, are in deed mariages of labor. And of this number may thoſe be reckoned,Of mariages made onely for beautie. wherein bodilie beautie, and other outward graces, are only regarded. For it ſeldome falleth out, but that the ſpirite of diſſention troubleth all in thoſe houſes, and that all loue and liking vaniſheth togither with age, which cauſeth the liuely hue of colour to wither away. Likewiſe amongſt theſe mariages of labour, we place thoſe wherein there is diſparitie of age, & eſpecially of maners. TherforeOf the diſparitie of age and maners betweene maried couples. 
                     Dionyſius the elder ſaid to his mother, who being very old, would needes marie a yoong man, that it was in her power to violate the lawes of Syracuſa, but not the lawe of nature. Aristotle ſayth, that men and women ought to marie togither in ſuch an age, that both of them ſhould leaue of to beget and to conceiue children at the ſame tyme. According to this rule the husband muſt beAt what age men and women ought to marrie. twentie yeeres, or there abouts, elder than his wife: bicauſe naturally women conceiue and beate children vntil fiftie yeeres, and men may beget children vntil 70. Lycurgus alſo forbad that any man ſhould marie before he were 
                        •
                     7▪ yeeres old, & a woman before 17. Whereof this reaſon

may rather be rendred, that the wife may more eaſily acquaint hir ſelf with hir husbands manners, he being then of ripe iudgement, and ſhe comming into his power from hir tender yeeres. For (as the ſame Aristotle ſaith) diuerſitie of manners and callings hindereth friendſhip and true loue. But bicauſe of the ſhortnes of mans daies, IWhy a man ought to haue ten yeeres moe than his wife. thinke it were good for him to marie at thirtie yeeres of age, taking a wife of twentie yeeres old, to the ende that hir age may not be too much vnlike his: that ſo liuing according to the common courſe of nature, they may leaue their children prouided at the ſame yeeres, and ſuch as might be well able to liue without them. A maiden alſo of that age is able to iudge a great deale better what is meete for hir, and what dutie ſhe oweth to hir husband, and of his commandements, than if ſhe were yoonger. Now, ſeeing we are about this matter, I thinke I ſhall notOf the mariage of widowes. digreſſe from the ſame, if I ſpeake of the mariage of widowes. It is certaine that thoſe women that haue already learned the diſpoſition of their former husbands, are often-times very hardly altered. Whereupon ſome alleadge the example of Timotheus, the beſt plaier on the flute of his time, who, when he tooke a ſcholler, vſed to demand of him whether he had made any entrance in that plaie:Timotheus. Which if he had, he tooke a greater reward by halfe than he did of them that knew nothing: ſaying, that his paines were greater in taking away from his ſchollers that which was naught and vnskilfull, than in teaching that which was good to ſuch as vnderſtood nothing at all thereof.Chilons opinion of ſecond mariages. 
                     Chilon one of the wiſe men of Grecia, ſaid, that he accounted him a very foole, who hauing ſaued himſelfe from a perilous ſhipwracke by painful ſwimming, would returne to ſea againe, as though a tempeſt had not power ouer all barks. Platoes Androgyna teacheth, that ſecond mariages can neuer be fitly made. Concerning this matter, we can1. Cor. 7. 39. haue no better counſell than that of S. Paule, whether I referre the ſolution of this matter. But experience dailyThe diſcommodities of ſecond mariage. teacheth vs what infinite miſeries, quarrels, ſuites, and ouerthrow of houſes, proceed from ſuch mariages, through

the donations and profits which thoſe yoong men craue that marie widowes, who forgetting all naturall dutie, doubt not to inrich ſtrangers with the goods of their owne children. Valeria of Rome may ſerue for a notableValeria. example to women, who ſaid, that hir husband died for others, but liued to hir for euer. S. Hierome rehearſeth a hiſtorie quite contrarie to this heere ſpoken of, auouching that he ſaw at Rome a woman that had beene mariedOf a woman that had beene maried to 22. husbands. to 22. husbands, who afterward marying one that had had 20. wiues, died in his life time. Whereupon the Romanes crowned him with Lawrell, in token of victorie, and cauſed him to carie a branch of Palme in his hand at his wiues funerall. He maketh mention alſo of another widowe, who of almes brought vp a little childThe notorious looſenes of a widow. and abuſed it at the age of ten yeeres, by whome ſhe became great with child, contrarie to the order of nature, God ſo permitting it, to diſcouer the vile filthines of that woman. Second mariages were a great deale more honourable for ſuch widowes. The fourth kinde of mariage remaineth yet, which wee called the mariage ofOf the mariage of griefe. griefe, which is nothing elſe but the aſſemblie and coniunction of the wicked and reprobate, of whome that common prouerbe is ſpoken, that it is better one houſe be troubled with them than twayne. Their life can not but be full of wretchednes and miſerie, the griefe whereof will abide by them for euer. But to returne to our firſt ſpeech of the mariage of loue, which is holie and lawfull, guided by good reaſon, and according to the ordinance of God, mortall men beholding the holines and neceſſitie of this myſterie, haue inriched and ſet foorth the ſame with all kind of ioy and delight, with the aſſemblie of kinsfolkes, and calling togither of friendes and gueſts,Commendable ornaments of mariages. with bankets, feaſtes, ornaments, iewels, Tragedies, Comedies, and ſuch like paſtimes, vttering ioy, and not to be miſliked: ſo that all diſſolutenes and ouer-great ſuperfluitie be ſet aſide, and honeſtie and comelines obſerued. But eſpecially the wedding ſongs, vſed by theWedding ſongs vſed in old time. Ancients both Greekes and Latines, and made to beautifie

and enrich their weddings, are woorthie of eternallDiuers cuſtoms vſed at the celebration of mariages. praiſe. Moreouer, they had amongſt them infinite and ſundrie cuſtomes kept at the knitting vp and celebration of mariages, ſome being good, others bad, of which we will heere alleadge certaine, bicauſe we may finde inſtruction in them. The Aſſyrians had certaine Magiſtrats called Triumairs, and Preſidents of weddings, approoued and graue men, whoſe office was once a yeere in euerie Towne and Village to bring all the yoong maidens that were to be maried, into one publike place, and to cauſe them to be proclaimed one after another, beginningThe Aſſyrians cuſtome. with the faireſt, who were giuen to them that offered moſt, and bad laſt. With this monie that came by them, they maried thoſe that were hard-fauoured, as good cheape as they could: and otherwiſe than after this ſort, it was not lawfull for any bodie to contract matrimonie. Wherein they ſhewed a maruellous care in prouidingThe cuſtome of the Grecians. equally for all their daughters. The ancient Grecians had a cuſtome to burne before the dore of the new maried wife, the Axletree of that chariot wherein ſhe was brought to hir husbands houſe: giuing hir to vnderſtand thereby, that ſhe was to dwell there with him, whether ſhe were willing or no, and neuer to depart from thence. Lycurgus would not haue the husband and wife to lye togither in the beginning of their mariage, nor to ſee one another, but by ſtealth and ſecretly: to the ende (ſayde he) that amitie and loue might be the better preſerued betweene them, that they might be healthie, and that their children which ſhoulde come of them,The cuſtomes of the Romanes. might be ſtronger. The Romanes paſſed all other nations in pompe, ceremonies, and comlines of mariage. They obſerued this inuiolably, that their maidens and widowes ſhould not be conſtrained to marrie. On the wedding daie they vſed that faſhion, which at this daie is verie common. The newe maried wife was richly apparelled, with hir haire hanging about hir ſhoulders, and hir head crowned with a garland of flowers. The mother of the Bride went before hir daughter, bearing a cofer of

trinkets, iewels, rings, and other little ornaments belonging to women. The maidens that came of wealthie houſes, had a chariot prepared for them, drawne with two white horſes, to declare the puritie of bodie, and innocencie of mind, which the yoong woman ought to haue. The newe maried wife was led from hir fathers houſe to hir husbands houſe, alongſt the broadeſt ſtreetes in the citie, to note thereby, that a wife ought alwaies to paſſe by the greateſt way, and not be found at any time in ſuſpected and ſecret places, whereupon ſome ſuſpition of euill may ariſe. When ſhe was come to the entrie of hir husbands houſe, before ſhe went ouer the threaſhold of the dore, he tooke hir with both his armes by the wings, and lift hir aloft in ſuch ſort, that he ſtroke hir head and the dore poſt togither, and ſo ſet hir within the dore before euer hir feete touched the ground. This was done, that the maried wife ſhould remember through the griefe of the blow, not to go often foorth out of hir husbands houſe, if ſhe would haue the report and name of an honeſt woman. Hir garments, behauiour, geſture and gate, were correſpondent to all modeſtie, honeſtie, & ſhamefaſtnes. She ware a iewell hanging by a riben about hir necke, to ſignifie, that ſhe was bound, and put in ſubiection to hirThe Romane brides vſed to preſent fire and water to their husbands. husband. She preſented alſo to hir husband water in one hand, and fire in the other. Which ſome interprete thus, that as the communication of mans life conſiſteth chiefly in the vſe of theſe two elements, of fire & water, ſo there cannot be any fellowſhip more familiar or neerer linked togither, than that of the husband and the wife. Now, bicauſe fire and water ſignifie communication, others haue thus vnderſtood it, that as fire and water are cleane contraries aſwell in the firſt as in the ſecond qualities, ſo are man and wife, the one being hot and dry, of the nature of fire, and the other cold and moiſt, of the nature of water: which contrarieties being ioined togither, make a harmonie & temperature of loue. Againe, ſome would haue the diſſentions, murmurings, & complaints, that are often in mariages ſignified therby: wherin laughter is not without

weeping, nor reſt without labor, nor ſweete without ſower, according to the nature of all earthly things, in which we cannot taſte honie without gall, nor ſugar without Aloes. Many other ceremonies were vſed of the Ancients, which for breuity ſake, as alſo bicauſe there is ſmal inſtruction in them, I omit for this preſent. Therefore to concludeWhat is ſignified by the name of a houſe. our diſcourſe, we learne that the name of a houſe doth not onely ſignifie the wals and roofe of a building, but that it ought to be taken for a familie gathered togither to communicate one with another in all neceſſities. We learne alſo that in euery mariage we ought to haue regard to the ordinance and inſtitution of God, and to thoſe politike lawes vnder which we liue, to the ende we trouble not common tranquillitie: that we muſt auoide all diſparitie of goods, of houſes, of age, and eſpecially of nature and manners. Let vs not ſuffer our ſelues to be caried away with any fooliſh paſſion, but looke chiefly to this, that vnder a gratious & honeſt behauiour may ſhine foorth cleare and euident ſteps of an vpright and ſincere ſoule, void of diſſimulation: ſaying with the Wiſe man,Prou. 31. 30. 
                     Fauour is deceitfull, and beautie is vanitie, but a woman that feareth the Lord, ſhe ſhall be praiſed. We muſt alſo rid our wedding aſſemblies of all diſſolutenes, of all kind of allurements to voluptuouſnes and nicenes, that they may rather ſeeme to be ſchooles of honour and chaſtitie, than of intemperancie and looſenes. If we lay ſuch foundations in mariages, no doubt but God will bleſſe them, and make them happie and proſperous, to the glorie of his name, and to the quietnes and contentation of vs all.
               
            
            
               Of the particular dutie of a husband towards his wife. Chap. 47.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  AS Phiſitions ſtand more in feare of feauers engendred of hid cauſes gathered togither by little and little of a long time, than of thoſe which proceed of very apparant cauſes: ſo the ſmal

iarres and daily quarrelings of maried folkes, being vnknowneSmal iarres muſt be auoided in a houſe
                           •
                        
                      to ſtrangers, and drawing by litle and little to an incurable hardnes, do more ſeparate them one from another, than any other cauſe whatſoeuer. Therefore it is neceſſary that all the rootes of ſuch naughty ſprigs ſhould be cut off, and all occaſions eſchewed, which might prouoke one another to the leaſt and lighteſt anger that may be. The induſtrie of the man ought to aime eſpecially at this, being called to the honorable eſtate of Head of a familie, looking diligently that he performe ſuch dutie towards hir, who is ſo ſtraightly linked vnto him, that ſuch diſſentions neuer take their beginning through his default. Let vs then (my Companions) take occaſion of this ſubiect to be better inſtructed in the dutie of a husband towards his wife.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Prou. 5. 18. 19. 20. 21. Reioice (ſayth the Wiſe man) with the wife of thy youth. Let hir be as the louing Hinde, and pleaſant Roe: let hir breastes ſatisfie thee at all times, and delight in hirEuery man muſt content himſelfe with his owne wife. loue continually. For why ſhouldest thou delight in a ſtrange woman, or imbrace the boſome of a ſtranger? For the waies of man are before the eyes of the Lorde, and he pondereth all his pathes.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Epheſ. 5. 25. 26. How husbands ought to loue, their wiues. Husbands (ſayth S. Paule) loue your wiues, euen as Christ loued the Church, and gaue himſelfe for it. So ought men to loue their wiues as their owne bodies: he that loueth his wife, loueth himſelfe. But it belongeth to thee (AMANA) to handle vs this point at large.
                  
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Gorgias an excellent Orator, commended of Cicero in many places, exhorted the Graecians long ſince to peace and concord, by an oration of woonderfull arte. Which when he had ended, one Melanthus ſtoode vp before all the companie that was preſent, and ſayd: My Lordes, behold Gorgias, who by his eloquent oration exhorteth vs that are in number infinite to concord, and yet he cannot playe the Oratour ſo well as to cauſe his wife and hir chamber-maide to liue quietly with him in his houſe, wherein there are but they three. For ye ſhall daily ſee them at ſtrife and continuall diſſention.

Therefore, my Lordes, I thinke it great raſhnes in him to exhort vs to concord, when he cannot haue it himſelfe in his priuate houſe. And truly, beſides the vnſpeakeable torment that is ioined with ſuch riots, ianglings, and controuerſies in a houſe, it is a ſhamefull offence when they are knowne to ſtrangers. The Ancients
                        Lar the houſhold God of the Heathen. had a priuate and houſhold God, whome they called the God Lar, which we may tranſlate into our language, the God of the Harth. He was had in ſuch veneration, that if any man withdrewe himſelfe to the harth and houſe of his deadlie enimie, his enimie durſt not offer him anie violence as long as he was there, the harth being vnto him a ſanctuarie and place of immunitie. For ſo we readThemiſtocles ſaued by flying to the harth of his enimie. of Themistocles, that being baniſhed from Athens, and purſued by ſome that would haue layed violent handes vpon him, he fled to the Harth of his deadlie enimie, who for that cauſe durſt not ſtrike him, nor offer him any iniurie. This Harth was dedicated and conſecrated to the Goddeſſe Vesta, and was placed where the chiefe fire of the houſe was made. Nowe I pray you, if it were prohibited, and accounted an vniuſt thing for a man to quarrell, to iniurie, or to offer violence, euen to his vtter enimie, beeing fled to his Harth, howe infamous an acte (thinke you) and vnwoorthie the nature of man, did theſe men iudge it to be, to offer any violence to them that were of the ſame Harth, but chiefly to the wife, whoWhat place the wife hath next to the man. is a principall perſon belonging to the bed, table, Harth, yea to the whole houſe of the husband, and is called by the lawe, a companion both of the diuine and humane houſe? At this daie we commonly obſerue this, not to offend in any ſort thoſe that come to ſee vs: and if we haue any occaſion of quarrelling, it ſhall not be ſhewed as long as they are in our houſe, if we haue any care not to be accounted vnciuill, and void of diſcretion. And how ſhall we not vſe the ſame reaſon towards them that are vnto vs a ſecond ſelfe, with whome we are to liue and die? Let vs then haue regard to thoſe principall points that are to be deſired for the eſtabliſhment and continuance

of loue, vpon which euerie holie mariage ought firſt toLoue the firſt foundation of euery holy mariage. be grounded, as we haue already ſaid. Secondly, it muſt be grounded vpon the conformitie and agreement of good and honeſt conditions: and laſtly, it muſt hold & depend of prudence, which breedeth a continuall, liuely, and mutuall affection of one towards another, the true teſtimonie whereof is a reuerent behauiour of each to other. It is a Maxime and principle granted by wiſe men, that noThe beſt muſt command. man is woorthie and meete to command, vnles he be better than they ouer whome he commandeth. Therefore it ſeemeth that nature commonly giueth more vigour, ſtrength, authoritie, grauitie, and prudence, in deedes and wordes to men than to women. The effects of which graces he cannot better ſhew foorth, than by gouerning himſelfeThe husband muſt command ouer his wiſe as ouer a free perſon. with reaſon, and according to duty towards his wife: firſt, in louing hir, then in gouerning hir gratiouſly, as being a free perſon, as Aristotle ſaith, perſwading hir more by reaſon than authoritie. He muſt not offer hir any iniurie, either in deede or worde, but honour and make much of hir. For the husband that honoureth his wife, honoureth himſelfe. The Lawyer ſaith, that maried women are and ought to be ſet foorth with the beames of their husbands, and that the husband ought to giue example to others to honour his wife: whereby alſo he ſhall prouoke his wife to honour him. But on the other ſide, by offring hir wrong, he ſhall incenſe hir, and giue hir occaſion to reply vpon him with bitter ſpeeches, which in the end will prouoke him to wrath, and to behaue himſelfeThe fruits of hard dealing with ones wife. woorſe towards his wife, thereby conſtraining hir, as it falleth out often-times, to inuent ſome miſchiefe againſt him and his honor. There are a thouſand examples heerof in good authors, and experience affoordeth too many proofes of the ſame. We reade of Clytemnestra the wifeClytemneſtra. of Agamemnon, that, to reuenge an iniurie receiued from hir husband, ſhe committed adulterie, and afterward conſented to his death. It is true that this is but a ſimple reuenge of women, and ſuch a one as lighteth vpon them ſelues. But what? This ſexe is fraile, ſpitefull, and giuen

to reuenge: and therefore men are to vſe the greater prudence in the gouerning and managing of them. The prouerbe is, that a man is bitten of his dog, by prouoking him ouer-much, and that an Eele is often-timesA husband muſt neuer beate his wife. loſt, when it is ſtrained ouer-hard. Therefore let a wiſe husband knowe this, that he muſt neuer deale iniuriouſly with his wife, eſpecially before others: and that he muſt abſtaine moſt of all from laying violent hands vpon hir. If the Ancients would haue their ſlaues corrected, rather with wordes than blowes, much more ought theMarcus Aurelius precept to husbands. wife to be ſo dealt withall, whome God calleth a helpe like to vs. To this effect Marcus Aurelius ſayd, that a wiſe husband and one that mindeth to liue peaceably with his wife, ought aboue all things to obſerue this rule, namely: to admoniſh hir often, to reprehend hir ſeldome, but
                     Iupiter. 
                     neuer to lay hands vpon hir. Homer bringeth in Iupiter reproouing his wife, and threatning hir when ſhe is rebellious, but neuer maketh him goe farther. We read in the life ofCato. 
                     Cato, of whome it was giuen out that he was a ſworne enimie to women, that he neuer ſtrake his wife, accounting that ſacriledge: and yet he knewe well howe to vſe the place and dignitie of a husband, which keepeth his wife in obedience. But aboue all that hath beene hitherto ſpoken,A husband muſt eſpecially auoid adulterie. a husband muſt obſerue this as an inuiolable lawe, that he abſtaine from touching any other woman but his owne, aſwell in reſpect of the feare of God, who excludeth all whoremongers & adulterers from his heauenlie manſion, as alſo bicauſe his wife ſhould haue no knowledge or ſuſpition thereof. For otherwiſe he will caſt himſelfe into a more dangerous Labyrinth, than was that of king Porſenna or of Dedalus: yea, he ſhall hardly haue a good countenance of his wife at any time, except ſhe diſſemble the matter, that ſhe may the better be renenged of him, either by rendring like for like, thinking that ſhe hath iuſt occaſion to breake hir faith made to hir huſband, ſeeing he hath broken his to hir, or elſe by ſome other meane vpon his perſon. Of this ſuſpition which the wife hath of hir husbands incontinencie, or the husband

of the wiues, is bred a great paſſion, or to ſpeake better,What iealouſie is. fury and rage, which we call iealouſie. Chryſippus calleth it a diſeaſe of the minde, proceeding from a feare which a man hath, that that thing is communicated to another, which he would not haue common but priuate to himſelfe. Or otherwiſe we may ſay, that iealouſie is bred of that loue, which will not ſuffer a partner in the thing beloued. Some write (ſaith Plutarke) that Cats are troubled with the ſmell of perfumes and ſweet ſauours, in ſo much that they waxe mad withall. Likewiſe if it ſhould ſo fal out that a woman ſhould be offended and haue hir braine troubled with the perfumes of hir husband, he were of a very ſtrange nature if he would not abſtaine from it, but for the enioying of a little pleaſure would ſuffer hir to fall into ſo great an inconuenience. Now ſeeing it is ſo that ſuch accidents come vpō them, not when their husbands are perfumed, but when they giue ouer themſelues to theWhoredom is great iniuſtice. loue of harlots, it is great iniuſtice in them to grieue, offend and trouble their wiues in ſuch hainous ſort. At leaſt wiſe they ſhould behaue themſelues as they do that draw neere to Bees, who abſtaine frō touching euen their owne wiues. For it is reported of Bees, that they hate and make warre more againſt them than againſt others, bicauſe they haue ſuch falſe harts, as to lie neere their wiues, being defiled and polluted with the company of any other womē. The wilde bore (ſaith one of the Poets) purſued of dogs, the Lioneſſe bitten with hunger, the Tyger robbed of hir yong ones, or the Viper whoſe taile is troad vpon, are not more terrible than a woman that is offēded: but nothing wil ſooner caſt hir into a phrenſie & fury, than ielouſy. Ariadna buried aliue Zenon Iſauricus the emperour, that ſheThe cruel reuenge of Ariadna. might be reuenged on him. He that taketh to himſelfe thoſe pleaſures which he forbiddeth his wife, doth as much as if he commanded hir to fight againſt enimies, to whom he had alreadie yeelded himſelf. And if vice, whoredom, curioſitie, ſuperfluitie, choler and other imperfections raigne among men, how ſhould they driue them away from women? So a husband muſt correct himſelfe firſt,

and after vſe learned inſtructions towards his wife. Let him (as Bees do) gather togither and cary to his wife, ſo much of his ſtudies as may ſerue for hir profit. For ſeeingWomen are capable of Philoſophie. women (as Plato ſaith) haue a ſoule as well as we, and as quicke a ſpirite, yea oftentimes a more excellent ſpirite than we, we muſt not think them vncapable of the goodly reaſons of Philoſophie, wherein many of them haue gone beyond many Philoſophers. Knowledge and skill wil keepe a woman from other vnmeete exerciſes, and being rauiſhed with hir husbands braue diſcourſes, ſhe will contemne the loſſe of time in vnprofitable matters. She will neuer fall into that daunger which oftentimes befalleth women, who conceiue and bring foorth by themſelues ſtrange counſels, and extrauagant paſſions, when they receiue not from elſe-where the ſeedes of good ſpeeches, and when their husbands impart not vnto them any ſound doctrine. The ſame (as fables faine) preuailed more than the Northerne winde. For the more the wind laboured to get away a mans gowne, and to that ende blew more violently, the harder did he girde vp and reſtraineA tale of the ſunne and the wind. his garment. But when the Sunne waxed hote after the winde, the man feeling himſelfe heated, caſt off his gowne, and afterward burning with heate, he put off his coate and all. So if husbands go about to order their wiues with their bare authoritie and by force, they will ſtriue againſt it, and be offended: but contrarywife, beingWomen muſt be led more by reaſon and gentlenes, than by force. admoniſhed with reaſon they yeeld of themſelues and take it patiently. The fooles of this world commonly gird and mocke that man, who peraduenture ſeemeth to be led a litle too much by his lawfull wife & loyall ſpouſe, vſing more gentleneſſe and curteſie towards hir, than rigor and commaunding: and yet you ſhall ſee themſelues ſo ſtrangely bewitched by ſome ſtrumpet, that they feare not to hazard their life and honour in hir ſeruice. But it beſeemeth a man a great deale better to be well liking, gentle and acceptable to an honeſt and vertuous wife, than to abaſe himſelfe to a common harlot. And thoſe men deceiue themſelues, who, hauing maried rich wiues

and of noble houſes, ſtudie not to make them more honeſtThe beſt way to bring an vnruly wife into good order is to make hir more honeſt. and better qualified, but to pull them downe, perſwading themſelues that they will come to better order when they haue abaſed & brought them lowe. Whereas euery one ought to maintain the dignitie of his wife as he would do the iuſt height of a horſe, and be skilful both in the one and the other to vſe the bridle well as it becomemeth him. Beſides, a husband is not to rule his wife as a lord or maſter doth his ſlaue, but as the ſoule doth a wiſe mans bodie, through a mutuall loue and ioint affection, whereby he is bound vnto hir. And as the ſoule may well be carefull ouer the body, although it become not a ſlaue to the pleaſures & inordinate affections thereof: ſo a wiſe husband will behaue himſelfe by pleaſing and gratifiyng his wife in honeſt things, and by ſhewing that he loueth honor and vertue aboue all things. This will be a mean to make hir as wiſe, vertuous and honeſt, as otherwiſe: if himſelfe be giuen to voluptuouſneſſe, he ſhall cauſe hir to like of curtiſans conditions, and to become ſlipperie and laſciuious. No man (ſaith Cleobulus) ought to chide or toNo man muſt chide or fawne vpon his wife before others. fawne vpō his wife before others: for the one is the point of a foole, the other of a mad man. Socrates practiſed one of theſe points very well, when Xantippa his wife reuiling and chiding him, in the ende being caried headlong with wrath, ouerthrew table and all. Whereupon Euthydemus whom he had brought home to ſuppe with him, roſe vp to depart. But Socrates not ſhewing himſelfe greatlySocrates patience in ſuſtaining the infirmities of his wife. mooued or angry with his wife, ſtaied him, and ſayde: What? do you not remember my friend, that as we were at dinner with you the other day, a henne lept vpon the table and did as much to vs, and yet we were not angrie therefore? Solon ordained that the husband ſhould goe ſee his wife thriſe a moneth at the leaſt, not for pleaſure, but to yeeld vnto hir, as it were by obligation, the pledges and gages of friendſhip through honor, grace and loialtie, which ought to increaſe daily. And as cities at ſundry times renew theſe alliaunces, which they haue one with another: ſo this lawe-maker would haue the alliaunce

of mariage, that I may ſo ſpeake, renued by the ſpeechesHusbands muſt be carefull in looking to their families. vſed at ſuch greetings and viſitations. We ſee daily what miſeries and offences light vpon houſes, when the head of the familie hath no care to rule and guide it: whereupon alſo the women thinke that they are deſpiſed and ſmally beloued. And in truth they haue occaſion giuen them ſo to thinke, when their husbands ſeldome keep them company. The Pilote that giueth ouer his ſhip to the mercy of the waues, declareth euidently that he careth not for looſing that which is in it. A wife without hir husband is expoſed to many ambuſhes and aſſaultes that are hardly ſuſtained.Women maried their ſeruants in the abſence of their husbands. To this purpoſe I remember a notable hiſtorie written in the chronicles of Ruſſia, namely, that the inhabitants of Nouogradum, which at this day is the chiefe & principall ſeate of that countrey, being gone into Graecia to beſiege the towne of Corſun, where they continued for the ſpace of ſeuen yeeres, their wiues in the meane while wearied with their long abode there, maried their ſeruants. The husbands afterward returning conquerours, found their ſlaues in the field, who gaue them battell, and had the better of them. Neuertheles in the end the ſlaues were vanquiſhed, and the moſt part of the women moued with indignation for that ouerthrow, hung themſelues. Now as touching that other point mentioned by thatMen muſt not dally with their wiues in the preſence of others. wiſe man Cleobulus, namely, that a mā muſt not dally with his wife in the preſence of others, Cato depriued a Senator of Rome from the Senatoriall dignitie, bicauſe he kiſſed his wife in his daughters preſence. This was ſomwhat too extreme. But howſoeuer it be, as Plato admoniſheth men growen in yeeres to ſhew themſelues ſhamefaſt before the yonger ſort, to the end that they alſo ſhould learne to behaue themſelues reuerently and warily, ſo ſurely this precept is eſpecially to be kept betweene man and wife, that they may be an example of honor and chaſtitie vnto all.What houſhold affaires are to be diuided between the man and the wife. Likewiſe the man muſt diuide the offices and affaires of the houſe with his wife, giuing hir authoritie ouer all things in his abſence: and in his preſence alſo ouer houſhold matters, & ſuch things as are more proper & agreeable

to that ſexe: cauſing hir to be feared, reuerenced, and obeied of the children, men-ſeruants and maid-ſeruants, as himſelfe. But as if one take two ſounds that agree well, the baſe is always more heard: ſo in a well ruled and ordered houſe, all things are done by the conſent of both parties, but yet ſo, that it is alwaies apparant, that things are done by the direction, counſell, and inuention of the husband. For a familie will ſuffer but one head, one maſterThere muſt be but one head in a familie. & one lord: otherwiſe if there were many heads, the commandements would be contrary, and the familie in continuall trouble. Now the foundation of all dueties here mentioned by vs of the husband towards the wife, and of all others which daily communication may require, is that true and vnfained loue that ought to be the vnſeparable bond of euery good mariage. We haue handledLoue the band of mariage. heretofore the great effects of friendſhip: which if they be required among common friends, no doubt but they are much more between thoſe, whom God, nature, the lawes, and loue, haue ſo ſtraightly ioined togither. Alſo let huſbandes know, that they ought to reuerence their wines more than any other perſon: and perceiuing them to be wiſe and vertuous, (as they may make them if they be not altogither forlorne and corrupted) let them neuer ſeemea hu band muſt not diſtruſt his wife. to diſtruſt them in any reſpect. The Romanes when they returned from a voiage, or from a farre countrey, or onely out of the countrey into the citie, if their wiues were at home, they ſent word before to giue them intelligence of their comming, to the end they ſhould not conceiue this opinion, that they meant to deale craftily or maliciouſly with them. Foraſmuch therfore as loue and friendſhip is the fountain of euery good dutie of the husband towards his wife, and that which as it were ſtealeth away, and maketh the will of his half-partner to be wholy his owne, let vs conſider for the concluſion of our ſpeech, of ſome notableExamples of the loue of huſbands towards their wiues. examples of great loue in the behalfe of men, to the end we may be drawen on to loue and to honor them that are in the ſame place towards vs that the church is towards God: which he ſo loued, that he ſent his only ſonne

                     T. Gracchus. to die for the redemption thereof. Tiberius Gracchus, a noble man of Rome, finding two ſerpents in the chamber wherein he ſlept, inquired for the meaning thereof by ſooth-ſaying, wherunto he gaue abſolute credite. Anſwer was made him, that if he ſlue the male firſt, he ſhould die before his wife, but if the female, his wife before him. As ſoone as he vnderſtood therof he ſlue the male, and within a litle while after he died. Whereupon Hiſtoriographers doubt whether his wife Cornelia were more happy in finding a husband that loued hir ſo well, than miſerable in looſing him. Baptista Fregoſa maketh mention of a Neapolitane,The great loue of a Neapoli
                        
                           •
                        ane towards his wife. whoſe wife being taken on the ſea coaſt by the Moores, he preſently caſt himſelf after hir into the ſea, and following their foiſt beſought thē to take him alſo. Which they did, ſo that both of them were brought before the king of Thunis to whom the veſſail belonged: who hearing the diſcourſe of the fact, and being moued with compaſſion ouer ſuch perfect friendſhip, deliuered them both.Orpheus. 
                     Orpheus (as the Poets write) loued his wife ſo entirely, that ſhe dying on the wedding day, he kept his loue inuiolable and would neuer ſet it vpon any other. Ninus king of the Aſſyrians, falling in loue with Semiramis the wife of Menon a vaſſaile of his, beſought him to let him haue hir to wife, in recompence wherof he offred him his daughter in mariage.Menon. But Menon bare ſuch great loue towards hir, that he would not yeeld therunto. Wherupon the king being mooued with wrath, and threatning to plucke out his eies and to take hir away by force, as he did in deed, Menon forPeriander. very griefe & ſorow hung himſelfe. Periander king of Corinth loued his wife ſo tenderly, that after ſhe was dead, he cauſed hir to be laid by him certaine daies. Marcus Lepidus
                     M. Lepidus. being driuen into baniſhment, heard that his wife was maried to another, whereupon he died for ſorow. WhenP. Numidius. word was brought to Plautius Numidius a Romane Senator, that his wife, whom he loued as himſelfe, was dead: heSylanus. thruſt himſelf into the boſome with a dagger, whereof he died. Sylanus a Romane ſlue himſelfe after his wife, whom he ſingularly loued, was taken from him, and giuen to

                     Nero the Emperor. Dominicus Cataluſius prince of LesbosDominicus Catahuſius. loued his wife ſo wel, that although ſhe grew very leprous, yet he neuer depriued hir therefore of his boord or bed. We read of a great lord of Spaine, called Roderigo Sarmiento,
                     Roderigo Sarmiento. that through griefe which he receiued for the loſſe of his wife, he ſlept for a yeeres ſpace in his clothes, did neuer eate vpon a table cloth, nor ſate him downe in any chaire, but afflicted himſelfe diuerſly. Therefore let vs learne by our preſent diſcourſe to loue our wiues perfectly, yeelding due beneuolence vnto them and behauing our ſelues diſcretly towards thē, without offending them, or going beyond the boundes of our duetie. And as nature mingleth vs togither by our bodies, to the ende that taking part of the one and part of the other, and puttingAll things muſt be common between the huſband and the wife. all togither, ſhe may make that which commeth thereof common to both, and that in ſuch ſort, that neither partie can diſcerne or diſtinguiſh that which is proper to it ſelfe from that which belongeth to the other: ſo let vs haue all things common togither, euen our will, affection and authoritie. Neuertheleſſe this muſt be done in ſuch ſort, that as in one cup, although there be as much or more water than wine, yet we call it wine, ſo in the authoritie of the wife the husbands name muſt be written, as he that directeth the ſame. But in the meane while let theſe wordes Mine and Thine be baniſhed far from them, vnleſſe it be in this reſpect, that, according to the opinion of the Phiſitians, as blowes giuen on the left ſide are felt on the right, ſo the wife muſt through compaſſion feele the harmes of hir husband, and the husband much more thoſe of his wife: to the ende that as knots haue their ſtrēgth by interlacing the ends one within another, ſo the ſocietie of mariage is preſerued and ſtrengthened when both parties affoord a mutuall affection of good will, being aſſured, that both togither ſhall be made heires of grace and life.
               
            
            
               
               Of the dutie of a Wife towards hir Huſband. Chap. 48.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  NAture hauing honored woman with aThe naturall gifts of women. gracious alluring of the eyes, with a ſweete ſpeech, with a beautifull countenance and modeſt behauior, hath giuen hir great means to win the good liking and loue of hir husband, if ſhe be honeſt and ſhamefaſt: as likewiſe ſhe may eaſily deceiue man by offring him pleaſure, if ſhe be wickedly minded. This did Olympias wife to king Phillip, know full well, when ſhe tooke the Theſſalonian woman by the hand whom hir husband loued ſo well, and by whom (as they ſaid) he was charmed and bewitched. But the Queene ſeeing hir ſo faire, and of ſo good a grace, and as hir ſpeech declared, a woman of a good houſe and well brought vp: Away (quoth ſhe) with all ſlander, for I ſee wel that your charms are in your ſelfe. And let vs not thinke that the power of a lawfull wedded wife is leſſe, if, by taking all things vnto hir, hir wealth, hir nobilitie, hir charmes, and the whole web of Venus, ſhe ſtudie by meeknes, good behauiour and vertue to obtaine hir husbands loue. Goe to then, let vs ſee if we can giue the wife ſome inſtructions touching this matter how ſhe may keep hir ſelf within the limites of hir dutie towards hir husband.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     Eph. 5. 23. 24. Wiues muſt be ſubiect to their husbands. As the Church is in ſubiection to Christ, euen ſo (ſaith the Scripture) let the wiues be to their huſbands in euery thing. For the huſband is the wiues head, euen as Christ is the head of the Church.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Wiues muſt be modeſt, wiſe, chaſte, keepers at home, louers of their husbands, and ſubiect vnto them. But it belongeth to thee ASER to be now vnto them in ſtead of a ſchoole-maſter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  When kings and princes honor Philoſophers and learned men, it is certaine that they honor thēſelues: but philoſophers that court it, and become ſeruants to riches, are not thereby honoured. We may ſay as much of

wiues. For whē they ſubmit themſelues to their husbands,It is an honor to a woman to obey hir husband they are praiſed: but if they will become miſtreſſes ouer them, it beſeemeth them as ill, as it doth ſuch as yeeld to that ſubiection: and both of them reape more ſhame thā honor thereby. Therefore thoſe women that make choice of effeminate husbands, & delight in commanding them, are like to ſuch as had rather guide the blind, than follow the wiſe and cleare-ſighted. So that if a wife loue, eſteeme, and honor hir husband, I thinke that all honeſt dutie will flow from thence, to their common contentation & comfort, & to the benefit, quietnes, and honour of the whole familie: I meane, if ſhe loue him as hir ſelf, and eſteem and honour him, as hir neereſt lord. A wiſe woman ought to thinke that hir husbands maners are the lawes of hir life, which (if they be good) ſhe is wholy to folow: but if they be bad, ſhe muſt patiently beare with them. For as a looking glaſſe ſerueth to no purpoſe, although it be gilt andA wife compared to a looking glaſſe. decked with precious ſtones, if it doth not liuely repreſent his face that looketh into it: ſo a woman is not to be liked albeit ſhe haue ſtore of goods, if hir life be not thereafter, and hir behauior & conditions be not conformable to hir husbands. If a looking glaſſe repreſent a ſadde and mourning countenance to one that is ioyful and mery, or contrarywiſe a ſmiling face to him that is ſorowfull, it is a falſe glaſſe and worth nothing. So is ſhe a bad wife and vnreaſonable, which frowneth when hir husband is deſirous to be mery with hir, & to take ſome honeſt recreation: or contrarywiſe, which laugheth and ſporteth hir ſelfe when ſhe ſeeth him full of buſines and greatly troubled. For the one is a token of hir froward diſpoſition: & the other, that ſhe deſpiſeth the affections of hir husband. And as lines and ſuperficiall partes, as the Geometricians ſay, mooueNotable ſimilitudes. not of themſelues, but as the bodies mooue wherein they are: ſo a wife muſt haue no proper and peculiar paſſion or affection to hir ſelf, but muſt be partaker of the paſtimes, affaires, thoughts & laughters of hir husband. The farther the Moone is from the Sun, the cleerer it is, and ſhineth ſo much the more: and contrarywiſe, it hath leſſe light, & is

                     Euil wiues reſembled to the moone. obſcuved the more, as it commeth neerer therunto: ſo euil women deale with their husbands when they loue not their preſence. For in their abſence you ſhall ſee them as iocund and frolick as may be, but when they are with their husbands and at home, then are they ſorowful & penſiue. Moreouer, a wife muſt not truſt too much either to hir wealth, or to the nobilitie of hir race, or to hir beautie, but to that which ſetteth neereſt hir husbands hart, that is, to hir behauior, maners and conuerſation, taking order thatAn ouerthwarting wife maketh hir ſelfe odious. theſe things be not hard, troubleſom, or irkſom to hir huſband euery day, but ſuch as pleaſe him and agree with his conditions. For the troubleſome conuerſation of a wife that alwais iarreth, in the end maketh euen hir honeſt behauior odious, as hir ouer-great pinching & niggardlines cauſeth hir ſparing & good huſwiferie to become hateful. As this cuſtom was obſerued amongſt the Perſians, that when their enimies came ruſhing vpon thē with great clamors, they receiued them with ſilence, & contrarywiſe, if they were ſet vpon with ſilence, they made head againſtHow a wife muſt deale with hir cholerike husband. them with opē mouth: ſo diſcreet womē hold their peace when their husbands cry out with choler, & contrarywiſe if they vtter not a word, they labor to appeaſe and pacifie them with their comfortable ſpeeches. A wiſe womā that loueth hir husband as becōmeth hir, ſomtime tollerateth & diſſembleth an euil intreatie, truſting ſo much to hir cō
                     ſtancie & vertue, that by continuing in hir dutie ſhe is able to bring him back again to his. She muſt gouerne hir ſelfeA woman muſt not diſcloſe hir husbands imperfections to any body. ſo diſcreetly, that neither hir neighbours, nor other of hir familiar friends be made acquainted in any ſort with hir complaints & grieuances. For by diſcouering them, either ſhe ſhal make hir ſelf a laughing ſtock to others, or els giue occaſion to the enimies of hir honor, to prouoke & ſollicit hir to naughtines. And if any one knowing the imperfections of hir husband, vnder this pretence of ſeeing hir hardly delt withal, perſwade hir to decline frō hir duty, ſhe muſt anſwer him after the example of king Phillip, who being wronged by the Graecians intreated them curteouſly, what then would my husband do vnto me, if I begin to

hate him, & to offer him iniury? If ſhe perceiue that any womā of hir acquaintance laboreth by hir talke either to ſow or to increaſe ſome domeſtical diſſentiō, ſhe may wiſely ſay with hir ſelf: In what caſe would this woman that ſeketh to make me iealous, deſire rather to ſee me, thā maliciouſly to play the ill huſwife with my huſband, & to forſake my houſe & mariage bed, whereupon it may be ſhe would gladly take my place? Thus a diſcreet woman wil giue ſmal eare, & much leſſe giue place to the light ſpeeches & fained promiſes of ſuch diſturbers of domeſtical peace. Neither will ſhe admit & nouriſh thoſe vain & ſottiſh opinions, which commonly buſie the minds of ſuch womē as are ruled & gouerned onely by paſſions, but containing hir deſires through reaſon within a cōuenient compaſſe, the confidence which ſhe hath in hir huſbands vertue wil breed perfect eaſe to hir ſoule, by taking frō hir all doubting & occaſion of complaining. Now vpō this diſcourſe we giue this note by the way, that whē anyMaried couples muſt not make two beds for any iarre between them. diſpleaſure falleth out betweene maried folks, they muſt haue a ſpecial regard then that they make not two beds. For by this mean their anger will indune the leſſer while. Alſo they muſt ſhun al occaſions of quarelling in bed. For as a great bellied woman redy to lie down, & euen feeling the pangs of hir trauell, ſaid to thoſe that willed hir to lie down vpon the bed, How can the bed cure me of this euil which
                     When is the beſt time and place to pacifie ſtrife between man and wife. 
                     came vnto me vpon the bed: ſo thoſe quarels, iniuries, wrath, & choler that are bred within the bed, can hardly be appeaſed & healed at any other time or place. But to cōtinue our matter of the duty of a wife, ſhe muſt neuer ſuffer any to enter into hir husbands houſe without his expres commandement or licēce. For euery honeſt wife ought to fear that which is cōmonly ſpoken of the loſenes of women, & labor as much as may be to cōuince thoſe ſlanderers of lying, who know no other ſong than to ſpeak of their incō
                     tinencie.A woman muſt be free from all ſuſpicion of incontinencie. 
                     Caeſar ſaid, That a womā must not only be free frō that fault, but alſo frō al ſuſpicion therof, which was the cauſe why he put away his own wife. And ſeing it is the duty of an honeſt womā
                     She muſt not loue to gad abroad or to be ſeene. to take vpon hir the care & ouerfight of houſhold affaires, ſhe muſt keep at home, and not loue to gad abroad, or be

deſirous of meetings, but ſo farre foorth as hir husband would haue hir do ſo. The greateſt vertue of a woman (ſaid Euboïdes) is not to be known but of hir husband: and hirShe muſt be modeſt in hir attire. praiſe (ſaid Argeus) in a ſtrange mouth is nothing elſe but a ſecret blame. A wife ought to be modeſt in hir garmēts and ornaments of hir body, and not vſe ſuch ſumptuous apparel as the law or cuſtom of the countrey permitteth:The true ornaments of a woman. bicauſe neither rich works of gold, nor precious attire, nor bodily beautie make not a woman ſo praiſe-woorthy as hir modeſtie doth, which conſiſteth in deeds, words, coū
                     tenance & apparel. That is an ornament (ſaid the Philoſopher Crates) that adorneth, & that thing adorneth a woman, which marketh hir more honourable. And this is not done by iewels of gold, emeralds, precious ſtones, or purple garments, but by euery thing that cauſeth hir to be accounted honeſt, wiſe, humble & chaſte. Thoſe womē that curiouſly prick vp themſelues, & inrich their bodies with ornaments ful of pompe, make men more diſſolute & inclined to looſenes, eſpecially when they make great window-works before their dugs, & giue licence to their eyes to wander & gaze about. Wheras contrarywiſe a wiſe womā through hir honeſt behauior, togither with hir lowly & ſetled look, leadeth ſo many as caſt their eies vpō hir to continencie and chaſtitie. But a diſcouered dug, a nakedCertain tokens of an adulterous hart. breſt, friſled locks, paintings, perfumes, & eſpecially a rouling eie, & a laſciuious & vnchaſt look, are the fore-rūners of adultery. He that wil not credit me, let him read Tibullus, Propertius, & Ouid, who are of the ſame opinion. It may well be ſayd of ſuch women, whoſe number is too greatShamefaſtnes is the beſt dowrie of a woman. amongſt vs, that they haue loſt all ſhame: albeit the beſt dowrie, the beſt inheritaunce and moſt precious iewell which a woman can haue, is to be ſhamefaſt. Yea the fortreſſe and defence that nature hath giuen to a woman for the preſeruation of hir reputation, chaſtitie, and honour, is ſhame, whereof whenſoeuer ſhe maketh no account, ſhe is vndone for euer. Socrates vſed to counſell thoſe young men that behelde them-ſelues in lookyng glaſſes, if they were harde fauoured to correct

their deformitie with vertue, by making themſelues vertuous: and if they were faire, not to blot their beautie with vice. In like maner it were very good, that when the maried wife holdeth hir looking glaſſe in hir hand, ſheAn excellent vſe of looking glaſſes. would ſpeake thus to hir ſelfe if ſhe be foule: what then ſhould become of me if I were alſo wicked? And if ſhe be faire, how ſhall this be accounted of, if I continue honeſt and wiſe? For if a hard fauoured woman be loued for hir good behauiour and honeſt conditions, it is greater honour vnto hir than if it were for beautie. Moreouer a woman muſt haue a ſpeciall care to be ſilent, and to ſpeakeA woman muſt be ſilent and ſecret. as ſeldome as ſhe may, vnleſſe it be to hir husband, or at his bidding: reſeruing houſehold wantes and affaires ſecret to hir ſelfe, and not publiſh them abroad. Thus doing, if any euill, any reproch or diſhonour come to the houſe through any of them that are within it, the fault will be hir husbands and not hirs. Likewiſe a woman that reſpecteth hir honour, ought to be aſhamed to vtter anyA woman muſt auoid ſilthie ſpeeches and ieſtes. diſhoneſt ſpeeches, floutes & ieſts, and no leſſe aſhamed to giue eare vnto them. For if ſhe once giue hir ſelf to gibing, they that laughed at ſome litle word of hirs, wil afterward mock the author therof: ſeeing the honor of womē is ſuch a nice & charie thing, that it is not lawful for thē ſo much as to thinke, much leſſe to ſpeake of many things, which men may freely both talke of & put in practiſe. Therfore thoſe dames that mind to preſerue their grauitie, muſt be ſilent not only in vnlawful, but euen in neceſſary matters, vnles it be very requiſite that they ſhould ſpeake of them. To be ſhort, that woman that is borne to vertue, and purpoſethA ſhort ſumme of the ductie of a wife. to performe hir dutie towards hir husband, muſt pleaſe him in all honeſt things, and in ſuch as draw neereſt to his inclination, ſhe muſt loue him intirely, and eſteeme of him aboue all others, ſhe muſt be patient and know how to winke at, and to beare with many things done by him, ſhe muſt be prudent to gouerne hir houſe, skilful in huſwifrie to preſerue hir goods, careful to bring vp hir children, faire-ſpoken and curteous to hir neighbors, plētiful in honorable works, a friend to honeſt company,

                     A woman muſt be deſirous of knowledge. and a very great enimie to the lightneſſe of youth. Moreouer ſhe muſt beſtow as much time as ſhe can ſteale from domeſticall affaires, in the ſtudie of notable ſayings, and of the morall ſentences of auncient Sages and good men. And it were a ſeemely and honorable thing to heare a woman ſpeake to hir husband in this ſort: Husband, you are my teacher, my gouernour and maſter in Philoſophie, and in the knowledge of moſt excellent and heauenly ſciences. For by ſuch honeſt occupations, women are withdrawen and turned aſide from other vnworthy exerciſes,Exerciſes vnſeemly for women. whereunto we ſee them ſo apt and inclined now a daies, which maketh them very offenſiue, as plaies, dancing, maſking, hunting, and diſcharging of harquebuzes, with ſuch other dealings very vnmeete for their ſexe. Whereas if in lieu of all theſe things a wife would embrace the loue of knowledge, ſo far foorth as hir wit and leaſure require, & as hir husband ſhall like of, ſhe ſhould be partaker not only of the floures and ſongs, but alſo of the fruits, which the Muſes bring foorth and beſtow vpon them that loue letters and Philoſophie: which will greatly helpe hir towards the leading of a happy life with hir husband. Now conſidering that loue is alwayes the wel-ſpring of euery good dutie, eſpecially between thoſe that are linked togitherWhat great loue the law of nations requireth in a wife towards hir huſband. by mariage, (which ought to be ſo great in regard of the wife, that the ciuill law and law of nations, will haue a woman folow hir husband, although he haue neither fire nor place to reſort vnto, or be baniſhed and driuen from place to place) let vs here call to remembrance ſome notable examples of the great loue that hath been in vertuous women towards their husbandes, as well when theyExamples of the great loue of women towards their husbands. Hipſicrates.
                      were aliue, as after their death, by refuſing to ouer-liue them. Queene Hipſicrates the wife of king Mithridates cō
                     meth firſt to mind, who bare ſuch loue towards hir husband, that polling hir ſelfe for his ſake (although ſhe was yong and very faire) ſhe acquainted hir ſelfe with the wearing of armour, and rode with him to the war. And when he was ouercome by Pompey, ſhe accompanied him in his flight through all Aſia, whereby ſhe mollified the griefe

and ſorow which he receiued by his loſſe. Triara, wife toTriara. 
                     Lucius Vitellus brother to the emperour Vitellus, ſeeyng hir husband in a daungerous battell, thruſt hir ſelfe amongſt the ſouldiours to beare him company, and to helpe him both in death and life, and fought as well as the valiaunteſt amongſt them. When king Admetus his wife ſawe hir husband very ſicke, and heard the anſwere of the oracle, which was, That he could not recouer except one of his best friendes died for him, ſhe ſlew hir ſelfe. When the wife of Ferdinando Gonçales a prince of Italy, kneweThe wife of Ferdinando Goncales. that hir husband was priſoner, and in daunger of death, ſhe went to viſite him, and putting on his apparell, abode in his place, whileſt he beyng clothed in hir garmentes ſaued him-ſelfe. Zenobia Queene of Armenia,Zenobia. ſeeing hir husband Radamiſus flie from a battell, and not beyng able to follow him bicauſe ſhe was great with childe, beſought him to kill hir. Which when he thought to haue done, ſhe was ſtriken downe with the blowe of a ſworde: but being taken of the enimie and throughly healed, Tyridates the king, who had vanquiſhed hir husband, maried hir afterward for the great loue that was in hir. The princeſſe Panthea loued hir husbandPanthea. 
                     Abradatus ſo well, that when he died in Cyrus campe, ſhe ſlue hir ſelfe vpon his bodie. Artemiſia Queene ofArtemiſia. Caria, for the great loue ſhe bare to hir husband that was dead, dranke all the aſhes of his bodie, meanyng thereby to be his ſepulchre. When Iulia the wife of Pompey
                     Iulia. ſawe a gowne of hir husbandes all bloodie wherewith he had offered ſome ſacrifice, ſhe imagined that he was ſlayne, and ſo died preſently after. When Porcia the wifePorcia. of Brutus heard of hir husbandes death, and perceiued that hir kinsfolkes tooke away all meanes of killing hir ſelf, ſhe drew hote burning coles out of the fire, and threw them into hir mouth, which ſhe cloſed ſo faſt, that ſhee was choked thereby. Sulpitia beyng carefully reſtrainedSulpitia. by hir mother Iulia from ſeeking hir husband Lentulus in Sicilia, whither hee was baniſhed, ſhee went thither beyng apparelled like a ſlaue, baniſhing hir ſelfe

voluntarily rather than ſhe would forſake hir husband.Octauia. 
                     Octauia ſiſter to Augustus, and wife to Antonius, notwithſtanding the iniurie that hir husband offered vnto hir in preferring before hir a Queene that was nothing ſo yong or faire as ſhe, bare ſuch great loue towards him, that ſetting aſide al intreatie of hir brother, ſhe would neuer leaue hir husbands houſe, but ſtil brought vp his children by his firſt mariage as carefully as if they had been hir owne. Moreouer ſhe ſought by all means to reconcile thoſe two emperors, ſaying, that it was an vnworthy thing, that two ſo mightie princes, the one for the euil intreatie of his ſiſter, the other bicauſe he was bewitched by a wicked woman, ſhould warre one againſt another. As this vertuous princes had taken hir iourney as far as Athens, where ſhe ment to take ſhipping, & to ſeeke out hir husband being then in war with the Parthians, bringing with hir ſouldiers, mony, furniture, & other munitions, he ſent hir word that ſhe ſhould paſſe no farther, but ſtay for him at Rome. This ſhe performed, and ſent him all the aboue named things, not ſeeming at all to be offended with him. Wheras he in the mean while skorned hir, ſporting himſelf with Cleopatra in the ſight and knowledge of all men, and afterward delt worſe with hir when the warre was begunne between him and Augustus. For he ſent a commandement to Octauia at Rome to go out of his houſe, which ſhe preſently obeied, albeit ſhe would not therefore forſake any of hir husbands children, but wept and bewailed hir miſhap which had brought hir to be a principal cauſe of thatAria. ciuill warre. Aria, the wife of Cecinna, followed in a little boate vnto Rome hir husband, who was taken priſoner bicauſe he had borne armes againſt the emperour Claudius. Being there condemned to die, ſhe would haue borne him companie, but that hir ſonne in lawe and hir daughter ſtayed hir. When ſhe ſawe that, ſhe ſtrake hir head ſo hard agaynſt the wall, that ſhe fell downe amazed: and beyng come to hir ſelfe agayne, ſayde vnto them: You ſee that you can not hinder me from dying cruelly, if ye ſtay mee from a more gentle death.

They being aſtoniſhed at the fact, and at hir words, ſuffered hir to do what ſhe would: who then ran to the place where hir husband was, and ſlewe hir ſelfe firſt, after ſhe had ſpoken thus courageouſly vnto him. I am not, Cecinna, ſorie for that which is done, but bicauſe the race of thy life muſt end. When Seneca was condemned to die by Nero,
                     The manner of Seneca his death. Paulina.
                      and had libertie to chuſe what kind of death he would, he cauſed his veines to be opened in a bath. His wife Paulina of hir owne accord did the like to hir ſelf in the ſame bath, mingling togither their blood for a greater vnion and coronation of their long and perfect loue. Whereof Nero being aduertiſed, preſently commanded that hir veines ſhould be ſtopt, conſtraining hir thereby to liue a little longer in continuall griefe. Hipparchia, a very faireHipparchia. & rich woman, was ſo farre in loue with the Philoſopher Crates, who was hard-fauoured and poore, that ſhe maried him againſt all hir kinsfolks minde, and followed him throughout all the countrie, being poorely apparelled & barefoote, after the Cynick faſhion. Piſca ſeeing hir huſbandPiſca. pine away daily through a great and ſtrange diſcaſe, which he had concealed from hir of long time, hauing at the length knowledge thereof, and perceiuing it to be incurable, ſhe was mooued with pitie for the euill which he ſuffered, whom ſhe loued better than hir ſelfe: and therevpon counſelled him with great courage to aſſwage his griefe by death, and the better to ſtirre him vp thereunto, ſhe offered to beare him companie. Whereunto hir huſband agreeing, they imbraced each other, and caſt themſelues headlong into the ſea from the top of a rocke. The king of Perſia taking priſoner the wife of Pandoërus, whomPandoërus wife. he had vanquiſhed and ſlaine, would haue maried hir. But ſhe ſlew hir ſelfe after ſhe had vttered theſe words: God forbid, that to be a Queene, I ſhould euer wed him that hath beene the murderer of my deere husband Pandoërus. Camma, a Greekiſh woman, of the countrie of Galatia,Camma. bare ſuch loue to hir husband, euen after his death, that to be reuenged of a great Lorde called Synorix, who had put hir husband to death, that he might marrie hir,

ſhe gently denied him at the firſt when he became a ſuter vnto hir, but after, in proceſſe of time, ſhe conſented thervnto. When they were come to the Temple of Diana to ſolemnize the mariage, before the aultar ſhe powred forth a little of that drinke, which ſhe had prepared in a cup, and drinking part thereof, ſhe gaue the reſidue to Synorix to drinke. The liquor was made of water, honie, and poiſon, mingled togither. When ſhe ſaw that he had drunke all, ſhe fetched a great and loud grone, and vſing reuerence towards the Goddeſſe, ſayd vnto hir: I call thee to witnes, that I haue not ouer-liued Sinatus my husband, for any other intent than to ſee this daie: neither haue I enioyed any good or pleaſure in all this time, wherein I haue ſince liued, but only in hope, that one daie I ſhould be able to reuenge his death, which being nowe perfourmed by me, I goe cheerefully and with ioy vnto my huſband. But as for thee moſt wicked man (quoth ſhe to Synorix) take order now, that thy friends and kinsfolkes, in ſteede of a wedding bed, prepare a buriall for thee. And ſo within a little while after, both of them ended theirMacrina. daies. Macrina, the wife of Torquatus, loued hir huſband ſo feruently, and was ſo ſorowfull for his abſence, that for one yeeres ſpace, wherein he was gone vpon a voyage, ſhe neuer went out of hir houſe, nor looked out of hir windowe. We read that many women of Lacedemonia, when their husbands were condemned to die for conſpiring againſt their countrie, came one euening clothed in blacke to the priſon, vnder colour to take their finall farewell of them: and changing their apparell, they couered their husbands with their vailes, who went out and left their wiues in their place, which ſuſtaining the puniſhment due to others, were beheaded, contrarie to humanitie, not without great patience ſhewed on their behalfe. Hiſtories are plentifull in ſhewing the great loue of women towards their husbands. Yea, I will not be afraidMen are inferior to women in perfecton of loue. to ſpeake it, men are farre inferior vnto them in perfection of loue. Wherefore we will conclude that it is eaſier for them to be dutifull to their husbands, whome,

as we haue alreadie ſayd, if they loue, eſteeme, and honour, no doubt but they are the chiefe cauſe of all peace and concord in their families, and of the proſperous ſucceſſe of their houſhold affaires, to the quietnes and contentation of their happie life, and to the immortall praiſe and honour of their good name.
               
            
            The ende of the twelfth dates worke.
         
         
            THE THIRTEENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of the dutie of the Head of a familie in other parts of the houſe, namely, in the Parentall, Maisterlie, and Poſſeſſorie part. Chap. 49.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     IT is not without great ſhew of reaſon which many Philoſophers maintaine, thatThe definition of Oeconomie and of Policie. the Oeconomicall ſcience, that is to ſay, the art of ruling a houſe well, is one of the chiefeſt partes of policie, which is the art of skilfull gouerning a great multitude of men. The reaſon is, bicauſe a Towne or Citie is nothing elſe but an aſſemblie of manie families and houſes togither, which will be verie harde for one onelie man to order well and iuſtlie, if he knowe not howe to ſet that order in his familie, which is neceſſarie, and to guide it with ſound reaſon and true prudence. Moreouer, when families are well gouerned, no doubt but it goeth well with the Common-wealth, as we ſee,

that the whole bodie is in good helth, when euery ſeueral member doth his dutie. Nowe that we haue conſidered particularly of that which concerneth the firſt and principall part of a houſe, and of the mutuall dutie of the huſband and wife, I thinke (my Companions) we are to beginne this daies worke with inſtructing our ſelues in that which the head of a familie ought to keepe and obſerue in other parts of his houſe, mētioned before by vs, namely,Euery head of a familie muſt prouide for his houſhold. 1. Tim. 5. 8. his children, ſeruants, and poſſeſſions, ſeeing we are taught by the Apoſtle, that he which prouideth not for his owne, and namely for them of his houſhold, denieth the faith, and is woorſe than an Infidell.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Euery houſe muſt be ruled by the eldeſt, as by a king, who by nature commandeth ouer euery part of the houſe, and they obey him for the good preſeruation thereof.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Euery man by right (ſaith Homer) hath rule ouer his wife and children, and he is not woorthy to haue any, that wanteth ſufficient vertue and prudence to gouerne them well. Go to then (ACHITOB) let vs learne of thee what belongeth to the parts of a houſe now mentioned by vs.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Anacharſis, one of the wiſe men of Grecia, ſaid, that a houſe is not to be called good, bicauſe it is well built, and of good ſtuffe, but men muſt iudge thereof by that which is within, & which belongeth to the houſe,What maketh a houſe to be called good. as namely, by the children, wife, & ſeruants: with whome, being wiſe and well qualified, if the father of a familie communicateth, and imparteth of that which he hath, whether it be in the bottome of a caue, or vnder the ſhade of a bough, he may be ſaid to dwell in a good and happie houſe. Therefore it is no ſmall happines and felicitie for them that are called to the gouernment of a familie, when they ſee it wiſe and well nurtured in euery part. But as nerues and ſinewes, being the inſtruments of ſence and motion, proceede and are deriued from the head, which by them infuſeth into all parts of the bodie, the Animal ſpirite, without which the bodie could not exerciſe any

naturall function of ſence and moouing: ſo the parts of a houſe commonly receiue the habite of manners and conditionsAll good order in a houſe proceedeth from the head of the familie. from the father of a family, as from the head therof: but then eſpecially, when he is prudent and wiſe, and imploieth his care, diligence, and induſtrie thereupon. Therefore a good houſholder muſt beginne the right gouernmentWhere a houſholder muſt begin to rule his houſe well. of his houſe at himſelf, by letting his houſhold ſee, that he is prudent, chaſt, ſober, peaceable, but chiefly religious and godly: as alſo by bringing foorth plentifull fruits of his dutie towards thoſe that are vnder his charge. For as the anger and threatnings of the head of a familie aſtoniſheth his children and ſeruants, ſo his good workes harteneth them on to do well. Now, bicauſe there is varietie of houſes, whoſe difference is commonly taken from the goods and abilitie of men, which abound to ſome, and are wanting to others, I will propound heere, as my purpoſe and meaning was before, a meane houſe, in all pointes perfect, and as we vſe to ſay, neither poore nor rich, from which notwithſtanding both great and ſmall may draw inſtruction for their gouernment. We haue alreadie ſeene, that a houſe is diuided into foure partes, whereof the coniugall or wedlocke part hath beene alreadie handled by vs. Now we muſt conſider of the other three, I meane of the Parentall, Maiſterlie, and Poſſeſſorie parts. And I thinke it will be beſt to follow that order which is moſt vſuall in the perfection and progreſſe ofThe progreſſe of a familie before it come to perfection. mariage, and in the accompliſhment of a houſe, which, both before and after the conſummation of mariage, is firſt compounded of the goods and wealth of men: next of men-ſeruants and maid-ſeruants: and laſtly, it is made abſolute and perfect by thoſe children which God ſendeth. The Poſſeſſorie part then is that which we call mooueable goods, immooueables, and ſuch goods asWhat a houſholder muſt firſt looke vnto. mooue of themſelues. This part of a houſe (as Aristotle ſaith) belongeth ſo to Oeconomie, that it ſhould go before it, and ſerue it, to the end that victuals, and other neceſſarie goods, might not be wanting in the houſe: wherin otherwiſe (ſaith the ſame Philoſopher) a man can not

liue, much leſſe liue well. For as in arts that haue their limits determined, it is neceſſary that conuenient and proper inſtruments be had to finiſh their woorke: ſo muſt itGoods are inſtruments tending to the maintenance of life. be in Oeconomie, in which goods are inſtruments ſeruing to maintaine life: and to poſſeſſe goods, is nothing elſe but to haue a multitude of inſtruments ſeruing thatTwo ſorts of goods. action wherein life conſiſteth. We may diuide all theſe goods into two principall kindes: namely, into thoſe that come from the father to the ſon by ſucceſſion, which we call Patrimonie, and thoſe that are gotten by induſtrie and labor. It is the dutie of the father of a familie to preſerue that for his, which his predeceſſors left him, to haueWhat intereſt a father of a familie hath in his goods. the vſe thereof onely as they had, and to vſe them well, as a faithful gardian and diſpoſer of thoſe goods which God giueth for the ſuccour & profit of his creatures. Yea, from that day wherin he taketh a wife, & much more when he hath children, he muſt thinke that he is no more Lord of his goods, but onely a Tutor: & that if they ſhould be waſted or loſt through his negligence, he were no leſſe faulty than he that ſhould ſteale them. Secondly, he muſt encreaſe his patrimonie by trauel, care, & good husbandry: he muſt get goods for his familie, by iuſt & ciuill meanes, obſeruing decencie and honeſtie in all things. After the firſt functions of a holy & chriſtian dutie, which are to go before, & to be ioined inſeparably to al the actions of life,Two ſorts of getting goods. as elſe-where we haue handled, & ſhal ſee more heerafter: we find two ſorts of getting, the one natural, the other artificiall. The naturall way conſiſteth in paſturing, or feeding of cattell, in tillage, in hunting & fiſhing, vnto which we may ſay, that an honeſt praie and bootie, agreeable to nature, is ioined, if it be practiſed in iuſt and lawfull wars. Heerunto alſo is referred the vent and ſale of his increaſe, that thoſe things which are ſold, and whereof we haue abundance, may procure vs from elſe-where ſuch other things as we want. The artificiall kind of getting, conſiſteth in workes, artes, handicrafts, trafficke, and marchandize,The end of arts, ſciences, and trafficke. exerciſed for gaine. The end of which kind of getting ought to be aſwell publike profite as priuate:

Therefore whatſoeuer is grounded vpon domeſtical profite onely in this ſecond ſort of acquiſition, is to be auoided and miſliked. For whereas it was firſt brought in of neceſſitie to helpe men to liue, this were craftily to turne it to another ende, and to applie it onely to one priuate mans gaine, not without the oppreſſing and detriment of our neighbour, for whoſe benefite a man muſt labour no leſſe than for his owne. Amongſt filthie gaines, VſurieBiting vſurie a deteſtable gain. is moſt to be miſliked and moſt deteſtable, which the Hebrewes call biting, and which doth not onelye gnaw the debtor to the bones, but alſo ſucketh out all the blood and marrow from the bones, engendring monie of monie, contrarie to nature, and to that intent for which monie was firſt brought in: namely, that exchange mightWhy monie was firſt inuented and vſed. be made of ſuch things as are vneaſie to be tranſported, and that the commoditie of trafficke might be continued for publike profite. Nowe a daies there is no trade ſo common, as that of vſurie: although it be altogither reprooued by the lawes of God & men. And ſurely we haue a goodlie cloake to couer the ſhame thereof, I meane the name ofThe queſtion of intereſt hath waightie reaſons on both ſides. intereſt, or profite of monie, when as it hath beene alwaies vnpleaſant in the ſight of God, who forbiddeth all kinde of vſurie whatſoeuer it be, and therefore it ought not to haue any place amongſt men that liue vprightly. There was a lawe amongſt the ancientAn ancient law againſt vſurie. Grecians and Romanes, which forbadde all vſurie ſurmounting one pennie for a hundred by the yeere, and they called it Vnciarie Vſurie. If any Vſurer tooke greater profite, hee was condemned to reſtore fourefold: bicauſe (as Cato ſayth) they iudged, that a Vſurer was a more wicked and vile man than a theefe, who was condemned but in double as much. Againe, this lawe was ſince that brought to a halfe-penie a yeere among the Romanes, and not longe after, Vſurie wasThe law Genutia forbad all vſurie. cleane taken awaie by the lawe Genutia, bicauſe of vſuall ſeditions which aroſe through the contempt of lawes concerning Vſurie. Whereupon, we may note, that what moderation ſoeuer is appoynted in Vſurie, if

men be ſuffered to take neuer ſo little, they will aſcend to the higheſt degree of all. Therefore we muſt conformeExod. 22. 25. Deut. 23. 19. our ſelues to the law of God, which taketh away all libertie heerein ſo plainly from vs, that it cannot be called into queſtion. Concerning arts exerciſed for gaine, although there are ſome of them very vile and contemptible, yet thoſe alſo after a ſort reſpect publike profite. But thoſe arts wherein there is more prudence, or no ſmall commoditie, as Phiſicke, Architecture, and other points of knowledge in liberall arts and ſciences, are honeſt and ſeemely for them that exerciſe them according to their eſtate. Now in all theſe diuers ſorts of getting, and in manyThe praiſe of husbandrie. others about which men are but too diligent, husbandrie is very commendable, yea, nothing is more fruitfull, nothing more pleaſant, nothing more woorthie and beſeeming a free man, and nothing more agreeable to nature. We will note therfore touching this part of a houſe, called Poſſeſſorie, that it belongeth to the dutie of the father of a familie to attend diligently to his houſe, carefully to prouide for his familie whatſoeuer is needfull & neceſſarie for it, and to preſerue for the ſame that which is already gotten, onely by well vſing the poſſeſſion therof.What good huſbandrie is. This is that which is ſignified by the Greeke worde 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , or good husbandrie: which is as much to ſay, as induſtrie in getting goods, and diſcreete gouernment in ſpending them to good purpoſe. And truly he that hath no care ouer his goods and houſhold, will be eaſily perſwaded to liue vniuſtly, and to take that which belongeth to another. For ſloth and vnwillingnes to do any thing, is the beginning and wel-ſpring of all iniuſtice. And ſo, whileſt a good father of a family laboreth to profit euery one, he muſt alſo be carefull for himſelfe and his. Let vs nowOf the Maiſterlie part of a houſe. come to the ſecond part of a houſe, called the Maiſterlie part, which comprehendeth vnder it men-ſeruants and maid-ſeruants. If prudence and reaſon are moſt neceſſary in all parts of houſe-keeping, their effects are well woorth the nothing, and to be deſired in this part, of which we will now intreate. For power and authoritie are of themſelues

too ſurlie and imperious in him that knoweth not how to repreſſe them wiſely: yea, they are eaſily turned into intollerable arrogancie, if the bridle of reaſon reſtraine them not. Therfore ſeeing we liue in a free countrie, wherin the ancient abſolute power of life & death ouer ſlaues hath no place, they, to whome God hath granted this fauourInſtructions touching the dutie of a maiſter towards his ſeruants. to excell, and to goe before others, whether it be in gifts of nature, or in graces of the ſoule, or otherwiſe in the goods of Fortune, they, I ſay, muſt in no wiſe contemn thoſe that ſeeme to haue beene forgotten and ſtripped of all theſe good things. Beſides, a father of a familie muſt conſider, that he ruleth not ſlaues, but free perſons. Therfore he muſt vſe their ſeruice, although not franckly for nothing, yet as that which commeth from a willing and free mind, not dealing roughly with them vpon euery occaſion, but rather handling them gently, as the creatures of God made after his image: ſeeing the pooreſt man isThe poore and rich are both created to one end. created for the ſelfe ſame principall ende that the mightieſt and richeſt is. Aristotle granteth this, that although a Maiſter is not bound in anie reſpect to his Vaſſaile, ſo farre foorth as he is a Vaſſaile, yet, bicauſe ſlaues are men, he is of opinion, that all lawes of humanitie ought to be kept with them. What then ought we to doe to ſuch as ſubmit themſelues freely vnto vs, to whome alſo we are vnited and linked by chriſtian charitie, as to brethren and inheritours of the ſame goods and promiſes? And yet we ſee that maiſters fall into bitter anger, crieAgainſt rigorous maiſters. out, offer outrage, vſe violence, and lay handes of their ſeruants vpon ſmall or no occaſion at all, as if they were vnreaſonable creatures, yea handling them woorſe than they doe their brute beaſtes. That this is true, we ſee not one of them but he hath great care that his horſes be well fed, dailie looked vnto, harneſſed and decked. Beſides, he taketh great heede that they be not tyred, nor ouer-laboured: but as for their ſeruants, they neither ſpare nor comfort them one whit, nor haue any reſpect to their eaſe and reſt. For mine owne part, I thinke that ſuch maiſters deſerue rather to be ſeazed vpon, as

mad men, than admoniſhed as ſociable perſons, I wiſhTwo properties requiſite in a maiſter. therefore, that euery maiſter of a houſe had theſe two properties in him: namely, that with all clemencie and meekenes he would vſe the ſeruice & obedience of them that are vnder him, by conſidering of them with reaſon, and by looking rather to the good affection and deſert of his ſeruant, than to the great and profitable ſeruice, which he draweth from him. The other point is, that the maiſter vſing the ſweate and ſeruice of his, ſhould not ſeeme to be diſpleaſed, teaſtie, or hard to content, but rather alwaies ſhewe foorth a gentle kinde of fauour and curteſie, or at leaſt a ſeuere familiaritie, ſeaſoned with a cheerefull and merrie countenance. Whoſoeuer ſhewe themſelues to be ſuch men, beſides the glorie which they ſhall obtaine by being taken generally for gentle and curteous men, their houſhold ſeruants will loue them the more, and will reuerence them as their fathers, not ſtanding in ſuch awe and feare of them, as men commonly doe of intollerable tyrants. Moreouer, as this aſſembly of a maiſter and of ſeruants tendeth, as euery other ſocietie alſo, vnto ſome good end, the maiſter hauing regard to that which concerneth him and his houſe, and his ſeruantsSeruants muſt not be defrauded of their pay. to the hope of profite and commoditie; order muſt be taken, that they, which haue with all carefulnes diſcharged their dutie, and yeelded that fidelitie and diligence that is requiſite to their ſuperiour, be not defrauded of the price, reward, hire, and deſert of their trauels. For if we thinke it great villanie to rob another man, let vs eſteeme it nothing leſſe to keepe backe the fruite of life, and to defraud the labours, perils, watchings, and exceſſiue cares of our ſeruants, in not recompencing them. Therefore concerning this part of a houſe, called the Maiſterlie part, we will note this, that as the Ancients made their ſlaues free, thereby to drawe from them voluntarie and vnconſtrained ſeruice, and to deliuer themſelues of that feare and diſtruſt, which they alwaies had of their ſlaues, accounting that prouerbe true: As many enimies as ſlaues: ſo ought we to bring vp and to nouriſh

our hired and mercenary ſeruants, which ſerue vs in theſe daies with a free and liberall kind of loue, by dealing gratiouſly with them, by perſwading them with reaſon, and by rewarding them liberally: and this will induce them to ſerue, honour, and eſteeme vs, as if our weale and woe were wholy common with them. The laſt part of the houſe remaineth nowe to be intreated of, which is theOf the Parentall part of a houſe. perfection thereof, and is called the Parentall part, comprehending vnder it, the Father and Mother, or one of them, with the children. The head of a familie (ſaith Aristotle) commandeth ouer wife and children, but ouer both, as free perſons, and yet not after one and the ſameThe difference betweene commanding ouer a wife and ouer children. manner of commanding, but ouer the wife, according to gouernment vſed in a popular ſtate, and ouer the children, royally or Prince-like. This commandement ouer children, is called royall, bicauſe he that begetteth, commandethThe word Father is a kingl
                           •
                         and ſacred title by loue, and by the prerogatiue of age, which is a kind of kinglie commanding. Therefore Homer calleth Iupiter the father of Men and of the Gods, that is king of all. For a king muſt excell by nature, and muſt be of the ſame kind, as it is with the aged in reſpect of the yoonger ſort, and with him that begetteth, in regard of his child, ouer whome he ought to be as carefull, as a king is ouer his ſubiectes. Vnto this part of the houſe a Father of a familie muſt haue a carefull eye, bicauſe heereuppon chiefly dependeth the honour and quietnes of his houſe, and the diſcharge of his dutie towardes God and his countrie: namely, by making his children honeſt and of good conditions. As the deſire and pricke of nature (ſayth Dion) driueth vs forward to beget children: ſo is it a teſtimonie of true loue and charitie, to bring them vppe, and to intreate them after a free manner, and to inſtruct them well. Therefore a Father of a familie ſhall ſatisfie his dutie concerning this parte of a houſe, by the good education and inſtruction of his children, and by exerciſing them in vertue. For manners and conditions are qualities imprinted in vs by longe tracte of tyme, and vertues are gotten by cuſtome

care, and diligence. Heereafter we are to conſider more amply and particularly of the inſtruction of youth, and therefore at this time we will content our ſelues with the giuing of certaine generall precepts, woorthie to be diligently obſerued of euery good father of a familie towards his children. For in vaine (ſayth Plato) doth he hope for a harueſt, that hath beene negligent in ſowing. I ſay, he muſt be paſſing carefull, and imploie all poſſibleYouth is the ſeede-corne of the Common-wealth. labour, that his children and youth may be well inſtructed, bicauſe they are the ſeede-corne of the citie: inſomuch that carefull heed is to be had euen of their words, geſtures, ſportes, and other actions, that nothing may leade them vnto vice. For otherwiſe if no reckoning be made of this age, a man ſhall labour no leſſe in vaine to preſcribe good lawes for them afterward, than the Phiſition doth that miniſtreth plentie of medicines to a diſeaſed partie that keepeth no diet at all. The beſt giftesThe giftes of nature are ſoone corrupted. of nature, if they be not well trimmed and looked vnto, become naught at the firſt, and afterward paſſing euill. Therefore a father of a familie ought not to be more carefull of anie thing than of the bringing vp of his children, according to whoſe good or euill education, the whole houſe will be gouerned. This firſt inſtitution of their life from the firſt age, is called diſcipline, which by little and little leadeth the ſpirite of the childe to the loue of vertue, euen of that vertue, whereby, beeing come to mans eſtate, he knoweth both howe to command, and howe to obeie, and to followe after nothing but that which the lawe commandeth and affirmeth to be good. The vices of children are ſwordes which paſſe through the hartes of their Fathers, who are for the moſte parte the cauſe of them through their negligence in correcting them, and ouer-great libertie which they graunt to this age that needeth a ſtaye and bridle, yea ſpurres, whereby to bee broken and made tractable, as men vſe to deale with yoonge Coltes. Therefore PLATO ſayde, that it is not in our owne power to cauſe our children to bee borne ſuche as wee woulde

haue them, but yet that it lieth in vs to make them good. Whereunto this will be a good meane, if from their yongA father muſt be loued, feared, & reuerenced of his children. yeeres we imprint in their harts a loue, feare, & reuerence of vs. For if theſe thinges concurre not togither in the childes hart, he will neuer yeeld due obedience to his father. Pythagoras ſaid, that a prudent father was better to be liked than a cholerike, bicauſe prudence ſerueth to procure loue and good will in thoſe that ought to obey: whereas choler maketh them odious that command, and cauſeth their admonitions to profite but little. For this cauſe Aristotle requireth perfection of Morall vertue in a father of a familie, ſaying: that his office is a kind of building,The office of a father reſembled to building. & that reaſon is as it were the builder, by whome he guideth & bringeth that Oeconomical worke to his perfection. And in deede the Ancients tooke great paines in teaching their children themſelues, not ſuffering them to be farre from their preſence during their youth: bicauſe they iudged (and that vpon good reaſon) that ſon-like reſpect & loue were good pricks to driue them forward toA child will learne better of his father than of any other. the ſtudie of vertue. And no doubt but if a skilfull father would execute this dutie of inſtructing his child in knowledge and learning, he would conceiue and take it a great deale better of him than of any other. Therefore Marcus Portius Cato would needs beſchoole-maiſter to his owneM. Cato. children, which inſtitution did greatly auaile them, not ſo much bicauſe he was Cato, as bicauſe he was their father,I. Caeſar. whoſe vertue they imitated. Iulius Caeſar adopted his nephew Octauian, & brought him vp himſelfe. Which did him ſo much good, that being come to the empire, he wasAugustus. called Augustus for his goodnes. He alſo performed as much afterward to his nephews Lucius & Caius, whome in like maner he had adopted. Noah, Lot, Iacob, and all the fathers,
                        Noah, Lot, Iacob, &c. God commandeth fathers to inſtruct their children. inſtructed their children themſelues: and God commanded the Iſraelites in the wildernes to teach their children the lawe, which themſelues had receiued from their fathers. To this purpoſe an ancient man ſaid, that it was the greateſt ſloth that could be, for a man to be negligent towards his children, & to teach them nothing. Great

heede therefore muſt be taken, that they be not left to the gouernment of their owne fantaſie, conſidering thatProu. 23. 13. 14. & 13. 24. Correction neceſſarie for children. Ecclus. 30. 8. 9. 11. 12. youth is very tender to reſiſt vice, and of it ſelfe vncapable of counſell. With-hold not (ſaith the Wiſe man) correction from the child: for in ſmiting with the rod, thou ſhalt deliuer his ſoule from hell. He that ſpareth his rod, hateth his ſonne, but he that loueth him▪ chasteneth him betime. As an vntamed horſe becommeth fierce: ſo a child ſuffred to do what he liſt, waxeth rebellious. If thou bring vp thy ſon delicately, he ſhall make thee afraid: & if thou play with him, he ſhall bring thee to heauines. Giue him no libertie in his youth, and winke not at his follie. Bow downe his necke while he is yoong, and beate him on the ſides while he is a child, leaſt he waxe ſtubborn, & be diſobedient vnto thee, & ſo bring ſorowe to thine hart. And yet I would not that fathers ſhould be ouer-ſharpe & hard to their children, not bearingSeueritie muſt be mingled with elemencie in the correcting of children. with any fault in them. But as Phiſitions mingling & ſteeping their bitter drugs with ſome ſweete iuice, haue found the meanes to make a paſſage for profite through the middeſt of pleaſure: ſo muſt fathers intermingle the ſharpnes of their reprehenſions & corrections with the facilitie of elemencie, & ſomtime let looſe a little the bridle to the deſires of their children, ſo that they wander not far from that which becommeth them. Againe, they muſt by & by let downe the button, & hold them hard in with the bridle, but yet ſupporting gently and patiently their faults committed through youth, & not of malice. And if it be ſo that they cannot but be angry, at the leaſt let their anger be preſently appeaſed. For it is better that a father ſhould be quickly angry (although that be an imperfection) ſo that he be ſoone pacified, than ſlowe to anger, and hardly brought to forgiue. But if a father be ſo ſeuere that he wil forget nothing, & be neuer reconciled, it is a great argument, that he hateth his children. And then he maketh himſelfe vnwoorthy of ſo excellent & diuine a name, ſhewing foorth effects cleane contrary therunto: wheras parents commonly loue their children too much, & vſe towards them rather too much lenitie, than iuſt ſeueritie.

                     Oh how the father (ſaith Seneca, ſpeaking of one that thruſt his ſon out of his houſe) cutteth off his lims with great griefe, how many ſighes he fetcheth in cutting them off, & how earneſtly he wiſheth to haue thē againe in their place? Moreouer, fathers muſt haue a ſpecial care, that they commit no fault, nor omit any thing appertaining to their dutie, to the end theyThe fathers life muſt be a mirrour of vertue to the child. may be liuely examples to their children, that looking into their life, as into a cleare glaſſe, they may abſtaine after their example frō ſpeking any thing that bringeth ſhame. Againe we know, that all thoſe fathers which lead an euill life, leaue not to themſelues any courage ſo much as to reprooue their ſlaues onely, ſo far off are they, that they can frankly chide their children. And, which is woorſt of al, by their naughty life they are vnto them in ſteed of maiſters & counſellors of il-doing. For where old men are ſhameles, there it muſt needs be, that yoong men become impudent & graceles. Fathers therfore muſt ſtriue to do whatſoeuer their dutie requireth, that their children may waxe wiſe and well qualified. This we may comprehend in fewe words: namely, if they bring them vp wel in their infancy, & let them haue due correction in their youth. Which twoWhen fathers may be iuſtly charged with their childrens faults. 1. Sam. 3. 13. things being neglected of fathers, the faults of their children are for the moſt part iuſtly imputed vnto them. Hely the Prieſt was not puniſhed for any ſin which himſelfe had committed, but bicauſe he winked at the ſins of his children. We read in the ſtorie of the Heluetians or Switzers, of the
                     The ſtorie of a father appointed to execute his owne child. 
                     iudgement of a tyrant condemned to death, where order was taken that the execution thereof ſhould be done by the father, who was the cauſe of his euill education: that he might come to his death by the author of his life, and that the father might in ſome ſort be puniſhed for his negligence vſed towards his child. Moreouer, they that haue many children, muſt be paſſing careful to bring them vp in mutuall friendſhip, cauſing them to giue each to other that honor and duty, vnto which nature bindeth them, and ſharpely chaſtiſing thoſe that in any reſpect offend therin. The Ephoryes of Lacedemonia long ſince cō
                     dēnedA father muſt bring vp his children in mutuall loue. a notable citizen in a very great ſum, when they vnderſtood that he ſuffred two of his childrē to quarel togither.

The beſt meane, which I find to auoid ſo great an euill, is to loue and intreat them all alike, and to accuſtom them to giue honour, dutie, and obedience one to another according to their degrees of age. They muſt remoue from them al partialities, and not ſuffer them to haue any thing ſeueral or diuided one from another, that as it were in one hart and will all things may be common amongſt them. Example heerof was that good father of a familieAelius Tubero. 
                     Aelius Tubero, who had ſixteene children of his owne bodie, all of them maried, and dwelling all in one houſe with their children, and liuing with him in all peace and concord. For the concluſion therefore of our preſent diſcourſe, we learne, that a father of a familie muſt begin the gouernment of his houſe with himſelfe, and become an example to his of all honeſtie & vertue. That he muſt not neglect the care of prouiding goods, & neceſſarie meanes for the maintenance of his familie, remembring alwaies that in nothing he go beyond the bounds of that ſeemelines and decencie, which dutie hath limited & preſcribed vnto him. That he ought to loue & to intreat his ſeruants curteouſly, putting away threatnings (as it is ſaid in theEph. 6. 9. Scripture) and knowing that both their and his maiſter is in heauen, with whom there is no reſpect of perſons. And for the laſt point, that it belongeth to his dutie to bring vp his children in the holie inſtruction and information of the Lord, not prouoking them to wrath, that God may be glorified, and he their father may reioice in the preſence of his friends, and that his countrie generally may receiue benefit, profit, and commoditie.
               
            
            
               Of the dutie of children towards their parents: of the mutuall loue that ought to be among brethren: of the dutie of ſeruants towards their maisters. Chap. 50.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  VPon a day when one ſaid in the hearing of Theopompus king of Sparta, that the eſtate of that citie was preſerued in ſuch flouriſhing

maner, bicauſe the kings knew how to command wel, the prince replied▪ that it was not ſo much for that cauſe, as bicauſe the citizens knew how to obey well. And to ſpeake the truth, to obey wel (as alſo the vertue of commanding)Obed great▪
                      is a great vertue, and proceedeth from a nature, which being noble of it ſelfe, is holpen by good education. Therefore Aristotle ſaid, that it was neceſſarie that he which obeieth ſhould be vertuous as wel as he that commandeth. Now ſeeing we haue intreated of the dutie of a father and head of a familie, exerciſing his office vpon all the parts of his houſe, let vs now conſider of the dutie and obedience that is requiſite in ſeruaunts and children, and of the mutuall and reciprocall amitie which ought to be betweene brethren, deſirous to preſerue the bond of Oeconomical ſocietie in a happie eſtate.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Col. 3. Eph. 6. 2. Children (ſaith the Scripture) obey your parents in all things: for that is well pleaſing vnto the Lord Honor thy father and mother (which is the firſt commaundement with promiſe)
                     Obedience to parents commanded of God that it may be well with thee, and that thou mayest liue long on earth.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Ecclus. 3. 4. 5. Who ſo honoreth his father, his ſinnes ſhall be forgiuen him, and he ſhall abstaine from them, and ſhall haue his daily deſires. And he that honoureth his mother, is like one that gathereth treaſure.1. Pet. 2. 18. And you ſeruaunts be ſubiect to your masters withObedience to maſters cōmanded of God. all feare, not onely to the good and curteous, but alſo to the froward. Let vs then heare ARAM diſcourſe more at large of that which is here propounded vnto vs.
                  
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Nature (ſaith Plutark) and the law which preſerueth nature, haue giuen the firſt place of reuerence andReuerence to parents placed next to the honor due to God. honor after God, vnto the father and mother: and men can not do any ſeruice more acceptable to God, than graciouſly and louingly to pay to their parents that begot thē, and to them that brought them vp, the vſurie of new and olde graces which they haue lent them: as contrarywiſe, there is no ſigne of an Atheiſt more certaine, than for aA token of an Atheiſt. man to ſet light by, and to offend his parents. The father is the true image of the great and ſoueraigne God, the vniuerſallA father is the image of God. father of all things, as Proclus the Academike

ſaid. Yea the child holdeth his life of the father next after God, and whatſoeuer elſe he hath in this world. Therfore a man is forbidden to hurt others, but it is accounted great impietie and ſacriledge for a man not to ſhew himſelfe ready to doe and to ſpeake all things, I will not ſay, whereby they can receiue no diſpleaſure, but wherby they may not receiue pleaſure. And in deed one of the greateſt good turnes that we can do to thoſe of whom we are deſcended, is not to make them ſad. Which cannot poſſibly be done, if God the leader and guide to all knowledge diſpoſeth not the mind to all honeſt things. The children of
                     Ecclus. 3. 1. 2. &c. 
                     wiſdome are the Church of the righteous, and their ofſpring is obedience and loue. Children, heare the iudgement of your father, and do thereafter, that you may be ſafe. For the Lord will haue the father honored of the children, and hath confirmed the authoritie of the mother ouer the children. He that honoureth his father ſhall haue ioy of his owne children, and when he maketh his prayer he ſhall be heard. He that honoureth his father ſhall haue a long life, and he that is obedient to the Lord, ſhall comfort his mother. He that feareth the Lord, honoreth his parents, and doth ſeruice vnto his parents, as vnto Lordes. Honor thy father and mother in deeds and in word, and in all patience, that thou mayest haue the bleſſing of God, and that his bleſſing may abide with thee in the ende. For the bleſſing of the father establiſheth the houſes of the children, & the mothers curſe rooteth out the foundations. Helpe thy father in his age, and grieue him not as long as he liueth. And if his vnderſtanding faile, haue patience with him, and deſpiſe him not when thou art in thy full ſtrength. For the good intreatie of thy father ſhall not be forgotten, but it ſhall be a fortreſſe for thee against ſinnes. In the day of trouble thou ſhalt he remembred, thy ſinnes alſo ſhall melt away, as the ice in faire weather. He that for ſaketh his father ſhall come to ſhame, and he that angreth his mother is curſed of God. By theſe holy ſpeeches we ſee how we oughtThe fiſt commandement only hath a ſpeciall promiſe annex ed vnto it. Eph. 6. 2. to loue, honor, reuerence, and feare our parents. This is comprehended vnder the firſt commandement of the ſecond table, and this only of all the ten articles of the Decalogue beareth his reward with him: albeit no recompence is due to him that is bound to do any thing, namely

by ſo ſtrȧight a bond as this, wherof all lawes both diuine and humane are full, and the law of nature alſo doth plentifully inſtruct vs therein, as it hath been diligently obſerued of very Infidels, Ethnikes, and Pagans. Amongſt the Lacedemonians this cuſtome tooke place, that the younger ſort roſe vp from their ſeates before the aged. Whereof when one asked the cauſe of Teleucrus, It is (quoth hee) to the ende that in dooing this honour to whom it belongeth not, they ſhould learne to yeeld greater honour to their parents. The arrogancie of a childe was the cauſe, that one of the Ephories publiſhed the law of Teſtaments, whereby it was permitted to euery oneThe law of Teſtaments to keep children in a
                           •
                        e. from that time forward to appoint whom he would his heire. This lawe ſerued well to make children obedient and ſeruiceable to their parents, and to cauſe them to be afraid of diſpleaſing them. Among the Romanes the child was not admitted to plead his fathers will after his death by way of action, but onely by way of requeſt, vſingChildren might not the out their liue
                           ••
                        es by way of action but of requeſt. very humble, honourable, and reuerent ſpeech of his dead father, and leauing the whole matter to the diſcretion and religion of the Iudges. Contend not with thy father (ſaid Pittacus the wiſe) although thou haſt iuſt cauſe of complaint. And therefore Teleucrus aunſwered aptly to one, who complained vnto him, that his father alwayes ſpake ill of him: If (quoth he) there were no cauſe to ſpeake ill of thee he would not do it. So that it belongeth to the duetie of a childe to beleeue that his father hath alwayes right, and that age and experience hath indued him with greater knowledge of that which is good, than they haue that are of yoonger yeeres. Philelphus ſaid, that although we could not poſſibly render the like good turnes to our parents, nor ſatisfie thoſe obligations by which we ſtand bound vnto them, yet we muſt doe the beſt we can vnto them: we muſt intreate them curteouſly and louingly, and not go farre from them: we muſt harken vnto their inſtructions, and be obedientThe dutie of children towards their parents. to their commaundementes: wee muſt not gaine-ſay their deliberations and wils, no more than the will of

God, whether it be that we are to depart from them, or to tary ſtill, or to enter into ſome calling agreeable to the will of God: we muſt not ſtand in contention with them whē they are angry, but ſuffer and beare patiently, if they threaten or correct vs. And if they be offended with vs when we thinke there is no cauſe why, yet we muſt not lay vs down to reſt before we haue by all kind of honeſt ſubmiſſionsHumilitie towards parents moſt commendable. appeaſed them. Humilitie is always commendable, but eſpecially towards our parents. The more we abaſe our ſelues before them, the more we encreaſe in glory and honor before God and men. This is very badly put in vre at this day, when the ſonne doth not onely not honor his father, but euen diſhonoreth him, and is aſhamed of him. He is ſo farre from louing him, that he rather hatethThe deſcription of a diſobedient childe. him, ſo farre from fearing him, that contrarywiſe he mocketh and contemneth him: and in ſtead of ſeruing and obeying him, he riſeth vp and conſpireth againſt him. If he be angry, he laboureth to anger him more: brieflie, ſcarce any dutie of a child towards his father is ſeene now a daies. And if ſome point therof be found in any towards his father, yet is it cleane put out in regard of the mother: as if he that commanded vs to honour our father did notThe mother is no leſſe to be honoured than the father. preſently ſay, and thy mother, vnto whō in truth we owe no leſſe honor, reſpect, and obedience, than to our father, as well in regard of the commaundement of God, as of the vnſpeakable paines and trauell which ſhe ſuffered in bearing and bringing vs into the world, in giuing vs ſucke, & in nouriſhing vs. But alas, what ſhall we ſay of thoſe that ſpoile their parents of their goods, houſes and commodities, and deſire nothing more than their death, that they may freely enioy, euen that which oftentimes their parents haue purchaſed for them? O execrable impietie! It is vnwoorthy to be once thought vpon amongſt vs, & the iudgement of God doth of it ſelfe ſufficiently appeere vpon ſuch curſed children. Whoſe behauiour that it may be more odious vnto vs, let vs learn of Pittacus, that our children will be ſuch towards vs as we haue been towards our parents. But let vs be more afraid to prouoke our fathers

in ſuch ſort through our default vnto wrath, that in ſtead of bleſſing vs, they fall to curſe vs. For (as Plato ſaith) there is no prayer which God heareth more willingly than that of the father for the children. And therfore ſpecial regardThe bleſſings and curſings of parents towards their children is of great waight. is to be had vnto the curſings and bleſſings, which fathers lay vpon their childrē. Which was the cauſe (as the ſcripture teacheth vs) that children in old time were ſo iealous one of another, who ſhould 
                        •
                     ary away the fathers bleſſing, and that they ſtoode in greater feare of their curſe, than of death it ſelfe. Torquatus the yonger being baniſhedTorquatus. from his fathers houſe, ſlue himſelfe for grief thereof. And to alleage another example out of the writings of auncient men, of the loue which they bare to their fathers, that of Antigonus the ſecond ſonne of Demetrius, is moſt woorthy to be noted. For when his father beyng priſoner ſent him worde by one of his acquaintaunce to giue no credite, nor to make account of any letters from him, if it ſo fell out that Seleucus, whoſe priſoner he was, ſhould compell him thereunto, and therefore that he ſhould not deliuer vp any of thoſe townes which he held, Antigonus contrarywiſe wrote to Seleucus, that he wouldAn example of great loue in a child towards his father. yeeld vp vnto him all the landes he had vnder his obedience, and would alſo himſelfe become his pledge, if he would deliuer his father. We may not here paſſe ouer with ſilence the rare example of daughter-like pietie, with which all the painters in the world haue ſet foorth their ſcience, I meane of the daughter that gaue ſucke to hirAn other of a daughter towards hir father. father who was condemned to die of that auncient and vſuall puniſhment of famine, which neuer ſuffereth a ſound man to paſſe the ſeuenth day. The iailour eſpying this acte of pietie gaue notice thereof to the magiſtrates, which beyng knowen to the people, the daughter obtained pardon for hir fathers life. Moreouer, ſeeyng we muſt labour to obey and to pleaſe our parentes in all things, it is certaine that no action, gift or diſpoſition inChildren can not pleaſe their parents better than to loue one another. vs is more acceptable, or contenteth them better than to ſee good-will, and an aſſured and certaine friendſhip among brethren. Which may eaſily be knowen by theſe

contrary ſignes. For if parents are offended when their children offer wrong to a ſeruant whom they loue, and if hartie old men are grieued when no account is made of a dog or horſe bred in their houſe, and are vexed whē they ſee their children mocke & deſpiſe thoſe paſtimes, ſtories, and other ſuch like things which they ſomtime loued, is it likely that they could patiently abide to ſee their children whom they loue beſt of all, to hate one another, to be always quarelling one with another, to ſpeake ill one of an other, and in all their enterpriſes & actions to be diuided, and ſet one againſt another, and to ſeeke to ſupplant and defeat each other? I think no man will affirme it. Therefore contrarywiſe we may iudge, that thoſe brethrē which loue and cheriſh one another, which ioine togither in one bond of ſelf-ſame wils, ſtudies & affections, that which nature had diſioined & ſeparated in bodies, & laſtly, which haue all their talke, exerciſes, playes & paſtimes common amongſt them, they I ſay vndoubtedly giue occaſion to their parents of a ſweete and happy contentation in their old-age for this brotherly loue & friendſhip. For no father (ſaith Plutarke) euer loued learning, honour or ſiluer ſo much as he did his children. And therefore they neuer took ſo great pleaſure to ſee their children good orators, rich, or placed in great offices and dignities, as to ſee the loue one another. To this purpoſe one rehearſeth that Apollonida
                     Apollonida. mother to king Eumenes and to three other of his brethren, accounted hir ſelfe happy as ſhe ſaid, and gaue great thanks to God, not for hir riches or principalitie, but bicauſe ſhe ſaw hir three yonger ſons, as it were a gard to their elder brother, who liued freely and moſt ſafelie in the middeſt of them with their ſwordes by their ſides, and their iauelins in their handes. Contrarywiſe, whenXerxes. king Xerxes perceiued, that his ſonne Ochus lay in waite for his brethren to put them to death, he died for diſpleaſure thereof. Therefore Euripides ſayd, that warres betweene brethren are grieuous, but moſt of all to theirHe that hateth his brother, hateth his parents. parents: bicauſe he that hateth his brother and cannot abide to looke vpon him, muſt needes alſo be offended

with him that begate him, and hir that bare him. Whereas good children that loue one another for the loue of their parents, are ſo much the more prouoked to loue and honour them, ſaying and thinking alwayes with themſelues, that they are bound vnto them for manie cauſes, but chiefly in regard of their brethren, who are vnto them as precious, pleaſaunt and gracious an inheritaunce as any they could receiue from them. This ment Homer to teache vs when he brought in Telemachus reckoningTelemachus. this amongſt his calamities, that Iupiter had ended the race of his father in him, and had not giuen him a brother. Let vs not then doubt, but that this is a certaine demonſtration to the parents that their childe loueth them, when he loueth his brethren. And this alſo ſerueth for as great an example and inſtruction to his children to loue one an other, as any can be. Therefore let vs vtterly baniſh awaye all hatred of our brethren, which is both condemned by God who commendeth aboue all things concord vnto vs, and alſo a naughtie nurſe for the olde age of fathers and mothers, and a worſe for the yong yeeres of children. And ſeeing we are about this matter of brotherly loue, ſo precious and excellent, whereunto now adayes men haue ſo ſmall regard, I thinke we ought to inſiſt and ſtand longer vpon it, and alleage ſome precepts and examples of auncient men, whereby to confirme vs in it more and more. Firſt, nature hath bred from our birth in regard of vs the beginningThe beginning of brotherly loue is in our natiuitie. and occaſion of this amitie, and hath taken away from our iudgement all former motions to procure loue. Therefore we muſt beware that we ſeeke not too exactly after the faults and imperfections one of another, but couer & beare with them, bicauſe they are of our own blood: knowing that no mans life can be ſincere & clean frō all vice, ſo that we were better to ſupport the domeſtical imperfectiōs of our brethrē, thā to make trial of thoſe that are in ſtrangers. That brother (ſaith Plutark) that warreth with his brother, & ſeeketh to procure a ſtranger to friend, ſeemeth to me to cut off voluntarily a mēber of his

                     The benefite that commeth to brethren by hauing common friends. owne fleſh belonging to him, that he may apply and faſten to that place one taken from another mans body. We note alſo, that nothing more preſerueth the loue of brethren, than to haue the ſame common friends. For ſeueral familiaritie, conuerſation & company keeping turneth aſide & alienateth them one from another, bicauſe thereby they acquaint themſelues with diuers natures, and take pleaſure in things that are contrary. But there is a further matter in it. For as tinne doth ſoder & ioine togither broken copper, by touching both ends of the broken pieces, bicauſe it agreeth as well with the one as with the other: ſo a common friend ſerueth to confirm, to preſerue, to encreaſe & to reunite their mutual friendſhip and good-wil, when vpon light occaſion ſomtimes it is as it were in danger of breaking. Which is ſo much the more to be feared,Enmitie between brethren is prodigious & vnnaturall. as it is certain, that all enmitie breedeth within our ſoules a thouſand paſſions that torment vs, but eſpecially that enmitie which a man beareth towards his brother, as that which is moſt prodigious and againſt nature. And as bodies that were once ioined togither, if the glew or bande waxe looſe, may be reioined and glewed againe; but if a naturall bodie breake or rent aſunder, it is hard to find any ſoder that is able to reunite and knit them well togither againe: ſo thoſe mutual friendſhips, which we contractIt is a hard matter to reconcile brethren once fallen at variance. voluntarily with ſuch as are not of kinne or allied vnto vs, if peraduenture they fall aſunder ſometimes, may eaſily be vndertaken againe, but when brethren are once eſtranged and fallen from that loue whereby nature doth neceſſarily linke them one with another, they are hardly reconciled againe togither. And if they be friendes againe, yet it is alwayes with ſome diſtruſt and ſuſpicion. Queſtionles it is impoſſible but that affaires ſhould breed in theſe times wherein we liue many occaſions of diſſention and debate betweene brethren, namely, for goodsHow brethren muſt behaue themſelues in the partition of lands & goods. and ſucceſſions, as this worde of Parting importeth, and bringeth with it diuiſion, euery one being deſirous to haue his owne. But herein alſo they muſt ſuffer their matters to fight by themſelues, without adding any headſtrong

paſſion, couetouſneſſe, or choler, which are as a hooke that taketh hold of them, and ſeeketh to ſet them togither by the eares. They muſt, as it were in a balance, conſider iointly togither on which ſide right and equitie declineth, and as ſoone as they can poſſible, let them remit the iudgement and deciding of their controuerſies to the arbitrement of ſome good men. Yea, a good brother ought rather to reioyce and to boaſt that he hath ouercome and gone beyond his brother, in gracious behauior, in curteſie, in voluntarily giuing of place, & in euery good dutie towards him, than in the diuiſion of ſome goods. Now let vs conſider of ſome notable examples amongſt the ancients, of great brotherly loue. Although we had ſearched all hiſtories, yet could we not finde a more memorable act, or woorthier to be ſet foorth at this day, and to be rather followed, eſpecially of the greater ſort, whoExamples of brotherly loue. quarell for their poſſeſſions and reuenues, than that which fell out betweene the children of Darius monarch of the Perſians. Ariamenes the eldeſt, and Xerxes the younger, being in great ſtrife togither for the ſucceſſion of the empire, the eldeſt alleaged his birth-right, the yonger, that he was the ſonne of Atoſſa, daughter to Cyrus the great, and that he was borne ſince his father was crowned king, and ſo next inheritour of the kingdome now that Cambiſes was dead. Each of them had great confederates, and many Perſian lordes were diuided into factious about this matter. But Ariamenes came out of Media, not inAriamenes. armes to make warre, although hee had greate meanes thereunto, but onely with his ordinarie traine, as one that purpoſed to purſue his right by way of iuſtice. Xerxes
                     Xerxes. before his brothers comming, exerciſed in Perſia all duties belonging to a king: but as ſoone as his brother was arriued, he willingly put off his kingly diademe and hat, and went out to meete him and to imbrace him. After that he ſent preſents vnto him, with commaundement giuen to thoſe that bare them, to ſay vnto him in this maner: Xerxes thy brother honoreth thee now with theſe preſents, but if by the ſentence and iudgement of the

princes and lordes of Perſia he be declared king, his will is that thou ſhouldeſt bee the ſecond perſon in Perſia after him. Ariamenes returned this aunſwere: I receyue my brothers giftes with all my harte, and thinke that the kingdome of Perſia belongeth to me: but as concerning my brethren, I will giue them that dignitie and honour that is due vnto them next to my ſelfe, and to Xerxes firſt of all. Nowe after that by their common conſent Artabanus their vncle had decided and brought to an ende their controuerſie, and adiudged the kingdome to Xerxes; Ariamenes preſently aroſe from his ſeate and went to doe homage to his brother, and takyng him by the right hande, ledde him to his royall and kingly throne. From that tyme forward he was always the greateſt next vnto him, and ſhewed him-ſelfe ſo well affected towards his right, that in the Salamine battell by Sea he died, fighting valiauntlieAntiochus. in his ſeruice. Antiochus ſurnamed the Holie, makyng warre with his Elder brother for his part in the kingdome of Macedonia, declared euen in his ambition, that all brotherly loue was not quite extinguiſhed and cleane put out in him. For in the hotteſt tyme of their warre, when his brother Seleucus had loſt the battell with great deſtruction of his men, and was ſuppoſed to haue been dead bicauſe no newes was heard of him: Antiochus put off his purple robe, and clothed him-ſelfe in blacke, and ſhuttyng vp his pallace royall, mourned and lamented verie much for his brother. But beyng afterward aduertiſed that hee was ſafe and ſound, and preparing an other armie, hee went in open ſhewe from his lodging, and ſacrificed to the gods by way of thankeſ-giuing, commaunding the Townes that were vnder his iuriſdiction to offer the lyke ſacrifices, and to weare Hattes of flowers in token of publiqueAthenodorus. ioye. Athenodorus the Graecian hauyng a brother elder than him-ſelfe, called Zeno, who beyng conuicted of a certayne crime, had loſt all his goodes by confiſcation, parted agayne with him all his owne goodes,

and gaue vnto him the iuſt halfe. When the king of Lydia demaunded of Pittacus whether hee had anyePittacus. goodes, yea (quoth hee) twiſe ſo much more than I woulde I had, beyng heire to my brother that is dead. The loue of that Perſian woman, of whome Plutarke
                     Great loue of a Perſian woman towards hit brother. maketh mention, was verie great, who beeyng asked why ſhee had rather ſaue the lyfe of hir brother than of hir owne ſonne: bicauſe (quoth ſhe) I may well haue mo children, but not more brethren, ſeeyng my Father and Mother are bothe deade. Howe much more then ought we to preferre our brethren before all other our friendes and acquaintaunce. For many may bee gotten of this kinde, and others if theſe fayle: but it is no more poſſible to get a newe brother, than to get an hande agayne that is cutte off, or an eye that is plucked out. Agrippa, brother in lawe to the EmperourAgrippa. 
                     Augustus, vſed to ſaye, that hee was greatlie beholding to that ſentence of Saluſt, Small thinges encreaſe by concorde, but periſh through diſcorde: bicauſe it procured vnto him all his wealth, by ſeekyng to liue in peace and friendſhip with his brother, and with euerie one. This is that which Scilurus leauyngScilurus left 80. ſonnes behind him. behind him foure-ſcore male-children, meant to teach them, and how they ſhould bee inuincible beyng ioyned and vnited togither, by offering to each of them a bundle of dartes to breake, which when they could not doe, he brake them one after another before their eyes. I woulde further enlarge this diſcourſe with examples of the loue of brethren, ſhinyng greatly in ages paſt, were it not that we muſt here ſpeake ſome-what of the ductie and obedience of ſeruauntes towards their maſters, according to that order which was propounded vnto vs. This wee will brieflie comprehend into foure generall poyntes. The firſt is, that they muſteThe dutie of ſeruants comprehended in ſoure points. be preſt and alwayes readie to put in execution their maſters will and commaundement, and to doe their buſineſſe moſt diligently, not beyng ſlouthfull, ſlacke and negligent, nor doyng any thing grutchingly. The

ſecond point is, that they muſt be faithfull vnto them, not beguiling nor defrauding them of any thing, nor affirming that before their faces to flatter them, which they will vnſay behind their backes. The third thing is, that they muſt ſeeke their maſters profite and commoditie more than their owne, and take good heede that no harme, loſſe, or trouble come vnto them. And if any goe about to procure any ſuch thing, they muſt vndertake the defence thereof diligently, euen to the hazarding of their liues if neede bee. The laſt point which good ſeruauntes are to keepe, is to vſe a double ſilence: the firſt, that they replie not againe to their maſters commaundementes, although ſometymes they ſuppoſe that they know better what is to be done than they that commaund them. The ſecond, that they reueale not to others their maſters ſecretes, nor ſowe them out of his houſe. To be ſhort, we cannot giue them better inſtruction than that of Saint Paule, ſaying: Seruauntes be obedient
                     Col. 3. 22. 23. 24. 
                     vnto them that are your masters according to the fleſhe in all things, not with eye-ſeruice as men-pleaſers, but in ſinglenes of hart, fearing GOD. And whatſoeuer ye doe, doe it hartilie, as to the Lorde, and not vnto men, knowyng that of the Lord yee ſhall receiue the reward of the inheritaunce: for yee ſerue the Lorde Christ. And elſe-where he exhorteth them againe,Tit. 2. 9. 10. 
                     to be ſubiect to their masters, and to pleaſe them in all thinges not aunſwering agayne, neyther pickers, but that they ſhewe all good faithfulneſſe, that they may adorne the doctrine of GOD our Sauiour in all thinges. Nowe for examples to allExamples of the loue of ſeruants towards their maſters. ſeruauntes that are deſirous to effect their dutie towards their maſters, we will propound two, the one olde, the other of late yeeres, which giue ſufficient teſtimonie of a ſonne-like rather than of a ſeruile affection. Antonius beyng ouercome of Augustus, and diſpairing of hisEros the ſeruant of Antonius. ſafetie, vrged the promiſe of Eros his ſeruant in whom he truſted, bicauſe he had giuen his faith long before that hee would kill him when he required the ſame at his hands. But the ſeruaunt drawyng his ſword, and holding it out as though hee would haue killed him, turned

his face on the one ſide, and thruſt it into himſelfe cleane through his bodie. Maurice duke of Saxonie beyng inThe ſeruant of Mauritius duke of Saxonie. Hungarie againſt the Turke, and walking out of the campe onely with his ſeruaunt, was ſet vpon by certaine Turkes, and his horſe being ſlaine, he was throwen to the ground. But his ſeruaunt caſt himſelfe vpon him, couered and defended him with his bodie, ſuſtained and kept backe the enimies vntil certaine horſemen came and ſaued the Prince, but died himſelfe not long after beyng wounded on euery ſide. Therefore to ende our preſent diſcourſe, let vs learne, that it is a great and commendable vertue, and beſeeming euery good and gentle nature, to know how to obey well, and to giue honour and ſeruice to thoſe that occupie the degree of fathers, lordes, and maſters ouer vs: as alſo to loue our brethren with an indiſſoluble loue, to reuerence one an other, the younger honouring the elder, and the elder yeelding all dueties of ſincere loue to the younger. Let vs not be leſſe afrayd of the curſe repeated ſo often in the Scripture againſt diſobedient children, than the auncients were of that lawe which condemned them to be ſtoned to death when they would not obey the voyce of their Parents, nor harken vnto them when they inſtructed them: but let vs much more feare that puniſhment, which will continue for euer, where there will be weepyng and gnaſhing of teeth.
               
            
            
               Of the education and instruction of Children. Chap. 51.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  WHen we intreated of the duetie of a father of a familie towards his children, we ſayd, that the chief marke whereat he ought to aime, was to make them honeſt and good of condition, which was to be performed by inſtruction and good bringing vp in the knowledge and exerciſe of vertue. Now bicauſe the chiefe foundation of a

                     The chief foundation of a happy life. happy life, is good inſtruction begun in youth, ſo that if the infancie of any bee well brought vp (as Plato ſaith) the reſt of his life cannot but be good, we ought as I thinke (my Companions) to take this matter againe in hand to follow and handle it more at large, to the ende to prouoke Fathers and all ſuch as haue authoritie ouer the younger ſort, to bee carefull and diligent in the well ordering of the ſeede of youth, which is the ſpring and roote of all proſperitie both publike and priuate.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     A father of a familie muſt be moſt carefull to bring vp his youth. We muſt not (ſaith Plato) be more carefull of any thing whatſoeuer, than of the good education of children. For if vpon their good bringing vp they become moderate and ſtayed men, they will eaſily diſcerne euerie thing that is good. And if good wits haue like education, they will growe from better to better euerie day.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  The beginning, middle, and ending of a happie life (ſaith Plutarke) conſiſteth in good education and bringing vp. But it belongeth to thee AMANA to inſtruct vs in this ſo excellent a matter.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  As a man cannot reape good wheate if heA fit compariſon. hath not ſowen good ſeede, nor gather good fruit of his trees, if he had no care at the beginning to dreſſe them well, nor to graft them with good ſciences afterward: ſo the corruption of mans nature, which of it ſelfe is more enclined to euill than to good, hindreth vertue from taking ſure footing and roote in the ſoules of men, if they be not from their very youth well and diligentlyThe ſpring of corruptions in common-welths inſtructed, ſtirred vp, and pricked forward to that which is honeſt and decent. And truely that common-wealth is moſt miſerable, wherein this tillage of infancie is neglected. For from this fountaine proceede rebellions, ſeditions, open murders, contempt of lawes and commandeme
                        •
                     ts of princes, pollings, briberies, hereſies, and Atheiſme. Therefore nothing was more eſteemed from time to time among the auncients, than the inſtitution of youth, which Plato calleth Diſcipline, whereby children

are led to this reaſon, not to follow any thing but that which the lawe commaundeth and alloweth for good. The monarchie of the Perſians, the common-wealth of the Lacedemonians, and ſince, that alſo of the RomansLawes that conſtrained fathers to ſee to their children inſtructed. had certaine lawes compelling fathers to prouide that their children might be inſtructed, not ſuffering them to be caſt away and corrupted to the detriment of the common-wealth. Amongſt other lawes there was one called Falcidia, whereby it was enacted, that the child ſhouldThe law Falcidia
                      be admoniſhed for the firſt offence, chaſtiſed for the ſecond, and for the third hanged, and his father baniſhed, as if he had been partaker in the fault, for want of good education and inſtruction of his ſonne. Heretofore we heard many teſtimonies of the care and trauell which famous and woorthie men tooke to inſtruct their children themſelues. Traian the emperour, and after him Adrian
                     A woorthy act of Traian and Adrian. at their owne coſtes and charges cauſed fiue thouſand noble mens children of Rome to be brought vp in learning, vertue and feates of armes. Our auncient kings, knowyng how neceſſarie this education of youth was, builded long agoe and cauſed to bee framed ſo many goodly Colledges as we ſee in the Vniuerſities of France: yea, the monaſteries were partly founded to this ende. But how carefull are we at this day to imitate thoſe auncients in this earneſtneſſe of good bringing vp of children in the ſtudie of ſciences and good diſcipline? Haue we not very good occaſion to ſay with Crates the Philoſopher, that it is moſt neceſſarie that one ſhould aſcend vp into the higheſt place of this kingdome, and cry aloude: Oh ye men, whither doe ye throwe your ſeluesCrates proclamation moſt neceſſary for theſe times. headlong in taking all the paynes that may be to heape vp goodes and treaſures that periſh, and in the meane while make no reckoning of your children, but ſuffer them to continue long, and to grow old in ignorance which deſtroyeth them both body and ſoule, and turneth to the confuſion and ouerthrow of your country? For it isEuil education corrupteth a good nature. moſt certaine, that a good nature ill brought vp, waxeth very pernitious, and that the mindes and hartes of men

                     Euil education corrupteth a good nature. that are corruptly inſtructed, become moſt wicked. Doe you thinke (ſaith Plato) that execrable villanies and horrible vices proceede rather of a naughtie nature, than of a noble nature corrupted with euill education? In like maner a good nature well tilled will attaine to the toppe of vertue, but if it be negligently looked vnto, it will be nothing but vice. But let vs ſee what goodly inſtructions the auncients haue giuen concerning this matter.Of the excellent education of children required by Plato. The ſame Plato was ſo carefull, and ſearched out ſo exactly the good education of children, as that which is as precious and neceſſarie a thing as any can be in the life of man, that hee taketh them euen from their mothers wombe, yea before they are begotten. Firſt, hee willeth that the husband and wife that are deſirous of children ſhould keepe them-ſelues from drunkenneſſe, and from entring into the bedde when they are cholerike and full of trouble, bicauſe that many times is the cauſe of vices in children. Next he requireth that greatWomen with child muſt walk much. bellied women ſhould giue themſelues to walking, and beware of liuing either too delicately, or too ſparingly: that they ſhould haue quiet mindes, with many other things, which he alleageth to that purpoſe. He ſaith alſo, that children being in their mothers wombe, receiue good and ill, as the fruites of the earth doe. After they are borne, he carefully recommendeth their education. Wee will not here ſtande vpon many pointes to be obſeruedEuery mother ought to nurſe hir own child. therein, as namelie vpon the choice of Nurſes, whereof fewe are ignoraunt, ſeeing it belongeth to the true and naturall office of euerie mother to nouriſh that with hir teate, which ſhe hath brought into the world, except there be ſome great and lawfull impediment. But let vs go on with the ſayings of Plato. He chargeth nurſes toOf the bringing vp of infants. lead their children oftentimes on their feete vntil they be 3. yeeres old, bicauſe this moouing is very profitable for them. He forbiddeth much crying in children, bicauſe it breedeth in them a habite and cuſtome of ſadneſſe. FromFrom 3. yeeres. 3. yeeres to ſix, he would haue them moderately corrected when they commit a fault, & forbidden aboue all things

to accuſtome them from that time forward vnto daintines, or to ouer-great ſeueritie, ſaying, that delicatenes maketh them froward, hard to pleaſe, cholerike, & ſoone mooued: and that ſeueritie maketh them hard-harted, cruell, abiect, baſe-minded, very blocks and fooles, andFrom ſix yeeres. haters of men. At ſixe yeeres of age he would haue them put apart from the daughters, and begin to learne to ride a horſe, to ſhoote, to practiſe all kind of feates of Armes, both with the right hand and with the left: to put in vre all other exerciſes of moderate labor, that they may waxe ſtrong, and be acquainted with labour, and therefore to vſe ſuch laborious paſtimes. But he expreſly forbiddeth to change euery day for new, this age being very apt thervnto: ſaying, that nothing is more pernitious than to acquaint youth to deſpiſe antiquitie. But aboue all things, he commandeth that children ſhould be ſo brought vp, that they be not conſtrained to any thing whatſoeuerYouth muſt be taught as it were in ſport, and not by compulſion. they ſhall take in hand, but as it were in ſport, that ſo euery ones nature may be knowne. Neither would he haue them beaten without great diſcretion, bicauſe it is not ſeemely that a free man ſhould learne liberall ſciences by ſeruitude and compulſion. And in truth no ſcience forced vpon a man, will continue ſtedfaſt with him. Moreouer,A commendable end of Muſicke. he would haue them apply themſelues to Muſicke, both to ſing hymnes and ſongs to the praiſe of God, to laud and magnifie him, and to hope for all good ſucceſſe from him, as alſo to recreate their ſpirits. He greatly miſliketh in them ſlouth and too much ſleepe, ſaying, that much ſound ſleepe is good neither for the bodie nor for the ſoule: that it is nothing profitable for him that deſireth to bring any good thing to paſſe, bicauſe as long as a man ſleepeth, he doth nothing more than if he liued not. Therefore whoſoeuer deſireth to liue, and to come to knowledge, let him watch as much as he may, hauing regard notwithſtanding to his health, which is contented with a little, when a man is once acquainted therewith. Now, bicauſe a child (as he ſaith) is more vnruly than a ſauage beaſt, he would neuer haue him left without a wiſe

                     Great care is to be taken in the choice of ſchole-maiſters. and vertuous maiſter. It is no leſſe neceſſarie (ſaith he) to conſider what teachers a man hath, than what parents. For as children doe in a manner carie away the ſpirits of their forefathers: ſo the vices of teachers are deriued vnto their ſchollers. Therefore let ſuch be choſen as teach vs their vertue by their workes, and not ſuch as onely vtterFrom the tenth yeere. and ſpeake many goodly words ſtudied out of it. At ten yeeres, this diuine Philoſopher would haue children to learne letters vntill fifteene. But bicauſe we are to learne languages that differ from ours, it were good to beginne ſooner, and to end a little after. I thinke it were very profitable for youth to begin at the aboue named age of ſixe yeeres, to teach him his moother toong perfectly, that he may read, pronounce, and write it well. After, at eight yeeres, to teach him the rudiments of the Latine toong, and to let him follow that vntil it be as familiar vnto him,From the foureteenth yeere. or little leſſe, than his natural ſpeech. At fourteene yeeres, the ſame Plato would haue children learne Arithmetike, ſaying, that it is very neceſſary both for a ſouldior, and for a Philoſopher: next, Geometrie, and that part of Aſtronomie that is neceſſarie for Coſinographie, which he would haue likewiſe learned. He commandeth alſo thatHunting animage of warre. youth ſhould practiſe hunting, bicauſe it is as it were an image of warre, and an exerciſe that maketh men apt to ſuſtaine all labour and trauell. This inſtitution of youth is ſurely woorthie of that diuine ſpirite of Plato, and that partie were very vnhappie, and of a froward and corrupt nature, who being thus diligently brought vp, would not growe to be a vertuous and good man. He puttethOf the education of daughters. ſmall difference betweene the education and bringing vp of daughters, and that of ſonnes, not depriuing women from publike adminiſtrations & charges, but onely that he would haue them imploied about ſuch things as require leaſt labour, and not to beginne to meddle with publike affaires, before they be fortie yeeres of age. HeReaſons why women may intermeddle with publike affaires. alleadgeth theſe reaſons, bicauſe often-times many women haue beene more excellent than all the men of their countrie, and ſuch are dailie to be ſeene. And ſeeing they

haue a ſoule aſwell as we, as quicke a ſpirite, and often-times more quicke than we, (whereof thoſe women are witneſſes, who hauing giuen thēſelues wholy to any thing whatſoeuer, were not inferiour, but rather went beyond many men) it were great follie in men, ſeeing God hath created man and woman with the like ſpirite, to cut off as it were the one halfe of their ſtrength, and to helpe themſelues but with a part thereof. Nowe, albeit theſe reaſons are of great waight, yet ſure it is that men and women, both by diuine and humane policie, haue theirAgainſt ignorance in women diſtinct and ſeuerall offices. It is very true, that I like not the opinion of many, who ſay, that women ought to knowe nothing, but to ſpinne and ſowe: which ſaying commeth neere to that of the Emperour, who would not haue a woman to haue more witte than is needefull for hir to diſcerne hir husbandes ſhirt from his doublet. Such opinions are fit for ignorant perſons, and proceede from a darke braine. For it cannot but be very ſeemelyWomen muſt be able to giue a reaſon of their being. and profitable for a woman to be able to render a reaſon of hir being, aſwell by the knowledge of the holie Scriptures, as by the precepts of good life, which we haue from the Ancients. This ought parents to teach their daughters, that they may be withdrawne from all other fooliſh loue, through the loue of vertue, and be deſirous of all honeſtie and chaſtitie: as alſo, that when they are moothers in good and holie mariage, they may be a principall cauſe of the good bringing vp of their children. Yea hiſtories reckon vp vnto vs a great many, that haueExample of learned women. beene in ſteede of Schoole-maiſters in excellent ſciences. Aretia taught hir ſonne Aristippus Philoſophie.Aretia. 
                     Zenobia Queene of the Palmyrians, being very well learnedZenobia. in the Greeke, Latine, and Aegyptian toongs, taught them to hir two ſonnes, and wrote an Epitomie of theCornelia. Eaſterne Hiſtories. Cornelia taught the Gracchyes hir two ſonnes, the Latine eloquence. But let vs followe our diſcourſe of the generall inſtruction of children.Of the inſtitution of youth according to Ariſtotle. 
                     Aristotle ſeemeth vnto mee to bee a good teacher and Maiſter, where hee ſayeth, that there are two ages, in

which it is neceſſarie to diuide the inſtitution of thoſe diſciplines, which we would haue our children learne: namely, from ſeuen yeeres vntill foureteene, which he calleth the age of pubertie: and againe from this age vntillTwo things to be reſpected in the inſtitution of youth. the one & twentieth yeere. He ſaith, that in the inſtitution of youth, two things muſt be looked vnto: the one, wherin children are to be inſtructed, the other, how they ought to be inſtructed. For all men are not agreed of this, what things children are to learne, neither yet is it decided, or reſolued vpon, to what end their inſtitution ought to be directed, whether to profite, or to manners, or to vnderſtanding and contemplation, which proceedeth from the variable opinions of men, who place their end in diuersThe end of all ſtudies. things. But how ſoeuer it is, we muſt, as we ſaid before, referre all our ſtudies to the glorie of God, and to the ſeruice of our neighbours, in liuing well according to thoſe charges and vocations whereunto we may be called. We haue already ſeene the diuiſion of ſciences and arts, and ſpoken of thoſe that are moſt neceſſarie for a happie life.Ariſtotle appointed that children ſhould learne foure things. Of Grammer. 
                     Ariſtotle following the cuſtome then vſed in Grecia, appointed that children ſhould learne foure things, Grammer, bodilie exerciſe, Muſicke, and painting: for certaine commodities meete for the life of a man. Grammer is the entire to all ſciences, whereby we learne to ſpeake exactly,The commoditie thereof. alſo to read and to write. And this is neceſſarie for all eſtates of life, whether publike or priuate, in peace or in warre, in a quiet life, or in multitude of buſines, for marchandice, for the guiding of a houſe, for the obtaining of knowledge, for the continuance and perpetuitie of the memorie of man. Briefly, as nature is the cauſe of our being, ſo the knowledge of letters, which Grammar teacheth vs, worketh in vs the knowledge how to liue well. For this cauſe Charondas the law-maker, as Diodorus the Sicilian writeth, preferred Grammer before all other ſciences, as that which is moſt neceſſarie for mans life, appointingA notable law for the common inſtruction of children. that all the children of his citie ſhould learne their letters at the charges of the common-wealth, which was to maintaine publike maiſters to teach both poore

and rich. Truly this law ought to be put in practiſe in all the townes of this kingdome, to reſiſt that pernitious Hydra of ignorance, which the richer ſort defend, making no account of knowledge, to the treading downe and oppreſſion of the poore, who would gladly haue the meanes whereby they might be inſtructed. The Gymnaſtical partOf Gymnaſtick, or bodilie exerciſe. was that arte, which, as the Ancients affirmed, did ſerue for health and ſtrength, preparing the bodies of children by honeſt and moderate exerciſes, as fencing, ſhooting, throwing of a ſtone, riding, wraſtling, running, leaping, ſwimming, and ſuch like. Theſe according to Ariſtotles opinion, are to be moderately practiced by children, vntill they be foureteene yeeres old, exerciſing them lightly, & not with forced labors, that their growth be not hindred thereby. This age being paſt, after they haue beſtowed three yeeres in other Morall diſciplines, and followed their ſtudies in deeper ſciences, vntill the one and twentieth yeere, then may they be exerciſed with more ſharpeThe end of Muſicke. and hard labors of the body. They muſt alſo be taught Muſicke, for the ſolacing and recreation of their mindes after trauels: and painting, that they may the better conſiderThe vſe of painning. of the beautie of the bodie, and vnderſtand the ſymmetry and apt compoſition of all things, to the ende that they may be the better aduiſed either in buying or ſelling them. Let them alſo knowe howe to drawe platformes of publike and priuate buildings, to ſet foorth countries, townes, and caſtels, their height, breadth, and length for the warre: liuing creatures of all ſortes, with their parts, herbs, trees, rootes, leaues, flowres, fruits for medicine, & for the knowledge of ſimples. In this inſtitution of children, Ariſtotle had reſpect to that which was conuenient, & drew neereſt to the forme of a happie Commonwealth eſtabliſhed by him, and to that which was neceſſary for the preſeruation and maintenance thereof. Nowe, let vs apply to our vſe that which we may learne both of him, and of the reſt of the Ancients, for the framing of yoong men to honeſty and vertue: leauing to the libertie of Fathers to make choice of thoſe arts and ſciences wherein

they purpoſe to bring vp their children, hauing regard to that whereunto nature maketh them moſt apt and pliable. We ſhall take a good way in the inſtitution of youth,Fower things to be vſed in the inſtitution of youth. Inſtruction, which conſiſteth in ſix precepts. 1. The firſt precept. The firſt thing that youth muſt learne, is to worſhip God. if we obſerue and vſe theſe fower things, Instruction, Admonition, Promiſe, Praiſes, and Threatnings. We will comprehend all Instruction vnder ſixe precepts. The firſt ſhall be to ſhewe vnto children, that they muſt worſhip God, and honour him chiefly and aboue all things, referring all their thoughts and deedes to the glorie of his name: that it is he that hath created and preſerueth all things, that he ſuffereth no wickednes to paſſe vnpuniſhed, nor good worke vnrewarded, but giueth eternall happines to good men, and euerlaſting paine and puniſhment to them thatWe can do nothing without the grace of God. are euill. Let them knowe that without his grace and fauour they can doe nothing, no not ſo much as liue one moment: and therefore that they muſt continually and before euery worke call vpon him, and beware that they offend him not by neglecting his commandemēts, which2. The ſecond precept. for this cauſe they muſt diligently learne. The ſecond inſtructionYouth muſt not glorie in tranſitoric goods. which I finde moſt neceſſarie for youth, is to teach them not to glorie in earthlie and worldlie goods, but to learne rather to deſpiſe them, and to tranſport the loue of the bodie and of carnall goods, which it deſireth, to the loue of the ſoule and of eternal goods, whichNor in bodilie beautie. properly belong vnto them. They muſt not make great account of the beautie of the bodie, which hauing incloſed within it the ſoule that is defiled with vice and ſinne, is nothing elſe but a pretious and proud ſepulcher, vnder which is contained a ſtinking and putrified carrion. They muſt not put their hope and confidence in riches, but be perſwaded that they are rich and happie, if they be wiſe, learned, and vertuous. And whileſt their vnderſtanding is good and in vigour, and themſelues haue time, they muſt put all their ſtrength to the obtaining of that whichThe fruits of true knowledge and vertue. will be profitable vnto them in their olde age: namely of knowledge and vertue, which will procure vnto them, honour, ſafetie, praiſe, happines, reſt, and tranquillitie in their life time, and will in the ende guide them to

eternall life, to be made coheires of the kingdome of heauen with Ieſus Chriſt. Thirdly, they muſt be taught3. The third precept. to eſchewe and flie from all ſuch thinges which they ſee are hurtfull to others, and learne to be wiſe by their dangers and perils. Nowe, that which marreth and hurtethThe common diſeaſes of youth. others, is diſobedience, lying, pride, infidelitie, naughtines, hazarding games, whoredome, drunkennes, prodigalitie, idlenes, and euill companie. Againſt the contagion of which vices, no better preſeruatiue can be had, than to ingraue modeſtie in their hartes, by the rule andModeſtie is the beſt remedie for them. meaſure whereof they may eaſily be directed to behaue themſelues vertuouſly. For this cauſe Plutarke ſayth very elegantly, that the fooliſh opinion and preſumption, which yoong men commonly conceiue of themſelues, ought rather to be emptied, than the ayre wherewith bottles and Kiddes skinnes are puffed vp when any good thing is to be put into them. Otherwiſe, being full of the winde of ouer-weening, they receiue none of that good inſtruction which men thinke to powre into them. For the fourth precept of their inſtruction, we will ſet4 The fourth precept hath fower branches. downe theſe fower thinges, which will ſtande them in great ſteede towards the attayning of a happie life. Let 
                      
                     them not be delicate or ſuperfluous in anye thinge: Let them 
                      
                     bridle their toong, and not be full of wordes, nor vtter filthie and diſhonest talke at anie tyme, but be gratious and curteous in ſpeaking to all men, ſaluting euery one gladly, and willingly giuing place in thoſe things wherein the truth is not hurt. Let them 
                      
                     maister their choler by cutting off impatience as much as may be, which is a ſingular vertue. Lastly, let them haue pure hands, 
                      
                     ſeeing manie great men by taking monie vniustly, haue ſtilled all that honour which they had gathered togither all the former time of their life. Fiftly, the examples of good and bad men,5. The fift precept. are to be laid before their eies through the reading and vnderſtanding of hiſtories, that they may knowe that vertuous men haue beene well rewarded, and the vitious receiued an euill and miſerable ende. For this cauſe we reade that the olde men of Rome vſed at feaſtes to ſinge the famous actes of their Anceſtours before

                     6 The ſixt precept. their youth. For the ſixt and laſt precept, we ſay, that it is needfull for youth to be vſed to labour and weariſomnes, to keep them from idlenes, and from falling into any diſhoneſt pleaſure. We haue ſeene what exerciſes and paſtimes are meete for them, according to the opinion of the Ancients: and at this daye we knowe howe to make choice of them, as ſhall be meeteſt for the nobilitie. Now, to ſpeake briefly of the other three generall precepts giuenOf admonition. by vs for the inſtitution of youth: Admonition is very neceſſarie for that age. For although youth be well borne and brought vp, yet hath it ſuch actiue and vehement prouocations, that it is eaſily brought to ſtumble. Wherfore yoong men muſt be often admoniſhed of their dutie, and ſpoken vnto of honeſtie, and of vertuous men, bicauſe words mooue their minds. The ſteps of their honeſt predeceſſors are to be laid before their eies, to induce themOf promiſes. Youth is to be drawne on with the promiſes of eternall life. to follow their paths. And aboue all things, the promiſe of that life, which is eternally happie for thoſe that perſeuere in vprightnes and iuſtice, is to be propounded vnto them. O man well affected (ſaith Horace) go ioifully whither thy vertue leadeth thee, and thou ſhalt reape great rewards for thy deſerts. O ye yoong men (ſaith Plautus) walke on in that way wherein vertue will direct you, and ye ſhall be very well recompenced. For he that hath vertue, hath all thinges neceſſarie for him, and wanteth nothing. Theſe are the promiſes which ought to be beaten into the harts of children: adding further to them that are very yoong a promiſe to giue them what they will, ſo that they learne well that which is taught them. Laſt ofOf praiſes and threatnings. all, praiſes and threatnings muſt be added, by commending children when we ſee them profit in vertue and honeſtie, to encourage them to go forward, and to do better & better. Glorie (ſaith Ouid) giueth no ſmall ſtrength to the mind, and the deſire and loue of praiſe, cauſeth the hart to be reſolute and readye to vndertake all things. Quintilian would haue yong men praiſed, when they profitte, and are willing to learne, as likewiſe they are to be threatned, if they be ſlothfull and negligent in the obtaining

of vertue and honeſtie, and wil neither heare nor vnderſtand, nor yet put in practiſe thoſe good admonitions that are giuen them. And if they amend not with threatnings, they muſt haue good diſcipline and correction vſed towards them, and be chaſticed with diſcretion. To this purpoſe Plutark ſaith, that the hope of reward, and feareHope and feare are the foundation of vertue. of puniſhment, are as it were the two elements and foundation of vertue. For hope maketh yoong men prompt and readie to vndertake all good and commendable things, & feare maketh them ſlowe in preſuming to commit ſuch things as are vile and full of reproch. So that if we practice diligently theſe precepts in the education & inſtruction of our children: there is no doubt, but as ſeales and ſignets doe eaſily make a print in ſoft waxe, ſo we may quickly caſt in the mindes of little children, as it were in a mould, whatſoeuer we would haue them learne for the leading of a good and happie life, to the glorie of God, the profit of their neighbours, and diſcharge of our conſciences which are bound thereunto.
               
            
            
               Of the diuiſion of the ages of man, and of the offices and duties that are to be obſerued in them. Chap. 52.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  AMongſt the moſt common and notorious faults, which fathers now a daies commit in the education and bringing vp of their children, this deſerueth great blame and reprehenſion, that in their firſt age they vſually prouide teachers for them, ſending them to Colledges, where they are kept in awe, when they cannot commit any greater euill than that which commeth from the yoong yeeres of their infancie, not very hurtfull to any, being light faults, and ſoone amended: but when the vehemencie of adoleſcencie beginnethAdoleſcencie is the age betweene 14. & 28 to tickle them with foule and infamous deſires, and when they haue greateſt neede of a bridle, then they let looſe the raines, and withdraw them from the ſubiection

of their guides, giuing them libertie to make choice of their eſtate of life, when their perturbations are moſt violent, & in danger to bring foorth moſt peruitious effects. Whereas on the contrary ſide then ought they moſt diligently to looke vnto them, and to ſet a moſt careful watch ouer them, that their firſt diſcipline and inſtruction may be framed in vertue, and in the perfection of a moſt happie life. For this cauſe (my Companions) I thinke that by continuing our former diſcourſe (ſeeing all men enioye not commonly this benefite of the forenamed education & inſtruction, from their infancie vnto the end) we ought to ſearch out ſome way whereby to amend the firſt faults, by handling the diuiſion of the ages of man, according to the ancient writers, and by ſetting downe a briefe inſtruction of that which is moſt neceſſarily required, and to be obſerued in euery of them, eſpecially in adoleſcencie, for the obtaining of true felicitie through good behauiour and inſtructions, which are the meanes thereof.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  It is true (as Plato ſaith) that vertue muſt be learned from the firſt infancie. Yea, there is no part of our age, which ought to be imploied in any other ſtudie. But adoleſcencie eſpecially muſt not onely inquire and ſeeke after the decrees of honeſty & vertue, but alſo haue them already imprinted and ingrauen in his hart.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  As no man euer ſaw a Bee become a Beetle through age: ſo no part of our life ought to leaue the firſt election grounded vpon vertue, if the ende thereof be to liue well. But let vs heare ASER diſcourſe of this preſent matter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  It cannot be denied, that place and time are a great helpe to honeſtie and vertue: inſomuch, that if we conſider not of them the knowledge and practiſe of that which belongeth to our dutie, cannot greatly profit vs.Place and time are to be conſidered in all things. For all things are to be applied in time & place, and ſome thinges are decent and lawfull vpon one occaſion, which would be very vnſeemely in another. The prouerbe ſaith, that the way to handle a ſound man is diuers from the guiding of him, to whome the diet is inioined. Euen ſo, although vertue &

honeſty are alwaies requiſite in a man, bicauſe it is the only ornament of his life: yet in diuers ages diuerſity of honeſt behauior is required, & the ſelfe ſame things are not decent in them, but ſome kind of behauiour is proper toAll kind of behauior not conuenient in all ages. the age of childhood, ſome to youth, and another to old age, bicauſe as nature altereth with age, ſo it behooueth that maners ſhould chang. Now, among them that haue moſt diligently obſerued the ſecrets of mans nature, there hath beene two ſundry opinions concerning the diuiſion of the ages of man. Some haue made 7. parts, adding decrepiteOf the diuiſion of the ages of man. or bed red-age after old age: & they would groūd their principal reaſon of this diuiſion vpon this, that theThe number of ſeuen accounted a perfect number. number of 7. is an vniuerſall & abſolute number. So we reckon 7. planets, whoſe motion worketh all generations & corruptions in the earth. By a ſtronger reaſon therfore this number of ſeuen wil be applied to the continuance of time. Moreouer, the growth of men according to age, increaſeth at the ſeuenth number. For teeth are bred in the ſeuenth moneth, & in the ſeuenth yeere they change & alter. Beſides, in the ſame yeere doubled, that is in the fourteenth yeere, man receiueth abilitie of ſeede, that is to ſay, of engendring. True it is, that the number of ſix worketh alteration in females. Yet the number of 7. in other things worketh augmentation, or elſe the reſt and quietnes of men, and ſheweth the difference or iudgement of diſeaſes. The whole time of the creation of the world is comprehended therein, & likewiſe the reſt and ceaſing of the worke-maiſter thereof. All the ancient writers haue alſo noted, that the number of 63. which is the multiplication of ſeuen by nine, carieth with it commonly the end of old men: bicauſe that in the whole courſe of our life we liue vnder one onely climate, which is either from ſeuen, orOf the climactericall yeere of 63. from nine yeeres, except in the yeere of 63. wherein two terminations or climates ende, that is to ſay, nine ſeuen times ſeuen, or ſeuen nine times nine: and therefore this yeere is called climactericall, wherein we may note out of hiſtories the death of many great men, and the change of eſtates and kingdomes. As touching the other diuiſion

                     The whole age of man diuided into ſix parts. Of Infaucie. of the age of man into ſixe parts onely, of which opinion Iſidorus is, we will now enter into the particular handling thereof. The parts are theſe: Infancie, Childhood, Youth, Adoleſcencie, Virilitie, & old age. Infancie is the firſt age of man, beginning after his natiuitie: & it is ſo called, bicauſe at that time he hath no vſe of ſpeech, and thereforeOf Childhood. cannot then learne manners and vertue, hauing no ſence or vnderſtanding to comprehend them. Childhood is, when children beginne to ſpeake; albeit as yet they haue not the full vſe of reaſon: in which eſtate a man may ſay they are vntill the age of ſeuen yeeres, during which time fathers and mothers ought to nouriſh and bring them vp in the feare of God, & reuerence of their parents, & frame them gently vnto all good maners, as we haue already declared. This age is called of the Latines Pueritia, as it were pure and neate fromHe meaneth not common & naturall infirmities, but malitious offences. ſinne: foraſmuch as children haue then no vſe of diſcretion, ſo that iudgement cannot be attributed to their works, wherby they may be called good or euill. Youth is reckoned from ſeuen yeeres of age vntill foureteene, at which time children ought to be deliuered vnto skilfull and honeſt maiſters & teachers, to be inſtructed.Two things requiſite in a Schoolemaiſter, skill, and boneſtie of life. Then muſt parents looke well whether thoſe two things are in them, to whoſe direction they commit the keeping of ſuch a pretious pledge: leaſt that befall them, which Hyperides an Orator of Grecia ſaid to one who told him that he had ſent a ſlaue with his ſon to gouerne him, you haue (quoth he) done very wel: for in ſteede of one ſlaue, you ſhall receiue twaine. Therefore it is very neceſſarie that ſuch maiſters ſhould be choſen for them, as are learned and ofThe benefit that commeth by good Schoolemaiſters. good life & conuerſation, that, as good Gardiners ſticke downe certain props hard by yong plants to keepe them vpright: ſo wiſe teachers may plant good inſtructions & precepts about yoong men, that their maners may be according to vertue. Let fathers beware leaſt being mooued with couetouſnes, they make choice of maiſters vnworthy their charge, that they may pay the leſſe ſtipēd, ſeking for good cheape ignorance: ſeeing that (as Plato ſaith) as childrē beare away as it were the minds of their progenitors,

ſo the vices of the Schole-maiſters flow vpon their ſchollers. At this age of youth the children of Rome did hangeA ſtrang cuſtom vſed by the children of Rome. in the Temple a little coller or iewell which they ware about their necks, during the time of their infancie, declaring therby that they renounced all childiſhnes, and that they were to chang their maners for the time to come. In token wherof one gaue them a white robe, and a purple coate, to teach them by the white colour to ſhunne vices, which made the ſoule blacke, and by the purple, to ſtriue to make their life gliſter and ſhine with good manners and vertue. And it ſeemeth that the Latines called thisThe reaſon o
                           •
                         this word Iuuentus.
                      age Iuuentus, bicauſe of the aide and helpe which men promiſed to themſelues through the vertuous inclination that appeered in yoong children. We ſaw before ſufficiently what is further required of this age, in regard of their inſtruction. Adoleſcencie is the fourth age of man, beginning at the foureteenth yeere, and continuing vntilOf adoleſcencie the 28. and it is deriued of this verbe Adoleſco, which ſignifieth to growe. For then doe men growe in bodie, in ſtrength, and reaſon, in vice, and vertue. And at that age the nature of a man is knowne, and whereunto he bendeth his minde, which before could not be diſcerned by reaſon of the ignorance of his age. This is that which Cicero ſaith, that the ſtudies vnto which we addict our ſelues in the time of our adoleſcencie, like to herbes and fruites that are come to their faſhion, declare what vertue there will be in time of ripenes, and what manner of harueſt wil follow. Therefore yoong men (ſaith this Father of eloquence) muſt make choice of one certaine kind of life, whereunto they are to giue themſelues all their life time without any manner of contradiction, and being conſtant therein, they muſt draw all their actions to that onely end, as an arrow is drawne towards a white. But foraſmuchThe fruits of adoleſcencie being left to it ſelf. as in the corruption of our time we ſee poore fruits of this age when it is left to it ſelfe, we may well ſay, that in this ſeaſon of adoleſcencie, children haue greateſt neede to be gouerned, ruled, and kept in great awe. For the inclination to pleaſures, and the eſchewing of labour, which

are naturall in man, commonly begin then to aſſault him with ſuch violence, that if yoong men be not well followed, they quickly turne to vice, hate thoſe that giue them good inſtruction, become preſumptuous, and ready to leaue that which before they loued: and taking no care for the time to come, like beaſts ſeeke for nothing but to ſatisfie their luſtfull deſires. For this cauſe that good EmperourAurelius exhortation to his ſonnes gouernours. 
                     Marcus Aurelius ſaid to thoſe vnto whome he recommended his ſon after his death. Beware that he bathe not himſelfe in ſlipperie pleaſures and deſires, ſeeing it is a hard matter to moderate and to ſtay the burning affections of a yoong man, eſpecially when he ſeeth in his own hand a licence not limited, which offereth vnto him all kind of contentation. And truly this vnbrideled licence of not being in ſubiection to any, which yoong men deſire and ſeeke after ſo earneſtly, and for want of right vnderſtanding, falſly call and imagine it to be libertie, bringeth them in bondage to ſeuerer and ſharper maiſters, than were thoſe teachers & Schoole-maiſters which theyConcupiſcence raigneth moſt in Adoleſcencie. had in their infancie: namely, to their luſts and diſordred deſires, which are then as it were vnchained and let looſe. But he which knoweth, that to follow God, and to obey right reaſon, are reciprocall and neceſſarily following ech other, muſt thinke that to leaue his infancie & firſt youth, and to enter into the ranke of men, is no freedome from ſubiection, but only a chang of commandement: bicauſe our life in lieu of a hired maiſter, who gouerned vs before,Who are to be accounted free. hath then a heauenly guide, that is, reaſon, to whome they onely that obey, are to be reputed & taken for free men. For after they haue learned to will that which they ought, they liue as they will, whereas the freedome of the will in diſordred actions and affections is ſmall, feeble, & weake, and mingled with much repentance. Theſe are thoſe good reaſons, which ought to ſound often in the eares of yoong men, and be ſupplied by little & litle through the ſtudy of good letters, & Morall Philoſophie of ancient men, vntill they haue wholy in poſſeſſion that place of maners, which is ſooneſt mooued, and moſt eaſily led, & are lodged therin

by knowledge and iudgement, which will be as a gardKnowledge and iudgement are the gard of adoleſcencie. to preſerue and defend that age from corruption. Vnto which things the Ancients looked very diligently, both to repreſſe boldnes, which commonly is the companion of adoleſcencie, and alſo to chaſtice their faults ſeuerely.Catoes ſonne baniſhed for breaking an earthen pot. And Cinnaes ſonne for gathering fruite without leaue. We read that one of Cato his ſons of the age of 15. yeeres, was baniſhed for breaking a pot of earth in a maids hand that went for water: ſo was Cinna his ſonne, bicauſe he entred into a garden, and gathered fruite without leaue. Therefore if a yoong man be well guided with reaſon, he will chuſe & propound to himſelfe that kind of life, which he purpoſeth to keepe vntill death, and begin ſome commendable life that is had in recommendation among vertuous men. The ancient Romanes minding to make declarationHow the Romanes taught their yoong men to forſake the follies of their firſt age. heereof, when their children were come to that age, they brought them to the common market place clothed with a mans gowne, and cauſed them to ſcatter nuts heere and there, & after that to forſake all play: ſignifieng therby, that they muſt leaue the follies of their firſt age, to imbrace more graue and ſerious matters. It belongeth to their duty (ſaith Cicero) to honor their Elders, & to markeThe dutie of yoong men. who are the honeſteſt men, & of beſt report, that by their coūſel they may learn to liue according to vertue & good maners, & haue honor alwaies before their eies. And as in calme weather whē a man is vpon the ſea, he muſt prouide ſuch things as are neceſſary againſt a ſtorme: ſo in time of adoleſcencie, men muſt furniſh themſelues with temperance, ſobriety, & continency, laying vp ſtore of prouiſion in due time, wherby to ſuſtaine old age the better. This is that which Plato ſaith, that a moderate youth maketh anA moderate youth maketh a happie old age eaſie olde age: but that which is immoderate maketh it greeuous & irkeſom. The defect of our ſtrength (ſaith Cicero) commeth rather of the vices of our youth, than of olde age. Now, bicauſe youth is at this day more than euer, giuen ouer to all kind of diſſolutenes, ſo that their greateſt glorie conſiſteth in going one beyond an other in vice, let vs here propound to thoſe that wil make their profit therof, ſome exāples drawen from the ancients, of rare vertue that ſhined

                     Examples of vertuous young men. in yong men. Ioſeph, Daniel, Salomon, deſerue the firſt place, who being very yoong men, executed deeds of woonderfull prudence. The holie Scriptures affoord vs a ſufficient number of teſtimonies, but we haue ſome alſo amongſt the Heathens and Pagans, that ought to ſtirre vp youthAlexander a paterne of vertue in his youth. vnto vertue. That great Monarch Alexander in his youth deſpiſed all kind of pleaſure and delight, eſchewed women, contemned monie, and all plaies and paſtimes that were vnprofitable, and to no good vſe, louing nothing but vertue and glorie gotten thereby. This was the cauſe why, being demanded whether he would not be preſent at the feaſt of the Olympian games, to try if he could win the price of running, ſeeing he was well made, and woonderfull light of foote, he anſwered. yes, if they were kings that ran. Whenſoeuer he heard newes that his father had taken any famous Towne, or wonne ſome great battell, he ſhewed no token of ioye, but ſaide to his equals in yeeres: My Father, Sirs, will take all, and leaue no goodlie and great matter for me to doe, and to conquere with you. Among other his commendable giftes of nature, which men admired in him at that age, he was greatly praiſed for a good horſe-man, which he ſhewed full wellBucephalus Alexanders horſe. when Bucephalus the horſe was brought to his father, and was to be ſold for thirteene Talents, that is in value 7800. crownes: which the yeomen of the kings horſe perceiued to be ſo skittiſh and wild, that they durſt not vndertake to breake him. But Alexander mounted on him, and handled him ſo cunningly, that all thoſe that were preſent, cried out by way of admiration: and Phillip kiſſing him, ſaid: Oh my ſonne, thou muſt ſeeke out a kingdome that is meete for thee, for Macedonia is not able to containe thee. This horſe alwaies ſerued Alexander after that, and died in a battell againſt the Barbarians, when he was thirtiePompey. yeeres olde. Pompey from his very youth ſhewed in his countenance (as Hiſtoriographers write) a pleaſant mildnes, ioined with a manlie grauitie, and in his conditions and behauiour, a reuerent excellencie of kinglie maieſtie. When he was yet verie yoong, he committed an

act of a wiſe and aduiſed captaine, being in the Romane armie whereof Strabo his father was captaine againſt Cinna. For when the ſouldiers began to rebel and to conſpire the death of their captaine, Pompey diſcouered the ſame, and tooke order for his fathers ſafetie. After, perceiuing that the ſouldiers truſſed vp bag and baggage to go yeeld themſelues to Cinna, he thruſt himſelfe into the middeſt of them, beſeeching them moſt humbly with teares in his eies, not to deale ſo groſely with their captain. In the end when he ſaw that they perſiſted in their opinion, he threw himſelfe proſtrate all along ouerthwart the gate of the campe, ſaying vnto thē, that if they were ſo deſirous to depart, both they and their horſes ſhould go ouer his body. Whereupon they were ſo aſhamed, that chaunging their mindes, euery one betooke him againe to his quarter, and reconciled themſelues vnto their generall. The prudence of Papyrius deſerueth to be alleaged here, who accordingPapyrius. to the cuſtome of the young gentlemen of Rome, was brought into the Senate, after he had put on the gowne wouen about with purple which they vſed to giue to yong men, to the end to frame them by litle and litle to the managing of affaires. In his returne from the Senate, which was longer in breaking vp than vſually they were woont to do, his mother asked him the cauſe thereof. And after many threatnings and compulſions, Papyrius not willing to reueale the ſecret of the councell, as it had been expreſly forbidden him, bethought himſelfe of a ſubtill lie, ſaying, that the Senators were in great contention whether it were more expedient to agree that one man ſhould haue two wiues, or one woman two husbands: which (quoth he) ſhalbe determined to morow. His mother beleeuing it, told the ſame to the Romane ladies hir companions, who met all the next day at the entrie of the Senate, beſeeching the iudges to giue a fauourable ſentence for them. The matter being knowen, procured great laughter, and made the prudence of this yong man to be greatly eſteemed. But let vs ſpeak of the other two ages of man. MansOf 
                           〈◊〉
                         ma
                           •
                        s eſtate. eſtate beginneth when a man is euen now ripe and ſetled,

and groweth no more in body. This onely age is moſt apt and fit to attaine to vertue and honeſtie. For then is reaſon ſtrong and power-full in him, then is his iudgement ſound, & his bodily vigor of force and ſtrength to labour and trauel. Of the name of this age, I mean of this Latine word Vir, did vertue firſt take hir name, which in Latine is Virtus: bicauſe this worde Vir, ſignifieth him that is in the age of virilitie, or mans eſtate, as if you would ſay, apt to be a miniſter and practitioner of vertue. It is true that Iſidorus confoundeth Youth, (which he placeth after Adoleſcencie) and virilitie togither; ſaying, that this word vir is a word of ſexe and not of age. But herein he agreeth with vs, that the perfection of mans ſtrength beginneth at 29. yeeres, where we ſaid that adoleſcencie ended. In this ſtrength a man continueth vntil 50. yeeres, and then beginneth to grow weake, and to decline continually vntillThe dutie of a man at the perfection of his age. death. The whole age of virilitie ought to be full of honeſtie and vertue, & to bring foorth the effects of prudence, temperance, fortitude and iuſtice, whereof we haue diſcourſed at large. And if any man before he came to this age, had not that education and inſtructiō which was neceſſary for him (whereof we haue alreadie diſcourſed) by reaſon of his fathers negligēce, or through the licentiouſnes of adoleſcencie, then eſpecially is he to take the bridle between his teeth in good earneſt, bicauſe yet there is good time & ſeaſon, yea oportunitie of great fruit, to profit in learning and vertue, ſo that he cannot alleage thisClitomachus. excuſe, that he was not inſtructed in youth. Clitomachus of Carthage, when he was aboue 40. yeeres of age, came to Athens to learne vnder Carneades, with whom he profited ſo well, that after his death he ſucceeded in his place and taught others. Lucius being at Rome, and meeting withM. Aurelius. the emperor Marcus Aurelius in the ſtreete with one man after him, demanded of him whether he went. It becommeth euen an old man (quoth he) to learne. I am goyng (ſaid he) to Sextus the Philoſopher, to learne that which I know not. Than Lucius lifting vp his hands towards heauen, cried out, O good God, I ſee an emperour euen gray-headed
                     
                     carying his booke as if he were a child to heare a lecture and to be instructed thereby: and yet most kings of the earth will not vouchſafe to looke vpon a booke at eighteene yeeres of age. Solon hadSolon learned to the hower of his death. this ſentence commonly in his mouth, that he waxed old as he learned. The ſame day and houre that he died, being aboue 80. yeeres olde, and hearing ſome of his friends diſputing of a certain point of Philoſophy, he lift vp himſelf vpon his bed after his maner as wel as he could. And being asked why he did ſo, To the end (quoth he) that when I haue learned that whereof you diſpute, I might end my dayes: & ſo in deed he did. For the diſputation was no ſooner ended but he died. Socrates learned muſick when he was very olde.Socrates learned muſick being old. T. Varro, and M. Cato learned Greeke when they were old. Iulianus. Alphonſus.
                      
                     Terentius Varro, and Marcus Portius Cato learned Greek when they were old. Iulianus the great lawyer vſed to ſay whē he was very old, that although he had one foot in the graue, yet he was deſirous to learne. Alphonſus king of Arragon, when he was 50. yeeres old, learned the Latin toong, and tranſlated Titus Liuius out of Latine into Spaniſh. The ſixt and laſt age of man is called Old-age, which according to Marcus Varro, and other authors, beginneth at 50. yeeres, bicauſe at this age the naturall power and ſtrength of man beginneth to decline and fade away. Iſidorus
                     Of old-age. calleth this time Grauitie, which he maketh to laſt vntill 70. yeeres, and termeth the ouer-plus of age beyond that, old-age. But as neither the diuiſion of ages here ſet downe, nor the termes wherein we haue encloſed them, could agree to the ages of our firſt fathers, either in the firſt or ſecond age, wherin they liued commonly as manie yeeres as we do moneths, ſo conſidering the ſhortneſſe of our days, which the Pſalmiſt limiteth within 80. yeeres atPſal. 90. 10. the moſt, I think we are to folow the opiniō of Varro, who calleth old-age whatſoeuer is aboue 50. yeeres. In which age prudence is a very meet & neceſſary ornament, whichPrudence is the ornament of old age. thoſe ancient men might attain vnto through long vſe of life, through knowledge, and through experience. Therfore it is their office to ſuccour and helpe the yonger ſort, their friendes, and the common-wealth by their prudence and counſell. For this cauſe Romulus the firſt

founder of the citie of Rome, choſe an hundred of the eldeſt in the citie, by whoſe counſell he willed that it ſhouldWhat Senate is, and frō whence it came. be gouerned. And of theſe old men called in Latin Senes, came that word Senatus, which is as much to ſay, as an aſſembly or gathering togither of olde men, whom we now call counſailors or Senators. And albeit that men now a dayes greatly abuſe thoſe charges, yet ſurely they properly belong to olde men, to whome it appertaineth to gouerne townes, to adminiſter iuſtice, and to be a paterne and example of honeſtie to the younger ſort. For then haue they no time to take their eaſe, but (as Cicero ſaith) they muſt encreaſe the exerciſes of the ſoule, as they diminiſh the labours of the bodie. Let them remember that ſaying of the Lacedemonian, who being asked why he ſuffredWhat vſe is to be made of a white beard. his beard to grow ſo long: to the end (quoth he) that by looking vpon my white haire, I ſhould be put in mind not to do any act vnbeſeeming this hoarie whiteneſſe. In this age that ſentence of Plato ought eſpecially to be wellEpaminondas ſalutation vſed to men according to their ages. thought vpon, That yong men die very ſoone, but that olde men cannot liue long. To which effect Epaminondas ſayd, that vntil 30. yeeres it may be thus ſaid to men, Ye are welcome: for vntill that time they ſeeme ſtill to be comming into the world. From 30. vntill 50. yeeres, they muſt be ſaluted in this maner, Ye are in a good hower, bicauſe they are then to know what the world is. And from 50. to the end a man muſt ſay vnto them, Go in a good hower, bicauſe then they go faire and ſoftly, taking their leaue of the world. Olde ageCato. (ſaid Cato to an olde man that liued ill) hath ſufficient deformities of it ſelf, do not thou adde ſuch as proceed fromWhat breedeth authoritie in a man. vice. For it is not griſled haire, nor a wrinckled viſage that bringeth authoritie, but a life that is honeſtly led and guided according to the beſt end of our being whereunto euery age is to be referred. To ſuch olde men (ſaith Sophocles)
                     Sophocles. as haue their ſoules nouriſhed with heauenly light,To whom old age is not grieuous. old age is not grieuous, and in ſuch the deſire of contemplation and knowledge encreaſeth as much as the pleaſures of their bodie decreaſe. Therfore when we haue paſſed ouer the greateſt part of our days to the profite of many,

if than through weaknes of extreme age we are conſtrained to leaue the managing of publike affaires, it will be very great honour, comfort and contentation of mind vnto vs, to run the reſt of our race quietly and peaceably in the ſtudie of letters, wherein delight is ioyned with honeſt contemplation.
               
            
            The ende of the thirteenth daies worke.
         
         
            THE FOVRTEENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of Policie, and of ſundry ſortes of Gouernments. Chap. 53.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     IF we are able to diſcern between the bodie & the ſoul, between this preſent tranſitorie life and the life to come, which is eternall, we will not thinke it ſtrange,The ſoule is not ſubiect to mans iuriſdiction. that one part of mans building ſhould be created to remaine free for euer, and to be exempted frō the yoke of humane power, acknowledging onely the ſpiritual iuriſdiction, and the other part to be in ſeruitude, and to receiue commaundement from thoſe humane and ciuill offices, which are to be kept amongſt men. In the kingdome of God (ſaith Paul) there is neither
                     Gal. 3. 18. 
                     Iew nor Graecian, neither bond nor free, neither Barbarian nor Scythian, but Ieſus Christ is all in all. Stand fast in the libertie
                     Col. 3. 11. 
                     wherewith you are made free. And by and by after he addeth: Onely vſe not your libertie as an occaſion to the fleſh, but by loue 
                     Gal. 5. 1. 13.
                     
                     ſerue one another. And elſe-where he ſaith, Let euery ſoule be
                     Rom. 13. 1. 2. All power is of God. 
                     ſubiect to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God. Whoſoeuer therfore reſisteth the power, reſisteth the ordinance of God. Wherby it appeereth that they which thinke that the maintenance of ciuil policies are the worke of man only, are greatly deceiued. For we muſt of neceſſitie beleeue,The beginning and preſeruation of policies is from God. that it proceedeth from the counſel of God, and from his eternall prouidence, without which neither the round frame of the world, nor cities & townes could in any ſort abide ſtedfaſt: & ſo that it is very neceſſary for their preſeruation, that certain lawes ſhould be appointed, according vnto which men may liue honeſtly & iuſtly one with another. As there are then two chief regiments & gouernments in man, of which one reſpecteth the ſoule, and acknowledgeth no temporal king or maſter, but holdeth of one only Ieſus Chriſt according to the miniſterie of his word, & the other is to ordaine a ciuil iuſtice only, and to reforme outward maners, wherunto the body during this life is wholy ſubiect, reſcruing the firſt eſtate of man in his freedom according to the diuine rule of pietie, we are diligently to looke to this ſecond eſtate of ſubiection & ſeruitude, which is moſt neceſſary for the maintenance of common peace & tranquillitie amongſt men. Now foraſmuch (my companions) as we haue hitherto according to our weak iudgement noted the moral vertues of the ſoul, for the better framing of mens actions to that which is decent & honeſt in this life, and folowing the ſame order haue alſo giuen rules & inſtructions for the gouernment of a family, we are now to enter into this large field of humane policie, & to conſider of the parts that belong vnto it, referring the chiefe ſcope of the handling of this matter, which otherwiſe would be infinite, to the ruling & preſeruing of our French monarchie, for the inſtruction of al eſtates that are therein. And firſt we wil ſee what ciuil policie is, and intreat briefly of the diuers kinds of gouernments amōg the ancients, that we may ſo much the better attaine to the knowledge of that vnder which we liue.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  To command and to obey (ſaith Ariſtotle)
                     
are not only neceſſary but alſo profitable: yea ſome thingsOf commanding and obeying. are borne to obey, and others to command, whoſe common end is publike benefit & ciuil iuſtice, which are preſerued by a wel eſtabliſhed policie, and right gouernment according to the lawes of nature.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     Policie is the bond of all ſocietie. Euery ciuil ſocietie muſt be kept in order by ſome policie, which is a neceſſary helpe to cauſe a man to walke in his vocation. But as the elements cannot be intermingled one with another, except it be by an vnequall proportion and temperature: ſo I thinke that ciuil policies cannot wel be preſerued but by a certaine inequalitie which is to be ſeene in all countries by diuers ſorts of Gouernments. But let vs heare ACHITOB diſcourſe to this effect.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     There is ſhew of commanding and obeying in all things, In all things compounded of matter and forme, commanding & obeying are ſo naturall, that there is ſome ſhew therof euen in things without life: as we ſee in that harmonie which conſiſteth in voyce, & in ſounds,As in harmonie. wherein the contra-tenor ſeemeth to command ouer the baſe. This whole inferiour world obeyeth the ſuperiour,The ſuperior part of the world ruleth the inferior. and is gouerned thereby, through a certain vertue accompanied with light and heate, called of many Philoſophers the ſpirit of the world, or as Plato ſaith, the ſoule of the world, which deſcending from the celeſtiall nature, and intermingling it ſelfe throughout the whole maſſe of this great body, penetrateth, quickneth, nouriſheth and moderateth all chaungeable things vnder the Moone. TheThe Sunne is king and the Moone Queene among the ſtarres. The Moone ruleth ouer all moiſtures. chiefe miniſter and diſpoſer of this vertue is the Sunne, whom we acknowledge as king among the ſtarres, lightning the vniuerſall frame with his beames. The Moone is as it were the Queene, ruling ouer all moiſtures, and among other maruails, ſhewing hir manifeſt power ouer the flowyng and ebbing of the Ocean ſeas. We ſee among the Elements that the Fire and Aire throughThe Fire and Aire chiefe among the elements. their firſt qualities are Actiue, and that the water and earth are Paſſiue, as beeyng more materiall. Amongſt all kinds of birdes the Eagle is preſident, amongſt beaſts the Lion. In freſh and ſalte waters the mightieſt fiſhes The Eagle, Lion
                     
                     whale and pike ouer their kinds rule, as the Whale in the ſea, and the Pike in pooles. Man ruleth ouer all liuing creatures, and in man compounded of body, ſoule, and vnderſtanding, the ſoule commaundeth ouer the body, and the vnderſtanding ouer the deſire. We haue alſo ſeene by proceeding from one particular man to a familie made of many perſons, how the head commandeth diuerſly ouer the partes of his houſe. Euen ſo it is neceſſary, that euery ciuill ſocietie, which is made one of many families tending to a generall good, ſhould be kept in by ſome policie conſiſting in commanding and obeying. In many places of the world there are countries where the cities are not incloſed, where there is no vſe of learning, and where there are no kinges. Other people there are that dwell in no houſes, that vſe no money, that liue with rawe fleſh: in a worde, that ſeeme to holdNo people without all policie. more of the nature of beaſts than of men. And yet there are none that haue no kind of policie eſtabliſhed amongſt them, or that vſe no lawes or cuſtomes, whereunto they willingly ſubmit themſelues. Neither are they without ſome apprehenſion and reuerence of the diuine nature, vſingDiuine iuſtice & humane policie always linked togither. prayers & ſacrifices, although damnable: ſo ſtraightly are theſe two things, diuine Iustice and humane Policie ioined togither, that the one cannot in any ſort remaine amongſt men without the other. Therefore Plutarke ſaith, that a citie will ſooner ſtand without a foundation, than ciuil policie can be framed and eſtabliſhed without any religion and opinion of God, or without the preſeruation thereof after it is once receiued. Moreouer, the firſt agreement of people forſaking their barbarous and ruſticall life, to ioine in ciuil ſocietie, was to this ende, that they might haue a place of religion to keepe them togither.Religion is the foundation of all eſtates. Religion ſurely is the foundation of all common-wealths, of the execution of lawes, of the obedience of ſubiects towards their magiſtrates, of their feare towards princes, of mutual loue among themſelues, and of iuſtice towards others. Lycurgus reformed the eſtate of the Lacademonians, Numa Pompilius of the Romanes, Solon of the Athenians, and Deucalion of all the Graecians generally, by making

them deuout and affectionate towardes the gods inThe auncie
                           ••
                         law makers eſtabliſhed then ordinance, through the means of religion. prayers, othes, oracles, and propheſies, through the means of feare and hope of the diuine nature, which they imprinted in them. Polybius gouernour and lieutenant to Scipio Africanus, and taken for the wiſeſt Politician in his time, ſaith, That the Romans had neuer any greater meansReligion the greateſt means of inlarging the Roman empire than religion, to extend the borders of their empire, and the glory of their famous acts ouer all the earth. Deſiring therfore that religion, the truth, and the law of God, all which are one, and publiſhed by the mouth of God, may continue and dwel amongſt vs, let vs ſee what Policie is, wherunto it ought chiefly to tend, and what ſundry ſorts there are of eſtabliſhing it, by the contrary kindes of gouernment vſed among the auncients. Policie is a worde deriued of this Greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , which ſignifieth theWhat Policie is, and from whence the word is deriued. regiment of a citie or common-wealth: and that which the Graecians call Political gouernment, the Latines call the gouerment of a common-wealth, or of a ciuil ſocietie. This word Policie hath been taken in many ſignifications amongſt the auncients: ſometime it ſignified a Burgeſie, that is to ſay, the participation and enioying of the rightsThe diuers ſignifications of this word Policy and priuiledges of a towne: ſometime the maner of life vſed by ſome politicall perſon: as when one commendeth the policie of Pericles, or of Bias, that is, their kind of gouernment: ſometime alſo when they would note ſome woorthy deed in the gouernment of the common-wealth, they ſayd, That man hath wrought an act of policie this day. But the chiefe ſignification of this worde, and that which aunſwereth to our preſent diſcourſe, is the order and estate whereby one or many townes are gouerned, and publike affaires well managed and administred. But before we beginne to ſpeak of the diuers ſortes of Policies, that is to ſay, of gouernments of townes, of which all Common-wealthes and Monarchies are compounded, let vs ſpeake a word of the end of policy, and of that marke whereat it ought eſpecially to aime. As all Cities and ciuill ſocieties are appointed for the obtaining of ſome Good, ſo all policie reſpectethOf the end of policie. the ſame, and tendeth to no other thing, than

to vnite and frame vs to the companie of men ſo long as we liue amongſt them: to conforme our maners to a ciuill iuſtice, to ſet vs at agreement one with another, and to maintaine and preſerue common peace and tranquillitie, by procuring that euery one may haue his owne. It is the cauſe that men to communicate togither without fraud or hurt, that the inſolencie of the wicked is brideled and puniſhed: briefly, that not onely all duties of humanitie are vſed amongſt men, but alſo that ſome publique forme of religion appeereth, and that blaſphemies againſt the diuine nature, and other offences which trouble common quietneſſe are not openly broched. For although itCiuil ordinance ought to maintaine the worſhip of God. falleth not within the compaſſe of mans power, as we ſaid, to preſcribe and appoint by their authoritie any regiment and gouernment ouer ſoules, yet euery one is not to bee ſuffred to forge at his pleaſure lawes concerning religion, and the maner of ſeruing God. But ciuil ordinance muſt carefully prouide, that the true ſeruice of God be not publikely violated and polluted through an vncontrouled libertie, eſpecially conſidering that the conſeruation of euery well ordered policie dependeth thereupon. But we ſhal vnderſtand this matter more at large hereafter in theEuery eſtate cō
                        ſiſteth of 3. parts, of the magiſtrate, the law, and the people. particular handling of the parts of an eſtate, which we wil diuide into 3. principal and general heads, folowing therin the ancient Politikes, namely, into the Magiſtrate, the Law, and the people. Now to goe on with that which was propounded vnto vs, let vs ſpeake of thoſe kindes of gouernments which were amongſt the ancients. The ordinance of a citie, or order amongſt magiſtrates, eſpecially amongſt them that had the ſoueraigne rule ouer all, was called of the ancients, Common-welth, or as ſome others wil haue it Weale-publike, which in hir kind of gouernment was namedWhen common-wealths are right, and when corrupt. according to the qualitie of the chiefe rulers therof. And thoſe common-wealths that tended to common benefit were ſaid to be right, & ſimply iuſt: but if they reſpected the profit of the ſuperiors only, they were ſaid to be corrupt, & were called tranſgreſſions of right commō-wealths, theſe being the cauſe of as much euil to the whole

body of the city, as the others are of Good. For as the good or euill of an houſe dependeth of the father of the familie, the ſafetie or loſſe of a ſhip, of the Pilote or maſter, theThe good or euil eſtate of cō
                        mon wealths dependeth of the magiſtrates next vnder God. good or ill ſucceſſe of an army, of the generall thereof: ſo the happines or vnhappines of townes and peoples dependeth of the magiſtrates, and yet ſo that God ruleth ouer all. Common-wealths then are either good or bad,The diuiſion of common-welths in generall. right or corrupted. That is a good common-welth, wherin the gouernours ſeeke the publike profit of the citizens, & the benefit of the whole ciuil ſocietie. It is called right and iuſt, bicauſe it hath ſuch an end, and ſeeketh after the ſame, taking no counſell about any thing, but only about the preſeruation of iuſtice. A corrupt common-wealth is that which repugneth and is directly contrary to that which is good and iuſt, & chiefly to the end therof. For it ſeeketh only the increaſe of priuate commoditie, hauing no care of publike profit. There are 3. kinds of good common-wealths,The ſubdiuiſion of them. and 3. of bad, whoſe gouernment alwayes conſiſteth in the ſuperiors of the eſtate, taking their appellation and name of them, as hath been ſaid. The firſt kind of good common-wealths is a Monarchie, which takethOf a monarchie. place whē the ſoueraigntie is in one alone. This reſpecting publike profit onely, and preferring common benefit always before hir own priuate and particular commoditie, taketh vpō hir the name of a kingdom, or of kingly power. But if ſhe looke vnto his particular benefit that ruleth, ſeeking to raign by an abſolute wil without any obſeruatiō of iuſt laws, then ſhe hath the name of tirānie, which isOf a tirannie. the firſt bad kind of cōmon-welth. Now foraſmuch as we liue in this kingdō, vnder this firſt kind of cōmon-welth, called a kingly monarchie, we wil dilate this matter, & cō
                     ſider thereof at large in a ſeueral treatiſe, that we may the better know the excellencie of it, when it is wel & iuſtly ordained. The ſecond kind of a right & good commō-welth is of a Greek word called an Ariſtocratie, which in our lā
                     guageOf an Ariſtocratie, and what it ſignifieth. we may interprete, the power of the beſt mē, whō we cal in latine optimates, bicauſe they are accounted for the beſt & moſt vertuous men. This forme of gouernment taketh

place when a few tried and approoued men for maners and learning haue the ſoueraigntie iointly togither, and make lawes for the reſt of the people, whither it be generally or particularly, directing their thoughtes to no other marke than to publique vtilitie and profite. This was ſeene moſt excellently among the Lacedemonians,The Lacedemonian eſtate was an excellent paterne of this gouernment. whoſe common-wealth ſurpaſſed all others of hir time, as well for hir policie and eſtabliſhment, whereof there was neuer the like, and wherein ſhe continued about 500. yeeres, as alſo for the glorie of hir warlike actes, whereby ſhe helde the empire of Graecia a long tyme, vnder the lawes of that happy Ariſtocraticall gouernment, which Lycurgus eſtabliſhed there. This man ſeeyng their eſtate to incline one while to tirannie, when the kings had too much power, and an other while to popular confuſion, when the common people beganne to vſurpe too greatWhy the Senate of Lacedemonia was firſt inſtituted. authoritie, deuiſed with him-ſelfe to giue them a counterpoize, that ſhould be healthfull for the whole bodie of the Common-wealth, by eſtabliſhing there a Senate, which was as a ſtrong barre, holding both the extremities in equall balaunce, and giuing firme and ſtedfaſt footing to their eſtate. For the 28. Senators making the bodie of the Senate, ſometimes tooke part with the two kings who were depriued of all ſoueraigntie, ſo far foorthWhat power the kings of Lademonia had. as was thought needfull to reſiſt the raſhneſſe of the people: and contrarywiſe, ſometimes they ſtrengthened the peoples ſide againſt the kings, who had then but the voyces of two Senatoures in the councell, thereby to keepe them from vſurping any tyrannicall power. True it is that their eſtate was not purely Ariſtocraticall, vntill one hundred yeeres after the firſt eſtabliſhment thereof by Lycurgus, bicauſe hee had left the confirmation and abrogation of the aduice and decrees ofThe policie of Polydorus and Theopompus to get the power out of the peoples hands. the Senate in the peoples power. But Polydorus and Theopompus beyng kinges, and ſeeyng how hard a matter it was to aſſemble all the people togither, and how they ouerthrew many tymes the ſacred decrees of the Senate, holpe them-ſelues with an oracle from Apollo,
                     
whereby it was ſignified that the Senate of thirtie ſhould from thence-forth haue all power in matters of eſtate, in ſo much that of Senators they became ſoueraigne lordes. And to content the people, they appointed fiue EphoriesWhy the Ephories were appointed in Lacedemoni
                           •
                        . who were choſen out of the people, as Tribunes to keepe away tiranny. That policie then is truely Ariſtocraticall, wherin vertue only is reſpected in the diſtribution of magiſtracies, and the benefit of the ſubiects is chiefly conſidered in the gouernment thereof. Oligarchie is oppoſiteOf an Oligarch
                           •
                        
                      and contrary to this, and is the ſecond kinde of a corrupted common-wealth. This is when a few noble or riche men occupie the authoritie and adminiſtration of the common-wealth, reiecting the poorer and baſer ſort, and aiming at nothing but at their owne priuate and particular profite, without all care of publique commoditie. Theſe men alwayes vſe to take part with their like in nobilitie or riches, to the treading downe and oppreſſion of the meaner ſort of people. Moreouer, they rule all matters according to their affections, and through ambition and couetouſnes take them into their own hands, vntilHow an Oligarchie is changed into a tirannie, with examples thereof. ſome one that is mightieſt amongſt them, find the means to rule abſolutely, and to change the Oligarchie into a tiranny. Aristotle affirmeth that all the auncient gouernments in Sicilia were Oligarchies, among which that of the Leontines was tranſlated into the tirannie of Panecus, that of Gela into the tirannie of Cleander, that of Rhegium into the tirannie of Anaxilas, and ſo of many others. The third kind of a good and right common-wealth is of a Greeke worde called Timocratie, which we may callOf a Timocraty. 
                     The power of meane or indifferent wealth. This kinde of gonernment was after a peculiar ſort called of the Auncients by the name of Common-wealth: bicauſe this policie tended moſt of all to publique profite, and was guided by lawes, andHis meaning is, that it is ruled by ſome lawes taken from ccb of theſe. compounded of an Oligarchie and a Democratie, which are two extremes, and of themſelues vicious and corrupt. For of their mediocrities this forme of common-wealth was inſtituted after 3. ſortes. Firſt, by taking the lawes and inſtitutions of both: ſecondly, by holding

the mediocritie of things commanded by them: thirdly, by following the conſtitutions, partly of the one, & partly of the other. Aristotle ſpeaketh of this kind of Common-wealth when he ſaith, That ciuill ſocietie conſiſting of meane perſons is very good, and that thoſe cities are wel gouerned wherein there are many of the middle ſort, who haue more power than both the other parties, or at leaſt than any one of them. For where as many are paſſing rich, or extreme poore, there followeth either an extreme Democratie, or an intollerable Oligarchie, or els through their exceſſe, a tirannie. Nowe the laſt kind of corrupt common-wealth remaineth to be ſeene, which is calledOf a Democratie. Democratie, where free and poore men being the greater number, are lordes of the eſtate. There were fiueFiue kinds therof, according to Ariſtotle in his 4. booke of Politi. ca. 4. ſortes of them: the firſt, where the gouernment was equally communicated to all: the ſecond, where regard was had to wealth, although it was but ſmall: the third, where all the citizens were partakers of the gouernment vnder the ruling of the lawe: the fourth, where euery one might attaine to the magiſtracie, ſo that hee were a citizen, and the lawe ruled: the fift, where other things beyng equall, the multitude commanded and not the lawe: and then the people onely gouerned, accordyng to their fanſie by decrees and prouiſoes, which they gaue out daily, oppreſſing the vertuous, riche and noble, that they might liue in all libertie. This kinde is not to bee called a Common-wealth, ſeeing the lawes beare no ſway, but beyng aunſwerable to a tirannie, it is paſſing ill, andAthens a Democratical eſtate. vnwoorthie to bee numbred among Common-wealths. Plato and Xenophon wrote, that the Democratie of Athens was ſuch a one, where the people was giuen ouer to all licentiouſneſſe without either feare of Magiſtrates, or obſeruation of lawes. Nowe of the three kindes of good Common-wealthes mentioned by vs, Aristotle, Polybius, Dionyſius Halicarnaſſaeus and Cicero, compound an other, that is partaker of all three: ſaying, that euery kindOf a mixt kinde of common-wealth. of Common-wealth eſtabliſhed ſimplie, and alone by it ſelfe, ſoone degenerateth into the next vice, if it be not

moderated and kept backe by the reſt. Therefore they ſay that a Common-wealth erected with a right gouernement to continue long, muſt haue the vertues and properties of the other Common-wealths, ioyned togither in hir, to the ende that nothing growe out of proportion which may cauſe hir to degenerate into hir next euill, and ſo conſequently ouerthrow hir. Likewiſe many auncientExamples hereof. and late Politikes haue maintayned, that the Common-wealths of the Lacedemonians, Carthaginians, Romans and others that are famous, as that of the Venitians, were compound and mildlie intermingled with the royall, Ariſtocraticall, and popular power. But this ſubiect deſerueth well a ſeuerall diſcourſe, which beyng needleſſe for the vnderſtanding of the matter here propounded vnto vs, we will not ſtay any longer in the curious ſearching out of ſundry other kindes of eſtates and policies, which the ancients haue drawen out of theſe alreadie deſcribed. We will note therefore for the concluſion of our ſpeech that the reaſon why ſo many kindes of Common-wealths are mentioned by the auncients is this, bicauſe euery citie is compounded of many partes, the diuerſitie of which, according as they were in greater number and power, cauſed them to varie the names of gouernments. But toThe perfecteſt diſtinction of common-wealths. auoyd confuſion and obſcuritie, we may ſay, that if the ſoueraigntie conſiſteth in one onely prince, the eſtate is Monarchicall: if all the people haue intereſt in it, the eſtate is popular: and if onely the leaſt parte of them haue the chiefe power, the eſtate is Ariſtocraticall. ButThere is difference between the eſtate and the gouernment of a common-wealth. if their forme of gouernment be contrary to their nature, they take an other qualitie but chaunge not their eſſence. Moreouer we ſay, that the preſeruation of euerie publique ſocietie dependeth of the policie well ordeined, without which there can be nothing but diſorder & confuſion among men. We ſay, that policie is the order of a citie in the offices of magiſtracie, namely, in the chiefe of all, in whoſe gouernment the whole Common-wealth conſiſteth: which if it be in the peoples handes, is calledExamples of the popular eſtate. Popular, as in the Cantons of Switzerland, and leagues

of the Griſons, in many free townes in Germanie, and in old time was in Athens: if in the hands of certaine perſons, as of the gentlemen of Venice, and of ſome familiesOf the Ariſtocraticall, in Genes, it is called Ariſtocraticall: if it dependeth of the wil of one alone, it is called a Monarchie, as in France,Of the Monarchicall. Spaine, Portingale, England, Scotland, Sweathland, Polonia. Further we ſay, that the diuerſitie of gouernment among cities and peoples, dependeth of their end: if they tend to a good ende, which is to publique benefite, they are good and iuſt: but if to an ill ende, namely, to the particular profite of ſuch as commaund, they are euill and vniuſt.
               
            
            
               Of the ſoueraigne Magistrate, and of his authoritie and office. Chap. 54.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     What right is. WE commonly ſay that that thing is rightly done, which is done according to the order and inſtitution ofThe foundation of euery eſtate is the ſoueraigntie therof. policie. Neither is right any other thing amongſt vs, than the order of that eſtate vnder which we liue, the ſoueraigntie wherof is the ſure foundation, vnion and bond of all the particulars in one perfect body of a commō-welth. And when iudgements are exerciſed by the magiſtrates, when the wil of iuſtice is declared by the expoſition of the lawes & of right, and when we direct our actions vnder iuſtice, thē is the order of ciuil ſocietie duly obſerued. HereuponEuery eſtate cō
                        ſiſteth of 3. parts in our laſt diſcourſe we ſaid, that the eſtate of a common-wealth was compounded of 3. general partes, of the magiſtrate, of the law, and of the people. Thus followyng our purpoſe, let vs intreat particularly of theſe parts, wherof euery common-welth conſiſteth: & firſt let vs conſider of the chief magiſtrate, and of his authoritie and office.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  All ciuil ſuperioritie is a holy and lawful vocation before God. And as iuſtice is the end of the law, andThe magiſtrate is the image of God. the law a worke of the magiſtrate, ſo alſo the magiſtrate is the image of God, who ruleth and gouerneth all, according

to which mould and paterne he muſt faſhion himſelfe through the meanes of vertue.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  As in a man that is well diſpoſed both in bodie and ſoule according to nature not corrupted, the ſoule ruleth and commandeth with reaſon, being the better part, and the body with the affections thereof ſerue & obey, as the woorſe part: ſo is it in euery humane aſſemblie. It belongeth to the wiſeſt to rule, and to ſuch as areThe wiſeſt muſt rule. leſſe aduiſed to obey. Therefore the Magiſtrate muſt aboue all things labour, that he be not vnwoorthie of that perſon which he ſuſtaineth. But let vs heare ARAM diſcourſe of this matter which is heere propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  God being carefull of all things, euen of the very leaſt, and comprehending in himſelfe the beginning, end, and midſt of them, according to his good pleaſure, and making all in all by his onely ſpirite, reſpecting the common good of this whole frame, and preſeruation ofWhy God diſtributeth his gifts diuerſly to diuers men. humane ſocietie, hath from time to time diſtributed to ſundry perſons diſtinct and different graces, that in exerciſing diuers eſtats, charges, adminiſtrations, offices, handicrafts, and occupations, they might through mutuall ſuccour, and interchangable helpe preſerue and maintain themſelues. This is that which we ſee in cities amongſt ciuill companies, which is aſmuch to ſay, as a multitude of men vnlike in qualities & conditions, as rich, poore, free, bond, noble, vile, skilfull, ignorant, artificers, labourers: ſome obeying, others commanding, and all communicating togither in one place their arts, handicrafts, occupations, & exerciſes, to this end, that they may liue the better, and more commodiouſly. They obey alſo the ſame Magiſtrates, lawes, and ſoueraigne councell, which Plato calleth the Anchor, head and ſoule of the citie: which naturally tendeth to ſome order and rule of dominion, as that which tooke beginning and increaſe from perſonsA well gouerned familie reſembleth the kingly regiment. acquainted with a gouernment that reſembleth the royall regiment, as appeereth in euery well ordered familie, and hath already beene touched of vs. The firſt ſoueraign gouernment was eſtabliſhed either by the violence of the

mightieſt, as Thucidides, Caeſar, Plutarke, and others write: and the holy hiſtorie teſtifieth the ſame vnto vs, and putteth this opinion out of doubt, where it is ſayd, that Nimrod
                     Gen. 10. 10. 
                     Chams nephewe, was the firſt that brought men intoOf the originall of kingdoms. ſubiection by force and violence, eſtabliſhing his principalitie in the kingdome of Aſſyria: Or if any will beleeue Demoſthenes, Ariſtotle, and Cicero, the firſt ſoueraigntie was inſtituted vpon their will and good liking, who for their owne commoditie, reſt, & ſecuritie, ſubmitted themſelues to ſuch as excelled moſt in vertue in thoſe times, whichCicero his opinion therein. they called heroicall. Who knoweth not (ſaith Cicero) in his oration for Seſtius, that the nature of men was ſometime ſuch, that not hauing natural equitie as yet written, they wandred vp and downe being diſperſed in the fields, and had nothing but that which they could catch & keep forceably by murders and wounds? Wherefore ſome excelling in vertue and counſell, & knowing the docilitie & vnderſtāding of man, gathered the diſperſed togither into one place, & brought them from that rudenes wherein they were, vnto iuſtice & gentlenes. Then they eſtabliſhed thoſe things that belonged to common profit, which we call publike, & appointed aſſemblies, afterward called cities, & walled about their buildings ioined togither, which we cal townes, hauing firſt found out both diuine and humane equitie. At the ſame time the authoritie of Magiſtrats tooke place, who were inſtituted by the conſent of the people, for that excellent heroicall vertue, which they ſaw in thoſe firſt Rectors and Ordainers of ciuill ſocietie, to whome was committed the iuriſdiction of lawes, or receiued cuſtomes, and the diſpoſition of written equitie to rule and gouerne their people thereafter. But not to ſtaye long about the diuerſitie of thoſe opiniōs, which we haue heere alleadged for the eſtabliſhment of the ſoueraigntie, this is out of queſtion, that the foundation of euery common-wealth dependeth thereupon, & that it is the abſoluteWhat ſoueraigntie is. & perpetual power of the Common-wealth, & is not limited either in power, or charge, or for a certaine time. This ſoueraigntie is in him or them that are chiefe of the

Eſtate: & a little king is aſmuch a ſoueraigne, as the greateſtA little king aſmuch a Soueraigne as the greateſt Monarch. Monarch of the earth. For a great kingdome (ſaith Caſſiodorus) is nothing elſe but a great Common-wealth, vnder the keeping of one chief ſoueraigne. But before we intreate more amply of his authoritie and office, it behoouethOf the name of Magiſtrate. vs to render a reaſon of the name of Magiſtrate, which is heere giuen vnto him. This word Magiſtrate, hath beene taken of the Ancients in diuers ſignifications: and Plato maketh ſeuenteene ſortes of them, calling ſome neceſſary Magiſtrats, others honourable. Ariſtotle ſaid, that they ought chiefly to be called Magiſtrats, that haue power to take counſell, to iudge, and to command, but eſpecially to command. And this doth the Greeke word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ſufficiently declare, as if he would ſay, Commanders: and the Latine word Magiſtratus, being a word of commanding, ſignifieth to maiſter, and to exerciſe dominion. Alſo the Dictator, who had the greateſt power to command,The Dictator of Rome was called Magiſter populi.
                      was called of the Ancients, Magiſter populi. Therefore albeit the name of Magiſtrate hath been heeretofore, and is yet giuen to all that haue publike and ordinarie charge in the Eſtate, yet we will as it were abuſe this name a little, by transferring it to the Soueraigne of all, of whome all Magiſtrats, lawes, and ordinances of the Common-wealthThe calling of Magiſtrates prooued to be lawfull. depend. Now, let vs ſee whether this vocation of the Magiſtrate be lawfull and approoued of God. We haue not onelye infinite teſtimonies in the Scripture, that the eſtate of Magiſtrates is acceptable before God, but which is more, it is adorned with honourable titles, that the dignitie therof might be ſingularly recommended vnto vs. When we ſee that all men placed in authoritiePſal. 82. 6. are called Gods, we muſt not eſteeme this title to be of ſmal importance, ſeeing it appeereth therby, that they are authorized by him, and repreſent his maieſtie in the ruling & gouerning of vs. If the Scripture (as that heauenlyIohn. 10 35. word ſaith) called them Gods, vnto whom the word of God was giuen, what is that elſe but that they haue charge & cōmiſſion from God to ſerue him in their office, & (as Moſes & Ioſaphat ſaid to their Iudges, whom they appointed 2. Chron. 19. 6.
                     
ouer euery citie of Iudah) to exerciſe iuſtice, not in the name of men, but in the name of God? By me (ſaithProu. 8. 15. 16. the wiſedome of God) kings raigne, and princes decree iuſtice. By me princes rule, and the nobles, and all the iudges of the earth. Moreouer we ſee, that many holye men haue obtained kingdomes, as Dauid, Ioſias, Ezechias: ſome gouernments and great eſtates vnder kings, as Ioſeph, and Daniel: others the guiding of a free people, as Moſes, Ioſua, and the Iudges, whoſe calling and eſtate was acceptable to God, as he hath declared by his ſpirite. WhereforeThe calling of the Magiſtrate is moſt holie. no man ought to doubt of this, that ciuill ſuperioritie is not onely a holie and lawfull calling before God, but alſo the holieſt and moſt honourable of all other, whereunto all the people is ſubiect, aſwell by the eſtabliſhment of the right of the eſtate, as by the holie and heauenly ordinance of God. And if the Magiſtrate be perſwaded (as it is certaine, that many Eſtates haue had that foundation) that the cauſe of his firſt inſtitution, and voluntarie ſubiection whereunto the people ſubmitted themſelues for their cō
                     mon benefit, was that excellencie of vertue, which appeered in ſome aboue the reſt, ought he not to thinke himſelfe vnwoorthy of ſo honourable a title, if he want the cauſe of the beginning thereof? But further, if the MagiſtrateHe is the miniſter of Gods iuſtice. know that he is appointed the miniſter of Gods iuſtice, vnto what great integritie, prudence, clemencie, moderation, and innocencie, ought he to conforme & frameGood counſell for Magiſtrats. himſelfe? With what confidence dare he ſuffer any iniquitie to haue entrance into his ſeate, which he vnderſtandeth to be the throne of the liuing God? With what boldnes will he pronounce any vniuſt ſentence out of his mouth, which he knoweth is appointed to be an inſtrument of the truth of God? With what conſcience will he ſubſcribe to, or ſeale any euill ſtatute with his hand, which he knoweth is ordained to write the decrees of God? To be ſhort, if the Magiſtrate call to mind, that as God hath placed the Sunne and Moone in the heauens as a token of his diuinitie, ſo is he alſo appointed in earth for the like repreſentation and light, will he not thinke that he is to

imploy and beſtow all his care and ſtudie, that he may repreſent vnto men in all his dooings, as it were an image of the prouidence, defence, goodnes, clemencie, and iuſtice of God? It is certaine that the Magiſtrate is the ſameThe Magiſtrate compared to the hart of a liuing creature. thing in the Common-wealth, which the hart is in the body of a liuing creature. If the hart be ſound and pure, it giueth life vnto the whole body, bicauſe it is the fountaine of the bloud, and of the ſpirits: but being corrupted, it bringeth death and deſtruction to all the members. So fareth it with the Magiſtrate, who is the ſoule of the people, their glaſſe, and the white whereat all his ſubiects aime. If he liue vnder right, reaſon, truth and Iuſtice, which are the proper wil of God onely, he is not vnlike to a line or rule,And to a Carpenters rule. which being firſt right it ſelfe, afterward correcteth all other crooked things that are applied vnto it. For nothing is more natural, than that ſubiects ſhould conforme them ſelues to the manners, deedes, and words of their prince. The wiſe Hebrew, Plato, Cicero, and Titus Liuius, haue left this Maxime vnto poſteritie as an infallible rule of Eſtate. And Theodoricus king of the Gothes, writing to the Senat of Rome, goeth yet further, vſing theſe words, as Caſſiodorus rehearſeth them: That the courſe of nature would ſooner faile, than the people would leaue off to be like their Princes. But further, as the hart in the bodies of liuing creatures is laſt corrupted, inſomuch that the laſt relicks of life ſeeme to abide therein: ſo it is meete, that, if any diſeaſe corrupt the people, the ſoueraigne Magiſtrate ſhould continue pure and ſound vnto the end from all that pollution. If there be any euill in the ſoule, it proceedeth from the wickednes of the body, being ſubiect to peruerſe affections: and looke what good thing ſoeuer is in the body, it ſloweth from the ſoule, as from the fountaine thereof. Now as it would be againſt nature, if the euils of the body ſhould come from the ſoule, & the good gifts of the body ſhould be corrupted by the vices of the ſpirite: ſo would it be very abſurd, that corrupt manners, euill lawes, vice, and vngodlines, ſhould proceede from the Magiſtrate vnto the people, ſeeing (as Plato ſaith) he holdeth the ſame place

                     The Magiſtrate is in the Common wealth that which reaſon is in the ſoule. in the Common-wealth, that reaſon doth in the ſoule, which guideth the other parts by wiſedome. And foraſmuch as the whole Common-wealth repreſenteth but one certaine bodye compounded of diuers members, whereof the Magiſtrate is the Head and moſt excellent of all, he muſt alſo vſe ſuch equitie, that he profit euery one of them, and beware that he be not contagious to the whole publike body through his euil example. The peopleThe example of the Magiſtrate is the beſt way to teach the people. (ſaith Seneca) giue more credite to their eies, than to their eares: that is to ſay, they beleeue that which they ſee, ſooner than that which they heare. And to inſtruct the people by precepts, is a long and difficult way: but to teach them by examples is very ſhort, and of greater efficacie. Therefore the Magiſtrate muſt be more carefull of that which he doth, than of that which he ſpeaketh. And that which he preſcribeth his ſubiects for a rule, as it were by law, muſt be confirmed of him by works and deedes. For as he is chiefly bound to follow the lawes of God and nature, ſo he muſt make all thoſe lawes and ſtatuts, which he eſtabliſheth in his eſtate, according to that paterne. AndWhereunto the Prince is bound aſwell as his ſubiect. therfore one of the Ancients ſaid very wel, that the prince togither with his ſubiects, had one and the ſame God to ſerue, one law to keepe, and one death to feare. We will then briefly comprehend the dutie of the Magiſtrate inThe dutie of the Magiſtrate conſiſteth in three things. theſe three things, in ruling, in teaching, and in iudging his people: which duties are ſo neerely knit and ioined togither, that the one cannot be well exerciſed without the other, and he that faithfully diſchargeth one, fulfillethThe art Royall, Philoſophicall, and Politicall is all one. them all. For this cauſe Plato ſaith, that the arte and ſcience of the King, of the Philoſopher, and of the Politician, is one and the ſame, bicauſe they conſiſt all three in knowing how to rule, to teach, and to iudge well. He ſaith alſo, that the only way to procure true quietnes and moſt happie felicitie in Common-wealths, is when by ſome diuine prouidence the ſoueraigne authoritie of Magiſtracie meeteth with the will of a wiſe Philoſopher in one perſon, that vertue may be ſuperior, and vice ſuppreſſed. And if ſuch a gouernour ouer people is to be accounted very

happy, they are no leſſe happie, that may heare the excellent diſcourſes, & good inſtructions which proceed from his mouth. Beſides, when they ſee vertue after a liuely ſort imprinted in a viſible paterne, & that the Magiſtrates life is ſuch an example, they become wiſe of their own accord. Then is force, conſtraint, or threatning, needeles to bring them to their dutie, as they that conforme themſelues to an'vpright & good life in friendſhip, charitie, & concord,Who is moſt woorthie of ſoueraigne authoritie. one with another. So that we may boldly ſay, that he is by nature moſt worthie of ſoueraigne authority, who is able by his vertue to imprint in mens harts the like diſpoſition & affection to liue wel & vertuouſly. But foraſmuch asWhy there are ſo few vertuous Princes. few vertuous men are found, & ſoueraigne Magiſtrats are not commonly choſen out of that ſmal number, but come to that authoritie for the moſt part by ſucceſſion: it is no maruell if there be but fewe ſuch Magiſtrates, as we haue here deſcribed: nay, it is rather greatly to be wondered at, if any one amonge a great many become very excellent. Notwithſtanding, as their ſoueraign is nothing leſſe ouer their ſubiects, who owe fidelitie & obedience vnto them: ſo are they alwaies bound to do their dutie and office towardsWherin the dutie of the chiefe Magiſtrate conſiſteth. them, which conſiſteth in miniſtring iuſtice, counſel, comfort, aide, and protection. Moreouer, bicauſe inſolencie and rebellious wickednes is alwaies to be found in ſome corrupt perſons, who neither by teaching, nor by example of good life will be brought to vertue, but perſeuer in committing a thouſand impious & vniuſt actions,Why the ſword is put into the Magiſtrates hand. for the puniſhment of ſuch, the ſword is put into the Magiſtrates hand, both by the law of God & man, that as the miniſter of God he ſhould ſerue his wrath, & take vengeance of them that do euil. This is that which is ſo expreſly cōmanded to Magiſtrats in infinit places of the ſcripture,Ier. 22. 3. vnder theſe words: Do iudgement & iuſtice: Iuſtice in deliueringWhat is meant by this precept. Do Iudgement and Iuſtice.
                      him that is oppreſſed by force, from the hand of the oppreſſor, in not grieuing ſtrangers, widowes, and orphanes, in offering no iniurie to any, in ſhedding no innocent blood, and in dealing vprightly with euery one: and Iudgement in reſiſting the boldnes of the wicked,

in repreſſing their impudencie and violence, and in puniſhingProu. 16. 12. & 20. 8. 26. their faults. It is an abhomination to kings (ſaith the wiſe man) to commit wickednes: for the throne is ſtabliſhed by iuſtice. A king that ſitteth in the throne of iudgement, chaſeth away all euill with his cies. A wiſe king ſcattereth-the wicked, and cauſeth the wheele to turne ouer them. Take the droſſe from the ſiluer, and
                     Prou. 25. 4. 5. 
                     there ſhall proceede a veſſell for the finer. Take away the wicked from the king, and his throne ſhall be ſtabliſhed in righteouſnes. Aſwell he that iustifieth the wicked, as he that condemneth the iust, is an abhomination vnto God. The people and nations curſe him that
                     He that ſuffreth euill, is culpable aſwell as he that committeth it. 
                     ſaith to the wicked, thou art iuſt. Yea, an offence is to be imputed aſmuch or more to him that ſuffereth it to be done, when he may & is bound to ſtay it, than to him that committeth the ſame. And if it be a point of true iuſtice in Magiſtrates to perſecute the wicked with drawne ſword, let not them that will needes (forſooth) abſtaine from all ſeueritie, and keepe their hands pure from blood, whileſt the ſwords of the wicked are drawne out to commit murder and violence: I ſay, let them not doubt but they them ſelues ſhall be iudged guiltie of great iniuſtice before theSeueritie and clemencie are to be linked togither in a Magiſtrate. diuine Maieſtie. It is true, that gentlenes and clemencie moſt of all beſeeme a great and excellent man, and is one principall vertue neceſſary for a Magiſtrate. Notwithſtanding it muſt ſo be ruled, that for the benefite of the Common-wealth, ſeueritie and rigor be ioined therewith: bicauſe it is vnpoſſible to rule & gouerne a multitude without this. And yet it is not the part either of a wiſe Phiſition, or of a good gouernor of an Eſtate, to ſet hand to the iron, except in great neceſſitie, when there is no other remedie. For if they do otherwiſe, as there is want of diſcretion in both, ſo moſt of all in the Magiſtrate, bicauſe iniuſtice alſo is ioined with crueltie. So that it is neceſſarie both in clemencie and rigor to keepe ſome honeſt meane by right reaſon, and prudence, to the end that the inconueniences of both may be eſchewed. This is that which Iſocrates, ſpeaking of the manner of raigning wel, teacheth, when he ſayth, that a man muſt be ſeuere in ſearching out of faults, and mercifull in impoſing puniſhments that are

leſſe than the faults, gouerning men more by clemencieCiuilitie and grauitie muſt be ioined both togither in a Magiſtrate. and prudence, than by rigor and crueltie. And ſeeing it falleth out ſo, that an ouer-ſeuere Magiſtrate becommeth odious, and that he is contemned & deſpiſed who is too gratious, a wiſe man muſt be both ciuill and graue; grauitie being comely in commanding, and ciuilitie neceſſarie for him that conuerſeth with men. For the concluſion therefore of our diſcourſe, we learne, that both by the eſtabliſhment of euery eſtate and policie, and by a holie & heauenly decree, we are ſubiect to the ſoueraigne Magiſtrate, who is lawfully ordained to rule, to teach, and to iudge vs in all things that reſpect this preſent life, and the preſeruation of ciuill ſocietie. We learne, that ſeeing he isThe dutie of the Magiſtrate. the image of God vpon earth, he muſt conforme himſelfe aſmuch as he is able to the perfection of all goodnes and iuſtice, that he may bring on them that are committed to his charge to godlines and vertue by his example: & that it is his dutie to honor the good, and to puniſh the euill, declaring thereby that he is the protector and preſeruer of publike tranquillitie, honeſtie, innocencie, and modeſtie, and appointed to maintaine the common ſafetie and peace of all men.
               
            
            
               Of the Law. Chap. 55.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  AS wee note in the vniuerſall frame of theAl motions contained vnder one, and all cauſes vnder the firſt. world, that many vnlike motions are contained within one heauenly motion, which is alwaies like to it ſelfe, & all cauſes by the firſt cauſe: and as in euery liuing creature many ſundry members diſtinct in office, are compriſed & brought into vnion and agreement by the ſoule & hart: ſo in euery Common-wealth compounded of many differing parts, neceſſary for the eſtabliſhment thereof, the law is the blood that giueth vertueThe law is the blood and bond of the Common-wealth. and life vnto it, the bond that reduceth all the parts therof to vnitie, and the firme preſeruer of ciuill ſocietie. Therefore ſeeing (my Companions) we haue diſcourſed of the firſt part of euery ciuil eſtate & gouernment, which

is the chief Magiſtrate: let vs conſider now of the ſecond, no leſſe neceſſary therein, which is the law, whereby he is ioined and vnited to the reſt of the publike body for the maintenance and preſeruation thereof.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     The law is the ſpirite and ſoule of the commonwealth. The lawe is in the citie, as the ſpirite is in the body. For as the body without the ſpirite vndoubtedly periſheth: in like maner euery citie & Commonwealth that hath no law, falleth into ruine and perdition. Therefore Cicero calleth lawes the ſoules of Common-wealths.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  As the ſoule guideth the body, and indueth it with abilitie to work: ſo the law is the direction & maintenance of euery Eſtate. By the lawe is the Magiſtrate obeied, and the ſubiects kept in peace and quietnes. But let vs heare AMANA handle this matter.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     All creatures are ſociable by nature. We ſee that naturally all liuing creatures, whether earthie, watry, aërie, or flying, tame, or wild, ſeeke after the companies and aſſemblies of their kinds, to liue with them, as Sheepe by flocks: Kine, Oxen, Harts, and Hindes, feeding by herds: Horſes, Aſſes, & Mules by companies: Choughs, Stares, Cranes, & other birds by flights: Fiſhes both in freſh and ſalt waters following one another in ſholes: Bees dwelling in hiues: Pigeons in doouehouſes: Ants in little hollow places. No maruell therefore if men, ſingularly adorned with an immortal ſoule, with reaſon,The prerogatiues of men aboue other creatures. & ſpeech, and by theſe prerogatiues more communicable than other creatures, as borne to honour God, to loue one another, to liue togither in a ciuill policie with lawes, Magiſtrats, & iudgements, hauing proper to themſelues onely the knowledge of good & euill, of honeſtie & diſhoneſtie, of iuſtice & iniuſtice, knowing the beginnings & cauſes of things, their proceedings, antecedents, & conſequents, their ſimilitudes & cōtrarieties, no maruel I ſay, if they liue more commodiouſly & happily togither, & do that by right & equity, which other liuing creatures do only by a natural inſtinct: ſeeing alſo they may be aſſured (as Cicero ſaith) that nothing here below is more acceptable to god the gouernor of all the world, than the cōgregations & aſſemblies of mē linked togither by right & equity, which we cal cities. Now we are

to note, that all thoſe which obey the ſame lawes & Magiſtrats,What a citie is. make iointly togither but one city, which (as Ariſtotle ſaith) is euery cōpany aſſembled togither for ſome benefit.The diuers ends of the three good Commonwealths. If a city be aſſēbled in monarch-wiſe, it is to be defē
                     ded againſt ſtrāgers, & to liue peaceably among thēſelues according to law: if Ariſtocratically vnder certaine chiefe lords, it is to be reſpected according to their riches, nobility, & vertue: if in a popular cōmunity, it is to enioy liberty & equality: & the better that the city is guided by policy, the greater benefit they hope for therby. Therefore as the Venetians make but one city, liuing vnder an Ariſtocraticall gouernment: the Bernians an other, liuing vnder a Democraty, whether they liue within or without the wals, or far frō the chief towne: ſo all the natural ſubiects of this Monarchy, acknowledging one king for their ſoueraigne lord, & obeying his commandemēts, & the decrees of his coūcel, repreſent one city & political cōmunion, cōpounded of many villages, townes, & prouinces, Prouoſtſhips, Bailiweeks, Senſhalſhips, gouernments, Parliaments, Barronies, Counties, Marqueſies, Dukedoms, Cures, Biſhopriks, Archbiſhopriks, being in & of it ſelf ſufficiently furniſhed with all neceſſary & honeſt things, for the leading of a good & vertuous life, & obeying the ſtatuts, lawes, & ordinancesA king muſt line vnder a law, albeit he be not ſubiect to the lawe. eſtabliſhed therin, according to which the Magiſtrat ought to rule & to gouern his ſubiects, ſhewing therby, that albeit he be not ſubiect to the law, yet he wil (as it becommeth him) liue & gouerne himſelfe vnder the law. Therfore the Magiſtrate is very wel called by ſome, a liuing lawe, & the law a mute Magiſtrate. Moreouer, the marke of aThe marke of a ſoueraigne. ſoueraign Prince, of which depēdeth whatſoeuer he doth by his imperial authority, is the power to preſcribe lawes vnto all in general, & to euery one in particular: & not to receiue any but of God, who is the Iudge of Princes (ſaith Marcus Aurelius) as Princes are the iudges of their ſubiects: yeaWiſd. 6. 3. it is God (ſaith the wiſe mā) that wil proceed with rigor againſt
                     How far Princes are ſubiect to lawes. 
                     thē for the contēpt of his law. So that they which ſay generally, that princes are no more ſubiect to laws, thā to their own couenāts, if they except not the laws of god & of nature, &

thoſe iuſt couenants and bargaines that are made withWherein the abſolute power of Princes conſiſteth. them, they are iniurious to God. And as for their power to abrogate ſuch lawes by their abſolute authoritie, it is no more permitted vnto them than the other: ſeeing the power of a ſoueraign is only ouer the ciuill or poſitiue lawes. But that we may haue ſome certaine vnderſtanding of the matter heere propounded vnto vs to intreate of, we muſt firſt ſee what the lawe is, into howe many kindes it is diuided, whereunto it ought to tend, theThe definition of the law. profite of it, and howe we muſt obey it. The lawe is a ſingular reaſon imprinted in nature, commanding thoſe things that are to be done, and forbidding the contrary.The diuiſion of it. We haue both the lawe of nature, and the lawe written.What the law of nature is. The lawe of nature is a ſence and feeling, which euerie one hath in himſelfe, and in his conſcience, whereby he diſcerneth betweene good and euill, aſmuch as ſufficeth to take from him the cloake of ignorance, in that he isThe diuiſion of the written law. The diuiſion of the law of God. reprooued euen by his owne witneſſe. The written lawe is double, diuine, and ciuill. The diuine lawe is diuided into three partes, that is, into Manners, Ceremonies,Of the Morall law. and Iudgements. That of Manners was called of the ancient writers the Morall lawe, beeing the true and eternall rule of Iuſtice, appointed for all men, in what countrie or tyme ſoeuer they liue, if they will direct their life according to the will of God. And as for the Ceremonies and Iudgements, although they haue ſome relation to Maners, yet bicauſe both of them might be altered and aboliſhed without the corruption or diminution of good manners, the Ancients did not comprehend thoſe two parts vnder the word Morall, but attributed this name particularly to the firſt part of the lawe, of which the ſincere integritie of Maners dependeth, which neither may nor ought in any ſort to be altered or changed, and whereunto the end of all other lawes is to be referred, in honouring God by a pure faith, and by godlines,Of the Ceremoniall law. and in being ioined vnto our neighbour by true loue. The Ceremonial lawe was a Pedagogie of the Iewes, that is to ſay, a doctrine of infancie giuen to that

people to exerciſe them vnder the obedience to God, vntill the manifeſtation of thoſe things which were then figuredOf the Iudiciall law. in ſhadowes. The Iudiciall law giuen vnto them for policie, taught them certaine rules of iuſtice and equitie, wherby they might liue peaceably togither without hurting one another. Now, as the exerciſe of ceremonies appertained to the doctrine of pietie, which is the firſt part of the Morall law (bicauſe it nouriſhed the Iewiſh Church in the reuerence of God) and yet was diſtinct from true pietie: in like maner, albeit their Iudiciall law tended to no other ende than to the preſeruation of the ſelfe ſame charitie that is commanded in the Morall law, yet it had a diſtinct propertie, which was not expreſly declared in the commandement of charitie. As therefore the ceremonies were abrogated, and true religion and pietie, I meane Chriſtian, ſubſtituted in place of the Iudaicll law: ſo the Iudiciarie lawes were cancelled & aboliſhed, without violating in any ſort the dutie of charitie. So that all nationsOf ciuill or poſitiue lawes. haue libertie to make for themſelues ſuch lawes as they ſhall thinke expedient for them, called of vs ciuill lawes, which muſt be ſquared according to the eternall rule of charitie, and differing onely in forme, they muſt all haue one end, commanding alwaies honeſt & vertuous things, and contrariwiſe forbidding thoſe that are diſhoneſt andThe diuiſion of ciuill lawes. vitious. Nowe of theſe ciuill lawes, there are two chiefe kindes amongſt vs: The firſt conſiſteth in lawes that are ratified & eſtabliſhed, vpon which euery Monarchie and publike gouernment is firſt grounded, and hath his beginning, which ought not in any wiſe to be infringed orWhat ciuill lawes may not be changed. changed: ſuch are thoſe which we call the lawes of the French-men: namely the Salicke law, eſtabliſhed by Pharamond,
                     The Salick law immutable. who was the firſt that tooke vpon him the name of king ouer them. Such lawes alſo are annexed and vnited to the crowne, and therefore the Prince cannot ſo abrogate them, but that his ſucceſſor may diſanull whatſoeuer he hath done in preiudice of them: much leſſe are ſubiects permitted to attempt any ſuch matter. Yea all thoſe that go about it, ſeeke nothing but to mooue ſedition in the eſtate,

                     What ciuill lawes may be changed. and to cauſe ſubiects to reuolt from their ſuperiours. As for the other ciuill lawes, as conſtitutions, ordinaunces, edicts, and cuſtomes, which haue beene made and receiued according to the condition and circumſtaunce of times and places, they are in the power of the ſoueraigne Prince, to change and to correct them as occaſion ſhall ſerue. And yet in the general and particular cuſtomes of this Realme, none haueA Prince may deny the requeſt of his three Eſtates, hauing reaſon and iuſtice on his ſide. beene commonly chaunged, but after the lawefull aſſemblie of the three generall Eſtates of France, or elſe of the particular Eſtates of euery Prouince: not as if the king were neceſſarily bound to ſtand to their aduice, or might not do contrary to that which they demand, if naturall reaſon and iuſtice ſtand with his will. And then whatſoeuer it pleaſeth him to like or diſlike, to command or forbid, is held for a law, an edict, and decree, and euery ſubiect is bound to obey it. But to ſpeake generally of the lawes of an Eſtate, the changing and gain-ſaying of them is a very pernitious plague in euery Common-wealth.The change of lawes in a well ſetled Eſtate is dangerous. This ancient rule and Maxime of wiſe Politicks, is well woorth the marking: That nothing is to be changed in the lawes of a Common-wealth which hath a long time preſerued it ſelfe in good estate, what apparant profite ſoeuer a man may pretend. And for this cauſe in the popular gouernment of the Romanes vnder Publius Philo the Dictator, that Athenian edict was receiued, and paſt by force of lawe, whereby it was not lawfull for any to preſent a request to the people, without the aduice of the Senate. But there was a farre more ſtrict and ſeuere decree amongeſt the Locrians. For it was to this effect (as Demosthenes rehearſethA ſeuere decree of the Locrians againſt ſuch as would bring in new lawes. it) that euery Citizen that was deſirous to bring in a newe lawe, ſhould come and declare it publikely before the people with a halter about his necke, to the end that if his newe lawe was not thought meete to be receiued, and very profitable for the Common-wealth, he might preſently be ſtrangled, as a woorthie reward for his raſhnes. In euery ſocietie (ſayth Aristotle) that is well inſtituted and ordained by lawes, great care is to be taken

that no part of the lawe, although neuer ſo little, be diminiſhed or changed: yea, moſt heede is to be had of that which is done by little and little. For if reſiſtance be not then made, it falleth out in the Common-wealth,Miſchiefs in a commonwealth muſt be reſiſted in the beginning as in the diſeaſed bodie of a man, wherein the diſeaſe, if ſpeedie remedie be not vſed in the beginning thereof, increaſeth by little and little, and that which might eaſily haue beene cured, through negligence is made incurable. Men neuer beginne (ſayed Paulus Aemilius the Romane Conſul) to alter and chang the eſtate of a Common-wealth, by making their firſt entrance with ſome notorious reſiſting of the lawes. And therefore we muſt thinke that the preſeruation of the principall foundations of a politike Eſtate is left at randon, when men neglect the care of keeping diligentlye the conſtitutions thereof, howe light, or of ſmall importance ſoeuerThe law is the foundation of ciuill ſocieties. they ſeeme to be. For ſeeing the lawe is the ſure foundation of euery ciuill ſocietie, if that fayle, it muſt needes be, that the whole politicall building will fall to ruine. Therefore Bias the wiſe ſayd, that the EſtateBias. of that Common-wealth is happie, wherein all the inhabitants feare the lawe as a ſeuere Tyrant. For then whatſoeuer it requireth, is vndoubtedly perfourmed. After the lawe is once eſtabliſhed and approoued (ſaith Iſidorus) we muſt not iudge of it, but iudge accordingWe muſt not iudge of the law but according to the law. vnto it. That is the beſte policie (ſayde Chilon one of the Sages of Graecia) where the people hearken more to the lawes, than to the Oratours. This alſo was the cauſe that Pauſanias the Lacedemonian made this aunſwere to one who demaunded of him, why it was not lawefull in their countrie to alter any of their auncient lawes. The reaſon is (quoth he) bicauſe the lawesWhy the Lacedemonian lawes might not be changed. muſt bee Miſtreſſes ouer men, and not men Mayſters ouer the lawes. Moreouer, the antiquitie and profite of lawes are ſo euident, that it is needeles to make any long diſcourſe thereof heere. Moſes was the firſtThe ancient law-makers. lawe-maker of the Hebrewes; Mercurius Triſmegistus of the Egyptians; Phoroneus the Kinge, of the Graecians:

                     Solon of the Athenians: Lycurgus of the Lacedemonians: Anacharſis of the Scythians: Numa Pompilius of the Romanes. Ten notable men were choſen by the Senate and people of Rome, to tranſlate and to expound the lawes of the twelue tables. We haue already declared how Pharamond made ours. The greateſt and beſt part of the lawes of Germanie was eſtabliſhed by Charles the great, Emperour and king of France. And ſo all regions haue had diuers lawmakers, according to the conditionNo law before the law of God. and circumſtance of time, place, and countrie. True it is, that before the publiſhing of the law of God, there was no law-maker of whome we haue any knowledge: and ſurely not ſo much as one word of a law is to be found in all the works of Homer, or Orpheus, or of any before Moſes. But Princes iudged and commanded all thinges by their ſoueraigne power, which kind of gouernment being more tyrannicall than kingly, could not be of any continuance or aſſurance, bicauſe there was no bond to knit the great with the ſmall, and ſo conſequently no agreement.The neceſſitie and profit of a law. Beſides, this is out of doubt, that all the ſubiects of an Eſtate ſtand in neede of a law, as of a light to guide them in the darkenes of humane actions: eſpecially it is neceſſarie for the terrifieng of the wicked, who might pretend ſome true cauſe of their ignorance, or ſome probable colour of their wickednes, or at leaſt ſome ſhew why they ſhould eſcape the puniſhment, which is notThe vpright and equall diſtribution of the law maketh a good gouernment. imprinted in our hartes, as things forbidden by nature. Neuertheles it is not the law that maketh a right gouernment, but vpright iuſtice, and the equal diſtribution therof, which ought to be ſurer ingrauen in the mindes of good kings and princes, than in tables of ſtone. And it is to ſmall purpoſe to multiply Edicts and Decrees, if they be not ſeuerely obſerued: yea the firſt ſigne that a manTo diſpence with good ſtatuts, and daily to make new, is a token of the decay of a common-wealth. may haue of the loſſe of an eſtate, is when there appeereth an vnbrideled licence and a facilitie in diſpenſing with good ſtatuts, and when new decrees are daily conſulted of. And if the eſtate be already troubled, the heaping vp of lawes vpon lawes is no leſſe dangerous for it, than a

multitude of medicines in a weake ſtomacke, whereas contrarywiſe, new introductions and abuſes are then eſpecially to be taken away, and things brought backe againe to their firſt and ancient forme. Hiſtories teach vs, that when edicts and decrees were moſt of all multiplied, then did tiranny gather greateſt ſtrength. As it fell out vnder the tyrant Caligula, who publiſhed decrees of al ſortsExamples therof in Caligula, & in Claudius. both good and bad, and thoſe written in ſo ſmall a letter, that men could not read them, to the end that he might thereby ſnare thoſe that were ignoraunt. His ſucceſſour Claudius made twentie edicts in one day, and yet tirannie was neuer ſo cruell, nor men more wicked than at that time. Therefore let the lawes and good ordinances of anHow lawes may be kept inuiolable. eſtate be inuiolable, ſtraightly kept, not ſubiect to diſpenſation, not fauourable to great men, but common and equall to all, and then ſhall the bond of ciuill ſocietie bee ſurely tied. Now where as I ſaid, that all nations haue libertie to preſcribe and frame ciuill lawes for themſelues, my meaning was not to approoue certaine barbarous & beaſtly lawes receiued of ſome people: as thoſe lawes which alowed theeues a certain reward, which permitted the company of men and women indifferently, and innumerable others more diſhoneſt, which are not onely voyd of all iuſtice, but euen of all humanitie. But theſe two things muſt be kept inuiolably in all lawes, namely, The
                     Two things required in the keeping of euery law. 
                     ordinance of the law, & the equitie of it, vpon the reaſon wherof the ordinance is grouuded. Equitie is alwayes one and the ſame to all people, bicauſe it is naturall. Therefore allEquitie is alwayes one and the ſame to all people. the lawes in the world, of what matter ſoeuer they are, muſt meete in the ſame equitie. Concerning the ordinance of the law, bicauſe it is ioyned with circumſtances, no inconueniēce letteth but that it may de diuers among ſundry nations, prouided alwayes that they all tend a-like to the ſame marke of equitie. Now ſeeyng the diuine law which we call morall, is nothing elſe but a teſtimonie of the law of nature, and of the conſcience that is imprinted in all mens hartes, no doubt but this equitie whereof we now ſpeake, is wholy declared and comprehended therein.

                     The equitie of the morall law ought to be the end and rule of all other lawes. Therefore it is meete that this equitie onely ſhould be the white, rule and end of all lawes. For (as S. Augustine ſaith in his booke of the citie of God) euery law that beareth not the image of the diuine lawe, is a vaine cenſure. And iuſtice is the end of euery law wel eſtabliſhed, which is the cauſe why S. Paul ſo greatly extolleth the vigor of the lawe, calling it the bond of perfection. Thoſe lawes then which are ſquared out by this heauenly rule, which tend to this ende, and are limited out by this meaſure, ought to be receiued and followed cheerfully, albeit they differ from the Moſaicall law, or otherwiſe one from another. For many haue denied (& ſome amongſt vs are yet of that opinion) that no Common-wealth can be well & iuſtlyTheir opinion confuted, who would tie all nations to the policie of Moſes. inſtituted and ordained, if leauing the policie of Moſes, it be gouerned by the common lawes of other nations: which is ſo abſurd a thing, and would be the cauſe of ſo great confuſion in the policies of the world, that there needeth no great ſtore of arguments to prooue it vaine and friuolous. Moreouer, by that diſtinction of the law which we haue already ſet downe in our diſcourſe, it appeereth ſufficiently, that the opinion of theſe doters is grounded vpon a meere ignoraunce of the will of God. The lawe of God forbiddeth ſtealing and diuers painesTheft puniſhed diuerſly in diuers nations. and puniſhments are appointed for the ſame in the policie of the Iewes, according to the kind, time, and place of the theft. The ancienteſt lawes of other nations puniſhed theeues by cauſing thē to reſtore double that which they had ſtolne. Thoſe lawes which folowed made a diſtinction betweene open and ſecret theft: others vſed baniſhment,How falſe witnes was puniſhed among the Iewes. and ſome death. The lawe of God forbiddeth falſe witnes-bearing, which was puniſhed amongſt the Iewes with the ſame puniſhment that the partie falſely accuſed ſhould haue incurred, if he had been found guiltie. In ſome other countries there was no puniſhment for it but publike ignominie and ſhame: and in ſome alſo the gibbet. Brieflie, all the lawes in the world with one common conſent, how different ſoeuer they be, tend to one and the ſame ende, pronouncing ſentence of condemnation againſt

thoſe crimes that are condemned by the eternall lawe of God: onely they agree not in equalitie of puniſhment, which is neither neceſſarie nor expedient. There is ſome ſuche countrey that woulde ſpeedily become deſolate through murders and robberies, if it did not exerciſe horrible & grieuous puniſhments vpon the offenders in thoſe crimes. There falleth out ſome ſuch time as requireth increaſe of puniſhments. Some ſuch natiō there is that ſtandeth in need of ſome grieuous correction to be appointed for ſome ſpecial vice, wherunto otherwiſe it would be more giuē than other nations. He that ſhould be offended at this diuerſitie, which is moſt meete to maintain the obſeruation of the law of God, would he not be thought to haue a malicious mind, and to enuy publike benefite and quietnes? For the concluſion of our preſent ſpeech, let vs learne, that ciuil lawes and ordinances depend only of theCiuil ordinances depend only of the ſoueraign ruler. ſoueraigne ruler, & that he may change them according to the occurrence and benefit of ſtate affaires. Let vs learn that all lawes muſt be referred to the infallible rule of theThe end wherunto all lawes are to be referred. iuſtice and will of God, and to the common profit of ciuil ſocietie: that he which commaundeth vs to obey magiſtrates not only for feare of puniſhment, but alſo for conſcience ſake, requireth of vs ſuch obedience to their lawes and ordinances: ſo that he is accurſed that infringeth or contemneth them. Therfore we muſt voluntarily ſubmit our ſelues vnto them, ſo that their general end be to ſet an order and policie amongſt vs, and not diſpute of their reaſon and cauſe, as long as their iuriſdiction extendeth not to our ſoules to lay vpon them a new rule of iuſtice.
               
            
            
               Of the People, and of their obedience due to the Magistrate, and to the Law. Chap. 56.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  WE haue hitherto ſeene, that the preſeruation of policies dependeth of the obſeruation of the law, that the ſoueraigne

magiſtrate ruleth thereby, and vſeth it as a bond to reduce to vnitie and agreement all the citizens of one Common-wealth, being vnlike in calling, and liuing vnder his dominion: at which marke euery good politike gouernor ought chiefly to aime. Now (my companions) we are to intreat of this third part of a citie, which maketh the politike body perfect and abſolute, namely, of the people, and of that obedience which they ought to yeeld to the magiſtrate and to the law.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  The whole Common-wealth fareth well orThe magiſtrate is the head, the law the ſoule, and the people the body of the common-welth. ill, as all hir parts, euen to the leaſt, are ruled, and containe themſelues within the compaſſe of their duetie. For all of them togither make but one body, whereof the magiſtrate is the head, and the lawe the ſoule that giueth life vnto it. Wherefore it is needefull that theſe ſhould commaund, and the other obey.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Whatſoeuer profiteth the whole, profiteth the part, and that which is commodious to the part, is alſo commodious to the whole: and ſo contrarywiſe. Wherefore to obey well, which is neceſſarily required of the people, is greatly auaileable to the whole political bodie. Now let vs heare ASER handle this matter vnto vs more at large.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  In euery diſcipline the beginning is commonly taken from the leaſt partes thereof. Grammer taketh his beginning from letters, which are the leaſt things inThe Nowne and Verbe are no parts of Logike, but of Grammer. it: Logike, from the two leaſt partes thereof, namely, the Nowne and the Verbe. Geometrie from the point: Arithmetick from Vnitie: Muſick from the Minnem and Sembrief, which are likewiſe the leaſt parts therof. Therefore hauing ſeene that Policie is the order and life of the citie, and that the citie is a multitude of citizens, before we ſpeak of the whole bodie of them, we muſt (as I think) intreat firſt of a citizen, who, although he differ accordingThe definition of a citizen in a popular ſtate. to the diuerſitie of common-wealths, yet to take him properly, may be ſaid to be euery one that hath right to iudge in his citie, & hath a deliberatiue voyce in the generall or common councell thereof. This definition of a citizen

cannot fitly be applied to all citizens of all Common-wealths, but only to thoſe that are ruled popularly, wherin they are all equall, and gouerne themſelues by aſſemblies, in which euery one hath libertie to ſpeake his aduiſe.Other definitions of a citizen. Some define a citizen to be he, whoſe parents are citizens: or els, to be a free ſubiect holding of the ſoueraigntie of an other: wherin they adde this word Free, to diſtinguiſh him from ſlaues and ſtrangers. But generally we may ſay, that whoſoeuer may beare offices or magiſtracie,A general definition of a citizen. in what forme of gouernment ſo euer, is reputed & taken for a citizen: and ſuch are all the naturall Frenchmen in this monarchie, amongſt whom there is not one, how baſe ſoeuer he be that may not be made noble by vertue, or that may not by skill and integritie of life attaine to the greateſt eſtates of iuſtice, of treaſurie, and of other publike charges. This is not ſeen in all common-wealths. For in the Seignorie of Venice it ſeemeth that none are truelyOf the ſtate of Venice. citizens, but the lordes and nobles, who onely enioy the office of magiſtracie, and may enter into the great councell after they haue attained the age of fiue and twentie yeeres. As for the people they intermeddle not with any matter of gouernment, this only excepted, that they may be Secretaries and Chancellors, as Contarenus reporteth. The citie of Rome hauing many times ſundry gouernments,Of the ancient eſtate in Rome. the appellation of a citizen was likewiſe diuers therein. For as long as the firſt kings rules, the common people were altogither excluded from publike honors & offices. But after when the regall power was changed into the gouernment of a certaine number of men, choſen by ſuffrages and common voyces, the people were admitted to magiſtracies, and to the managing of affairs, being preſent at the publike aſſemblie had in Mars his field, which was diſtributed by tribes, wardes, companies, and centuries, to deliberate of the common eſtate, to create magiſtrates, and to decree new lawes: where he was reputed for a citizen in deed, that was a free man, that had both houſe and tribe, and poſſibilitie to attaine to honor, enioying beſides many other priuiledges and prerogatiues.

But when the ſoueraigntie came into the emperors hands, thoſe aſſemblies continued onely vnder Iulius and Octautus, and after were abrogated by Tyberius and tranſlated to the Senate, and to the abſolute power of the prince, taking away al authoritie frō the people in publike matters. Now to returne to our former aſſertion, we ſay,Who are truly citizens. that all they are citizens to whom the gate that leadeth to the gouernment of the citie lieth open, I mean the whole company of them that liue vnder the ſame lawes and ſoueraigne magiſtrates. Such are all the ſubiects and naturall vaſſals of our king, of whom the people and the nobilitieThe diuiſion of the whole people into three orders or eſtates are the two orders or eſtates, and of them is the eſtate of the church compounded, which maketh one part of the common-wealth of France. This ſelf-ſame diſtinction of citizens is obſerued almoſt throughout all Europe.The diuiſion of citizens in Venice and Florence. But beſides this general diuiſiō, there are ſome more ſpecial in many common-welths, as at Venice, into the Gentlemen, Burgeſſes, & Common people: at Florence before it was brought in ſubiectiō to a Prince, there were the greater ſort, the middle ſort, & the vulgar or common ſort of people. And our ancient Gaules had the Druides, the Horſemen, & the inferior
                     In Egypt and among the ancient Gaules. 
                     people. In Egypt were the Priests, the Souldiors, & the Artificers. And although Plato labored to make all the citizens of his common-welth equal in rights & prerogatiues, yet he diuided them into three eſtates, into Gardes, Souldiers,
                     Theſe gardes were the Senate and councell for ſtate affaires, conſiſting of 400. Burgeſſes. and Labourers. Whereupon we muſt neceſſarilie inferre this concluſion, that there neuer was, nor can be Common-wealth, wherein the citizens were equall in all rights and prerogatiues, but that ſome had more or leſſe than others, and yet ſo, that wiſe Politikes haue carefully prouided, that the meaneſt ſhould haue no cauſe to complaineOf the agreement that is to be kept between the eſtates of a common-wealth. of their eſtate. Moreouer, the conueniencie and proportionable agreement of our French eſtates, hath been the cauſe why this kingdome (vntill this our infortunate age) hath continued & proſpered ſo long amongſt other kingdoms both of auncient and late times, namely, when Goodes, Honours, and publike charges were ordinarily diſtributed, according to the condition of euery eſtate,

and their rightes and priuiledges preſerued: eſpecially when it was carefully prouided, that one eſtate ſhould not grow too great aboue the other, I meane, that the nobilitie ſhould not keep the people too much vnder, and bring them to a deſperate eſtate: and that the people through their traffike, offices of iudgements, and receipts for the prince which they exerciſed, and benefices which they enioyed, ſhould not exceſſiuely enrich themſelues, to the preiudice of the nobilitie, nor get into their hands the lands of the nobles, who being impoueriſhed, could not ſuſtain the charges of warre, nor ſerue the king in his armies. ButOne cauſe of the 
                           ••
                        ſerie of France at this preſent. the neglect of this foreſight, & the great inequalitie of riches among the eſtates (that one part which was woont to be pooreſt, being now become richer than both the other two) is the cauſe of great wounds in the body of this monarchie. The poore people being oppreſſed by both the other eſtates, is fallen vnder the burthen like to Aeſops aſſe. And the horſe that would cary nothing, I mean the nobilitie & clergie are conſtrained, ſome to beare their tenths & extraordinary ſubſidies, & others to 
                        •
                     ell their liuing to go to war at their own charges. But theſe things deſerue a long diſcourſe by it ſelf, & may hereafter be touched more fitly thā at this time. Let vs then generally conſider of our propoſition, namely, of the duty of al thoſe ſubiects whichThe office and dutie of ſubiects. liue vnder one eſtate and policy. Firſt it is neceſſary that they ſhould haue the eſtate of the magiſtrate in great eſtimation, acknowledging it to be a commiſſiō & charge giuen by God, & therfore they muſt honor & reuerēce him, as one that repreſenteth vnto them the heauenly empire ouer al creatures. For as God hath placed the Sun in the heauēs as an image of his diuine nature, which lightneth, heateth, quickneth, & noriſheth al things created for mās vſe, either in heauē or earth: ſo the ſoueraign magiſtrate isThe ſoueraign magiſtrate compared to the Sunne. the like repreſentatiō & light in a city or kingdō, eſpecially ſo long as the feare of God, & obſeruatiō of iuſtice are imprinted in his hart. Some are obediēt enough to their magiſtrates, & would not but that there ſhould be ſome ſuperior vnto whom they might be ſubiect, bicauſe they know

                     Againſt them that thinke the magiſtrate to be a neceſſarie euil. it to be expedient for common benefit: yet they haue no other opinion of a magiſtrate, but that he is a neceſſary euil for mankind. But when we know, that we are commā
                     ded to honor the king, to feare God and the king, which we finde often in the ſcripture, we muſt vnderſtand thatProu. 24. 21.
                     What is ment by honouring the King. this word to honour, comprehendeth vnder it a good opinion and estimation, which we muſt haue of the ſoueraigne magiſtrate: and that the ioining of the king with God, muſt cauſe vs to attribute great dignitie and reuerence vnto him, in reſpect of that power which is giuen him from his maieſtie. Likewiſe when it is ſaid, that we muſt be ſubiectRom. 13. 5. 
                     to the higher powers, not bicauſe of wrath onely, but alſo for conſcience
                     Subiects muſt obey their prince for the feare of God. 
                     ſake, it is to honour them with an excellent title, and to binde vs to obey them for the feare of God, and as we wil obey his ordinance, bicauſe their power dependeth of him. Of this honour and reuerence it followeth, that we muſt ſubmit our ſelues vnto them in all obedience, whether it be in yeelding to their ordinances or heſtes, in the paiment of impoſtes and ſubſidies, or in receiuing ſuch publike charges, as it ſhall pleaſe them to commit vnto vs.Of the ſeruice due to the prince. Briefly, euery ſubiect is bound to ſerue his prince with goods and life, which is the perſonall ſeruice of a naturall ſubiect, not as a hireling that ſerues at will, whereas theRom. 13. 1. 2. other ſeruice is neceſſarie. Leteuery ſoule (ſaith S. Paul) be ſubiect to the higher powers. For whoſoeuer reſisteth the power, reſisteth
                     Tit. 3. 1. 
                     the ordinance of God. He writeth alſo to Titus in this maner. Put them in remembraunce that they be ſubiect to the principalities and powers, and that they be obedient and ready to euery
                     1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. 
                     good worke. Submit your ſelues (ſaith S. Peter) vnto all maner ordinance of man for the Lordes ſake, whether it be vnto the king, as vnto the ſuperiour, or vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are ſent of him for the puniſhment of euil doers, and for the prayſe of thē that do well. Moreouer, to the end that ſubiects ſhould teſtifie, that they obey not diſſemblingly, but of a free and willing mind, S. Paul addeth, that they muſt by prayers to God recommend their preſeruation and proſperitie vnder1. Tim. 2. 1. 2. whom they liue. I exhort (ſaith he) that first of all ſupplications, prayers, interceſſions, and giuing of thanks be made for all
                     
                     men, for kings, and for all that are in authoritie, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godlines and honestie. Neither let any man deceiue himſelf herein. For ſeeing no mā can reſiſt magiſtrates without reſiſting God, howſoeuer ſome may think, that a weak & powerles magiſtrate may be cō
                     temned without puniſhment, yet God is ſtrong & mighty to reuenge the contempt of his ordinance. Beſides, vnderPriuate men muſt not buſie themſelues in publike affairs. this obedience is contained that moderatiō which al priuate perſons ought to obſerue in publike affairs, namely, that they muſt not of their own motiō intermeddle in the gouernment or reformation of them, nor take vpon them raſhly any part of the magiſtrates office, nor to attempt any publike thing. If there be any fault in the common policie that needeth amendment, they muſt not therfore ſtir at al therin, nor take to thēſelues authoritie to redres it, or once to put too their helping hands, which in that reſpect are as it were bound behind thē. But they are to ſhew it to the ſuperior, who only hath his hand vnbound to diſpoſe & order publike matters, & if he then command them to deal therin, they may put it in executiō, as being furniſhed with publike authoritie. For as we vſe to call the counſailorsThe counſailors of a prince are his eies & eares: and his officers are his hands. of a prince, his eies & eares, bicauſe they muſt be vigilant for him, ſo we may alſo cal thoſe mē his hands, whom he hath appointed to execute ſuch things as are to be don. And to theſe we owe honor & obedience, ſeeing the force of the laws conſiſteth in their cōmandement. Theſe are the magiſtrates & officers eſtabliſhed by the ſoueraigne, & armed with power to cōpel the ſubiects to obey his laws, or els to puniſh thē. Wherby we ſee two kinds of cōmandingTwo kinds of publike power. with publike power, the one in chief, which is abſolute, indefinite & aboue the laws, aboue magiſtrates and priuate men: the other is lawful, ſubiect to the lawes & to the ſoueraigne, which power properly belongeth to them that haue extraordinary power to command, as long as their commiſſion laſteth. The ſoueraign prince acknowledgethThe difference between the prince, the magiſtrate, and the priuate man. (after God) none greater thā himſelf: the magiſtrate holdeth his power (after God) of the ſoueraign prince, and is always ſubiect to him & to his laws. Priuate men acknowledge

after God (who muſt alwaies be firſt) their ſoueraign prince, his lawes & his magiſtrates, euery one in his place of iuriſdiction. They are bound to obey them, euenHow farre ſubiects are bound to obey their prince and his lawes. then (which is repeated in many laws) when they cōmand any thing cōtrary to publike profit, or againſt ciuil iuſtice, ſo that it be not againſt the law of God & of nature. Now foraſmuch as when we intreated of the ſoueraigne magiſtrate, we deſcribed him ſuch a one as he ought to be, anſweringThe titles of a good magiſtrate truly to his title, that is to ſay, a father of the coū
                     trey which he gouerneth, a ſheepheard of his people, the gardian of peace, protector of iuſtice, & preſeruer of innocencie, that man might wel be iudged to be beſide himſelfThe behauiour of euil princes. that would reprehend ſuch a gouernment. But bicauſe it commonly falleth out, that moſt princes wander far out of the right way, & that ſome hauing no care to do their duty, ſleep in their delights & pleaſures, others fixing their harts vpon coueto
                        •
                     ſnes, ſet to ſale all lawes, priuiledges, rights & iudgemēts: ſome ſpoil the poore people by ouercharging them with impoſtes & exactions to furniſh their prodigalitie & vnmeaſurable diſſolutenes: others exerciſe open robberies, in ſacking of houſes, violating of virgins & maried women, in murdring innocents, or ſuffring ſuch violence to be done vnder thē by the miniſters & baudes of their pleaſures: ſome alſo oppres the nobility, euen the princes of their bloud, to ſhew fauour to baſe perſons, and thoſe ſtrangers, deſpiſing woorthy mē that are their natural ſubiects & vaſſals: I ſay conſidering theſe things, it will be very hard, yea altogither impoſſible, to perſwade a great many, that ſuch are to be acknowledged for princes and true ſuperiors, & that we muſt of neceſſitie obey thē ſo far as we may without offending our conſciēces confecratedTirants are naturally hated. to God onely. For this affection is rooted in the harts of men, to hate & deteſt tirants no leſſe than they loue & reuerence iuſt kings. So that whē amongſt ſuch lothſom vices, ſo far eſtranged not only frō the duty of a magiſtrate, but alſo from all humanity, they ſee in their ſoueraign no forme of the image of God, which ought to ſhine in him, no ſhew of a miniſter giuen from aboue for the prayſe of

good men, and execution of vengeance vpon the wicked, they are eaſily driuen forward to hate & to contemn him, and finally, to rebell againſt him. But if we direct our ſight to the word of God, it will lead vs a great deale farther. For it wil make vs obedient, not onely to the rule of thoſe princes which execute their office according to iuſtice, but to them alſo that do nothing leſſe than their dutie. It telleth vs, that whatſoeuer they are, they haue their authoritie from God only: the good, as mirrors of his goodnes; the bad, as ſcourges of his wrath to puniſh the iniquitie ofWe muſt obey and reuerence vniuſt princes a▪ well as iuſt. the people: but both the one and the other, authorized from him with the ſame dignitie and maieſtie in regard of their ſubiects. Therfore in reſpect of obedience and reuerence, we owe as much to the vniuſt, as to the iuſt prince. Which thing bicauſe it is ſo hardly beleeued amongſt mē, & leſſe practiſed now than euer, I wil inſiſt a litle longer in the proofe of my ſaying by teſtimonies of the ſcripture, than we haue vſed to do in our other diſcourſes. Firſt, I deſire euery one diligently to conſider and marke the prouidence of God, & that ſpecial working wherby he vſeth to diſtribute kingdoms, & to eſtabliſh ſuch kings as he thinks good, wherof mention is oftē made in the ſcripture. As it is written in Daniel: He changeth the times & ſeaſons: he taketh
                     Dan. 1. 21. & 4. 14. 
                     away kings: he ſetteth vp kings, that liuing men may know, that the most high hath power ouer the kingdom of men, and giueth it to whomſoeuer he wil, & appointeth ouer it the moſt abiect among mē. It is wel known what maner of king Nebuchadnezzer was,Nebuchadnezzer. euē he that took Ieruſalē, namely, a great thief, & a robber. Notwithſtanding God affirmeth by the prophet Ezechiel,
                     Eze. 29. 18. 19. 
                     That he gaue him the lād of Egypt for the reward of his work▪ & for the wages of his army wherwith he had ſerued him, in ſpotling and ſacking Tyrus▪ And Daniel ſaid vnto him: O king thou art a king of
                     Dan. 2. 37. 
                     kings; for the god of heauē hath giuē thee a kingdom power, ſtrēgth, & glory. Whē we heare that he was appointed king by god, we muſt withal cal to mind the heauēly ordināce, which cō
                        mandeth vs▪ to feat & honor the king, & then we wil not doubt to yeeld to a wicked tyrant that honour which God hath thought him meet for. Whē 
                     Samuel declared to the people of

Iſrael what they ſhould ſuffer of their kings, not onely according to the rights and priuiledges of his maieſtie, but by tyrannical cuſtoms and faſhions, namely, that they would
                     1. Sam. 3. 
                     take their ſonnes and daughters to ſerue him, their lands, vines and gardens, to giue them to their ſeruants, contrary to the commandement of the law of God: yet he inioined them all obedience, leauing them no lawful occaſion to reſiſt their king. I haue
                     Iere. 27. 5. &c. (ſaith the Lord in Ieremy) made the earth, the man, & the beaſt that are vpon the ground, by my great power, & by my out-ſtretched arme, & haue giuen it vnto whom it pleaſed me. But now I haue giuen al theſe lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of
                     A tyrant called the ſeruant of God. 
                     Babel my ſeruant, & the beasts of the fields haue I alſo giuen him to ſerue him. And all nations ſhal ſerue him, and his ſonne, and his ſonnes ſonne vntil the very time of his land come alſo. And the nation and kingdom which will not ſerue the ſame Nebuchadnezzar king of Babel, & that wil not put their necke vnder the yoke of the king of Babel, the ſame nation wil I viſite, (ſaith the Lord) with the ſword, famine, & pestilence. Wherfore ſerue the king of Babel and liue. We know by theſe words with what great obedience God would haue this peruerſe & cruel tyrant to be honored, only for this reaſon, bicauſe he was lift vp by his hand vnto that roial maieſtie. Now if we are bound to beleeue as much of al the kings of the earth, theſe fooliſh & ſeditious thoughts ſhould neuer come into our mindes, that a king muſt be handled according as he deſerueth, & that it ſtandeth not with reaſon, that we ſhould accoūt our ſelues his ſubiects, who for his part behaueth not himſelfe towards vs as a king. There is in the ſame prophet a cōmandemēt of god to his people to deſire the proſperitie of Babylon, wherin they were held captiues, & to pray for it, bicauſe
                     Ier. 29. 7. 
                     in the peace therof they ſhould haue peace. Behold how the Iſraelits were commanded to pray for his proſperity, who had ſpoiled thē of their goods & poſſeſſions, caried thē into exile, & brought thē into miſerable bōdage: ſo far off is it, that they were permitted to rebel againſt him. Although Dauid already elected king by the wil of God, & anointed1. Sam. 24. 7. & 26. 9. 10. with holy oile, was vniuſtly purſued of Saul, yet he ſaid, The lord keep me from doing that thing to my maſter the lords anointed,
                     
                     to lay my hand vpon him. For who can lay his hand on the Lordes
                     Dauid would not lay vioſent hands vpon Sauls perſon. 
                     annointed and be guiltles? As the Lord liueth, either the Lord ſhal ſmite him, or his day ſhall come to die, or he ſhall deſcend into battel, and periſh. The Lord keepe me from laying my hand vpon the Lords annointed. This word is directed to vs all, & it ought to teach vs not to ſift out the life of our ſoueraign prince, but to content our ſelues with this knowledge, that by the wil of God he is eſtabliſhed & ſet in an eſtate, that is ful of an inuiolable maieſtie. Moreouer, we read in Ioſephus, that the holieſt men that euer were among the Hebrewes, called Eſſaei, that is to ſay, true practiſers of the lawe of God,Theſe Eſſaei or Eſſeni, were a ſuperſtitious ſect among the Iewes, that pretended to lead a moſt perfect kind of life. maintained this, that ſoueraigne princes, whatſoeuer they were, ought to be inuiolable to their ſubiectes, as they that were ſacred and ſent of God. Neither is there any thing more vſuall in all the holy ſcriptures than the prohibition to kill or to ſeeke the life or honour, not onely of the prince, but alſo of inferiour magiſtrates, although (ſaith the ſcripture) they be wicked. And it is ſaid in Exodus,
                     Exod. 22. 28. 
                     Thou ſhalt not raile vpon the iudges, neither ſpeake euill of the ruler of thy people. Now, if he that doth ſo is guiltie of treaſon, both againſt the diuine and humane maieſtie, what puniſhment is ſufficient for him that ſeeketh after their life? According to mens lawes, not onely that ſubiect is guiltie of high treaſon that hath killed his ſoueraigne prince, but he alſo that attempted it, that gaue counſell, that conſented to it, that thought it. Yea, he that was neuer preuented nor taken in the maner, in this point of the ſoueraigne the law accounteth him as condemned alreadie: and iudgeth him culpable of death that thought once in times paſt to haue ſeazed vpon the life of his prince, notwithſtanding any repentance that folowed. And truly there was a gentleman of Normandie, who confeſſed to a Franciſcan frier, that he once minded to haue killed kingA gentleman iudged to die, bicauſe he once thought to haue killed his prince 
                     Francis the firſt, but repented him of that euill thought. The frier gaue him abſolution, but yet afterward told the king thereof, who ſent the gentleman to the parliament of Paris there to be tried, where he was by common conſent condemned to die, and after executed. Amongſt the

                     A ſ
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        r
                           •
                         law againſt treaſon. Macedonians there was a law that condemned to death fiue of their next kinsfolks that were conuicted of conſpiracie againſt their prince. We ſee then the ſtraight obligation wherby we are bound vnto our princes both by diuine and humane right. Wherfore if it ſo fall out that we are cruelly vexed by a prince voyd of humanitie, or els polled and burthened with exactions by one that is couetous or prodigall: or deſpiſed and ill defended by a careleſſe prince, yea afflicted for true pietie by a ſacrilegious and vnbeleeuing ſoueraigne, or otherwiſe moſt vniuſtly and cruelly intreated, firſt let vs call to mind our offencesHow we muſt behaue our ſelues vnder a tyrant. committed againſt God, which vndoubtedly he correcteth by ſuch ſcourges. Secondly, let vs thinke thus with our ſelues, that it belongeth not to vs to remedie ſuch euils, being permitted onely to call vpon God for helpe, in whoſe hands are the harts of kings, and alterations ofPſal. 82. 1. & 2. 12. kingdoms. It is God, who (as Dauid ſaith) ſitteth among the gods, that ſhal iudge them: at whoſe onely looke all thoſe kings and iudges of the earth, ſhall fall and be confounded, who haue not kiſſed his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, but haue decreed vniuſt lawes, to oppreſſe the poore in iudgement, and to ſcatter the lawfull right of the weake, thatEſay 10. 1. they may praie vpon the widowes, and poll the orphans. Thus let all people learne, that it is their duetie aboue all things to beware of contemning or violating the authoritie of their ſuperiours, which ought to be full of maieſtie vnto them, ſeeing it is confirmed by God with ſo many ſentences and teſtimonies, yea although it be in the hands of moſt vnwoorthy perſons, who by their wickednes make it odious (as much as in them lieth) and contemptible. Moreouer, they muſt learne that they muſt obey their lawes and ordinances, and take nothing in hand that is againſt the priuiledges and marks of ſoueraigntie. Then ſhall we be moſt happy, if we conſecrate our ſoules to God only, and dedicate our bodies, liues and goods, to the ſeruice of our prince.
               
            
            The ende of the fourteenth daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE FIFTEENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of a Monarchie, or a Regall power. Chap. 57.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     WHen we began yeſterday to intreat of the ſundry kinds of eſtates and gouernments that haue been in force amongſt men, and of the excellencie or deformitie of them, we reſerued to a further conſideration the monarchie or kingly power, vnder which we liue in France. This forme of regiment by the common conſent of the woorthieſt philoſophers and moſt excellent men, hath been always taken for the beſt, happieſt, and moſt aſſured common-wealth of all others,The lawes of nature lead vs to a monarchie. as that wherein all the lawes of nature guide vs: whether we looke to this little world, which hath but one bodie, and ouer al the members one only head, of which the wil, motion and ſenſe depend; or whether we take this great world, which hath but one ſoueraigne God; whether we caſt vp our eyes to heauen, we ſhall ſee but one ſunne, or looke but vpon theſe ſociable creatures belowe, we ſee that they cannot abide the rule of many amongſt them. But I leaue to you (my Companions) the diſcourſe of this matter.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Among all creatures, both with and without life, we alwais find one that hath the preheminence aboue the reſt of his kind. Among al reaſonable creatures,In euery kind of thing one excelleth. Man: among beaſts, the Lion is taken for chiefe: among

birds, the Eagle: among graine, wheate: among drinks, wine: among ſpices, baulme: among all mettals, gold: among al the elements, the fire. By which natural demonſtrations we may iudge, that the kingly and monarchicall gouernment draweth neereſt to nature of all others.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  The principalitie of one alone is more conformable,A monarchie moſt ſignificantly repreſenteth the diuine regiment. and more ſignificant to repreſent the diuine & ineffable principalitie of God, who alone ruleth al things, than the power of many ouer a politicall body. Notwithſtanding there hath been many notable men that haue iudged a monarchie, not to be the beſt forme of gouernment that may be among men. But it is your duetie (ACHITOB) to handle vs this matter.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  This controuerſie hath always been very great among thoſe that haue intreated of the formes of policies and gouernments of eſtates, namely, whether it be more agreeable to nature, and more profitable for mankind to liue vnder the rule of one alone, than of many, neither ſide wanting arguments to prooue their opinion. Now although it be but a vaine occupation for priuate men, who haue no authoritie to ordain publike matters, to diſpute which is the beſt eſtate of policie: and a greater point of raſhneſſe to determine therof ſimply, ſeeing the chiefeſt thing conſiſteth in circumſtances, yet to content curious mindes, and to make them more willing to beare that yoke vnto which both diuine & humane nature and equitie hath ſubiected them, I purpoſe here to waigh their ſtrongeſt reaſons that haue miſliked a monarchy, to the end that by contrary concluding arguments, which maintaine & defend it, both they and we may be ſo much the more ſtirred vp, to range our ſelues willingly vnder the happy & lawful rule of our king, conſidering the agreement & participation which it hath, with al the good policies that can be named, as alſo the happines & certain benefit that commeth to vs, as well in reſpect of this our priuate life, as of the cōmon proſperitie of the whole publike body, vnto which we owe our ſelues. Firſt, we wil note that a monarchie, a kingdome, or royall power; ſignifie

one and the ſame thing: namely, one kind of Common-wealth,What a Monarchie or kingly power is. wherein the abſolute ſoueraigntie conſiſteth in one onely Prince, who may not be commanded by any, but may command all. If there be two Princes of equall power in one eſtate, neither the one nor the other is ſoueraigne. But a man may well ſay, that both togither haue the ſoueraignty of the Eſtate, which is comprehended vnder this word Oligarchye, and is properly called a Duarchy,Of a Duarchy, that is, of the rule of two. which may continue ſo long as thoſe two Princes agree, otherwiſe it muſt needes be that the one will ouerthrow the other. Therefore to auoid diſcord, the Emperours diuided the Eſtate into two parts, the one taking himſelfe for Emperour of the Eaſt, the other of the Weſt:The diuiſion of the Empire. and yet the edicts and ordinances were publiſhed by the common conſent of both Princes, to ſerue both their empires. But as ſoone as they fell in debate, both the Empires were in deede diuided, both for power, for lawes, and for eſtate. He therefore may be called a Monarch, that of himſelfe alone hath power to preſcribe lawes to all in generall, and to euery one in particular. And vnder this power are comprehended all the other rights and marks of ſoueraigntie, which the Lawyers call regall rights, and handle them ſeuerally, which neuertheles we may comprehend vnder eight ſoueraigne marks: namely, to make8. Marks of ſoueraigntie. and to abrogate a lawe: to proclaime warre, or to make peace: to take knowledge in the laſt appeale of the iudgments of all Magiſtrates: to appoint or to diſappoint the greateſt officers: to charge or to diſcharge the ſubiects of taxes and ſubſidies: to grant tollerations and diſpenſations againſt the rigour of lawes: to inhaunce or to pull downe the title, value, and conſtant rate of monie: to cauſe ſubiects and liege people to ſweare, that they will be faithfull without exception, to him vnto whome the oath is due. Now, to enter into that matter, which we purpoſed eſpecially to handle: namely, whether a Monarchie be more profitable, than any other forme of eſtate: manyTheir reaſons who miſlike a Monarchie. haue maintained that it is a dangerous thing to liue vnder the rule of one onely king or prince, bicauſe it is a very

hard matter to find one perfect in all points, as euery King or Prince muſt of neceſſity be, if he will deſerue that name: according to that which Cyrus Monarch of theWhat excellencie is required in him that ruleth others. Perſians ſayd: That it belonged to none to command, if he were not better than all thoſe ouer whome he commanded. Moreouer, although it were poſſible to finde one of that perfection which is required, yet were it a thing alwaies to be greatly feared, that by reaſon of humane frailtie, and of the great licence that kings haue to execute their wils, he would change both condition and nature, and of a King become a Tyrant, of which there are infinite examples ſet downe in hiſtories. Yea it is certaine, and granted by the greateſt part of them that haue written of ſtate matters, that euery kind of Common-wealth that is eſtabliſhed ſimply, and alone by it ſelfe, quickly degenerateth into the next vice, if it be not moderated and held backe by the reſt: As a kingdome is ſoone changed into a tyrannie, an Ariſtocraty into an Oligarchy, and ſo of the other. But this danger is greater in a Monarchy, (as they ſay that miſlike it) than vnder the rule of many, bicauſe it is vnlikely, that all of them ſhould be wicked, and if any one be ſo, the good men may bridle him. And ſo they conclude, that it is not ſo dangerous a matter to liue vnder the gouernment of many, as of one, who may more eaſily corrupt his nature, being a Monarch, than many can doe that are elected in an Ariſtocraty, as the Areopagiticall Lordes in Athens, the Ephoryes in Lacedemonia, and the Senate in Rome. After the death of Cambyſes, Monarch of the Perſians, when the chiefe LordsThe Perſian Councell held for the eſtabliſhing of their Eſtate. of the kingdome had ſlaine that Magus, who vnder the name of Smerdis had vſurped the rule of the Eſtate, they deliberated of the affaires, and helde a generall Councell, wherein (as Herodotus writeth) many very woorthieOtanes oration. and memorable ſpeeches were vttered. Otanes mooued this, that the affaires might be gouerned in common by the Perſians, ſpeaking vnto them in this manner. I am not of opinion, that one of vs from hence forward ſhould be ſole Monarch ouer all, bicauſe it is neither pleaſant nor

good to haue it ſo. For ye know to what inſolencie Cambyſes was growne, ye haue alſo throughly ſeene the boldnes of the Magus: and ye may thinke with your ſelues how perilous a thing it is to haue a Monarchy, which may do what it liſt, not being ſubiect to correction. The beſt man in the world placed in this eſtate, will ſoone be caried away with his woonted thoughts. Inſolencie poſſeſſeth him, bicauſe of preſent proſperitie, and hatred is ſoone bred in ſuch a man. Now hauing theſe two vices, he aboundeth in all iniquitie, and committeth great iniuſtice, one while through inſolency, another while of hatred. Although a Tyrant, hauing abundance of all goodThe effects of a Tyrant. things, ſhould be farre from enuy, yet the contrary falleth out in him towards his ſubiects. For he hateth good men that liue and proſper well, he delighteth in the wicked, and gladly heareth euill reports of other men. And which becommeth him very il, if you admire and praiſe him moderately, he is angry that you do it not exceſſiuely: & yet if you doe ſo, he will miſlike it, thinking that you flatter him. Beſides, which is woorſt of all, he changeth the lawes and cuſtoms of the countrie, forceth women, killeth good men, not taking knowledge of their cauſe. Thus did this Perſian Lord conclude, that a Monarchy was to be left, & a Democraty to be choſen. Megabyſes, one of his companions,Megabyſes oration for an Ariſtocraty. liked well the aboliſhing of a Monarchy, but perſwaded the Oligarchical gouernmēt, ſaying, that nothing was more ignorant, or more inſolent, than an vnprofitable multitude. Therefore it was in no wiſe tollerable, that eſchewing the inſolencie of a Tyrant, they ſhould fall into the handes of an vnbrideled and diſordered people. Many others haue noted great dangers and diſcommoditiesThe dangers of a Monarchy. in a Monarchy, eſpecially in the change of the Monarch, whether it be from ill to good, or from good to better. For we commonly ſee at the changing of Princes, new deuices, newe lawes, newe officers, newe friends, newe forme of liuing: bicauſe Princes ordinarilye take delight in changing, and in remoouing almoſt all things, that men might ſpeake of them: which manye tymes bringeth

great diſcommodities to their ſubiects. But if this were not ſo, and the Prince as wiſe as hart could wiſh, yet the alliances and leagues made by a mans predeceſſor, end with him: which is the cauſe that the alliances ending, the neighbours betake them to armes, and the ſtrongeſt aſſaulteth the weakeſt, or elſe preſcribeth him lawes. For many maintaine, that the ſucceſſours of Princes are not bound to the treaties and obligations of their predeceſſors, if they be not their heires. An other inconuenience to be feared in a Monarchie, is the danger of falling into ciuill warre, through the diuiſion of thoſe that aſpire to the crowne, and namely, if there be right of election, which oftentimes draweth after it the ruine of the eſtate. But put the caſe there were no ſtrife for the Monarchie, yet if the Monarch be a childe, there will be diuiſion for the gouernment of him, betweene the moother and theA child Prince is a token of Gods wrath. Princes, or betwixt the Princes themſelues. Alſo when God purpoſeth to be reuenged vpon nations, he threatneth to giue them children for Princes. And although the child hath a Tutor, by the appointment of the predeceſſor, or by cuſtome, yet is there danger of making himſelfe ſoueraigne Lord, of which thing hiſtories ſet downe many examples before our eies. If a yoong Prince freed from Tutors, come to the crowne, his gouernment is no leſſe to be feared. For being then ſet at libertie when his luſts are moſt violent, you ſhall ſee nothing in his Court but fooleries, maskings, and looſe behauiour. If he be warly, he will hazard his ſubiects, his eſtate, and his perſon, to make triall of his valure. Briefly, a craftie and wicked Monarch will eſtabliſh a tyrannie: a cruell man will make a ſlaughter-houſe of the Common-wealth: a whore-maiſter will make it a ſtewes: a couetous wretch will pull off both haire and skin from his ſubiects: a prodigall Prince will ſucke the blood and marrow, to glut a dozen of horſeleaches about his perſon: a fooliſh and ignorant Prince will do woorſe, falling eaſily into the moſt of theſe vices, for want of iudgement to knowe and to make choice of counſell, neceſſary for the gouernment of his eſtate. Theſe

are the chiefe reaſons of them that miſlike a Monarchie. Now we will alleadge the other reaſons in the defence of it, and begin with Darius his declaration vpon the ſpeechesDarius oration for a Monarchy. of his companions, rehearſed by vs in the generall Councell of the Perſians: bicauſe it is well woorthy to be remembred, according vnto which the Monarchie was concluded of in the Councell. In my iudgement (ſaid he to the aſſemblie) Megabyſes ſaid well concerning the multitude, but ill in that which belongeth to an Oligarchy. For although there be three kinds of Policies, a Democraty, an Oligarchy, and a Monarchy, and all good, yet I ſay this laſt is farre better than the other, bicauſe there is nothing ſo good as the gouernment of one vertuous man alone, who iudging thereafter, gouerneth his people without reprehenſion. I will not ſpeake of the councels which he taketh in like manner againſt his enimies and ill-willers. But in an Oligarchy, where many buſie themAgainſt an Oligarchy. ſelues with publike affaires, great enmities ariſe betweene them, from whence proceede ſeditions, and from ſeditions murders, and by murders ſome one attaineth to a Monarchye. Whereby you may eaſily knowe how much better a Monarchy is. As touching the people, it is impoſſible but that where they rule, there ſhould be much wickednes, which increaſing in the euill gouernours of the Common-wealth, breedeth not hatred betweene them, but great friendſhip. For they that are euill affected towards the Common-wealth, hide one anothers counſell, vntill ſome one man being ſet ouer the people, cauſe them to giue ouer. Then is that man admired, and therewithall made a Monarch: whereby alſo it is euident, that a Monarchy is beſt. Wherefore my aduice is, that, ſeeing we haue beene ſet at libertie by one onely man, we ſhould maintaine that Eſtate: otherwiſe we ſhall diſanull the lawes of our countrie, that are already well eſtabliſhed, which will not turne to the beſt for vs. Dionyſius Halicarnaſſaeus in his antiquities of Rome, affirmeth that the like ſpeech was vſed before Romulus, when he firſt eſtabliſhed the gouernment in Rome: where Amulius concluded for

                     A Monarchy concluded vpon in the Councell of the Perſians, of Romulus, and of Auguſtus. the Monarchy, as Darius did among the Perſians. The ſame queſtion was deliberated of by Auguſtus amongſt his friends, bicauſe he deſired nothing more than to liue in reſt, and to giue ouer the Eſtate: but it was then concluded, that a Monarchy was beſt for the Common-wealth, and the cuent prooued the ſame. For before the Romans could not liue ten yeeres without ciuill warre or ſedition: whereas Auguſtus preſerued them almoſt 50▪ yeeres in perfect peace, which continued alſo long time after his death. Demoſthenes in his firſt Olynthiacke oration, ſheweth the Athenians what aduantage a Monarch hath in the deliberation and execution of great enterpriſes, ſpeaking in this manner. It is greatly auaileable for the ſpeedie and commodious execution of warlike exploits, when one man alone hath the ouer-ſight of all enterpriſes, both ſecret and open, & withall is Captaine, Lord, & Treaſurer, & alwaiesThe commodities of a Monarchy. preſent at the affaires. But who can deny, that it is not a great deale better for great and mighty nations to be gouerned Monarchically, to the end that they may maintain themſelues in vnity at home, & abroad in reputation? Eſpecially thoſe nations where there are Princes, Dukes, Marqueſſes, Earles, Barons, & other gentlemen, who poſſeſſe in the higheſt, loweſt, & midle ſort of iuſtice; Villages, Boroughs, Townes, Caſtles, with vaſſals holding and relying of them by fealtic and homage: as namely in France, Spaine, and other countries, wherin the Monarch by abſolute power, and force when need is, holdeth in the greater ſort with the leſſe, ſtaying the inſolencie of the one, & releeuing others from oppreſſion. Otherwiſe, if they were diuided into many heads, diſagreeing among themſelues, and acknowledging no ſoueraigne Lord, who doubteth but that they would be continually troubled with ciuill warres, ſet vpon by ſtrangers, and ſpoiled of all ſides? Italy prooueth this ſufficiently vnto vs, which commanded the greateſt part of the world, when it was vnited in on
                        •
                     
                     ▪ but being now diuided into many Potentats and Seignories, after vnſpeakeable calamities of ciuill wars, which it hath ſuffered a long time, it is yet without doubt expoſed for a

praie to all the neighbours, if they were not ſtaied with otherItaly a praie to all h
                           •
                        r neighbours, and 
                           ••
                        y. warres. If we conſider the antiquitie of the royal gouernment, & how it hath been practiſed of all nations almoſt, either wholy, or in part, to their great honor & felicitie, we ſhall be conſtrained to prefer it before all others, & to account all thoſe happy that liue vnder a Monarchy. As men liued in old time (ſaith Ariſtotle) vnder Kings, ſo they
                     Of the antiquitie of a kingdome. 
                     thought that the gods had a king. All nations (ſaith Cicero) obeyed kings in old time, which kind of rule was at the firſt beſtowed vpon moſt inſt men. And it hath greatly profited our commonwealth, that from the beginning therof it hath been ruled by a kingly gouernment. The firſt name of Empire and rule, knowne in the earth (ſaith Saluſt) was the royall Estate: but then men liued without couetouſnes, euery one being content with his own. From the beginning (as Trogus Pompeius writeth) of countries and nations, the gouernment was in the hands of kings, who were not lift vp to that high degree of maieſ
                           •
                        ie by popular ambition▪ but for their modeſtie, which was knowne & approoued of good men. Then the people were not kept in awe by any lawes, but the pleaſure & will of Princes ſtood for all lawes. They were more giuen to keepe the frontiers of their Empire, than to inlarge them. Kingdomes were bounded by his countrie that raigned therein. Ninus king of the Aſſyrians,Ninus was the firſt that extended the limits of his kingdom. whome the Scripture calleth Nimrod, (that is a rebell) and a mightie hunter, was the firſt that changed the ancient cuſtome of the nations, through greedie deſire of ruling, and that beganne to warre vpon his neighbours. For finding that the people knew not as yet how to reſiſt, he ſubdued them al, from his kingdome to the end of Lybia. Almoſt all the ancient nations of greateſt renowne liuedWhat Eſtates were ruled Mona
                           •
                        chically. vnder the royall gouernment, as the Scythians, Ethiopians, Indians, Aſſyrians, Medes, Egyptians, Bactrians, Armenians, Macedonians, Iewes, and Romanes, after they were wearie of other gouernements. Thoſe alſo that are moſte famous at this daie, liue after the ſame ſort, as the Frenchmen, Spaniards, Engliſhmen, Polonians, Danes, Moſcouites, Tartares, Turkes, Abiſſines, Moores, Agiameſques, Zagathians, Cathains. Yea the

ſauage people newly diſcouered, are in a manner all vnder kings. And they that liue in other kinds of Common-wealths, as the Venetians, do retaine an outward ſhewe ofThe Dukedome of Venice is electiue. a king, whome they call a Duke, who is electiue, and to continue his eſtate as long as he liueth. In other places they haue Gonfalonners, as at Lucques; the like whereof they were woont to haue at Florence, and at Sienna. In ſome places they haue Aduoyers, or Bourg-maiſters, as in the Cantons of Switzerland, and in the free townes ofWhat this word Emperour importeth. Germany, which acknowledge an Emperour. Vpon which name we will note by the way, that it importeth no more than the name of a king, although amongſt the Lawyers and others, there haue beene infinite queſtions as touching the authoritie and preheminence of both: namely, that the Emperours haue vſurped ouer other kings vntill this preſent, albeit the power and maieſtie of the Empire is greatly diminiſhed, ſo that nothing elſe remaineth in a manner but the name and ſhadow of it within Germany.Vpon what occaſion the name of Emperour was firſt giuen to a Monarch. As for this title of Emperor, which the Romane Monarks tooke to themſelues, & before vſed to call their Generals in warre by that name, it was vpon this occaſion taken vp. After they had depriued Tarquine of the kingdome of Rome, by reaſon of his pride and inſolencie, this name of king became ſo odious amongſt the Romanes, that it was forbidden to be vſed, by an edict and ſolemn oath. Whervpon when their popular Eſtate was changed into a Monarchie, they would not call their Monarch by the name of King, by reaſon of their ancient oath, but called him Emperour, as Appian writeth. But to continue the diſcourſe of our principall matter, and to anſwer briefly toThe reaſons alleadged againſt a Monarchie anſwered. the reaſons alleadged againſt a Monarchye, we haue firſt to note, that the moſt part of the dangers mentioned do ceaſe, where the Monarchy goeth by ſucceſſion, as it doth in ours. For there is no cauſe of feare in regard of any that might aſpire to the Crowne, or of the treaties and alliances, which are not broken by the Prince his death, but renued and confirmed by his ſucceſſor and heire, vnles before they were greatly preiudiciall to the Eſtate. That new

Princes ſeeke after nouelties, it may be ſaid of ſome: but it is much more vſuall in Ariſtocraticall and Popular Eſtates. For Magiſtrates that are renued ſo often, would be very ſorowfull that their yeere ſhould run out before they had done ſomething that might cauſe men to ſpeake either good or euill of them. As for the troubles about the gouernment of a yoong king, peraduenture it falleth not out once in a hundreth yeeres: whereas if a Gonfalonner of Genes be choſen but onely for two yeeres, & the Common-wealth will be all on fire. To put into the ballance the cruelties and robberies of a tyrant, whereby to counterpeaze many good Princes, there is no ſhew of reaſon in ſo dooing. For we know well enough, that a peaceable Ariſtocratie wiſely guided, if it may be ſo, is better than a cruell tyrannie. But the chiefe matter ſubiect of our diſcourſe, is to knowe whether it be not better to haue oneOne iuſt Princ: better than many good Lords▪ and many Tyrants woorſe than one. iuſt and perfect king, than many good Lords: and by the contrary argument, whether the tyrannie of 50. tyrants is not more perillous, than of one only tyrant. Now, if many Maiſters, Pilots, how wiſe ſoeuer they are, hinder one another, when euery one deſireth to hold the Rudder: then ſurely many Lords wil do the like, when they ſeeke al togither to gouerne the Common-wealth, albeit they are wiſe and vertuous. And truly no Ariſtocratical or Popular EſtateMonarchies haue continu▪longeſt. can be named, that hath laſted aboue 600. yeeres togither, and few haue endured ſo long: but many Monarchies haue continued 1000. and 1200. yeeres in the ſame eſtate. Moreouer, they are agreeable to the vpright lawes of nature, which (as we haue before diſcourſed) do al lead vs to a Monarchy. But there is more to be conſidered of in our French kingdome, which ought to mooue all French harts very much to deſire the preſeruation therof, and to thinke themſelues happy, that they may liue vnder it: I meane that which we touched in the beginning of our ſpeech: namely, the agreement & participation, which it hath with all good policies. Many Politicks haue giuenThe opinion of many Politicks touching a mixt eſtate of a Common wealth. this out, that no Common-wealth inſtituted to continue long, ought to be ſimple or of one only kind: but that the

vertues & properties of the other Eſtates muſt meete togither in it, to the end that nothing grow out of proportion, which might cauſe it to degenerate to the next euill, and ſo conſequently ouerthrow it. This was firſt obſeruedThe Lacedemonian eſtate mingled. by Lycurgus, who in ordaining the Lacedemonian Common-wealth, mingled the Senate with the Kings, & after the Ephories were eſtabliſhed aboue the Kings, inſomuch that they were mingled and weighed ſo equally togither, that a man could not wel diſcerne vnder what kind of gouernmentThe Carthaginian Common-wealth was mixt. it was erected. The Carthaginian cōmonwealth alſo, moſt floriſhing for a long time, was ſo inſtituted in the beginning thereof. It had kings, the Ariſtocratical power of Senators, & the common people, who had their preheminenceThe Romane eſtate mingled. in things belonging vnto them. The Romane Common-wealth, during the time of hir greateſt glorie, had theſe 3. parts ſo equally & proportionably tempered, that a man could not tell, whether it were altogither Ariſtocratical, or Democratical, or Monarchicall. In looking to the power of the Conſuls, a man would haue iudged it Monarchical & Roial: to the Senators, Ariſtocratical: toThe eſtate of Venice compounded. the Tribunes & common ſort, Democratical. The Venetians in their Cōmonwealth repreſent al theſe eſtates. Their great Councel hauing ſoueraign power, wherof the Senat & the authority of al their Magiſtrats dependeth, doth repreſent the Popular eſtate. The Duke, who is Preſident as long as he liueth, repreſenteth the roial power, bicauſe he eſpecially retaineth the grauity & dignity therof. And the Colledge of ten men, with the Colledge of ancients, commonly called Sages, repreſenteth the Ariſtocraty, as Contarenus
                     What agreemēt the French Monarchy hath with euery good policie. writeth. As for our French Monarchy, it may wel be ſaid alſo to be partaker of all 3. in regard of the gouernment therof, albeit in truth the eſtate therof is a ſimple & pure Monarchy. For the king is the Monarch, beloued, obeied, & reuerenced: who although he haue all power & ſoueraigne authority to cōmand, & to do what he will, yet this great & ſoueraigne liberty ſeemeth in ſome ſort to be ruled & limited by good lawes & ordinances: and by the multitude & great authority of Officers, & Counſellors,

who are aſwell neere his perſon, as in ſundry places of his kingdom. The 12. Peeres, the ſecret & priuy councels, the Parliament & great Councel, the Chambers of accounts, the Treaſorers, & Generals of charges reſemble in ſome ſort the Ariſtocraty. The States yeerely helde in the Prouinces, the Mairalties of townes, Shreeualties, Conſulſhips Capitolats, & Church-wardens, are as it were the forme of a Democraty, as Sieſſel declareth more at large. Moreouer the general Eſtates of the Realme, which are woont to be gathered togither to deliberate (the king being Preſident) of all matters concerning the Eſtate, doe they not ſufficiently teſtifie the happie order therof, drawing neere to the gouernment of a good Oeconomiſt, when the king (as Aristotle ſaith) commandeth in his kingdome, as a good father of a familie ruleth ouer his children, with loue, and according to right and iuſtice? Wherefore although all the authoritie of Officers, Counſellors, Parliaments, and Eſtates, dependeth (as riuers of a fountaine) of the onely power of their king and Prince, yet of his fatherly and royall goodnes he granteth them ſuch authoritie, that hardly could he do any thing that were very violent, or too preiudiciall to his ſubiects. And if ſome ſuch actions may be noted, they come rather through the fault of his Counſellors, than from his Maieſty. Thus let vs conclude with Plato, that the royall gouernment and authority ought to be preferred before all others policies, as that which draweth neereſt to the diuinitie. But it muſt haue a Senate of good men ioined vnto it, after the forme of an Ariſtocratie, as our kings haue alwaies vſed to haue, of their natural benignitie, which maketh them inclinable to all exerciſes of vertue, pietie, and iuſtice.
               
            
            
               Of diuers kinds of Monarchies, and of a Tyranny. Chap. 58.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Why men are diueiſly affected vnto diuers formes of gouernments. THe varietie of manners, and inclinations to diuers things, which is (we ſee) particularly in euery one from his birth, and generally

throughout all nations of the world, diſpoſeth without doubt the people as they growe in age and iudgement, and according to their bringing vp, to like one kind ofThe praiſe of the French nation for their loue to a Monarchy. gouernment rather than another. But Frenchmen haue euen to theſe laſt times, caried away the praiſe of a more naturall and conſtant diſpoſition, loue, obedience, and fidelitie towards the maieſtie of a king, than other nations euer ſhewed to their forme of eſtate and gouernment. For amongſt them all, there is not one nation to be found, that hath ſo conſtantly continued in their lawes and ancient cuſtomes without any alteration and change, as this flouriſhing Monarchie, which hath alſo gone beyond them all in goodnes and mildnes of gouernment, as we may ſee better (my Companions) if we compare with it thoſe ſundry ſorts of Monarchies, which haue been heretofore, and doe at this day flouriſh, of which many come as neere to a tyrannie, as ours is farre diſtant from it. And to make a tyrannie appeere more odious, we will conſider the pernitious and miſerable eſtate thereof.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     The difference betweene the rule of a king, and of a tyrant. As it properly belongeth to a royall eſtate to gouerne and to rule ſubiects, not according to the ſenſuall appetite, and diſordered will of the Prince, but by maturitie of counſell, and by obſeruation of lawes and of iuſtice: ſo it agreeth with a tyrant to raigne by his abſolute will, without all regard either of lawes, or of the precepts of iuſtice.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  A tyrant (ſaith Seneca) differeth from a king in effect, not in name. The one ſeeketh his owne profite onely, and the other, the profite of the Common-wealth. Now let vs heare ARAM, who will teach vs to diſcerne them well by their works.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Amongſt all the Monarchies that euer were, or are at this daye among men, moſt of the ancient authorsFiue kinds of Monarchies. and great Politicks haue noted out fiue ſundric ſortes, of which I purpoſe heere to diſcourſe particularly with briefe examples, that the excellencie of ours may the better appeere ouer others, eſpecially ouer thoſe that decline much vnto tyrannye, whoſe ſhame

and infamie I will heere diſplay. The firſt and moſt ancientHow the firſt Monarchy came vp. kind of Monarchy was that, which was voluntarily offered by the people for ſome heroicall vertue appeering in thoſe men whom they iudged worthie to gouerne them iuſtly and vprightly. And when they continued in this ſort to declare themſelues benefactors of the multitude, in gathering them togither, in giuing vnto them territories, and in diſtributing lands among them, in finding out of arts, in making of warre, and in the adminiſtration of iuſtice vnto them, their authoritie and power did lawfully deſcend to their ſucceſſors, who had ſoueraigne power in time of warre, and were chiefe in certain ſolemn ceremonies of their ſacrifices. Herodotus, Demosthenes, Aristotle, Cicero, and many others, make mention of this kind of Monarchy. After the floud, when the number of men increaſed, Noah perſwaded his children, and others of his poſteritie, to diſperſe themſelues in diuers countries, to till the ground, and to build townes, and to this ende he aſſigned to euery one his Prouince by lot. Nimrod the ſonne of Cuſh, whoſe grandfather Noah was, abodeGen. 10. 8. of the raigne of Nimrod. with his men in the land of the Chaldeans, and was their firſt king, and the firſt king of Babylon. He wasNimrod was the firſt king that warred vpon his neighbours. the firſt that beganne to extend his bounds by force vpon his neighbours, ſending whole companies of people into many and diuers countries, to laye the foundations of other kingdomes, as hiſtories doe giue vs certaine knowledge thereof. This is the cauſe why many eſtabliſh the firſt Monarchy in Aſſyria vnder him. We read alſo in good authors, that the firſt and ancient kings of Egypt kept themſelues a long time in this heroical vertue, whichOf the happie raigne of the king▪ of Egypt. had procured vnto them their dignitie. They liued not diſorderedly, as thoſe doe, who bicauſe of their dominion, iudge their owne will to be a iuſt lawe for them, but they followed the conſtitutions of lawes, aſwell in the gathering of their duties and tributes, as in their manner of life. They vſed the ſeruice of Noble mens and ofThey vſed the ſeruice onely of Noble mens children, 
                           •
                        nd they wel learned Princes children onely, who were of the age of twentie yeeres, and were inſtructed in all ſciences. The reaſon

whereof was, that the king being pricked forward with the ſight of thē that were about him, might beware how he committed any thing woorthie of reproch. And truly there is nothing that corrupteth Princes ſo much as vitious ſeruants, who ſeeke to pleaſe their ſenſuall deſires and affections. When the king aroſe in the morning, he was bound firſt to take and receiue all the letters and requeſts that were brought vnto him, that anſwering neceſſarie matters firſt, all his affaires might be guided by order and reaſon. Then he went to the Temple to offer ſacrifice to the gods, where the Prelate and chiefe Prieſt, afterThe Prieſts of Egypt vſed to praiſe their Princes in the Temple before the people. the ſacrifice and praiers were ended, rehearſed with a loud voice in the preſence of the people, what vertues were in the king, what reuerence and religion towardes the gods was in him, and what clemencie and humanitie towards men. Moreouer, he told that he was continent, iuſt, noble-minded, true, liberall, one that brideled his deſires, and puniſhed malefactors with a more mild and light puniſhment than the greatnes of their ſinne and offence required, rewarding alſo his ſubiects with graces & gifts that were greater than their deſerts. This done, he exhorted the king to a happie life agreeable to the gods, and likewiſe to good manners, by following after honor and vertue, and therewithall propounded vnto him certaine examples of the excellent deedes of ancient kings,The diet of the ancient kings of Egypt. thereby to prouoke him the rather therunto. Theſe kings liued with ſimple meates, as with veale & birds for all diſhes: they kept very exactly all the lawes and ordinances of their countrie in euery point of their life, which was no leſſe directed euen in the leaſt things, than the ſimpleſt of their ſubiects. And truly ſo long as the kings of Egypt were ſuch zealous obſeruers of their lawes, and of iuſtice, & raigned peaceably among their ſubiects, they brought many ſtrang nations into their ſubiection, & gathered togither infinite riches, whereby they adorned their countrie with great buildings and ſumptuous works, and deckedOf the ſecond kind of Monarchy. their townes with many gifts and benefits. The Barbarian kingdomes were the ſecond kinde of Monarchy:

namely, the ancient Monarchies of the Aſſyrians, Medes, and Perſians, whoſe Princes vſurped Lordlie rule ouer their goods and perſons, and gouerned their ſubiects as a father of a familie doth his ſlaues. Which kind of gouernment ſauoureth more of a tyrannie, than of a kingdome: beſides, it is directly againſt the law of nature, which keepeth euery one in his libertie, and in the poſſeſſion of his owne goods. Notwithſtanding when by the law of Arms, and of iuſt warre, a Prince is made Lord ouer any people, they properly belong to him that conquereth, and they that are ouercome, are made his ſlaues by the ancientThe difference betweene a Lord-like Monarchy and a tyranny. conſent of all nations: and this maketh the difference betweene the Lord-like Monarchy, and a tyrannic, which abuſeth free ſubiects as ſlaues. Of this ſecond kinde of Monarchy was the kingdome of Perſia (as Plato writeth) vnder Cambyſes, Xerxes, and other kings, vntill the laſt Darius. For vſurping more abſolute authoritie to rule, thanMarks of a tyrannicall gouernment. was conuenient, they began to contemne their Vaſſals, and to account of them as of ſlaues: and putting no more confidence in them, they intertained into their ſeruice mercenarie ſouldiors and ſtrangers, whereby they made their owne ſubiects vnfit for warre, and ſo in the end loſt their eſtate, when it ſeemed to haue attained to the top of worldlie proſperitie. Such is the eſtate of the Turke at thisOf the eſtate of the Turke. day, wherein he is ſole Lord, commanding ouer his ſubiects in rigorous manner, aſwell ouer the Muſulmans, as Chriſtians, and Iewes. He vſeth in his principall affaires, which concerne peace and warre, and matters of gouernment, the ſeruice of runnagate ſlaues, whom he placeth in authoritie, changeth or depoſeth as he thinks good, without peril and enuie: yea he ſtrangleth them vpon the leaſt ſuſpition or diſlike conceiued of them, not ſparing his owne children and others of his blood, if they anger him. So did Sultan Solyman deale with Hibrahim Baſcha, who wasThe death of Hibrahim Baſcha. almoſt of equall authoritie with him: inſomuch that he was there called the Seignour, king of the Ianitzaries, the Baſcha, and king of the men of Armes. Neuertheles in one night, wherin he made him ſtay & ſup with him, & lie in his

owne chamber, he cauſed him to be ſlaine, and his bodie to be caſt into the ſea. The morrow after he ſeazed vpon his goods, as confiſcate, and caried them away: and yet no man euer knewe the cauſe of his death, except it were this, that he was growne too great, and conſequently ſuſpected of his maiſter, who was a Tyrant, rather than aThe Turke diſpoſeth of all Lordſhips at his pleaſure. King. Likewiſe he keepeth in his hands all the Lordſhips of his kingdome, which he diſtributeth to men of warre, who are charged to maintaine a certaine number of men of Armes, and of horſes, according to the rate of their reuenew: and when it pleaſeth him he taketh them away againe. Neither is there any man in all the countries vnder his obedience, that poſſeſſeth Townes, Caſtles, and Villages, or dwelleth in ſtrong houſes, or that dare build higher than one ſtorie, or than a Dooue-houſe. The greatOf the Eſtate of Moſcouia. Knes, or Duke of Moſcouia, exceedeth for ſeueritie and rigour of commanding, all the Monarchs in the world, hauing obtained ſuch authoritie ouer his ſubiects both Eccleſiaſticall and ſecular, that he may diſpoſe of their goods and liues at his pleaſure, ſo that none dare gaineſay him in any thing. They confeſſe publikely, that the will of their prince is the will of God, and that whatſoeuerOf the king of Ethiopia. he doth, is done by the will of God. The king of Ethiopia is alſo a Lordlike Monarch, hauing (as Paulus Iouius affirmeth) 50. kings no leſſe ſubiect vnto him than ſlaues.The king of Ethiopia whipped his Lords like ſlaues. And Frauncis Aluarez writeth, that he hath ſeene the great Chancellour of that countrie ſcourged ſtarke naked with other Lords, as the very ſlaues of the prince, wherein they thinke themſelues greatly honoured. TheOf the kingdom of Peru. Emperour Charles the fift, hauing brought vnder his obedience the kingdome of Peru, made himſelfe ſoueraigne Lord thereof in regard of goods, which the ſubiects haue not, but as they farme them, or for terme of life at theOf the third kind of Monarchy. moſt. The third kind of Monarchy, whereof the Ancients made mention, was that of Lacedemonia, wherein the king had not abſolute power, but in time of warre out of the countrie, and a certaine preheminence ouer the ſacrifices. We made mention of their gouernment before. The

firſt kings in Rome were ſacrificers alſo, and afterward, the emperors called themſelues Pontifices, that is, chiefe biſhops: and thoſe of Conſtantinople were conſecrated, asWhat kings took vpon them ſoueraigntie in religion. our kings of Frāce are. In like maner the Caliphaes of the Saraſins were kings and chiefe biſhops in their religion: the one in Bagdet, the other in Cayre. The king of Calecuth is chiefe of his religion, and for this cauſe goeth before the other kings of India in dignitie, and is called Samory, that is to ſay, God on earth. The Pope commandeth ouer the temporalties of the church, called S. Peters patrimonie, as king: and is reaſt of the latin chriſtian churches, as head of the religion, I meane in thoſe places, & of thoſe perſons, where he is ſo taken and acknowledged. The king of England certaine yeeres paſt tooke vpon him the title of king and ſupreme gouernor of the Church. The fourthOf the 4. kind of monarchie which is electiue kind of monarchie is electiue, not hereditarie: in ſome places for terme of life, as the empire of Almaigne, the kingdom of Polonia, of Bohemia, and of Hungaria: in other places for a certaine time, as was the Dictatorſhip at Rome. Theſe eſtates are not commonly ſo ſure and durable as thoſe that are hereditarie, bicauſe of the practiſes & foreſtalling of voyces, which are for the moſt part vſed, wherupon ſeditions ariſe, to the great detriment of thoſe kingdomes. For the prince being dead, the eſtate remainethThe dangerous ſtate of an electiue kingdom when the prince is dead. in a pure Anarchie, without king, without lord, without gouernment, & in danger of ruine, like to a ſhip without a Pilote, which is ready to be caſt away with the firſt wind that bloweth. Alſo a gate is ſet open to theeues and murderers, who kill and ſlay at their pleaſure vpon hope of impunitie: as it is commonly to be ſeene (as hiſtories rehearſe) after the death of the kings of Thunes, of theExamples therof in the kingdoms of Thu
                        
                           •
                        es, of Eg
                           •
                        pt. The great diſorder in Rome vp
                           •
                        n the death of the Pope. Souldans of Egypt, and of the Popes of Rome: where the ſeat being vacant, the firſt thing that is commonly done, is the breaking open of priſons, the killing of iailers, the letting out of guiltie perſons, and the reuenging of iniuries by all poſſible meanes: and this continueth vntil the colledge of cardinals haue agreed vpon a ſucceſſor. And in deed, in the yeere 1522. two were executed, againſt whom

it was prooued, that at ſundry tumults mooued at this election, they had ſlaine an hundreth and ſixteene men.In the empire of Germanie. As touching the Empire of Almaigne, their hiſtories are full of impoueriſhmentes fallen vpon them through the election of their Emperours, as well by ciuill warres, as by murders and poiſonings. So that within three hundrethIn the Popedome. and three-ſcore yeeres ſince the Empire fell vnder the election of ſeuen princes, eight or nine Emperours haue been ſlaine or poiſoned, beſides thoſe that haue been ſhamefully thruſt out of their imperiall ſeate. Eccleſiaſticall perſones alſo haue not wanted ciuill warres about their elections, wherein no ſuch prouiſion could be made, but that two and twentie Popes were cut off,All electiue princes are either taken indefinitely, or out of certaine eſtates. and many thruſt out of their ſeate: as may be ſeen in the Regiſters of the Vatican. Nowe we muſt note further, that among the electiue eſtates, euery election is either of ſuch perſones as the Electours like of, as in Germanie they doe not onely chuſe for emperoures the princes of Almaigne out of diuers families, but ſometime ſtraungers haue been choſen, as Alphonſus king of Spaine, and Richard Duke of Cornewall, and brother to king Henry the third: or elſe it is out of certaine inferiour eſtates, asThe Souldans of Cayre choſen out of the Mammelucks. the Pope out of the Colledge of Cardinals, and not long ſince the Souldan of Cayre out of the Mammeluckes: vnto which degree of honour none could aſcend, except before he had been a ſlaue and a runnagate Chriſtian: ſo that afterward he commaunded abſolutely in Egypt and Soria. This eſtate hauing continued about three hundreth yeeres, was not long ſince quite ouerthrowen by Sultan Selym king of the Turkes, who tooke the laſt Souldane, and cauſed him to bee caried vpon an oldeThe great maſterſhip of Malta electiue, and that alſo of Pruſſia. Cammell all a-long Cayre, and then to be hanged vpon one of the gates of that Citie. The great maſter of Malta is choſen by the chiefe Priors of his religion: as that alſo of Pruſſia was before the agreement made with the king of Polonia, by which compoſition his eſtate wasOf the fift kind of Monarchie turned into a Duchie, ſubiect to the crowne of Poland, and of electiue made hereditarie. The fift kinde of Monarchie

is hereditarie, and is properly called royall andwhich is hereditarie. lawfull: whether the king come to the eſtate by right of ſucceſſion, as Thucidides writeth of the auncient kings: or whether the kingdome be giuen by vertue of the lawe, without regard had to daughters, or to males deſcendingThe Salick law excludeth daughters and their ſonnes. of them, as it is in this kingdome, by the Salicke lawe: or whether it bee giuen as a meere gift, as the kingdomes of Naples and Sicill were giuen to Charles of Fraunce, and ſince giuen agayne to Lewes of France, firſt Duke of Aniow: whether it bee left by will, as the kinges of Thunis, Fez, and Marocke vſed to doe, and as it was practiſed alſo by Henry the eight, king of England,Kingdoms left by will. who left his kingdome to his ſonne Edward, appointing Mary after him, and after hir Elizabeth, or by what other meanes ſo euer the Prince becommeth lord of the eſtate, his monarchie is alwayes royall and lawfull, if he in like maner bee obedient to the lawes of nature, as he deſireth that his ſubiectes ſhould bee towards him, leauyng to euery one his naturall libertie and proprietie of his goodes, and looking to the profite and commoditie of the Common-wealth. This kingly gouernment Aristotle compareth to Oeconomie. For although a father of a familie gouerne his houſe after his pleaſure, yet he reſpecteth the commoditie of his familie. Vnder this happie fourme of gouernement, beyngOf the happy gouernment of the eſtate of France. the beſt of all, wee may boaſt that wee liue in Fraunce, through the goodneſſe of our kinges, who neyther ordaine, nor put any thing in execution, but by mature deliberation and counſaile, which they take with the princes of their bloud, and with other notable and graue perſones whome they call neere vnto them, as though their ſoueraigne power were ruled and moderated. For firſt the king commaundeth nothing that taketh effect, if it bee not ſigned by his Secretaries, and ſealed with his great ſeale: that is to ſaye, ſeeneThe Chancellor of France muſt approoue all matters before they can paſſe. and approoued by the Chauncellour, who is a ſeuere Controuler of all matters that paſſe. All the kinges letters muſt alwayes of neceſſitie bee approoued by

the iudges to whom they are directed, and examined not only whether they were obtained by priuie inſinuation or fraudulent dealing, but alſo whether they be lawful or vnlawfull. Yea in criminall matters, the re-inabling of ſuch as before were not capable of offices or dignities, writs of repeale from baniſhment, pardons & remiſſions, are skanned with ſuch rigor by them, that the procurers of ſuch letters are compelled to deliuer them bare-headed and kneeling, and to offer themſelues priſoners, of what eſtate ſoeuer they be: in ſo much that oftentimes men are condemned and executed with their pardons about them. As for the giftes and expences of the king, whether they beOfficers in France ſworne to let nothing paſſe that is hurtfull to the realme, notwithſtanding the king his cō
                        mandement. ordinarie or extraordinarie, the chamber of accounts examineth them narowly, and many times cutteth off ſuch as haue no good ground: by reaſon that the officers are ſworne to let nothing paſſe to the detriment of the realm, notwithſtanding any letters of commandement whatſoeuer. Among other things the king may not alienate his crowne reuenues, without ſome cauſe knowen to the ſayd officers of accounts, and to the parliaments. And which is more, publike treaties with neighbour ſtates, edicts and decrees haue no authoritie before they are publiſhed in the high courts. By which moderation his power is not leſſened, but made ſurer, more durable, and leſſe burthenſome to his ſubiects, being wholy ſeparated from tiranny, which is hated of God and men, as we may haue further knowledge by diſcourſing thereof particularly. So that ouer and beſides thoſe fiue kindes of monarchies mentioned of vs, tiranny may be put for the ſixt, which we may call that, wherein the monarch treading vnder foote the lawes of nature, abuſeth the libertie of free ſubiects, as if they were ſlaues, and other mens goods as his owne. AmongOf a tiranny, & of the name of a tirant. the auncients the name of tyrant was honourable, and ſignified nothing elſe (being a Greeke worde) but a prince that had gotten the gouernment of the eſtate with out the conſent of his ſubiects, and of a companion had made himſelfe a maſter, whether he were a wiſe and iuſt prince, or cruel and vniuſt. And in deed moſt of them became

wicked to make ſure their eſtate, life & goods, knowing that they were fallen into many mens hatred, bicauſe they had inuaded the ſoueraigntie. In this reſpect therfore was this dominion & rule called tyrannical, bicauſe it gouerned in lord-like maner without right ouer free men, compelled and forced to obey. But generally we may call that a tirannie, when the prince accounteth all his will as a iuſt law, and hath no care either of pietie, iuſtice, or faith, but doth all things for his owne priuate profite, reuenge, or pleaſure. And as a good king conformeth himſelfe toThe difference between a good king and a tyrant. the lawes of God and nature, ſo a tyrant treadeth them vnder foote: the one ſtriueth to enriche his ſubiects, the other to deſtroy them: the one taketh reuenge of publike iniuries, and pardoneth his owne, the other cruelly reuengeth iniuries done to himſelfe, and forgiueth thoſe that are offered to others: the one ſpareth the honour of chaſte women, the other triumpheth in their ſhame: the one taketh pleaſure to be freely admoniſhed, and wiſely reprooued when he hath done amiſſe, the other miſliketh nothing ſo much, as a graue, free, and vertuous man: the one maketh great account of the loue of his people, the other of their feare: the one is neuer in feare but for his ſubiects, the other ſtandeth in awe of none more than of them: the one burtheneth his as little as may be, and then vpon publike neceſſitie, the other ſuppeth vp their bloud, gnaweth their bones, and ſucketh the marrow of his ſubiectes to ſatiſfie his deſires: the one giueth eſtates and offices to meete with briberie and oppreſſion of the people, the other ſelleth them as deare as may bee, and careth not for the oppreſſion of his ſubiectes: the one in time of warre hath no recourſe but to his ſubiects, the other warreth againſt none but them: the one hath no garde or garriſon but of his owne people, the other none but of ſtraungers: the one reioyceth in aſſured reſt, the other languiſheth in perpetuall feare: the one is honoured in his life tyme, and longed for after his death, the other is defamed in his lyfe, and rent in pieces after his death. Examples hereof are

                     Diogenes girdeth Dionyſius. in euery mans ſight. And therefore Diogenes the Sinopian meeting one day in the citie of Corinth with Dionyſius the younger, tyraunt of Syracuſa, who was then brought into the eſtate of a priuate man, baniſhed from his countrey, and fallen from his dignitie, ſpake thus vnto him: Truely Dionyſius thou art nowe in an eſtate vnwoorthie of thee. The tyraunt ſtanding ſtill withall, made him this anſwere: I like thee well Diogenes, bicauſe thou haſt compaſſion of my miſerable fortune. What? (replied the Philoſopher) doeſt thou thinke that I pitie thee? I am rather grieued to ſee ſuch a ſlaue as thou, who deſerueſt to growe olde and to die in that curſed eſtate of a tyraunt, as thy father did, to take thy pleaſure in ſuche ſafetie, and to paſſe away thy tyme freely amongſt vs without feare. And to ſay truth, tirannie is ſuche a miſerable condition, that euen they that practiſe it and glorie therein, are conſtrained manie tymes to confeſſe with their owne mouth, that noOf the miſerable condition of tyrants. kinde of life is ſo wretched as theirs. This ſelfe tyrant Dionyſius, when hee was in the greateſt glorye of his eſtate, declared as much to Democles, one of his familiar friendes, who had ſayd that he was moſt happie. Wilt thou (quoth Dionyſius to him) enjoy my felicitie but for one day onely? Whereunto when Democles agreed,Democles was quickly wearie of the eſtate of Dionyſius. hee cauſed him to be ſerued at the table as himſelfe was woont to be, with all the magnificence that could be deuiſed, hanging in the meane while a ſworde right ouer his head, which was tied to the roofe aloft onely by one haire of a horſe taile. When Democles perceiued that, he was well contented to make a ſhort dinner, and to paſſe away the reſt of the day in his former eſtate. Loe, (quoth the tyraunt then vnto him) how happie our life is, whichA tyrant cannot long continue. with all our armed garde hangeth but by a little threed. Moreouer, the raigne of tyraunts beyng without meaſure and reaſon, and guided onely by violence cannot be of any long continuaunce. This is that which Thales the wiſe man ſayde, that there was nothing ſo ſtraunge or rare, as an olde tyrant. And albeit they liue miſerablie

in perpetuall diſtruſt of euery one, yea, of their neereſt kindred, yet their ende is more wretched. For thereTyrants haue commonly an euil end. were fewe of them that died not a cruell and extraordinarie death, moſt of them being ſlayne and murdered: and others perſecuted with ſtraunge griefes, died like mad and deſperate men, through the remembraunce of their corrupt life, and of the cruelties which they had committed. In auncient time tyrannie was ſo deteſtable,Examples of the extraordinarie deaths of tyrants. that euen ſcholers and women ſought to winne the reward of honour by killing tyraunts: as Aristotle the Logitian did, who ſlew a tyraunt of Sycionia, and as Thebe, who killed hir husband Alexander, tyrannt of the Phereans. Thirtie tyraunts were ſlayne in one day in the Citie of Athens, by Theramenes, Thraſibulus, and Archippus, who had but three-ſcore and tenne men to execute that enterpriſe. Leander tyraunt of Cyrena, was taken aliue, and being ſewed into a leather bagge, was caſt into the ſea. Aristodemus tyraunt of Cumes, tooke Xenocrita by force, beyng a wealthie citizens daughter whome he had baniſhed, and keeping hir with him as his wife, ſhee ſtirred vp Thymoteles and others to recouer the libertie of their countrey, who beyng ſafelie let into the tyrants chamber by hir, ſlew Aristodemus. Beſids, the auncientes had appoynted great rewardes and recompencesRewards appointed for murderers of tyrants. for the murderers of tyrauntes: namelie, titles of Nobilitie, of Proweſſe, of Chiualrie, images, and honourable titles: to bee ſhorte, the goodes of the tyrauntes were giuen vnto them, as to the true deliuerers of their Countrey. Nowe albeit wee ſayde, that this worde tyraunt was taken amongſt them for him that made him-ſelfe ſoueraigne Prince of his owne authoritie, with-out election, or right of ſucceſſion, or lotte, or iuſt warre, or ſpeciall callyng of GOD, yet wee muſt not inferre this conſequent, that therefore it is lawfull to kill euerie Prince that exerciſethIt is not lawfull for any to kill his Prince, although a tyrant. tyrannie. For it belongeth in no wiſe eyther to anye particular ſubiect, or to all in generall, to ſeeke the honour or lyfe of the Prince, that is abſolutely and

lawfully ſoueraigne, as we haue alreadie diſcourſed. Now to conclude our preſent ſpeech, we may ſee how farre the eſtabliſhment of this French Monarchie is from any inclination, and from all things that may ſeeme to giue any entraunce, life and preſeruation to a tirannie: nay it is cleane contrary thereunto, and goeth beyond all monarchies that euer were or are amongſt the ſundrie nations of men, for goodneſſe and mildeneſſe of gouernement: which ought wonderfully to ſtirre vp Frenchmen to perſeuere in loue, obedience, and fidelitie towardes their king, for which ſtraungers haue alwayes prayſed them.
               
            
            
               Of the Education of a Prince in good maners and conditions. Chap. 59.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  THe effect of cuſtome is wonderfull, yea it is ſo power-full, that it paſſeth nature, eſpeciallyCuſtome goeth beyond nature in that which is euil. in vice and diſſolutenes. Wherein if men be once plunged, it is a very hard matter, eſpecially if they be young, to drawe them out of it. But further when they know that they haue in their handes an vnbrideled licence, and a ſoueraigne authoritie to enioy their luſtes and deſires at their pleaſure, a man may then ſaie, that all hope of amendment is vtterly periſhed in them, and that it is altogether impoſſible to gaine any thing of them by counſell, inſtruction or reaſon. Therefore it is very certaine, that the principall hope and expectation of a Prince (after requeſt made to God, that by nature he may bee of a good and teach-able diſpoſition) ought to bee grounded alwayes in his educationThe chiefe hope of a prince dependeth (next to God) of his inſtitution. and firſt inſtitution, which beyng either good or badde, will bring foorth like effectes, to the great good or hurt of his ſubiectes. Nowe then (my Companions) let vs diſcourſe of that which we thinke ought to be obſerued in the right inſtruction of a Prince in all kinde of good maners, and commendable conditions, as well for his

owne profit, as for the common vtilitie of all thoſe ouer whom he is to command.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  Men are commonly carefull to ſtrengthen with rampires the bankes of riuers, which receine into them great quantitie of waters. But it is needefullA notable compariſon. that more diligence be vſed in preſeruing and fortifying the minde of a young prince with ſtrong reaſons, graue ſentences, and moſt learned preceptes of wiſedome, againſt the greatneſſe of his fortune, the great aboundaunce of wealth, riote, delightes, and flatterie, diſguiſed with fidelitie and libertie, which, lyke to a mightie ſtreame, fall from ſome rocke to ouer-whelme and to drowne the weake ſeedes of Vertue naturallie in a Prince.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Why great care is to be had in the inſtitution of a prince. Men muſt bee ſo much the more carefull in the dreſſing and tillage of that ſpirite and ſoule, which they know ought to bee vigilant, wiſe, prudent, and iuſt for the benefite of many. Such a one is the king or magiſtrate, or any other man that is to deale in gouernement, and in publike affaires. For to fill that ſoule with vertue and goodneſſe, is to profite an infinite number by the meaues of one. Now let vs heare AMANA diſcourſe vpon this matter.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  All kingdomes vnder which men doe liue at this day, are eyther hereditarie, or giuen by election.The kingdom of France goeth only from male to male. Some that are hereditarie goe by ſucceſſion from male to male onely, as this kingdome of Fraunce. And this did the French-men wiſely ordaine in the beginning of their Monarchie by the Salicke lawe, by which prouidence and fore-ſight, they haue continued in the ſame kind of gouernement almoſt one thouſand and two hundreth yeeres, ſo that the crowne neuer went out of their nation, neither hath the roiall linage chaunged oftener than thriſe in ſo long continuaunce: which thing neuer happened to any other Monarchie or Seignorie to any mans knowledge. In other kingdomes, when males are wanting daughters ſucceede, as in Spaine, England, and Scotland. Moreouer in hereditarie kingdomes, where

males ſucceede, in ſome places that honour is alwayes reſerued for the eldeſt, who giueth an honeſt penſion to his younger brethren, as it is in Fraunce: or if no regard be had to birth-right, either he is preferred that is fitteſt to gouerne, or he that is moſt warlike, and in greateſt fauourThe barbarous crueltie of Selim. with the ſouldiours, as in Turkie, Selim the firſt of that name, beyng the third and youngeſt ſonne of Baiazet the ſecond, vſurped the Empire by the aide of the Ianitzaries vpon his father, whome he cauſed to be poiſoned, and ſlew Achmat and Corcuth his two elder brothers, with all his nephewes, and others of Ottomans race, ſaying that nothing was pleaſaunter than to rule when all feare of kindred was taken away. In ſome places they kill not their brethren and kindred, but ſhut them vp in ſomeThe cuſtome of electing of a king in Ethiopia. moſt ſure and ſafe place of cuſtodie, as they vſe or are accuſtomed to doe in Ethiopia, where hee that muſt beare rule, is kept alone, the reſt are ſent to a very high and ſtrong mountaine, called the mountaine of the Iſraelites; from whence none of the male kinde may euer come foorth, except Prester Iohn die without heire of his bodie to ſucceede him in the crowne: for then he that is next vnto it, and knowen to be woorthieſt and fitteſt, is taken foorth. By this meanes that great kingdome hath continued very long without ciuill warre or murder, and neuerThe cuſtome of ſucceſſion in Calecuth. wanted of-ſpring of the royall race. In Calecuth, when the king dieth, although hee haue male children, or nephewes by his brother, yet none of them ſucceed in the kingdom, but his ſiſters ſonne: and if they faile, the next of the bloud royal commeth to the crowne. They ground this vpon a fooliſh and fond ſuperſtition which they haue in cauſing the Queene to bee defloured by ſome young prieſt called Bramin, in whoſe cuſtodie ſhe remaineth euer after, ſo long as the King is abroade. Whereuppon they preſume, and peraduenture not without good cauſe, that the children which deſcend or are borne of that Ladie, hold more of the prieſt than of the prince. Concerning kingdomes that goe by election, we haue ſpoken of them alreadie. Now bicauſe it is a very harde matter to

change him that is once choſen in ſuch a kingdome, greater conſideration muſt be had in making the election, leſt the ouer-ſight of one hower procure a perpetuall repentaunce. But where the prince is by nature and not by election, men muſt labour by carefull induſtrie and diligence to bring him vp, and to inſtruct him well by repleniſhing his mind with ſound opinions from his infancie, and by caſting vpon his new ground ſeedes of vertue and honeſtie, which by little and little may growe and waxe ripe with age, and hauing once taken roote, may abide ſtedfaſt and firme to his liues ende. For there is no timeWhen a prince may beſt be corrected. better and fitter to frame and to correct a prince in, than when he knowes not that he is a prince. For if he learne to obey from his infancie, when hee commeth to the degree of commaunding, he applieth and behaueth himſelfe a great deale better with his ſubiectes, than they that from their youth haue been alwayes free and exempted from ſubiection. For by ſuch education or bringing vp, a Prince addeth to his royall greatneſſe, and to thoſe faſhions which great men haue by nature, curteſie and gentle behauiour, which cannot but bee very acceptable to his people, and containe them more willingly in their duetie of obedience. Therefore the prince in his yong and tender yeeres muſt bee diligently imployed, not onely in with-drawing him from diſhoneſt things, but alſo in cauſing him to taſte of vertue, and to haue ſome preceptes thereof ingrauen in his brayne, vntill in the ende he vnderſtand all that belongeth to his duetie, and whatſoeuer elſe may helpe him forward to leade a good and happie life. If wiſe fathers with great care bring vp, and inſtruct their children, who ſhall ſucceed them but in the gouernment of ſome litle houſe in the countrey, how much greater care and labor ought to be taken in teaching him well & wiſely, who is to ſucceed in the Empire ouer much people, and whoſe life ought to be the diſcipline of their maners & conditiōs? For this cauſe a good & prudent prince muſt take pains in cauſing his children to be brought vp, that he remember he hath begotten them for the Common-wealth,

                     The beſt token of remembrāce that a Prince can leaue behind him. not to ſerue his priuate affections. Let him knowe, that although he erect a great number of images, builde ſumptuous houſes, eſtabliſh good and holeſome Ordinaunces, yet hee cannot leaue a more excellent marke of his, than a ſonne, who degenerating in nothing, repreſenteth the goodneſſe of his father by vertuous actions. For he dieth not that leaueth behinde him a liuely image of himſelfe. And truely it is the perfection of an excellent prince to rule in ſuch ſorte, as if hee would ſtriue, that his like for goodneſſe and iuſticeHow a prince ought to liue himſelfe, and to bring vp his children. coulde not ſucceed him, and ſo to bring vp his children, as if hee deſired that they ſhoulde ſurmount him in vertue. To this ende therefore let him make choice of all his ſubiectes, yea from what place ſo euer, and gather together vertuous and ſincere men, vncorrupted, graue, and ſuch as are learned not onely through preceptes, but alſo through the experience of manye thinges, to whome their age breedeth reuerence, their good lyfe authoritie, and their mildeneſſe and gentle behauiourWhat teachers a yong prince muſt haue. loue, and good-will: that the tender ſpirite of the yong prince, offended with the rough dealyng of his teachers, may not beginne to hate vertue before he know it, nor yet corrupted through their ouer-great gentleneſſe, degenerate and ſtarte aſide where it ought not. Wherefore Seneca ſayde, that a Prince his teacher muſt haue theſe two properties, Hee must know how to chide without
                     Two properties requiſite in him that teacheth a prince. 
                     ſhaming of him, and howe to prayſe hym without flatterie. Moreouer, great care muſt bee had in making choice of all ſuch perſones, whether they are men, women, children, or ſeruauntes, as come neere about him, eyther to gouerne, or to ſerue him, or to keepe him companie. For ſeeing the moſt part of mens mindes incline to euill, and no childe is ſo happily borne, but hee mayWhat maner of perſons muſt be about the prince. bee corrupted through wicked education, what may a man looke for but verie great euils from that Prince, who, of what nature and ſpirite ſoeuer he be, preſently after he is out of his cradle, is ſtuffed with fooliſh and falſe opinions, nouriſhed among fonde women, brought vp

in the middeſt of laſciuious maidens, of loſt children, vile and abiect flatterers, of iuglers and plaiers, of drunkards, of dice-plaiers and inuenters of pleaſures? briefly, in the midſt of ſuch caitifes, amongſt whom he heareth and learneth nothing but pleaſure, delight, pride, arrogancie, couetouſneſſe, choler and tirannie, and ſo departing from this ſchoole, takes vnto him the ſcepter and gouernment of his Empire? Now he that is elected and choſen to vndertakeThe duty of him that is choſen to bring vp the prince. ſuch a great and difficult charge, as is the education and inſtruction of the prince, muſt bring with him a will woorthie the ſame, conſidering with himſelfe, not how many benefices and biſhoprikes he may get into his hands, but how he may deliuer vp a vertuous prince vnto his countrey, which putteth all hir truſt and confidence in him. Let him know that they do good to all the people,To make a good prince is to do good to all his people. who make them good mē whom the people cannot want: as contrarywiſe, they that marre and corrupt princes and kings, ought to be an abomination to all men, and puniſhed no leſſe than they that put poiſon, not into a cup, but into a common fountaine, of which they ſee euery bodie drinke. Firſt then he that hath taken this charge vpō him, muſt narowly note whereunto the nature of the prince is inclined, ſeeing it may be knowen by ſome ſignes euen in his yong yeeres: as whether he be not giuen to anger, toThe inclination of a yong prince muſt firſt be knowen. ambition, to deſire of renowne, to riot, to play, to couetouſnes, to reuenge, to war, or to tiranny. After, when he knoweth to what vice he is enclined, he muſt fortifie his mind againſt the ſame with good opinions and with holie reſolutions, and labor to change his hart, which is yet tender, into a habite that is contrary to his nature. And when he perceiueth that his tender nature inclineth to honeſt and commendable things, or to ſuch vices as will eaſilie change into vertues in princes well brought vp, as to ambition and prodigalitie, he muſt pricke him forward, and helpe his good nature by diligent trauel. Neither muſt he vſe precepts onely to withdraw the prince from diſhoneſtHow a yong prince muſt be taught. things, & to procure in him a longing deſire to doe thoſe things that are vertuous, but he muſt labor to imprint and

to roote them in his memory by diuers formes, now by ſentences, another while by fables, after by compariſons, then by examples, or by ſome notable ſayings, ingrauen in rings, and painted in tables. Briefly, if there be any other thing wherein this age taketh pleaſure, let that be a meane to worke in him a taſte of vertue. Aboue al things ſpeciall regard is to be had, what opinions are ingrauen in the prince his braine. For the whole order of his life proceedeth from that fountaine. And therfore he muſt labor immediately to imprint in his mind holy and good opinions, which may ſerue for a counter-poiſon againſt the cō
                     mon errors of the ignorant people: but chiefly to inſtruct him throughly in gods truth, & in that which concerneth his ſaluation. He muſt perſwade him, that whatſoeuer isDeu. 17. 18. 19 The law of God belongeth to the prince. taught in the law of God, belongeth to none ſo much as to the prince, and that as he is to raign by him, ſo likewiſe it belongeth to his office to raigne according to his will, that he may enioy proſperitie in this world, and eternall felicitie in the bleſſed life to come. Let him be taught to loue vertue as the only good, and to hate vice as the onely euil: let him know that the one is folowed no leſſe with ſhame and diſhonor, than the other with glory and honor, eſpecially in a prince, in whom if vertue take place, as it were in a high watch-tower, it ſhineth ſo cleerely, that the brightnes thereof remaineth long after his death. As for all worldly pompe, antiquitie of petigree, images and riches, they are but meere vanitie and folly, not woorthie to be cared for, or to be admired by a vertuous prince. Let him be perſwaded that dignitie, greatnes and maieſtie are not to be ſought after by the helpe of fortune, or by humane means, but by wiſdome, integritie of life & maners, and by vertuous and noble deeds. Plato ſaith not withoutWhen a Common-wealth is happy. cauſe, that a Common-wealth will neuer be happie vntill princes play the Philoſophers, or Philoſophers take the rudder of the Empire in hand. Now his meaning is not to cal him a Philoſopher, that is learned in Logike, in naturall Philoſophie, and in the Mathematicks, but him, who with an vntamed hart deſpiſeth the vaine ſhadowes of

things, and followeth after true goods. A philoſopher andThe agreement between a Philoſopher and a Chriſtian. a Chriſtian differ but in name: and a prince wel inſtructed in piety, is truly both the one and the other. Therefore he ought to learne nothing ſooner (next to the law of God) than the morall philoſophie of the auncients, which teacheth all vertue. Is there any thing more fooliſh than to eſteeme highly of a prince if he vaute well, if he play well at tenniſe, if he be ſtoute and ſtrong: briefly, if he be cunning in ſome things, which peraduenture a peaſant would doe better than he, and in the meane while he is puffed vp with pride, he polleth his people, and ſporteth himſelfe in all kind of diſſoluteneſſe and pleaſure? What honor is it for a prince to go farre beyond the common ſort in precious ſtones, gold, purple, traine of ſeruants, and in other ornaments of the body, and in euery thing that is falſly called good, and in the meane while to be farre inferior in the true goods of the ſoule to many of his people, and thoſe of loweſt calling? Theſe opinions, as holy and inuiolable lawes, muſt bee ingrauen in the hart of a young prince, and muſt bee, as it were the firſt lines that are to be drawen in the voide table of his ſoule, namely, that he muſt ſtriue that none excell him in the goods of the ſoule, in wiſdome, magnanimitie, temperance and iuſtice.Wherin a prince ought to excell others. Frugalitie, modeſtie, and ſobrietie in other men may be attributed either to pouertie or to niggardlines, but in a prince they cannot but be a note of tēperance, I meane, when he vſeth goods modeſtly, who hath as much as he will. Ancient men called that prudence miſerable, which was gottē by the experience of things, bicauſe it is bought with publike loſſe & calamity. But ſuch kind of experience ought to be fartheſt off from a Prince, bicauſe the longer it is a learning, the greater cauſe is it of many euils vnto al his people. If Scipio Africanus had reaſon to ſay, that this ſpeech, I had not thought it, did not beſeem a wiſe man, how much more vnſeemely is it for a Prince, who cannot vtter the ſame without his great harme, and greater to the Common-wealth? For as in a voiage the fault of a common Mariner (ſaide Agapetus) doth but little hurte,

                     The fault of a Prince is much more hurtfull than that of a priuate man. whereas the ſlip of a Pilot bringeth ſhipwracke: ſo in monarchies the offence of a priuate man is more hurtfull to himſelfe than to the Common-wealth, but if the prince begin to faile, he hurteth euery one. This is the cauſe why the mind of a prince muſt eſpecially be inſtructed with good reſolutions & ſentences, to the end he may be skilfullA prince ought to be skilfull by reaſon and not by vſe. by reaſon and not by vſe. For then the counſel of aged men will ſupply that experience of things which is wanting in him. He muſt be giuen to vnderſtand, that his life is in the face of all the world, that he can do nothing that will be hid, and therfore if he be good, it muſt needs turne to the great benefit of many; if wicked, to their hurt likewiſe: bicauſe the prince is always the very portrature after which ſubiects conforme themſelues. He muſt know that the greater honour is giuen vnto him, the more he is to ſtriue that he may be woorthie of it, looking more to his owne doyngs and actions, than to the prayſes that men giue him, which he muſt beleeue and receiue, accordingHow a prince is to receiue the praiſes that are giuen him. as he behaueth himſelfe. For if hee rule well, they are due vnto him; if ill, he is honoured and praiſed, either through conſtraint, or of flatterie: or els it is to ſhew him vnder hand what he ought to bee. Let him know that as God hath placed the Sunne and the Moone in the heauens for a reſemblaunce of his diuinitie: ſo a prince is the like repreſentation and light in a kingdome, as long as he hath the feare of GOD, and the obſeruation of iuſtice imprinted in him. For theſe two things make their life diuine and celeſtiall, that are placed in high degree of power and authoritie: as contrarywiſe, the contempt of pietie and iuſtice, maketh it beaſt-like and ſauage. As God the giuer of all things ſtandeth not in neede of any mans ſeruice to receiue a good turne of him: ſo it is the dutie of a worthie prince, who repreſenteth the figure of the eternallGood precepts for princes ſet out by compariſons. king, to profite euery one with-out reſpect of his owne commoditie and glory. As God is not touched with any affections or paſſions, but ruleth and gouerneth all thinges perfectly by his prouidence: ſo after his example a prince laying aſide the perturbations

of his ſoule muſt follow reaſon onely in all his dooings. As there is nothing more common than the ſunne, which imparteth of hir light to all the celeſtiall bodies: ſo a Prince muſt be alwaies readye to profite the Common-wealth, and haue within him the light of wiſedome, to the end that if others looſe their brightnes, yet he may neuer be ouertaken with darknes. As the Sunne when it is higheſt in the Zodiacke mooueth ſloweſt: ſo the higher that a Prince is lift vp in greatnes and authoritie, the more gentle and gratious he ought to be, keeping himſelfe from dooing any thing that beſeemeth not a Prince. Therefore let him thinke, that nothing is more vile and abiect, than for him that is called a king and Prince of free men, to become a ſlaue to riot, choler, couetouſnes, ambition, & other vices of like qualitie, which are moſt vile and cruell maiſters. He muſt be ſo affected towards his ſubiects, as a good father of a familie is towards thoſe of his houſhold: bicauſe a kingdome is nothing els but a great familie, andA kingdome is but a great familie. a king the father of a great many. For although he paſſe them in greatnes and authoritie, yet he is of one and the ſame kind with them, a man commanding men, and free ouer thoſe that are free, not ouer beaſts or ſlaues, as Ariſtotle ſaith very well. And if he would haue that excellent title, which we giue to God the Prince of all men, calling him Our father, he muſt procure it not by threatnings and feare, but by good deedes, by meekenes and humanitie, which will ſtand him in ſteede of a ſure Gard to preſerue his eſtate. For the loue and loialtie of his ſubiects willThe ſafetie of Monarchies dependeth of the loue and loialtie of ſubiects. greatly encreaſe thereby, of which the aſſurance of Monarchies dependeth. When the nobilitie and common-people vſe to feare, not him, but for his ſake that commandeth them, then he ſeeth with many eies, heareth with many eares, and perceiueth a farre off whatſoeuer is done. Let the Prince haue this ſaying of Plutarke alwaies engrauen in his ſoule: That nothing heere below pleaſeth God more, or draweth neerer to his diuine nature, than to rule well in all iuſtice and equitie, which is the chiefeſt charge of his vocation, and that vnto which he is ſtraightly bound in reſpect

                     The mutuall duties of the Prince and his ſubiects. of his ſubiects. For as the ſubiect oweth obedience, aide, and reuerence to his Lord: ſo the Prince oweth iuſtice, defence, and protection, to his ſubiects. When a Prince ſheweth himſelfe vpright, indifferent, and true of his word to all, it is the greateſt felicitie that can happen to a Common-wealth, and that which crowneth the MonarchWhat praiſe a Prince is to ſeek after. thereof with greater glorie and honour. And truly a Prince ought to be more carefull to obtaine that praiſe and reputation which proceedeth of goodnes and vertue, than that which commeth of ſtrength and power. For as the diuine nature, vnto which kings muſt endeuour to conforme their woorks and actions, excelleth all other eſſences and natures chiefly in three things, that is, in immortalitie, power, and goodnes: ſo a Prince muſt ſtriue to excell his ſubiects, not ſo much in the immortalitie of his name, or in power, as in goodnes, which vertue is certainly much more venerable, and drawethThe whole world is immortall in reſpect of ſubſtance, but not of qualities. neereſt to the diuinitie. For to be incorruptible and immortall, the fower Elements, and the whole frame are indued with that qualitie, as naturall Philoſophers maintaine. And as for ſtrength and power, earthquakes, lightnings, tempeſtuous whirlewinds, flouds and inundations of waters, are full of force and might: but nothing is partaker of iuſtice, vprightnes, and equitie, except it be diuine, and that by the meanes of reaſon and vnderſtanding. So that (as the ſame Plutark ſaith) we only are capeable of that Good of vertue that commeth from God. To be ſhort, let the Prince be diligently taught whileſt he is yoong, and labour to knowe how he may adorne his name with works anſwerable to thoſe excellent Epithits and titles, wherewith Iulius Pollux, who was gouernour to the Emperour Commodus in his yoong yeeres,Excellent titles of a good Prince. ſetteth foorth a good king. He calleth him Father, gentle, acceptable, mercifull, prudent, iust, curteouus, noble-minded, free, a contemner of monie, not ſubiect to paſſions, but commanding ouer himſelfe, one that ouercommeth pleaſures, and vſeth reaſon, quicke of iudgement, ſharpe, prouident, good in counſelling, iuſt, ſober, godly, and full of good religion, carefull ouer the welfare of
                     
                     men, conſtant, firme, no deceiuer, minding great things, decked with authoritie, induſtrious, a quicke diſpatcher of affaires, carefull ouer thoſe whome he commandeth, a Sauiour, ready to do good, ſlow to reuenge, alwaies one and the ſame without turning aſide, inclining greatly to iuſtice, eaſie to haue acceſſe vnto, curteous in ſpeech gentle to them that haue to deale with him, plaine, a louer of vertuous and valiant men, who neuertheles are not deſirous of warre, a louer of peace, a peace-maker, a preciſe obſeruer thereof, borne to correct the manners of people, skilfull in diſcharging the dutie of a king and Prince, hauing knowledge to make good lawes, borne to profit euery one, and of a diuine forme. A Prince of noble birth ſhall feele himſelfe greatly prouoked to deſire and ſeeke after theſe excellent gifts and graces, through the conſideration of examples propounded vnto him, concerning the liues &Examples of former ages muſt be propounded to Princes. deeds of ſo many famous and woorthy men, as are at this day after innumerable ages reuiued againe by meanes of hiſtories. And it cannot be but he will be greatly pricked forward to conforme himſelfe vnto them, thereby to giue like occaſion to good wits, to write, ſinge, and publiſh his praiſes. What Prince will not burne with a iealous deſire of vertue, when he heareth that the onely fame thereof in the perſon of Scipio Africanus allured and rauiſhed theeuesScipio Africanus. and robbers with ſuch an admiration, that when they vnderſtood that he was in a houſe far from any towne, they did beſet it round, and as he ſtood in his defence to driue them away, they threw downe their weapons, aſſuring him, that they came thither onely to ſee and to reuerence him, as in deed they did? What prince will not be poſſeſſed with ioy, when he heareth, that Menander king of theMenander. Bactrians was ſo beloued of his ſubiects for his iuſtice and vertue, that after his death the cities were in great contention, which of them ſhould haue the honor of his buriall, for the appeaſing of ẇhich ſtrife, order was taken that each of them ſhould make a tombe? Who wil not be mooued with loue towards the goodnes of Traian EmperourTraian. of the Romanes, when he heareth his Panegyricall Oration, wherein Plinie, after he had extolled him to heauen, concludeth thus: That the greatest happines,
                     
                     which could come to the Empire, was, that the Gods tooke example by the life of Traian? Who will not deſire the honour thatAgeſilaus. king Ageſilaus receiued, when he was fined by the Ephoryes, bicauſe he had ſtolne away the harts, and wonne the loue of all his Citizens to himſelfe alone? Who will notAriſtides. wiſh to haue the ſurname of Aristides the iuſt, as diuine and royall a title as euer king could obtaine, rather than as many vſe to be called Conquerours, Beſiegers, Thunderers? Briefly, vnto theſe examples oppoſe the reprehenſion and marke of perpetuall infamie, which hiſtories ſet vpon euill Princes, and it cannot be but that a Prince well brought vp, and exerciſed in the loue and ſtudie of vertue, will be very deſirous to ſhew foorth the fruits and effects thereof, eſpecially if he be well inſtructed in the feare of God, and knowledge of his dutie, whereof he ſhall haue perfect vnderſtanding in the law of God, which he is commandedDeut. 17. 19. by the ſoueraigne king of all to haue with him, to read in it all the daies of his life, and to obey it, to the end he may raigne happily in earth, and finally in heauen.
               
            
            
               Of the office and dutie of a King. Chap. 60.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     AVguſtus Caeſar hearing ſome rehearſe, that Alexander the great, after he had finiſhed moſt of his conqueſts at two and thirtie yeeres of age, ſaid, that he tooke great care to know what he ſhould do afterward: I woonder (ſaid this wiſe Monarch) at the
                     It is as hard a matter to gouerne well, as to get an Empire. 
                     ſpeech of that great Prince, whereby it ſeemeth he thought that there was leſſe to do in well ordering, ruling, and preſeruing a great Empire once entirely gotten, than in conquering the ſame. And ſurely to ſpeake truth, there is nothing more difficult than to raigne well. Moreouer, it is better for a Prince to gouerne prudently, and to rule according to his eſtate, than to inuade & poſſeſſe another mans countrie: namely, if he conſider, that God, being ſo gratious vnto him asWhy Princes are placed in their thrones. to bring innumerable perſons vnder his obedience, hath chiefly eſtabliſhed him to keepe them in the knowledge

and obſeruation of true religion, to rule them by good lawes, to defend them by armes, and in all things to be ſo carefull of their good, that they may eſteeme of him, as of their father and ſheepeheard. Now ſeeing we haue ſummarily intreated of the education and inſtitution of a prince vnder the charge of a teacher and gouernour, let vs in this place (my Companions) conſider of his office and dutie, when he raigneth with full authoritie ouer his ſubſubiects.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     The good will of the people dependeth of the integritie of religion. Foraſmuch as integritie of religion, and the good will of the people are two principall pillers vpon which the ſafetie of euery Eſtate ſtandeth, the king ought to procure the firſt, being therefore appointed by God ouer ſo many millions of men: and the ſecond without doubt dependeth of the former, which is the onely difference betweene a king and a tyrant, who ruleth by conſtraint.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  In a king is ſeene the ordinance of God, who is the author and preſeruer of policies, and of good order. Therefore his feare and reaſon, muſt neuer depart out of his mind, to the end that ſeruing God, he may profite all thoſe that liue vnder his dominion. But from thee ASER we looke for the diſcourſe of this matter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  The ſeuen Sages of Grecia being inuited to a feaſt by Periander prince of Corinth, were requeſted by him to enter into the diſcourſe of the eſtate of great men.The ſayings of the ſeuen wiſe men of Grecia touching the eſtate of Princes. 
                     Solon ſpeaking firſt, ſaid: That a ſoueraigne king or prince cannot any way procure greater glorie to himſelfe than by making a popular Eſtate of his Monarchy: that is to ſay, by communicating his ſoueraigne authoritie with his ſubiects. Bias ſpeaking next, ſaid: By ſubmitting himſelfe firſt of all to the lawes of his countrie. Thalcs: I account that Lord happie that attaineth to old age, and dieth a naturall death. Anacharſis: If he be the onely wiſe man. Cleobulus: If he truſt none of thoſe that are about him. Pittacus: If he be able to preuatle ſo much, that his ſubiects feare, not him, but for him. Chilon: A Prince muſt not ſet his mind vpon any tranſitorie or mortall thing, but vpon that which is eternall and immortall. Periander concluding vpon theſe opinions,

ſaid, that all theſe ſentences ſeemed to him to diſſwade a man of good iudgement, from deſiring at any time to command ouer others. The Emperour Traian writingTraians letter to the Senate, touching the carefull eſtate of Princes. to the Senate of Rome, among other things, vſed theſe very words: I freely confeſſe vnto you, that ſince I began to taste of the trauels and cares which this Imperiall Eſtate bringeth with it, I haue repented me a thouſand times that I tooke it vpon me. For if there be great honor in hauing an Empire, there is alſo very great paine and trauell in gouerning the ſame. But ouer
                     To what falſe ſurmiſes a Prince is ſubiect. 
                     and beſides, to what enuie is he expoſed, and to how many miſlikings is he ſubiect that hath others to gouerne? If he be iust, he is called cruell: if pitifull, he is deſpiſed: if liberall, he is thought to be prodigall: if he laie vp monie, he is taken for couetous: if he be addicted to peace, he is ſuppoſed to be a coward: if he be courageous, he is iudged ambitious: if graue, they will call him proud: if affable and courteous, he is termed ſimple: if ſolitarie, an hypocrite: and if he be merrie, they will ſay he is diſſolute. After many other ſpeeches, this good Emperour concluded, that although he willingly accepted of his eſtate at the firſt, yet he was very ſorowful afterward that he had ſo great a charge: bicauſe the ſea and the Empire were two pleaſant things to looke vpon, but perilous to taſt.
                     Who is fitteſt to tule. Diuine Plato wrote alſo, that none was fit to gouerne an Empire, and to be a Prince, but he that commeth vnto it through conſtraint, and againſt his will. For whoſoeuer deſireth the charge of a Prince, it muſt needes be, that he is either a foole, not knowing how dangerous and full of care the charge of a King is: or if he be a wicked man, that he mindeth nothing but how he may raigne to ſatiſfie his pleaſure and priuate profite, to the great hurt of the Common-wealth: or elſe if he be ignorant, that he conſidereth not how heauie the burthen is which he taketh vpon him. Therefore a wiſe Prince will not thinke himſelfe the happier, bicauſe he ſucceedeth in a greater Empire and kingdome, but remember rather, that he laieth ſo much the more care and paine vpon his ſhoulders, and that he beginneth then to haue leſſe leaſure, leſſe reſt and happines in paſſing away his time. In other perſons, a fault is pardoned in youth, and growing old, they are ſuffered

to take their eaſe. But he that is Head of a Common-wealth, bicauſe he is to trauell for all, muſt be neyther yoong nor old. For he can-not commit a fault how ſmall ſoeuer it be, without the hurt of many men, nor yet reſt from his dutie, but it will turne to the miſerie of his ſubiects. This cauſed the Philoſophers to ſay, that a Prince ought not to dedicate the Common-wealth to himſelfe, but to addict himſelf to the Common-wealth, and for the profit thereof alwaies to be diligent, vertuous, and wiſe, & ſo to gouerne his Empire, that he may be able eaſily to giue a reaſon of his charge. And bicauſe no man asketh anThe Prince muſt giue account to none but to God. account of him in this life, he ought to be ſo much the more ſtirred vp to demand a ſtraighter reckoning of himſelfe, being aſſured that the time wil come, and that ſpeedily, wherein he muſt yeeld it vp before him, with whome there is no reſpect of Princes, except in this, that they ſhal haue the Iudge more rigorous againſt them, that haue abuſed greater power and authority. To begin therfore to handle the duty and office of a Prince: firſt, he muſt haueThe firſt and principall dutie of a Prince is to haue the law of God before his eies. Pſal. 119. the lawe of God continually before his eies: he muſt engraue it in his ſoule, and meditate vpon the wordes and ordinances thereof, all the dayes of his life, deſiring of God to graunt him the ſpirite of vnderſtanding to conceiue them well, and according to that diuine rule to direct all his intents and actions to the glorie of that great, eternall, and Almightye Kinge of Kinges: aſwell for the ſaluation of his owne ſoule, which he ought to preferre before the rule of the whole worlde: as for the good of thoſe that are committed to his charge to gouerne, teach and iudge them. For it is moſte certaine, that of the knowledge of the truth in the Prince his hart, all good order of his Eſtate dependeth: and that his pietie is ofThe pietie of the prince is of great force with his ſubiects to ſtirre them vp to their dutie. great force to awaken his ſubiects in their dutie: namely, when they ſee him followe and cleaue to true religion without faining and diſſimulation. Therefore he muſt carefully prouide, that falſe doctrines, hereſies, blaſphemies agaynſt the name of GOD and his truth, with other offences in matters of religion, be not openly

broached & ſowne amongſt the people, but that ſome publike forme of Chriſtian religion may alwaies be ſeene in his kingdome, which is the ſure foundation of euery well eſtabliſhed Monarchy. But heerein that which I ſaid before, is diligently to be noted: namely, that the Prince through wiſedome craued before at the hands of God,The Prince muſt be ſure that the religion he maintaineth is the iuſt will of God. muſt be well aſſured of his diuine, iuſt, and eternall will, and according to that, take order that true pietie may not be publikely violated and polluted by an vncorrected libertie. Next, we will briefly comprehend all thoſe points, which ancient men both Philoſophers and ChriſtiansThe duties of a Prince comprehended in three points. haue required in an abſolute and perfect Prince, in three principall duties and actions: that is, in ruling, iudging and in defending. He muſt rule by good lawes, and by good example; iudge by wiſedome, prouidence, and iuſtice; and defend by prowes, care, and vigilancie. Theſe duties, that excellent greek Orator and Philoſopher Iſocrates ſeemeth to haue couertly contained in theſe words,Iſocrates argument, whoreby he prooueth the good raigne of a Prince. which he wrote to Nicocles the Prince: This may prooue vnto thee that thou hast raigned well, if thou ſeēſt that the people, which is ſubiect vnto thee, encreaſe in modestie and wealth vnder thy gouernment. For good lawes, iustice, and good example of life, make ſubiects better, and prudence ioined with fortitude and prowes, richer. Now that a good Prince (I call him good and iuſt that imploieth all his power to be ſuch a one, being ready to ſpend his bloud and life for his people) may attaine to theſe excellent qualities, his loue, and affection towardsA Prince muſt loue his ſubiects. his ſubiects, is very neceſſarie, as that which is able to preſerue the indiſſoluble bond of mutuall good will betweene them & him, which is one of the ſureſt meanesHe muſt begin reformation at himſelfe. to maintaine great Eſtates and Monarchies. Next, he is to begin the good ordering of his Eſtate at himſelfe, and reforme firſt of all, all diſorder in his owne life and maners, & correct thoſe things that are moſt ſecrete in his court: knowing that from thence forward he muſt liue as it were in an open Theater, where he is ſeene on euery ſide, ſo that his life will be a diſcipline and inſtruction of good or ill liuing vnto others. Therefore let him ſtriue to excell

thoſe whom he ruleth, & to ſurmount them as far in vertues, as he ſurpaſſeth them in riches & honor. Amongſt al thoſe that followe him, he muſt alwaies haue the wiſeſtHe muſt haue the wiſeſt next his perſon. next his perſon, & cal others from al parts neere vnto him, not refuſing or contemning any man of skill & reputation. He muſt often heare them, learne of them, & being a Iudge amongſt ſuch as are leſſe skilfull, ſtriue to go beyōd the beſt learned through diligence and ſtudye. By which kind of exerciſes he ſhal knowe how to gouerne the eſtate of his kingdom vprightly, & cannot but do ſuch things as are praiſe-woorthy. And foraſmuch as common tranquillity & publike quietnes is one principal end of ciuil ſocietie,The firſt dutie of a king towards his ſubiects. the firſt duty of a good king towards his ſubiects, is to maintaine them in peace & concord. For it is vnpoſſible that a Common-wealth ſhould flouriſh in religion, iuſtice, charitie, integrity of life: briefly, in all things neceſſary for the preſeruation therof, if the ſubiects enjoy not an exceeding great & aſſured peace. Let the Prince then without intermiſſion, ſeeke after the ſafeſt meanes to keepe his kingdome in quietnes & reſt: let him deliuer his ſubiects from calamitie: let him be careful of al things which mayGood precepts for a Prince. be profitable & commodious vnto them, & let him command them with mildnes, & teach them obedience by the vprightnes of his commandements. Let him not ſuffer his people to be ouer inſolent, nor yet to be troden vnder foote and oppreſſed: but let him take order, that ſuch as are moſt honeſt may be preferred to honors & offices, & that the reſt may not any way be wronged. He muſt alter thoſe ciuill lawes and cuſtoms of liuing, which being ill eſtabliſhed, are preiudiciall to his ſubiects, and ordaine allWhat manner of lawes are to be eſtabliſhed in a Commonwealth. iuſt and profitable lawes, agreeing with themſelues, and ſuch as breeding but fewe ſuites among his people, may briefly iudge and decide them according to right and equitie. In this point a good Prince muſt vſe great care and diligence that iuſtice may be well adminiſtred, to the preſeruation of euery mans right, and to the puniſhment of the wicked. This is that which the ſpirite of God ſo often commandeth: namely, to execute iudgement and righteouſnes, 
                     Ierem. 22. 3.
                     
                     to deliuer the oppreſſed from the hands of the oppreſſor, not to vexe the ſtranger, the fatherles, nor the widow, to doe no violence, nor ſhed innocent blood. And theſe ſelfe ſame things muſt he cauſe to be obſerued by them that are appointed to exerciſe iuſtice in his name. Which bicauſe it was neglected by many kings, they loſt both life and kingdome, as wePhilip loſt his life bicauſe he delaied iuſtice. read of Phillip king of Macedonia, a very mild Prince, and of an excellent nature, who was neuertheles ſlaine by Pauſanias, bicauſe he delaied a long time to let him haue right and iuſtice, concerning an iniurie which an otherDemetrius threw the ſupplications of his ſubiects into a water. had offered him. Demetrius alſo loſt his kingdome, bicauſe he could not abide to heare his ſubiects, but eſpecially for this matter. One day when many ſupplications were preſented vnto him, he put them into the plaites of his cloake, and paſſing ouer a bridge he threwe them all into the water, and would not once vouchſafe to read them: whereupon the people being filled with indignation, rebelled againſt him. On the other ſide, a good Prince ought freely, and at all howers of the day, to heare the complaints of his ſubiects, and to prouide thereafter, as one that is truly zealous of iuſtice, clemencie, and goodnes, which are rather diuine than humane qualities, and moſt proper to him that will conforme himſelfe aſmuch as may be (as it becommeth him) to that heauenlye vertue, which is alwaies iuſt and mercifull, and (as Plutarke ſaith) ruleth all things without compulſion, mollifieng the neceſſitie of obeying by admonition and perſwaſion of reaſon. Nothing is more conuenient for a Soueraigne than gentlenes, for a Prince than clemencie, for a King than mercie: and yet ſeueritie and rigour of iuſtice are no leſſe neceſſarie ornaments, for the diſcharge of his dutie,A prince muſt execute iuſtice vpon the tranſgreſſours of the law of God and of nature. and the good of his ſubiects. Therfore in that which concerneth diuine and naturall right, & the puniſhment eſtabliſhed for the tranſgreſſion therof, he muſt alwaies vſe iuſtice, and beware leaſt his facilitie in granting fauor & diſpenſations, make him a promoter of euill, which (as Seneca ſaith) if he leaue vnpuniſhed, is transferred vnto his poſteritie. But when the Prince onely is offended through

ſome light contempt, or excuſable breach of his Edicts, it cannot but be commendable in him to vſe pardon & pitie.When it is commendable in him to ſhew mercie. Theſe are thoſe ſtrong and mighty chaines, which (as Dion ſaid to Dionyſius the king of Syracuſa) will preſerue his kingdom in a happy, flouriſhing and peaceable eſtate, I meane goodnes and iuſtice. For force, feare, & the multitude of his gard, aſſure not the eſtate of a Prince ſo well, as the good wil, affection, fauour, and loue of his ſubiects, which he may obtaine by goodnes and iuſtice. They onelyHow a Prince may preſerue his kingdome a great while without danger. (ſaid Marcus Aurelius inſtructing his ſonne) are to hold a kingdom long time without danger, who by good behauiour and iuſt dealing imprint in the harts of their ſubiects, not a feare of their power, but a mutuall loue of their vertue. For thoſe ſubiects are to bee ſuſpected that ſerue through conſtraint and extremitie, not they that obey being mooued with reaſon and gentlenes. Theſe holie precepts were ſo well put in practice by thisMarcus Aurelius ſtood not in feare of his ſubiects. good Emperour Marcus Aurelius, that all his ſubiects had very eaſie acceſſe vnto him: inſomuch that albeit he were a great Monarch, yet he neuer had any gard, no not ſo much as a Porter to his Pallace. Likewiſe king Numa putNuma refuſed the gard of three hundred archers which Romulus had. from him thoſe three hundred Archers, which Romulus vſed to haue for his gard: ſaying, that he would not diſtruſt that people which put their truſt in him, nor command ouer that people that diſtruſted him. To this purpoſe, when Plato ſawe the aboue-named Dionyſius compaſſedPlato his ſpeech to Dionyſius concerning his gard. about with many ſouldiours of his Gard, he ſayd vnto him, What? Haſt thou committed ſo many euils, that thou ſtandeſt in neede of ſuch a Gard of armed fellowes? Nowe it is moſt certaine, that the obedience of the ſubiect ſpringeth and proceedeth from the loue of his Lord, as alſo that the loue of the Lord increaſeth through the obedience of the ſubiect. But bicauſe the wickednes of men is ſo great at this day, that they which ſtriue to be very gratious, are contemned and deſpiſed, it is very neceſſary that the Prince ſhould ſhew foorth a certaine kind of grauitie and ſeueritie, and according to the times, places,Grauitie and ſeueritie requiſite in a prince. perſons, and occaſions that are offred, cauſe his power

and the maieſtie of his commandements to be perceiued,A principle in ſtate matters. being alwaies the ſtronger: bicauſe in matter of Eſtate a man may holde this for an vndoubted principle, that he is maiſter of the eſtate, who is maiſter of the forces. Thus the gentlenes of the Prince accompanied with ſeueritie, his bountie mingled with rigor, and his facilitieThe effects of harmonicall iuſtice. with auſteritie will be the meanes that his vertue ſhall attaine to a harmonical iuſtice, which diſtributeth vprightly that which appertaineth to euery one: reward to whome reward, & puniſhment to whome puniſhment belongeth. From theſe duties & offices of a good Prince towards his ſubiects, already mentioned, proceedeth the fatherly care which he hath of their proſperitie in the preſeruation & encreaſe of their cōmodities & riches, ſo far off is he from all headlong deſire to inuade & ſpoile them. He conſiderethWhat authority a Prince hath ouer his ſubiects goods. wiſely, that although he hath authoritie & power ouer the goods of his ſubiects, yet not in ſuch ſort as he hath ouer his owne demaine, or as if the proprietie therof belonged to him, but only to this end to demand aide & ſuccor for the good & profit of the Common-wealth. Homer bringing in Achilles offring great iniuries to Agamemnon, againſt whome he was ſore incenſed, ſaith that he called him Deuourer of the people: and contrariwiſe, when he would in other places praiſe the king, he termeth him Sheepheard of the people. And truly they are vnworthy of the title of Prince, that lending their eares to ſuch as inuent new ſubſidies, impoſe them daily on their ſubiects: & hauing againſt all humanitie ſpoiled them of their goods & riches, conſume them miſerably vpon pleaſures, or cruelly in warre, when they might aſwel ſuffer their poore ſubiects to liue in peace. When Marcus Antonius was in Aſia, he doubled the taxe, and laid a ſecond charge vpon them, that he might haue wherewith to furniſh his immoderateHebreas freedome of ſpeech in reproouing Antonius. expences. The Eſtates of the Countrie ſent Hebreas to ſhewe him howe the caſe ſtoode with them, who vſing a maruellous freedome of ſpeech, ſpake vnto him in this manner. If thou wilt haue power to laye vppon vs two taxes in one yeere, thou muſt alſo haue

power to giue vs two Summers and two Autumns, two Harueſts and two Vintages. Further, he added this; Aſia hath paied thee 200000. Talents (that was ſix ſcore millions of gold) if all this ſumme came not into thy cofers, call them to account that haue receiued it. But if thou haſt receiued it, and yet haſt nothing left, we are caſt away and vndone. Theſe words ought to be well noted of a prudent Prince, that he may throughly conſider with himſelfe, and keepe a regiſter of all that is leauied of the poore people in his name, leaſt ſome few about him fat themſelues with the oppreſſion and ouerthrow of many, as it commonly falleth out: and let him be ſo carefull of the blood and ſubſtance of that bodie wherof he is head, that he profit all the members equally. Ezechiel crieth out againſt ſuch Princes as deuoure the ſubſtaunce of their Vaſſals by loanes and taxes. Apollonius ſaith, that the goldSome gold more vile and baſe than iron. which is taken from ſubiects by tyrannie, is more vile than iron, bicauſe it is wet with the teares of their poore ſubiects. Artaxerxes ſaid, that it was a great deale more ſeemelier for the Maieſtie of a king to giue, than to take by polling, and to cloath than to vncloath; the one belonging to theeues, and not to Princes and Kings, vnles they will falſifie ſtaine their name. King Darius ſent for all the gouernors of the Prouinces vnder his ſubiection, andDarius diminiſhed his tributs. enquired of them among other things, whether the taxes and tributes were not too exceſſiue: whereunto when they made anſwere that they thought them moderate, he preſently commanded that they ſhould raiſe but the one halfe thereof: eſteeming the loue of his ſubiects a richer treaſure, than all the heapes of gold, which he might haue gathered. We may not heere forget to propound to kings the example of that good king S. Lewes the ninth of thatLewes the 9. was the firſt that raiſed a taxe in France. name, who was the firſt that raiſed a taxe in his kingdom, but it was onely by way of a neceſſarie ſubſide during the warre, not vſing it as an ordinarie receite. Directing his ſpeech to Philip his eldeſt ſonne, and ſucceſſor, he vttered theſe words in his Teſtament, which is yet to be found in the treaſorie of France, and is regiſtred in the Chamber

                     His exhortation to his eldeſt ſonne. of accounts. Be deuout in the ſeruice of God, haue a pitifull and charitable hart towards the poore, and comfort them with thy good decdes. Obſerue the good lawes of thy kingdom: take no taxes nor beneuolences of thy ſubiects, vnles vrgent neceſſitie, & euident commoditie force thee vnto it, and then vpon a iuſt cauſe, and not vſually: if thou doeſt otherwiſe, thou ſhalt not be accounted a king, but a tyrant, &c. I leaue the reſt of the clauſes in his Teſtament. Moreouer, liberalitie wel vſed, as we haue elſ-where handled the ſame, is a very comely ornament for a Prince.Liberalitie neceſſarie in a Prince. 
                     Socrates ſaid, that it was the dutie of a good king to be beneficiall to his friends, and of his enemies to make good friends, to which purpoſe nothing will helpe him more than liberalitie. Neither muſt he be only liberal, but magnifical alſo and ſumptuous, prouided alwaies that of magnifical, he become not prodigal, which would ſoone make him an exactor, and in the end a tyrant. But a ſoueraigne Prince muſt eſpecially haue an eie to this, that the rewards of vertue due to woorthy men be preferred before all his gifts and good turnes, and that he recompence ſuch as haue deſerued any thing, before he giue to them that haue deſerued nothing. For an vngratefull Prince will hardly retaine an honourable and vertuous man anyThe difference betweene a reward and a benefit. A king muſt be as good as his word. long time in his ſeruice. Neither is the eſtimation of a reward, and of a good-turne all one: bicauſe a reward is giuen for deſert, and a benefite by grace. Beſides, a Prince muſt be alwaies true, and as good as his promiſe, that men may giue greater credite to his bare word, than to another mans oath. For it ought to bee as an Oracle, which looſeth his dignitie, when men haue conceiued ſuch an euill opinion of him, that he may not be beleeued vnles he ſweare. And if he pawne his faith at any time, he muſt account it ſacred and inuiolable: bicauſe faith is the foundation and ſtaie of iuſtice, vpon which the eſtate of great men is grounded▪ as we diſcourſed elſe-where.The ſaying of Theopompus. That ſaying of Theopompus King of Sparta, is alſo to be well noted by the Prince. When a friende of his asked him how a king might keepe his kingdome in ſafetie, he

anſwered: By granting libertie to his friends freely to tell him the truth. He muſt take their aduice in doubfull matters, that he may gouern his eſtate more aſſuredly, waighing and iudging of their opinions with great prudence. Neither muſt he thinke them his beſt ſeruants that praiſeA Prince muſt diſcerne wiſelie betweene faithfull ſeruants and flatterers. all his ſayings and dooings, but thoſe that with modeſtie reprooue his faults: he muſt diſcerne wiſely betweene them that cunningly flatter him, and thoſe that loue and ſerue him faithfully, that wicked men may not be in greater credite with him than good men. For this cauſe alſo he muſt carefully enquire after his houſhold ſeruants and familiar friends, that he may knowe them well: bicauſe all other men will take him to be ſuch a one as they are with whome he conuerſeth ordinarily. Oſiris King of Egypt had for his Armes a Scepter with an eye in the toppe of it: noting thereby the wiſedome that ought toWiſedome neceſſarie in a King. be in a king: namely, that it belongeth not to one that wandereth out of his way to direct others, that ſeeth not, to guide, that knoweth nothing, to teach, and that will not obeye reaſon, to command. Likewiſe in all his actions he muſt vſe reaſon as a heauenlie guide, hauing chaſed away the perturbations of his ſoule, and eſteeme it a greater and more royall matter to command himſelfe, than others. He muſt thinke that it is the true and proper office of a king not to ſubmit him-ſelfe to his pleaſures,Temperance requiſite in a Prince. but to containe his owne affections rather than his ſubiects. Further, he muſt vſe to take pleaſure in thoſe exerciſes, which may procure him honour, and cauſeWhat maner of exerciſes a Prince muſt vſe. him to appeere better to the worlde. He muſt not ſeeke for reputation in vile things, which men of baſe eſtate and naughtie behauior commonly practiſe, but follow after vertue onely, wherein wicked perſons haue no part. Let him remember alwaies that he is a King, and therefore that he muſt ſtriue to doe nothing vnwoorthie ſo high a dignitie, but continue his memorie by valiant and noble acts. This is that wherein one of the wiſe Interpreters knew wel how to inſtruct K. Ptolemy, who demanded of him how he might behaue himſelfe, that neither idlenes

nor pleaſures might diſtract him. It is (ſaid he) in thine owne power, as long as thou commandeſt ouer a great kingdome, and haſt ſo many great affaires to manage continually, which will not ſuffer thee to diſtract thy mind vpon other matters. If priuate men, borne to vertue, are willing many times to die, that they may purchaſe honour: much more ought kinges to doe thoſe thinges which will procure them honour, feare, and eſtimation euery where, during their life, & alſo through their brightnesA Prince muſt be skilfull in warre, and yet loue peace. ſhine a great while after their death. Moreouer, a prince muſt be warlike, and skilfull in warfare, prouiding carefully all things neceſſarie for warre, and yet he muſt loue peace, and vſurpe nothing that belongeth to another man contrary to right, nor enter into warre, but to repell violence in extreame neceſſitie. Aboue all thingsA Prince muſt carefully auoid ciuill diſſention. he muſt feare ciuill diſſentions, as moſt pernitious to his Eſtate, and take aduice prudently concerning the meanes wherby all occaſions of their entrance may be taken from his people. Heerein learning will helpe him well, and the knowledge of hiſtories, which ſet before his eies the aduentures that haue befallen both ſmall and great, and cal to his remembrance the times paſt, whereby he may better prouide for the time to come. Vnto which if he adde the counſell of wiſe men, as we haue already touched, he ſhall knowe more perfectly whatſoeuer concerneth the good of his eſtate. But aboue all he muſt knowe howe toWhat Counſellors a Prince muſt chuſe. make choice of men, and not thinke them wiſe that diſpute curiouſly of ſmall things, but thoſe that ſpeake very aptly of great matters. Neither let him account thoſe men beſt, and worthieſt of credite, that haue gotten moſt authoritie, but trie and indge them by their profitable works: namely, if he ſee that they giue him wiſe and free counſell, according as occaſions concurre, and affaires require: and then let him alwaies with ſpeed execute thoſe things, which by their counſell he findeth good and neceſſary. For the concluſion therefore of our preſent diſcourſe,The ſumme of the dutie of a Prince. we will comprehend the office and dutie of a good Prince in fewe words: namely, if he ſerue God in ſinceritie

and puritie of hart, if he inquire diligently after the truth of his word, and cauſe his ſubiects to liue thereafter: if he prouide for their profit, redreſſe their miſeries, and eaſe them of oppreſſion, exaction and polling. If he be pliable to heare the requeſts & complaints of the leſt, indifferent and moderate in anſwering them, ready to diſtribute right to euery one, by propounding reward for vertue and puniſhment for vice. If he be prudent in his enterpriſes, bold in his exploits, modeſt in proſperitie, cō
                     ſtant in aduerſitie, ſtedfaſt in word, wiſe in counſail: briefly, if he gouerne in ſuch ſort, and raigne ſo well, that all his ſubiects may haue what to imitate, and ſtraungers to commend.
               
            
            The ende of the fifteenth daies worke.
         
         
            THE SIXTEENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of a Councell, and Counſailors of estate. Chap. 61.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     
                        DIocleſian the Emperor ſaid, That the condition of Princes was miſerable and dangerous,
                     A common miſery incident 
                           〈◊〉
                         the eſtate of princes. 
                     bicauſe they were commonly deceiued by them whome they trusted moſt, being themſelues almost alwayes ſhut vp in their pallaces, and vnderstanding no more of their affaires, thā their ministers would declare vnto them, who conſult many times tog
                           •
                        
                        ther how they may diſguiſe the truth of their estate. For this

                     Counſellors are the eies & eares of a Prince. cauſe although it be neceſſarie for a prince to haue many eyes and eares, for which intent we ſay that his counſellors ſerue, yet he muſt looke himſelfe as much as he can euen to the depth of his affaires. And truly it belongeth to the dombe, blind and deafe, to ſpeake, ſee and heare nothing, but by the mouth, eies, and eares of other men. But in thoſe things wherein the prince is conſtrained to relie vpon an other mans report, he muſt vſe great prudence to diſcerne flatterers and diſguiſers of matters, whoWhat counſellors are to be vſed by Princes. are not touched but only with their priuate profite, from thoſe that are mooued with the zeale of publike benefite, and of his ſeruice, and vſe theſe men in matters of counſell, which is moſt neceſſarie for the ſound preſeruation of al eſtates. And in deede there was neuer any eſtate but vſed counſell and counſellors in the eſtabliſhing and gouernment thereof, as we may vnderſtand more of you my companions, if you thinke good to diſcourſe of this matter.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Counſell is the anchor of the citie. Counſell (ſayd Socrates) is a ſacred thing, and as Plato calleth it, the anchor of the whole city, wherby it is faſtned and ſtayed, as a ſhippe in the water. Yea, all the great and goodly exploites of armes and lawes, are nothing elſe but the execution of a wiſe councell.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     The excellencie of counſell. Counſell (ſaith the ſame Plato) hath the ſelfſame place in a common-wealth that the ſoule and head hath in liuing creatures. For the vnderſtanding is infuſed into the ſoule, and ſight and hearing are placed in the head: ſo that the vnderſtanding being ioined to theſe two goodly ſenſes, and reduced into one, preſerueth euery thing. But of thee (ACHITOB.) we expect a whole diſcourſe vpon this matter.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     All common-wealths conſiſt chiefly of two things. All Common-wealths conſiſt chieflie of two things, of counſell & of iudgement, according to the diſpoſition of which, the affaires of the eſtate are well or ill handled. Therefore to enter into this matter here propounded, and to leaue iudgements to be conſidered of hereafter, we muſt firſt know that the ordinarie Councell of an eſtate, which the Ancients commonlie called a Senate,

is the lawfull aſſemblie of counſellors of eſtate, toWhat a councel is. giue aduiſe to them that haue ſoueraigne power in euery Common-wealth. When we ſay a lawfull aſſemblie, it is to be vnderſtood of that power which is giuen vnto them by the ſoueraigne to meete togither in time and place appoynted. And where as we call them counſellors of eſtate, it is to diſtinguiſh them from other counſellors and officers, who are often called to giue aduiſe to Princes, euery one according to his vocation and qualitie, and yet are neyther counſellors of eſtate, nor ordinarie counſellours. Of this councell all the reſt of the publike gouernmentThe profit of a councell. dependeth, and by this all the partes of the Common-wealth are tied, vnited, and knitte togither, through that direction of religion, iuſtice, warre, treaſures, lawes, magiſtrates and maners which proceedeth from it. Therefore the Senate is very well called by Cicero,
                     A councell or Senate is the ſoule of the common-welth. the ſoule, reaſon, and vnderſtanding of a Common-wealth: whereby he meaneth, that it can no more bee maintained without a councell, than a bodie with-out a ſoule, or a man without reaſon. The Hebrewes likewiſeThe Hebrewes compared it to a foundation. called the councell a foundation where-upon all goodly and commendable actions are built, and without which all enterpriſes are ouerthrowen. Now foraſmuch as there hath been, and are at this day among ſundry nations, ſundry ſortes of gouernments and policies, ſo there is no leſſe difference in the eſtabliſhment of a councell in them, as alſo many alterations in the inſtitution and power thereof. And namely, among the auncient Graecians, beſide the ſeuerall councell of euery Common-wealth, there was the ſacred councell of the Amphictions, ſo called, bicauſe it was inſtituted by Amphiction the ſonne ofThe councell of the Amphictions. 
                     Deucalion. This councell was as it were the generall aſſemblie of the eſtates of all Graecia, and was helde twiſe a yeere, in Spring time, and in Autumne, at Delphos in the Temple of Apollo, for the commoditie of the ſeate thereof, beyng as it were in the middeſt of all Graecia. The authoritie thereof was ſo great, that whatſoeuer was concluded vpon there, the Graecians obſerued and kept it

inuiolable, whether it were in matters concerning religion and pietie towards their gods, or peace and vnitie among themſelues. The Lacedemonians and Meſſenians met togither certaine dayes in the yeere at the temple of Diana vpon the borders of Laconia, and there after ſacrifice, conſulted of their waightieſt affaires. And yet both they and the reſt of Graecia had certaine general councels concerning the gouernment of their eſtate, beſides thoſeThe Senate of the Lacedemonians. that were particular, which they vſed daily. The Senate of thirtie counſailors eſtabliſhed by Lycurgus when he reformed the Lacedemonian eſtate, obtained the ſoueraigntie not long after, and of Senators became abſolute lordes.The Senate of the Athenians. 
                     Solon ordained amongſt the Athenians, beſides the Senate of 400. which was changeable euery yeere, a priuie & perpetual councell of the Areopagites, compounded of three ſcore of the wiſeſt, and of ſuch as were blameles, who had the managing of thoſe affaires that were moſt ſecret. Romulus
                     The Senate of the Romanes. the firſt founder of Rome, compounded the Senate of 100. of the notableſt citizens: and hauing receiued the Sabines into his protection, he doubled the number of Senators, which afterward Brutus encreaſed with an otherThe power of the Conſuls of Rome. hundred. As long as the happy popular gouernement of the Romanes laſted, the Conſuls, albeit in dignitie they repreſented a royall perſon, yet they had no other power but to lead the armies, to aſſemble the Senate, to receiue the letters of captains, and of their allies, and to preſent them to the Senate, to heare embaſſadors before the people, or before the Senate, to aſſemble the great eſtates, and to aske the people aduiſe concerning the creation of officers,The power of the Senate of Rome. or publiſhing of lawes. But the Senate diſpoſed the reuenues of the Empire, and the common expences: appointed lieutenants to all gouernors of prouinces, determined of the triumphs, ordered religion, receiued and licenced embaſſadors of kings and nations, and tooke order for ſuch as were ſent to them. The puniſhment of all offences committed throughout Italy, which deſerued publike execution, as treaſon, conſpiracie, poyſoning, wilfull murder, belonged to the Senate. If any priuate perſon

or any citie ſtood in need of ſome ſpeciall fauour, or of reprehenſion, or of ſuccour and protection, the Senate had all the charge thereof. It was forbidden vnder paine of high treaſon to preſent any requeſt to the people without aduiſe taken of the Senate. Neuertheleſſe, the ſoueraigntie always belonged to the people, who might confirmeThe power of the people of Rome. or infringe the decrees of the Senate. Since that time according to the ſundry alterations of their eſtate and gouernment, the councell varied in forme. Augustus eſtabliſhed a particular councell of the wiſeſt Senators, & thoſe but few in number: and after that another ſtrict councell of Mecaenas and Agrippa, with whom he decided the chiefeſt matters. In Turkie the councell is kept foure daies inOf the councel of the Turke. a week by the Baſſaes whereſoeuer the prince ſoiourneth. If it be in time of peace at Conſtantinople, or in ſome other towne within his dominion: if in warre, it is kept within his pauilion. In this councell called Diuan, where audience is open to euery one, they conſult of embaſſages and of anſwers to be made vnto them, of matters of eſtate, and of ſoueraigntie, of the meanes how to prouide for decaied prouinces, of murders and condemnations. The ſuppliant, complainant or ſuter ſpeaketh without an aduocate, and is forced to anſwer preſently to the obiection of his aduerſarie if he be preſent, or to prooue his ſayings by witneſſes: and foorthwith the definitiue ſentence is giuen, which may not be reuoked. When the councell hath continued 7. or 8. houres, the Baſſa Viſir maketh true relation to the prince of all that hath been handled: if he lie it is preſent death. For the prince oftentimes liſteneth at a window, called daungerous, right againſt the Diuan, which is made in ſuch ſort, that he may heare and ſee, and not be perceiued: and although he were neuer there, yet they thinke that he is alwayes there. After he hath heard the diſcourſe and aduiſe of his councell, he ſeldome gainſaieth, but confirmeth or moderateth the ſame. Theſe things being thus ordered, they are written and regiſtred by officers appointed thereunto. Concerning his treaſure the Baſſaes meddle not there-with, but two generall treaſurers

are ouer-ſeers and chiefe dealers therein, the one being of Romania, the other of Anatolia. Two Cade liſquers haue the adminiſtration of all iuſtice, who ſit with the Baſſaes in the Diuan: neither doth any other ſit there but the twelue Bellerbeis, the Prince his children beyng Preſidents in their fathers abſence. The Muphtie is chief of the religion, and looketh vnto matters of conſcience.Of the councell of the Venetians. At Venice the generall aſſemblie of Lordes and gentlemen is called the great councell, which hath the ſoueraigne power of the eſtate, and of which the Senate and the authoritie of all their magiſtrates dependeth. Beſides this great councell and Senate compounded of threeskore perſons, there are foure other councels, that is, the councell of Sages for ſea matters, the councell of Sages for land matters, the councell of tenne, and the councell of ſeuen, where the Duke maketh the ſeuenth, and this is called the Seignorie. If there ariſe any hard matter among the Sages, it is referred to the councell of tenne, and if they be diuided, the councell of ſeuen is ioyned to the councel of tenne. But if the matter be of great waight, the Senate is called, and ſometime alſo (albeit rarely) the great councell of all the Venetian Gentlemen, in whichOf the councel of Rhaguſium. the laſt reſolution is made. At Rhaguſium they create a Preſident from moneth to moneth, who dwelleth in the pallace, and hath twelue counſailors, which aſſembly is called the little▪councell. There is alſo an other councell called the councell de Pregadie, into which a hundreth ofOf the councel of Genes. the ancienteſt citizens may enter. Next, there is the great councell, at which all the nobilitie aboue twentie yeeres of age are preſent. At Genes the whole common-wealth is gouerned by them that are borne of eight and twentie families: neither is any man called to beare any office whatſoeuer, vnleſſe he be of this aſſemblie, which they call an Aggregation. Out of this are taken foure hundreth, which make the great councell, that hath all the power and authoritie of the eſtate, and is choſen from yeere to yeere. They create the Duke and the eight gouernours of the Common-wealth, who are renued from

two yeeres to two yeeres. In Switzerland there are twoThe councel of Switzerland. councels in euery Canton, a little one and a great one. But if any great matter fall out, that is common to all the leagues, they hold their generall councell, called a Iourney, or a Diet. The like is vſed in Almaigne, whereThe councel of Germanie. the Emperour can ordaine nothing that concerneth the common benefite of Germanie, or the authoritie and preſeruation of the Empire, without the counſell and conſent of all the eſtates, eſpecially of the ſeuen Electors. Hee may not of him-ſelfe vnder-take any warre at his pleaſure, neither leuie tributes, nor rayſe ſouldioures of that nation, nor call in any forraine ſouldioures. They haue alſo a councell eſtabliſhed at Spira, which is called the Imperiall chamber beyng as it were a Parliament of Almaignes for the adminiſtration of iuſtice among them.The aſſemblie of eſtates in Polonia. In Polonia there is an aſſemblie of eſtates euery yeere, eſpeciallie for theſe two cauſes: the one, to adminiſter iuſtice in ſoueraigntie, vnto which are brought appeales from all the iudges of the countrey: the other, to prouide for the defence and ſafetie of the Countrey againſt their next enimies, namelie, the Tartares, who make often incurſions vppon them. None is receyued for a Senatour amongſt them, if hee bee no Palatine, Biſhop, Gouernour of ſome Forte, or other Captaine, or hath not beene Embaſſadour. In Spayne there are ſeuenOf the councel of Spaine. councels, beſides the priuie councell, which are alwayes neere the King in ſeuerall Chambers vnder one roofe, that the king may be the better infourmed of all affaires. Their names are theſe, the councell of Spayne, ofSeuen ſeuerall councels in Spaine. the Indies, of Italie, of the lowe Countreys, of Warre, of the Order of Saint Iohn, and of the Inquiſition. In the Realme of Englande there is a priuie Councell,Of the councell of England. which neuer exceeded the number of twentie perſones. The firſt eſtabliſhment thereof was but of fifteene: although it appeareth by the concluſion of a peace made betweene Lewes the ninth, and Henry king of England, that ſeuenteene of the priuie Councell ſware vnto it, namelie, one Archbiſhop Chauncellour, one Biſhop,

ſix earles, and ſix other lordes, beſides the high Treaſurer, and the two magiſtrates, whom they call the chiefe iuſtices of England. Frō three yeeres to three yeeres they hold a parliament, where all the eſtates are called togither to deliberate about the affaires of the kingdom. But enough of ſtrangers. Let vs now come to the eſtabliſhment and inſtitution of the councell in this French Monarchie, where we ſhal ſee that it is not inferior (if it go not beyond them) in excellencie and good order to all that are alreadie ſetOf the ſecret councell of France. downe, or that euer were. Firſt we know, that the king hath all ſoueraigntie by right of the eſtate, as heretofore we haue diſcourſed. The firſt councell neere about him is the ſtrict or ſecret councell, called the councell of ſtate affaires, which is commonly held in the morning after his maieſtie is vp. None haue entrance into this, but a fewe whom the king iudgeth wiſeſt, of greateſt experience, and moſt truſtie to his maieſtie, with whome he communicateth his waightieſt affaires as they fall out, and determineth with them of ſuch principall matters as were deliberated of before in the priuie councell, and in the councell of the treaſurie, if they be ſuch as deſerue to bee brought thither. In the ſecret councell the letters of princes, of embaſſadors, of gouernors and captains are opened: reſolutions and matters agreed vpon are commended to the Secretaries of the eſtate: gifts & rewards granted with the rolles and records thereof, letters and commaundementsOf the priuie councell of France. ſigned with the kings hand. The priuie councell is compounded of diuers great perſonages called thereunto by his maieſtie, either for the nobilitie of their bloud and greatnes of their houſe, or for their woorthines, wiſedom, knowledge and experience, who haue places and deliberatiue voyces in the councell as long as it pleaſeth him. Sometime the king ſitteth among them when any great matter is in queſtion: in his abſence the firſt prince of the bloud is Preſident. The Conſtable and Chancellour, two chiefe officers of the crowne, haue great authoritie therein, the one being principall of warre, the other of iuſtice: They ſit on each ſide in equall degree, being alwayes one

right before another. This councel is held either for mattersWhat matters are handled therein. belonging to the treaſurie, or for other things concerning ſtate-affaires of the kingdom, and then none enter therein but the Secretaries of the eſtate, the Treaſurer of the priuie treaſure, the Ouer-ſeers of the treaſures, appointed to take knowledge of the leuying and laying out of money, and the Secretaries belonging to the ſame: or elſe it is held for parties, that is, for the affaires of iuſtice depending of the ſoueraigntie. Then the maiſters of the Requeſts ſeruing in their turns enter therin, who bring in requeſts, informations, ſuites called thither by Iniunctiōs, and other waightie matters which the king hath reſerued to his owne knowledge, or ſuch as cannot be decided elſe where. Somtimes alſo the parties themſelues are heard, or elſe they ſpeake by Aduocates. This is greatly to be commendedA commendable cuſtome vſed in the priuie councell of France. therein, that euery one that hath entrie into the councell (although peraduenture he hath neither deliberatiue voyce, nor place) may bring in any mans requeſt, & aduertiſe the councell of that which is profitable for the Common-wealth, that order may be taken for the ſame. And many times their counſell is firſt demaunded, then the aduice of the counſellours of eſtate, ſo that the greateſt lordes giue their opinion laſt, to the end that freedom of ſpeech may not be taken away by the authoritie of the princes, eſpecially of factious and ambitious men, who neuer ſuffer any contradictions but againſt their wils. By this means alſo they that haue conſulting voyces onely, prepare the way and make it eaſie for them that haue deliberatiue voyces to conclude of matters, and many times furniſh the councell with good and forceable reaſons; and if they erre at any time, they are brought backe againe by the reſidue without ielouſie. This priuie councel deliberateth & finally determineth (vnder the ſoueraigne will of the king) of the complaints of priuate men in matters concerning the eſtate, of the ſuites of towns and prouinces, iudgeth of the appeales made from Parliaments, conſidereth vpon extraordinary dayes of the decrees of Parliaments, concerning their order & diſcipline how it is

kept: dealeth with the tranſporting of wheate & of wines: alſo with all marchandiſes either brought in or caried out of the realme, and with the impoſtes laid vpon them: taketh order for the currant and fineneſſe of money: hath regard to the demaines of the crowne, to lones and taxes, and other reuenues of the king, and to the chief cuſtoms, prolonging their yeeres, abating the rentes of Farmers, or diſcharging thē altogither, taking knowledge of their cauſe and of former informations, ioyning therewith the aduiſe of the Treaſurers, & of the Generals of thoſe charges. All matters whatſoeuer being agreed vpon & appointed to take effect, muſt be ſigned by one Secretarie at the leaſt, and ſomtimes alſo by one of the maſters of Requeſts before it be ſealed by the Chauncellor, who ouerlooketh and examineth narrowly all matters concluded vpon: which maketh his authoritie very great, & ſomtimes odious.Of the great councell. The great councell, which at the firſt inſtitution therof was ſeldom imploied but about ſtate-affairs, was made an ordinarie court of 17. counſellors by Charles the 8. and Lewes the 12. made it vp 20. beſides the Chancellour, who was Preſident of that court: but vnder king Francis another Preſident was appointed. This coūcell had the knowledge of extraordinarie cauſes by way of commiſſion ſent from the priuie councell, and ordinarily of appellations made from the Marſhal of the kings houſe. The court ofOf the court of Parliament. Parliament was the Senate of France in old time, and erected by Lewes the yong according to the trueſt opinion, to giue aduiſe to the king: in which twelue Peeres were eſtabliſhed, ſo that the name of the court of Peeres remaineth with it to this day. But Phillip the faire made it an ordinarie court, and granted vnto it iuriſdiction and ſeat at Paris, but tooke from it the knowledge of ſtate-affaires. For, as we haue alreadie declared, there are no counſellors of eſtate amongſt all the magiſtrates of Fraunce, but thoſe that are ordinarie of the priuie councel. But beſides the councels ſpecified by vs, Princes haue alwayes had aOf the ſtrict councell. ſtrict councel of two or three of the deareſt and truſtieſt about them, wherin the reſolution of the aduiſes and deliberations

of other councels is had, yea many times of the greateſt affaires of the eſtate, before others haue deliberated of them. Neuertheles, this auncient cuſtome of calling the general eſtates of the realme togither when they ſaw it neceſſarie, hath been always obſerued by kings and princes. Our firſt progenitours the Gaules, before either Romanes or kings ruled ouer them, aſſembled togither out of Aquitane, out of the prouince of Narbone, of Lyons, and of other quarters, about the number of threeskore nations, to take aduiſe and counſell of their generall affaires. Since that tyme our ancient kings of France haue vſed oftentimes to hold the eſtates, which is the aſſemblie of all their ſubiects, or of their deputies. For toWhat it is to hold the eſtates. hold the eſtates is nothing elſe, but when the king communicateth his greateſt affaires with his ſubiects, taketh aduiſe and counſell of them, heareth their complaintes and griefes, and prouideth for them according to reaſon. This was called in olde time the holding of a Parliament, which name it retaineth yet in England and Scotland. But at this day the name of Parliament belongethThe name of parliament belongeth to priuate courtes in France. onely to priuate and particular courtes of Audience, conſiſting of a certaine number of Iudges eſtabliſhed by the king in ſundry of his Prouinces, and the publike and generall courtes of Audience haue taken the name of eſtates. The eſtates were aſſembled for diuers cauſes, according as matters were offred: either to demaund ſuccour and money of the people, or to take order for iuſtice, andCauſes of the aſſemblie of eſtates. for men of warre: or for the reuenues of the children of Fraunce, or to prouide for the gouernement of the kingdome, or for other matters. The kinges ſate amongſt them, and were Preſidentes, except at one aſſemblie, wherein was debated the nobleſt cauſe that euer was, namelie, to whome the kingdome of Fraunce belonged after the death of Charles the faire, whether to his coſin Phillip de Valois, or to Edward king of England his brother in lawe. King Phillip was not Preſident, not beyng at that time king, and beſides a partie. No doubt but the people receiue great benefit by this aſſemblie of eſtates.

For this good commeth vnto them, that they may drawe neere to the kings perſon, to make their complaints vnto him, to preſent him their requeſts, and to obtaine remedie and neceſſary prouiſion for redreſſe. Whereby we may eaſily iudge, that many, who haue written of the duetie of magiſtrates and ſuch like treatiſes, are greatly deceiued inThe aſſembly of eſtates is not aboue the prince. maintaining this, That the estates of the people are aboue the prince: which laieth open a gappe to the rebellions of ſubiects againſt their ſoueraign, ſo that this opinion can haue no reaſon or good ground to leane vpon. For if this were true, the commō-wealth would not be a kingdom or monarchy, but a pure Ariſtocratie, as we haue declared heretofore. Yea, what ſhew of reaſon is there to maintaine this error, ſeeing euery one in particular, & al in general bowe their knees before the king, vſe humbly requeſts & ſupplications, which his maieſtie receiueth or reiecteth, as it ſeemeth beſt vnto him? But in this caſe we except a king that is captiue, beſide himſelf, or in his infancie. For that which is thē decreed by the eſtates, is authorized as from the ſoueraign power of the prince. Moreouer we may ſee what great good commeth to the king by the aſſemblie of his eſtates, in the firſt ſpeech, which maſter Michael de l' Hoſpital Chauncellor of France made at the laſt aſſemblie of eſtates at Orleans. Where he confuteth at large their opinion that ſay, that the king after a ſort diminiſheth his power by taking aduiſe and counſell of his ſubiects, ſeeing he is not bound ſo to doe: as alſo that he maketh himſelfe too familiar with them, which breedeth contempt, and abaſeth his roiall dignitie. But we may aunſwere themTheopompus anſwer to his wife. as Theopompus king of Sparta did his wife, who obiected this vnto him by way of reproch, that by bringing in the Ephories, and minglyng their gouernement with his, he would leaue his authoritie and power leſſe to his children than hee receiued it from his predeceſſours▪ Nay (ſaid this Prince vnto hir) I will leaue it greater, bicauſe it ſhall be more aſſured. The Emperour Aurelius ſayd as much to his mother, bicauſe hee freely heard euery one. Beſides, as we ſee that in any great perill of

ſea, or fire kindled to the daunger of publike profite, noAn excellent compariſon. mans ſeruice or ſuccour is reiected, how baſe ſoeuer his calling is: ſo it cannot but be profitable for the Eſtate, when it is threatned with ruine, and the affaires therof are of greateſt importance, to receiue the counſell of all that haue intereſt therein, laying the opinions in the balance, rather than the perſons from whom they come. And hereby the ſoueraigne maieſtie and prudence of a Prince is knowen, when he hath both power and skill to waigh and to iudge of their aduice that giue him counſel, and to conclude with the ſoundeſt, not the greateſt ſide. But to go forward with that which remaineth, let ſo many as haue this honour to be ordinarie counſellors to Princes, remember the ſaying of Solon the wiſe, That they are not called
                     The dutie and qualities of counſellors of eſtate. 
                     thither to pleaſe, and to ſpeake to their liking, but to vtter the truth, and to giue them good counſell for common ſafetie: that they must bring with them for an aſſured and certaine foundation of their conference about ſtate-affaires, a good intent mooued with reaſon and iudgement to profite him, not with paſſions, or deſires of vain-glory, of couetouſneſſe, of emulation, of any other imperfection that leadeth them to their priuate profite: that they must at the entrie of the councell chamber, vnclothe themſelues of fauour towardes ſome, of hatred towardes others, and of ambition in themſelues, and aime at no other marke, than at the honour of God, and ſafetie of the Common-wealth. To this ende they muſt neceſſarilie be furniſhed with wiſedome, iuſtice and loyaltie.Three things neceſſarie in a counſellor of eſtate. As for skill and knowledge, although it be requiſite in counſellors of eſtate, namely, the knowledge of the lawes, of hiſtories, and of the eſtate of Common-wealths, yet ſound iudgement, integritie and prudence are much more neceſſarie. Aboue all things they muſt hold nothingCounſellors may not be Penſioners to forrain princes. of other Princes and Seignories, that may binde them to their ſeruice. And yet now a dayes to receiue a penſion of them is ſo common a matter (but very pernitious in any eſtate) that it is growen to a cuſtome. Ageſilaus
                     Example hereof in Ageſilaus. would not ſo much as receiue a letter, which the king of Perſia wrote vnto him, but ſayd to his meſſenger, that if the king were friend to the Lacedemonians, he

need not write particularly to him, bicauſe he would alſo remaine his friend: but if he were their enimie, neyther letter nor any thing elſe, ſhould make him for his part otherwiſe affected. To bee ſhort, let counſellors of eſtate learne of Plutarch, that it is neceſſarie for them to be free from all paſſions and affections, bicauſe in giuing of counſell the mind hath moſt force towards that wherunto theCounſellors muſt not through feare ſhrinke from their dutie. will is moſt enclined. As for feare, danger, or threatnings, they muſt neuer ſtay them from doyng their duetie, but let them conſtantly propound and maintaine that which they iudge to be good and profitable for the Common-wealth. We read that the Thaſiens making warre with great vehemencie againſt the Athenians, publiſhed a decree, that whoſoeuer counſelled or ſpake at any time of concluding a peace between them, ſhould die the death.Examples hereof. Within a while after one of the citizens conſidering what great hurt his countrey receiued by that warre, came one day into the aſſembly of the people with a halter about his necke, and cried with a loud voyce, that he was come thither to deliuer the Common-wealth by his death, that they ſhould put him to death when they would, and that for his part he gaue them counſell to abrogate that law, and to make peace: which was done, and he pardoned.Conſidius anſwer to Caeſar. 
                     Conſidius a Romane Senatour would neuer be from the Senate, no not when Caeſar ruled all by violence, and did what pleaſed him, and when none of the other Senatours came any more through feare of his force. And when Caeſar asked him how he durſt be there alone to ſtand againſt him: bicauſe (quoth he) my age taketh all feare from me. For hauing from hence forward ſuch a ſhort time to liue in, I am not greatly carefull to ſaue my life. If kings did correct all thoſe that giue them ill counſell,Solyman hanged a wicked counſellor. as Solyman did one of his Baſſaes, who was his kinſman, they would not ſo readily conſent to the paſſions of great men. This Infidell cauſed him to be hanged, bicauſe he counſelled him to put a Gentleman to death vniuſtly (which he had done) that he might enioy his wife more caſilie. Now for the concluſion of our diſcourſe, we will

here ſet downe the aunſwer of one of the Hebrew interpreters to king Ptolemie, who asked him, To whome a Prince ſhould trust, or commit himſelfe. To thoſe (ſayd this wiſe man) that loue him ſo entirely, that they cannot be drawen from him neither through feare, gifts or gayne: bicauſe he that aſpireth to riches, is naturally a traitour. Let vs learne that a counſell wel inſtituted and compounded of good men is a moſt neceſſarie point in the eſtabliſhment and preſeruation of euery eſtate: and as theGood counſell better than many hands. olde Prouerbe ſaith, Good councell is better than manie hands. Let vs learne, that all thoſe that are called thereunto, ought to aime at nothing but at publike profite, of which the happineſſe and greatneſſe of the Prince dependeth, who muſt not contemne the counſell and ſeruice of the leaſt when they can profite the Common-wealth, but heare them willingly, and ſatiſfie their iuſt requeſts.
               
            
            
               Of Iudgements, and of Iudges. Chap. 62.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  WE are now (my companions) according as the ſequell of our ſpeech requireth, to conſider of Iudgements, which I affirmed in the beginning to be one of thoſe two things whereof euery Common-wealth conſiſteth, and that according as they are ordained, the affaires of the eſtate proceed well or ill. Therfore I leaue the diſcourſe of this matter to you.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  No citie (ſaith Plato) can truly be called a city if it want iudgements well inſtituted, and conſequently iudges to exerciſe them.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Iudgements are lawfull to ſuch as vſe them aright, and Iudges are to vs the miniſters of God for our good, as Saint Paule ſaith. Now let vs heare ARAM vponRom. 13. 4. this matter.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  As it is a very dāgerous matter for an eſtate to

wauer daily in deliberations, and not to be well reſolued touching the affaires thereof, or after reſolution to leaueThe common breach of lawes breedeth contempt of the magiſtrate. them without ſpeedy executiō: ſo the eſtabliſhment of many good lawes and ordinances, bringeth greater peril thā profit to the ſame eſtate, if they be not ſeuerely obſerued & kept. For the authoritie of the ſoueraign magiſtrate, in whoſe name they are made, is ſo much the more cōtemptible amongſt his ſubiects, as they know that they are leſſe obeied: as though the fault proceeded from his inſufficiencie of skil to command. He that leadeth well before, is the cauſe why he is wel folowed: & the perfectiō of the art of a good Querie of the ſtable, conſiſteth in making the horſe obedient, & in bringing him to good order: ſo the principall effect of the knowledge of a king is to iuſtruct wel his ſubiects in obediēce. To this purpoſe the eſtabliſhment of good iudges ouer thē wil help well, that they may take knowledge of ſuch as gain-ſay and reſiſt the publikeIudgements are the ſinews of an eſtate. lawes and ordinances of his maieſtie, who is to authorize their iudgements, as the chiefe ſinewes of the whole body of his eſtate. For nothing euer cauſed Common-wealthes to flouriſh ſo much as the conſtant keeping of their countrie lawes, and the ſtrict execution of iudgements agreeable vnto them. And (as Cicero ſaith) thoſe eſtates that are neer their ouerthrow, all things beyng in a deſperate caſe, fall into this miſerable iſſue, that men condemned by theA certain token of the ruine of an eſtate. lawes, are reſtored, and iudgements giuen are cancelled: which things when they come to paſſe, euery one knoweth, that their ruine is at hand without all hope of ſafetie. Moreouer, foraſmuch as the Prince knoweth that he is as it were bound and indebted for iuſtice, he ought to be ſo much the more careful that it may be rightly adminiſtredThe prince ſtā
                        deth bound for iuſtice, and muſt anſwer before God for the breach therof. by thoſe to whom he cōmitteth that office: eſpecially, ſeeing he muſt anſwer for it himſelfe before god, to whom he may not ſay, that he charged the conſciences of his iudges therwith, & ſo diſcharged his own. Wherfore if he adorne his eſtate with reſolute & prudent officers, who will exactly preſerue the bond of the common-welth, by the ſeueritie of their iudgements, & vpright holding of the balance,

no doubt but all kind of publike felicitie will iſſue from the ſame. But let vs briefly conſider what iudgement is, the diuiſion of iudgements, their adminiſtration, & what manner of Iudges ought to exerciſe them. Iudgement isWhat iudgementis. properly that which is ordained by the Magiſtrate, obſeruing the tenor of the law. But foraſmuch as through the infinit varietie of cauſes, times, places, and perſons, which cannot be comprehended in any lawes or ſtatuts whatſoeuer, puniſhments were referred to the will and power of the Magiſtrates, and the dammages of ciuill matters to the conſcience & religion of the Iudges; that which they determine by reſolute ſentences according to their opinion, is alſo called Iudgement, although more properly it may be called a Decree. For this cauſe we ſay, that as there are two principall pointes in euery Common-wealth, which Magiſtrates muſt haue before their eies, that is, theMagiſtrats muſt alwaies haue the law & equitie before their eies. law and equitie: ſo alſo there is the execution of the law and the duty of the Magiſtrate, which conſiſteth either in commanding, in decreeing, or in executing. Of Iudgementes, ſome are called priuate, ſome publike, ſome criminall,The diuiſion of iudgements. others ciuill. Priuate iudgements are of bondages, preſcriptions, Gardianſhips, Wardſhips, contracts, teſtaments, ſucceſſions, mariages. Publike iudgements concerne hainous offences againſt God & man, as ſacriledge, treaſon, reſtitution of monie, or other bribes taken by Magiſtrats, robbery of the kings treaſure, forgeries, theft, wilfull and conſtrained murders. Plato ſpeaketh at large of theſe in his booke of lawes, and it would be an infinite matter, and ſmally to our inſtruction, to ſeeke out the diuers kinds of iudgements, which either haue beene, or are among men. But this is well woorth the noting, that amongeſt the ancient Grecians and Romanes, all iudgements both priuat and publike, were from point to point followed, and with all rigor obſerued, and they that ſtood againſt them were proſecuted and ſet vpon with fire and ſword. Among other examples Diodorus rehearſech a ſtorie of the Phocians, a people of Grecia, condemned by the iudgement of the Amphyctions in a certaine ſumme

                     A rigorous iudgment of the Phocians. of monie, bicauſe they had tilled a great deale of ground that was conſecrated to the gods. Which ſumme when they refuſed to paye, they pronounced their countrie as confiſcate and conſecrated to the gods: wherupon aroſe a warre, called the holie warre, made by the reſt of the Grecians againſt them, and in the ende their vtter ruine & ſubuerſion. Whoſoeuer was once accuſed of any crime before the Iudges in Lacedemonia, although he were abſolued, yet he abode a certaine time after in that eſtate of a criminall perſon, during which time enquirie might be made againe of him, and newe iudgement giuen according to his deſert. If the Ephories condemned their kings in any ſumme, yea if it were to death, their iudgementsOf the iudgements of the Romanes. were executed with all rigor. The iudgements of the Romanes were for a long time in the hands of three Orders or Eſtates: namely, of Senators, Knights, and TribunesWho were Iudges amongſt them, and how they were choſen. of the treaſure. Neuertheles, the ſame perſons did not alwaies iudge, but the Pretors, who were annuall Iudges, and chief amongſt them, tooke a certaine number of Iudges by lot out of thoſe three Eſtates. And if they that were firſt taken were refuſed by any one of the parties, others were choſen by an after-lot, who being agreed vpon andThree kinds of Pretors in Rome. ſworne, were diſtributed by decuries or tens. There were three ſorts of Pretors, the Pretor of the Citie, who tooke knowledge of particular cauſes: namely, of ciuill and criminal matters amongſt the citizens of Rome: the Pretor eſtabliſhed for matters betweene ſtrangers & citizens: & the Pretors appointed for publike cauſes. The Senators were once the only Iudges of all proceſſes: but Tiberius & Caius Gracchus being popular perſons, to diminiſh the authority of the Senate, and to encreaſe the peoples power, ioined vnto them 300. Knights, according to the number of the Senators, & brought it ſo about, that the iudgmēts of al cauſes were diuided betweene theſe 600. men. Vnder Sylla all authoritie of iudging was reſtored againe to the Senate: but Pompey after that brought in the Knights againe, & all iudgements were equally communicated vnto the three Orders aboue mentioned. Afterward, when

                     Caeſar was Dictator, he reduced them to two Orders only, that is, to Senators, & to Knights. Buda in his annotations vpon the Pandects, hath obſerued many good things belonging to the Romane iudgements, which curious ſpirits may looke into: among the reſt, of the great reſpect & honor that was giuen to Magiſtrats. Concerning which matter we may vſe as a good teſtimony, that which we read inOf the reuerence and honor which was giuen to Magiſtrates. 
                     Plutark, of Fabius Maximus his ſon, who ſeeing a far off his father come towards him on horſe-backe, & that his ſergeants in regard of fatherly reuerence had not cauſed him to alight, commanded him to ſet foot on ground. Which the father preſently obeied, & imbracing his ſonne, made greater account of him, than if he had done otherwiſe. The ſame author writeth, that one Vectius was preſently ſlaine, bicauſe he aroſe not whē the Tribune of the people paſſed before him. And Valerius Maximus ſaith, that the Cenſors did note with ignominy, & withall diſfranchiſed a citizen of Rome, bicauſe he breathed & yawned a little too loud in their preſence. But what? Eſtats & dignities were then giuen to vertue, & not to him that offred moſt. And often times the places of iudgement were neceſſarily, and as it were by force laid vpon Iudges, being more honourable than profitable, yea very incommodious to ſuch as wouldAn excellent way to decide all controuerſies betweene parties at diſcord. diſcharge themſelues vprightly therein. I remember an excellent iudgement giuen by Archidamus the Lacedemonian, when he was choſen Arbitrator to decide a certaine contention betweene two friendes. After he had brought them both into the Temple of Diana, and made them ſweare vpon the aultar, that they ſhoulde obſerue preciſely whatſoeuer he determined, wherunto they yeelded. I iudge then (quoth he) that none of you depart out of this Temple, before you haue ended your ſtrife. Thus were they both conſtrained to agree among themſelues, and Archidamus freed from perill of looſing one of their friendſhips, againſt whome he muſt needes haue giuen iudgement. By this meanes he put in practice that ſaying of Pittacus, That a man muſt not be ludge or Arbitrator in the controuerſie of two friendes, least by iudging profitably for
                     
                     one, he looſe the friendſhip of the other. But let vs ſpeake of ourOf the ancient reputation of iudgements in France. own Eſtate. In old time (as many hiſtories report) iudgements were ſo well adminiſtred in France, that ſtrangers did willingly ſubmit themſelues vnto them. Frederick the 2. ſubmitted to the iudgement of the king and his Parliament, the deciding of many contentions and controuerſies betweene him and Pope Innocent the fourth. In the time of Phillip the Faire, the Earle of Namure did the like, albeit that Charles of Valoys the kings brother, was his aduerſe partie: ſo great confidence had he in the equitie of thoſe Iudges. At the ſame time Phillip Prince of Tatentum willingly accepted for Iudge, the king ſitting in his Parliamēt, about the controuerſie that he had with the Duke of Burgundye, for certaine charges which he ſhould defraye towardes the recouerie of the Empire of Conſtantinople. The like did the Duke of Lorraine in the ſuite which he had againſt Guy of Caſtillon his brother in law, for their diuiſion of lands. And in the yeere 1402. the Kinges of Caſtile and of Portingale ſent an agreement made and paſt betweene them, that it might be publiſhed and proclaimed in the Court of Parliament, to haue greater authoritie thereby. Truly theſe teſtimonies are as famous for the glorie of iuſtice vſed in France, as any that can be alleadged by the Grecians or Romanes, for the proofe of their iuſt iudgements, of the reputation of their lawes, and renowne of their Magiſtrates. But let vs conſiderThe iuſtice of France fallen from the ancient glorie. how farre iuſtice is fallen at this day from that ancient opinion and credite, iudgements being now brought to that length, and intangled in ſo many formalities, that it is a thing greatly to be pitied, and full of calamitie, to ſee this Realme ſo infected, as it were with a generall contagious diſeaſe, wherein ſuch an innumerable companie of men liue by that miſerable exerciſe of pleading, calledTokens of a corrupted Eſtate. 
                     Practice. Plato ſaith, that it is an euident token of a corrupted Eſtate, where there are many Iudges and Phiſitions: bicauſe the multitude of Iudges is maintained by the vnfaithfulnes and contention of men, and the great number of Phyſitions by idlenes, daintie fare, and gluttony. There

was neuer any nation of which this might be more truly ſpoken than of ours, as it is notoriouſly knowne to euery one. Paulus Aemilius writeth, that in the beginning, FrēchThe proceeding of iuſtice in France from time to time. men behaued themſelues ſimply and plainly in matters of iudgement, reſting in the determinations giuen by the Bailiffs and Seneſhals, who had the adminiſtration almoſt of al right and iuriſdiction, and thinking it vnſeemely and void of honeſtie, to ſeeke a farre off for right by meanes of appeale. But after that ſlanders aroſe amongſt them, and ſuites were multiplied, ſoueraigne iuſtice began to be exerciſed once a yeere, and that for a few daies togither: afterward, twice a yeere, alwaies changing the place. In the end it was determined, that the chiefe iudgements ſhould be held in a certaine place, and that a houſe ſhould be built for that purpoſe at Paris, the principall citie of the kingdome. Whereupon, in the raigne of Phillip the Faire, the Pallace was erected according to that greatnes and magnificence wherein you now ſee it, with hals & chambers, into which were diſtributed by certaine companies thoſe Iudges that gaue the laſt ſentence frō which no appeale might be made, both in ciuill and criminal matters. The erection of this Parliament into an ordinarie Court, doth giue vs to vnderſtand that there ſhould be one orThe officers of the Court of Parliament in Paris. two Preſidents. The firſt Preſident was the Earle of Burgundy, a Prince of the blood: as in the Imperiall Chamber, the Preſident is alwaies one of the Princes of the Empire. And it was a cuſtome for a certaine time, that the chiefe Preſident ſhould be a man of warre, as in deede to this day he taketh vpon him the eſtate of knight. Beſides, there were eight Clearks, and twelue Lay men, foure Princes of the blood for Requeſts, two Chambers of Inquiries, where there were eight Lay men, and eight Clearks Iudges, and foure and twentie Relators. They were called Clearks that wore long gownes, whether married or vnmarried, and the others Lay men. At this day there is theThe pre
                           •••
                        te▪ ſtate of the Paeliament. great Chamber, which is the firſt and chiefeſt, and is called the Pleading place, where firſt of all, matters belonging to the Peeres and to the King, are decided, and ordinarily

thoſe verball appellations that are made vpon the Pleas of the Aduocats, or if they cannot be readily determined, they are remitted to the Councell, for which there is a Chamber appointed. Next, there are fiue Chambers of Inquiries, wherein proceſſes in writing are examined and determined. There alſo is the Tournel, or place where criminall actions are iudged, and the Treaſure-chamber for cauſes touching the kings reuenues. There is the court of Requeſts, wherin chiefly matters of priuiledges belonging to the kings traine and to others, are iudged. There is the Auditorie of the maiſters of Requeſts for the houſhold, who iudge of the titles of offices: the Chamber of the Generals, of the iuſtice of the Releefs, and the Chancery. On the other ſide is the Chamber of accounts, and that of the generall Receiuers. Some of the counſellours are married, others are Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and are diuided by Chambers according as the Court is furniſhed. In the great Chamber there are for the moſt part foure Preſidents, vnto whom the neceſſitie of times haue added two others, who may be ſuppreſſed when there is no need of them. In the other Chambers there are but two Preſidents. Moreouer, there is one Procurator for the king, & two Aduocats, to looke to the kings prerogatiues, and to all ſuch matters: two Scribes to collect, inroll, and to deliuer both ciuill and criminall deedes: foure Notaries and Secretaries to eaſe them, beſides a great number of other writers. Budaeus, a very skilfull man, and a diligentOf the ancient eſtate of the Parliament. ſearcher out of all antiquitie, hath obſerued in his firſt annotations vpon the Pandects, that there were three ſorts of Iudges in the time of Phillip the Long. In the firſt bench, which was properly called the Parliament of Prelats and Barons, vnto whome certaine Lawyers were aſſiſtants, or other learned men, called Clearks and Lay men, three Prelats and three Barons were Preſidents, and iudgment was not giuen ſo much by the pluralitie of voices, as by the ſufficiencie of thoſe that gaue their verdicts. He ſaith alſo, that the Lay-counſellors were taken from amongſt Gentlemen and others, of whome it was not required

that they ſhould be Graduats in the lawe, but it was ſufficient if they had indifferent skill in other learning, as we ſee that ſome ſhort gowned men haue. They did not then ſtudie the Romane lawes, as they haue done ſince: whereupon they haue erected at this day Vniuerſities of the lawe in the beſt Townes of France: from whence many thinke that the multitude of ſuites haue proceeded, bicauſe they learne by this meanes the occupation or craft of pleading, as the Lorde Chancellour de l'Hoſpital declared in his ſecond Oration which he madeFerdinando forbad that any Lawyers ſhould go into the Weſt Indians. to the Eſtates at Orleans. We read that when Ferdinando king of Spaine, ſent Pedrarias as gouernour into the Weſt Ilands newly diſcouered, he forbad him to take any Lawyer or Aduocate with him, that he might not cary the ſeede of ſuites thither where there were none at all. Cicero complained of his time, that many notable decrees of lawes were corrupted and depraued by the curious heads of the Lawyers. What would he do if he were now aliue, and ſawe the great heapes and piles of bookes, with our practiſe in the lawe? If he ſawe that holie Temple of lawes ſo vilely polluted, & miſerably prophaned? Where a thouſand cauils and quiddities are continually coined by ſuch writings, according to the ſaying of that Comicall Poet: That through craft and ſubtiltie one miſchiefe is begotten vpon another? Moreouer, in thoſe happye daies, of which we made mention, there were few ſtatuts & edicts, bicauſe mē thought that good maners were the beſt laws, & that naturall ſence holpen with an vpright conſcience, and ioined with due experience, was the 
                        ••
                     ghteſt rule to iudge by. But after that men became ſo skilfull in ſuites,The ſprings of all corruptions of iuſtice. and that offices of iuſtice, from honorable but finally profitable, being freely giuen to thoſe that deſerued them, came to be gainefull, free from yeelding any account of their dooings, and ſet foorth to ſale, as marchandice, for them that bad moſt, and offered laſt: after that men began to ſpice their ſuits with great ſummes of monie, and to forſake that ancient plainnes, which conſiſted in giuing of a fewe iunckets to the Iudges: after that profite

began to grow by determining of by-matters, and ſuch as happen before the maine cauſe, and by deciding of ſuites by Commiſſioners: after that Preſidents and Counſellors began to take delight in this, that they were followed,The Areopagites iudged by night, and in the darke. ſollicited, and ſought to by ſutors, contrary to the cuſtome of the Areopagites, who iudged by night, and in the darke, and contrary to the opinion of Marcus Cato, who ſaid, that it was not ſeemely for a man to recommend his right to the Iudges, or to pray them to commit no iniuſtice, bicauſe theſe two things ought to be deerer to the Iudges than to the parties, who can looſe but mortall and vading goods, whereas the others pawne their ſoules to hell fire that laſteth for euer: after that, gifts were receiued of both ſides againſt expreſſe prohibitions giuen outThe Switzers forbid their Iudges to take any thing for iudging. by publike lawes and ſtatutes, wherein the Switzers may ſerue vnto vs for a notable example, amongſt whom it is forbidden vnder paine of life, to take any thing either directly or indirectly for iudging: after that Aduocats began to cōſider ſleightly of cauſes, not hauing ſo much patience to end one matter, bicauſe they would ſpeedily to another: whereby they giue occaſion many tymes to their Clients to ſaye, as a Peaſant ſaide not long ſince toThe ſaying of a Peaſant to three Lawyers. three famous Aduocats, whoſe counſell he had vſed: Truly (quoth he) ye haue laboured faire: for ye haue left me in greater doubting than I was in before: after they began to write in ſheetes with ſeuen or eight lines on a ſide, and to diſguiſe matters with friuolous anſwers that lay open their griefes, with contradictions, replications, admonitions: after that 
                        〈◊〉
                      who in former times were to be had for nothing, and appointed for certaine cauſes▪ became hirelings and perpetuall, yea at this day their offices are ſet to ſale: after that Sollicitors were ſuffered in middeſt of them all, to be, as it were the skum-gatherers of ſuites, with all that rablement of practitioners, who deuoure the ſubſtance of poore men, as Drones eate vp the hony of Bees: laſtly, after the Chancery did let looſe the bridle to all ſortes of expeditions, and went about to teach the Iudges, I ſay, after theſe things began to be practiſed, we

fell into this miſerie of long ſuits, gainefull to wicked andOf the miſerie which length of ſuits bring with it. faithles men, who ſeeke nothing but delaies, & very preiudiciall to good men, who many-times had rather looſe their right, than vndoe themſelues by following it ſo long time by way of iuſtice. For they commonly ſee the righteſt cauſe fruſtrated by delaies, which are granted at their pleaſure that are fauoured, and by infinite other vniuſt meanes. Sometimes many iudgements are giuen vpon one matter, and yet nothing concluded: or if there be any definitiue ſentence, it is by and by ſuſpended from execution, vpon the leaſt obiection that is made, or elſe it is called into doubt by ſome ciuill requeſt, or by a writ of error. Thrice happie were we, if we might continue in that ancient ſimplicitie and naturall goodnes, rather than after this manner to infold our ſelues in ſo many proceedings and captious ſubtleties, which haue corrupted and extinguiſhed the light of iuſtice, imprinted in the hartes and mindes of all men well borne. We ſeeThe great abuſe of iuſtice in France. that ſuites are heaped vp one vpon another, and made immortall: that nothing is ſo certaine which is not made vncertaine: that no controuerſie is ſo cleare, which is not obſcured: no contract ſo ſure, which is not vndone: no ſentence or iudgement ſo aduiſedly giuen, which is not made void: all mens actions open to the ſlanders, craft, malice, redemptions, and pollings of Lawyers: the maieſtie and integritie of ancient iuſtice loſt: and laſt of all, that in the dealings of men nowe a daies, no ſhewe of vpright iuſtice, but onely a ſhadowe thereof remaineth. This euill being ſo great, and growne to ſuch extremitie, it is impoſſible but that, according to the courſe of worldlie things, the ruine thereof ſhould be at hand, or at leaſt it is to receiue ſome notable change within ſhort ſpace. For (as Plato ſaith) in a corrupt Common-wealthHow a corrupt Common-wealth muſt be corrected. defiled with many vices, if a man ſhould thinke to bring it backe againe to hir firſt brightnes and dignitie, by correcting ſmall faults, and by curing the contagion thereof by little and litle, it were all one as if he ſhould cut off one of Hydras heades, in whoſe place ſeuen moe did

ſpring vp: but that alteration and diſorder whereby all euill & vice was brought into the Common-wealth, muſt be plucked vp by the rootes. Therefore let vs not thinke it ſtrange, if they that haue the raines of the gouernment of this Eſtate in their hands, find ſo many difficulties and ſo ſmall meanes, in the reformation therof. For, as Demades ſaid, they gouerne nothing but the ſhipwracke of the Common-wealth. Neuertheles honeſt men, indued with ſome gifts, & with good iudgement, ought not to be diſcouraged in ſo great a ſtorme, but the more that the tempeſtuous rage thereof ſeemeth to torment the Veſſell of our Common-wealth, and that with ſuch violence, that the Patron himſelfe and the Pilotes are in a manner tired, and faint with continuall trauell, ſo much the more diligently ought the paſſengers to lend their hands, ſome to the ſailes, ſome to the tackling, and ſome to the anchor▪ yea now is the time (following the counſell of Cicero in the like caſe) that all that are endued with ſingular giftes of nature, fit for the managing of affaires, ought boldly toWhen it is lawfull to ſeeke after publike offices. take vpon them publike Offices and Eſtates without feare, to the ende that all entrance may be ſhut vp againſt the wicked, who are the nouriſhers of this preſent corruption. Nowe, if thoſe three things, which Aristotle requireth in all good Iudges and Magiſtrates, did abound in them that ſhould heerafter be called to adminiſter iuſtice and iudgement: namely, a loue to the preſent Eſtate, a ſufficiencie to exerciſe thoſe duties that are required in their office, with vertue and iuſtice, we might yet ſee ſome Idea and forme of that golden age, wherein our Predeceſſors liued, we might ſee pietie and iuſtice flouriſh, to the great benefite and felicitie of this French Monarchie. Concerning that which may be further required in the duties, qualities, and conditions of good Iudges, we may be inſtructed by our other treatiſe, wherein we entreated of Counſellors of Eſtate, and alſo by calling to mind the former diſcourſes of vertue and iuſtice. I onely will adde heere, that it were very commendable and full of profite, yea neceſſarie for the Eſtate, that all the companies of

Iudges ſhould be compounded of ſuch notable old menIudges ought to be ſuch old men as haue experience ioined with their knowledge., as with their knowledge haue experience of many things. And in deede this title of Senator, which was giuen them in ancient time, ſignifieth an olde man: neither did the Grecians or Romanes call any to that degree, but olde men. But how can we deſire a more heauenlie ordinance than that which God himſelfe appointed, when he eſtabliſhed a Senate? Gather togither (ſaid he) three ſcore and tenne of the ancienteſt of the people, wiſe men, and ſuch as feare God. Surely in this election of Iudges, it behooueth Kinges to vſe great prudence, and (as Iſocrates ſaide) to take triall of them, to knowe whether they are of good iudgement, whether they haue a ſharpe ſight in affaires, and whether they are not troubled with the change of their life, but behaue themſelues wiſely in euery eſtate, both in proſperitie and in aduerſitie: eſpeciallyMagiſtrats muſt not be couetous to take good order that they be not ſuch as are ſubiect to lucre, from whence all iniuſtice proceedeth. Therfore Cicero would haue the contempt of temporal goods, from whence all quietnes of our mindes commeth, to be no leſſe in Magiſtrates, than in true Philoſophers. Yea, he ſaith, that they ought to be more carefull and laborious to attaine vnto it, than the others, bicauſe worldlie affaires toucheth them neerer, ſo that they haue greater cauſe to ſtand in feare of the alteration of fortune, of aduerſitie, and of pouertie. Vnto which agreeth fitly that ſaying of Plinie the yoonger: That no point of Philoſophy
                     The chiefeſt point of Philoſophy. 
                     is more excellent than to deale in publike affaires, and to do iuſtice, whereby they practice that which philoſophers teach. But out of queſtion, the forme and manner, which of late time hath beene vſed in calling Iudges & Officers to their charges, is ſo farre from that which we deſire heere, that in this reſpect a man may call it the mother of all corruption and iniuſtice. For when a Iudge is made, his knowledge is notA corrupt making of Iudges. examined, his integrity & vprightnes of life is not weighed his long experience is not conſidered, his age & vertue is not regarded, but only his crownes are viewed to ſee whether they are weight. Now ſince that ſuch men grew rich,

although they are found inſufficient, yet they obtaine ſo many letters of commandement, ſo many Mandatums one in anothers necke, that in the end they are receiued whatſoeuer they are, to the great preiudice of the whole Common-wealth. We are therefore to wiſh that all valuing and ſale of offices, eſpecially of iudgement and iuſtice may be aboliſhed and diſanulled, that all meanes of fauor and ambition may be taken away, that the ancient andThe ſtatute of S. Lewes concerning the election of officers. happie ordinances of our kings may be reſtored: eſpecially that decree of S. Lewes the king, whereby he enacted, that all publike offices ſhould be beſtowed vpon the election of three perſons, choſen by the Officers and Citizens of thoſe places, to one of which ſo elected, the king was to giue freely without monie, the office then void. This holie ordinance hath ſince that time beene often renued by king Phillip the Faire, Charles the Wiſe, Charles the 7. Lewes the 11. and Charles the ninth that dead is, when his Eſtates were held at Orleans. So that if the King and his Councell would aduiſedly conſider of theſe things in the eſtabliſhing of Iudges and Magiſtrates in his kingdome, and would ſtrengthen them in the execution of their iudgements, the obedience of his ſubiects; would be greater, and the foundation of all good order and policie more ſure.
               
            
            
               Of Seditions. Chap. 63.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  AS it is neceſſarie that all things which haue a beginning ſhould end, & which encreaſe ſhould diminiſh and waxe olde, ſome ſooner, others later, according to the diſpoſition of thatNo earthly thing perpetual. matter whereof they are compounded, and through the influence of the heauenlie bodies, from which (nature woorking in them by hir author) this continuall and mutuall ſucceſſion of generation and corruption proceedeth: ſo are publike eſtates firſt inſtituted, encreaſed, maintained, leſſened, changed, deſtroied, turned & returned one frō another by the diſpoſition of God. Thoſe that

are beſt grounded in religion and iuſtice, haue their power moſt aſſured, and are of longeſt continuance, but noneNo Common-wealth perpetuall. are perpetuall, although their policie and manner of gouernment be neuer ſo good. For we ſee them al corrupt in proceſſe of time, and in the end periſh through their own vices that follow and accompanie them, being firſt mooued and ſtirred vp by nothing ſo much as by ſedition, and ciuill warre. This bringeth to light all euill that lurketh in thoſe members of the politike body that are moſt pernitious, vntill the infection be wholy ſpread, and hath taken hold of the nobleſt parts thereof, whereby it is brought to extreame miſerie without hope of remedie. Nowe, although euery one of vs haue ſufficient feeling heereof in himſelfe by his owne harme, yet we may know it better by taking occaſion vpon this ſubiect to diſcourſe of the nature of ſeditions, & of their common effects, that we may haue them in greater deteſtation, and bring euery one of vs his hart and mind to helpe this Eſtate, if there remaine neuer ſo little ſhewe or meanes whereby the ſubuerſion thereof may yet be kept backe. But I leaue the diſcourſe of this matter to you my Companions.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  All ſedition is euill and pernitious, although it ſeemeth to haue a good and honeſt cauſe. For itNo iniurie is a ſufficient cauſe for any man to moone ſedition. were better for him that is author of ſedition, to ſuffer any loſſe or iniurie, than to be the occaſion of ſo great an euill, as to raiſe ciuill warre in his countrie.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  Nature (ſaith Empedocles) vſeth no other meanes to deſtroy and to ouerthrow hir creatures, than diſcord and diſiunction: and ſedition (as Thucydides ſaith) comprehendeth in it all kind of euils. Let vs then heare AMANA, who will prooue this ſufficiently vnto vs.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  If we conſider, how God minding to puniſh Adam for his ingratitude and diſobedience, made his owne members rebell againſt the ſpirite, vnto which they obeied before, whereby he became captiue vnderThe originall of all ſedition. the lawe of ſinne, no doubt but we may ſay, that after the ſame manner he chaſtiſeth Kings, Princes, and Heads of Common-wealths, that haue no care to obey his commandements,

and to cauſe others to keepe them, by the rebellion of their owne ſubiects, not without great danger of depriuation from all authoritie by them, and of receiuing the law at their hands to whome they ſhould giue it, as it hath beene ſeene practiſed in many Eſtates andThe cauſe of vnion and concord in kingdoms. gouernments. Religion and the loue of God bringeth with it all vnion and concord, preſerueth Kingdomes and Monarchies in their integritie, and is the nurſing motherThe fruits of the contempt of religion. of peace and amitie amongſt them. But the contempt of religion bringeth diſcord and confuſion, ouerturneth all order, treadeth vertue vnder foote, giueth authority to vice, and ſoweth quarrels and diſſentions amongſt men, from whence ſeditions and priuate murders proceed, and in the end ciuill and open wars, which are as flaming fires to take hold of, and to conſume moſt flouriſhing Eſtates. For without doubt, if men had in them the true loue and feare of God, which cannot be without the loue of our neighbour, no ſuch effects would euer proceed from their works and actions. Politicks haue labored infinite waies to maintaine the people in peace, and to cauſe ciuill iuſtice to flouriſh. They haue made many Lawes and Edicts, many Statutes, appointed many puniſhments, to bridle the boldnes of ſeditious fellowes, to repreſſe extorſions, wrongs, and murders: but bicauſe they built without aPeace and concord effects of the feare of God. Iſaias. 2. 4. Micah. 4. 3. foundation, that is, without the feare of God, all their labour taken therein was fruitles. It is the feare of God onely that cauſeth ſwords to be broken and turned into mattocks, and ſpeares into ſiethes, as Iſaias and Micah ſpeake: that is to ſay, which breedeth humanitie and gentlenes, mollifieth mens harts, and cauſeth them to ſuffer much to auoide ſtrife and debate; in a word, which is able to vnite in one with vs moſt ſtrange and barbarous nations. Beſides, it is the profeſſion of godlines to ſuffer, and not to offer violence, neither can it bring foorth euill effects contrarie to their cauſe. This deſerueth to be handled at large, but our preſent ſubiect leadeth vs to diſcourſe of the nature of ſeditions, and to ſet before our eies the euils that proceede thereof, both by reaſons and examples, referring

the conſideration of their cauſes vnto ſome other time heereafter. Sedition then being taken generally, is nothingWhat ſedition is. elſe but ciuill warre, ſo hurtfull to all Eſtates and Monarchies, that it is the ſeede of all kinde of euils in them, euen of thoſe that are moſt execrable. It engendrethThe fruits of ſedition. and nouriſheth want of reuerence towards God, diſobedience to Magiſtrates, corruption of manners, change of lawes, contempt of iuſtice, and baſe eſtimation of learning and ſciences. It cauſeth horrible reuenging, forgetfulnes of conſanguinitie, parentage, & friendſhip, extorſions, violence, robberies, waſting of countries, ſacking of townes, burning of buildings, confiſcations, flights, baniſhments, cruell proſcriptions, ſauage murders, alterations and ouerthrowes of Policies, with other infinite exceſſes and intollerable miſeries, pitifull to behold, and ſorrowfull to rehearſe. Sedition armeth the father againſt the ſon, the brother againſt the brother, kinſman againſt kinſman, men of the ſame nation, prouince, and citie, one againſt another. Heerupon the fields, which before were fertile, are left vntilled, ſumptuous and rich houſes remaine emptie & forſaken, famous and wealthie townes ſtand deſolate, by reaſon of the loſſe of their ancient ornaments, I meane their priuate and publike buildings, and their notable Inhabitants and Citizens. And, which is woorſt of all, no man will acknowledge a Soueraigne, but euery Prouince will ſeeke to withdraw it ſelfe, and to be made a Canton. In the end, the bodie thus diſmembred, and the parts thereof infected with the ſame poiſon of diſcord, deſtroy themſelues: that the propheſie of Ieſus Chriſt, who is the truth it ſelfe, might be fulfilled, where he ſaith: That euery kingdome diuided in
                     Matth. 12. 25. 2. Sam. 24. 14. 
                     it ſelfe, ſhall be deſolate. Therefore Dauid did rather chuſe a plague amongeſt his ſubiects, than warre or tumults. And Pythagoras ſayde, that three thinges were by all meanes to be remooued: a diſeaſe from the bodie, ignorance from the ſoule, and ſedition from the Citie. Plato alſo affirmeth, that no euill is woorſe in a Citie than that which diuideth it, and of one maketh it two: and that nothing

is better than that thing which tieth and vniteth it togither.What communitie Plato required in his Common-welth Whereupon he wiſhed, that there might be a communion, not onely of all goods, but alſo of that which nature hath appropriated to euery one, as of eies, eares, and hands, to the end that whoſoeuer ſaw, heard, or did any thing, he might imploy all to common profite and vſe, thereby to maintaine better the mutuall loue of Citizens, who hauing nothing priuate, would by this meanes be alwaies touched with the ſame ioy and griefe, praiſing and diſliking all iointly togither the ſame things. There areTwo kinds of warre. two ſorts of warre mentioned alſo by Plato, who calleth the one ſedition, which is the woorſt, and the other which is more gentle, is that againſt ſtrangers. Nestor, a wiſe and prudent counſellour among the Grecians, ſaid in a Councell (as Homer reporteth) that he which loueth ciuill war, is a moſt wretched, cruell, and deteſtable man, and vnwoorthy to liue. And truly if we looke to the examples of thoſe fruits, which haue alwaies proceeded of ciuill wars, we ſhall ſee that they haue beene guided after a moſt cruel and horrible kind of hoſtilitie, and that their iſſue hath beene the loſſe and ouerthrow of many flouriſhing Common-wealths.The fruits of ciuil warre among the Grecians. 
                     Thucydides ſpeaking of the generall diſſention amongſt the Grecians for diuerſity of gouernments, which they ſought to bring in amongſt themſelues, ſome deſiring to be gouerned in a Democraty, others is an Oligarchy, rehearſeth incredible euils which aroſe of that warre. As ſoone (ſaith he) as any inſolencie was knowne to be committed in one place, others were encouraged to do woorſe, to enterpriſe ſome new thing, and to ſhewe that they were more diligent than others, or more inſolent and hot in reuenging themſelues. They diſguiſed all the euils which they committed with commendable titles, calling raſhnes Magnanimitie, and modeſtie Baſenes of mind: head-long indignation Manlines and Hardines, prudent counſell and deliberation Coloured back-ſliding. Whereby it came to paſſe that whoſoeuer alwaies ſhewed himſelfe furious, was accounted a loial friend, and he that gain-ſaid, was ſuſpected. If any one of the contrarie faction

gaue any good and honeſt counſell, it was not accepted: but if they could withſtand it by any notorious deed, they had rather be reuenged ſo, then they would not giue occaſion to others to offer the like wrong to them. When any agreement was made and confirmed with a ſolemne othe, it laſted vntil one of the parties grew to be the ſtronger, that he might breake and violate the ſame, and by extreme wickednes ouercome the other, which proceeded of couetouſnes and deſire of other mens goods. Hereupon thoſe factions and part-takings were kindled, which procured infinite euils to the whole countrey of Graecia, wherein there was no quietneſſe, vntill it was quite ouerthrowen by ſeditions and ciuill warres. This is that which Demades obiected to the Athenians by way of reproche,Demades reprocheth the Athenians. that they neuer intreated of peace but in mournyng gownes, namely, after they had loſt many of their kinſfolkes and friends in battels and skirmiſhes. Ageſilaus king of Lacedemonia bewailed this miſerie when he ſawe ſuch cruell warres betweene the Athenians and Lacedemonians, people of one countrey, and although he had wonne a great battell neere vnto Corinth with great loſſe to his enimies, and ſmall hurt to his owne men, yet not reioicing, but rather being very ſorowfull, he vttered theſe words with a loud voyce: O poore Graecia, how miſerable art
                     Ageſilaus bewaileth the ciuil diſſention of Graecia. 
                     thou to ſlay with thine owne hands ſo many of thy valiaunt men, as would haue ſufficed to diſcomfite in one battell all the Barbarians ioyned togither. Hiſtories tell vs, that the Romanes came to that great Empire more by diſſentions and ciuill warres, which they ſowed amongſt their neighbors, than by force of armes. For after they had kindled the fire in one nation, they maintained one ſide a certaine time, vntill in the end they ouerwhelmed both the one and the other. Thus they deceiued the Carthaginians, the Aſians, the Gaules, and Graecia. Onely England was not quite ſubdued, bicauſeThe prudence of Engliſhmen. it knew their practiſes, and turned all domeſticall choler againſt the enemie when the danger was common. Traian the emperour writing to the Senate of Rome amongſtTraians letter to the Senate of Rome. other things ſent theſe wordes: I recommend vnto
                     
                     you aboue all things, friendſhip and brotherhood among your ſelues: bicauſe ye know that in great Common-wealths home-warres are more hurtfull than thoſe that are made against ſtrangers. For if kinſmen and neighbours had neuer begun to hate one another, & to war one vpon another, Demetrius had neuer ouerthrowen Rhodes, nor Alexander Tyrus, nor Marcellus Syracuſa, nor Scipio Numantium.
                     The Romane Empire decaied through ſeditions. And in deed the Romane Empire fell from hir greatneſſe by the ſame meanes of ciuill warre which they had long time nouriſhed among others. Yea it is certaine, that in no place part-takings full of all kind of crueltie, were ſo vſuall and ſo long time practiſed, or factions and ſeditions were more cruell than in Rome. The firſtThe original of the Romane ſeditions. occaſion thereof was their gouernement, wherein the people alwayes ſet themſelues againſt the Senate and the Nobilitie, the Senate ſeeking to rule without meaſure, and the people to encreaſe their libertie. During theſe diſſentions, it came to paſſe that at one time foure thouſand and fiue hundreth ſlaues and baniſhed men inuaded the Capitoll, and wanted litle of making themſelues lords of Rome. Appian hath written at large of their ſeditions and partialities, and ſaith that through ambition and couetouſnes one ſide daily ſought to diminiſh the authoritieM. Coriolanus being baniſhed contrary to right, tooke armes againſt his countrey. of the other. He ſaith that Martius Coriolanus being vpon this occaſion, and in theſe diſſentions driuen out of the citie contrary to right and reaſon, went to the Volſci, and warred on their ſide againſt his countrey, being the firſt baniſhed perſon that tooke armes againſt Rome. And in deed, neither in the councell, nor in the citie, there was no ſword drawen, nor man ſlaine in ciuil ſedition, vntillT. Gracchus the firſt that was ſlaine in Rome by ſedition. 
                     Tyberius Gracchus fauouring the people, & making lawes in their behalf, was killed, and many others that were with him in the Capitoll neere the Temple. Whereupon hatred and rancor increaſing openly amongſt them, infinite murders followed, and many of the chiefeſt euen the Conſuls were ſlaine, the contempt of lawes and iudgements enſued, and in the end open war, armies & troupes one againſt another with incredible thefts and cruelties. At laſt Cornelius Sylla, one of the ſeditious perſons, ſeeking to redreſſe

one euil with another, (after theſe diſſentions had continued about 50. yeeres) made himſelf prince ouer the reſt in many things, taking vpon him the office of a Dictator, who was woont in former time to be created in the greateſt dangers of the common-wealth only for ſix moneths. But Sylla was choſen perpetuall Dictator, bicauſe neceſſitieSylla made himſelf perpetuall Dictator. ſo required, as he ſaid himſelfe. After he had practiſed much violence, he continued in quietnes like a conquerour, and was thereupon ſurnamed the Happie. After his death ſeditions began a freſh, and reuenging of thoſe cruelties which he had committed, vntil Caius Caeſar laid hold of the Seignorie and principaltie, hauing diſcomfited & ouercome Pompey, to whome he was before allied. For when they twaine ſought by their plat-formes and deuiſes to commaund all, they could not abide one another within a while after, Pompey being vnwilling to haue an equall, and Caeſar a ſuperiour. Afterward Brutus and Caſſius beyng mooued with deſire either of rule, or of publike libertie, ſlew Caeſar: whereupou the ſeditions grew greater than they were before, and the triumuirate warre was opened againſt them, which preuailing for a time, was it ſelfe diſſolued and brought to nothing. For Octanius only of the three remained a peaceable poſſeſſor of the Romane Empire, beyng happy in all things, and feared of all men, leauing heyres of his race to rule the Monarchie after him. Augustus beyng dead, the eſtate began vnderThe Romane Empire began firſt to decline vnder Tiberius. 
                     Tyberius his ſucceſſour, a voluptuous prince, to decline by little and little from the periode of hir greatneſſe, vntill in the ende there remayned no more than that which we ſee incloſed within the limites of Germanie. Alexanders
                     Diuiſion ouerthrew Alexanders Empire. Empire beyng the greateſt that euer was, vaniſhed away as a fire of Towe, through the diuiſion and diſorder that was amongſt his ſucceſſoures. The Empire ofThe cauſe of the ruine of Conſtantinople. Conſtantinople through the part-takings of Princes, is brought vnder the tyrannous and miſerable power of an Ethnike and barbarous Turke. We read in Ioſephus thatThe cauſe of the ſubiection of Iudaea to the Romans. the kingdome of Iudaea became ſubiect and tributarie to the Romanes, through the ciuill warres between Hircanus
                     
and Aristobulus, who were brothers. For Pompey being of Hircanus ſide, tooke the citie of Hieruſalem, and led away Aristobulus and his children priſoners with him, after the countrey had ſuffred infinite calamities by their domeſtical diuiſions. Which when Onias a holy man did wel foreſee, he with-drew himſelfe into a ſecret place, and would not take part either with the one or the other ſide. And being taken by Hircanus his men, they required him, that as once he obtained raine by his prayers in the tyme of a drought, ſo he would now curſe Aristobulus and all thoſe of his faction: but he contrarywiſe lifting vp his hands toOnias prayer. heauen, vttred theſe wordes. O God, king of the whole world, ſeeing theſe men among whom I ſtand, are thy people, and they that are aſſailed, thy Priests, I beſeech thee humbly, that thou wouldest harken neither to theſe men against the other, nor to the other against theſe: for which holy prayer he was ſtoned to death, ſuch was the poiſoned rage of this people one againſt anCiuil warres in Italy between the Guelphes and the Gybellines. other. Was there euer any folly, or rather fury like to that of the Guelphes and Gybellines in Italy, of whome the one ſide held with the Pope, and the other with the Emperour? The Italians vpon no other occaſion but only in fauour of theſe two names, entred into ſo extreme a quarell throughout the whole countrey, that greater crueltie could not be wrought between the Infidels and Chriſtians, than was committed amongſt them. This contention continueth yet, inſomuch that murders are euery where committed in the townes, euen between naturall brethrē, yea between the father and his ſonnes, without all regardThe great crueltie of the Guelphes and Gybellines. either of bloud or parentage. Their goods are ſpoyled, their houſes razed, ſome baniſhed, others ſlain: & whileſt euery one feareth leaſt any reuenge ſhould be layed vp in ſtore for him, or for ſome other of his ſide, they kill many times litle infants, whom the moſt barbarous men in the world would ſpare. Theſe two factions fought continually togither through mortall hatred, ſo that they could not dwell togither in one citie, but the ſtronger always draueBy what tokens they know one another. out and expelled the other. They knew one another by feathers, by the faſhion of their hoſe, by cutting of bread,

ſlicing of orenges, and by other markes▪ which is a very pernicious thing, and hath procured great deſtruction of people, and ouerthrow of townes. The Italians ſay, that this fire was firſt kindled at Piſtoya between two brethrē,The originall of this contention. the one called Guelph, and the other Gibellin, who quarelling togither, diuided the towne between them, whereupon the Gibellins were driuen out. This ſeparation, like to a contagious diſeaſe, vpon no other occaſion was ſpread ouer all Italy, inſomuch that afterward all that were at contention any where, were diuided into Guelphs & Gibellines. The Germains thinke that theſe names came from thir countrey and language: and that the emperor Frederike the ſecond, in whoſe time this diuiſion began, called his friends Gibellines, bicauſe he leaned vpon them, as a houſe doth vpon two ſtrong walles that keep it from falling: and thoſe that were againſt him of the faction of Pope Gregorie the ninth, he called Guelphs, that is to ſay, Wolues. What did England ſuffer by the deuiſion of theThe diuiſion of the houſes of Yorke and Lancaſter. houſes of Yorke and Lancaſter, that gaue the white and red Roſes in their armes? Which contention although it began when Henrie the 4. who was duke of Lancaſter and earle of Darbie, vſurped the kingdom vpon his coſin Richard the ſecond, whom he cauſed to be ſlaiue in priſon, after he had compelled him to reſigne his kingly power and crowne of England, yet it was hotteſt in the raigne of king Henry the 6. who ſucceeding his father and grandfather, was at Paris crowned king of England and France. Afterward fauouring the houſe of Lancaſter againſt theHenry the 6. depriued of his Kingdom by the houſe of Yorke. houſe of Yorke, they that held with the red Roſe tooke armes againſt him, ſo that in the end he was depriued of his eſtate, and ſhut vp as priſoner in the Tower of Londō, where he was after that put to death. Theſe factions and ciuill warres (as Phillip Cominaeus writeth) indured about 28. yeeres, wherein there died at ſundry battels and skirmiſhes aboue 80. perſons of the bloud royall, with the flower of the nobilitie of England, beſides an infinite nū
                     ber of the valiaunteſt men and beſt warriours among the people. Many lordes were put in priſon, or baniſhed, leading

the reſt of their liues miſerably in ſtrange countreys: the ancient pollicie of the kingdom corrupted, iuſtice cō
                     temned, and the Iland impoueriſhed, vntill in the end theThe vnion of the houſes of Lancaſter and Yorke. earle of Richmond ouercame king Richard, enioyed the kingdom quietly, and was called Henry the ſeuenth: hauing married Elizabeth daughter to Edward the fourth, both of them beyng the ſole heires of the families of Lancaſter and Yorke. By means of this mariage the diſſention ceaſed in England, and the red and white Roſes were ioyned togither in one armes. There was no CountreyOf ciuil warres in Spaine. more afflicted than Spayne, both by ciuill warres and by Neighbour-ſtates, when it was diuided into many kingdomes. The Moores ouer-ranne it on the one ſide, the French and Engliſhmen deuoured it on the other, taking part at the firſt with the diſſentions that were in Caſtile between Don Peter and Don Henry; next with the contentions that aroſe betwixt Caſtile and Portingale, which cauſed much euil to both the kingdomes. But ſince that Spaine hath been vnited, it hath extended hir dominionThe great iuriſdiction of Spain. into Afrike, and into the New found Ilands, borne armes in Germany, and in Hungary, commanded ouer the chief Ilands of the Mediterranean ſea, ouer Naples and Sicilia, ouer Millan and Flanders. Contrarywiſe, Italy hauing in former times hir forces knit togither, obtained the EmpireOf ciuil diſſention in Italy. of the world, but being now diuided into many Seignories and Potentates that agree badly togither, and hauing ſuffred all the calamities in the world by ciuil warres, lieth open to the iniuries of ſtrangers. Through the ſame cauſe the power of Germany is greatly diminiſhed, wherin not long ſince the princes of Saxonie were banded oneGermany vexed with ciuil warre. agaynſt an other: Iohn Fredericke, Phillip Lantgraue of Heſſe, the Duke of Wittemburg, with many free cities, rebelled againſt the Emperour: the peaſauntes roſe againſt the Nobilitie to ſet themſelues at libertie: the Anabaptiſts poſſeſſed Munster, made a botcher their king,Hungaria loſt by ciuil diſſention. and held out the ſiege for the ſpace of two yeeres. Hungaria, which had valiauntly reſiſted the Turkes almoſt two hundreth yeeres togither, was at length ſubdued by

them, through the diuiſions that were in the countrey, as Polonia is greatly threatned by the Moſcouite. In Perſia, after the death of king lacob his two ſonnes ſtroue for the gouernement of the countrey, but the Sophie Iſmael
                     Perſia was ſubdued by the diſſention of two brethren. commyng in the meane tyme vpon them with his new religion ſlew one of them in battell, and compelled the other to flie into Arabia, and ſo poſſeſſed the kingdome, which he left to his children. Phillip the eleuenth, Duke of Burgundie, eaſilie ſubdued Dinan and Bouines in theDinan and Bouines ſubdued through diſſention. countrey of Liege, which were ſeparated onely by a riuer, after they had ouerthrowen themſelues by their diſſentions, whereas before he could not obtaine his purpoſe. And whileſt the kings of Marrocke warred one with another for the eſtate, the Gouernour of Thunis and of Telenſin made himſelfe king, renting a ſunder his two prouinces from the reſt to erect a kingdome. Concernyng Frenchmen, they haue beene often and many times moleſted with ſeditions and ciuill warres as well as others.France much troubled with ciuil warres. The nobilitie of Fraunce was almoſt all ſlayne at the battell of Fountenay neere to Auxerre, by the ciuill warres betweene Lotharius, Lewes, and Charles the balde. And Champagnie loſt ſo many of the nobilitie in warre, that the Gentlewomen had this ſpeciall priuiledge grauntedWomen in Champagnie made their huſbands noble. them, to make their husbandes noble. When king Iohn was priſoner in England, Charles his ſonne Regent of Fraunce, beyng at Paris to gather money for his raunſome, there fell ſuch a diuiſion betweene the king of Nauarre, who tooke part with the Pariſians, and the Regent, that the people vnder the guiding of Marcel, Prouoſt of the merchauntes, ranne to Charles his lodgyng, where the Marſhalles of Cleremount and Champagnie were ſlayne, euen in his chaumber and preſence, and their bodies drawen ouer the marble ſtones. The like was done to Reignold Dacy the kings Attorney, beſides many other murders, ſo that the Regent had much ado to ſaue himſelfe without Paris. But the foreſt factions that euerCruel warre between the houſe of Burgundie & of Orleans. were in Fraunce, were thoſe of Burgundie and of Orleans, which cauſed a moſt grieuous & cruel ciuill war,

that laſted 70. yeeres, with murders, robberies, and vnſpeakable cruelties. Both of them, one after another, called in the Engliſhmen to ſuccor them, who afterward ſeazed vpon the crowne. It was a pitifull thing to ſee France cruelly tormented both by hir owne ſubiects & by ſtrangers, to ſee it void of right & equitie, without magiſtrates, without iudgements, without lawes, which had no abiding place amongſt fire and force, where violence onely raigned. All this was procured by the ambition of theſe two houſes, each of them ſeeking to obtaine the gouernmentThe cauſe thereof. of the kingdom vnder Charles the ſixt, whoſe wittes fayled him. By the means of theſe diuiſions Henry the fift king of England, taking to wife Katherine the youngeſt daughter of king Charles was put in poſſeſſion of Paris byHenry the 5. proclaimed king of France. the duke of Burgundie, and proclaimed heire and Regent of Fraunce by the conſent of three eſtates held at Troy. But the death of this Henry and the duke of Burgundie forſaking the alliance of the Engliſhmen, with the valure and good behauiour of king Charles the 7. as alſo the loue and fidelitie of the Frenchmen, reſtored the kingdom to that eſtate wherin it is at this preſent. Now if France hath heretofore ſuffred ſo much by ciuill warres, and domeſticall ſeditions, if all forraine eſtates haue receiued ſo many ſundry alterations, and incredible wounds by the ſame means, how can we looke for leſſe, nay rather haue we not already ſeene the like or greater calamities amongſt vs, through our diſſentiōs & priuate quarels between certainAmbition and deſire of gouernment the chiefe cauſe of the troubles in France. houſes contending one with another, being chiefly mooued with ambition and deſire to gouerne? Why doe we not acknowledge this firſt cauſe of our miſeries, that we may lay aſide all hatred crept in amongſt vs vnder pretence of diuerſitie of religion, that we may reunite our mindes ſo much diuided, to the good and common quietnes of vs all, and liue vnder the obedience of our Prince with that fidelitie for which Frenchmen haue been alwais praiſed aboue other nations? Do not ſo many examples, both of auncient and later times make vs ſee thus much, that if we redreſſe not this contention, this goodly and

floriſhing kingdom, which heretofore hath growen great by the concord and obedience of our aunceſtors is readie to fal into vtter ruine and ſubuerſion, through our factions, diuiſions, and part-takings? Shall this little that remaineth of the French monarchie, which in formerThe ancients limites of the French monarchie. times hath had all the empire of Germany, the kingdoms of Hungarie, Spaine and Italy, and all the bounds of the Gaules to the riuer of Rhine, vnder the obedience of hir lawes, ſhall it I ſay, be thus laid open as a praie, and that by hir owne ſubiectes, caried headlong with ſuch paſſions, that they make the way plaine and readie for ſtrangers to bring them vnder their miſerable bondage? Shall it be ſaid among our poſteritie, that our ſelues haue encouraged them to vnder-take that, which not long ſince, Spaine, Italy, England, the Lowe countreys, the Pope, the Venitians, being all ioyned togither againſt the houſe of Fraunce, durſt not take in hand after the taking of Frauncis the firſt, and the loſſe of that famous battell? Not one of them durſt enter into Fraunce to conquere it, knowing the lawes and nature of this Monarchie. For as a building layd vpon deepe foundations, and made ofA compariſon. laſting ſtuffe, well knit and ioyned togither in euery part, feareth neither windes nor ſtormes, but eaſily reſiſteth all aſſaults and violence: ſo this kingdom will not eaſily admit any alteration and change, as long as all the members continue vnited and ioyned togither vpon the foundation of their lawes. Therefore let the king, princes, their councell, great and ſmall, euery one in his place take order,Good counſell for all kings and ſoueraigne princes. that God may be truly knowen, and ſincerely ſerued according to his iuſt and righteous will: that honeſt behauiour may be maintained, the authoritie of lawes kept, iuſtice adminiſtred, magiſtracie duely exerciſed, rewards and puniſhments diſtributed equally, that vertuous men may be honored, and the wicked corrected. Otherwiſe, if we cōtinue long diuided into companies, with defiances paſſing & repaſſing, if we perſiſt in our wonted inuectiues and riots, & referre not all our actions to ſome good ende, let vs not looke for leſſe than for a generall

deſolation and pitifull ouerthrow of our countrey, appeering already in many places thereof, or at leaſt for ſome horrible mutation and change of the eſtate.
               
            
            
               Of the cauſes that breed the change, corruption and finall ruine of Monarchies and Policies. Chap. 64.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  AS long as the Phyſition knoweth not the cauſe of his Patients diſeaſe, it is impoſſible for him to remedy the ſame, & to preſcribeA diſeaſe known is almoſt cured. a medicine to the ſicke partie. A diſeaſe knowen (ſaith the Prouerbe) is in a maner cured. So fareth it with Eſtates and Monarchies that are changed, marred, and in the end brought to ruine by diuers cauſes: which if they were wel knowen to their princes and gouernors, might eaſily be preuented by prudence and reaſon, and fit remedies then applied to thoſe euils that diſpoſe & lead thē to mutation, when the natural corruptiō that is in them (as euery thing hath his proper & inward corruption of which it is eaten and conſumed) beginneth to ſpread it ſelfe to the beſt parts to marre all. Go to then (my companions) hauing ſeen the nature of ſeditions, let vs ſeek out the cauſes that ſtirre them vp, whereby Eſtates and Monarchies are changed, marred, and in the end ouerthrowen.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     The cauſes of diuiſion between ſubiects. The diuiſion that is between ſubiects of one and the ſame prince, ariſeth for the moſt part of diſcontentment, where-with ſome are mooued vpon iniurie or contempt, or elſe of feare that men haue of the light, or to auoyd ſome euil, or of great idleneſſe, pouertie and neede.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Two cauſes of the franticke feauer of French diuiſions. There are (as I take it) two cauſes intermingled, which breede this franticke Feauer of our Fraunce, the one proceeding from the Eſtate, the other from religion. But let vs heare ASER to whome the handling of this ſubiect offered nowe vnto vs, belongeth.
               
               
                  
                  ASER.
                  There is no beginning of any thing whatſoeuer ſo ſmall, which through continuance & perſeuerance is not ſoone made great and ſtrong, if vpon ſlight account thereof it be not ſtayed. Euery euill (as Cicero ſaith) in the firſt ſproute thereof may be eaſily ſtopped, but being inueterate, is more ſtrong and vneaſie to be ſuppreſſed. So that if it be mette withall before it appeare and breake foorth, the danger is leſſe, although it proceed firſt from the neceſſitie of naturall corruption, which is in all things that are created, and is to be ſeene euen in things withoutCorruption is naturall in all things. ſenſe, as Mil-dew in wheate, rottenneſſe in wood, ruſt in braſſe and iron: yea euery thing is corrupted by it own euill, howſoeuer it eſcapeth all outward harmes. Therefore as a good Phiſition preuenteth diſeaſes, and if one part be ſuddenly touched with raging payne, aſſwageth the preſent euill, and then applieth remedies to the cauſes of the diſeaſe: ſo a wiſe prince or gouernor of a Common-wealthA Prince compared to a Phyſition. ought to preuent as much as is poſſible the ordinarie changes of all eſtates, which ouer-take them either by outward force, or by inward diſeaſes. When they beginne, he muſt ſtay them whatſoeuer it coſt him, and then looke what the cauſes are of thoſe diſeaſes that are fartheſt from effect, and apply conuenient and apt remedies vnto them. Now it is certaine, that if a man wouldTo know the cauſes of euils is the readieſt way to cure them. throughly meet with all hurtfull things, or otherwiſe cure any ſuch euill when it happeneth, hee muſt know their cauſes whereof the effect dependeth, which is the very entraunce to all good helpes and remedies what ſo-euer. Fore-ſeene miſchiefes (as the Poet ſaith) hurt not ſo much as thoſe that come vnlooked for. A wiſe man premeditateth all that may happen, but it falleth out contrary to fooles. And if we haue neuer ſo ſmall an in-ſight into the condition and ſtate of worldly thinges, wee canWhen Common-wealths begin to alter. not in any wiſe doubt of this, that euery Common-wealth, after it is come to the toppe of perſection, which is the flouriſhing eſtate thereof, hath but a ſhort tyme of continuance: whether hir ouerthrowe proceedeth from the violence of hir enimies, when ſhee thinkes

hir ſelfe ſafeſt: or whether ſhe waxe olde through long tract of tyme, and ſo ende by hir inward diſeaſes: or whether ſhe ſodainly decay and fall downe with hir owne waight by reaſon of ſome other hidden cauſe. Which chaunges of Common-wealths beyng matter ſufficient to make a great booke, we are, according to the ſequele of our diſcourſe, to conſider chiefly of the cauſes that for the moſt part ſtirre vp ſedition, and breed the alteration and finall ouerthrowe of Eſtates and Monarchies. The Philoſophers propound foure cauſes of euery thing, the efficient,
                     Foure cauſes of all things. 
                     the materiall, the formall, and the finall cauſe. The efficient cauſe of ſeditions is double; the one neere, the other remooued a farre off. The neere or next cauſe, areThe efficient cauſes of ſeditions. the authors of ſeditions, by whoſe counſell, direction and helpe they are ſtirred vp and brought to paſſe. By the cauſe remooued a far off, I meane thoſe things for which men are prouoked to raiſe ſeditions, and of which we are chiefly to intreat in this place. They are the matter ofThe materiall cauſe of ſeditions. ſeditions againſt whome they are raiſed, as princes and magiſtrates, who are ſuperiours, and ſometime their ſubiectes, beyng inferiours. The forme of ſedition is theThe formal cauſe. ſtirring vp of the people, noyſe, out-cries, batteries, murders, ciuill warre, the taking of townes, ſpoyling ofThe difference between a rebellion and a faction. countreys, burning and baniſhment. If it bee of ſubiectes towardes their lordes and ſuperiours, it is called rebellion: if betweene ſubiectes or equals, it is called a faction. The ende of ſeditions is that for which they areFower final cauſes of ſeditions. firſt mooued and ſtirred vp. Aristotle ſetteth down foure ends of ſeditions, namely, profit, & honor, with their contraries, loſſe & diſhonor. For men are commonly mooued to ſedition either through hope of profit & honor, or elſe through feare of loſſe and diſhonor towards themſelues or their friends, ſo that they deſire the one & ſhun the other. Vnto profit we referre riches: to honor, magiſtracie, publike offices & charges: to loſſe, pouertie: to diſhonor, cō
                     tinual iniurie, contempt, & ſuch like means. Which things although they are reckoned among the motiues, or efficient cauſes of ſeditions, ſo farre foorth as they prouoke

men to ſtirre vp ſeditions, yet they may bee endes alſo, bicauſe men conſpire togither, either to obtaine or to eſchew them. Thereore let vs handle the cauſes which mooue the people to murmure, and lead them from priuate and ſecret grudging, to publike and open ſedition, from which the changes, alterations, and finall ruines of eſtates and monarchies proceed. The couetouſnes of magiſtratesCouetouſnes a principall cauſe of ſedition. and gouernors ſeemeth to be a chief cauſe therof, when they lay vpon their ſubiects great exactions, taxes, loanes, and other intollerable ſubſides, whereby their patience is oftentimes turned into furie, and their hartes ſet vpon reuolting, are driuen forward to imitate them1. King. 12. 14, 16. that forſooke Roboam for the ſame cauſe as the ſcripture rehearſeth. But foraſmuch as all ciuill ſocietie is appointed to the end that men might keep their goods ſafely vnder the protection and guiding of good gouernors, they that beare chief rule in eſtates ought eſpecially to prouide that not onely publike goods may be diſtributed and imploied according to common neceſſitie and profit, but alſo that euery mans priuate goods may be in ſafeti
                        •
                     . Publike goods are the reuenues of Seignories, kingdoms andWhich are publike goods. empires, demeans, taxes, tributes, confiſcations, exchetes, ſubſidies, graunts, and impoſitions brought in for the ſupply of publike neceſſitie. A man may ſay that couetouſnes, which is a wrongfull deſire of another mans goods, isWhen couetouſnes is committed in publike goods. committed in theſe publike reuenues, whē the mony that commeth of them, is conuerted rather to priuate than to publike vſe, by thoſe that haue the diſpoſing therof: which fault the Romans called peculatus, and the iudgement giuen againſt it, Repetundarum. Now whē ſuch goods are waſted vnprofitably, or ſuperfluouſly, princes & magiſtrates vſe to lay immoderate and ſtrange exactions vpon their ſubiects. Couetouſnes alſo is vſed in priuate goods, when the poorer or weaker ſort are ſpoiled of their owne by the mightier. The people will hardly beare this kind of vſurping, when they conſider that they are tormēted by thoſe that ſhould defend them: & this dealing is ſubiect to reſtitutionGod requireth reſtitution of oppreſſors. before God. Hiſtories are ful of changes, ſeditions

and deſtructions of commō-wealths, ariſing of theſe cauſes of couetouſnes, wherof we haue alleaged many examples in our diſcourſes. Vnder Charles the 6. king of FranceGreat ſeditions began vpon a ſmall occaſion. great ſeditions and robberies were practiſed by the Pariſians, by reaſon of impoſts and ſubſidies that were leuied of the ſubiects. The occaſion of theſe commotions was bicauſe the farmers exacted a halfpeny of a poore woman that ſold Water creſſets. The couetouſnes, briberie, andCouetouſnes cauſe of the death of the nobilitie in Switzerland. polling vſed by the lords & nobles of Switzerland cauſed the common people to fall to mutinie, and to deliuer thē
                     ſelues out of their ſlauery & bondage by horrible maſſacres, which they made of them. Vnder Ioel and Abiah the1. Sam. 8. 5. ſonnes of Samuel & iudges ouer the Iſraelites, the people oppreſſed through their couetouſnes, asked a king, wherupon the eſtate of their gouernment was changed. The ſecond cauſe that breedeth the alteration & ruine of Common-wealths,Ambition the ſecond cauſe of ſeditions. is ambition, or deſire of honor, which then eſpecially mooueth men to murmure, when the vnworthy are aduanced & preferred before men of deſert. Honor isHonor the only reward of vertue. the only reward of vertue, & that which is more eſteemed of euery loftie & noble hart, than all worldly goods. Therfore it is meet that in the diſtribution of publike charges, rewards, and honors, regard be had to the qualitie, merite and ſufficiencie of men, that they may be giuen to woorthy perſons, and that ſuch as are vnfit may be put backe.Onely vertue ought to open the gates of honour. Let vertue only & diligence open the gates of honor, and not mony or fauor. We ſaw before many examples of the fruits of ambition, & we taſte daily of ſome that are very bitter. The third cauſe that changeth and ouer-turneth eſtatesIniurie the third cauſe of ſedition & monarchies, is iniurie: which hapneth when they that are higheſt in authoritie, through too much inſolēcie & pride offer wrong to the honor or perſon of their inferiors. A kingdom (ſaith the wife man) is tranſlated frō one nation to another through the iniuſtice, iniuries & contumeliesWhy Cvrus reuolted from his grandfather Aſtyages. offred by ſuperiors. Cyrus the great reuolted frō his grandfather Astyages, ouercame him in battell, & tranſlated the monarchie of the Medes vnto the Perſiās, bicauſe of that iniurie which he offered vnto him, in caſting him

out into the fields as ſoone as he was borne. Coriolanus beingCoriolanus. vniuſtly baniſhed his countrey, tooke armes, conquered a great part of the Romane dominion, and burned all to the gates of Rome, bringing their eſtate to ſuch an extremitie, that it was readie to be deſtroyed, had not the women come towards him to pacifie him. Childeric kingChilderic ſlaine by Bodilus. of Fraunce, cauſed Bodilus to be whipped with rods, wherupon he ſlew him a
                        •
                     d his wife great with child. Iustine the
                        Iustine 3. third emperour, was ſlayne by Atelius generall of his armie, whoſe ſonne he had murdred, and abuſed his wife to deſpite him there-with. Feare alſo is many times theFeare the fourth cauſe of ſeditions. cauſe of alteration and daunger to a Common-wealth, when guiltie and conuicted perſones mooue ſedition, and rebell againſt the Magiſtrates to preuent and auoyd theCatiline. puniſhment that is due to their faultes. Catiline vrged with the conſideration of his manifold wicked prankes, and with the feare of iudgement conſpired againſt his countrey, beyng aſſiſted by Lentulus, Cethegus, with many ſacrilegious perſones, murderers, adulterers, bankrupts and other naughtie liuers that ſtoode in feare of iuſtice by reaſon of their misbehauiour. Neither may any man doubt but wicked men will rather trouble the eſtate than ſtand in daunger of their liues, or hazard their goodes. For beſides the aſſuraunce which they haue conceiued to eſcape the iudgement of men by this meanes, they haueWhat maner of men are afraid of peace. this further aduauntage to fiſh in troubled waters: ſo that they are no leſſe afrayd of peace than of the plague, hauing in all euentes the ſame reſolution before their eyes that Catiline had, who ſayd that he could not quench theFeare was one cauſe that mooued Caeſar to ſeek the empire. fire begun in his houſe with water, and therefore would pull it downe and ſo quench it. This was one reaſon that mooued Caeſar to lay hold of the eſtate, bicauſe his enimies threatned, that as ſoone as he was out of his offices they would cauſe him to giue an accoūt how he had diſcharged thē. I would to god we had not bought as deerly the ſame cauſes of our ciuil warres. Likewiſe too much authoritieExceſſe in authoritie & power is the fiſt cauſe of ſeditiēs and power both for wealth & friendſhip, is dangerous in euery kinde of gouernment, ſo that great heede is to be

taken, that none grow to be vnmeaſurable great. For men are ſubiect to corruption, neither can euery one ſuſtaine wiſely the proſperitie of fortune: which cauſeth ſome to ſeeke the alteration of popular and Ariſtocraticall Common-wealths into monarchies, & others to vſurpe kingdomesWhat the Oſtraciſme among the Athenians was. & empires. This reaſon brought in the Oſtraciſme amongſt the Atheniās, which was a baniſhmēt for a time, wherby they brought downe them that ſeemed to exceed in greatnes. This they vſed (as Plutarke reherſeth) againſt Themistocles, Aristides, and other excellent men, fearing leaſt their authoritie, credite, and good will of all men, ſhould procure them a kingly power with the chaunge ofMany kings ouerthrowen by ſuffring their ſeruants grow too great. their popular gouernment. Many kings and princes that had ſome of their friends and ſeruaunts too great, were themſelues or their children ouerthrowen by them afterward. Tyberius making Seian too mightie: Commodus, Perennius: Theodoſius the ſecond, Eutropus: Iustinian, Belliſarius: Xerxes, Artaban, were in danger of their eſtate. The vnmeaſurable authoritie of the Maiors of the palace, and of the Conſtables, chaunged the crowne of France from the race of Clouts to that of Charles Martel: and vpon the ſame occaſion it was afterward taken from thatContempt is the ſixt cauſe of ſeditions. line, and tranſferred to another. Contempt alſo is another cauſe greatly to be feared in euery eſtate and Monarchie, as that which oftentimes breedeth their change and ouerthrow. It is very daungerous in two conſiderations eſpecially: firſt when ſome are contemned and excluded from publique offices and dignities which they deſerue, and yet ſee them wholy in the power and diſpoſition of ſome particular men. Whereupon both the one and the other are mooued to ſedition, the contemned perſones through enuie and deſire of reuenge; they that haue the great charges in their handes, through contempt of the others, whome they ſeeke vtterly to exclude, and to driue them further off from all publique honours and authorities. Secondly, contempt is verieWho are moſt ſubiect to contempt. pernitious, when inferiours contemne their ſuperiours. They are commonly deſpiſed that haue neither vertue,

courage, nor fortitude, that are not able to profite themſelues or others, that are not laborious, painfull, nor any manner of way carefull. Where contempt is, there no obedience is to be had. This maketh the ſonne diſobedientContempt brecdeth diſobedience. to the father, the wife to the husband, the learner to the teacher, the ſeruant to the maiſter. The opinion of prudence, iuſtice, conſtancie, knowledge, goodnes, modeſtie, and of other vertues, nouriſheth and preſerueth the obedience of ſubiects towards their Princes, and the contrarie vices prouoke them to rebellion. Therefore as policies proſper when they are gouerned by prudent, iuſt, conſtant, valiant, and moderate men: ſo they are troubledCauſes that mooue ſubiects to contemue their Princes. with ſeditions through the ignorance, cowardlines, and intemperancie of Princes, or elſe when they are too familiar with their inferiors, or when they are ſuddenly lift vp from baſe eſtate, or ſeem too aged, or too yong, or poore, or miſerable, all which things breede contempt. Wherefore this is ſet downe as a good rule to preſerue the eſtateA rule of Eſtate. of a Monarchy: That the Prince must procure to himſelfe loue, without the contempt or hatred of any, if it may be. For the obtaining whereof, there is no better way, than the iuſt diſtribution of rewardes. The Princes and Lords of France,Lewes the 11. fought withall by his Nobles, bicauſe he contemned them. bicauſe they were contemned by king Lewes the 11. who had none about him, nor fauoured any but men of lowe and baſe eſtate, gaue him battell at Montlhery (whereof the battel hath euer ſince retained the name) to the great perill of the Eſtate, and danger of the kings life, if he had not appeaſed the indignation and furie of the ſaid Princes and Lords, by his great prudence and policie. Moreouer,Ouer-great inequalitie betweene Eſtates in a Common-wealth is the ſ
                           •
                        
                        uenth cauſe of▪ ſeditions. too much encreaſe and vnproportionable growth is one cauſe that procureth the change and ruine of Common-wealths. For as the bodie is made and compounded of parts, and ought to grow by proportion, that it may keep a iuſt meaſure: ſo euery Common-wealth beeing compounded of orders or eſtates, as it were of parts, they muſt be maintained in concord one with another, by equall and due proportion obſerued betweene each of them. For if one Eſtate be aduanced too much aboue another,

diſſention ariſeth. As long as the three Orders and Eſtats at Rome, namely, the Senators, the Knights, & the people, were caried proportionably, their policie flouriſhed: but after they dealt one againſt another through enuie, ambition, & couetouſnes; diuiſions, and part-takings began. This cauſed many to commend equalitie ſo much,Equalitie the mother of peace. calling it the nurſing mother of peace & amitie betweene ſubiects: and contrariwiſe inequalitie, the beginning of all enmities, factions, hatred, & part-taking. But ſeeing it is meete that in euery well eſtabliſhed policie there ſhould be a difference of rights and priuiledges betwixt euery eſtate, equalitie may continue, if carefull prouiſion be made, that one Eſtate go not too much before the other.Impunitie of offences the eight cauſe of ſeditions. The impunitie of offences is one cauſe alſo from whence ſeditions and ciuill warres proceede, yea it is a matter of very great waight, and yet men make leaſt account therof. We ſpake of it before, but we muſt of neceſſitie often rub vp the remembrance thereof, as the wiſe HebrewThe meaning of this precept, Be not ſuretie for another.
                      doth by repeating ſo many times that admonition, that we ſhould not be ſuretie for another: not that he forbiddeth charitie towardes the poore, but that none ſhould be a meanes to let the wicked eſcape, vnles he will beare the puniſhment himſelfe. This is that word which God ſent to1. King. 20. 42. king Achab, after he had ſaued the life of Benhadad king of Syria, that he made himſelfe a pledge for another man, by ſuffering the wicked to liue, and therefore that it ſhould cost him his life. Hitherto we haue ſeene how the couetouſnes of Princes, the ambition or deſire of honour in priuate men, iniurie, and reproch, feare in the guiltie, exceſſe of authoritie and wealth, contempt, ouer-great encreaſe, or aduancement without proportion: and laſtly, impunitie of offences, procure commonly ſeditions in Eſtates andOther cauſes-of ſedition. Monarchies. Beſides all theſe, extreame pouertie and exceſſe of wealth, idlenes, and want of feare of the forraine enimie, as we haue elſe-where declared, change of Princes and lawes, too great licence of ſeditious Orators and Preachers, the naturall diſpoſition of places where men are borne, which maketh them more inclined to commotions

and ſeditions, as Hiſtoriographers haue noted of Genes, Florence, and Flanders, with many other things may be ſaid to be cauſes of ciuill warres, of alterations, changes, and ruine of Eſtats and Policies. Among which we note that ſhame is ſometime a cauſe of changeShame is ſometime cauſe of alteration of Eſtates. in the gouernment of Common-wealths, but it is without tumult or ſedition. Thus it fell out in Herea, a towne of Arcadia, which was gouerned popularly, where men of no account were elected Magiſtrates by others like themſelues: whereupon beeing mocked, they changed their manner of election into chuſing by lot, that ſo they might haue a more lawefull excuſe. There was ſeene not long ſince in the Councell of France ſuch a number of Maiſters of Requeſts, and of Secretaries of the Treaſure, that very ſhame cauſed them to be ſent away, bicauſe it was not meete to entreat of great and waightie matters before ſuch a multitude. Negligence likewiſe breedeth theNegligence a cauſe of chang. Two ſorts of negligence. change and ouerthrow of a politike Eſtate. There are two ſortes of negligence, the one in thoſe that call, chuſe, or receiue into any great office, ſuch men as are vnwoorthie, and care not for their charges; or that ſuffer ſuch perſons to aſcend to the chiefeſt places of Magiſtracie, that are enimies to that forme of Common-wealth, as if the chiefe men in Bearne ſhoulde chuſe an Auoyer, which office is contrarie to their manner of liuing: or if the Venetians ſhould chuſe a Duke, or the Cardinals a Pope, that were not of their religion: or if the King of Fraunce ſhould create a Conſtable or Chancellour, that liked not a Royall and Monarchicall Eſtate. The other kinde of negligence, which is much more common, is in them that are called to a dignitie, office, or Magiſtracie, and ſhewe them-ſelues retchles in that adminiſtration and exerciſe, as we ſee that moſte Biſhops andBiſhops neglecting their charg to deale in worldly affaires, bring themſelues into contempt. Prelats neglect the dutie of their charges, to imploie or beſtowe their tyme in worldlie affaires, for which cauſe they growe into miſliking and contempt. From hence haue proceeded great offences, and maruellous troubles, which may more eaſilye bee lamented, than

taken away, or reformed, being ſuch abuſes as haue taken deepe roote. Moreouer, the alteration of policie is bred by other meanes by little and little, as when through diſſimulation or otherwiſe, men ſuffer ſome part, albeit neuer ſo little, of the lawe or politike Eſtate to be cut off.An Eſtate is not changed all at one time, but by little and little. Changes ſeldome fall out all at one time, if they are not very violent, but for the moſt part go on by litle and litle, as the ſeaſons of the yeere ſlide away ſoftly from great heates to hard froſts, and from the froſt and cold of winter, to the heate of ſommer. A lingring feuer afflicteth the patient ſo eaſily, that he hardly perceiueth himſelfe therin: but if it be ſuffered to continue, without redreſſe in due time, it will turne to a hectick feuer, and ſo conſequently become incurable. So fareth it with an Eſtate and Policie, whoſe authoritie waxeth contemptible, and is loſt by little and little, when men are negligent in preuenting the ſame in due time. He that will conſider the alteration happened in France within theſe thirtie yeeres, ſhall find it to be very great, aſwell in regard of religion, as of manners and lawes, which neuertheles came by little and little, and ſo continueth ſtill, greatly threatning a change of the eſtate. Heere therefore I will diſtinguiſh betweene the chance of lawes, cuſtomes, religion, & place, which is properly but an alteration, and the change of an eſtate, which is when the ſoueraigntie goeth from one intoDiſſimilitude a cauſe of chang. the power of another. Diſſimilitude alſo is the cauſe many times of ſedition, and of change in the Common-wealth, which commeth to paſſe when the Inhabitants of a place are not of the ſame nation, but many ſtrangers are receiued into it, who perceiuing them-ſelues to be the ſtronger part, haue many times thruſt the naturall Citizens out of their towne: whereof Ariſtotle alleadgeth many examples that fell ſo out in the Grecian cities. At Sienna,Examples of ſtrangers that haue expelled naturall Citizens out of their townes. at Genes, at Zurick, at Cullen, the ſtrangers being multiplied draue out the Lords of thoſe places, and ſlew moſt of them, bicauſe they were ouer-charged with exactions, euill entreated, and excluded from bearing of offices. They of Lindauia ſlew the Lords of the countrie, and

changed the Ariſtocraty into a popular Eſtate: and ſo did the Inhabitants of Strausborough, who hated the Nobilitie in ſuch ſort, that they would not ſuffer any of them to enioy the great eſtates and publike charges, vnles he prooued that his grandfather was one of the baſer ſort of the people. Theſe examples mooue naturall Inhabitants many times to ouer-runne ſtrangers, when they ſee the number of them waxe ouer-great amongſt them. One exampleThe Inhabitants of Geneua conſpired againſt ſtrangers in their citie. heereof we may note in the citie of Geneua, into which when many ſtrangers, aſwell Frenchmen as others retired for religion, the naturall Citizens could neuer brooke them, although they were very profitable to the citie, making it rich and populous, whereas before it was poore, and ſmally inhabited: but conſpired many times to driue them out, as namely that conſpiracie of one Perin, in the yeere 1556. which began to be put in execution,Caluine hazarded his life to appeaſe a tumult in Geneua. when Caluine ranne into the midſt of their naked ſwords to appeaſe the tumult, as Beza writeth in his life. The ſame feare mooued Pharaoh, when he ſawe the Hebrewes encreaſe ouer-faſt amongſt his ſubiects, to decree, that the Midwiues ſhould from that time forward, kill the maleExod. 1. 16. children at their birth. Now in receiuing of ſtrangers regard muſt be had to the number, that it be not ouergreat, and that their authoritie be not vnmeaſurable. For otherwiſe it is neceſſarie for trafficke ſake, and for many other publike commodities, that ſome be receiued of others. Many other kinds of diſſimilitude are found in common-wealths,Diuers kinds of diſſimilitudes in Common-wealths. as diſſimilitude of linage betweene the Nobilitie and Common-people: of offices, betweene Iudges, Treaſurers, Souldiors, Prieſts: of profeſſions, betweene Lawyers, Phiſitions, Diuines, and Philoſophers: of occupations, betweene Bakers, Butchers, Shooemakers, Painters, Smithes, Carpenters: without which diſſimilitudes no Common-wealth can conſiſt. Therefore they are not to be taken quite away, but onely the diſorder that groweth amongſt them, that ſo they may be reduced to a conuenient agreement, like to that which is betweene the diuers parts that are in the conſtitution of the world & of man.

We may alſo call a diſſimilitude, that difference which is of religions, as of the Iewes, Chriſtians, Mahomiſts, Caphrans, Armenians, Grecians, Latines, Iacobites, Ethiopians: then betweene the Chriſtians themſelues, as Catholiks,Whether diuerſitie of religion be a cauſe of ciuill warre. Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Caluiniſts. Many haue ſaid, and are yet of this opinion, that the chiefe cauſe of ciuill warres in France proceedeth from this diuerſitie of religion. And to ſay truth, there is nothing that carieth men away with ſuch vehement paſſions, as zeale of religion, for which they fight more willingly thā for their liues, goods, wiues, and children. Through the diuerſitie heereof they that are neereſt of kinne looſe their naturall loue, they that are of the ſame country and language, perſecute one another as mortall enimies, and ſundry nations abhorre one another for the ſame. Theſe things are too well knowne amongſt vs to require proofs thereof. And trulyDiuerſitie of opinion among ſubiects, dangerous in an Eſtate. in reſpect of ſedition and tumult, nothing is more dangerous, than for ſubiects to be diuided in opinion, whether it be in matters of eſtate, or of lawes and cuſtoms, or for religion. For if they be of diuers opinions, ſome labour for peace, and ſeeke to make others agree vnto it, who wil neuer agree amongſt themſelues. And in truth it is a very hard matter to maintaine publike exerciſes of any religion whatſoeuer, when it is contrary to the religion of the people, or of the moſt of them, who many times cannot be kept within compaſſe neither by lawes nor Magiſtrats, vnleſſe the force appointed to keepe them in bee veryThomas Emperour of Conſtantinople ſlaine for pulling downe of Images. great. For we ſaw that Thomas, Emperour of Conſtantinople, was cruelly ſlaine by the people amidſt a great congregation in the Church, bicauſe he went about to pull downe Images. But I am of this opinion (yet readye to yeeld to a better iudgement) that if men were honeſt and vpright, and walked in their calling holily, they would neuer fight among themſelues for religion. And if there had beene no other cauſe mingled therwith in our ciuill wars, we ſhould not haue had experiēce of thoſe miſeries which daily ouer-whelme vs. The authoritie of a holie and free Councell may by the grace of God end all theſe diſſentious:

in the meane time let euery one ſeeke by good life and amendment of manners, to ſerue for a light to thoſe that are out of the way, laying aſide all part-takings, forgetting all iniuries, and taking vp againe our firſt vnitie, concord, & friendſhip. Yea I doubt not, but that a Prince embracing with a true zeale the opinion of his religion, and neglecting the contrarye, would aboliſh it without force or conſtraint, if God maintain it not. For the minds of men reſolued in a religion, are more confirmed therin if they be reſiſted, but ſhrinke of themſelues if compulſion be not vſed. Now for the end and concluſion of our diſcourſe, laying a part the cauſes of ſeditions and ciuil wars, which bring alteration, and ouerthrow many times to Eſtates and Monarchies, whereof we haue particularly intreated, we will heere comprehend, and reduce to a certaine number the cauſes of the changes of all Common-wealths:The cauſes that brcede the change of all Common-wealths. namely, when the poſteritie of Princes faileth, and the greateſt amongſt them enter into ciuill warre for the Eſtate: when moſt of the ſubiects are extreme poore, and a few exceeding rich: when the diuiſion of offices and honors are vnequall: or elſe through extreame ambition and deſire of commanding: through the reuenge of iniuries: through the crueltie and oppreſſion of tyrants: through the feare of chaſticement, which ſome haue that deſerue it: through the change of lawes and religion: through the greedie deſire that ſome haue to enioy at wil thoſe pleaſures which they ſeeke after: laſtly, through the expulſion of ſuch as defile the places of honor with exceſſiue and beaſtly pleaſures. All theſe things breede the change, corruption, and finall ouetthrow of flouriſhing Eſtates and great Monarchies, and therefore all Princes, Gouernors, and politike Rulers ought carefully to looke vnto them.
               
            
            The ende of the ſixteenth daies worke.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTEENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of the preſeruation of Eſtats and Monarchies, and of remedies to keepe them from ſedition. Chap. 65.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Why Wiſedom is giuen of God. 
                     WIſedome (ſaith Lactantius) is giuen of God to all men, that euery one according to his abilitie and capacitie might ſeeke after things vnknowne, and examine that which he knoweth. And we muſt not thinke, that ſuch as haue gone before vs many yeeres and ages, did ſo poſſeſſe and vſe hir, that ſhe is now leſſe forceable in vs. She cannot be wholy poſſeſſed, no more than the light of the Sunne: and as the Sunne is the light of our eies, ſo is wiſedome the light of mans hart▪
                     Wiſd. 6. 21. If your delight thē (ſaith the wiſe man) be in thrones and ſcepters, O kings of the people, honor wiſedome, that yeThe praiſe of wiſedome. may raigne for euer. Truly ſhe is neceſſarie prouiſion for them that would raigne, that they may do it woorthily, and ſafely maintaine their eſtate: yea ſhe is no leſſe requiſite in euery calling. For ſhe illuminateth and ſharpneth the diſcourſe of reaſon by the knowledge of things, ſhe ruleth and conducteth the will to that which is the true and onely Good. Therefore ſeeing that wiſedome, which is aſmuch to ſay in regard of vs, as the ſearching out of the truth, is both offered, and needefull for all men, euery one ought to be ſtirred vp to imbrace it with a burning zeale and affection, that he may bring foorth the fruits of

perfect charitie, by applying it (next after the ſeruice of God) to the common profite of men. Which thing, ſeeing it hath prouoked our yong and vnexperienced yeeres to vtter our former Morall and Politicall diſcourſes, and to handle yeſterday the cauſes that breede change and ruine to Eſtates and Monarchies, although ſuch high matters ſurpaſſeth the capacitie of our vnderſtanding, yet let vs (my Companions) follow with the ſame zeale our venturous enterpriſe, and as we haue profited in the ſchoole of this ſelfe ſame wiſedome, let vs enter into the conſideration of thoſe meanes and remedies that are contrary to the cauſes of corruption in policies, and that may ſerue to their preſeruation. Albeit they may be knowne by the ſame cauſes that corrupt them, ſeeing contrary effectsContrary cauſes bring foorth contrary effects. proceede from contrary cauſes, and corruption is contrary to preſeruation. But the vnderſtanding of this matter will be more cleare and profitable heereby, to them that will take the benefite thereof.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  If all callings were content with their owne fortune and goods, if they would abſtaine from other mens goods, and from offering them wrong, if they would be more intentiue to amend their owne life, than to reprehend others, and ſubmit them-ſelues willingly to the obedience of their Magiſtrats, lawes, and ordinances, I thinke it would be a meane to cauſe euery Monarchie to flouriſhe and to continue happie a longe time.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Equalitie (ſaid Solon) neuer breedeth ſedition in the gouernment of a Common-wealth, but is the nurſing mother of peace and concord, and the maintainer of loue, whereby the vnitie of ſubiects is preſerued. But as the graue and destruction are neuer glutted (accordingProu. 27. 20. to the ſaying of the wiſe man) ſo mens eies are neuer ſatisfied. But the diſcourſe of this matter heere propounded belongeth to thee ACHITOB.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  That great louer of knowledge and vertue, Ptolomy king of Egypt, as he feaſted one day ſeuen Embaſſadors of the beſt and moſt flouriſhing Common-wealthes

in his time, reaſoned with them about their gouernments, that hee might knowe which of them had the beſt policie, and was furniſhed with the beſt lawes and moſte commendable cuſtomes. The diſputation was long, and the matter throughly debated amonge them with manye reaſons. But Ptolomy being deſirous to bee inſtructed by them in the beſt and rareſt pointes, neceſſarye for the preſeruation of an Eſtate, prayed them to propounde euerye one three of thoſe cuſtomes and lawes that were moſte perfect in hisChoice cuſtoms of ſeuen flouriſhing Eſtates. Common-wealth. The Embaſſadour of the Romanes beganne, and ſayde: Wee haue the Temples in great reſpect and reuerence: wee are very obedient to our Gouernours: and we puniſh wicked men and euill liuers ſeuerely. The Carthaginian Embaſſadour ſaid: In the Common-wealth of Carthage, the Nobles neuer ceaſe fighting, nor the Common-people and Artificers labouring, nor the Philoſophers teaching. The Sicilian ſayd: In our Common-wealth iustice is exactly kept, merchandiſe exerciſed with truth, and all men account themſelues equall. The Rhodian ſayd: At Rhodes old men are honest, yoong men ſhamefast, and women ſolitarie, and of fewe wordes. The Athenian ſayd: In our Common-wealth rich men are not ſuffered to be diuided into factions, nor poore men to be idle, nor the Gouernours to be ignorant. The Lacedemonian ſayd: In Sparta enuie raigneth not, for all are equall, nor couetouſnes, for all goods are common, nor ſlouth, for all labour. In our Common-wealth (ſayd the Embaſſadour of the Sicyonians) voyages are not permitted, that they ſhoulde not bring home newe faſhions at their returne: Phyſitions are not ſuffered, least they ſhould kill the ſound: nor Orators to take vpon them the defence of cauſes and ſuites. If all theſe good cuſtomes were iointly kept in any one Eſtate, I doubt not but the greatnes of it might be continued long, and all cauſes of ſeditions cut off. But to ſpeake more plainly and particularly, and to handle the preſeruation of Monarchies and Common-wealths, with the remedies that keepe them from ſedition, I ſaye firſt that Horace, that moſt learned Poet, had reaſon to beginne his Satyres

or profitable ſpeeches with thoſe men that are neuerDiſcontentment is the ſpring of all vices. contented, conſidering that the diſcontentment of mortall men is the fountaine and ſpringe of all vices. For I praie you, what vice is not grounded vpon an vnſatiable deſire of hauing, as may appeere in all them that can-not content them-ſelues with their preſent eſtate, nor appoint an ende in that which they haue, but place it alwayes in that which they would haue. Couetouſnes committeth robberies, executeth murders,The effects of couetouſnes. exerciſeth ſpoyling, cauſeth battells, breedeth ſchiſmes, hindreth reformation, and the generall Councell, cloaketh abuſes, nouriſheth ignorance, asketh vniuſtlie, receiueth diſhoneſtlie, diſſolueth bargaines, breaketh fayth, peruerteth iudgementes, and to conclude, it ouer-turneth and confoundeth all right, both diuine and humane. Therefore couetouſnes is very fitlie called an vnquenchable fire, an inſatiable deſire, a bottomleſſe gulfe. So that the contentation both ofThe contented mind of Magiſtrats is the firſt meane to preſerue an Eſtate. ſoueraigne Magiſtrates, and of ſuch as are vnderneath them, and their moderate affections whereby they ſeeke not to inuade and to poſſeſſe other mens right, nor to heape vp treaſures and riches, but direct their leauell to common profite onely, to gouerne prudently, and to order as it becommeth them whatſoeuer is vnder their authoritie: this I ſaie is a ſtronge bonde to keepe euerie Common-wealth in a flouriſhing Eſtate, and an vnconquerable bulwarke againſt all ſedition. Manie Princes beeing deſirous to extende their limits vniuſtlie, and to conquere newe Eſtates, haue oftentymes loſte or diminiſhed their owne dominion, beſides the burthenſome calamities, which they haue brought vppon their people. And when they placed vnder them couetous Gouernours and Magiſtrates, that were ſlaues to their purſes, the ruine, or great trouble at leaſt of their Eſtates followed after. Therefore Iethro ſayde to Moſes: Prouide thou amonge all the
                     Exod. 18. 21. 
                     people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating couetouſnes: and appoint ſuch ouer them to bee Rulers ouer
                     
                     thouſands, ouer hundreds, ouer fifties, ouer tennes, to iudge the people at all times. Tiberius Nero knowing that his ſubiects were naturally giuen to tender greatly their owne profite,Why Tiberius would not change his Lieutenants. would not ſend any to ſucceede (as the cuſtome was before) and to take the place of the Gouernors and Lieutenants of his Prouinces, vnles the other were dead. For (ſaid he) when they perceiue that they draw neere the end of their office, the double their polling, and a newe Gouernour doth as much: whereas other-wiſe, when they are once full gorged and ſatisfied, they are at the leaſt occaſioned thereby to ceaſe from rauening, and to eaſe their people: namely, when they know that they ſhall alwaies enioy their power and authoritie. The cuſtome thatA notable cuſtome vſed by Seuerus in making vnder-gouernors. 
                     Aurelius Seuerus vſed, is much more praiſe-woorthie. For when he ſent Gouernours into the Prouinces, he cauſed their names to be publiſhed many daies before, to the end that whoſoeuer knew any thing in them woorthie of reprehenſion, he ſhould giue notice thereof: and they that reported truly, were promoted to honour by him, and ſlanderers grieuouſly puniſhed. He gaue to all Magiſtrates gold, ſiluer, ſeruants, and all neceſſary things, yea Concubines alſo, to the ende that in their charges they ſhould not be conſtrained by neceſſitie to commit iniuſtice,The ſecond meane to preſerue an Eſtate. or to extort vpon the people. Moreouer, the modeſtie of Magiſtrats in commanding, ſerueth for a good remedie to retaine their ſubiects within their dutie, eſpecially if to bring thē forward the better, they adde to their commandemēts gentle perſwaſions grounded vpon liuely reaſons, & holy admonitions, whereby they ſeeme willing rather to inſtruct their people, than by force to compell them to obedience. Thou ſhalt gouerne thy kingdome very well (ſaid one of the Interpreters of Ptolemy) if imitating the gentlenes of God in all things, thou vſeſtThe third meane. patience and long ſuffering. That is alſo one point that greatly ſtaieth the alteration and change of Common-wealthes, when both great and ſmall are contented with that eſtate whereunto they are called, and are not carried awaye with ambition, to deſire higher

degrees of honor than their condition deſerueth. Again, they ought not to reſpect their owne valure and deſert ſo much, as to thinke that great eſtats and honors are a due and neceſſary reward for their vertue: and that vpon their deniall, they haue iuſt cauſe to make ſome commotion in the Common-wealth. But let them rather conſider thatOf whome a Prince holdeth his ſoueraigntie. the Prince holdeth his ſoueraigntie of God, and of the ancient lawes of the Eſtate, and that al his ſubiects in reſpect of him are but as a ſet of counters, whereof he makethSubiects compared to a ſet of counters. one to be one in value nowe, then to ſtande for a thouſand, by and by for a hundred thouſand, and afterward for nothing. If we haue leſſe fanour and grace, we ſhall be leſſe enuied, which alwaies taketh holde of the greateſt. Exact and preciſe obſeruation of iuſtice is no leſſe neceſſarieThe fourth meane. for the preſeruation of Eſtates and Monarchies, as we haue elſe-where diſcourſed: and it ought to be exerciſedMagiſtrats muſt be puniſhed aſwelt as the Common people. not only vpon the ſimple people, but alſo vpon Magiſtrates when they abuſe their calling and dignitie. For when their faultes are vnpuniſhed and winked at to the oppreſſion of the meaner ſort, they are eaſily induced to murmure and to mooue ſedition. Ariſtotle approoued not this cuſtome in Lacedemonia, that the power of the Senators was perpetuall during their life, and that they were exempted from correction, and from yeelding an accountAriſtotle miſliked perpetuall Magiſtrates. of their dooings, bicauſe (as he ſaid) to appoint perpetuall Magiſtrats, is to kindle the fire of ſedition in the Common-wealth. But this is contrary to the opinion of Plato, and of many Politicks, albeit there is no want of arguments and excellent reaſons, aſwell on their ſide who would haue Magiſtrates annuall, as on theirs that would haue them perpetuall. But as contrarie Eſtates ought to be gouerned by contrarie meanes, ſo it is neceſſarie that in a Monarchie ſome offices ſhould be perpetuall, and other mutable. And if neede be, generall Commiſſioners may be appointed, as it was practiced in the time of Lewes the ninth, and of Phillip the Faire. To this purpoſe Buda
                     Generall Commiſſioners requiſite in a Monarchy. complaineth, bicauſe the Commiſſioners had no authoritie ouer the Magiſtrates of France, eſpecially ouer the

Parliaments, as alſo bicauſe they were not perpetuall. He maketh a goodlie diſcourſe of them, and ſheweth what manner of men ought to be choſen thereunto. TheThe ſift meane. ſpeedie puniſhment of wicked and condemned perſons, all delaie ſet aſide, is a good remedie to preſerue policies.Delay in puniſhing the wicked, is dangerous. For when they ſee that for their offences and miſchieuous dealings they are daily taken, examined, put to the torture, condemned, and executed, according to their deſerts, if before their execution they haue any leaſure and reſpit through the negligence of Magiſtrates, they ſeeke by all meanes to mooue ſedition and trouble in the Common-wealth, hoping thereby to ſaue their liues,The ſixt meane. and to auoide that puniſhment vnto which their conſciences iudge them to be indebted. The equall proportion and meaſure of all and euery particular part in a Politike bodie, according to the degrees of callings and perſons, is neceſſarie for the preſeruation of Eſtates and Monarchies, that there may be equalitie not of thinges, but of proportions, and that degrees may be kept. As for example, albeit the Diuine, Lawyer, Captaine, Counſellor, Treaſurer, differ one from another, yet they muſt of neceſſitie agree, and be made equall, not in their calling, but by a like proportion, that euerie one may execute his office without the hinderaunce of another.Geometricall proportion ought to be obſe
                           •
                        ued in Common-wealths. Therefore Plato ſaide, that the publike Eſtate is in good caſe, if it be inſtituted according to Geometricall proportion, and all benefites beſtowed accordingly. If the Kinge giue the office of Chauncellourſhip to a wiſe and learned man that loueth iuſtice and publike quietnes:Vpon what men publike charges are to be beſtowed. the office of Conſtableſhippe, or of the Marſhalſhippe of Fraunce, to good Captaines, and ſuch as are experienced in State affayres: the gouernment of the Church to a Diuine of good life and manners, and one that is well skild in Eccleſiaſticall gouernement: the office of iuſtice to an honeſt Lawyer: the keeping of the treaſure to a Treaſurer of an vpright conſcience. Then if euerie one keepe his owne place, and perfourmeth his dutie without encroching vppon another,

or hindering of him, to the ende that publike conueniencie and agreement may not be troubled, this order wil make an equalitie betweene vnlike perſons. For we findTwo ſorts of equalitie. two ſortes of equalitie: namely equalitie of quantitie, and of proportion. Equalitie of quantitie is requiſite in commutatiue iuſtice, that euery one may take as much as he ought. Equalitie of proportion is requiſite in diſtributiue iuſtice, and in rewarding men according to their deſert. This equalitie (ſayth Plato) giueth the greateſt honours to them that excell moſt in vertue, and the leſſer places of dignitie to ſuch as are inferior in vertue and learning, diſtributing to both that which belongeth vnto them by reaſon. Beſides, the meanes alleadged alreadie by vs for the preſeruation of Eſtates and Monarchies, Aristotle ſetteth downe theſe that followe. LetThe ſeuen
                           •
                        h meane. nothing (ſayth he) be doone againſt the lawes and cuſtomes, which, as before we diſcourſed, are the chaines and bondes of all Empires, Powers, and Common-wealthes. Let remedie bee vſed againſt the beginning ofThe eight. an euill, howe ſmall ſoeuer it bee. For often-times of a ſmall occaſion, as it were of one ſparkle, a great fire of troubles is kindeled in the Common-wealth. And asThe beginning of euils muſt be ſtaied. great ſtormes and tempeſtes proceede from exhalations and vapours that are not ſeene: ſo ſeditions and ciuill warres beginne for the moſt part of verie light matters, which a man woulde neuer thinke ſhoulde haue ſuch an iſſue. Let no credite be giuen to craftie and ſuttle deuices, inuented to deceiue Common-wealthes withall. Theſe are meanes commonly practiſed by forraine andThe 
                           •
                        inth. domeſticall enimies to Eſtates, who thereby diſguiſe the truth of matters: whereof we haue had good experience in France, when in the Councell of our Princes information hath beene giuen cleane contrarie to the truth: inſomuch that we haue felt the cruell hand of ſtrangers before euer we would haue beleeued that they had taken horſe in their owne countrie. And therefore amongeſt ſuch nouriſhers of our miſeries, this prouerbe is rife: That a lie is alwaies good how little a while ſoeuer it be beleeued. Let

                     The tenth. thoſe that are placed in the offices of Magiſtracie, behaue themſelues modeſtly both towards thoſe that deale not at all in publike affaires, and towards them that meddle therewith: offering no iniurie to the one ſort, and liuingThe eleuenth. friendly with the other. Let them that are to care for the ſafetie of the Eſtate, watch alwaies, and ſtand vpon their gard, and often times propound cauſes of feare, to make the ſubiects more attentiue and heedefull to that whichThe twelfth. they ſhould doe. Let there be no contentions or quarrels betweene the Nobles, and let others be preuented that are not yet ioined to thoſe diſſentions, before they enter into them. This is the chiefeſt thing at this day, whereunto our kings and Princes ought eſpecially to looke. For amongeſt their traines there is nothing but leagues and part-takings, from which nothing will proceede in the end but trouble and hurt to their Eſtate. Therefore theyContentious perſons muſt be remooued from the Court. muſt take away all occaſions of hatred and quarrelling, & remooue ſuch farre from their Court that loue contentions: bicauſe that as quarrellers of themſelues tarye not long in ſeruice, ſo by their meanes Princes looſe other good ſeruants. And if they will not, or are afraid to put them from the Court, at leaſt-wiſe let them take knowledge of all their enmities, factions, and diſcontentmentsPrinces muſt labour by all meanes to end the contentions of their ſubiects. that are amongſt them, and labour to end them, not in outward ſhew onely, but by ſome good effect. Let them content ſuch as are not well pleaſed, if they can iuſtly doe it: let them grant meanes of ſafetie to them that ſay they haue cauſe to diſtruſt others: and let them reconcile profeſſed enimies. But aboue all things, let not the PrinceThey muſt not be parties in their ſubiects quarrels. make himſelfe a partie in the contentions of his ſubiects, if the occaſion of their ſtrife be not grounded vpon the Eſtate. For in ſteede of keeping to himſelfe the place of ſoueraigne Iudge, he ſhall be onely the chiefe of a faction, and ſo bring his eſtate and life into danger. The puniſhmentThe thirteenth. of rebels is one meane alſo to preſerue Eſtates and Common-wealths, & to preuent ſeditions, whereby they are altered and changed. But regard muſt be had (according to the counſell of Hippocrates) that medicines be not

applied to incurable diſeaſes. For when all the people, or the moſt of them are culpable, to puniſh all, is as much as to ouerthrow the common-wealth. It is alſo a good mean and moſt vſuall for the auoiding of ſeditions, to take fromThe fourteenth. the people their armour, and to haue fortreſſes fenſed and furniſhed with all things neceſſarie for them. For the neglecting of this giueth occaſion to troubleſome heads, and to ſuch as deſire nouelties to execute their wicked purpoſes, and to trouble the eſtate: and the libertie of armour maketh them more fierce and inſolent therein. Moreouer we may comprehend that which is requiſite and neceſſarieFiue neceſſary things for the preſeruation of euery common-wealth. for the preſeruation of euery good Common-wealth vnder fiue things: namely, let it be loued faithfully, defended manfully, adorned with nobilitie, ordred profitably, and gouerned prudently. It is naturally ingrafted into euery liuing creature, to loue that place where it tooke beginning. The ſauage beaſtes (ſaith Caſſiodorus) loue woods and foreſts: birds loue the ayre: fiſhes the ſea andAll liuing creatures loue the place of their birth. riuers: men loue the originall place of their birth and being: in a worde, both men and beaſtes loue thoſe places where they purpoſe to liue and to continue long. He that is more in loue (ſaith Aristotle) with his priuate profite, than with publike wealth, looſeth the name of a good citizen, and taketh vnto him the name of a wicked ſubiect. Therfore euery one both great and ſmall ought to dedicate all good gifts in them to the benefit of their country, louing their fellow-ſubiects, & exerciſing their charges & callings faithfully. It is their dutie alſo manfully to defend the common-wealth againſt all forraine incurſions: and he that defendeth his countrey, defendeth himſelfe and his: He that refuſeth to die (as Cicero ſaith) in the defence of his countrey, dieth togither with it: which being ouerthrowen,It is the dutie of euery ſubiect to defend his countrey. the inhabitants are therewithall deſtroyed. No man therefore ought to feare daunger in defence of his countrey: and it is better to die for many than with many. They that die (ſaid Iustinian the emperour) in the defence of their Common-wealth, liue alwaies by glorie. Therefore euery one ought to arme himſelfe with manhood,

which is one kind of Heroicall fortitude, as the morall Philoſophers ſay, that he may be ſeruiceable for the ſafegard of his countrey in time of need, and of a iuſt war.The nobilitie is the ornament of a Common-wealth. The nobilitie is the ornament of euery Common-wealth. For commonly the nobles are of greater abilitie, of better behauior & more ciuill than the common people, than artificers, and men of baſe eſtate, bicauſe they haue beene brought vp from their infancie in al ciuilitie and amongſt men of honor. Moreouer to haue a noble hart & inuincible to reſiſt the enimie, great to exerciſe liberalitie, curteous and honeſt in talk, bold to execute, gentle to forgiue, are graces & vertues proceeding from honeſtie, which are not ſo commonly found among men of baſe condition, as among thoſe that come of good & ancient ſtocks. For thisOf the law proſapia.
                      cauſe there was in Rome a law called proſapia, that is to ſay, the law of linage, wherby it was ordained, that they which deſcended from the race of the Fuluians, Torquates, & Fabritians, ſhould haue the Conſulſhip, when it ſo fell out, that the Senate diſagreed about the election of Conſuls. In like maner they that came of Lycurgus in Lacedaemon, of Cato in Vtica, of Thucidides in Galatia, were not onely priuiledged in their own Prouinces, but alſo greatly honoured ofTo whom the defence of a countrey chiefly belongeth. all nations. The defence and preſeruation of the countrey belongeth chiefly to the nobles, as they that haue greater vſe and practiſe of weapons, than the common people haue, whom God & nature haue ſubiected to them, that they ſhould be their defendors & protectors. In this ſort then is the Common-wealth decked and adorned of the nobilitie, & by their means honored of neighbor-friends, and feared of hir enimies. Next it muſt be ordred profitably. Where no order is, there is all confuſiō. And therfore as a good father of a familie taketh order in his houſe, and a Pilote in his ſhip: ſo the magiſtrate muſt appoint an order in his citie & common-wealth. For all communitie is confuſion, if by order it be not brought to vnitie. OrderWhat order is. is the due diſpoſition of all things. The order of the heauens, times & ſeaſons teacheth vs among other things the wiſdom of the Creator, who hath appointed all diuine, celeſtiall

and earthly things by a wonderful diſpoſitiē. Neither doth any thing make magiſtrates of common-welths more admired & commended, than the good order which they eſtabliſh in them. The end of all good order tendethThe end of order. to profit, as the end of confuſion to loſſe and deſtruction. And if profit be to be conſidered in any thing, it is chiefly to be thought vpon in a politike body. The more common & generall a good thing is (ſaith Aristotle) ſo much the more is it to be esteemed aboue another. Therefore if it be a good thing and cōmendable to appoint a profitable order in a houſe or ſhip: it is a great deale better, yea moſt excellent, to order a Common-wealth profitably. Laſt of all a Common-wealth muſt be gouerned prudently. Gouernment preſuppoſeth order, bicauſe no man can rightly and duly gouerne without order. Gouernement is a right diſpoſitionWhat gouernment is. of thoſe thinges of which a man taketh charge vpon him to bring them to a conuenient ende. Euery Monarch, Emperour, King, Prince, Lord, Magiſtrate, Prelate, Iudge and ſuch like, may bee called a Gouernour: in whom wiſedome, patience, and diligence are neceſſarilie required for the diſcharge of their dueties. Neither may ignoraunce or any errour be receyued for ſufficientIgnorance is no ſufficient excuſe for a magiſtrate. excuſe of him that hath taken vpon him a publike charge, and much leſſe if he required and ſought for it himſelfe. Yea he may bee charged with the leaſt fault, eſpeciallie when it concerneth the eſtate, or ſome great matter wherein the Common-wealth hath intereſt. For this cauſe wee ſayd, that the Common-wealth muſt bee gouerned with Prudence. But Prudence (ſayth Aristotle) preſuppoſeth wiſedome, and is the right reaſon ofWhat prudence is. thinges that are to bee done. Without Prudence (ſaith Xenophon) wee can haue no vſe at all of vertue. For in the adminiſtration eyther of priuate or publique matters, wee can come to no good ende, without the direction of Prudence, which teacheth vs to prouide for thinges to come, to order thinges preſent, and to call to minde thinges paſt. Wee haue heretofore diſcourſed more at large both of that vertue, and alſo of others

requiſite in euery magiſtrate for the faithfull execution of his charge. Whereunto we wil adde this thing only, that euery gouernor muſt remember, that lordſhip, empire, kingdom, maieſtie, dominion and power are rather heathen than chriſtian wordes: and that the empire of aWhat a chriſtian empire is. chriſtian prince is nothing elſe but a iuſt adminiſtration, protection and meane to do good. Therfore when he beholdeth an innumerable multitude of his ſubiectes, he is to thinke that ſo many millions of men depend of his carefulnes, not to do with them what pleaſeth him, but to labour and trauell to make them better than when he receiued them. And in all things wherein the ſafetie of the common-wealth conſiſteth, whether it be in preuenting the cauſes of change therein, or in redreſſing ſeditions which trouble it, he muſt always reſolue with himſelfe to bring his purpoſe to paſſe, how difficult ſoeuer the way be, releaſing rather ſomewhat of the extremitie of right, (as Lucius Papinius ſaid) ſeeing the quietnes and ſafetie of the people is the chiefeſt, and moſt vpright lawe among men that can be. So that when the Common-wealth is in danger or in neceſſitie, we muſt freely beſtow vpon that bloud and name, which is commō to vs with all the members of the politike body, whatſoeuer cannot bee kept backe without violating that common kindred, and the eſtate of the common-wealth. So that if he hinder publike benefit, and hurt the eſtate, it is not to be called right any longer, as Appius Claudius ſaid, ſpeaking of the authoritieWe muſt ſpare no coſt to help the common-wealth. of the Tribunes among the people of Rome. And it is a point of true and naturall prudence ſometime to giue place to the times, but to neceſſitie always. A good Pilote neuer oppoſeth himſelfe wilfully againſt a tempeſt, but ſtriketh ſaile and keepeth himſelfe ſtill: then waighing his anchors, he floteth ſafely vpon the waues, which not long before were ſwollen and lift vp to drowne him. If a man ſtriue againſt a tempeſt and againſt heauen, doth he not euen blindfold caſt himſelfe downe headlong, and as it were deſperately ſeeke his owne deſtruction? Now if all theſe things hetherto mentioned by vs be diligently obſerued,

there is no doubt (God proſpering all) but that the preſeruation of Eſtates and Monarchies, with good remedies to keepe them from trouble and ſedition will follow after.
               
            
            
               Of the Harmonie and agreement that ought to be in the diſſimilitude or vnlike callings of ſubiects, by reaſon of the duetie and office of euery estate. Chap. 66.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  WE ſaw before (my companions) that a citie or ciuill company is nothing elſe but a multitude of men vnlike in eſtates or conditions, which communicate togither in one place their artes, occupations, workes and exerciſes, that they may liue the better, & are obedient to the ſame lawes and magiſtrates. We learned alſo, that of ſuch a diſſimilitude an harmonicall agreement ariſeth by due proportion of one towards another in their diuers orders & eſtates, euen as the harmonie in muſicke conſiſteth of vnequall voyces or ſounds agreeing equally togither. I am of opinion therefore, that to prouoke euery one particularly to ſeeke after and to practiſe this apt agreement, we are to conſider ſeuerally of all the principall partes that are in a politike body well ordered, and to handle the ſeuerall dutie and office of euery one of them. But I leaue the diſcourſe of this matter to you.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  As there is but one Lord, one faith, one Baptiſme, one God and father of all, which is aboue all andEphe. 4. 5. 6. through all, and in vs all: ſo all that beleeue in him ought to be one, and to haue but one hart and one ſoule, euery one referring his giftes and graces to the exerciſe of perfect charitie.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Oh how happy a thing is it to ſee one flock guided vnder one God and one king in one religion and policie? Although they be many mēbers, yet they make but one bodie, of which euery one hath a like care. But let

vs heare ARAM diſcourſe at large vpō that which is here propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  As we ſee that in the body of this vniuerſall frame, there is (as the Philoſophers ſay) matter, forme, priuation, ſimplicitie, mixture, ſubſtaunce, quantitie, action and paſſion, and that the whole world being compoundedAll things ſtand by proportion. of vnlike elements, of earth, water, ayre and fire, is notwithſtanding preſerued by an Analogie and proportion, which they haue togither: and as we ſee in a mans body, head, hands, feete, eyes, noſe, eares: in a houſe, the husband, wife, children, maſter, ſeruaunts: in a politike body, magiſtrates, nobles, common people, artificers; and that euery body mingled with heate, cold, drie and moyſt, is preſerued by the ſame reaſon of analogie and proportion which they haue togither: So is it in euery common-wealth well appointed and ordred, which conſiſting of many and ſundry ſubiects, is maintained by their vnitie, being brought to be of one conſent & wil, and to communicate their works, artes and exerciſes together for common benefit & profit. For euery one is beſt in his own arte, neither can all men do all things. And if it be a very hard matter to bee excellent in any one vocation, it is impoſſible to excel in al, & to exerciſe them duly. Now we ſay that ſixe things are neceſſarily required to frame a happy citie & ciuil ſocietie, namely, ſacrifices, iudgements, armes, riches, artes, and Aliments: vnto which ſixe thingsSix ſundry callings of men neceſſary in euery good common-wealth. and works, ſix ſortes of men are anſwerable, Paſtors, magiſtrates, nobles, burgeſſes, artificers, and husbandmen. Therfore to begin the particular handling of the dutie & office of theſe callings, and that as briefly as I can, we are firſt to note, that neuer any nation in all the world was ſo barbarous, or ſo farre eſtranged from ciuilitie, that did not acknowledge and adore ſome diuine nature, and vſeNo nation but adoreth ſome diuinitie. ſome kind of ſacrifices and ſo conſequently that had not ſome prieſts to exerciſe them, & ſome proper ceremonies.The ſacrifices of Chriſtians. 
                     Aristotle in his Politikes ſaith expreſly, that it is a neceſſary thing to haue prieſts in euery city, to take care of the worſhip of the gods and of ſacrifices. Euery worke that we

do (ſaith Auguſtine) to be ioyned neerer to God by a holy ſocietie, is a ſacrifice. There are three general ſorts of ſacrifices:Three ſorts of ſacrifices. the firſt is the ſacrifice of the ſoule, which we offer to God by contrition, deuotion, contemplation and prayer: the ſecond is of the body, which we offer to God by faſting, abſtinence, or by ſuffring martyrdom to maintain his law, iuſtice and truth. The third ſacrifice is of outward goods, whē we offer them vnto him in the works of charitie according to his holy ordinance. So that if ſacrifices and prieſts always took place among the Barbarians, much more careful ought they to be to maintaine this diuine myſterie, that adore and perfectly know God. And as men haue liued vnder three lawes, the law of Nature, the written law, and the law of Grace, ſo there were ſacrifices and prieſts vnder euery one of them. Melchizedech liuedOf prieſts and paſtors. vnder the law of Nature, Aaron vnder the written lawe, and vnder the law of Grace, vnder which we liue at this preſent, Ieſus Chriſt that great and eternall Prieſt and Sacrificer, who hath offered himſelfe a ſacrifice for our redemption, and hath left vs his diſciples and Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſours to be our paſtors in the guiding of our ſoules vnder his Teſtament and new couenaunt, which is the infallible rule of his holy and iuſt will. Therefore let them that boaſt, that they are called of God to ſuch an excellent charge, looke to diſcharge themſelues faithfully,Wherein the office of true paſtors conſiſteth. by teaching the truth and leading a life agreeable to their doctrine. Otherwiſe, if they ſit in the chaire of peſtilence (as Dauid ſpeaketh) let them looke for a horrible iudgement of God vpō their ſoules, when he ſhall ſay vnto them by way of reproch; that in this world they ſate in their pō
                     tificall ſeates, as the Scribes and Phariſies did long ſince in the chaire of Moſes. Their watchmen (ſaith Eſay ſpeakingEſa. 56. 10. 11. of euil paſtors) are all blinde: they haue no knowledge, they are dumbe dogs: they cannot barke: they lie and ſleepe, and delight inAgainſt dumbe dogs and couetous ſheep-heards. ſleeping. Theſe greedie dogs can neuer haue enough, & theſe ſheep-heards cannot vnderstand: for they all looke to their owne way, euery one for his aduantage, & for his owne purpoſe. But contrarywiſe, A Paſtor (ſaith Saint Paule) must be vnreprooueable, 
                     Tit. 1. 7. 8. 9.
                     
                     The qualities of a good paſtor. 
                     as Gods ſteward, not frowarde, not angry, not giuen to wine, no ſtriker, not giuen to filthie lucre, but harberous, one that loueth goodneſſe: wiſe, righteous, holy, temperate, holding faſt the faithfull worde according to doctrine, that he alſo may be able to exhort with wholeſome doctrine, and improoue them that ſay against it.
                     1. Pet. 5. 2. 3. 
                     Feede the flocke of Christ, which dependeth vppon you (ſaith Saint Peter) caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthie lucre, but of a ready minde: not as though yee were lordes ouer Gods heritage, but that ye may be enſamples to the flocke. Therefore if Paſtors preach the Goſpell, giue example of good life by their workes, fight againſt the enimies of the truth with the weapons of charitie, prayers, perſwaſions, teſtimonies of the holy ſcripture: if they remooueVices to be auoided in a paſtor. from them couetouſneſſe, pride, diſſoluteneſſe, and ſuperfluitie of expences, and walke in this ſort in their vocation, the firſt place of honour is due to them amongſt men, and a greater and vnſpeakable prepared for them in heauen. The ſecond thing that is neceſſarie in euery Common-wealth and citie, are iudgements, and conſequently magiſtrates to execute them. But bicauſe we diſcourſed at large of this matter before, we will not ſtand long vpon it, but comprehend in few wordes the whole duetie and office of a good magiſtrate, which conſiſteth in foureThe dutie of a good magiſtrate conſiſteth in foure things. things: In taking nothing vniuſtly from any body, in giuing to euery one his owne, in deſpiſing his owne profit, and in preſeruing publike profite. He performeth theſeIuſtice diſtributed into 7. parts. duties perfectly by the diſtribution of iuſtice into ſeuen partes: by procuring that God may be worſhipped, that reuerence be giuen to ſuperiours, that concord be amongst equals, that diſcipline bee vſed towards inferiours, patience towardes enimies, mercy towards the poore, and that integritie of life proceede from himſelfe. Nowe let vs conſider of Armes, and of Nobles.Of armes and of the neceſſitie of them. Armes (as Varro ſaith) are all warlike inſtrumentes, ſeruing both to ſet vpon our enimies, and to defend our ſelues from their aſſaultes and enterpriſes. They are neceſſarie in a Common-wealth and citie for theſe three cauſes, to reſiſt the outward force of enimies, and to keepe them in feare: to repreſſe naughtie citizens, both

by compelling them to obey magiſtrates and lawes, and by puniſhing the guiltie: and laſt of all, to defend the libertie of ſubiects. The exerciſe and vſe of armes, warres and battels, hath from all antiquitie been committed to the noble men. Nobilitie (as Aristotle ſaith) is a glitteringWhat nobilitie is. excellencie proceeding from aunceſtors, and an honour that commeth from an auncient linage and ſtocke. Or, (according to Boetius Seuerinus) nobilitie is a prayſe that proceedeth from the deſerts of our Elders, and forefathers. Many make three kindes of Nobilitie: one thatThree kinds of nobilitie. is bred of vertue and of excellent deedes: the ſecond that proceedeth from the knowledge of honeſt diſciplines and true ſciences: and the third that commeth from the ſcutchions and armes of our aunceſtors, or from riches. But to ſpeake truely, there is no right Nobilitie, but thatWhich is right nobilitie. which ſpringeth of vertue, and good conditions. For as he is a thiefe that ſtealeth, and he vniuſt that doth vniuſtly: ſo he is a vile and baſe perſon, that dealeth vilanouſly. He boaſteth in vaine of his great linage, and ſeeketh to be eſteemed for the nobilitie and vertue of his aunceſtours, that hath no goodneſſe in him, nor commendable qualitic of his owne to ioine with thoſe of his predeceſſors. Let no man pleaſe himſelfe too much (ſaith Agapetus) in the nobilitie of his anceſtors, for all men haue dung for their ſtock from whence they come: both they that are pricked vp in purple and fine linnen, & they that are afflicted with pouertie and ſickneſſe: as well they that are decked with crownes, as they that lie naked vpon the ſtrawe. Let vs not therfore brag of our earthly race, but let vs glory in the integritie of maners. Although vice be in one that commeth of noble bloud, yet is it always lothſome and infamous: yea it doth ſo much the more appeere ſhameful & odious, as it is ioyned with greater nobilitie. But vertue is the very liuely colour & ornament of nobilitie, and cauſeth it to be honored for loue of it ſelfe only. All kings and princes (ſaith Plato) came of ſlaues, and all ſlaues of kings. What profite is there
                     Macrines letter to the Senate of Rome touching nobilitie. (ſaith Macrine the Emperour writing to the Senate of Rome) in nobilitie, if the hart of a prince be not repleniſhed with
                     
                     bountie and gentlenes towards his ſubiectes? The goods of fortune come oftentimes to the vnwoorthie, but the vertue of the ſoule always maketh a man woorthie of the greatest praiſe. Nobilitie, riches and ſuch like, come from without a man, & are ſubiect to corruption: but iustice, bountie, and other vertues, are not only wonderfull bicauſe they come from the ſoule, but procure alſo to him that hath them & vſeth them vertuouſly, a perfection of all felicitie. Yea it is far better and more commendable in a man, to leaue to his posteritie a good beginning of nobilitie by vertue, than to defame by villanie & wicked behauior that praiſe which he hath receiued frō his predeceſſors. Therefore we ought not to be puft vp with pride bicauſe we come of a great race, ſeeing that honour belongeth more to our progenitors thā to vs, if we be notMalach. 2. 10. noble by our owne vertue. Is not one God (as Malachie ſaith) father of vs all? He made the firſt kings of a poore & baſe ſtock, to teach vs, that men ought not through arrogancie, & vaine boaſting of their nobilitie, eſteeme themſelues better than others, but ſo far forth only as his holy gifts and graces are more abundantly in them. Saule was choſen king as he was ſeeking his fathers aſſes: Dauid, whē he was a ſheepheard, and the yongeſt of his brethren. The brier and the roſe came of one and the ſame roote: ſo noble-men and vile perſons came of one maſſe and lumpe. The brier is reiected bicauſe it pricketh, & the roſe for hir good ſmel is eſteemed and held in mens hands. So he that maketh himſelfe vile through vice, ought to be reiected, and he that is odoriferous and ſmelleth ſweetly by good vertues and noble actions, ought to bee eſteemed, honoured and accounted noble of what race & ſtocke ſoeuer heWhen nobilitie of birth is to be eſteemed. commeth. True it is, that ancient nobilitie ioined with excellent vertue, is very commendable among men, eſpecially in euery monarchie wel eſtabliſhed, of which the nobilitie is the chiefeſt pillar, being appointed by God, and approoued by the law of man, for their fidelitie towardes their kings, and defence of their ſubiects, wherein the trueOf riches and burgeiſes. dutie and office of noble-men conſiſteth. Riches are the fourth thing neceſſary in euery common-welth, and conſequently citizens, who commonly poſſeſſe them, and are

ſetled from all antiquitie in towns, hauing rents, reuenues and poſſeſſions, and being as it were the ſtrong pillars of cities, and of the whole political body. Cicero ſaith, that riches are the ſinews of battels. For as the whole body of aRiches are the ſinewes of war. man feeleth & moueth by the ſinewes: ſo the body of the common-wealth receiueth ſtrength & power by riches, to gather men of war togither in defence of hir libertie. For this cauſe Aristotle in his plat-forme of a happy common-welthThey are neceſſary in a Common-wealth. requireth abundance of wealth and money to help publike affairs at home, & warlike matters abroad. And in another place he ſaith, that a happy life conſiſteth in the perfect vſe of vertue, aſſiſted with bodily & external goods, as with inſtruments that ſerue to execute honeſt actions wel & vertuouſly. It is certain that gold & ſiluer in reſpect of the ſoule, are neither good nor ill, but by good vſage they are made profitable for this life, & the abuſe of them is hurtful both to the body & ſoule. And in deed riches of their own nature are not to be condemned. Abraham, Lot, Iacob, & Iob were rich & holy men. Ioſephus writeth that neuerThe exceeding riches that Dauid left to Salomon. any king, either of the Hebrews, or of any other nation, left ſo great riches to his ſucceſſor, as Dauid did to Salomon. For he left him to build the temple withal, 10000. talents of gold, & 100000. of ſiluer, beſide infinite ſtore of ſtuffe, of wonderful coſt and value, which he had cauſed to be prepared & made readie. The ſumptuouſneſſe of that Temple, as it is deſcribed by this Hiſtoriographer, is wonderfull. He ſaith that it was made and finiſhed in ſeuenThe number of workmen about Salomons temple. yeeres by 80000. Maſons, 3200. Ouerſeers, & 30000. Hebrewes that hewed wood in the foreſt, and 70000. others that brought ſtones and ſuch like matter for the worke. If the riches of the Romane Empire had not been great, I meane both the publique and priuate wealth, it is certaine, that it had not ſo long time maintained it ſelfe in ſuch a glorious and flouriſhing eſtate, as the like was neuer before, cauſing the fartheſt and moſt vnknowen nations to ſtand in feare of hir weapons. Hereof wee haueAuguſtus maintained yeerely 44. legions of ſouldiors. good proofe by that which we read of Augustus Caeſar, who ordinarily defrayed the charges of 44. Legions, which

amounted yeerely to twelue millions of gold. But the RomaneThe limites of the Romane Empire in the time of Auguſtus. empire was then come to the top of hir greatneſſe, hauing for hir bounds the riuer of Euphrates on the Eaſt ſide, the Oceā ſea on the Weſt, on the South ſide the fruitfull region of Africa, and on the North ſide the riuers of Rhine and Danubius. At this day 50. kingdoms & eſtates are diuided out of that monarchy. Therfore if the citizens of the common-wealth poſſeſſe riches, if they imploy thē vpon good workes, and that liberally for the tuition, defence and ſetting foorth of their countrey, they behaueOf Artes and Artificers. themſelues like good citizens, borne to do good, and to profit the Common-wealth. The fift thing neceſſary in euery good Common-wealth and citie, are occupationsWhat an Arte or occupatiō is. and conſequently craftſ-men. An arte is a habite of working according to right reaſon, as Aristotle ſaith. Or elſe an arte is the knowledge of ſome certain thing gotten by vſe, inſtruction or reaſon, tending to neceſſary vſes for mans life. Some artes conſiſt in Speculation, and others in practiſe. We call Speculation Theoricall, that is to ſay, Speculatiue: and Action practicall, that is to ſay, Actiue. This word Artificer is deriued of the worde Arte. Nowe bicauſe that nature is moſt perfect next to God, the neerer that arte approcheth to nature, the better and perfecter it is, as appeereth in images and pictures: ſo that arteArte is an imitation of nature. is nothing elſe but an imitation of nature. Thoſe Artes that are commonly called Mechanicall, or handy-craftes, whereby they differ from liberall Artes, of which we haue alreadie diſcourſed, are of diuers ſortes. For the better vnderſtanding of them wee will preſuppoſe that man hathThree things neceſſary for the life of man. need of three temporall things for the maintenaunce of this life, namely, of Alimentes, Houſes, and Clothing. He ſtandeth in neede of Alimentes to reſtore the conſumption of radicall moyſture, waſted away by naturall heate,The vſe of Aliments. (as the weeke conſumeth the oyle in the Lampe) I ſaye to reſtore it agayne by moyſt nouriſhment, as by breade, wine, fleſh, and other aliments, without which a man could not liue. Theſe nutrimentes are prouided and prepared by men of Occupations, as by Butchers, Fiſhmongers,

Bakers, Cookes, Vintners, and other handycraftſ-men, which ſerue and looke to the prouiſion of victuals. Next, mē haue need of houſes, that euery one may haue his priuate place of refuge to keep his body, familie, & goods vnder couert: & theſe are edifices and frames erected by theThe vſe of houſes. arte of building, & made by Maſons, Carpenters, Geometricians, Sawyers, Ioiners, & other handycrafts that are occupied in caruing. Likewiſe a city, in reſpect both of ornament & of defence, ſtandeth in need of wals, towers, bulwarks, rampires, andother things of defence, as alſo of temples and other common places: all which cannot be made without the artes of building and of Maſonry. The third thing which men ſtand in need of, are garments toThe vſe of garments. clothe themſelues withall, to preſerue natural heat, and to keep out external cold: & theſe are prouided by Mercers, Drapers, Tailors, Hoſiers, & ſuch like. Beſides the abouenamed things we ſtand in need of armour & of horſes to defend our libertie, and for our greater commoditie: and ſo conſequently Armorers, Glazers, Sadlers, Spur-makers, Smithes and ſuch like, are neceſſarie. Likewiſe for the preſeruation and recouerie of our health, we muſt honor the Phyſition, Chirurgion, Apothecarie, Drug-ſeller and ſuch like. The dutie and office of all artificers, is to auoyd idlenes,The dutie of all artificers. ſlooth, and negligence, and eſpecially to vſe no deceit in their artes, but to referre the end of their labours more to common profite than to their priuate gaine. And for the auoiding of Ingroſſers, it is very expedient that the craftſ-men ſhould be diuided into diuers parts of the city,Artificers of one Science, ought not to dwell all togither. and not placed all on a rowe in one quarter therof, as they do in the townes of Afrike, and in many cities of Europe. For beſides the diſcommodities in great townes, when euery quarter hath not in it ſuch artificers as are commonly neceſſary, it is to be feared that there wil be amongſt thē Ingroſſers to fore-ſtall the merchandiſe and wares: or elſe iealouſie and quarels are to be feared, if one ſell better cheape than another, euen before his eyes that refuſed to take that money. It is true, that ſuch artificers as are leaſt required, as men that liue by the hammer, may be ranged

in one quarter, that thereby they may be ſeparated from men of learning and quietnes. The ſixt and laſt thing neceſſary in a Common-wealth remaineth to be conſideredOf Aliments & labourers. of, namely, Aliments, and conſequently labourers. We haue already ſpoken of Aliments: but as for that whichThe prayſe of husbandry. concerneth husbandry eſpecially, there is no other arte, that doth more awaken the minde of man, that rauiſheth his ſences more, that affoordeth greater pleaſure, or is more neceſſarie and profitable for the life of man, than husbandry. Moreouer nothing ſauoureth of greater antiquitie, nothing doth better diſcouer the greatnes of theThe antiquitie therof. works of God, nothing doth caſt forth more liuely marks and beames of a wonderful diuinitie, than husbandry. For moſt of other arts were inuented long time after man was created of God, and augmented ſince by the induſtrie of many. Onely husbandry gaue ſufficient teſtimonie of it ſelf, & of the incomprehenſible power of God, when preſently after the creation of the elements there came out of the bowels of the earth all kinds of herbes and plants garniſhed with their proper vertues for the ſeruice & commoditieMen haue been always more inclined to huſbandry than to any other vocation. of man. Man himſelf alſo by a diuine and natural inſtinct hath been from the beginning more enclined and diſpoſed to the tillage of the earth, than to any other ſtudie & vocation whatſoeuer: as we read of our firſt fathers who commonly called themſelues Laborers of the earth, and feeders of cattell. Husbandry and the countrey life were ſo much commended & eſteemed of the auncients, that many of them haue written ſundry bookes therof inPrinces haue forſaken their diademes to fall to husbandry. Cyrus.
                      Greek & Latin: and many monarchs haue heretofore left their great palaces, & contemned their purple robes and diademes, that they might giue themſelues to the manuring of countrey cōmodities. Cyrus was neuer better pleaſed and contented, than whē he might be dreſſing of ſome goodly piece of ground, and ſetting of a certaine numberDiocleſian. of trees checker-wiſe. Diocleſian forſook the ſcepter of his empire, that he might with-draw himſelfe into the fields, and trim with his owne hands, trees, graffs, ſeuerall plots of ground, and gardens. Beſides in husbandry and the

countrey life, profite aboundeth with pleaſure and gaineProfit and pleaſure are ioyned togither in huſbandry. with delight. As for profite it is very euident. For a good husbandman is alwais prouided of bread, wine, fleſh, fruit, wood, and other Aliments. And concerning pleaſure, it is incredible to one that hath skill and will to conſider of the maruels of nature, beſides a thouſand delights, with exerciſes as pleaſaunt and profitable for his health as can be. And that benefit which is moſt excellent and chiefeſt of all, I meane tranquillitie of mind may more eaſily bee obtained by the Muſes darlings, and louers of knowledgeThe countrey fitter for ſtudents than the citie. in the midſt of the open fields and pleaſaunt ſound of waters, than amongſt the noiſe of ſuites & diſſentions wherwith cities are repleniſhed. It belongeth to the dutie of labourers to liue in their ſimplicitie, and to do their endeuorThe dutie of husband men. in tilling the fields. For the performing hereof they ſtand in need of 3. things: of skill to know the nature ofThree things neceſſary for them. the ſoile, and the ſeaſons of ſowing and gathering: of will to be diligent and carefull to continue in their countrey labour: and laſtly, of abilitie to prouide oxen, horſes, cattell, & other inſtruments of husbandrie. By this diſcourſe therefore we may ſee what things are moſt requiſite and neceſſarie for the inſtitution of a happy common-wealth, and that no man is ſo induſtrious, wittie or prudent, that of himſelfe without the helpe of another he can liue without ſocietie, and miniſter to himſelfe all neceſſary things. For this cauſe the fellowſhip of many togither was found out, that by teaching, iudging, defending, giuing, taking, changing, ſeruing and communicating their works and exerciſes one with an other, they might liue well and commodiouſly togither. Which thing will vndoubtedly come to paſſe in euery Common-wealth, when euery one walking in his vocation, directeth his will and worke to the ſeruice of God, his prince and countrey.
               
            
            
               
               Of Peace, and of Warre. Chap. 67.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  
                     IVstinian the Emperor in the Preface of his Inſtitutions ſaith: That it is neceſſarie for theEuery common-wealth muſt be always prouided againſt all euents both of peace & warre. imperial maieſty to haue reſpect to two times, namely, of peace and of warre, that it may be prouided againſt all euents either of the one or the other. Lawes and good politike ſtatutes are neceſſary for it in time of peace, that the Prouinces may be quietly gouerned: but in time of warre it muſt alwayes haue armour readie and couenient forces, to helpe friends, to reſiſt enimies, and to containe diſobedient ſubiectes within compaſſe. Nowe hauing hitherto intreated of that policie, which chiefly reſpecteth the tyme of peace, we muſt hereafter (my companions) referre to our diſcourſes that ſmall knowledge which we haue of warlike diſcipline. And firſt I thinke we muſt oppoſe theſe times of peace and warre one agaynſt the other, and conſider of their cleane contrary effectes, that we may bee ſo much the more eaſily ledde and perſwaded to deſire and procure that which is beſt and moſt profitable for euery eſtate and monarchie. Therefore I propounde vnto you this matter to diſcourſe vpon.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Rom. 12. 18. Col. 3. 15. 
                     If it be poſſible, as much as in you is (ſaith the Apoſtle) haue peace with all men: and let the peace of God rule in your hartes, to the which ye are called in one body. For truely without peace all riches is but pouertie, all mirth but mourning, all life but death. But no man can perfectly know the benefit of peace, that hath had no triall of the burthen of warre.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Leuit. 26. 3. 6. 14. 15. 25. If ye walke in my ordinaunces (ſaith the eternall God) I will ſend peace in the land: but if ye will not obey me, but deſpiſe mine ordinaunces, I will ſend a ſword vpon you, that ſhall auenge the quarell of my couenaunt, and ye ſhall be deliuered into the hand of the enimie. Now let vs heare AMANA diſcourſe vpon that which is here propounded vnto vs.
                  
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     Lycurgus entring into the gouernement of

the Lacedemonians, and finding their Eſtate greatly corrupted, determined with himſelfe to change their whole Policie. For he thought that if he ſhould onely make ſome particular lawes and ordinances, it would doe no more good, than a ſlender medicine would profit a corrupt bodie full of many diſeaſes, before order were taken for the purging, reſoluing, and conſuming of the euill humors, that a new forme and rule of life might afterward be preſcribed. His enterpriſe although great and difficult, yet fell out very well, and his lawes were receiued & approoued of the people, after a little force and feare wherwithLycurgus referred all his lawes to warre, appointing the Ilotes onely to deale with occupations. at firſt they were reſtrained. But this law-maker referred all his lawes to warre and to victorie, and kept his ſubiects in continuall exerciſe of Armes, not ſuffering them to learne any other ſcience or handi-craft, vnto which he appointed the Ilotes onely, who were men brought in ſubiection by the right of warre. Whereby Lycurgus ſeemeth to haue beene of this mind, that force ought to be miſtres in all worldly matters, and that other things ſerue to no purpoſe if they want Armes, which by a certaine right of warre that ſhall alwaies continue amongſt men, bring in ſubiection to Conquerours the perſons & goods of thoſe whome they ouercome. It ſeemeth alſo he thought, that there was neuer any true peace amongſt men, but onely in name, and that all Princes and people liue in continuall diſtruſt one of another, and doe nothing elſe for the moſt part but watch how to ſurprize each other, (as Plutark elegantly ſetteth it out) notwithſtanding all leagues and goodly agreements that paſſe betweene them. Numa
                     Numa referred all his lawes to peace. 
                     Pompilius, ſecond king of the Romanes, cleane contrary to Lycurgus, was ſo farre in loue with peace, and referred all his lawes in ſuch ſort thereunto, that during his raigne, there was neither warre, nor ciuil diſſention, nor any motion of noueltie in the gouernment of the Common-wealth. Much leſſe was there any enmitie or enuie conceiued againſt him particularly, or conſpiracie againſt his perſon through deſire of ruling, but all occaſions of war being extinguiſhed and remooued, the Temple of Ianus
                     
                     The keeping of Ianus Temple ſhut, was a ſigne of peace among the Romanes. was continually kept ſhut for the ſpace of fortie yeeres, which was a ſigne of peace amongeſt the Romanes. For not onely at Rome the people were tractable through the example of the iuſtice, clemencie, & goodnes of king Numa, but alſo in the townes round about there was a maruellous alteration of manners: inſomuch that as the beames of a cleare Sunne are diſperſed abroad, ſo there was ſhedde in the hartes of men a ſecrete deſire to liue in peace, to labour the grounde, to bring vppe their children quietly, and to ſerue and honour their gods. And Plutarke writeth in his life, that in his time there was nothing but feaſtes, plaies, ſacrifices, and bankets throughout all Italy: ſo that a man might ſay, that the wiſedome of Numa was a liuely fountaine of all goodnes and honeſtie, out of which many riuers iſſued to water all Italy, and that his peaceable prudence was communicated as it were from hande to hande vnto the whole worlde. Nowe, although theſe two men haue beene greatly praiſed and commended for ſundrie rare vertues, yet all men approoue not the extremities which they followed in this forme of gouernment. For as he is pernitions that mooueth and continueth warre onely to ſubdue his neighbours, to inlarge the borders of his countrie, and to vſurpeThe diſcommodities of a long peace. other mens right, which ſauoureth more of brutiſhnes, than of humanitie: ſo a long peace bringeth with it many diſcommodities, making men inſolent commonly through too great proſperitie, as alſo nice, lauiſh, and effeminate, through abundance of wealth and idlenes. Therefore Plato, Aristotle and Polybius reprooue Lycurgus, bicauſe he propounded onely the exerciſe of the vertue of warre to his Citizens, which is the leaſt of thoſe foure, that are neceſſarie for the eſtabliſhment and preſeruation of euery Empire: ſaying, that all his lawes were wel ordained to make men valiant, but not iuſt, temperat, and prudent. On the other ſide, they that are too much affected to peace and quietnes, weaken themſelues by little and little before they be aware, and by their example mollifie the courage of youth, whereby they lie open to

the iniuries of thoſe that will inuade them, and ſo looſe their libertie, not being able to defend their perſons and goods. But as the world is compounded of 4. elements, byExcellent compariſons betweene the compoſition of the world, and of euery happy Common-wealth. whoſe mixture it is ſo made, that it is both ſeene and touched, & withall is preſerued in ſuch loue & concord, that it cannot be diſſolued by any other thā by him that made it: ſo euery publike Eſtate muſt be eſtabliſhed by 4. vertues, by whoſe harmony & agreement it is preſerued. And as the fire & the earth were firſt created to make the whol frame ſubiect to ſight & feeling, and then the water & the aire mingled with them, that the diſſimilitude of thoſe extreames might be tempered according to proportion: ſo fortitude and iuſtice are firſt required in the ordaining of Common-wealths, bicauſe they cannot continue without law and ſtrength, and next prudence and temperance being ioined with them, moderate the rigour and remiſnes of both. Againe, as by theſe natures of which all things are made, being diſperſed aboue and beneath, and on all ſides, the world is preſerued and continued, ſo that light things are kept from aſcending through the waight of heauy things, & contrariwiſe heauy things held aloft, that they fal not: ſo by theſe 4. vertues diſperſed amongſt men, a Common-wealth wel inſtituted & guided by diſcipline, is maintained. And although by reaſon of the varietie and change of humane affaires it cannot continue ſo long, & ſo adorned as the worlde, yet it will abide many yeeres. Moreouer, as the elements are bred one of another, & alter to & fro, going into, & returning continually from the firſt matter, which receiueth them into it ſelfe, for which cauſe they cannot be ſeene ſimple, but mixed: wherupon ariſeth ſuch a tēperature of al things, that they wither not by drougth, nor burne with heate, neither are ouer-whelmed with too great moiſture, nor grow ſtiff with exceſſiue cold: ſo theſe vertues whereby cities are inſtituted, muſt be mingled one with another, & agree togither for their mutuall preſeruation, wiſedome beeing Preſident ouer them in which they are all contained. For they cannot maintaine them-ſelues one without another, nor keepe

                     How the vertues are knit togither and depend one of another. their vigor and dignitie. Iuſtice without temperance is rigour: fortitude ſeparated from iuſtice is raſhnes and crueltie, and without prudence iuſtice is but craft and ſuttletie. To conclude, temperance without fortitude ought rather to be called cowardlines and nicenes: whereby we ſee that they are ſo interlaced, and depend in ſuch ſort one of another, that they cannot be ſeparated. If it fal out otherwiſe, that eſtate wherein ſuch diſorder taketh place, muſt of neceſſitie be vtterly ouerthrowne or changed. Out of theſe learned Philoſophicall diſcourſes we will draw a very good leſſon: namely, that in euery Eſtate wel inſtituted for continuance, this temperature of the foure vertues muſt neceſſarily be kept, that men may be inſtructed howe to gouerne themſelues well both in time of peace and of warre, and obſerue ſuch a moderation therein, that knowing how to deale in both times, they may be ready and fit for warre when neceſſity vrgeth, hauing thisPeace is to be preferred before warre. end before them to attaine to peace, which muſt alwaies be preferred, as reſt is before trauell, and good before euill, as we ſhal eaſily vnderſtand by conſidering their contrary effects. It is certaine that Philoſophie is beſt exerciſedThe effects of peace. in time of peace. For when there is no trouble of war, the ſpirite is quiet, and fit for euery honeſt kind of reſt, ſo that arts and ſciences go well forward, lawes are in force, iuſtice flouriſheth, vertue ſheweth hir effects better, vice languiſheth, the zeale of pietie encreaſeth, the diſcipline of the Church is authoriſed, both the noble and meane man preſerueth and augmenteth his wealth, trade and trafficke is free: briefly, euery one receiueth good & commoditie,The effects of warre. and ſo conſequently the whole bodie of the Common-wealth. But if we looke to thoſe effects, which the time of warre commonly bringeth foorth, the deſire of hauing is awakened, couetouſnes encreaſeth, iuſtice falleth to the ground, force and violence beareth ſway, ſpoiling raigneth, riot is ſet at libertie, wicked men are in authoritie, good men oppreſſed, innocencie troden vnder foote, maidens and wiues defloured, countries waſted, houſes burnt, Churches deſtroied, tombs broken downe,

goods ſpoiled, murders committed, all vertue baniſhed from among men, vice honoured, the lawes contemned and broken, the ſeruice of God forſaken, the eſtate of the Church derided, the nobilitie and people burdened with infinite charges and coſtes, all kinde of trade hindered: briefly, there is no calamitie or miſerie that aboundeth not in the Common-wealth in time of warre. We mayWhat kingdom is happie. iudge that kingdome happie, wherein the Prince is obedient to the lawe of God and nature, Magiſtrates to the Prince, priuate men to Magiſtrates, children to their fathers, ſeruants to their maiſters, and ſubiects being linked in loue one with another, & all of them with their Prince, enioy the ſweetenes of peace, and true quietnes of mind. But warre is cleane contrary thereunto, and ſouldiors are ſworne enimies to that kind of life. For war maketh menWarre maketh men cruell, and peace gentle. barbarous, mutinous, and cruell, as peace maketh them curteous, and tractable. We read that Engliſhmen were in times paſt ſo ſeditious and vntameable, that not onely their Princes could not do what they would, but alſo the Engliſh merchants were of neceſſity lodged apart by them ſelues. For ſo the towne of Antwarpe was conſtrained to do, where there was one houſe common for all merchant ſtrangers, except Engliſhmen, who had a houſe by themſelues, bicauſe they could not abide to be ioined with others. The chiefe cauſe of that ſtrang qualitie was bicauſe their countrie bordered vpon two Eſtates and Nations that were their enimies: namely, vpon the Frenchmen and Scots, with whome they had continuall warre: but ſince they concluded a peace, and ioined in league with France and Scotland, they became very mild and ciuill. And contrariwiſe the Frenchmen, who were inferiour to no nation whatſoeuer, in curteſie & humanitie, are greatly changed from their naturall diſpoſition, and become ſauage ſince the ciuill warres began. The like (as Plutarke ſaith) happened to the Inhabitants of Sicilia, who by meanes of continuall warre grew to be like brute beaſtes. Archidamus king of Lacedemonia, knowing well the effects of peace and warre heere briefly touched by vs, and

hearing that the Elians ſent ſuccors to the Archadians toArchidamus letter to the Elians. warre againſt him, tooke occaſion to write vnto them after the Laconicall manner, in ſteede of a long diſcourſe. Archidamus to the Elians: Peace is a goodly thing. And another time he gaue a notable teſtimonie how farre he preferred peace before warre, when he made this anſwer to one that commended him, bicauſe hee had obtained a battell againſt the fore-ſaid Archadians: It had beene better if we had ouercome them by prudence rather than by force. The ſelfe ſame reaſon of louing peace, and of abhorringCato miſliked Caeſar for breaking of peace. the breakers thereof, was the cauſe why Cato in a full Senate oppoſed himſelfe againſt the requeſt which Caeſars friendes made, that the people ſhould offer ſacrifices by way of thankſ-giuing to the gods, for the notable victories which he had gotten againſt the Germanes, of whom he had ſurprized and diſcomfited 300000. I am (ſaid Cato) rather of this opinion, that he ſhould be deliuered into their hands whome he hath wronged without cauſe by violating the peace, which they had with the people of Rome, that they may puniſh him as they thinke good, to the ende that the whole fault of breaking faith and promiſe with them, may be caſt vpon him alone, and not be laid vpon the citie, which is no cauſe at all thereof. And to ſay truth, wiſe men are greatly to feare all beginnings of warre. For being in the end growne to ſome ripenes, after that ſome men wanting experience in worldly affaires, haue raſhly and vnskilfully ſowne the ſeede thereof, hardly can the greateſt and wiſeſt kings plucke it vp againe without great labour and perill. Therefore they that are too deſirous and haſtie to begin warre, peruert the order of reaſon: bicauſe they beginne by execution and force, which ought to be laſt, after due conſultation. But he deſerueth greater honour and praiſe that procureth peace, and winneth the enimies harts by loue, than he that obtaineth victorie by ſhedding their blood cruelly. For thisWherefore and when we muſt begin warre. onely reaſon (ſaith Cicero) we muſt begin warre, that we may liue in peace, and not receiue wrong: but this muſt be done after we haue required ſatisfaction for the iniurie

offered. It was for theſe conſiderations that Phocion, that great Athenian Captaine laboured to ſtoppe the warre, which the people of Athens had determined to make againſt the Macedonians, at the perſwaſion of Leosthenes.
                     Phocion diſſwaded the Athenians from warre. And being demanded when he would counſell the Athenians to make warre, when I ſee (quoth he) that the yong men are fully reſolued not to leaue their rankes, that rich men contribute monie willingly, and Oratours abſtaine from robbing the Common-wealth. Neuertheles the armie was leauied againſt his counſell, and many woondering at the greatnes and beautie thereof, asked him howe he liked that preparation. It is faire for one brunt ſaid Phocion, but I feare the returne and continuance of the warre: bicauſe I ſee not that the citie hath any other meanes to get monie, or other Veſſels and men of warre, beſide theſe. And his foreſight was approoued by the euent. For although Leosthenes proſpered in the beginning of his enterpriſe (whereupon Phocion being demanded whether he woulde not gladly haue doone all thoſe great and excellent things, anſwered that he would, but not haue omitted that counſell which he gaue) yet in the end he was ſlaine in that voyage, the Grecian armie ouerthrowne by Antipater and Craterus two Macedonians, and the citie of Athens brought to that extremitie, that it was conſtrained to ſende a blanke for capitulations of peace, and to receiue within it a garriſon of ſtrangers. Thus it falleth out commonly to thoſe that ſeeke for war by all meanes, either by right or wrong. Euerie PrinceThe fruits of vniuſt warre. that deſireth it in that manner, ſtirreth vppe againſt himſelfe both the hatred and weapons of his neighbours, he vexeth and greeueth his ſubiects vnwoorthily, ſeeking rather to rule ouer them by violence, than to gaine their good will by iuſtice: he quite ouer-throweth his Countrie, preferring dominion, and greatnes of his owne glorie, before the benefite, quietnes, and ſafetie thereof: and often-times he diminiſheth his owne authoritie, and is brought in ſubiection to his enimies, whilſt he laboreth to poſſeſſe another mans right by force. Auguſtus the Emperour

                     When a warre is lawfull. ſaid, that to haue a good and lawfull warre, it muſt be commended by the Gods, and iuſtified by the Philoſophers.Traian neuer vndertooke vniuſt warre. And Aelius Spartianus affirmeth, that Traian only of all the Romane Emperors was neuer ouercome in battell, bicauſe he vndertooke no war, except the cauſe therof was very iuſt. But we may ſay, that no warre betweene Chriſtians is ſo iuſtified, but that ſtill there remainethAntigonus teſtimonie of the iniuſtice of warre. ſome cauſe of ſcruple. The teſtimonie of Antigonus the elder, wherein he accuſeth himſelfe, is very notable to ſhewe what great wickednes and iniuſtice is in warre, when he vſed this ſpeech to a Philoſopher that offered and dedicated vnto him a treatiſe, which he had made of iuſtice. Thou art a foole, my friend, to come and tel me of iustice, when thou
                     Caeſar. 
                     ſeeſt me beate downe other mens townes. Caeſar anſwered little leſſe to Metellus a Tribune of the people, who being deſirous to keepe him from taking the monie that was in the common treaſurie, alleadged vnto him the lawes that forbad it: to whome this Monarch replied, that the time ofFamine and the plague follow warre. warre, and the time of lawes were twaine. Moreouer, we ſee that famine and the peſtilence commonly follow war. For the abundance of all things being waſted, want of victuals muſt of neceſſitie ſucceede, whereupon many diſeaſes grow. Briefly, it bringeth with it nothing but a heape of all euils and miſeries, and eaſily draweth and allureth the violence and euill diſpoſition of many to followe theMalcontents are glad of war. ſtate of the time. For they that deſire a change, are very glad of ſuch an occaſion to ground their plat-formes vpon: which they could not doe in time of peace, bicauſe men are then of a better iudgement and affection, aſwellCauſes why the exerciſe of arms muſt alwaies continue. in publike as in priuate matters. But whatſoeuer we haue ſpoken of the miſeries that followe warre, warlike diſcipline muſt not be ſuffered to degenerate in a Common-wealth well eſtabliſhed: ſeeing there is neuer want of euill neighbours that are deſirous to incroach vppon other mens borders, and ſeeing the lawes, iuſtice, ſubiects, and the whole ſtate, are vnder the protection of Armes, as it were vnder a mightie buckler. And foraſmuch as the defence of our life, & purſuite of theeues is warranted both

by the lawe of God, of nature, and of man, it followeth that the ſubiects muſt needes be trained vp in feates of Armes, both defenſiue and offenſiue, that they may be a buckler to the good, and a barre to the bad. Wherein theAuguſtus kept 40. legions in continuall exerciſe of warlike diſcipline. example of Auguſtus is very notable, who in time of an aſſured peace would not diſſolue and diſmiſſe the fortie legions, but ſent them to the Prouinces & borders of thoſe nations that were moſt barbarous to keepe them in warlike diſcipline, and withall to take away as neere as heConſtantine the Great. could all occaſion of ciuill warre. Whereof Constantine the Great had ſorrowfull experience, when he diſcharged his bands of ſouldiours, whereby he opened the gates vnto his enimies, who after that inuaded the Romane Empire on all ſides. For the concluſion therfore of our diſcourſe, let vs learn to deſire peace rather than war, the one being a certaine ſigne of the bleſſing of God vpon his people, and the other of his wrath and malediction.Good conſiderations for a Prince. Let the Prince thinke with himſelfe (as Traian wrote to the Senate) that he is called not to warre, but to gouerne: not to kill his enimies, but to roote out vices: not ſomuch to goe foorth to warre, as to tarie in the Common-wealth: not to take another mans goods from him, but to doe iuſtice to euery one, eſpecially conſidering, that in warre a Prince can fight but in the place of one, at which time he is wanting to many in the Common-wealth. And yet bicauſe the ſwoord is put into the Magiſtrates hand, for the preſeruation of publike peace, he cannot imploie or vſe it better than in reſiſting, breaking, and beating downe their attempts, that tyrannically ſeeke to trouble it, being ledde with ambition and deſire to enlarge their bounds with other mens right. Nowe, bicauſe the greater part of Potentates and neighbour Princes direct their purpoſes to this marke, it is very expedient and neceſſarie in euery well ordered Eſtate, that the youth, eſpecially the Nobilitie ſhould be trained vppe and exerciſed in feates of Armes, to the ende that in time of neceſſitie, and for common profite, they may be apt and readie to ſerue their Prince and Country.
               
            
            
               
               Of the ancient Diſcipline and order of Warre. Chap. 68.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  BVt following our purpoſe, which is to diſcourſe of the ſtate of warre, according to the ſmall experience that our age affoordeth, and our ſtudie hath gathered, wee are nowe to ſpeake (my Companions) of warlike diſcipline, which for the excellent order thereof vſed in ancient time, is ſo much the more woorthie to be noted, as ours is to be contemned, for the great diſorder that is ſeene in it. Therefore I leaue the handeling of this matter to you.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Diſcipline among ſouldiors is the cauſe that order is kept in all matters of warre, which procureth in armies obedience and victorie.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  The vnbrideled licence that is vſed nowe adaies amonge ſouldiours, breedeth ſuch boldnes in them, that all warlike diſcipline is ſupplanted thereby. But let vs heare ASER diſcourſe of this matter.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  If we appoint to euery one (ſaith Socrates in Plato) his ſeuerall arte whereunto he is apteſt by nature, and which he muſt vſe all his life time, forſaking all other trades, to the ende that obſeruing opportunities, he may diſcharge it the better, there is no doubt but that in warlike diſcipline, which is great deale more excellent than any other trade, greater leaſure, greater cunning andIt is not the weapon that maketh a warriour. practiſe is neceſſarily required. For if a man take a target, or ſome other warrelike weapon and inſtrument in his hande, he is not by and by fit to fight, much leſſe of ſufficient courage to ſerue manfully, if he be not long before prepared there-vnto by ſound reaſons and reſolutions. It is no woorke of an hower, or of a daie, to perſwade men, that if they will get praiſe, they muſt ſettle them-ſelues to ſuſtaine all trauels, to aſſaie all perils, and to holde this opinion conſtantly, that it is more to

bee deſired to die fighting in a good and iuſt quarrell, than to eſcape with life by flying away. But that whichFrom whence valure proceedeth. breedeth and nouriſheth ſuch thoughts in mens harts, is the good education and inſtitution of youth in the diſcipline of vertue, and in the knowledge of Fortitude and Magnanimitie, which are inſeparably followed of honor and immortall glorie: whereby all feare of enimies is taken away, and watching, trauelling, ſuffering, obeying, well liked of, that they may bring to paſſe their noble enterpriſes. The Aſſyrians, Perſians, Grecians, and Romanes, whoſe deedes of Armes are almoſt incredible, had alwaies in ſingular recommēdation the maintenance of warlike diſcipline: but their chiefe deſire was to imprintThree things neceſſarily required in men of warre. Good will commeth from good inſtitution. theſe three things in the hartes of their ſouldiours, Willingnes, Reuerence, and Obedience, of which things the happie conduct of all warre dependeth. They that were well brought vp and inſtructed in vertue, could not want good will to execute vertuous actions. Thoſe Heads andReuerence from the wiſedome and experience of Captaines. Leaders of armies that were well choſen, and had wiſedome and experience, did by their woonderfull vertue prouoke euery one to reuerence them. Moreouer, this Maxime of warre was diligently practiſed of the Heads:Obedience is wrought in them by the diligence of the Heads. namely, to make their ſouldiours more deuout and obedient to their commandemēts, than affectionated to any other thing, howe gainefull ſoeuer it were. At this daie, as the former education and inſtruction is wanting, ſo the Heades and Captaines are inſufficient. And from thence proceedeth the diſorder and diſobedience of men of warre, whereuppon loſſe of the battell, and deſtruction of the armie followeth in ſteede of victorie. But that we may beginne to conſider of this ancient warrelike diſcipline, wee will heere onely waigh the order of the Romane armies and battels, who excelled all Nations in feates of Armes: and then wee will looke into that great obedience and ſeuere rule of liuing, that was obſerued among the men of warre. We ſhall not finde in all the Romayne Hiſtories anye battayle of greater or more importaunce betweene the people of

Rome, and any other nation, than that which they had with the Latines, when Torquatus and Decius were Conſuls. For as the Latins by looſing the battel were broughtThe vertue of the Captaines is much in war. into bondage, ſo ſhould the Romanes haue beene, if they had not woonne it. Titus Liuius is of this opinion, who maketh both the armies in all reſpectes alike, both for number, vertue, reſolution and order, and putteth the difference onely in the vertue of the Captaines, which he ſuppoſeth was greater on the Romanes ſide, & ſo conſequently cauſe of their victory. The likenes & equalitie of theſe two hoſts proceeded of this, bicauſe they had long time followed & practiſed feates of armes togither, vſing the ſame order, language, & weapons; & keeping the ſelfe ſame maner of ordring their battels, inſomuch that bothThe ancient order of the Romane armie. their orders & their Captaines had the ſame names. Now this was the order of the Romane army. Their whole hoſt was diuided into three principall parts, whereof the firſt conſiſted of pike-men, the ſecond of the chiefe gentlemen & Lordes, the third was called the rereward, & euery part was chiefly compounded of foot-men, being accompaniedThe Romanes diuided their armie into three parts. with a certaine number of horſemen. Their battels being ordered in this ſort, they placed pike-men in the foreward, right behind them were the noblemen, and in the third place behind they appointed their rereward, which they called by the name of Triariẏ. They had alſo certaine troups of horſemen, both on the right & left ſide of euery part of their army, whom they called wings, in reſpect of the place which they had, bicauſe they ſeemed to be the wings of that body. They ſet the foreward cloſe togither in the fore-front, that it might both breake in vpon the enimy, & ſuſtaine the on-ſet. The battel, bicauſe it was not to fight firſt, but to ſuccour the fore-ward when it was either put to the woorſt or driuen backe, was not ioined ſo cloſe, but kept their ranks wider aſunder, ſo that it might without diſorder to it ſelfe receiue the foreward within it, if by any miſhap or breach of aray, it ſhould be conſtrained to retire. The rereward had their ranks farther diſtant one from another than the battel, that it might be able to receiue

within it both the foreward and the battell when neede required. Their battels then being thus ranged, they began the skirmiſh, and if their pikemen were driuen backe and vanquiſhed, they retired into the diſtances and void ſpaces of the noble-men. Then both of them being knit togither in one, made one bodie of two battels, and ſo began the fight againe. But if they both being ioined togither were put to the worſt, they gathered themſelues togither in the wide and large rankes that were left for them in the rereward of the Triariẏ. And then theſe three parts ioined in one renued the fight, and ſo either loſt or woonne the battell, being vnable to repaire them-ſelues againe. Therefore when the rereward entered into the conflict, the armie was in danger: whereupon aroſe that prouerbe, Res redacta eſt ad Triarios, which is aſmuch to ſay in Engliſh, as the matter is brought to the Rereward, & to the extremitie. Now the Captaines of theſe our times, hauingThe benefite of this Romane order. forſaken all order of ancient diſcipline, make no account of this ordinance of warre, although if it be well conſidered, it will be found a matter of great importance. For he that ordreth his hoſt ſo that he may repaire himſelf thrice in one battell, muſt haue fortune his enimie three ſundry times before he can looſe it, and be vtterly ouerthrowne. Whereas he that truſteth onely to the firſt encounter, as the moſt do at this day, offereth himſelfe raſhly vnto danger and loſſe. For one onely diſorder, one ſmal vertue may cary the victorie from him. Now that which hindreth our armies from repairing themſelues thrice, is the lack of skil to gather one battel into another. We alſo appoint onely a foreward and a maine battel for the moſt part, & lay the hope & ſtrength of the armie vpon the horſemen: wheras the Ancients made moſt account of the footmen. So that if the horſe-men receiuing the onſet ſhould haue the repulſe, and their aray broken, the reſt were eaſie to be delt withall: beſide, that commonly the foote-men are diſordred by their owne horſemen, being compelled to retire. For this cauſe the Switzers, called by ſome maiſters of theſe late warres, when they purpoſe to fight, eſpecially

                     The wiſedome of the Switzers fighting on the Frenchmens ſide. on the Frenchmens ſide, are very carefull to haue the horſemen on the one ſide, and not to followe next after them, to the ende that being wide of them, if by miſhap they ſhould be repulſed, yet they might not ouer-runneFrenchmen looſing the firſt encounter, looſe alſo the victorie. and diſorder them. And this hath beene often-times noted, that the Frenchmen according to the aduantage or diſcommoditie of the firſt brunt giuen by their foreward or battell, haue been partakers of the like iſſue and euent afterward: ſo that if they were put to the woorſt in the firſt encounter, their enimie was in a manner aſſured of the victorie. This cauſed Titus Liuius to write in many places, that Frenchmen in the beginning of a battellSome armies are furious, and yet keepe good order. are more than men, but in the ende leſſe than women. But that which cauſeth them to breake their order ſo quickly, may be better knowne, if we ſet downe heere two kindes of armies, the one where there is furie and order, as there was in the Romane armie, in which, according to the teſtimonie of all hiſtories, good order through continuance of time had planted ſuch a warlike diſcipline, that nothing was doone among them but by rule. They did neither eate, nor ſleepe, nor deale in any other warlike or priuate action, without the appointment of the Conſul, or Head of the armie. So that all vertue being thus ſetled amongſt them, they exerciſed their furie by meanes, and as time and occaſion ſerued: neither could any difficultie ariſe, that could quaile their reſolution well begunne, or cauſe them to be diſcouraged,Good order in armies is neuer without hope of victorie. by reaſon of their good order, which refreſhed them and ſtrengthened their courage that was nouriſhed with the hope of victorie, which is neuer wanting as long as good orders are truly obſerued. But in the other kind of armieIn the French armies is furie without order. where furie beareth ſway, and not order, as it falleth out often in the French armies, if victorie doth not followe their firſt aſſaie. For their furie, wherein their hope conſiſted, is not ſuccoured with ſetled vertue, neither haue they any other confidence but in their furie, ſo that as ſoone as they are ſomewhat cooled, and ſee neuer ſo little diſorder and breach of aray, they are preſently diſcomfited.

Contrariwiſe, the Romanes being leſſe afraid of perils, bicauſe of their good order, fought firmely and reſolutely togither without any diſtruſt of the victorie, being as courageous and vertuous in the ende as in the beginning: yea the harder they were charged with weapons, the more were they inflamed and ſet on fire. Moreouer, concerning their warlike diſcipline, it may eaſily be knowne by that ſpeech which Titus Liuius rehearſeth of Papirius Curſor, who complained of the corruption that began to growe in their armie, for the which he would haue puniſhedThe ancient warlike diſcipline of the Romanes. 
                     Fabius Generall of the horſemen. No man (ſaith he) beareth any reuerence either to men, or to the gods. The Edicts of the Captaine, of the Coronell, and of the Soothſaiers, are not obſerued. The ſouldiours goe wandering vppe and downe like vagabonds, both in countries that are at peace with vs, and alſo in our enimies lands: they diſcharge themſelues at their pleaſure, and forget their oath. The Enſignes are deſolate, and not followed. Beſides, they ioine not togither as they are commanded, nor conſider whether it be by day or by night, whether in a place of aduantage, or of diſaduantage. They fight without the Captaines commandement; they keepe not their rankes and ſignes. Briefly, whereas war was woont to be ſolemne and ſacred, it is diſordered, inconſiderate, and guided at all aduenture, after the manner of theeury. But asWhat manner of campe the ancient Romanes had. long as warlike diſcipline tooke place among the ancient Romanes, their campe was a ſchole of honor, of ſobriety, of chaſtity, of iuſtice, & of all vertue, ſo that no man might reuenge his owne iniuries, or proceed of himſelf peremptorily. They knew not what it was to liue at diſcretion, much leſſe to go a foraging, to rob, ſteale, beate or murder,Of the ancient obedience of ſouldiors to their captains. as men do now a daies. And as touching obedience towards their Captaines, it was very wonderfull. For they feared not to preferre it before the ſafetie of their owne liues, and before all victorie. At the battell of Cannas the Romane knights ſeeing the Conſull alight and certaine others with him bicauſe he was hurt, and thinking that he had commanded them all to doe ſo, they preſently left their horſes, which was the cauſe of their ouerthrow. And this did Hannibal then declare with a loude voice,

ſaying: I would not deſire rather to haue them deliuered to me bound, than as they be. The executions that were ſhewed vpon the diſobedient and offenders were ful of rigour,Of the execution that was ſhewed vpon ſouldiors that offended. and the qualitie of their puniſhments maruellous ſtrange. For the Heads of armies ſometime ſticked not to cauſe a whole legion to paſſe through the pikes, (which conſiſted of 6000. footemen, & 500. horſemen) for ſomeThe tithing of armies was moſt ſeuere. notable fault committed by them. But among all their terrible executions, the tithing of armies was moſt ſeuere, when euery tenth man throughout a whole hoſte was by lot put to death. No kinde of puniſhment could be found that was more fearefull for the correcting of a multitude than this, which they practiſed eſpecially when the chiefe author, and they that were the procurers of ſome notorious fact, were not knowne. For then it had beene too much to haue chaſticed the whole companie: and if ſome had beene corrected, and others left vnpuniſhed, innocents peraduenture ſhould haue ſuffered, and the guiltie eſcaped ſcot-free. Whereas by tithing they that were puniſhed, could not complaine but of the lot: and the reſt were kept in feare, leaſt the like faults ſhould fall out againe amongſt them. Whereupon they obſerued one another, that as many as did not their dutie might beeHow Captaines were puniſhed if they offended knowne and chaſticed. The Captaines and Heads of armies were no leſſe rigorouſly handeled by them that had the ſoueraigntie of the Eſtate, if they did capitulate, or make any agreement with the enimies, to the detriment and diſaduantage of the Common-wealth. For they ſent them backe againe naked, and not the Heads onely, but alſo all that had any charge in the armie, and conſented to the compoſition, that the enimies might returne vpon their Heades all the ſinne of breaking that oath which they had taken, and that appointment which they had ſworne to. The Emperour Aurelius laboured earneſtly to bring in againe the ancient diſcipline of warre, and toAurelius letter to a Tribune touching warlike diſcipline. cauſe it to be ſtrictly obſerued: whereof his letter is a ſufficient teſtimonie, being written by him to a Tribune of warre, in theſe words. If thou wilt be a Tribune, or rather if
                     
                     thou wilt liue, restraine the ſouldiours hands, that none ſteale another mans henne, or touch his ſheepe. Let no man take a grape, or ſpoyle and treade downe the corne. Let no man exact of his Oast oyle, ſalt, or wood: but let euery one be content with his allowance. Let them inrich themſelues with the praie of their enimies, and not with the teares of our ſubiectes. Let their armour be glazed and cleane: their hoſe and ſhooes good and ſtrong. Let new apparell driue away the olde: and let them keepe their wages in their purſe, and not ſpend it in tauernes. Let them lay aſide bracelets and rings. Let euery one dreſſe his owne horſe, and one helpe another. Let the Phyſitions and Chirurgions looke to them without money, and let Sooth-ſayers haue nothing giuen them. Let them liue chastly in their Oasts houſes: and let ſuch as are mutinous and giuen to quarelling, be puniſhed and corrected. Let thē trench their campe euery day as if they were neere their enimy. Behold ſurely an excellent forme of warlike diſcipline expreſſed inThe corruption of warlike diſcipline in theſe dayes. few words, which is ſo farre from our behauiour, that the people in theſe dayes would thinke they were fauourably delt withall, if the ſouldiours tooke no more from them, but that which this emperor forbiddeth his to take vpon paine of life. And truely the vnmeaſurable licence that is granted them, cauſeth the ſouldior to enter into the field onely to ſpoile and rob, and to eſchew the 
                        •
                     ight. And in ſtead of helping one another, and taking care euery one of his owne horſe, there is not a ſouldiour ſo begger-like, but will haue his foure Lackeis: ſo that a thouſand ſouldiors in theſe dayes will be more chargeable to the people, than twentie thouſand that are well ordered wouldAurelius puniſhed adulterie and theft committed by his ſouldiors, with death. be. If a Romane ſouldiour had committed adulterie with his Oaſts wife, Aurelius cauſed him to be torne in ſunder with two trees bowed downe one againſt another. It was death alſo to take an egge. If hee went out of his ranke whileſt the armie marched, he had the baſtonnado. Oftentimes for one ſimple fault a whole Legion was diſcharged and the captaine ſeuerely puniſhed: and yet for all this rigor, the ſouldiors loued the Emperour as their father. He alſo gaue them their pay well and truly, and rewarded liberally ſuch as did their duetie. This is the way

                     True payment of ſouldiors redreſſeth many diſorders amongſt them. to redreſſe ſo many diſorders and calamities as are ſeene in our armies, and to reſtore in ſome ſort that warrelike diſcipline which is aboliſhed. For ſouldiours alleage this as an excuſe for all their wicked deedes, that they are not payd, and many would not bee payd, that ſo they might cloke their robberies. When the ſmall taxe, and ſince that the payment of fiftie thouſand footemen, was layed vpon the ſubiects, the king promiſed to imploy that mony vpon no other vſe, than vpō the paiment of his men of war, as alſo to keepe that money apart from his ordinary receipts. But bicauſe this is not duely obſerued, the people are doubly vexed: for they pay their money, and yet are polled on all ſides. Notwithſtanding all theſe ordinarie charges, the poore peſants would thinke themſelues happie if they were diſcharged by erecting victualing tents for the men of warre, as they haue been forced to doe of late yeeres. Now what good iſſue can be hoped for, when the ſouldiors through an vnbrideled licence, ſack, ſpoile, and burne the poore ſubiects? This hath alwayes been ſeene, that houſes, families, kingdoms and Empires, haue come to ruine and pouertie, bicauſe the poore were contemned and the ſubiects giuen ouer to the robberies of ſouldiors.The vnrulines of the Pretorian ſouldiors. The immoderate licence of the Pretorian ſouldiours (who were to the emperors as the Ianitzaries are to the Turke) and of other men of warre was no ſmall helpe to ouerthrowe the Romane Empire. For taking vpon them to elect Emperours at their pleaſure, one was choſen in one armie and an other elſe-where, and preſently murdered by thoſe that had elected them. Their inſolencie alſo cauſed ſeditions and ciuill warres, whereupon thoſe kingdoms and countreys that were vnder the Romane obedience, reuolted. And it commeth to paſſe oftentimes, that their vnruly behauiour incenſeth the people in ſuch ſort againſt them, that their deſtruction followeth. As it hapned to all the Frenchmen that were in the Ile of Sicilia, in the yeere 1281. vpon Eaſter day, at the firſt peale to Euenſong, at what time they were all put to death by a ſecret conſpiracie for their inſolencies and whoredoms: whereupon

this prouerbe doth yet remaine amongſt vs, The Sicilian
                     The Sicilian Euenſong. 
                     Euenſong. There is no corner of this kingdom where the people being halfe mad through the iniuries receiued from the men of warre, haue not committed infinite and cruell maſſacres. We may not here forget to propound the wiſe and warlike diſcipline of Bellizarius, lieutenauntBellizarius. generall to the Emperor Iustinian, who for valure and temperance was equall to the ancient Romanes (as hiſtories teſtifie of him) which was the cauſe that he reconquered all Italy poſſeſſed by the Barbariās. Not long ſince during the warre of Piemont (which was a very ſchoole of vertue,The mild wane of Piemont. and of warrelike knowledge) the peſaunt, husbandman, and artificer, were ſuffered quietly at their worke, the warre continuing betweene warriours onely for the poſſeſſion, and not the ruine of the countrey. And as the people were then glad to receiue amongſt them ſuch armies, ſo they diſpaire no leſſe at this day, bicauſe all warlike diſcipline, all policie both diuine and humane, is in ſuch ſort extinguiſhed, yea all kind of humanitie and ſocietieThe crueltie of theſe late French warres. which is to be ſeen amongſt barbarous people, that it is lawfull for Frenchmen to ſacke, ſpoile, and put to ranſome Frenchmen that are many times of the ſame ſide, faith and condition, and that without puniſhment. But let vs not looke for proſperitie and good ſucceſſe in our enterpriſes, before there be ſome other order and diſcipline obſerued.
               
            
            The ende of the ſeuenteenth dayes worke.
         
         
            
            THE EIGHTEENTH DAIES WORKE.
            
               Of the office and dutie of a Generall. Chap. 69.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     THoſe men commonly proſper in their affairs that vnderſtand them throughly, and manage them well & diligently: conſidering aduiſedly what hath beene heretofore, that they may in ſome ſort iudge of that which is to come, bicauſe all worldly things haue euermore ſome agreement with the ages paſt. Which commeth of this, that beyng the works of men, they haue had, and will alwayes haue like formes, and therfore muſt of neceſſitie haue like effectes. But the cauſe of the good or euill ſucceſſe of men (in reſpect of mans nature) conſiſteth in this, that the meanesTime and occaſion are diligently to be waighed in all matters. and maner of proceeding iumpe with the time, wherein the very condition therof, and the occaſion offred, is diligently to be obſerued. And if this conſideration taketh place in all priuate affaires, it is much more neceſſarie in warre, wherein a light fault oftentimes procureth loſſe &The good or ill ſucceſſe of an army dependeth of the captaine. ouerthrow to a whole armie, whoſe good or ill happe dependeth of the head and leader therof, according as he is either woorthy or vnwoorthy of his charge. My opinion therfore is (my companions) that we alleage in this place whatſoeuer we know belongeth to his duetie and office. I propound now the diſcourſe of this matter to you.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Men diſdaine commonly to obey ſuch as

know not how to commaund well. Therfore euery Generall of an armie ought to labour carefully, that men may behold and ſee a certaine greatnes, magnanimitie & conſtancie in all his doings.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  A Generall muſt be had in eſtimation of his ſouldiors, and of that reputation, that they may giue credite to his prudence: otherwiſe an army doth quickly become rebellious, and troubleſome to be guided. But let vs learne more amply of ACHITOB whatſoeuer concerneth this matter.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     A captaine muſt not offend twiſe in warre. 
                     Lamachus a great Athenian captain ſayd, that no man muſt offend twiſe in warre, bicauſe the faults are of ſo great waight, that for the moſt part they bring with thē the ouerthrow of the ſtate, or loſſe of life to thoſe that commit them, and therefore that it was a hard and daungerous matter to haue experience thereof. So thatPrudence gotten by vſe muſt be haſtened forward by knowledge. Prudence gotten by vſe ought to bee haſtened forward, bicauſe it is deerly bought, & ſo long a cōming, that oftentimes death preuenteth it. It muſt be haſtned forward by the diligent enquirie of thoſe things that haue fallen out both before & ſince our time, that we may become wiſe by other mens perils. For this cauſe it is very neceſſarie, that whoſoeuer taketh vpon him the honor of guiding an armie, ſhould exerciſe his minde as much in ſcience, and in the knowledge of hiſtories, as he doth his body in all martiall actes, that ſo he may diligently obſerue the deedes of famous perſonages, ſee how they gouerned themſelues in warres, and examine the cauſes of their victory, thereby to flie the one and to follow the other. And bicauſe it is againſt reaſon, that a well armed man ſhould obey him that is vnarmed, or that they ſhould take the rudder out of the Pilots hand to ſaue the ſhip in a ſtorme, that haue no skill in ſea-faring matters; it is very requiſite that whoſoeuerNo man ought to be generall before he haue obtained the renowne of a valiant man. vndertaketh to commaund an army, ſhould firſt haue gotten a good report of all men for his valure and greatneſſe of courage, whereby his authoritie will be reuerenced, as being beſtowed vpō one that is woorthy of it: foraſmuch as titles of dignitie do not honor men, but men are an ornament

to titles. Now if ſouldiors haue conceiued a good opinion of the deſert and valure of their captaine, it will be as a ſharpe ſpur to pricke them forward in well doing, and cauſe them to honor & to loue his commandements. For true zeale of vertue, that is to ſay, the deſire to imitate it, is not imprinted in mens harts, but through a ſingular good will & reuerence towards that partie that worketh the impreſſion. It was not then without good cauſe, that the anciēts greatly eſteemed the dignity of a General, being ioined with prowes, knowledge & experience: ſeeing the happy or vnhappy euents of warre ordinarily depend therof (next to the chief cauſe proceeding frō God) as we ſhewed yeſterday what Titus Liuius wrote of the battel betweenCimon preferred an army of Harts before an army of Lions. the Romans & the Latins. For this reaſon Cimon a great mā of Athens ſaid, that he had rather haue an armie of Harts guided by a Lion, than an armie of Lions hauing a Hart for their captaine. Now if we deſire to vnderſtand in few words what maner of mē are moſt woorthy of ſuch charges, we may learne it by the anſwere that one of the wiſe Interpreters made to Ptolomie concerning this matter:What captains are woorthieſt of their charge. 
                     They (ſaid he) that excell in proweſſe and iustice, and preferre the ſafetie of mens liues before victorie. But to diſcourſe more particularly of the dutie and office of the head of an armie, Valerius Coruinus Generall of the Romans againſt the Samnites, to whom he was redy to giue battell, incouraged his ſouldiors to do well in few words, and taught euery one how he ſhould proceed to obtaine the place andCoruinus Oration to his ſouldiors. degree of a captaine. A man must conſider well (quoth he vnto them) vnder whoſe conduction he entreth into battell: whether vnder one that can cauſe himſelfe to be heard as if hee were ſome goodly Oratour, that hath a braue tongue, but otherwiſe is a Nouice and vnskilfull in all points of warre, or vnder ſuch a one as hath skill himſelfe to handle his weapon, to marche first before the enſignes, and to doe his duetie in the hottest of the fight. I would not, Souldiours, that yee ſhould follow my wordes, but my deeds. I ſet before you an example ioyned with instruction and diſcipline, as he that hath gotten three Conſulſhips with this arme, not without exceeding prayſe. Hereby we learne, that the ancient

captaines and Heads of armies had this laudable cuſtomeCaptains vſed in old time to make Orations to their ſouldiors. to make Orations to their men of warre, thereby to make them more courageous, as appeereth in all hiſtories both Greeke and Latin. This faſhion is now loſt togither with the reſt of warlike diſcipline: at leaſt wiſe there is no account made of it in France, whereupon it commeth to paſſe, that many great men are but badly followed and ſerued in warre. For as he that ſtandeth in neede of the faithfull ſeruice of men ought to winne them rather by gentleneſſe and good turnes, than by authoritie and rigour:Captains ought to make much of their ſouldiors. ſo he that would haue prompt and reſolute ſouldiours for warre, that hee may vſe their ſeruice in tyme of neede, muſt make much of them, and allure them to his obedience by liberalitie, and by good and gracious ſpeeches. For in truth they muſt be good friends and affectionate ſeruitours vnto a man, that ſetting all excuſes aſide (of which there is neuer any want) are to fight for him: they muſt neither be enuious at his proſperitie, nor traiterous in his aduerſitie. And there is no doubt but that in a matter of great importaunce, the graue exhortationsThe benefit of making Oratiōs to ſouldiors. of a Generall, grounded vpon good reaſons and examples greatly encourage and harten a whole armie, in ſo much that it will make them as hardie as Lions, that before were as fearefull as ſheepe. Moreouer, if he that is eſteemed and iudged to be valiaunt and noble-minded, ſheweth foorth effectes aunſwerable thereunto, he doubteth the courage and ſtrength of his armie: as contrarywiſe, the leaſt ſhew of cowardlineſſe, diſcouragement or aſtoniſhment ſhewed by him, draweth after it the vtter ruine of his ſouldiours. But to returne to the duetie and office of a good Captaine of an armie, as the beſt worke that a man can doe, is firſt to bee honeſt and vertuous: and than to take order that himſelfe and his familie may haue aboundantly all things neceſſarie for this life: ſo euery wiſe and well aduiſed leader of men of warre, muſtA good captain muſt be alwayes furniſhed with munitions and victuals. diſpoſe and prepare himſelfe to the ſame ende, and foreſee that nothing be wanting vnto them, neither munitiōs of warre, nor victuals. He muſt not thinke to make new

prouiſion when neceſſitie vrgeth him, but euen than when he is beſt furniſhed, he muſt bee carefull for the time to come. Wherby taking away all occaſiō of cōplaining from the ſouldior, he ſhall be better beloued and obeyed, and more feared and redoubted of his enimies. To this purpoſeCyrus Oration to his captains. 
                     Cyrus ſaid to his chiefe men of warre: My friends I reioyce greatly that you and your men are contented that ye haue abundance of all things, and that we haue wherewith to do good to euery one according to his vertue. Notwithstanding we must conſider what were the principall cauſes of theſe good things, and if yee looke narowly ye ſhall find, that watching, trauell, continuance in labor, and diligence haue giuē vs theſe riches. Therfore ye muſt ſhew your ſelues vertuous alſo hereafter, holding this for certaine, that ye ſhall obtaine great ſtore of riches and contentation of mind by obedience, constancie, vertue, ſuſtaining of trauell, and by courage in
                     A good captain muſt neuer ſuffer his army to be idle. 
                     vertuous and perillous enterpriſes. Moreouer a good captaine of an armie muſt be very carefull, that he neuer ſuffer his hoſt to be idle, but cauſe his ſouldiors either to annoy the enimie, or to doe themſelues good. It is a burthenſome thing to nouriſh an idle body, much more a whole family, but eſpecially an armie, and not to keepe them occupied. His meaning that warreth of neceſſitie, or through ambition, is to get or to keep that which is gotten, and to proceed in ſuch ſort, that he may in-rich, and not impoueriſh his countrey. Therfore both for conquering, and for the maintenance and preſeruation of that which is his owne already, he muſt neceſſarily beware of vnprofitable expences, and do all things for common commoditie. So that who ſo euer would throughly put in practiſe theſe twoWarre ought to be ſpeedily ended. points, he had need to follow that cuſtome, which the ancient Romanes vſed, namely, at the beginning to make them ſhort and terrible, as we vſe to ſay. For entring into the field with great power and ſtrength, they diſpatched their warre ſpeedily within few dayes: inſomuch that all their iourneis made againſt the Latines, Samnites, & Tuſcans were ended, ſome in ſix, others in ten, and the longeſt in twentie dayes. And although afterward they were conſtrained to keep the fields a longer time, by reaſon of the

diſtance of places and countreys, yet they did not therefore giue ouer the following of their firſt purpoſe, but ended as ſoone as they could, their enterpriſes of warre by quick battels, according as place and time ſuffred. True it is, that a prudent captaine muſt be skilfull to take the enimie at aduantage: but if it be ſo that he cannot, the betterA good captain muſt not be ouer venturous. and more vertuous man he thinks himſelfe and thoſe that follow him to be, ſo much the more paines is required of him for his owne and their preſeruation, as men vſe to keep ſafely thoſe things which they account deereſt, and to lay them vp in a ſure place. The dignitie of a Head of an armie, is in truth greatly to be accounted of, eſpecially when it is ioyned with proweſſe and experience, the chief point whereof is to ſaue him that muſt ſaue all the reſt. Therefore Timotheus an Athenian captaine, (and Chares
                     A General muſt not raſhly hazard himſelfe. alſo an other captaine) ſhewed one day openly vnto the Athenians, the skarres of many woundes which he had receiued in his body, and his ſhield alſo that was ſpoyled and thruſt through with many puſhes of a pike: but now (quoth he) I am of another minde. For when I beſieged the citie of Samos I was very much aſhamed that an arrowe ſhotte from the walles fell harde by me, being then too venturous a yong man, and hazarding my ſelfe more raſhly than became the Head of ſo great an armie. And yet when it greatly profiteth the whole enterpriſe, and isWhen he ought to venture himſelfe. a matter of no ſmall importance, that the Generall of the armie ſhould put his life in daunger, then he muſt yeeld, and imploy his perſon, not ſparing himſelfe, or giuing place to their wordes who ſay, that a good and wiſe captaine ought to die of age, or at leaſt to be olde. But where ſmall benefit ariſeth if he proſper well, and contrarywiſe, an vniuerſall loſſe and generall hurt to all, if any thing but well betide him, no wiſe man will require it, or be of the opinion, that he ſhould venture himſelfe as a common ſouldiour doth, whereby he being the Generall ſhould be in daunger of deſtruction. And yet in the meane while he muſt not be leſſe carefull ouer the ſafetie of thoſe valiaunt men that follow him, or thruſt them into danger but very

                     Antoninus preferred the life of one citizen before the death of a thouſand enimies. warily, remembring the ſaying of that good emperor Antoninus, that he had rather ſaue one citizen, thā put a thouſand enimies to death. The anſwer of Scipio was very like it, whē he was earneſtly requeſted by the ſouldiours at the ſiege of Numantia to gine an aſſault. I had rather (quoth he) haue
                     Scipio would haue all wayes tried before the ſword were vſed in warre. 
                     the life of one Romane, than the death of all the Numantines. He vſed alſo to ſay, that all things ought to be aſſaied in warre before the ſword be taken in hand. And in deed there is no greater victory than that which is gotten without ſheding of bloud. Sylla, Tiberius, Caligula and Nero had no skill, but to commaund and to kill: but that good Augustus, Titus and Traian, were always ready to ſollicite, toWhen Auguſtus would haue battell giuen. requeſt, and to agree by forgiuing. Augustus alſo ſaid, that although a prince were mightie, yet if hee were wiſe, hee would neuer giue battell vnleſſe there were more apparant profite in the victorie, than loſſe if the enimie ſhould ouercome. And in deede he neuer gaue battell but vponNarſes always wept the night before he gaue battell. neceſſitie. We reade of that great captaine Narſes, who ſubdued the Gothes, vanquiſhed the Bactrians, and ouercame the Germaines, that he neuer gaue his enimies battell, but he wept in the Temple the night before. Theodoſius the Emperor ſuffred not his men to aſſault any towne, nor to lay ſiege vnto it before tenne dayes were paſt, cauſing this proclamation to be made vnto them, that hee graunted theſe tenne daies to the ende they might accept and taſte of his clemencie before they had experience of his power. It is a common ſaying, that it is not enough for a Captaine to know how to leade his men well to the fight, vnleſſe he foreſee alſo the meanes to retire and toTwo faults to be eſchewed of euery captain. ſaue them in tyme of neede. And it is no leſſe fault in a Captaine to fall into an inconuenience vnlooked for, than through too much miſtruſt to let ſlippe an occaſion of doyng ſome great exploite when it is offred. For want of experience breedeth raſhneſſe in the one, and taketh away boldneſſe from the other. Neither muſt a good captaineA good General muſt alwayes ſeare the worſt. onely vſe preſent occaſion well, but hee muſt alſo iudge wiſely of that which is to come, diſtruſting alwayes the doubtfull iſſue of all enterpriſes of warre. For this

cauſe the ancient Generals of armies, both Greekes and Latines neuer marched but in armour, nor incamped, although they were farre from their enimies, but they cloſed their campe round about with a trench. And when Leonidas was demanded the reaſon hereof, he aunſwered, bicauſe as the ſea hath his ſandes, gulfes, and rocks, ſo hath war his,
                     I had not thought it, a dangerous ſpeech in a captaine. 
                     among which none is more perillous and hurtful than this of, I had not thought it. Among other things neceſſary in a captaine, the knowledge of nature, and of the ſituation of places is very requiſite: which is to know how the mountaines are lift vp, how the valleis hang, how the Champian fields areA good captain muſt haue skill to diſcerne the ſituation of places. couched togither, and to know the nature and courſe of riuers, & the bredth of mariſhes. This is profitable in two reſpects. Firſt a man learneth thereby to know his owne countrey, & ſo to be more skilful to defend it. Secondly, hauing by that means had good practiſe of the ſeat of that countrey, he may eaſily conceiue the ſituation of another place, of which ſometime he muſt neceſſarily conſider. So that if a General be wanting herein, he is deſtitute of the chief vertue which a good captain ought to haue. For it is that which teacheth him to find out the enimy, to encampThe benefit of Geometry in a General. himſelf, to guide an hoſt, to ſet his men in aray for the battell, and to take the aduauntage at the ſiege of a towne. Among other great praiſes that authors giue to Philopaemenus▪
                     
                     Philopaemenus in time of peace ſtudied the diſcipline of war. prince of the Acheans, they forget not this, that in time of peace he ſtudied diligētly how he might war more skilfully. And when he was in the fields with his friends, he would ſtand ſtil many times and conferre with them, vſing ſuch like ſpeeches: If the enimie were in this mountaine and we here with our campe, who ſhould haue the aduantage, & how might we ſeeke him out, marching on in battell? If we would retire, how ſhould we do? If they retired, how ſhould we folow thē? Thus in the way he ſet before them all the chances that might happen to a campe: then he would heare their opinions, and after ſet down his own, confirming it with reaſons. This he did ſo well, that by reaſon of theſe continual diſputations and cogitations, no hinderance could befall him when he guided an army, which he could not redreſſe▪ 
                     Xenophō
                      ſheweth

in Cyrus his life, that being ready to ſet forward in thatCyrus reſembleth his going to warre to hunting. voyage which he vndertooke againſt the king of Armenia he ſaid familiarly to his men, that this iourny was but one of thoſe huntings which they had ſo often practiſed with him. He willed thoſe whom he ſent to lye in ambuſh vpon the mountaines, to remember when and how they went to pitch their nets vpon the ſmall hils: and to thoſe that went to begin the skirmiſh, he ſayd, that they reſembled ſuch as went to rouze a beaſt out of his denne, to driue him to their nets. This noble Prince ſhewed well that hisHunting is an image of warre. exerciſe of hunting was not vnprofitable vnto him (as in deede it is a true paterne of warre) but that it did helpe him greatly to iudge of the nature and ſeate of thoſe places which he frequented in his countreys. And bicauſe all landes are like in ſome things, the perfect knowledge of one countrey (which often vſe of hunting bringeth) mayP. Decius. helpe one to iudge well of an other. Publius Decius Tribune of the ſouldioures in the armie which Cornelius the Conſull led againſt the Samnites, beholding the Romane hoſt brought into a valley where they might eaſily be encloſed of the enimies, went to the Conſull and ſayd, Doe you marke, O Cornelius, the toppe of this mountaine aboue our enimie? It is the fortreſſe of our hope and ſafetie if we make haſte to take it, ſeeyng the blind Samnites haue forſaken it. We ſee then how profitable, yea how neceſſarie it is for a captaine to know the beyng and nature of countreys, which helpeth a mā much in that principall point touched before by me, namely, to compel his enimies to fight when he perceiueth that he is the ſtronger, and hath the aduantage of them: & if he be the weaker, to keep himſelf from ſuch places where he may be cō
                     pelledC. Marius neuer gaue his enimies occaſion to force him to fight. therunto. This is that wherby Caius Marius, who was ſixe times Conſull, got the renowne to be one of the greateſt captains in his time. For although he were Generall of many armies, and fought three great battels, yet was he ſo warie in all his enterpriſes, that hee neuer gaue his enimies occaſion to ſet vpon him, and to force him to fight. And that was a notable aunſwere which he made

to the Generall of his enimies, who willed him to come out of his campe to battell, if he were ſuch a great captain as men reported him to be. Not ſo (quoth he) but if thou art the great captaine compell me to it whether I will or no. This is one thing alſo wherein the Head of an armieThe captains of an armie muſt be very ſecret. muſt be very vigilant, that all ſecrecies be cloſely kept among the captaines of his hoſt. For great affaires neuer haue good ſucceſſe when they are diſcouered before they take effect. To this purpoſe Suetonius ſaith, that no man euer heard Iulius Caeſar ſay, To morrow we will do that, and to
                     I. Caeſar very ſecret in tyme of warre. 
                     day this thing: but, we will doe this nowe, and as for to morrow we will conſider what is then to be done. And Plutarke ſaith in his treatiſe of Policie, that Lucius Metellus beyng demaundedL. Metellus. by a Captaine of his when hee would giue battell, ſayde, If I were ſure that my ſhirte knew the least thought in my hart, I woulde preſently burne it, and neuer weare any other. Therefore affaires of warre may be handled and debatedAffaires of war muſt be debated by many, but concluded by few. of by many, but the reſolution of them muſt be done ſecretly, and knowen of few men: otherwiſe they would be ſooner diſcloſed and publiſhed, than concluded. Notwithſtanding it is very neceſſarie, that the General ſhould oftentymes call a councell, ſo that it be of expert and ancient men, and of ſuch as are prudent and voyde of raſhneſſe.Vrgent occaſions in warre require ſhort deliberation. But in all caſes of neceſſitie a man muſt not ſtand long in ſeeking for reaſon, but ſuddenly ſet vpon them. For many tymes ſundry captaines haue vndone themſelues in warres vpon no other occaſion, but bicauſe they lingred in taking counſel, when they ſhould without loſſe of tyme haue wrought ſome notable enterpriſe. Moreouer, for the inſtruction and patterne of the dutie and office of a good Head and captaine of an armie, we can alleageCato a notable paterne for all captains to folow. none more woorthy to be imitated than Cato of Vtica, a Conſul of Rome, who had the guiding of a legion when he firſt tooke charge vpon him. For from that tyme forward he thought, that it was not roial or magnificall to be vertuous alone, being but one body: & therfore he ſtudied to make all that were vnder his charge like himſelfe. Which that he might bring to paſſe, he took not frō them

the feare of his authoritie, but added reaſon thereunto, ſhewing and teaching them their dutie in euery point, and always ioyning to his exhortations reward, for thoſe that did well, and puniſhment for ſuch as did euill. So that it was hard to ſay, whether he had made them more apt for peace or for warre, more valiant or more iuſt, bicauſe they were ſo ſtout and eger againſt their enimies, and ſo gentle and gracious to their friends, ſo feareful to do euil, and ſoPompey. ready to obtaine honor. The vertue of Pompey is alſo worthy to be followed of euery great captain, f or the temperance that was in him, for his skil in armes, eloquence in ſpeech, fidelitie in word, as alſo bicauſe he was to be ſpoken with, and ſo louingly entertained euery one. And ifHow Cato diuided the ſpoiles. with theſe things the example of the ſame Cato be followed in his prudent liberalitie, and diuiſion of the ſpoils and riches of the enimies, that captaine that ſo behaueth himſelf ſhal deſerue eternal praiſe, and pleaſe all thoſe that follow him. For when this vertuous captaine had taken many townes in Spaine, he neuer reſerued more for himſelfe than what he did eate and drinke there. He deliuered to euery one of his ſouldiors a pound waight of ſiluer, ſaying that it was better that many ſhould returne to their houſes from the warre with ſiluer, than a few with gold: and as for the captains he ſayd, that during their charges and gouernements they ſhould not grow and increaſe in any thing but in honor and glory. For the concluſion therefore of our ſpeech, we note, that a Generall of an army deſirous to bee obeyed (which is neceſſarie) muſt behaue himſelfe ſo, that his ſouldiors may thinke him woorthy to prouide and care for their neceſſary affaires. Which thing will come to paſſe, when they ſee that he is courageous & carefull, that he keepeth his place and the maieſtie of his degree well, that he puniſheth offenders, and laboureth not his men in vaine, but is liberall, and performeth his promiſes made vnto them.
               
            
            
               
               Of the choice of Souldiors, of the maner how to exhort them to fight, and how victory is to be vſed. Chap. 70.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  A Gamemnon generall Captaine of the Graecians before Troy, ſpeaking of Achilles, and being grieued bicauſe he refuſed to ſuccour them, hauing been offended by him, ſayd, That a
                     One godly man in a campe is in place of many. 
                     man beloued of God, is in the place of many men in a campe, and far better than a whole company that is vnruly, and cannot be gouerned but with great paine and care. This reaſon was the cauſe that good men heretofore were greatly honored in war, and much ſought after by great captaines, bicauſe they were very religious, and vndertooke nothing before they had prayed to their gods, and offered ſacrifices after the maner of their countrey. Alſo after they had done ſomeSouldiors ought to begin their war with prayer▪ and end with praiſe & thankſ-giuing. great exploite, they were not ſlouthful to giue thē thanks, by offrings and hymnes ſong to their praiſe. But all theſe good conſiderations haue no more place amongſt vs, than the reſt of their warlike diſcipline, principally in that no regard is had what maner of men are to be vſed in ſeruice, but onely how a great number may be had. And many times he that is knowen to be a bold murderer, and giuen ouer to all wickedneſſe, ſhall be preferred to an office before an honeſt man: and which is more, we deſpiſe our owne countrey-men, whome the welfare of our countrey concerneth as well as our ſelues, and rather truſt ſtrangers and hirelings, who ſeeke nothing but deſtruction, ſo that we our ſelues alſo bewaile, but too late, the miſchiefes that haue light vpon vs. For this cauſe I propound vnto you (my companions) to diſcourſe vpon, the election and choiſe which is to be conſidered of, in taking ſuch men of war to whom a man may ſafely commit himſelf: & if you thinke good, you may ſpeak ſomwhat alſo of the maner of exhortatiō to fight vſed by the ancients, bicauſe I touched it by the way in my former diſcourſe: & laſtly how victory ought to bee vſed, which commonly followeth good

order and diſcipline of war, wherof we haue hitherto diſcourſed.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  
                     Why a man muſt vſe his own ſubiectes in warre. Foraſmuch as the chiefe force of an armie conſiſteth in the ſincere and conſtant good will of the ſouldiors towards him for whom they fight, it is not to be ſought for elſe-where than in his owne naturall ſubiects, to whome proſperitie and good ſucceſſe is common with the Prince.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  
                     My friends (quoth Cyrus to his men of war) I haue choſen you, not bicauſe I haue had proofe heretofore of your manhood, but bicauſe from my yong yeeres I haue known you ready to doe thoſe things, which we in this countrey account honest, and to eſchew all diſhonestie. This cannot be truely ſaid of ſtrangers neuer ſeen before, who come out of their countrey to inrich themſelues with the ouerthrow of their neighbours. But it belongeth to thee ARAM to handle this matter here propounded vnto vs.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  If we conſider diligently of the cauſes, from whence came the ruine of the Romane Empire, we ſhall find, that thoſe meanes which the wiſeſt Emperors inuented for the ſafetie and preſeruation thereof, turned in the end to the deſtruction of it. Firſt the ordinary armies placed by Augustus neere to Rome, & in the borders of his eſtate,Three cauſes from whence proceeded the ruine of the Romane empire. ouerthrew many of his ſucceſſors, & euen the empire it ſelf, which they would ſometimes ſet to ſale, & deliuer vp to him that gaue moſt for it. Next, the tranſlation of the empire, which Constantine the great made from Rome to Bizantiū, afterward called by his name Constantinople, therby to make it more ſure againſt the Perſians & other people of Aſia, greatly haſtned forward the ouerthrow of the ſame. For when he caried thither the chief ſtrength andThe diuiſion of the empire weakened the ſame. wealth of Rome, & diuided the empire into the Eaſt and Weſt, 
                        •
                     e weakned it very much, ſo that the Weſt was firſt deſtroyed, and then the Eaſt: which if they had continued vnited and knit togither, might for a long time, and in a maner for euer, haue reſiſted all inuaſions. Thirdly, when the Emperours thought to ſtrengthen themſelues with ſtrange, hired, & forrain power, called to their ſuccour, as

namely the Gothes, thereby weakening their owne forces and naturall ſtrength of the Empire, they put ere they were aware, Rome and Italy, and conſequently the other Prouinces into the hands of the Barbarians. Yea we find, that the greateſt calamities that euer happened to Common-wealths diuided, was when the Citizens were ſeueredDangerous to an Eſtate to call in forraine ſuccours. among themſelues, and called in ſtrangers to helpe them, who vſing often to goe that way, at the laſt made themſelues maiſters ouer them. The Germanes called byAs appeereth by the Sequani.
                      the Sequani to their ſuccour againſt thoſe of Autun, compelled them to deliuer halfe their land vnto them: and at length they drooue away all the naturall people of the countrie, and became Lordes of the greateſt part of the Gaules territorie. But not to go ſo farre off, it is high time for vs to grow wiſe by our owne perill. The factions of theBy the Frenchmen. houſes of Orleans and of Burgundy, called in the Engliſhmen into France, who by this meane ſette ſuch footing therein, that they poſſeſſed a great part therof a long time after. What lacked in our time why the Frenchmen blinded & caried away with partialities (and God grant they may throughly knowe it) did not bring their countrie to that extremitie of miſeries, as to ſubmit it to the ſeruice and ſlauerie of a ſtrange yoke, vnder the colour of begging helpe at their handes? What letted why there was not plaied among vs, of vs, and by vs, the cruelleſt & moſt ſorrowfull tragedie that euer was, when men came hither from all quarters to behold the ſight? Would not a man haue thought, that both great and ſmall had wittingly purpoſed to ouer-throw the goodlieſt & moſt noble kingdome of the world, and themſelues withall, and ſo in the end haue ſhamefully loſt the glorie and renowne, which their Anceſtors had woorthily gotten for them? Now, if any good hap hath turned this tempeſt from vs againſt our wils, at the leaſt let vs call to mind the danger whereinto we had willingly caſt our ſelues, and let vs not forget the admonition that was giuen vs by thoſe barbarous fellowes, whoſe Captaines and Counſellors asked vs why we called them in, when a little before their departure out of

this kingdome, they were complained vnto for the extorſionsThe end that forraine ſouldiours propound to themſelues. and cruelties which their men practiſed. What thinke you (ſaid they) is the intent and purpoſe of our men in following vs, but to enrich themſelues with your ouerthrow? Agree among your ſelues, and neuer call vs more, except ye minde to taste of that which ſhall be woorſe. But let vs enter into the particular conſideration of the perill and hurt that commeth by forraine and mercenarie ſouldiours, that we may knowe whome wee ought rather to vſe. The armes where-with a Prince defendeth his Countrie, are either his owne, or hired of ſtrangers, or ſent to his ſuccour by ſome Prince his friend, or elſe mingled of both togither. They that maintaine, that it is neceſſarie for the proſperitie and preſeruation of euerie happie Common-wealth, not to vſeReaſons why forraine force is woorth nothing. forraine helpe, ſay, that hired force and ſuccour of ſtrangers is woorth nothing, but rather dangerous, and that if a Prince thinke to ground the aſſurance of his Eſtate vpon forraine force, he cannot ſafely doe it. For they agree not eaſily togither, they doe all for profite, and will be neither well ordered nor obedient. On the other ſide, they are not ouer-faithfull, they are all in their brauerie amonge friendes, but hartleſſe amonge enimies. They neither feare God, nor are faithfull to men. The reaſon heereof is this, bicauſe no loue, nor anye other occaſion holdeth them but paie, and hope of ſpoyle. Which is no ſufficient cauſe to mooue them to die willingly in his ſeruice, whoſe ſubiects they are not, andThe cauſe of the laſt deſtruction of Italy. whoſe ruine they deſire, rather than his increaſe. The laſt deſtruction of Italy came by no other thing, than bicauſe it truſted a longe time to forraine and hyred forces, which brought ſome thinges to paſſe for ſome men, but as ſoone as another ſtranger came, they ſhewed what they were. Heereuppon it came, that Kinge Charles the eight eaſily ouer-ranne all Italy with chalke, as we vſe to ſpeake, that is to ſaye, that without reſiſtance he ſent before to take vp his lodging, bicauſe they that ſhoulde haue withſtoode him, and were called in to keepe the Countrie, did of their owne accord take his parte. But

there is a further matter. Strange hired Captaines either are excellent men, or haue nothing in them. If they beThe diſcommoditie of bringing in hired Captaines. valiant, the Prince is not to truſt them. For out of doubt they will ſeeke to make themſelues great, either by his ouerthrowe that is their Maiſter, or by deſtroying others againſt his will. And if the Captaines haue no valure in them, he cannot hope for any thing but for the cauſe of his owne perdition. Succour is moſte hurtfull to an Eſtate, when ſome Potentate is called in with his forces for aide and defence. Thoſe ſouldiours may well be good and profitable for themſelues, but are alwaies hurtfull to ſuch as call them in. For if a man looſe the fielde, he is ouer-throwne: if he winne it, he is their priſoner. Such ſuccour is a great deale more to bee feared, than hired ſtrength, which obeieth the Prince that calleth them, and requireth their helpe. But when a man receiueth in an armie vnited, and accuſtomed to obeye the Captaine that conducteth and bringeth them in, his deſtructionDangerous for a Prince to call in a Potentate to ſuccour him. is alreadie prepared, and cannot be auoided, who openeth the doore of his owne houſe to let in an enimie ſtronger than himſelfe. Therefore it were expedient for euerye Prince to trye all waies before he haue recourſe to ſuch men for helpe and ſuccour. And whoſoeuer ſhall reade and conſider well the times that are paſt, and runne ouer the preſent ſtate of things, he ſhall ſee, that whereas one proſpered well, an infinite number were deceiued and abuſed. For a Common-wealth, or an ambitious Prince, coulde not wiſh to haue a better occaſion whereby to get the poſſeſſion of a Citie, Seignorie, or Prouince, than when hee is required to ſend his armie to defende it. But what? The ambition, deſire of reuenge, or ſome other affection of men is ſo great, that to accompliſh once their preſent will, they forget all dutie, and caſt behind them the care of all danger and inconuenience whatſoeuer, that may light vppon them. The Herules, Gothes, and Lumbards by theſeExamples of the change of Eſtats by meanes of forraine ſuccour. meanes became Lordes of Italy: the Frenchmen of the Gaules Countrye, the Engliſhmen of greate Britaine,

the Scots of Scotland after they had driuen out the Britons and Picts, who called them in for ſuccour. The Turks made themſelues Lords of the Eaſt Empire, and of the kingdom of Hungary, being likewiſe required of help by the Emperours of Conſtantinople, and by the States of Hungary. Not long ſince Cairadin a Pirate, being called by the Inhabitants of Alger to driue the Spaniards out of the fortreſſe, after he had vanquiſhed them, he ſlew Selim Prince of the towne, and made himſelfe king, leauing the Eſtate to his brother Arradin Barberoſſa. And Saladine a Tartarian Captaine, being called by the Calipha and Inhabitants of Caire to driue the Chriſtians out of Soria, after the victorie ſlew the Calipha, and became abſolute Lorde thereof. The foreſight which the Princes of Germany hadCharles the fift, bound by oath not to bring any forraine ſouldiors into Germany. of the perill and hurt that all ſtrangers bring to an Eſtate, cauſed them to bind the Emperour Charles the fift, by the twelfth article of conditions, vnto which he ſware before he receiued the Imperiall crown, that he ſhould not bring in any forraine ſouldiors into Germany. And yet through the great number of Spaniards, Italians, and Flemmings that came into the countrie, beeing called in againſt the Proteſtants, there wanted little of changing the Eſtate of Almaigne into an hereditarie kingdom. Which had bene ſoone doone if king Henry the ſecond had not ſtaied it by his French power, for which cauſe he was called by books publiſhed, and arches erected in their country, Protector of the Empire, and deliuerer of the Princes, who ſince haue concluded amonge themſelues, that they will neuer chuſe aCharles 7. made decrees for French ſouldiors. forraine Prince. Charles the ſeuenth king of France, hauing by his great good ſucceſſe and vertue, deliuered France of Engliſhmen, and knowing well that it was neceſſarie for him to be furniſhed with his owne forces, inſtituted the decrees of horſemen, and of the companies of footemen. After that, king Lewes his ſonne aboliſhed his footemen, and began to leauy Switzers: which beingWhat inconueniences France is fallen into by hiring Switzers. likewiſe practiſed by other kings his ſucceſſors, many men haue noted, that by countenancing the Switzers, they haue cauſed their owne forces to degenerate and growe

out of vſe, diſanulled the footemen, and tied their horſemen to other footemen: inſomuch that ſince they haue been vſed to fight in company of the Switzers, they think that they cannot obtaine the victorie, nor yet fight without them. Therfore the prudence of king Francis the firſt,Francis 1. eſtabliſhed ſeuen legions of footmen. muſt needes be honored with exceeding great praiſe, in that he eſtabliſhed ſeuen legions of footmen, accounting 6000. men to a legion: ſo that there could be no better deuice for the maintenance of warrelike diſcipline, nor more neceſſary for the preſeruation of this kingdome, if thoſe good ordinances that were made to this end be wel marked. Neuertheles they were aboliſhed in his raigne, eſtabliſhed againe by Henry the ſecond his ſucceſſor, and after that abrogated. I am of opinion, that if theſe ancient inſtitutions both of horſemen and footemen were reuined, they would be a good mean, whereby we might alwaies haue men of warre to defend this kingdom, to conquer that which is taken from it, and to helpe our friends: whereas nowe we are faine to vſe the ſeruice of vnskilfull men that are made Captaines before euer they were ſouldiors, or elſe of neceſſitie compelled to begge and to buy very deare the ſuccour offorraine nations. My meaning is not, that a Prince ſhould neuer vſe the helpe of others, but alwaies take his own forces collected among his ſubiects. Nay I ſay to the contrary, that it muſt needs be profitableHow a Prince may vſe the ſuccours of his Allies. for him to vſe the ſuccors of his Allies, ſo that they be ioined with him in league offenſiue and defenſiue. For by this meanes, he doth not onely make himſelfe ſtronger, but withall taketh away both that aide from his enimie, which he might otherwiſe haue drawne from thence, and occaſion alſo from all men to make warre with the one, except they will haue the other alſo their enimie. But aboue all things, let no Prince truſt ſo much to the ſuccours of his Allies, except himſelfe with his ſubiects be of greater ſtrength. And if Allies are to be feared when they are ſtronger in another countrie, what aſſurance may a man haue of forraine ſouldiors, that are at no league either offenſiue or defenſiue with vs? Now if vpon the due

conſideration of theſe things, ſouldiors be carefully trained vp in good diſcipline of warre, which may be collected out of many inſtitutions that are extant, and if the guiding of them be giuen to good, vertuous, and expert Captaines, ledde onely with a deſire to doe their dutie to their King and Countrie, this kingdome will be feared of ſtrangers, and without feare it ſelfe of their aſſaults and enterpriſes. Eſpecially if in the Prince his abſence, the ſoueraigne authoritie of commanding abſolutely in the armie, be committed into the hands of a Captaine woorthy his charge, as we haue diſcourſed, who is able to win theHow a Captain ſhould exhort his ſouldiors. harts of men, and to prouoke them to their dutie by liuely and learned reaſons: as namely, That all men muſt die, and therefore that it were too great follie in a man to refuſe to die for publike profit, which bringeth vnto vs immortall glorie, ſeeing he muſt once of neceſſitie yeeld vp his life: that a glorious death is alwaies to be preferred before a ſhamefull life ſtained with reproch: briefly, if he can ground his exhortations vpon the occaſion of taking armes, of time, place, eſtate and condition of the enimies, and of the good that will come to them, if they obtaine the victorie. But in all theſe things the iuſtice and equitie of the cauſe of war, is that which moſt of all maketh good men courageous, who otherwiſe neuer ought to fight. We may read a million of goodly Orations made in time of warre, & ſet forth in one volume, with which euery wiſe and prudent Captaine may helpe himſelfe according as occaſion is offred. Now, if that ancient order & diſcipline, of which we haue hitherto diſcourſed, and which may be learned more at large in their excellent writings, were renued & imitated by our armies, as the late vſe and practiſe of Armes exerciſed at this day, is apt and fit for the ſame, being more terrible than that of the Ancients, who had no gun-powder, no doubt but great obedience of ſouldiors towards their Captaines would ariſe of it, whereas now a daies in ſteede of commanding, they haue nothing left but an humble requeſt to be vſed towards their ſouldiours, who neuertheles turne it into contempt and want of courage. But if true obedience were ioined with good order, the

hope of proſperous ſucceſſe in our enterpriſes would be farre greater. Nowe, when our affaires ſucceede happily,How victory is to be vſed. ſo that wee haue our enimies at aduantage, or haue gotten ſome victorie, wee muſt beware leaſt inſolencie blind vs in ſuch ſort, that truſting to our good happe, we goe beyond our bounds, and looſe the occaſion of a certaine and ſure benefite, through hope of ſome greater good as yet vncertaine. Hannibal after the diſcomfiture ofExamples of ſuch as knew not how to vſe victorie wiſely, and to take opportunitie offered. the Romanes at Cannas, ſent men to Carthage to carie newes of his victorie, and withall to demand a newe ſupplie. Whereupon the Senate was long in deliberating what was to be doone. Hannon, a prudent old man was of opinion, that they were to vſe the victorie wiſely, and to make peace with the Romanes, which they might obtain of them with honeſt conditions, and not to expect the hazard of another battell. He ſaid that the Carthaginians ought to bee ſatisfied with this declaration alreadie made to the Romanes, that they were ſuch men as could ſtand againſt them: and therfore ſeeing they had woonne one victorie of them, they ſhould not venture the loſſe of it, in hope of a greater. This prudent counſell was not followed, although afterwarde the Senate did acknowledge it for the beſt, when that occaſion was loſt. Alexander the Great had already conquered all the Eaſt, when the Common-wealth of Tyrus, being great and mightie, bicauſe the Citie was ſituated in the water, (as Venice is) and aſtoniſhed at the greatnes & fame of that Monarches power, ſent their Embaſſadors vnto him to offer what obedience & ſubiection he would require, vpon condition that neither he nor his men would enter into the Citie. Alexander diſdaining that one citie would ſhut their gates againſt him, to whō the whole world was open, ſent them backe again without accepting their offer, & went thither to pitch his Campe againſt it. After he had continued theThe Tyrians beſieged and ſubdued by Alexander. ſiege 4. moneths, he thought with himſelf, that one onely Towne would ſhorten his glorie more than all his other conqueſts had done before: wherupon he purpoſed to try an agreement by offering that vnto them which thēſelues

had required before. But then the Tyrians were waxen ſo luſtie and bold, that they did not only refuſe his proffers, but alſo executed as many as came to conclude with them. Whereupon Alexander being mooued with indignation, cauſed an aſſault to be made with ſuch heate and violence, that he tooke and ſacked the towne, put ſome of the Inhabitants to the edge of the ſwoord, and made the reſidue ſeruants and ſlaues. Agreement and compoſition is alwaies to be preferred before continuance of warre. And howſoeuer a man may ſeeme to be aſſured, and as it were certaine of the victorie, yet ought he to doubt the vncertaintie of humane things. That courageous and valiant Hannibal, being called out of Italy by his Countriemen to ſuccour them againſt the Romaines, by whome they were beſieged, when his armie was yet whole, demanded peace of them before he would enter into battel, bicauſe he ſaw that if he loſt it, he brought his Countrie into bondage. What then ought another to do, that hath leſſe vertue and experience than he? But men fall into the error of vnmeaſurable hope, vpon which ſtaying them ſelues without further conſideration, they are ouerthrowne.It is not good to fight with deſperate men. Sometimes when we contemne our enimie too much, and bring him into a deſperat eſtate, we make him more venturous to vndertake, and violent to execute any dangerous matter. Deſpaire (ſaid Tubero) is the laſt but the ſtrongeſt aſſault, and a moſt inuincible tower. For this cauſe the ancient Romane Captaines were very diligent and carefull to lay all kind of neceſſitie to fight vpon their men, and to take it from their enimies by opening vnto them paſſages to eſcape, which they might haue ſhut vp againſtIohn king of France taken by the Engliſhment. them. K. Iohn, bicauſe he would not make peace with the Engliſh hoſt, which deſired to eſcape onely with life, was taken and caried priſoner into England, and his armie conſiſting of fortie or fiftie thouſand men, was diſcomfited by ten thouſand Engliſhmen, ſome ſay more,Gaſton de Foix. ſome leſſe. Gaston de Foix, hauing woonne the battell at Rauenna, and following after a ſquadron of Spaniards that fled, loſt his life, and made all that a praie vnto the enimie,

which he had conquered before in Italy. Ancient hiſtories are full of ſuch examples, and namely of ſmall armiesSmall armies that ouercame great. that ouercame thoſe that were great and mightie. Darius againſt Alexander, Pompey againſt Caſar, Hannibal againſt Scipio, Marcus Antonius againſt Augustus, Mithridates againſt Sylla, had greater forces without compariſon than their enimies. Therefore good Traian ſaid, that to accept of warre, to gather a great number of men, to put them
                     Victorie commeth only from God. 
                     in order, to giue battell, appertaineth to men, but to giue victorie was the worke of God onely: ſo that great armies preuaile but litle againſt the wrath of the Highest. If then we would knowe a good way how we ſhall neuer be vanquiſhed, we muſt not truſt to our armour or force, but alwaies call vpon God to direct our counſels for the beſt. By this alſo we ſhall beValiant men are full of compaſſion. perſwaded to vſe victorie mildly, ſeeing it is the propertie of valiant men to be gentle and gratious, ready to forgiue, and to haue compaſſion of them that ſuffer and indure affliction. There is no true victorie (as Marcus Aurelius wrote to Popilion Captaine of the Parthians) but thatNo true victorie without clemencie. which carieth with it ſome clemencie: ſo that a rigorous and cruell man may not in reaſon be called victorious. And it is moſt true, that to ouercome is humane, but the action of pardoning is diuine. As touching the ſacking and ouerthrow of townes taken in warre, carefull heede (ſaith Cicero) muſt be taken, that nothing be done raſhly or cruelly. For it is the propertie of a noble hart to puniſhRingleaders of euill are to be puniſhed, and the multitude to be pardoned. ſuch onely as are moſt guiltie, and the authors of euil, and to ſaue the multitude. Briefly, to obſerue in all thinges whatſoeuer is right and honeſt, to be valiant and gentle, to be an enimie to thoſe that doe vniuſtly, fauourable to the afflicted, ſeuere to quarrellers, and full of equitie to ſuppliants, are thoſe praiſe-woorthie qualities for which Alexander, Iulius Caſar, Scipio, Hannibal, Cyrus, and many other both Greeke and Romane Captaines are moſt commended, who ought to be imitated in the arte of warre by all excellent men.
               
            
            
               
               Of a happie Life. Chap. 71.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  WE haue hitherto diſcourſed (my Companions) of vertues & vices, for which the life of man is praiſed or diſpraiſed in all Eſtats and conditions, whereunto the varietie of maners, and inclinations to ſundry ſtudies and works cal men, and make them fit. Wherin we haue chiefly followed the ends and bounds of honeſtie & equitie propounded by Moral Philoſophers, from whence they draw particular duties, and all actions of vertue, vſing a very commendable and excellent order & diſpoſition. Now ſeeing we are come to the end of the cauſe of our aſſemblie, as we began it with the true & Chriſtian knowledge of the creation of man, and of the end of his being, vnknowne to ſo many great perſonages in the world, who are lightenedHumane ſciences are but darkenes in regard of the word of God. only with humane ſciences, which are but darkenes in regard of that heauenly light, the eternal word of God, that guideth the ſoules of the beleeuers; I think that we ought alſo to end and breake vp this our meeting togither with the maner of a happie life and death, according to thoſe endes that are propounded vnto vs by the infallible rule of all vertue and truth, which if they be not ſo ſubtilly ſet downe and diſputed, as the Philoſophy of the Ancients is, yet at the leaſt they are without compariſon better and more certaine. Go to then, let vs heare you diſcourſe firſt of a happie life.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Pſal. 84. 4. 5. 11. Bleſſed are they (ſaith the Prophet) that dwell in the houſe of God, and that euermore praiſe him, hauing his waies in their harts. He will giue them grace and glory, and will with-hold no good thing from them that walke vprightly.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  What happier life can we require, than thatIohn 17. 3. which S. Iohn calleth eternal life: namely, to know one only true God, & Ieſus Chriſt whō he hath ſent? But it belongeth to thee AMANA to feede our ſpirits with this excellent ſubiect.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  Although the ſpirite of God, teaching his iuſt and holy will by a doctrine that is ſimple and void of all vaine ſhew of wordes, hath not alwaies obſerued and

kept ſo ſtrictly ſuch a certaine order and methode, to prepare and to direct their liues that ſhall beleeue in him, as the Philoſophers did, who affected the greateſt ſhew outwardly that they could, thereby to make manifeſt the ſharpnes of their wit, & the greatnes of their humane vnderſtanding, yet may we eaſily gather out of this diuine doctrine, (which doth more deface all glittering ſhew and beauty of humane ſciences, than the Sun excelleth darkenes) a moſt excellent order, teaching vs to frame a happie life according to the mould & paterne of true & heauenly vertue. This order conſiſteth of two parts, the one imprinting in our harts the loue of iuſtice, the other giuing vnto vs a certaine rule, that will not ſuffer vs to wander hither & thither, nor to ſlip aſide in the framing of our life. ConcerningOf the loue of righteouſnes. the firſt point, the Scripture is full of very good reaſons to encline our harts to loue that Good, which in deed is to be deſired, I meane perfect righteouſnes. With what foundation could it begin better, than by admoniſhing vs to be ſanctified, bicauſe our God is holy? WhereuntoLeuit. 19. 2. the reaſon is added, that although we were gone aſtray as ſheepe
                     1. Pet. 1. 15. 16. 
                     ſcattered & diſperſed in the Labyrinth of this world, yet he hath gathered vs togither, to ioine vs to himſelfe. When we heare mention made of the coniunction of god with vs, we muſt remember, that the bond thereof is holines, and that weHolines is the end of our calling. muſt direct our ſteps thither, as to the end of our calling, that we may be transformed into the true image of God, which through ſinne was defaced in the firſt man, & conſequently in vs. Moreouer, to mooue vs the more to embrace that only & true God, the ſpirit of God teacheth vs, that as he hath reconciled vs vnto himſelfe in his ſon Ieſus Chriſt, ſo he hath appointed him to be vnto vs an exampleChriſt is a paterne of righteouſnes vnto vs. and paterne, vnto which wee muſt conforme our ſelues. This heauenly worde alſo taketh occaſion to exhort vs thereunto in infinite places, drawing his reaſons from all the benefits of God, and from all the parts of our ſaluation. As when it is ſaide: That ſeeing God hath
                     Malach. 1. 6. 
                     giuen himſelfe to be our Father, wee are to be accuſed of notable ingratitude, if wee behaue not our ſelues as his children.
                     
                     Eph. 5. 26. 30. Seeing Ieſus Chriſt hath clenſed vs by the waſhing of his blood, and hath communicated this purification vnto vs by baptiſme, there is no reaſon why we ſhould defile our ſelues with new filthines. Seeing he hath ioined & ingrafted vs into his body, we muſt carefully looke, that we defileCol. 3. 1. 2. not our ſelues in any ſort, being members of his body. Seeing he that is our Head is gone vp to heauen, we muſt lay aſide all earthly affections, and aſpire with all our hart to that heauenly
                     1. Cor. 6. 19. 
                     life. Seeing the holy Ghoſt hath conſecrated vs to be the temples of
                     1. Theſ. 5 9. 
                     God, we muſt labour and ſtriue that the glorie of God may be exalted in vs, and beware that we receiue no pollution. Seeing our ſoules and bodies are fore appointed to enioye that immortalitie of the kingdome of heauen, and the incorruptible Crowne of God his glorie, we muſt endeuour to keepe both the one and the other pure and vnſpotted, vntill the day of the Lord. Behold ſurely good grounds, meete to frame and inſtitute a happie life by, and to mooue a Chriſtian to bring foorth the effectes of ſuch an excellent and woorthie title throught the loue ofWe muſt alwaies ſtriue to come to perfection. righteouſnes, hauing this marke alwaies before his eies to direct all his actions thereunto: namely, to aſpire to that perfection which God commandeth. From which although the affections of our fleſh ſeeke to ſeparate vs, and the difficulties are great, ſo that it is impoſſible for vs to attaine perfectly thereunto in this mortall priſon, yet let vs not leaue of to followe that waye which we haue once begunne, looking to our marke in puritie, vprightnes, and ſimplicitie, and ſtriuing to come to our ende, vntill wee perfectly ſee that ſoueraigne goodnes, when hauing put off the infirmitie of our fleſhe, and being made partakers of that goodnes in full meaſure, we ſhall be receiued of God into his heauenlie kingdome. Let vs nowe come to the ſeconde point. Although the lawe of God compriſed in ten Commandements, and thoſe ten alſo contained onely in two, hath a moſt excellent methode and well ordered diſpoſition, whereby to direct our life, & to make it happy, yet it hath pleaſed our good Maiſter, his eternall ſonne, to frame them that are his by an exquiſite doctrine, according to that rule which he had giuen vnto

them in his lawe. The beginning of that way which he taketh, is after this ſort: namely, to teach them that it is theWhat the dutie of euery faithful man is. Rom. 12. 1. 2. dutie of euery faithful man, to offer his body a liuely, holy, and acceptable ſacrifice to God, wherin conſiſteth the chiefeſt point of that ſeruice which we owe vnto him. Thē he goeth on to exhort vs, that we would not faſhion our ſelues to this world, but be changed by the renewing of our mind, that we may prooue what is the good will of God. That is no ſmall reaſon to ſay that we muſt conſecrateWhat it is to conſecrate our ſelues to God. and dedicate our ſelues to God, that from hence forward we ſhould neither thinke, ſpeake, meditate, or doe any thing but to his glorie. For it is not lawefull to applye any thing that is conſecrated to a prophane vſe. Nowe, if we be not our owne, but belong to the Lorde, we may thereby ſee both how to auoid errour, and whither wee muſt direct all the parts of our life: namely, to the rule of his holie and iuſt will. Let vs not propound to our ſelues this ende, to ſeeke after that which is expedient for vs according to the fleſh. Let vs forget our ſelues as much as may be, and all things that are about vs. We are the Lordes, let vs liue and die to him: and let his will and wiſedome gouerne all our actions. Let all the parts of our life be referred to him as to their onely ende: and let all our humane reaſon yeeld and retire, that the holie Ghoſt may haue place in vs, and that our reaſon may be ſubiect to his direction, to the ende we may no more liue of our ſelues, but hauing Ieſus Chriſt to liue and raigne within vs. I liue (ſaith Saint Paule) yet not I nowe, but Christ
                     Gal. 2. 20. 
                     liueth in me. Truly he that hath Ieſus Chriſt liuing in him, and that liueth in Ieſus Chriſt, liueth no more in himſelfe, and careth leaſt for him-ſelfe. For if all true loue hath ſuch force within the hart where it is placed, that it careth not for itſelfe, but delighteth in, and is altogither partaker of the thinge that it loueth: howe much ſtronger ſhall the heauenlie loue be to with-drawe all our affections from the earth vnto the things of the ſpirite?True loue of God breedeth in vs a diſlike of ourſelues. O good Ieſus, O loue of my ſoule (ſaith S. Augustine) as often as loue beginneth in mee, it endeth with hatred in

thee: but when it beginneth in thee, I come to the hatred of my ſelfe: ſo that the ſcope of thy loue is nothing elſe but diſlike of our ſelues. Therefore our Sauiour ſaidMatth. 16. 24. to his Diſciples, that if any man would followe him, he ſhould forſake himſelfe. Moreouer, after the hart of manFruits of the deniall of our ſelues. is once poſſeſſed with this deniall of himſelfe, firſt, all pride, haſtines, and oſtentation, are baniſhed out of the ſoule: next, couetouſnes, intemperance, ſuperfluitie, deſire of honour, and of all delights, with the reſt of thoſe vices that are engendred through the loue of our ſelues. Contrariwiſe, where the deniall of our ſelues raigneth not, there is man giuen ouer to all kind of villanie, without ſhame or bluſhing: or if any ſhewe of vertue appeereSelfe loue is the cauſe of the moſt of our imperfections. in his actions, it is corrupted before God through a wicked deſire of glorie. Moſt of our imperfections proceede from the loue of our ſelues, which hindreth vs from diſcharging our duty towards God and towards our neighbors,The definition of charitie. according to charity. Charitie is nothing elſe but to loue God for himſelf, & our neighbour for his ſake: I ſay, to loue God, bicauſe he is the ſoueraigne good, & bicauſe the greatnes of his goodnes deſerueth it: to loue our neighbours, bicauſe the image of God ſhineth in them, whome he hath ſubſtituted in his place, that we ſhould acknowledge towardes them the benefits which he hath beſtowed vpon vs. And who is able to performe thoſe duties that S. Paule requireth in charitie, vnleſſe he hath renounced himſelfe, that he may ſeeke nothing but the profite1. Cor. 13. 4. of his neighbour? Loue (ſaith hee) ſuffereth long: it is bountifull, it enuieth not: it doth not boaſt it ſelfe: it is not puffed vp: it diſdaineth not: it ſeeketh not hir owne things: it is not prouoked to anger, and ſo forth. If that onely ſaying were there, that we muſt not ſeeke our owne profite, it ſhould be of no ſmall force with our nature, which draweth vs ſo much to the loue of our ſelues, that we forget what wee owe to our neighbours. But if we would faithfully diſcharge this dutie, let vs whileſt we do good, and exerciſe the offices of humanitie, remember this rule: That we are Stewards of all that God hath giuen vnto vs, wherby we may help our neighbour,

and that one day wee ſhall giue account howe wee haue executed our charge limited vnto vs in the practiſe of charitie, by a true and ſound affection of friendſhip. Which thing wil haue place amongſt vs, when we take vponThe effect of true charitie towards our neighbour. vs their perſons that ſtand in neede of ſuccour, when we pitie their miſerie, as if we felt and ſuſtained it, & when we are touched with the ſame affection of mercie to help them, that is in vs to helpe our ſelues. As for that which onely concerneth our dutie towards God, the deniall of our ſelues will make vs patient and meeke. And when our affections pricke vs forward to ſeeke how we may liue in reſt and eaſe, the Scripture alwaies bringeth vs backe to this, that reſigning our ſelues and all that we haue, into the hands of god, we ſhould ſubmit the deſires of our hart to him, that he may tame them, and bring them vnder his yoke. We are led with a furious kind of intemperance, &The naturall inclination of men with an vnbrideled luſt, in deſiring credite and honour, in ſeeking after power and might, in heaping vp of riches, and in gathering togither whatſoeuer we iudge meete for pompe and magnificence. On the other ſide, we maruellouſly feare and hate pouertie, baſenes, and ignominie, & flie from them as much as we can. Heereupon we ſee in what diſquietnes of minde all they are that order their liues after their owne counſel, how many waies they aſſay to attaine to that, vnto which their ambition & couetouſnes carieth them. But they that ſubmit themſelues wholy vnder the yoke of Gods wil, neuer entangle themſelues in theſe ſnares. For firſt, they neither deſire, hope, or imagine of any other meanes to proſper by, than the bleſſing of God: and therefore they ſtay and reſt themſelues aſſuredly therupon, as vpon that which is able to giue thē a good iſſue in all things, and true felicitie, which cannot in any wiſe be in the dooings of wicked men, what falſe proſperitie ſoeuer appeereth in the eies of fleſh. Heereof it commeth, that they aſpire not through iniuſtice or other ſiniſter meanes to any worldly goods, but contemne them, ſeeking after the onely true goods which turne them not aſide from innocencie. For they are aſſuredly perſwaded

that the bleſſing of God is not extended vpon the woorkers of iniquitie, but onely vpon ſuch as are vpright in their thoughts and works. Moreouer, it ſerueth for a bridle to reſtrain them, that they burne not with a diſordred deſire of worldly goods, bicauſe they holde this for certaine, that the bleſſing of God cannot helpe them to obtaine that which is cleane contrary to his word, whereby we are commanded to withdraw our whole hart from this world, that we may lift it vp in the meditation of eternall happines. The Lord (ſaith Iuſtine Martyr) will not honourCorruptible things are no ſufficient recompence for vertuous men. his children with worldly happines, for a reward of their pietie. For thoſe things that are ſubiect to corruption can not be a recompence to good men for their vertue: bicauſe they are circumſcribed and limited by the change of the mortall eſtate of vertuous men, who are depriued altogither of them at the time of their death. And as good men are not ſaid or accounted to be of the world, ſo their glorie, riches, and wealth, are not in the earth. So that in what eſtate ſoeuer a Chriſtian man is, he feeleth him ſelfe alwaies mooued to giue glorie to God, & iudgeth that all things are appointed by him in ſuch ſort, as is moſt expedientRom. 8. 28. for his ſaluation. If aduerſitie preſſe him, & the miſeries of mans life ſeeke to make him diſtruſt the grace and fauour of God, or to murmure againſt him through impatiencie, he ſtriueth ſo much the more on the other ſide to conſider of his heauenly iuſtice and goodnes, in that he chaſticeth him iuſtly, and for his benefite: and arming him-ſelfe with patience, he expecteth with a quiet and thankefull mind the iſſue of God his ordinance, wherevnto he wholy ſubmitteth himſelfe. Beſides, he conſidereth howe God calleth all his to beare their croſſe, andMatth. 16. 24. 25. teacheth them to prepare them-ſelues to ſuſtaine a hard and laborious life, full of trauell and of infinite kindes of euils, vnto which Ieſus Chriſt their Head was firſt made ſubiect. Where this conſolation followeth preſently vponRom. 8. 17. it, that ſuch a life is a preparation to follow him into his eternall glorie. Yea the more we are afflicted and indure miſeries, the more is our ſocietie with Chriſt Ieſus

certainly confirmed vnto vs. Now the chiefe rule propoū
                     ded vnto vs by the ſpirite of God concerning this matter is, that with what kinde of tribulation ſoeuer we are afflicted, we ſhould looke to this ende, to acquaint our ſelues with the contempt of this preſent life, that we may thereby be brought on to meditate vpon the life to come. But bicauſe this diuine wiſdome knoweth full well that we are enclined and led with a blind & euen brutiſh loue of this world, it vſeth a very apt reaſon to draw vs backe and to awaken our ſluggiſhnes, that our harte ſhoulde not bee too much ſetled vpon ſuch a fooliſh loue. There is none of vs that will not ſeeme to aſpire throughout the whole courſe of his life to a heauenly immortalitie, yea to ſtriue for the obtaining of it. For we are aſhamed not to excell the brute beaſtes in ſome thing, whoſe condition would ſeeme to be more happy than ours, if we had no hope of eternitie after death. Neuertheleſſe, if a man examine the counſels, deliberations, enterpriſes and workes of euery one, he ſhall find nothing but earth in them, being ſuch as tend altogither to the commoditie of this life. Now this blockiſhnes proceedeth from hence, that our vnderſtanding is as it were dimmed with that vain brightnes which riches, honors and powers haue in outward ſhew, wherby it is hindred from looking farther. In like maner our hart being preſſed with the affections of the fleſh, which propound vnto it couetouſnes, ambition, and all other carnal deſires, our ſoule is at length perſwaded to ſeek for hir felicitie vpon earth. The Lord therefore to meete with thisHow God teacheth vs to know the vanitie of this life. miſchief teacheth his ſeruants to know the vanitie of this preſent life, by exerciſing them daily with diuers miſeries. He ſendeth thē no proſperitie, which is not mingled with greater aduerſitie, that by learning to condemne altogither this earthly life, they may frame their harts to deſire and to meditate vpon the life to come. Wherefore when they trie by afflictions, that this preſent life, conſidered in it ſelfe, is full of diſquietnes, of troubles, altogither miſerable, and in no reſpect happy, that all the wealth thereof had in ſo great eſtimation, is tranſitorie and vncertaine,

vaine and mingled with infinite miſeries, they conclude therupon that nothing is to be ſought or hoped for in this world but calamitie, and that the crowne of glory & trueWe muſt not hate the bleſſings of this life. felicitie is to be looked for elſe-where, namely, in heauen. Notwithſtanding as long as they enioy this life, he would not haue them ſo to contemn it, as to grow into a hatred therof, or to be vnthankful to God for the benefits which they daily receiue therin of his maieſtie, but rather to account it a ſpeciall gift of his heauenly clemencie, in that through the midſt of thoſe tribulatiōs which they endure, he maketh a way and entrance for them vnto eternal life. For which, & for thoſe infinit bleſſings which they receiue alſo in this life of his goodnes, they acknowlege that they are bound to yeeld vnto him immortal thanks, labouring only to vnfold themſelues out of this ouer-great deſire of mā, caried away with the diſordinate loue of this life, that they may tranſferre their chief affection to the celeſtial &Pſal. 44. 22. heauenly life. And ſeeing it is ſo, that al the faithful, as long as they remain vpon earth, are as ſheepe appointed to the ſlaughter, to the end they might be made conformable to their head Chriſt Ieſus, ſurely they ſhould bee accounted paſſing wretched, if they did not lift their mindes on high to ſurmount all that is in the world, and to go beyond the regard and care of things preſent. On the contrary ſide, if they haue once lift vp their thoughts aboue the earth, whē they ſhall ſee the vniuſt proſper in the world, when themſeluesThe comfort of the godly in the midſt of troubles. ſhalbe vngently handled by thē, when they ſhal endure reproch, when they ſhalbe polled or afflicted with any kind of iniurie, their comfort in al theſe euils will be toMath. 25. 34. haue the laſt day before their eies, in which they know that the lord wil gather his faithful ones togither into the reſtIſai. 25. 8. of his kingdom, that he wil wipe away the teares frō theirApoc. 7. 17. eies, crown thē with glory, clothe thē with gladnes, ſatiſfie them with the exceeding ſweetnes of his delicacies, exalt them vnto his high manſion, in a word, make them partakers of his happines. In the meane time going on in their courſe with all tranquillitie & ioy of ſpirit, they are cheerfully to giue vnto God that homage & worſhip that is due

vnto him, ſubmitting themſelues wholy to his greatneſſe, & receiuing with all reuerence his cōmandements. Next,The ſumme of our dutie towards God. they muſt put that truſt & hartie aſſurance in him, which they haue receiued by knowing him aright, attributing to him all wiſdom, iuſtice, goodnes, vertue & truth, & making this account, that all their happines is in communicating with him. Inuocation foloweth, wherby their ſoules muſt haue recourſe vnto him as to their only hope, whē they are preſſed with any neceſſity. In the laſt place is thankſgiuing which is that acknowledgement, wherby all prayſe is giuē vnto him. Vnder theſe 4. points of worſhip, truſt, prayer, and thankſgiuing, all thoſe innumerable duties which we owe to God, may well be comprehended. Moreouer, the contempt of this preſent life, and the meditation of that which is immortal & heauenly, will teach vs the right vſe of earthly goods created of God for the ſeruice of man, as neceſſary helpes for this life. Which things we muſt notThe true vſe of temporal things neglect in ſuch ſort, that we neuer vſe them but vpon conſtraint & neceſſity, taking no delight in them as if we were ſenceleſſe blocks. Much leſſe may we abuſe them by ouergreat luſt in ſuperfluity & delights, but apply them to that end for which God hath created & appointed thē for our good, & not for our hurt, namely, that they ſhould ſuſtain, nouriſh, preſerue & delight our nature, vſing thē in al temperance & mediocritie with thankſgiuing. So that we are to vſe theſe goods as though we vſed them not, that is to ſay, our chief affection and deſire muſt be ſo ſmally ſet vpō them as if we were wholy depriued of them: and we muſt be diſpoſed and affected as well to ſuſtaine pouertie patiently & with a quiet mind, as to vſe abundance moderately. Eſpecially let vs referre the true and holy vſe of all our earthly commodities to the works of charitie, as we haue already touched: knowing that all things are ſo giuē vnto vs by the goodnes of God, & appointed for our commoditie, as things cōmitted to our truſt, of which we muſt one day giue account before his maieſtie. For the concluſion therfore of our ſpeech, we learn that thelife of a Chriſtian is a perpetuall ſtudie and exerciſe of the mortification

of the fleſh, vntil it be ſo throughly dead, that the ſpirit of God may raigne fully in his ſoule. We learn alſo, that our whole life ought to be a meditation and exerciſe of godlines, bicauſe we are called to ſanctification: that true happinesWherein a happy life conſiſteth. of life in this world conſiſteth therein, namely, when being regenerated by baptiſme and the ſpirit of God, we haue the loue of righteouſnes throughly imprinted in our harts, and follow the diuine rule thereof by framing and directing all our actions to the glory of our God and profit of our neighbors. Wherfore euery one of vs muſt take his vocation and calling for a principle and ground, & for a ſtation aſſigned of God, vnto which we muſt direct our leuell, withdrawing our mindes from the yoke and bondage of thoſe naturall perturbations that are in vs. Wee muſt not be led with ambition and deſire to take hold of many ſundry matters at once, being aſſured, that euery worke done according to our calling, how contemptible ſoeuer it be among men, ſhineth before God and ſhall be rewarded by him, beyng accounted very precious in his ſight.
               
            
            
               Of Death. Chap. 72.
               
               
                  AMANA.
                  NO man ought to be ignorant of this, that after God had created man in the beginning, he placed him in a garden and paradiſe ful of al pleaſures and delights, and gaue him leaue to vſe all things contained therin, the fruit of the knowledge of good and euill onely excepted, which was expreſly forbidden. Neuertheleſſe, being vnable to keepe himſelfe in that high degree and great dignitie, he fell by diſobedience: ſo that thinking to make choice of life, he choſe theGen. 2. 17. fruit of death, as God had foretold him, ſaying, Whenſoeuer thou eatest of this fruit of the knowledge of good and euil, thou ſhalt die the death: which thing fell vpon him, and vpon all hisRom. 6. 23. poſteritie. Whereby we ſee, that the reward and recompence of ſinne, is death, not onely bodily death, but which is more, ſpirituall, whereby we are baniſhed and ſhut out

of the heauenly kingdome and inheritance, if we apprehend not that great grace and mercy of the father offered to all that draw neere vnto him by true confidence in Ieſus Chriſt: to the ende (as the Apoſtle ſaith) that as ſinneRom. 5. 21. raigned vnto death, ſo grace might raign by righteouſnes vnto eternall life through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. And this is the onely way wherby to paſſe from death to life, when we ſhall be ſubiect to no condemnation or afflictiō. Moreouer, neither ſworde, famine, nor any other miſerie can hurt vs, no not temporal death, which (according to māsTemporal death is the way that leadeth the godly from bondage to bleſſedneſſe. iudgement) is the extreameſt of all miſeries, ſhall in any ſort confound vs, but rather be a meane and pleaſant way for vs to paſſe by from priſon and bondage to ioyfull liberty, and from miſerie to happineſſe. Therfore (my companions) as death is the end of all men, happy to the elect and vnhappy to the reprobate, ſo let vs finiſh our diſcourſes with the handling thereof.
               
               
                  ARAM.
                  Nothing but death and the end of this bodily life is able to accompliſh the wiſh and deſire of a faithful chriſtian. For the ſpirit being then deliuered, as it were out of a noiſome and filthie priſon reioyceth with freedom and libertie in thoſe pleaſant places, which it ſeeketh after and deſireth ſo earneſtly.
               
               
                  ACHITOB.
                  
                     Heb. 9. 27. Ecclus 7. 36. 
                     It is decreed that all men must once die. And therfeore (as the Wiſeman ſaith) whatſoeuer thou takest in hand, remember the end, and thou ſhalt neuer do amiſſe. Now ASER, as thou beganſt to lay the foundation of our Academie, ſo make thou an end of it with the treatiſe of Death that endeth all things.
               
               
                  ASER.
                  It is no maruell if natural ſenſe be mooued & aſtoniſhed, when we heare that our body muſt be ſeparated from the ſoule. But it is in no wiſe tollerable, that a Chriſtian hart ſhould not haue ſo much light as to ſurmount & ſuppreſſe this feare whatſoeuer it be, by a greater comfort and conſolation. For if we conſider that this tabernacle of our body which is weake, vicious, corruptible,The comſort of euery true chriſtian againſt death. caſuall, and inclining to putrefaction, is diſſolued and as it were pulled downe by death, that it may afterward

be reſtored to a perfect, firme, incorruptible and heauenly glory, ſhal not this certain aſſurance compel vs to deſire earneſtly that which nature flieth and abhorreth? If we conſider that by death we are called home from a miſerable exile, to dwel in our countrey, yea in our celeſtial coū
                     trey, ſhall we not conceiue ſingular conſolation thereby? But ſome man may ſay that al things deſire to continue in their being. For the ſame cauſe I ſay, we ought to aſpire to the immortalitie to come, where we haue a ſetled eſtate, which is not ſeene at all vpon earth. How commeth it toRom. 8. 22. paſſe, that the bruite beaſts and ſenceleſſe creatures, euen wood and ſtones, hauing as it were ſome feeling of their vanitie & corruption, are in expectation of the iudgement day that they may be deliuered from their corruption, and yet we that haue ſome light of nature, & boaſt that we are illuminated by the ſpirit of God, lift not vp our eies aboue this earthly putrefaction, when we talk of our beeing? But what ſhal we ſay of thoſe men (whoſe number alas is very great) who quenching all natural light, & oppoſing themſelues directly againſt the teſtimonies of truth, which preſſe their conſciences & ſound daily in their eares, dare yet doubt of, yea impudently deny this day of iudgement, and the change of this mortall life into a ſecond, which is immortal? If the word of god ſo expreſly ſet down for our aſſurance be of ſo litle credit, that it wil not ſatiſſie them, yet how is it that they are not conuinced by the writingsAgainſt Atheiſts and Epicures that deny the immortalitie of the ſoule. of ſo many Ethnike and heathen Philoſophers, who make the immortalitie of the ſoule out of doubt, & by the conſideration of the being of this life conclude a iudgemēt to come, which bringeth perpetuall happines and felicitie to the ſoules of the bleſſed, & euerlaſting miſerie & paine to them that are vnhappy? Plato vnder the name of Socrates may ſerue for a fit teacher for ſuch Epicures and Atheiſts that wil not heare the heauenly word of the almighty. Frō whence commeth it (ſaith he) that we ſee ſo many wicked mē paſſe the courſe of their days in worldly happines and fclicitie, and die in great rest & quietnes, whereas on the other ſide ſo many good men liue & die in great afflictions, & most hard calamities? The reaſon
                     
                     is, bicauſe God doth not puniſh and chastiſe all the wicked vpon thePlato prooueth that there is a iudgement to come, and a ſecond life. earth, to the end men may know, that there is a iudgement to come wherin the vngodlines of ſuch men ſhal be corrected. Neither doth he recompence all good men with bleſſings in this world, to the ende they may hope that there is a place in the other life where the vertuous ſhalbe rewarded. Likewiſe he doth not puniſh all the wicked, nor reward al good men here beneath, least men ſhould thinke that the vertuous folowed vertue in hope of a carnal & earthly reward, or eſchewed vice for feare of puniſhmēts & torments in this world. For ſo vertue ſhould be no more vertue, ſeing there is no action that may cary the ſurname of vertuous, if the intent of him that doth it, be in hope of ſome earthly & carnal recompence, & not for the loue of vertue it ſelf, & that he may be accepted of God, and ſo conceiue hope of eternal rewards in the other life. Alſo he puniſheth and correcteth ſome wicked men vpon earth, & rewardeth ſome good men, least if good men only were afflicted, & the wicked ſuffred in quiet, men might be brought to beleeue that there were no prouidence, & that the diuine nature had no care of vs, & ſo all men would giue ouer themſelues to folow iniustice. By the ſequele of this ſpeech Plato inferreth & proueth, that there is one God that hath care ouer his cretures, & that naturally euery ſpirit loueth him better that ſtriueth to reſemble him in manners & faſhiōs of liuing, that reuerēceth & honoreth him, thā thoſe that feare him not, but deſpiſe him whoſe conditions are altogither vnlike his. Moreouer, he prooueth euidētly, that good
                     How good men are diſcerned from the wicked 
                     men in feare & reuerence of the Deitie, ſtriue to imitate it by good works done to the benefit and ſafetie of others: and contrarywiſe, that the wicked deſpiſe God and all lawes both diuine and humane: whereupon it followeth that God loueth good men, and hateth the wicked. And bicauſe we ſee that good mē are ſubiect to calamity &
                     The afflictions of the godly in this world, prooue a ſecond life. 
                     ignominy in this world, we muſt therfore vndoubtedly confeſſe, that there is another life after this, wherein good men are eternally rewarded, & the wicked puniſhed. Otherwiſe it would folow, that God cared more for the wicked than for the good, which were too abſurd to graunt. From hence that diuine Philoſopher draweth this concluſion, that the life of a wiſe man ought to be a perpetual meditation of death, and that the very feare to die, & not any deſire to liue, is that which maketh death fearefull to them that know not the

immortalitie of the ſoule. Now then ought not theſe men to bluſh for ſhame, that dare doubt of the ſecond life and future iudgement, when they heare this diſcourſe of an Ethnike and Pagan, deſtitute of that true light of God, and ſincere religion which is manifeſted to vs in Ieſus Chriſt? Truly nothing is more cleere in all the holy ſcripture, than that as before the firſt day mētioned in Geneſis, all things were poſſeſſed of Eternitie, ſo that there was neither time, nor yeere, nor moneth, nor ſeaſon, but all things were in that Eternitie, ſo when the laſt day ſhal come, all ſhall be eternall for the felicitie of the good, & torment of the wicked. But to returne to our ſpeech of death, the worde ofThree kinds of death. God giueth vs to vnderſtand of three kinds of death: the one is the ſeparation of the ſoule from the body, with the diſſolution of the body vntill the reſurrection, and of this is our preſent diſcourſe. The ſecond is the death of ſinne, as it is ſaid oftentimes, that they are dead that nouriſh themſelues in ſinne. The third is called in the Apocalyps,Apoc. 20. 6. the ſecond death, and ſometimes eternal death, vnto which the wicked ſhalbe condemned in the laſt iudgemēt. Therfore to cōtinue our ſpeech of corporal & temporal death, if the doctrine of the ſonne of God be neuer ſo little apprehendedWhy the faithfull ought to deſire death. of vs by faith, we ſhall ſee cleerely enough that the faithful ought to haue that in great requeſt, which to humane ſenſe ſeemeth neither happie, nor to be deſired, ſeeing it turneth to their ſaluation. It belongeth to him that will not goe vnto Ieſus Chriſt to feare death: and to be vnwilling to goe to Chriſt, is a badge of ſuch a one as wil not raign with him. What traueller hauing paſſed many dangerous wayes, reioyceth not when he draweth neer to his countrey? And who is not content to depart out of an olde ruinous houſe? What pleaſure haue wee in this world, which draweth neere to an end euery day, & which ſelleth vnto vs ſo deere thoſe pleaſures that wee receiueWhat the life of man is. therein? What other thing is this life but a perpetual battell and a ſharpe skirmiſh, wherein we are one while hurt with enuie, another while with ambition, and by and by with ſome other vice, beſides the ſuddaine onſets giuen

vpon our bodies by a thouſand ſorts of diſeaſes, and fluds of aduerſities vpō our ſpirits? Who than will not ſay withPhil. 1. 23. S. Paul, I deſire to be diſſolued and to be with Christ? Why do we daily pray that the kingdom of God ſhould come, if it be not for the deſire which we ought to haue to ſee the fulfilling therof in the other life? We haue a thouſand teſtimonies in the ſcripture, that the death of the body is a certaine way by which we paſſe into that true and eternal life, and into our owne countrey. Fleſh and bloud (ſaith Saint1. Cor. 15. 50. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 
                     Paul) cannot inherite the kingdom of God, neither doth corruption inherite incorruption. For this corruptible must put on incorruptiō, and this mortali must put on immortalitie: then ſhall bee fulfilled that which is written, Death is ſwallowed vp in victory. They that beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt haue already ouercome death, ſin, and hell. And therefore contemning death they may ſay, O death where is thy ſting? O graue where is thy victory? The ſting of death is ſinne, and the ſtrength of ſinne is the law: but thanks be vnto God which hath giuen vs victory through our Lord Ieſus Christ. He which hath raiſed vp the Lord Ieſus, ſhall raiſe vs vp
                     2. Cor. 4. 14. 
                     alſo. Our conuerſation is in heauen, from whence alſo we looke for
                     Phil. 3. 20. 21. 
                     the ſauiour, euen the Lord Ieſus Christ, who ſhall change our vile body that it may be faſhioned like vnto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able euen to ſubdue all things-vnto himſelfe. Ye are dead (ſaith he to the Coloſſians) and your life
                     Col. 3. 3. 4. 
                     is hid with Ieſus Christ in God. When Christ which is our life ſhall appeere, then ſhall ye alſo appeere with him in glory. My brethren (ſaith he to the Theſſalonians) I would not haue you ignorant
                     1. Theſ. 4. 13. 14. 
                     concerning them which are a ſleepe, that ye ſorow not euen as other which haue no hope. For if we beleeue that Ieſus is dead, and is riſen, euen ſo them which ſleepe in Ieſus will God bring with him. Ieſus
                     Heb. 2 14. 15. 
                     Christ (ſaith he to the Hebrewes) was partaker of fleſh and bloud: that is to ſay, was truly man, that he might destroy through death, him that had the power of death, that is, the deuill. And that he might deliuer all them, who for feare of death were all their life time ſubiect to bondage. God hath ſaued vs, and called vs with an holy calling (as he ſaith to Timothie) not according to our works,
                     2. Tim. 1. 9. 10. 
                     but according to his owne purpoſe and grace, which was giuen to vs through Christ Ieſus before the world was, but is now made manifest

                        by the appeering of our Sauiour Ieſus Christ, who hath aboliſhed
                        Iob 19. 25. 26. 27. 
                        death, & hath brought life & immortalitie vnto light through the Goſpel. I am ſure (ſaith Iob) that my redeemer liueth, and he ſhall ſtand the last on the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet ſhall I ſee God in my fleſh. Whom I my ſelfe ſhall ſee and mine eyes ſhall behold, and none other for me. Ieſus Christ is our head, and we are his members. This head cannot be without his members, neither can forſake them. Where
                        Iohn 12. & 17. 
                        Christ is there ſhall we be alſo. He that conſidereth diligently theſe places of Scripture, and infinite others contained therein, it cannot be but he ſhould haue great ioy and comfort in his hart againſt all feare and horror of death. And then comming to compare the miſeries which neuer leaue this life, with that vnſpeakable happines and felicitie,
                     1. Cor. 2. 9. 
                     which eye hath not ſeene, neyther eare hath heard, neyther came into mans hart, which God hath prepared in the ſecond and eternall life for all faithfull beleeuers; a chriſtian will not onely paſſe ouer this mortall life with eaſe and without trouble,Who they be that feare not death. but will euen contemne and make no account of it, in reſpect of that which is immortall. But to whome is death ſweete if not to them that labour? The poore hireling is well at eaſe when hee hath done his dayes woorke. So death is alwayes ſweete to the afflicted, but to them that put their truſt in wordly things, the remembrance thereof is bitter. Now then the children of God are not afrayd of death, but (as Cyprian writeth in an Epiſtle ſent to the Martyrs of Chriſt) hee that hath once ouercome death in his owne perſon, doth daily ouercome him in his members: ſo that we haue Ieſus Chriſt not onely a beholder of our combates, but alſo an aſſiſtant and fighter with vs. And by his grace abounding in the harts of the faithfull, they are ſo much the more bent to meditate vpon the benefites of the future and eternall life, as they ſee that they are inuironed with greater ſtore of miſeries in this fading and tranſitorie life. Then comparing both togither they find nothing more eaſie than to finiſh ſweetly their race, and to value the one as litle, as they account the other abſolute in all felicitie. Moreouer, ſeeing heauen

is our countrey, what is the earth elſe but a paſſage in a ſtrange land? And bicauſe it is accurſed vnto vs for ſinne, it is nothing elſe but the place of our baniſhment. If our departure out of this world be an entrance to life, what isA compariſon betweene this life and that which is eternall. this world but a ſepulcher? And to dwell heere what is it elſe but to be plunged in death? If it be libertie to be deliuered out of this bodie, what is this bodie but a priſon? And if it be our chiefe happines to enioie the preſence of our God, is it not a miſerie not to enioie it? Now vntill we go out of this world, we ſhal be as it were ſeparated from God. Wherefore if this earthlie life be compared with the heauenlie, no doubt but it may be contemned, and accounted as it were doung. True it is that we muſt not hate it, but ſo far foorth as it keepeth vs in ſubiection to ſinne. And yet whileſt we deſire to ſee the ende of it, we muſt not be careleſſe to keepe our ſelues in it, to the good pleaſure of God, that our longing may be far from all murmuring and impatiencie. For our life is as a ſtation, wherein the Lord God hath placed vs, that we ſhould abide in it vntill he call vs backe againe. Saint Paul indeed bewailed his eſtate, bicauſe he was kept as it were boundPhil. 1. 23. in the priſon of his body longer than he would, & groned with a burning deſire vntill he was deliuered: but withall to ſhew his obedience to the wil of God, he proteſted that he was ready for both, bicauſe he knew himſelfe indebted for the glorifieng of his name, whether it were by death or by life. For it belongeth to him to determine what is expedient for his glorie. Wherefore if it behooueth vs to liue and die vnto him, let vs leaue both our life & death to his good pleaſure, but yet ſo that we alwaies deſire rather to die than to liue, & be ready cheerfully to renounce this life, whenſoeuer it pleaſeth the Lord, bicauſe it holdeth vs vnder ſin. And let vs hold this Maxime, that no man hath throughly profited in the ſchool of Chriſt Ieſus, but he that with ioy & gladnes expecteth the day of death, and of the laſt reſurrection. S. Paul in his epiſtle to Titus deſcribeth alTitus. 2. 13. the faithful by this mark: & the ſcripture when it propoū
                     deth vnto vs matter of reioicing calleth vs backe thither.

                     Luke 21. 28. 
                     Reioice (ſaith the Lord in Luke) and lift vp your heads, for your redemption draweth neere. It were abſurd that that thing ſhould breed nothing but ſorow and aſtoniſhment in vs, which Chriſt thought was fit matter to worke ioy in vs. Now than ſeeing death is dead to them that beleeue in him, there is nothing in death which a mā ought to feare. It is true that the image thereof is hideous and terrible, bicauſe that beſides the violent taking away of life, it repreſenteth vnto vs the wrath of God, which biteth like a ſerpent: but now the venome of it is taken away and can not hurt vs. And as through the braſen ſerpent which Moſes lift vp in the wilderneſſe, the liuing ſerpents died,How death can not hurt. and their venome hurt not the Iſraelites: ſo our death dieth, and is not able in any ſort to hurt vs, if we behold with the eyes of faith the death of Ieſus Chriſt. Briefly it is nothing but an image and ſhadow of death, and the beginning and entrance vnto true life. Wherefore concluding our preſent ſpeech, let vs learne that as our miſerable nature had brought vs to the like condition of death: ſo the grace of God maketh this difference, that ſome, namely the wicked, die to their deſtruction; and others, which are the children of God led by his ſpirit and word, die to liuePſal. 116. 15. more happily, ſo that their very death is precious in the ſight of God. And although the luſt of our fleſhe, beyng blind and earthly, ſtriueth continually againſt the deſires of the ſpirit, ſeeking to ſeparate vs as far as it can from our ſoueraigne Good, yet let vs haue this ingrauen in our harts, that they are happy that know the vanitie of this world, more happy that ſet not their affections vpon it, and they moſt happy that are taken out of it to be with GOD in the kingdome of heauen.
               
            
         
         The ende of this Academie. 
               〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
            .
      
      
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPALL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS ACADEMIE.
            
               A
               
                  ADmonition: ſundrie instructions how to admoniſh wiſely. Pag. 153
               
               
                  Aduerſitie: who are ſoonest thrown downe with aduerſitie, 301. the cō
                  mon effects thereof, 345. the Romanes were wiſest and moſt constant in aduerſitie, 347. examples of constancie in aduerſitie. 348
               
               
                  Adulterie: the miſerable effects of adulterie, 240. the puniſhment of adulterers among the Egyptians, 241. Zaleucus law, and the law of Iulia against it, 240. testimonies of Gods wrath against it. 241
               
               
                  Age hath no power ouer vertue, 61. the diuiſion of the ages of man. 563-564
               
               
                  Ambition: two kindes of ambition, 224. the cauſe of ambitious deſires, 225. the effects of ambition, 224. & 229. examples of mê void of ambition, 186. ambition breedeth ſedition, 225. ambitious men full of ſelfe-prayſe, 226. examples of ambitious men, 227. &c. they cannot be good counſellours to Princes. 231
               
               
                  Anger: the crueltie of Theodoſius committed in his anger, 316. Valentinian brake a veine in his anger. 317
               
               
                  Apparell: against exceſſe in apparell, 219. examples of ſobrietie in apparel. 219
               
               
                  Archbiſhop: the free gird of a Peſant giuen to an Archbiſhop▪ 
                  158. the Archbiſhop of Magdeburg brake his neck in dancing. 216
               
               
                  Armes, Armie: the exerciſe of armes must alwayes continue, 762. the auncient order of the Romane armie. 766
               
               
                  Arrogancie dwelleth in the ends with ſolitarines. 157
               
               
                  Ariſtocratie: the deſcription of an Aristocratie, 579. the estate of Lacedemonia was Aristocraticall. 580
               
               
                  Artes and Artificers: the neceſſitie of artes and artificers in a common-wealth, 750. artificers of one ſcience ought not to dwell all togither. 751
               
               
                  Authors: how much we owe to good authors. 45
               
               
                  Authoritie: what authoritie a prince hath ouer his ſubiects. 670
               
            
            
               B
               
                  Backbiting: the prudence of Dionyſius in puniſhing two backbiters, 388. when backbiting hurteth most. 460
               
               
                  Bankets: the custome of the Egyptians and Lacedemonians at bankets. 203
               
               
                  Beard: what vſe is to bee made of a white beard. 572
               
               
                  Belly: the belly an vnthankefull and feeding beast, 201. & 202. it hath no eares. 212
               
               
                  Birth: the follie of birth-gazers. 42
               
               
                  Biting: what biting of beasts is most dangerous. 460
               
               
                  Body: the wonderfull coniunction of the body and ſoule of man, 19. the conceptiō, framing and excellencie of the body. 21
               
               
                  Brother: he that hateth his brother, hateth his parents, 542. the benefite that brethren receiue by hauing common friends, 544. examples of brotherly loue. 545
               
            
            
               C
               
                  Calling: callings were distinct from the beginning, 478. ſixe ſundry callings neceſſary

in euery common-wealth, 744. holineſſe is the end of our calling. 795
               
               
                  Captaine: the loſſe of a captaine commonly cauſeth the ruine of an armie, III. how captaines were puniſhed if they offended, 768. a captaine must not offend twiſe in warre, 773. what captains are woorthiest of their charge, 784. the captains of an armie must be very ſecret, 781. two faults to be eſchewed of euery captaine, 778. how a captain ſhould exhort his ſouldiors. 790
               
               
                  Cheere: good cheere keepeth baſe mindes in ſubiection. 206
               
               
                  Children must loue, feare, & reuerence their father, 533. the dutie of children towardes their parents, 541. examples of the loue of children towards their parents. 541
               
               
                  Choler: whereof choler is bred, 314. how the Pythagorians reſisted choler, 315. magistrates ought to puniſh none in their choler. 316
               
               
                  Citie: what Citie ſeemed, to Clcobulus best guided. 264
               
               
                  Citizens: who are truly citizens. 606
               
               
                  Clemencie: examples of great clemencie in princes, 324. &c. it preſerueth the thrones of Princes. 411
               
               
                  Common-wealth: a ſure token of a deſperate common-wealth, 407. 600. 690. the ſpring of corruption in Common-wealths, 550. the deſcription of a mixt common-wealth, 583. how a corrupt common-wealth must bee corrected, 699. when common-wealths begin to alter, 717▪
                   the cauſes therof. 739
               
               
                  Commandement: the 5. commaundement onely hath a ſpecial promiſe annexed vnto it, 538. there is a ſhew of commanding and obeying in all things. 575
               
               Compariſons: 33. 38. 46. 47. 55. 64. 70. 105. 150. 176. 191. 212. 286. 338. 339. 343. 360. 371. 378. 383. 4
                     •
                  6. 446. 448. 487. 513. 550. 589 641. 687.
               
                  Communitie: Plato eſtabliſhed a communitie of all things in his common-wealth, 490 the confutation therof. 491
               
               
                  Concupiſcence: the fruites of concupiſcence. 238
               
               
                  Conſcience: the force of conſcience in the wicked, 68. examples of tormented conſciences. 68
               
               
                  Conſtancie: the wonderfull constancie of Socrates. 348
               
               
                  Correction n
                     •••
                  ſſarie for children, 534. the lawe Falcidia touching the correction of children. 551
               
               
                  Councell: what a councell is, with the profite of it, 677. of the councell of ſundrie countreys. 679. &c
               
                  Counſellors: qualities requiſite in counſellors of estate. 687
               
               
                  Counſell: good counſell for counſellors, 155. and for princes. 157
               
               
                  Countrey: examples of the loue of heathen men towards their countrey. 60. 98. &c
               
                  Couetouſneſſe is neuer ſatiſfied, 445. the fruites of couetouſnes, 446. examples of coueiouſnes, 449. what magistrates are best liked of couetous princes. 456
               
               
                  Coward: Agamemnon diſpenſed with a rich coward for going to warre, 284. what vices proceed of cowardlines. 285
               
               
                  Creation: the end of the creation of al things 92.
               
               
                  Creatures: all creatures are ſociable by nature. 594
               
               
                  Curioſitie: against curioſitie in knowledge, 161. two kindes of curioſitie, 162. against curious inquirie into other mens imperfections, 166. curious perſons profite their enimies more than themſelues, 167. wittie anſweres made to cu
                     •
                  io
                     ••
                   questions, 169. curioſitie in princes affairs, perilous. 168
               
               
                  Cuſtome: a notable custome of the Lacedemonians, 150. custome in ſinning is dangerous. 69
               
            
            
               D
               
                  Death: the feare of death doth not aſtoniſh the vertuous, 60. what death Ceſar thoght beſt, 262. no man ought to hasten forward his death, 293. what it is to feare death, 294. the comfort of euery true Christian against death. 805.
               
               
                  
                  Definition: the definition of ambition, 224. of anger, 312. of a body, 20. of charitie, 321. of a citie, 595. of a Citizen, 605. of comelines, 181. of confidence, 300. of duty, 94. of enuie, 458. of fortune, 468. of friendſhip, 138. of a houſe, 490. & 492. of iealouſie, 505. of iustice, 390. & 391. of intemperancie, 190. of iudgement, 691. of liberalitie, 435. of the law, 596. of malice and craft, 123. of man, 13. of meekenes, 321. of nature, 172. of Oeconomie, 523. of policie, 523. of paſſion, 30. of Philoſophy, 40. & 390. of prudence, 104. of patience, 310. of pleaſure, 236. of ſedition, 705. of ſocietie, 480. of the ſoule, 23. of temperance, 181. of vertue, 52. of vice 65. of wedlocke. 480
               
               
                  Democraty: the deſcription of a Democraty, with the ſundry kinds of it. 528
               
               
                  Deſire: the effects of deſire. 36
               
               
                  Diſeaſes: the end, cauſe, and remedie of bodily diſeaſes, 29. the cauſe of the diſeaſes of the ſoule, 33. the ſeede of diſeaſes. 211
               
               
                  Diſcipline: the ancient warlike diſcipline of the Romanes, 769. the corruption thereof in theſe daies. 769
               
               
                  Diſcord: all things are preſerued by agreeing diſcords. 19
               
               
                  Diuiſion: of Citizens, 606. of a Common-wealth, 579. & 583. of dutie, 94. of a houſe, 492. of iuſtice, 393. of the law, 596. of nature 171. of Philoſophy, 40. of paſſions, 31. of ſpeech, 127. of the ſoule, 23. of ſciences. 76
               
               
                  Dowries: why the dowries of women haue alwaies had great priuiledges, 486. Lycurgus forbad all dowries. 493
               
               
                  Drinke: the manner of drinking in old time, 203. against exceſſiue drinking. 204
               
               
                  Drunkennes: hurtfull effects of drunkennes and gluttony, 213. examples of drunkennes. 214
               
               
                  Duarchy: what a Duarchy is. 617
               
               
                  Dutie: wherein the dutie of man conſisteth, 12. dutie and profite are distinct thinges, 429. the duty of a wiſe man, 12. what duty we owe to God, and what to our neighbour, 94. fower riuers iſſue out of the fountaine of duty. 96
               
            
            
               E
               
                  Eclipſe: Nicias feared an eclipſe of the Moone. 120
               
               
                  Education helpeth the defect of nature, 175. examples therof, 177. naughtie education corrupteth a good nature, 551. how Plato would haue children brought vp, 552. of the education of daughters. 554
               
               
                  Emperours: there were 73. Emperours of Rome within 100. yeeres, 223. what this word Emperour importeth. 624
               
               
                  End: the proper end of all things. 477
               
               
                  Enimy: how one may reape benefite by his enimies, 112. 383. why men are beholding to their enimies, 379. the common behauiour of men towards their enimies. 380
               
               
                  Enuy is a note of an ambitious man, 225. the nature of enuie, 457. the fruits of it, 458. it hurteth enuious perſons most, 459. a good way to be reuenged on the enuious. 464
               
               
                  Ephoryes: why the Ephoryes were appointed in Lacedemonia. 581
               
               
                  Equality: two ſorts of equalitie. 737
               
               
                  Equity is alwaies one and the ſame to all people, 601. the equity of the Morall law ought to be the end and rule of all lawes. 602
               
               
                  Error: the ſpring of all error. 119
               
               
                  Eſtate: euery Estate and policie conſisteth of three parts, 578. the opinion of Politicks touching a mixt Estate, 625. examples of mixt Estates, 626. what it is to hold the Eſtates, 685. a rule of Estate, 723. choiſe cuſtome of ſeuen flouriſhing Estates, 732. meanes to preſerue an Estate, 734▪
                   &c. it is dangerous to an Estate to call in forraine ſuccours. 785
               
               
                  Euent: wee must not iudge of enterpriſes by the euent, 305. we must be prepared againſt all euents, 306. the euent of all things is to be referred to the prouidence of God, 42
               
               
                  Euill: what we ought to call euill. 63
               
               
                  Exerciſe: what bodily exerciſe is meete for youth. 557
               
               
                  Expences: a good law e to cut off the occaſions of idle expences. 221
               
            
            
               
               F
               
                  Fables: who delight most in reading of fables. 462
               
               
                  Family: there must be but one Head in a family, 509. the progreſſe of a family before it come to perfection. 525
               
               
                  Father: why many fathers ſet not their children to ſchoole, 72. the ſtorie of a father appointed to execute his owne child. 535
               
               
                  Fauour: the puniſhment of one who ſolde his maisters fauour. 411
               
               
                  Feare: two kinds of feare, 278. the feare of neighbour enimies is the ſafetie of a Common-wealth, 279. good feare is ioined with the loue of God, 280. examples of wary feare 280. a ſtrange effect of feare in one night, 284. examples of feare which is the defect of fortitude. 281
               
               
                  Feaſt: how wiſe men feasted one another in old time, 202. Socrates feast. 208
               
               
                  Fidelitie: a deſcription of fidelitie. 414
               
               
                  Flatterie: the common practiſe of flatterers, 139. good counſell for Princes against flatterers. 462
               
               
                  Fleſh: the works of the fleſh. 20
               
               
                  Foe: he that hath no foe, hath no friend, 145. Looke Enimie.
               
                  Fortitude: the woorkes of fortitude must bee grounded vpon equitie and iustice, 251. it is a good of the ſoule, not of the body, 266. the parts of fortitude, 267. examples of fortitude. 273. &c.
               
                  Fortune: what is to be vnderstoode by this worde fortune, 307. howe wee may vſe theſe words of fortune and chance, 469. the opinions of Philoſophers touching fortune, 470. the deſcription of fortune, 470. examples of hir contrary effects. 472
               
               
                  France: one euident cauſe of the preſent ruine of France, 163. the miſerable estate of France, 408. one cauſe thereof, 607. the happie gouernment of France, 635. two cauſes of the preſent diuiſions in France. 716
               
               
                  Friend, and Friendſhip: the difference between friendſhip and loue, 138. what things are requiſite in friendſhip, 139. the chiefe cauſe and end of all true friendſhip, 138. friendſhip must be free, 142. three things neceſſarie in friendſhip, 148. examples of true friendſhip, 145. what manner of man we must chuſe for our friend, 140. howe we must prooue a true friend, and ſhake off a falſe, 141. how we must beare with the imperfections of our friend. 144.
               
            
            
               G
               
                  Gaming: the effects of gaming, 374, what mooued the Lydians to inuent games, 374. Alphonſus decree against gaming. 375
               
               
                  Generall: a good leſſon for a Generall, 292, properties requiſite in a Generall. 300
               
               
                  Glorie: how ielouſie of glorie is tollerable, with examples thereof, 251. &c. examples of the contempt of glorie. 254
               
               
                  Gluttonie: the fruits of gluttonie, 213. examples thereof. 214
               
               
                  God: all things are preſent with God, 407. he ordereth caſuall things neceſſarily, 468 he is the Idaea of al good. 42
               
               
                  Goods: the nature of worldly goods, 37. two ſorts of goods, 52. & 526. two waies to get goods. 526
               
               
                  Grace: effects of Gods grace in the regenerate. 18
               
               
                  Grammar: the commodities of grammar, 556
               
               
                  Griefe: a meane how to beare griefe patiently. 331
               
            
            
               H
               
                  Happines: all men naturally deſire happines, 31. who are happie, and who vnhappie. 51. what it is to liue happily, 38. 54. how we must make choice of a happie life, 246. wherein good or ill hap conſisteth, 330. notable opinions of good and ill hap, 332, wherein true happines conſisteth. 334
               
               
                  Hatred: how far a man may hate the wicked, 387. the difference between hatred and enuie, 459. the bounds of a good mans hatred, 463.
               
               
                  Hiſtories: the praiſe and profit of hiſtories. 79
               
               
                  Homage: what homage we ow to God. 93
               
               
                  Honor: how a man may ſeeke for honor, 232.
                  
examples of the contempt of honor, 233. the first ſtep to honor. 247
               
               
                  Hope: hope must be grounded vpon the grace of God, 300. two kinds of hope, 301. the fruit of hope, 302. hope and feare are the foundation of vertue. 561
               
               
                  Houſe; a houſe conſisteth of liuing ſtones, 489 ſmal iarres must be auoided in a houſe. 501
               
               
                  Hunting is an image of war. 554
               
               
                  Husbands: how they ought to loue their wiues, 501. a husband must neuer beate his wife, 504. he must neither chide nor fawne vpon his wife before others, 507. examples of the loue of husbands towards their wiues. 510.
               
               
                  Husbandrie: the praiſe of husbandrie, 528. 752. the antiquitie of husbandrie. 752
               
            
            
               I
               
                  Idlenes: it is the mother and nurſe of all vice, 369. Pythagoras precept against idlenes, 370. examples against idlenes. 377
               
               
                  Ignorance: ignorance of our ſelues the cauſe of much euill, 12. pernitious effects of ignorance, 117. 118. common effects of ignorance 119.
               
               
                  Impatiencie: who are most giuen to impatiencie and choler, 312. how it may be cured. 313.
               
               
                  Impoſt: a commendable kind of impoſt. 220
               
               
                  Impudencie: the deſcription of impudencie. 428.
               
               
                  Incontinencie: the difference betweene an incontinent and an intemperate man, 190. Socrates diſputation against incontinencie. 238
               
               
                  Infants: how infants are to be brought vp. 552
               
               
                  Ingratitude: meanes to keepe vs from ingratitude, 432. it was the cauſe of mans fal, 425 great men are ſoonest touched with ingratitude, 428. examples against it. 430
               
               
                  Innocencie is a tower of braſſe against ſlanderers. 466
               
               
                  Iniurie: how manie waies a man may receiue iniurie. 384
               
               
                  Iniuſtice: the fruits of it in the wicked, 403. it is a generall vice, 404. the effects of it, 405. how many kinds there are of iniustice. 404
               
               
                  Intemperance: the companions of intemperance. 192. what predominant paſſions are in it, 189. exāples of intemperance. 193 &c.
               
                  Ioie: examples of ſome that died of ioie. 36
               
               
                  Iudgement: from whence iudgement proceedeth, 89. the iudgement of the best, not of the most is to be preferred, 249. iudgements are the ſinewes of an estate. 690
               
               
                  Iudges: how the Egyptians painted iudges, 394. a corrupt manor of making iudges. 701
               
               
                  Iuſtice: the fruits of iustice, 390. the ground of all iustice, 391. examples of the loue of iustice, 395. how the abuſe of it may be remedied, 399. the deniall of iustice is dangerous, 408. 658. the ſprings of all corruptions of iustice, 697. iustice diſtributed into ſeuen parts. 746
               
            
            
               K
               
                  Knowledge: the knowledge of God and of our ſelues must be linked togither, 12. the end of the knowledge of our ſelues, 16. the benefits that come by knowledge. 74
               
               
                  King: wherein the greatnes of a king conſiſisteth, 57. wherein kings ought to exerciſe themſelues most. 80. the true ornaments of a king, 180. the difference betweene a great and a little king, 398. what power the kings of Lacedaemonia had, 
                     
                        •
                     80. good precepts for kings, 648. a king must be skilfull by reaſon and not by vſe, 648. the first and principall dutie of a king is to haue the law of God before his eies, 655. he muſt begin reformation at himſelfe and his court. 656. the ſumme of the dutie of a king. 674
               
               
                  Kingdome: what cauſeth kingdoms to flouriſh, 399, of the originall of kingdoms, 586. their alteration commeth through vice, 67, they floriſh through vertue, 61. Of the antiquitie of a kingdome, 623. the dangerous eſtate of an electiue kingdom vpō the death of the prince, 633. what kingdoms are electiue. 634
               
            
            
               L
               
                  Law: what ciuill lawes may not be changed,

                  597. the end of all lawes, 603. change of lawes in a well ſetled estate is dangerous, 598. what the law of nature is, 596. the ancient law-makers, 599. what maner of lawes are to be establiſhed in the Commonwealth, 657.
               
               
                  Learning: examples of ancient men that gaue themſelues to learning, 570. examples of great loue to learning. 81
               
               Letter: Anacharſis letter to Craeſus, 78, Alexanders to Ariſtotle, 80. Caeſars to Rome: Octauianus to his nephew: Platoes to Dionyſius: Pompeies to the ſenate, 132. Piſiſtratus to his nephew, 146. Traians to Plutarke, 157. & 233. Traians to the ſenate, 654. 707. Macrines to the ſenate of Rome, 747. Aurelius to a tribune. 768
               
                  Liberalitie: a poore man may be liberal, 436. the lawes of liberalitie, 440. examples of liberalitie. 441
               
               
                  Loue: loue is the first foundation of euery holie marriage. 530
               
               
                  Life: mans life compared to the Olympian aſſemblies, 38. one cauſe of the long life of our elders, 198. Senecaes opinion of the ſhortnes of our life, 211. our life compared to table-play, 335. no man ought to hide his life, 373. the end of our life, 377. three things neceſſarie for the life of man, 750. wherein a happie life conſisteth. 804
               
               
                  Lying: lying in a prince is moſt odious. 417
               
            
            
               M
               
                  Magiſtrate: of the name of magiſtrate, 587. good counſell for magiſtrates, 588. the dutie of the magiſtrate conſiſteth in three things, 590. what maner of then magiſtrates ought to be, 399. 593. the titles of a good magiſtrate. 610
               
               
                  Magnanimitie: magnanimitie conſiſteth in three things, 289. woonderfull magnanimitie, 59. three effects of magnanimitie, 290. examples thereof. 295. 296
               
               Malice: the malice of Nero and Tyberius. 124
               
                  Man: the prerogatiues of men aboue other creatures, 594. the maner of mans conception and faſhioning, 21. the end of his being, 13. 73. 95. three things neceſſarie for the perfection of man, 173. common effects of mans fraile nature, 339. the dutie of a man at the perfection of his age. 570
               
               
                  Marriage: the author, antiquitie, and ends of marriage, 482. reaſons againſt marriage, 482 the defence of marriage, 484. motiues to marriage, 488. fower kinds of marriage, 492. the beſt time and place to pacifie ſtrife betweene married couples, 515. at what age men and women ought to marrie. 495
               
               
                  Maske: againſt masks and mummeries. 214
               
               
                  Maiſter: what properties are requiſite in a maiſter. 528. 530
               
               
                  Mediocritie: mediocritie muſt be vſed in all actions. 160
               
               
                  Mecknes: the effects of meeknes, 321. examples of meeke princes. 323
               
               
                  Memorie: the praiſe of memorie, 88. examples of good memories. 89. reaſons why quickeſt wits haue beſt memories, and contrariwiſe. 90
               
               
                  Mercie: who were forbidden to enter into the temple of mercie. 320
               
               
                  Mind: baſe minds ſtand in great fear of death and griefe. 283
               
               
                  Mirth: how mirth is commendable. 464
               
               
                  Mocking: how a man may repulſe a mocke, 386. examples thereof. 387.
               
               
                  Monarchy: what a monarchy is, 579. 617. the law of nature leadeth vs to a monarchy, 615 reaſons againſt a monarchie, 617. the commodities of a monarchie, 622. monarchies haue continued longeſt, 625. what agreement the French monarchie hath with euerie good policie. 626. Fiue kinds of monarchies, 628. how the firſt monarchie came vp. 629
               
               
                  Monie: why monie was firſt inuented, 527
               
               
                  Mother: the mother is no leſſe to be honored than the father, 540. euerie mother ought to nurſe hir owne child. 552
               
               
                  Murder: a cruel murder of a gentlewoman, & hir houſhold. 450
               
               
                  Muſicke: a commendable end of muſicke, 553.
                  
when muſicke is moſt conuenient. 202
               
               
                  Myſterie: how far we may ſearch into heauenly myſteries. 41
               
            
            
               N
               
                  Nature: the diuiſion of nature, 171. the corruption therof. 173
               
               
                  Negligence: two ſorts of negligence. 725
               
               
                  Neighbor: reaſons to mooue vs to loue our neighbors. 320
               
               
                  Nobilitie: what nobilitie is, with the ſundrie kinds of it, 747. nobilitie is the ornament of a common-wealth. 740
               
               
                  Number: the number of ſeuen accounted a perfect number. 563
               
            
            
               O
               
                  Obedience to Gods law is the mother of all vertues. 94
               
               
                  Offences are neuer without paine. 67
               
               
                  Office: in what caſe a good man may ſue for an office, 98. 700. the inconuenience that commeth by ſetting offices to ſale. 400
               
               
                  Old-age: when old-age beginneth, 571. to whom it is not greeuous. 572
               
               
                  Officers: the ſtatute of S. Lewes concerning the election of officers. 702
               
               
                  Oligarchie: what an Oligarchie is, and how it changeth into a tyrannie, 581. reaſons againſt an Oligarchie. 621
               
               
                  Oration: Otans oration for a popular regiment, 618. Megabyſes oration for an Ariſtocratie. 619. Darius oration for a monarchie, 621. Coruinus oration to his ſoldiers, 784. the benefit of making orations to ſoldiers, 775. Cyrus oration to his captaine. 776
               
               
                  Order: what order is. 740
               
            
            
               P
               
                  Painting: the vſe of painting. 557
               
               
                  Parliament: the preſent eſtate of the parliament of France. 695
               
               
                  Paſtors: wherein the office of true paſtors conſiſteth. 745
               
               
                  Paſſions: the paſſions of the ſoule are headſtrong, 35. the ſcope of our paſſions, 32. pleaſure and grieſe are the cauſe of paſſions, 28. naturall paſſions not to be condemned. 30
               
               
                  Patience: the fruits of patience, 310. what the wicked account of patience, 314
               
               
                  Peace: the diſcommodities of a long peace, 756. the effects of peace. 758
               
               
                  People: the diuiſion of the people into three orders or estates. 606
               
               
                  Periurie: examples of gods iudgements vpon periured perſons. 420. 423
               
               
                  Perturbations: from whence the perturbations of the ſoule proceede, 31. the original, nature and effects of perturbations. 33
               
               
                  Philoſophy: howe we may knowe whether we profit in Philoſophy, 47. the fruits that follow the ſtudie of it, 346. examples of loue to Philoſophy, 48. what diuine Philoſophy is, 40. the chiefe foundation of all Philoſophy, 45. the perfection of Philoſophy. 48
               
               
                  Philoſopher: neceſſary points for a Philoſopher, 45. what this word Philoſopher importeth, 51. what kind of knowledge is chiefly required in a Philoſopher, 78. Philoſophers ought to be conuerſant with Princes. 155
               
               
                  Plaies: hurtfull effects of plaies. 216
               
               
                  Pleaders: againſt prating pleaders. 129
               
               
                  Pleaſure: pleaſure is the end of ſuperfluitie, 210. what Philoſophers placed their chiefe Good in pleaſure, 235. the fruits of pleaſure. 236
               
               
                  Policies: a meane to preſerue policies, 401. what policie is, and from whence the word is deriued, 577. no people without ſome policie. 576
               
               
                  Pouerty: why poore men are not leſſe happye than the rich, 359▪
                   the fruits of pouertie, 361 pouertie pleadeth for it ſelfe, 362. what pouerty is odious, 366. a good law for the poore 438
               
               
                  Power: ciuill power ought to maintaine the worſhip of God, 578. two kindes of publike power. 609
               
               
                  Praiſe: a good man may ſometime praiſe him ſelfe. 250
               
               
                  Pride: the effects of pride, 250. examples of pride puniſhed. 254
               
               
                  Prince: the looſe life of Princes is dangerous for their Estates, 242. &c. a good conſideration

for Princes, 324. it is dangerous for Princes to aduance wickedmen, 343. the promiſe of a Prince is tied with a double bond, 417. howe farre Princes are ſubiect to lawes, 595. wherin their abſolute power conſisteth, 596. when a Prince may deny the request of his three Estats, 598. obedience is due to vniust Princes, aſwell as to iust, 611. a child prince is a token of Gods wrath 620. it is not lawful for any to kil his Prince although he be a tyrant, 639. when a Prince may best be corrected, 643. two properties requiſite in him that teacheth a Prince, 644. howe a yoong Prince must be taught, 645. excellent titles of a good Prince, 650. Looke more in chap. 59. & 60.
               
               
                  Prodigalitie: how prodigalitie and couetouſnes may be in one ſubiect. 447
               
               
                  Profite: profit must not be ſeparated from honestie. 95
               
               
                  Promiſe: whither a forced promiſe is to bee kept, 414. no promiſe ought to bee made against dutie, 415. we must keepe promiſe with our enimie, 416. examples of promiſekeeping. 418
               
               
                  Proſperitie: effects of 100 great proſperitie in common-wealths, 281. more hurtfull than aduerſitie, 340. examples of ſome that were ouerthrowen by proſperitie, 342. of others that were not puft vp with it. 343. &c
               
                  Prudence: the effects of prudence, 104. 106. prudence hath three eies, 105. examples of prudence, 108. &c. a prudent man is not ouer-light of belief. 114
               
            
            
               Q
               
                  Quarel: the common excuſe of quarellers. 385
               
               
                  Quietnes: how a man may haue continuall quietneſſe. 67
               
            
            
               R
               
                  Raſhnes: the effects of raſhnes. 285
               
               
                  Reaſon: the errour of the Philoſophers touching the ſtrength of reaſon, 24. there is a double reaſon in man. 14
               
               
                  Recreation: how men ought to recreate thē
                  ſelues. 375
               
               
                  Religion: religion is the foundation of all estates, 576. Socrates called it the greatest vertue, 53. integritie of religion knitteth the harts of ſubiects to their princes, 653. the fruits of the contempt of religion. 704
               
               
                  Reprehenſion: how we must vſe reprehenſion, 151. examples of free reprehenſion. 156
               
               
                  Reuenge: priuate reuenge commeth of frailtie, 326. examples of princes void of reuenge 327. Socrates precept against priuate reuenge, 381. a comendable kind of reuenge. 382. 383.
               
               
                  Reward: the difference between a reward and a benefit. 672
               
               
                  Riches: how riches may be well vſed, 435. the common effects of riches, 350. anotable example of the true vſe of riches, 439. the nature, qualitie, and fruits of riches, 351. what riches are to be ſought for, 358. riches are the ſinewes of warre. 749
               
               
                  Rome: of the ancient estate of Rome. 605
               
            
            
               S
               
                  Salick: the Salick lawe excludeth daughters and their ſonnes from gouernment. 635
               
               
                  Schoole-maſter: what ſchoole-masters are to be choſen, 554. the properties of a good ſchoolemaster. 564
               
               
                  Sciences: what ſciences are first to be learned. 77
               
               
                  Scoffing: what ſcoffing is, and how it is to bee auoided. 464
               
               
                  Secret: of concealing a ſecret. 134
               
               
                  Sedition: the original of all ſedition, 703. the fruits of ſedition, 705. the cauſes of ſedition. 718
               
               
                  Selling: it is wickednes to conceale the fault of that which a man ſelleth. 416
               
               
                  Senate: what a Senate is, and from whence the word came, 572. why the Senate of Lacedemonia was first instituted, 580. of the Senate of ſundry nations. 678
               
               
                  Seruant: examples of moderate traine of ſeruing-men, 220. the dutie of ſeruants comprehended in foure points, 547. examples of the loue of ſeruants towards their maiſters. 548
               
               
                  
                  Seueritie: an example of most cruell ſeueritie. 412
               
               
                  Shame: honeſt ſhame is alwaies commendable, 264. howe we must learne to reſist all naughty ſhame, 259. 261. ſhame is the keeper of all vertues, 256. what ſhame is hurtfull. 259
               
               
                  Shamefaſtnes: the ſhamefastnes of the Romans, 263. of the Mileſian maidens, 264. it is the best dowrie of a woman. 516
               
               
                  Signes: Anaxagoras ſaying against the ſuperstitious feare of celestiall ſignes. 121
               
               
                  Silence: Alexander gaue monie to a poet to keepe ſilence, 131. the praiſe of ſilence. 133
               
               
                  Sinne: the puniſhment of ſinne is equall with it both for age and time, 407. how we must auoid and repreſſe it, 258. ſome ſinnes are puniſhments of other ſinnes, 190. how we may ouercome great ſinnes, 47. ſinne the firſt and true cauſe of all our miſerie. 13
               
               
                  Sobrietie: it preſerueth health, 200. examples of ſobrietie. 203. &c.
               
                  Societie: the end of all ſocietie. 480
               
               
                  Soueraigntie: what ſoueraigntie is, 586. the marke of a ſoueraigne. 595
               
               
                  Souldiers: good counſell for ſouldiers, 343. ſouldiers must begin war with praier, and end with praiſe. 783
               
               
                  Soule: the ſoule is not ſubiect to mans iuriſdiction, 573. the ſoule is infuſed not traduced, 23. the properties of the ſoule, 25. the ſoule is truly man, 12. 85. 115. the actions, beautie, and delight of the ſoule. 26
               
               
                  Speech: pleaſant ſpeeches full of doctrine, 114. how it is framed, 127. Laconical ſpeech, 128. two times of ſpeaking, 130. how great men ought to ſpeake, 131. a good precept for ſpeech, 132. examples of the commendable freedome of ſpeech. 135
               
               
                  Spirit: the difference betweene the ſoule and the ſpirit, 88. the proper worke of mans ſpirit. 74
               
               
                  Sports: the ſports of prudent men. 113
               
               
                  Studie: the end of all ſtudies. 556
               
               
                  Stupiditie: the deſcription of ſtupiditie. 196
               
               
                  Subiects: what ſeruice they owe to their princes, 608. how far they are bound to obey their prince and his lawes. 610
               
               
                  Superfluitie: how Heraclitus diſſwaded ſuperfluitie, 217. good counſell for princes and magistrates concerning ſuperfluous expences. 222
               
               
                  Swearing: against ſwearing. 317
               
            
            
               T
               
                  Temperance: no vertue can be without temperance, 180. fower parts of temperance, 182. what paſſions are ruled by it, 181. examples thereof. 184
               
               
                  Temple: the temple of Diana was burnt by Eroſtratus. 196
               
               
                  Theft: theft puniſhed diuerſly in diuers nations. 602
               
               
                  Timocratie: the deſcription of a Timocratie. 581
               
               
                  Toong: the toong is the best and woorſt thing that is, 130. examples of miſchiefes cauſed by the intemperancie of the toong. 134.
               
               
                  Trafficke: Lycurgus forbad all traffick with ſtrangers. 164
               
               
                  Treaſon: treaſon and crueltie neuer find place in a noble hart, 296. the effects of treaſon, 418. examples of the ill ſucceſſe of traitors, 422. a ſeuere law againſt treaſon. 614
               
               
                  Truth: all men by nature haue ſome light of truth. 18
               
               
                  Turke: of the eſtate of the Turke, 631. he diſpoſeth of all lordſhips at his pleaſure. 632
               
               
                  Tyrannie: when a kingdome turneth into a tyoannie, 579, tyrants are naturally hated, 610. marks of a tyrannie 631. of the name of a tyrant, 636. the difference betweene a good king and a tyrant, 637. examples of the extraordinarie deaths of tyrants. 639
               
            
            
               V
               
                  Vain-glorie: Solon called euery vain-glorious man a foole, 255
               
               
                  Valure: properties requiſite in a valiant man, 267. all hardie men are not valiant, 268. how a man may be valiant, 288. frō whence valure proceedeth. 765
               
               
                  Vengeance: why God deferreth his vengeance vpon the wicked. 69
               
               
                  
                  Venice: of the ſtate of Venice, 605. the dukedome of Venice is electiue. 624
               
               
                  Vertue: vertue is neither without affections, nor ſubiect vnto them, 309. the propertie of vertue oppreſſed, 347. three things concurre in perfect vertue, 175. the neere coniuncti
                     •
                   of all the vertues, 107. examples of the force of vertue in aduerſitie, 58. the excellencie and property of vertue, 55. it is alwaies void of extreame paſſion. 37
               
               
                  Vice: when we begin to hate vice, 64. the effects of vice, 65. how we ſhould fortifi
                     •
                   our ſelues against vice, 69. fi
                     ••
                   vices brought out of Aſia by the Romans. 164
               
               
                  Victorie: how victorie is to be vſed. 791
               
               
                  Vnhappines: who are vnhappie. 334
               
               
                  Vnthankfulnes: Draco puniſhed vnthankfulnes by death, 429. the fruits of vnthankfulnes. 430
               
               
                  Voice: the diuerſitie of mens voices is a great ſecret of nature. 22
               
               
                  Vſuric: biting vſuric is deteſtable gaine. 527
               
            
            
               W
               
                  War: a notable example against ciuill war, 101. two kinds of war, 706. whether diuerſitie of religion be a cauſe of ciuill war, 738. the effects of war, 758. wherefore and when we must begin war, 760. three things neceſſarily required in men of war, 765. war ought to be ſpeedily ended. 776. affaires of war must be debated by manie, but concluded by few. 781
               
               
                  Whoordome: the hurtfull effects of whoordome, 237. &c. good counſell against whoordome. 244
               
               
                  Wicked: why the life of the wicked cannot be happ
                     ••
                  
                  ▪ 
                  406. the propertie of the wicked. 67
               
               
                  Widow: of the marriage of widowes. 496
               
               
                  Wife: a wife is to be choſen by the cares, not by the fingers, 493. the best way to order an 
                     〈◊〉
                   wife, 507. how ſhe must deale with hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   husband, 514. a ſhort 
                     〈◊〉
                   of 
                     •
                  he dutie of a wife, 517. examples of the great loue of wi
                     ••
                  s toward their husbands. 518.
               
               
                  Wiſedome: it is true wiſedome to know our ſelues, 11. the perfection of a wiſe mans life, 18. a wiſe man is aſhamed to offend before himſelfe, 68. the praiſe of wiſedome, 75. 730.
               
               
                  Wit: quicke wits commonly want memorie, 84
               
               
                  Wimes: how the Iewes puniſhed falſe witnes bearing. 602
               
               
                  Woman: why the woman was created of the rib of man, 485. the naturall gifts of women, 512. curtaine takens of an adulterous hart in a woman, 516. against ignorance in women. 555
               
               
                  Worke: wherin she perfection of euery worke conſisteth, 266. two things requiſite in euerie good worke. 95
               
               
                  World: the differens opinions of the Stoicks and Epicures concerning the gouernment of the world. 328
               
               
                  Wrath: Cotys brake his glaſſes to auoid occaſion of wrath. 315
               
               
                  Writing: pi
                     •
                  hie writings of ancient men. 132
               
            
            
               X
               
                  Xenophon: the great prudence of Xenophon in conducting an armie. 81
               
            
            
               Y
               
                  Yeer: effects of the climacterical yeer. 63. 563
               
               
                  Youth: how the Romans taught their youth to for ſake the follies of their first age, 567. examples of v
                     •
                  riuous yoong-m
                     •
                  n, 568. how the Per
                     •
                  ia
                     •
                   youth was instructed, 263. two things to be reſpected in the institution of youth, 556. the common diſeaſes of youth, 559. ſixe precepts requiſite in the in
                     •
                  truction of youth. 558
               
            
            
               Z
               
                  Zaleucus: Zaleucus la
                     •
                  e against adulterie. 240
               
               
                  Zeale: the zeale of the ancients in the ſeruice of their Gods. 97
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   