
      
         
            
            
            A uery brefe treatiſe, ordrely declaring the prīcipal partes of phiſick, that is to ſaye: Thynges natural. Thynges not naturall. Thynges agaynſt nature.
            Gathered, and ſette forth by Chriſtopher Langton.
            Anno dn̄i. M.D.XLVII.
         
         
            
            ¶Wylm̄ Baldwyn▪
            
            
               ¶Who ſo deſyreth health got, to preſerue:
               And loſt, to procure: ought chefely to knowe
               Suche naturall thynges, as therto maye ſerue:
               Great knowlege wherof, this boke wil him ſhow.
            
            
               Whiche ſmal though it ſeme contayneth as much
               Of arte to be knowen of them that are wyſe,
               As byg myghty bokes agaſtfull to tuche,
               As well for the wayght, as for the heauy pryce.
            
            
               Reade it therfore all ye that loue your healthe,
               Learne here in an houre, elles where in a yere
               Scarce red, the which Langton willing our welth
               Hath englyſhed brefe, as it doth appere.
            
            
               To whome the free geuer of your ſo great gayne,
               Yelde thākes & prayſes, a payment for his payne.
            
            Conſule valetudini.
         
         
            
            The contentes of this Boke.
            
               ¶The firſte boke.
               
                  OF what kynde of artes phyſicke is. Cap. i.
               Of the ſectes in Phyſycke. Cap. ii.
               The partes of phyſicke. iii.
               The diſtribucion of Phyſicke in to three fourmes. Cap. iiii
               Of the numbre of thinges naturall. v.
               Of Elementes. Cap. vi.
               Of temperamentes. Cap. vii.
               Of Humors. Cap. viii
               Of the partes of mannes body. Cap. ix.
               Of powers or faculties. Cap. x
               Of Actions. Cap. xi.
               Of Spirites. Cap. xii.
            
            
               ¶The ſeconde boke.
               OF the number of thinges not naturall. Cap. i
               Of Ayer. Cap. ii
               Of meate and drynke. Cap. iii
               Of exerciſe, and reſt. Cap. iiii
               Of Slepe and watche. Cap. v
               
                  Of Fulneſſe and emptineſſe. Cap. vi
               Of the perturbations and ſudayne mocions of the mynde. Cap. vii
            
            
               ¶The thyrd boke.
               OF the number of thynges agaynſt nature. Cap. i
               Of the cauſes of diſeaſes. Cap. ii
               Of diſeaſes. Cap, iii
               Of Accidentes, Cap, iiii
            
            
               ¶The fowerth boke.
               ¶Howe to iudge of any diſeaſe. Cap, i
               Of Vrine, Cap, ii
               Of the excrementes of the belly, Cap, iii
               Of the Spettel, Cap, iiii
               Of the Pulſes, Cap. v
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            ¶ To the right high and mighty Prince Edwarde, Duke of Somerſet, Protector of the kynges maieſt. realmes and dominions, and gouerner of his moſt Royall perſon, Chriſtofer Langton wyſſheth health and encreace of all godlyneſſe.
            
               PHiſicke hath bene ſo afflicted & clogged wyth ignoraunt wryters (it were to tediouſe to rehearce eyther theyr names or theyre opinions) that before Gallenes dayes, none knewe which was the truth. And though Gallen wrot orderly, yet by the iniurye of tyme, the beſt parte of his workes be loſt, to the great hynderaunce of all ſuche as ſhalbe ſtudentes in Phiſicke: Yet yf but halfe that that remayneth, were englyſſhed, I woulde then thynke yt we ſhoulde haue al thynges

in Phiſicke a greate deale the playnar, to the great profit & welth of the realme dyuers wayes. For fyrſt it woulde ſaue great exſpence of money, which vnlearned ſtrangers dayly carrye awaye. Than it woulde be the ſafegarde of manye mennes lyues, whiche myght be able to do the king otherwyſe right good ſeruice: And finally it wolde cauſe a great encreaſe of wiſdome, whiche paſſeth bothe golde & precious ſtones. Wherefore I conſideryng the wealth of the greater nū
               ber, haue taken vpon me to wryte orderly of a great peace of phiſicke which I dedicate vnto your grace not that I thynke it worthy ſo noble a Prince, but partly becauſe I iudge you a man muche deſirous to knowe ſuche thinges as be here ſet foorth for the bodyly healthe, &

partely for that I truſt your noblenes wil further al godly ententes: whiche yf ye doe, ye ſhall not only encorage me (whiche am but a lernar, and as yet a young ſtudent in Phyſicke) but other alſo (whiche are alredy perfect in the workes of Phyſicke) dayly to ſet foorth ſuche thinges, as may profit many, and hurte none. Thus I praye god graunt to youre grace in al your affayers, moſt proſperous ſucceſſe, and after this trāſitory lyfe, ioye withoute ende. Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The fyrſte boke.
            
               ¶The fyrſte Chapter. Of what kynde of artes Phiſicke is.
               
                  SEyng that I haue taken vpon me, to wryte a breefe treatyſe vpon Phiſicke, for the alonlye commoditie of ignoraunt and vnlearned ſtudentes in the ſame, I think it very neceſſarye and expedient to open and declare, bothe playnlye, and brefely what phyſicke is, whiche in Latine is called Medicina, & in Englyſſhe woorde for woorde, Medicine.
               Hyppocrates in his boke de flatibus, whiche is as muche to ſaye, as in his boke of Spirites, or blaſtes, affirmeth that Medicine or Phyſicke, is nothyng, but the adiection of that that lacketh, or the

ſubtraction, or takynge awaye, of that whyche is ſuperfluous, & redoundeth: the whych declaration or definition, Gallen alloweth in manye places, & trulie not wtout a cauſe: For ther is no parte of phiſike but it is cōprehended in thys finition. Auerroes in the .vi. boke, and the .i. Chapiter, of his gatheringes dothe define phiſicke verye fetely, in theſe wordes folowinge. Medicina eſt ars factiuarum vna, ratione, et experimento inuenta, que tum ſanitatem tuetur, tum morbum depellit. whiche is as muche to ſay in englyſh, as Phiſike is one of thoſe artes whyche dothe make thinges inuented, or found out by reaſon and experience, and the whyche partly defendeth health, and partly beteth away diſeaſe, and ſiknes.
               
                  Herophilus woulde haue defined it, after this faſhion. Medicina eſt ſcientia ſalubrium, inſalubrium, et neutrorum.
               
               Whyche in englyſhe is as foloweth. Phyſike is a ſcience of thynges holſome, & vnholſome, and of neyther of bothe: Gallen vſeth thys finition, in hys boke yt is called ars medica, not becauſe he doth ſo greatly alowe it, but becauſe yt ſerueth hys pourpoſe, whyche is eaſie to be knowen of that, that foloweth: where he ſayeth that this worde ſcientia, muſt be taken in that place, accordynge to hys common ſignificatyon, and not as it ſignifyeth properlye: wherefore phiſike is an arte, and no ſcience, and ſeynge yt is an arte, I thynke yt well donne,

to ſhewe in what kynde of artes it is: For there be many differences of Artes, but eſpeciallye .iiii. One is called in Latyne, Contemplatoria, whiche hath his ende only in the ſeyng and beholdyng of thynges, and maye well be called contemplacion or knowlege, ſuche is Arithmetick, Aſtronomie, & natural philoſophie, for ther is none of theſe artes that doth any thing but is onlye ended in contemplacion and ſtudye.
               There is an other which is called in Latyn, Actiua, in Englyſh practiſe, and conſiſteth in doynge, as dawnſyng, and harpyng, wyth other lyke.
               The thyrde in Latyn maye be called Factiua, which beſyde the practiſe and ſtudye, leaueth behynde his woorke, as payntyng, & buyldyng,

and of this kynde there be two artes, for ſome make the workes them ſelues, as weuyng & tanning, and ſome correct and amend the thynges, whan they be made: as botchyng and clowtyng of old garmentes houſes, & other thīges The fowerth in Latyn is called comparans, which in our tong may be called a gettyng arte, for it doeth make nothynge, but by ſtudye, & induſtry getteth certen thynges as fyſſhynge and huntyng, theſe truly do make nothyng: but their ſtudy & labor is to get ſomthyng. And to be brefe, Phiſicke as Gallen ſayeth, is a kynde of thoſe Artes whiche reſtoreth theyr woorkes nowe alreadye done, and correcteth the ſame, and not of them whiche make theyr workes newe. For Phiſicke of her ſelfe maketh

not her examples, as the arte of buyldyng, knyttyng, and weuing dothe. But as that arte that mendeth olde houſes, and piceth olde garmentes: ſo phiſike doth amend the euyll conſtitution of mannes bodye.
            
            
               ¶The ſeconde Chapiter. Of the ſectes in phiſyke.
               
                  YT is nowe alredye ſhewed, that phiſike is an arte which reſtoreth healthe beynge abſent, and defendeth the ſame beynge preſent, but howe thys art maye be gotten yt is not agreed vpon amongeſt all men, for ſome thynke experience ſufficiente to the gettyng of this arte, and do cal them ſelfes therof Empericos. Theſe be they that haue ther firſte reſpect

vnto the heape of accidentes, and begynneth their cure of them, wythout any knowledge ether of the diſeaſe, or the cauſe, and they call the forſayde heape of accidentes in Greke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the whyche in Lattyn is called Congeries, and concurſus, and in Engliſhe a heape, and concurryng, or runnynge to gether. Secundarilye, they obſerue, and marke, in the cummynge to gether of Accidentes, Medicines which they know to be mete for the diſeaſe, onlye by vſe and experience. Thyrdely they lerne remedies of the hiſtorie, of ſuche as they haue before proued: Fowerthly they goe from lyke, to lyke.
               For what ſoeuer remedyes they haue proued by experience, in manye men, and often tymes

(but alwayes they proue them in the ſame and lyke meaſure, orelles by chaunce, and as a man woulde ſaye vnloked for, they marke and obſerue them to be lyke, & to haue one effect) the ſame they vſe boldly▪ nothyng curiouſe in the inquyryng what facultie or nature they be of, that is to ſaye whether they be hote or colde, drye or moyſte, & they beleue and credit the olde auncientes, whiche hath lefte in wrytyng, ſuche thynges as they haue noted and obſerued by experience, & that yt thē ſelues haue obſerued & marked, they cal in Greke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whiche in Englyſh, maye be called theyr owne inſpection, and looke what they haue obſerued, & marked by chaunce, as yf a mā by fallyng from hygh, be woūded, or hurte, or els yf a man beyng ſicke

and folowyng his appetite, drīke colde water, the whiche hath eyther done good or euyll, they call 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which is to ſaye an obſeruacion made by chaunce. But whan they learne that that is marked by other, they call it in Greke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   whiche may be called the obſeruation of other.
               They vſe alſo to go from lyke to lyke, whiles they intermedle with ſuche thīges, as they haue not yet proued, althoughe they be of one kynde, and this is called of them in greke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which in englyſh is goyng from lyke to lyke, and by this rule they tranſfer one medicine to dyuers euyls, and from one place affected to another & from one medicine whiche they knewe before, to an other of the ſame kynde vnknowen.
               
                  〈2… pages missing〉
               
               
                  Yf the naturall egeſtions be holden to long, then the party hath a byndyng diſeaſe they ſaye: but yf they runne to muche, that they call an open diſeaſe: And yf a man be bothe bounde and lewſe together, than they call that ſycknes a combynation of bothe the fornamed euyls: as yf the eye ſhoulde ſuffer a fluxe, and an inflammation together, of the whiche, the inflammation is a ſycknes that byndeth, and the fluxe an open diſeaſe: then theyr remedye in ſuche a caſe, is to bynde that that runneth, and to open that that is boūde, as if there be any inflammation in the ſhoulder or arme, what is their rule? what, but withoute deliberation, or conſideration of the place affected, ſtrayght to lewſe the bellye, & yf it fortune bothe the forſayde euyls

to chaūce at one tyme, in one membre, then what do they? vtterly necglect that that is of the leaſt daunger: and theſe be they which reprehende Hyppocrates, becauſe he ſayeth that phyſicke is a longe arte, and that mannes lyfe is but ſhorte, for they ſaye that it is not ſo, but rather cleane contrary. For as they ſaye, yf al that is ſuperfluous were cut out, phiſicke myghte be eaſily learned in .vi. monethes. The begynner of this ſecte, was Syrus, Aſclepiades ſcholer: after whome came Theſſalus, Proclus, and manye other.
               Moreouer there be other which be called Dogmatici, becauſe they grounde all theyr doynges vppon reaſon. Theſe do learne diligently the nature and cōſtitution of all ſuche bodyes as they take in hand

to heale: and doe marke verye dilygently, euerye day, the alterations of the ſame, beſyde this, they ſay, that yt is euerye honeſt Phiſition hys part, to know, and conſyder well, both the nature of the ayer, waters, and wyndes, and the place alſo wher the ſycke abydethe, and his accuſtomed diet, as well in meates, and drinkes, as bathes, exerciſes, & other thinges, to the end, that he may haue a ſure knowledge, bothe of the cauſes, & remedyes, of all diſeaſes. They wyll alſo that he be ſuche an one, that he be able, to proue by reaſon, what nature any kynde of medicyne hath, and that he be able to apoynt, (though he neuer ſawe yt before) what yt is able to doe, and they counſel euery Phiſition, to begynne his cure, accordyng to

the ſtrength of the ſick, and not as ye diſeaſe paraduenture ſhall wyll hym: And they doe not denye, but that experience is neceſſarye, howbeit they denye it to be ſufficient to cure all malledies, and to finde, and ſerche out, all thynges. And alſo they ſay, yt without reſon, experience can hardly be come by. The firſt author, and founder of this ſect, was Hyppocrates Lous, withoute dowt, the moſte lerned, and noble Phiſition, that euer was, after hym came Diocles, Praxagoras, and Chryſyppus, wt many mo, no leſſe lerned, then famouſe.
            
            
               ¶The .iii. chapter. The partes of phiſicke
               
                  THere be .vi. eſpeciall partes of phiſicke, the firſte dothe conſidere the conſtitucion

of mannes nature, & bodie. The ſecond defendeth the bodie from ſycknes, kepynge it in healthe. The third inquireth the cauſes, and accidentes, of ſicknes, and diſeaſes. The forthe conteyneth the knowledge as well of thinges paſt, as alſo preſent, and to come. The fifth ſhoweth an order, and a way, how all diſeaſes, ſhoulde be healed: and this part, is deuyded into thre other partes. The firſte of the thre, techeth the healing of ſickneſſes, by diet only, and therefore it is both the chefe, and moſte noble parte of phiſicke, and without the which, the other partes, which ſerue to the helyng of diſeaſes, can not be: and hereof it is, that Hippocrates wrot thre great bokes of the remediynge of

all feruent diſeaſes, by diet onlye, in the which boke, he proueth euydently, that of a lytell faut or error in the diet of ſuche as be ſycke, foloweth death without remedy, the whiche thing yf it be true, as vndoutedlye it is, what be ſuch Phiſitions worthye, as doe vtterlye necglect the ſame, and thinke that they haue done a great feat, whan they haue wrytten a byl or two, to the appoticarie, takynge no care in the meane tyme, what manner of dyet, the ſicke kepeth.
               The ſeconde parte, healeth by medicins inwarde, & outwardly taken. But there be medicins of .ii. ſortes, that is to ſay ſimple, and compounde, and firſt to the parfit curyng of the diſeaſe moſt neceſſary is the knowledge of the ſimple

and this care whiche is a greate charge, is commytted to ſuch, as be vnlerned, yea and in many places (more is the pittie) to foliſh, & ignorant wemen: I wolde rather wiſhe, the handlynge of ſuche Iuelles, to be in the handes, of ye beſt lerned, and wyſeſt Phiſitions: For as it is a thinge to be laughhed at, if a Paynter know not his penſill, or a coblar hys nall, or a tannar his lether, ſo think ye that a Phiſition is not to be laught to ſcorne? yf he know not the matter of that arte, which he profeſſeth? But now adayes he is moſt ſet by; and had in the greteſt eſtimation, which knoeth ye leaſt, & which can make one medicine ſerue a thowſande diuerſe diſeaſes, whiche is as lyke to be true, as one ſhooe to be mete & ſit for ſo many

feet. And as for medicins, they be not worth a vyle ſtraw, except they com out of Ethiop, Arabi, or India, wheras for vs engliſh men, ther is non ſo good, as our owne Engliſhe ſimples: For it can not be proued, yt nature euer brought forthe any wher liuing creatures, where as ſhe left nothing to fede them wyth all, and lykewyſe as ſhe hath prouided meat, ſo hath ſhe medicyns alſo, but the ſuttylties of men, for their owne gayne, and priuat Lucre, hath browght to paſſe that al thing is oute of order, bothe in the ſhoppes of the appoticaries, and other places elles where. The thyrd part is Surgery, which is wrought by mannes hand, which Gallen commendeth hyghly, in many, and ſundry bokes.
            
            
               
               ¶The .iiii. chapter. The diſtribution of Phiſicke in to thre formes.
               
                  QVre forfathers haue diſtributed, and deuided Phiſicke, into thre formes, or orders, and that for no other pourpoſe, but that yonge ſtudentes of Phiſick, might lerne diligently, and a gret dele the better remember, what ſo euer they had red, in the monumentes of olde writers. The firſt order is of thoſe thinges, of ye whiche, mānes body is made of, and it hath pleſed the foreſayde elders, to call ſuche thinges, as oure body is cōpact, & made of thinges natural, becauſe to the perfection of mannes body they be neceſſary.
               
                  The ſeconde order, is of thoſe thinges, with the which, oure bodye is nouriſhed, that yt may remayne in healthe: & theſe thinges be called not naturall, not becauſe they be vtterlye agaynſt oure nature, but becauſe if they be geuen without diſcreciō, they may make ſuche alteration in the bodye, as may extinguiſhe and aboliſhe vtterlye, the lyfe.
               The thirde order, is of ſuch as hurt, and harme the body, and corrupt it, & therfore, they be called, thinges agaynſte nature, be cauſe they be clene contrary to nature.
            
            
               ¶The fyfth chapter. Of the number of thinges naturall.
               
                  
                  NOwe it is tyme to ſpeke of the firſt part of Phiſicke, whiche entreateth of the naturall cōſtitution of mannes bodie, & this part of Phiſicke, is not put firſte, without a cauſe: For no mā can do any good with a medicyne, whiche is ignorant in the conſtitutiō of mannes bodie, therfore the thinges naturall wherof mannes bodye is conpact & made, be ſeuen in number.
               1 Elementes: as the fiere, ayer, water, and erthe.
               2 Temperamentes: as hote, cowlde, moyſt, and drye.
               3 Humores: as blowde, fleume, chollar bothe yelow & black.
               4 Partes: as fleſh, bone, brayne harte, liuer, heed, and handes
               5 Faculties: as Animall, vitall, &

naturall.
               6 Actions: as Animall, & naturall.
               7 Spirites: as animall, vitall, and naturall.
               Theſe thinges I entend (god willing) to expreſſe ſo well as the ſterillite of my ſimple wyt, will geue me leaue, begynnyng firſt wyth the Elementes.
            
            
               ¶The ſixte, chapter. Of the Elementes.
               
                  TVlly ye eloquent Romain, counſelleth very wel euery mā, firſt of all and before he make any far procedynge, to defyne the thing, of the which he pourpoſeth to entreat, to ye entent that euery mā may perceyue what it is ye is ſpokē of therfore according to his counſell (I

wyll fyrſt define what an element is: wherfore an element, (as Galen ſayeth in the .viii. boke of the decrees of Plato, and Hyppocrates) is the leſt part of that thynge, of the which it is an element, and of theſe amongeſt the hole nature of thynges, there be but fower in number, which is the fyer, Ayer, water, and yearth: and as of theſe all thynges naturall, haue there begynnynge, ſo at the length, they ſhall be reſolued into the ſame agayne. For Hyppocrates ſayeth, in a boke, which he entytelleth the nature of man, that after the ſoule is once diſſolued from the body, euery thinge, wherof the body was of firſt, is returned in hys owne nature agayne, as loke what in the begynnyng was drye, that is

tourned in to drye, & what was moyſte, becōmeth moyſte agayne: and lykewyſe heat is turned into heat, and colde, becommeth colde agayne, but after theſe elementes be once mixte in the body they can no more be called elementes, that is to ſay pure, and ſimple bodyes, & that ye is made of them, is a bodye mixt, and corruptible.
               Therfore as Gallen counſelleth in the firſte boke of elementes, go not about to ſerche out or to finde in any naturall body, any thinge that is ſimple, and not mixt, or compounded, leſte thou loſe thy peyne, but be contented yf thou ſe a member that is could, hard, and drye, and a nother that is moyſte, rare, and fluxible, to thinke the tone to come of the yearth,

and the other, of the water, And lykewyſe whan thou conſidereſt with thy ſelfe, in thy mynde, the nature of a ſpirit, then remember the ayer. For ſeing that the elementes, be the leſt partes of owre bodies, it is not poſſible that they ſhould be perceyued by any ſenſe. Yf theſe elementes wer not mixte all together, nether man, nor no other liuinge creature, coulde be made of them, for what part of the body they ſhould towch, they muſt of neceſſitie, corrupt the ſame. For ther is no part of the bodie that can abyde ſafe without hurt, or dammage, the towchynge of any thynge, that is ether extreme hote or extreme colde, moyeſt, or drye. And herof it is euident that theſe elementes be not mixt in mannes bodye, as wheate, or barley, is

mixt in a hepe, for of the grayne ther is no alteratiō, ſeing after the mixture it remaynethe hole, but the elementes be ſo altered, and chaunged, that after the mixture, ther remayneth nothyng, but onely a ſignification of theire qualities, the which qualities, whiles they be in the elementes, altering the ſubſtaunce ſubiect to them, do cauſe the mutuall alteration, of ye elementes. Yt is neceſſarie for a Phiſition, to conſider exactlye, and diligentlye, the nature of the elementes, to the ende that he may knowe, howe health is made of the temperature, of heat, cold, dry, and moyſt, and of the diſtemperature of the ſame ſicknes.
            
            
               ¶The ſeuen chapter. Of temperamentes
               
                  
                  AMongeſt thynges naturall, the temperamentes, haue the ſecond place, a temperament is no thinge elles, but a complexion, or a conbination of ye fower elementes or elles of heat, coulde, dry and moyſt: of temperamentes there be .ix. differencis, of ye which one is temperat, be cauſe it excedeth in no qualitie, the reſt be all diſtemperat, of the which .iiii. be ſimple, as hot, cold, dry, & moyſt, and .iiii. be compounde, as hot & moyſt to gether, cold and dry, hot and dry, coulde, and moyſt. The ix. difference, which I ſayed before was temperat, may be taken .ii. manner of wayes, ether temperat ſimple and abſolutly, or elles temperate in euerye kynde of

thinges: loke what is temperate ſimply, and abſolutly, that in the reſpect of all thinges, is temperat and in it the elementes be equally mingled, and ſuch a thinge muſt be knowen by cogitacion only, for other wayes it cannot, as Gallen is a manifeſte witneſſe in the firſte boke, that he writ in the defence of health.
               And that is temperat in euery kind, in the which, is the ſame mediocrity of contrary elementes, as is conuenient to the nature, not only of man and beſt, but alſo of trees, and plantes, and this temperament is in all them that be hole accordynge to there nature, and it may be knowen of hys functions, and officis, who is hole according to hys nature.
               
                  For he that can doe euerie thing well, which he is apt to doe naturally, is as hole as nature made hym, whether it be man or beſt or it be tree, or plant: as an apple tre is very well, or hole, according to his nature, whā he bereth a great number of good apples, and likewiſe an horſe, whan he runneth very ſwift. Therfore this is not the temperament, which is meſured by weyght, wherin ther is as many degrees of heat, as of cold, and of drineſſe as of moiſture, for that is no where, nor can not be knowen, but by cogitation, as is a foreſayd: but in this temperament which is in euery kynd of thinges the elementes be ſo mixt, that the temperament which commeth of the mixture, agreeth both to the nature of mē, beſtes, and plantes.

Therefore it is called a temperament, accordynge vnto iuſtice, which meſureth to euery man, not by weyght, but by dignity: wherefore what ſoeuer thinge exceadeth this temperament, ether in heate, could, drynes, or moyſture, ye ſame is not temperate: and of the ſame that redoundeth it taketh ye name, as if it be hete that is ſuperfluous then it is called hot, & loke what thinge hath more hete, then colde, that ſame is hote, & contrary, yf it haue more cold than heate, it is called could, & lykewiſe that that hath more moyſture, then drines, is named moyſt: and agayne, yf it haue more drines thē moyſture, then it may be called dry: and here of it commeth ye ſummer is called hote, becauſe it hath more hete then coulde, and wynter is called

colde, becauſe it hath more colde then heate: furthermore if a thinge excede in heat and moyſture to gether, or in colde and dryneſſe, or in hete and dryneſſe, or in colde and moyſture, then it muſt take name, of the qualities which excedeth: as yf heat and moyſture excede, then it muſt be called hote and moyſte: yf colde and drynes, cold and dry: and ſo of the other. And hereof it is euident, that ſumtyme one temperament is equall and temperate in one oppoſicion, and diſtemperate, and not equall in an other.
               For yf it be not neceſſary, for that that is hote to be dry, but may be moyſt, then it may alſo be temperate, becauſe the meane is nygher to the dry temperature, then is ye moyſt: and lykewiſe an other temperature that is colde yf it may as

well be dry as moyſt, may be temperate alſo: becauſe the meane is nigher to the moyſt temperature, then the dry is.
               The ſame anſwere may be made of drye and moyſte, that before is made of hote and colde. Therefore it is no maruayle, though there be ſumthinge temperate in the one halfe, and not temperate in the other. But here thou muſt take hede, yf thou be axed of what temperature a man, an aſſe, or an oxe is, that thou anſwere not ſymply and abſolutly: For to that that is ſpoken diuerſly, and is diuerie alſo of it ſelfe, no man can make abſolutely & ſimply a direct anſwere: Therfore before thou make thyne anſwere, yu muſt bid hym, ſhowe yt ye mā, the aſſe, or ye oxe, whereof he douteth: then yf he dout of a man,

thou muſte haue a reſpect to the perfit man, whiche (as Gallen ſayeth in the firſte boke of his tē
                  peramentes) is neyther hote, nor coulde, and as he differeth from hym, ſo make anſwere, ſayinge eyther that he is hot, or otherwiſe as thy iudgement ſhall lede the: but yf he doubt of a beſt, then thou muſt haue an eye to the hole kynde of men. For all other kindes, compared vnto it, are diſtemperat, & as he differeth from mankynde, eyther in hete, or otherwiſe, ſo ſhape hym an anſwere. And that thou be not deceyued, in makyng thyne anſwere, thou muſte vnderſtand, that heat, coulde, dry, and moyſt, be taken diuerſly: For firſt they be taken abſolutely, and ſimply, that is to ſay without any admixtion of other bodyes: and of

this ſorte, the only elementes be hot, coulde, dry, & moyſt: ſecondarely they be ſpoken by exceſſe, as whan there is in one thing, more hete then coulde, more dryneſſe, then moyſture, or other wyſe: and of this faſſion bloud, fleme, wyne, oyle, & honny, be called hot, colde, dry, and moyſt: and that, that is called hote, colde, dry, and moyſte of this ſort, is ſpoken yet .2. maner of wayes. fyrſt abſolutly, that is compared to no one alone, but to the hole nature of thinges, and of this faſſhiō a dog, ſimply, & abſoluetly taken, and not compared to any thing alone, is dry: otherwiſe that is to ſay not abſolutly, but cōpared to ſum one alone, may be moyſt, as to a piſmyre. And moreouer, there be .iii. diuers maner of compariſons, the firſt is betwyxt

two of diuers kyndes, as a man to a beaſte. The ſecond is whan ye diſtemperate is compared to the temperate of the ſame kynde, as a man compared to the parfit man, whereof we ſpake before. The thirde is, whan .ii. diſtemperate of one kynde, is compared together: as one man to an other, one lyon to an other, one horſe to an other. Whoſoeuer dothe diligently examin theſe thinges, may eaſly iudge of what temperament the iiii. tymes of the yere, that is to ſay ye ſpringe, ſummar, autumne, and winter, be. For euery one of theſe by hym ſelfe and without compariſon, maye be called hote cold, drye, or moyſt, & of this faſhion the ſpring is withoute all exceſſe, becauſe there is not as is in wynter, more colde then heat: nor

as in ſummar, more heat thē cold: lykewyſe there is a mediocritie of dryneſſe and moyſture, and therfore Hippocrates ſayeth, that it is the moſt holſumeſt tyme of all the yere, and a tyme in the which there chaūſeth no deadly ſicknes. For ye moſte part of the diſeaſes of the ſpringe, happen by reſon that all the euyll humors be driuen from the innar partes, in to the ſkynne. Wherefore the diſeaſes be rather to be imputed to the body, then to ye tyme of ye yeare. For what body ſo euer hath good homours, that bodye remayneth ſtyll in healthe, ſo long as the ſpryng laſteth: paraduenture it doeth not ſo in ſummar, autumne or wynter, becauſe theſe tymes brede or encreſe euyll humors: as ſummar encreaſeth chollar, & autumne melancholy, & wynter fleme & watriſh humors.

It is poſſible, that ſum man wyll reprehend my ſayinges, obiecting the begynnyng of the ſpringe to be coulde, accordyng to wynter, & the latter ende hot, as in ſummar. In dede I confeſſe no leſſe, then ye begynnynge of the ſpringe, to be a lytell coulde, and the latter ende, a lytell hote, but not in exceſſe, as it is eyther in ſummar, or wynter. Wherfore it can not be called hote and moyeſt, as ſūme doe ſuppoſe, becauſe it can not be hot and temperat, both at one tyme. As for ſummar by the conſent, as well of the Philoſophers, as of phiſitions, is hot and dry, becauſe there is in it more heat then could, more drineſſe, then moyſture. Autumne ſimply, and without exception, can not be called colde, and dry, as ſūme holde opinion, for it is not

coulde, becauſe there is as muche heate as coulde, ſeing the middle of the day is much hotter, then the mornynge, and euenynge. Therefore it is founde to be diſtemperat, in heat, and coulde, and ſo mixt of bothe, that it can nether be called hote, nether coulde. Therefore it is full of perilouſe diſeaſes becauſe it is diſtempered both in heate, and coulde: and becauſe it hath more dryneſſe, then moyſture, therefore it is called dry. As for wynter it is moyſt, & could, not becauſe it is more moyſt & coulde, then ye other times of the yere, but becauſe there is more moyſture then drines, more could then heate. Nowe that I haue ſo brefelye (as I coulde) declared the temperamentes of the tymes of the yere, it is mete & cōuenient,

to ſhewe in as fewe wordes as I can, the temperamentes of the iiii. ages, which are chyldehode, youth, mannes ſtate, and olde age: Chyldehode is from the chyldyng the ſpace of .xv. yere next folowyng, and it is hote and moyſt, and that is eaſie to be perceyued hereof, that the firſt conſtitution of the chylde, is of ſeede, and bloude, the whiche both be hote and moyſt. Youthe beginneth where chyldehod endeth, & continueth .x. yeres: in this age ther is more firye heat, & leſſe natural heat thē is in childehode as Gallen witneſſeth in hys ſecond boke of temperamentes. Mannes ſtate begynneth at .xxv. and continueth to .xxxv. the which tyme is hote and dry: Olde age beginneth at .xxxv. and continueth the reſt of the lyfe, though ſumme

doe recken it but to .ix. and fortie yere, and it is colde & dry. Ye ſhall fynde in other places, mo differences of ages, howbeit I thinke theſe ſufficient, for ſuche as be not to deynty, and exquiſite. Whoſo thinketh hym ſelfe not ſatiſfyed, with this brefe expoſition of temperamentes, let hym reade diligently Galenes .iii. bokes of temperamentes, and I dout not, but he ſhall be ſatiſfyed. For I makyng haſte to better and more profitable knowledge, cānot finde in my harte, to tary any lenger in this diſputation, yet whoſo euer ſhall dilygently examine in hys mynde that that is wryttē before, may eaſely (yf he be not halfe foliſhe) gather ye reſt which wanteth without a techer, or an inſtructar.
            
            
               ¶The .viii. chapter of humors.
               
                  
                  HVmours be fower in number, that is to ſay, bloude, chollar, flewme, and melancholy: of the which, bloude is hote, moyſt, and ſwete. Flewme is coulde, moyſt, and vnſauery, lyke vnto the pure water: yelowe chollar, hote, dry, and bittar: blacke chollar, or melancholy, coulde, drye, ſowre, and ſtipticke.
               Theſe humours be called hot, could, dry, and moyſt, becauſe they be ſo in power, and not in acte, and ther is great difference betwixte thinges that be hot of power: and thinges hot in acte. For that thing is hot in acte, which is hot alredy, and that is hot in power, which is not hot alredy, but may, and is apt to be hot afterward, & ſo we call bryne, or vinegar drye, though

they appere to the eye to be moyſt, yet experience hath proued them drye, becauſe they conſume the ſuperfluous humours, bothe of fleſh, & alſo other thinges. Whan theſe .iiii. humours reſerue theyr forſayde qualities, then the body wherein they be, is hole, and without diſeaſe, and the before named humours, be called of the Phiſitions, naturall. The receptacles of bloud, be the vaynes, and pulſes, but the bloud, that is contayned in the pulſes, (as Gallen ſayeth in his firſt boke, and firſt chapter of affected places) differeth from the blowde of the vaynes, in that, that the blowde of the pulſes is both hotter, thynnar, & yelower. The well of the blowde, is the liuer, & not onely that, but alſo the firſt inſtrument of mannes bodye

and the naturall and true cullour of the blowd, is red: which Galen affirmeth in many places. Where blowde redoundeth the body is feat, fayer, mery, & pleſantly diſpoſed. Flewme, of cullour is white, which at the length by ye meanes of naturall heat, may be tourned in to bloude: and therefore ſeinge it is a nowriſhment but halfe boyled, nature hath prouided no propre, or peculier receptacle for the pourgynge of it. For flewme engendred in the ſtomake or mawe, be cauſe it is carryed together wt the iuice that came of the meate & drinke vp in to ye liuer, is at length by much alteration tourned into bloude, and that which is caryed together with the bloud in the vaynes, may ſkant be ſpared, becauſe it mittigateth the greate feruent, and outragious heat of

ye bloud: therfore it hath morenede to tarry ſtyll & be altered, then to be pourged, & caryed away, but yt that remayneth behynde in the guttes, is pourged, & caryed quite oute at the fundament, by reaſon of the chollar cūmynge fro the lyuer (as Gallen ſayeth in the .v. of his bokes, of the vſe of the partes of mannes body.) The excrement which falleth frō ye brayne in to ye mouth, can not properly be called flewme but rather muck, or ſniuil: flewmatick bodyes, be ſlothfull, ſlepy, fleſhye, & ſoone horeheared. Yelowe chollar hath his name, of his culour, & nature hathe prouided a proper place for it, which is ye blather vnder ye liuer: for it was neceſſary for it to be parted from the bloud, leſt at the length ye hole body, ſhould becumne yelowe, as it doth in the yelowe Iawndies.

Cholericke men be angry, ſharpe wytted, nymble, and quicke in all theyr affayers, inconſtant, and leane and good digeſters of theyr meat: melancholy is the dregges and filthe of the bloud, and therefore it is blacke, as it appereth in the name: it were great daunger, for it to be left in the liuer, therfore the ſplyne is prouided of nature, to receyue it, the which ſplyne yf it drawe leſſe then it ſhould do, then the melancholy, or blacke chollar, is left with the blowde: by reaſon whereof the body getteth a black colour, or at the leaſt a feuer quartayne. Men that be melancholy, be ſottell, couetouſe, greate frettars with them ſelues, vnfaythful, ſad, and carefull, enuious ferfull, and weak ſprited. The vſe of theſe forſayde humors, is ſuch

in eſpeciall as foloweth. The bloud ſerueth to the nowriſhment of the hole body, flewme helpeth the mouyng of the ioyntes, yelow chollar clenſeth the inteſtines of of their flewme and filthe, melancholy healpeth ye action of the ſtomake, (as Gallene writeth in his v. boke of the vſe of the partes, of mannes body) by reaſon yt it draweth the ſtomake together, wherby the naturall heat, is encreaſed: & the concoction of the meat, made much the more parfit. Soranus an Epheſian borne, wryteth: that theſe humours rule the body by courſe, eche of them .vi. houres to gether: as bloud begynneth at .ix. of the clocke in the night, & ruleth vntyll .iii. of the mornyng, yelowe chollar beginneth at .3. in the mornyng, and gouerneth vntyll .ix. of

the mornyng, melancholy beginneth at .ix. and continueth to .iii. in the after noone. Flewme begynneth at .iii. of the after noone, and laſteth tyll .ix. of the night. Theſe humors, ſumtyme loſe theyre naturall qualities wherby they hurt the body, and be called not naturall. Blowde becummeth vnnaturall, ether whan it putrifieth in the vaynes, be cauſe the pores be ſhut, or els whan it is mixt with ſūme other euyll humor, as in the dropſy, where it is mingled wt water, or finally, whan it is mixt, ether wt ouer muche chollar, flewme, or melancholy, whereof it taketh a newe name, and is called eyther cholericke blowd, flewmaticke, or melancholy bloud: For it is neuer naturall, except in the mixture, it haue the rule and dominion. Of vnnaturall flewme, there be .iiii.

kyndes, (as Gallen wytneſſyth in his ſecond boke & .vi. chapter, of ye differences of feuers). The firſt is watryſh, & of the cullar of molten glaſſe, wherof it hathe to name citrine & is very cowld. The ſecond kynde, is that which after ye hawking out, hath a ſwete taſte, & is called ſwete flewme. The third is ſowre of taſte, & is not ſo colde as the citrine, & cowlder then the ſwete. The fowerth is ſalt, eyther by ye mixture of ſūme ſalt humor, or elles by putrifactiō, & is called ſalt flewme. Of vnnaturall yealowe chollar, there be .v. kyndes. The firſte is yelowe, lyke vnto the yolkes of egges, & as Gallen ſayeth is engendred in ye vaynes The ſecond is colowred lyke leade, or garlicke & is bred in ye ſtomake or mawe. The thirde is of a ruſty cullour, & it alſo is bred in ye ſtomake.

The forth inclineth ſumwhat towardes grene, and is engendred in the place beforeſayd. The .v. is of the cullour of the ſea, and groweth in the ſtomacke alſo. Of melā
                  choly, or black chollar, ther is but one kynde vnnaturall, & it is ſumwhat browne of cullour, and ſo ſharpe and ſowre that it eateth, & fretteth the body, where it goethe.
            
            
               ¶The .ix. chapter, of the partes of mannes body.
               
                  THe firſte diuiſion of partes of mānes body, is of thoſe, that ye latten men call ſimilares, & diſſimilares, whiche in engliſhe, may be called lyke, and vnlike▪ For ſimilares be ſuch partes as be lyke vnto them ſelues in all thinges, which when they be diuided, or parted in ſonder

the leſte of them kepeth the ſame name that the hole dothe, whereof it is part: and diſſimilares, be ſuch as are vnlyke them ſelfes in all thinges, which whan they be deuided or parted a ſunder, none of them can be called by the name yt the hole is, as in example. No part of the head, can (yf it be ſeparat, & parted, from the head) be called an head▪ no more can any part of the hand be named an hand, nor of ye foote, a foote: nor of the eye, an eye: yet euery parte of water is called water, and euery part of bloud, is called bloude, and euerye parte of bone, bone: and euery part of fleſh, is called fleſhe. Therfore theſe laſt reherſed be ſuch as the laten men call ſimilares, and the other be the ſelfe ſame, yt be called diſſimilares, or inſtrumentales. Gallen ſayeth, yt
                  
the ſame partes, which the latyns call ſimilares, be the firſt elementes, and begynners of mannes bodye, although the ſelfe ſame, be common to brute beaſtes alſo, for ther is nether oxe, horſe, ne dogge, but they haue pulſes, vaynes, ſenewes, tiinges, griſtilles, ſkinnes, and fleſhe, yet not in all poyntes lyke vnto man, and beſide theſe, other that man hath not, as hornes, bylles, ſpowres, & ſkales: of theſe, the other which be called diſſimilares, or inſtrumentales, be made, as hed, handes, feet, & ſuch lyke. An inſtrumentall parte, differith from the inſtrument, becauſe that ſūme of the ſame partes, before is called ſimilares, be inſtrumentes, and yet may not be inſtrumentall partes. For euery part (as gallen ſayeth) that bringeth forth a parfit actiō,

is an inſtrument: wherof it commeth that the pulſes, vaynes, and ſenewes, be inſtrumentes, and no inſtrumentall partes. Of ye inſtrumentall partes, there be thre called chefe, or principall: ye brayne, hart, & liuer. There are ſumme, whiche addeth vnto theſe, ye priuy partes, becauſe they conſerue and kepe ye kinde.
               There be belonging to theſe, iiii. other, as to ye brayne, ſenewes: to the hart, pulſes: to the liuer, vaynes: and to the pryuye partes, the ſparmaticke veſſayles: beſyde theſe, there be certayne other partes of the body, whiche nether rule other, nor yet be ruled of other, but hath a facultie of them ſelfes, whereof they be gouerned: as bone, tiynge, ſkynne and fleſhe.

All ye partes of mannes body, haue nede of pulſes, and vaynes, to the keping of ther ſubſtance: vaynes, to the entent yt they may be nowriſhed, and pulſes for the kepynge of naturall heat in good temper. Hytherto I haue ſpoken generally of the partes of mannes body: whoſo is wyllyng to haue a particular reherſall of all the partes, let them ſeke Gallen, or Veſal
                     •
                  us. For they haue writtē hole bokes, and greate volumes of them: and as for me, I haue written of the ſame, in an other place, ſo well as my wyt, lernyng, knowledge, and the ſterilitie and baraynes of the engliſh tong, wolde gyue me leue. Therfore if that I ſhould wryte the ſame agayne. I ſhoulde both be ouer tedious to ſuch as ſhowld heare me, & alſo I ſhowld breake

my promyſe, becauſe I haue promiſed, to write a brefe, and a ſhorte treatyſe, vpon Phiſicke.
            
            
               The .x. chapter, of powers or faculties.
               
                  A Facultie, or a power, is the cauſe, frō whence the action procedethe. There be .iii. faculties, or powers, diuers ech to other, which gouerneth the bodye, and be called Animall, vitall, and naturall. The animall power or facultie, cummeth from the brayne by the ſenewes, & geueth both mouyng and felynge, to eche part of the body, and is author of the ſenſes, and all voluntary actions. The vital power cummeth from the harte, and is caryed in the pulſe throughout the bodye,

wherto it geueth life: wherof it is euident, that the hart is the wel of lifely heat: the natural power, cō
                  meth from the liuer, and is caried to euerye parte of the body, by the vaynes, and ſerueth to the noriſhynge of the ſame. This power, or facultie, is deuided in .iiii. other powers, the firſt is attractiue, the ſecond is retentiue, the third concoctiue or alteratiue, the fowerth expulſiue. The attractiue power, is the ſame, by ye which, euery part of ye body draweth to it, ſuch iuyce as is mete and conuenient to noriſhe it, and that iuyce, which is ſooneſte made like, is moſt conuenient for nowriſhment: therfore this power, ſeing that it prepareth matter, to the noriſhment of euery part, ſerueth to the power alteratiue, or concoctiue. The retentyue

power holdeth ye ſame which is al redy drawen, vntyl it be altered & chaunged: & this power alſo, ſerueth vnto the alteratiue, or concoctiue power.
               The alteratiue power, hath name of hys action, for it altereth the iuyce, and at the length, maketh it lyke to the part, that is noriſhed. The expulſiue power or facultie, ſeparateth the euyll from ye good, leſt with long tariynge together, the one ſhoulde marre the other: & this as the other, ſerueth to the alteratiue power. Theſe .4. powers, be in euery part of euery naturall body, as Gallen witneſſeth, in hys bokes, of powers or faculties.
            
            
               ¶The .xi. chapter, of Actions.
               
                  
                  AN action, is an actuall mouyng, procedinge from a facultie, and therefore the facultie is alwayes the cauſe of the action, wherfore whan the power periſheth, ther foloweth no action at all: That which the action hath made & finiſhed, is the worke: as bloud, fleſhe, & bone, and as ye may call euery action a certayne worke of Nature, ſo ye can not call euery worke, an actiō: as fleſh is a work of nature, & not an action. There is in ye body .ii. manner of actions. One is called Anymall, or voluntarie, which procedeth from the ſynowes, and muſcules, & this is ſuche an actiō, yt whan it is, it may be ſeaſed, & whan it is not, it may

be rayſed, as a man liſteth, as in example. The head, armes, and legges, may be moued, or holden ſtyll, as it ſhall pleſe the dody, that hath them. This action is parted in to thre. The firſt is of feelynge, which is deuided in .v. as in to the action of ſeinge, hearinge, felinge, ſmellynge, and taſtyng. The ſecōd, is the action of voluntarye mouyng. The third, is the action, of the cogitation, memory, and reaſon, which of all the reſt, is moſt noble, and excellent. As for reſpiration, is a voluntary action, becauſe it is in oure wyll to holde oure breth: or to let it go, which is euident of the ſeruaunt (that Gallē ſpeketh of) which held his breth vntyl he dyed. Wherfore it is euident, that ſūme voluntarye actions, be free: & ſum, ſerue the affectiōs

of the body. For to walke any whither, or to ſpeake with any body, or to take any thinge, be fre actions, but to eaſe the belly or to make water, ſerue the neceſſitie of the bodye. Yt is poſſible for a mā, to holde hys peace (yf he haue ſo conſtitute with hym ſelfe) an hole yeare to gether, but to hold his excrement, or hys water .ii. monethes, or .ii. weckes, it is not poſſible. For they prouoke ſo oft, and greue a man ſo muche, that oftentymes, they wyll not abyde, tyll they maye be conuenientlye let forth, and lyke vnto theſe, is reſpiration, or the actiō, of brething. For whoſoeuer hathe his brethe ſtopped, but a very littell tyme, it is a greate doubte, yf he dye not fourth with all. But the naturall action, which is not voluntarye,

cummeth of the vaynes, and pulſes. For let a man doe what he ſhall, and yet they wyll doe theire office, without any let. Amongeſt the naturall actions, be reckened, generation, Auction, nutrition, Formation, Alteration, appeticion, attraction, concoction, retention, diſtribution, excretion, & ſuch other. But as for generation, it is not one ſimple naturall action, for in it is, bothe alteration, and formation. The amplyfycation, and increacement, in length, bredeth, and depeneſſe, of all the vttar partes of the bodye, is called auction. Nutrition, is the aſſimilation, or makyng lyke, of the nuriſhment to that, that is nuriſhed: to the whiche, appoſition, and agglutination or adheſiō be neceſſary. For after that the iuyce, which

afterward ſhall nuriſh euery part of the body, is once fallen from ye vaynes, it muſt firſt be put to, and then ioyned or glued, & laſt of all, made like. It is very mete and expedient for euery Phiſition, entending his pacientes health, diligently to conſider all the actions, as well the animall, as naturall: becauſe of them, the conſtitution of the body, is eaſy to be knowen.
               For what body ſo euer is in health, the ſame hath all the actions parfit and ſownde, and what body is ſicke and diſeaſed, it hath cleane otherwiſe. Moreouer the action for the moſt part, declareth the place affected. For there can be no action hurt, but that part or inſtrument, wherin it is, muſt be affected alſo.
            
            
               ¶The .xii. chapter, of ſpirites.
               
                  
                  A Spirit is a ſubtyl, thynne, and bright ſubſtance, made of the fineſt partes of the blowd, that the power may be caried from the principall partes of ye body, to ye reſt: wherby eche maye doe hys dutie and office. There be in number, only .iii. ſpirites: the animall, vitall, and naturall. The animall ſpirit, hath his place, in ye brayne, and being diſperſed in the ſenewes, geueth the power of mouinge, and feling, to eche part of the body: It is made of the vitall ſpirite. The vitall ſpirit, is in the hart, and is caried in the arteries, throughout the body, being the very cauſe of all naturall, and lyuely heat: It is made of the exhalations, or the dryeſt, and fineſt

partes of the bloud. Yf there be any naturall ſpirit, it is in the liuer and vaynes, and in dede to ſay the truthe, there is no greate nede for any ſpirite, to carry any power of nowriſhing through the body, ſeing yt euery part draweth hys nuriſhment, euen as the adamante ſtone draweth yron: & beſyde this, the liuer hath no ſuch matter, as any ſpirit can be made of. For if there were any matter, wherof the naturall ſpirit might be made, that muſte nedes be the vitall ſpirit, of whome the animall ſpirite alſo, is made: but ſeing that the vitall ſpirit is engē
                  dred in the hart, and by the pulſes carryed through the body, it had ben neceſſary, that there ſhold haue ben great pulſes, from the hart to to the lyuer, whiche might haue

broughte ſo much vitall ſpirit, as ſhoulde haue ſuffiſed to haue made naturall ſpirite. Howbeit it is euident, yt there cummeth no arteries to the lyuer, but ſuch as be with the ſmalleſt for ſuch a pourpoſe, and then ther is no ſuch cauitie in the liuer, as is in the brayne, or hart, where any generation of the naturall ſpirit, may be. Moreouer, there is no veſſelles prepared of nature for the cariage of it, excepte a man ſhoulde ſay, that it is caryed with the groſſe bloude in ye vaynes, whych is not lyke: ſeinge the vaynes, haue but one cote, and that of no great thickenes, nether (& yf that were true,) the vaynes ſhoulde beat, as ye arteries doe. Alſo there is no waye or enterance for ayer, wherof it might be nowriſhed as the animall & vitall be.

And agayne, the bloud of the lyuer, is ſo groſſe, and mixt with other humors, that it is not mete to make any ſpirites of. Therfore, ſeinge that there is nether any ende, wherfore it ſhowlde be made, nor matter, wherof it could be made, nor nouriſhment to preſerue it, nor a conuenient place, to make it in, nor finally any way or conduite, wherby it might be brought in to euery part of the bodye: I may iuſtly, and not with out a cauſe, doubt of it, although it be a common opinion amongeſt ye phiſtions, that there is a naturall ſpirite.
            
            The ende of the firſte boke.
         
         
            
            The ſeconde boke.
            
               ¶The .i. chapter, Of the number of thinges not naturall.
               
                  THinges not natural, be .vi. in number.
               1 Ayer.
               2 Meat and drinke, or any thing, īwardlye taken.
               3 Exerciſe, and reſte, both of the body, and partes.
               4 Slepe and watche.
               5 Excretion, and retention, or fulnes, and emptines.
               6 Affectes or perturbations of the mynde.
               Theſe be called thinges not naturall, becauſe they alter oure bodies,

and if they be not diſcretly taken, vtterlye aboliſh health: on the other parte, yf they be wiſely and ſoberly vſed: they doe not only defende health, but alſo ſtrengthen nature in all her workes and actions. Therfore they be in yt parte of phiſicke, which defēdeth health And to the ende that no man, be ignorant in ye vſe of them, I pourpoſſe brefely, & in as fewe wordes as I cā, to declare & ſhew the vſes of eche of them alone by himſelfe.
            
            
               ¶The .ii. chapter, of Ayer.
               
                  QF thinges not natural. Ayer is moſt neceſſarye to be conſidered, becauſe ye naturall heat, can not

be kept in temper, without it, and becauſe, we muſte nedes receyue it into our bodies, be the weather neuer ſo foule, and finallye there can neyther health be defended, nor diſeaſe cured, or remedied without it. Therfore it lyeth vs in hand, to take eſpeciall heed, and diligent watche, that we miniſter it in due tyme and ſeaſon, that it may be as it ſhoulde be, a cauſe of health, which no doubte it ſhall, if firſt we marke wel the ſubſtaunce of it, whether it be pure and clene, or groſſe and thicke, or cloudie. That is ye beſt and moſt holſume, which is pureſt, not infected with no ſtandinge pooles, nor no marriſhe groundes, nor with the carren of beſtes, nor with the putryfactiō of herbes, fruite, or grayne, and ſuch lyke.
               
                  Whan we haue well conſidered the ſubſtance of the ayer, then we muſt marke well the qualitie. For as to temperat bodies, the moſte temperat ayer is holſumeſt, ſo to bodies diſtempered, ayer diſtempered in a cōtrary qualitie, is moſt holſum: as to ſuche as be cowlde: ayer that is hote, and to ſuche as be hote, cowlde: and to them that be dry, moyſte: and to ſuche as be moyſte, dry. But yf it happen ſo, yt the ayer be not contrary of qualitie, then it muſt be prepared and made for oure pourpoſe by art: as yf the diſeaſe or ſicknes be hote & dry, then we muſt by ſprinklynge of cowlde water on the pauement or floore, & by ſtrawyng of herbes & be ſettyng vp of ſuche boughes as be colde & moyſt, prepare ye ayer & make it coulde, & moyſt: On ye
                  
otherſyde, yf the diſeaſe be cowlde and moyſt, then the houſe muſt be perfumed with ſuch thinges as be hote and dry, vntyll the ayer alſo be made hote, and dry. In long diſeaſes, ther is none ſo good a remedy, as to change the ayer: and therof it came, that ſo many going to ſaynte Cornelis, were healed & cured of the falling euyl: by changyng of the ayer, and not by myracle, as we poore fooles thought, kneling, & creping, to ſaynt Cornelis horne: but thankes be to the omnipotent, and euer lyuing god, and to oure noble kynge, ſuch moſt vyle abhominable ydolatry, is nowe well lefte here in this realme.
            
            
               ¶Of meate and drinke. The .iii. chapter
               
                  
                  I Woulde counſel euery man, as well the hole as ye ſicke, to take good hede what they eat and drinke: For bothe the goodnes, meſure, qualitie, cuſtome, delectation, order, tyme, houre, and age, muſt be conſidered. Therfore he that purpoſeth not to be ſicke, nor to haue a ſickly body, let his firſte care be to eat ſuche meates, as make good iuice.
               For there is nothyng ſo apt to breede ſicknes, as is the euyl habit of ye body, which is gotten by feadyng of meates, that make euyll and noughtye iuyce. That is alwayes good meate, which is light in digeſtyng, and thynne of ſubſtaunce, and the which alſo bredeth good iuyce: and that is euill, which is contrary vnto it. His

next care ought to be, that he eate no more at one tyme, then is ſufficient to ſerue Nature, & ſo he ſhall bryng to paſſe, that eyther he ſhall neuer or elles very ſeldome, fall in to any perilous diſeaſe: Howbeit ye Phiſition ſhoulde geue great diligēce, in dieting of the ſicke, For a litell to much ſumtyme, though the meat be neuer ſo good, maketh a fault incorrigible: & a quicke or ſharpe ſickneſſe, & a ſicknes that is long & ſlow, may not be meaſured bothe a like. For a ſharpe, & a ſhort diſeaſe, muſt haue a thinne, and a ſlendar diet: and a longe diſeaſe, a more fullar. Therfore the Phiſiciō in preſcribing of diet, muſt marke well the ſtrength of hys pacient: & firſt according vnto hys ſtrength, & then according to the nature of the ſicknes, preſcribe ye meaſure of hys meates and drinkes.
               
                  After the meaſure the Phiſition ought immediatly to marke well the qualitie of the meates: For ſuch as be hole, to the ende that they may kepe theyr health, muſte be fed with meates of lyke, & not of contrary qualitie: and ſuche as be ſicke, ought to be fed wt meates of contrary qualitie: As they that be ſycke for hete, muſt be remedied by meates that be coulde, & they that be ſicke of colde diſeaſes, muſt haue hote meates: and in diſeaſes that be moyſte, dry meates: and in dry diſeaſes, moyſt meates. Therfore ſuche as haue moyſt bodies, as childrē, muſt be fed with moyſt meates: and ſuch as be ſicke of dry diſeaſes, as of feuers, muſt alſo be fed wt moyſt meates, the tone to kepe theyr bodyes moyſt ſtyll, & the other, to amende and correcte

their dryneſſe: and lykewiſe of the reſt. Such as be hote of nature, muſt eat hot meates, yt they may kepe theyr heat ſtyll, but yf theyr heat once waxe vnnaturall, then it muſt be brought in temper, by ye healp of ſuch thinges, as are colde: and yf they be ouer colde, by heat: and yf they be ouer moyſt, by dryeth: but if theyr heat, colde, drineſſe or moyſture be naturall, & excede not, then it muſt be cheriſhed ſtyll with meates of like qualities, as I ſaid before. Next the qualitie conſider the cuſtume, for that ought not to be broken, except there be great cauſe whye, ſeing that ſuch meates as a man hath accuſtomed hym ſelfe vnto, although they be worſe, hurt not ſo much as the other doe, of the which he hath not accuſtomed to eat of. Therfore in

diſeaſes, the Phiſition may not be to buſie, in pluckyng away their pacientes from theyr accuſtomed meates & drinkes: but if it happen ſo, that of neceſſitie there muſt be a change, then it may not be done raſhely, or all at ones, but fayre & ſoftly, and by lyttell, & lytell. For all ſudden mutations, be daungerous. And it is mete for the Phiſition to obſerue, in what meates ye ſicke deliteth moſt. For ſuche as he hath pleaſure of in the eatinge, the ſame the ſtomake enbraſeth more gredely: and digeſteth or altereth much ſoner, & therfore they muſt be taken, & preferred before better, though they be worſe. Furthermore he muſt take heed what order his pacient kepe in hys diet, for it is a prepoſterous ordar, to beginne with quynces or orynges

and ende with ſallades, made of herbes, and oyle.
               Take this alwayes as a generall rule, that that meat which is moſt eaſy to be digeſted, ſhoulde be eaten before that, that is hardar: & that alſo that is moyſt, before that that is drie: and that that is leuſe and ſlipperie, before that yt is hard and byndinge. Amongeſt other thinges, the time of eatyng wolde not be forgotten.
               They that be hole, ſhoulde exerciſe thē ſelfes before they eat, & ſhould not eat againſt theyr appetite, nor abſtayne whan ther appetite prouoketh them: & they that be ſicke, ſhoulde vtterlye forbeare, vntyll there fittes were in the declination, or ful finiſhed.
               Howbeit the diſeaſe may be ſuche,

& the pacientes ſtrength ſo weake, yt it ſhall be nedefull to fede them, both in their fittes, & out of theyr fittes: howbeit I leaue that to the diſcretion of the Phiſition. And I thinke it but well doone, to put you in remembraunce, what your diet ſhould be, in the .iiii. ſeuerall times of the yere: In winter, more meat and leſſe drinke, and meates and drinkes that be hot and drye, as roſted meates, and wyne then may ſafely be dronken, withoute water. In the ſpring, we ſhoulde eat ſumdele leſſe, and drinke a lytell more then in wynter, and eate alſo more of fleſhe, and change frō roſted to boyled: In ſummar we muſt endeuer oure ſelfes, yt oure bodies may be ſoft, and colde, and therfore we muſt eat leſſe, & drinke the more, and eat for the moſt part

boyled meates, & ſuch as is colde. In Autumne we ſhould eat ſumthynge more then in ſummer, and drinke leſſe, and of byggar drinkes be ſumthinge more bolder then in ſummer. And as the tyme is to be conſidered, ſo is the age alſo. For chyldren muſt be fed, with moyſt meates. And ſuch as be not yet at their groeth, becauſe their bodies be more temperate, muſte haue, more temperate meates. And luſty men ſuch as is alredye paſte theyr groeth, becauſe their bodies be hot, and dry, ſhoulde haue lyke meates, that is to ſay ſuche as is hot & dry: olde men becauſe their bodies be ouer cold and dry, muſt be fed with meates, that be hote and moyſte.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. chapter, Of exerciſe, and reſt.
               
                  
                  EVery ſofte mouynge, is not an exerciſe, as Gallen ſayeth, but yt that is ſūthing vehement, as lepyng, coytyng, runnyng, tennys, footbale, ſhootyng, and ſuch lyke. Exerciſe hath many notable commodities but .3. in eſpeciall: the hardnes of the inſtrumentes, the encreſe of naturall heat, and the more vehement and quicker mouynge of the ſpirites: & eche of theſe hath hys peculier, and particuler cōmoditie. The inſtrumentes by meanes of theire hardnes, may endure to labor the bettar, and alſo perfourme theyre actiō more eaſely. The encreſe of naturall heat amendeth the alteration, and concoction of the meat,

wherby the body is much ye more luckely nuriſhed. The quicker & vehementer mouynge of the ſpirites, healpeth to pourge the excrementes, bothe by the raynes, ſkinne, & guttes. Exerciſe bringeth theſe cōmodities to ye bodye, yf it be takē in due tyme, or elles it hurteth more then it profitteth: for yf it be taken whan ther is ether any cruditie in ye ſtomake, or vaynes, it will fill all ye body full of euyll humors, by reaſon that ye crude, and rawe iuyſe, is plucked in to eche part of the bodye. Wherfore exerciſe, ſhoulde ether be taken before meat, or elles after that ye concoction of ye ſtomake & liuer is ended: & ye parfit knowlege of this tyme, is taken of ye vryne. For whan the concoction of the liuer is donne, then the vryne waxeth yelowe.

Howbeit the very beſt tyme of exerciſe is whan yeſterdayes meat is throughly digeſted: as one time for exerciſe, is better thē an other, ſo one kynde of exerciſe, profiteth ye body more then an other. That is ye beſte kynde of exerciſe, in the which euery part of the body, ſuſteyneth lyke labor and payne, and yet in the ſame there may be committed many errors and faultes: for it may be to much, or to littell, yet of bothe, leſſe hurteth to lyttle. Therfore the exerciſe, wolde continue ſo longe, vntyll the bodye ſwellethe, and waxinge read, beginne to ſwete all ouer: and whan any of theſe tokens chanceth, then the exerciſe wolde be ſeaſed incontinent, leſt the good iuice be expelled together with the euyll, & ſo the body ſhal be made leaner, and

dryer, which wyll hynder the groinge. As exerciſe, yf it be diſcretely myniſtred, preuayleth much to the defence of health, ſo reſt and quietnes, yf it be not taken in his tyme, filleth ye body full of ſicknes: For it cauſeth cruditie, which is ye mother, and roote in manner, of all daūgerous ſicknes. There be many good tymes for reſt, but the very beſt tyme, as Hyppocrates witneſſith, is whā the body is weried with labor, and exerciſe. For then he ſayeth, that ye reſt taketh awaye the werineſſe.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. chapter, of ſlepe, and watche.
               
                  SLepe is the reſt of ye animal power, or as Ariſtotell ſayeth, the priuation & takynge away, of the ſenſes,

whiche cummeth of a profitable humor, fallyng from the brayne in to the ſenewes. Of ſlepe the body receyueth many profitable commodities.
               For whiles the animall power reſteth, the naturall power laboreth moſt ſtrōgly, by reaſō wherof the meat is well digeſted, and ye bodie luckely nuriſſhed.
               There be .iiii. thinges, whiche in ſlepe, wolde by earneſtlye loked vpon.
               The firſte is the ſleping tyme, as the night, which for ſlepe of all other tymes, is moſte conuenient: both becauſe the night is coulde & moyſte, and becauſe that then, all thinges is quiet wtout any noyſe. I wolde counſell no man to ſlepe on the daye except he feele ether a

great wearineſſe in al his body, or haue not ſlept ye night before, and yet then it wolde not be taken vpon a full ſtomake neyther, but rather faſting, and emptie.
               The ſecond is the quantitie, for ſlepe yf it continue to long, beſide other incōmodities, it letteth the pourginge of excrementes.
               The thirde, is the lyinge a bed, for therby the diſgeſtion maye be eyther furthered or hyndered. Wherfore firſt it is beſt to lye vpon the right ſide, and then vpon ye lift, that the meat, and drinke, may go lowe ynough, and the mouth of the mawe ſhet the better.
               As for lying vpon the backe, it is vtterly condemned of all men, for it is the cauſe of many perilous diſeaſes, as the apoplexie, & ſuch lyke.
               
                  The fowerth thing, which muſt be conſidered in ſlepe, is the nature of the dreames: for by them the Phiſition ſhall haue a great geſſe of what quality the humor is, which redoundeth and is ſuperfluous. The Phiſition ought to be as diligent, in the miniſtration of ſlepe, to them that be ſicke, as to them yt be hole. For as all other thinges, ſo ſlepe, yf it be not well ordred & taken in hys tyme, may hurt very muche. It hurteth them moſte, whiche haue any of theyre innar partes inflamed: wherfore ſuch muſt be kept from ſlepe, leſt the inflammation be encreſed withall: and moreouer in ſhakynge feuers, the ſicke ought to be kept waking, whyles the colde ſhakynge endureth, leſt the natural heat, & bloud be drawen in to muche, by reaſon

whereof, the feuer wyll be much ye more ſtubberne to be cured. Such as be hole, and without ſickneſſe, muſte beware of ouer much ſlepe, leſt ye good temper of theyr braine be quite marred, & theyr ſtrength alſo cleane reſolued: and of the other ſyde yf they watche to much, theyre bodies ſhall be filled with rawe humors: therfore it muſt be vſed, nether to much, nor to lytell, but moderatlye, & in a meane. Of ſlepe & watche, much more might be written, howbeit, this maye ſuffiſe well ynough, at this time.
            
            
               ¶The .vi. chapter, of fulneſſe and emptineſſe.
               
                  GAllen ſayeth yt there is .ii. kyndes of fulneſſe. The tone is whan the qualytie alone excedeth, and

the other, whan the humors be growen to much in quantitie. Ther is alſo yet an other kynde of fulneſſe, which is called repletion, and that is properly of meat and drincke.
               Howbeit Gallē maketh .ii. kindes of repletion, the tone is, whan the veſelles be ſo ful, that they can not receyue eaſylye any more, as whā a man hath eaten ſo muche, that his bellye ſeemeth to be extended withall: and the other is whan ye power is loded to muche, though the veſelles be not halfe full, as whan a man eateth more meate then nature or the power that gouerneth hys body, can digeſt. Yet the abundaunce of humors, is deuided in to mo kindes, for whan all the humors doo abound to gether, it is called of ye grekes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and of the latines plenitudo, and in engliſhe, it maye very wel be named fulneſſe: So whan the bloud only redoundeth it maye be called fulneſſe, becauſe it is not ſo pure, but that there is bothe chollar, flewme, melancholy, & water in it: and this fulneſſe is mente .ii. maner of wayes, as whan the holoweneſſe of the vaynes is filled, ſo that the vaynes ſwell withall: or elles whan the power that maketh blud, is not ſufficient to alter or digeſte that that is contayned with in.
               Whan the bodye is filled, eyther with yelowe chollar, melancholy, flewme, or watriſh humors, then it is called Cacochimia, whiche in Engliſhe, is as muche to ſaye, as euyl, and naughty iuyce.
               
                  I coulde neuer nether in Gallen, nor in any other notable author, find any mo differencis of fulnes, then is afore reherſed: therefore ſeinge that I haue brefely, ſayed all that I can concernyng the differences of fulneſſe, or repletion: it remayneth behynde to ſhewe my mynde concernyng the differences of emptineſſe, or euacuatiō, which may cum many wayes: as by lettyng of bloud, pourgyng of ye belly by medicyne, by the ſettyng to boxing glaſſes, by faſtinge, by ſlepynge after hungar, by vryne, by drawyng out of the ſpettill, by bledynge at the noſe, by bryngynge downe of wemens flowers, by the Hemorrhoides, by carnall copulation, by inſenſible euaporation. Of the which I entend to ſpeke of eche in hys ordar. The body, hath

moſt nede of bloud lettinge, whan the vaynes be ſo full, that they be extended withall: For than it is a preſent remedy, and howe muche the more a man fealeth hym ſelfe heuyer then he was wont to be, ſo much that kynd of fulneſſe which is referred to the ſtrength, is encreaſed: but then the veſſelles, are thought to be full, whan the body is much extended with prickynge paynes, & then the Phiſition may be bolde to open ye vaynes, ſo that ye pacient haue cōpetent ſtrength, but the other kynde of repletion, may not alwayes be remedied wt bloud letting, but ſumtimes other wayes, as by faſtynge, pourging, and ſuch lyke, & it is as neceſſary to opē the vaine, whan by meanes of ſūme ſtroke, or for ſūme greate payne & grefe, or by the debylitie

of ſūme part, the bloude is inflamed, as it is in the kyndes of fulneſſe, or repletion before named: to be brefe whan ſo euer the diſeaſe is outragiouſe, yf ye ſtrength ſerue, ther is nothyng ſo neceſſary as to let bloud. Amongeſt al other thinges in lettyng of bloude, the age muſt be conſidered: for childrē before .xiiii. yeares be ful complete & ended, & old mē after they be paſt lxx. yeres ought not but vpō great conſiderations be let any bloude: Howbeit, if in this age they be ful of bloud, and haue good ſtrength, and yf the tyme of the yeare alſo ſerue, and the diſeaſe be ſuch, that it requireth bloude lettynge, the Phiſicion maye boldlye open the vayne a lyttell. Therfore the number of the yeares are not onely to be conſidered, but the complexion,

or the habyt of the ſicke mannes body alſo. For ſūme at .lx. yeares, may abyde more, then other ſūme at .l. wherfore whan the ſtrength ſerueth, & the ſickeneſſe requireth the takynge awaye of bloud, the phiſitiō may boldly, & at one time, take away as much as ſhal be cō
                  ueniente, to the curyng of the diſeaſe: but in caſe the ſtrength of the paciente be feble and weake, then the bloude wolde not be taken awaye al at one tyme, but rather at twiſe, or thriſe, as the ſicke, maye departe withall. In extreme burninge feuers, if the ſtrength ſerue, the beſt remedy is, as Gallen ſayeth, to let bloude, vntyll the bodye waxeth faynte, and ſwoune with all, for the coolynge of the body, wyll extinguiſhe the feuer, and in manye, bothe loſe the bellye,

and alſo prouoke ſweate. In letting of bloude, the naturall conſtitution of the body, muſt be wel loked vpon, for they that haue great vaynes, & be nether to leane, nor to whyte, may ſpare more bloude, then they yt be very leane, & white, & haue but ſmall, and litell vaines. The region, may not be forgotten nether, for ſuch as doe dwell in regions which be very muche diſtē
                  pered ether wt heate or colde, may not abyde the takynge awaye of much bloude, becauſe that theyre bodies whiche dwell in the colde region or contrye, loſing much naturall heat wt theyr bloud, waxe afterward to colde: & the ſtrength of theyre bodyes whiche dwell in ye hote contrey, is afterwarde diſſolued or diſſipate, wt ouermuche heate: and by this reaſon, nether

ſummar, nor wynter, be conuenient to let bloude in, but the ſpringe only, becauſe that it is temperate. As cōcerning what time, or houre of the daye, Gallenes counſell is, that theye that be hole, in the morninge, within an houre after that they be riſen, & they that be ſicke, at all houres, both of the day, and nyght (ſo that theyr ſtrength and ſickneſſe do ſo require.) The Phiſitiō ought before he let any vaine be opened, to inquire diligently of hys formar life, and diet: For yf he haue liued ydellye, and haue bene fed with ſuch meates as nurriſhe much, he may take boldly & wtout feare ye greater quantitie of blud, howbeit yf he haue bene a greate riottour, & a common drunkarde, then Gallen ſayeth that it is mere fooliſheneſſe to do any thynge at

all, for ſuch by theyr intemperat lyfe, wil fil as faſt as they be emptyed. In bloud lettyng, the eſpeciall care ought to be, of the vayne. For ſeinge that ther is .iii. vaynes in the arme, ye innar vayne, which is called of the Surgiens, baſilica, and is the lyuer vayne, ſhoulde be opened, for all ſwellynges, or payne vnder the necke. But the vtter vayne, which is called cephalica, & in engliſhe the head vayne, owghte to be ſmitten whan the partes aboute the necke be troubled, as ye head, and face. The middell vayne, which is called Mediana, wolde not be medled with, but there as the other vaynes, appere not. There be vaynes alſo at the knees, and anclees, which whan ye diſeaſe liethe lowe, is moſt meet to be opened. The laſt care, and charge ſhowlde be, of the ſtintyng

of the bloud: For how much the better it runneth, ſo muche the ſoonar it wolde be ſtinted, or ſtayed: but after that ye vaine is ones ſmitten, it ſhoulde not be ſtayed, vntyl ether that the bloud, or pulſe were chaunged. The ſeconde way of emptiynge the body, is by medicyne receyued in to the ſtomake, which ſhould not be vſed but whā the body is replete with euyll, and corrupt humors: wherfore ſuch as be in healthe and haue good and ſwete humors, Hippocrates wold in no caſe to be purged, by any medicine, for feare of diſſoluing theyr power. But ſuch as haue nede of pourgynge, muſt firſt make them ſelfes apt & meete for the ſame, by bathes & eatyng of moyſt meates: for ſo they ſhall delyuer theyre guttes from obſtructions.

Howbeit yf the humors be thicke & clammy, then they muſt be made thinne, & ſubtell and apt to runne, by ſuche decoctions & ſyrupes as doe incyde groſſe matter. But yf ye humors be thinne and ſubtell, thē they haue no nede of any preparatyue, and the Phiſition ought alwayes to obſerue, that he pourge no humors whiche be crude and rawe, except for theyr multitude they ſwell the bodye, then withoute any more delyberation, they muſte forthwithal be taken away with a pourginge medicyne: leſte the ſtrength of the body be diſſolued, or the fyerye heat of the feuer encreſed, or finally the humors be dryuen to ſū principall part, wherby Nature ſhalbe leſſe able to deliuer the body: For yf nature be not holpen before that tyme, ſhe

ſhall be in ſuche a rage, that nothynge can be done well or orderlye in the bodye. The next care is what humor ſhould be pourged. Therefore the Phiſition ſhoulde take heede that he pourge no moo humors, thē be hurtfull to the bodye: As yf fleume do redounde & hurt ye body, it only is to be pourged: yf chollar, ether yelowe, or blacke, offende the bodye, then he ſhould vtterly abſtaine frō fleume and likewiſe whan water aboundeth, it only ſhoulde be taken awaye: for as Hippocrates ſayeth, if ſuch humors be pourged, as ought to be, it profiteth the bodye, and is donne, withoute gryefe or payne, but elles it is cleane cōtrary. Beſyde this, the time of ye yeare woulde be conſidered, as well in pourging as in lettyng of bloud.

For there be ſumme tymes of the yere in the whiche it is very madneſſe to lewſe ye bellie: For in winter, whan it is froſt or ſnowe, or in ſummar, when the heat is outragious, whoſoeuer is pourged ſhal be much the worſe for it: and yet of both times, the leſſe mete for pourgyng, is the ſummar. For then the body is ſo aduſt, with heate of the wether, that it is not well able to beare the ſharpneſſe of the medicyne, and nature alſo beinge made weake with the heate of the ſummar, is more weakned of the medicyne: inſomuch that many being pourged then, fall ſicke of feuers, & be quite deſtitute of their ſtrength. Therefore the ſpringe tyme, of all other tymes of the yere, is moſte holſome, bothe to powrge the body, and to let bloude.
               
                  In pourgynge the body, the region alſo muſt be conſidered. For yf it be very hot, it letteth the workinge of the medicyne, becauſe it draweth the humors in to ye ſkin, and the aboundaunce of heate healpeth to diſſolue the ſtrength. The age may not be forgottē: For chyldren becauſe they be not yet at their groweth, be nothing mete for pourgations: lykewyſe olde mē whē they waxe weake, ſhoulde not be troubled wt any medicines. And as in all euacuations, ſo in pourging of the belly, the ſtrength of the ſicke muſt be earneſtly loked vpon: For ſo longe as the ſicke, maye abyde eaſilye the taking away of his humors, he may ſafely be pourged, & no longer though all be not gone.
               
                  In leuſyng the belly, vehement & ſtronge laxes, be vtterly to be abhorred: for beſydes that they weaken the ſtrength, they hurt maruelouſly the ſtomacke. Laſte of all in pourgyng of the bellye, the excrementes wolde be taken heede to, of the Phiſicion, becauſe he may diuine diuerſe thinges bothe of their ſubſtance, qualitie, and coulour. The thirde way to cleanſe the bodie is by vomit, wherof Nature hath much good: For they that vomit often, for the moſt part be alwayes hole. For there is euacuation made as well of flewme, as of chollar: by meanes wherof, the ſtomacke is not filled with euyll humors & the head findeth muche eaſe. Vomiting is moſt profitable for them that be cholerick, hauing large breſtes, ſhort neckes, & wide

mouthes, it profiteth alſo to ſuch as by meanes of great eatynge & drinkinge, reſerue crude, and rawe humors in theyr ſtomakes: yet he that wyll be hole and pourpoſeth to be olde, let hym not be to buſye with vomittynge: For the muche vſe of it cauſeth deafneſſe, & hurteth the eyes, it breaketh ye vaynes of the breſte and lunges, it offendeth the teathe, and cauſeth head ache. Therfore it is ye Phiſitions dutie to declare, who is apt to vomit, and who is not. For ſuche as be not apte to vomit, ſhoulde be pourged dounwarde, and in no-caſe conſtrayned to vomit: ſuch as be not apt to vomite be they that be betwixt fat and lene, hauynge theyr breſtes narrowe, and theyr neckes long: and ſuch as be leane, ſlender, and haue wyde breſtes, &

ſhorte neckes, be apt to vomit. In vomittyng the excrement muſt be loked well vpon, for the ſight of it, ſhall amend the coniecture of the Phiſicion. The forth way of emptying ye body, is by boxyng: which (as Gallen ſayeth in hys boke yt he wrote of boxing) doth not only make euacuation and drawe oute muche matter, but alſo eaſeth the payne, and diminiſheth the ſwellyng, diſſolueth wynde, and ſtyrreth vp appetite where it was almoſt loſt, confirming the ſtrength of weake ſtomakes, calleth againe life in ſwounes, and fayntynges, it draweth alſo ſwellynges and fluxes, from one part to another, & ſtinteth bledyng, and ſtayeth wemens flowers. There be .2. kindes of boxing, on is withoute any ſcarifiyng, which preuayleth moſte in

drawing backe of humours, as in ye drawing back of wemens flowers whā they rūne to much, & theſe be light boxing glaſſes, which be vſed wtout ſcarifiyng. The other is wt ſcarifiyng, which is vſed in hard ſwellynges, cummynge of melancholy, or whan ye partes be troubled wt the fluxe of any ſharpe matter, whiche muſte be drawen from one to another: & in ſharpe & quicke diſeaſes, wheras ye pacient may ſpare no bloude: ſcarifyinge profiteth watryng eyes, and alſo paines, both of head, breſt, & backe The .v. kynde of emptying the bodye, is by bathe, and here ye muſte marke that there is .ii. kyndes of bathes, one is naturall, and an other artificiall. That is called natural which ſpringeth of his owne accorde, without ye healp of mānes inuention.
               
                  Of naturall bathes ſumme be hote by the mixture of niter, ſalte, allume, brimſtone, chaulke, lyme, yrō, copper, goulde, ſyluer & tinne, which ether lieth in the bothom of the bathe, or elles in the rockes, or hylles from whence the ſpringe cūmeth, whereof water taketh his qualitie: & by this reaſō, ye bathes which be in a towne, called Bathe here in Englande, be hote: to the great admiration of all ignorante people. Theſe kyndes of bathes be good for ſuche as be diſeaſed in their ioyntes or haue crude, & raw matter in theire bodyes, and be diſeaſed ether with pockes, pyles, or emeroides: but for men, that be in health, and haue ſwete humors they be nothyng mete, yea and the vſe of them, is very perilous. Artificiall bathes, be made by mannes

witte, therefore they be not in all places lyke: But here in Englande they be nothing ſo commendable, as in Germany and other places. For here there is but one hotte houſe, and therefore the ſubtell parte of the humor is drawen out, and ye groſſe is left behinde. But in Germany, & in other places, they haue diuers houſes, firſt one, wher they put of their clothes & an other where they be annoynted and rubbed, and in the thyrde houſe they ſweate and be waſhed: the forthe houſe is not ſo warme as the thyrde, & the fyfthe is ſumwhat colde: nowe that I haue declared the partes of the artificiall bathes, whiche were vſed in the olde tyme, and yet be in many places, I purpoſe to ſhewe in as fewe wordes, the commodities of the

ſame, begynnyng with the firſte part, which is a warme houſe prepared with fire, or wyth warme water and ſwete herbes, to the entente that the littell pores of the ſkynne may open eaſilye, and the hole body with all the humors, be ſumwhat warmed. The nexte houſe beinge ſumthynge warmer, ſtirreth vp the ſpirites, and diſſolueth the groſſe humors, and the rubbyng with the annoyntynge, correcteth & amendeth the hardnes of the ſenewes, ioyntes, and loynes: the thirde houſe by hys greate heat, diſſolueth mightilye the groſſe humours, by meanes, wherof nature pourgeth the bodye of them: and the luke warme water, moyſteth the hole body, & taketh away weryneſſe, yf ther be

any in the vtter partes: ye fowerth houſe, becauſe it is ſumwhat coldar, reducethe nature by litell, and litell, to here priſtinate ſtate. The fifth by meanes of his colde, ſhutteth agayne the pores of ye ſkinne, which beateth the naturall heate in, and cauſeth good concoction, amendyng the action bothe of the ſtomacke and liuer. The ſixt kinde of thoſe thinges which lewſeth the body, is ſweat: and it ought to be prouoked whan any euyll humors, is in the innar partes, as in feuers & peſtilent agues.
               It may be prouoked diuerſly as by the heate of drye bathes, hote ſtones, & yrons, or by ſwete herbes and warme water, ether in pottes or in blathers. But in all vehement, and ſharpe diſeaſes,

and eſpeciallye in hote agues, the Phiſiciō ſhoulde take great hede of the ſweat, markynge very dilygentlye which is good, and whych is euyll: For by them he may coniecture muche of the cauſe of the grefe, but as Hyppocrates ſayeth, thoſe ſweates in feruent and hote diſeaſes, which cōmeth in the iudgyng dayes, & doe ende the feuer, be beſt and moſt holſume: and it is not euyll whan the patient ſweateth in euery part of hys body, ſo hys paynes waxe leſſe withall: but whā ye body ſweateth muche, and the paynes encreaſe, it is not good: Howbeit it is worſt of all, yf the ſweate be cold. And whan the face, head, and necke ſweat onlye, if it be in any hot ague, it declareth dethe whichout any remedy. In prouokyng of ſweate, the Phiſition

ſhoulde take hede, that it be not to much, for feare of diſſoluyng of the ſtrength of hys pacient. The ſeuenth kynde of euacuation is exerciſe, wherof we ſpoke before in the fowerthe chapter, of this ſame boke. The .viii. kynde is abſtinence, or hungar, which doth not extenuat nor make euacuation of him ſelfe, but by meanes that that is not reſtored which wt abſtinence or faſtinge, was waſted. Faſtyng or abſtinēce may be takē .ii. wayes eyther vtterly to forbeare bothe meate and drinke, or elles to take ſo much, as is ſufficient to kepe the ſoule and the body together, and no more. Ther is nothyng, that ſo muche profiteth ether the ſicke, or the hole, as doth abſtinence, yf it be taken in due tyme and orderly: and therfore Plinie, (none of the

worſt wryters of Phyſycke) commendeth ſobrietie in meates and drinkes, ſayinge that it is verye profitable for all men to be temperate in their diet. And the very father of Phiſicke Hyppocrates, affirmeth moderate eatynge and drinking, to be the caſtel of health, and many tymes ſuch as be diſeaſed and ſicke, be cured onlye by abſtinence. In preſcribynge of abſtinēce, the Phiſitiō ſhoulde diſcretly conſider who may beſt beare it, for as Gallen ſayeth in his .2. boke of temperamentes. They yt haue ſmall vaynes, haue but lytell bloude, wherfore they can not faſte without hurtyng theyre bodies, & they that haue great vaynes, haue plentye of bloude, wherefore they maye the better away with abſtinence, without any decay of theyr bodelye health or ſtrength: of ſuch

as be ſicke, they yt be full of crude, & rawe humors, be leaſt hurte wt faſtyng, yea the beſt remedye to all ſuch is abſtinēce: but to be brefe none ſhoulde be cōmaunded to faſt of the Phiſicion, but ſuche as be ſtronge, or elles be ſicke of ſuche diſeaſes as cū of cruditie. As abſtinence, if it be geuen in ſeaſō, & to ſuche as hath nede of it, profiteth very muche, ſo if it be taken out of time, or be geuen to ſuch as nede it not, it hurteth twiſe as much: It is taken out of time, whā ye bodye is weake & the diſeaſe eaſy to be ouer cumme, or elles whan it is preſcribed vnto ſuch as be of nature cholericke, for in ſuch it bredeth chollar & cauſeth feuers with many frettes and pinchinges both in the belly & alſo in the mouth of the mawe.
               Slepe hathe the .ix. place, of

thoſe thinges which healpe euacuation: howbeit all ſlepe dothe not extenuat, nor at all tymes, but that only which is taken the body being hungery, or elles by and by after exerciſe and labor: for the naturall heate in ſlepe is called in to the innar partes, whych whan it findeth no nurriſhment nor meate to be altered and digeſted, it doth waſte and conſume the profitable humors of all the body, and ſo of neceſſitie it both drieth the body, & leſſenneth it alſo: the which thing Hyppocrates witneſſeth ſayinge: Much ſlepe drieth his body which before hath bene to muche pourged any manner of way. Alſo in hys .ii. boke that he writ of good ordar of diet, he affirmeth yt ſlepe extenuateth the body which faſteth or kepeth abſtinence, and maketh

it coulde, conſumynge all the humiditye wythin it. Of all other tymes, that ſlepe whiche is taken in the morninge after exerciſe, dryeth the body moſt, & the ſame alſo doth ſlepe taken after bathes. For the bathe opening the poores, maketh euacuation of all the excrementes which lurked in ye ſkynne, and ſlepe immediatly folowinge the bathe, calleth in the naturall heat agayne and waſteth the profitable humidity of ye innar partes. The .xii. kynde of euacuatiō is the prouoking of vrine, which ſhould be vſed whan ther is any obſtruction, or any great abundaunce of humors about that part of the liuer, which in latten is called gibba or els in the raynes or bladder, for if the obſtruction be in cauo hepatis (which as gibba is the plumppeſt

parte and the toppe of the liuer, ſo cauum is the holoweſt parte & the loweſt of ye ſame) thē it is better to lewſe the bellye, then to prouoke vryne. For Gallen ſayeth as the toppe of the liuer, which before is called gibba is clenſed by prouokinge of vrine, ſo the holowe part of the liuer, which I called cauum is pourged by lewſyng of the belly. The which ſayinge he repeteth in the .vii. chapter, of his .ii. boke that he write to hys frynde Glauco, and in many other diuers, and ſundry places. In the prouokynge of vrine ye Phiſicion muſt beware that there be no fluxe of bloude, nor exulceration in the raynes or bladder: for thē it is better to pluck from thence in to other partes of the body, thē to drawe from other places thyther.
               
                  The .xi. kynde of euacuation, is the drawinge downe of the ſpettell, or the excrement of the braine, by the mouthe: whoſe vſe is, whā the breſte and the inſtrumentes of brethynge ſhoulde be pourged: wherfore whan the ſpettell is equall bothe in quantitie, and collour, then it declareth the breſt, & the inſtrumentes of brethynge, to be in perfit health: but whan it is otherwyſe, that is to ſaye of diuers cullours & not equall, it declareth the inſtrumentes of brethynge, and the hole breſt ſo farre to be diſtempered, as it differethe from hys owne naturall cullour, and quantitie. Wherfore the Phiſicion ſhoulde diligently conſider what Hyppocrates hathe writ in the .ii. boke prog. and Aphor .43. & alſo in ſūme of the other folowing.

The .xii. kinde of euacuation, is by holdyng medicynes in the roofe of ye mouthe, which is called gargelyng, vnder the which kynde is cō
                  tayned the puttyng of medicines in to the noſe called niſynge: and theſe if they be vſed in theyr time, profiteth and healpeth the braine very much. The .xiii. kynde is the bledyng at the noſe, which amendeth the obſtructions of ye brayne, & the diſtillations from the heade, in to all partes of the body: wherfore the Phiſitiō ſhoulde diligently attende that in bledyng at the noſe, he knowe whan to ſtynt it, & whan not: For ſūme tyme, whan it hathe bled but a verye litell, it muſt be ſtaied incontinent. Sumtyme it is not ſtayed wtout greate daunger, as yf it chaunce by the abundaunce of nawghtye bloude,

for then it is better to healpe nature to expell the nawghtie bloud, thē to ſtay it: wherfore euery Phiſicion, ſhoulde wel remember this ſayinge of Hyppocrates: whan ſo euer the bledynge at the noſe, quieteth not the body, it muſt be ſtopped wt a dry medicyne. The .xiiii. kynde of euacuation, is wemens flowres, which chaunce to wemē at times appoynted of nature, that by the meanes of them, ye hole bodye may be pourged, and ſo health defended: wherfore if the flowres be ſuppreſſed at any tyme, excepte that tyme that the woman goethe with childe, or geueth ſucke, it decayeth health vtterly, and marreth the good conſtitution of the body, as well as whan they runne to muche, which Hyppocrates witneſſeth ſaying as foloweth.

Of to many flowres, cūmeth diſeaſes, but of to fewe or not at all, foloweth diſeaſes of the wombe. Yet in ſtopping of the flowres, the Phiſicion ſhoulde behaue hym ſelfe wiſelye, leſt he ſtop them to ſone or to late. For ſū wemen hath them naturally longer, then other haue, which Hyppocrates witneſſeth ſaying: to ſuch womē as haue moyſt bodies, their flowres continueth long, & if they cū not downe quickly, they ſwell with all. The xv. kynde of euacuation is done by the hemorrhoides, which is the name of certayne vaynes cūminge to the loweſte parte of the fundament, by the which nature purgeth the body of melancholye wherby it deliuereth the bodye, of many diſeaſes: which Hippocrates affirmeth, ſayinge. They that haue the

hemorrhoides be ſafe frō all paine of their ſides, and inflammatiō of their lunges, nor ſhal be troubled nether with byles, ſcurfe, nor no kynde of lepry. Therfore the Phiſiciō muſt take great hede in ſtoppynge of them, leſt they be the authors of great and perilous ſickneſſis, as of the dropſie, & conſumtions. He that requireth a longer diſputation of this matter let hym reade ouer Hyppocrates bokes, written of the ſame matter. The xvi. kinde of euacuatiō is the fleſhly or carnall copulation, which profiteth ye body much yf it be vſed moderatly and in due tyme: For it amendeth the fulneſſe of the body, and as Aetius in the .viii. chapter of hys .iii. boke, & Agineta in the 3. chapter of his .i. boke witneſſeth,

whan the body is at the groweth it maketh it ſtrong, nymble, and quicke, and amendeth the hard habyt of the bodye: For it mollifieth the inſtrumentes, and dilateth the pores and pourgeth the body of flewme: Morouer it quickneth ye wit & pacifieth anger, wherefore it profiteth all them, that haue loſt ther wyttes, either with anger or elles wt ſorowe, it profiteth them alſo, which haue the fawling euil: & ſuch as haue heauineſſe in theyr browes, and ache in theyr heades, many tymes be cured by it. Which Hyppocrates confirmeth ſaying: carnal copulation, which is called venus▪ amendeth all diſeaſes that cum of flewme, howbe it yf it be vſed to much, it hurteth the eyes, and all the ſenſis, and the head, ſenewes, breſt, raines, loynes

thyghes, and morouer haſteneth olde age and deth, and vtterly diſſolueth the ſtrength of the bodye: and hereof it commeth that they that vſe it to much, be forgetfull, and be weake & full of payne, both in their ioyntes, loynes, & thighes, & it bringeth many to ye ſtrangury, & many to the gout. Of all tymes of the yere, it may ſafeſt be vſed in thy ſpringe, it is vtterly to be abhorred in autumne, and in ſūmar. Winter alſo by meanes of hys greate colde, is not very good: the beſt houre for it is as Gallē ſayeth whan the body is in a meane, betwixte full, and emptie, and excedeth nether in heat nether in colde, dryneſſe nor moyſture. Therefore who ſo euer wyll vſe it, let hym beware of cruditie, drunkennes, hungar, weryneſſe, vomittynge,

pourging of the belly, watchyng, and all other ſuch as healpeth to diſſolue the ſtrength of the body. After moderate eatyng is the beſt time of it, and before ſlepe, for that amendeth ye ſtrength, and maketh that there foloweth no colde after it. For ſlepe immediatly folowing it, taketh away the werines of the muſcles and ſenewes, and calleth in the natural heat: which maketh the concoction perfit. Moreouer this time is beſt and apteſt, to the procreation of children for many cauſes: but eſpecially becauſe the woman whyles ſhe ſlepeth, holdeth her huſbandes ſeed beſte. The .xvii. kynde of euacuation is perſpiratiō, or euaporation, which is done ether by nature, or elles by medicine, which ſo finely ſubtylith the humors, that they paſſe by

the inſenſible poores of ye ſkinne, without any putrifiynge. Hitherto I haue declared the kyndes of euacuatiō, or emptines the which euery diligent Phiſition muſt ſo well obſerue, that he may knowe whan to vſe this kynde or that, or elles whan to ſtop, for ſumtyme it is better to encreaſe humors▪ then to diminiſhe them. Finallye the Phiſition ſhoulde obſerue, and marke, howe he ſhould make euacuation and where, and what, and whan, and how much.
            
            
               ¶The .vii. chapter. Of the perturbations, & ſudden motions of the minde.
               
                  
                  THe Affections, which be the ſudden motions, and perturbations of the mynde, ought not to be neclected of the phiſitiō: becauſe they be of great might, and make great alteratiō in all the body: ye whiche amongeſt al other, feare, Ioy, angar and ſorowe declare euidently. Feare by drawing the ſpirite and bloud in to ye innar partes leaueth the vtter pale for colde. Anger ſetteth the body on fire with mouing of the bloud to the vtter partes & as in anger the pulſe beteth mightely, ſo in fere it beateth almoſt nothyng at all: ſorrow is an affection wc the which ye hart as though it were ſmytten, is drawen together, and doth tremble and quake, not without great ſenſe of payne:

and ſo by lyttel and lyttel whiles the ſorow goeth not away, the ſtrength of the hart, is quite ouerthrowen, and the generation of ſpirites is letted, by meanes wherof, the lyfe is vtterly extinct: ſuche a cruell ſcourge is ſorow vnto mā.
               Feare and ſorowe differ of this faſhion, ye ſorowfull mā ſuffereth that by littell and litell, which the fearfull mā doth ſuffer all a tonſe. Ioy is a ſudden motion, with the whiche ye harte reioyſing dilateth hym ſelfe, and ſuddenly ſendeth furth al hys naturall heat and ſpirites, wherby ſumtyme it chaunſeth that a weake body diethe in Ioy, becauſe for lacke of ſtrength the hart cā not call in agayne his naturall heat and ſpirites. Aulus Gellius, in hys .iii. boke and .xv. chapter writeth ā hiſtorye worthy

to be remembred of one Diagoras yt had .iii. ſonnes, which were all crowned of the people in one day at the playes of the hil Olimpia, & whileſt the people and his iii. ſōnes reioyſing, embraſed their father, caſtyng theyre garlandes vpon hym, he died in theyr armes.
               Philippides alſo a maker of playes whan he had ye victorie amongeſt the Poettes, whiche he loked not for, died by and by amongeſt them all.
               Howe be it anger kylleth no man, becauſe it nether cooleth the naturall heat nor yet diſſolueth the ſtrength.
               The phiſition ſhoulde marke earneſtlye not onlye theſe, but all other affectes of the mynde alſo: partly, that he may know of them, what humor redoundeth: but eſpecially,

that he may lerne, how to reſiſte them: and by hys counſell maſter them in the ende.
            
            ❀The ende of the ſeconde boke
         
         
            The third boke
            
               ¶The firſt chapter of the number of thinges agaynſte Nature.
               
                  THynges agaynſte Nature be .iii. in number: the firſte is the cauſe which goeth before the diſeaſe.
               The ſeconde is the diſeaſe it ſelfe, by whome the action is firſt hurt.
               The third is the accidentes folowyng the diſeaſe.
               
                  This ſame parte of phiſicke, which inquireth of the cauſes and the accidētes of diſeaſes, is called of the Grekes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſoundeth nothing elles but the mouyng of any thing that is affected: wherfore he hath hys ſubſtance no lenger, then he is in mouing, altering, or changing: and ſo he differeth from affection taken ſpecially, the which is nothynge elles but an alteration remayning in a thing that hath ſuffered: by this meanes, the diſeaſe and the cauſe, with the accidente, which be affections of oure body, as pale, and euyll culour, be called affections, and yet the ſame accidentes be called alſo paſſiōs. The reſte which be the faultes of ſum action, as ouer much inanition, or retentiō, be alonly called paſſions

& not affections: becauſe they be not thinges permanent, but is only, and remayne ſo long as they be in growing. Here it is to be noted, that a thyng may ſuffer .ii. manner of wayes: firſte whan it ſuffereth of it ſelfe, as if the guttes ſuffer payne, of anye ſharpe, or bytynge humors conteyned within them, which may be called theyr owne paſſion. Secondarily, whan a thynge ſuffereth not of it ſelfe but of another, as whā the head ſuffereth payne by reaſon of euyll vapowres, cummynge from the ſtomacke, which is called a paſſiō by conſent of other: ye ſhall finde this matter diſputed more at large in Gallenes firſte boke of places affected.
            
            
               ¶The .ii. chapter, Of the cauſes of diſeaſes
               
                  
                  THe cauſe of ye diſeaſe, is an affectiō againſt nature, going before the diſeaſe, and ſtirring it vp: which of it ſelfe, & firſte, hurteth no action: but accidentally, that is to ſay, by other. And ſecōdarily, as by healp of the diſeaſe cummynge betwixt, as ſhall be ſhewed more playnly hereafter. There be .ii. manner of cauſes of diſeaſes: one is externall ſo called, becauſe it is outwardly receiued, and was not before with in the body: as colde, and ſuch other. The tother, is called internall, which is within the body, as humors putrified within the body, & growen out of temper. Gallē ſpeaketh of no mo cauſes of diſeaſes then theſe .ii. Yet Auicen wt
                  
other of the ſame layer, affirme that ther is an other cauſe, which ioyneth euer with the diſeaſe: and the takyng away of it, is as they ſay the curynge of the ſicknes: as yf rotten, or putrifyed humors, kindell a feuer, thē by theyr ſaying ſo ſoone as the putrified matter is takē away, ye feuer muſt ceaſe of neceſſitie: howbeit it is for ye moſt part ſene that ye feuer remayneth after the putrifactiō is clene gone. wherfore it is euident, that Auicen, and all that be of hys opinion is foule deceyued therin: howbeit I thinke this to be ye thing, which deceyueth them. They define ſyckneſſe as it were the actiō hurt alredye, and not that that hurteth

the actiō firſt, ſo that they call that the ſickneſſe, which Gallen calleth but the accidente of the ſickneſſe: & I coulde take Auicennes parte in this matter, ſauinge that he agreeth with Gallen in the defining of ſickneſſe, forgettyng hym ſelfe to be in contrary tales: wherfore I wolde counſel all yonge ſtudentes in phiſicke, to lerne the cauſes of ſickeneſſe of Gallē, or elles of ſuch as folowe hym, as Aetius, & Paulus Aegineta. Howebeit there is none to be compared with Gallen becauſe he hath wrytten of them in ſuche a good ordar, as neuer any other hath wryt the lyke, and this I dare affirme that euerye wel lerned man, can do no leſſe thē confeſſe the ſame.
            
            
               ¶The .iii. chapter, Of diſeaſes.
               
                  
                  A Diſeaſe, is an vnnaturall affectiō of the body, by which the action is fyrſte hurt, therfore it differeth frō the cauſe in that ye the cauſe neuer hurteth anye action of hym ſelfe, but by meanes of the diſeaſe. Of diſeaſes ther be .3. chefe & principal kindes: one is in thoſe partes of the bodye that is called of ye latins ſimilares, ſuch be ye bones, ſenewes, vaynes, with all other ſimple, & ſparmaticke partes: another is in the inſtrumentes, as in the heade, eyes, handes, and feet: the thirde conſiſteth in them both. That diſeaſe yt happeneth in ye ſparmatick partes, is ſuch a diſtemperature ether of heat, coulde, dryneſſe, or moyſture, that it hurteth ſumme action, for

a man may be diſtempered in ſum part and yet be hole, and not ſicke: but whan the diſtemperature groweth ſo much, that it hurteth any action of the body, then it may be called a diſeaſe of the ſparmatike partes. Wherefore who ſo is of this ſort diſtempered, is ſicke: and he that is diſtempered and hath no action hurt, may not be called ſicke, but intemperat. For of them that be hole, yf ſum ſhoulde not be temperat and ſum intemperat, one of theſe .ii. muſte nedes be true, ether all men alwayes to be ſicke, or elles all men to haue one diſtemperature, which bothe be very falſe. The ſame diſtemperature which before I called a diſeaſe of ye ſparmaticke & ſymple partes, is deuided in to .ii. Egall, & not egal: it is called an egall diſtēperature, whan all partes of the body, are

diſtempered alike, as in the feuer hectica, which is a cōſūptiō, wherin al partes of ye body, be like hote: and the contrary vnto this, is the diſtemperature, which is not egal as in that kynde of dropſy, that falleth in to the legges, and feete, and in all kynde of feuers, excepte the before named hectica. Of vnequall diſtemperature there is alſo ii. kyndes. The .i. is the only alteration of the qualitie, as the burnynge of the fire, or of the ſunne. The .ii. is, beſyde the qualitie, the fluxe of ſum humor, as in yt kynde of ſwellynge, yt is called phlegmon, Beſyde this of diſtemperatures, one is ſimple, and an other is compound: it is called ſimple whan on qualitie, as heat, or colde, excedeth alone: and compound, whan many excede together, as hot and moyſte, colde and drye, excedynge

to gether, in one member. The tother kinde of diſeaſe which only is in the inſtrumentes, may be called the euyll conſtitution, or compoſiciō of them. But there be .ii. kindes of inſtrumentall diſeaſes, for ſum be ſimple: and they be .iiii. in number, one is to be ſene in the vncumly comformation, another in the number of partes, the thirde in the quantitie of eche part: and the .iiii. in the compoſition. The diſeaſe of conformation happeneth of the vncumly figure, as whan ſumme part is holowe from the natiuitie, or elles after by caſualtie, which ſhoulde not, and alſo ſum other part rough that ſhoulde haue ben ſmothe: of number, whan there be ether to many, or to fewe partes: of quantitie whan they be ether to big, or to litel: of cōpoſicion whan

they be put in wronge places, or whā they that ſhoulde agre together, doe not. The thirde kynde of diſeaſe, is common as well to the ſimple and ſparmatick partes, as to the inſtrumentall: and it is the deuiſion of that that is hole, and of one pece, which diuiſion yf it be in the riynges or byndynges it is called anulſiō: in the fleſhe, a byle: in the bone, a broken creuiſe: in the ſenowes, a conuulſion, or crampe. Theſe diſeaſes ſumtyme be compounde, whiche is whan they be ioyned to other. Hitherto I haue brefly declared the .iii. firſt kindes of ſickneſſis, of the which ſum be verye quicke, and ſum be dull, or ſlow: Such as be very quick, wil be at the worſte, in .iiii. dayes, or ſoone after. Of ſuch as be quicke and ſharpe, there be .ii. ſortes, for

ſum wyll be at the worſte, in .14. dayes, and ſum not vnder .40. All other diſeaſes, which paſſe .40. dayes before thei be at ye worſt, be called dul or ſlowe. But as quick, and ſhorte diſeaſes, haue theyr begynnynge of bloude and chollar, which be hote humors, ſo ſlowe & dull haue theyr diſſeaſes, beginnyng of colde humors, as of flewm & melancholy. Let this generall, and brefe declaration of diſeaſes, at this tyme ſuffice.
            
            
               ¶The .iiii. chapter, of accidentes.
               
                  
                  THis worde accidente is takē .2. maner of wayes: generally and ſpecially, generally, it ſignyfyeth any thing contrary to nature: ſpecially, all thinges agaynſt nature, excepte the cauſes of diſeaſes, and diſeaſes them ſelfes.
               Therfore it is nothynge elles but an vnnaturall affection of the body, which foloweth the diſeaſe, as the ſhadowe foloweth the body. The accidentes ſpecially taken, be deuided in to .iii. partes. For ſum be the fautes & errors of actions, ſum affections of oure body, other ſum folow them both, ether by ouer much excretion, or retention of excrementes & other like ſuch thynges. Of the error in actions, there be .ii. differences: animall, & natural. The faultes, or errors,

of the animall actions, be yet deuided in to .iii. for ether they be faultes of ye ſences, as of hearing, ſeinge, taſtyng, ſmellyng, felynge, or els of mouinge, or finally of the principall actions, as of ymagining, thinkinge and remembring. Theſe be all the animall actions, of the which eche one may be hurt iii. manner of wayes: firſte if the action be vtterly extincte, as yf a man ſee nothyng at all: ſecōdarily, yf it be not vtterly aboliſhed, & takē away but decayed ſumthing or not parfit, as whan a man ſeeth but euen ſcantly as they do, which the ignorant call ſand blynde. Thirdly whā it is depraued, and wronge wraſted, as whan a man of force, ſeeth thinges which he did not beholde with hys common ſenſe, as they do which loke a goggell:

And as it is euident, that all theſe fautes happen in the ſight, ſo they happen alſo in eche one of the other before named ſenſis.
               There be thus many as folowe naturall actions, appeticion, concoction, digeſtion, pulſatiō, attraccion, alteration, retention, expulſion. Of the which eche may erre .iii. manner of wayes, as is ſayed before in the actions animall: and the fautes or errors of the ſame, be accidentes folowyng diſeaſes. There be beſyde theſe .iiii. manner of accidentes, which be affections of oure bodies: as vnnaturall cullers, ether in ye hole body, or elles in ſumpart of it: Fylthy ſauors alſo ether of ye mouthe, noſe, or eares and obſurde and vnnaturall ſapores, belonging to the taſte: and beſide theſe, hardnes, drines, & roughnes

of the ſkynne.
               As for the vnnaturall inanitions, or detentions from whenſe ſo euer they cum, they be contayned vnder one of theſe .iii. differencis: For eyther they be vnnaturall ī their hole ſubſtance, as that fluxe of bloude that is called commonly the emorroydes: or elles they are in theyre qualitie, as ſumtyme it chaunſeth in wemens flowres: or finally in their quantitie, they be founde vnnaturall, as the great abundance or lacke and ſcarſnes eyther of the vryne or ſweat. The whiche euery one, is handeled to the vttermoſte in Gallē, where he entreateth of ye cauſes, of accidentes.
            
            ¶The ende of the thirde boke
         
         
            
            The .iiii. boke
            
               ¶The firſt chapter. Of that part of phiſick which teacheth the knowlege of thinges yt be paſt, preſent, and to cum.
               
                  THis is that ſame part of phiſicke, the which (as I ſayed before) contayneth the knowlege of thinges that be paſt, and the inſpection, or the beholdynge of ſuch as are preſent, and the prophecie, or prognoſtication of thinges to cum. And therfore the mo cōmodities it hath the more exactly it wolde be lerned: for firſt it teacheth ye knowlege of all paſſions, & diſeaſes: in ye which (yf the Phiſition be ignorant) he ſhall neuer be able, to do any thing worthy prayſe, in the body.

Therfore that yonge ſtudentes, may the more luckely, attayne to the knowlege, of this parte of phiſicke, I wolde counſell euery eche one of them, to reade diligently Gallens .vi. bokes of places affected: in the which he handleth this matter at the large. For ſo it ſhall be brought to paſſe that he ſhal be experte in the diſeaſes, of euery part, be the part neuer ſo lyttell.
               Who ſo is exactly ſene in this knowlege, ſhal beſides other, haue this eſpeciall commoditie, which is, that among the ſicke, his credit ſhall be greate: for the ſicke man truſteth none ſo muche, nor is ſo well ruled of any, as he is of that Phiſitiō, which is able to declare thinges preſent paſte, and to cum. Therfore the diſeaſe is eaſilye cured whan the Phiſition, and the

pacient, be both againſt it, & moreouer he ſhal beare no blame, what ſo euer chaunce or happen to hys pacient, yt I may omytte the great prayſe, glory, and renoune, which with one conſente ſhall be geuen hym euery where. Therfore Hyppocrates counſelleth all Phiſitions, diligently to learne this knolege. The whiche, no man hath ſo well diſcuſſed (I except Hippocrates alwayes) as Gallen hath. Wherfore they that be able to vnderſtande hym, let them go no farthar: but as for yonge and ignorant ſtudentes, (for whoſe ſake only I haue taken this in hand) if they reade diligently this littell rude worke, I truſte though they be not ſatiſfied, yet they ſhall not leſe all their payne. Therfore firſt of all to the accomplyſſhynge, or

gettyng of this knowlege, it is neceſſarye to expounde this worde Criſis, which the lattyns call iudicium, & in engliſh it may be called iugement: but at this preſent time it ſignifieth any ſuddē mutation in euery diſeaſe whether it be longe or ſhort, and this ſudden mutation is parted in .iiii. For ether the ſicke is made hole incōtinent, or elles is in a greate towardneſſe to health, or dieth out of hand, or finally becūmeth a greate deale worſe. The firſt of theſe mutations, which wt
                  out any delay cureth the diſeaſe, is ſimply and abſolutly called Criſis, The other which only amendeth ye diſeaſe, is called criſis inſufficiens, which is to ſay ā inſufficient iugement. The third is called mala criſis, that is to ſay an euyl change, or iudgement. The .iiii. may be called

both vnparfit and euyll alſo. To ye knowlege of this chaunge which is called criſis, the .iiii. times of the diſeaſe, that is to ſay, the beginnyng, the encreaſynge, the heyght, and declination, muſt be obſerued, and marked of the Phiſition. The beginnyng is deuided in .3. the firſt inuaſion of the diſeaſe is the firſte beginnynge, & is ſimple wtout any bredth. The .ii. hath bredth, and continueth to the thirde day. The third is the tyme afterwarde, tyl ye begynnyng of concoctiō. The time wherin the ſicknes groweth, is frō the begynnyng of concoction, vntil the diſeaſe be at his ful ſtrength which before is called the heygth. The .iiii. tyme which is called the declination, begynneth after the heygth, and laſteth tyl the diſeaſe be ful paſt and ended.
               
                  Theſe be the vniuerſall tymes in diſſeaſes, beſydes whiche there is other called particular: as in ſuch feuers as kepe fittes, the beginnyng of the fitte, is the colde in the vtter partes: the growynge is whiles the body waxeth hote: and the ſtate, or hayght is, whan the heate is egally diſperſed throughout the body: the declination, whā the heat goeth away. Before I declare howe to knowe this ſudden mutation, which of the grekes is called Criſis, I thinke it expedient, and neceſſary to ſhewe in fewe wordes, the difference of ye ſignes & tokens goinge before, which be of thre ſortes: of the firſt ſort, is ye ſignes of cruditie, and concoction, as the excrementes of the bellye, the vryne, and ſpettel: by the egeſtions of the nether belly it is knowen

how the ſtomacke altereth: the vryne ether declareth cruditie, or good concoction in the vaynes: the ſpettell ſhoweth ether ye good, or euill conſtitution of the lunges, and inſtrumentes of breathing.
               Theſe ſignes what tyme of the diſeaſe ſo euer they happen, kepe alwayes theyre power firme and ſtable: For the ſignes of concoccion, alwayes declare health, & the cōtrary ſignes, ether great paines longe ſicknes, deth, or finally the turnyng agayne of the euyll. Of the .ii. ſorte be the ſignes of life & dethe: as quicke ſlepe, eaſy brethinge, goodnes of the pulſe, like in face to them that be hole, hanſume & cumly liyng in bed, ſweat, and ſuch as to theſe be clene contrary. Of the third ſort be the iudgynge ſignes, of the which ſorte

there be .ii. kyndes: for ſum be as ſignes, and cauſes both together, as vomittynge, excrementes of the belly, the great quantitie of vryne, and ſweates, bledynge at the noſe, or the falling of humors out of one place in to another: and other be as ſignes alone, as watche, deade ſlepes, troubleſum dreames, difficultie of breathynge, dimneſſe of ſight, dulneſſe of ſenſe, head, necke, and ſtomacke ache, ſinginge in the heade, involuntary teares, quiuerynge of ye neyther lippe, forgetfulneſſe, face, eyes, & noſe red, abhorryng of meat, vehement thurſte, wt other ſuch lyke. All theſe, in that yt they declare any ſudden mutation, be called iudgynge ſignes: and in that that they folow diſeaſes, they be called iudgynge accidentes.

Theſe haue not theyr power alwayes firme, and certayne, as the ſignes of concoction, and cruditie haue, but they are to be liked if they happen after concoction, that is whyles ye ſickeneſſe is in the ſtate: and in the begynnyng, and before any concoctiō, they be not only not to be belyked, but to be fered, as deadly ſignes. Concernyng ye Nature or propertie of ſignes, for this tyme, let this ſuffice: but as for ſuch ſignes, as declare ſudden mutation before called criſis, to be good▪ I entend yet (god willing) to ſpeake a lyttell more, whiche maye be knowen .iii. manner of wayes. Firſt yf before Criſis cum, there be concoction of the diſeaſe,

I meane of the vryne, the egeſtions, and ſpettell: the which eche, ought to be conſidered in hys proper place: For in the diſeaſes of ye breſt, & lunges, the ſpettell ſhould be taken moſte heade of, and beſte marked, and yet the vryne ought not to be neglected, no nor the excrementes of the belly nether, but in an ague, which is without any inflammation eyther of the lyuer raynes, bladder, or ſplene, ye vrine muſt be regarded eſpecially: as yf the ſtomake, or mawe, be greued, the excrementes of ye belly wolde be conſidered before the other. Yet the vryne, is not then to be abiected nether. Secundarily yf the cū
                  mynge of it, be ſignified by any of the iudgynge dayes, it is to be lyked of the Phiſition: the declaration of the which dayes, I omyt,

becauſe I haue obſerued that ther is in them, more error then truthe, more ſuperſtition, then knowlege: and byſyde this, the ſcripture commaundeth vs Chriſten men, to obſerue no dayes: yet yf any man be wylling to know them let him ſeke what Hyppocrates, & Gallen hath written of them: & then I doubte not (though he be dull wytted) but that he ſhall quicly know what is ment by them. Thirdly it is good, yf the meſure, and forme of the excrementes, be correſpondent, and aggreable to the diſeaſe: as yf in an hot burnynge feuer, the ſicke blede at the noſe: or after a feruent ſhakynge, ſweat much, and hot in all partes of hys bodye: or vomite muche chollar, or finally voyde much by ſyege, for ſo ye feuer tertian ſhoulde ende: the quotidian not

only by much ſweatyng, but alſo by the avoydynge of flewme, both vpward, and dounward, in greate quantitie. The freneſie, is iudged by much hot ſweat, cummynge in euery parte of the body, but eſpecially yf the head ſweate feruently: yet ſumtyme it is iudged and ended, by bledynge at the noſe: howe be it in the lythargie, bledynge at the noſe is euyll.
               The pleureſie is betwixte theſe .ii. For bledyng at the noſe in it, is to be lyked better, then in the lithargy, & worſe then in the phrenſie. The inflammacions of ye liuer and ſplene, be alwayes iudged by bledynge at the noſe: the liuer, if it blede on the right ſide, and ye ſplene f the lift: beſide theſe, the age and complexion of the ſicke, and alſo hys forma
                     •
                   diet, and place wherin

the ſicke abydeth, with the tyme of the yere, and the preſent conſtitution of the ayer, be to be conſidered of the Phiſitiō, whiles he iudgeth criſis to be ether good or euil. For as the diſeaſe is cholerike, & all theſe cholericke alſo, it is neceſſary that whan criſis happeneth, chollar plē
                  tifully to be voyded: ſo if flewme redounde it is nedefull for flewme to be pourged: if diuers humors, ye euacuation muſte be alſo of diuers humors. But whan the Phiſition ſhall know theſe thinges exactly, then of ye ende, he may eaſily know the reſt: for yf the ſicke, which alredie hath ſuffered criſis, be deliuered of his ague and other accidentes & be better culloured, hauyng alſo better pulſes, and more ſtrength to riſe, without doubte the criſis was good.
               
                  The knowlege of the euyll Criſis, as ther is in it much coniecture, ſo ther is alſo in it much incertaynty: For as where nature is ſtrong, and ruleth eaſily the humors, ſhe moueth orderly, and maketh an ende of her actions: ſo whan ſhe taketh a fall, her motions be both incertayne, and inordinate, and therfore hard to be knowen. wherfore ſuch a caſe requireth an artificer, and a well exerciſed Phiſitiō, the which may firſte declare whether there ſhall be any Criſis, at all or no: ſecūdarily wether this day, or that: laſt of all whether it ſhall kyll the ſicke forthwith, or but only hurte hym. What ſhoulde nede many wordes, by theſe .3. it is eaſily to be knowen whether the ſick ſhall die, or liue: firſt, by the kinde of the diſeaſe: ſecundarily, by the greatneſſe

of it: thirdly, by the manner, and faſhion of it: fortly by the mouyng of it. The kynde of the diſeaſe, is knowen of ye accidentes folowing it, as in example: the pleureſie is knowen by the prickyng payne of the ſyde, ye difficultie of brething by the fieuer whiche alwayes is annexed to it, by ye coughe, & hardneſſe of the pulſe: but ye greatneſſe of it, may be learned by the quantitie, & vehemency, of the forſayde accidentes: and the manner of it, by the accidentes which folow it: as yf they be many in number, yf they be longe, mightye, and euyll, or ſuch as to theſe be cleane contrary, the mouynge of it, by the tyme of the partes of the fit. To theſe .iiii. the conſideration of the cūtry, the tyme of the yere, the nature, & cōſtitutiō of the ſickmanes

body, with other ſuch, as is in this ſame chapter before reherſed is neceſſary alſo. Of theſe, that Phiſition which is an artificer, ſhall eaſily iudge life or deth in his pacient: & he yt is not, let hym ſpeake no farther thē he knoweth, & ſo he ſhall ſuſtaine no blame nor ſhame.
            
            
               ¶Of the vryne. The .ii. chapter.
               
                  SEing that the vryne is the alonly marke of ye liuer & vaynes, in what error thinke you that the Phiſitions are now a dayes which take vpon them, to iudge all diſeaſes by the vryne: which is as abſurde & impoſſible, as of the ſpettell, to declare the gryefe of the bladder, and raynes: wherfore ſeinge that agaynſte all knowlege, and good lernynge, they do ſo ſhamefully abuſe the lookynge of the water, &

deceyue the poore, ignorant, and ſimple people ſo craftily, I thinke them worthy to be called, as Ariſtophanes calleth them, couetouſe and vnlerned Phiſitions, ſithens that they eſteme more theyr filthy lucre, then the truthe. But nowe to my pourpoſe. The vryne is the excrement and watry ſubſtance of the blood, which after ye concoction doone in the vaynes, is drawen thenſe by the kidneyes or raynes, in to the bladder, where it is reſerued tyl it may cōueniently be let out: in the beholding of the which, ther is .4. thinges to be cō
                  ſidered, which be theſe folowing: ye ſubſtance, cullar, quantitie, & cō
                  tentes: of ye which no man can wel iudge, which knoweth not parfitly ye holſummeſt, & of all other the beſt vrine, wherto he may cōpare the reſt.
               
                  The beſt water, or vryne, and the which is of a temperate man, in ſubſtance is nether to thicke nor thinne, but moderate, in quantitie as much, & no more then he dronk: in cullar ſumwhat inclinynge towardes yealowe, hauynge a white, light, and equall ſediment: & ſuch a water as this, of a yonge Phiſition ſhoulde often be loked vpon, to the entent that whan he ſeethe any other differ neuer ſo litell from it, he may forthwith cō
                  iecture the ſame man, whoſe water he hath ſene, ſo much to differ from parfit health, how much hys water differeth from the other. Now after I haue ſhowed which is the beſt water, ther remayneth behynde, the declaration of ſuch thinges as is in ye vryne, eſpecially to be cōſidered: which I pourpoſe

to declare orderly. The ſubſtance of the vryne, is ether thicke, thynne, or moderat and equall betwixt both. That which is moderat, is of all other the beſt, and yf it be to thinne or thick, it declareth vnparfit concoction: Of the thyn vryne, there is .ii. differences: For the one is piſſed thynne, and clere, and ſo remayneth ſtyll: and the other is piſſed thinne and clere, and after becummeth thycke and troubled: but they be both crude, & rawe, and doe lacke concoction, & thus they differ: The tone ſignifieth extreme cruditie, declarynge nature as yet, not to haue begūne any concoction. The tother ſhoweth that nature hath begun concoctiō but very lately. The troubleſumnes ſignifieth great plenty of wyndie ſpirites, to be mixt with

the watry ſubſtance of the vryne. Of thycke and troubled waters, there is alſo .ii. differencis: yf it be thick whan it is piſſed, then afterward it waxeth clere, hauing a reſidence in the bothome, which proficieth of ſum inequall turbulent matter remayning behynde in the vaynes: And on the other ſide, ſum other water, whiche after it is made is thicke, and remayneth ſo ſtil: which ſignifieth great trouble and agitation, as yet to remayne in the bloode. Hitherto I haue declared the ſubſtance of the vryne, wherfore now foloweth the cullar: of the which ther be .vi. differencys in eſpeciall, which is white pale, tawny, yealow, red, & blacke: For all the reſt be contayned vnder theſe. Vndar white is contayned the cullar of criſtall, ſnowe, &

water, the which all ſignifie great cruditie. Not ſo whyte as theſe is milke, horne white, & the hearres of a chammell: And as the vrynes of theſe cullars, differ from very white, ſo they declare better concoction. After whyte they be next, that be ſum deale pale, the which becauſe they be a littell tincte, they ar not extreme crude. A pale cullar is made, by the mixture of chollar, and water together, ſo that in the mixture there goeth but a litell chollar, to a great dele of water: of pale by meanes of concoction, ſū
                  time is made a light tawny which Actuarius, taketh to be the cullar of gilt. After a tawny followeth a light yelow, which is a cullar like the floures of cartamus, which is commonly called the gardyn ſaffaron: after the which, commeth yealowe, whiche is the cullar of

ſaffaron: and a light red, whiche is ye cullar of a certayne drug, called bolum, is next: then red it ſelfe which is the cullar of a cherry: after theſe is a darke red, whiche is the cullar of a mulberry: and yet there is a darcker, which is made of whyte, and red, egally myxte together, and of the latyns it is called, Venetus: grene is the cullar of beetes, whiche the gardiners call the whyte beetes, or elles the cullar of ye precious Emmoroyde: Beſyde theſe, there is yet other cullars, as the cullar of oyle, the cullar of lead, and all cole blacke cullars, which is knowen almoſt of euery chylde. Yf I haue here in the diſcripſions of cullars, miſſe or wronge named any cullar, I praye the paynters, to accept my good wyll, and pardon my ignorancye:

in the iudgyng of cullars ye Phiſiciō ſhoulde be prouident, becauſe that oftentymes, with euery light occation, the cullar of the vrine dothe alter, and change, not only in them that beſicke, but alſo in thē yt be hole: & of this mutatiō, or chaunge there is .3. ſpecial cauſes. The firſt is meate not wel altered, or diſgeſted, which is not apt to make bloude, wherfore it changeth the cullar of the vryne to ye ſame cullar that it ſelfe is of, which is wont to happen to them that is ſicke and diſeaſed, yea and ſumtyme to ſuch alſo as is hole: moreouer ſum medicine will alter the cullar of the vrine. The ſecond cauſe of ye altering of ye cullar in ye water, is the drinke: for the vryne cōmonly kepeth the cullar of thoſe thinges which is receyued in the

drinke. The .iii. cauſe is the collyquation of ſuch thynges, as conſume and melt in the body, as the fat, which whan it waſteth, for the moſt part cullereth vryne. Beſyde theſe there be other cauſes alſo whiche do the ſame, as exerciſe, hungar, ſlepe, watche, wt a great many other ſuch like. which in the beholdynge of the vryne eche one by hym ſelfe ſhoulde be diligently conſidered of the Phiſition. Now I entende to declare what may be coniectured in the vrine of the ſubſtance, & cullar. A thinne vrine, ſignifieth the lacke of natural heat, not without the obſtructions of y• liuer, raynes, & ſplene, by meanes of cruditie: A thicke declareth exceſſe of matter, & humors fillinge the belly, guttes, and the holowe partes of the liuer: which yf it be ſene in a feuer, thynne goinge

before, it ſignifieth the diſſoluing of ye feuer. But if after yt the feuer is alredie cū, ye vryne appere thick, nor in continuance of time waxeth no thinnar, thē it ſignifieth plenty of humors. Concernyng ye cullars what white, pale, yelowe, & read ſignifie, partly is alredy declared, & more may be gathered, of theſe ye folow. The darke red which is the cullar of the mulberry, ſhoweth yt the bloode burneth in the vaynes. The grene ſignifieth the worſte kind of chollar to be encreſed both in quātitie, & qualitie. That vryne which hath ye cullar of oyle, ſhoweth ye colliquatiō of ye hole body, or elles of ye raynes only. The blacke water ſumtyme declareth healthe as in the pourginge of melācholy, but if grene went before, thē it is a very argumēt of death, & it is more

to be feared in men then wemen. Now we be cū vnto the quantitie which in them that be hole ſhould be ſo much as was dronken. The water excedeth in quantitie for ye moſt part, by meanes of theſe cauſes folowynge: firſt whan a man eateth and drinketh to much, the meat being to moyſt, or the drinke being watriſhe wine. The ſecond whan he hath taken medicynes, which prouoke vryne. The thirde whan the raynes is diſtempered with ouer much heat. The forth whan the belly is drier, then it ought to be naturally. The fyfte whā ther procedeth no euacuatiō of ye belly nor other wayes, which Hyppocrates witneſſeth, ſayinge: Water much in quantity, made in the night, prophecieth of a ſmall ſiege: Litel water hapneth of cō
                  trary

cauſes: Firſt of littell drinkynge, drineſſe of meates, muche exerciſe, and other lyke vnto theſe, which be wont to dry the body. Secondarily, for meates & medicyns whiche for their groſneſſe, make obſtruction in the liuer and ſplene, and other places. Thirdly for the groſneſſe and clammyneſſe of humors. Forthly for the plentifull pourgynge of the belly. Fyftly for the vehement heat, and drineſſe in a feuer. Sixtly, for the weakneſſe of the excretiue power, both in the raynes & other partes ſeruynge to the avoydynge of the water, or vryne. The .iiii. thynge which in the vryne is to be conſidered be the contentes, ſo called (I thynke) becauſe they conſiſt in euerye parte of the altitude of the body of the water. And as the

heyght of the body of the water is deuided in to .iii. as in to the bothome of the vryne, the brinke, or higheſt region, & in to the middell of theſe extremities: ſo of the contentes ſum ſwymmeth in the top, and other hangeth in the middell, and ſum goeth to the bothom. In ye contentes ther be .iii. thinges to be conſidered, ye ſubſtance, cullar, and quantitie. The ſubſtance, becauſe ſūme be thicke, and other ſum thynne, and ſūme in a meane betwixt bothe. The contentes of healthy waters, be moderat of ſubſtance, light, & egall. They be called light, which be continuall & of of one pece, not rough, nor broken in any part, & ſuche as is to theſe contrary may be called rough. Cō
                  tentes yt be groſſe, ſignifie copie & plenty of crude, & raw humors in

the vaynes, & ſumtime ye ſtrength of the excretiue facultie, in pourginge ſuperfluous humors. Contentes yt be thinne, ſignifie weakneſſe of nature in ye ſecōd cōcoctiō
                  ▪ & declareth alſo groſſe humors to be ſubtyled, & made thynne. Concernyng the cullar of contentes, ſū be very whyte, ſumme pale, ſūme yealowe, ſūme red, ſūme bluddy, ſūme blacke, & ſūme of diuers cullars. Contentes very whyte be ether peces of ſlymye humors, or els matter to much baked: whiche commeth from ſūme of the innar partes: pale contentes be euill, becauſe they decline from the naturall cullar: yealowe be euyl alſo, in that yt they declare the ouer muche encreaſinge of chollar: red ſignifie lacke of concoction, and the contynuynge of the diſeaſe. Blodie declare yt the blood is not throughly

labored of nature: blacke ſignifieth ether ye mortifiyng of naturall heat, or elles the pourgynge of melancholy. Nowe ſince that I haue brefely declared the cullar, and ſubſtance of the contentes, ther remayneth behynde the quantitie, which if it be much, as it ſhoweth the nuriſſhynge of the body, ſo it dothe the fortifiynge of the excretiue facultie. For while nature laboreth much in alteryng the nurriſhemente, ſhe muſt nedes make many excrementes. The ſcarcity & lacke of cōtentes, happeneth ether of faſtyng, or exerciſe, or obſtruction in ye vaynes, or finally of ouer ſlowe concoction. Sumtime there is an euill ſauor in the vrin, which ſignifieth ether rottenneſſe of ſum part of the body, or elles the mortifyinge of the hole body: ſpecially

yf ye ſubſtance, & cōtentes be euill.
            
            
               ¶Of the excrementes of the belly. The .iii. chapter
               
                  THat ſiege, or excrement is beſt, &, moſte naturall, whiche is ſoft, and lieth together hole, and well compact, made at the accuſtomed tyme in health, and in quantitie, correſpondent to that yt is eaten: of the contrarye part, that is an euill and an vnnaturall ſiege, or excrement which is hard, thynne, or rough, not made in ye accuſtomed howre of healthe. If the ſiege be very much cullared, it is euyll and ſignifieth ouer muche chollar in the guttes: and if it be not tincte at all, but like vnto the meat whiche was eaten, it ſignifieth cruditie, &

no chollar at all to reſorte to the guttes: but if ye ſiege be yealowe in ye declination of the ſickneſſe, thē it declareth the body to be pourged of chollar very well. If the ſiege be grene it ſhoweth that there is great plentie of ruſtie chollar: and yf it be blacke it ſignifieth ether the abundance of melancholy, or elles the aduſtion of blood in the ſtomacke. Yf it be of the cullar of leade, then it betokeneth the mortifiynge of the innar partes, or at the leaſte an extreme colde in the ſame. If it be ether fatty, or clammye, & no like meat hath be eaten immediatly before, it ſignifieth the hole body to conſume. If it be verye muche ſtinkyng, it is a ſure token of putryfaction. In theſe thinges, the nature and qualitie of the meates, be as well to be cō
                  ſidered,

as the imbecillitie an weakeneſſe of the guttes, in ſuffering fluxes, and reumes from the head. whan the excrement in cummynge forth maketh any noyſe, it declarethe winde to be mixte wt thynne moyſture, and the fundement to be drawen nere together. Whan any wyndye ſpirit ſtriueth with moyſture, then commonly there remayneth ſum fome in the ſiege. The ſiege being diuers in cullar, ſhoweth ye body to be diuerſly affected: wherfore for the moſt part it is a ſigne of long ſickneſſe.
            
            
               ¶Of the ſpettell. The .4. chapter
               
                  THe ſpettell is to be conſidered in all diſeaſes, but eſpecially in the diſeaſes or griefes of the breſt, and lunges: in the which diſeaſes, yf the pacient ſpet nothing at all, it is a tokē
                  
of extreme cruditie: but if he ſpet, though it be moyſt & crude it ſignifieth the firſt part of the diſeaſe, which is the beginning to be newly ended: after that it is more baked & cummeth vp firſt a littell, & then more & more, thē the ſickneſſe is almoſt in ye ſtate & at the worſt, & whan it is well baked, & cūmeth a great paſe, then the diſeaſe is alredy in the ſtate, which is to ſay at the heyght, becauſe thē it cā grow no hygher, & after cummyng leſſe, wt more eaſe & leſſe grefe in coughyng, and takyng of breth, beinge alſo well cōcoct, & not crude, it ſignifieth ye ſickneſſe to decline, & depart. Yf the ſpettel be ſumthynge nigh vnto yelowe, wt a light fome vpon it, it is a token, of cruditie only, without any furthar euill. But if it be very yelow, tawny, grene, or

blacke, or clammy wt much fome, it is not to be beliked at all: if it be blody, it is nothynge ſo euyll as blacke and yealow, but the manner of excretion, muſt alſo be well marked: For if it cum vp eaſily, thē it is to be accounted good, and yf not but wt difficultie of brethyng, thē it is euel. The abſolute note, & marke, of concoction is whan the ſpettel is light, white, and egal, & of ſubſtance nether thynne, nor thicke: yf the ſpettell be thynne, & not blacke, it ſignifieth nothynge but the lacke of naturall heat, but yf it be the cullar of leade, or ruſtineſſe or blacke, it is extreme euyll.
            
            
               ¶The .v. chapter of the pulſes.
               
                  THe pulſe is a ſenſible mouynge of the hart and Arteries, (that is to ſay vaynes, hauing

two coates growing of the hart, & carriynge both blod and ſpirit) by the which they be lifted vp and let done againe. This mouynge hath ii. vſes: For in the dilatynge of the arteries, colde Ayer is drawen in which doeth not only ſtirre vp, but alſo refreſheth the vitall power, wherof the Animall ſpirites be made, and in the ſubmiſſion, or cō
                  traction of the forenamed Arteries, the ſmoky excrement whiche came of burnte & humors aduſte, is expelled. Parauenture ſumme will loke, that here in this place I ſhoulde haue declared the differencys of the pulſes, becauſe that wtout the knowlege therof, there can be no diuinatiō by the pulſes. Howbeit I willingly at this time omyt them, becauſe Gallen and

Archigines with other mo auncient writers are not as yet agreed of them, & Cornelius Celſus (non of the worſt Phiſitions) ſemeth to doubt much whether any thynge may certaynly be coniectured by them or no. But this I am aſſured of that though I ſhould haue ſet them furth ſo playnly as I coulde for my lyfe, yet they ſhoulde not haue bene throughly knowen, but of ſuch as alredy be well entred, & practiſed, not only in the workes of Phiſicke, but alſo in Arithmaticke, and Mathamaticke: and as for ſuch let them ſerche what Gallen and other olde phiſitions haue wrytten: For to them this littel rude boke is not written, but only to ſuche as are ignorant in the lattyn tong, yt they may by healp of this my boke, not only lerne ſū
                  thyng

for theyr bodely health, but alſo ſaue theire money, which they dayly waſt in feeding ſuch Phiſitions as be not lernyd, wherfore gentyll readers accept my good wyll though I haue not ſatiſfied youre expectation, remembrynge the olde poetes ſayinge: Rebus et in magnis eſt voluiſſe ſatis.
which is to ſay that in matters of weyght, to haue ben wyllynge it is ſufficient.
            
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London in Fleteſtrete at the ſigne of the Sunne, ouer agaynſt the condyte, by Edvvard VVhitchurche the .x. day of April.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   