
      
         
            
            
            A
Briefe Deſcription of Hieruſalem
and of the Suburbs therof,
as it floriſhed in the time
of Chriſt.
            Wherto is annexed a ſhort Commentarie concerning
thoſe places which were made famous by
the Paſsion of Chriſt, and by the Actes of holye
men, confirmed by certeine principall
Hiſtories of Antiquity.
            Verie profitable for all Chriſtians to read, for the
vnderſtanding of the ſacred Scriptures
and Ioſephus his Hiſtorie.
            
               Hereunto alſo is appertaining a liuely and
beawtifull mappe of Hieruſalem, with
Arithmeticall directions, correſpondent
to the numbers of
this Booke.
            Tranſlated out of Latin into Engliſh
by Thomas Tymme Miniſter.
            
            
               LONDON,
Printed by Peter Short for
Thomas Wight.
1595.
         
         
            
            
            To the right honourable Sir Iohn
Puckering, Knight Lorde Keeper of the great
Seale of England, Thomas Tymme, wiſheth
increaſe of honour here, to Gods glorie;
and perpetuall felicitie in the
worlde to come.
            
               FOrſomuch as (right
honorable) Jeruſalem,
the citty of our
God, euen vppon
his holy mountaine
the ioy of the whole
earth, and the Cittie
of the greate
King, that faire and
moſt auncient Cittie,
by a ſpeciall prerogatiue is by God him
ſelfe bewtified aboue all other Citties: and
was therefore the cheefe, moſt noble and famous
Cittie of the worlde: Many trauellers
and Pilgrimes, haue at ſundry times both in
Mappes and hiſtories, deſcribed the ſame.
By the aduantage of whoſe laboures therein,
now of late one Chriſtien Adrichom, hath performed

a moſt liuely deſcription, and in the
Latine tongue enriched with diuers antiquyties.
The profit that might come hereby to
my countrimen of the vulgar ſorte, both for
the better vnderſtanding of the ſtory of the
Bible, where Jeruſalem and the partes thereof
are often times mentioned, and alſo for the
ready conceauing of Joſephus his hiſtory, moued
me to tranſlate it into the engliſh tongue:
And the book thus tranſlated, with the charts
expreſſed in naturall coloures, I haue preſumed
to dedicate vnto your honour. And bicauſe
the maiſter workeman in this new plat
of ould decayed Jeruſalem, hath left behind
him ſum rubbiſh and reliques of the Romiſh
ſuperſtition, I haue in ſome meaſure purged
and ſwept the ſtretes and corners of the ſame,
with the broome of truth, and carying them
out by the Scouregate haue layed them on
the Leyſtall of obliuion. My paines herein taken,
though not ſo great, as the laying of Ieruſalems
foūdation, or the raiſing of a chief corner
ſtone or the ſquaring & finiſhing any part
of this exquiſite plat: yet ſuch it is, as euen in
the meaneſt degree of a poore labourer, that
doth but ſweepe the ſtreetes, I moſt humbly
beſeech your honor to accept as a ſmall mite

of my good will: The which I gladly offer, to
the ende, that amidſt the greate burdens of
your moſt weighty affaires, your honour behoulding
this moſt braue cittie, adorned with
ſo glorious a temple, and contemplating the
paſſion of our ſauiour Chriſt therein, may be
delighted and recreated: And further, that
viewing this terreſtriall cittie, whoſe glory is
now vaniſhed, may thinke ſtill as the Apoſtle
did ſay, Non habemus hîc manentem ciuitatem,
and ſo aſpire to that heauenly Jeruſalem, garniſhed
and full ſtored with all manner of delights
which abideth for euer: wherein I doo
moſte humbly and hartely wiſh your good
Lordſhip a moſt happie reſidence, after you
haue performed your moſt honorable courſe
in this life, in the ſeruice of your
country, the pleaſure of your
prince, the generall benefit
and comfort of your
own ſoule.
            
               Your Honors moſt dutifull
to command,
Tho: Tymme.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Preface.
            
               FOrſomuch, the truth of hiſtorie, is
the foundation of faith, and of ſpirituall
vnderſtanding, (Chriſtian
Reader,) and the hiſtory of things
donne, blinde and imperfect, without
the knowledge of places, the
which knowledge giueth muche
light, both to the truth of hiſtory, and alſo to the ſpirituall
interpretation thereof: therefore I haue thought good
to obſerue two things with great diligence in this worke.
Firſt that I might portray and ſet forth the true and liuely
Image of Ieruſalem, of all other citties the moſt glorius
and famous throughout the whole world, whereof mention
is made in ſacred and in prophane hiſtories, as it floriſhed
in Chriſt his time; and alſo the forme of the temple,
(the fame whereof hath beene extolled aboue the heauens,
and was worthy of eternall memory) by the ſacred Scriptures,
by approued writers, and by auncient tradition of
faithfull and truſty men, in a liuely plot, or map, moſt equiſitly
drawn, together with the names, originalls, ſituations,
and formes of euery place, and the moſt worthy hiſtories
concerning the ſame, with all breuity. Secondly,
that I might rightly diſpoſe the places of Chriſt his pasſion,
and repreſent euery thing which he ſuffered in euery
place, euen as if they were now donne before our eies: and
ſo repreſented that I might, explaine it with plaineneſſe
and breuity. For hereby, all thoſe thinges which he ſuffered
for our ſakes, wilbe both more plainely vnderſtood,
and alſo more profitably remembred. But per aduenture
there wilbe ſome which will miſlike this our endeuour,
and the rather bicauſe we haue many thinges by tradition
of elders: to whom I anſwere out of Saint Hierom where

he ſaith, That eccleſiaſticall traditions, which are no
hinderance to faith, are ſo to be kept, as they were deliuered
by the auncients. In the meane time I will not
ſay, that they are too raſh & too too wicked, which wil deny
that thing,Hier. to. 1. which hath beene godly receiued at al times
and of all men.Epiſt. 28. ad Lucinium. So many of vs therefore as waſhed with
the bloud of Chriſt, do beare his name and are called Chriſtians,
if our faith be aunſwering to our name, and our life
not diſagreeing from the truth, hoping to be ſaued by the
merits & grace of Chriſt our ſauiour, let vs beleeue that,
which incorrupt and reuerend antiquity hath left, let vs
in no wiſe depart from thoſe thinges which our aunceſtors
haue celebrated without ſuperſtition, and which by the
conſent of the whole worlde, are come euen from them to
our hands, and with thankful godlines, and godly thankfulneſſe,
let vs call to minde thoſe places oftentimes, which
may put vs in rememberance of the pasſion of Chriſte: to
which places this mappe will leade vs, as it were by the
hande: and with the eies of faith and of our minde let vs
looke vpon the ſame ſonne of God, and inwardly behoulde
him, who being vrged with the great loue of our ſaluation,
hauing finiſhed his laſte ſupper in the parlour of Sion
and being come into the Garden of Oliuet, prayed and
ſwet bloud, through the anguiſh and greuous conſideration
of the Imminent afflictions. Immediately hee was betrayed
by the moſt wicked Iudas; he was taken, bounde,
and thruſt forward by the Iewes, euen as a lambe by the
woolues, moſt cruelly amidſt the noiſe of clamors and weapons,
and then was ledde to the houſe of Anna the high
prieſt: There hee was ſtricken: From thence hee was
drawne to the pallace of Caiphas: in the ſame, hee was
falſely accuſed, condemned, ſpyt vpon, blindfolded, buffeted
with fiſtes, and ſundry waies all the night ſcorned and
afflicted. In the morning he was violently caried through
the midſt of the cittie to the houſe of Pilate. From thence

he was led to the pallace of Herod and accufed againe, deſpiſed
of him, mocked, & apparrelled like a foole in a white
garment, & brought back again by another way of the city
to Pilate. There again he was accuſed of many faultes, ſtripped,
and greuouſly whipped, cloathed with purple, crowned
with thornes, dyuerſly derided, ſpitted vppon, buffetted
with fiſtes and ſtricken with a reede▪ and being thus miſuſed,
was made a gazeing ſtocke to the people and adiudged
to death. Then he was loden with a heauie croſſe, and
in the ſight of all the people, with greeuous and bloudy ſteps
hee was drawen, punched: and vrged by the furiouſe violence
of the ſoldiers, through a great parte of the cittie,
and by the gate of Iudgement out of the cittie, by a harde
and ſtoany way, euen vnto mount, Caluarie. And being
come thither he was ſtripped againe, and being both faint
and weary, was refreſhed with gaule in ſtede of drink: and
about high noone he was faſtened to the croſse, & ſo lifted
vpon high. And hanging on the croſſe by the ſpace of three
howers, was derided with taunts & reproachfull woordes:
being thirſtie, they gaue him vineger to drinke. Finally
he which could ſaue the world with one drop of his bloude
would needes beſtowe vppon vs by the fiue Riuers of his
woundes, his life, with all his bloude. A figure hereof
was that braſen ſerpent,Cant. 3. which moſes cauſed to be exalted
in the wildernes. To this ſpectacle alſo our heauenly father
calleth euery faithfull ſoule, Come forth (ſaith he)
ye daughters of Sion, and ſee king Salomon, Naye one
farre greater then Salomon.
               Lament. of Ieremy 3. In like manner Chriſt hanging
on the croſse crieth out O all ye which paſſe by the
way, behould and ſee, if there be any ſorrow & greefe
like myne.
            
            And not onely to the conſideration and meditation of
theſe things, but alſo to the Imitation, God in the holy
Scripture exhorteth vs in theſe woordes (ſpiritually interpreted)
ſaying, Looke, & make all thinges according

to the example or faſhion which was ſhewed thee in
the mount.
               Exod. 25. For all the precepts of life, which our ſauiour
taught all the time of his preaching,Heb. 8. as well by word as by
example, the ſame he expreſſed in himſelfe in one day of
his pasſion: Wherefore if we would follow Chriſt, not onely
in woorde but alſo in woorke, we may, by his liuely crucified
Image on mount Caluarie, as it were out of a goulden
booke intituled with the noble title of three moſt principal
languages, written with the quils of the ſpeare, of the nails
of the thornes, and of the whippes, in the moſt pure parchment
of the Immaculat lambe, and with the purple bloude
of the ſame, both learned and vnlearned, learne eaſely &
breifly, perfect theologie, the moſt wholeſome remedies of
Phiſicke, the full knowledge of Lawe and of Iuſtice, the
ſcience of liberall artes, of true humilitie, of obedience, of
pietie, of charitie, of patience, finally of all manner of vertues,
and of thinges moſt perfect: and may alſo bee inflamed
and drawen to loue and to follow Chriſt. Thus the bleſſed
virgin, ſtanding nere to the croſſe of Chriſt, did not onely
with bodely eies, but alſo in hart, through faith (which wauered
not in her) behould the woundes of her ſonne and ſeriouſly
thinking thereon, was ſo comforted, that now, as
Ambroſe ſaith ſhe was prepared alſo to die for the good
of mankind.Ambroſe in Luc. ca. 23. So ſaint Ihon both ſeing the ſide of Christ opened
with a ſpeare,Iohn. 19. bloude with water comming foorth of
the ſame, and alſo giuing teſtimonie thereunto, did by the
meditation thereof ſo greatly profite, that at the laſt he became
a moſt perfect diuine, and a ſoaring Eagle to behoulde
the moſt holy Trinitie.Luk. 23, Hier. to. 1. So the Theefe, when he ſawe and
hearde Chriſt Ieſus crucified,Epiſt. 13. ad Paulinum. in continently tourned vnto
Chriſt, and confesſing him, he made the puniſhment of murder
martiredome, and chaunged the croſſe for Paradice.
So alſo the Centurion by this ſpectacle,Mar. 15. receaued ſo great
ſtrength of faith, that vnder the croſse he was made a famous

confeſſor of Chriſt, and further (as Chryſoſtome
ſaith) was afterwarde crowned with Martyredome.
               Chriſoſt. in Mat. ca. 27.
Moreouer Thomas behoulding & touching the wounds
of Chriſt crucified, was ſo illumined with faith, that hee
plainly and openly profeſsed Chriſt, to be both his Lord and
his God.
            This beeing ſo, and loue procuring loue, euen as the
loadſtone draweth Ironne: who is hee, I pray you, whome
ſo vehement loue of Chriſt, nay rather a heate and flame
will not affecte, kindell, and ſette on fier? Who is he when
at the death of Chriſt all creatures do ſuffer with him, the
Sunne darkened, the vaile of the Temple rent in ſonder,
the earth quaking, Rockes breaking, graues opening, and
the deade ariſing, who and what is hee (I ſay) that will
not woonder, and that will not be abasſhed? Onely Adams
children, for whoſe cauſe he died are not moued with this
ſo great a benefite.
            The Adamente, that moſt harde ſtoane, is mollified
with the bloude of a goate: Iron with the heate of fier is
made ſofte:Heb. 6. 10. but the hartes of Chriſtians more harde then
Adamant or Iron, are not mollified with the bloude and
fier of Chriſt▪ but do crucifie a freſh vnto themſelues the
ſonne of God, and do tread vnder their feete the bloude of
the teſtament.
            What I pray you can be more beſeeming, more meete,
more Iuſte, and more profitable for vs, then to loue againe
him that ſo loueth vs, and Imitate him whome wee loue?
For if any thing herein ſeme harde, if any thing greuous,
that thing, loue, the ſweete yoke of the Lord, maketh light
and eaſie, for all labor is light, to him that loueth, according
to that notable ſentence of that auntiente father
ſaint Gregory, Nihil adeo graue eſt quod non aequanimiter
toleretur, ſi Chrſti pasſio, ad memoriam reduca
tur. There is nothing ſo heauy & burthenſome but the ſame

is willingly borne, if ſo be the pasſion of Chriſt be remembered.
            For we will indure all thinges with patience as light
and eaſie, if we call to mynde what hard wordes, harder
ſtripes, and moſt harde paines and afflictions, he ſuffered
for vs, whoſe heade was crowned with thornes, his eyes
blinde foulded, his eares filled with reproaches, his mouth
with gaule and vineger, his face polluted with ſpitting,
his cheekes bruſed with buffetting, his kneeſe ſhaking, his
ſhoulders laden with the croſſe, his hart repleniſhed with
ſorrow his bodie torne with whippes, his members racked,
his handes and feete bored,Exod. 15. to be breefe from the crowne of
the heade to the ſoales of the foot, he ſuſtained an Innumerable
ſort of woundes and ſorrowes. Wherefore as the waters
Mara, being ſometimes bitter, were made ſwete by
Moſes, at what time he caſt wood into them: euen ſo all
our tribulation, if we patiently indure the croſſe of Chriſt,
will waxe ſweete, and the gaule thereof will: tourne into
honny. For by the meditations of theſe afflictions of our ſauiour,
faith is illumined, hope ſtrengthened, charitie inflamed,
and all vertue increaſed. Wherefore ſaint Auguſtine
a light of the Church, no leſſe truly then godly, prouoking
vs by very forceable woordes therevnto: ſaith thus, Behould
the woundes of him that hangeth, the bloud of
him that dieth,
               Auguſt. in lib de virgi nitate. 
               the price of the redemer, the ſcarres of
him that ryſeth: His heade boweth to kiſſe thee, his
hart is opened to loue thee, his armes ſtretched abroad
to imbrace thee, his whole bodie ſet forth to redeeme
thee. Conſider what and how greate 
                     •
                  heſe thinges be,
waigh them in the ballance of your heartes, that hee
may be wholy faſtened in your hartes, who for vs was
wholy faſtened on the croſſe. Thus far Auguſtine. So
that it is not enough to meditate of theſe thinges once: but
it is profitable to thinke vpon them often: yea the oftener,
the more they auaile and profite. In the wholeſome contemplation

of whoſe pasſion, although we profite much, yet
we ſhall neuer attaine to the perfite knowledge thereof,
but there will remaine ſtill ſomewhat that we may ſeeke
for, the full knowledge wherof is reſerued to our heauenly
countrey. In the meane tyme, let vs contemplate in theſe
thinges day and night, in theſe things let vs recreate and
buſie our ſelues. In theſe let vs watch, in theſe let vs ſleep,
yea to die in the meditation of theſe things, is moſt Chriſtian,
and auaileable to euerlaſting ſaluation.
            
               Places of holy Scripture to the
praiſe of IERVSALEM.
               Lamenta. II.
               Is this the citty of perfit bewty, the ioye of the whole
earth.
               Ezech. V.
               This is IERVSALEM, I haue ſet it in the middeſt
of the nations & countries, yt are round about her.
               II. Cron. VII.
               I haue choſen this place for my ſelfe, to be a houſe
of ſacrifice.
               Iſaias. II. Micheas. IIII.
               The Lawe ſhall go foorth of Sion, and the woorde
of the Lord from IERVSALEM.
               Apocalips XXI.
               I ſawe the holy Citiie, new IERVSALEM,
come downe from God out of Heauen, prepared as a
bride trimmed for her husband.
               Tobit. XIII.
               O IERVSALEM the holy Cittie, many nations,
ſhall come from far to the name of the Lord God, with
giftes in their hands, euen gyftes to ye King of heauen:

all generations ſhal praiſe thee, and giue ſignes of ioye.
Curſed are all they which hate thee, but bleſſed are
they for euer which loue thee. Reioyce and be glad for
the children of the iuſt: for they ſhall be gathered and
ſhall bleſſe the lord for the iuſt. Bleſſed are they which
loue thee, for they ſhall reioyce in thy peace. Bleſſed
are they which haue bene ſorrowfull for all thy ſcourges.
For they ſhall reioyce for thee, when they ſhal ſee
all thy glorie and ſhall reioyce for euer. Let my ſoule
bleſſe God ye great King. For IERVSALEM ſhall
be built vp with Saphires & Emeraudes, and thy walls
with pretious ſtoanes, and thy towers & thy bulwarkes
with pure gould. And the ſtreetes of IERVSALFM
ſhalbe paued with Berall, and Carbuncle, and ſtoanes
of Ophir. And all her ſtreets ſhall ſay, Halleluiah, and
they ſhall praiſe him ſaying, bleſſed bee God which
hath extolled it for euer,
            
         
         
            
            Thomas Newton to the
louing Reader.
            THat ſtately place, that princely bowre
            that ſeate of mightie King,
            That floure of Beniamin his tribe,
            whoſe fame through world did ring,
            Ennobled with ſuch royall ſtiles,
            and titles of renowne,
            And ouer worldlie citties all
            moſt meete to weare the crowne;
            Loe, heere preſented is to Viewe
            in ſuch good currrant ſort;
            As no penne heretofore perform'd
            or made thereof report.
            So that wee neede not now to runne
            or gad from place to place,
            In daungers great, through countreis ſtaunge
            to trie or know this caſe.
            That braue eſtate which earſt it had,
            is now (alas) defac'de.
            King dauids houſe, and temple now
            is quight and cleane diſgrac'de.
            Yet ſitting ſtill with booke in hand
            we here may plaine beholde
            The ſtate of ech thing as it was,
            in times that were of old.
            Where Chriſt did preach, where Chriſt did ſuppe,
            where Chriſt did faſt and pray,
            Where Chriſt was caught, where chriſt was whipt,
            where theeues did him betraye:
            Where he a precious raunſome paid
            for man who had offended;
            Where he was buried; where he roſe,
            and eke where he aſcended.
            
               
Where Annas kept his pompous court,
            where Caiphas palace ſtoode;
            Where wicked Pilate dwelt, that did
            condemne moſt guiltles blood.
            This and much more is here diſcourſt
            by him that both had read
            And ſeene with eye, full thirtie yeeres,
            where hee his life had lead.
            Whoſe worke and paines as they deſerue
            much thankes and hartie praiſe.
            So Timme his guerdon well deſerues
            of all men in theſe daies.
            Aſwell for heere acquainting vs
            with this rare worke of skill,
            As alſo for his other paines
            that paſſed haue his quill.
            Who like a candle waſtes himſelfe
            in giuing light to others?
            Moe ſuch God graunt to take like care,
            to helpe their Chriſtian brothers.
            
               Thomas Newton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ A BRIEFE
DESCRIPTION
OF IERVSALEM AND
THE SVBVRBES THEREOF
AS IT FLORISHED IN
THE TIME OF CHRIST.
            
               1 
                     IEruſalem
               
               the elect Cittie of God,The originall places frō whēce this commentary is taken and where more is to be red.
holy and moſt glorious, built vpon
the holy mountaines, excelling all
the citties of the world, as well by
the loftineſſe of the ſeate, as by the
moderation and temperature of
the heauens,Pſalme 47. and 86. and fruitfulneſſe of
ſoile, was ſituated in the mideſt of the whole worlde,
and of Iudaea, as it were in the very center and heart
of the earth.Math. 4. 5. And being as a Queene amongeſt
all other neighbour citties,Pſalm. 73. had the preheminence
as the head ouer the body,Ezech. 5. and ſhined as the ſunne aboue
others in ſumptuouſnes and glorious buildings:
hauing ſuch ſurpaſſing excellency,Ioſeph. lib. 3 de bello Iudaico. cap 2. ſhe was by a certaine
ſingular priuiledge in time paſt, the onely place
which God had choſen to himſelfe: and was a figure
not only of euery faithfull mans ſoule, but alſo of the

elect Church of Chriſt militant vppon earth,Deu. 16. 17 and of
that bleſſed triumphant Church in heauen.Pſal. 47. A cittie
of perfect beautie:Tren. 2. the virgin of the worlde, the paragon
of all the Eaſte, and the ioye and reioycing of the
whole earth.
               This cittie was builded about the yeare from the
creation of the world,Gen. 14. two thouſand twenty and three,
in the time of Abraham,
                  Ioſ. l. 7, an. Iud. cap. 7. & l. 7. Bell. by Melchiſedech the Kinge.
In hebrue it was called SALEM; and in Greeke SOLYMA:
and it ſeemeth that hee poſſeſſed the ſame
fiftie yeares.Iud. ca. 18. The which afterwards the Iebuſites enioyed,Gen. 10.
who ſprang from Iebuſi,
                  Ioſua. 10. 15. & 18. the ſonne of Chanaan:
of whome it was called for a time Iebus, and Iebuſaeum
at what time Ioſua ſlue the King thereof.Iudg. 1, 19. And the Iebuſites
helde the ſame,2. kings 5. eighte hundred and twentie
foure yeares,1. Cron. 11. who truſted ſo much to the ſtrength of
their cittie,Ioſ. l. 7. an. cap. 3. that when king Dauid aſſailed the ſame;
in contempt of him and of his army they placed vpon
their walles, the blind, the halt, and the maimed,
ſaying that theſe were ſufficient to beate backe the enemy.
               But when Dauid through Gods helpe enioyed the
cittie,Hier. to. 3. de loc. Heb. lit, 1. the Iebuſites being expulſed, hee reedified the
ſame rounde, fortified it with a caſtle, dwelt therein,
and made it the Metropolitan cittie of the whole prouince
of Iudaea,
                  Euſ. Euāg. praep. li. 9. and the heade of all the kingdome,
and from thence foorth called it Ieruſalem,
                  3. Reg, 3. 5. 6. 9, 10. 7. as it were
Iebuſſalem the letter b. (to make the better ſounde)
tourned into r. Notwithſtanding there are ſome
which write, that it is called Ieruſalem, of the magnificent
temple which Salomon builte therein, as it
were Hieron Salomonis.
                  Ioſep. lib. 8. For the Greekes call a temple

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .Ant. cap, 2, & 5. In continuance of time Salomon and other
kings of Iudaea greatly enlarged the ſame, and ſo fortified
it with moſt ſtrong gates, towers, walles, and

trenches, and ſo adorned it with a temple, with pallaces,
and with moſt exquiſite buildings, that among
other citties it was a miracle of the whole world, and
is therefore more honoured with ſilence, then with
all that can be ſaid concerning the ſame.
               In this glory and excellency,Ioſ. con. Api on lib, 1. 
                  Ieruſalem floriſhed
foure hundred ſeuenty and ſeuen yeares, as if it had
beene an earthly paradiſe,Strabo. geograph. li. 16. being in compaſſe round
about, ſixe miles and two hundred and fifty paces.
And by the wall and circuit of the cittie, there was a
ſtony trench or vaulte threeſcore foote deepe, and in
bredth two hundred and fiftie, wherein was abiding,
about one hundreth and fiftie thouſand men.4 Reg, 16. 21. 24. 25. But
when the wickedneſſe of the Princes and people not
only had profaned the temple with the abhominations
of Idols,2. Cron 28. 33. 36. but alſo had filled the cittie euen to the
full with innocent bloud moſt cruelly ſhed, the cittie
together with the temple, Princes, and people by the
iuſt vengeance of God,Mich. 3. was by Nabuchodonoſer kinge
of Babilon (but Gods whip) ſo vtterly ouerthrowne,Ierem, 25. 26. 29.
and deſolated threeſcore and ten yeares, that Sion
was plowed vp like a field, and Ieruſalem was become
as a heape of ſtones,Hier. tom, 3 trad. Heb. in 2, par. 15 and the mountaine of the temple,
as it were the height and top of woods, ſo as in
the meane time (as Hierom witneſſeth) that neither ſo
much as a bird,1. Edr. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. nor a beaſt, could flie, or paſſe through
the ſame.Neem. 1. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
               
               Afterwards the temple only being with much a do
and very hardly builded, wanting gates, towers, and
walles, was inhabited againe by the Iewes (retourning
out of the captiuity of Babilon) threeſcore yeares.
               Moreouer within the ſpace of two and fitie dayes,
Nehemia incloſed it in compas three miles and ſeuen
hundred and fity paces,1 Mach. 12. 13 & 14. with gates, towers & a ſtrong
wall:Ioſ. 6. be. 6. and afterward, the ſame being bewtified by the

                  Machabees,
                  Ioſ. be. 13. & ce. by Herod, and by others very ſtately, with
publique and priuate buildings,Pſal. 37. recouered the former
dignity,Iſai. 2. being very famous and populous by the ſpace
of fiue hundred and foure and twentie yeares:Mich. 4. hauing
in it many narrow ſtreetes,Acts. 1. by reaſon of the exceeding
nomber of houſes therein.Mar. 16. At what time there,Pſal. 18. as in
a Theater,Ioſ. 6. bel. 13, and 7. be. 14. 17. and 18. Ieſus Chriſt wrought our ſaluation: and
from thence as from a center, the apoſtles ſpred forth
the Euangelicall doctrine throughout the world.
               But Titus Emperour of Rome, being brought by
the iuſt iudgement of God to take vengeance for the
Death of Chriſt, the thirtie and eight yeare after his
paſſion, beſieged it round, caſting a banke about it, &
ſhut vppe the Iewes in the Cittie as in a priſon, which
came out of euerie Tribe to cellebrate the feaſt of paſouer
there. Wherevpon that Cittie, the woonder of
the world, was made a denne of theeues, and a ſepulcher
of dead men. For by reaſon of ciuill murders,
famine, peſtilence, and ſword, there periſhed in the
ſame, eleuen hundred thouſand Iewes. And as for the
Citty it ſelfe, Titus did ſo vtterlie ſubuert it, that men
which came vnto it, would ſcarſe beleeue that euer it
had beene inhabited. Neuertheleſſe, hee left three
principall Herodian Towers, that is to ſay Hippic, Mariam,
and Phaſel, which were more notable than the
reſt, aſwell for greatneſſe as for beawtie, and that part
of the Citties wall,Luk. 19 which compaſſed them from the
Weſt, vnſhaken; to the ende, that both it might bee a
Caſtell for the Romane ſouldiers which ſhould be left
there for a Garriſon, and alſo to ſhewe vnto poſteritie
what manner of Cittie,Eu. in Cronic. et hiſt. & how well fortified, the force
of the Romans had ſubdued.Eccle. lib. 4. cap. 6. But after threeſcore and
fiue yeares, the Iewes rebelling againe, A Elius Adrianus
the Emperour ſlue many thouſands of them, and
vtterly ſubuerted thoſe Towers with the remainder of

the wall,Hier. in lo. Act. Apo. lib. H. and commaunded the Cittie to bee ſtrewed
with ſalt: whereby it came to paſſe according to the
propheſie of Chriſt, that there was not left one ſtone
of the Cittie vpon a ſtone. And building the Cittie againe
in leſſe compaſſe,Neceph. 3. Hiſto. Eccl. 24. hee excluded mount Sion,
with the pallace of Salomon, and that of the Queene,
and the houſe of the forreſt of Libanus, alſo the gate
of the North corner,Broca. in deſcrip. loco rum terrae ſanctae itinere. 6. and the tents of the Aſſyrians,
and all the north parte, euen to the dounge gate and
to the gate of Ephraim: but the mount of Caluary, and
the ſepulcher of the Lord, which were aforetime without
the walles, hee incloſed with the North walles of
the cittie; and ſet the picture of a ſow cut in Marble
vpon the forefrunt of that gate, by which men go to
Bethleem, thereby giuing to vnderſtande, that the
Iewes ſubiect to that law of ſwines fleſh, were vnder
the power of the Romaines: whom by an Edict he forbad
neuer more to enter into that cittie,Wil. Tyr. hiſto. bel. ſac. lib. 14. cap. 12. or looke into
the ſame from the top of any higher place, and from
thenceforth commanded it to be called AEliam Capitoliam,
after his owne name.Iacob. vit. cap. 55. But after this, being
inhabited of the Chriſtians, and dignified with a Patriarchall
ſeate, receiuing againe in continuance of
time the name of Ieruſalem, floriſhed fiue hundred
yeares in Chriſtian religion,
               And in the yeare after the birth of Chriſt ſixe hundred
thirty and ſix,Onuphr. in chron. Eccleſiaſt. it was taken by the Saracens which
raigned in Egipt, and ſo poſſeſſed foure hundred three
ſcore and three yeares.
               After this in the yeare of Chriſt,Wilhelm.Tyriarch. hiſt. bel. ſa. lib. 8. cap. 5. 18. 19. 20. 21. & l. 9. c. 1. 2. 9. 1099 the cittie
Ieruſalem was recouered by the Chriſtians hauing for
their Captaine, Godfrey of Bullion, who was the firſte
that entred vpon the wall of the cittie with great courage
and moſt fierce aſſalt, the Ides of Iuly, the very
ſame day and houre, wherein Chriſt died: And ſo

greate ſlaughter was made, throughout al the ſtreetes,
lanes,Iacob. de vitria. cap 20. and corners of the cittie, that no man coulde
paſſe but ouer the deade bodies of the ſlaine: and ſo
exceeding was the effuſion of bloud, that men went
ouer their ſhooes in the bloud of the dead:B. Salig. in epiſt. ad Ioā. a Lotharing card. inſomuch
that the conquerers themſelues were from the ſole of
the foote to the crowne of the heade imbrued with
bloud. Who when they enioyed the cittie, putting
off their armour, and clenſing themſelues from their
bloud, viſited the places of Chriſts paſſion, reſurrection,
and aſcenſion (which the faithful that dwelt in Ieruſalem
ſhewed vnto them) and beheld them with reuerence.
The eight day after with one conſſent they
elected Duke Godfrey, and created him the king of Ieruſalem.
But the man being full of Godlineſſe and humility,
would not be crowned with a crowne of gold
after the manner of Kinges, in the holy cittye, but
contented himſelfe and reuerenced the like crowne
of thornes, with the which the emperour of mankind
was crowned in the ſame place, when he went to be
crucified for our ſaluation.
               
                  Ieruſalem therefore being recouered by the Chriſtians
was ſo held and enioyed by them foureſcore
and eight yeares.Baſ. Hero. bell, ſacri. contin, lib, 1 cap. 7. & l, 6, cap, 10. Afterward namely in the yeare,
1187. the ſecond day of october, the Chriſtian princes
(wo and alas) diſagreing amonge themſelues, Ieruſalem
was deliuered vp to Saladine the Soldane of
Egypt,Matt, Palmerius in Cronic. vppon this condition that it ſhould be lawfull
for the Chriſtians to departe with bag and baggage:
the which Saladine held it three hundred and thirtie
yeares.Moſſaeus in Cronic. But in the yeare of our Lord, 1517. it was inuaded
by Selimo the emperour of turques, & is at this
day in the ſame compaſſe of walles poſſeſſed by the
Turkes:Onaphr, in cronic. who name it Cuſumobarech or Codsbarich, that
is to ſay, a holy cittie. So that from the firſt foundation

thereof vnto this preſent yeare one thouſand, fiue
hundred, ninety foure are paſſed three thouſand, fiue
hundred, thirtie and one yeares.
            
            
               THE FIRST PART OF THE CITTIE. THE PLACES VVITHIN THE CITTIE.
               
                  2 MOVNT SION,
                  which is called ye mount
of the Lorde, and the Holy Mountaine,
is much more higher then other mountaines
and larger:Pſal. 2. 25. after the faſhion of a
Theater in the fourme of a halfe circle
compaſſing the cittie on the ſouth parte.Ioel 2. 3. And
being ſet as a looking glas on a high place,Ioſep. 6. bel. 6. et. 15. ant 14. founded by
God vppon a firme rocke,Nicep. S. hiſt. eccl. 30 on euery ſide broken off,
had a plainenes thereon like to a towne, and being very
pleaſant and recreatiue, it repreſented the excellencie
and delights of heauen.Brocard. itiner. 6. Whoſe top the Iebuſites
firſt of all fortified with a ſtrong caſtle, and the
compaſſe thereof with firme and loftie walles, with
gates,Salig. tom. 6, cap. 6. and with towers. Whome when Dauid the
king had expulſed, he made the caſtle and the walles
round about,Iſa. 14. 20. the gates and the towers, much more
defenſible,Baſ. Hero. bel ſa. ri. cout in. lib. 1 cap. 8. and made the top and plaineneſſe of the
hill into ſtreetes and lanes, and builded there for himſelfe,
for his nobles and worthies, houſes, and called it
the cittie of Dauid: which now alſo Ioſephus calleth
the higher cittie, and the holy parte. The Machabees
reedifying the ſame mountaine in compaſſe,2. King. 5. made it
moſt ſtronge with many walles,1 Para, 11. &, 15. and lofty towers, in
ſuch wiſe as notwithſtanding any force, it was inuincible,
only by famine it might be ſurpriſed: where were
many ſtraight and narrow paſſages, and many houſes
of cittizens placed.
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     
From this mountaine,Pſal, 47. 86 according to the foretelling
of the prophets,Ioſ. 6. bel. 6 & 1. bel. 1. a law, and an euangelicall light came
forth,1 Macab. 4. and as it were from the head it ſelfe, it was ſpred
forth into the whole bodie of the world, for the ſauing
health of all nations.Ioſe. bel. 15. & 16. The which when the Romanes
by the iudgement and will of God, againſt all hope of
man, and without bloudſhed had taken (the ſeditious
within the Citty beeing ſtricken with a ſudden feare,
and roaming heere and there from the wall, and hiding
themſelues in their ſinkes) being diſperſed in all
corners and ſtreetes with their naked ſwordes, ſlue all
that they met withall,Iſai. 2. hauing no regard of perſons or
ſex,Mich. 4. and ſet fire on the houſes burning them and all
thoſe that were fled into them,Iſai. 49 and deſtroying manie
houſes whereinto they entred for pillage ſake,Luke. 2. where
finding whole families dead (whome the famine had
conſumed) they ſo abhorred the ſight thereof that
they returned backe againe emptie,Actor. 13. running thorowe
with their ſwordes all that they met,Ioſeph. 7. bel. 16. and ſo filling the
ſtreetes with dead bodies, that the whole Citty flowed
with bloud in ſuch aboundance, that (as Ioſephus
witneſſeth) many things burning, were quenched with
the plentifull bloud of the ſlaine. But night comming
on the ſlaughter began to ceaſe, but the burning increaſed.
The next day following, Titus being entered
into the Citty woondered at the fortifications of
the Cittie, and at the rockes of the towers, which the
Tyrants through follie had willinglie forſaken. To be
briefe, when hee had ſeene their ſubſtantiall altitude
and inuincible force, we haue fought (ſaith he) by the
manifeſt helpe of God, and it was God which draue
out the Iewes from theſe holdes. For what hands of
men, or what engines of warre might haue preuailed
againſt theſe? Many ſuch words ſpake he to his frends.
This mountaine though it were excluded out of the

cittie, yet afterward it was builded againe and inhabited.
But now being in the Suburbs moſt ruinous, it
lieth waſt.
               
            
            
               THE PLACES OF MOVNT SION.
               
                  3. THe Caſtell of Sion
                  
                  being ancient and ſtrong, was
ſet on the verie toppe of mount Sion, round like a
crown, and was a ſure defence and beautie both of the
Cittie and Temple,4 king, 13 and was as the capitall or chiefe
place of ſo great a cittie.2 king, 5 7, 11. Heerein the Iebuſites
dwelte at the firſte: whome Dauid caſting out by
force,3 king. 1 enioyed the caſtle, and receiuing from Hiram
king of Tyrus, ſtones, wood, and artificers, builded out
of the ſame a ſtrong pallace for himſelfe,1 Chron. 11, 17 and a houſe
of Cedar with a kingly throne. In the which caſtle
afterward, Dauid himſelfe and other kings of Iuda inhabited,
and vſed the ſame for the kinges ſeat. And
for this cauſe it was continually kept with a ſtraight
garde of ſouldiors.Ioſe. 6. bel. 6 And in proceſſe of time it was called
the kings caſtle,Ieremy 17 and the houſe of Dauid, the ſeate
and throne of Dauid,Luke 1 alſo the Court and kings houſe.
In this caſtle the moſt cruell of all tyrantes Antiochus
king of Syria,
                     Ariſtaeas li. de 72. int which in Greeke was called 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,1 Mach, 1
that is to ſay Renoumed,
                     1 Mach, 13 14. (but more truly 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , that
is Mad, he deſerued to be called) placed a garriſon of
Gentiles: whereby in the time of the Machabes hee
afflicted the Iewes very much a long time. The which
when Simon Machabaeus had inforced to yeeld thrugh
famine, and had cleanſed the caſtle from the polluſion
of Idols, they entered therinto with palmes in their

hands with Cimbals, with pſalterions, with hymnes
and ſonges: and he placed therein men of the Iewes
to defend the Cittie and countrey, yet nowe there is
nothing to be ſeene but the ruines thereof.
               
               
                  4. THE KINGS PRISON
                  with a lofty Tower,Neem, 3 which
ouerlooked the kings houſe.Ieremy 23 39, 40 Into this priſon Ieremie
was caſt, becauſe hee propheſied that the Cittie
ſhould be taken: and at the laſt was deliuered out of
the ſame by Nabuchadonezer, when the Cittie was
taken.
               
               
                  5. CAESARS and AGRIPPAS hall,
                  
                     Ioſ. 15, ant. 11. & 1. bel 16. & 6. bel. 6. was the kings
houſe, which Herod the Aſcalonite builded for
himſelfe in the vppermoſt cittie: for he builded in his
pallace two great and faire houſes of poliſhed marble
and fine gold, wherevnto the Temple it ſelfe was not
comparable, and calling them after the names of Caeſar
Auguſtus, and of Agrippa his ſonne in law, his
friends, he named the one CAESARS, and the other
AGRIPPAS.
                  
               
               
                  6. THE PARLOVR OF SION
                  
                  was ſcituate about
the middeſt of mount Sion,
                     Mat. 26. being large, paued,Marke, 14 and
verie faire:Luk. 22. wherein Chriſt in his laſt ſupper did eate
the paſchall Lambe with his diſciples,Iohn. 13▪
                      waſhed their
feete, and inſtituted the ſacrament of his moſt bleſſed
body and bloud.Luke 24. In the fame, on the day of his reſurrection
(when he was entered,Iohn▪ 20▪
                      the dores being ſhut)
ſtanding in the middeſt of his diſciples, he ſhewed vnto
them the wounds of his ſide, of his hands and feete,

and did eate before them: after that, breathing vpon
them,Iohn: 20 he gaue them the holy ghoſt, and therewithall
power to remit, and reteine the ſinnes of all manner
perſons. The eight day after this, here he offered vnto
Thomas the Apoſtle the prints and ſcarres of the
ſpeare and nailes to ſee and feele.Actes 1, 2 Here, after the Lords
aſcenſion,Hier. to. 1 epiſt. 27 ad Euſtoc. vir. & to. 3 epiſt. 1. ad Paulin: Niceph. lib. 2. hiſt. eccle cap. 3. 
                     Matthias was by lot choſen into the Apoſtleſhip
of Iudas the traitour. Here on the day of Pentecoſt,
the holy Ghoſt came downe in a great ſounde,
and in the forme of fierie toonges, lighted vppon one
hundred and twenty beleeuers: and at the firſt ſermon
of Peter, three thouſand Iewes were conuerted and
baptized. In this place Iames the Lordes brother ſirnamed
Iuſt,
                     Act. 6, 15 was by the Apoſtles created the firſt Biſhop
of Ieruſalem: and Stephen with ſix more, were
ordained Deacons. Heere the Apoſtles entered into
the firſt conſultation, or councell, and ſet downe the
twelue Articles of Chriſtian faith.
               
               
                  7. THE CYPRES trees of Mount Sion,
                  
                  
                     Eccleſ. 24 which were
very excellent, whereof the booke called Eccleſiaſticus
maketh mention.
               
               
                  8. THE HOVSE OF Annas,
                  
                  
                     Iohn. 18 the chiefe prieſt, the
father in law of Caiaphas,
                     Thren. 3. wherein Chriſt was examined
of Annas concerning his Diſciples and his
doctrine, at what time he aunſwered that he had
taught openly before all men, for the which
he receiued a blow on the cheek
by a ſeruant.
               
               
                  
                  9. THE HOVSE OF THE WOORTHIES,
                  wherin
the ſtrong men, and valiant peeres of king Dauid
dwelt:Neem, 3 where alſo as in a wreſtling place, the cheefe
wreſtlers and champions, for exerciſe ſake, vſed to try
maiſteries.
               
               
                  10. THE HOVSE OF THE VIRGIN MARY,
                  
                     Niceph. 2 hiſt. eccle. 3 & 21. wherin
after the death of her ſonne ſhe dwelt with Iohn
the Apoſtle.
               
               
                  11. THE HOVSE OF VRIA,
                  
                     2 king. 11, 23. one of the moſt valiant
ſouldiors of Dauid, whoſe wife Bethſabe, bathing
her ſelfe in a fountaine of her Garden (which alſo is
to be ſeene in the map) by her beautie allured Dauid
to adultery, beholding her from a gallerie of ye kinges
houſe.
               
               
                  12. THE VPPER MARKET,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel. 6, by reaſon whereof, the
vpper cittie alſo, was called ſometimes the vpper
market.
               
               
                  13. THE STAIRES OF THE CASTLE,
                  
                     Acts, 21 and 22 or priſon,
whereon the Apoſtle Paule ſtood, when hee made
aunſwer for himſelfe.
               
               
                  14. THE STAIRES OF SION
                  ,Neem. 3, 12. by which men went
vppe to the cittie of Dauid.Ioſ. 15, ant. 14.
                  
               
               
                  
                  15 THE KINGES GARDEN,
                  
                     4 king. 21 the which alſo was
called the garden of Oza,Neem, 3 wherin Manaſſes and Amon
kinges of Iuda were buried.
               
               
                  16 MELLO,
                  a valley or dale, very deepe and wide,
which lay betwene mount Sion and the lower
citty,Baſ. Hero. 1. bell. ſa. 8. and extended it ſelfe from the water gate to the
fiſh gate.Bro. itin. 6. Dauid builded and compaſſed mount Sion
round about from this valley:2. King. 5. the concauity and bottome
whereof Salomon did make leuell and plaine,1. Chro, 11
that it mighte bee a conuenient ſtreete:3. Kin. 9. 11▪
                      and from
thence forth it was called the ſtreete of the water gate.Neem. 8.
He alſo bewtified the ſame with buildings,2 Chro, 32. which being
decaied, was repaired by Ezechias. In this place
it was that Ioas king of Iuda was ſlaine by his ſeruants
in the way downe to Sela.
                     4, king, 12. But in Ioſephus time, this
valley was called Tyropoeon,
                     Ioſeph. 6. bell. 6. and was very large and
full of dwelling houſes.Brocord. itinere. 6. At this day this valley is ſo
filled vp with earth and ſtones, that there remaineth
only a ſmall ſhew of the former concauity & depenes.
               
               
                  17 THE PALLACE OF CAIPHAS;
                  belonging
to euery high prieſte, large and ſquare: wherein
ſomtime dwelled Eliaſib the cheef prieſt.Neem. 3. In this pallace
the princes of the people being gathered together,Matt. 26. & 27.
conſulted among themſelues what pollicy they
might vſe to catch Ieſus,Mar, 14, 15 and to kill him:Luk, 22. 23 to whome
he was there ſoulde by Iudas for thirty peeces of ſiluer.Ioan. 18.
Afterwards alſo he was thriſe denyed by Peter:
and was by falſe witneſſes of the Iewes, accuſed before
Caiphas in the counſell of the prieſtes and elders, to

whom when hee anſwered nothing beeing ſtraightly
charged by the high prieſt, to tell whether hee were
Chriſt the ſonne of God, the which when he confeſſed,
hee was conuinced as it were of blaſphemy, the
cheefe prieſt calling for the ſentence of the counſell,
threeſcore and ſix elders condemned him to be worthy
of death, and aunſwering ſaid, He is worthy to die.
Wherevpon the ſeruants and ſouldiors, did preſently
ſpit in his face, they blinde-folded him, buffeted him
with their fiſtes, commaunding him to propheſie,
ſcorned him all the night with ſundry mockes, and
vexed him with many blaſphemies, and that I may
ſpeake much in few words, no mortall man in this life
is able to expreſſe, what and how much hee endured
this night. And in the morning following, the rulers
of the Iewes aſſembled together in this place againe,
to deliuer him vp to death: and leading him bounde,
they deliuered him to Pilate the deputie.
               
               
                  18. THE FOVNTAINE OF SION,
                  the which was
made with great labour and coſt.
               
               
                  19. THE BRIDGE OF SION,
                  
                     Ioſ. 15, ant. 14, and 7 bel. 13, 15 by which men went
through the valley out of the vpper cittie vnto the
Temple.
               
               
                  20. THE GATES OF SION,
                  
                     Pſal, 86. which the Lord loueth
more than all the Tabernacles of Iacob.
               
               
                  21. THE VPPER GATE,
                  
                     2 Cron. 23, by which Ioas when he was
crowned king of Iuda in the Temple, and guarded

with the princes of the Iewes, was led into the pallace
of the kings of Iuda.
                  
               
               
                  22. THE SEPVLCHER OF DAVID,
                  
                     3 kin. 2, 11 together with
the field wherin the kings were buried,2 Chron. 24, and 26 the which
verie ſtately was placed aloft in the citty of Dauid:Neem, 3
wherein Dauid himſelfe,Ioſep, 7. ant. 16, and 13 
                     Salomon, and other kings of
Iuda, alſo Ioyada the chiefe prieſt were buried. Into
this monument of Dauids ſepulture,Ant. 15, & 16, ant. 7 
                     Salomon brought
great treaſure at his burial. The which Hircanus ye high
prieſt & captain opening, brought from thence 3000.
talents of ſiluer.Acts. 2 Not long after this, Herod the Aſcalonit
king of Iewes,Niceph. hiſt eccle. 3 went about alſo to bring much treaſure
out from thence,Breid. 12 Iul. but a flame of fire breaking forth
and conſuming two of his ſouldiors, he left off his enterpriſe,Sal. to. 7. cap. 2
and to make ſatisfaction for himſelfe, hee adorned
the ſame monument with faire ſhining Marble,Paſch. d. 184
which continued there a long time after. Where ye
                     Saracens afterwarde builded a church for themſelues
which ſtandeth as yet; which place they greatly reuerence,
and ſuffer not any chriſtiā to enter into ye ſame.
               
               
                  23. THE SEPVLCHER OF STEPHEN,
                  
                     Acts, 8, 5▪ 22 the firſt
Martyr; of Nichodemus, and of Gamaliel, Paules
ſchoolemaiſter.
               
               
                  24. THE TABERNACLE OF SION,
                  
                     1 Chro, 6, 7 couered
with skinnes which king Dauid made,2 king. 9 and placed
the ſame in the little hil of Mount Sion which is called
Gabaon,
                     2 Chron, 5 and with great reuerence he put the Arke of
God therein,Ioſ. 7 ant. 4 and appointed prieſts and Leuites continuallie
to Miniſter from day to day by turne, which

remained there twenty and foure yeares,Breid. 12. Iul. paſch. d. 184. vntill it was
carried by Salomon into the temple. In the ſame, Dauid
ſorrowing for his adultery with Bethſabe, and murder
of Vrias, made certeine pſalmes of repentance.
               
               
                  25. THE KINGS PRESSES,
                  
                     zach. 14. wherein the kings wine
was preſſed.
               
            
            
               THE SECOND PART OF
THE CITTIE.
               26. THE DAVGHTER OF SION,
               
                  Pſal. 9, 72 ſo
called,zach. 9 becauſe it ſeemed to growe
from mount Sion, the which was
alſo called the lower citty, beeyng
another part of the cittie, whereof
there is often mention made in the
holy ſcriptures and in Ioſephus.
               
            
            
               THE PLACES OF THE DAVGHTER
OF SION.
               
                  27. THE MOVNTAINE OF ACRA,
                  
                     Ioſe. 13. ant 9. & 6. bel. 6. 7, & bel. 13, 16. was ſometime
in the lower cittie verie loftie and ſteepe, the
heighth whereof afterward Simon Machabaeus abated
and made plaine by the continuall labour of the people,
which he imployed heerein by the ſpace of three
yeares day and night, that the Temple alone might be
higher then all other places of the cittie.
               
               
                  
                  28. THE AMPHITHEATER,
                  
                     Ioſe. 15, ant. 10. that is a place inuironed
with ſcaffoldes and ſtages, capable of foureſcore
thouſand men, where the people were woont
to behold their games, which Herod the elder firſt of
all other builded in the field at Ieruſalem with great labour
and coſt. Wherein, to recreate the beholders,
wraſtlers and ſword players, ſhewed many feates of
actiuitie: and ſometimes, Lyons, Leopardes, Bulles,
Beares, Bores, Wolues, and other exceeding wilde
and fierce beaſts, fought one with another, and ſometime
condemned men were caſt vnto theſe to bee deuoured,
and captiues taken in warre. At which time
of their games, the place beneath was ſtrowed with
ſand, to the end that neither the ſword players ſhould
faile in their footing, nor the fighters might bee defiled
with the bloud of the ſlain, nor yet that the ſprinkling
of the bloud ſhoulde bring horror to the lookers
on.
               
               
                  29. THE CASTLE ANTONIA,
                  
                     Ioſ. 15. ant. 14. & 18. ſtrong and wel fortified,Ant. 8.
lying neere to the North ſide of the Temple,
which was builded in time paſt on a high rocke fiftie
cubits high,Item. 1. bel. 3, & 4. 16, & 6. bel, 6 & aliâs ſape. and very ſteepe round about, and the tower
was called Baris. In this the chiefe prieſts which
came of the Machabees euen till Herods time inhabited:
where in a Cell made for that purpoſe, the ſacred
ſtole of the chiefe prieſt was kept, the gouernour of
the Tower lighting a candle there euery day. Herod
the greater hauing gotten the kingdome, and ſeeing
that this caſtle was conueniently ſcituat to command
the Cittiſens; that they might not ſeeke innouation

through ſedition, repaired the ſame to his greate coſt,
and fortified it within with a roiall pallace, euen like a
cittie, and with fower loftie towers at each corner,
whereof three were fiftye cubits hie, and the fourth
threeſcore and ten, from whence the whole temple
might be ſeene: and for the fauour which hee bare to
Marcus Antonius his frend, he called it ANTONIA
In this caſtle the Romaine ſoldiors, kepte alwaies
watch with their ſoldiors, hauing an eie and principall
care leaſt the people ſhould worke any innouation
in the Temple on the feaſt daies. And ſo the
Temple belonged to the cittie, and the caſtle Antonia
to the temple.
               
               
                  30. THE COVRTE OF RECORDES,
                  which wee
commonly call the courte of Chauncery, or of the
Roules: that is to ſay, a houſe wherein the act of the cittie,
and of the cittizens, and alſo their publike records,
and the accoumpt of creditors were kepte:Ioſe, 2, bell. 17. &. 7. bel 13. the which
the ſeditious burned, the keepers thereof flying from
thence to the end they might deſtroy all the euidence
of the creditors, and ioyne vnto them all the detters.
               
               
                  31. THE CASTLE OF ANTIOCHVS EPIPHANIS,
                  
                     Ioſe.:12. ant. 6.
both high and ſtrong, the which, after the
ſlaughter of many cittizens,1. Mac. 1. the ſpoile of the cittye
and temple,Dan. 8. 11. 12. and the burning of moſt faire houſes, he
builded vppon the mountaine Acra, and fortified it
with ſtronge walles and towers, and placed a Garriſon
of Macidonian ſoldiers there mingling with them
certaine of the moſt raſchall fugitiue Iewes, by whom
the continual ſacrifice was taken away by the ſpace of

three yeares and the citty it ſelfe vexed more then ſix
and twentie yeares. But after this Simon Machabaeus
wan and deſtroied this caſtle.
               
               
                  32. THE COMMON PRISON OF THE CITTIE,
                  
                     Act. 4, 5.
wherein the Apoſtles being ſhut vppe,Ioſe. 6. bel. 6. by the rulers
of the Iewes, were in the night time brought forth by
the angell. Ioſephus ſeemeth to cal this priſon Betiſo.
                  
               
               
                  33 THE CORNER PARLOVR,
                  
                     Neem. 3. belonging to the
corner houſe, where the publike ſuppers were kept.
               
               
                  34. THE VAVLTED CAVE,
                  leading from the caſtle
Antonia into the Temple,Ioſe. 15, ant 14. which Herod the elder
made, ſetting a tower thereon,Breid. 14. that by the ſame hee
might paſſe priuilie into the temple,Iul. if ſo bee the people
intended to make any inſurrection againſt the K.
the which remaineth as yet very wonderfull & large,
inſomuch that ſix hundred horſes may verie conueniently
be placed therein.
               
               
                  35 THE COVRT,
                  
                     Ioſep. 6, bel. 6, et, 7 be. 13. In Hebrew called Gaſith. Which
in the inner cittie was ioyned to an olde wal thereof.Exod. 18.
Wherein were three ſcore and tenne Senatours
and ordinary Iudges,Hier. to, 3. epiſt. 25, ad. Fabiol. which were called of the Iewes
Sanhedrim, in Greeke Synedrium, that is to ſaye in
Engliſh,marſ. 11. The counſell of the Elders, and Seniors of
the people.Num. 11. Theſe dealt in the affaires of the common
wealth, gaue Lawes, and determined the doubtfull
and weightie cauſes, yea euen of other Citties

alſo, they ended ſtrifes and controuerſies, and gaue
the ſentence of death,Deu. 17 generally they dealt in all capitall
cauſes, except onely in the difficulties and miſteries
of Gods Lawe and of the Iewes Religion, the
which the prieſtes onely determined. In this conſiſtorie
the Apoſtles were examined,Actes 4, 5 whipped, and
forbidden to preach, and yet went reioyſing from the
Councell, becauſe they were counted worthy to ſuffer
ſhame for the name of Ieſus.Actes 6, 7 Heere it was that
Saint Stephen ſtanding before the Councell, and his
countenance ſhining like an Aungell, lifting vppe
his eies, ſawe the Heauens open, and the glorie of
God, and Ieſus ſtanding at the right hande of GOD,
from thence hee being caſt with violence out of the
Citty, was ſtoned.
               
               
                  36 THE HOVSE OF ANANIAS THE HIGH PRIEST,
                  
                     Ioſep. 2. bel. 17. which the ſeditious at ye length fiered.
               
               
                  37. THE HOVSE OF SAINT ANNE,
                  
                     Breid. 26, the Grandame
of Chriſt,Iul. Sal. to. 8. cap. 6 wherein ſhe with Ioacim her huſband
abode when the feaſt was at Ieruſalem, where
they both died.Iac, vitri. cap. 58 Heere the bleſſed virgine Mary was
conceiued (as ſome coniecture) and aboad there during
the paſſion of Chriſt.
               
               
                  38 THE HOVSE OF THE RICH GLVTTON,
                  
                     Luke. 6
which burneth in hel according to the Euangelicall
ſtorie.Breid. 14. In the which houſe that he dwelt,Iul. it is reported
by ſome antiquities,Sal. tom. 8 cap. 6 a high wall whereof is
ſhewed at this day to Chriſtian trauellers.
               
               
                  
                  39. THE HOVSE OF MISSA,
                  
                     4 king. 11 whereof mencion
is made in the fourth booke of Kings.
               
               
                  40 THE HOVSE OF THE NATHINAEANS,
                  
                     Neem. 3
which carried wood and water into the Temple.
               
               
                  41. THE HOVSE OF THE PRINCE OF THE PHARISEIES,
                  
                     Luke. 14 in the which Chriſt touched the
man ſicke of the dropſie and healed him.
               
               
                  42. THE HOVSE OF THE FORREST OF LYBANVS,
                  
                     3, kin, 7, 10
in length one hundred cubits,2. Par. 9 in breadth
fiftie,Iſai. 22 and in heigth thirtie cubits: the which Salomon
builded moſt braue and glorious of poliſhed marble,Ioſep. 18 ant. 5. 6, 7.
of Cedar trees, garniſhed with ſiluer and gold, hauing
a flat roofe with walkes and galleries: (according to
the faſhion of Paleſtine) and within liuely counterfeits
of ſundry trees and plants moſt artificially made,Hier. to. 3 epiſt. 33 ad Suniam.
that the leaues thereof ſeemed in ſome ſort to ſhake.
And neere vnto the ſame hee planted a groue and a
greene arbor,Eccleſ. 2 made of all manner of trees, and watered
with fountaines: alſo hee made parkes and fiſhe
pooles, wherein it is like were all manner of wilde
beaſtes, birds, and fiſhes. This houſe was a ſtorehouſe
of meate, an armorie for weapons of warre, a houſe
wherein ointments, paintings, and ſweete perfumes
were laied vppe and preſerued. Beſide theſe, two hundred
ſhields of golde for horſſemen, and three hundred
large targets of golde for footemen which Salomon

made, were in this houſe by him laide vppe.
Al other veſſels alſo of this houſe, were of gold. To this
houſe the king and his peeres came when the weightie
affaires of the Common wealth were ended, and
recreated their mindes, with banquets, with plaies,
and with pleaſant walkes.
               
               
                  43 THE HOVSE OF SIMON THE PHARISIE
                  which is at this day to bee ſeene:Luk. 7. wherein Chriſt
ſitting at the Table, forgaue vnto Mary Magdalen
the ſinfull woman (bewailing her ſinnes, and waſhing
his feet with her teares, wiping them with her haire,
kiſſing them, annointing him, and much louing him)
many ſinnes.
               
               
                  44 THE HOVSE OF THE COMMON PEOPTE
                  wherein they exerciſed themſelues with dartinges
& other exerciſes of the arme,Ieremy 39 and with feaſtes, with
plaies and walkes refreſhed their mindes.
               
               
                  45 THE GREAT MARKET,
                  
                     Ioſe, 13. ant 20. &. 1. bell. 3. which was in the midſt
of the cittie, and neere adioyning to the Caſtle
Antonia,Ioſe. 14, ant 22. item. 1. bel. 7. & 11: wherein Alexander the king of the Iewes,
and the chiefe prieſt, crucified eight hundred Iewes,
killing alſo the Wiues in the preſence of their husbands,
and the children in the ſight of their mothers:
the which ſpectacle himſelfe with his Concubines
beheld, at what time they were banqueting in the caſtle
Antonia. For the which crueltie he was ſirnamed
Crucida. In the ſame market place, Herod the greater,
fought a great battell with the Parthians, which went

about to bring againe Antigonus into the kingdom.Ioſe. 6. bel. 14. & 7. bel, 7. & 8.
Furthermore when the famine through the Romane
ſiege was exceeding great in Ieruſalem, in ſuch wife
that it conſumed whole families, and repleniſhed the
toppes of houſes with fainting women and children,
and the waies with the dead carcaſes of olde men (in
which extremitie they did eate leather, their girdles,
their ſhooes, hay, and mothers, their owne children)
then a man might haue ſeene luſty yoong men which
afore time were moſt flouriſhing, paſſe through this
market place, like ſhadowes of dead men. And when
thoſe which remained aliue, were not able to burie
the dead, by reaſon of theyr exceeding multitude, and
could not endure the ſtinke of the bodies vnburied,
they caſt them ouer the wall into the vallies of the cittie.
The which when Titus ſawe as hee went about
the wals, full of dead bodies much putrified, he fetcht
a great ſigh, and houlding vppe his handes to GOD,
proteſted that it was not his deed, for the obſtinate
Iewes refuſed peace, to them often times offered.
               
               
                  46. THE MARKET OF WARES,
                  the which was in
the vpper part of the lower cittie,Acts 12. in the which,Euſeb, 2. hiſt. eccle. 9 fiſh
and ſundry other things were folde. In this market S.
Iames the greater,Neceph, 2. hiſt. eccl 12. the brother of Iohn, ſuffered his
martyrdome by the tyranny of Herod Agrippa.
                  
               
               
                  47. THE VPHOLSTERS MARKET,
                  
                     Neem. 3. wherein all maner
of olde garments that had beene worne aforetime
of others, were to be ſold.
               
               
                  
                  48. THE SCHOLE OF GENTILLITIE,
                  
                     1 Mach. 1. and 2. which Ieſus,
the falſe high prieſt of the Iewes (who after the
manner of the Gentiles would be called Iaſon) and other
Iewes apoſtatas,
                     Mac. 4. by the permiſſion of Antiochus
Epiphan, ſet vp euen vnder his caſtle oueragainſt the
temple: wherein the people were taught the lawes
and faſhions of the Gentils, & the youth inſtructed in
the ſtudies and diſputations of the Greeke philoſophers.
Where they being naked and annoynted with
oile, exerciſed themſelues in feates of actiuity, in martiall
actions, and in enterludes. Furthermore in the
ſame place, the ſayde Apoſtatas ſet vp EBHEBIAM,
that is to ſay a Stewes of faire young boyes, wherein
they committed moſt filthie thinges againſt nature,
By reaſon thereof many fell from the lawe of God, to
the manners and abhominations of the Gentiles, being
as it were ſould to commit monſtrous wickednes:
inſomuch that ſome of the prieſts forſaking the temple
and worſhip of God, gaue themſelues to the exerciſe
of feats of actiuity: here hence alſo there ſprang
vp among the Iewes diuers ſects, namely the Phariſies,
the Saduceis, the Eſſeies &c.
               
               
                  49 THE HOVSES OF THE PRIESTES,
                  
                     Lyra in Neem. 3. and of the
Leuites whoſe houſes were ſhut vp by the outward
parte of the wall: but from the former parte they
had a proſpect toward the temple.
               
               
                  50 THE HABITATION OF THE TARGET BEARERS,
                  
                     4. King. 11. was builded before the weſt gate of the

temple:Ioſeph. 20. where firſt the Iewes,Ant. 15. then the Romaine ſoldiors,
vpon the ſolemne feaſt days had the ſtations for
the guarde of the temple.
               
               
                  51 THE LYSTES,
                  
                     Ioſ. 15, ant 10. & 17. ant 9. 10. OR TYLT, which was placed
oueragainſt the South parte of the Temple, wherein
horſſes, by running, agillitie, and ſwiftneſſe were
exerciſed. And the wraſtlers and champions did contend
before the people, who ſhould rnnne ſwifteſt on
foot, with chariots diuerſly drawne, who ſhoulde
breake moſt ſpeares, and in other maſteries, and feares
of valiencie. Where Herod the kinge for the honour
of Auguſtus Caeſar ordeined the game and priſe, of
fiue yeares continuance; appointing vnto the victors
greate rewards. the ſame Herod when he ſhould die,
called all the more noble ſorte of the Iewes of al places
within his dominion, by an Edict threatning death to
ſuch as ſhould not obey, and cauſed them to be ſhut
vp in the Lyſtes, to the ende that after his death they
all being there ſlaine, euery houſe might haue cauſe to
waile euen in deſpight of all Iudaea.
                  
               
               
                  52. THE MOVNTAINE MORIA,
                  the which in
another place is called the lande of viſion,Gen. 22. and the
mountaine of the temple,Mich. 3. and the mountaine of the
daughter of Sion,
                     1 Mach. 13 & 16. lying neere vnto the eaſte wall of
the cittie,Iſa. 10. 16. being very high, ſtoany, and very ſteepe
rounde about.Ioſep. 15. ant 14. & 6. bel. 6. In this mountaine Abraham being
ready to offer vp his ſonne Iſaac, in ſteede of him offered
vp a Ramme which was taken, by the hornes in a
thicket. This was the very ſame mountaine which
Dauid bought of Streuna or Ornan the Iebuſite for ſix
hundred ſicles of goulde: and erecting an alter in his

threſhing flower, he offered a burnt offering vnto the
Lorde,1, Cron. 21. which the fire from heauen conſumed. Afterward
in the ſame mountaine Salomon builded vnto
the Lorde a moſte excellent Temple both for largeneſſe
and bewtie; whereof mention ſhalbe made hereafter.
               
               
                  53. THE FIRST WALL,
                  
                     Ioſe. 6, bel, 6 7, &c. the which was called the
olde wall, both in regard of the valleis, and a hill
which was alofte aboue them, and alſo in regarde of
threeſcore towers whereinto it was deuided, the
which made it very defenſible and ſtrong.
               
               
                  54. OPHEL,
                  
                     2. Cron. 27. 23. which Ioſephus calleth Ophlam, was a tower
of an exceeding height, whoſe top ſeemed to
rech vnto the cloudes; it was fortified with a caſtle,
and compaſſed about with a firme wal, neere vnto the
Temple, notwithſtanding it was without the wall,
which ſhut off the habitation of the prieſts. Herein
dwelte the Nathenims. Into this Manahemus the
tyrant flying, was taken and ſlaine. This ſame was at
the laſt burned by the ſoldiors of Titus.
                  
               
               
                  55. THE PALLACE OF THE MACHABEES,
                  builded by them on a very loftie place on the weſte
ſide of the Temple,1. Mac. 13. from whence they which would
behoulde the cittye and thoſe things which were don
therein,Ioſe. 17, ânt 14. had a moſt pleaſant and delectable proſpect.
The which kinge Agrippa afterward excedingly
enlarged and made it a Courte for himſelfe: from

whence out of his parlour hee might behold whatſoeuer
was donne in the temple. For the which cauſe the
rulers of the Iewes builded a very high gate betwene
that and the weſte part of the inner Temple, to hinder
the kings proſpect. This thing both kinge Agrippa,
and Feſtus alſo the Lieutenant of the country tooke
in very euill parte, who alſo commanded them to pull
downe the ſayde gate. But the rulers intreated, that
they might haue leaue to ſend ambaſſadors to Nero
the emperour concerning this matter, ſaying that
they could not liue if any thinge were caſted downe of
the buildings of the temple. The which liberty when
they had obtained; they ſent Iſmaell the cheefe prieſt,
and Helchia the treaſurer, and with them ten of their
chiefe rulers. And Nero at the earneſt ſute of Poppea
his wife, a godly woman, which ſhee made for the
Iewes, pardoned the building of the ſaide gate, and
permitted the ſame ſo to ſtand.
               
               
                  56. THE PALLACE OF PILATE,
                  
                     Pſal. 37, et. 72. and of the
Lieutenants of Rome, adioyning to the Gallerie,
which lieth on the North ſide of the caſtle Antonia:
                     Iſa. 1, 50▪ 53, 63.
which pallace,Math. 27. was much more large, loftie,
and fayrer,Mar. 15. then all the buildinges of the cittye, and
had an aſcend or mounting,Luk. 23. of twenty and eight ſteps
of Marble.Ioan. 18.
                  
                  Here when Chriſte was falſely accuſed, and required
to bee crucified, by the princes and people
of the Iewes, for (that as they ſayde) hee peruerted
the people, forbad tribute to be giuen to Caeſar, ſayde
that he was Chriſt a King, and therfore approued him
ſelfe a ſeditious perſon, Pilate condemned him to be
whipped vnder the forme of this ſentence▪ which was

found in a moſt ancient chronicle,Breid 21. Iul. Sal. tom 8. cap. 7. as followeth, Ieſum
Nazarenum virum ſedicioſum, et Moſaicae legis contemptorem,
per pontifices et principes ſuae gentis accuſatum,
expoliate, ligate, et virgis caedite. That is to ſaye,
Take ye Ieſus of Nazareth accuſed by the chiefe prieſtes
and rulers of his owne Nation to bee a man ſedicious,
and a contemner of Moſes Lawe, ſtrip him, binde him,
and whyp him. Whereupon the ſoldiors of Pilate led
him into the Iudgement haule, ſtript him before the
whole band of ſoldiors and other people, tied him to
a piller, beate him moſt cruelly with roddes, and rent
and tare his moſt tender body. After this, they put
on him a purple robe, platted and in forcible manner,
broided on his head a crowne of ſharpe thornes, deliuered
into his right hand a reede, and in ſcorne ſaluted
him as a kinge bending the knee before him, many
waies mocked him, they did ſpit on him, they did
buffet him, and ſtrike him vpon the wounded heade
with a reede.
               
               
                  57 THE QVEENES PALLACE,
                  
                     3 Reg, 7. 9. which Salomon
moſt royally builded of precious and poliſhed ſtones,Cro. 2. 8. 9.
for the habitation of his wife which was Pharaos
daughter.
               
               
                  58 SALOMONS PALLACE,
                  
                     3 kin. 7, 10 exceeding greate
and fayre, the which hee builded in thirtene yeares
magnificently and moſte ſumptuouſly on the ſouth
parte of the mount Moria, of bright marble, and cedar
trees, ſupported with many pillers, for his owne
habitation: this he wonderfully garniſhed with gold
and ſiluer round about, and made all the veſſels thereof
of gold. In the ſame place afterward, the Chriſtian

kings of Ieruſalem had their pallace, where firſt began
the order of the Templers.
                  
               
               
                  59 THE CASTLE PISAN,
                  
                     Sal. to. 7. cap. 1. compaſſed about with
deep trenches, & towers; the which was builded
on the weſt part of the cittie, by the Chriſtian inhabitants
of a towne in Italie belonging to the Piſans, at
what time they had the dominion of the holy lande.
Where firſt the Piſans, after them the Saracens, and
now the Turkes, do exact of the pilgrims of the holy
land ſacrilegious tribute.
               
               
                  60 THE INNER FOVNTAINE,
                  
                     2. Reg, 20. which king Ezechias
made in the midſt of the cittie at the North
ſide of the temple.2 Cron. 32. For he brought into the cittie the
waters of this fountaine,Eccleſ. 48▪
                      from the higher fountaine of
Gition, by conduct pipes which were vnder the earth,
and made them to iſſue forth in this fountaine. This
fountaine he compaſſed about with a wel to water the
whole cittie, that the people in time of ſiege might
not be diſtreſſed with the want of water.
               
               
                  61 THE POOLE PROBATICA,
                  
                     Iohn. 5. that is to ſay ye ſheep
poole, wherein the ſheepe and other beaſtes were
waſhed that were appointed for ſacrifice. In Hebrue
it is called Betheſda, (and corruptly Bethſaida) that is
to ſay, the houſe of effuſion becauſe the raine waters
ran into the ſame. It was ſituate betwene the gate of
the valley and the temple.Sol. to. 8. cap. 5, 6. It was the largeſt and moſt
principall poole or water of the whole cittie, hauing
fiue porches, which king Salomon made for the ſeruice

of the Temple. And this Ioſephus calleth Salomons
lake or Poole. For in this poole the Nathenims
waſhed the oblations which they deliuered vnto
the prieſts to be offered in the Temple. The Water
heereof was moued at certeine times by the Aungell
of the Lord, and who ſo after the ſtirring therof went
firſt into the water, he was healed, whatſoeuer diſeaſe
he had. And therefore there lay a great multitude of
languiſhing people in the porches thereof, as blinde,
lame, withered, waiting for the mouing of the water.
Among which number Chriſt healed a man which
had languiſhed thirty and eight yeares.
               
               
                  62 THE OLD FOVNTAINE,
                  
                     Iſai. 22. together with a Riuer,Ieſe. 7, bel. 24.
which iſſuing out of the ſame runneth through
the whole Cittie into the brooke Cedron.
                  
               
               
                  63 THE BRIDGE,
                  
                     Ioſe. 14. and portch with gates, by which
men went from the gallerie,Ant. 8, et 15. and from the Caſtle
Antonia, ouer the valley of Cedron into the Temple,
the which at the firſt the fauorites of Ariſtobolus againſt
Pompei,
                     Ant. 14, et 1. Bel. 5. and afterward the ſeditious againſt Florus,
                     Item. 2, bel 15, 16, &c.
cut off, leaſt by the meanes of the Caſtle Antonia,
the Temple ſhould be gotten.
               
               
                  64 THE WARDERS GATE,
                  
                     Neem: 12 ſo called, becauſe certeine
of the kings guard warded there, at ſuch time
as the king entered into the Temple.
               
               
                  
                  65 THE HORSE GATE,
                  
                     Lyran, in Neem. 3 ſo named, becauſe men
might ride ſo farre as that place: but then leauing
their horſes, they went on foote into the temple. At
the which place began the habitations of the prieſts.
               
               
                  66. THE GATE OF THE ESSENS,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel, 6 was ſcituate in
the olde wall of the Citty.
               
               
                  67. THE FIRST GATE,
                  
                     Zach. 14 whereof the Prophet Zacharie
maketh mention.
               
               
                  68. THE PORCH OF PILLERS,
                  
                     3 king. 7 ſcituate before Salomons
pallace, the which was fiftie cubites long,
and thirty cubites broad, and ſupported with ſtrong
pillers.
               
               
                  69. THE BEAST MARKET,
                  
                     Ioh, 5. called Probatica, where
ſheepe, oxen, and other beaſtes for ſacrifice were
ſold in the open market.
               
               
                  70 THE PALLACE OF QVEENE BERNICE,
                  
                     Act. 25. 26. ſiſter
of king Agrippa,
                     Ioſ. 2, bel 15 16, et, 17. who with her brother at Caeſaria
heard Paules ſupplication before Feſtus. And afterwards
paying her vowes to God at Ieruſalem, ſhee
came bare foot before Florus ſitting in his iudgement
ſeat tyranizing againſt the cittiſens, whom ſhe beſeeched
in vaine as concerning them.
               
               
                  
                  71. THE PALLACE OF GRAPTA,
                  
                     Ioſ. 5. Bel. 9 the neece of
Izata kinge of the Adiabens, which ſhe built for her
ſelfe. Wherein afterward, Ihon the Captaine of the
ſeditious abiding, lefte there his mony and ſpoiles of
tyranny.
               
               
                  72. THE PALLACE OF HELEN,
                  
                     Ioſ. 20, ant. 2. & 6. bel. 7 & bel, 13. Euſeb. 2 hiſt eccle. 12. which exalted
it ſelfe in the middeſt of the mountaine Acra. She
being the Queene of the Adiabens which dwelt beyond
Euphrates, was conuerted from Gentiliſme, to
the religion of the Iewes,Acts 11. and came to Ieruſalem, to
dwell. Where ſhe being become a Chriſtian, at what
time that greate famine, (whereof Agabus propheſied)
in the dayes of the emperour Claudius, pinched
the whole world, but ſpecially the land of Iudaea, this
good Queene (I ſay) at her proper coſts and charge
ſent for great ſtore of corne out of Egypt which ſhee
diſtributed among the poore and needy at Ieruſalem.
                  
               
               
                  73. THE PALLACE OF MONOBAZ,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel. 7. kinge of Adiabens,
the ſonne of Helen, which was ſituat in the
eaſte parte of the cittie.
               
            
            
               74. THE TEMPLE OF THE LORD,
               
                  King. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9, 2 Chro. 2. 3 4. 5. 6. 7 otherwiſe
called, the Lordes houſe and the ſanctuary. The
which Salomon the peaceable kinge builded of the
matter prepared by Dauid his father, and of electe,
hewen, and polliſhed ſtones, and of timber cut from
mount Libanus, by the labour of more then a hundred

fitie three thouſand men in the mont Moria,
without any ſound of axe or hammer, in ſeuen yeares,
ſo ſumptuous and magnificent both within and without
with ſhining gould, that it was counted the miracle
of the world. Concerning the wonderfull excellencie
whereof nothing can bee ſufficiently ſpoken.
When Salomon dedicated this Temple, the cloude
and glory of the Lord filled it, & the fire which came
from heauen conſumed the ſacrifices which were offered
therein. As concerning the enterance of this
temple, the ſame was contrary to the faſhion now vſed,
being Eaſt-ward, and the backe part tended weſt;
whereuppon the prieſts, and people praied turning
to the weſt, and worſhipped God herein with greate
reuerence, vntill through the Impietie of the kinges
and people of the Iewes,4. King. 25. it was prophaned with the
polluſions of Idols often times.2 Chro. 36. Therefore foure hundred
fortie and one yeares after the firſte foundation
thereof, by the iuſt iudgement of God, Nabuchodonozer
kinge of Babilon burnt the ſame, and ſo deſtroied
it,1 Eſ. 3, 5, 6. that it lay deſolate threeſcore and tenne yeares.
But after that,2 Mac, 3 
                  Zorobabell repaired the temple againe
in excellent ſorte with ſquared ſtones,Ioſep. 2, bel. 17, &, 7, bel 10. and the beſte
timber in the ſame mountaine, within the ſpace of
forty and ſix yeares.1. Mach. 1. 4, 6. 13. And this alſo was of ſo great eſtimation
that it was honoured throughout the whole
world, and was from all partes enriched and bewtified
with the greateſt gifts and honors of kings and princes.
The which after three hundred, fiftie, and fower
yeares, was ſpoiled by Antiochus Epiphan king of Syria,
and polluted with Idols. In the third yeare of the
contamination thereof, the moſt valiant Captaine of
the Iewes Iudas Machaboeus, purged it, and reſtored
to the ſame againe, the goulden veſſels, and the worſhip
of God. And that it might neuer more be defiled,

he did waule it about in manner of a caſtle with deepe
trenches,Ioſe. 14. ant 8. et 7. bel. 4 9. with ſtrong and high walles, and with gates
and towers both forceable and faire.
               Wherein hee being beſeeged a long time with one
hundred and twentie thouſand Gentils, coulde not
be commaunded.
               But aboute one hundred yeare after this when
that famous Captaine of the Romaines Pompei the
greate foughte againſt it,Strabo. Geo gra, lib. 16. hee wanne it with maine
force,1 Mac. 6, and in the entering thereof hee ſlue therein
twelue thouſande Iewes; and Pompei himſelfe with
his peeres entring into the moſte holye place, and
behoulding the Table, the Candleſticke, and other
thinges there, of ſhining goulde, and finding alſo
two thouſand talents of the holy treaſure, this heathen
Prince mooued as it were with a certayne godlineſſe,
woulde not ſo muche as touch any of them
but the nexte daye after the ſiege commuanded the
keepers of the temple to clenſe the ſame, and to celebreate
their lawfull and ſolemne ſacrifices. This
ſelfe and ſame temple being afterwardes decayed,
Herod the Aſcalonit kinge of the Iewes, by the ſpace
of nyne yeares and a halfe, repaired and bewtified it,
with ſumptuous buildings.
               And according to the propheſie of the prophet
Aggei (euen as the Church is preferred before a
Sinagogue,Agge, 2, and the bloud of the goſpell is more precious
then the golde of the lawe) greater was the glory
of this ſecond temple,Luke, 2. then was that of the firſte:
becauſe Chriſte,Math. 4. with his preſence, doctrine and
miracles,Ioan, 7. 8. 10, et, ce. glorified this. For in this, when hee
was a childe hee was offered. In this hee ſate in the
middeſt of the doctors; In the pinacle of this Temple
hee was tempted of the Diuel, when he faſted fortie

dayes and forty nights. In this likewiſe he preached
often times, and was vexed by the Iewes. All
which thinges, as they make muche for the glory
of the temple, ſo they did nothing auayle, but that
the very ſame Temple, in the yeare from the foundation
thereof vnder Zorobabell fiue hundred eightie
and ſixe, by the armye of Titus Caeſar, after a
doubtful and bloudie battaile,Ioſe. 7. bell. 9. 10. 18. was wonne with great
force and violence, and ſo greate a ſlaughter of Iewes
made aboute the alter for burnt offerings, that the
bloude of the ſlayne ranne like a riuer by the ſtayres
of the Temple: and the Temple it ſelfe in the firſte
brunte and furie of the battaile was ſette on fiere, by
a certayne ſoldior, moued by diuine motion, not
attending to the commaund of any, euen without
the Emperours conſent: And by this burning, a
worke of al that euer was ſeene or heard of, the moſt
wonderfull, and the ornament of the whole worlde,
the tenth daye of the moneth of Auguſt,En, in chr, et 4, hi. eccl, 6. was conſumed
into aſhes: to witte, euen the very ſame day and
moneth, whereon aforetime the temple was burnt
by the Babilonians.
                  Niceph, 3. hiſt, eccle. 24.
               
               Yet for all this after threeſcore and fiue yeares,
the Iewes rebelling agayne, and going aboute to
reſtore the Temple in the ſame place where it was
afore, AElius Adrian the Emperour, ſlue of
them in one daye fiue hundred and foure ſcore thouſande,
and vtterly raſed the reſte of the buildinges
of Ieruſalem, and leueled the mountaine Moria
whereon the Temple was builded, and made it
euen, caſting the rubbiſh and earthe thereof into
the vale Ioſaphat, and into the brooke Cedron,
lefte the citty truſting to the defence of the mountaine
and Temple, ſhoulde riſe vppe and rebell any

more againſt the Romaines. He waſted alſo with fire
and ſword nine hundred and foure ſcore villages. But
the emperour Iulian the Apoſtata, after two hundred
and twenty ſeuen yeares, to make the oracle of Chriſt
falſe,Ruffin. in Euſeb, hiſt. which he had propheſied concerning the temple
that there ſhould not bee lefte one ſtone vppon
another,Eccl, lib, 10 cap, 37, 38. 39. gaue vnto the Iewes money out of the common
treaſurie, and commanded them to build a new
the temple and to ſacrifice there according to the law
of Moſes.
                  Theodoret. 3, hiſt, eccle. 17.
               
               The Iewes glad of this, came from all partes of the
world to Ieruſalem,
                  Zozo. 5. hiſt eccle, 21. and threatning greuous things againſt
the Chriſtians,Niceph. 10. hiſt, eccle. 32, 33. they prepared & got vnto them
skilfull workemen, ſtones, timber, morter, and all
other things neceſſary for the building: alſo they cauſed
to be made ſiluer mattockes, ſpades, and baskets:
and throughly purged the place where the Temple
ſtoode, with ſuch ſpeede and willingneſſe, that their
women alſo beſtowed all their ouches, taches, bruches,
and other Iewells, for the building, and caried
out from that place all the rubbiſh in their laps. And
when the foundations were opened and clenſed, the
day following they ſhould haue begun their foundation,
but the ſame night there came ſuch an exceeding
and vehement tempeſt, that it caried away and
ſcattered abroade their ſtone, timber, and morter,
with other their neceſſaries. Ouer and beſides this, a
greate earthquake, ſhooke all the ſtones of the olde
foundations of the temple and diſperſed them, diſordered
the houſes nexte adioyning to the temple by a
downefall, and killed many Iewes.
               And when they which remained, in the morning
enterpriſed againe to build; a fier falling from heauen,
a flame alſo breaking foorth from the foundations of
the temple, deſtroyed more Iewes then before, which

either were buſy about the worke, or which came thither
to ſee and looke on: and all that daye burnt and
conſumed into aſhes, their maules, hammers, axes,
ſpades, and all other working tooles, that nothing
was left. The Iewes being yet obſtinately bent, the
next night following, a bright ſigne of the croſſe appeared
in heauen, and the garments of all the Iewes
were marked as it were from heauen with figures of
the croſſe, and repleniſhed therewith as the firmament
with ſtarres; which when the day appeared they
ſeeking to put out, could not by any manner of means
do it. And thus being aſtoniſhed and confounded,
they lefte off both their vaine enterpriſe and alſo the
place. So that by their wicked endeuour, the diuine
oracle, was not only not made fruſtrate, but alſo more
fulfilled and confirmed.
               The Iewes being in this ſorte beaten from their enterpriſe,
the Chriſtians neuertheleſſe were not afeard
to build in the ſame place. For they erected a temple
there in a round forme, made of greate hewen, and
polliſhed ſtones, couered with a leaden roofe, very
large high and bewtifull to behold. The which in
proceſſe of time, was honored with the Patriarchall
ſeate, and became famous by reaſon of the true and
pure worſhip of God which was therein maintayned.Wilh. ty, lib. 8, hiſt, bel. ſacri, c, 20. et. lib. 9, cap 9.
At the length being inuaded by the Saracens, it was
contaminated foure hundred threeſcore and three
yeares, with the filthy worſhip of Mahomet. Finally
in the yeare of Chriſt,Broc. iti, 6. 1099. the very ſame temple,Breid. 14. Iul.
though it was fortified with a wall, with towers, and
with ſtrong gates by the Chriſtians, yet was it violently
wonne by Godfrey of Bullion, a valeant man; who killed
within the circuit of the temple, ten thouſand Saracens,
in ſuch wiſe that the vpper face of the earth
was couered with the bloud of the ſlayne. In the

which place the ſaide Godfrey erected a Colledge of
diuine ſeruice, giuing continuall maintenaunc to the
ſame, furniſhing it with neceſſary habitations, which
ſo continued by the ſpace of foure ſcore and eighte
yeares. The which expired, the ſame was poſſeſſed
againe by the Saracens, through the pernicious diſcorde
of Chriſtian princes: who in the toppe thereof,
(according to their manner) ſette vp the figure of
the halfe moone: and in the courts thereof they planted
figges, and oliue trees. The ſame being nowe
poſſeſſed of the Turkes, is defiled with the deteſtable
worſhip of Mahomet. And all Chriſtians are commanded
by an Edict, not to enter thereinto, vppon
paine of death. For if any Chriſtian bee knowne to
haue entered therein, hee is by and by either compelled
ſolemnely to deny the faith of Chriſte, or elſe
publiquely to loſe his head.
            
            
               THE FIRST PARTE OF
THE TEMPLE.
               
                  75. THE HOLY OF HOLYEST,
                  
                     Exod. 26. the
which is ſo called bicauſe of the
ſinguler holineſſe of the place.Leu, 16. 23 It
is alſo named the Oracle,
                     Numb. 29. 19. and the
Inner houſe.
                     3. King. 6. For it was the ſecreteſt
part of the temple,2 Cro. 3. 4, 5. whereinto
fewe did come: being twentie
cubits longe, and as many in bredth; the heighte
whereof was one hundred and twenty cubits. Whoſe

floore was paued with marble,Heb, 9, 13. and layde ouer with
firre boardes,Ioſeph, 6. bell 6. couered with plate of golde. The gates
were made of poliſhed ſtones inwardely framed with
boordes of cedar, and couered with golden plates: the
which being faſtened with nailes of golde ſhined moſt
gloriouſly, as if it had beene a diuine worke. Whereon
were grauen Cherubims, pretious ſtones, palmes,
flowers, Imboſements, and pictures of diuerſe ſortes,
repreſenting the celeſtiall bewty. The roofe alſo was
couered with golden plate, the very top whereof was
ſette full of goulden prickets, or ſharpe ſpittes to fraie
away birdes, leſte by ſitting thereon, it mighte bee
polluted. Into this ſacred holy of holyeſt, the chiefe
Prieſte, for the diuine maieſty thereof, entred but
once euery yeare alone,Heb, 9. 13. in the feaſt of purgation: on
which daye the Iewes did faſt and afflict themſelues.
And then that greate and chief prieſt of God, prefiguring
the perſon of Chriſte, offered the bloude of a
calfe burnte without the hoaſt, for his owne ſinnes,
and for the ſinnes of the people. Who if he weare but
ſomuch as in ſleepe polluted, entred not in in his own
perſon, but by his ſubſtituted vicar.
               
            
            
               THE PARTES OF THE
MOST HOLY PLACEs.
               
                  76. THE ARKE OF THE COVENANT,
                  
                     Exo, 25. 27 et 40 the which
by the commaundement of God was made of Sethim
wood,Num. 17. which corrupteth not,Deut. 31. by Moſes in the
deſerte, couered within and without with plate of
pure goulde, being ſette in the middeſt of the holy of

holieſt,Heb. 9. ſhining like the ſun with the glittering brightneſſe
of golde.Ioſ. 3, ant, 8 Whoſe ſurpaſſing bewtie is rather to
be wondred at, then with words to be expreſſed. In
this Arke the two tables of ſtone, containing the ten
commaundements written with the finger of God,
were kept with a ſingular care and holineſſe: alſo the
Pot wherein was Manna: and Aarons floriſhing rod,
and the booke of Deuteronomy. The Arke abode in
this place about foure hundred and thirty yeares.2. Mac. 5, 2. It is
written in the book of the Machabees, yt in the time of
the captiuity of Babilon, the Prophet Ieremy by the
commandement of God, hid the ſame priuily together
with the Alter of Incenſe, and the perpetuall fier, in a
caue of the mount Nebo.
                     2 Chro, 36.
                  
                  But the Hebrues coniecture,Dan. 1. that it was caried by
Nabuchodonozer into Babilon:
                     1. Eſd. 1. & that it was neuer returned
againe,3. Eſd. 1. but another made by the Iewes in
ſteade thereof after the returne from the captiuitie.Hier. in Ioel cap. 3.
Other ſome thinke that Nabuchodonozer carried away
the ſame with fiue thouſand and foure hundred veſſels
of ſiluer and golde,Ioſe. 10, ant 13. which belonged to the temple
of Ieruſalem,
                     Sucton. in vit. veſpaſi. and put them into the temple of Bell his
god,Rodolph. lan gius de vrbis Hiroſol templique origine et excidio. lib. 
                           •
                        . cap. 15. but preſerued by Gods prouidence (as it was
ſometime in Philiſtaea) after threeſcore and ten yeares
of the captiuitie, they thinke (I ſay) that it was reſtored
againe to the Iewes, at their returne by Cyrus,
together with the ſaid veſſels. But after the beſeeging
of Ieruſalem Titus and Veſpaſian, cariyng out of the
temple to Rome, the Arke of the couenant, the two
tables of the Lawe, with both the rods of Moſes and
Aaron: alſo the goulden table, and ſome of the ſhew
bread: the goulden Candleſtick alſo, and the foure pillers;
made theſe to be caried among other ſpoiles, by
the Iewes themſelues round about the cittie in an open
triumph, wherein with greate pompe they triumphed

ouer that nation: Simon Giora Captaine of the
ſeditious, and ſeuen hundred Iewes captiues (which
were ſelected from among the reſt for youth and comlyneſſe)
going before the triumpher halfe naked, with
their hands bound. This triumph being ended Veſpaſian,
layed vp all the veſſels of Ieruſalem, in the Temple
of Peace at Rome, which hee in moſte ſumptuous
manner had builded: But the lawe of the Iewes, and
the purple vailes of the moſt ſecret places, he commanded
to be ſafely layde vp in his pallace.
               
               
                  77. THE TWO CHERVBIMS,
                  
                     Ex. 25, 37. of glory, the which,
as it appeareth by the Hebrue text of Paralippomenon,
                     2. King. 6.
are like vnto young boyes,Heb. 9. made of the wood of
the oliue tree,Ioſ. 8, ant, 3. ten cubits high, and couered with plates
of gold, and ſhining with angelicall brightneſſe, ſtood
at each ende of the Arke with wings ſpred, one couple
couering the propitiatorie, and with the other
couple touching the gate on both ſides: Whoſe faces
were directed toward the vttermoſt houſe: and
looking one towardes the other, they behelde both
themſelues, and alſo the propitiatorie.
               
               
                  78. THE PROPITIATORIE,
                  otherwiſe alſo called the
oracle, the which being aboue the Arke, betwene
the wings of the two Cherubims, and ſhining with
moſt pure golde in brightneſſe aboue the ſunne, repreſenting
the diuine maieſty, was as it were the ſeate
of God ſpeaking: from whence he gaue oracles and
anſweres.
               
            
            
               
               THE SECOND PARTE OF
THE TEMPLE.
               
                  79. THE HOLIE PLACE,
                  
                     Exo. 26, 29 ſo called
for the dignitie of the place.Leuit. 10. It
was alſo called the Sanctuary,
                     3. King. 6 the
outwarde houſe of the Lorde,1 Cro. 23, 24. and
the prieſts Courte.2. Paralip. 3. This is the other
parte of the Temple, fortye
cubits longe,Ezech. 44. and twenty broade, in
highte one hundred and twenty cubits.Luke 1, The doores
hereof were of golde.Heb. 9. The floore made of firre boards
was couered with plate of goulde.Ioſ. 8, ant, 3. et 15 an. 14. The gates were
made of poliſhed ſtones, and beeing within lined
with boardes of Caedar, were couered outwardely with
plates of goulde. Whereon was grauen Cherubims
pretious ſtones, palmes, flowers, and ſundry carued
workes and pictures, which wonderfullie delighted
men to behold. Aboue it was couered with a fayre
roofe, ſhining as if it had beene fier.
                  From the enterance hereinto, ſuch as were not
cleane, were forbidden by the Lawe. Only the prieſts,
which Kinge Dauid reckened to the number of thirty
eight thouſand, and diſtinguiſhed them by Lot into
foure and twenty orders, entered dayly thereinto.
                  All which beeing without vice, according to
Dauids ordinance, wekely by turne, from Saboth to
Saboth abſtayning from their wiues, from wine and
from all other ſtronge drincke, their priuities couered
with linnen breeches, outwardely cloathed and

girded with a linnen garment, wearing a ſilke myter
on their heade, in a wonderfull order, and with the
greateſt reuerence that coulde bee, they worſhipped
God, they offered ſacrifices and made their praiers.
               
               
                  80. THE ALTER OF INCENSE,
                  
                     Exo. 30. 37 of gould,Leuit. 2. which
by Gods commaundement was placed ouer againſte
the vaile hanging before the moſt holy place,1. Mac. 4.
called the holye of holyeſt: Whereon the Prieſtes,Luk. 1.
euery daye morning and euening offered vnto God
for a ſweete ſauour, Frankenſcence and ſweete perfumes.
The angell Gabriell ſtanding ſometime at
the righte hande of this alter, toulde vnto Zachary,
as hee was offering Incenſe, the conception of Iohn
Baptiſt.
                  
               
               
                  81. THE GOVLDEN CANDELSTICKE,
                  the
which hauing ſeuen branches,Ex. 25, 26. 27. 37 and ſo many Candles,
was placed on the South ſide of the Temple:
the which being lamps of moſt pure oile,Leuit. 24. burned continually,
and gaue light as well by day as by night,Ioſ. 3 an, 10. to
all the holy place.
               
               
                  82. THE FOVNTAYN,
                  
                     Ezec. 47. of water which iſſued forth on
ye right ſide of the temple the water wherof Salomō
                     
deriued into the ſea of bras,Ioel 3. and into the copper Lauer:
                     Ariſteas li. de 72 anter pret.
the which being carried from thence by Conduit
pipes vnder the earth breking forth halfe a mile from

the eaſt ſide of the citrie ranne into the brooke Cedron.
               
               
                  83. THE GOVLDEN TABLE,
                  
                     Exo. 25, 26 37. the which ſtood on
the North ſide of the temple,Leuit. 24. whereon were ſette
twelue loaues made of the moſt pure and fine flower
of wheate.1 King. 21. The which being ſtale,Mar. 2. remayned to the
vſe of the prieſts,Ioſ. 3, ant, 9. and then new were ſupplyed againe
euery Saboth day, vppon the which were layde two
golden cups full of Frankenſence.
               
               
                  84. THE CHEFE PRIESTE
                  his Image,Exo. 28, 39 and holy apparell,Leui. 8, 16.
euery parte whereof ſhewe forth vnto vs, a
diuine and heauenly magnificence. For when he went
to offer ſacrifice, or to enter into the moſt holy place
he put on not only the vnder garments ſpoken of before
vnder the nūber ſeuenty nyne, but alſo aboue vppon
them a Tunicle of Iacinct with ſleues downe to
the ankells, at the lower hem wherof there did hang
threeſcore and two golden bells, and in another border
as many pomegranats. The Tunicle was girt with
a girdle foure fingers broad, wouen with ſilke, gould,
precious ſtones, and flowers of ſundry colours. Aloft
aboue this, he did wear an Ephod or Superhumeral,
that is to ſay, a moſt faire cloake, made of golde, of Iacinct,
of purple, ſcarlet and of fine ſilke moſt curiouſly
wouen together, dazling of the eies by reaſon of ye variety
& glittering brightnes of the colours and flowers.
Vpon each ſhoulder whereof there were ſeueral Onix
ſtones included in golde, which Ioſephus calleth Sardonichs:
in either of which ſtones ſix names of the children
of Iſraell were grauen.
                  Beſide theſe, he had the Reaſonable of Iudgement,

which he caried vpon his breſt, wherein was doctrine
and truth. The Reaſonable was a ſquare thing about
the bredth of a mans hand, wouen and made of golde,
lacinct, purple, ſcarlet, and fine ſilke, whereto were
faſtened twelue precious ſtones of diuerſe ſortes, hauing
ingrauen in them the names of the twelue ſons
of Iſraell, according to the order of their natiuitie.
Moreouer on his head he ware a long rounde cap, in
forme of a Miter, made of Iacinct and fine ſilke; vpon
the front wherof was ſet a brooch of gold in forme of
a halfe gloabe, which figured the ineffectable name of
God, Tetragrammaton, with theſe foure Hebrue letters

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      theron ingrauē, ſetting forth by the wonderfull
brightneſſe thereof the excellencie of the diuine
maieſtie: Alſo the golden Cenſer in his hand: by
which he offered vnto God the moſt fragrant odor of
Frankenſence, is a parte of his ornaments.
                  Al which things as they are ful of miſteries, ſo ſome
of them excelled the reſt in diuine power. For that
ſtone which the high prieſte did beare on his righte
ſhoulder, ſo often as he had pleaſed God with ſacrifices,
did ſo wonderfully ſhine, that they which ſtoode
a greate way off might perceiue it. And (which is no
leſſe wonderfull) the twelue ſtones which were on
the Reaſonable, did foreſhewe vnto them which went
to the warre, victorie.
                  For before the army ſhould moue it ſelfe, there
came ſo great a brightneſſe from them, that it gaue al
the people to vnderſtand that God was preſent, and
that he would helpe all thoſe that call vpon him. But
now God being angry with the wickedneſſe of his
kings, both the Reaſonable and the Onix alſo haue ceaſed
one hundred and fiue yeares before the natiuity of
Chriſt to giue their wonted ſhine and brightneſſe.
               
               
                  
                  85 THE VAILE,
                  
                     Exod. 26. 36. was wouen of Iacinct, purple, ſcarlet
and fine ſilcke in moſt bewtifull varietie; and was adorned
with Cherubims and al manner of flowers imbroydered
thereon,2 Cron. 3. which hong at the gate before the
moſt holy place,Math. 27, and at the death of Chriſt was rente
from the top to the bottome euen in the midſt,
               
            
            
               THE THIRD PARTE OF
THE TEMPLE.
               86 THE IEWES ILE
               . The which alſo is called the Entery,
                  3. King. 6.
the Haule,
                  2 Cron. 4. 6 the Holy Secular, & Salomons Porch,
being the thirde parte of the temple.Ezech. 40. Into the which
men wente vp by foure ſteppes.Heb. 9. Whoſe pauement
checkered with marble of ſundry ſortes,Ioſeph. ant 3. 14. et 6. bel et 7. bell 4. 16. et l. 2. cont: Apionene. was open to
the aier, and vncouered, and was compaſſed aboute
with a wall made with three degrees of ſtones of ſūdry
colours. To the which were annexed greate porches,
broade, and aboue threeſcore and tenne cubits high,
born vp with marble pillers of ſingle ſtones which wer
twenty fiue cubits high, the roofe couered with Cedar.
The inſet gates couered with golde, ſhined moſt
gloriouſly. And it had three high gates: whereof the
firſt tended toward the eaſte, the ſecond towarde the
South, and the third toward the North: euery of the
which gates were ſhut with two ſiluer doores thirtie
cubits high, & fiftene broad: but the weſte part had no
gate but was incloſed with a whole wall. And this was
called the Iewes Ile or Haule becauſe only the Iewes

being cleane and chaſte made their praiers there,Luke 1. and
heard the words of the law.Iohn. 10. In the which place,Act. 3. 4. 5. Chriſt
taught the people often times:Ioſe. 15. ant 14. et. 2. be 16. et. 6. 7. and where the Iewes
would haue ſtoned him: and Peter when he had healed
the lame man ſpake vnto the people: and conuerted
fiue thouſand men. Before this Haule incloſed
with alattice, there was a Table ſette, containing this
lawe ingrauen with letters of Greeke and Latine, Euery
ſtranger that ſhall enter into the holy place ſhall dye.
And the Romaines had giuen authority to the Iewes
to put to death as wel Romaines as Iewes, which tranſgreſſed
this law.
            
            
               THE PARTES OF THE
IEWES ILE.
               
                  87 THE ALTER OF BVRNT OFFERINGE OF BRASSE,
                  
                     Ex. 27. 38. the which ſtoode in the midſt of the Ile
open to the aier and vncouered.1 Corn. 4 Wherein that perpetuall
fier was dayely maintained by the putting to of
wood which fier in old time,Leuit. 9, 6 et. 1. the Lord ſente downe
from heauen, when Aaron at the firſte time offered ſacrifice
in the deſert. On the which altar, the prieſts euery
day morning and euening, burnte ſundry ſortes of
Male beaſtes which were cleane and without blemiſh,
as Sheepe, Oxen, and Goates, turtels, Pigeons,
and ſuch like, which were conſumed with this holye
and perpetuall fier, for a burnte offering and Odor
of ſweete fauour vnto the Lorde. But in the time
of the Captiuity of BABILON, this perpetuall
fier was hidden by the Prieſtes in a drye pitte or well

and being ſought for by Neemia the prieſt,2. Mac: 1. threeſcore
and ten yeares after the ſame, there could be no fier
found in that place, but a certaine thicke water which
by diuine power, at the praier of Neemia was ſette on
fier.
               
               
                  88 BOOZ and IACHIN,
                  
                     3. King. 7. 2 Cron. 3. two pillers of braſſe of wonderfull
beawty, thirtie two cubits high, whoſe circumference
or circuit comprehended twelue cubits,
which Salomon cauſed to be made artificially, and placed
them in the porch of the temple, one at the right
hand, which hee named Iachin, and the other at the
left hand which he called Booz.
                  
               
               
                  89. THE LAVER OF BRASSE,
                  
                     2. Kin. 7. 2 Cron. 4. a veſſell of greate capaſcitie,
full of water, placed by Salomon on the
North ſide of the temple, whereon were carued the
pictures of cherubims, Lions, and Oxen. In this the
prieſts waſhed the beaſts which ſhould ſerue for burnt
offerings, which neuertheleſſe were firſte waſhed in
the ſheepe poole called Probatica.
                  
               
               
                  90 THE HOVSE OF COVNSEL,
                  
                     1 Cron. 26 at the South ſide
of the temple, where was the aſſembly of the elders
of the people.
               
               
                  91 THE CLOSETS,
                  
                     1 Cro. 9, 2. Ierem. 35. Ezech. 42. or veſteries, were ſide houſes, lōg,
broade, and high, like towers. In the which, the
Prieſts when they ſhould enter into the holy place,
did put off their wollen garments, laying them vp till

the ſeruice was ended.1. Mac. 4. Wherin alſo they did eate
the partes of the peace offerings.
               
               
                  92. THE SEA OF BRASSE,
                  
                     Exo. 30, 38 containing very greate
ſtore of water,3. King. 7. which Salomon made, and placed
on the South ſide of the temple,3. Cron. 4. vpon twelue oxen of
braſſe; wherein the prieſts entering into the temple to
ſerue at the alter, waſhed their hands and their feete.
               
               
                  93. THE NEW GATE,
                  
                     Iere. 26, 36 the which was in the Ile of
the temple toward the ſouth where Ieremie foreſhewing
that the citrie and temple ſhould be deſtroied,
was taken. And where Baruch red before the people
the propheſie of Ieremy.
                  
               
               
                  94. THE HOLY GATE,
                  
                     3. Eſd. 9. otherwiſe called the braſen
gate, which being in the Inſet parte of the temple,
opened toward the Eaſt: before the which Eſdras red
the law of God before the people: and where the rulers
of the Iewes, a long time after that, exhorted the
ſeditious vnto peace.
               
               
                  95. THE PORCH OF THE TEMPLE,
                  
                     3, King. 6. builded by
Salomō
                      before the Sanctuary,
                     2 Cron. 3. the which was twenty
cubits long, and ten broade.
               
               
                  96. THE RINGES SEATE,
                  
                     Hier. in 2 Cron. 3. the which was very loftie,
the which Salomon prepared for the kings.
               
               
                  
                  97. THE LOFTES OF THE SINGERS,
                  where diuine
praiſes were ſonge with voice,Ezec: 40. and with diuers
inſtruments.
               
               
                  98. THE PLACE OF ZACHARIAS,
                  
                     2 Para. 24. where he was
ſtoned betweene the temple and the altar.Mat. 23.
                  
               
               
                  99. THE PLACE,
                  where the Iewes woulde haue ſtoned
Chriſt.Iohn. 10.
                  
               
            
            
               THE FOVRTH PARTE OF
THE TEMPLE.
               100 THE ILE,
               
                  Ezech. 40. which belonged to the
Gentiles,Ioſ. 15, ant. 14, et, 6, bel. 6, et, 7, bel. 10, et, lib, 2. contra Apionem. being alſo called the out
ſet Courte, which is the fourth part
of the temple, into the which men
aſcended by many ſtares. Whoſe
inſet ſpace open to the aier paued
with al manner of bewtiful ſtones,
had foure excellent gates opening towards the foure
partes of the worlde, which were ſhut with dores of
braſſe. This being a ſquare porch much like a cloyſter,
vphoulden with pillers of Marble, & ſeeled ouer
with cedar, was thirtie cubits broade. The whole circuite

and compaſſe of which porch, was fiue hundred
paces. Into this Courte or porch all ſortes of Iewes
and Gentiles might enter, both cleane and vncleane:
where vpon it was called the Courte of the Gentiles.
Here hence it was that Chriſt did caſte out twiſe the
buiers and ſellers: and ſuffered not any man to carry
ſomuche as a veſſell through the ſame. Here hee
diſcharged the woman taken in adulterie. Here hee
taught often times. Here alſo the Iewes woulde haue
ſtoned him. Finally here it was that hee was glorified
before the Gentiles with a voice from heauen.
            
            
               THE PARTES OF THE
COVRT OF THE GENTILES.
               
                  101 THE GOVLDEN EAGLE,
                  
                     Ioſe. 17, ant 8, et, 12. was of great waigth,
ſette vp by Herod the greater ouer the greateſt gate
of the Temple,Item. 1, bel. 21, et, 2, bel, 1. and was at the laſte pulled downe by
the Iewes and cut in peeces, where vpon aroſe a great
tumult, and many were ſlaine.
               
               
                  102. THE TREASVRIE
                  ;Mar: 7. in Hebrue called Corban, a cheſt
wherein was offered and kepte ſuche money,Mar. 27. as
ſerued for the neceſſaries of the ſacrifices,4. King. 12. for the ſuſtentation
of the poore, and for the repairing of the
Temple. When Helidore, who was ſente by the
kinge of the Syrians, ſoughte to take the ſpoyle of

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
this treaſury,2 Cron. 24. he was ſcourged by angels from heauen.
And when Pilate by the like temiretie would haue beſtowed
this holy treaſure for the bringing in of waters
he was let and hindred by a general vprore of the people:2 Mac. 3.
the which neuertheleſſe the Romaines when they
had wonne the cittie tooke and caried way.Ioſe. 18. ant. 5 Alſo we
reade that Lyſimachus was ſlaine neer vnto this place:Ioſe. 17. bell. 11.
Here it was that Chriſt taught himſelfe to be the light
of the world,2 Mac. 4. and ſayd that he ſhould be lifted vp vpon
the croſſe by the Iewes.Ioan. 8. Chriſt ſitting here,Mar. 12. pronounced
that the poore widdow offering two mites,Luk. 21. had
giuen more then all the rich.Ioſe. 18. aut 13, et, 19. Ouer this treaſurie, for
a monument of his aduerſe fortune turned into proſperitie,
kinge Agrippa hanged vp that golden chayne,
which the Emperour Caius gaue vnto him: being equall
in waight to that Iron chaine with the which his
hands were bound by the commandement of the emperour
Tiberius.
                  
               
               
                  103. ACHAS DIALL,
                  
                     4. King. 26. the king, which he made, wherin
the kinge Ezechias being ſicke,Iſai. 38. for a ſigne of recouering
his health, the ſhadowe of the ſunne by diuine
miracle, went backwards ten degrees.
               
               
                  104. THE NORTH GATE,
                  
                     1. Cron. 26. whereof mencion is often
times made in the Scripture and in Ioſephus.
                  
               
               
                  105 THE SOVTH GATE,
                  
                     1. Cron. 26, mentioned often times in
Scripture, and in Ioſephus.
                  
               
               
                  
                  106 THE WEST GATE,
                  
                     1. Cron. 26 the which alſo in the booke
of Cronicles,1 Cro. 23. is called the gate of foundation.
               
               
                  107. THE EAST GATE,
                  the which alſo is called the
gate Sur,
                     1. Cr. 9, 26. otherwiſe Seir: alſo the kinges gate, and
the Bewtifull gate:Neem. 3. becauſe of all the reſte it was the
greateſt,4. K. 11, 15. higheſt,2. Cron. 27 and faireſt: by which alſo there was
the principall enterance into the temple.Acts. 3. This being
decayed was repaired by kinge Ioatham. And neere
vnto this gate the Apoſtle Peter, with his word, healed
the man which was lame from his mothers womb
and ſate there begging of almes.
               
               
                  108. THE TOWERS OF TROMPETORS,
                  
                     Num. 10. which
were erected alofte in the weſt corners of the temple.Ioſ. 5. hel. l 9
In the tops whereof, the prieſts, wanting the vſe
of belles, with two ſiluer trompets, called the people
vnto the temple. Frō thence alſo they tould the people
of Feſtiuall daies, of Sabboths, of faſtes, and of ſolemne
feaſtes.
               
               
                  109
                  HERE Chriſte writing with his fingar on the groūd
made the accuſers of the women taken in adultry
aſhamed and ſet her free.Iohn. 8.
                  
               
               
                  110 HERE
                  Chriſt making a whip of cordes, caſte out the
buiers and ſellers,Iohn. 2. together with their marchandis.Matth. 21.
                  
                  
                     
                     Thus far we haue ſpoken of the Temple, and of the partes
thereof: and now me will proſecute the other partes of
the daughter of Sion.
                  
               
               
                  111. THE THEATER,
                  
                     Ioſe. 15. the which was builded in forme
of a halfe circle by Herod the Aſcalonite kinge of
the Iewes,Ant. 19, et. 20. neere vnto the pallace of the Machabees.
In the circuit whereof in Imagerie was ſette foorth
the tittles,Ant. 15. the victories, and ſpoiles, of Auguſtus
Caeſar; ſhining with ſiluer and goulde: where the better
and more worthy ſorte ſitting vppon ſtayres and
ſeates made round in compaſſe, and the reſt ſtanding
therein, behelde the players, and actors, and muſitians,
playing theire comedies and tragedies, and other
plaies.
               
            
            
               THE PLACES OF THE
DAGHTER OF SION.
               
                  112 THE THROANE OF SALOMON
                  .3. King. 10. It was a very
great thron of Iuorie,
                     2 Cron. 9. couered ouer with ſhining
goulde,Ioſe. 8, cloſe and rounde in the toppe like a Iudgement
ſeate, hauing ſixe ſteppes or ſtayres, at eache
ende whereof were twelue Lyons ſet. In this throne
kinge Salomon ſate, when hee heard the controuerſies
of the people, and pronounced Iudgement, and
capitall ſentences, appointing lawes and ſtatutes.

Herein alſo hee ſate, when in royall manner hee
woulde ſhewe foorth his pompe,Lyra. in, 3. glory and Riches,
and when he intended to beſtow vpon his faithful ſeruants
rewardes.King. 7.
                  
               
               
                  113 THE PASSAGE
                  which Kinge Salomon made of
ſtrong timber,2 Cron. 9, to go from his pallace into the temple.
               
               
                  114. THE TRIBVNALL,
                  was a publique place, ſet before
the houſe of Pilate,
                     Iohn. 19▪
                      and appointed for Iudgement,Mat. 27.
where the Lieutenants of Rome were wonte
to giue ſentence,Mar. 15. which in Greeke,Luke 24, was called LITHOSTROTOS,
that is, a place of pauement, and in
Hebrue, GABATHA: bicauſe it was highe and
loftie. Pilate ſitting in this iudgement ſeate, and hauing
good wil to free Ieſus ſtanding before him, tooke
water and waſhed his handes before the people, ſaying,
I am innocent from the bloude of this iuſte man.
But all the people crying out Crucifie him, Crucifie
him, his bloude bee on vs and on our children: and further
laying treaſon to his charge in that hee made
himſelfe a kinge, hee condemned Chriſt to the death
of the croſſe, in this forme of wordes, euen as wee
founde them in certeine antiquities, from whence
we faithfully report them.
                  
                     Ieſum Nazarenum ſubuerſorem Gentis, contemptorem
Caeſaris, et falſum Mesſiam, vt maiorum ſuorum
teſtimonio probatum eſt, ducite ad communis ſupplicij
locum: et cum ludibrio Regiae maieſtatis, in medio duorum
latronum cruci affigite. I lictor, expedi cruces.
                     
That is to lay, carry ye to the place of common execution
Ieſus of Nazareth, a ſubuerter of his nation, a
contemner of Caeſer, and a falſe Mesſias, as is proued
by the teſtimony of the elders of his owne people, and
crucifie him betwene two theeues in reproch & ſcorn
of his kingly maieſty. Go hang-mā, & mak ready with
ſpeede the croſſes. The which ſentence pronounced
he deliuered him to the ſoldiors to be crucified. Who
brought forth Ieſus,Iſa. 53. depriued of all bewtie and comlineſſe,
and more like to a leaper, then to himſelfe, by
reaſon of the paines which they had laide on him, but
that he might bee knowne vnto the people, they put
on him againe his owne garmentes, and carieng his
croſſe, with two theeues through the gate of Iudgement,
to be crucified in mount Caluary.
                  
                  
                     Pilate ſitting in this Tribunall ſeate in time of
an Inſurrection for beſtowing the holy treaſures of
the temple,Ioſe. 18, ant, 5, et, 2, bell. which were called Corban,
                     8. Euſeb. 2. gaue a ſecret
ſigne to the ſoldiors which were priuilie armed
vnder their cloathes,Hiſt. celc. 6 that they ſhould not vſe ſwords
but clubs,Niceph. 2. to beate downe the tumultuous Iewes.Hiſt. ec. 10. By
which meanes many of them were ſlaine, many ſore
wounded, and very many trodden vnder foote, euen
to death by their owne company in the tumult.
                  After this Florus the Lieutenant, ſitting in the ſame
iudgement ſeate,Io. 2, bel, 15. cauſed many of the Noble men and
gentlemen of the Iewes, to be beaten and torne with
rods and whips, and to be faſtened on croſſes: who alſo
cauſed many other maſſakers about the cittie, nothing
ſparing neither women, children, nor ſucking
babes. The which were certain beginnings of vengeance
taken by almighty God vpon the obſtinat Iewes
for the ſhedding of the Innocent bloud of Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  115. THE TOWER OF STRATO,
                  
                     Ioſ. 13, ant. 18, et, bel, 3 in Greeke called
Pyrgus Sratonis, ſituate betwene the caſtle Antonia
and the temple: it was a hollow & an obſcure paſſage
where Antigonus was ſlaine by the ſoldiors of his
brother.
               
               
                  116 THE VALLY OF CEDRON,
                  
                     Sopho. 1: Ioſ. 14, ant. 8, et, 15, an. 14. broad, deepe and
dark, which in manner of a ditch or trench compaſſed
the temple round about. And becauſe it was diſpoſed
after the faſhion of a morter, it was called in He
brue Macthes,
                     Item. 1, bel. 5, et, 6. bel. 6▪ 7. et. 6, Ioſ, 20. ant, 16. and in Latine Pila. This was ſo exceeding
deepe, that men could not looke down from the
roofe of the temple into the bottome therof but their
eies, would dazle and their heades ſeme to turne with
gidineſſe.Euſeb. 2. Herein Merchantes, and all ſortes of
chapmen dwelled.Hiſt. eccle. 1 et, 23. Into this vally Iames the brother of
the Lorde, firſte Biſhop of Ieruſalem, for profeſſing
Ieſus the ſonne of God on the feaſte of paſſeouer was
caſt downe headlong from the battlementes of the
temple at the commandement of Anani a Saducei
chiefe prieſte, and was immediately knockt on the
head with a fullers club, & was there buried nere vnto
the temple, his monument remaining there alonge
time after.
               
               
                  117 THE WAIE OF THE CROSSE,
                  by which
Chriſt hauing receiued his iudgement to be crucified,
went forward with painefull and bloudy ſteps to
mount Caluary.
                  
                  
                     
For beginning at the Pallace of Pilate he made
ſixe and twenty ſteppes (which make threeſcore and
fiue foote) vnto the place where the croſſe was layde
vpon him.D. Petrus Potens & M. Mattheus Stenberch did meaſure the cittie of Ieruſalē long ſince, by whoſe reporte this Deſcription is made.
                  
                  From whence (all the cittye gazeing on him) carying
his croſſe on his ſore ſhoulders, hee came towardes
the Weſte, or rather North-weſte, foureſcore
ſteppes, which make two hundred foote, to
the place, where men ſay, that hee fell downe vnder
his croſſe.
                  From thence going forward, by threeſcore ſteppes
and three foote (which make a hundred fiftie and
three foote) hee came to the place where the bleſſed
virgin Marye with Iohn the Apoſtle mette with
him.Alſo petrus cal entinus in his booke intituled the way of the croſſe. And proceeding from hence by threeſcore
and eleuen ſteppes, and one foote and a halfe (which
make a hundred ſeuentie and nine foote) he came vnto
a certaine croſſe way, where Simon of Ciren was
compelled to beare the hinder parte of the croſſe with
Chriſt.
                  Taking his way hence by one hundred ninetie
and one ſteppes, and halfe a foote, (which commeth
to foure hundred and ſeuenty foote) hee came to the
place where a certayne woman mette with him. And
from thence going three hundred thirtie ſixe ſteppes
and two foote, (which amounte to eighte hundred
fortie and two foote) hee came to the Iudiciarie gate
where once againe he fell with his croſſe.
                  From thence hee aſcending faintely a very heard
and ſtony way towardes the North, hee gained three
hundred forty and eighte ſteppes and two foote (the
ſumme eight hundred ſeuentye and two foote) which
broughte him vnto a two foulde way, where certaine
women weeping ſpake vnto him: And from hence

laboring forwarde threeſcore ſteppes and one and
halfe a foote, (which make foure hundred and foure
foote) hee fell downe the laſte time, at the foote of
the mounte CALVARIE. From thence hee wearilie
and faintingly went forwarde eighteene ſteppes, or
fortie fiue foote to the place where the hange-men
drewe off his cloathes, where they gaue him to drinke
wine mixt with mirrh and gaule.
                  Then hee went on twelue ſteppes, or thirty foote
euen to the place where hee was nayled on the croſſe
on mounte CALVARIE. So that from the Pallace
of Pilate, vnto the place where Ieſus was crucified,
the diſtance is a thouſande three hundered and ſeuen
ſteppes: or by another accoumpt, three thouſand two
hundred ſixtie and eight foot,
                  We haue made ſuch exacte deſcripion and demonſtration
of the way of the croſſe (as alſo the way
of the Captiuity hereafter expreſſed vnder the number
of two hundred and ſeuen) to the ende that euerie
Chriſtian man, in all places, euen in the doores
of his houſe, or walking often times in his garden,
or being in a iourney, or in the Temple, either lying
in his bedde, may by the Imaginination of his minde
conceiue the like way, and with godly affection of the
hearte may meditate vpon the paſſion of Chriſt: the
which no doubt is both acceptable vnto God, and for
our owne ſoules health moſte profitable as the holy
Scriptures, and the writinges of good men by their
often exhortations do teſtifie.
               
               
                  
                  118. THE WAY OF ENTRANCE EOR THE HORSES,
                  
                     4. King. 11.
which was betwene the pallaces of Salomon,
                     2. Cron. 23.
and of the Queene.Ioſ. 9, ant, 7. By which Athalia the Queene being
brought out of the horſſe gate, was ſlaine in the
valley of the Brooke Cedron.
                  
               
               
                  119 THE GALLERY,
                  made in forme of a ſtone bridge,
with many arches, extending it ſelfe with ample
largeneſſe ouer the common ſtreete, adorned with open
walkes vppon the ſame. From the which there
was a paſſage from the pallace of Pilate, into the caſtle
of Antonia, and ſo from thence into the Temple.
Frō this place, being very ſafe, ye Lieutenants of Rome
were wont to ſpeake vnto the people.Ioan. 19. Whereon Pilate
ſtanding, exhibited Ieſus to the Princes and people
of the Iewes to bee looked on, being very ſoare
ſcourged, ſpit on, cloathed with a purple cloake, and
wearing a ſharpe crowne of thornes vppon his head,Breid. 14.
ſaying vnto them Behould the man;
                     Iul. that he being thus
afflicted,Sal. tom, 8. cap. 7. they might haue compaſſion on him. But
they with confuſed voyces cried,Ioſ. 2, bel, 1. 6, Item, 5. bel. 9. 
                     crucifie him, crucifie
him. Whereas yet an arch of ſtone is to be ſeene,
and is ſhewed vnto ſtraungers, with this Inſcription:
Tolle, Tolle, crucifig—the reſt cannot be red, by reaſon
antiquitie hath worne it out. From this Gallery kinge
Agippa pronounced an eloquent oration to pacifie
the ſedicious people, exhorting them to obay the Romaines,
Ioſephus maketh mention many times of this
Gallery.
                  
               
               
                  
                  120 THE CROSSE OF CHRIST,
                  which was layd on
his ſhoulder,Paſch. d. 207. was fiftene foote long, and eight foot
ouer, as we haue receiued by tradition of the elders.
               
               
                  121 HERE
                  it is ſayd that Chriſt fell the firſt time vnder his
croſſe.Paſch. d. 207.
                  
               
               
                  122 HERE
                  alſo by tradition of ſome fathers,Breid. 14. it is ſayde,
that the bleſſed virgin Marye with Iohn and certeine
godly women ſtoode,Iul. as Chriſte paſſed by with
his croſſe.
               
               
                  123. CHRIST, being com to theſe two waies,
                  
                     Math. 27,and being
wearied with the heauy burden of his cros,Mar. 15. is ſaid
to haue fallen.Luke. 23. For the which cauſe,Breid. 14. the ſoldiors and
Iewes,Iul. fearing that he would faint, before he could be
crucefied,Sa. 1, 8, c, 7. tooke a certaine man comming out of the
country,Paſ. d, 20 8. named Simon of Cyren, and compelled him
to carry the croſſe after Ieſus.
               
            
            
               
               THE THIRD PARTE OF THE CITTIE.
               124 THE SECOND CITTIE.
               
                  4 King. 22. This is
the thirde parte of the cittye,2. Cron. 34 the
which alſo had many narrow waies
wherof mention is made ſomtime
in the Scripture wherein amonge
others many prophets and noblemen
dwelt.Sopho, 1. This when the Romaines
had gotten,Hiero. in 2. they were by the ſeditious againe driuen
out of the cittie.Cron. 34.
                  Io. 6, bel, 10
               
            
            
               THE PLACES OF THE SECOND
CITTIE.
               
                  125. THE LAKE AMYGDALON,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, be, 12. neere vnto the
which Titus erected a Bulwarke.
               
               
                  126. THE HOVSE OF MARIE,
                  the mother of Iohn,
and of Marke,
                     Acts. 12. one of the ſeuenty and two diſciples
of Chriſt, wherin the faithful of the primitiue church,
were wont to aſſemble themſelues, & to pray. Where
alſo after the martirdome of Iames the Apoſtle, Peter
being caſte into priſon by Herod Agrippa,
                     Sal. tom. 8. cap, 4. they praied
without ceaſſing for his deliuerance. Who at the laſte
being brought out of priſon by the angell, and knocking
at the dore of this houſe, was by a damſell brought

into the ſame. In the which place afterward a church
was builded which was the firſte of the Chriſtian
Greeks. And is an epiſcopall ſeate, which the Sirians
hould vnto this day.
               
               
                  127. THE HOVSE OF OLDA THE PROPHETES,
                  the wife of Sellum;
                     4. King. 22. a famous noble-man the greate
vncle of the prophet Ieremy:
                     2 Cron. 34. whoſe counſell being aſked
by the king Ioſias, ſhe foretould him of the deſtruction
of Ieruſalem.
                  
               
               
                  128. A CONDVIT,
                  and fountaine, which by pipes ſent
forth water alofte:Ioſ. 2, be, 18 & 6, bel. 6. and by the like pipes deriued water
into Herods pallace, and about the ſame, filling the
ceſterns thereof.
               
               
                  129 THE WOOD MARKET
                  which Ceſtius ſet on fier.Ioſ. 2, be 24.
                  
               
               
                  130. THE HABITATION OF THE RECHABITES
                  :Iere, 35.
who liuing religiouſly according to the commandement
of their Father, poſſeſſed neither fieldes nor
vineyards, and like pilgrims of this world, dwelt not in
houſes but in tents, and wholely abſtained from wine.
Wherfore when through the neceſſitie of warre they
were cōpelled to come into the citty, Ieremy drinking
vnto them by the cōmandement of God, they would
drink no wine. By which example of their obedience,
the ſame prophet reprehended the diſobedience of
the obſtinat Iewes, neglecting the commandement of
God; and therefore he did ſet before the one a puniſhment,
and before the other a rewarde.
               
               
                  
                  131 A LAKE,
                  which was ſituate betwene two walles of
the citty,Iſai. 22. whereof mention is made in Iſai the prophet.
               
               
                  132 THE MIDDLE TOWER,
                  
                     Ioſ, 6, bel, 9. which was in the middle
wall.
               
               
                  133 A MONVMENT
                  of Allexander Iannaeus the high
Prieſt and king,Ioſ 13, ant 21, et, 6, bel, 8. wherein he was buried by the authority
of the Pharaſies very ſumptuouſly.
               
               
                  134 A MONVMENT
                  of Iohannes Hircanus,
                     Ioſ. 6, bel, 7. highe
prieſt and Captaine: of whome mention is often
made in Ioſephus.
                  
               
               
                  135. THE SECOND WALL,
                  
                     2 Cro. 32, the which is alſo called
the middle wall,Neem. 3, 12 bewtified with many gates,Ioſ. 6, bel, 6. and
deuided with fourteene towers▪ the which wall Ezechias
the kinge repaired, and made more ſtronge and
higher.
               
               
                  136 THE PALLACE OF HEROD,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, be 6. the which was
builded by HEROD the Aſcalonite kinge of the
Iewes, (who killed the Innocents) with ſundry ſorts of
polliſhed marble ſtones nere vnto the weſt wall of the
cittie, from the old wall, euen to the middle wal: being

moſt ſingularly bewtified with ſiluer and gould moſt
ſtrongelie fortefied with an iron gate,Acts 12. and three moſt
excellent towers,Ioſ, 2. be, 17 to wyt, Hippic, Mariam, and Phaſel,
which in greatnes, ſtrength and beautie, excelled all
the towers of the whole world. Within was the kings
haule, which being builded on high and verie loftie
with vnſpeakable magnificence, was wholly cōpaſſed
about with moſte beautifull towers,Luke. 23. parlours, chambers,
galleries, porches, & with pillers, with the which
there was an incloſed court open to the ayre.
                  In this haule, Chriſt was preſented to Herod Antipas
Tetrarch of Galilie, who killed Iohn the Baptiſt;
which Herod, asked Chriſt many queſtions, who was
there conſtantly accuſed by the Iewes. Whom, when
he anſwered nothing,Breid. 14. the ſame Herod and his whole
rout deſpiſed and ſcorned:Iul. and ſo ſent him to Pilat
clad in white, as if he had bene a foole, or a ieſter. But
nowe this pallace is a ſcoole for children of the Infidelles.
               
               
                  137. THE MIDDEL GATE,
                  
                     Ierem. 39. & 52. of the ſecond wall, wherin
the vttermoſt walles being broken, the princes
of the king of Babilon did ſit.
               
               
                  138. THE VTTERMOST COVRT,
                  compaſſing the
Haule of Herod round about,Io. 2, be, 17. where the kings ſoldiers
did watch and ward. Wherin was the kings priſon
whereinto malefactors were put. In this priſon
Saint Peter was ſhut vp by king Herod Agrippa,
                     Act. 12. who
had ſlane Iames the greater. Which Peter being
bound with two chaines, & moſt ſafely kept by fower
quaternions of ſoldiors all the daies of ſweete bread:

But in the night before the day whereon hee ſhould
haue bene put to death, he was by the Angell of the
Lord looſed from his chaines, and by him brought
foorth through an iron gate, by the firſt and ſecond
watch, into the cittie.
               
               
                  139 THE LAKE, CALLED STRVTIVM,
                  which was
the middle Lake.Ioſe. 6, bel, 12. Here alſo Titus cauſed a bulwark
to be made.
               
               
                  140. THE TOWER HIPPIC:
                  The which being fower
ſquare,Ioſe. 6. bel. 5. 6. 7 was builded in the ſecond wall, vpon a high
hill. It was fower ſcore and fiue cubits high, and hauing
two toppes was to be ſeene a far off. It was marueilouſe
ſtrong, builded by Herod the elder: who hauing
in the warre loſt his friendes the Hippics, called
this tower after their name Hippic.
                  
               
               
                  141. THE TOWER MARIAMME,
                  
                     Ioſe, ant, 9. & bell. 16. & 6. bel. 6, The which beeing
fiftie cubits high ſtood aloft in moſt bewtiful manner,
vpon a high hill of the ould wall, the which Herod
builded for a memoriall of Mariamme his beſt beloued
wife, whom he had ſlaine, and called it after her
name Mariamme. And becauſe it caried the name of
a Queene, therefore it was more beautifull in ſhewe
then the other.
               
               
                  142. THE TOWER PHASELVS,
                  
                     Ioſ, 14. ant. 22. et 16. which being fower-ſcore
& ten cubits high, ſet vpon a high place of ye
ould wall, and made alofte in forme of a ball was of

woonderful height and exceding ſtrong.ant 5. et 17 ant 14. et 1 bel, 11. et 6. bel. 6. et 7. bell, 18. Which Herod
builded after the faſhion of the tower Pharus in
Alexandria. And in the honor of his brother Phaſelus
called it Phaſelus, who being taken priſoner by the
Parthians, and hauing no libertie to vſe neither weapon
nor hands: ran his head againſt a ſtone and ſo killed
himſelfe. How this and the other two towers were
left ſtanding after the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, reade
vnder the nomber of (1.) going before.
               
               
                  143. HERODS PARKE,
                  which had in it an orchard & a
garden,Ioſ. 6, bel. 6. watered with ponds, riuers, & fountaines:
repleniſhed with ſundry wild beaſtes, fiſhes and fouls:
hauing many large walkes, & round about the ſame,
many towers of tame doues.
               
               
                  144 THE HOSPITALL,
                  
                     Ioſ. 13, ant. 15. which Hircanus the highe
prieſt founded, with the mony which he got out of
the ſepulcher of Dauid.
                     Egeſi. 1, hi. wherin pilgrims, poore men,
and ſuch as were Impotent were ſuſtained and kept.Iudaic, 1.
                  
               
               
                  145. THE WRESTLING PLACE,
                  
                     Io. 6, bel, 6 the which was placed
in Herods Pallas. It was large, ſeruing in the
winter time for wreſtlers, and for other exerciſes, and
paſtimes, wherewith men recreated themſelues.
               
            
            
               
               THE FOVRTH PARTE OF
THE CITTIE.
               146. THE NEWE CITTIE,
               called in
Greeke Caenopolis, the fourth parte
of the cittie;Ioſ. 19, an. 7 & 2. be. 15. & 6. bel. 6. the which was ſeuered
as the other parts of the cittie were
with walles, and many narrowe
waies, which went cros, extending
to the walles of the cittie. Wherein
dwelt woolle ſellers, Carpenters, Smithes, and other
workemen and artificers.
            
            
               THE PLACES OF THE NEW
CITTIE.
               
                  147 BEZETHA,
                  a mountaine,Ioſ. 6, bel, 6.. the which hauing many
houſes built theron was inhabited by the common
ſorte of people.
               
               
                  148 THE CASTEL OF THE ASSIRIANS,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel, 8 & 13, nere vnto
the which Titus pitched his tentes, at ſuch time
as he had gotten the wall of the citty. This caſtle ſtood
more then an arrow ſhoote from the ſecond wall.
               
               
                  
                  149. THE THIRD WALL,
                  the which alſo is called
the outſet wall, which kinge Agrippa made vpon
the common charge of the cittizens,Ioſ 19, ant 7 Item, 2. bel. 10. & 6. bell. 6. extending
it more broad and highe then it was before. This wall
was very firme and ſtrong, fiue and twenty cubits
high. It had foure ſcore and tenne ſquare and loftie
towers which were of greate force, diſtant one from
the other two hundred cubits; whoſe building and
bewty in ſtone worke, was nothing inferior to that of
the temple.
               
               
                  150 THE BROADE STREETE:
                  
                     Neem. 3. 8. the which alſo was caled
the ſtreete of the gate of Ephraim.
                  
               
               
                  151 THE KINGES CAVES,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel. 6. vpon the which the third
wall of the cittie was builded in length.
               
            
            
               THE GATES AND TOWERS
ABOVT THE CITTIE.
               
                  152 CAPHETETA,
                  
                     1 Mach. 12. the Eaſte wall of the Cittye vppon
the brooke Cedron, which Ionathas Machabeus repaired.
               
               
                  153 THE CORNER STONE,
                  
                     Iſa. 28. which was moſte harde,
being the firme foundation of mounte Sion.
                     Pſal. 117: This

was a figure of Chriſt,Neem. 3.
                     Acts. 4. who is the ſtronge and ſtable
foundation of his church.Rom. 9
                     1 Pet, 2.
                  
               
               
                  154 THE GATE OF THE CORNER,
                  ſo called becauſe
it was ſituate in the north-eaſte corner of the
cittie,4 King. 14. next vnto the brooke Cedron.
                     2 Cron. 25. The which alſo
was called the gate of Beniamin,
                     Iere, 31. 37▪ 38. bicauſe the way led
through the ſame vnto the tribe of Beniamin. By this
gate,zach. 14. wood was brought into the cittie out of the deſert.Broc, itin, 6.
In this gate alſo Ieremy the prophet was apprehended,Sal. tom. 8. cap, 5.
whoſe ruines are nowe to bee ſeene a greate
way out of the cittie.
               
               
                  155 THE GOVLDEN GATE,
                  ſituate betwene the
gate of the valley and the gate of the fountaine, ſo
called bicauſe it was gilden with goulde:Eze. 43. 5 It was alſo
called the Eaſte gate,Broc, itin 6. bicauſe it was builded on the
eaſte ſide of the Temple.Sal. to. 9. cap. 4 And bicauſe it led by a very
ſhorte way, from the temple of mounte Oliuet, it
was rather a gate of the temple then of the cittie:Breid. 14 paſch die. 184. and
therefore Neemias maketh no mention thereof. By
this gate Chriſte came riding vppon an aſſe into the
cittie of Ieruſalem at what time men cutte downe
palmes and ſtrowed them in his way, crying Hoſanna
before him.
               
               
                  156 THE GATE OF EPHRAIM,
                  
                     4. King. 41. which now of ſom is
called Saint Stephens gate,2. Cron. 25 ſituate on the north part
tending toward the way which leadeth vnto the tribe
of Ephraim,
                     Nee. 8, 12, where vppon it was called the gate of Ephraim.
From this gate vnto the gate of the corner

                     Ioas king of Iſraell,
                     Ioſ. 9, ant, 10. beate downe the wall of Ieruſalem
by the ſpace of foure hundred cubits,Broc, itin 6 ſal. tom. 8. cap, 5, and in triumphant
manner hee being caried into the cittie in his
chariot through that breach, became Lorde of the
cittye. The which wall together with the towers
thereof, Ozia kinge of Iuda afterwarde reſtored againe.
               
               
                  157. THE WATER GATE,
                  
                     Nee, 2. 3. 8 the which was ſituate betwene
mount Sion,
                     2 Cro. 23, and the mount Moria,
                     Iere 19, 31. in the
valley called Mello,
                     Broc, itin, 6. ſa, tom. 8, c, 5. toward the eaſt. It was called the
water gate, bicauſe it opened a paſſage, vnto the fountaine
of the water of Siloe: and bicauſe horſes were caried
through the ſame to be watred in the brooke Cedron.
And for this cauſe it was called the eaſte horſe
gate and it tended toward the valley Gehennom.
                  
               
               
                  158 THE GATE GENATH,
                  or the gate of kinge
Herods Garden,Ioſ. 6, bel. 6. 7. 8. which was not farre from the ſecond
wall of the cittye. By which, water was brought
vppe into the Tower Hippic. By this gate the ſeditious
priuily ſalyed out many times vppon the Romaines.
                  
               
               
                  159 THE GATE OF THE KINGES GARDEN,
                  
                     4. King. 25.
which in mounte Sion was placed betwene two
walles of the caſtle: by which kinge Zedechias fled in
the night.
               
               
                  
                  160 THe gate of the high prieſts pallace,
                  
                     Neem. 3. at the ſouth ſide
of the cittie.
               
               
                  161 THE FISH GATE,
                  
                     2 Cro. 33. the which was ſituate nexte to
the tower of Dauid in the valley Mello,
                     Sopho. 1. betweene
mount Sion,
                     Neem, 3, 2. and the lower cittie, towardes the weſte:
and by the vault adioyning to the ſame,Broc. itin, 6, Sal, to. 8. cap. 1, 5. it gaue a conuenient
paſſage too and from the cittie to euery man.
And it was called the fiſh gate, becauſe through the
ſame, fiſhes were brought into the cittye from Ioppe,
and from other townes of the ſea coſt. This alſo had
other names, as the gate of Dauid: and the marchants
gate. Dauids gate, bicauſe it was nexte to Dauids tower:
& the merchants gate, bicauſe by the ſame much
marchandize were carried into the cittie from Bethelem,
Hebron, Gaza, from AEgipt, and from AEthiopia.
By this gate ſtrangers that came from the weſte,
were wont to enter into the cittie.
               
               
                  162. THE DOVNG GATE,
                  
                     Neem. 2. 3. 12. on the eaſt ſide of the cittie,
toward the corner gate, on the north-eaſt, caried
all the doung and filth of the cittie which the raine
gathered together, into the brooke Cedron. Where
vpon it was rightly called the doung gate.
               
               
                  163. THE GATES OF WOMENS TOWERS
                  .Broc. iti. 6. On the
north end of the citty,Sa. t, 8c. 5. by which the ſeditious brake
forth vppon the Romaines,
                     Ioſ. 6, bel. 2. & 5. when they beſeeged the
cittie.
               
               
                  
                  164. THE VALLEY GATE,
                  
                     2 Cron. 26. ſo named,Neem. 2. 3. 12. bicauſe it made
way into the valley of Ioſephat, ſituate in the midſt
betwene the doung gate,Broc. itin, 6, and the goulden gate, and
not far diſtant from the ſheepe market,Breid. 14. and the poole
called Probatica.
                     Iul. The which alſo for this cauſe deſerued
to be called the droue gate,Sal. to, 8. cap 5. bicauſe the flockes of
cattell which were ſoulde in the ſheepe market and
were to bee offered for ſacrifice in the temple, were
brought in by this gate. But now it is called Saint Stephens
gate of the firſt martyr Stephen, which was ſtoned
to death not far from the ſame.
               
               
                  165. THE OLDE GATE,
                  which being on the weſt part
of the cittie,Nee, 3, 12▪
                      was called in time paſt by the Iebuſites
the gate Iebus.
                     Deut. 22. It was alſo called the iudgement gate,
bicauſe in olde time,Ruth. 4, the Iudges did ſit there in Iudgement.Iohn 19.
For then the Seniors did exerciſe iuſtice and
Iudgement in the gates of their citties.Heb. 13. And ſuch as
were condemned to die, went out at this gate.Broc. iti. 6. Where
vpon Chriſt was led out of the ſame to bee crucified.Sal, tom 8. cap, 7.
Of this gate, there are at this day ſome oulde remainders
and ruines to be ſeene.
               
               
                  166 THE ROCKE
                  : which was very high, going alonge
from the tower Pſephina vnto mounte Sion,
                     Broc, itin, 6 vpon
the which the whole weſt wall of the cittie ſtood.
               
               
                  167 THE TOWER ANANEEL,
                  
                     Iere, 31. the which being not
far diſtant from the corner gate,Zach. 14. towards the eaſte

and by north,Nee. 3, 12. was very ſtronge and notable: whereof
the holy ſcripture maketh mention often times.
               
               
                  168 THE CORNER TOWER,
                  
                     2 Cron. 26. ſtanding alofte vppon
the corner gate, which kinge Ozias did ſtrongly
repaier, and made it one hundred and fifty cubites
high.
               
               
                  169 THE TOWER OF DAVID
                  :Vuil. Tyr, 9 be, ſac, 3. ſtronge and loftie,
the which was builded by king Dauid in a corner
of two deepe valleys,Broc. itin, 6. on the toppe of a broken rocke,
with foure ſquare ſtones moſte firmely ioyned together
with Iron and leade: whoſe ſingular fortitude,
and notable bewty, for the commendation of Chriſts
ſpouſe (which is the Church) is ſpoken of by Salomon
when he ſaith. Thy neck is like the tower of Dauid, builded
with bulwarkes, where vppon there hang a thouſand
ſhields;
                     Cant. 4: 
                     yea all the weapons of the Giants.
                  
               
               
                  170 THE HIGH TOWER,
                  
                     2 Cron. 26. which was builded vppon
the gate of the valley.Ioſ. 9, an, 11 The which alſo kinge Ozias
repaired, and that it might be ſeene beyonde mounte
Oliuet, hee made it one hundred and fiftye cubites
high.
               
               
                  171 THE LANTERN TOWER,
                  ſituate on the North
end of the cittie, which men thinke was ſo called,
bicauſe fier was continually kepte there,Nee. 3, 12. to ſerue as a
marke both for land and ſeafaring men, to direct them
the right way.
               
               
                  
                  172. THE GREAT TOWER,
                  
                     Neem, 3. which ſtanding neere the
wall of the temple was higher then the reſt.
               
               
                  173. THE TOWER MEAH,
                  
                     Nee. 3, 12. otherwiſe Emat, that is
to ſay of one hundred cubits, which was not farre
from the temple.
               
               
                  174. THE TOWER PSEPHINA,
                  
                     Iſe. 6, bel, 2. 5, 6. which was eighte
ſquare, of ſeuenty cubits highe, founded at the
North-weſte corner of the cittie,Broc. Itin, 6 vppon a very high
rocke: being like a ſtronge tower, which by reaſon of
the exceding hight thereof was feareful, from whence
on a cleere day, men might behould Arabia, the ſea,
and the vttermoſte borders of the Hebrues. The ruines
whereof are as yet to be ſeene.
               
               
                  175 THE TOWER OF SILOE,
                  
                     Luk. 13. which falling in
Chriſts time ſlue eighteen men.
               
               
                  176 THE DEEP VALLEY,
                  
                     Broc. itin, 6 which compaſſing mount
Sion on the North and ſouth parte, went all along
the weſte ſide of the cittie, euen to the gate of Ephraim,
making a fitte and conuenient ditch for the Cittie.
               
            
            
               
               THE PLACES WITHOVT
THE CITTIE. THE PLACES AT THE EAST PART
OF THE CITTIE.
               
                  177. THE WATER,
                  
                     Ariſtaeas. lib. de 72. interpretibus. which was brought out of the temple
by conduit pipes vnder the earth, iſſued foorth
here with greate noiſe,Mat, 21. 26 and ſo ranne into the brooke
Cedron.
                     Mar. 11. 14
                  
               
               
                  178. BETHANIA,
                  the noble caſtle of Marry and of Martha
the ſiſters of Lazarus, hauing many houſes, the
which was ſituat beyond mount Oliuet,
                     Luk. 10. 29 diſtant from
Ieruſalem fifteene furlongs,Ioh. 11▪ 12. that is, two Italian miles.
From which place, though it were but a little way off,
yet by reaſon that mount Oliuet lay betwene, the cittie
Ieruſalem could not be ſeene: excepte from a little
hill from whence part of mount Sion might be ſeene.
Chriſte often times lodged in this houſe of Martha:
where he preached the worde of God to Mary ſitting
at his feete. Here he raifed vp Lazarus to life, after he
had beene buried foure daies, and began to ſtincke.
Here, hee ſitting in the houſe of Simon the leaper, at
the table together with Lazarus, Martha ſeruing thē
                     Mary annointed him with a moſt pretious ointment.
               
               
                  
                  179. BETHPHAGE,
                  
                     Math, 21. a little village, belonging to ye prieſts
ſituate at the eaſt foote at the mounte Oliuet,
                     Marke 11. from
whence Chriſt ſente two of his diſciples vnto the Caſtle
Oppoſite,
                     Luk 19. or ouer againſte them,Iohn. 12. to fetch the Aſſe
and the Coulte. The which brought, and the diſciples
cloathes laide on the Coulte, hee roade on the
ſame into Ieruſalem. But comming down from mount
Oliuet, and ſeeing the cittie, he wept on her, and propheſied
hir vtter ruine bicauſe ſhe knew not the day of
hir viſitation.
               
               
                  180 THE CASTLE OPPOSITE,
                  
                     Mat, 21. or which lyeth ouer
againſt you (to vſe the wordes of Chriſt) when
he ſent his diſciples to fetch him the Aſſe.Mar, 11. It was a village
right ouer againſt Bethphage.
                     Luke 19.
                  
               
               
                  181 THE WELL,
                  
                     Iohn 11. nere vnto Bethanie, where when the
Lorde came to raiſe vp Lazarus, Martha firſt met
with him, and afterward called forth hir ſiſter Mary.
                  
               
               
                  182 THE LITTLE HILL,
                  at the foote of mounte Oliuet,
                     Ioſ. 6, be. 13
neere vnto the Doue-houſe a little aboue the
valley of Siloe.
                  
               
               
                  183. THE WITHERED FIG-TREE,
                  planted beſide the
way of Bethanie,
                     Mat, 21. the which bearing no fruite, but
garniſhed only with leaues, was curſſed of Chriſt and
ſo preſently withered.
               
               
                  
                  184 THE DRAGON FOVNTAINE,
                  which doth
ſpringe euen at this daye,Neem. 2. which was betwene the
valley and the dung gate.
               
               
                  185. GEHENNOM,
                  the which alſo was called Benhennom,
                     Ioſu. 15, 18
that is to ſay, the valley of the ſons of Ennom.
It was a place which was ſituate in the Suburbes of
the cittie of Ieruſalem towarde the South-eaſte.3. King, 11. In
which place of Benhinnom was the tabernacle and the
Idole Moloch:
                     Acts. 7, the which Idole as it was chiefe and
principall amonge all the other Idols, ſo the ſame
being the greateſt abhomination and moſte hated
vnto God, hee often times forbad the ſame in the
ſcriptures. It was an Idoll the matter whereof was
braſſe; made in the likeneſſe and ſimilitude of a king,
it was hollow within, and had a head like to the head
of a Calfe, the other partes or members of the body
hauing the ſhape and faſhion of a man, the armes
whereof were ſtretched out: whereto the children that
ſhoulde bee offered were made faſte, with the vehement
and extreame heate of the Idoll were burned
and vtterly conſumed being ſo houlden as it were of
the ſame betweene his armes. For when the Idoll
was made red whot with the fier which they had
put into the hollowneſſe of the ſame, then the moſte
wicked parents of theſe children in moſte cruell and
barbarous manner, deliuered vppe their ſonnes and
their daughters to theſe deteſtable and diueliſh Imbracings

of the Idoll, that ſo they mighte bee burnte.
And this they did of a certaine deueliſh deuotion,
offeringe them vppe to the Diuell Moloch for a burnt
offering of moſte filthie ſauour. Amiddeſt theſe
horrible tormentes where with they were thus tormented,
the miſerable Clamor of the children could
in no wiſe bee heard, whereby the parentes mighte
in any ſorte bee moued to pittie or compaſſion, for
that the prieſtes of this Idole Moloch, during the
whole time of the ſacrifice,4. King. 16. &. 21 did vſually make an exceeding
greate noiſe both with the trumpettes and
drums.
                  Wherevppon that place was called alſo Tophet. In
this abhominable manner,2 Cro. 28 33. 
                     Achaz, and Manaſſes
alſo,4. King. 23. kinges of Iuda, beeing euen as madde as the
Common people, offered vppe their ſonnes to the
Diuell Moloch. The which deteſtable madneſſe, the
godly kinge Ioſias ſeeking at the length to redreſſe,
brake in peeces the image of Moloch, cut downe his
Groues, and defiled the place thereof with the filthineſſe
of dead Carcaſſes, of bones, and of other vncleane
thinges, and appointed it to bee a perpetuall
dunghil for euer.
                  In this Valleye Ieremye at the commandement
of GOD,Iere 7, 19, 32. breaking an earthen potte in peeces againſt
the grounde,Iſai. 30. before the Elders of Iuda: propheſied
that GOD woulde after the ſelfeſame manner, break
and deſtroye both the Cittye and the people. According
to which propheſie, there was ſo great and
mightie a multitude of people ſlaine there, becauſe
they had filled this place with the bloud of Innocent
children, that this place was called no more the valley
of Tophet, but Poliandron, that is to ſaye a heape
of manye dead bodies, whoſe Carcaſes lyeng

there vnburied, became meat for the birdes of the
ayre and for the beaſtes of the field.
               
               
                  186. GETHSEMANI,
                  a ferme place, at the foote of
mount Oliuet.
                     Math. 26. This had manie fruitfull oliue trees.
When Chriſt intended to go vnto the garden that
was in mount Oliuet,
                     Mar. 14. he came from his laſt ſupper into
this place, heauie and ſorrowfull vnto the death.
               
               
                  187 THE GARDEN OF OLIVET,
                  in the mount of
Oliuet,
                     Mat. 26. where Chriſt praied vnto his father three
times,Mar. 14. that the cuppe of his paſſion might paſſe from
him.Luke 23, And being in an agony, as he continued in praier,Iohn. 18.
he ſwet bloud which fel droppe by dropp vnto the
earth:Hier. in loc, at what time hee was comforted by an angell
from heaueu.Heb, lib, G. In Hieroms time there was a Church
builded on this place,Broc, itin 6. which is as yet to be ſeene.Bre. 14. Iul.
                  
               
               
                  188 THE KINGS GARDEN,
                  the which alſo was called
the incloſed garden.2. King. 25. It was in the Suburbes of
Ieruſalem,
                     3. King. 1. walled round about. And like to a parradiſe
it was planted with trees,Cant. 4. of all ſorts of fruits,4 Kings 25. with
hearbes,Iere. 39. 52 with flowers of moſt ſweet ſauour, and what
ſoeuer els that might delight the ſences.Ioſe. 7, ant. 15. et. 9. ant 11. It had alſo
moſt pleaſant and conuenient walkes. In this was that
famous fountaine Rogel, & the ſtone Zoeleth, of both
which there is often mencion made in the Scripture;
where Adonias when he purpoſed to raigne, offered
oblations, and with his followers made a feaſt.
               
               
                  
                  189. THE GROAVE OF MOLOCH,
                  
                     4. King. 23. conſecrated to
the Idol Moloch:
                     Hieron. in Ier, 19, et, in Mat, 10. where the worſhippers thereof,
after they had ended their ſacrifice, committed fornication
vnder the ſhadow of the trees.
               
               
                  190 THE MOVNT OF OFFENCE
                  ;3. King. 11. it was a very high
mountaine,4. King, 23. ſituate on the ſouth ſide of the kinges
garden. Where the moſte wiſe Salomon being nowe
old, was ſeduced & made foliſh by his ſtrange wiues,
building a temple to Melchom the Idoll of the Ammonites,
which alſo he worſhipped.
               
               
                  191 THE MOVNT OLIVET
                  ; or mounte of Oliues, ſo
called by reaſon of the great plenty of oliues which
grew there: called alſo in Greeke Elaeon, which otherwiſe
alſo is named the famous, and holy mountaine.
It was ſituate on the eaſt ſide of Ieruſalem. It was ſeperated
from the high cittie, the valley of Cedron lying
betwen, diſtant from the cittie a Saboth daies iorney,
according to the Scripture: but according to Ioſephus,
                     Dan. 11.
it was diſtant fiue furlonges: who alſo addeth
that the top of the hill was ſix furlongs from the citty.Zach. 14.
For it was of ſo greate hight,Acts. 1. that from the ſame, not
only almoſt all the ſtreetes of Ieruſalem but alſo the
dead ſea,Broch. itin. 5. might eaſily be ſeene. And beſides the oliues
it abounded with palmes,Breid. 14. Iul. pines, mirtells, and other
fruitful trees.
                  In the toppe of this hill, the holy king Dauid fleeing
from the face of his ſonne Abſolom, weping, and barefooted
worſhipped God.2. King. 15. In this mountaine alſo his

ſonne Salomon forgetting all godlineſſe,3 King. 11. erected a
temple to Aſtaroth the Idole of the Sidonians,
                     4. King. 23. right
ouer againſt the temple of Ieruſalem (from whence euery
one that committed Idolatry mighte beeſeene.)
The which alſo with all other places dedicated to Idols,
Ioſias vtterly deſtroied.
                  Chriſt often times came vp into this mountaine,
both for quietneſſe ſake and alſo to pray,Luk. 21, 22 24. tarieng there
all the night.Iohn. 18. 8. Alſo from the top of this mount, he aſcended
into heauen,Act. 1. in the preſence of his diſciples
ſtanding there and behoulding him, after he had bleſſed
them.
               
               
                  192. THE MOVNT OF OFFENCE,
                  a high mountain,
on the other ſide of the brooke Cedron, and on the
North ſide of the mounte Oliuet,
                     3. King. 11. diſtant from Ieruſalem
foure furlonges.4 King. 23. Whereon Salomon by the motion
of his heatheniſh wiues,Broc, itin, 6. builded a Temple to
Chamoſh the Idole of the Moabites.
                     Sa. 6, cap, 5 This alſo Ioſias
brake downe. In the time of the Machabees a Caſtle
was builded on this mount, ſome tokens whereof are
to be ſeene at this day.
               
               
                  193 THE FVLLERS MONVMENTE
                  : the which
was not farre from the Corner gate,Ioſe. 6, bel, 6 in the North-eaſte.
               
               
                  194. THE PALME TREESE,
                  
                     Neem. 8. wherof mention is made
in Neemias,
                     Iohn. 12. and in Saint Iohns Goſpell.
               
               
                  
                  195 THE DOVE-HOVSE,
                  on the South ende of the
mount Oliuet;
                     Ioſ. 6, bel. 13. It was made of ſtone, round, loftie,
and faſhioned like a tower, wherin were ſtore of doues
to the number of foure or fiue thouſand.
               
               
                  196. THE BRIDGE OF CEDRON,
                  
                     Bre. 14. Iul. made of ſtone,
with one arche erected ouer the brooke Cedron,
which Helena the Emperes cauſed to be made in that
place.
               
               
                  197. THE SEPVLCHER OF THE VIRGIN MARY,
                  
                     Ioan. Damaſce de dormitione Deipar.
which was in the valley of Ioſaphat neere vnto the
ferme place of Gethſeman, at the foot of mount Oliuet
wherein the body of the moſt holy and bleſſed virgin,
was decently buried by the Apoſtles.
               
               
                  198. THE COMMON PLACE OF BVRIALL,
                  
                     4. King. 23. which
was in the velley of Ioſaphat,
                     Ierem. 26. where the common
ſort of people were buried.
               
               
                  199. THE FOVNTAINE OF SILOE,
                  
                     Iſai. 8. 22. whereto was
ioyned the poole of Siloe,
                     Nee, 3. the which alſo is called
the lower poole, lyeng on the weſte ſide of the valley
of Ioſophat, and ſpringing from the roote of mounte
Sion. The water thereof being cleere, ſweete, and
plentifull, ran with a ſtill and calme ſtreame into the
brooke Cedron.
                  
                  This fountaine kinge Hezechias repaired. In the

poole of this fountain the man which was borne blind
waſhing his eies which Chriſte had annointed with
clay and his ſpittle,Iobn 9. receiued his ſight.Broc, itin 6. 
                     Ioſephus teſtefieth
that Siloe,
                     Breid. 14 Iul. and all other waters which were without
the cittie, did ſo faile and vaniſh away before the
comming of Titus Caeſar,
                     paſch die. 197. that water was ſoulde hard
by them.Io. 6, bel, 11 And after his comming, they did ſo abound
to him and his hoaſt, that they had water enough for
them and for their cattell. Concerning the vertue of
this water, the moſt dilligent Surueyour of this place
Saligniacus, writeth in this ſort. The water of this fountaine
is of greate price at this day, euen among the Saracens
themſelues. For whereas naturally they be rammage
and ſtinke like Goates,
                     Sa. t. 10. c. 1 
                     they waſhing themſelues and their
children therein, doe mittigate the euill ſauour thereof.
The Turkes alſo make great accoumpte thereof, for that
they finde by experience, that the vſe thereof is good for
the ſight of their eies.
                  
               
               
                  200 STEPHEN,
                  
                     Acts. 7. the Deacon, in the very flower of his
youth, was ſtoned to death, praying to God for
them that ſtoned him, whoſe garments the young
man Paule kept. This man, was the firſte that triumphed
with the palme of martirdome.
               
               
                  201 THE BROOKE CEDRON
                  ; is a riuer on the eaſte
ſide of Ieruſalem betweene the ſame and mounte Oliuet,
                     1. King. 3.
which being increaſed with diuers ſprings iſſuing
from all partes out of the mountaine,Iere, 31. and pooles,Ioſ. 8, ant. 1. et 6. bel, 13.
ran through the valley of Ioſaphat,
                     Ezech. 47. and Gehennom with
a ſiluer ſtreame, and ſo paſſed through the plaines of
the wilderneſſe into the dead ſea.
                  On the bankes of both ſide this riuer, there grewe

many frutefull trees: the pleaſant ſhew whereof, together
with the gardens neere adioyning which were
watered with the criſtall ſtreames of Cedron,
                     Broc, itin, 6. greatly
delighted the eies and mindes,Sal. tom. 9. cap, 1. of ſuch as walked by
the ſame. King Dauid paſſed ouer this riuer bare footed,2. King. 15.
bare headed, and with watery eies, accompanied
with his moſte truſty frendes, fleeing from the face of
his ſonne Abſolom. Chriſt alſo went ouer the ſame,
with his diſciples when hee wente to the garden of
mount Oliuet.
                  
               
               
                  202 THE VALLEY OF IOSOPHAT,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel. 3. the which alſo
is called the valley of Cedron,
                     Hieron. in loc. Heb. litt. C. and the valley of
Mountaines. It is a wide and deepe valley betwene Ieruſalem
and mounte Oliuet,
                     zach. 14. compaſſing the cittie on
the eaſt parte,Broc, itin. 6 ſal. tom. 8. cap, 8. the which is made very fruitfull by the
paſſage of the brooke Cedron. The greate deepenes
of this valley was much filled by Titus and Adrian
the Romaine Emperours,3 King. 15. caſting into the ſame great
ſtore of earth with the ruines of the temple and cittie,4 King. 23.
yet it was not therewith any thing neere leueled.2 Cron. 15. 2. 9. 30. In
this valley, the godly and religious kinges of Iuda, Aſa
Ezechias and Ioſias, burned the Idols of the temple,
and caſt their aſhes into the brooke Cedron.
                  
                  This valley was the common place of buriall for
the whole cittie,Ioel. 3. where all the common ſorte of people
were buried.Sal, tom. 9. c, 2. For it was the manner of the Iewes
to bury their dead courſes out of the citty. And in the
ſame place, the Turkes are now buried.
               
               
                  203. THE VALLEY OF SILOE,
                  
                     Ioſe. 6, bel, 13. ſo named of the
fountane of Siloe:
                     Salig. to. 8. cap. 2. wherein the Iewes which at this
day dwell at Ieruſalem, are buried.
               
               
                  
                  204 THE WAIE OF THE FVLLERS FIELDE,
                  
                     4 Kings 25. lying
betweene the water of Siloe and the South-eaſte
corner of the cittie.Iſai. 7. 36. Here the Prophet Iſaias
foretoulde king Achaz, that Chriſt ſhould be borne
of a virgin.
               
               
                  205 THE WAY OF THE CAPTIVITIE
                  .Ioan. Paſc. in pereg. ſ. die. 190. 193. 194. 197. 200. et 207. Theſe
ſmall prickes traced foorth in length (as you ſee)
doe demonſtrate the way, by which Chriſte was
ledde captiue for the redemption of mankinde. For
being come into the garden of mounte Oliuet to pray
after his laſte ſupper in the parlour of mounte Sion,
and hauing offered to GOD his Father the holye
ſacrifice of praiers,Iſai. 53. returning from thence hee mette
with his enimies which came to take him,Iere. 11. to whome
hee yeelded himſelfe. Who hadde ſcarce gone fortie
ſteppes from the place where hee prayed, but
the ſoldiors which were ſente from the highe prieſtes
and rulers of the people, layed handes on him, tooke
him, and bound him.
                  From whence he was preſently caried as a meke
Lambe by thoſe rauening woolues, armed with
weapons,Pſal. 109. ouer the brooke Cedron, to the houſe of
ANNA, which was diſtante from the place where
hee was taken, two thouſande three hundred and
ſixtie paſes. And from hence hee was caried to the
Pallace of CAIPHAS three hundred and thirtie paces.
And ſo afterwarde hee was conducted by the
ſouldiors and by the people to the pallace of Pilate,
which was diſtante from that of CAIPHAS a thouſande

paſes. And from thence to the pallace of HEROD
which was diſtante three hundred and fiftie paces.
Laſtly from thence againe to the pallace of Pilate
hee was caried by another way then that which
hee came, the diſtance of ſixe hundred elles which
make about the length of halfe a myle and more. The
paſes whereof wee ſpeake here, containe two foot and
a halfe.
               
               
                  206 THE WAY, TO ANATHOT,
                  
                     Broc, itin 6.to Bethel, and to
the wilderneſſe.
               
               
                  207 THE WAY TO IERICO, and to ENGADDI,
                  
                     Luke 10. 
of the which there is mention made in ſome of the
Euangeliſts.Mar, 11.
                  
               
               
                  208. HERE THE THREE APOSTLES,
                  
                     Mar. 14. 
                     Peter, Iames,
and Iohn,
                     Luke 22. ſate while Chriſte prayed in the Garden,
being aboute a ſtones caſte from the ſelfe ſame
place.
               
               
                  209 HERE
                  the other eight Apoſtles taried being diſtante
about a quarter of a mile from the other three places.Mat, 26.
                  
               
               
                  210. HERE CHRISTE,
                  
                     Mat, 26. to make vs free, was betraied with
a kiſſe by the Traitor Iudas,
                     Mar. 14. and was bounde with
hard and ſtraight bands (as if he had ben an euil doer)
by the Iewes, whom he beate downe backward to the

ground by the word of his mouth.Luk. 22. There Simon Peter
moued ſodainely with great feruencie,Iohn. 18. ſtroke the ſeruant
of the high Prieſt whoſe name was Malchus, and
cut off his right eare: which chriſt immediately reſtored
againe. But the reſt of the Apoſtles being afeard
left the Lord and fled.
               
               
                  211. IN this place of mount Oliuet
                  
                   right ouer againſt the
temple neere to a certaine water,Mat. 23, et. 25. Chriſt ſate with his
diſciples,Mar. 13. making a longe ſermon concerning the deſtruction
of Ieruſalem,
                     Luk. 21. the afflictions of the godly to
come, the comming of falſe prophetes, the ſignes
of the ende of the world, and concerning the manner
of the laſt iudgement. In the which place, there was
afterward builded a temple which is now deſolate.
               
               
                  212. THIS WAY Chriſt came to Ieruſalem,
                  
                  
                     Mat. 21. ſitting vpon
the Aſſes coult,Mar. 11. wayted on with a great company
of men,Luk. 19. ſom going before,Iohn. 12. and otherſome following
after him: where vnto alſo a great number which
came out of the cittie ioyned themſelues. So that
he ſeemed to be receiued of all men with ſo greate fauour,
that many ſpraed their cloathes in the waye,
ſom cutting downe the bowes of palmes, oliues, and
other trees, to honour him there withal, ſtrowed them
in the way. And the voices of ſuch as reioyced was
heard in euery place as he went reſounding with theſe
cries, Oſanna in the higheſt, bleſſed is he that commeth
in the name of the Lord. With this pompe and triumph
the true king and humble triumpher, entered in at the
goulden gate, and rode aboute the temple, and the
greateſt part of the cittie. With this newe ſpectacle,
the whole cittie was moued ſaying, Who is this? The

multitude which followed him anſwered, This is Ieſus
the Prophet of Nazareth a Citty af Galile. Then the
crie of thoſe that reioyſed and were gladde increaſed
more and more, and men and women, young and
olde, yea which is wonderful) the very infants, which
came from al parts, cryed out together, Oſanna to the
ſonne of Dauid, Bleſſed bee the king of Iſrael, which
commeth a king in the name of the Lord. Bleſſed be the
kingdome that commeth in the name of him, that is Lord
of our father Dauid: peace in Heauen, and glory in the
higheſt, Oſanna in the hygheſt. With theſe ioyful voices
and cryes, they proclaiming their Meſſias, followed
him euen into the Temple. Where this newe
king happily beginning his kingdome, preſently healed
the blinde and the lame. In the meane time the
wicked and enuious Phariſies, the chiefe prieſtes and
Scribes, doo fret and fume, who ſeeing the great maruels
which he did, and the children crying in the temple,
Oſanna to the ſonne of Dauid, ſaid among themſelues,
Do ye not ſee how we profit nothing? Behold the
whole world goeth foorth after him.
                     Pſal. 8. Wherevpon they
begin with Ieſus himſelfe ſaying, Mayster, dooſt thou
heare what theſe ſay? Rebuke thy Diſciples. To whome
he ſhewing that this was long before propheſied of
by the Prophet, anſwereth, Why ſhould they not? Haue
ye not read, Out of the mouth of very babes and ſucklings
thou haſt ordained praiſe? I ſay vnto you if theſe
holde their peace, the ſtones ſhall
preſentlie crye.
                  
               
            
            
               
               THE PLACES ON THE
SOVTH PART OF THE CITTIE.
               
                  213. ABACVC.
                  
                     Dan. 14. Here the Angell of the
Lord taketh vp the prophet Abacuc
by the haire of the head,Breid. 14. Iul, as hee
was carying to the reapers in the
fielde their dinner, and caried him
with the ſame meat into Babilon to
feede Daniel,Salig. t. 10. cap. 2. being ſhut vp in the
Lyons denne. Who being fed, he brought Abacuc
hither againe.
               
               
                  214 ACELDEMA, or Haceldemach,
                  
                  
                     Zach. 11. that is to ſaye the
fielde of bloud.
                     Mat. 27. It was a potters fielde ſituate at the
South parte of mounte Sion hauing behinde it a hill
of the ſame name.Act. 1. This fielde,Niceph. 8. by the counſaile of the
Iewes,Hiſt ec. 13. was bought with the thirtie peeces of ſiluer for
the which Iudas ſoulde Chriſt,Broc. itin. 6 that it might ſerue to
bury ſtrangers in,Breid. 14 Iul. the middle parte whereof the Empereſſe
Helen cauſed to be incloſed with a foure ſquare
wall in length ſeuenty and two foote, and in bredth
fiftie.Salig. tom, 6 cap, 5, et, t. 10, cap, 1. And the ſame to bee couered ouer with a roofe
hauing ſeuen loope holes by which the deade bodies
of Chriſtians might be let downe.Paſ. d. 197.
                  
                  The vertue of this earth is reported to be wonderfull,
and almoſt incredible, to witte, that it bringeth
and conſumeth into duſt, the bodies of the dead men
within the ſpace of twenty foure howers, leauing nothing
but the bones.
               
               
                  
                  215 THE FVLLERS FIELDE,
                  
                     4 King: 18. which lay all along at
the South ende of the cittie,Iſai. 7. 36. euen from the valley
of Siloe eaſt ward vnto mount Gihon, towards the weſt
and betweene the wall of the citty and the water. In
this fielde the Fullers did ſcoure their cloathes in the
brooke next adioyning, and did ſet them on tainters,
and ſo dry them.
               
               
                  216. THE DENNE, OR CAVE, of Iames the leſſe,
                  wherin he is ſaid to haue hid himſelfe by the ſpace
of three dayes,Hie. to. 1. in catal, ſcrpt. Eccle. hauing vowed not to eate breade vntill
Chriſte was riſen agayne. For the which cauſe
the Lorde appered to him a parte,1 Cor, 15. after his reſurrection.
               
               
                  217 THE CAVE OF PETER THE APOSTLE,
                  
                     Breid, 18, Iul.
wherein after hee had denied the Lorde thriſe, hee
repented him and mourned with many teares.
               
               
                  218 THE TENTS OF THE ASSYRIANS,
                  of whom
for a reuenge of their blaſphemy, the moſt ſtronge
to the nomber of 185000 in the very firſt night of the
beſeeging Ieruſalem,
                     4. King. 18. 19. were ſlaine by the Angell of the
Lord,2 Cron, 32. and (as Auguſtine reporteth) their bodyes
were brought into duſt,Auguſt, t. 10 ad fratres in ere ſerm. 25. that they might not infect the
aier: their garments, armour and weapons notwithſtanding
remaining whole and ſound, that the people
of Ieruſalem might haue the ſpoile.
               
               
                  
                  219 THE HOVSE OF ELIAS,
                  
                     Breid. 14. Iul. wherein it is ſaid that
the prophet Elias ſometime dwelt. Where afterward
alſo a Church was builded.
               
               
                  220. THE MOVNTAINE EROGE,
                  otherwiſe called
the South Mountaine,
                     Ioſu. 15, 18 being very high and loftie,4 King. 15.
bowing a little towarde the weſt.2 Cron. 26 Concerning this
mountaine this is worthy to bee noted;Amos 1. That, when
Ozias king of Iuda preſumed to put on him the prieſts
attire,zach. 14. entered into the ſanctuary of the Temple,Ioſ. 9, an. 11 and
offered vpon the golden altar, the incenſe of ſweete
ſauour vnto God: by and by there came a great earthquake,Adā Reiſne rus et Ioan. Herdenus in deſcrip. vrbis Hiero ſol, lib. 7. c, 2.
(whereof alſo Amos and zacharias the Prophets
make mention) whereby the vpper part of the
Temple was ſhaken, and this mountaine cleft in the
mids, with ſo great and terrible violence, that one
part thereof falling and tumbling downe was rolled
and carried by the ſpace of foure furlongs euen right
ouer againſt the Eaſt mountaine (which is called the
mount of offence) where at the length it ſtaied. King
Ozias himſelfe in the meane time, blaſted and terrified
with lightning, was ſtricken in the forehead with a
Leproſie. For the which cauſe he being preſently caſt
out of the Temple and Citty, languiſhed all his life
long, and was ſhut vp in his houſe and ſeparated euen
till the day of his death.
               
               
                  221. A FOVNTAINE
                  .Mat, 2. At this Fountaine, the Starre,
which vaniſhed away when the three wiſe men,Breid. 14. Iul.
which came from the Eaſt, were entered Ieruſalem,Sal, tom. 10 c, 2.
                     
appeared vnto them againe: and led them vnto Bethlehem.
                  
               
               
                  222. THE CAVE OF the Prophet Ieremy:
                  
                  
                     Lamen. 1. 2 3. 4. 5. wherein he
ſitting with a greeued and ſorrowfull mind, wept,
moorned,Necep. 8. Hiſt, ec. 30. and bewailed the deſtruction of Ieruſalem, with ſobs and ſighes. Where Helena, the Empreſſe
(as Nicephorus teſtifieth) builded a notable monument.
               
               
                  223 ISAIAS
                  .Argum. in Iſaiam. Here that notable Prophet Iſai, when hee
propheſied in Ieruſalem about threeſcore and ten
yeares,Hierom tradit. Heb. iu. c. 2. Pa, 33. Broc. itin, 6. Breid. 14. Iul. by the commandment of king Manaſses, was
ſplit through the body with a ſawe, and was buried
vnder an Oake, whoſe ſepulture is to be ſeene at this
day.
               
               
                  224 THE CAVES OF THE APOSTLES
                  . There are
many Caues, wherein eight of the Apoſtles (as it
is reported) hid themſelues, during the time of the
Lords paſſion.
               
               
                  225 THE MONVMENT ABSOLOM,
                  
                     2. King. 18. is a marble
piller,Ioſ, 7. an, 10 with an Inſcriptiō on the ſame, diſtant from
Ieruſalem two furlonges: which Abſolom beeing aliue
ſet vppe to himſelfe for a monument in the kings
valley: where there is as yet to be ſeene a great heape
of ſtones, which daily is increaſed more and more.
For the Pagans and ſtrangers paſsing by that way, vſe
this for a cuſtome, that euery man caſt a ſtone at the

piller, and challenging as it were, according to the
lawe,Breid, 14. Iul. his rebellion againſte his father Dauid, they
curſſe him with this malediction, Curſed be the Parricide
Abſalom, and accurſed be all they for euer, which
vniuſtly do perſecute their parents.
                     Paſ. d. 191.
                  
               
               
                  226 THE RIVER OF THE VPPER FOVNTAINE,
                  ſituate on the South parte of mount Sion (which
Hieron calleth the Fullers fountaine) the which the
noble king Ezechias repaired with the conduct therof
alſo.4. King, 18. This he choaked with earrh,2 Cron. 32▪
                      at what time the Aſſyrians
beſeeged Ieruſalem.
                     Iſai. 7. 36.
                     Hier. in loc.
                     Heb. lit. T.
                  
               
               
                  227 THE SEPVLCHER OF ZACHARIAS,
                  the ſon
of Barachias, whome the Iewes ſlue betweene the
temple and the altar.
               
            
            
               THE PLACES ON THE WEST SIDE
OF THE CITTIE.
               
                  228. BAALPARASIM,
                  is a field in the valley of Raphaim,
wherein Dauid the king,2 King. 5. at the firſt time, ouerthrew
the Philiſtians,
                     1 Cron. 14. and buried their Gods which he found
in their tents.
               
               
                  229. HERODS TENTS,
                  
                     Ioſe. 14. ant 24. et 1., bel 12. which as Ioſephus witneſſeth,
he pitched on the weſte part of the cittie.
               
               
                  
                  230. THE FOVNTAINE GIHON THE LOWER,
                  
                     2 Cro. 33
which ſprange vp in the end of the fullers field,Broc. itin. 6. the
waters wherof Ezechias brought vnto the vpper ountaine.
               
               
                  231. THE FOVNTAINE GIHON the higher,
                  
                     4. King 20. ſpringing
from the mount Gihon,
                     2 Cron. 32. which afterwards Ezechias
ſtopped vp,Eccle. 48. and cutting deeper into the rocke, he
brought the waters thereof vnto the weſt parte of the
cittie of Dauid,Broc. itin, 6, by conduct pipes vnder the earth, by
which he brought it through the middeſt of the cittie,
into the innermoſte fountaine, leaſte when the cittye
ſhould be beſeeged the people might want water.
               
               
                  232. IVDAS,
                  
                     Mat. 27. who of an Apoſtle being become a traytor,
hoong himſelfe vpon a wilde figge tree:Acts. 1. And being
hanged bruſt aſunder in the midſt, and all his bowels
guſhed out.
               
               
                  233. THE MOVNT OF CALVARIE,
                  
                     Iere. 31. a rockie mountaine
of meane hight,Mat, 27. called in the Hebrue tongue
Golgatha;
                     Mar. 15. which was nexte to the Northweſt parte of
the cittie.Luke 23. In the which place offenders condemned
in open iudgement,Iohn. 19. were put to death. Where at all
times,2 Cor. 5. a man might ſee the boanes and bowels of men
hanged, or otherwiſe put to death. Here, Chriſte Ieſus
our ſauiour, which knew no ſin, becam (as the Apoſtle
ſayth) ſinne for vs, that is to ſay, was made a ſacrifice

for our ſinnes, and as if he had beene an euill dooer
was hanged between two theeues, and for our ſaluatiō
crucified. So that now mounte Caluary, which aforetime
was a place moſte infamous, by the paſſion and
bloud of Chriſt, is now made famous and honorable.
               
               
                  234. MOVNT GIHON,
                  
                     Broc, itin. 6 ſal. tom. 6. cap. 5. a mountain full of ſtones, high
and long, which running along by the Weſt part
of the Cytty, growing leſſe and leſſe towards the gate
of iudgement, is ſeuered from the Citty by a deepe
valley. In this mountaine, at the commaundement
of Dauid,
                     3. King. 1. 
                     Salomon was annointed king, by Sadoc the
chiefe prieſt, and by Nathan the prophet with the holie
oyle. To whom immediatly all the people cryed,
God ſaue king Salomon.
                  
               
               
                  235 THE MONVMENT of Anani
                  
                  the chiefe prieſt, of
which Ioſephus maketh mention, in his ſixt booke,
and thirteenth chapter of the Iewes warre.
               
               
                  236 THE PEARE TREES
                  of the valley Raphaim,
                     2. King. 5. the
which Ioſephus calleth the wood of weeping,1 Cron. 14. neere
vnto the which Dauid aſsiſted by God from Heauen,
gaue a ſecond ouerthrow to the Philiſtines, purſuing
them a great way.
               
               
                  237 THE SEPVLCHER OF CHRIST,
                  
                     Iſai. 11. was a newe
Monument,Mar. 25. eight foot long, diſtant from Mount
Caluarie,
                     Mat. 1. 6 one hundred and eight foot, and from moūt
Sion about a mile: which Ioſeph of Arimathea, a

noble Senator,Luke 23. had hewen out in the rocke for himſelfe,Iohn. 19.
in the Garden neere vnto mount Caluarie. In
the which Sepulcher he togither with Nichodemus,
                     Nicep. 8.
and the virgine Mary,Hiſt ec. 30. with other godly women, buried
the body of Ieſus,Beda in Mar. ca 16. being with the conſent of Pilate
taken from the croſſe,Broc. itin, 6. and then trimmed with mirre
and Aloes,Breid. 12 Iul. and wrapt in a fine linnen cloath, was put
honorablely into the ſame, the head layed toward the
weſt: And rolling a ſtone of exceeding waight to
the mouth of the monument,Sal, tom. 7 cap, 3. et 6. he went his way. But
in the meane time, the chiefe prieſtes and Phariſies,
going about to hinder the reſurrection of Chriſt takinge
vnto them a ſtrong garde of ſoldiors, watched
the ſepulcher, and ſealed the ſtone which ſhut vp the
mouth of the ſepulcher, leaſt the keepers and watchmen
being corrupted with money ſhoulde deale deceiptfully.
But this dilligence of the Iewes, by which
they went about to houlde Chriſt in the graue from
riſing againe, increaſed the miracle, and confirmed
the faith of the Reſurrection.Mar, 16. And there hee firſte
of all appered to Mary Magdalen,Iohn 20. at the monument
as ſhee was weeping, in the likeneſſe of a Gardener.
               
               
                  238. A WOOD,
                  neere vnto the cittie, as is to be gathered
by Ioſephus in his ſixt booke and fourtene chapter
of the Iewes warre.
               
               
                  239 THE BROOKE, OR RIVER GIHON,
                  
                     2 Cron. 32. at the ſouth-weſt
corner of the cittie: which king Achas had
begun to bringe from the lower fountaine Gihon into
the vpper fountaine: the which kinge Ezechias at the
laſt finiſhed.
               
               
                  
                  240 THE VALLE OF DEAD CARCASSES,
                  
                     Iere. 31. which
lay betweene mount Caluarie,
                     Lira, ibid. and the walles of Ieruſalem:
ſo called, bicauſe the dead carcaſſes, bones, &
aſhes, of ſuch as were put to death or burnt on mount
Caluarie were caſt thereinto.
               
               
                  241 THE VALLEY OF THE FOVNTAINE GIHON:
                  
                     2 Cro. 33.
whereof mencion is made in the booke of
the Cronicles,Ioſ. 6. be, 13▪ et 15, et 18, and in Ioſephus.
                  
               
               
                  242. THE VALLEY Raphaim,
                  
                  
                     2. Kin. 5. 23 that is to ſay, of Gyants. It
a is valley on the weſt ſide of the cittie very large &
great,,1 Cro, 11. 14. which beginneth at the north part, and extendeth
vnto the South;Iſai. 17. bringing foorth moſt plentifully
in time paſt excellent wheate, wine, oyle, and al other
fruites. In this valley Dauid by the helpe of God, twiſe
ouercame the Philliſtines which ſought to inuade him
with a great armie.
               
               
                  243. THE WAIES TO BETHLEHEM, Emaus, to Gaza,
and to Ioppa,
                  
                  
                     Actor. 8. Broc. itin. 6 which Salomon made with flint and
ſtoane, euen as he did other waies, which led to Ieruſalem,
both to make the paſſage more eaſie, and alſo to
ſhew foorth the magnificence of his kingdome in this
point.
               
               
                  244. THE WAIE TO SILOE, and to Gabaon,
                  
                  whereof
Brocardus in his ſixt booke of his traueile maketh
mention.
               
               
                  
                  245. HERE CHRIST
                  fell againe;Paſ. d. 10. as according to the tradition
of the fathers of old.
               
               
                  246. HERE IESVS
                  
                      tourning himſelfe about to the women
that mourned and wept,
                     Luke 23. 
                     ſayde,
                     Breid. 14 Iul. ye daughters
of Ieruſalem,Salig. tom, 8 cap, 7. weep not for me; but weep for your ſelues and
for your children, bicauſe the day ſhall come, &c.
               
               
                  247. HERE CHRIST FELL DOWNE
                  the third time
vnder his croſſe:Breid. 13. Iul, as the fathers of old time haue affirmed.Paſ. d. 181, et 212.
                  
               
               
                  248 HERE CHRIST WAS STRIPT OVT OF HIS
GARMENTS;
                  
                     Pſal, 38, et 68. whoſe body being all to torne with
whips,Iſai. 63. could not but be very ſoare, wherunto his bloudy
garments cleauing gaue newe occaſion of paine,Mat. 27.
when they were violently pulled off.Mar. 15. And ſtanding
there naked al the while that the cros was a preparing,Breid, 12.
in the could & wind, he ſate down at the length vpon a
ſtone, where he dranke wine mixt with gaule & mirh.
               
               
                  249 HERE CHRIST BEING LAYED ON HIS BACK
ON THE CROSSE,
                  
                     Pſalm. 21. and ſtretched out vpon the
ſame,zach. 13. his hands and feete was nayled thereunto with
Iron nayles:Iohn. 20. and his tender members were with ſuch
force ſtrayned and racked vppon the croſſe,Salig. to. 7. cap. 4. that the
very arteries and ſinewes were looſened,Paſ, d. 214. and all his
bones might be toulde.
               
               
                  
                  250 THIS IS the moſt notable and memorable place of
the whole world,
                  
                     Mat. 27. euen the clifte of the Rocke of
mount Caluarie,
                     Mar. 15. wherein the Croſſe bearing the bodie
of Chriſt,Luk. 23. was faſtened about high noone of the feaſte
day of Paſſouer.Iohn. 19. Vpon the top of which croſſe, a white
table was faſtened, expreſſing the cauſe of his death,
written with Pilats owne hand in theſe woordes of
Hebrue, Greke and Latine.
                     IESVS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE IEWES
                  
                  Further it is to be remembered,Math. 27. that the Iewes did
in ſuch manner erect and ſet Chriſt vpon his croſſe,Mar. 15.
that his backe partes might be toward Ieruſalem, and
his face towards the weſt. For they demed him vnwoorthy
to haue his face toward the holie cittie.Luk. 23. But wee
muſt thinke, that this was not done altogether by fortune,
or without a myſtery: but rather by the ſingular
diſpenſation of God, his miſeries ſeeme to be no falſe
prophets of our felicitie,Iohn. 19. by this meanes, and by this
dede forewarning them of that which the Prophet
Ieremy had propheſied ſhould come to paſſe, ſaying
I will ſcatter them with an Eaſt wind before the enimie,
                     Beda in Luc, cap, 23
                     I will ſhew them the backe and not the face,
                     Breid. 12. 
                     in the day of
their deſtruction.
                     Iul. For as ſaint Hierom ſaith, ſeeing they
are diſperſed throughout the whole world, and do cal
vpon God night and day in the ſynagogues of Sathan,Salig. to, 7. cap, 5.
God ſheweth vnto them his backe, and not his face
that they may knowe that hee is alwaies going from
them,Iere, 18. and not comming towards them:Hieron. in Iere, cap, 18 And that euen
in the day of their deſtruction, that is to ſay, during
all the time after the paſſion of our ſauiour,Pſal. 58. vnto
the very ende of the worlde:Iſai. 10. that when the fullneſſe
of the Gentiles is come in,, the remnant of the people

of Iſraell may bee conuerted at the laſte,Rom. 9. and. 11. and bee
ſaued. And I verily coniecture that by this their cruelty,
they were foretellers of our felicity. For in that
they did ſette the moſte ſweete and amiable face of
our ſauiour towarde the weſte, it ſeemeth vnto me
to note no other thinge, but the very ſame which
the kingly Prophet longe before had toulde ſhoulde
come to paſſe ſaying, His eies behoulde the gentiles.
For hee hauing the eyes of his mercie opened and
fixed vppon vs,Pſal. 65. from the time of his paſſion, will not
ceaſe to looke vpon vs with a fauorable countenance
euen vnto the end of the world.
                  Therefore, Chriſte being on this manner hanged
on the croſſe, three howers naked, bloudy, wounded,
crowned with thornes, did hang between two theeues
in moſt grieuous torments, partaker with them of the
paine and puniſhment, as if he had beene a companion
with them in their wickedneſſe: The which thing
the prophet Iſaias foreſhewed ſhould come to paſſe,
ſaying, Hee was reputed among the wicked. Whome in
the meane time, the Iewes, the high prieſts, together
with the Scribes and elders of the people pasſing by,
yea the common ſoldiors alſo, and the theefe that was
crucified with him, in ſteed of conſolation, which belongeth
to al that are afflicted, in moſt reprochful manner
ſcorned him, ſhaking their heads, and ſaying, Thou
which deſtroieſt the temple of God, and buildeſt the ſame
againe in three daies, ſaue thy ſelfe: if thou beeſt the ſonne
of God, come downe from the croſſe, He ſaued others, him
ſelfe he cannot ſaue If he be Chriſt the king of Iſraell, let
him come down now from the croſſe; and wee will beleue
him. He truſted in God, Let him deliuer him nowe, if hee
will haue him. For he ſaid I am the ſon of God.
                  
                  Ieſus moſt patiently ſuffering all theſe things more
bitter then the croſſe, was ſo far from reuenging them

that he praied for them that mocked him ſaying, Father
                     
                     forgiue them for they know not what they doe. And
to the other of the theeues requiring mercy hee promiſed

                     Paradiſe, ſaying, Verely I ſay vnto thee, This day
thou ſhalt bee with me in Paradiſe. And then behoulding
his well beloued mother, and the diſciples alſo
whome he loued, and commending a virgin to a virgin,
 ſaid vnto his mother, Behould thy ſonne. And then
he ſayd to his diſciple, Behould thy mother: who from
that hower forward tooke her for his owne. While
theſe thinges thus proceeded, the ſunne abaſhed at
thoſe pasſions which the creator of all the worlde ſuffered
on the croſſe, as it were mourning hid his face:
and was darkened from the ſixte hower, (at what
time it ſhyneth in greateſt glorye) vntill the ninth
hower.
                  Then Ieſus complayning that he is forſaken of his
father, cryed out with a ſtrong voice ſaying, My God,
                     
                     My God, why haſte thou forſaken me? This donne, to
the ende all thinges that were ſpoken of by the prophets,
 might be fulfilled, hee ſayd, I thirſte. Straight
way one running,Pſalm, 68. as though he would doo him ſome
good, when he had taken a ſpounge, and filled it with
vinegre, hee put it vppon a reede and gaue him to
drinke. Ieſus wonderfully thyrſted for the ſaluation
of men: but the Iewes offered him nothing but gaule
and vinegre. And ſo ſoone as Ieſus had taſted the
 vinegre, hee ſayde, It is finiſhed, geuing thereby to
vnderſtand,Heb, 5. that the ſacrifice was truly ended according
to the will of his father. And once againe crying
out with a loud voice and with ſheading of teares,
 hee ſayth, Father into thy handes I commende my ſpirit:
And ſo bowing downe his heade (a man of floriſhing
age) hee yealded vppe his breath, the nynth
hower of the fiue and twentieth day of March, and in

the three & thirtith yere of his age and three moneths.
But in the yeare from his Incarnation, the thyrty and
foure.
                  By this ſacrifice, the moſte high and euerlaſting
prieſt inflamed with moſt ſingular and vnſpeakeable
loue, offered him ſelfe a ſacrifice and a peace offering
to God his father, and by his death deſtroyed death,
ouercame Sathan, brake a ſunder hell gates, reſtored
life, and opened vnto all beleeuers, the euerlaſting
kingdome of heauen. For this cauſe, the fathers of
ould time, ingraued in ſiluer theſe words of the pſalme
in Greeke, and ſet it in the circumference of the hole
which was made on the toppe of mount Caluary, and
wherein the croſſe of Chriſt was faſtened, but nowe
they are ingrauen in copper thus.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
that is to ſaye, Here God our Kinge before
worldes wrought ſaluation in the middeſt of the
earth.
                  The which one and onely bloudy ſacrifice moſte
truly and lawfully made,Paſ. d, 223. et, 224. hee woulde not by and by ſo
ſoone as he was dead be taken from the croſſe, but euen
as when he was aliue, ſo when hee was dead, by
the ſpace of three howers he hong as a ſpectacle to all
men: and as he ſpared no one member from torment
ſo his will was to ſhed all his bloude, euen to the very
laſte droppe of his moſte pretious heart, and to open
the fountaine for the waſhing away of our ſinnes,Zach. 13. the
which we may vſe to our endleſſe comforte.Iſai. 12. Therfore
one of the ſoldiors perceauing and opening his ſide
and hearte,Zach. 12. preſently there iſſued foorth bloude and
water as from a moſte liuely ſpringe, to the ſanctifying
and ſaluation of his Church. In the meane ſeaſon all
thinges gaue teſtimonie to their Lorde and makers
death. The vaile of the Temple rente aſunder in two

partes: the earth was ſhaken and quaked, the graues opened,
the deade bodies of men aroſe againe, and the
ſtoanie rockes, (to the ſhame and reproach of the
Iewes for the hardnes of their hartes) claue a ſunder &
burſt in peeces.
               
               
                  251 HERE the bleſſed virgin Marie,
                  
                  
                     Iohn. 19. accompanied with
Iohn,
                     Luk. 2▪
                      with Marie Magdalen, & with other women,
ſtoode with a firme mind and conſtant faith,Breid. 12. where according
to the propheſie of Simeon,
                     Iul.
                     Salig. to, 7. cap. 5. the ſworde of ſorrow
pearſed her ſoule.Paſ. d. 225.
                  
               
               
                  252 HERE the ſoldiors
                  which crucified Chriſt, parted his
garments among them and caſt lotts for his ſeameles
coate who ſhould haue it,Iohn. 19. that the ſaying of the prophet
might be fulfilled,Pſal. 21. 
                     They parted my garments among
them, and for my Veſture they did caſt lottes.
                  
               
               
                  253. HERE the dead Corpes
                  of Chriſt, being taken down
from the Croſſe,Breid. 12. was deliuered to the bleſſed virgin
Marie to be buried.
               
               
                  254 HERE
                  
                     Chriſt meteth with the women,Math. 28. which returned
from his Sepulcher toward Ieruſalem, and ſaluteth
them, who imbracing and kisſing his feete woorſhiped
him.
               
               
                  255 HERE
                  Chriſt in the forme of a ſtraunger,Luk. 24. went with
the two diſciples toward Emaus:
                     Mar. 16. and in the way as

they wente together, hee interpreted Moſes, and the
Scriptures of all the prophets, which he proued to bee
fulfilled in him.
               
            
            
               THE PLACES ON THE
NORTH SIDE OF THE CITTIE.
               
                  256. THE tents of the Chaldaeans.
                  
                  On this North part of
the cittie,4 King. 25. 
                     Nabuchodonozer kinge of Babilon, and
the Chaldaeans,
                     Iere 1, 39, & 52. ſcaled the wals of Ieruſalem, and wan it.
               
               
                  257 THE TENTS of the Romaines,
                  the which were pitched
betweene the Womans towers,Ioſ. bell, 2. 3, 5, 6. 7, 8 9, 10 et 7. bel 1, 2. 4. 9 10, 15, 16. and the tower
PSEPHINA. On this parte, although incloſed and
fortified with a triple wall, Titus and the Romains aſſayled
Ieruſalem. For on this parte onely, the citty was
ſauteable. And albeit the other partes were compaſſed
round about with one ſingle wall onely, yet the ſame
being very ſtrong, and ſette vppon ſtony and cragged
rocks, and hauing alſo deepe valleies or trenches Impaſſable,
were inexpugnable. Therefore they began to
ſcale the firſt wall, which was the outermoſt and third
wall of the cittie. After that they tooke in hand the ſecond
wall: And then the third wal of the cittie, which
wall alſo called the old wall. Next they took the caſtle
Antonia: And ſo the temple, which was fortified like a
caſtle and laſt of all they entered mount Sion, of al the
reſt,Wtl, Tyr, bel ſac. lib, 8, cap 5 et 18, the moſt ſtrong. At what time alſo the Chriſtians
tooke this cittie in hand to win it, they began their enterpriſe
on this part, anong whome Godfrey of Bullion
was the firſt that entered the wal, nere vnto the gate of
Ephraim, whoſe ſoldiors following the aſſalt like men,

opened immediately the ſayde gate, and ſo wan the
cittie. The which alſo the Saracens beſeeging on the
ſame parte, wan from the Chriſtians.
               
               
                  258 THE HILL GAREE,
                  
                     Iere, 31. the which was neere to Ieruſalem
one the north.
               
               
                  259 EREBINTH
                  was a little village on the north.Ioſ.6. be, 13
                  
               
               
                  260. GARDENS AND FEARMES,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, be. 2. 4. 7. incloſed with wals
and hedges: where Titus taking a vew of the citty
was in danger.
               
               
                  261 THE SEPVLCHER of Helene
                  
                  Queene of the Adiabens
(who vittailed Ieruſalem in the time of the famine
with wheat) the which ſhe moſte ſumptuouſly
builded with three pinacles,Ioſe. 20. ant 2. 3. et 6. bel 2. 5. 6. about three furlongs diſtant
from the cittie.Euſeb. 2. hiſt eccl, 12 Wherin ſhe was buried with her
ſon Iſates:
                     Hie. to. 1. epiſt. 23. ad Euſtoch. the which alſo was ſtanding in the time of
Euſebius and Hierom.
                  
               
               
                  262 THE NORTH MOVNTAINE,
                  
                     Ioſ, 6. be. 13 where Pompei pitched
his tents.
               
               
                  263 THE MONVMENT of Herod Agrippa:
                  
                  
                     Act. 12. who for his
intollerable pride being ſtriken by the angell of the
Lord,Ioſ. 19, ant. 8. et 6, bell, 4. 13. and conſumed of wormes, dyed.
               
               
                  
                  264. SAPHA,
                  in Greeke called Scopos, that is to ſay, A
place of eſpiall, ſituate towarde the north, diſtante
from the cittie about ſeuen furlongs.Ioſ, 11. ant, 8. et 2. bel. 24. et 6. bell 3. 4. It was ſo named,
bycauſe from thence both the citty and temple might
be ſeene. Here Iaddus the chiefe Prieſt, and the reſt of
the prieſts, in their prieſtly attire, and al the people clad
in white garments, went foorth to meete Alexander
the greate, kinge of the Macedonians, when hee came
with his army to deſtroy Ieruſalem. Whome when
Alexander ſaw by and by ſuppreſſing his fury, in humble
ſort worſhipped the name of God, which ſhined
in goulden letters in the Reaſonable of the high prieſt,
and gaue reuerence to the high prieſt. Then entering
into the Cittie and Temple, hee offered ſacrifice
to God, and graunted greate priuiledges vnto the
Iewes.
               
               
                  265. THE FRVITEFVLL WOOD,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6, bel, 4. et 7, which Titus cauſed
to be cut downe.
               
               
                  266 THE LAKE OF SERPENTS,
                  
                     Ioſ. 6. bel, 4. which in ould time
was called Bethara.
                  
               
               
                  267. THE WAY,
                  
                     Broc. itin, 6, by which men went into Samaria and
Galile.
                  
               
               
                  268. THE VILLAGE
                  neere to Ieruſalem,
                     Neem. 3. whereof Neemia
maketh mention.
                  
                     
THeſe (Chriſtian Reader) are the moſt notable and
famous places of the Citty and Temple of Ieruſalem.
By the placing whereof, the ſcituation of the reſt
may eaſily be knowne. Therefore if wee haue made a
true deſcription, let the praiſe be giuen to God, the
giuer of all good gifts. But if otherwiſe there bee any
defect, impute that to my want of skill, and not to my
ill will: who for that I was not able to giue towards the
furniſhing of the Temple, golde, ſiluer, or pretious
ſtones, haue notwithſtanding offered a little oyle to
lighten the Church; truſting that the ſame will be acceptable,
both to Chriſt,who allowed the twoe
mites which the poore Widdow offered: &
alſo to thoſe that be good Chriſtians,
whom it becommeth well to
be like vnto their hed
CHRIST.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               The names of the Authors out of whoſe
workes and trauels this Deſcription of
Ieruſalem is taken and made.
               THE HOLIE BIBLE, of the old and new Teſtament.
               FLau Ioſephus, a prieſt of the Iewes: who flouriſhing in
the 70. yeare of Chriſt, exactly deſcribed the ſcituation,
the forme, and the beſieging of the Citty of Ieruſalem.
               EXemplars of the famous Doctor of the church S. Hierom,
as well printed as written. Who liued in the yeare
of Chriſt. 380.
               IAmes of Vitriac, who trauelled into the Holy lande, and
and returning was made Biſhop of Acon, who wrote a
Booke, concerning the Holy land, and the wonders which
he ſaw there. He floriſhed in the yeare of our Lord. 1231.
               IAmes pantaleon a Frenchman, Patriarch of Ieruſalem,
his booke concerning the Holy land. Who was famous in
the yeare of Chriſt, 1247.
               THe exact Deſcription of Ieruſalem, and of the places of
the holy land, made by Brocardus a Moonke, publiſhed
at Baſil by Heruage, and at Antwerp by Stelſius. Who
in the yeare of Chriſt, 1283. after great ſearch and dilligent
ſuruey of that Citty and land, and the view of the antient
ruines thereof, deſcribed the ſame moſt carefully.
               THe Deſcription of Ieruſalem and of the holy places, by
Iohn Mandeuille Engliſhman, who finiſhed his peregrination
in the yeare of our Lord, 1322, and diligentlie
deſcribed the ſame: printed at Antwerp by Nicol. Wou
                  
                     •
                  er,
in Anno. 1564.
               A Table of the Citty Ieruſalem, and a verie ancient deſcription
of all the Holy lande, portrayed one hundred
yeare ſince and more in parchment, which Iohn Huls procured

from the Librarie of the Colledge of ſaint Hierom
at Delph in Holand.
               THe originall of the Citty of Hieruſalem and of the
Temple in the ſame, deſcribed by Rodulph Langius,
Anno 1476. and printed at Colen, Anno. 1517.
               THe Pilgrimage to Hieruſalem and to mount Sinai, of
Bernhard Breidenbach, Deane of the Church of
Mentz, which he, accompanied with others moe, finiſhed,
Anno 1483. and moſt dilligently deſcribed the ſame.
               Adding thereunto a portraiture of the moſt principall
places of the holy land and of his trauell, which he cauſed
a cunning painter to make vpon the view of euery place,
whom he had in his companie for that purpoſe: Printed
at Mentz, An. 1486.
               
                  A Deſcription of the voyage to Hieruſalem, publiſhed in
the yeare 1520. by M. Gerard Kuynretorff and others.
               
                  A Delineation of the Citty of Hieruſaiem, which mayſter
Iohn Schorrel with the helpe of a skilfull painter
drue foorth by the view of the eie, ſitting on mount Oliuet.
1521.
               THe Deſcription of Hieruſalem and of the holy places,
by Ioan. Heuterus Praetor of Delph, which hee ſette
foorth in An. 1521.
               THe like Deſcription was made by Bartholmew of Saligniac
Knight, and profeſſor of both lawes. 1525.
               
                  A Peregrination, with an exact deſcription of Hieruſalem
and of the holy places, made by Iohn Paſch Doctor
of Diuinitie, printed at Louane in the yeare, 1563.
               THe Hiſtories of the Holy warre, whereof there were
three and twenty books, ſhewing how in the year 1099
Hieruſalem and the whole land of promiſe, was recouered
againe by the Chriſtians, and ſo poſſeſſed of them 84. years
by William, archbiſhop of Tyren, Chancellor of Hieruſalem:
printed at Baſill in the yeare. 1564.
               
                  
SIx bookes of Hiſtorie concerning the holy warre, ſette
forth by Iohn Herold, printed at Baſil in the year, 1560
               
                  A Delineation, or Mappe of the Citty Ieruſalem, and of
the holy places of al the land of Paleſtine, by Herman
Broculoo, printed at vtrict in the yeare, 1538
               BOnauentur of Mirica his Deſcription of Hieruſalem,
and of the holy places thereof, who made three voiages
thyther, and dwelt there a long time, in the yeares 1538.
and 39.
               The vniuerſal Coſmography of Sebaſtan Munſter.
               THe Deſcription of the Cittie of Hieruſalem, and of
Paleſtine, by Wolfgang Weyſsenburch: Printed in the
yeare, 1542.
               
                  A Dilligent Deſcription of the places of the olde & new
Teſtament gathered out of many authors: as, out of
Ptolomie, Plinie, Pomponius Mela, Strabo, Herodotus,
               Hierō, Ioſeph Egeſippus, Stephanus, Raphael volateran,
Lyra, Bocas. And out of the morelater, as Iames ziegler,
Wolfang Weyſsenburg, and Andrue Althamer, menne
that heerein haue taken great paines: and printed at Paris.
               
                  A Delineation and deſcription of the Citty Ieruſalem,
and of the land of promiſe, moſt exquiſitlie doone by
Bonauenture Broccard, in the yeare, 1544.
               
                  A Deſcription of Ieruſalem and of the places thereof, by
M. Gerard Ioan of Leiden, in the yeare, 1556.
               
                  A Map of the Citty of Ieruſalem, and of the whole lande
of promiſe, made by Tilmannus Stella in the yeare,
1557, and printed at Anwerp.
               
                  A Topographical deſcription of the Citty of Ieruſalem
by Fabian Licinius a Venetian, printed at Venes in
the yeare, 1560.
               
                  A Mappe of Ieruſalem ſet forth by Adam Reiſzner,
exhibited to the Emperour Ferdinando in the yeare,
1559.
               
                  
THe way of Caluarie, written in Latin, by Laurence
Surius.
               THe way of the Croſſe, from Pilates houſe to Mount
Caluarie, publiſhed by Peter Calentine, and printed
at Louane in the yeare, 1561.
               THe Itinerarie of Iohn Godſcalci of Delph which he finiſhed
in the yeare, 1561.
               
                  A Deſcription of Hieruſalem and of the places therabout
by Isbrand Godfrey, which hee finiſhed in the yeere,
1563.
               THe voyage of the noble knight, Baptiſt van der Muelen
of Mechlin, who by word of mouth deſcribed vnto
me oftentimes Hieruſalem, & al the places thereof, which
he ſurueyed in the yeare, 1567.
               THe Deſcription of the old and new Hieruſalem, made
by Peter Lackſtein, and painted in a map by Chriſtian
Sgrothen in the yeare, 1570.
               
                  A Topographical delineation of the Citty of Hieruſalem
made by Antonie de Angelis a minorite, who dwelt
a long time at Hieruſalem, ſet forth in the yeare, 1578.
               
                  A Verie large map the Citty of Hieruſalem, and of all
the holy land, drawne in parchment with the hande of
Biron a Frenchman with liuely colours, & bewtified with
Gold, and deſcribed in the French toong, which Mappe,
MICHAEL EYZINGER of Auſtria, a moſt dilligent
hiſtoriographer, deliuered vnto me.
            
            THeſe are for the moſt part the chiefe Authors among
them, which of ſet purpoſe haue handeled this
Argument, and of whome I make ſpecial mention, I
haue vſed many, of whom I haue nothing ſpoken: And
to make mention of all ſuch writers, which hauing anoher
purpoſe, and haue yet giuen me matter to write of,
yeere to make a tedious Catalogue.
         
         
            
            A Table Alphabeticall, whereby the
Reader may finde the principall matters
conteyned in this booke.
            
               A
               ABacuc, 213
               Aceldema, 214
               Anani his moniment, 235
               Annas his houſe, 8
               Amphitheater, 28
               Antonia his Caſtell, 29
               Arke of the Couenant, 76
               Altar of Incence, 80
               Altar of burnt offring, 87
            
            
               B
               BAalpharazim, 228
               Bethania, 178
               Bethphage, 179
               Broad ſtreet, 150
               Bridge of Cedron, 196
               Bridge of Sion, 19
               Bridge from the caſtell antonia, 63
               Brooke of Cedron, 201
               Brooke Gihon, 239
               Booz and Iakin, 88
               Bigneſſe of Chriſt his croſſe, 120
            
            
               C
               CAeſar and Agrippas hall, 5
               Caiphas pallace, 17
               Caſtell Antonia, 29
               Caſtell of Antiochus, 31
               Caſtell Piſan, 59
               Caſtell of the Aſſyrians, 148
               Caues, called the kings caues, 151
               Caſtel oppoſite, 180
               Caue of Iames, 116
               Caue of the Apoſtles, 224
               Caue of Peter, 117
               Caluarie, 233
               Caue of Ieremy, 222
               Capheteta, 152
               Cherubims, 77
               Candleſtick of gold, 81
               Chriſt his croſſe, 120
               Chriſt rideth to Ieruſalem, 211
               Chriſt falleth downe vnder his croſſe
245, 247, 121.
               Chriſt ſpeaketh to the moorners, 246
               Chriſt ſtript out of his clothes, 248
               Chriſt racked and nayled on the
croſſe, 249
               Chriſt deliuered to the virgin mary,
253
               Chriſts garment parted by lot, 252
               Chriſt ſpeaketh to the women after
his reſurrection, 254
               Chriſt talketh with his two Diſciples
going to Emaus 255
               The court, 35
               Court of Records, 30
               Corner parlour, 33
               Corner ſtone, 153
               Court of Herods pallace, 138
               Conduct, or fountaine, 128
               Cloſets, 91
               Common place of buriall, 198
               Cypres trees, 7
            
            
               D
               DIall of Achas, 103
               Douehouſe, 195
            
            
               E
               ESſens gate, 66
               Eagle of gold, 101
               Erebynth a village, 259
            
            
               
               F
The
               Fountaine of Sion, 18
               Fountaine the innermoſt, 60
               Fountaine old, 62
               Fountaine in the temple, 82
               Fountaine, 128, 221
               Fountaine dragon, 184
               Fountaine of Silo, 199
               Fountaine Gihon the lower, 230
               Fountaine Gihon the higher, 231
               Frutefull wood, 265
               Fullers field, 115
               Figge tree withered, 183
            
            
               G
The
               Garden belonging to the king,
15 and 188
               Gardens incloſed, 260
               Garden on mount Oliuet, 187
               Garments of Chriſt parted by lot, 252
               Gates of Sion, 20
               Gate, called the vpper gate, 21
               Gate of Warders, 64
               Gate called the horſſe gate, 65
               Gate belonging to the Eſſenes, 66
               Gate the firſt, 67
               Gate, called the new gate, 93
               Gate called the middle gate. 137
               Gate called holy gate, 94
               North Gate, 104
               Gate South, 105
               Gate in the Weſt. 106
               Gate of the corner, 154
               Goulden Gate, 155
               Gate of Ephraim, 156
               Gate called the water gate, 157
               Gate Genath, 158
               Gate of the kings garden, 159
               Gate of the high prieſts pallace, 160
               Gate called the fiſh gate, 161
               Gate called the dung gate, 162
               Gate of womens towers, 163
               Gate called the Valley gate, 164
               Gate called the old gate, 165
               Groue of Moloch, 189
            
            
               H
The
               Houſe of Annas, 8
               Houſe of the Worthies, 9
               Houſe of the Virgin Mary, 10
               Houſe of Vria, 11
               Houſe of Ananias, 36
               Houſe of S. Anne, 37
               Houſe of the rich glutton, 38
               Houſe of Meſa, 39
               Houſes of the Nathinaeans, 40
               Houſe of the prince of Phariſeis 41
               Houſe of the forreſt of Lybanus, 42
               Houſe of Simon the phariſei, 43
               Houſe of the common people, 44
               Houſes of the prieſts, 49
               Houſes of the target bearers, 50
               Houſe of counſel, 90
               Houſe of Mary the mother of Iohn,
126
               Houſe of Olda the propheteſſe, 127
               Houſe of Elias, 219
               Hill Garee, 258
               Hole where the croſſe ſtood, 250
               Hill which is little, 182
               Herods parke, 143
               Hoſpital, 144
               Holy place, 79
               Holy of holyeſt, 75
            
            
               I
The
               ILe of the Iewes, 86
               Ile of the Gentiles, 100
               Iſaias martyred, 223
               Iudas hanged on a tree, 232
            
            
               
               L
The
               Lyſtes or tyltyard, 51
               Lauer of braſſe, 89
               Lofts of the ſingers, 97
               Lake, 131
               Lake Amigdalon, 125
               Lake of Serpents, 266
            
            
               M
The
               MArketplace, 12, 45, 46, 47, 69, 129
               Mary and Iohn beholde Chriſt
as he paſſeth by with his cros, 122
               Mello, 16
               Moloch his Groue, 189
               Mount Sion, 3
               Mount Moria, 52
               Mountaine Bezetha, 147
               Mount of offence, 190, 192
               Mount oliuet, 191
               Mountaine Eroge, 220
               Mount of Caluary, 233
               Mount Gihon, 234
               Mountaine in the north part, 262
               Monument of Alexander, 133
               Monument of Iohn, 134
               Monument of the Fuller, 193
               Monument of Abſolom, 225
               Monument of Anani, 235
               Monument of Herod, 263
            
            
               N
The
               NOrth mountayne, 262
               North gate, 104
               New Citty, 146
            
            
               O
The
               Ophel, 54
               Oliuet, 191
            
            
               P
               PArlour of Sion, 6
               Parlour in the corner, 33
               Pallace of Caiphas, 17
               Pallace of the Machabees, 55
               Pallace of Pilate, 56
               Pallace of the Queene, 57
               Pallace of Solomon, 58
               Pallace of Queene Bernice, 70
               Pallace of Grapte, 71
               Pallace of Helen. 72
               Pallace of Herod, 136
               Pallace of Monobaz, 73
               Paſſage of the temple from Salomōs
pallace, 113
               Palme trees, 194
               Peare trees, 236
               Place of zacharias death being ſlain,
98
               Place where the Iewes woulde haue
ſtoned Chriſt, 99
               Place where the woman taken in adultery,
was abſolued, 109
               Places of Chriſts fall, 121
               Place where the three Apoſtles ſate,
while Chriſt prayed, 208
               Place where the 8. Apoſt. tarried, 209
               Place where Iudas betrayed Chriſt
with a kiſſe, 210
               Place where Chriſt preached of the
deſtruction of Hieruſalem, 211
               Place where Mary with others ſtood
at Chriſt his death, 251
               Porch of pillars, 68
               Porch of the temple, 95
               Priſon, called the kings priſon, 4
               Priſon common, belonging to the
citty, 32
               Poole, called Probatica, 61
               Prieſt, called the high prieſt, 84
               Propitiatory, or mercy ſeat, 78
            
            
               R
The
               REchabites habitation, 130
               Rock of the Weſt Wall, 166
               Riuer of the vpper fountaine, 226
            
            
               S
The
               
                  
SApha, 264
               Sion. 3.26, 27
               Sepulcher of Dauid, 22
               Sepulcher of Stephen, 23
               Sepulcher of Chriſt, 237
               Sepulcher of Helen, 261
               Sepulcher of the virgin Mary, 197
               Of zacharias, 227
               Stayres of the caſtell, 13
               Stayres of Sion. 14
               Schoole of Gentility, 48
               Sea of braſſe, 92
               Seate appertayning to the king, 96
               Singers ſeats aloft, 97
               Solomons throne, 112
               Simō of Cyren, beareth the cros, 132
               Second citty, 124
               Stephen ſtoned, 200
            
            
               T
The
               TAbernacle of Sion, 24
               Temple of the Lord, 74
               Table of Gold, 83
               Tents of the Aſſyrians, 218
               Tents of Herod, 229
               Tents of the Chaldeans, 256
               Tents of the Romanes, 257
               Theater, 111
               Throne of Salomon, 112
               Tribunal ſeat, 114
               Towers of the trumpetters, 108
               Tower Strato, 115
               Tovver in the middle, 132
               Tovver Hippic, 140
               Tovver Mariamme, 141
               Tovver Phaſelus 142
               Tovver Ananael, 167
               Tovver in the corner 168
               Tovver of Dauid, 169
               Tovver called the high tower, 170
               Tovver called the Lanterne, 171
               Tovver called the great tower, 172
               Tovver Meah, 173
               Tower Pſephina, 174
               Tovver of Siloe, 175
               Treaſory, 102
            
            
               V
The
               VAlley called the deep valley, 176
               Valley of Ioſaphat, 202
               Valley of Siloe, 203
               Valley of dead carcaſes, 240
               Valley of the riuer Gihon, 241
               Valley of Cedron, 116
               Valley of Raphaim, 242
               Vaulted caue, 34
               Vaile of the temple rent, 85
               Village nere to Ieruſalem, 268
               Vria his houſe, 11
            
            
               W
The
               Wine preſſe belonging to the K, 25
               Wals, firſt 53, ſecond 135, the thirde,
149
               Way of the croſſe, 117
               Way of entrance for the horſes, 118
               water iſſuing forth of the temple, 177
               Way of the Fullers field, 104
               Way of the captiuity, 205
               Way to Anathot, 206
               Way to Iericho, 207
               Way to Siloe, 244
               and to Bethlehem, 243
               Way to Samaria, and Galile, 267
               Well, 181
               Whipping of the buyers and ſellers,
110
               A Wood, 138
            
            
               Z
               Zacharias place where he was ſlayne
betweene the temple & the Altar,
98.
            
            
         
      
   