
      
         
            
            
            THE
DECLARAtion
of the Lord de la
Noue, vpon his taking Armes for
the iust defence of the Townes of Sedan
and Iametz, frontiers of the Realme
of Fraunce, and vnder the protection
of his Maiestie.
            Truely translated (according to the French Copie
printed at Verdun) by A. M.
            
            LONDON,
Imprinted by Iohn Woolfe,
1589.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE DECLARATION OF
THE LORD DE LA NOVE, Vpon
his taking Armes for the iust defence of the
Townes of Sedan and Iametz, frontiers of
the Realme of Fraunce, and vnder
the protection of his Maiestie.
            
               THE deuoire of a Gentleman,
making profession of vertue,
consisteth (first of all) in so well
ordering and digesting his actions,
that himselfe may receyue
in them contentment: Afterward
hee ought to make such a splendour of
them, and to iustifie them in such sorte, as the
well minded may bee satisfied, and the ill disposed
rayse no suggestion to condemne them.
And seeing it is so, that honour (which is the rewarde
of the fairest workes) proceedeth from
such, who after they haue examined and finde
them worthie, will approue them: he then that
is desirous to be honoured, ought to be very carefull
that his owne actions (if it be possible) bee
not blemished with any spot or staine: and especially
such as deale with persons of great and
highest qualitie, herein stand bound with chiefest
regard. Admit they should incurre but onely
the detection of slaunder, which is so cōmon

in this vnhappy age, when wee see that blamed
which is most modestly doone, and the contrary
to passe with commendation: may not this
then serue as a liuely touch or feeling, to admonish
such to render a publique account, of the
principall carriage of their liues? What I haue
determined to doo at this present, shall be some
discourse of mine owne: to the ende it may bee
truely knowne, what causes haue mooued mee,
after so long rest, and euen among the bonds of
some particular promises, to take these Armes
for defence of the Townes of Sedan & Iametz,
auncient frontiers of the Realme, against such
as haue assayled them.
            To many it is well knowne, in what miserable
captiuitie I haue beene deteyned the space of
fiue yeares and a halfe, by those who haue gotten
little praise for such rigour, wherein happily
I had longer continued, if they had not prooued
the vncertaintie of humane affaires: but
God is to bee bountifully blessed for this bitter
aduersitie, wherein I haue learned that, which
the most sweetest prosperitie would haue made
me misconceiue.
            The time beeing nowe come of my deliuerance,
I was taken foorth of my darke habitation,
to be brought to the place, where I receiued
the sentence of my libertie: but with conditions,
no lesse hard then mine imprisonment had

beene: notwithstanding I accepted them ioyfully,
in respect they surceased my long heauines.
I must say then, that the first cause of this so
desired benefit, was the bountie of God, who
now remembred mine affliction. The second,
the prisoner that I tooke, for whome I was exchaunged,
and who was of greater price then I.
And the third, the bond of one hundred thousand
crownes made by the King of Nauarre on
his goods in Flaunders, for the assurance of my
promises, not to beare Armes against the King
of Spayne in his countryes.
            This accomplished, I was deliuered, & then
I went towards Nancy, to make proofe of satisfiyng
certaine other points, which are couched
within mine Articles: to vnderstand if my Lord
the Duke of Lorraine, (ouer and beside the aforenamed
suretie) would be likewise bo
                  •
               nd for
me to the King of Spaine, in the said sum of one
hundred thousand crownes, & if he fayled, one
Prince of Allemaigne, or one Canton of the
Zwitzers. That I should also dēliuer my second
Son, to be one yeere as an hostage in his Court.
Beside, that the said Duke, & my Lord the Duke
of Guyse, shuld promise by writing a part, signed
with their hands: that I should not beare Armes
against the King of Spayne. In all these bondes
these Spaniards boūd me, as if they had receiued
occasiō of feare, that so slender a Solidiour as my

selfe, should come soone or late to hinder the
course of their victory: from which thought I
was most furthest off, for my desire stretched no
otherwise, than to gohome to my house, there to
repose my selfe, and giue God thanks for sauing
me from the shadow of death and the graue.
            Beeing arriued in Lorrayne, I spake with the
said Princes, to know if they would fauour mee
with this bond: whereto they very liberally cō
               discended:
prouided, that his most Christian
Maiestie agreed thereto. To him I went, and
could not obtaine his consent, except I would
promise him, that I would not enter Armes
without his expresse commaundement: this I
likewise graunted. Soone after he wrote to my
Lord the Duke of Lorrayne, that he might answere
for me to the King of Spayne: which hee
did, vnder these conditions, that I should bee
bound to him in a hundred thousand crownes,
with all my goodes, as a gage of his bond, for
the satisfaction: afterward, I should promise, not
to beare Armes against him, nor his estate. Like
promise I made him also, in case it went not against
my dutifull obeysance, of seruice and fidelitie
to the Crowne of Fraunce, and to the
King my Souereigne Lord. All these matters
ended, I departed from the saide Princes, hauing
beene very curteously entertayned by thē,
and then I went to Geneua, where I made my

choise of aboade, during the time of this miserable
warre. At the ende of two moneths, my
Sonne, whome I sent for from the King of Nauarre,
came to me, and I sent him in hostage to
Nancy, here he was gently intreated while he
there remayned.
            See heere successiuely the pure truth of all my
promises and bonds, and the causes of my libertie
discouered in due order. Which I haue
doone, to the ende that many, who are ouer hastie
in censuring the actions of others, either by
humours, ignorance, or bad information: should
be better aduised, & not to condemne me without
they first had heard me, as I know diuers already
haue doone, within more than six moneths:
at which time (with all their vigilancie)
they could not reprooue me of any speeches,
that happily might be thought woorthie reprehension.
But these good censurers doo not in the
meane while forethinke themselues, howe they
rashly attempt in causes against their Souereigne
Lord, and likewise against their natiue
countrey.
            In sooth, if I would haue shrunke from my
wordes, beeing pressed thereto by mine owne
particular interests, I should haue beene an
handsome subiect. As for the straunge Armie
raysed, if I would haue gone therin, I could haue
had no meane place or authoritie: seeing that

Monsieur de Buillon, and my cheefest frendes,
who were imploied in the conduct therof, called
me, and would haue deferred more to me, then
I could well couet or desire. But I excused my
selfe, and would not outgo the limits of my promises,
because I could not with credit doo it.
And many Gentlemen yet liuing, who were at
the preparation of the said Army, knowe, that I
went so farre as Strasbrough, through the instāt
intreaties then made to me, by letters from the
Lord of Buy, that I should parle with my Lords
the Dukes of Lorraine and Cazimire, chiefly
with Monsieur de Segur, to compound for their
passage thorow Lorrayne, and that all had agreed
(because it was giuen mee) that I should bee
admitted to this busines, where the one nor the
other should be circumuented. But being there
arriued, & not finding the letters of the Princes
before named, and contrariwise, seeing on both
sides courage enkindled, and hatred increase,
the Armies on foote, and their swordes ready
drawne, I thought that the time for me to bee
imployed was past, and agreement should now
be subiect to obseruation: wherefore I would
not wrap my selfe betweene these two tempests,
least my reputation should bee impeached by
fortune. And I did write to my Lord the Baron
of Ausonuille, who was then at Phaltz-bourgh,
the cause that then did withhold me.
            
               Within a while after the saide Army beeing
ouerthrowne, more through themselues then
the strength of the contrary part, the remainder
driuen backe towards the Alpes, and Monsieur
de Bouillon, who was the chiefe, ouerwearyed
with so great trauayle, came to rest himselfe at
Geneua, where an exceeding feuer tooke holde
on him, whereof he dyed ten dayes after. And
being yet in perfect memory, he disposed himselfe
to make his testament, whereby (among other
things) he ordayned, that his chiefe countries
should remaine vnder the protection and
seruice of the Crowne of Fraunce, and desired
that his Maiestie would maintaine them vnder
such conditions, as they had beene in former
times. And after he had named Monsieur de
Montpensier tutour and gouernour of Madamoiselle
de Bouillon his sister, whom he left his
sole and onely heyre: he charged me also with
her wardship of her chiefe countries, with power
there to vse and commaund. Which I accepted,
for the desire I had to be imployed in
matters profitable to the Realme, & forthwith
I went into Allemaigne, to passe thence to Sedan.
But being aduertised, that my Lord the
Duke of Lorraine had brought his siege before
Iametz, I staied, and that for twoo reasons: The
first, because I would not trauayle alone in danger
of so many armed men, and loose my selfe

against my will. The other, seeing the said Duke
had begun this warre contrary to the opinion
of many, and of my selfe likewise: I should bee
thought (in respect of what I had promised)
scant maister of my sences, to goe cast my selfe
downe headlong, and so with the councell of
my Lords the Duke Cazimire & Deux-ponts,
and other my good freendes, I embraced the
way of negotiation, rather then that of force.
            Beeing then returned to Geneua, I sent to
his Maiestie, to aduertise him of my charge, and
how my intent stretched to the benefite of his
seruice, hoping hee would not misconceiue of
mine enterprise: humbly desiring his highnes,
to wish my Lord the Duke of Lorrayne, not to
whet his anger vpon an innocent ward, and to
forbeare to touch Sedan and Iametz, frontiers
of his Realme. He wrote to me againe, that he
would send the Lord de Rieux, to cause the
siege to be raysed from Iametz, and that Monsieur
de Montpensier should goe with speed to
Sedan, for the better disposing of the affayres
there: beside, he thought good that I should
not need to goe, because order should be taken
by these meanes. For the rest, hee commended
mine intent, and would assure himselfe of my
vndoubted affection to his seruice, & the generall
good of my country, whose safetie I would
euermore seeke by all lawfull meanes.
            
               This letter receyued, I paused thereon, for the
opinion I held, that the commendation, intreaty,
and prouision of so great a King, would suffise to
remedie a mischiefe that pressed so farre. But hauing
attended for the space of three moneths, &
seene that the wordes of his Maiestie were disdained,
and that one of the Townes was now to
be defended from a furious assault that the other
likewise would go forth in Armes, against them
that made their fieldes voyde and desolate, and
that my Lord the Duke of Montpensier could
not (for good considerations) proceed so farre
as to these places: Seeing likewise (on the other
side) many good Frenchmen, and others of the
Religion, not onely to write to mee, but to tell
me, that in respect of the charge I had taken on
me, I should receyue reproche, and bee accused
to haue fayled in honour, and against the fidelitie
I owe to my Souereigne Lord: if I would
not trauayle with hand and heart, for the conseruation
of these oppressed Townes, which
were vnder the protection of the King, & how
I might sufficiently behold, that against effects
of such puissance, it were in vaine to bring vnnecessary
helps, but rather matter of like consequence.
This being vndoubtedly true, I should
so acknowledge: yet I imagined, that lawfull
and reasonable proceedinges, ought to
outgoe such as are gouerned by violence, especially

for mine owne particular regard.
            In this sort I prepared my selfe to go into Allemaigne,
where I discoursed with certaine
Princes, freendes to this Realme: to see by what
meanes they could warrant, that which it seemed
the Frenchmen would loose, and strangers
occupy. They pleaded that this difference arose
on small occasion, and could no way be so boldly
decided as by Armes: since that to a Countie
of Monbelliard, who had receyued as great an
iniury, they would deny to make satisfaction.
Now as eche one knowes, that the Allemaigne
iron will not bee mooued without a straungers
golde, and that the one being not seene to glister
aboundantly, the other stands still without motion
of stir
                  •
               ing: This made mee resolute to trauaile
to Sedan, which I perfourmed, passing ouerthwart
Lorrayne and Fraunce, with no small
store of daungerous perils, and beeing there arriued,
I vnderstood the truth of the state of Iametz,
(the defenders of which place are woorthie
great prayse) which rather stood in neede
of fauour, then now to come to the sharpest
tearmes: yet was I aduised to attempt the likeliest
and sweetest course, causing to be proposed
to my Lord of Ansonuille, a most auncient and
honorable stay in actions of hostilitie, for certaine
moneths, as well to win time in woorking
on the entraunces, made by Madame of Aramberg,

neere kinswoman to Madamoyselle of Bouillon:
as also the better to dispose affections
in seeking the means of agreement, rather then
to follow these threatnings of ruine. These conditions
would be no lesse for the assaulters, then
for the people assayled, nor of lesse honour to either:
But they hauing examined them, would
neither make any account thereof, or answere,
happily for some opinion they holde, in staying
on their aduauntage and hope, rather then in
their consenting: which will be an occasion, to
giue a long course to the euils that this little
warre hath ingendred, and daily will do. Which
to preuent, Monsieur de la Ferté, who hath often
come to Sedan about busines, shall be witnesse,
how I haue twise sayde vnto him, that my
Lord the Duke of Lorrayne shall gather no
great fruite by this warre: little gayne shall hee
get, and that vncertaine, but store of charge
and trauayle certaine. The Towne of lametz,
which yet resisteth, hath cost him foure times
more then it is woorth: yet should not hee set
himselfe agaynst an Orphane Princesse, who
demaundeth nothing but peace, whereto shee
will attaine by dilligent search: otherwise her
country must suffer, and in such sort as it were to
begin agayne. As could I declare vnto him
by what meanes, and hee should bee suffised
therewith, when I speake that which is true,

rather as a seruant to his deserts then an enemy,
and as one that loueth quiet, vnwilling to vse
my Armes against him. This likewise I willingly
alleadge, to the ende it may be knowne,
that I haue attempted all courteous wayes not
to enter Armes: as well for the good of both
partyes, as alfo for mine owne contentment.
Certainly, I am very desirous, not to bee constrayned
to drawe my swoord, which for these
eight yeares hath continued idle, and chiefly against
a Prince, to whome I finde my selfe beholding.
Yet (in my iudgement) he is brought
into these newfoūd conceits, by the bad & euill
disposed councell of others, rather then by his
owne naturall disposition: but I may not goe
contrary to that which reason willeth, who
commandeth me when question is made of two
bondes, to preferre the cause of nature before
that of getting, because it is a matter most honest,
and among these acquisitions, after I haue
iudged of the difference betweene them, I will
stay my selfe vpon the strongest.
            Among all Nations, naturall dutie hath euermore
beene, and yet is most commendable, and
the first (after God) is that wherewith wee regard
our country, which comprehendeth in it
all the other, and bindeth vs so straitly to her,
that it is (as it were) sacrilege, to fayle in the due
performance therof; none of all the other may

be equalled with this. As for the fathers & mothers
themselues, who haue giuen life to their
children, when the father shall be imployed in
the right of his country: they must be constrained
to holde him excused, howsoeuer deuoted
in affection he be to them. Much more ought
such doo, as holde any one bound onely for a
good turne or a simple promise: for it is a necessary
consequence, that a greater matter must be
preferred before a lesse. I haue heere before declared,
that which I promised to my Lord the
Duke of Lorrayne, but yet with an exception,
which although it had not beene made, ought
euermore to take place, and I thinke that few
people would make doubt thereof, (albeit wee
lyue in such a season, wherin all things are debated
and disguised) that the dutie to the Prince,
must go before that is due to any benefactour:
who happily may say; Seeing I haue beene the
cause of your libertie, why will you offend me
with Armes, which you promised not to beare
against me? Truly I cannot deny, that my Lord
the Duke of Lorrayne hath ayded mee to defend
the same more entiere and happy: but I
should not haue recouered the same (which I
speake not as ingratefull for his good turne) by
the three meanes that I haue rehearsed, before
hee bound mee to him: not hauing so small a
thing to promise in preiudice of my present

bond, whereto nature, the lawes, and men of
vertue, will that I cause it to holde due degree.
            I know well it will bee obiected to mee, that
the party which I make to sound so high, ought
to enter into consideration, to see what is attempted
against it: which I would with all my
heart. But what is this then, to assayle Sedan &
Iametz, Townes vnder the protection, frontiers
of the Realme, faithfull to the Crowne, peopled
with Frenchmen? is not this to touch Fraunce
it selfe? Truely a Romane Ambassadour that returned
from Hanniball, sayd most well & wisely
before the Senate, that the Carthaginians in
beating of the walles of Sagunt, a confederate
Cittie, battered the walles of Rome. And with
as good right it may be sayde, when with their
Cannons they beat on Iametz, they might doo
the like against them of Paris.
            I haue beene patient so long time, that I haue
iust occasion to feare, least I bee reprooued of
sloth and breach of fayth (hauing a lawfull calling
for the defence of the said Towns) if I should
longer deferre to imploy my selfe in their safegard
from ruine. King Frauncis the great durst
hazard his person and forces, not to haue the
dishonor of the losse of Landrecy, a little towne
that was not of his Realme, but gotten in the
countrey of another. The like did the deceassed
Duke of Guyze, for the defence of Metz, at the

new entraunce thereof into the protection of
Fraunce. Should I then fayle, that am but a
most simple subiect, yet retayned for those that
are incorporate with vs, and where there is not
one house, but the Flowers de Luces floorish
therein?
            I shall bee accused as ingratefull towards my
benefactour, because I beare these Armes against
him: but it is in such a defence as I may
not forsake, without beeing conuinced of more
great ingratitude towardes my Countrey and
King.
            You haue broken (saith one) your promise,
which vpon so woorthy a good turne you hartily
plighted. If things were in like estate as when
I promysed, I should bee restrayned within my
bounds: but one hath chaunged them, in dooing
that which I haue shewed, and vnlawfull
beside to be doone.
            Let vs now come vnto the second bond, that
the Tutour is to procure the best for his warde,
and ayd her so farre as need shall require. The
Ciuilians holde thus much, that they place this
next after the father to his owne childe: and will
that the officer shall run to the maintenance of
his wardes right, so soone as to that belongeth
to his Prince. This also reason requireth: the
one being more destitute of a stay or helpe, then
the other, and this bond fulfilled, is so much the

more of force, in that it is ioyned next vnto
that of nature. So that I am not to be thought
woorthy of blame, if I haue preferred this before
the other vnto my Lord the Duke of Lorrayne:
namely in this respect, because it is to
defend, and not to assayle, the defence beeing
more iust then the offence: seeing also, that
this charge was deferred to mee, before my
Lord of Lorrayne assayled Madamoyselle de
Bouillon.
            And that which hath fortifyed me in this resolution,
is in hauing examined the cause of
the warre, I finde that the assaulter hath very
slender right to doo so: for if it were about any
auncient difference, hee ought then to shewe
his titles, and to haue them disputed by reason.
If hee haue proceeded on any iuiurie receyued
by the deceassed Lord of Bouillon: why dooth
he not as much to the King of Nauarre, to the
Allemaigns, Zwitzers & Frenchmen, who haue
all sacked and burned within the countrey of
Lorraine? It is not reasonable, that this little estate
should satisfie for a common domage.
            Ought wee not rather imitate that course,
that serued for the wrongs doone to the Countie
of Mont-belliart, to wit, a freendly composition,
which was proposed for feare of the Allemaigns:
who notwithstanding euermore denied
helpe to this ward, left desolate in sight of euery

one? In meane while, God will woorke for the
oppressed, and succour them in time needfull.
            In fine, it is in vayne to flatter, but rather
speake the truth: doth it not appeare, that this is
for the dissipatiō of the realme, when they make
such shouldering, where the one side is perceyued,
& the other masqued? What is this but as
the Parisians did, and as the attempt against Bolongne
sometime, and on the Marquisate of Saluce
not long since? Is not this rather to run after
a pray, then it can any way seeme for the
Kings seruice, when they pill and poll, & make
such outrage? I will auouch that his wisedome
is great, & yet greater is the constraint that one
maketh of his will, in pressing it to resolue on a
war, wherein depends the ruine of France especially
in one that hath a spirite of sweetnes and
peace. In this case, what ought an honest minded
man, couragious, and a louer of his country
doo? euen to imitate the auncient Frenchmen,
braue heads & Captaines, as the Bastard of Orleaunce,
the Hire and Poton, they seeing King
Charles the seuenth to despaire of his affaires,
being assailed with most puissant enemies in the
very entrailes of his Realme, whome he quietly
suffered, as vnable to remedie the same: yet
would not these (for all this) let fall their vnconquerable
hope, but with a feruēt affectiō would
venture thēselues in this imminēt dāger, to find

some meane to exempt the same. And as for the
apprehension of the present euill, some holde, it
may be that the King enclosed, will giue a commaundement
to his subiect, not to aid his estate
now perishing: shall this default bee an excuse
for the subiect? We owe loue, obeisance, subiection
and fidelitie to our King, who notwithstanding
may die: but wee owe so much to our
countrey as cannot dye.
            Truely I should be quit of my promise to his
Maiestie, not to beare Armes against his seruice
(albeit I must perseuer heerein, if I be vsed as an
enemy) seeing the horrible confusions that are
in the estate: for all is corrupted, force ruleth,
the lawes are without strength, and euen already
(by some) our houses are diuided, and our
liues prescribed, so that we haue no right of the
one or other. As for the roiall authoritie, in what
manner is it reuyled, despited by the people,
when butcheries shall be made of the subiects of
the Realme? Solon said, that in a diuision a good
Citizen ought not to stand still, but to take the
better parte, in respect of his bond to the commonwealth.
But our countrey is not onely diuided,
but ouerthrowne; not in perill, but already
lost. And in the middest of so great disorder, is
it wisedome to sit with our armes crosse folded,
when reason bids vs throw them abroad? Shall
I attend the rest of the misfortunes of the

Frenchmen, to depend on our warres, hauing
bowed their knees before the angry conqueror,
or before a straunger, to the end that afterward
I may receiue what Silla presented to his hoast
at Praeneste? This cannot bee doone but once,
vnwoorthy is it to doo it twise. But when I consider
things to come, in how miserable estate we
shall be, if God should call away our King, (to
whom I wish a long life, conioined with a iust &
peaceable raigne) wee should not suffer to rise
these factiōs of Burgundie and Orleance, which
now prepare themselues, the one to assaile, & the
other to defend: euen that will happen which is
publikely spoken, and the blind themselues may
see, that this warre begun, is rather for the state
then any Religion: but from what euill shall
we then escape free, and of what goodes shall we
not be depriued?
            Hatred, discord▪ spoyle, and these Allarmes,
            Crueltie, feare, fierce combats, & these Armes,
            Shall be our pastimes, &c.
            But now to escape these daungerous rockes,
let vs turne our selues to God, who sendes these
plagues for our incorrigible behauiour. Let vs
weepe for our countrey, and succour her in this
generall shipwracke: let vs euery one helpe to
saue her with our armes, and not with our legs,

according as the Romaine saide: who forsooke
Caesars part being his benefactour, to embrace
that of the common good.
            I pray God, that in this generall assembly of
the Estates, some one will craue remedie for our
insupportable euils: which may bee throughly
holpen by ceassing these Armes, and remaine incurable
by the continuance.
            This is an heretique that speaketh (some zealous
will say) beleeue them not, rather account
them blasphemers. My Lords, be not offended
at these wordes, which may serue you to colour
the warre you would prolong. Truely I am no
heretique, for I will liue and die in this excellent
and renowned fayth of the Romaine Church, a
member of the Catholike: euen the same that
Saint Paul (who was the first Bishop thereof)
instituted, as it appeareth by his sacred registers.
But shall I tell you who he is that wee ought to
account an heretique, in these times wherin we
liue? It is the man that desireth not any peace
or concord in the estate: that wisheth the chāge
thereof: that strengtheneth himselfe with the enemies
of the Realme: that expecteth the fall
thereof, because he might gather the pieces;
who hath equitie and holines in his mouth, and
iniustice and hypocrisie in his hart. On the contrary,
the true Catholique is hee that pursueth
peace and vnanimitie: that suffereth paciently

the temporall gouernment established by God
ouer him: that holdes in suspition those straungers
who would procure our ruine: that would
haue the estate preserued: and that sheweth in
all his actions how he loueth order, iustice, and
pietie.
            For conclusion, I will loue my country which
hath brought me vp, I will reuerence my Souereigne
Lord, although he would pursue mee, I
will defend my libertie, goodes, and life, if any
would take them from me. I will aid the French
shamefully afflicted, in as much as I may honestly
doo, I will garde my warde, as the lawes
commaund mee, and I will oppose my selfe against
straungers (whatsoeuer particular bond
they hold of mee) who would against all right
possesse themselues with the Towns of the
Realme, for I am a true Frenchman.
Inough is said, the time requires
I should doo it, in respect
it is followed truely
and iustly.
            FINIS.
         
      
   