
      
         
            
            
            THE
SECOND PART
OF THE FRENCH
ACADEMIE.
            VVherein, as it were by a naturall hiſtorie
of the bodie and ſoule of man, the creation,
matter, compoſition, forme, nature, profite and vſe of all
the partes of the frame of man are handled, with
the naturall cauſes of all affections, vertues and vices,
and chiefly the nature, powers, workes and immortalitie
of the Soule.
            By PETER DE LA PRIMAVDAYE Eſquier, Lord
of the ſame place and of Barre.
            
            And tranſlated out of the ſecond Edition, which was
reuiewed and augmented by the Author.
            AT LONDON
Printed by G.B. R.N. R.B.
1594.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVrable
Sir IOHN PVCKERING knight,
Lorde Keeper of the great Seale of England,
T. B. wiſheth increaſe of honour here, to the glory
of the Higheſt, and endleſſe happines with the
Saints in the worlde to come.
            
               HAuing finiſhed (Right honourable)
the tranſlation of the ſecond part of
the French Academie, and pondering
with my ſelfe, vnto whoſe Patronage
I might commendand committ
the ſame, as it were into a ſafe
Hauen to be preſerued from the tempeſtuous
and ſurging waues of this
Sea-like worlde, it came to my minde vpon ſundry good
conſiderations, that your Honour might chalenge the ſame
as a thing that by all right appertaineth vnto your ſelfe.
For firſt, calling to my remembraunce, that the principall
ſcope aymed at by this Author in the penning of his book,
was to vphold the glorious essence of God againſt all contradiction
of Atheiſts, and that by the viewe of his diuine
woorkes in the creation of the bodie and ſoule of man, I
preſently concluded with my ſelfe, that the defence of this
poynt againſt that viperous broode, was a woorke beſt beſeeming
the ſacred ſeate of Magiſtracie, and ſuch as for

their places repreſenting the perſon of the ſupreme Iudge,
wore by the infallible worde of trueth adorned with his
owne titles, Pſal. 82. 1. Exod. 21. 6. Nowe foraſmuch as by
the ſpeciall prouidence of God it hath pleaſed her royall
Maieſtie to aduaunce you to that ſeate of magiſtracie, next
vnder her Highneſſe, in which you are placed, it ſeemed
vnto mee, that I ſhoulde after a ſort offer wrong vnto your
Honour, if I did not recommend vnto it the defence of the
higheſt ruler, whoſe perſon you doe in a higher degree
then others repreſent. Secondly, when I conſidered with
my ſelfe that this generation of Earth-wormes, which
place nature being but a creature in the roome of the Creatour,
and denie the immortalitie of ſoules after this life,
doe therein as much as lieth in them labour to put out the
light of their owne conſcience, which yet could neuer be
wholly darkened in the mindes of anie, no not of the moſt
deſperate Atheiſt that euer was, I thought it moſt conuenient
to craue, that your Honours lawfull protection in
the behalfe of this Booke, and of my ſmall paines taken
therein for the benefite of my countrey, might bee as it
were a Sub paena ſerued vpon the whole rabble of theſe deuils
incarnate, to cauſe them to appeare at that high court
of Conſcience, in which you enioy the chiefeſt place next
vnder her ſacred Maieſtie, there to make anſwere to the
humble complaint of Conſcience, vnto which they offer
ſuch notorious violence. A third reaſon that moueth mee
to become an humble petitioner, that this booke may be
gathered vnder the wings of your Honours ſafe defence,
is the conſtant report of your great care, that none be intertained
into your retinue and familie, whoſe hearts are
poſſeſſed with a liking of that Antichriſt of Rome, within
the compaſſe of whoſe iuriſdiction, this dangerous infection
of Atheiſme beganne firſt in this latter age of the
worlde to breake foorth, and hath nowe ſet footing euen
in thoſe countries, from whence by a generall conſent of
all Eſtates it hath beene baniſhed long agoe. Let Florence

teſtifie this to all poſteritie ſucceeding, where that monſter
Machiauel firſt beganne to budde, who hath nowe
ſpredde abroade his deadly branches of Atheiſme ouer
the moſt countries in Chriſtendome, inſomuch as fewe
places but are ſo well acquainted with his doctrine, that
the whole courſe of mens liues almoſt euery where, is
nothing elſe but a continuall practiſe of his preceptes.
And yet Machiauel beeing Secretarie to that Florentine
eſtate, and employed altogether in ciuill affayres,
may ſeeme in ſome ſort inexcuſable, if hee bee compared
with manie of thoſe vnholy Fathers of Rome, who
making open profeſſion to bee the Ring-leaders (forſooth)
of the whole worlde to bring them vnto GOD,
were plunged irrecouerably in this bottomleſſe gulfe of
Atheiſme. Pope Leo the tenth a Florentine borne, was
ſo farre from confeſſing Chriſt Ieſus to bee the Sonne of
God with Peter, whoſe Vicar hee woulde ſeeme to haue
beene, that hee bluſhed not openly to deride the doctrine
of the Goſpel, and to ſcoffe at Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe
the Authour thereof. For vpon a time as Cardinall
Bembo by occaſion cited vnto him a place of Scripture
concerning the gladde tydings of ſaluation, this
ſonne of perdition moſt blaſphemouſly replied vpon him
in this manner, Howe profitable this fable of Chriſt hath
beene to vs and to our crewe is well knowen to all ages. A moſt
horrible ſaying, and ſuch as coulde not proceede but from
a flatte Atheiſt: of whom alſo it is reported, that he maintained
there was neither Heauen nor Hell after this life.
Birds of the ſame feather were Silueſter the ſecond, Benedict
the ninth, Gregorie the ſeuenth, Iohn the three & twentieth,
Alexander the ſixt, Clement the eight, Paulus the thirde,
with diuers others of that rabble, of whome ſome vtterly
renounced God and betooke themſelues to the Deuill,
ſome denyed the immortalitie of the ſoule, ſome taught
moſt damnable hereſies, and all of them turned the
grace of our God into wantonneſſe, denying God the

onely Lorde, and our Lorde Ieſus Christ, Iude verſe 4.
It woulde require a long time to anatomize their ſeuerall
liues, and your Honours waightie affaires in behalfe of
this Church and Common-wealth will ſuffer no long diſcourſe:
in regarde whereof I am conſtrained in few words,
and yet in moſt humble wiſe to recommend my ſelfe and
theſe my poore labours to bee ſhrowded vnder your Lordſhips
ſafe protection, moſt heartily crauing at the handes of
the higheſt, ſo to guide your Honor in the managing
of that great charge he hath called you vnto, as
may make moſt both for his own glory here,
and for your bleſſed and endleſſe rewarde
elſe-where.
[*⁎*]
            
               Your Honors
moſt addicted
T. B.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER
            
               Grace and Peace.
            
            
               
                  SENECA the Philoſopher reporteth (gentle
Reader) that the looking glaſſe was firſt inuented
to this end, that man might vſe it as a
meane to know himſelf the better by. Now beſides
that in a glaſſe wee may attaine to ſome
kinde of knowledge of our ſelues when wee take
a viewe of our owne countenance, and of the lineaments
& proportion of our bodies outwardly,
Socrates applied the ſame to a further vſe
for the inſtruction of manners. For as Apuleius writeth of him, he earneſtly
perſwaded his Auditors to looke often into a glaſſe, and to beholde themſelues
therein, to this intent, that he which thought himſelfe beautifull and
faire, might take occaſion thereby to auoyde all kinde of deformitie in maners
and conuerſation, whereby that beautie of his woulde be greatly blemiſhed:
and that whoſoeuer perceiued by the glaſſe any defect of comelineſſe
in his countenance, might labour ſo much the more ſeriouſly by the helpe of
vertue and inward graces of the mind to recompence the outward wants &
imperfections of his body. In which reſpect this Booke may moſt fitly be reſembled
to a glaſſe, as that which affoordeth vnto vs both theſe vſes in farre
more excellent maner then can be performed by any looking glaſſe how rare
and ſurpaſſing ſoeuer it be. For euen the beſt of that kind doth repreſent vnto
our eyes only ſo much of the ſurface of our own bodies as is directly before
it, but as for the hinder parts we take no view of them by a glaſſe, much leſſe
is it able to giue vs a ſight of the internall members of our bodies, wherby we
may attaine to any profitable knowledge of them. But if wee take a diligent
view of this booke, and with the eies both of body and mind looke intentiuely
vpon the ſame, it will in moſt euident maner repreſent vnto vs not only the
outward members of mās body both before and behind & on euery ſide, but
euen the moſt hidden and inward parts thereof, which otherwiſe before life
haue left the body cannot poſſibly be ſeene of any man. Here may you behold
all the bones as it were the frame and timberworke of mans body, yea the very
foundation vpon which all the reſidue of the building is laide. Heere may
you ſee the exquiſite frame and compoſition of the head, as it were the vpper
lodging of this houſe, the ſeuerall ventricles of the braine, as ſo many ſundrie
chambers for the intertainement of the Animal ſpirits: the ſinguler workmanſhippe
of the eyes, as of the lights and windowes appertaining to this pallace
of mans body: the matter and fourme of the humors in the eyes, as it
were the chriſtall glaſſe ſet in the windowes, together with the eye-liddes as

caſemēts to opē & ſhut, to receiue in or keepe out the light as need requireth:
beſides the eyebrowes as penthouſes to defend thoſe windowes from the violence
of ſtormy weather. What ſhould I ſpeake of the eares, as of high watchtowres
whereby warning is giuen to the internal ſenſes ſo often as any aduerſary
noyſe giueth notice of enemies approching to annoy this goodly caſtle?
The mouth is it not as the doore that receiueth in all kind of prouiſion meete
for the reparation and maintenance of this great building, as occaſion ſerueth?
It is a world to thinke what excellent workmanſhippe appeareth in the
voyce & tongue of man, and what ſinguler vſes it hath very requiſite for the
perfection of this piece of worke. Now if we ſhall deſcend and enter into the
contemplation of the breaſt, as of the middle ſtory of this building, & conſider
with what goodly houſhold ſtuffe thoſe roomes are adorned, who is able either
with tongue to vtter, or with heart to cōceiue, the rare deuiſes the pretious
Iewels, the ſingular art there to be foūd? What an exceeding faire roome
is the dining chamber of the heart, the receptacle of the wil & affections, the
ſhop wherein the vital ſpirits are wrought, and the forge from whence is deriued
that fire and heate which warmeth the whole houſe? And leaſt this
fire ſhould breake forth into ſuch a flame as might bring perill of burning to
this goodly building the chamber of the heart is dayly & continually refreſhed
with coole blaſtes proceeding from the lungs, as from an outward roome
that is built round about a great part thereof. Here alſo is to be ſeenethe
Artery, which as a liuely conduite carieth forth continually moſt chriſtall
ſtreams of vital ſpirits into euery roome and office of the houſe. Betwixt this
ſecond ſtory and the third is laid the Midriffe as a flore that maketh a ſeparation
betweene the inſtruments of the vitall parts being the implements of
that middle roome, and the naturall inſtruments of the neather ſtory which
ſerue both for the vpholding & maintenance of the whole building, and alſo
conteineth in it matter for the erecting of a new frame, which is to ſtand after
the former is come to his ful period. In this third ſtory or partition is to
be ſeene the ſtomacke, which being as it were the kitchin of the body receiueth
in at the doore of the mouth al ſuch meats & drinks as are requiſite for
the keeping of it in ſufficient reparations, & for the defence of it againſt two
mighty enemies Hunger and Thirſt, who by continuall vndermining can of the
ſame, la
                  •
                or to lay it euen with the ground. And becauſe nothing can be prepared
in the kitchin without heate, & the maintenāce therof, beſides the natural
heat of the ſtomack it is cōpaſſed on the right ſide with the liuer, on the
left with the ſpleene, behind with the muſcles of the chinebone, before with
the kal, aboue it hath the hart & midriffe, and within it are ſundry vital ſpirits,
from al which as frō ſo many ſeueral fires, it receiueth heat for the better
dreſſing and concocting of that which is conueyed into it. Neither are the
gutters & ſinks neceſſarily belonging to euery houſe, wāting to the perfection

of this beautifull building of mans body: as may appeare by the guttes and other
partes of baſer ſeruice, without which it is not poſſible that this frame
ſhould long continue. Now beſides the ſingular delight and pleaſure, which
this naturall knowledge of our owne bodies yeeldeth vnto our minds, the profite
& commodity that iſſueth here from is great & manifold. For firſt in regard
of our ſelues if we were throughly acquainted with the Anatomy of
our bodies, with the ſubſtance and ſituation, with the forme and qualities,
with the vſes and offices of euery part and member of the ſame, it is out of all
queſtion, that by the knowledge therof, we might both preuent many diſeaſes
and infirmities, which through want thereof would ſeaſe vpon vs, and being
ouertaken with any, might recouer our ſelues more ſ
                  •
               eedly by a wiſe and
skilfull cariage of our ſelues according to the ſame. Neither is it layd vpon
euery one to haue ſo much skill as is requiſite for him that maketh profeſſion
of that art towards all men, but onely ſo farre forth as may ſerue for the p
                  •
               eſeruation
of his owne health, eyther in imploying the talent of his priuate
knowledge, or in yeelding himſelfe more readily, vnto the wiſe direction of
the skilfull Phyſicion. Secondly,Prou. 6. 6. as Salomon ſendeth vs to the induſtrious
nature of the Piſmire to learne diligence and forecaſt in our calling, ſo
the Apoſtle taketh occaſion by the varietie of members in one body,1. Cor. 12. to reprehend
two ſorts of people in the Church of Corinth, both ſuch as were
caried away with enuy towards their ſuperiours, themſelues being indued
with meaner gifts, and thoſe alſo who being furniſhed with more excellent
ornaments of Gods ſpirite, were puffed vp with pride in themſelues, and with
diſdyne towards others of fewer graces. And this being the ſecond vſe
that ariſeth from this naturall knowledge of our bodies, offreth it ſelfe in
moſt plentifull manner to be obſerued by vs, in euery part and member of
the ſame. What a notable leſſon of good neighbourhood are we taught by the
view & contemplation of mans face? For, as many ſeueral members of different
vſes are ſo artificially knit and linked together in one face, that not one
of them is any impediment or hinderance, vnto another in the execution of
his office: ſo we are inſtructed thereby how to cary our ſelues towardes our
neighbours, euery one to containe himſelfe within the limits of his ſeuerall
calling, & not to incroch one vpon another as the maner of a great many is,
that are not contented with their owne eſtate. Againe, in the ſecond ſtory of
this frame when wee conſider the lungs, which are the bellowes of the
voyce, are placed ſo neere the heart that they compaſſe it rounde about,
are not all men thereby admoniſhed, that their ſpeach is but the interpreter
of the heart, & the meſſenger therof? that the mouth muſt like a good
ſeruant attend vpon the heart, & vtter nothing but that which it receiueth
firſt frō the ſame? that no man ought to imitate the example of Hippolytus
in Euripides, who being admoniſhed of his Nurſe to remember his Oath,

made her this miſhapen anſwere, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : The tongue
hath ſworne, but the mind is vnſworne? As many hollow-hearted ſubiects
of late dayes behaued themſelues towads her Maieſtie, hauing rec
                  •
               iued a
diſpenſation ſo to doe from Pope Gregorie the thirteenth, whoſe goodly poſie
was thus ſet down in certaine tokens ſent to all ſuch as were to be reconciled
vnto him, Fili mi da mihi cor & ſufficit, My ſonne, giue me thy heart,
and i
                     •
                   ſufficeth. Which is all one as if he had ſaid ſweare and forſweare thy
ſelf if thou wilt, ſay thou art a good ſubiect go to the church, do whatſoeuer is
commanded thee, ſo thou let me haue thy heart, it skilleth not who haue thy
t
                  ••
               g, thy hande, & all the reſt of thy body. Elihu being of another ſpirit, was
better inſtructed in the knowlege of this neare coniunction, which naturally
ought to be betwene the heart and the tongue: and therefore ſpeaking to his
friend Iob he telleth him,Iob 33. 3. 
               that his words ſhould be in the vprightneſſe of
his heart. Whereas they that follow not this courſe of nature, but violently
draw their tongue to vtter that which is far diſagreeing from the meaning
of the heart, are branded for the ſame by the kingly Prophet Dauid with this
mark of infamy,Pſalme 12. 2. that they are men of two harts, or of a double heart, which
is monstrous in nature. The like inſtruction to this we are taught in that the
tongue is placed ſo neere vnder the braine, which is the ſeate of the mind &
vnderſtanding part of man, as it were at the feet of her ſchoolemaſter, to the
intent it ſhould not ſpeake vnaduiſedly and handouer head, as we vſe to ſay,
but with great deliberation, both in regard of the matter it ſelf to be deliuered
by ſpeech, and alſo of the circumſtances of time, place and perſons, which
are not to be neglected. For looke how preposterous it is to ſet the 
                  〈◊〉
                before
the horſe, ſo is it for the tongue to run before the wit, and to vtter it knoweth
not wel what, hauing receiued no direction from the ſame. And therfore Salomon
putting the name of heart for the minde and vnderſtanding part of
man ſaith,Prouer. 15. 28. and 16. 23. that a righteous mans heart meditateth or pondereth what
it ſhal anſwer: & that the heart of the wiſe guideth his mouth prudently.
Neither is it ſlightly to be paſſedouer, that euery one hauing two eies that
ſerue for ſeeing, two eares for hearing, two noſtrils for ſmelling, two feet for
going, hath yet but one ſoft & fleſhy tongue for ſundry vſes, & that tied fast
with ſtrings, & compaſſed about with gums, teeth, and lips, as with a double
wall, to teach men thereby, that the tongue being a very vnruly member, had
neede to be brideled & hemmed in on euery ſide, leaſt it breake forth into a
world of wickednes, and breed deſtruction to the whole body. Now if we look
into the middle ſtory of this building, there wee ſhall ſee that although the
heart be the fountaine of life, and the root of al the vital ſpirits that are diſperſed
into euery part and member of the body, yet it cannot want either the
coole refreſhing it hath from the lungs, or the veine-pip
                  •
               s proceeding from
the liuer, or the moouing ſtrings it hath from the ſinews, or the neceſſary defence

of the ribbes and bones, which as ſtrong bulwarks and rampires fence
it in on euery ſide. Euen ſo fareth it with the great and mighty men of this
worlde; who although in regarde of their power and authoritie ouer others,
they ſeeme to haue their liues and liuelihoodes at their becke and
commaundement, yet they are ſo farre from being able of themſelues to
maintaine their honours and high places without the neceſſary aide of the
inferiour ſort, as that without them they ſhoulde want wherewith to vpholde
their owne liues. But this appeareth yet more euident in the lower ſtory of
this frame, where the guttes and entrailes of the body as it were the ſinks of
an houſe haue their abiding. For although in regard of their vſe they may
ſeeme to be the baſest and most abiect partes of the body, yet if we conſider
the neceſſitie of them, we ſhall ſee that a man may better ſpare a principall
member of his body then the leaſt gut that is in his belly. Euen ſo fareth it
with the politike body of a cōmon wealth, in which the baſe Artiſan wil ſooner
be miſſed oftentimes then he that carrieth a greaterport, and is aduanced
to a higher roome and office in the ſame. A third vſe that may be made
of this booke as it were of a christal glaſſe worthy the looking into, is that ſingular
delight & pleaſure which may be reaped, by the view and conſideration
of the harmony betwene this terrestriall frame, & the celestiall habitation
of the heauens, when they are compared together. And as that famous
ſentence 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Know thy ſelfe, is reported of many to haue deſcended
from the heauens, ſo ſurely it wil be no ſmall furtherance to a man whereby
hee may attaine to a better knowledge of himſelfe, if hee ſeriouſly obſerue
what a great agreement there is betwene him and the heauens, whereunto
the very ſituation of his countenaunce lift vp towardes heauen, doeth as it
were leade him by the hand. Firſt therefore if wee conſider the originall of
them both,Gen. 1. 1, 26. wee finde in holy Writ, that as God is ſaide to haue made the
heauens in the beginning, ſo alſo it is there related, that not long after he
made man after his owne image and committed vnto him the ſoueraigntie
ouer the earth and ouer all liuing and moouing creatures vnder the cope of
heauen. Neither can it bee truely ſaid, that howſoeuer the Lord himſelfe
formed the firſt man, and breathed in his face the breath of life, yet ſince
that firſt creation hee hath not intermedled at all with the continual propagation
of mankinde, but hath ſurrendered all his working power into the
handes of nature, by whoſe powerfull operation the matter of mens bodies
is brought to this glorious perfection, which we ſee it hath when it firſt appeareth
in the worlde. For this is to ſpeake after the manner of meere naturall
men, that haue not as yet learned the language of Canaan, as is plaine
if wee call to minde what the kingly Prophet ſaieth vnto the Lorde, that it
was hee that poſſeſſed his reines,
               Pſal. 139. 13. 
               and that couered him in his mothers
wombe. Which alſo is more manifeſtly taught by that holy man Iob, who

confidently affirmeth,Iob 10. 10, 11. that it was the Lorde who had powred him out
as milke, and turned him to cruddes like cheeſe: that he had clothed
him with skinne and fleſh, and ioyned him together with bones and
ſinewes. Wherefore as it was the eternall God, who firſt turned the body of
the heauens into that roundnes, gathered the light into the bodies of the celeſtiall
lamps, fixed the ſtarres in the firmament, endued ech planet with his
ſeuerall motion, and clothed the inferior world with this glorious circumference:
ſo the ſame God at the firſt planted Adam as the roote of mankind,
and euer ſince hath cauſed his whole race & euery ſeuerall perſon as ſo many
branches to iſſue and grow out of his loynes. He turned the eies into that
roundneſſe: hee planted the eares as watch-towers in the vpper part of the
head: he placed the tongue, faſtned the teeth, ſtretched out the ſinewes? hee
watred the veines with blood, gaue maeſſines to the bones, and clothed the
fleſh with a fine skin as with a garment: he ſeuered the fingers and toes, cauſed
the feete to walke, and the hands to gripe. Hee, and none but he giueth
ſight to the eies, hearing to the eares, taste to the tongue, ſmelling to the noſtrilles,
and feeling to the fingers. Who but hee hath endued the lungs with
breathing, the heart with the ſpirits of life, the ſtomacke with concoction, the
liuer with the making of blood, and womens breastes with the making of
milke? Who hath faſhioned the inſtruments of hearing in the head like to a
hammer and an anuile, the heart in the body like a pyramide, and made the
ſpleene in ſubſtance like a ſpunge? Who hath couered the head with haire for
comelines, and boared the skin through with infinit pores for euacuation?
In a word, who hath giuen beauty to the whole body, and to each member his
ſeueral operation? What father, what mother, what workman hath wrought
theſe things, but the onely wiſe and immortall God? But to proceede, as the
ſunne, moone, and celeſtial ſtarres and planets haue a double motion, the one
common with the whole body of the heauens, the other proper and peculiar
according to the nature of euery ſeuerall ſtarre: ſo haue the partes of mans
body two motions, whereof the one dependeth of the motion of the whole body,
and is therefore vniuerſall, and the other is particular according to the
inſet nature and diſpoſition of each ſeuerall member. And to deſcend to a
more ſpeciall compariſon of one particular thing with an other, how doth the
diuerſe operations of the animal ſpirite (whoſe ſeate is in the braine) concurre
with the different workings of the ſunne in the firmament vpon the inf
                  •
               riour
bodies here below vpon the face of the earth? We ſee that through
the ſelfe-ſame reflexion of the ſun-beames, the clay is hardned, and the wax
made ſoft: that the light of the ſun is comfortable to ſome eies, whereas other
become worſe through the brightnes of the ſame, that it worketh otherwiſe
vpon a thicke body then vpon a thin, vpon a hard then vpon a ſoft, vpon a
plant then vpon a ſtone, vpon the earth then vpon the water. So the Animal

ſpirit being distributed into ſundry partr and members of the body worketh
diuerſly in each of them according to the diuerſe nature, compoſition, and
temperament of euery one. For being imparted to the eyes by the opticke ſinewes
it giueth ſight: to the eares by certaine paſſages, it woorketh hearing:
to the tongue by ſmall Nerues, it breedeth tasting: in a worde, being
disperſed into the muſcles and skinne by meanes of certaine ſinowie
threedes concurring in manner of a net, it infuſeth feeling throughout
the whole body. And as it often falleth out that wee are depriued of the
heate and light of the ſunne, when either ſome thicke cloude, or the bodie
of the Moone, or ſome ſuch thing is interpoſed and put betweene vs and
the ſame: ſo wee quickely ſee and feele the want of the Animall ſpirite,
when any thicke clammie humour, or winde, or melancholicke fumes, or
any ſuch impediment ſtoppe the paſſages and hinder the woorking thereof,
as is to be ſeene in them that are taken with the palſie, apoplexie, madneſſe,
numneſſe, and ſuch like. It is no leſſe delectable then ſtraunge to conſider
in howe many thinges the Sunne as it were the heart of the heauens, agreeth
with the heart of man, which may not vnfittely bee called the ſunne
of the body. For as the Sunne being the chiefest of the Planets occupieth
the middle place among thoſe wandering ſtarres, hauing the reſt as his
guarde both aboue and beneath him, to employ as neede requireth both
for their owne ſafetie and the good of the inferiour worlde: ſo the heart
being the chiefest member of the body, is ſeated in the middle ſtorie of the
ſame, hauing the other partes both aboue and beneath it and on euery ſide,
employing them according to their ſeuerall offices for the vpholding and
preſeruation of the whole frame. And as the Sunne is the ſtorehouſe of
that celestiall heate, which together with a diuine and quickening ſpirite
working in the bowelles of the earth maketh it a fruitfull Mother, and tender
Nurſe for the bringing foorth and preſeruation of all thinges: ſo the
heart is the harth from whence proceedeth all that inſet and natiue heate,
which being conueyed with the vitall ſpirite into euery member of the bodie
maketh them liuely and powerfull to perfourme thoſe dueties that are enioyned
them. Concerning the motion of the heart, as it agreeth with
the Sunne in this that they both haue a double motion, ſo in that the hea
                  •
               
being the firſt that receiueth life and motion, is the Originall of all motion
in the body, it reſembleth the whole heauens, of which dependeth all
naturall motions of inferiour bodies whatſoeuer. Againe, the two eies in
the head repreſent the two chiefe lights in the firmament. And as there are
both ſimple ſtars in the heauens, namely the Sunne, Moone, Saturne, Iupit
                  •
               r,
Mercurie with the rest, and alſo compound, as the Charles-waine, the
Lion, both the beares and others: ſo in the body there are ſimple or ſimilar
partes, as the ſinewes, bones, arteries, veines, &c. and compound partes,

as the heart, liuer, braine, ſtomacke, lungs and ſuch like. Moreouer, it is
certaine, that the Planets, howſoeuer in regarde of their moouing to and
fro they are ſaide to be wandring ſtarres, haue yet their certaine li
                  •••
               tes in
the heauens, especially in the Zodiacke, in which as in their dwelling houſes
they exerciſe thoſe naturall powers wherewithall they are endued, as the
proper manſion of the ſunne is in Leo, of the Moone in Cancer, of Saturne
in Capricorne, of Iupiter in Sagittarius, and ſo of the rest. In like
manner, although the body of man bee ſo framed, as that there is no one
part but it is ſeruiceable vnto all, yet there are certaine ſeuerall places appointed
as peculiar ſhoppes for each facultie to woorke in especially, as the
braine for the Animall ſpirite, the heart for the Vitall, and the liuer
for the Naturall: the gall is the receptacle for choler, the ſpleene for
Melancholy, the ſucking veines ſerue to purge the blood from the ſerous
ſubſtaunce of it, and ſo of the other powers and partes of the body. To conclude
this third vſe (for a day woulde not ſuffice to vtter all that might bee
ſpoken in this matter) as the Sunne by reaſon of the Annuall progreſſe
through the twelue ſignes, maketh a ſenſible diuiſion of the yeere into foure
partes, which haue their different ſeaſons and qualities if they fallout according
to the courſe of nature, and ſo likewiſe the Moone by her 
                  〈◊〉
                quartereth
the moneth accordingly: euen ſo farethit with the body of man in regarde
of his whole age, which being conſidered from the beginning vnto
the ending, agreeth very fitly to thoſe ſeuerall ſeaſons both for number
and praedominant qualities, if the threede of life bee not cutte off in the
midway by the raſour of death. For the body of man in his firſt age, which
is his childehoode, is moist and hote, and ſo is the former part of the yeere
called the Spring, as alſo the firſt part of the moneth from the new moone to
the ending of the first quarter. In the ſecond part of mans age, which is
his floriſhing and youthfull time, the body of man is hote and dry, ſuch as
are the qualities of the ſecond part of the yeere or Sommer ſeaſon, and of
that ſecond part of the moneth, which is from the firſt quarter to the full
Moone. Thirdly, the bodie of man in the third part of his age, commonly
called Mans-age, is colde and moist according to the dispoſition of
the third part of the yeere called Autumne, and of that ſeaſon of the
Moone, which is from the full to the laſt quarter. To conclude, in the
fourth and last quarter of mans age called Olde-age, his body is cold
                  •
                and
drie like to the Winter ſeaſon, and to the fourth part of the Moneth, which
is from the last quarter to the next newe Moone. Nowe as theſe three
former vſes of the Anatomie of mans bodie ſerue for the commoditie and
delight of man, ſo the fourth is the ſame that ought to be made, not onely of
the body of man, but as Salomon teacheth vs, of all the creatures both
in heauen and earth, and that is the glorie of God, For the Lord hauing

ſet in his viſible creatures euident markes of himſelfe and of his eternitie,
power goodnes,Rom. 1. 20. wiſedome and prouidence, as the Apoſtle teacheth, what remaineth
but that man for whoſe ſake & ſeruice the Lord created al things,
ſhould thereby acknowledge his ſoueraigne Lord, and returne vnto him all
glory, praiſe, and duetifull obedience for the ſame. That we ought to make
this vſe of the Anatomicall conſideration of our bodies, the kingly Prophet
Dauid teacheth vs moſt diuinely by his owne example, when after a view
taken of the admirable woorke of God in faſhioning him in his mothers
wombe, he break
                  •
               th forth into this ſaying,Pſalm. 139. 14. 
               I will praiſe thee, for I am fearefully
and wonderfully made: maruellous are thy works, and my ſoule
knoweth it wel. And ſurely vnles we tread in the ſteps of this worthy king,
& propo
                  ••
               d this as the ſcope of all our trauailes in ſearching out the ſeuerall
parts of our bodies, that God our Creatour and gratious preſer
                  •
               er may bee
praiſed, worſhipped, & feared thereby, we ſhall neuer know our ſelues aright,
and as we ought to doe, but rather ioyne with the most part of men who not
vſing their skill in this behalfe as a ladder to climbe vp by vnto God. ſticke
faſt in the very matter and forme of their bodies, ſo that many of them become
meère Naturalists and very Atheiſts. One especiall cauſe whereof, as

                  〈◊〉
                it is becauſe they lay not the ground and foundation of their skill in
the holy Scriptures, the fountaine of all ſound knowlege, which teach vs, that

                  •
               t is the Lord that made vs and that formed vs from the womb,Iſay 44. 2. but followe
after ſome ſmall ſtreames of this knowledge, euen ſuch as are polluted with
the in
                  •
               entions of mans braine placing the courſe of nature in the procreation
of mankind (which is but an effect of Gods almightie working power) in
the roome of God himſelf the ſupreme cauſe of al. In which reſpect they may
not vnfitly be reſembled to Moles that are alwaies plodding in the earth, or
to ſwine that finding acorns vpon the ground, neuer looke vp to the tree from
which they fall. They forget that mans eies are therefore ſet in the head,
which is the vpper part of the body, rather then in his breaſt, belly, or feet, becauſe
he ſhould be admoniſhed thereby to lift vp his mind vnto heauen and
heauenly things: & therfore Plato ſaith, that mens eies were ſet in a body erected
and looking vpward, that they might be as guides to leade them to the
knowledge of God, vpon the ſight of the celeſtiall light, & notice taken of the
heauenly motions. Otherwiſe, althogh a mans skill be neuer ſo great, althogh
he knowet
                  •
                the way of the ſtars, the walles of the world, the foundatiōs of the
earth, the top of the heauens, yet if he be ignorant of the creator & moderatour
of them all, it ſhal profit him nothing. But as no man is to look for grapes
of thorns, or figs of thiſtles, ſo we muſt not thinke that Epicures and Atheiſts
wil once either labor to know God or open their lips to praiſe him, when as yet
they haue not learned to beleeue that he is, much leſſe that he is a rewarder
of them that ſeeke him.Hebr. 11. 6. And ſurely of all Sathans deluſions wrought by him

in the hearts of vnbelee
                  •
               ers, this monstrous error of 
                  〈…〉
               ,
as that which is deſtitute of all ſhew of 
                  〈…〉
               
ſelfe into the heart of man. For 
                  〈…〉
               
r
                  •
               ption, hunger and thirſt is not more incident vnto him then 
                  〈…〉
               
rel
                  •
               gion and aberration in 
                  〈◊〉
               , yet for any man not to ſee and acknowledge
by the dimme candle of nature, that God is, that his 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •••
               
               cheth
ouer all, that the ſoule of man is immortall, and that after this l
                  •
               ſe
there is a place of happineſſe for the good and of torments for the wicked, is
as I may terme it, a ſupernaturall error, or rather cleun
                  •
                againsſt 
                  〈◊〉
               
religion, nature and all. The trueth whereof appeareth both by the common
conſent of all nations, who haue generally approo
                  •
               ed thoſe points as inuiolable
principles and maximes in nature, and alſo by the iudgement of
the ſounder ſort of Phyloſophers and Lawmakers amongſt the Heath
                  ••
               ,
who knowing that all mens conſciences did naturally acknowledge not onely
a being of a diuine power, but a ſubiection alſo thereunto, pret
                  •
               nded
that their lawes and ſuperſtitions came from ſome one or other of their
ſuppoſed gods & goddeſſes: as Minos King of the Cretenſians made the people
beleeue that he had receyued his lawes of Iupiter, Lycurgus the D
                  •••
               
               demonian
lawmaker of Apollos oracle, Numa Pompilius a Roman
                  •
                king
of Aegeria the Nimph, and ſo the reſt of others. And in tru
                  •
               th they that
deny the diuine eſſence, what do they but deny themſelues, and the being of all
things in the world beſides? For as Aratus the heathen Poet 
                  〈…〉
               
is alſo confirmed vnto vs by the Apoſtle Paul,
               Act. 17. 
               In God we liue, 
                     〈…〉
                  
haue our being: ſo that without him it is impoſſible wee ſhould haue any being
one moment of an houre. And it is ſtrange to conſider 
                  〈◊〉
                theſe reaonable
beaſtes (for men I dare not call them) ſtanding ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                vpon reaſon
and ſenſe as they would ſeeme to do, cannot in reaſon 
                  〈◊〉
                that this
great variety & exquiſite order, which they behold and ſee in nature & natural
things, muſt of neceſſity haue ſome ſuperiour cauſe from which they receiued
both their firſt beeing, and their conti
                  ••
               al 
                  〈◊〉
                in the ſame.
When they looke vpon any excellent picture, they preſently iudge, as the truth
is, that it was wrought by ſome cunning painter: and euery 
                  〈◊〉
                building
leadeth all men to the conſideration of ſome exquiſite maſter builder that
framed it. And ſhall not the view of the worlde, and the knowledge of ſo
many admirable things therein as are ſubiect to all our ſenſes, conſtra
                  •••
                
               
                  •
               s
to acknowledge a ſuperiour cauſe and creator of them all? Doeth any
ſhippe ſayle his right courſe without a Pilot? or is there any Citie well gouerned
without a Magiſtrate? And ſhall any ſurmize, that the celeſtiall
lights could obſerue their right motions without the direction of him that
made them? or that the terreſtriall globe of the earth coulde 
                  〈◊〉
                ſo
well ordered by the courſe of nature, were it not that all things are 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
by him that 
                  〈◊〉
                them all? But ſuch is the blockiſhneſſe of theſe 
                  〈…〉
               
that they will beleeue nothing but that which they may ſee
with their eyes, and 
                  〈◊〉
                knowledge of by the light of their bodies. As
though, if their eyes were plucked out of their heads there could be no ſunne
in the 
                  〈…〉
                nor light in the worlde becauſe themſelues were in darkeneſſe
and coulde ſee nothing. How many things are there in nature which

                  〈…〉
               , and yet no man maketh any queſtion of their being, no
not they 
                  〈◊〉
               , who notwithſtanding deny that there is any diuine nature,
any 
                  〈◊〉
                ſoule, Angell or ſpirite, becauſe they are not viſible and
ſub
                  •
               ect to 
                  •
               ight. Can any of them ſee the winde, looke vpon the voice of a man,
beholde the ſweete harmony of muſicke? Nay, can they take a viewe of the
heartes in their bodies, or of the braines in their heades? Are they therefore
without heart and braineleſſe? Surely it ſeemeth they are cleane voyde
of brayne, 
                  •
               it and common ſenſe, that nayle all their beliefe ſo faſt to the
ſight of their b
                  •
               dily eyes. And yet were it ſo that they would not moſt wilfully

                  〈…〉
                the euidence of their owne hearts, they ſhould there behold with
the eyes of their mind as it were in a chriſtall glaſſe that which may bee
knowen of God.
               Rom. 1. 19. Nay the holy Ghost proceedeth further, and telleth vs,
that euen our bodily eyes may and doe after a ſort looke vpon the eternall
powe
                     •
                   and Godhead,
               Pſal. 20. 
               which are ſeene by the creation of the worlde,
being viewed in the workes thereof. And becauſe it may ſo fall out by
the 
                  〈◊〉
                iudgement of God, that theſe beetle-eyed Atheiſts may aſwell be depriued
of their bodily eyes, as they want the ſight of their mindes, the creator
and Lorde of the whole worlde hath ſet ſuch markes of his diety in his
workes that ſuch as haue onely the direction of nature may euen with their
eyes cloſed vp touch and handle him if they will but grope after him,
               Act. 17. 27. 
               in
whom we all liue mooue and haue our being. What ſhould I preſſe them
with the certayne teſtimony of their owne hearts and conſciences, which will
they will they, drawe them to a fearefull acknowledgement of the mighty
power of God, whenſoeuer eyther by his terrible voyce of thunder he ſhaketh
their heartes, or by ſome irrecouerable diſeaſe, as a meſſenger of death, hee

                  〈◊〉
                them to appeare before his tribunall ſeate and throne of iuſti
                  •
               .
But there needeth no other proofe to co
                  ••
               nce them then the wordes
of their owne mouthes. For doe not their horrible oathes whereby they blaſph
                  ••
               
the Maieſty of God, and aſmuch as lyeth in them teare him in pieces,

                  •
               e a
                  •
               e 
                  •••
               neſſe againſt themſelues that the Lorde whom they deſpite in that

                  〈…〉
                hath a being, howſoeuer otherwiſe they deny the ſame? And
if no reaſon will ſinke into their braines, yet mee thinks the waight of Gods
iudgement which haue from time to time ſeaſed extraordinarily vpon theſe
Atheiſts that haue ſprung vp in the world ſhould cauſe them more ſeriouſly
to conſider of their miſerable eſtate.
            
               
It is reported of Protagoras,
               Protagoras. who was one of the firſt of that ſtamp, that
being baniſhed from Athens, and his Books publikely burnt, he was drowned
in the ſea as he ſailed into Sicilia. Diagoras
               Diagoras. was violently ſlaine by certain
men whom the Athenians had hired with mony for that purpoſe. Epicurus
               Epicurus.
alſo, who placed his felicitie in corporall pleaſures, died miſerably in a veſſell
of hot water, after that he hadbin foureteene daies together extremely tormented
with the ſtone in the bladder. Lucianus,
               Lucianus. ſurnamed by his owne
countrimen the Blaſphemer, as he behaued himſelfe moſt curriſhly in barking
both againſt the gods of the Heathen, and againſt Chriſt Ieſus the Sauiour
of the worlde, ſo his ende was thereafter by being torne in peeces
and deuoured of dogges. Plinie
               Plinie Sen. the elder denying the immortalitie of the
ſoule of man, and placing Nature a creature in the ſteade of God the Creatour,
whileſt he was ouer-curious in ſearching out the cauſe of the burning
of Aetna, was choaked with the ſmoke that iſſued from it. A iuſt puniſhment
for him to ende his life by ſmoke, who eſteemed his ſoule to be no better
then a little vapour.Caſſius. Brutus. 
               Caſſius being a profeſſed Scholler of Epicurus, &
Brutus moſt brutiſhly railing vpon the prouidence of God becauſe his enterpriſes
againſt Caeſar ſucceeded not to his deſire, were both ouertaken
with the reuenging hand of God, the one of them cauſing his ſeruant to be
his Butcher, and the other embruing his hands in his owne blood. The like
befell Lucretius
               Lucretius. a most notorious Atheiſt, who being depriued of the right
vſe of his ſenſes, abuſed by him to the denying of God and of all religion, ſlewe
himſelfe in the middeſt of his madneſſe. Pope Iohn the 13.Pope Iohn 13. may woorthily
be enrolled in this band, as he that was not aſhamed to put vp 
                  •
                ſupplication
to the deuill to ſend him goodlucke at dice: and one day in the middeſt of
his iollitie hee tooke a cuppe of wine and dranke to the deuill. But by the iuſt
iudgement of God hee was ſtabbed in with a dagger by one who tooke him
committing adultery with his wife, ſo that hee died thereof within eight
dayes after. Leo the tenth PopePope Leo. 10. of that name, who thought there was
neither heauen nor hell after this life, and blaſphemouſly ſaide that the
Goſpel of Chriſt was but a fable, was ſodainely ſtriken dead with an extreame
laughter, which he fell into by reaſon of newes brought him of the
ſlaughter and ouerthrowe of certaine French men in Italie by his meanes.
The French hiſtories make mention of one Frances Rabelais,
               Frances Rabelais. who hauing
ſucked in this poiſon of Atheiſme made a mock at al religion, as Lucretius
his forerunner had done before him: but the ſelfe-ſame author & defender
of true religion, that tooke frō 
               Lucretius al vſe of reaſon, did ſo depriue this
beaſt of all ſenſe, that as he led a brutiſh life; ſo he died like a ſwine in the
midſt of his drunkennes, deriding thoſe that ſpake vnto him of God and of his
mercy. Iodellus
               Iodellus. likewiſe a French Poet, and a profeſſed Atheiſt, as he gaue
himſelfe in his life time to write tragedies, ſo he made a right tragicall end.

For hauing through gluttony and riot waſted his patrimony and wealth, he
fell into ſuch extreame neede, that hee was miſerably famiſhed for want of
ſuſtenance. It would aske a long time to ſet downe the iudgements of God
that haue iustly ouertaken ſundry others of this abominable crew: only I will
rehearſe one hiſtory worthy our knowledge concerning this matter, mentioned
by Enguerran in the ſecond volume of his Hiſtories. In the raigne of
Lewes the eleuenth, and vpon the fift day of Iune 1464. there happened
(ſaieth he) a wonderfull accident in the Palace at Paris, whileſt there was
a controuerſie in pleading betweene the Biſhop of Angiers and a rich citizen
of that towne,A citizen of Angiers. whome the Biſhop accuſed of notorious Atheiſme,
namely, that he had ſaide in the hearing of many, that he beleeued not there
was any god or deuill, either any heauen or hell, Now as the Biſhops Aduocate
rehearſed theſe woordes, the place where they were pleading trembled
very ſore, inſomuch that with the ſhaking a ſtone fell downe from the
toppe to the bottome, but hurt no body, albeit they were all taken with a
great feare. Whereupon they went all preſently out of the place vntill the
next day when the matter was to be heard againe. And then alſo the ſaide
roome beganne to ſhake againe, ſo that one of the ſommers of the chamber
ſprang out of the morteſſe, and bowed downeward two feete, but fell not.
All that were preſent ſuppoſed they ſhould haue died no other death, which
cauſed them ſo violently to ruſh out, that for haste ſome left their hattes,
ſome their cappes, ſome their ſlippers behinde them, neither durſt any
pleade any more there before it was throughly mended. Nowe albert Enguerran
ſpeaketh nothing of the determination of that ſuite, yet for aſmuch
as nothing commeth to paſſe by happe-hazard (as they vſe to ſpeake)
but all things are guided by the good prouidence of God, it is out of question,
that the Lorde woulde teach vs heereby, howe wee ſhoulde deteſt and
abhorre ſuch execrable thoughtes and ſpeeches, ſeeing the very dumbe
creatures, as the ſtones, the timber, and the earth it ſelfe (which of it
owne nature is vnmooueable) were ſo affected with the horrour thereof,
that they coulde not abide ſo much as to heare it ſpoken of without ſhaking.
But here ſome will ſay vnto mee, that this labor might well haue bin ſpared,
conſidering that the ſunne-ſhine of the Goſpel (which breaketh forth ſo
cleerely in all quarters of the lande) will quickely deſcry if any ſuch ougly
bird ſhould once beginne to peepe out of the ſhell within the nest of this Iland.
And if the Athenians being meere heathen men baniſhed Protagoras
out of their territories, and burnt his Bookes in a publike place, becauſe
in the beginning of one of them he called the deity into queſtion, wee
may not think but that in this land ouer-ſpread with the knowledge of God,
this monſtrous brood ſhalbe nipped in the head ſo ſoone as euer it ſhall dare to
ſhew it ſelfe. Indeed a man would thinke that Atheiſme ſhould not once be

dreamed of, or named amongst vs, conſidering that we liue in thoſe times of
which the Prophets foretold,Isaiah. 11. 9. & 54. 13.
               Ier. 31. 34. 
               That the earth ſhould be full of the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters that couer the ſea: that all the childrē
of the Church ſhould be taught of the Lord: ſo that one neighbor ſhal
not teach another, ſaying, Know the Lord: for they ſhall all know me
from the leaſt of them to the greateſt, ſaith the Lord. So a man woulde
thinke that Fraunce, hauing bin for theſe thirty yeeres & vpwards almost
continually ſcourged with ciuillwarres, and that for the cauſe of religion,
ſhoulde bee ſo farre from being ſtained with the leaſt ſpotte of Atheiſme,
as that it might now at the length truely ſay with the Prophet Dauid,
               Psal. 119. 71. 
               It is
good for me that I was afflicted, for thereby haue I learned to keepe
thy law. And yet both this our Author and ſome other of that nation, knowing
that this infection hath ſeazed vpon many of their countrie-men, haue
laboured by their writings to ſuppreſſe the ſame. And ſurely it is greatly to
be feared, that as their diſguiſed attire couereth the bodies of many of our
people, & maketh them deformed, ſo this poiſon of Atheiſme hath paſſed the
narrow ſeas, & is landed in the hearts of no ſmal number, to their vtter deſtruction
both of bodie and ſoule. Neither is this the feare of ſome few without
any ground, but of a great many wiſe and godly Chriſtians, who ſeeing
the generall prophanneſſe of mens liues almoſt euery where, both publikely
crie out against the preſent infection, and priuately bewaile the future euils
that neceſſarily follow the ſame. And albeit per aduenture there bee none
amongeſt vs, that are ſo farre gone in Atheiſme as Ligneroles a French
Courtier of late daies was, who is ſaid to haue made open profeſſion thereof,
yet if the tree may be iudged of by the fruites, & the outward effects of mens
liues doe ſhew the inward affections of their hearts, he that hath but halfe an
eye may ſee, that there are a great many amongst vs of thoſe fooliſhmen of
whom Dauid ſpeaketh,Psal. 16. 1. 
               Who ſay in their hearts that there is no God. In
the forefront of which companie, the ſtudents of Machiauels principles and
practicers of his precepts may worthily be raunged. This bad fellowe whoſe
works are no leſſe accounted of among his followers, then were Apollos Oracles
among the Heathen, nay then the ſacred Scriptures are among ſound
Chriſtians, bluſheth not to belch out theſe horrible blaſphemies againſt pure
religion, and ſo againſt God the Author thereof, namely, That the religiō
of the heathen made them ſtoute & courageous, whereas Chriſtian religion
maketh the profeſſors thereof baſe-minded, timerous, & fitte to
become a pray to euery one: that ſince men fell from the religion of
the Heathen, they became ſo corrupt that they would beleeue neither
God nor the Deuill: that Moſes ſo poſſeſſed the land of Iudaea, as the
Gothes did by ſtrong hand vſurpe part of the Romane Empire. Theſe
and ſuch like poſitions are ſpued out by this hel-hound ſometime againſt true

religion, otherwhiles againſt the religion and Church of Rome, ſometimes
alſo taxing the religion of the heathen, of falſehoode, and cooſinage:
ſo that in trueth hee woulde haue all religion to be of like accompt with his
diſciples, except it be ſo farre foorth as the pretence and ſhewe of religion
may ſerue to ſet forward and effect their wicked pollicies. And for this
cauſe hee ſetteth downe this rule for euery Prince and Magistrate to
frame his religion by, namely, that he ſhould pretend to be very religious
and deuout, although it be but in hypocriſie. And to this hee addeth
a ſecond precept no leſſe impious, that a Prince ſhould with tooth
and naile maintaine falſe myracles and vntrueths in religion, ſo long
as his people may thereby be kept in greater obedience. Nowe what
fruits wee are to expect from the ſtudents of this profeſſion, let all men iudge
that haue any ſparkes of pure religion glowing in their hearts. Ʋnto theſe
may bee added, ſuch as treade in the ſteppes of Lamech, who derided
the iudgement of God vpon Caine: ſuch as walke in the wayes of Iſmael,
who mocked Iſaac in regarde of the promiſe: and ſuch as thoſe irreligious
perſons were of whome Peter ſpeaketh, who in iesting-wiſe aſked what was
become of the promiſe of Christ his comming to iudgement. That there are
ſuch amongeſt vs, euen in theſe times wherein we liue, let the teſtimonie
which one of that crew gaue lately of himſelfe when the heauy hand of God
by ſickeneſſe ſommoned him to giue an accompt of his diſſolute life. He being
one day admoniſhed of his friendes to leaue his badde courſe of life,
which otherwiſe woulde bring him to vtter destruction, ſcoffingly returned
them this anſwere: Tuſh (quoth hee) what is hee better that dieth
in his bedde then hee that endeth his life at Tiburne? And beeing further
vrged to doubt the loſſe of his ſoule in Hell fire for euer although hee
feared not death in this worlde, hee replied, Hell? What talke you of
Hell to mee? I knowe if I once come there, I ſhall haue the company
of better then my ſelfe: I ſhall alſo meete with ſome knaues
in that place, and ſo long as I ſhall not ſit there alone, my care is
the leſſe. But you are madde folkes (quoth hee) for if I feared the
Iudges of the Bench no more then I dread the iudgements of God,
I woulde before I ſlept diue into one karles bagges or other, and
make merrie with the ſhelles I found in them ſo long as they would
laſt. The voyce of a meere Atheiſt, and ſo afterwardes hee pronounced
of himſelfe when hee was checked in conſcience by the mightie hand
of GOD. And yet this fellowe in his life time and in the middeſt of his
greateſt ruffe, had the Preſſe at commaundement to publiſh his laſciuous
Pamphlets, whereby hee infected the hearts of many yoong Gentlemen and
others with his poyſonfull platforms of loue, and diuelliſh diſcourſes of fancies
fittes: ſo that their mindes were no leſſe poſſeſſed with the toyes of his irreligious

braine, then their chambers and ſtudies were peſtered with his lewde
and want on bookes. And if the reſt of his crew may be permitted ſo eaſily as
hee did without controlment to inſtill their venimous inuentions into the
minds of our Engliſh youth by meanes of printing, what other thing can wee
looke for, but that the whole land ſhould ſpeedily be ouerflowen with the deadly
waters of all impieties, when as the flood-gates of Atheiſm are thus ſet wide
open? Are they not already growen to this boldnes, that they dare to gird at
the greateſt perſonages of all eſtates and callings vnder the fables of ſauage
beaſts, not ſparing the very dead that lie in their graues? that the holy Apoſtles,
the bleſſed virgin Mary, the glorious kingdome of heauen it ſelfe
muſt be brought in as it were vpon aſtage to play their ſeuerall parts, according
as the humor of euery irreligious head ſhal diſpoſe of them? And wheras
godly learned men, and ſome that haue ſpoken of their owne experience,
haue in their bookes that are allowed by authority, termed Stage-playes and
Theaters, The ſchoole of abuſe, the ſchoole of bawdery, the neſt of the
deuil & ſinke of all ſinne, the chaire of peſtilence, the pompe of the deuil,
the ſoueraigne place of Satan, yet this commendation of them hath
lately paſſed the Preſſe, that they are rare exerciſe of vertue. It were too
long to ſet downe the Catalogue of thoſe lewde and laſciuious bookes, which
haue muſtered thēſelues of late yeeres in Pauls Churchyard, as choſen ſouldiers
ready to fight vnder the deuils banner: of which it may be truely ſaid,
that they preuaile no leſſe (if not more) to the vpholding of Atheiſme in this
light of the Goſpel, then the Legend of lies, Huon of Burdeaux, King Arthur,
with the reſt of that rabble, were of force to mainteine Popery in the
dayes of ignorance. Wherefore my humble ſute is to all ſuch as may by vertue
of their authoritie ſtay the violent courſe of Atheiſme dayly ſpredde abroade
by theſe pernicious Pamphlets, that they woulde lay to their helping
hand for the ſpeedy redreſſe thereof. And as for thoſe that reape the gayne
of iniquitie by the ſale of ſuch infectious ſtuffe, oh what a ſweete ſmelling
ſacrifice ſhould they offer vnto the Lord, if they would gather all ſuch hurtfull
Books together, and cauſe them to paſſe through the fire in the midſt of
that yeard, where now they are ſo commonly ſold. Hereby it would come to
paſſe, that the land being purged of ſo great contagion as droppeth out of the
pennes of ſuch godleſſe braines, the Lord would withdrawe his heauy hand,
which now many wayes preſſeth vs ſore, the preaching of the Gospel woulde
preuaile mightilie,Act. 19. 19, 20. as it did in Epheſus after the like ſacrifice, and
yoong Gentlemen and others woulde employ good houres
vpon better ſtudies: which the Lord
grant for his mercies ſake.
AMEN.
            
         
         
            
            THE SPECIALL AND
principall matters handled in this ſecond
tome of the French Academy, as it is diuided
into ſeuerall dayes workes, and diſtinguiſhed
by Chapters.
            
               The firſt dayes worke.
               
                  Pag. 15 OF the creation of the firſt man,
and of the matter whereof the
body of man is made. Chap. 1.
               22 Of the creation of woman. Chap. 2.
               28 Of the ſimple or ſimilarie parts of the
body, namely the bones, ligaments, griſtles,
ſinowes, pannicles, cords or filaments,
vaines, arteries and fleſh. Chap. 3.
               34 Of the compound parts of the body,
and firſt of the feete and legges, and of
the armes and hands. Chap. 4.
               41 Of the backbone of the marrow
thereof: of the ribs, and of other bones
of mans body. Chap. 5.
               47 Of the ſhare bone and marrow of the
bones: of the bones in the head, and of
the fleſh: of the muſcles and of their
office. Chap. 6.
               52 Of the kernels in the body, and of
their ſundry vſes, eſpecially of the
breaſts of women, of their beauty and
profite in the nouriſhing of children,
and of the generation of milke. Chap. 7.
               57 Of the fatte and ſkins of mans body,
and of their vſe: of the haires thereof.
Chap. 8.
            
            
               The ſecond dayes worke.
               62 Of the bodily and external ſences,
eſpecially of touching: of their
members, inſtruments and offices.
Chap. 9.
               67 Of the eyes, and of their excellency,
profite and vſe: of the matter and humors
whereof they are made. Chap. 10.
               73 Of the tunicles and skinnes of the
eyes: of their forme & motions: of their
ſundry coulors: of the ſinewes whereby
they receiue ſight, and of other parts about
the eyes. Chap. 11.
               79 Of the eares, and of their compoſition,
office, and vſe. Chap. 12.
               85 Of the diuers vſes of the tongue: of
the inſtrumēts neceſſary both for voyce
and ſpeach, howe there is a double
ſpeach, of the forme thereof, how the
ſpirite of man is repreſented thereby.
Chap. 13.
               91 Of the agreement which the inſtruments
of the voyce and ſpeach haue
with a payre of Organs, what things are
to be conſidered in placing of the lungs
next the heart, of the pipes and inſtruments
of the voyce. Chap. 14.
               96 Of the tongue, and of the nature and
office thereof: of the excellency & profite
of ſpeach which is the art of the
tongue: what is to bee conſidered touching
the ſituation thereof in the head,
and neare the braine. Chap. 15.
               103 Of the office of the tongue in taſting,
and in preparing meat for the nouriſhment
of the body: of the teeth, and of
their nature and office: of the conduite
or pipe that receiueth and ſwalloweth
downe meates. Chap. 16.
            
            
               The third dayes worke.
               108 OF the ſence of taſt giuen to the
palal: what taſtes are good to
nouriſh the body: of the diuerſitie
of them: of hunger and thirſt, and
of their cauſes. Chap. 17.
               113 Of helps and creatures meete for the
preſeruation and nouriſhment of the
body: how God prepareth them to ſerue
for that purpoſe: of their vſe. Chap. 18.
               119 Of the noſe and of the ſence of ſmelling,
and of their profit and vſe: of the
compoſition matter and forme of the
noſe. Chap. 19.
               124 Of the vſe briefly of all the outward
ſences of mans body, namely in purging

the ſuperfluities and ordures of his
noſe: of the diuerſity that is in mens faces,
and of the image of the minde and
heart in them. Chap. 20.
               130 Of the nature, faculties and powers
of mans ſoule: of the knowledge which
we may haue in this life, and how excellent
& neceſſary it is: into what kinds
the life and ſoule are diuided. Chap. 21.
               136 Of the two natures of which man is
compounded how the body is the lodge
and inſtrument of the ſoule: how the
ſoule may be letted from doing her proper
actions by the body, and be ſeparated
from it, and yet remaine in her perfection.
Chap. 22.
               142 Of the braine and of the nature therof:
of the ſundry kinds of knowledge that
are in man: of the ſimilitude that is betweene
the actions and workes of the
naturall vertues of the ſoule, and of the
internall ſenſes. Chap. 23.
               147 Of the compoſition of the braine,
with the members and parts thereof: of
their offices, and that knowledge which
ought to content vs touching the principall
cauſe of the vertues and wonderfull
powers of the ſoule. Chap. 24.
            
            
               The fourth dayes worke.
               148 OF the ſeate of voluntary motion
and ſenſe: of the office and
nature of the common ſenſe:
of imagination, and of fantaſie: & how
light and dangerous fantaſie is: of the
power which both good and bad ſpirits
haue to mooue it. Chap. 25.
               158 Of reaſon and memorie, and of their
ſeate, nature & office: of the agreement
which all the ſenſes both external and
internall haue one with another, and of
their vertues. Chap. 26.
               164 That the internall ſenſes are ſo diſtinguiſhed,
that ſome of them may bee
troubled and hindered, and the reſt bee
ſafe and whole, according as their places
and inſtruments aſſigned vnto
them in the body are ſound or periſhed:
and of thoſe that are poſſeſſed with deuils.
Chap. 27.
               170 Of the reaſonable ſoule and life, and
of vertue: of the vnderſtanding and will
that are in the ſoule, and of their dignity
and excellency. Chap. 28.
               176 Of the variety and contrarietie that
is found in the opinions, deliberations,
counſayles, diſcourſes, and iugdements
of men, with the cauſe thereof: and of
the good order and ende of all diſcourſes.
Chap. 29.
               182 Of iudgement, and of his office after
the diſcourſe of reaſon: and how beliefe,
opinion, or doubting followe it:
of the difference that is betweene
them. Chap. 30.
               187 Of the meanes whereby a man may
haue certaine knowledge of thoſe
things which hee ought to beleeue and
to take for true: of the naturall and ſupernatural
light that is in man, and how
they beare witneſſe of the image of God
in him. Chap. 31.
               192 How the vertues and powers of the
ſoule ſhew themſelues by litle and litle,
and by degrees: of contemplation, and
of the good that is in it: of that true
and diuine contemplation which wee
looke for after this life. Chap. 32.
            
            
               The fift dayes worke.
               198 OF the appetites that are in all
liuing creatures, and namely in
man, and of their kinds: and
particularly of the naturall and ſenſitiue
appetite. Chap. 33.
               203 Of will and of the diuers ſignifications
and vſes of theſe words (Reaſon and
Will.) of the actions, freedome, and nature
thereof: of the power which reaſon
may haue ouer her. Chap. 34.
               208 Of thoſe good things which both
men only guided by the light of nature,
are able to propound to themſelues, and
to follow, and they alſo that are guided
by the ſpirit of God: of the power and
liberty of the will in her actions, both
externall and internall. Chap. 35.
               214 Of the diſtinction that ought to bee
betweene the vnderſtanding & knowledge,
and the will and affections in the

ſoule, and betweene the ſcates and inſtruments
which they haue in the body:
of the agreement that is betweene the
heart and the braine. Chap. 36.
               219 Of the nature and compoſition of
the heart, and of the midriffe: of the tunicles
or skinnie couerings of the
breaſt, and of the Pericardion, or Cawle
about the heart: of the motion, office
and vſe of the lungs: of the heart, and of
the arteryes. Chap. 37.
               224 Of the ſubſtance, ſituation and counterpoize
of the heart: of the nature and
vſe of the vitall ſpirite, and of the forge,
veſſels and inſtruments thereof: of the
ſundry doores and pipes of the heart,
and of their vſes. Chap. 38.
               229 Of the ſecond motion of the heart,
which belongeth to the affections of
the ſoule, and of thoſe that goe before
or follow after iudgement: of the agreement
that is betweene the temperature
of the body, and the affections of
the ſoule. Chap. 39.
               233 Of the health and diſeaſes of the
ſoule: of the agreement betweene corporall
and ſpiritual phyſicke: how neceſſarie
the knowledge of the nature of
the body and of the ſoule is for euery
one. Chap. 40.
            
            
               The ſixt dayes worke.
               237 OF foure things to bee conſidered
in the will, and in the power
of deſiring in the ſoule: and
firſt of natural inclinations: of ſelfe loue,
and the vnrulineſſe thereof. Chap. 41.
               241 Of the habite of the ſoule in the matter
of the affections, and of what force
it is: of the cauſes why the affections are
giuen to the ſoule, with the vſe of them:
of the fountaine of vertues and vices.
Chap. 42
               246 That according to the diſpoſition of
the iudgement, the affections are more
or leſſe moderate or immoderate▪ of the
cauſe of all the motions of the ſoule and
heart: of the variety of affections: of
the generation, nature, and kindes of
them. Chap. 43.
               250 That ioy or griefe are alwayes ioyned
to the affections: and what ioy and
griefe are properly. Chap. 44.
               255 Of the cauſes why God hath placed
theſe affections of ioy and ſorrow in the
heart: of true and falſe ioy, and of good
and bad hope. Chap. 45.
               260 Of feare, and of the nature and effects
thereof toward the body the mind
and the ſoule, and how it troubleth
them: of the true harneſſe and armour
againſt feare. Chap. 46.
               265 Of the delight and pleaſure that followeth
euery ioy, and of the moderation
that is required therein: of diuers
degrees of pleaſures, and how men abuſe
them, eſpecially thoſe pleaſures,
which are receiued by the corporal ſenſes.
Chap. 47.
               270 Of the compariſon of pleaſures receiued
by the internall ſenſes: and how
men deſcend by degrees from the beſt
to the baſeſt pleaſures: of the difference
betweene the vſe of ſpirituall delights
and corporall: and how the one chaſe
the other. Chap. 48.
            
            
               The ſeuenth dayes worke.
               276 OF the affections of loue, of the
nature, kinds, and obiect of it:
of the beginning of friendſhip:
of the vertue and force of alluring that
is in likeneſſe and in beauty: of the agreement
that is betweene beauty and
goodneſſe. Chap. 49.
               281 Of other cauſes why beauty procureth
loue, and of diuers degrees and
kinds of beauty: how it is the nature of
loue alwayes to vnite, an what other
effects it hath: how loue deſcendeth, and
aſcendeth not: what power it hath to allure
and breed loue. Chap. 50.
               286 Of deſire and coueting, and of the
kinds of it: of the infiniteneſſe of mens
deſires, and what Good is able to ſatiſfie
and content it: of the difference betweene
deſire and loue, and of the vtmoſt
limit and end of loue. Chap. 51.
               
                  
291 Of the good things that are in true
loue, of the diuers valuations of loue,
and of the benefits which it procureth:
what knowledge is requiſite to allure
loue, and how one loue groweth by another
of the friendſhippe that may bee
both betweene the good and the
badde. Chap. 52.
               297 Of fauour, reuerence, and of honour:
of their nature and effects: of thoſe outward
ſignes whereby they ſhewe themſelues:
of pity and compaſſion, and
howe agreeable it is to the nature of
man. Chap. 53.
               302 Of offence in the heart and ſoule:
of the degrees of offence, and of the
good and euill that may be in this affection:
of contempt that is bredde of it,
and of mockery, which followeth contempt.
Chap. 54.
               307 Of anger and of the vehemency and
violency thereof: of the difference that
is betweene anger and rancor: of the affection
of reuenge that accompanieth
them: of the motions of the heart in
anger, with the effectes thereof, wherefore
this affection is giuen to man, and
to what vſe it may ſerue him. Chap. 55.
               313 Of hatred and of the nature and effects
thereof of a good kind of hatred,
and of the remedy to cure the euill hatred:
of enuie, and of the kindes and effects
thereof: of the difference betweene
good and euill enuy. Chap. 56.
            
            
               The eight dayes worke.
               319 OF iealouſie and of the kindes
thereof: how it may bee eyther
a vice or a vertue: howe true
zeale, true iealouſie and indignation
proceede of loue: of their natures, and
why theſe affections are giuen to
man. Chap. 57.
               324 Of reuenge, cruelty and rage, and
what agreement there is among them:
what ſhame and bluſhing is, and why
God hath placed theſe affections in
man: and of the good and euill that is
in them. Chap. 58.
               330 Of pride, with the conſideration
thereof aſwell in nature intire as corrupted:
of the orginall thereof, and of
ſuch as are moſt inclined thereunto:
what vices accompany it: how great a
poiſon it is, and what remedy there is
for it. Chap. 59.
               335 Of the naturall powers of the ſoule,
and what ſundry vertues they haue in
the nouriſhment of the body: of their
order and offices: of their agreement
and neceſſary vſe: where the vegetatiue
ſoule is placed in the body, and
what vertue it hath to augment the
ſame. Chap. 60.
               341 What inſtruments the ſoule vſeth in
the body, about the naturall works of
nouriſhing and augmenting: of the ventricle
of ſtomacke, and of the figure,
orifices and filamentes it hath: of the
ſtomacke, and of what ſubſtance and
nature it is: of the cauſes of hunger and
of appetite: of the inferior orifice.
Chap. 61.
               347 Of the intalles and bowels, and of
their names and offices: of the nature of
the three ſmaller guttes, and of the other
three that are greater: of the inſtructions
which wee may learne by theſe
things. Chap. 62.
               353 Of the Meſentery and Meſareon: of
the Meſeraicall veines, of the Pancreas
or ſweete bread, and of their nature and
office: of the liuer, and of his nature and
office: of the rootes, bodies & branches
of the veines: of their names and vſes,
and of the ſimilitude betweene them
and the arteries. Chap. 63.
               358 Of the blood, and of other humours
in the body: of their diuerſity and nature,
and of the agreement they haue
with the elementes: of the ſimilitude
that is betwixt the great garden of this
great worlde, and that of the little
worlde, touching the nouriſhment
of things contayned and preſerued in
them. Chap. 64.
            
            
               
               The ninth dayes worke.
               363 OF the vapours that aſcend vp
to the braine, and of the waters
and cloudes contayned
therein: and in what perils men are

                     〈◊〉
                  : why the ſoule and blood are put
one for another: of the temperature of
the humors neceſſarie for the health
and life of the body: of the cauſes of
health and of diſeaſes, and of life and
death. Chap. 65.
               368 Of the vſes and commodities of the
humors ioyned with the blood, and
what veſſels are aſſigned vnto them in
the body, and of their nature and offices,
and firſt of the cholericke humor,
and of the ſpleene: then of the flegmaticke
humor, and of the kidneys and other
veſſels, which it hath to purge
by. Chap. 66.
               373 Of the names whereby the humors of
the body are commonly called, with
the cauſes wherefore: of the compariſon
betweene the corruption and temperature
of the humors of the body, and
betweene the manners and the affections
of the ſoule: of the meanes whereby
the humors corrupt, and of the feauers
and diſeaſes engendred thereby: of the
ſundry naturall temperatures in euery
one. Chap. 67.
               379 Of the diuers temperatures and complexions
of men, according to the nature
of humors that beare moſt ſway in
them: of the diſpoſition whereunto they
are naturally mooued by them eyther
to vertues or vices: of the means to correct
the vices and defects that may be in
our naturall inclinations. Chap. 68.
               383 Of the reſtauration and reparation
of all natures created by the generatiue
power and vertue that is in them, and
namely in man: what generation is, and
what the generatiue power of the ſoule
is: what the ſeede is, and how generation
proceedeth of ſtrength and of infirmity.
Chap. 69.
               388 Of the powers of the generatiue vertue
and of their offices: of the principall
cauſe why God gaue to man the power
of generation: in what ſence the reines
are taken for the ſeate of generation:
how we ought rightly to conſider of the
generation of man. Chap. 70.
               393 Of the faſhion of a childe in the
wombe, and how the members are framed
one after another in the mothers
belly: of the time and daies within which
a child is perfectly faſhioned. Chap. 71.
               398 Of childbirth and the natural cauſes
thereof: of the great prouidence of God
appearing therein: of the image of our
eternall natiuitic, repreſented vnto vs
in our mortall birth. Chap. 72.
            
            
               The tenth dayes worke.
               404 WHy God created man naked,
and with leſſe natural
defence then he did all other
liuing creatures: how many wayes
he recompenceth this nakedneſſe: of the
generall beauty of the whole body of
man, ioyned with profite and commodity.
Chap. 73.
               409 Whether the life of the body can proceede
eyter of the matter or of the
compoſition, forme and figure, or of the
qualities thereof, or elſe of the harmony,
coniunction and agreement of all
theſe: whether any of theſe, or al of them
together can be the ſoule: of the length
and ſhortnes, of the diuers degrees and
ages, and of the ende of mans life: of
death, and of the cauſes both of life and
death: of the difference that is betweene
naturall and ſupernaturall Philoſophy
in the conſideration of things. Chap. 74.
               414 Of the cauſes generally of the length
and ſhortneſſe of bodily life: of naturall
and of violent death: in what maner the
life of man conſiſteth in his breath: of
the principall things required to life,
and without which it cannot be: of the
difference betwixt the life of men and
the life of beaſtes: of the image of the
ſpirituall death in the corporall: of the
true comfort which wee ought to haue
therein. Chap. 75.
               
                  
420 Of the chiefe conſolations, which the
wiſeſt among the Pagans and Infidels
could draw from their humane reaſon,
and naturall Philoſophy againſt death:
of the blaſpemies vſed by Atheiſts and
Epicures againſt God and nature: what
nature is, and who they be that attribute
vnto it that which they ought to attribute
to God. Chap. 76.
               426 That there is but one ſoule in euery
ſeuerall body: that one and the ſome
ſoule hath in it all thoſe vertues and
powers, whoſe effects are dayly ſeene: of
the ſeate of the ſoule in the body, and of
the principall inſtrument thereof of the
vnion of the body and ſoule: of the diuers
degrees of nature, and of the excellency
that is in it: of the fountaines and
bounds of all the powers and vertues
of the ſoule. Chap. 77.
               432 Of the nature and varietie of the animal
ſpirits, & how they are only inſtruments
of the ſoule, and not the ſoule it
ſelfe: of the nature of thoſe bodies wherin
the ſoule may dwell and worke: of the
difference that is, not onely betweene
the ſoule and the inſtrumente by which
it worketh, but alſo betweene the inſtruments
themſelues, and their natures
and offices, and which of them are neareſt
or fartheſt off: of the degrees that
are in the vnion and coniunction of the
ſoule with the body. Chap. 78.
               438 Of the diuiſions of man made in the
holy ſcriptures, aſwell in reſpect of the
ſoule as of the body in what ſignifications
the names of ſoule, ſpirit and heart
are vſed therein, and the cauſes why: of
the intier ſanctification of man: how
the ſoule is taken for the life, and for
the members and inſtrumentes of
nouriſhment and for nouriſhment it
ſelfe. Chap. 79.
               444 What is meant by a liuing ſoule, what
by a ſenſuall and naturall body, and
what by a ſpirituall body: how the name
of ſoule is taken for all the deſires of the
fleſh, and for all things belonging to this
life: and not onely for the whole perſon
aliue, but alſo for the perſon being
dead, and for a dead 
                     〈…〉
                  
for the ſpirite ſep
                     •
                  rate from the body.
Chap. 80.
            
            
               The Eleuenth dayes worke
               490 WHether the ſoule of man
is engendred with the body,
and of the ſame ſubſtance
that the body is of: or whether it
be created by it ſelfe and of another ſubſtance:
whether it be needefull for vs to
knowe what the ſoule is, and what is the
e
                     ••
                  ence thereof, or onely to knowe of
what qualitie it is, with the workes and
effects thereof. Chap. 81.
               495 Whether there be any thing mortall
in the ſoule of man: of the diſtinction
betweene the ſoule and the powers of it:
of the opinion of Philoſophers, and
what agreement is betweene them touching
the ſoule of brute beaſts, and the
nature and ſubſtance of it: of their opinion
that deriue the ſoule of man and
the ſoule of beaſts from one ſou
                     •
                  taine:
of them that aſcend higher, and of their
reaſo
                     ••
                   Chap. 82.
               499 Of the opinion of Galen, of Plato,
and of Ariſtotle touching the ſubſtance
and nature of mans ſoule: of the opinion
of Occ
                     •
                  m touching the vegetatiue
and ſenſitue power thereof, and of the
diſtinction of ſoules he maketh in man:
of the ſentence of the Platoniſts, and of
Origen touching the creation, birth,
and nature of the ſoule: of the coniunction
of the ſoule with the body, and the
eſtate thereof in the ſame. Chap. 83.
               503 Of the opinion of the Platoniſts and
ſome others touching the ſubſtance of
mens ſoules: in what ſence not only the
Poets and heathen Philoſophers, but alſo
Saint Paul haue ſayd that men were
the generation and linage of God: of
their error that ſay, that ſoules are of
the very ſubſtance of God: of the tranſmigration
of ſoules according to the
opinion of the ſame Philoſophers.
Chap. 84.
               509 The chiefe cauſes, as learned men

thinke, 
                     〈…〉
                   Pythagoras and

                     〈…〉
                   tranſmigration of
ſoules, and transformation of bodies:
the ancient opinion of the Iewes touching
the ſame thing. Chap. 85.
               515 Of the Pythagoreans of theſe dayes
amongſt the Chriſtians, and of their
fooliſh opinions: of the opinions of many
Doctors and and Diuines touching
the creation and ordinary generation of
mens ſoules: of the moderation that
ought to be kept in that matter: of the
cauſe of the filthineſſe and corruption
of mans ſoule. Chap. 86.
               5
                     ••
                   Of thoſe powers and properties,
which the ſoule of man hath common
with the ſoule of beaſt
                     ••
                   of thoſe powers
and vertues which are proper and peculiar
to it ſelfe, according to the Philoſophers:
of the difference and agreement
that is betweene humane philoſophie
and chriſtian doctrine touching
th
                     •
                  ſe things. Chap. 87.
               5
                     •
                  6 How men can haue no certaine reſolution
of the immortality of the ſoule,
but by the word of God: of the peruerſneſſe
of Epicures and Atheiſtes in this

                     〈◊〉
                  : of the chiefe cauſes that hinder

                     〈◊〉
                   from beleeuing the immortality of
the ſoule, and of their blockiſhneſſe and
euill iudgement therein: how wee muſt
ſeeke for the image of God after which
man was created in his ſoule. Chap. 88.
            
            
               The twelfth dayes worke.
               5
                     ••
                   OF thoſe who deſire the returne
of ſoules departed to teſtifie
their immortality: what witnes
hath binne ſent vs of God out of another
world to reſolue vs therin. Chap. 89.
               53
                     •
                   Of naturall reaſons whereby the immortality
of ſoules may be prooued againſt
Epicures and Atheiſts: and firſt
of the argument taken from the faculty
of knowledge which the ſoule hath, and
from that knowledge of eternity which

                     〈…〉
                  : howe it appeareth, that it is not
begotten of this corruptible nature, becauſe
it aſcendeth vp vnto God: and
how by a ſpeciall benefite of God, it is
dayly created, and not by the vertue of
nature. Chap. 90.
               541 Of the argument for the immortality
of the ſoule, that may bee taken from
that natural deſire therof & of perpetuitie
which is in it: of another argument
to the ſame purpoſe, of the deſire which
men haue to continue their name and
memory for euer: an argument to the
ſame end taken from the apprehenſion
and terrour which men may haue both
of the death of the body: and alſo of the
ſoule and ſpirite. Chap. 91.
               546 Of the agreement that may be taken
from the delights and pleaſures of the
ſoule to prooue the immortality therof:
an argument to the ſame ende taken
from the inſatiable deſires & pleaſures
of men, euen from ſuch as are moſt carnall:
of the teſtimony which they may
find euen in their vices to prooue the
immortality of their ſoule. Chap. 92.
               551 Of the teſtimony that men haue of
the immortall nature of the ſoule in
their very body, by the compoſition and
frame thereof: of that which is in the
motion and reſt of their ſoule: how the
creation of the whole world ſhoulde be
vaine, and how there ſhould be no prouidence
of God, no religion, no diuine
iuſtice, if the ſoule were mortall: of the
multitude and qualities of the witneſſes
that ſtand for the immortality
thereof. Chap. 93.
               556 Of another argument for the immortality
of the ſoule taken from that naturall
deſire which men haue of knowlege:
of Ariſtotles opinion touching the
nature and immortality of the ſoule: of
other reaſons of Philoſophers to proue
that the ſpirite cannot be a corruptible
and mortall nature: and how iuſt men
ſhould be more miſerable, and ſhoulde
haue more occaſion to feare and to eſchew
death, then the vniuſt and wicked,
if the ſoule were mortall. Chap. 94.
               563 Of that prayſe and reward which wiſdome
and vertue may receiue of man in
this worlde: how miſerable it is 
                     •
                  f there

bee no better prepared for them elſewhere:
how death would bee more grieuous
and lamentable to the beſt learned
and wiſeſt men, then to the ignorant
and fooliſh, if the ſoule were mortall
how the beſt & moſt certaine iudgement
of men is for the immortality of
the ſoule: of them who not beleeuing the
ſame, ſay that it is good for men to bee
in ſuch an error. Chap. 95.
               569 Of thoſe internall teſtimonies, which
all men cary within themſelues, to conuince
them that doubt of the immortality
of the ſoule, and of the iudgement
to come, which ſhall be in eternall happineſſe
for the good, and perpetuall torment
for the euill: howe the very heathen
acknowledged aſmuch by reaſons
taken from the teſtimonies of nature.
Chap. 96.
            
            
               The thirteenth dayes worke.
               575 OF the teſtimonies which euery
one may take from his conſcience:
of that feare vnto which
all men are naturally ſubiect to prooue
the immortality of the ſoule & a iudgement
of God vpon the iuſt and vniuſt:
how that which the Atheiſtes ſay, that
feare cauſeth gods amongeſt men ſerueth
to ouerthrow their damnable opinion.
Chap. 97.
               581 Whether Epicures and Atheiſts bee
reaſonable beaſts, yea or no, and what
reaſons they bring to ouerthrow the immortality
of the ſoule: of the falſe opinion
of Pliny touching the ſame, and of
his friuolous and brutiſh reaſons to this
purpoſe: of the brutiſh concluſion vnbeſeeming
the whole race of mankind,
which hee maketh of this matter, and
of the iudgement of God vpon him.
Chap. 98.
               588 Of them who ſay, that wee cannot
know by the light of nature but that the
ſoule is mortall: of them that alledge a
place of Salomon againſt the immortality
of the ſoule: howe wee ought to
conſider of the iudgementes of God
vpon Epicures and Atheiſtes: how
the abſurdities which follow their doctrine
declare plainly the groſſeneſſe of
it: of the force of thoſe argumentes that
were produced before for the immortality
of the ſoule. Chap. 99.
               594 Of the image of God in the ſoule of
man, and of the image of the worlde in
mans body: of the coniunction that is
betweene God, the Angels, and men of
the ſundry degrees of Good that are
therein: of thoſe leſſons and inſtructions
which wee ought to receiue from the
wonderfull compoſition aud coniunction
of the ſoule and body. Chap. 100.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FORESPEACH OF
THE INTERSPEAKERS IN
this Academy, wherein is handled the cauſe
of their future diſcourſes touching the naturall
hiſtorie of Man.
            
               The names of the diſcourſers.
ASER, which ſignifieth Felicitie. AMANA, Trueth. ARAM, Excellency.
ACHITOB, Brother of goodneſſe.
            
            
               
                  ASER.
               My companions, I greatly bewayle
the miſery of our age, wherein ſo many Epicures
and Atheiſts liue, as are dayly diſcouered
amongſt vs in all eſtates and callings.
True it is, that the diſagreement in matters of
religion amongſt them that beare the name
of Chriſtians is very great, and cauſeth much
trouble in the Church: neuertheleſſe, I doubt
not but that agreement might ſoone bee
made, if the word of God onely might be the iudge of true & falſe religion.
For all that feare God, and are carefull to doe nothing contrary
to their duety, that accompt the holy ſcriptures to be the true doctrine
of the ſpirite of God, and are aſſuredly perſwaded, that there is
another life after this and a iudge before whome they muſt appeare,
they, I ſay, are not ſo hardly induced to peace and concord, but that a
man may hope well of them. But they that feare nothing, that call all
things into queſtion, that eſteeme all religion to be opinions only tormenting
mens braynes: they likewiſe that ſtifly reſiſt euen the trueth
it ſelfe, whereof their owne conſciences conuince them, labouring as
much as lyeth in them to extinguiſh not onely the light of God within
them, but that alſo which they learne in his word, ſuch monſters, I
ſay, will trouble all Chriſtendome more then the contentions about
religion, vnles the goodnes of God prouide ſome conuenient remedy
for the ſame. For they muſt be taught to beleeue one God, one Ieſus
Chriſt, the immortalitie of the ſoule, the reſurrection of the body, a
ſecond euerlaſting life full of ioy and happineſſe for good & iuſt men,
but full of griefe and paine for the wicked and vniuſt: generally, they
muſt be taught to beleeue whatſoeuer we learne in the holy ſcriptures
concerning the creation and end of euery nature. Theſe things being

ſpirituall and heauenly cannot be ſeene nor comprehended without a
celeſtiall and ſupernaturall light, nor without ſpirituall eyes, ioyned
with the vertue and power of the ſpirite of God, who onely is able to
clarifie our eyes and to giue them ſight. For albeit God gaue ſpirituall
eyes to man, when hee endued him with a reaſonable and vnderſtanding
ſoule, yet they are euen blind through ſinne, if they alwayes
haue not God that great and euerlaſting Sunne to illuminate them
with his diuine light: as the eyes of the body remaine in darkeneſſe,
when bodily light is taken from them.Matth. 15. 14. iohn 9. 39. Hereupon they are called blind
in holy ſcripture, that haue not the true knowledge of God by the
light of his word. For although they that are moſt ignorant haue ſome
little knowledge and ſence of the diuinitie by that ſmall remnant of
naturall light, which man receiued at his firſt creation, neuertheleſſe
becauſe this ſparkle is ſo ſmall in regard of that darkeneſſe, which filleth
the mind of man, it is not ſufficient to leade them to God, and to
the right way of ſaluation. Therefore they ſoone goe aſtray and wander
hither and thither, and for the moſt part followe ſuperſtition in
place of religion, and lies in ſtead of trueth: becauſe it is an eaſie matter
for the deuill to diſguiſe his inuentions vnder a falſe ſhew of piety,
that they may not diſcerne betweene trueth and falſehood, betweene
that which God liketh, and which he diſliketh. For ſeeing the ſparke
of naturall light in mans vnderſtanding is ſo ſmall, there needeth no
great troubling of the ſpirite, neyther any great impediments to bee
caſt in his way to confound and amaze him, and to take away, or vtterly
to ouerturne his iudgement, whereby to mak
                     •
                   him as vnable to
iudge of the trueth, as a blind man is to iudge of colours. But they are
in farre worſe caſe that voluntarily ſeparate themſelues from all truth,
both naturall and ſupernaturall. For they eaſily beleeue that, which
the Epicures long ſince taught againſt the immortalitie of ſoules, and
againſt the prouidence of God towards men: inſomuch that they hold
this for moſt certaine, that the ſoule periſheth as the body doth, and
that there is no God that intermedleth in the gouernment of humane
affaires, but that they are guided eyther by fortune, or by prudence,
or by the folly of men, according as matters fall out.
               I quake to thinke that ſuch monſters are to be found amongſt them
that berare the name of Chriſtians, and haue in former times receiued
the markes and ſeales of Chriſtianitie in the Church of Ieſus Chriſt.
But my quaking is doubled when I conſider, that many of them that
profeſſe learning and humane philoſophie, and that are thought to
haue moſt skilfull ſharpe and ſubtill wits, are not onely infected with
this execrable Atheiſme, but profeſſe it, open a ſchoole thereof, and

know how to poyſon many with it. For as there was neuer yet opinion,
error or hereſie ſo ſtrange or monſtrous in the world that hath not
alwayes found men ynowe to receiue it, ſo long as there were Authors
and maſters to ſet it abroach, ſo theſe profeſſours of Atheiſme are
neuer without great ſtore of diſciples: becauſe after this maner God
puniſheth the curioſity, ingratitude, and peruerſeneſſe of men, the contempt
of his word and hatred of the trueth, which is commonly in
them, as alſo the pleaſure they take in vanitie and lies. Therefore God
by his iuſt iudgement giueth them ouer into a reprobate ſenſe, ſo that
they cannot but alwayes reiect the trueth, and imbrace error and lying,
as he often threatneth them by the mouth of his Prophets and Apoſtles.Esay 29. 14. 2. tim. 3. 13. 2. theſ. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Examples hereof wee ſee dayly in ſuch as thinke themſelues
the wiſeſt men, who haue this in their cogitation (if they dare not
ſpeake it openly) that it belongeth not to men of wit to beleeue in
God and his word, but to ſuch as are ſimple and fooliſh: not to theſe
great and noble ſpirits that flie aboue the clouds, who in trueth know
more then they ſhould, to bring them to that place of weeping and
gnaſhing of teeth.
               We are to liue (my companions) amongſt ſuch kind of men, and I
ſuppoſe that ye, as well as my ſelfe, haue heard ſome of them ſpeake:
eſpecially ſince of late times the ſeruice of Princes hath longer retayned
vs neere vnto them, then we were wont in our yong yeers when
the ſtudy of good letters did wholy poſſeſſe vs. Therefore we ought to
be very deſirous to fortifie our ſelues dayly with ſtrong and powerfull
reaſons againſt whatſoeuer wee may heare vttered by theſe ſcorners
of all pietie: not for feare that wee ſhall at any time bee deceiued by
them (for I am moſt aſſured of the graces and gifts, which we haue
receiued from God) but that we may haue abundantly wherewith to
reſiſt the vaine and weake arguments of theſe deceiuers, when wee
light among them, eſpecially in the company of ignorant folks, whom
they may eaſily draw to their ſide if we ſhould be ſilent. Beſides, although
we ſhould not be able to confound them by reaſon of their obſtinacy,
yet we ſhall at the leaſt giue them occaſion to thinke more ſeriouſly
of their error. I know well what ſmall accompt they make of
the teſtimonies of holy ſcriptures, and how they eſteeme of them but
as of fables and dreames made by ſome doters and idle perſons: for
ſo they call the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apoſtles. As for the writings
of Philoſophers, they will beleeue Epieurus, Pliny, Lucretius, Lucian,
and others of their ſect, who deny all diuinitie, and the immortality of
ſoules. But they will giue no credite to any thing that we fetch from
the ſaying of Pythagoras, and Socrates, and from the writings of Plato,

Ariſtotle, Cicero, Plutarch, and an infinite number of other excellent
Philoſophers of all nations, who haue all taught that there is a diuine
prouidence and iuſtice, and that the ſoule is immortall. What ſhal we
ſay then? where ſhall we ſeeke for arguments which they will vouchſafe
to heare? I haue heard them ſay ſometimes, that they would giue
credite to naturall Philoſophy in thoſe things wherein the cauſes are
prooued by their effects. Now if we take this courſe to prooue vnto
them a godhead, his prouidence, his future iudgement, and the immortalitie
of the ſoule, which way ſoeuer we turne our ſelues, eyther vpward
or downward, on the right hand or on the left, we ſhall find teſtimonies
euery where, which they may not in any wiſe reiect. For we
haue nature, the neceſſitie of cauſes, proportion and ſimilitude, the life,
decency, and dignity of man, the goodneſſe of God, the vtility that
commeth by mankind proceeding from the bounty of God, all which
with one common conſent, and as it were with one voyce doe teach
& cry, that there is one God creator & gouernor of the whole world,
and that the ſoule of man cannot be mortall. Hereof it is, that the holy
Ghoſt doth often propound vnto vs in holy ſcriptures this whole viſible
world, as a great booke of nature, and of true naturall diuinitie, all
the creatures as preachers and generall witneſſes of God their creator,
of his workes and of his glory. Neuertheleſſe there are but fewe that
haue ſuch eyes as are requiſite for the reading of this booke, or fit eares
to heare the voyce, and to vnderſtand the ſermons of theſe naturall
preachers, no not amongſt them that are moſt skilfull and beſt ſtudied
in the ſearching out of nature, and haue greateſt knowledge of naturall
things, of liberall arts, and of all humane philoſophy. For there are as
many, yea moe, to whom in this reſpect the ſelfe ſame thing is befallen,
which long ſince befell to the firſt and greateſt philoſophers, vnto
whom Saint Paul obiecteth this by way of reproch,Rom. 1. 18, 19. &c. that when they
knew God by the works of the creation of the world (wherein he maketh
his power, his eternall and inuiſible Godhead, as it were viſible
vnto vs) they did not glorifie him as God, but withheld the trueth in
vnrighteouſneſſe. And yet it wil not be a hard matter for vs (God being
our helper) to make it manifeſt by the conſideration, not onely of
the whole frame, but of the leaſt creature therein, eſpecially of the body
and ſoule of man (who is a litle world) and of the creation, nature,
dignitie and excellency of both his parts, how not onely the ſimpleſt
and moſt ignorant may and ought to learne to know God & his prouidence
ouer euery nature, and ſo to honor and to glorifie him, as hee
hath bound them thereunto, but alſo how the wiſeſt ought to direct
all their skill and knowledge which they haue in naturall philoſophy,

to this ſelfe ſame end. As for thoſe that make open profeſſion of Atheiſme,
and refuſe the teſtimonies, which God in his word ſetteth
downe vnto vs, of himſelfe, of his prouidence, and of all things belonging
to the ſaluation and ſoueraigne good of men, they ſhal haue yet,
wil they nill they, ynough probable reaſons to prooue all theſe things,
ſo that we may eaſily conuince and prooue vnto them by theſe teſtimonies,
which euery one of them carieth about in himſelfe, both the
immortality of the ſoule, as alſo the religion of God and of his prouidence.
For theſe three things are ſo linked together, that in no wiſe
they cannot, neyther ought to be ſeparated: ſo that he which admitteth
the one, muſt of neceſſitie approoue the others, and if he doubt of
the one, he reiecteth all.
               As therefore (my companions) ſome yeeres paſt after our returne
from warre, we tooke occaſion vpon the corruption that then was in
all the eſtates of Fraunce, and the forlorne manners which raigned in
euery one, to meete together and to diſcourſe in our Academy of the
inſtitution in good manners, and of the meanes to liue well and happily,
to the end that in renuing the memory of our former ſtudies we
might begin to direct our life to that principall end, which the Philoſophers
appoint thereof, namely vertuous actions: So I thinke that euen
now we haue an other good occaſion to read in this great booke
of nature, and to bring one to another whatſoeuer we haue learned
concerning the nature of man. For firſt we haue leaue in regard of our
Princes ſeruice, to recreate our ſelues for a while in our owne houſes.
Againe, the ſelfe ſame place where we met ſo fitly, and wherein we
began our former diſcourſes of Philoſophy, doth inuite vs to proceed
in them. Moreouer, we doubt not of the combat, which is prepared
for vs when we ſhal viſite our neighbours and friends, amongſt whom
many profeſſe themſelues better Philoſophers then good Chriſtians.
We know alſo into what ſtraights we haue bene brought in our maſters
courts: and let vs not hope that the perill will be leſſe when their
ſeruice ſhall recall vs neere vnto them. Wherefore we ſhal doe well to
arme our ſelues now with all the reaſons and teſtimonies which wee
haue in nature againſt that Epicurean doctrine, whoſe only drift is, by
denying the immortalitie of the ſoule to turne men from all religion
and feare of God. For thus doing, we ſhall not onely greatly profite
our ſelues, but them alſo, who being in danger to be ſeduced by ſuch
deceiuers ſhall heare vs now and then reaſon with them: who feeling
themſelues conuinced by naturall reaſons wherein they ſuppoſed to
haue greateſt ſtrength, will not be ſo bold to vomit their poyſon before
others, but ſhall be conſtrained to d
                     •
                  geſt it by themſelues 
                     •
                  o heir

owne confuſion and ouerthrow. I deſire therefore (my companions)
to know how you ſtand affected towards this my intent and purpoſe.
            
            
               AMANA.
               If euer there were age, wherein thoſe ſignes of the end of
the world,Matth. 24. which the ſpirit of God hath foretold vs, haue bene ſeene,
it is this, wherein they are ſo apparant, that there is no one body, if he
be not depriued of all diſcourſe of reaſon, who doth not acknowledge
them very euidently. For we are fallen into thoſe times wherein ſtore
of falſe prophets are ariſen, & haue ſeduced many, wherein all iniquity
is increaſed, and charitie altogether frozen. Which thing hath diſcouered
not only many falſe religions, but alſo Atheiſme, which is farre
worſe. For without doubt they that are altogether voyd of religion, are
farther off frō true religion then they that follow one that is falſe. And
yet there are as many, yea moe at this day that doe openly ſhew themſelues
to be Atheiſts & Epicures, then there are of thoſe that are taken
for good Chriſtians. If in outward ſhew they profeſſe religion, it is but
to couer themſelues vnder the vale thereof, to the end that men ſhould
not take thē for ſuch as they are indeed, as alſo that they might keepe
company with the beſt. But in their hearts, & amongſt their companions
they mocke & laugh at al religion, at al feare of God, & whatſoeuer
els is taught vs by his word touching any other life thē this, wherin
ioy is prepared for the good, and torments for the wicked. Nowe if
there were nothing els to doe, but to conuince ſuch men of errour &
lying, the matter were eaſie: for they cary all their witneſſes and their
condemnatiō with them: but they are not ſo eaſily confounded. For a
man is conuinced, when he is conſtrained to acknowledge in his conſciēce
that he hath no reaſon wherby he is able to withſtand & gainſay
that trueth, which is ſhewed vnto him, & which condemneth him.
But if he be obſtinate, head-ſtrong, wickedly giuen & f
                     •
                  oward, he will
neuer leaue kicking againſt the pricke, but perſeuere in his headin
                     •
                  ſſe
and obſtinacie, & in his maliciouſnes and peruerſenes. For whē reaſon
faileth him, he armeth himſelfe with impudencie; like to a bold murtherer,
or to a ſhameleſſe harlot that will bluſh at nothing. Therefore
Chryſoſtome ſaid not without reaſon, that heretiks may wel be conuinced,
but not confounded. For they do but wipe their mouth, as Salomon
ſpeaketh of an harlot, which preſently after boaſteth that ſhe is an
honeſt woman. But howſoeuer wicked men ſtriue to blindfold their
vnderſtanding, & to harden their heart againſt the iudgement of God,
yet it is neuer propounded vnto them, but will they nill they, they
feele themſelues pricked and preſſed with ſome ſence thereof. True it
is, that it is not ſo with them as the childrē of God are touched, as they
of whom it is written, that after they had heard the preaching of Saint

                  Peter,
                  Acts 2. 37. 
                  they were pricked in their hearts, whereby they were led to true
repentance, becauſe they had bin touched to the quicke by the word.
But it is ſaid of the reprobate and of them that are hardened, of which
ſort are all Atheiſts, that God hath giuen them a pricking ſpirite, by
reaſon of their bitter h
                     •••
                  t, which cauſeth them alwaies to increaſe in
bitterneſſe, to fret and chafe againſt God, when they feele themſelues
preſſed by his word and by his iudgement.
               Therefore I am of opinion (my companions) that for this cauſe,
and for thoſe reaſon which ASER recited vnto vs, we are now to call
to memory all the teſtimonies that we can bring of God & of his prouidence,
of his iudgement, and of the immortalitie of mens ſoules, by
the conſideration of the nature of man, and of his parts, the body and
ſoule: expecting when ſometime hereafter God ſhall giue vs grace to
contemplate the ſelfe ſame things in euery nature, and in all this great
viſible world. For no doubt but ſuch kind of contemplation will furniſh
vs ſufficiently with arguments to conuince all Epicures and Atheiſts,
& to conſtraine them to acknowledge in their conſcience a diuine
iuſtice,Psal. 19. 1. and an eternall life. The heauens (ſaieth the Prophet) declare
the glory of God, & the firmament ſheweth the worke of his hands. This
hie ornament, this firmament ſo cleare, and face of heauen ſo ſumptuous
to behold, is a thing full of greatneſſe. Therein we may behold the
Maſter builder thereof, clothed with the whole frame as with a garment,
which is a ſure teſtimonie of his power and vertue. He who cannot
fall within the compas of mans groſſe ſences, maketh himſelfe as it
were viſible in his terrible workes.What we learne by the view of the world. This worlde is vnto vs a learned
ſchoole, wherein the praiſe of God doth preach it ſelfe. It is a goodly
large & rich ſhop, wherein this ſoueraigne and moſt excellent workman
layeth open all his works, to this end, that he might be knowen
by them. It is a temple, wherein there is no creature ſo little, but it is
as it were a ſimilitude and reſemblance of the creator thereof, to ſhew
and manifeſt him vnto vs. In a word, it is a Theatre, where the diuine
eſſence, his iuſtice, his prouidence, his loue, his wiſedome haue their
working by a wonderfull vertue in euery creature, euen from the hieſt
heauen vnto the center of the earth. Aske the beaſts (ſaith Iob) and they
ſhall teach thee, and the foules of the heauen and they ſhal tel thee: or ſpeake
to the earth and it ſhall ſhew thee, or the fiſhes of the ſea, and they ſhall declare
vnto thee. Who is ignorant of all theſe, but that the hand of the Lorde hath
made theſe? But truly there ſhineth in man more then in all other creatures,
a beame of the diuinity, & a proportionable image and ſimilitude
of his nature, in that God hath framed him of an immortal ſoule, capable
of vnderſtanding, & of reaſon, to make him partaker of his eternal

glory and felicity.Psal. 8. 1. 4, 5, 6. 
                  O Lord (ſaith the Pſalmiſt) who marueilous is thy
name in all the wolde! What is man that thou art mindfull of him? and
the ſonne of man that thou viſiteſt him? Thou haſt made him a litle lower
then God, and crowned him with glory and worſhip. Thou hast made him
to haue dominion in the works of thine hands: th
                        ••
                      haſt put all things vnder
his feete. But withall, as God hath more expreſly created man after his
owne image, then any other viſible nature, and therefore more excellent
then the heauens or the earth, or any thing contayned in them, ſo
he hath ſingulerly bound him to know and to honour him, in which
thing he hath placed his ſoueraigne Good. But man being exalted by
God to that honour, that he might attaine to ſo great felicitie, could
not conceiue or acknowledge it: which is the cauſe that we ſee ſo many,
who following the corruption of mans nature, are not onely become
like to brute beaſtes,Psal. 32. 9. Isai. 1. 3. but much more vnthankefull, yea farre
more forgetfull & miſerable then they are. The Oxe knoweth his owner,
and the Aſſe his maſters crib, but man will not know God his creator,
of whome he holdeth body, ſoule, and goods. What a horrible
ſhame is it, that the Oxe & the Aſſe, which are ſuch dull beaſts, ſhould
giue greater honor and obedience to man, of whom they receiue their
food, then man doth to God, of whom he hath and dayly doth receiue
ſo many benefits? Let vs make haſt therefore (my companions) to go
to the ſchoole of nature. For if we profite well therein, I doubt not but
we ſhall eaſily come to the knowledge of the creator thereof, and of
the chiefe end of our being.
            
            
               ARAM.
               All things created haue their proper motion,Euery creature hath his proper motion and diſpoſition. which they
follow according to that loue that euery one of them beareth to his
natural diſpoſition. For the heauens continue alwayes conſtant in their
naturall motions. And as the fire and ayre naturally loue to be aboue,
and therefore drawe thitherward without ceaſing: ſo the water and
earth loue to keepe below, ſo that they alwayes bend that wayes. So
that none of the elements can find any ſtay or reſting place vntill they
be come to thoſe places which God hath appoynted for them. Plants
caſt their rootes downeward, and their branches vpward, euery one
following therein his nature. For a plant being to receiue his nouriſhment
from the earth by meanes of his rootes, which are vnto it in ſtead
of mouthes and veines to ſucke and draw neceſſary ſuſtenance for the
preſeruation of it ſelfe, ſendeth them alwayes into the ground, and diſperſeth
them all about according as they can find nouriſhment: but
the ſtalke, ſtocke, branches and boughs, which are to be nouriſhed in
the ayre, alwayes diſperſe themſelues, draw and aſcend vpward. Beaſts
hauing ſenſe, doe much more ſhewe that liking which they haue to

follow their natural inclination. For we ſee that by their proper apprehenſion
and appetite, they are driuen hither and thither to ſeeke and
follow after that which they deſire and loue, being agreeable to their
nature: and to flie from that which they hate, as being contrary thereunto.
Likewiſe men, who only of all other mortall creatures were by
creation made partakers of reaſon, haue their proper motion conuenient
to their nature. For being created to attaine to that ſoueraigne and
eternall Good, which is ſet before them in the diuine eſſence, they haue
receiued from that infinite goodnes power and vertue to wiſh for that
Good, with a deſire to apply and ioyne themſelues thereunto. Wherefore
all men are naturally pricked and driuen forward with a loue and
deſire tending to that Good: aſwell becauſe of that naturall agreement
which they haue with the ſame Idea of Good, which is God (their
ſoules being of a celeſtial and immortall eſſence) as alſo becauſe this
Good is of that nature that it ought to be loued of euery nature, yea
ſo much the more loued as there is greater meaſure of reaſon in the
creature to know it.The difference betweene the naturall and ſupernaturall deſire of man to good. But this deſire naturally ingrafted in euery mans
heart, which prouoketh and keepeth men in a loue and liking of euery
thing which they thinke meete to content and ſatisfie them, and which
they ſeeke after in diuers things as their affections lead them, differeth
much from that deſire, which by heauenly grace is planted a new in
thoſe, whom God according to his good pleaſure and alwaies iuſt wil,
hath choſen and elected to euerlaſting happineſſe, and pricked forward,
guideth and leadeth them to that principall end for which they
were created. For although the other ſort of men, being heires of that
corruption that hath ouerſpread the whole nature of man by the
meanes of the ſinne of the firſt father of all, be driuen forward in ſoule
and ſpirit, yea many times not thinking thereof, to their naturall deſire
of obtayning that Good: yet they ſeeke it as blind men that goe by
groping, but cannot find it, becauſe the darkenes of error & ignorance,
wherewith their vnderſtanding is ouerwhelmed, hindreth them from
looking directly towards that Good, and cauſeth them to wander out
of that only way that could lead them vnto it. So that in ſtead of looking
vnto God, and to celeſtiall and heauenly things, they ſtay themſelues
about earthly & corruptible things, vnto which the neerer they
labor to approch, the farther off they are from the end of their wiſhes &
deſires. For this cauſe the bleſſed Apoſtle ſaith,1. Cor. 2. 14. 
                  that the natural man perceiueth
not the things of the ſpirit of God: for they are fooliſhneſſe vnto him:
neyther can he know them, becauſe they are ſpiritually diſcerned. But they
that are illuminated, and guided by heauenly and ſupernaturall light,
and whoſe vnderſtanding is framed by the ſpirit of God, to receiue

It, know then how they are carried by their proper motion to the
contemplation of the true Good, in the enioying whereof they ſhall
once for euer be made partakers of a felicitie,Iſay. 64. 4. which eye neuer ſaw,
nor eare heard, neither came into mans heart: I meane, when by
diſſoluing the mortall tabernacle of this body, they ſhall be clothed
with glorious immortalitie, and ſhall ſee him face to face who
is all in all: in whome they ſhall be ſatisfied, according to the doctrine
of the Prophet,Pſal. 16. 11. 
                  In thy preſence is the fulneſſe of ioy, and at thy
right hand there are pleaſures for euermore. This is that (my companions)
which ought to whet vs on to direct our ſight ſtreight to that
place whereat wee ought to leuell, namely to heauen, and not
looke to any other thing then to God, who is the ſcope, which
we deſire and ſhal one day attaine vnto. Nowe if wee can not ſee
this white ſo farre off, and much leſſe come vnto it without direction,
GOD is come neare vnto vs in the perſon of his Sonne Ieſus
Chriſt, who being the brightneſſe of his glory, hath left vs his word
for a ſure guide, beſides ſo many teſtimonies of his prouidence and
goodneſſe ouer all creatures,How we may ſee God. that wee daily beholde him as it were
viſible in them. For the ruled motions of the heauens, the wonderfull
workemanſhip of ſo many ſtarry tents, the connexion, agreement,
force, vertue and beauty of the Elements: the ſituation, firmneſſe, &
ſpreading of the earth amidſt the waters, and ſo many ſundry natures
and creatures in this whole frame of the worlde: al theſe things I ſay,
are ſo many interpreters to teach vs that God is the efficient cauſe
of them, and that he is manifeſted in them and by them, as their final
cauſe. But the glaſſe wherein we may yet better beholde him is man:
in whome ſhineth and is imprinted an image of the diuine eſſence,
which is not found againe in any viſible creature; & that is reaſon and
vnderſtanding, wherof by creation he was made partaker aſwel as the
Angels. This is the chiefe and principall work of the creation, whereby
God meant to giue ſuch a being to his creatures & ſpiritual natures, to
the end he might communicate his wiſdom & goodnes with them, &
thereby lead them to eternal felicitie. Wherefore if it be good for men
to conſider the works of God in his creatures, and in their nature created
by him, and that for the reaſons and ends declared by vs, it is better
and more neceſſary that they ſhould do the ſame thing in their owne
perſon & nature, wherein there are almoſt as many maruailous works
of the almighty power of God, as ther are in ye whole frame beſids,
and in all other creatures. Therefore that ſentence which ſaith, Knowe
thy ſelfe, was not without good reaſon ſo much praiſed and renowmed
amongſt al the ancient Greeke and Latin Philoſophers, as that which

is worthy to be taken for a heauenly oracle, & a ſentence pronounced
by the mouth of God. For whoſoeuer ſhall know himſelfe well, cannot
faile to know God his creator, and to honour him as he ought, if
he follow the chiefe end for which man was created, as wel as the reſidue
of the creatures. Plato in his Phaedrus, and in the tenth booke of
Lawes,How Plato came to the knowledge of God. ſearching and inquiring by the meanes of motion, what was
the ſubſtance, nature and immortalitie of the ſoule, attained to the vnderſtanding
of the diuine eſſence. Ariſtotle alſo taking the ſame way
in his 8. booke of naturall Philoſophy, ſheweth that he knew God vnder
the name of the firſt moouer, who was perpetual and vnmoueable.
But we may attaine to the knowledge of God & of our ſelues, a great
deale better then al the Philoſophers could, who were ignorant of the
true beginning and end of things, if we be guided by the word, which
is the light of the trueth, and whereof al the humane philoſophy of the
wiſeſt that were, is but a li
                     ••
                  e ſhadow. Now then, if vnder this heauenly
guide wee feede our ſpirites with a doctrine that teacheth man to
know himſelfe well, wee beginne at that ſcience which of all other
is moſt neceſſary, profitable, and pleaſant: I ſay neceſſary, as that
which guideth and leadeth vs as it were by the hand to find out God;
profitable, becauſe it bringeth a maruailous commoditie to this preſent
life, both in regarde of bodily health, as alſo of ruling all our actions
according to vertue; and pleaſant, becauſe a man may ſee
therein as it were in a ſacred temple all the images of the wonderfull
workes of the world.
            
            
               ACHITOB.
               I cannot but greatly commend thoſe Philoſophers
that reprehended and condemned them, who ſpent all their time only
in the contemplation of heauen and earth, and of the nature of other
creatures, and in the meane while deſcended not into themſelues,
to know themſelues and their nature, but eſpecially their ſoule.
For what will it profite a man to take ſo great paines as to meaſure
the whole world, and to compaſſe on euery ſide all the elementarie
region, to knowe the things that are contained in them, and their
nature, and yet in the meane time hee can not meaſure or knowe
himſelfe being but alittle handfull of earth? For although the knowledge
of the reſt of the creatures that are in this great viſible worlde,
will greatly helpe to leade him to the knowledge of God the Creatour,
neuertheleſſ
                     •
                   he ſhall neuer be able to know him well, if withall
he know not himſelfe.The knowledge of God and of our ſelues ioyned together. Yea theſe two knowledges are ſo ioyned togither,
that it is very hard matter to ſeuer them. For as a man can not
know himſelfe if he know not God, ſo he cannot know God wel, if in
like ſort he know not himſelfe. So that I take this for moſt certain, that

neither Aſtronomy, Geometry, Geography, or Coſmography, nor any
other Mathematical ſcience is ſo neceſſary for man, as that whereby
he may learne to know himſelfe wel, & to meaſure himſelfe wel by the
meaſure of his owne nature, that he may thereby know how to contayne
himſelfe within the limits thereof. As for Mathematicians, natural
Philoſophers & Phiſicions, who beſtow their trauaile in the knowledge
of nature and natural things, and in the meane time forget God
and themſelues, whereas they ought to learne both the one and the other,
by that knowledge that God hath giuen them of his works, I
ſay they are not worthy to be taken for naturall Philoſophers, Phiſicions
or Mathematicians, but rather for blockheaded beaſts. In my opinion
they behaue themſelues, as if a man ſhould be alwayes occupied
in looking vpon his houſe, and handling of his mooueables and
houſhold ſtuffe, and in the meane time did not put them to thoſe principall
and ſpeciall vſes, for which they ought to ſerue, but were altogether
forget full of himſelfe, of his wife, and of his children. Moreouer
concerning Phiſicions, if their care to know their own ſoule, with the
nature and parts therof, be not more to miniſter that food and phiſicke
which is neceſſary for it to liue wel and happily, and that for euer,
then to know the nature of mens bodies that they may cure others, it
may worthly be ſaid vnto them, Phiſicion heale thy ſelfe. For if he be
worthily derided that taketh in hand the cure of other men and cannot
heale himſelfe, or at the leaſt hath no care to doe it, ſurely that man
is well worthy to be had in greater deriſion that is more carefull, not
only of his owne, but alſo of other mens bodies, then he is of his owne
ſoule, whereby he differeth from brute beaſts, and is made partaker of
an immortall nature. Wherefore it is very requiſite, that all ſtudents in
naturall philoſophy ſhould profit ſo well in the ſtudy thereof, as to be
able to turne it into true naturall diuinity, whereby they may learne to
know God their creator, in that nature which he hath created to this
end to make himſelfe ſeene and knowen therein to all men.
               We haue therefore good cauſe (my companions) to beſtow al poſſible
paines & trauaile, that we may proceede on in ſo neceſſary & profitable
a knowledge.Two books that reach vs to know God. Wherfore we muſt lay before our eyes two bookes
which God hath giuen vnto vs to inſtruct vs by, and to lead vs to the
knowledge of himſelfe, namely the booke of nature, and the booke of
his word, which we muſt ioyne both together, as alſo that doctrine,
which is ſet forth vnto vs in them concerning the knowledge of our
ſelues, eſpecially of the ſoule, which is the true man. For the firſt booke
would ſtand vs in ſmall ſtead without the ſecond, as we ſee it dayly by
experience, yea euery one of vs hath trial thereof in himſelfe. Therefore

God of his great mercy hath added the ſecond booke vnto the firſt, to
ſupply the want that is in our nature through ſinne. For if man had not
ſinned, this booke of nature would haue ſufficed to haue kept him alwayes
in the knowledge, contemplation; and obedience of God his
creator. For then he ſhould himſelfe haue caried the booke whole
and perfect imprinted in his heart and mind: neyther ſhould his ſoule
haue needed any teacher to know to ſelfe, but in it ſelfe it ſhould haue
cleerely beheld and contemplated it ſelfe, ſo long as ſhe preſerued 
                     •
                  er
firſt light and aboad in that harmony wherein God had created her.
But now that ſhe is in the body, as it were ſome excellent picture of
Apelles fallen into a ſinke of mire, couered and compaſſed about with
thicke miſts,The neceſſitie of the word and obſcure darkneſſe, it is very needfull that we ſhould
haue another new light, brought vnto vs from heauen, which is not naturall
as the firſt but ſupernaturall. For this cauſe God hath farther giuen
vs this ſecond booke, of which I ſpake euen now, by means wherof
and by the vertue of his holy ſpirit, hee communicateth vnto vs as
much celeſtiall and heauenly light as is needfull for the knowledge
of our ſelues and of his high Maieſtie. Being therefore guided by the
ſpirit of God, whereby our ſpirit doth ſee and contemplate, let vs read
in theſe two bookes, & diligently note in them the parts, and powers,
force and vertue aſwell of the body as of the ſoule of man, eſpecially
the immortality thereof: whereby we ſhall make the way eaſie, for vs
to walke and ſport our minds hereafter in the large and goodly fields
of the whole world, by diſcourſing of all natures contayned therein, if
it ſhall pleaſe God to giue vs grace, as he hath giuen vs wils to performe
it. True it is, that we haue now taken in hand a very long piece
of worke, and not greatly neceſſary in reſpect of the principall cauſe
of our meeting together, if we meant here to make an entire and perfect
Anatomy of mans body. This duetie belongeth to Phyſicions;
which we will not take vpon vs: but it ſhall ſuffice vs to open a gappe
to the conſideration, firſt of the matter whereof the body is made, and
of the diuerſitie thereof: then of the fourme which God hath giuen
vnto it: and laſtly of the profit and vſe of them both. For through a
litle vnderſtanding and knowledge, which wee may haue of theſe
things, if we conſider them as we ought, we ſhal haue great occaſion
to maruayle at the worke of God in the frame of the body: yea wee
ſhall ſee therein ſtore of teſtimonies of his almighty power, knowledge,
wiſdome, goodneſſe and prouidence. But as for the ſoule, we
will labour to make her to behold herſelfe in the glaſſe of her wonderfull
actions, ſo farre forth as ſhe is able to contemplate herſelfe, and
to meaſure her greatneſſe by her owne compaſſe. Wherefore we will

here make as it were an Anatomy of the ſoule, and of all her partes,
powers, vertues, and faculties, inſtructing our ſelues at large in the conſideration
of her nature, creation and immortalitie: and eſchewing in
all our diſcourſes as much as we may, obſcure words and phraſes, ſubtill,
curious and vnprofitable diſputations, which the ancient Philoſophers
haue vſed in the ſearching out of ſuch matters, we wil apply our
ſelues to the greateſt number of ſuch as haue not haunted the ſchooles
of philoſophy, that we may profit many, and inſtruct our ſelues in the
truth by familiar ſpeaches, ſo farre forth as our weake iudgement is able
to comprehend, being directed by the gift and grace of God, and
made cōformable to his word, which is the true touchſtone whereby all
doctrine is to be examined. Moreouer we wil obſerue in our diſcourſes
the ſame order which we kept in our Academical treatiſes: but only
that I thinke it meeteſt for our preſent purpoſe, that euery one of vs after
he hath diſcourſed of ſome point, ſhould offer matter ſubiect to his
companion to proſecute and ſpeake of, as if he gaue him inſtructions
concerning that thing which he propoundeth vnto him. And thus we
will deale all foure of vs, euery one in his courſe, making one diſcourſe
round in the morning, and another the afternoone: continuing vntill
we haue finiſhed as it were a naturall hiſtory of man, and of
his parts, the body and ſoule. First therefore thou ſhalt
inſtruct vs ASER, in the creation of firſt
man, and in the matter whereof
mans body is
made.
            
            Par la prieres Dieu m'ayde.
         
         
            
            ¶THE FIRST DAYES
worke of the ſecond part of
the French Acadamy.
            
               Of the creation of the first man, and of the matter whereof the body
of manis made. Chap. 1.
               
                  ASER. God only hath his being of himſelfe,
therefore he is eternal, without beginning &
without end. But becauſe hee would not be
alone, he created the creatures, and by their
creation gaue being to that which was nothing
before. Therefore all natures tooke
their beeing and eſſence, and do hold it of that
firſt euerlaſting eſſence. Thus alſo he anſwered
to Moſes, who asked of him what his
name was:The name of God. Exod. 3. 14. 
                  I will be that I will be: or, I am that I am, Moreouer he ſaid,
Thus ſhalt thou ſay to the children of Iſrael: I am hath ſent me vnto you.
We ſee heere what name hee giueth himſelfe, whereby hee ſheweth
that he onely is, and hath an immutable eſſence and exiſtence, which
onely, to ſpeake properly, a man may call a Being. Wherefore ſeeing
God is the firſt eſſence, and that onely that hath being of it ſelfe, and
from which all others proceede, as riuers from their ſpring and fountaine,
we ſhall eaſily come vnto the Eternitie of God, if we know how
to aſcend thither by the degrees of the eſſences of all thoſe creatures,
which deſcended from his eternall and vnchangeable eſſence, by reaſon
whereof he is called Iehouah by the Hebrews.
               If then we conſider our ſelues, euery one of vs ſhal know that he had
a beginning, that he made not himſelfe, neither came into the worlde
but by ye help of another. This conſideration wil leade euery one to his
father and mother that begat him: & being come ſo far, he wil paſſe on
and aſcend ſtep by ſtep to his anceſtors,Steps to aſcend vp by to the knowledge of God. making the like iudgement of
al his predeceſſors as of himſelfe. For he wil by and by think, that they
came into the world after the ſame maner that he did, and not otherwiſe,
and that they were not the firſt men. Thus if a man aſcend vp ſtil
from father to father, he muſt needes in the ende come to ſome one father,
that was the firſt father of all, of whome all others tooke their
beginning, as hee that was the ſtocke of all mankinde. This firſt
father muſt either haue his being of one, or be eternall, or come of

ſome eternall matter like to God, or bee God himſelfe. Which
becauſe he
                     •
                   coulde not be, 
                     •
                  hee muſt needes haue ſome beginning,
and bee borne after another faſhion then they were that deſcended of
him. Now what 
                     〈◊〉
                   can we ſay he had but the Creator of the whole
world? Being come to his firſt beginning wee can mount no higher,
but muſt ſtay there, and conclude, that this firſt builder of nature was
without beginning, that he is infinite and eternall, otherwiſe we ſhall
neuer find place to ſtay at. Thus we ſee how the creature leadeth vs
from eſſence to eſſence, proceeding from one to another, vntill it come
to the firſt eſſence which is infinite and eternall, the ſpring and fountaine
of all others, which we call God. But let vs ſpeake of this creation
of the firſt man.
               After the almighty power of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Eternal had within nothing and of
nothing made the onely matter of the world, & had ſeucred out of this
Chaos, the ayre, the fire, the earth and the water, & inriched the whole
with celeſtiall lights; herbes, plants, earthy, ayery, and watry liuing
creatures,Gen. 1. 26. 
                  Let vs (ſayd he) make man in our owne image according to our
likeneſſe, and let them rule ouer the 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  of the ſea, and o
                        •
                     er the foule of the
heauen, and ouer the beaſts, and ouer all the earth, and ouer euery thing that
creepeth and moouethon the earth. Nowe we will note here in the firſt
place three things well worthy of conſideration.Three things to be conſidered in the creation of man. Firſt, that God did
not barely command that man ſhould be made and created, as he commanded
for the other creatures: but he ſpeaketh, as though ſome great
king or prince ſhould ideliberate with his Councill about the making
of ſome great worke: declaring afterward himſelfe why he tooke this
way in the cruation of man onely, and not in the creation of the other
creatures like wiſe, when he ſayth, According to our own image and likeneſſe,
which is the ſecond thing we haue to note. For by theſe wordes
he plainely declareth, that he mindeth to make a worke, the like wherof
was not before, and to draw our an image more agreeable to his
nature and more worthy his Maieſty then he had done before amongſt
all the works
                     •
                   of his hands. For although he had already idomed and
repleniſhed the whole heauens 
                     〈◊〉
                   goo
                     •
                  y lights, yea al thee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
and reſidue of the world with all ſorts of creatures, yet there was not
one creature vnder heauen which he had made capable of vnderſtanding
and reaſon, to know and glorifie God the creator of the whole
world. And 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Angels being 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſpirits had this vnderſtanding
and knowledge, yet he would haue man beſides vpon earth,
for whoſe ſake chiefly he had created the world, to the end hee might
know and glorifie him together with his Angels. Therefore Moſes addeth
the third thing which we haue to conſider in this deliberation of

mans creation, thereby the better to let vs know the excellency of this
creature aboue the reſt, when hee declareth, that God would create
him, that he might rule ouer the reſt of the liuing creatures, and ouer
the whole earth, as if man ſhould be his Lieutenant, and as it were a
litle terrene god, vnder the great & ſoueraigne God that created him.
But ſome man may aske with whom God maketh this deliberation?
For he ſpeaketh as though he would haue ſome helpers and companions
in the making of this ſo excellent a work. The Prophet Iſaiah anſwereth
to this,Isa. 40. 13, 14. rom. 11. 34. ſaying, Who was his counſeller? or who hath giuen to him
firſt, and he ſhalbe recompenſed? For he had no other counſaile or helpe
but of himſelfe, and of his heauenly and eternall wiſedome, as it is teſtified
by Salomon.
                  Prou. 8. 22. &c. Therefore we muſt not thinke that he had the Angels
for counſellers and helpers, either in the creation of man, or of any
other creature whatſoeuer, as ſome haue preſumed to imagine and
to affirme. For that were to derogate too much from the nature and
maieſtie of God, and to take from him the title of Almightie, which agreeth
to him onely. For the creature cannot be a creator. And as there
is but one onely God, ſo there is but one creator of all things. For the
worke of the creation can agree to none but to God only. But Moſes
by this maner of ſpeaking in the plural number, meant to giue out
ſome obſcure knowledge of the trinitie of perſons that is in the vnitie
of God,The trinitie of perſons in the vnitie of the godhead. and that vnion which they haue together in the worke of the
creation, which is common to the Father, with the Sonne and the holy
Ghoſt, as are all the other workes of God. For although there bee diſtinction
of perſons in one and the ſame diuine eſſence, yet there is no
diuiſion betweene them nor ſeparation. And as they are vnited together
in one and the ſame eſſence, ſo likewiſe are they in all their works.
For the Father doth nothing but by the Sonne, & that in the vertue of
the holy ſpirite.Gen. 1. 27. Therefore the Prophet addeth immediately God created
the man in his image: in the image of God created he him: he created them
male and female. We ſee here that Moſes doth not propound vnto vs
three Gods or three creators, but one onely. And in that he doeth twice
repeate this, that God created man in his image, it is to let vs vnderſtand,
that this point ought to be well conſidered of, and weighed, as that
wherein conſiſteth all the excellencie of man, and the true difference
that is betweene him and the other liuing creatures, which are but
brute beaſts. We ſhall know where we ought to ſeeke this image of
God in man, after we haue heard the reſt of the hiſtorie of his creation.
For after that Moſes hath briefly and ſummarily ſpoken as wee haue
ſaide, he taketh the ſame matter againe into his hand and intreateth
thereof more ſpecially.Gen. 
                        〈◊〉
                      7. He ſaith then, That the Lo 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the

duſt of the ground, & breathed in his face breath of life, & that the man was
a liuing ſoule. Wherby he ſheweth euidētly, yt God did not create ye body
& ſoule of mā both at one time, as he had created the beaſts, but the
body firſt & then the ſoule, which he ioined therwith, not only to giue
life vntoit, as it is giuen to brute beaſts by ye ſoule which they haue, but
alſo to make it capable of vnderstāding, as we ſhal vnderſtand more at
large hereafter. For we ſpeak not now by what means, or at what time
ye ſoule is ioined with the body in the cōmon & ordinary generation of
men, but only of the mean & order which God obserued in the creatiō
of ye firſt mā, according to ye rehearſall which Moſes maketh. Now touching
ye matter wherof he made him, becauſe the chiefeſt & moſt apparant
was taken frō the earth,Gen. 3. 19. it is ſaid expreſly, that he was made therof,
& that he ſhould return thither, as we ſee it true, in the death of euery one.
But this is moſt certain & granted of al ye great philoſophers yea euidēt
to be ſeen, that mans body is compounded of the 4. elements, & of all
their qualities,Mans body compounded of the 4. elements. as alſo all the other bodies of creatures vnder heauen.
And becauſe the greateſt part which remaineth of yt which wee ſee of
man, is of ye earth, therefore it is ſaid, that he returneth to earth, although
whatſoeuer is taken of the other elements in ye compositiō of his body,
doth likewiſe turne againe into thē. For the fleſh of man agreeth aptly
with the earth, his vital ſpirits wt the aire & the fire, his humors with the
water.Of what element e
                        •
                     ery ſence holdeth moſt. The ſence of ſeeing agreeth wt the fire: that of hearing with the
aire: yt of taſting we the element of water: the ſence of touching with the
earth: & that of ſmeling with the aire and fire, as we ſhall vnderſtand
more at large hereafter when we handle them. Yea there is no piece ſo
ſmall in the whole frame of man, wherein euery one of the elements
doth not intemeddle his power & qualities, although one of thē doth
alwaies command aboue the reſt. This is to be ſeen in the blood, which
is the firſt & chiefeſt of thoſe 4. humours in the body, & is properly of
the nature of the aire. For the muddy dregs, which cōmonly thickē &
ſettle in the bottō of it, are of the nature of the earth, & are called Melancholy:
the pure blood that ſwimmeth in the midſt doth repreſent vnto
vs the aire: that humour that ſwimmeth in a rounde circle is watrie
ſleame: and the skumme that appeareth aboue, is the choler, which is
of the nature of the fire. If we cōſider the ordinary generation of men,
the matter is humour: naturall heate is as it were the maſter buylder:
dryneſſe hardneth the body: and colde refreſhings doe not onely moderate
the heate that the moyſt matter ſhould not bee conſumed, but
haue alſo their proper action to congele and gather it together.
               Nowe we muſt vnderſtand that of this firſt matter which contained
all the elements,The firſt matter the mother of all things. and which God made the mother of all things, and

capable of all formes, euery bodie is compounded, & euery one returneth
into the ſame againe, & of that taketh a new forme: ſo yt the true
matter of all corporall things doth not turne into nothing, neither increaſeth
or decreaſeth in any ſort. So that euer ſince the Eternall that
can doe all things, made this whole great frame of nothing, no one
thing is made of nothing, neither doth any thing vaniſh into nothing:
but the change of euery thing yt is bred or that dieth, is only in forme.
Now by this knowledge of the matter of the firſt mans body, we may
eaſily vnderſtand of what matter al mens bodies are made. For certain
it is, yt of one only man al others haue had their beginning, being all his
ſeed & offſpring & multiplying daily according to his firſt vertue. The
reaſon hereof is this, becauſe this power is naturally ingraffed in euery
thing to bring forth his like, & to continue it ſelfe in the ſame kind, being
inhabled therunto through a quickening vertue infuſed into it by
that diuine reaſon, which is the efficient & preſeruing cauſe of all creatures.
Now I doubt not but ye Epicures & Atheiſts, & ſuch like deriders
of God & his word, with whom this age is peſtred more then any age
paſt, will account all this to bee a very fable, that hath bene hitherto
ſpoken of the creation of the firſt man. For they giue no more credite
to the writings of Moſes, and of all the Prophets & Apoſtles, then to
an old wiues tale, or to the fables of doting dreames. Neither wil they
beleeue any more of God, of his prouidence and of his workes, then
they are able to vnderſtand, know, and comprehend by their naturall
reaſon. They will ſay then, that they haue not ſeene the like workes
in nature,An argument of all Atheiſts againſt mans creation. (which they put in ſtead of God:) and ſo by the ſame reaſon
they wil account for lies whatſoeuer the word of God teacheth vs cō
                  cerning
the creation of this great viſible world, & of all things contayned
therein, as alſo that which we ſhal heare anon touching the creation
of woman. And thus becauſe they ſaw not when God created the
worlde, & becauſe he did ſet another order in nature after the creation
thereof, then there was before he had created nature, therefore according
to their goodly phyloſophie, there ſhalbe neither God nor Creator,
nor difference betwixt the workes of the creation, in which nature
it ſelfe was created, and thoſe that ſollowed after God and diſpoſed the
order of nature created by him. What then ſhall we ſay of man & of al
the world? Shal he be without a creator, and eternall, or made of ſome
matter that was eternall with God, or ſhall he be God himſelfe? For
eyther he was created, or he was not created. If he were not created,
then is he eternall, as euen Ariſtotle ſaith, following the diſcourſe
of humane reaſon,Ariſtotles errour was yt the worlde had no beg
                        •
                     nning which notwithſtanding blinded him in this marter
of creation: Wherein hee is not onely contrarie to the worde, but

alſo to his maſter Plato, and to the beſt and moſt excellent amongſt
the Philoſophers. But if the worlde was created, it muſt needes bee
that it had ſome beginning, & that the firſt man, (as likewiſe euery other
creature) was begotten after another maner then the vſe is at this
preſent. But what would theſe ſharpe wittes, or rather dull beaſts ſay,
if they had not ſeene by experience the woorke of God (which they
call the worke of nature onely) in the generation of men? For of what
are they daily begotten and conceiued, but of a ſuperſluitie, and as it
were of an excrement of mans body, as hereafter we ſhall vnderſtand
more at large? Is this farre more eaſie to digeſt in humane reaſon then
the firſt creation of man? If theſe skorners had neuer ſeen ſuch a thing,
and if they were not conuicted heereof by dayly experience, they
would giue as litle credite to thoſe that ſhould tell them of it, as they
doe to the ſpirite of God ſpeaking of his workes by the mouth of his
Prophets. As for thoſe that ſet nature in the place of God, what greater
brutiſhnes can proceede from them? For doeth not the very ſame
of nature declare ſufficiently,Nature commeth of the Latine word Naſcor. which ſignifieth to be borne. that nature is a thing made and created,
and ſo conſequently, hath her creation and her birth of God, as all other
creatures haue? But God puniſheth theſe poore ignorant fellows
with the like iudgement that he doeth many other skilfull and great
Philoſophers, whome hee oftentimes giueth ouer into a reprobate
ſence, becauſe through their pride and ingratitude they abuſe
the knowledge of naturall things which God giueth them: and ſo
that ſcience which ſhould lead them to a greater knowledge of God,
maketh them more beaſt-like then any other, through their owne
fault. For it cannot be otherwiſe but that euery one, conſidering the
nature and compoſition euen of one only member of mans body, moſt
of neceſſitie acknowledge and confeſſe, that ſome Woorke-maſter
made it, and that this Woorke-maſter is of no bodily or humane nature,
but of a ſpirituall and diuine being: that hee hath not onely vnderſtanding
and knowledge of all things, but alſo that hee is vnderſtanding
it ſelfe: that hee knoweth, loueth, and is the authour of all
order, and that his wiſedome and vertue is ſo infinite, that it ſurmounteth
all mens vnderſtandings. Heereupon it followeth, that hee is
worthie to be eſteemed for God, and to bee woorſhipped of all men.
There are others that aske, why man was not created an infinite ſpace
of time before hee beganne to be by the teſtimonie of the holy Scripture,
which teacheth vs, that it is not yet fully 6000. yeeres ſince his
creation, as though he had bene created very late. But if the ſhortneſſe
of time offendethe them, becauſe they thinke that there are ſo
fewe yeers, ſince we reade in holy Scripture, that man was created,

let them conſider that nothing laſteth long if it haue any
ende, and that the whole ſpace of ages paſt, if it be compared with eternitie
that is endleſſe, is not onely not to be thought litle, but none
at all. Therefore that queſtion which now they aske after 5000. yeres,
they might with the ſame curioſitie demaund after ſixe hundred thouſand
yeeres, if the world had endured ſo long. They alſo that were before
vs when man was but newely created, might haue moued this
queſtion: yea the firſt man might haue enquired alſo aſſoone as hee
was made, why he was not made before. And ſo this controuerſie about
the beginning of mans being, had neuer at any time heretofore
any other reaſons then it hath nowe, neither ſhall haue heereafter.
Let vs knowe then that God being eternall and without beginning
began time, and in time made man whome hee had neuer made before,
being ledde thereunto not by any newe and ſodaine motion,
but by an immutable and eternall counſaile. For no newe thing can
befall him, neither is there any thing in him that is mutable: but according
to the height and depth of his riches hee hath multiplied the
children of men. And let them thinke, imagine and diſpute what
they liſt, yet all things haue had their beginning according to the
good prouidence of God, which no man in the worlde can ſufficiently
comprehend. O great myſterie, that God hath alwayes
beene, and that it pleaſed him ſome time paſt to make man firſt,
who was neuer made before, and yet not to change his purpoſe
and will!How we muſt aſcend vp to the knowledge of God by his creatures. Thus you ſee howe wee muſt ſteppe by ſteppe aſcend by
the workes of God vnto himſelfe, as we haue alreadie touched in the
beginning of our ſpeech, and as wee can doe it well ynough in mens
workes. For when I behold a worke, it by and by putteth me in minde
of the inſtruments wherewith it was made, and the inſtruments, of
him that made them, and of him that ſet them aworke. Then the
Workemaſter putteth me in minde of him that made him ſuch a one,
namely, both of his maſter that taught him, and alſo of his parents that
begate him. Thus climing vp ſtill from one to one, and from degree
to degree, I muſt needes in the ende conclude, that there is one chiefe
Workmaſter, of whom all others are deſcended by their order & degree.
And there I muſt ſtay: as in like maner proceeding from one eſſence
to another, I may come to the contemplation of that infinite and
eternall eſſence, which is the ſpring and firſt cauſe of euery nature,
namely vnto God, who hath giuen to that matter whereof he made all
things, a forme meete and conuenient for that worke which he would
make of it. This is that which I thinke we ought to conceaue touching
the creation of the matter of mans body. Now before we conſider the

diſpoſition therof, I thinke we ought to intreate of the creation of woman,
who is one ſelfe ſame fleſh, differing onely in ſexe, and appointed
of God to bee a neceſſarie helpe for the originall and preſeruation
of mankinde: which I deſire to heare you diſcourſe of, AMANA.
            
            
               Of the creation of Woman. Chap. 2.
               AMANA. No maruaile, if the eye of mans ſoule be often dimmed,
yea looſeth all light in the diligent conſideration of the wonderful
workes of Gods prouidence. For as the eye of the body although
cleare of it ſelfe, cannot behold colours, figures, & other viſible things,
except it bee illuminated with light from heauen, or from ſome other
lightſome body: ſo albeit our vnderſtanding of it owne nature be very
cleare ſighted, as being a beame of the diuine brightnes, yet by reaſon
of the bond that conioyneth it to the body, wherein it is ouerwhelmed
with the darknes of the matter, it can in no wiſe attain to the glittering
conceptions of eternall wiſedome, vnleſſe it alwaies haue God
that great & euerlaſting Sunne, and his heauenly light to illuminat it,
and to guide it to the faithful contemplation of the woorkes of his almighty
hand. This hath bin the cauſe why ſo many great wits diſcourſing
philoſophically of the originall and beginning of things, and looking
on euery ſide, yea doubting and fearing many things, which they
found contrary to humane reaſon, haue bin caried hither and thither
with diuers opinions, like to a veſſel toſſed in a deep ſea, but could neuer
come neere to the knowledge of the trueth. But if wee follow the
bright ſtarre of trueth fixed in the heauenly booke of life, as wee haue
learned therein the creation of man, ſo we may as eaſily be inſtructed
in the creation of the woman, to the confuſion of the wiſe men of the
world, and of all Epicures and Atheiſts. The holy ſcriptures teach vs,
that after God had created man & placed him in the garden of Eden,
to dreſſe it, and keepe it, & had forbidden him to eate of the tree of the
knowledge of good & euil, which was a ſigne & tokē of the homage,
obedience, and ſubiection he did owe to God his creator & Lord, and
of that bleſſed life appointed for him as a recompence and crowne of
this obedience, It is not good (then ſaide hee) that man ſhoulde bee himſelfe
alone,
                  Gen. 2. 15, 18. 
                  I will make him an helpe meete for him. And to ſhew the better
how this helpe was, not onely meete, but alſo neceſſary for man,
Moſes ſaith, that God had already brought all the beaſts before Adam,
that he might name them according to their natures and kinds,
which hee perfourmed.What great knowledge of naturall things was in Adam.
                   Whereby we may iudge, what great knowledge
of naturall things was in Adam before he ſinned. For otherwiſe

hee could not haue giuen to all liuing creatures names agreeable
to their nature: and if hee had not named them as he ſhould, hee
had brought in great confuſion in nature, Afterwarde Moſes addeth,
that amongst all thoſe liuing creatures hee found no helpe meete for
Adam: yea the Lorde had ſpoken of him before, as if he had bene
alone in the worlde. For although all the beaſtes, and all the reſidue
of the creatures were giuen to man to aſſiſt him, ſo that being
in that eſtate of innocencie wherein hee was then, hee might
receiue all ſeruice and readie obedience from all the creatures, neuertheleſſe
hee had not as yet any helpe of his kinde. For hee coulde
not haue that familiaritie and conueſation with the beaſtes, nor
receiue ſuch helpe from them, as hee coulde from creatures of his
owne kinde. Therefore when the Lorde ſaide, that it was not good
for man to be alone, hee declared plainely, that he did not create him
to liue and ſolitary in the world, but with companie, and that his
will was, that there ſhould be men vpon earth, who ſhould liue in ſocietie
and fellowſhip together.Man was created for ſocietie. Nowe ſeeing that man was created
for this ende, he coulde not liue in company with others of his kinde
without generation and multiplication thereof, which coulde not
be except hee were ioyned to a wiſe, ſeeing it pleaſed GOD to appoynt
it ſo. Wherefore as hee created the other liuing and ſenſible
creatures of two ſexes in one kinde, namely, ſome males and others
females, that they might increaſe and multiplie by generation, ſo
likewiſe dealt hee with mankinde. But as hee tooke an other courſe
in the creation of man, then he did in that of beaſtes, ſo alſo dealt he
in the creation of the woman, whome hee purpoſed to giue vnto
man for a companion. For hee created not man and woman both
together, but man firſt, and then woman afterwarde, as wee will
declare by and by. Nowe becauſe there is no coniunction or communion
in any humane ſocietie, wherein that holy bonde, which
ought to knitte all men together, and ioyne them one to another, is
better declared, then in that whereby man & wife are conioyned and
vnited, as it were in one ſelfe ſame bodie, and in one ſoule, therefore it
pleaſed God not without cauſe to beginne this holie ſocietie by that
coniunction, which is the bonde and foundation of all the reſt, and
as it were the ſpring-head and fountayne of all mankinde. Therefore
it is written, that GOD minding to create woman and to
giue her to man for an helper, cauſed an heauie ſleepe to fall vpon
Adam, (which name is as much to ſaye as, Of earth) and
when hee ſlept hee tooke one of his ribbes, and cloſed vp the fleſh
in ſteade thereof. And the Lorde God made a woman of the

ribbe,The creation of woman, and vſe thereof. In Hebrew Iſh ſignifieth man, and Iſhah woman. which he had taken from man: then the man ſaid, This nowe is
bone of my bones, and fleſh of my fleſh, ſhe ſhall be called Mannes, or Manniſh,
becauſe ſhe was taken out of man. Firſt we ſee in this hiſtory, that God
woulde not that the male and female ſhould haue two beginnings,
but onely one, and that they ſhould be as it were one ſtocke of mankinde,
to the end that the coniunction therof ſhould be more ſtraight,
firme and inuiolable. For if it had beene otherwiſe, the diuerſitie of beginnings
might haue giuen occaſion either of conte
                     •
                  ning one another,
or of enuie, diſſention, and brawlings. Therefore God created
in the perſon of Adam the fountaine of mankinde, and after
framed Euah, (which is as much to ſay, as aliue, or liuing) to the
ende wee might knowe, that the woman was not created as a new
creature of an other race or kinde, but was onely a portion and part
of the nature of man. By this meanes Adam had in the woman as
it were a glaſſe to beholde and contemplate himſelfe, as Euah alſo
had the like in him, and as yet to this day euery husband hath the
like in his wife, and euery wife in her husband. For the woman
was fleſh of the fleſh of man, bloud of his bloud, and bone of his
bones, euen as it were his owne body, and a ſecond-ſelfe. Howe
then can the husband deſpiſe and hate his wife, and not hate himſelfe?
For as Saint Paul witneſſeth,Epheſ. 5. 29. 
                  No man euer yet hated his owne
fleſh. And what cauſe hath a woman to bee loath to bee obedient
to her husband, if ſhee conſider that ſhee is taken out of him, and
that in ſetting her ſelfe againſt him, ſhee ſtriueth aginſt her ſelfe,
and doeth her ſelfe great wrong and iniurie? Therefore as the Lord
hath declared what place hee woulde haue the husband and wife
to keepe, euery one in their degree, by that order which hee hath
obſerued in creating the man firſt, and then the woman: ſo he hath
done the like in that hee created the woman neyther of the mans
head nor of his feete, but of his ribbe. Whereby as on the one ſide,
hee admoniſheth the wife not to lift vp her ſelfe aboue her huſband
by taking authoritie ouer him, and ſo making her ſelfe his
head: ſo on the other ſide hee admoniſheth the husbande not to
abuſe his authoritie, by putting his wife vnder his feete, as if ſhee
were a ſlaue, but to account of her as of his ſiſter and 
                     •
                  ompanion.
Wee are therefore to conſider the great wiſedome and prouidence
of God in this creation of the woman. But Atheiſts, and other contemners
of the worde of God, beſides that goodly ground and foundation
of their impieti
                     ••
                   whereof wee heard before, take farther occaſion
to deride this hiſtorie of the creation of woman, becauſe it
is ſayde, that ſhee was builded of a ribbe which God tooke from Adam.
                  
Truely the woorkes of God in the creation of things are not vſuall,
becauſe they are the firſt: but they which will not beleeue them,
may as well giue no credit neither to the myracles that haue beene in
times paſt, nor to thoſe that are daily ſeene. For they were not to be
called by this name of miracles, if they were wrought by an ordinarie
courſe of nature. They conclude then out of Moſes ſpeach, either that
Adam had then one rib more then he ſhould haue had,How Atheiſts ſcofle at the womans creation. or elſe that he
had one leſſe then he ſhould after the womans creation: ſo that what
ſide ſoeuer you take they will find a great abſurdity. They that ſeeke
for occaſions in this ſort to ſcofte at the workes of God, that ſtudy and
take delight to cauill at them, will alwayes finde abſurdities enough
in them according to their corrupt will and iudgement. For they will
daily coine as many as they liſt to hinder themſelues from the knowledge
of God and of his workes, leaſt they ſhould be conſtrained by
them to glorifie him. But indeede what can they doe elſe but barke againſt
God and his prouidence, and laugh at al that is taught vs by the
holy ſpirite concerning the creation of all thinges contained in the
world, ſeeing they are not capable of the knowledge and vnderſtanding
of heauenly myſteries? But I demand of them, what ſtrange matter
they finde in this, if it were ſo that Adam was created with one rib
more then men commonly haue, which God prepared in his creation
for the womans creations or otherwiſe, if hee had one leſſe after her
creation,Genes. 2. 21. which is more likely? For it is ſaide expreſly, that God filled
vp with fleſh that place out of which hee tooke the ribbe whereof he framed
Euah. So that Adam loſt nothing, neither was he leſſe perfect in
reſpect of that. For God did very well recompence it two wayes.
Firſt, bicauſe that which he put in ſteade thereof, did ſerue Adams turne
as well as if his rib had remained ſtill. Secondly, it turned to his great
good, in that he had a whole woman for one of his ribbes, yea ſuch
an helpe was giuen vnto him, that ſhee was as it were another halfe
of his body to make him a perfect man. Beſides al this, we haue further
to note the ſignifications of thoſe things which God meant to repreſent
vnto vs, and to teach vs by that manner of proceeding, which hee
obſerued increating the woman; of which I haue already ſpoken. But
we haue alſo to marke herein a notable prophecy of Ieſus Christ and
of his Church and a liuely image of her vnion,Of the mvſterie of Chriſt and his Church in the creation of the woman. coniunction, and communication
with him being her husband. For as the rib was taken
from the mans ſide whileſt he was aſleepe, that the woman might bee
made: ſo in the death of Ieſus Chriſt, ſignified by this ſleepe, and whileſt
he hung vpon the croſſe, his ſide was pierced, out of which iſſued
blood and water which reſemble the Sacraments that tend to the edification

of the Church. And as Euah was taken from Adam according
to the fleſh, who was the firſt ſtocke of mankinde, and then ioyned
vnto him in marriage, that of twaine they might be one in one fleſh:
ſo the Church was taken from Ieſus Chriſt according to the ſpirite,
who is the true ſtocke of mankind regenerated and reformed after the
image of God, that ſhe might be one myſtical body with Ieſus Christ,
who was giuen vnto her by God for her husband and head. For this
cauſe we may ſay the ſame things of him and of his Church, which we
ſpake before of the authoritie and ſoueraignty of the husband ouer his
wife, & of the ſubiection of the wife towards her husband. For the
Church was not firſt, but Ieſus Chriſt who is eternall, very God and
very man: neyther was Ieſus Chriſt taken from her, but ſhee from
him. Therefore that which Adam ſaide of Euah, when God brought
her vnto him, and when he had ſeene her after he awoke from ſleepe,
namely,Ephes. 5. 30. 
                  This now is bone of my bones, and fleſh of my fleſh, Saint Paul applieth
to Ieſus Chriſt and to his Church, becauſe ſhee is made bone of
his bone, and fleſh of his fleſh, and partaker of the very nature of Ieſus
Chriſt by faith in him, and by that vnion, coniunction, and fellowſhip
which ſhe hath with him, whereby ſhee is conioyned vnto him
as his ſpouſe. Wherefore the faithfull haue good cauſe to reioyce,
knowing that there is the like ſpirituall vnion, coniunction and communication
betweene Ieſus Chriſt and them, as there is betweene the
husband and the wife according to the fleſh.
               Nowe as wee haue anſwered to the friuolous ſpeeches which Atheiſts
commonly make about the creation of the woman, ſo wee
will not paſſe ouer with ſilence the opinion of naturall Philoſophers,The opinion of naturall Philoſophers touching the nature of women.
who ſay, that the male is as it were a perfect man in compariſon
of the woman, and that ſhee is an imperfect man. For they doe
teach, that nature tendeth alwayes to the greateſt perfection that
ſhee can attaine vnto: and becauſe the male is more perfect then
the female, therefore that ſhee alwayes endeuoureth to bring
foorth males. But when ſhee wanteth power and ſtrength to doe
that ſhee woulde, ſhe ingendereth females inſteade of males. Wherevpon
it ſhoulde followe, that the generation of the woman, as alſo
that of the other females of all liuing creatures, is an infirmitie, a
defect, and an imperfection of nature. But I woulde gladly demaunde
of them, whether GOD made an imperfect worke or
no, when hee created the firſt woman: and whether hee did not
create her as perfect in her kinde, and in that degree for which hee
created her, as hee did the man in his. Moreouer, ſeeing God is
the creatour of nature, it is certaine that hee created it perfect in all

things belonging vnto it, and that hee hath made it ſubiect to certaine
Lawes, vnder which it is alwayes guyded by his prouidence
as well in the generation of females as of males, of the woman as
of the man. And if ſome creatures excell others, yet that hindereth
not why euery one ſhoulde not bee perfect in his order and
nature, hauing regarde to their Creatour, and to the ende for the
which hee created them. Wee muſt not therefore alleadge anie
imperfection in the creation of the woman, more then in that of
the man: ſeeing that if ſhee had beene created otherwiſe then
ſhee was, ſhee ſhoulde not haue beene ſo perfect in her nature
as ſhee is, becauſe ſhee woulde not ſo fitly ſerue that turne for the
which ſhee was created, namely, to helpe man, both in the generation
and continuance of his kinde, and alſo in being a ſuccour
vnto him in ſuch thinges as belong to his nouriſhement, and
in the guiding and gouernement of them. Beſides, is it not ſayd
as well of the woman as of the man, that ſhe was created in the
image of GOD, as wee haue already heard? For Moſes, after
hee had ſayde that God created man in his image, addeth immediately,Genes. 1. 27. 1. Cor. 11. 7.
                  In the image (I ſay) of God created hee him, hee created
them male and female. And, as man is the image and glorie of
God, ſo the woman is the glorie of the man: neyther can the one be
bee without the other. For as the woman is of the man, ſo the man
is by the woman, but all thinges are of GOD. Therefore the worde
of Building,
                  What the word 
                        〈◊〉
                      importeth in the 
                        ••
                     eation of the woman. Geneſ. 2. 22. which the Prophet vſeth in ſetting downe the creation
of the woman, is duely to bee conſidered in this matter. For
when hee ſaieth that God built the woman of Adams ribbe, this
worde importeth more then if he had simply ſayde, that he made
and formed the woman. For thereby hee woulde haue vs knowe
the perfection of man, and of mankinde in the creation of the
woman, becauſe without her his building coulde not be finiſhed.
So that man is as it were the firſt foundation, vpon whom the woman
was builded: as likewiſe by generation of children proceeding
from them both, this building is not onely preſerued and continued
ſtill, but alſo furthered and augmented. Vpon the like reaſon the
worde that ſignifieth a childe in the Hebrew tongue, is taken from
a worde that ſignifieth to build in the ſame language: as in deede
children alſo are the true building of a houſe. But before we enter into
any larger diſcourſe of this matter to know the generation and multiplication
of mankind, I am of opinion that we ſhal do well to intreat
firſt of the diſpoſitiō of that matter, wherof we heard before his body
was made, as alſo of the partes thereof. For generation reſpecteth

chiefly the third kind of the natural powers & faculties of man, whoſe
vertue and properties we are not to conſider of, before we haue beene
inſtructed in all things that concerne the particular compoſition of
mans body and of euery part thereof: to this end, that we might haue
the true knowledge of that lodging which God hath giuen to man to
dwell in vpon earth, and that ſtep by ſtep wee might come to conſider
of the hoſt or tenant of this tabernacle, namely of the ſpirite and
ſoule, which is truely man. Let vs then beginne to take a view of the
diuiſion of the chiefe partes of the body, and ſo handle firſt the ſimple
or ſimilary partes, of which all the reſt are compounded. This matter
ſubiect I offer to thee ARAM, for thy diſcourſe.
            
            
               Of the ſimple or ſimilary partes of the body, namely the bones, ligaments,
griſtles, ſinowes, pannicles, cordes or filaments, vaines, arteries,
and fleſh. Chap. 3.
               ARAM. If wee take pleaſure in beholding materiall frames builded
with mens hands, eſpecially if they be made by rare workemen,
and ſuch as excell in their Arte, and in viewing attentiuely the
goodly workes that are in them, we ought to be a great deale more
delighted without al compariſon, in looking vpon the ſtately edifices
builded with the very hand of God, and vpon the exquiſite and wonderful
workes wherewith he hath adorned and ſet them forth. Curioſity
cauſeth many men to wander all their life time in lands and ſeas
vnknowen, to feede their mindes with a vaine knowledge of the maners
and cuſtoms of ſtrangers: but very few will be found, who haue
a care to know themſelues. In ſo much that being able to diſcourſe of
the ſituation of diuers regions, and of the beauty of thoſe places and
fortreſſes that are therein, yet they know not their owne houſe wherein
they alwaies dwel, and much leſſe themſelues, namely their ſoules,
which are the inhabitants. But if we thinke it a ſhame for a man to bee
ignorant of thoſe things that belong, or bring commodity or pleaſure
to the life of man, the ignorance of our ſelues, which hurteth this life
and the other we looke for, is a great deale more ſhamefull and diſhoneſt.
Now a man may eaſily perceiue how commendable, excellent
and profitable the knowledge of the nature of our bodies, and of euery
part thereof was iudged to be by men in ancient time, in that they
had publike ſchooles amongſt them, in which euery one might daily
behold Anatomies: yea Anatomies were ſhewed to euery one that
would ſee them in the priuate houſes of Philoſophers and Phyſicions.
And for this cauſe Galen ſaith, that the Ancients would not write of

this ſcience. But after when this diligence of the firſt louers thereof
beganne to be deſpiſed and reiected of the moſt part of men, it was
neceſſary that ſome ſhould write thereof for their good, as alſo for the
benefit of poſteritie. Otherwiſe they would haue fallen within ſhort
ſpace into a dangerous ignorance of their nature, and of the cauſes and
remedies of ſuch diſeaſes as dayly trouble them. But wee muſt referre
that knowledge, which in our diſcourſes wee ſeeke for out of this ſcience,
to another end. Neyther do we vndertake to ſpeake of that Art
and Science that belongeth to Phiſicions, as though we made profeſſion
thereof,The true ende and vſe of knowing th
                        •
                      booke. but onely to ſhew the true vſe of it, and howe it may bee
referred to the honour of God, and to the knowledge of his wiſedome
and prouidence: as alſo to the end, that in beholding the wonderfull
compoſition and diſpoſition of the members of our body, wee ſhoulde
remember the creator thereof, who ſeeth whatſoeuer heth moſt ſecret
and hidden therein, and who is able to make as it pleaſeth him an
Anatomy both of body and ſoule, and to ſend them both to euerlaſting
hell fire, when they will not acknowledge him to be the efficient
and finall cauſes of their being. Hauing regard therefore to this ende,
we will conſider of the parts of mans body according to the ſubiect
propounded vnto vs.
               The partes then of the body are diuided into two ſortes or kindes:
the firſtis, the ſimple or ſimilary parts, the other the compound parts.
The ſimple partes are of that nature,What the ſimple or ſimilary parts of mans body are. that euery portion of them, howe
great or little ſoeuer it be, retaineth alwayes the name that is giuen to
the whole, whereof it is a part: and of theſe ſimple partes the other
kinde is named, whereof wee will intreate heereafter, becauſe they
are compounded partes, and obtaine the place of members, whoſe
partes are not called by the name of the whole member, but euery
part hath his ſpeciall name. For all the partes of the head are not called
by the name of the head, and ſo it is in the other members of the
body. But if a bone bee broken into many peeces, euery peece is ſtill
called a bone: and the like may be ſaid of the other ſimple parts, which
are nine in number, namely, the bone, the ligament, the griſtle the ſin
                        •
                     w,
the pannicle, the cord or filament, the veine, the artery and the fleſh. Our
ſpeach therefore muſt be of theſe. No man is ignorant, that the foundation
of euery building is as much a part thereof rather more (although
it appeare not) then any other part howe ſumptuous ſoeuer it
be. For the reſt are laid and planted vpon the foundation, neyther can
they long continue in their beauty, vnles that be good and firme. We
may ſay the like of the bones of a mans body:Of the bones of mans body. (which are made of the
ſeede in generation, when the thickeſt part of it is hardned by heat, as

ſtones are baked in the earth by great heat.) For they are not only like
to foundations and pillers, which ſuſtaine the body & al the members
thereof, but they are as it were pales and fences vnto it to containe all
things that are within the building of the body, and to inuiron al the
parts of it, as it were with walles and rampires. For this cauſe they are
more earthy, drier, and colder then any other part of the body. And
therefore the prouidence of God appeareth moſt wonderfull in this
compoſition of the bones, ſeeing that of one ſelfe ſame peece of earth
or clay he maketh the bones ſo ſtrong and hard in compariſon of the
ligaments,Gods prouidence great in the creatiō of the bones. gri
                     •
                  tles, and oter ſimple partes: ſo that in reſpect of theſe
the other are for ſtrength & hardnes like to ſtones and mettals in compariſon
of the other part of the earth. Neither is the wiſedome of God
worthy of great admiration in this reſpect onely, but alſo becauſe hee
made not the bones all of one peece, nor yet of one faſhion and forme.
For minding to giue motiō, not only to man but alſo to al other liuing
& ſenſible creatures, the bones were to be diuided & diſtinguiſhed into
diuers pieces, to the end they ſhould not hinder this motion, which
is ſo neceſſary for thoſe creatures: the maner whereof wee may ſee in
men armed at all points.A fit ſimilitude. For the harneſſe muſt be made of diuers pieces
according to the ioynts of the members, that their moouing may
haue no impediment. But becauſe the bones being diuided and ſeparated
one frō another, cannot be ſo conioyned or vnited together, that
euery one ſhould ſuſtaine that charge which it hath to beare, therfore
that they might ſerue more fitly for motion to the creatures, God hath
framed thē in ſuch wiſe, that they haue their ioynts in ſo good proportion
& ſo aptly interſerted one within another, as that the whole combination
& vniting of thē al together is maruailous exquiſit & goodly
to behold, like to a worke made of many pieces, which all meet together
in one body. For ſome of them are hollow like to a round box,
that they may be conioyned with the other that are round in the ends,
to the end they might be knit together more cōueniently. To be ſhort,
they haue all their faſhions proportionable one with an other according
to that maner of vniting, which is moſt meet & conuenient for thē.
Now becauſe this coniunction of ioynts cannot keep itſelf at that ſtay
if it haue no other band,Of the ligaments. therfore hath God placed there certaine ligaments,
or ſt
                     •
                  ings of the bones which are white partes, without blood,
void of ſence, not holow, proceeding from the bones, & differing from
them in nature,Of the griſtles. although not ſo much as the griſtles do. For the griſtles
(which ſerue alſo for a ſtay that is ſofter then the bones, to the end they
ſhould not rubbe together ouer hardly one within another) are more
earthy, drier, and harder then the ligaments, and yet not ſo much as the

bones: ſo that they are as it were of a middle ſubſtance and nature betweene
the bones and the ligaments, which are alſo very earthy, drie,
and hard, but leſſe then the griſtles and the bones, and more then the
ſinewes,Of the ſinews. which alſo in ſome ſort draw neare to the nature of the ligaments.
But they differ both in that they haue diuers originalles, as alſo
bicauſe the ligaments are altogether inſenſible, as the bones & griſtles
are, neither can they giue any motion or ſenſe as the ſinewes can, but
ſerue only for bāds to tie the bones one to another, & to knit the other
members vnto them. But the ſinews, which proceede either from the
braine, or from the marrow of the backe bone whoſe originall is from
the braine, are of a tēder, ſoft, & white ſubſtance, & of that nature that
they haue al ſenſe, which they impart to al the ſinewy parts of the body.
And of thē alſo ſome giue both ſenſe & motion together. Therfore
their ſubſtance is not ſo dry, nor ſo hard as that of the ligaments: neyther
yet is it ſo ſoft & tender as is the ſubſtāce of the fl
                     •
                  ſh, or of the kernels,
or of the skinnes, & of ſuch other like parts, wherof we wil ſpeake
hereafter. As for the pannicles,
                  Of pannicles and 
                        •
                     ilaments. & cords or filaments, which are litle long
threeds, ſlender & white, ſolide & ſtrong, we may comprehend them
vnder the name of ſinews & ligaments, becauſe they take part of both
natures. For ſome of them haue ſenſe with the ſinewes, others haue
none with the ligaments. The office of the pannicles (which are litle
skins made of ſinews & ligaments) is to defend & to knit together the
members, & to impart to many of them ſenſe, as to the liuer, the heart,
the lungs, the ſplene, & the kidneis. And as for the filaments, they ſerue
the body, ſome to draw nouriſhment, others to retaine and keep that
which is meete to nouriſh the body, and ſome to driue forward and
to caſt forth thoſe excrements and ſuperfluities, which help not to nouriſh
it,Of the veine
                        •
                     . but are only a burthen and griefe vnto it. The veines are thinne
and ſlender pipes carying the thicker blood wherewith the body is
nouriſhed, and they haue their beginning from the liuer. For in that
the hollow veine is greater and larger then the reſt, and out of that all
the other veines extend themſelues into all the body, as it were branches
proceeding from the body of a tree. Herein (as we will do in all
our diſcourſe) we follow the common opinion approued of the late
learned Philoſophers, Phyſicions, & Anatomiſts. For Aristotle wrote
that the heart was the original of the veins. But Hippocrates taught otherwiſe,Of the arteri
                        •
                     .
whom Galen followed, confuting Ariſtotles opinion. As for
the Arteries or pulſes they are pipes that proceed frō the heart. For in
that is ye great artery planted, which is ye ſtock of al the reſt, which ſerue
to cary the vital ſpirits throghout the body: they are couered with litle
skins, that are ſtrong & thick to keep the ſpirits from breathing out, &

for the ſame cauſe they haue their paſſages more ſtreight. So that they
haue two skinnes or couerings, whereof that which is vnderneath is
fiue times thi
                     •
                  ker then the skinne of a veine. To conclude, the Arteries
and veines are ioyned together, to the ende that the vitall ſpirites
might draw and receiue from the veines conuenient matter for their
nouriſhment, as alſo that by their heat they might warme the blood
that is within them. For there are certaine mouthes in them both for
this mutuall communication, both that the ſpirit might draw his nouriſhment
from the veines, as flame fetcheth the preſeruation of his
light from the lampe, and alſo that the veines might receiue ſpirit and
heat from the arteries.Of the fleſh. As for the fleſh it is a ſubſtance of blood, which
is then made when the thickeſt part of it is as it were congeled: and
with that all the members of the body are clothed outwardly. Wee
muſt ſpeake more largely of the vſes and properties of all theſe ſimple
partes, which wee haue here laid open in few wordes. In the meane
time in this litle that hath bin diſcourſed, wee ſee a maruailous prouidence
of God, who hath diſpoſed and tempered the matter of the body
in ſuch wiſe, that hee made it ſo apt to effect that worke which hee
purpoſed, & that by proportions and mixtures ſo well contriued from
one degree to another, as he hath done in the elements, to the end that
all the partes of the body might the better be preſerued one by an other.
And although mens bodies are compounded of earth and of the
other elements, as we haue already touched, yet God ſheweth himſelfe
very won
                     •
                  e. full in this whole worke and matter of man. For as
he turneth the earth into diuers natures, ſo that of one peece hee maketh
gold, of another ſiluer, of this braſſe, iron and other met
                     •
                  alles, of
that mineralles, of another pretious ſtones of ſund
                     •
                  y ſortes, which are
as it were 
                     •
                  he bones of the earth, beſides a great many other things of
diuers kinds which were infinite to rehearſe: ſo of one ſelfe ſame matter
appointed for the compoſition of the body, hee maketh va
                     •
                  iety of
workes that 
                     〈◊〉
                   may be framed and furniſhed in al reſpects. For we ſee
what difference there is betweene the bones, which partes are moſt
earthy,The bones moſt earthy of all the parts. and ſo conſequently drieſt, hardeſt, and coldeſt, becauſe of al
other partes they d
                     •
                  aw neareſt to the nature of the earth. Then the griſtles
obtaine the ſecond degree next after the bones for agreement of
nature, as that which is in then iddeſt betweene the bones and the
ligaments, as the ligaments are of a middle nature betweene the griſtles
and the filaments, and the filaments betweene the ligaments
and the ſinewes, and ſo of the reſt. Therefore as God the great workmaſter
of nature hath framed all the partes of mans body of matter taken
from all the elements, ſo alſo hee hath tempered his matter according

to the worke he meant to make, and to that office, which it
pleaſed him to appoint vnto euery part and member of the body. So
that the matter of ſome partes holdeth more of the earth, of other
partes it hath more water, or aire, or fire, or elſe is more or leſſe mingled
of all together. Whereby it appeareth how aptly this workemaſter
can apply himſelfe vnto his worke. Wee haue alſo another notable
teſtimony of his prouidence, in that hee hath made the ligaments
ſo ſtrong and firme according to the neceſſitie of their office, hauing
ordained them to knit the bones in their ioynts, and to bee as it were
bands & cords to tie and conioyne them together, euen as the thongs
of harneſſe keepe the parts thereof bound and tied one to another. We
may ſay as much of the filaments, but chiefly of the ſinewes, which
in their places ſerue for bands to the body. And here wee haue alſo to
note, that becauſe God hath created them to giue both motion and
ſenſe to the body, therefore hee hath planted their roote partely in
the braine, partly in the marrow of the backebone, which is alſo deriued
from the braine: as the originall of the ligaments is either in the
bones, or in the griſtles, or in the skinne, and the beginning of the filaments
both in the ligaments and in the ſinewes, according to that vſe
for which they were made. And that the motion of liuing creatures
might not be hindered, hee hath not made the ligaments, nor the filaments
nor the ſinewes of any ſuch boiſterous or ſtiffe matter, but that
the creatures may eaſily bend euery way whitherſoeuer they liſt to
mooue and turne their members. Neyther hath hee made them of ſo
tender and ſoft matter, but that they are ſtrong and powerful enough
to holde faſt all the members within their ioynts, to the ende they
might not eaſily become bare and thruſt out of their places, as alſo to
furniſh the creatures with ſtrength and power, which conſiſteth principally
in the force and might of theſe partes. It is requiſite alſo that
they ſhoulde be ſuch, becauſe they are as it were in continuall labour,
and ſuſtaine great ſtreſſes. Wherefore they muſt needes bee of ſuch
matter as will not eaſily yeelde or weare away, or breake in pieces.
And becauſe all the members and all the ioyntes are not to ſuſtaine
labours and brunts alike, therefore the Lorde hath very well prouided
for that, as hee hath done the like alſo in the compoſition and diſtribution
of the bones. For thoſe members that muſt ſuſtaine the heauieſt
burthens and greateſt brunts, that are to diſpatch moſt labourſome
buſineſſe, and therefore require the greater ſtrength, haue biggeſt,
ſtrongeſt, and mightieſt bones, ligaments and ſinewes, ſo that
their bulke, bigneſſe, breadth and thickeneſſe are anſwerable to
their neceſſary vſes. The leſſer members and ſuch as are to vndergoe

leſſe paine, which are ordained to effect more fine and witty workes
wherein Arte is more required then force, haue alſo their bones, ligaments
and ſinewes leſſer and ſmaller, ſo that in certaine places there
are ſome bones paſſing ſmall, and ſinewes, which are onely as it were
little threedes. Thus much I thought meete for vs to vnderſtand
concerning the ſimple parts of the body, nowe wee muſt conſider the
compound partes: and firſt intreate of the outermoſt partes, and ſo
followe that which wee ſpake of the foundation of mans building, to
the ende, that by little and little wee may ſet him vpright, and conſider
him throughly in all his partes. Therefore thy ſpeach ACHITOB,
ſhall be of the feete and legges, and of the armes and handes.
            
            
               Of the compound partes of the body, and first of the feete and legges,
and of the armes and hands. Chap. 4.
               ACHITOB. Among the manifolde and great commodities,
which wee may reape by the diligent conſideration of the Anatomy
of the body, there are two of greateſt weight. The firſt is, to
put vs in minde of our mortalitie in regarde of our bodies,A double vſe of Anatomy. to the ende
that we ſhould not pleaſe ourſelues too much in the beautie of them,
and ſo waxe prowde and abuſe our ſelues, as alſo that wee ſhould remember
all thoſe teſtimonies, which wee haue in the holie Scriptures
of the frailtie of man, and of his whole nature. For when wee
ſee that thoſe partes of the body that are hardeſt, ſtrongeſt, moſt firme,
and ſuch as after the death of a man continue longeſt before they returne
into powder, and into that firſt matter out of which they were
taken, as namely thoſe partes that were propounded vnto vs in the
former diſcourſe, eſpecially the bones: I ſay, when we ſee that theſe
notwithſtanding their hardneſſe, muſt in the ende returne to duſt as
well as the reſt, what ſhall wee thinke of the other partes that are
ſofter and more tender, and leſſe able to reſiſt corruption? Therefore
the ſpirite of God doeth ſo often by his worde call and ſend vs backe
to that inſtruction, which hee giueth vs by the matter whereof hee
made and framed our bodies, and by the conſideration of our owne
originall and birth: to the ende wee ſhoulde learne to containe our
ſelues euermore within the compaſſe of all humilitie and modeſtie,
as well towardes him, as one towardes an other. Hereof it was that
Iſaiah had commaundement giuen him from the Lorde to crie,Eſay 40. 6. Iob 14. 1, 2. 
                  that
all fleſh i
                        •
                      graſſe, and all the grace thereof as the floure of the field. Man
that is borne of a woman (ſaieth Iob) is of ſhort continuance, and full
of trouble. Hee ſhooteth foorth as a floure, and is cut downe: hee vaniſheth

alſo as a ſhadow, and continueth not. Againe for the ſecond point,
wee are taught to conſider and to knowe by that prouidence of God,
which ſheweth it ſelfe in the compoſition of the vileſt and moſt earthy
partes, and in that frame which hee maketh for the building of the
whole body, howe great and woonderfull it ought to be in the reſidue,
namely in the nobleſt partes thereof, eſpecially in the ſoule,
if wee could ſee it with our eyes, as wee beholde the body. Wherfore,
that wee may the better knowe the excellent worke of God in
this building, we muſt raiſe it vpright before our eyes, to the end wee
may behold it on the out-ſide (as it were a frame ready made) from
the foote to the top, and from the foundation to the couering and
higheſt part thereof.
               The whole body of man is commonly diuided into foure principall
outward parts,Foure principall parts of the body. which are called compound, in reſpect of the ſimple
partes ſpoken of before, which ſerue for matter to make them of:
whereupon afterward they take the name of member, according to
that forme that is giuen to eche of them. Theſe foure principall parts
are, the head, the breaſt, the belly, the outward partes, namely, the armes
and handes, the legges and feete. The head endeth where the necke
beginneth. The breaſt comprehendeth that part which we commonly
call the breaſt, alſo the backe, the ribs, and whatſoeuer elſe is contained
in them from the necke vnto the midriffe,Of the midriffe. which is a skinne
that ſeparateth the heart and the lungs on the one ſide, and the inferiour
intralles on the other. The belly reacheth from thence where the
breaſt endeth vnto the bone aboue the priuie members and neare to
the groine. The extreme or outward parts are already named by vs;
and of them our preſent diſcourſe ſhall be, beginning, as it were at the
foundation, vpon which all the body is laide. Firſt therefore wee ſee
how God hath ſo aptly faſhioned the feete, that they doe not onelie
beare vp al the reſt of the body, but alſo carry and recarry it whereſoeuer
a man wil. Next, the legs are ſet vpon them, as it were the pillers
of this whole building, being cloſed in ſuch ſorte vnto them as neede
requireth, to helpe the feete to ſuſtaine and beare vp all the reſt of the
frame laide vpon them.Eccles. 12. 3. For this cauſe Salomon calleth them the ſtrong
men that ſtoope in olde age, when their vertue and ſtrength faileth them.
For they bow through weakenes, and tremble as the hands do, which
the ſame Prophet calleth the keepers of the houſe. Now becauſe the chief
ſtrēgth of the body lieth in the bones, when the ſcriptures meane to ſet
forth any violēt griefe, as when a man is extremly preſſed▪ & as it were
altogether oppreſſed,Psal. 6. 2. and 22. 14. iſay 38. 13. they ſay that his bones are vexed, or broken, or out
of ioynt, that is to ſay, all his ſtrength and power, ſo that he is as a bodie

whoſe bones are wholy broken and ſhiuered. And when the Scripture
woulde ſignifie the contrarie,Iob 21. 24. Eſay 66. 14. it ſaieth that, their bones runne
full of marrow, and that they flouriſh like an hearb. Nowe if we take
the whole legge, namely from the huckle bone vnto the endes of
the toes, it hath three great partes anſwerable to the three partes of
the whole arme, which part of the body reacheth from the ſhoulders
vnto the endes of the fingers. In the firſt place is the foote, which is
the nethermoſt part of the whole legge, and it conſiſteth of three
partes,Three parts of the legge. which alſo are anſwerable to the three partes of the hand.
The firſt is the heele, which by a ioynt and conuenient knitting together,
vniteth the foote to that parte of the legge which reacheth
from thence vp to the knee or gartering place. The ſecond is the ſole,
and as it were the back
                     •
                   of the foote, being long, large and hollow
in the middeſt, to the ende it might be more fit to ſtand faſt and to
walke vpon. The toes are the third part of the foote, being ſet and
placed in ſuch wiſe as is moſt conuenient for that duetie of the foote.
For they differ much from the fingers, not onelie in length, but alſo
in ſituation, becauſe the office of the hand and the foote is not all
one. Therefore as the fingers are longer then the toes, ſo the thumbs
are otherwiſe placed then the great toes. For if the great toe were
placed as the thumbe is, it woulde hinder the foote in ſteade of helping
it: and the like may bee ſaide of the other toes. The two other
partes of the legge are, firſt, that which is from the knee to the
foote, which is commonly called the legge for want of an other proper
name in our tongue, next the thigh, which is from the huckle
bone vnto the knee. And as this hath his ioynt and band to faſten him
to the knee, ſo the other by the like meanes is ioyned to the foote.
Therefore both the foote and the whole legge haue their neceſſary
motions through the helpe of the ſinewes and muſcles, as well to
ſtretch it ſelfe out, as to bowe and bend forward and backeward, vpward
and downeward, as alſo to turne it ſelfe on the right hand, and
on the left, and round about: both to ſet forward and to retire, to aſcend
and to deſcend, and for all the motions that are meete and conuenient
both for this member and for all the partes of it. Thus much
for the loweſt foundation of the frame of mans body, and for the pillers
that holde it vp. Nowe wee muſt conſider of the other outward
partes, the armes and the hands.
               As God hath giuen to man two legges and two feete to holde him
vp,Of the armes and handes. and to carry him whitherſoeuer hee woulde goe, ſo hee hath giuen
him two armes and two handes, to diſpatch all buſineſſe which
hee thinketh good. Therefore the hand is rightly called by Ariſtotle,
                  
                  
                     •
                  he inſtrument of the inſtruments. For there is no member in all the
body nor inſtrument whatſoeuer, that maketh moe or more ſundry
workes. This inſtrument maketh all other inſtruments, and ſetteth
them a worke, as wee ſee by experience. And becauſe man onely of
all other liuing creatures is capable of Artes, and knoweth how to vſe
them, therefore hath God giuen to him onely this inſtrument to exerciſe
them. We ſee alſo that there is no worke which he cannot doe
with his hands. And what worke of God is there which hee doth not
counterfaite, as if he were ſome litle god vpon earth, that had vndertaken
to make an other viſible worlde within this worlde created by
God? For if wee conſider the Sciences and A
                     •
                  tes of men, and thoſe
excellent woorkes which they make by the meanes of their handes,
who will not be rauiſhed with admiration? That ſentence of Anaxagoras
may well be approoued wherein hee ſaieth, that the hand is
the cauſe of knowledge and wiſedome: (although Plutarch doeth
learnedly vnderſtand experience, by the hand.) For if it did not frame
letters and figures, nor made inſtruments requiſite and neceſſary for
all Sciences and Artes, they could not in any wiſe be either taught or
learned. Therefore conſidering well that which we ſay, man may bee
called a ſecond Creatour, who taking patterne by the worke of God
in the creation of the worlde hath endeuoured to make woorkes anſwerable
vnto thoſe which God hath giuen him in the worlde for a
pattetne to imitate.The agreement and difference betweene the workes of God and the workes of man. Pſal. 33. 9. rom. 4 17. But there is great difference betwixt the workes
of man and the workes of God, eſpecially in three pointes: namely,
in the matter, in the forme, and in the life of them, together with all
thoſe thinges which it bringeth with it. For firſt man can not worke
without matter, which he cannot find in himſelfe, as God who made
all things of nothing, and made that to be which was not. But man
dealeth contrarily. For hee can make nothing of nothing, but muſt
of neceſſitie haue matter meete for the worke he taketh in hand, vnto
which he is able to adde the forme onely. And yet hee cannot giue it
any faſhion except hee firſt had the patterne thereof in the wo
                     •
                  kes of
God. For although he can make very ſtrange figures, and ſuch as the
very like hath not beene ſeene in all nature, nor amongſt all the creatures,
yet hee cannot pourtraite any ſo new, or ſo ſtrange, whereof he
had not before ſome reſemblance in the workes of God in ſundrie
creatures. For hee taketh diuers pieces of many ſundry figures, with
which afterward heaped together, hee counterfaiteth one altogether
newe and ſtrange. As for example: neuer man ſawe a mountaine
all of golde, yet a man may imagine one in his mind, and frame
an image thereof in his imagination. For albeit he neuer ſawe ſuch a

mountaine, yet becauſe hee hath ſeene both mountaines and alſo
golde, by ioyning theſe two together which hee knoweth, he can
frame the image of ſuch a mountaine in his minde, and then hauing
in this ſorte formed and conceiued it, hee can counterfaite it with
his hand. But as God taketh not the matter of his woorkes without
himſelfe, and without the treaſures of his infinite power, ſo hee needeth
not to ſeeke elſe where for formes and patterns then in the treaſures
of his eternall wiſedome and infinite knowledge. Againe, there
is this beſides, which is chiefeſt of all, that hee is able to giue, not
onely being, but alſo life, ſenſe, and motion to his workes, yea ſuch
nature and properties as pleaſeth him: which man can not doe. For
hee can not change the nature of that matter vpon which hee worketh,
but it muſt ſt
                     •
                  ll continue the ſame in nature and diſpoſition.
And although hee can drawe ſundry effectes from thoſe matters about
which hee is occupyed according as hee may mingle and
compound them together, neuertheleſſe hee altereth not their
nature, but they retaine it ſtill according to their portion, euerie
one in his place. Neither can hee giue to the beſt of his woorkes ſo
much life as is in a reddiſh, or in any other leſſer hearb or plant: nor
ſo much motion, ſenſe, and induſtry as a Flie or an Aut hath, or the
leaſt worme in the earth. Nowe to proceede in beholding the vſe of
the hand, wee muſt vnderſtand that God gaue vnto men armes and
handes chiefly to helpe one another, more then with any other member
of their body, in ſo much that they ought to referre al their works,
artes,All handy workes ought to tend to common profite. and exerciſes to common benefite and profite. But it is farre otherwiſe.
For there is no member whatſoeuer with which they hurt
one ano
                     •
                  her more: ſo that their hands are more dangerous without al
compariſon, then the pawes of all ſauage beaſts. For thoſe beaſts that
are moſt cruell ſpare the blood of their kinde, but men delight to imbrew
their handes in mans blood, yea in the blood of their neareſt
kindred. There are ſome alſo who ſhamefully abuſe their handes in
cauſing them to ſerue for diuinations: from whence the Arte of
Palmeſtrie proceeded,Of the Arte of Palmeſtrie. which is full of ſuperſtition, and of fooleries
well woorthy to bee laughed at: and ſuch are all the other kindes of
diuinations inuented by the vanity of mans braine. They that would
ſeeme to alleadge ſome ſhewe and likelihoode of foundation for it,
ſay, that nature hath imprinted in the lines of the handes woonderfull
ſignifications of the temperature and diſpoſition of the whole bodie.
Therefore they call the long line in the middeſt of the hand, the line
of life, and ſay, that they who haue it whole throughout, are long
liued. But ſuppoſe this were ſo, yet what probabilitie is there for

any to ſeeke in the lines of the hand for the knowledge and ſignification
of all thinges that ſhall befall men, and to foretell them,
as they ſay, their good and ill fortune? For although it were ſo,
that by looking vpon the handes, a man might in ſome ſorte, iudge
of the temperature and diſpoſition of the body, yet what reaſon is
there to extend this conſideration to the foretelling of all thinges, as
if God or nature, as they ſpeake, had ſet markes in the handes, ſo
that a man might knowe, I ſay not by the Science, but by the vanitie
of Chiromancie, whatſoeuer good or euill ſhall come vnto
men? For they that deale with this kinde of diuination doe not
only foretel whereunto the body may be diſpoſed according to the
temperature therof, as a Phyſicion may iudge of the ſicknes or ſoundnes
of the body by thoſe tokens which he ſeeth therein folowing his
Arte, but they go a great deale further. For they take vpon them to
foretel al good & ill aduentures, namely, whether a man ſhal be rich
or poore, married, or no, & whether he ſhal haue many wiues, & what
they ſhalbe, whether maidens or widows, whether rich or poore, with
ſuch other toyes and olde wiues tales, whereof their Bookes of Palmeſtrie
are ful. They therefore are very fooles that giue credite to ſuch
praedictions.Of the Palmeſtry of Chriſtians. But Chriſtians haue a true and ſure kinde of Chiromancie
which they may vſe. For if men conſider onely their handes,
with what workemanſhip they are made, for how many vſes they
may ſerue, and howe profitable and neceſſary they are for them,
they ſhall finde in them an infinite number of markes to make them
good diuiners; yea it will teach them to diuine that of neceſſitie
there was a God and a Creatour, who was the workemaſter that
made that worke and thoſe ſo excellent inſtrumentes, whoſe vſe
and commoditie can not ſufficiently bee conceiued. For although
wee had neuer heard of God or of his prouidence, this onely conſideration
ought to bee ſufficient to teach vs to ſeeke him, and to
holde vp towardes him thoſe handes which hee hath giuen vs. If
therefore by the contemplation of our handes, and by thoſe markes
of the power, wiſedome, goodneſſe and prouidence of God, which
are imprinted in them, wee can learne ſuch a Science and Arte of
Diuination, as will the better induce vs to glorifie God in the workmanſhip
of our bodies, then doe wee profite greatly therein. And
this wee ought to doe, not onely by the contemplation of our
handes, but alſo of all the reſidue of the members and parts of our
body, euen vnto our very haires and nailes. For wee haue not
ſo many Preachers onelie of his glorie and magnificence in our
bodies, as wee haue members, but alſo as there are haires in the

head. For there is nothing, no not ſo much as a little haire, (as wee
ſhall ſee heereafter) whereby God doeth not teſtifie his diuine prouidence.
Wherefore if wee ſhoulde by peece-meale lay open onely
thoſe principall things which are to be conſidered in all the partes
of the arme and hand, and thoſe teſtimonies of the great prouidence
of God that may be found and noted in them, a whole day would not
ſuffice: although we did onely behold the great workemanſhip that
is, I ſay not in the whole hand, but in one finger thereof. For it is an
inſtrument which God hath giuen onely to man, to touch and to take
with, to gripe and to vſe in his owne behalfe in ſteade of all kinde of
defenſiue weapons.The vſe of the hand. In this reſpect he made it of ſuch a faſhion that
he can lay hold of, and apprehend all things either great or ſmall, of
what forme or figure ſoeuer they be, whether round, ſquare, or otherwiſe.
And therefore it was requiſit that the fingers of the hand ſhould
be vnequal, that they ſhould be placed and diſpoſed as they are, thereby
the better to gripe and to lay holde of all thinges. For albeit ſome
of them be longer then others, yet when we cloſe our hand, and gripe
anything, they are all equall. And as God hath giuen to man a mind
capable of vnderſtanding & knowledge, ſo alſo he hath adorned him
with this excellent inſtrument, which is ſo neceſſary for all Artes, that
without this, thoſe other would remaine idle. In a word, it is an inſtrument
which man could not want neither in peace nor warre. Neither
is there any thing to be found therein, which doth not ſerue very fitly
for al dueties of the hand, as alſo nothing is wanting that is neceſſary.
The very nailes haue two excellent properties:The properties of the nayles. the one is, that they
ſerue for a couering and an ornament to the ends of the fingers: the other,
that they help to take hold of, and to gather litle and hard things.
For this cauſe alſo they are ſo conuenient both for matter and forme,
and ſo fitly faſtned and ſet in their places, as better could not be deuiſed.
But let vs conſider of the whole arme or hand, to ſee the compoſition
and diuiſion thereof. As we ſaid before of the legge, ſo there
is in the whole arme three great and principall partes,Of the three partes of the whole arme. taking all that
member which is from the ſhoulders vnto the endes of the fingers.
The firſt is the hand, which likewiſe hath three chiefe partes, namely,
that which is ioyned with the lower part of the arme from the elbowe
vnto it ſelfe, and it is called the wreſt: the ſecond is the hollowe
palme which is apt to gripe with,Three parts of the hand. together with the backe of it
on the other ſide: then the fingers make the third part, being ſo
made and placed as they are fitteſt to take eaſily, to gripe, to cloſe,
and to cruſh. In ſo much that whatſoeuer hath beene ſpoken by
me worthy conſideration in the legges and feet touching their office,

and all thoſe motions that are apt, and neceſſary for them, the ſame
alſo may be plainly ſeene in the whole hand and arme. The ſecond
principall part of the whole arme is that which is taken from the elbow
vnto the hand: the third is from the ſhoulder vnto the elbow, and
both the one and the other are ſo coupled together with their ioynts
and bands, as is moſt requiſite for all their motions. Thus ye ſee what
in my opinion ought chiefly to be knowne in this our preſent matter.
Now ſeeing we haue begun to take a viewe of the foundation of the
frame of man by the conſideration of the fourth compounded part of
the body, I thinke that before wee handle the other three, wee ſhall
doe well to behold the wonderful compoſition of many bones, which
ſerue alſo to ſuſtaine the whole ſtocke of the body, and vpon which
the backbone is chiefly grounded. Therefore thou ASER intreating
therof, and of the ribbes and other bones of mans body ſhalt prepare
the way for vs to proceede in the deſcription of our building, euen vnto
the toppe and higheſt place of the whole frame.
            
            
               Of the Backebone and of the marow thereof: of the ribbes and of other
bones of mans body. Chap. 5.
               ASER. Thoſe Philoſophers that were indued with greateſt
knowledge of thoſe excellent things that are hidde in mans nature,
ſtood much vpon the contemplation of this, that his face was lift
vp towards heauen: whereupon they concluded, that he ought to abandon
all carking care of baſe and earthly thing to contemplate
thoſe things that are aboue and heauenly, and in the knowledge of
them to ſatisfie the deſires of his ſoule. And truely this is woorthy to
be conſidered, that amongeſt terreſtriall creatures which walke vpon
the earth, God hath created none with two legges onely, or that is
made ſtraight and bolt vpright, but man. Therefore he onely and no
other hath the ridgebone made according to the ſtraightneſſe of the
legges: which is neither in foure-footed beaſtes, nor in birdes, albeit
they goe vpon two feete, and haue their head lifted vpwarde. For as
well their legges, as thoſe of foure-footed beaſts are ſo placed in regard
of the backebone when they walke, as mens legges are when they ſit
downe, namely cornerwiſe, not downeright. But when men goe,
their legges are ſtretched ſtraight with the backebone, (which is like
the keele of a ſhippe) vnto which all the bones belonging to the ſtock
of the bodie are conioyned, euery one being anſwerable each to other
according to their proportion: as the other peeces of wood whereof
a ſhippe is made, are ioyned with the keele by that knitting together

which they haue therewith. For this cauſe the whole bodie of
man is ſtraight, and can ſtand vpright, and ſit downe. But no beaſt
can doe eyther of them, becauſe there is no ſuch vprightneſſe
voyde of corners betweene their backebone and their legges, as
there is in man. Therefore they can neyther holde nor doe any
thing eyther ſtanding or ſitting. For although they can ſtay themſelues
vpon their haunches, yet they cannot ſitte altogether like
to man. And contrariwiſe, man can doe nothing well lying along
or with his bellie downewarde as beaſtes vſe: but ſtanding or ſitting
hee can doe all his affayres verie eaſily. To this ende hath
GOD giuen him legges and feete, armes and handes, of which
wee ſpake before. Now as hitherto wee haue ſeene the loweſt foundation
of mans building, namely the feete and legges, ſo heere
wee muſt knowe that there is yet another wonderfull frame of bones,
as it were a newe foundation for the whole ſtocke of the bodie, and
reſidue thereof. Amongſt others ſome are verie ſtrong, being placed
croſſewiſe to vpholde the reſt: they ſerue alſo for the defence
of manie inwarde partes that are againſt them. Vpon this ſecond
foundation the backebone is layde,Of the backebone. which reacheth vp to the
head, and is verie artificially made. For firſt, becauſe a man cannot
alwayes ſtande vpright, but muſt ſometime bende himſelfe,
or lye downe, or turne from one ſide to another, it is not
made all one bone, but it conſiſteth of manie bones, namely of
foure and twentie, which are called the knuckles or turning ioyntes
of the backebone.Eccles. 12. 6. For this cauſe Salomon verie fitly calleth it the ſiluer
chaine or coarde, which lengtheneth, or ſhrinketh being conſumed
with extreame olde age. For it is framed after the faſhion of a
chayne, and holdeth the lower partes of the bodie, as it were tyed
and chayned unto the higheſt part, which is the head. Againe, it is
not without good cauſe called 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  chayne of ſiluer. For it is a verie
precious part of the bodie, and ought to bee greatly accounted of,
both becauſe the bodie ſtandeth in neede of it, and alſo for manie
great benefites which it receiueth thereby. True it is that ſome vnderſtand
by this chaine of ſiluer, the vniting and agreement of matters
whereof the bodie of man is made, beeing taken from all the
Elements, and ioyned together by a goodly harmonie and proportion.
But the former expoſition ſeemeth to mee moſt fitte, becauſe of
that ſimilitude which the backbone and ioyntes of it with their vſe,
haue with a chayne and the vſe-thereof. For if the chine-bone
were all of one piece, a man ſhoulde bee alwayes ſtiffe like to a
pale, or like to a logge or bodie of a tree: and ſo the ſtocke of

the body coulde not enioy thoſe motions that are neceſſarie for it,
as wee ſee all the members haue agreeable to their nature. For
they are nt planted into the ſtocke of the bodie, as boughes and
braunches are into the ſtocke of a tree, which are without motion
aſwell as their ſtocke. Likewiſe man (whome the Philoſophers
called a Tree turned vpwarde, becauſe hee hath his rootes in his
head) is a farre other kinde of plant then thoſe are, which beeyng
in the earth, ſtirre not out of one place. For it is a tree to be
caried about, whoſe braunches haue their naturall motion. And
as touching thoſe bones whereof the chine-bone is made, they
are ſo ordered, that the firſt which ſuſtayneth all the reſt, as the
principall foundation (beeing called Os ſacrum,
                  Of the holy bone. that is, The holie
bone) is the largeſt, biggeſt and ſtrongeſt: and beeyng ioyned to
the hippes is verie artificially framed of three bones, and ſometimes
of fiue or ſixe. Wherefore ſome thinke that it is ſo called
by reaſon of the artificiall compoſition thereof: others, becauſe of
the greatneſſe: and ſome, becauſe it helpeth women in their trauaile,
as that whoſe knitting together openeth with the hippebones
in them that bring foorth children. Others ſaye, that there
is no opening, but onely that it ſtretcheth foorth and inlargeth it
ſelfe. There are ſome alſo that thinke it is ſo called, becauſe it is ſo
neceſſarie vnto life, that after it is once hurt, death followeth. After
this bone, the reſt that followe are leſſe and leſſe vntill you
come to the higheſt: inſomuch that the loweſt are biggeſt, and
the higheſt leaſt, to the ende that as they are the foundation one
of another, ſo they might bee able to beare that charge which
they are to ſuſtayne, and bee the leſſe burdened. And as for the
coniunction and vniting of them together, it is ſo well contriued,
that it hath ſo much ſtrength as is neceſſarie for it, and is
neyther too ſoft, nor too harde, too drie nor too wette and ſlipperie,
but that which is meete for their motions. This order of bones
and turning ioynts thus raunged, is properly called the Backebone
or Chine, and in Latine Spina dorſi, becauſe of the ſharpe endes or
poyntes which eche of them hath oneuerie ſide for his defence, as it
were thornes.Of the marow of the chine. This whole chine hath a marow proceeding from the
hinder part of the braine, and reaching downe to the nether ende
of the backebone: which beeyng rounde in ſhape, is as a riuer
whoſe ſpring is in the brayne, from whence it proceedeth as the
great Arterie doeth out of the heart, and the hollow veyne out of
the liuer, as wee haue alreadie declared, and may intreate thereof
more at large in ſpeaking of the inner partes of the bodie.

Therefore as the great arterie is as it were the ſtocke of all the reſt, being
planted in the heart from whence it ſpringeth, and the hollowe
veyne whoſe fountaine is in the liuer, is as it were the ſtocke of the
other veines: ſo the marrowe of the chine is as it were the ſtocke
and ſpring from whence all the ſinewes iſſue, which afterward like
to litle riuers impart their ſence and motion. And becauſe the fountaine
of this riuer is in the braine, therfore alſo the originall of ſinewes
is attributed thereunto, notwithſtanding that all thoſe ſinewes which
giue motion and ſence to the partes that are vnder the head, except it
be to the intrals and guttes, proceede from the marrowe of the chine.
Hereby we may note once againe, that that place alleadged by mee
out of Salomon where hee calleth the backbone a ſiluer chaine,
                  Eccles. 12. agreeeth
alſo very fitly with that which is here ſpoken. For ſeeing the ſinewes
diſtribute ſence and motion to all the members of the body, as
it hath bene already told vs, and haue their beginning from the braine
and marrow of the chine, we may well ſay that it is a chaine and coa
                     •
                  d
of a great length, which extendeth it ſelfe very farre by reaſon of other
chaines and ſtrings proceeding from it. For as the backbone may
be reſembled to a chaine, ſo the marrowe within it is like to a coarde,
whereof all the ſinewes, which are as it were the little ſtrings of all the
members of the body, haue their beginning and increaſe. And therfore
ſome in ſtead of a ſiluer chaine tranſlate, a coard or threede of ſiluer, as
wee reade in the common Latine tranſlation: but the ſence is all one.
And that which Salomon addeth after of the golden ewer which is broken
in olde-age, with the expoſition of the beſt learned giuen thereof,
agreeth alſo very well to this effect.Of the skinne of the braine called the golden Ewer. For by this golden Ewer they vnderſtand
the skinne that couereth the braine, which is of a yellowiſh
colour, reſembling the colour of golde. It is very fitly called a Ewer,
becauſe it is a veſſell contianing the matter and nouriſhment of the ſinewes,
and as it were the fountaine of all the motions and ſences of
the body: it is as it were the lodging of all the animall partes, and the
originall of all the ſences both internall and externall. Wherefore the
matter of the braine contayned within it is of a more celeſtiall nature
then any other part of the bodie, and commeth neereſt to the ſpiritual
and diuine natures. So that this veſſell is not without good and iuſt
cauſe called by Salomon the Ewer of gold. For there is in it a fountaine
out of which man receiueth great treaſures. Nowe becauſe the ſinewes,
arteries and veynes were to haue their paſſage and iſſue from
their fountaine without let or hinderaunce, it was requiſite that the
backebone ſhould haue ſuch holes as it hath, and that the bones therof
ſhould be of that faſhion they are, to the ende that neyther themſelues,

nor the marrow within might be eaſily broken, and that the
next partes and members might not be hurt. For it is very dangerous
to haue any rupture or hurt in the chine aſwell by reaſon of the marrow
as of the ſinewes. And becauſe it pleaſed God to lodge there
thoſe internall members of the bodie, that are moſt neceſſarie for life
and for the preſeruation thereof,Of the ribbes. he faſtened the ribbes to both ſides
of the backebone, namely twelue on euery ſide: and hath left a ſufficient
ſpace betwixt them, that the place might bee able to receiue
thoſe members, for whoſe cauſe they were ſo built & diſpoſed. So that
there are before and behinde, eſpecially about the nobleſt members,
very long and large bones, to defend them on al ſides (as it were good
harneſſe and ſtrong bulwarkes) but chiefly behind, becauſe the armes
and handes cannot ſo well defend them, as they may the other before.
Therefore God hath better armed them with bones, making
thoſe of the ſhoulders ſo large behind as they are, and knitting them
alſo vnto the backebone by their bande, but yet ſo that they touch it
not. Likewiſe they are faſtened to the higheſt bone in the breſt which
reacheth vp to the throate, aboue the firſt ribbe, by two litle bones
which paſſe ouer the ribbes that are betwixt them. For this cauſe theſe
bones are called the keyes of the throate.The keyes of the throate. For they cloſe and ſhutte
vp theſe partes as it were keyes, ſo that without them ſhoulder
blades would fall backeward, beeing no more able to keepe cloſe together,
then the poldron of an harneſſe not beeing faſtened to the
gorget. The armes likewiſe are faſtened to the ſhoulders, as alſo the
thighes and legges to the hippes: then the handes are ioyned to the
armes with their ioyntes and bandes, as hath beene touched before.
Now we are to note further, according to that I ſpake euen nowe, that
the backebone is in a mans body, as the keele in a ſhip: ſo that as the
reſt of the matter and forme of the ſhippe muſt bee well proportioned
and framed according to the keele, ſo is it in the compoſition of
mans body, and in that correſpondencie, which all the members
ought to haue with the ridgebone of which they all depende, otherwiſe
there would be no good agreement but great deformitie. And as
for the ribbes and breſt bones, they haue ſuch workemanſhip as is requiſite
for the members contained within the ribbes.Of the workemanſhip of the ribbes and of other bones. For ſeeing the
members of mans breathing are cloſed within, needefull it is that they
ſhould not onely bee defended and armed with bones for their garde
and preſeruation, but alſo that theſe bones ſhould bee ſo placed, that
they might inlarge and reſtraine themſelues, open and cloſe againe, in
ſuch wiſe that the breathing and members thereof be not hindered in
their motions. Therefore they are all by nature leſſe harde then the other:

beſides, they are many, to the end there might be ſpaces betwixt
them, not only for the inlarging & reſtraining of the breaſt, but alſo
that the muſcles might bee placed betweene the ribbes. And this is
one cauſe, why it was needfull that the backebone ſhould be framed
as it is, namely, that it might bee moe commodious for reſpiration.
And becauſe the ſtomacke alſo ſtandeth in neede of inlargement and
reſtraint according to the quantity of the meate which it receaueth,
and according as it is lift vp and preſſed downe thereby, therefore it
was requiſite that it ſhould haue the like helpe. But foraſmuch as it
might ſoone bee hurt by reaſon of the hardneſſe of the ribbes, if they
were driuen and forced againſt it, God hath ſo diſpoſed thoſe ribbes
wherewith he hath defended the ſtomacke, that they are neyther ſo
long nor ſo hard as the reſt. For they are of a ſofter kind of bone, drawing
neerer to the nature of griſtles then the other, and the more they
deſcend downward, the ſhorter they are. Therefore the lower part of
the ribs are commonly called the falſe ribbes,
                  How many falſe ribbes there are. or baſtard ribbes, which
on eche ſide are fiue in number; the other ſeuen ending at the breaſtbone,
to the end they may defend and garde the heart & lungs, which
are vitall parts. Hereupon when any hath bene wounded to death, it is
often ſaid in the holy ſcriptures,2. Sam. 2. 23. & 3. 27. that he was ſtricken vnder the fift ribbe,
becauſe no blow pierceth thoſe partes, but it hurteth ſome one of the
vitall members, which cannot be wounded, but that death followeth
therevpon. We ſee then how the prouidence of God did well forcſee
whatſoeuer was requiſite in this worke of mans body, and hath prouided
thereafter as need required: as we may eaſily iudge by that which
wee haue heard of the bones onely, which parts are moſt earthie and
maſſy, and are voyde of all ſence. Wherefore we may well conceaue
how excellently this wiſedome hath wrought in the other partes and
members that are more noble. But we may iudge a great deale better
of all this, if we conſider that our treatiſe of the bones onely, is but very
litle in compariſon of that which might be ſpoken, if a man would
vtter it as Phiſicions doe, and diſtinguiſh properly of all the kindes of
bones, and of their vſes. Nowe to ende the outwarde compoſition
of the body touching the bones, we muſt conſider of the ſhare bone,
and of the bones of the head, & of the marow that is within the bones,
and of the vſe of the necke. Laſt of all, wee will clothe with fleſh this
dry Anatomy, that afterward we may come to thoſe parts of our building
that are moſt noble and excellent. Therfore it belongeth to thee
AMANA to intreat of this ſubiect.
            
            
               
               Of the ſhare bone and marrow of the bones: of the bones in the head, and of
the fleſh: of the muſcles and of their office. Chap. 6.
               AMANA. Nothing maketh the worke of God in the compoſition
of mans bodie more woonderfull, then the beautie of his ſhape,
and the exquiſite arte vſed in the worke, wherin a man cannot change
ſo much as a naile or an eyelidde, which is but haire, but that ſome imperfection
muſt be acknowledged therein, and ſome diſcommoditie
following thereupon will cauſe it to be perceiued. For this cauſe the
kingly Prophet conſidering his creation, ſpeaketh as one rauiſhed
with admiration. I will (ſayeth hee) prayſe thee,
                  Pſal. 139. 14. 
                  for I am fearefully
and wonderfully mad: marueilous are thy woorkes, and my ſoule knoweth
it well. Hee could not in all that Pſalme maruaile ſufficiently at
ſo excellent a woorke of God. Therefore he vſed a word which ſignifieth
as much in the Hebrewe tongue, as if in ſtead of our ſpeech,
thou haſt framed or faſhioned me, hee ſhould haue ſaide, I haue benewouen
or wrought in tiſſue and interlaced, and faſhioned artificially as it were
in broadery woorke. And truely no image or picture, howe well ſoeuer
it bee painted and purtrayted, is to be compared with the forme
and figure of mans bodie: neyther is there any woorke of tapiſtrie,
ſo well wrought and imbrodered, or that hath ſuch varietie of exquiſite
arte, and ſuch diuerſitie of figures, as that hath. And from
what paterns doe Painters and Ingrauers take the faſhion and forme
of thoſe Images and pictures which they would drawe foorth, but
from this? What is a piece of tapiſtry or imbrodered woorke in compariſon
of a mans bodie, which is as it were an image of the whole
world, and wherein a man may finde almoſt the varietie and draughts
of all things contained in the whole frame of the world? This will euidently
appeare vnto vs in the ſequele of our ſpeeches, touching the
compounded parts of the body.
               Therefore to finiſh the externall compoſition of this humane building
concerning the bones, we will firſt note, that God in creating the
bellie hath not compaſſed it about with bones,Why the belly is not enuironed with bones. as he hath done the other
parts of the body, and that chiefly for two cauſes. Firſt, it is moſt
meet it ſhould be ſo, by reaſon of the meat it receiueth. Secondly, for
the benefite of women that beare children. But to the end it might be
vpholden together with that burden it beareth, God hath giuen vnto
it the Share bone for a foundation,Of the Share bone, or tayl
                        •
                     
                     bone. which alſo ſtandeth inſteed of a bulwarke
for the bowels. And becauſe a man cannot alwayes ſtande vpright,
but muſt oftentimes ſitte downe, not onely to reſt himſelfe, but

alſo to diſpatch many works which he hath to doe, therefore he hath
the buttocke bones and the fleſh wherewith they are couered,Of the buttocke bones. which
are vnto him in ſtead of a ſtoole and a cuſhion to ſitte at his eaſe. And
foraſmuch as the bones are to be nouriſhed, they haue for their familiar
foode, the marrow, which by nature is moiſt, ſoft, fat, and ſweete.
Therefore it hath neyther ſinew nor ſence,Of the marow. but is within the bones, as
the ſappe of trees is in the middeſt of their ſtockes and braunches. For
this cauſe Iob ſpeaking of the proſperitie of the wicked,Iob 21. 24. ſaieth, His
breaſts are full of milke, and his bones runne full of marrowe. But this is
ſtrange, that ſeeing it is made of the thickeſt of the blood, as it were a
ſuperfluitie of the meate, how it can be ingendred within the bones,
and draw nouriſhment from the veines, as other parts of the body do.
But God knew well howe to prouide for that, and to make way for
nouriſhment through the hardnes of the bones, which are not all alike
full of marrowe. For as ſome of them are more drie or moyſter,
more hard or ſofter then others, ſo they haue more or leſſe marrowe:
and ſome haue none at all, becauſe they neede it not. Now this marrow
whereof we ſpeake nowe, differeth from that in the chine-bone,
which the Arabians call Nucha,
                  Nucha. and is of the nature of the ſubſtance
of the braine, from whence it proceedeth as a riuer from his fountaine,
for the generation of ſinewes, to which ende the other marrow is not
appoynted of God, but onely for the nouriſhment and preſeruation
of the bones. Seeing then we are come to the braine, we muſt conſider
with what bones God hath incloſed it on euery ſide for the defence
therof, how many in all there are in the head both before and behind,
on the right ſide and on the left, aboue and beneath: of what forme,
breadth, length, and hardnes, and how they are ioyned one with another
by ſeames and bands, and that not without great reaſon and conſideration
of the Workmaſter, which made ſuch an excellent peece of
worke.Of the bones of the head. For firſt, there are commonly ſixe bones, which compaſſe the
braine on eche ſide, beſides that which is called the Wedge-like bone,
which is vnder the pallat of the mouth, and vnto which all the reſt are
faſtened. And becauſe there are many veſſels and members in the
braine and head, God hath made the head of a round figure, reaching
ſomewhat in length, and bulking out ſomewhat more both before &
behinde. Now foraſmuch as vapours, fumes, and ſmokie excrements
mount vpward, therefore he hath created the head, and thoſe bones
of the head that are higheſt, not ſo ſolide and thicke as the reſt, to the
end the vapours and fumes ſhould not continue incloſed within the
braine, but might euaporate, and ſo disburthen the brayne: otherwiſe
it would be very ill at eaſe, and ſubiect to many diſeaſes. Therefore

all of them together are ſo made one bone, that yet they are not
all of one and the ſame piece, but ioyned together, not by ligaments,
as many ſundrie and ſeuerall bones are, but by ſuch a proper and apt
coniunction, that there appeareth betweene them as it were a ſeame
made after the manner of a Sawe or Combe, as if they were verie finely
ſewed together. And becauſe the bones behinde coulde not haue
that helpe of the handes, for their defence which the bones before
may haue, God hath created them more harde and ſtronger. Beſides,
they all are to the brayne and to euery part thereof, in ſtead of an helmet
and murrion to defende it on euery ſide. Thus you ſee the compoſition
of the head touching the bones thereof, which is ſo ioyned
to the body by the backebone, that nothing but the neck, which is the
vpper ende of the chine,Of the necke and vſe thereof. is betweene them. For it was neceſſarily
to haue motion both aboue and beneath, before and behinde, and on
both ſides: which could not haue beene if it had beene faſtened to
the ſhoulders without any ſpace betweene, which is neceſſarie alſo
both for breathing, for voyce, and for manie other purpoſes that
may bee noted heereafter. And albeit the necke ſerued for nothing
elſe but for voyce, yet is it ſo neceſſarie, that without it a man coulde
haue no voyce, nor any other creature to which it is giuen, as appeareth
in thoſe that haue no necke. For all beaſtes that want the necke,
want alſo the voyce, as wee may ſee both in fiſhes, and in thoſe
beaſtes which the Latins call Inſecta animalia: the reaſon is becauſe
they haue no necke whereby to ioyne their head with the reſt of their
bodie, but onely as it were a litle threede, which holdeth both the
one and the other cloſe together. Nowe that wee are come to the
toppe of the building of mans bodie, and haue ſet him vpright, as it
were a dryed Anatomie, we muſt come next to the couering of the
bones, ſinewes and other partes mentioned by vs, to the ende that
after wee haue finiſhed the deſcription of the outwarde partes, wee
may ſpeake alſo of thoſe that are within.Of the fleſh. The fleſh then is the firſt
garment wherewith the bones are couered: and it is properly called
by that name which is giuen to that part whereof the Muſcles
are compounded. For ſome vnder the name of Fleſh comprehend
the Kernels and the fatte, becauſe of the agreement which theſe
partes haue one with another, and by reaſon of their vſe. For as
for the fleſh, it hath this in common with the Kernels and fatte, that
it is ſoft and tender: but heerein it differeth from that matter whereof
Kernels are made, in that the matter of Kernels is more Spongelike.
Wee learned before that Fleſh is a ſubſtance of blood, and
howe it is made thereof. Concerning the Muſcles, wee vſe to

call by that name the proper inſtrument that mooueth voluntarily
all the members of the bodie.Of the muſcles. Therefore it is compounded and
made of threedes proceeding from the ſinewes, and of ligaments
compaſſed about with a great deale of fleſh, inſomuch that when
the Muſcles are taken away from the bodie, there remayneth almoſt
nothing but bare bones. Their proper place is in all places of
the bodie where there are ioyntes and where motion is required. For
without them the bodie cannot haue that voluntarie motion whereof
I ſpake euen nowe,What voluntary motion is. and which is ſo called, becauſe thereby a
man may mooue and remooue his members from one place to another
as he thinketh good, and as hee ſhall iudge it needefull for himſelfe.
Wherefore we muſt knowe that the brayne which is the ſeate
of the animall partes, and the originall of the all the ſinewes, and of all
motions and ſences giuen to the bodie by them, is in reſpect of the
whole bodie like to a Waggonner that guydeth his Waggon, and
the Muſcles are like to the bittes and brydles of horſes, to cauſe them
to retyre or ſet forwarde as the Waggonner pleaſeth, eyther to draw
them backewarde, or to driue them forwarde, to pull in or to let
looſe the bridle. The ſinewes are as it were the reynes and leathers
faſtened to the bridles, to holde them in, or to let them looſe, and
to turne them both on the right hande and on the lefte: then
thoſe members of the bodie which moue it from one place to another,A compariſon betwixt the body and a chariot.
are as it were the horſes that are ledde and guided by this
meanes, and the reſt of the bodie is like to the Charet and the burden
which it caryeth. And for this cauſe the Muſcles are compounded
of ligaments, ſinewes and fleſh. For as the ligaments ſerue to
knit them together, and the ſinewes miniſter ſence and motion, ſo
the fleſhe ſerueth to the benefite of thoſe litle ſtrings that proceede
from the ligaments and ſinewes: firſt to nouriſh them, then to holde
them vp foſtly, as if they leaned vpon little cuſhions and pillowes,
and laſtly, to keepe them aſwell againſt the vehemencie of internall
heate, as againſt the heate, colde, and hardneſſe that comes from
without. Likewiſe the fleſh perfourmeth all theſe thinges vnto the
reſt of the thredes that are throughout the whole bodie, both in the
heart and in the ſtomacke, and in other partes that haue fleſh. But
we haue further to note the great differences of fleſh that are in all the
partes of the bodie, that we may ſtill increaſe in the knowledge of
the marucilous woorkes of God, and of his diuine prouidence. For
there is great difference betweene that fleſh where with the bones, ligaments
and ſinewes are couered and clothed, and that of the internall
partes of the bodie, which alſo differeth in quality, albeit all is

compounded of one and the ſame matter. For what difference is there
betwixt that fleſh which is betweene the skinne and the bones,The differences of fleſh. and
that of the brayne: as alſo that of thelungs, heart, liuer, ſplene and
kidneyes? Not one of all theſe members hath his fleſh like to any
of the reſt, but they all differ very much according to the nature and
office of the compounded members. For the fleſh of the brayne is by
nature apt for the generation of the animall ſpirites, as that of the
heart for the vitall ſpirits, and that of the lungs for ayre and breathing,
that of the liuer to turne the matter which it receyueth from the ſtomacke
into blood and into nouriſhment for all the members: that of
the ſplene to draw the groſſe blood which is as it were the Lees of the
blood, and to nouriſh it ſelfe thereby: that of the kidneyes alſo to
drawe ſo much blood as is requiſite for their nouriſhment, and likewiſe
to drawe the vrine, which after they ſende into the bladder.
Thus you ſee howe euery of theſe internall partes of the body is compounded
of fleſh meete for his nature and office. Whereby wee ſee
many and ſundry ſhoppes within mans body, whereof euery one
hath his proper woorke about which it is buſied, and ſuch a nature
as is agreeable to that woorke which GOD hath aſſigned vnto it,
who is the Creator and the Workmaſter, and effecteth all theſe works
by his heauenly prouidence.
               Moreouer,Diuers vſes of the fleſh. we haue to note that the fleſh generally ſerueth the
whole bodie for matter of filling, to keepe cloſe all the members
thereof, and namely all the bowels, and to fill all the ſpaces betweene
them, as alſo to ſtrengthen all thoſe partes that are inuironed
therewith, to the ende they might not eaſily bee ſhaken in
pieces. It defendeth alſo all the members both againſt heate and
colde. Likewiſe if any man fall, or lye downe, it ſerueth him for a
boulſter or ſoft pillow, and for a ſhelter againſt bruſes, and a defence
againſt wounds, for a ſhadow againſt heate, and a gowne againſt
colde. And thus much I thinke ſufficient to bee knowne concerning
this preſent Subiect. Nowe before wee take any other matter
in hande, wee are to conſider of the Kernels that are in the body,
becauſe of their excellent vſe and propertie: eſpecially wee
are to conſider of the Dugges, wherein appeareth a ſingular worke
of GOD, namely in women, as wee may preſently heare of ARAM.
            
            
               
               Of the kernels in the bodie, and of their ſundrie vſes, eſpecially of the
breaſts of women, of their beautiè and profite in nouriſhing of children,
and of the generation of milke. Chap. 7.
               ARAM. He that ſhould onely ſtay in conſidering the lumpe and
confuſed matter whereof man is dayly made, hee ſhoulde ſee
therein but a litle ſlime, yea ſuch vile corruption and rottenneſſe, that
a man would bee euen aſhamed to name it. But as a painter with his
colours & draughts of his penſil giueth a forme to that matter whereof
he maketh his piece of woorke, and painteth limme after limme,
and piece after piece: ſo the Lorde giueth by little and little and by
piecemeale to that confuſed maſſe and lumpe, ſuch forme and faſhion
as it pleaſeth him to beſtow vpon it in that time which he hath appointed
for that purpoſe: and, as hee vſeth to doe, beginning alwayes
at the leaſt and weakeſt part, and at that which is as it were nothing,
hee ſtill continueth and increaſeth his woorke vntill it be perfite and
abſolute. Likewiſe, after we haue conſidered of the leaſt & moſt earthy
partes that are in the corruptible matter of the body, we will looke into
them that are more excellent, and then come to the contemplation
of that immortall eſſence, which dwelleth in him. Therefore I wil now
goe on with our matter Subiect.
               
               Thoſe partes of the body that are called Kernels (by reaſon of the
ſimilitude they haue with nuttes) are of two ſortes,Two kindes of Kernels in the bodie. and haue their
vſe and commoditie very great, eſpecially in two reſpects. For ſome
are by nature more thicke and dry, and ſerue to faſten the vpper partition
of the members and veſſels of the bodie, to the end they ſhould
neyther breake nor cleaue. Therefore wee haue ſuch Kernels in the
necke, in the arme-pits, in the groynes, and in thoſe partes where the
elbow and the hamme bende, and in certaine other partes. There are
others not ſo thicke by nature, and more ſpongy and moyſt, and full
either of milke, or of ſeede, or els of a flegmatike and glewiſh humor.
Now albeit all kinds of Kernels are giuen to the bodie to drink vp the
humors, and to moiſten the other partes, neuertheles thoſe that are of
this latter kind, ferue chiefly for the firſt vſe. We haue ſuch alſo to moiſten
all the partes of the mouth, and of the throate by the meanes of
ſpittle, that ſo they may bee kept from drought, and that thirſt may
bee repelled and moderated. Likewiſe they are very ſeruiceable to
the life of man, in that they ſoake and drinke vp, as it were ſpoonges,
the fleame that deſcendeth from the braine, that it ſhould not fall vpon
the lungs, or into the ſtomake, or vpon other partes of the bodie,
to the great damage and danger thereof, as it happeneth to ſuch

as are ſhort breathed and in conſumptions, and to them that are
troubled with rheumes. And as theſe ſerue in the mouth and throate
for ſpittle, ſo there are many, and thoſe very great ones in womens
pappes, eſpecially when they haue milke to the making whereof
they ſerue, as alſo thoſe that are in more ſecrete partes which ſerue
for ſeede, namely to keepe it, to dreſſe it, and to prepare it for generation.
Therefore it is that thoſe kernels which are in the breaſts
of men and of young maydens are leſſe and harder.The leaſt part in man full of admiration, and very profitable. Wee ought not
heere to paſſe ouer without great admiration, the good temperature
and diſpoſition, which GOD hath made of the whole matter
and forme, and of all the partes and members of mans bodie, inſomuch
that there is nothing howe litle or vile ſocuer, which is ſuperfluous,
which is not very commodious and profitable, and which
is not wonderfully well applyed and appropriated to ſuch places as
are moſt fitte for it, and to thoſe vſes whereunto it ought to ſerue.
For who woulde haue thought that theſe kernels thus diſperſed
throughout the bodie, were ſo many wayes ſeruiceable vnto it as we
ſee they are? Yea wee might heere rehearſe manie moe vſes if we
woulde ſpeake more particularly of this matter, whereof wee
meane to ſpeake but generally, as alſo of all the reſt that concerne the
anatomie of the bodie, according to that ende which wee propounded
to our ſelues in the entrie of our ſpeeches, namely, to open a
gappe onely to the conſideration, firſt of the matter whereof mans
bodie is compounded, and of the diuerſitie thereof: then of that forme
which God hath giuen vnto it: and laſtly of the profit and vſe of both:
to the ende wee might dayly learne the better to knowe the great
power, skill, wiſedome, goodneſſe and prouidence of him that hath
created and diſpoſed all things in ſo good order. But as touching
that which we ſpake of the pappes, and of their ſubſtance, wee haue
yet to conſider of two poynts well worthie the noting, concerning
the place where God hath ſeated them.Of the pappes, & of their ſituation, and vſe. Firſt, they are there placed
where they ſerue to ſhroude and to defend the nobleſt and moſt neceſſarie
partes for life that are in the breaſt, namely the heart and the
lungs. For they are ſet before them to countergard and keepe them,
both from ouer great heate, and from exceſſiue colde, and from many
other inconueniences. And as they ſerue for the heate of the heart,
ſo their owne heate is increaſed by reaſon they are ſo neere the heart,
whereby the milke that is ingendred in them is the better baked. So
that wee ſee, that although GOD hath not giuen men pappes for
the generation of milke and nouriſhing of children, as women haue,
neuertheleſſe they are not without profite, and vſe in them, as wee

haue hearde. Whereunto alſo wee may adde the beautifying of
that part of the bodie where they are placed, eſpecially in women.
Againe, could they poſſibly be ſet in any place, that were more fit
and more eaſie, both for Mothers and Nurſes, and for the children
to whome they giue ſucke and nouriſhment? For if the mother bee
diſpoſed to giue her childe ſucke, ſhee hath this commoditie to ſitte
downe if ſhe will, to holde it in her boſome, and vpon her knees,
and likewiſe to imbrace it in her armes, whether ſhe ſit, lye downe,
or ſtande: alſo ſhee may carie it vp and downe whither ſhee pleaſe,
euen whileſt ſhee giueth it ſucke, and feedeth it. This commoditie
is not graunted to the females of beaſtes when they giue ſucke and
nouriſh their little ones with their teates. Wherein wee haue to
marke one notable difference which GOD hath put betweene
men and beaſtes.The difference betweene ye care of men and beaſts ouer their litle ones. For beaſtes haue no other care of their yong ones,
but onely to nouriſh their bodies with foode vntill they bee able to
feede and gouerne themſelues: afterward, both ſyre and damme and
little ones forget one another, taking no more knowledge eche
of other, nor louing one another more then other beaſtes of
their kinde. But amongſt men, both the father and the mother are
caried with an affection towardes their little children, which is
the cauſe why they forget them not as beaſtes doe. And as they
loue their children, ſo are they loued of them, inſomuch that there
is a mutuall loue proceeding from that naturall affection which they
beare one towardes another. On the other ſide, this loue cauſeth
parents to let their children haue inſtruction, that they may bee wiſe
and vertuous. And therefore it is not without good cauſe that
womens pappes are placed in the breaſt, namely, to the ende they
ſhoulde bee vnto them as ſignes and teſtimonies of the affection of
the heart, and of that loue which they ought to beare towardes their
children, whereof they ought to make them partakers aſwell as of
the milke of their breaſtes, and as if they gaue vnto them their
heart, as they giue them their blood turned into milke. Likewiſe,
children are by the ſelfe-ſame meanes to bee admoniſhed of that
mutuall affection and loue,A good leſſon for children. which they ought to carie towards their
mothers, as if they had ſucked it out of their breaſts, and from their
heart together with their milke, that they may returne the like vnto
them againe. Wherefore, mothers and children haue a wiſe miſtres
in nature, and in the prouidence of God that appeareth therein, if they
knew how to followe it well. Againe, for this cauſe mothers ought
to take greater delight in nouriſhing their owne children, then in

committing them to the handes of ſtrangers and hyred Nurſes. For
out of doubt, the mutuall affection and loue of eche to other woulde
greatly increaſe thereby. Nowe hauing ſpoken of the place which
God hath aſſigned to the pappes,Of the forme of the pappes. let vs conſider his prouidence in
their forme, which is ſuch, that fayrer and more fitte for that office
of theirs coulde not bee deuiſed. For wee ſee howe they hang
there in the breaſt of the mother and Nurſe, as it were two bottles,
hauing nipples and holes made fit for the infants mouth, that
hee might take holde of them, and drawe and ſucke the milke
that is within the dugges, which are filled preſently after the child
is borne, ſo that hee is no ſooner come into the worlde, but hee
hath ſuch foode and nouriſhment readie dreſt as is meete for him.
For albeit the infant bringeth his teeth with him from his mothers
wombe, yet becauſe they are hidde within the gummes, and are
not yet come foorth, hee muſt haue ſuch meate as needeth no chewing,
but may bee ſucked, which GOD hath prouided for him.
Wherein wee haue a woonderfull teſtimonie of the care hee hath ouer
vs, and what kinde of Father and cheriſher hee is. For this
cauſe Dauid had good reaſon to ſay,Psal. 8. 2. 
                  Out of the mouth of babes and
ſuckelings hast thou ordeyned ſtrength, becauſe of thine enemies. For
if one conſider the prouidence of God, which dayly ſheweth it
ſelfe ouer children onely, there is no Atheiſt, Epicure, or other
enemie of God ſo great, which ſhall not bee confounded, conuinced,
and conſtrayned, will hee nill hee, to giue glorie to GOD.
For before children can ſpeake, euen from their mothers breaſtes,
they ſhewe foorth and preache the prouidence of God in prouiding
milke for them.How children 
                        •
                     reſed in their mothers belly. But wee ſhall finde it a matter of greater admiration,
if wee conſider not onely in what manner they are nouriſhed
preſently after their birth, but alſo howe they are nouriſhed
in their mothers wombe. For there they are not ſuſtayned
by the mouth, nor with milke, as they are after their byrth, but
with their mothers owne blood receiued by the Nauill, which is
in the middeſt of the bodie. But God hath made ſuch an agreement
betweene the wombe in which the little childe is nouriſhed
in his mothers belly, and betwixt her breaſts, that that blood
wherewith the Infant was feede before it was borne, preſently after
the birth aſcendeth into her pappes,How and whereof milke is made. in which, by reaſon of the
aboade it maketh there, it becommeth white, and is ſo well heated
and prepared, that it hath as conuenient and pleaſant a taſte, as can be
put into the infants mouth. And as for the ſubſtance of the milke, there

cannot be any that is more fitte to nouriſh it or more naturall, feeing it
is the accuſtomed and vſuall ſuſtenaunce: neither is there any difference,
but only in that it is otherwiſe coloured, being ſomewhat changed
in taſte & ſauour, as alſo in this, that the infant receiueth it by another
paſſage then it did before. Wherefore it is needfull that it ſhould
haue a conuenient and pleaſaunt taſte for the mouth that receiueth
it: as alſo it is very requiſite that it ſhould bee of that colour which
it receiueth in the pappes. For it woulde bee ſtrange to ſee the
infant draw blood from his mothers breaſt, to haue his throate full of
it, and his mouth bloodie. All theſe things ſhewe well that the Prophets
had good cauſe to ſay, that the mouthes of litle infants preach
the prayſes of Gods prouidence, and confounde his enemies. For
when that foode which God giueth to nouriſh them in their mothers
wombe can feede them no more there, it hath pipes whereby to retire
to that place in which it may performe the 
                     •
                  ame duetie, and that ſo fitly,
that if that blood which is turned into milke did deſcend, as it aſcendeth
by veynes which paſſe from the wombe to the breaſtes, the
prouidence of GOD would not ſo manifeſtly appeare as it doeth.
And therefore we ſee by experience, that ſo long as the childe is nouriſhed
in his mothers wombe, there is no milke in the breaſts, but after
it is borne, the blood that ranne euen vnto the wombe, aſcendeth
vpward by veynes, making a good long iourney before it come to the
breaſtes.How the milke is wrought and whited. For theſe veynes reach vp hard to the throate on euery ſide,
inſomuch that the blood which they carie to the pappes aſcendeth aboue
the breaſts, and then deſcendeth into them: to this ende, that
through the length of time wherein it abideth in the veynes, it might
haue more leaſure to bee the better wrought, and to bee turned into
milke, and into that white colour which it receiueth. And the milke is
made the whiter, not onely through the aboad which it maketh in the
breaſts, but alſo by the meanes of that kernelly fleſh whereof they
are compounded. For it is of a whitiſh colour, that it might giue
the ſame colour to the milke, whereof the pappes are the veſſels. So
that heere wee may the better knowe (as wee touched before) why
GOD by his prouidence made the breaſtes of that matter and colour
whereof they conſiſt. Nowe wee haue further to note another
poynt wherein God hath very well prouided for the comfort
of women, as it were a recompence for the paines and trauaile
which they haue both in the bearing and bringing vp of their children,
namely, that whileſt a woman is withchilde, and giueth ſucke
to her infant, ſhee hath not her monethly and vſuall purgations, becauſe
her ſuperſluous blood, and that which at other times is an

excrement and muſt be voyded, is not then any longer a ſuperfluous
excrement, (if ſhe be not otherwiſe euil affected in body by ſickenes)
but is turned into the foode of the child,Whereof womans milke is made. whether ſhe beareth it in her
belly, or giueth it ſucke with her breaſts. Wherein wee ſee a maruailous
worke of God. For it is all one as if hee turned poiſon or venim
into good meate and nouriſhment, yea into moſt deintie foode, for
the vſe of ſuch a delicate mouth and tender nature as an infant hath
that is newly borne. Further alſo we will note heere, that ſo long as
the infant is in his mothers belly, it is nouriſhed more like to a plant,
then to thoſe liuing creatures which receiue their food by their throat.
And yet after he is borne, he knoweth wel wherefore his mouth ſ
                     •
                  rueth
before euer he vſed it, without any other Maſter or Miſtreſſe to
teach him this skill them the prouidence of God, which ſheweth it
ſelfe alſo in other creatures in the like caſe, but not in ſuch euident
and excellent manner.How and where an infant receiueth breath and foode in the wombe. We may ſay the like of the breath which the
infant receiueth not in 
                     〈◊〉
                   mothers wombe by his mouth, no more
then the meate wherewith hee is fedde, nor yet by the noſethrilles,
which are more ſpecially giuen to the body for that purpoſe, but by
the nauill which is appointed to be the pipe to conuey both vnto him
before he be borne. But the diſcourſe of this matter will fall out more
fitly heereafter to be handled at large, when wee ſhall ſpeake of the
naturall and internall powers of the ſoule. Wherefore it is time to finiſh
the couering of our building, and ſo make an end of the ſpeaches
of this dayes worke. Therefore it belongeth to thee ACHITOR, to
couer it with skinne and haire, vnleſſe you thinke good firſt to tell vs
ſomething of the fat that is found within the skinne.
            
            
               Of the fatte and skinnes of mans body and of their vſe: of the haires
thereof. Chap. 8.
               ACHITOB. Hitherto our intent hath beene, after ſpeach had of
mans creation, firſt to erect vp his tabernacle, as it were a d
                     •
                  ie
Anatomy, which is a body conſiſting onely of bones. After wee clothed
it with ſinewes, muſcles, ligaments, fleſh, and kernelles, which
ſerue it for a garment,A ſimilitude. or ſtandeth in ſteade of morter or plaiſter for
the walles of a building. For in this edifice of mans body, the bones
occupy the place of ſtone, which muſt afterward be committed to the
Maſon to cauſe them to keepe cloſe together, euery one in his place.
But yet we haue to white it ouer, which is the laſt couering, to make it
fairer, better poliſhed, and more perfect. For if we conſider it onelie
as hitherto it hath beene ſet out vnto vs, we ſhall ſee it but as it were a

frame not poliſhed, nor made perfect without: or as it were a bodie
without a skinne, which is not very pleaſant to ſight. Therefore wee
will now put on the laſt garment, which couereth all the reſt, namely
the skinne: but firſt a word of the fatte, which being within, is of great
force to preſerue and keepe it.
               I will not ſtay heere to declare how and by what meanes the fatte,
as alſo the kernels and paps are made of the blood, becauſe our principall
ſcope is to ſhew the prouidence of God in the vſe of all the parts
of the body, leauing to the Phyſicions that which appertaineth to
their office, touching the intire and perfect knowledge of the Anatomy
of the body. Seeing then wee are to ſpeake of the fatte that is
found in the body,The vſes of fatte in the body. it ſerueth for the defence and preſeruation of thoſe
partes that are couered therewith, not onely againſt heate and cold,
and other thinges that come from without, which might indammage
thoſe partes, but alſo to keepe in naturall heate the longer, by whoſe
vertue concoction of meate (commonl
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   led digeſtion) is made
in the body. Likewiſe it is very profitable for thoſe partes that are
in greateſt and moſt vſuall motion, to ſupple and annoint them, as
well to make them more nimble and readie to mooue, as to preſerue
them from drying, and ſo conſequently from bruzing and waſting.
There is alſo in many places a certaine humour which ſerueth
to annoint the ioynts and their ligaments, and the ſmall endes of the
griſtles. For moiſture helpeth motion very much, and preſerueth thoſe
partes that are mooued, as wee ſee by experience in chariot wheeles.
For when the axeltrees are greazed, about which they mooue, they
doe not onely turne about more eaſily, but alſo laſt and continue longer:
whereas although they were all of yron, yet they woulde
weare away and be ſet on fire of themſelues, if they were not annointed
and moiſtned with ſome humour. Nowe let vs come to conſider
of the couering of mans body. As therefore a man vſeth not one
onely garment, but diuers, ſo is it with the body. For firſt hee is clothed
with three skinnes,Three skinnes of the body. that are great, long and large, with which
hee is couered cleane ouer from the ſole of the foote to the toppe of
the head.The firſt skinne hath no feeling no
                        •
                      blood. The firſt is a little skinne very thinne, which of it ſelfe hath
no feeling, being made of the ſecond skinne which it couereth: and
this ſecond skinne is made of ſinewes, fleſh, and litle veines, and in
ſome places of little arteries, being as it were of a middle nature betweene
the ſinewes and the fleſh. Therefore this skinne hath feeling
throughout, and is not without blood as the firſt is. There is alſo a
third skinne vnder the ſecond, which is more fleſhy, and therefore
it is thicker and more ſtrong, vnto which the muſcles cleaue, and

through which very thinne arteries and productions of ſinewes paſſe,
which tie it with the other skinne. The fatte of the body is betweene
theſe two skinnes, which ſerue the whole body not onely for a couering,
but alſo for an ornament, eſpecially thoſe that are moſt
without, which in mens bodies ſtand in ſteade of that skinne wherewith
the bodies of beaſts are couered. Beſides theſe three skinnes
that couer all the body, there are within, many other particular skins
of diuers ſortes, to couer the members that are there, which the
Phyſicions call Membranes and Tunicles,
                  Of membran
                        ••
                      and tunicles. with ſuch other names
agreeable to their Arte, to diſtinguiſh them one from an other according
to each of their offices. For there are many in the head to
couer, folde vp, and to containe the inward partes thereof and of
the braine: as alſo in the breaſt, and conſequently in other partes
and members within. Among the reſt ſome are like to nettes and
coiffes: others reſemble littl
                     •
                   ſackes or bandes, according as thoſe
members are which they are to couer, ſeruing alſo for defence vnto
them, and to diſtinguiſh and ſeparate the partes one from an other.
Wee will leaue to the Phyſicion to number and to diſtinguiſh them,
and to name euery one by their proper name: and nowe come to
conſider the laſt couering which is vpon the body in certaine places,
eſpecially vpon the head,Of the haires. and that is the haire, which principally
aboundeth in the head, both in men and women, becauſe it proceedeth
out of a moyſt and ſoft place. And to the ende it might take
the better roote there, the skinne that is vnderneath it, is very
thicke and fleſhy. The profite of the haire is great, and ſerueth for
many thinges. Firſt, it is the ornament and beauty of the head.
For as the face woulde bee euill fauoured and vnſightly, if it were
hairy, ſo contrariwiſe, the head woulde bee very deformed if it
were skinneleſſe, where it is couered with haire: as we may iudge
by them that haue balde heades. Therefore becauſe it is the toppe
of the building of mans body, God woulde haue it adorned with
ſuch a couering: which alſo ſtandeth him in ſome ſteade to defend
his braine, and to conſume the groſſeſt and moſt fumy excrements,
of which the haires of the head are ingendred, ſo that they are a
kinde of purgation for it. Beſides, it ſerueth for a couering to
the head, which it may vſe at pleaſure, as neede requireth, againſt
both heate and colde. For it doeth not alwayes neede to bee alike
couered at one time and in one age, as at an other. Therefore a man
may let them growe, or cut them, or ſhaue them cleane off, as
is moſt commodious for euery one. And when they waxe gray

and white through age, they put men in minde of two things. Firſt,
that they drawe towards the graue and death, to the ende they might
in good time frame themſelues thitherward,Good leſſons for the gray headed. and if they haue gone aſtray
in youth and forgotten God, that then at length they ſhould bethinke
themſelues, and conſider that they are no more yong, and that
they muſt ſhortly die: for although it be late, yet better late then
neuer. But it is beſt to follow Salomons counſell, who admoniſheth
yong men to remember God before the Almond tree flouriſh:
                  Eccles 12. 5. comparing
an olde man that is gray and white with age, to a bloſſomed tree,
by reaſon of the whitenes of the floures. For when a man flouriſheth
in this ſort, his floures put him in minde that the tree of his body drieth
vp, and that it looſeth his naturall ſtrength: whereas the floures of
trees are teſtimonies of the vigor that is yet in them to beare fruit.
Therfore we are very miſerable, if we do not glorify God in our youth,
neither thinke vpon any other life then this. For we come farre ſhort
of the life of trees, and are not of ſo long continuance, neither are wee
yeerely renued as they are, which ſeeming to be dead in winter floriſh
and wax greene in ſpring time, as if they became yong againe. Which
thing we are not to looke for in this worlde, wherein we flouriſh contrary
to trees, namely in winter, which is our olde age. Secondly, gray
and white haires warneth men to haue ſuch manners as becommeth
that age and colour, that they may make olde-age reuerent, according
to that ſaying of the wiſe man,Prou. 20. 29. 
                  The glory of the aged is the gray
head. For ſuch are thoſe ancient men, whome God in his Law commaundeth
to be honoured,Leuit. 19 32. when hee ſaieth, Thou ſhalt riſe vp before
the horehead, and honour the perſon of the olde man, and dread thy God.
I am the Lorde.
                  Of the beard. The ſame conſideration alſo ought to be in the beard,
which is a great ornament to the face, and ſerueth to diſtinguiſh the
ſexes, and likewiſe the ages of men: vnto whome they bring authoritie
and maieſtie. For this cauſe the auncients did ſhaue or powle
their beardes and haire in the time of mourning and affliction: ſo that
when the Prophets denounced ſome great aduerſitie and deſolation,
they foretolde that euery head ſhould he 
                        •
                     ald, and cut, and ſhauen, and
the beards in like manner:Eſay 15. 2. 2. Sam. 10. 4. as it appeareth in the Prophecie of Eſay againſt
Moab and ſuch like. Wee 
                     〈◊〉
                   alſo that Hanun king of the
Ammonites, ſhaued off the halfe of the beards of Dauids meſſengers
to bring them in deriſion, whereupon they would not ſhewe themſelues
openly to the people vntil their beards were growen. Concerning
womens haire,Of womens haire. Saint Paul teſtifieth expreſly, that God hath giuen
it vnto them to admoniſh them of the ſubiection they owe to their
husbands, and of that power which they haue ouer them, in token

whereof they ought to haue the head couered, eſpecially in the aſſemblies
of the Church.1. Cor. 11. 5, 6. Therefore he ſaieth, Euery woman that prayeth or
prophecieth bareheaded, diſhonoure thither head: for it is euen one very thing,
as though ſhee were ſh
                        ••
                     en. Therefore if the woman be not couered, let her
alſo be ſhorne
                        •
                      and if 
                        〈◊〉
                      be ſhame for a woman to be powled or ſhauen, let her
be couered.
                  Vers. 1
                        •
                     , 14, 15▪
                   And a little after: Iudge in your ſelues, is it comely that a woman
pray vnto God vncouered? doeth not nature it ſelfe teach you, that if
a man haue long haire, it is a ſhame vnto him? But if a woman haue long
haire, it is a praiſe vnto her: for her haire is giuen her for a couering.
Wherein the Apoſtle laboureth chiefly to admoniſh women, that nature
hath giuen to them longer haire then to men, and that it becommeth
them beſt to haue it ſo, to the end they ſhould keepe their heads
couered with ſome vaile and honeſt couering, for the reaſons declared
by him: ſending them to the ſchoole of nature to learne of her what
modeſtie and honeſtie they ought to followe and to ſhewe in their
haire.The ſchoole of Nature is the ſchoole of God. For indeed this ſchoole of nature is the ſchoole of God the creatour
of nature, in which he teacheth vs by our owne body, and by the
nature thereof, what is conuenient and honeſt for vs. Therefore God
hath not couered ſome partes of the body with haire for an ornament
only, as the beard in men, and haire of the head both in men and women,
and for other cauſes whereof I haue ſpoken, but alſo to admoniſh
them to couer that, which they can not diſcouer without ſhame
and villany, whether it be by deede or worde. Heereupon it is▪ that
not onely thoſe parts of the body that are more honorable and noble,
as the head and face, are adorned with haire to giue them greater maieſtie,
but alſo places more ſecret are couered therewith, to teach vs,
that the honour wee owe to them is to keepe them couered and hid:
and that they diſhonour them greatly, and themſelues alſo, who diſcouer
them, not only byvile and ſhameleſſe handling, but alſo by infamous
and diſhoneſt wordes, as many doe, that alwayes haue filthie
ſpeaches of whoredome in their mouths. For that which is diſhoneſt
to be ſeene and to be diſcouered to the eyes, is alſo diſhoneſt to bee
heard, and to be diſcloſed to the eares, which wee muſt keepe chaſte,
as likewiſe the eies, the tongue, the mouth, and the heart. Therefore
they that behaue themſelues otherwiſe, do as if they meant to deſpite
God and Nature, whome they will not followe as miſtreſſe. Wherefore,
when Saint Paul ſendeth women to the ſchoole of Nature to
learne that leſſon which is there taught them, hee openeth vnto vs a
great gappe, whereby wee may knowe what Miſtreſſe God bath giuen
vs in nature, and what inſtructions wee may receiue from her, if
wee can vnderſtand her, and haue the wit to knowe, and to comprehend

all that ſhee ſheweth vs, euen in our owne bodies and goe no
further into her ſchoole, conſidering that there is not ſo little as one
haire therein, from which wee cannot take inſtruction. Howe great
then woulde the profite be, if wee coulde conſider as wee ought, other
thinges that are more excellent, and of greater importance?
Nowe that we haue raiſed vp the frame of mans body from the foundation
vnto the very top, we muſt to morrow by the helpe of God, in
continuing our ſpeach of the compound parts of the body, enter into
the conſideration of thoſe goodly outward members wherewith the
head is adorned, and of the ſenſes of the body, vnto which thoſe ſerue
as inſtruments. Therefore it belongeth to thee ASER, to beginne the
handling of ſuch an excellent matter.
            
            The end of the first dayes worke.
         
         
            THE SECOND
dayes worke.
            
               Of the bodily and externall ſenſes, especially of touching: of their
members, inſtruments and offices. Chap. 9.
               
                  ASER. They that haue the greateſt knowledge in humane
Artes, although it be in naturall Philoſophie,
are not therefore more happy then others, vnles they
haue learned to ioyne therewith the knowledge of diuinitie.
For albeit they haue greater vnderſtanding of
the nature of things created by God, then other men
that haue not beene conuerſant in ſuch ſtudies, yet all their skill, being
blinde in reſpect of true and eternall wiſedome, wil profite them
nothing, but onely to make them more guiltie before God, and
worthy of greater condemnation, then if hee had giuen them no
more vnderſtanding then beaſts haue. And who knoweth not that
the felicitie and ſoueraigne Good of man,Wherein true 
                        〈◊〉
                      conſiſteth. conſiſteth not in the knowledge
of the creatures and of their nature, but in the knowledge of
the Creatour that made them? Therefore wee ſhoulde labour in
vaine to knowe our ſelues, if it did not leade vs to the knowledge
of God: yea it woulde helpe vs nothing at all, but to manifeſt more
euidently our ingratitude towardes his Maieſtie, and to aggrauate ſo
much the more his iuſt and fearefull iudgement vpon our heades.
Likewiſe wee ſhoulde reape little benefite by our carefull inquiry into

the matter and forme of the frame of man, whereof wee diſcourſed
yeſterday, if it ſerued not vnto vs for an entrance into a deeper contemplation
of the goodly woorkes, that appeare outwardly therein,
and of thoſe corporall ſenſes that haue their ſeates and inſtruments in
them. And all this knowledge woulde doe vs little or no good at all,
if wee were not ledde thereby to the vnderſtanding of the internall
ſenſes of the ſoule, vnto which the former ſerue as meſſengers and
miniſters, as theſe latter doe vnto the minde and vnderſtanding.
Therefore in following this order let vs aſcend ſtep by ſtep to thoſe
things that are moſt excellent: and although the eye of our minde
ſhould daſell whē we draw neare vnto thē, yet we ſhal gaine greatly,
becauſe thoſe things are very great which draw neereſt to perfection.
               Hauing before compared the compoſition of mans body to a building,
and hauing raiſed vp all the outward partes of it vnto the verie
toppe, it remaineth nowe that wee ſet on the gates and windowes.
When a man woulde ſignifie that a houſe is very lightſome and hath
ayre enough, wee commonly ſay that it is well boared or pierced.
Which may truely be ſpoken of mans bodie in reſpect of thoſe outward
members,Of the beautie that is in the face. which God hath faſhioned in the head, eſpecially
in the face, which hee hath appointed for ſeruantes to the chiefe
bodily ſenſes, whoſe ſeruice alſo is afterward required for the ſpirituall
and internall ſenſes. It is in this part of our building and tabernacle,
wherein God cauſeth the greateſt beautie thereof to ſhine, I
meane in the face, which is as it were an image of goodly, orient, and
liuely colours, enriched with many excellent workes, not onely in
regarde of the skinne and painting, but alſo of the forme, and of
ſo many goodly and pleaſant members as are ornaments vnto it; yea,
which are ſo neceſſary, that without them all the reſt are as it were
vnprofitable, neither coulde they preſerue and keepe themſelues. I
ſpeake not yet of thoſe partes that are hidden, and contained within
the head, but onely of thoſe members which appeare outwardly,
which are in ſuch wiſe diſpoſed euery one in his place, that albeit they
be not farre diſtant one from another, yet the neere ioyning of them
together doeth not cauſe them one to hinder the office of an other,
notwithſtanding their diuerſitie, as wee ſee euidently, and ſhall
know more at large by the ſequel of our ſpeaches. Hereby doth God
admoniſh vs how wee ought to behaue our ſelues one toward an other,A good inſtruction for euery one.
and dwell eueryman within his boundo
                     •
                   and limites, not ſetting
one vpon an other, and not incroching vpon any thing that is our
neighbours. For as theſe is ſpare and roome enough in the head for
all the ſenſes and members that are there, and the like in the reſt of

the body for all the members whereof it is compounded, by reaſon of
the good order, concord & conſent that is amongſt them: ſo the earth
and the worlde is bigge enough, and hath goodes enough for all, if
wee had skill and coulde beare one with another, and be content euery
one with his eſtate and office, and with thoſe gifts which we haue
receiued from God, as members of one and the ſame body. If this
good accord and conſent were amongſt vs, a litle place would pleaſe
vs: but if we doe otherwiſe, all the worlde wil not be great enough to
ſuffice vs. No riuers, ſeas, or mountaines will be ſufficient, to keepe vs
within our bounds and borders. Therefore let vs learne of the ſenſes
and members of our body, what rule wee ought to keepe one with an
other. The bodily ſenſes, which God hath giuen to man to bee miniſters
and meſſengers to the ſpirituall ſenſes of the minde, are fiue in
number:Fiue corporall ſenſes. namely, the ſight, hearing, ſmelling, taſte, and touching.
To al the members & inſtruments of theſe ſenſes, which ſhal be hereafter
declared vnto vs, the facultie of ſenſe is generally giuen by the
ſinewes, which haue their originall from the braine, as we haue already
touched. So that hereby we ſee what is the dignitie and excellencie
of the head, ſeeing God hath placed therein the fountaine and
ſpring not onely of all the ſence, but alſo of all the motions of the boby,
which are wrought by meanes of the ſinewes. For we muſt know,
that foure things are required in the office and vſe of the bodily ſenſes.Foure things required in bodily ſenſes.
The firſt is the power and vertue of the ſoule, which giueth ſenſe
by the animall ſpirite guided by the finewes. The ſecond is the inſtrument
being well applied and made fit for his vſe and office, by which
the ſoule effecteth her worke. The third is that thing that is to be perceiued
by ſenſe, about which the ſoule exerciſeth her office. The fourth
is the meane or way, which receiueth the obiect of the ſenſible qualilitie,
and and carrieth it to the inſtrument. As for example: If the queſtion
were of ſight, firſt there muſt be this power and vertue of ſeeing in
the ſoule. Next, the eie is neceſſarily required thereunto: for it is the
proper inſtrument appointed to receiue light. Then there muſt bee
light, without which all thinges are couered with darkeneſſe and
made inuiſible. For although the eies by nature are partakers of light,
yet that which they haue naturally, and which they cary within them
ſelues, will affoorde them as ſmall light as if they had none at all, except
they receiue a greater light that commeth from the heauens, or
from ſome light 
                     〈◊〉
                   body, as from fire, or from a candle lighted, as
we ſee by experience the night time. Laſtly, the meane or middle
way is of neceſſitie required, by which the light is to be brought and
communicated with the eye, and that is the aire, through which it

paſſeth, as through a glaſſe or chriſtall or ſuch like bodies, which are
not ſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   that they keepe backe the light from 
                     〈◊〉
                   through
them. For if there bee nothing betweene them, I meane betweene
the eye and the light, and thoſe colours which it muſt beholde, a
can not apprehend and perceiue them. The like is to bee ſaide of the
ſenſes of hearing, ſmelling, and taſting, as we ſhall vnderſtand berter,
when wee ſpeake of them heereafter particularly. But as for the
ſenſe of touching it is moſt earthy of all the reſt.Of the ſenſe of touching. Therefore it agreeth
with th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   is common to all the partes and members of the
body that haue ſ
                     •
                  nſ
                     •
                  , although it bee more 
                     〈◊〉
                   leſſe in ſome places
the
                     •
                   in others. This ſenſe is giuen to the body to diſcerne the firſt
qualities by, namely, hote, colde, moyſt, and drie, from others that
accompany them, as heauy, and light, hard, and ſoft, ſower, and
ſweete, thicke, and thinne: which are compounded qualities, taken
from the foure 
                     〈…〉
                   all corporall things are made of the foure elements.
Concerning g
                     •••
                  atneſſe, figures, members, motion, and reſt,
they are common to many of the ſenſes. Thus much for the ſenſe of
touching, from which the reſt do differ, in that euery one hath his proper
ſenſe, which is not communicated with any other. For onely the
eyes ſee, the eares heare, the noſe breatheth, the tongue and palate
taſte. And heere wee haue to conſider of the great prouidence of
God in many points.No body can live without ſome ſenſe of touching. Firſt, foraſmuch as the body cannot liue without
the ſenſe of touching, which hath for obiect the elementary qualities,
it is giuen to all liuing creatures in euery part of the body, to the ende,
that thereby they might knowe according to the proportion of the
qualities, what is profitable or hurtfull to their bodies in the participation
of theſe qualities, and ſo eſchew more eaſily that which might
hurt them. But men haue this ſenſe chiefely in the endes of their fingers,
that touching ſlightly with them, they might make the firſt triall
of all qualities. For if they feele that the thing which they touch,
is too hote, or too cold, or that there is ſome other exceſſe in the quality
which might hurt them, they are admoniſhed thereby, to the end
that by a very litle hurt, they might auoyde a greater. For a man may
better cheape feele a litle griefe and that very lightly in the end of one
finger, or of many, then in a whole member, or in all the reſt of his
body. Beſides, God hath further prouided for this ſenſe, in that it is
not ſo ſharp to 
                     ••
                  ele ſuddainely and to the quicke, as the ſight or hearing,
to the end the body ſhould receiue leſſe dammage by that which
it toucheth if it be hurtfull for it. Now the eyes, becauſe they doe not
touch that which they ſee, nor the eares that which they heare, therefore
they can not be ſo damnified, as the reſidue of the members may,

which feele not except they touch.
               Moreouer,Some members of the body abſolutely nec
                        •••
                     
                     tie to life. we haue yet to note the prouidence of God herein, that
amongſt them members giue by him to the body, he hath created ſome
of that nature, that a man can in no wiſe liue without them: and others
ſo, that albeit they be not neceſſary for life, yet he can not liue at
his eaſe, and not receiue great hurt if he want them. The members of
the firſt ſort are, the braine, the heart, the lungs, the liuer, the ſplene, the
ſtomacke, and ſuch like, that are the ſeates of the animal, vital, and natural
vertues, without which there could bee no ſtay of life. For after
theſe members are hurt or periſhed, farewell life. The other ſort are
the eies, the eares, the noſe, the tongue, the feete, the hands, and ſuch
like. For although a man looſe ſome one or many of theſe members,
yet he doeth not therefore looſe his life, but hee ſhall ſurely feele the
detriment, which ſuch a loſſe bringeth vpon him. And as wee commonly
ſay,A prouerbe. that the Oxe knoweth not the valow of his 
                        •
                     orne vntill the haue
loſt it, ſo wee may with greater reaſon ſay, that no man knoweth of
what valew the partes of his body are vntill he want them, or vntill
they be ſo hindered that they cannot fulfill their office. Wherefore we
ought to pray to God to preſerue them for vs whileſt wee haue them,
and giue him thankes becauſe he hath not created vs lame or maimed
of any member. And when we ſee any that were borne without them,
or that haue loſt them ſince, wee ought to be ſo much the more ſtirred
vp to glorifie him, acknowledging it to come from his grace in that
he hath dealt better with rathe
                     •
                  r with them, although we haue deſerued
no more then they. Now becauſe we do not ſo, neither haue this
conſideration as we ought, to giue him thankes, and to vſe them to his
honour and glory, therefore he depriueth vs of them many times, to
puniſh this ingratitude, and to cauſe vs to know better the valew of
theſe gifts, after they are taken from vs, and that wee haue loſt them,
ſeeing we could not knowe it whileſt wee had them, nor yet him that
gaue them vnto vs. And by the ſame meanes alſo he would admoniſh
and put vs in minde of the dammage we receiue by the defects of our
ſoule, by thoſe which wee feele by experience in our bodies. Whereupon
wee haue an other goodly point of the prouidence of God to
note,An other point of Gods 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   in that hee hath giuen vs almoſt all double members, without
which we could not liue but with great paine and trouble: to the end
that if we loſt one, wee might yet vſe the other, and in ſome ſort ſupplie
the loſſe of that which is wanting. For this cauſe hee did not
create onely one eye, or one noſethrill, one eare, one arme, one
hand, one legge, or one foote, but twaine. This ought to bee well
conſidered, that wee might haue the better knowledge of the care

that God hath ouer vs, ſeeing hee hath ſo well prouided for all
things, that hee will not onely haue vs liue, but alſo furniſh vs with
all neceſſary things, whereby wee might liue more commodiouſly,
more eaſily, and with leſſe paine and trouble. And when it falleth
out, that ſome one of theſe members or both are wanting, God ſupplieth
this defect by maruailous meanes. For ſometimes wee ſee that
maymed folkes haue done many thinges with their feete, or with
their necke and head, that others could hardly doe with their hands:
at leaſt wiſe they haue done things without handes, that would ſeeme
altogether incredible to ſuch as haue not ſeene them.The hands ſometimes ſtand in ſt
                        •
                     ade of the tongue and cares. And many
times wee ſee dumbe men, whoſe handes ſtand them in ſteade both
of tongue and eares. For by the ſignes and geſtures of their handes
they ſignifie their meaning to others, as if they themſelues did
ſpeake: and vnderſtand the minde of others that make the like
ſignes. Yea, there are ſome that conceiue what others ſay vnto
them, onely by ſeeing them open and mooue their lippes, ſo that
we muſt needs acknowledge it as a miracle of God. Now hauing ſpoken
generally of the ſenſes of the body, and ſpecially of touching,
as alſo of their members and inſtruments, wee muſt come to their
particulars. Therefore AMANA, thou ſhalt diſcourſe vnto vs firſt
of the eyes, which are as it were the principall windowes of this
building which we haue vndertaken to pourtraite and ſet foorth.
            
            
               Of the eyes, and of their excellencie, profite, and vſe: of the matter
and h
                     •
                  nors whereof they are made. Chap. 10.
               AMANA. It hath alwayes bin the opinion of the Stoics and Academics,The opinion of the Stoics and Academics.
that the bodily ſenſes did rather hinder then help to
obtaine wiſedome: that no man could know or vnderſtand anything:
that the ſenſes were feeble and ſlowe: that ſenſible things were ſo
ſmall, that they could not be perceiued: or els ſo ſubiect to motion,
that no certainetie coulde be found in them: that our life is ſhort, and
full of opinions and cuſtomes: that all was compaſſed about with
darkenes, and hid: and therefore that nothing could be perceiued or
vnderſtoode, ſo that men were to profeſſe that they woulde affirme or
approoue,In Phad. & in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . of nothing. Plato writeth in many places, that wee muſt
beleeue nothing but the vnderſtanding, which beholdeth that that is
ſimple and vniforme, and as it is indeede: and that there is no ſcience,
but only in thoſe reaſons & diſcourſes, which the ſoule maketh whē it
is not troubled with bodily lets, as with ſight, and hearing, or with
griefe & pleſure.14. de 
                        •
                     rap
                        ••
                     . Euang. c. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Euſebius diſputing againſt this, ſheweth that the ſenſes
help much towards the obtaining of wiſedome: & that when they

are rightly affected, and in their naturall habite, they neuer deceiue the
mind that it 
                     •
                  tentiue. But wee ſhall knowe more at large what their
profit is by continuing our diſcourſes of the inſtruments of the ſenſes.
               Let vs knowe therefore,Of the eyes and of their vſe. that the eies were giuen of God to men to
cauſe them to ſee, and to be as it were their watch towers & fentinels,
the guides & leaders of the whole body: as alſo they are as it were the
chiefe windowes of the body, or rather of the ſoule, which is lodged
within it. For it is a moſt excellent worke of God, whether we cōſider
the matter wherof they are made, & how diuerſe or agreeable it is to
the office that is aſſigned them? or the beauty that is in their forme, &
in the diuerſity of their colours: or the commodity & vſe of their motions,
and howe they are ſet in their places, as it were goodly pretious
ſtones laide in ſome curious piece of worke: & how they are inuironed
and armed both aboue and beneath, on the right hand and on the left,
with the eye-lids, and the eye-browes, not onely for their protection
and defenſe, but alſo to adorne, and to make them ſhew more beautifully.
And ſurely it is not without cauſe that God hath put ſuch great
excellencie in them, and hath created and framed them ſo artificially.
For firſt, they are the chiefeſt members of all the bodily ſenſes, whoſe
nature approcheth nearer to the nature of the ſoule and ſpirit,The eyes draw neereſt to the nature of the ſoule. then any
other, by reaſon of the ſimilitude and agreement that is betweene
them. Therefore by good right they beare rule among all the ſenſes,
and all the other members of the body, as being their guides. For they
are giuen to man chiefly to guide and leade him to the knowledge of
God, by the contemplation of his goodly works, which appeare p
                     •
                  ncipally
in the heauens and in al the order thereof, and whereof w
                     •
                   can
haue no true knowledge and inſtruction by any other ſenſe but by
the eies. For without the who could euer haue noted the diuers courſe
and motions of the celeſtiall bodies? yea wee ſee by experience, that
the Mathematicall ſciences, among which Aſtronomy is one of the
chiefeſt, cannot be well and rightly ſhewed and taught, as many others
may, without the helpe of the eyes: becauſe a man muſt make
their demonſtrations by figures, which are their letters and images. I
paſſe ouer many other Sciences, as that of the Anatomy of mans body
and ſuch like, which are very hard, yea impoſſible to bee learned
and knowen certainly vnleſſe they may be ſeene with the eie. Wherefore
ſeeing the bodily ſenſes are the chiefeſt maſters of man, in whoſe
houſe the ſpirite and vnderſtanding is lodged and encloſed, the greateſt
and firſt honour is by good right to be giuen to the eies and ſight.
Likewiſe it is the firſt miſtreſſe that prouoked men forward to the ſtudie
and ſearching out of ſcience and wiſedome.Sight is our firſt miſtreſſe. For of ſight is ingendred

admiration and wondering at thinges that are ſeene: and this
admiration cauſeth men afterward to cōſider more ſeriouſly of things,
and to marke them better: and from thence it is that men fall to enquire
of matters more carefully, and to ſound them deeper. In the
ende they come to the ſtudie of ſcience and wiſedome, which is the
knowledge of ſupernaturall light, namely of the light of the minde,
vnto which, ſcience and doctrine is as light is to the eye, ſo that it
contemplateth and muſeth by that, as the eye ſeeth by right. Therefore
we haue to note, that it hath pleaſed God the creator of al things
to ſcatter his light throughout the whole world, & ouer all creatures
as well ſpirituall and inuiſible, as corporall and viſible. His ſpirituall
light hee hath infuſed into ſpirituall creatures, and bodily light into
bodily creatures, to the ende that by this benefite the ſpirites might
haue vnderſtanding, and the eyes ſight. So that Angelles and the
ſpirites of men, which are ſpirituall and inuiſible creatures, are illuminated
by the meanes of vnderſtanding,O
                        •
                      ſpirituall eyes & ſpirituall light. with that ſpirituall and
heauenly light whereof God hath made them partakers: as the bodies
of liuing creatures, and chiefely of man are illuminated with the
corporall light of the Sunne by meanes of the eyes. For as bodies
haue their bodily eyes, ſo ſpirites haue their ſpirituall eyes. For that
vnderſtanding wherewith God hath indued them, is vnto them as
the eyes are to the body. Wherefore by that they ſee God, who is
their heauenly Sunne, and the fountaine of all diuine and ſpirituall
light, as bodily eyes beholde the materiall ſunne, wherein as in a
fountaine God hath placed corporall light, which he would haue vs
ſee and know by meanes of the eyes: which wee ought to acknowledge
as a great benefit.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      the light 
                        〈◊〉
                     . For the light is a worke of God woorthy of
great admiration, which diſcouereth and ſheweth to vs a great part of
nature, and is vnto vs in ſteade of an image of the beſt and moſt excellent
natures, which without doubt are lights & ſhining natures. Neither
coulde any man poſſibly expreſſe in wordes or teach in any ſorte
what the light is, which ſheweth al other things, & what is the beautie
& excellencie thereof, vnleſſe the eyes did beholde and know it, &
diſtinguiſh it from darkenes. For by meanes of the eyes we may iudge
what our life woulde be, if it were buried in perpetuall darkenes, or if
man had no inſtrument to apprehend and to receiue the light when it
ſh
                     •
                  neth. Therefore as God hath created the light to diſcouer and ſhew
all things by it, ſo he hath giuen eyes to man, whereby he may apprehend
& receiue it. To this ende he hath made them of a matter that is
partaker of light, and meet to receiue it, that by the agreement of nature
that is betweene them & the light, they might enioy it, and by 
                     •
                  he

ſelfe ſame meanes they might be meſſengers to the minde to induce
and leade it to the conſideration of the diuine light, whereof corporall
light is a very ſmall reſemblance: and hereby alſo the mind might
knowe that God,1. Tim. 6. 16. 
                  who dwelleth in a light that none can attaine vnto, is a
maruailous light, as holy men knowe by experience when hee ſheweth
himſelfe vnto them. For as the eie is like to a glaſſe that receiueth
the images of thinges offred vnto it, ſo God imprinteth images of him
ſelfe in our mind as in a glaſſe. Wherefore as a glaſſe cannot receiue any
image, but of ſuch things as are ſet before it: ſo the image of God
cannot ſhine not be imprinted in the mind of man, vnleſſe he alwayes
ſet God before his eies, that he may receiue his image. And as the eie
is illuminated by the beames that proceed from the ſunne, ſo the mind
is illuminated by the brightnes of the diuine light, in which we conſider
the Father in the vnitie of the godhead, as the ſpring & fountaine
of al light, & the Sonne, as the beames & brightnes ingendred thereof,
& the holy Ghoſt, as a flame proceeding from it, which cauſeth the eie
of the mind to receiue it, & to be made partaker thereof. We ſee then
how our eyes together with the light admoniſh vs of great thinges, of
moſt excellent works of God, and of great ſecrets of ſpirituall & heauenly
things, whoſe images he hath imprinted in the light and in our
cies, to the ende, that by theſe corporall and viſible images, wee may
haue ſome knowledge of thoſe things wherof they are images, which
cannot be ſeene & perceiued with corporall ſenſes, but only with the
ſpirituall ſenſes of the ſoule. Wherefore wee ought greatly to praiſe
God for this goodly gift, both of the light & of the eies, which cannot
ſufficiently be valewed. For although it did vs no more ſeruice then it
doth to brute beaſts, namely to guide and leade vs in this corporall
life, yet we ought ſeriouſly to acknowledge the excellencie of ſo great
a gift of God, & how profitable and neceſſary it is for vs. But there is a
great deale more in it,The difference betwixt the ſight of men and of beaſts. by reaſon of the mind and vnderſtanding which
God hath giuen to the ſpirit and ſoule of man, as it were ſpirituall eies,
to the end there might be an agreement & proportion betweene thē0
& the eyes of the body. For as the eies declare to the mind what they
ſee, that it might take knowledge therof: ſo when the mind hath ſeene
with ſpirituall eies thoſe images that are offered vnto it by the bodily
eies, it cauſeth them to ſee a great deale more clearely, then the eies of
brute beaſts do. For becauſe they want minds & vnderſtanding, their
eieſight pierceth no further then vnto thoſe corporall thinges which
they behold. Wherfore when they ſee the light of the ſunne, they only
prepare themſelues to be guided by it, & neuer cōſider or looke any
further. But man, if he be not altogether brutiſh as beaſts are, ſtayeth

not there, but paſſing further he cōſidereth the beauty of the ſunne, &
thoſe great benefits which it bringeth with it. And being aſcended ſo
hie by the means of corporall light, he aſcendeth euen to the ſpirituall
& diuine light, & to God, who is the eternal & infinit Sunne. Man alſo
hath ſo much the more knowledge of the nature of corporall light, &
of the effects therof, & hath alſo ſo much the more celeſtiall & heauē
                  ly
light whereof bodily light is an image, as his mind is illuminated by
the word and ſpirit of God. For otherwiſe men ſee litle clearer, & not
much farther by the light of the body, then brute beaſts do. Moreouer
we made mention in our former ſpeach of 4. things requiſit to ſee by:
which alſo are to be vſed in the other ſences. I will only adde a litle of
the fourth thing, which is of the meane that receiueth the obiect of the
ſenſible quality, & beareth it to the inſtrument. If thoſe bodies that are
ſet before our eies, are ſo thicke by nature that the light can not pierce
through thē, thē doth the light appeare vpon them, but not in ſo great
meaſure, nor ſo cleare as in the aire & in other bodies, as in glaſſe, chriſtal
or ſuch like that are not ſo thicke, that they wil hinder the light frō
piercing through them.Of colours, and of their nature, varietie, and vſe. This part of light that is vpon thicke bodies, is
called colour, which is of diuers ſorts, according to ye mixture of light
& darknes that is in them. For firſt there are 2. kinds of ſimple colours,
by mingling of which together al other colours are cōpounded. The
one is white, which hath moſt light in it of all others, and therfore wil
take any other colour. Thē there is black colour, which hath leaſt light
in it: & therfore it wil take no other color.All compound colours made of blacke and white mingled. Now according as theſe 2.
kinds of colors are mingled together, al other colours, being infinit in
nūber, are cōpounded, taking their diuerſity & difference as they haue
more white or black mingled in thē. For this cauſe ſome are red, others
yellow, theſe greene, thoſe skie-color, others gray, or blew, or tawny.
In a word, it wold be a difficult matter, yea impoſſible to reherſe al their
differences & varieties. But God ſheweth himſelf yet more wōderful
in the diuerſitie that is ſeene euen in one kind of colour. For let vs conſider
in a medow or garden al the herbs, trees, & plants that are there
with leaues & floures, & we ſhal ſee no green in any one of thē, which
differeth not in ſome thing from the greene of another kind, although
they be all greene. The like may be ſaid of their floures. For whether
they be white, or blacke, or red, or yellow, or azure, or of any other color,
we ſhall not find one that differeth not in ſomthing frō others of ye
ſame colour, but of a diuers kind. So is it with diuers fethers & colors of
birds, amongſt which there are ſuch ſundry colours, that a mā cannot
tel what certain name to giue thē: as for exāple, we ſee about the neck
of a Ring-doue. And althogh Painters indeuor as much as lieth in thē,

counterfaite all theſe diuerſities in their printings mingled with many
colours, and howſoeuer, as followers of nature, they come very neere
her, yet they can neuer approch ſo neere as to be able to repreſent any
colour ſo liuely as ſhe brings it forth. Now if the eies were not capable
of light, they could not ſee any colour, nor diſcerne one from another:
and if they could not ſee colours,Nothing ſeene but by colour. they ſhould ſee nothing. For nothing
can be ſeene but by meanes of colours, no more then it may bee ſeene
without light, of which thoſe are made. And as the eyes cannot well
ſee if they haue not as much light as is needefull for them: ſo if they
haue too much, and more then they want, they will ſee a great deale
leſſe: or if it be very great, they will be dazeled, and as it were blinde.
Therefore it muſt be diſpenſed vnto them by iuſt meaſure and proportion
according to their capacitie: and then through the reflexion of
thoſe thinges which it diſcouereth vnto them, it imprinteth their images
in them, as the image of a ring is imprinted in ſealed waxe. Now
hauing ſpoken of the principall vſe of our eyes, if I ſhoulde enter into
a more particular conſideration of their nature, I knowe not almoſt
at which ende to beginne. For there is nothing, either in the matter
of which they are made, or in their forme, compoſition and vſe, howe
ſmall ſoeuer it be, which is not able to caſt all men into great admiration.
For firſt,Of the matter and humours of the eyes. if you aske after their matter, they are compounded
of three ſortes of humours, of which the one is like to water, the other
to glaſſe molten, or to the white of an egge, and the third to
yee or chriſtall: and therefore they take their names of thoſe things
which they reſemble. Concerning the Chriſtalline humour, it is
not ſo thinne, but more firme then the other twaine, much like to
waxe melted. Neuertheleſſe it is a great deale more cleare and more
gliſtering then both the other: ſo that there is the ſame difference betweene
theſe three humours, and that which may bee ſeene through
them, which is betweene chriſtall, glaſſe, and water, and that which a
man may ſee through them.Of the Chriſtalline humour. The Chriſtalline humour is giuen to
the eye to impart light vnto it: therefore it is in the eye, as it were a
little round Christall glaſſe, very gliſtering. And although the other
twaine are very bright, ſo that the light may paſſe through them, as
it were through water and glaſſe, yet they haue no light of themſelues,
as the chriſtalline humour hath, which coulde not receiue
that light which it doeth from without, if of it ſelfe alſo it were not
partaker of light, and if by that participation which it hath, there
were not in it a naturall agreement with the other. The other
twaine are ioyned vnto it not onelie to nouriſh and moyſten it,
that it drie not too faſt, but alſo to helpe to preſerue it, and to

moderate the vehemencie both of thoſe ſpirites and colours that
might hurt it. Nowe becauſe theſe humours are liquide and ſoft,
they had neede of fitte veſſelles to keepe euery one in his place appoynted,
for the executing of their office.How the humor
                        •
                      are placed. The chriſtalline humoris in
the middeſt of the other twaine, becauſe it is the glaſſe of the eye,
which receiueth the light, and the images of thoſe things that by the
light are diſcloſed vnto it. Therfore it hath behind it that which reſembleth
molten glaſſe, or the white of an egge, which is not altogether
ſo ſoft and liquide, as the other before that reſembleth water. Thus
hath God diſpoſed them according to that naturall cōueniency which
is betweeue them, that they might be ſo knit one to another, as is meeteſt
both for them and their vſes. And being all ioyned together, they
ſerue to fill vp that hollow place within which the eyes are incloſed:
ſo alſo the other partes, and namely the fat, whereof they are well prouided,
ſerueth not onely to fill vp voyde roome, but alſo is appointed
to this end, that the eyes might reſt them more at eaſe, and be moyſtened
the better.How Gods prouidence appeareth in the eyes. In all which things great wonders of Gods prouidence
appeare moſt cleerely: namely, in this, that the humors are ſo diſtinguiſhed,
euery on keeping his place without mixture or confuſion, as
alſo in this, that the chriſtalline humour, which is partaker of light, and
which ought to receiue it, is ſo well compaſſed about and fortified on
all ſides. For this cauſe it is more firme then the other, that it might
both keepe and diſtribute better the light which it receiueth, and alſo
preſerue it ſelfe, and helpe the other humors that are ioyned vnto it,
which being as it were Nurſes vnto it, doe in like manner helpe it againe.
Moreouer, wee are greatly to maruaile at the prouidence of
God, in conſidering the coates and skinnes of the eyes, their forme
and motions, their diuers colours, and the ſinewes whereby they receiue
ſight: the diſcourſe of which matters, I lay vpon thee, ARAM.
            
            
               Of the tunicles and skinnes of the eyes: of their forme and motions:
of their ſundrie colours: of the ſinewes whereby they receiue ſight,
and of other partes about the eyes. Chap. 11.
               ARAM. If we would ſtand to conſider of all thoſe things that are
worthy of admiration, but in one eye onely, aſwell in reſpect of
the matter, as of the forme, and meanes whereby they receiue the vertue
of ſeeing, and performe their duetie, as the Phiſicions ſhe we theſe
things in an Anatomi
                     •
                  , a man might make a very great booke thereof,
as likewiſe of all the other members. For there is no member ſo
little, wherein there is not moſt exquiſite arte, and wherein a man may

not ſee maruellous workes of Gods prouidence, ſo that I ſhoulde bee
wonderfully abaſhed to ſee any Phiſition proue an Atheiſt, if he haue
neuer ſo litle knowledge of the nature of mans bodie, and of the compoſition
and Anatomie of the partes of it, were it not that God puniſhed
them with the like iudgement that he hath done other great Philoſophers,
whome he caſteth into a reprobate ſence, becauſe through
pride and ingratitude, they abuſe that knowledge of naturall things,
which he hath giuen them. Let vs learne therefore to know the Creator
by the knowledge of the creatures, and let vs look vpon the workmaſter
in the excellencie of his works. And now to this end, according
to out intent, let vs with the eyes of the minde, behold the eyes of the
body, ſeeing they looking vpon all things, yet cannot ſee themſelues.
               Nowe as we haue perceiued,Of the tunicles and skinnes of the eyes. that God hath diſpoſed the matter
and humors of the eyes according to that office whereunto he hath aſſigned
them, ſo he hath appointed tunicles or coates which are little
skins, in which they are contained as it were in their veſſels, and compaſſed
about with them as it were with litle bands, to keepe them vnited
and cloſe together, and to preſerue them, that they mooue not
forth, and runne out, and withall to bee vnto them a ſure defence.
Theſe skinnes according to their offices and vſes are diſpoſed one after
another, and interlaced between the humors of the eyes, according
to that agreement of nature which they haue, both amongeſt themſelues,
as alſo with thoſe humors which they ſerue, and which in like
ſort ſerueth them, to the end that neither the one nor the other ſhould
eaſily receiue hurt.Fiue tunicles. And amongſt thoſe fiue ſeuerall tunicles, which
there are of them, according as the Phiſicions and Anatomiſts diſtinguiſh
them, one is very ſlender, like to a ſmal ſpiders web, or to a very
litle fine white skinne, that is betweene the partes of an onion. Then
there is another that is like to a litle threede: and the third reſembleth
in colour the ſtone of a redde grape, I meane the outward ſide of it.
They are named by the Grecians and Latines according to the ſimilitudes
and likeneſſe of thoſe things which they reſemble. But the chiefeſt,
ſtrongeſt, and hardeſt of them is like to a flender and cleere horne,
I meane that horne whereof Lanterns are made, but that it is not ſo
hard and thick by a great deale: and by reaſon of the ſimilitude which
it hath with horne, it is called by the ſame name. This hath God created
in this ſort, both that it might bee a ſtronger defence to all the
humors of the eyes, and alſo that it might ſerue for the light which
they are to receiue, through which it ſhineth, as the light that is
in a Lanterne beſides the horne of which it is made. There is yet another
white skinne, which ſerueth to keepe in the whole eye vnto the

head, in the place aſſigned for it: and this is the firſt, as that like the ſpiders
webbe is the laſt, and then the other are placed betweene theſe in
the ſame order that I haue named.A teſtimonie of Gods prouidēce. Heerein appeareth the woorke of
God, namely his prouidence is to be well marked in this, that he hath
not placed the eyes ſo farre out in the face and head, as hee hath done
the noſe, eares, and lippes, but more inward as it were in holes and litle
dennes, by reaſon of the humors whereof they are compounded, to
keepe them ſo much the more faſt and cloſe together, becauſe they
are liquide. Therefore they are ſhut vp in their holes, as the water of a
Well is in that place where it is gathered together. For this cauſe the
Hebrewes often vſe the ſolfeſame word to ſignifie both the eyes and
fountains.Of the forme of the eye. Next, God hath created thē of a round forme, both becauſe
it is the faireſt, moſt ſeemly and moſt perfect, as alſo becauſe it is moſt
moueable, and eaſieſt to turne and returne on euery ſide, as the office of
the eye requireth. For ſeeing they are giuen to man and to al creatures
for the direction of the whole bodie, and of all the members thereof,
they ought not to be ſo faſtened in the place where they are, that they
can neuer looke but one way, nor ſtirre themſelues on any ſide.
Therefore God hath appointed to euery eye ſeuen muſcles, both to
keepe them firme and ſteady,Of the muſcles of the eyes. as alſo to cauſe them to remooue and
turne vpward and down ward, on the right hand & on the left, croſſewiſe
and round. And as the round forme is moſt perfect, ſo it is moſt fit
for the office of the eyes, to the end they may ſee all things better, and
comprehend all ſorts of ſhapes better then if they were flat, or hollow,
or ſquare, or of ſome other faſhion beſides round: as a man may iudge
by the diuerſitie of looking-glaſſes, and of their figures and makings,
according to the variety of which, they repreſent diuerſly thoſe things
whoſe images they receiue. Now becauſe man, as alſo all other creatures
goe forward, and not backward or ſidewiſe, therefore God hath
not placed the eyes either in the hinder part of the head, or on any ſide
thereof, but before. And although the eyes be moueable and made to
turne on euery ſide, yet they neuer turne cleane backward, but onely
ſidewiſe, ſo farre as they can ſee and behold well. For they haue nothing
to looke vpon within the head, but only without. Therfore they
haue this aduantage beſides, that being ſet in that place which is aſſigned
vnto them in the head, they may turne from one part to another,
and ſee, not onely on the right hand and on the left, but alſo behinde,
by that motion which the head hath from his ſinewes by meanes of
the necke: which motion the head ſhould not haue, if it were ſeated
vpon the ſhoulders without a necke: and this is another commoditie
of the necke, whereof we ſpake not before.
               
                  
Nowe before wee goe any further in the diſcourſe of thoſe
partes that are about the eyes for their defence & preſeruation, it ſhalbe
good for vs to conſider here of the goodly painting, and varietie of
colours that are in them. For firſt wee haue a white colour, which couereth
the greateſt part of the eye: next that goodly ſmal circle, which
is round about the eye: then the apple of the eye, which the Hebrews
call the daughter of the eye, being in the midſt of it, as it were a little
glaſſe, where in a man may alwayes ſee ſome image, as it were in a
glaſſe when one looketh into it. This little circle is called by ſome a
Crowne, and by others a Rainebow, becauſe of the diuerſitie of colours
that are ſeene in it: which are not all alike in all men. For ſome haue
this circle more black, others more gray, others more yealow, or more
redde. Moreouer, beſides the ſinewes of thoſe muſcles that are giuen
to the eyes to moue them euery way, eche of them hath one proper
vnto it ſelfe, wherby the life and vertue of ſeeing is communicated vnto
it from the braine, by meanes of the ſoule that giueth life to all the
bodie.Of the viſuall ſinewes. Therefore theſe ſinewes differ from all the reſt, in that they are
not ſolide, but hollow within, like to little water pipes, to carry vnto
the eyes the ſpirites of ſight, which are as it were a little flame of
light, whereby they receiue from the brayne, life and vertue of ſeeing.
Next we are to conſider how God hath placed them neere the noſe,
to the end they may purge alſo by that on eche ſide, aſwell as the other
humours of the braine.The vſe of the kernels neere the eyes. Therefore there are kernels hard by them
in the head, which ſerue both to moyſten and to water them according
as they haue neede, by reaſon of their burning nature and perpetuall
motion, and alſo to retaine and ſoke in humours, leaſt they ſhould
deſcend and fall downe vpon them too faſt, and ſo hurt them. Beſides
this commoditie, the noſe in his place is vnto both the eyes in ſteade of
bulwarks, and ſo alſo are the bones which cloſe them in on euery ſide,
and the balles of the cheekes, which are higher then the holes of the
eyne, that they alſo might ſerue to defend them. Moreouer, God hath
further armed them with eyeliddes, which ſerue them both for ornament,
and are alſo in ſtead of gates vnto them, hauing muſcles to open
and to ſhut them, eyther wholly or in part as neede ſhall require, both
for ſight,Of the cyclids & of their haires. for ſleeping and waking, and for defence. And beſides the
eyebrowes wherwith God hath couered them aboue the liddes, there
are little haires growing at their brimmes, which God hath not giuen
in vaine. For firſt, they ſerue to direct the beames of the ſight, that they
may ſee more directly: next they ſerue for defence againſt litle flyes,
againſt 
                     〈◊〉
                  , mo
                     •
                  tes, and other ſmall things that might enter in, and
trouble them. Moreouer, they ſerue for ornament, as it were ſome pretie

border round about them. And becauſe the haires of the eyeliddes
haue an other office then thoſe of the eyebrowes, therefore they are
otherwiſe diſpoſed: for they are not ſo thicke, nor mingled one within
and about another, as the hayres of the eyebrowes are, but they are
raunged and ſet all in ranke, euen orderly one by another. And as for
the eyebrowes,The vſe of the eyebrowes. they doe not onely ſerue to ſet forth the eyes, that their
beautie may the better appeare, but alſo to defend them againſt the
raine, againſt the ſweate of the head and forehead, and other things
that might deſcend and fall vpon them if they had not this to ſtay thē.
And to this purpoſe we ſee the agreement which they haue with the
noſe on eche ſide, and how the prouidence of God hath made them
like to a halfe circle, or a halfe moone, or a little arche, or els after the
faſhion of a little penthouſe, to the end that the ſweat and raine might
haue an eaſie courſe and deſcent on both ſides, and not runne into the
eyes. And becauſe they ſhould not hinder in ſteade of helping, God
hath created them of that nature, that they growe not like the haire,
beard, or nailes, but continue alwayes at one ſtay. What then wil thoſe
women ſay for themſelues, who take ſo great paines in twitching and
plucking off the haire of their eyebrowes, to the end they ſhould not
be ſo thick or great as nature hath made them. For they thinke it greater
beautie when they are ſhorter and thinner.Againſt the pri
                        ••
                      of women. But in this, as in all their
paintings and prankings they doe not only lift vp themſelues againſt
nature, as though they would worke her a ſpite, but alſo be haue themſelues
as if of ſet purpoſe they meant to reproch God for creating thē
as he did. Now in ſpeaking of the eyes, let vs beware that we be not
ſo blind, as that we cannot ſee that thing by them, which they teach
vs, or take no heede of that which they ſhew vnto vs. For the conſideration
of one of them alone, or of one eyelid or browlidde onely, ought
to teach vs to open and to lift them on high, that they may ſearch out
and contemplate him that created them, and hath giuen them vnto
vs:Pſal. 94. 9. euen to him who ſaith, I that formed the eye, ſhall I not ſee? Therefore
we ought to be afraide, leaſt our eyes be giuen vnto vs as Iudges;
to conuince vs of our ingratitude towards God their and our Creator,
and to condemne vs. For there are but too many miracles to be ſeene
of his almightie power in their creation, & too many witneſſes of his
prouidence towards vs, to make vs more then aſhamed and confounded.
We haue yet another point to bee noted touching their ſituation,
which cauſeth a certaine proportion and agreement to bee betweene
the heauens and the head,Of the proportiō betweene the heauens and the bead. and betweene the eyes of the great & little
worlde, and thoſe of the body and ſoule. For it is moſt certaine, that
they could not be placed more conueniently, then in the higheſt part

of al the bodie, as it were in the higheſt towre, ſeeing they are to ſerue
all the other members in place of Warders and Watchmen, and of
guides and leaders. Therefore Salomon had reaſon to call them the
Lookers aut by the windowes.
                  Eccles. 12. 3. For the holes of the head in which they
are placed as it were Looking-glaſſes, are their windowes through
which they ſee and behold. We may alſo ſay aſmuch of the apple of
the eye, which looketh within his litle circle, as it were by a window.
For this cauſe, as God hath placed the ſunne, moone, and all the reſt of
the lights aboue in the heauens: ſo he would that there ſhould bee
ſome proportion betweene the heauens and the head of man, and betweene
thoſe goodly lights aboue named, and the eyes that are created
to receiue light from them, and to be that in man who is the litle
world, which the ſunne, moone, & other lights of heauen are in this
great vniuerſall world. Therefore foraſmuch as the eyes are as it were
the images of theſe goodly bodies and celeſtiall glaſſes, they occupie
the higheſt place in this bodie of the litle worlde, as the lights doe
in the great bodie of the world, whereof they are as it were the eyes,
to giue it light on euery ſide.The eyes drawe neereſt to the nature of fire. For this cauſe alſo the eyes are more
fierie, and haue more agreement with the nature of fire, then any other
member that belongeth to the corporall ſenſes. And as they
are in a high place, ſo they are admoniſhed thereby of the place vnto
which they ought to looke, according to that which Dauid ſaith,
I lift vp mine eyes to thee that dwelleſt in the heauens.
                  Psal. 123. 1. In all theſe things
we ſee a goodly harmonie and agreement between the great and the
litle world, the like whereof we ſhall alſo finde betweene the worlde
and the ſpirituall heauen, whoſe ſunne and light is God, and between
the eyes of the ſoule and of the mind. Therefore Ieſus Chriſt ſaid very
well,Matth. 6. 22. 23. 
                  The light of the bodie is the eye: if then thine eye be ſingle, thy whole body
ſhalbe light: but if thine eye be wicked, then all thy body ſhalbe dark. Wherfore,
if the light that is in thee be darknes, how great is that darknes? So that
the eyes being as it were the lanterne, lampe and flame of the whole
body, they could not haue a more apt place, or more conuenient for
their nature, then that where God hath placed them. The like alſo may
be ſaid of the ſpirituall eyes of the ſoule & of the mind. For God hath
lodged the vnderſtanding and reaſon in the braine of man,The agreement betweene the eies of the ſoule and thoſe of the body. as it were
in a high towre, in which it ought to raigne as a Queene and Princeſſe,
and guide vnder her lawes all the affections and actions of men,
as the eyes guide all the members of the body And when God, who is
the ſunne and light of the world▪ & of the ſpiritual heauen, reacheth out
his beames to theſe eyes of the ſoule by his eternall Sonne, and giueth
them life, vigour and vertue by his ſpirite, then is the minde wel lightned,

and then doth ſhe happily and to her proper end direct al the parts
of the ſoule. Now for the concluſion of our ſpeech, ſeeing wee haue
ſpoken largely enough of the eyes of the bodie, and of their nature,
beautie, and excellencie, and what goodly images of the ſpiritual eyes
they repreſent vnto vs, let vs yet a litle better acknowledge the greatneſſe
of their Woorkmaſter, by conſidering apart the matter whereof
they are made, I meane by it ſelfe and without the woorkmanſhip: as
if we ſhould now behold their ſubſtance without that diſpoſition and
form which he hath giuen them. What is an eye pluckt out of the head
but a litle clay and mire? as indeed it is the matter whereof it is made.
Now what a wonderfull thing is it, that God hath ſo appropriated it,
as to make ſuch a goodly piece of woorke thereof, and ſuch faire inſtruments
for the ſeruice of men? And therefore our Sauiour Ieſus
Chriſt meant to repreſent this diuine woorke,Iohn 9. 6. when hee made the
blinde to ſee by putting clay vpon his eyes. Let vs therefore vſe their
ſight, which is ſuch an excellent gift of God, to behold his workes,
and thoſe goodly images of the diuine nature, which on euery ſide,
and continually are before our eyes: and let vs beware that wee
feede them not with the ſight of prophane and diſhoneſt things, leaſt
they ſerue to poyſon the minde and ſoule, whereas they ought to become
meſſengers, to declare vnto it honeſt & healthful things. For he
that doth otherwiſe is woorthy to haue, not onely his bodily eyes put
out, and pluckt out of his head, but alſo the eyes of his mind, that ſo he
may be blinde both in body and ſoule, as it commonly falleth out to
many. But let vs follow our matter propounded touching the ſenſes,
and their members: and ſpeake vnto vs, ACHITOB, of the eares, and
of their compoſition, offices, and vſe.
            
            
               Of the Eares, and of their compoſition, offices, and vſe.
Chap. 5.
               ACHITOB. The wiſedome of God is ſo great, & he prouideth ſo
wel for al things by his prouidence, that he neuer doth any thing
in vain: inſomuch that there is nothing whatſoeuer in all nature, which
hath not his proper vſe, and which is not compounded of matter and
forme agreeable thereto, for the inſtruction of men. But foraſmuch as
men are rude of vnderſtanding, and by reaſon of their natural corruption
eaſily turned aſide from the chiefe ende of their being, namely,
the contemplation of celeſtiall and heauenly things, in place whereof
they betake thēſelues to ye care of thoſe things yt are earthly & corruptible,
it commeth to paſſe, that hauing eyes and eares, they neither ſee

nor heare any ſpirituall thing, ſo that their very light is become 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
And then how great may we thinke the darknes to be in thoſe
partes that ought to be guided by thē that are capable of light? Therfore
as we haue learned, that the eyes are the firſt guides and houſhold
maſters that God hath giuen to euery one, and the firſt authours and
inuentors almoſt of all artes, ſciences, and diſciplines, becauſe by their
ſight we know the light, colour, greatnes, figure, number, ſituation,
and motion of bodily things, both neere and farre off: ſo now we are
to know, that the heating and the cares are very conuenient for one
man to communicate his knowledge with another, as if one ſhoulde
powre wine or water out of one veſſell into another. But they are eſpecially
giuen by God to men, that they might ſerue to receiue the doctrine
and inſtruction of wiſedome, as we may perceiue if we conſider
diligently their nature and vſe.
               The eares then,The ſituation of the cares. in mine opinion, are alſo as it were watchmen ouer
the whole body, aſwell as the eyes. For it is not onely required, that a
watchman ſhould ſee, but alſo that he ſhould both heare and ſpeake.
Therefore are the eares placed harde by the eyes on eche ſide, aſwell
for an ornament to the head, as for the commoditie and vſe of the
whole body. For that place is fit for them that they may ſo much the
more conueniently receiue thoſe ſounds that come vnto them, and
cauſe them to heare, euen as the eyes receiue the light, which cauſeth
them to ſee. Therefore as God hath diſpoſed the matter whereof it
pleaſed him to make the eyes, and hath giuen them ſuch a forme as agreeth
beſt to that office, which bee would haue them performe, ſo
hath he done in regard of the cares, as alſo of all the other members of
the body.Of their making. For this cauſe hee hath made them of griſtles, which are a
great deale harder and more firme then either fleſh, kernels, ſinewes,
or ligaments: but yet nothing ſo hard as the bones are, as we haue already
learned by that which was ſpoken before. Beſides, neere about
the place where the eares are, he hath ſet the hardeſt and firmeſt bones
that are about the head. Therefore they are called ſtony bones by reaſon
of their hardneſſe, and of their naturall agreement with ſtones:
whereby the cares are ſtrongly fortified, and that very agreeable to
their nature and office.Of their forme. As for their forme, it is halfe round, and very
well compaſſed. They are alſo doubled in about the ends, as if nature
had wrought them about with litle ledges turned in of the ſame matter,
in moſt excellent and decent maner. And amongſt all liuing creatures
God hath giuen vnmoueable eares to none,The cares of men and apes only are without mouing. but only to man, and
to an ape: for the reſt can moue them vp and downe. And as for this
externall and eminent part of the eare that appeareth without, if it ſerued

onely to beautifie the head, the vſe of it were not to bee deſpiſed.
For it is euident by ſuch as haue their eares cut off,Of their vſe. how deformed and
vnſeemely the head would bee to looke vpon, if it were not decked
with that part of the 
                     •
                  ares planted there by God for their greater ornament,
as it were two goodly bruches. Heereof it is, that thoſe
men haue this part cut off, who are to be made deformed and infamous
for ſome notorious offence. But beſides the honour and ornament,
which this part of the 
                     •
                  ares bringeth to the head, it ſerueth alſo to
couer the brayne which is next to the cares, leaſt it ſhould bee hurt.
And to the ende that they might not bee eaſily bruzed, or broken,
nor yet hang downewarde, they are, as I haue ſaide, of a griſtly ſubſtance,
as are all thoſe partes that are bare and appeare outward, and
which are in daunger to receiue iniuries and diſcommodities from
without. Likewiſe this outward growing of the eares bringeth a double
commoditie with it to the reſt of that member. The firſt is, that
it keepeth backe the rayne and ſweate of the head, and much
filth that might enter into the eares, if thoſe places were flatte,
and had nothing but the holes of the eares without theſe bulwarkes,
Therefore their forme is made ſo, that they aſcend and bende vpward
without, but are hollowe within. The other is, that it helpeth
much for the better receiuing in of the ſoundes that are brought to
the eares by the ayre, becauſe thereby the ſoundes are better conueyed
vnto that place, which is properly appoynted for the hearing. For
this cauſe the cares are not pierced ſtraight outright, but their holes
are made winding in, like the ſhell of a ſnayle, whoſe forme they
repreſent, ſo that one cannot thruſt ſtraight foorth ſo much as a litle
threede, or the briſtle of a hogge. For if they were boared outright,
many inconueniences would befall them. The firſt is, that the
ſoundes woulde not be conueyed in ſo well, as they are in places that
bend and giue backewarde, where they haue rebounds, which cauſeth
them to ſtay and ſound better. The ſecond is, that the eares ſhould
receiue ouer-great ſound and too thick, and ſo being more confuſed,
they could not bee diſcerned and vnderſtood ſo well. Againe, as too
great light doth not onely dazell the eyes, but hurteth them withall:
ſo ouergreat ſoundes would marre the inſtrument of hearing, if they
were not diſtributed and compaſſed according to the capacity therof.
For there muſt alwaies be an anſwerable and apt proportion between
the ſenſe, the thing ſubiect to ſenſe, and the meane by which the ſenſe
is made. Hereupon it falleth out oftē, that many become deafe by hearing
ouergreat ſoundes, whereof wee haue experience in Smithes, amongeſt
whome many are thicke of hearing, becauſe their eares

are continually dulled with the noyſe and ſound of their hammers and
anuiles. The like oftentimes happeneth to thoſe that deale with artillery,
by reaſon of the continual vſe and greatnes of the ſound.Of the place of hearing. Moreouer
wee muſt note, that there is a very litle hole in ech of theſe ſtonie
bones,Three ſmall bones in the eares. in which the hearing is properly made, and within which alſo
there are three very ſmall bones, whereof the one is called an anuile,
the other the hammer, becauſe they are made almoſt of the ſame faſhion,
ſo that a man would ſay, that nature had framed a little anuile
and a little hammer to make ſoundes, and to cauſe them to be heard.
The third ſmall bone was founde out by certaine Phiſicions and Anatomiſts,
and being boared in the middeſt is faſhioned like to a litle
ſtirrope, and is alwaies leſſe then any of the other twaine. Phiſicions
that write of Anatomie make no mention of this laſt, or if any
ſpeake of it, they are but fewe, and of late time. And in deede it
is a harde matter, euen for them that are moſt skilfull and expert, to
look vnto all how diligent and able ſo euer they be in Anatomie, eſpecially
in the view of many inſtruments, & of their ſundry parts, which
are ſo ſmall, that hardly can we diſcerne them with our eyes if we look
not very narrowly vnto them, and that after we are tolde thereof before.
As for theſe ſmall bones whereof I ſpeake nowe, and namely the
third, a man may perceiue them better in a dry Anatomie, and in ſome
skull that hath nothing but the bare bones, then he ſhall in a whole
bodie. Therefore the skilfulleſt Phiſicions and Anatomiſts confeſſe,
that the body of man hath ſuch woonderfull arte in it, that euery
day they finde ſome newe thing in it, which was not obſerued by
any in former times. But let vs returne to our ſpeech concerning
that which remayneth of the compoſition of the eares. Beſides
theſe litle bones,Of two skinnes within the eares. there are two ſmall skinnes full of nerues, which
holde and binde theſe bones in ſuch wiſe, that they are as it were a litle
tabour ſtretched out in that place. Theſe ſmall skinnes haue their
originall from thoſe ſinewes, by which the vertue of hearing proceedeth
from the brayne to the eares. For after the ſounds are made
in the ayre, they are caried to theſe skinnes, and then heard and diſcerned
by them. Heereupon they are made hollowe, to receiue the
ſoundes that come from without, hauing a nature that agreeth very
much with the ayre, as the eyes do with the fire, I meane in reſpect
of their vertue which is burning and gliſtering, albeit their
ſubſtance bee moyſt. Therefore as the eyes iudge of light and colours,
and by that meanes bring great pleaſure and profite to men:
ſo the eares iudge of ſounds and of the voyce,What profite and pleaſure is receiued by the eares. of notes, harmony, and
of melodies, whereby man receiueth commoditie and delight. And

if there were but the ſundry notes of birdes, what ſolace doeth hee receiue
by it? But beſides, how many inſtruments are there of moſt excellent
and melodious muſicke, what voyces and pleaſant ſongs, framed
very cunningly, and with great grace and harmonie by the arte
of muſicke? For we ſee by experience, that this ſcience is giuen of
God to men, that it might be chiefly dedicated to their eares, to the
end that by the ſounds & ſongs which they heare, they might be ſtirred
vp to praiſe God the giuer of them. Therefore Salomon not without
good reaſon called them the daughters of ſinging or of muſicke,
                  Eccles. 12. 4. becauſe
of the delight which they take therein, and alſo becauſe this
whole arte, and all ſongs and melody would bee vaine and vnprofitable
to the life of man without hearing. But aboue all, the chiefeſt
profite that the eares bring to men, is by the meanes of ſpeeche,
whereby they communicate one with another all their conceiptes,
imaginations, thoughtes and counſailes, ſo that without them
the whole life of man would bee not onely deafe, but dumbe alſo
and very vnperfect, as if man had neyther tongue, mouth nor ſpeech.
And on the other ſide, ſeeing man hath alwayes neede of doctrine
and inſtruction, albeit all the other bodily ſenſes helpe him therein,
neuertheleſſe, none is ſo fitte or more ſeruiceable to this purpoſe,
next to the eyes, then the eares. Wherefore if Salomon for the cauſe aboue
rehearſed, called them the daughters of ſinging, a man may
alſo call them the daughters of diſcipline and of knowledge. For
as man hath nothing more proper then ſpeech, whereby hee letteth
others knowe what hee hath in his minde and heart, ſo hee
hath nothing more fitte then that, to teach all thinges by, whoſe
doctrine is alreadie begunne by meanes of the other ſenſes,How doctrine is learned. but
principally of the eyes. For the other ſenſes together with the
ſenſe of ſeeing, are as maſons, that lay the firſt foundation of
the frame of doctrine, and afterwarde ſpeech buildeth vpon this
grounde-woorke: which it cannot doe, if it bee not holpen by the
eares and by hearing, which agree with the voyce pronounced
by the mouth, whereby ſpeech is ſent and conueyed to the eares,
that it may bee hearde and vnderſtoode of them.
               Thus after the knowledge of things is found out, and artes begunne
by meanes of the ſight, after the ſame manner that was
declared before by vs when wee intreated of the eyes, then the
ſenſe of hearing teacheth a great deale more, both greater matters
and ſooner. For wee receiue and vnderſtande in a ſhort ſpace, that
which our maſter who teacheth vs, hath obtayned and prepared
in a very long time. For howe many thinges muſt wee ſee,

and what bookes muſt we reade before we ſhall attaine to the knowledge
of that,The benefite of Lectures. which we may learne by hearing one lecture, at which
we ſhalbe auditors onely one houre or leſſe? Let vs conſider then how
conueniently and bountifully God dealeth with men in this behalfe,
when that thing which is very profitable and moſt neceſſary is made
ſo eaſie for them. For nothing is more profitable or more neceſſarie
then to learne much, nor any thing more eaſie then to heare much.
Therefore Salomon ſaieth,Prou. 1. 5, 6. 
                  That a wiſe man ſhall heare and increaſe in
learning, and a man of vnderstanding ſhall attaine vnto wiſe Counſels,
to vnderſtand a parable and the interpretation, the wordes of the
wiſe and their darke ſayings. This alſo is the meanes whereby GOD
hath appoynted, that men ſhall learne and vnderſtand his will. And
therefore, as we heard that eyes were giuen vnto vs, to this ende eſpecially,
that they ſhould contemplate the workes of God, their and
our Creator: ſo we ought to know that eares were giuen vs, that before
all things we ſhould heare and vnderſtand his voyce and worde,
and conſecrate them wholly to that purpoſe: to the end that after the
eares of the body haue heard it, they ſhould be the meſſengers to declare
it to the eares of the ſoule and minde,How hearing is framed in the eares. to cauſe them alſo to heare
and vnderſtand the ſame. For this cauſe, as the aire that entreth into
the eares, and bringeth vnto them the ſound made in it ſelfe, when it
is ſtricken and moued, moueth the litle hammer of the eares, and cauſeth
ſeth it to ſtrike vpon the anuile, and ſo maketh a ſound by meanes of
the litle taber, through whoſe ſounde the ſpirites of hearing are awakened:
ſo God by inſpiration worketh in his Prophets and Miniſters,
who receiue his voyce after a diuine manner: and then are
they as it were the hammers that ſtrike vpon the anuiles of mens
mindes and heartes, by which ſounde the ſpirites of the hearers are
awakened and ſtirred vp. But my deſire is, that wee ſhould throughly
conſider heere this great ſecrete of GOD that lyeth hidde in nature,
namely, the meanes whereby the hearing is made and framed
in the eares, which wee cannot ſee or comprehende as it is in
it ſelfe. Neuertheleſſe, God giueth vs great light thereunto by the
matter and forme of the inſtruments, which he hath made for the hearing.
Wherefore ſeeing the eares are framed ſo artificially as wee
haue hearde, as appeareth to the eye by their Anatomie, wee cannot
doubt but that God would haue their vſe and artificiall compoſition
knowen to them that may beholde with their eies the inſtruments
of hearing, when they are laid open vnto them, as they are to Anatomiſts,
to the end that by the view and contemplation of thē, they
might iudge of that ſecret worke of nature which God hath wrought

in hearing, which cannot bee ſeene with eyes when it is in doing.
For we knowe by experie
                     •
                  ce whereto ſerueth a hammer, an anuile,
and a taber, and what ſound they make when the one ſtriketh, and
the other is ſtricken, and howe that hollow things are more fitte to receiue
ſounds, and to cauſe them to be heard better, then things that
are ſolide and more thicke. So that when we ſee inſtruments like to
theſe in the compoſition of the eares, we may eaſily iudge, that God
hath not placed them there, but to doe that ſeruice which may be
perfourmed by ſuch inſtruments, to the end we ſhould know the great
skill and wiſedome of the Woorkmaſter that made them. Now for
the concluſion of our ſpeech, let vs learne, that although our eares
did vs no more ſeruice then the eares of brute beaſtes doe to them,
and reached onely to the vſe of this life, yet coulde we not ſufficiently
acknowledge that good, which God doth to vs by them. But wee
muſt make a greater account of this, that by the meanes of his worde,
which he will haue declared to our cares, he cauſeth them to ſerue to
his honour and glory, and to our owne ſaluation. Therefore let vs
apply theſe ſo beautifull and artificiall members, with all the reſt of
our ſenſes to their principall ende, yea to the end of all nature, namely,
to the glory of their Maker: and let them be deafe, and ſtopped
vp againſt all diſhoneſt things that might poyſon them, and ſo conſequently
our mindes by them.1. Cor. 15. 33. For that which Saint Paul ſaith, That
euill wordes corrupt good manners, ought to be extended to euery vile,
diſhoneſt, and wicked thing which the eares may heare. Wherefore
they that abuſe them ſo vilely, deſerue that God ſhoulde pluck
them off, and ſtoppe them, and make them altogether deafe, not only
their bodily eares, but alſo thoſe that are ſpirituall, as hee maketh
them blind according to that threatning which he giueth out by Eſay.
                  Eſay. 6. 9, 10.
Now to follow our purpoſe touching corporall ſenſes and their inſtruments,
I thinke we ought to intreate of the tongue, becauſe it ſerueth
chiefly for ſpeech, whereof we haue already made ſome mention, and
for the ſenſe of taſte, in which we muſt be inſtructed. Therfore ASER,
declare vnto vs the diuers vſes of the tongue, and what inſtruments are
neceſſary both for voyce and ſpeech.
            
            
               Of the diuers vſes of the tongue: of the inſtruments neceſſary both for
voyce & ſpeech: how there is a double ſpeech: of the forme thereof:
how the ſpirit of man is repreſented thereby. Chap. 13.
               ASER. If wee were onely of a ſpirituall nature as the Angels are,
it is certain we ſhould by and by vnderſtand one another, by that

minde & vnderſtanding, whereof we are partakers, as they vnderſtand
eche other: neither ſhould we need ſpeech, tongue, eares, or eyes, to
heare and ſee by, no more then thoſe natures that conſiſt only of ſpirit,
hauing all thoſe things ſpiritual wherby they communicated both with
God, & amongſt themſelues. But we can haue no ſuch communicatiō
among our ſelues by the vnderſtanding of the mind & ſpirit only, becauſe
of that corporall nature which commeth between the ſoules &
ſpirits one of another. Wherfore the helpe of ſpeech, aſwel as of the other
external ſenſes, is very requiſite for vs in euery part of life. Alſo becauſe
our ſoule, being kept vnder our fleſh as vnder a vaile, vſeth cogitations
& diſcourſes, it ſtādeth in need of ſpeech, of words & of names,
by means of which it may vtter & publiſh that, yt lieth bid as it were in a
deep & darke place, where nothing is ſeene. Foraſmuch therfore as the
tongue is the principal inſtrument wherby God giueth ſpeech to mē,
& without which they would be dombe, & ſeeing alſo it ſerueth the
ſenſe of taſte as wel as the roofe of the mouth, it ſhall not bee without
good conſideration, if intreating now of this mēber, & of ye vſe therof,
we place it in the order of our diſcourſes, betweene the inſtruments of
hearing, whereof we ſpake before, and thoſe of taſte, of which we will
ſpeake hereafter, for the agreement it hath with them both.
               God hath giuen ye tongue to man not for one vſe alone, but for many:
& namely for three at the leaſt,Three vſes of the tongue. which are all very neceſſary for ye life of
man. The firſt is to frame the ſpeech: the ſecond, for the taſte: the third,
to helpe to prepare the meate that is chewed in the mouth for the
nouriſhing of the body. And becauſe the firſt is the nobleſt of all, and
giuen to man onely, whereas the other twaine are common to him
with beaſts, I wil begin with that: whereunto this may be added, that
becauſe of the conueniencie it hath with the hearing, and with the
eares, theſe two matters will agree the better, beeing ioyned in order
one after another. Next we will handle the other vſes that appertayne
properly to the ſenſe of taſte & to the nouriſhing of mā. Now we haue
firſt to note, that God hath placed many inſtruments in the body without
which ſpeech could not be well pronounced & expreſſed. For firſt,
ſpeech could not be without voyce, for the which God hath created
many inſtrumēts ye are all neceſſary for that purpoſe,The inſtruments of the voyce. as namely, the weſell
of the throate, the windepipe, the throte, the lungs, the breaſt, and
certaine back-running ſinewes appointed therunto by reciprocal motions.
All theſe partes helpe onely to make the voyce of man, without
any framing of ſpeech, except it be the weſell of the throte, which is a
litle fleſhy and ſpongie bodie, in figure like to a pine-apple, hanging
at the end of the palat, whoſe vſe is manifold. For it ſerueth firſt to ſtay

the aire from ruſhing in ouer faſt & violently into the lungs,The vſe of the weſel of ye throte. & from
entring in too cold & ouer ſodainly vnto them. Then it ſerueth alſo to
diuide & diſtribute the aire when it aſcendeth from the lungs, ye it may
be the better ſcattered & diſperſed into al parts of the mouth. And by
this means this inſtrument faſhioneth the voyce, & cauſeth it to yeeld
a ſound, & ſo prepareth it for the tongue, that it may be articulated and
framed into ſpeech by ye ſame. Therfore beſides the weſel of the throat
which ſerueth for theſe two vſes, there are fiue other inſtrumēts which
in regard of this preſent matter ſerue only to frame ye voice into ſpeech,Fiue inſtruments requiſite to lea
                        ••
                     e the voyce into ſpeech.
that otherwiſe would be but a confuſed voyce. The firſt is the tongue,
which hath the chiefe place among the reſt: then the palate, the teeth,
the lips, and the noſe. For although a man may ſpeake when hee hath
not all theſe parts perfect, yet his ſpeech wil not be well framed if hee
want any one of them, as we ſee by experience in them that haue loſt
their teeth, or their lips, or the roof of the mouth, or that haue their noſe
cut, ſtuffed, or otherwiſe troubled. For this cauſe the Hebrewes name
their letters, ſome gutturall, becauſe they are pronounced more in the
throat: others, dentall, becauſe a man cannot wel pronounce thē without
the teeth: and ſo they call others, labiall, that is, letters of the lips:
and others, letters of the palat, becauſe they cannot bee well expreſſed
without thoſe parts of the mouth. The like is in all other languages, albeit
they doe not diſtinguiſh their letters by ſuch names. Now in ſuch
varietie of inſtrumēts made for the ſeruice & vſe of one only thing, we
ought to acknowledge the great nobility and dignity of ſpeech,Of the dignitie of ſpeech. with
which God hath indued & honored man aboue al other creatures. For
he hath not giuen it to any of them, but to him only, & by that he hath
put a difference betweene him & the beaſts, as alſo by reaſon and vnderſtanding,
whereof he hath made him partaker, & in reſpect wherof
he hath giuen him ſpeech, which is as naturall vnto him as reaſon,
which is the ſpring head thereof, and from whence it proceedeth, as a
riuerfrom his fountaine. For how could men make known their counſailes
& thoughts without ſpeech? And what good ſhould they receiue
by that ſenſe & vnderſtanding which God hath giuen them more thē
to beaſts, if they had no more ſpeech then they haue, wherby to make it
known? And to what purpoſe would ſpeech ſerue them, if they knew
not what to ſay? And what ſhould they haue to ſpeake, if they had no
more vnderſtāding & reaſon then other liuing creatures haue? Were it
not ſufficient then to haue a cōfuſed voice only as they haue? Therfore
alſo we ſee how God hath ioined theſe twothings together graunting
ſpeech vnto man, becauſe hee hath created him pa
                     •
                  taker of reaſon
and vnderſtanding. And hauing depriued beaſts of the one, hee hath

alſo depriued them of the other, ſo that they are partakers neither of
reaſon nor ſpeech.Ecclus. 17. 5, 6. For this cauſe Ecclesiaſticus hath ioyned theſe
things together, ſaying, That God hath giuen to men counſell, and tongue,
and eyes, eares, and an heart to vnderstand, and ſixtly, he gaue them a ſpirite,
and ſeuenthly, he gaue them ſpeech to declare his woorkes. Hee filled
them with knowledge of vnderſtanding, and ſhewed them good and euill.
Whereby he teacheth vs plainly, what is the right & true vſe of ſpeech,
to what end it is giuen to man, and from whence it ſpringeth. For he
placeth counſell in the firſt place, and next the tongue. Againe, after
the heart and ſpirite, he placeth ſpeech, that we might know who is
their meſſenger. Whereupon we may conclude, that the one is giuen
for the other, and both to glorifie God, by ſhewing foorth his works
and marueilous actes.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſermon. To which effect Baſil the great ſaith very well,
that God hath created vs and graunted vs the vſe of ſpeech, to the end
we might haue the ability and meanes to lay open one to another the
counſels and thoughtes of our heartes, and to diſtribute amongſt vs
that which is in euery one, by reaſon of that communicable nature in
which we are created. For the heart ought to bee in man as a ſecrete
treaſurie, or as a larder or pantry in a houſe, out of which all things
neceſſary for the vſe thereof, and for the maintenaunce of the whole
familie are dayly taken. The heart alſo is like to a ſeller or garner,
wherein counſels and thoughts are locked and cloſed vp, and the
tongue is like to the ſteward who draweth out and diſpenſeth whatſoeuer
is to bee diſtributed. For as wee ſaide in the beginning of
our ſpeech, our ſoule vſeth thoughts and diſcourſes, which cannot
bee declared ſo long as it is incloſed in this tabernacle of fleſh,
without ſpeech, wordes, and names, by meanes of which, ſhe bringeth
foorth and publiſheth that which was incloſed and hidden in the ſecrete
cloſet of her vnderſtanding.Two ſortes of ſpeech in man. And ſo wee ſay, that there are two
kindes of ſpeech in man, one internall and of the minde, the other
externall, which is pronounced, and is the meſſenger of the internall,
that ſpeaketh in the heart. Therefore that which is framed in
voyce▪ pronounced in ſpeech, and brought into vſe, is as a riuer ſent
from the thought with the voyce, as from his fountaine. For before the
thought can vtter any outward ſpeech by meanes of the voyce, firſt
the minde muſt receiue the images of things preſented vnto it by the
corporall ſenſes.The degrees by which we come to 
                        ••
                     eech. And then hauing receiued them by the imaginatiue
vertue that is in it, reaſon muſt diſcourſe to knowe and to conſider
of them well, and to ſeparate or ioyne things according to
that agreement or difference, that concorde or diſcord, which they
may haue amongſt them. Next, it is neceſſary that iudgement ſhould

follow this diſcourſe, to make choiſe of, and to followe that which it
ſhall iudge to be meete and conuenient, and to reiect and ſhunne the
contrary. Laſtly, all muſt be vttered by ſignifications apt and conuenient
for euery thing: ſo that when the minde hath giuen ouer to the
office of the vocall inſtruments, that which it hath compriſed and reſolued
vpon in manner aforeſaid, the ſame is manifeſtly declared outwardly
by the aire framed into voyce, I meane by the moouing of the
articulate and diſtinct voice, whereas before it was hid and couered.
Now when this voice and ſpeach is pronounced with the mouth, as it
is inuiſible to the eyes, ſo it hath no body whereby the hands may take
hold of it, but is inſenſible to all the ſenſes, except the hearing, which
neuertheleſſe cannot lay hold of it or keepe it faſt, as it were with griping
hands, but entring in of it ſelfe, it is ſo long detained there whileſt
the ſound reboundeth in the eares, and then vaniſheth away ſuddenly.
But albeit the ſound and the voyce paſſeth ſo ſodainely, as if
preſently it flew away hauing reſpect to the outward ſpeech, neuertheleſſe
the internall ſpeach remaineth, not onely in the ſpirite, heart,
and thought that ingendred it, not being in any ſort diuided, cut off,
or ſeperated, but alſo it filleth all the hearers, by reaſon of the agreement
that is betweene the ſpirites and mindes of men, and the ſpeach
that is bred there, and becauſe it differeth not much from the minde,
and from the thought where it firſt beganne and was bred. And thus
the thoughtes and counſailes of the minde and ſpirite are diſcouered
and manifeſted by ſpeach.What voyce is. So that al voice is not ſpeach. For the
name of voyce generally taken comprehendeth all ſounds and things
which bring any noiſe to the eares. Neuertheleſſe it is more properly
and ſpecially attributed to thoſe ſounds, which all ſortes of liuing
creatures are able to make with their throat to ſignifie any thing therby.
But man onely hath articulate and well diſtinguiſhed ſoundes:
vnto which, birdes of all other beaſtes approch neereſt, ſo that euen
many of them are taught in ſome ſort to frame mans voyce: but it is
without vnderſtanding. And becauſe that inſtruments of muſicke do
after a ſort imitate the diſtinct voyce of men, wee attribute voyce to
them: although the ſounds which they make be more without iudgement
and vnderſtanding then that of beaſts.Speach repreſenteth all the partes of the ſoule. But in men, voyces framed
into wordes are ſignes and ſignifications of the whole ſoule and
minde, both generally and ſpecially, namely of the fantaſie and imagination,
of reaſon and iudgement, of vnderſtanding and memory, of
will and affections. Wherefore it is an eaſie matter to iudge by his
ſpeach howe all theſe partes are affected, namely, whether they bee
ſound, or haue any defect in them. For if a man be dull witted, or

haue his fantaſie and imagination troubled, and his memory ſlowe
and heauy, he ſhall haue much adoe to ſpeake that which he thinketh
and conceiueth in mind, and haue as we vſe to ſay, but a bad vtterance.
Which thing alſo may happen to good wits, either for want
of exerciſe and vſe, or through ſome defect that may be in the body,
or in the inſtruments of the voice, or becauſe the matter whereof they
ſpeake may be profound, obſcure, and difficult, ſo that a man cannot
eaſily find words fitly to expreſſe the nature of it, as the woorthineſſe
thereof requireth. Which reaſon oft entimes maketh wiſe and skilfull
men ſlowe to ſpeake, becauſe they know what a hard matter it is
to vtter in good ſort that which is to be ſpoken, in ſo much that they
had rather keepe ſilence, then ſpeake ill or vnproperly. But a lighthead,
and a cocke-braine that is void of this conſideration, wil thinke
hee hath a more ready wit. For he wil ſpeake before he ponder or diſcourſe
in his minde. So that whoſoeuer hath not a ripe and ſtayed
reaſon, nor temperate and ſetled ſenſes, hee can not haue his wordes
ſet in good order, nor his ſpeaches well knit and agreeing one with
another, as we haue example heereof in children and fooles. And if a
man haue reaſon and iudgement ready at hand, but not ſtayed and pithy,
hee may well prooue ſome great babbling pleader, but not eloquent.
For hee onely is to bee accompted eloquent,Who is to be accompted eloquent. who can conceiue
well in his ſpirite and minde that which he ought to ſpeake, and
then is able to expreſſe it well, both by apt wordes, and by ſentences
that are well tied and knit together. We ſee then how the voyce and
ſpeach of man lay open his whole heart, minde, and ſpirite. But the
voyces of beaſts haue no ſignifications but onely affections, I meane
ſuch as are in men, and which the Grammarians call Interiections,
becauſe they are not framed into ſpeach, nor well diſtinguiſhed as others
are. Nowe if wee vnderſtand all theſe things well, they may
help very much to inſtruct and confirme vs in the doctrine of the Trinitie
of perſons, of the Vnitie of the Godhead, and of the eternall generation
of the Sonne of God, who is his diuine and euerlaſting
word. Likewiſe they will cauſe vs to conceiue more eaſily, how this
heauenly and eternall word, namely, Ieſus Chriſt, is the Image and
Character of God, the expreſſe and ingraued forme of his perſon, as
it is in the Epiſtle to the Hebrews,
                  Hebr. 1. 3. and not in ſhadow or painting. For
the glorie, maieſtie, and vertue of the Father is alwaies hid from vs, but
only ſo farre foorth as it ſheweth it ſelfe ingraued in his ſonne and
in his word,Of the image of the heauenly word in the ſpeach of man. as the image of the minde appeareth imprinted and ingrauen
in the ſpeach that is vttered. And as the internall word bred in
the minde departeth not from it, neither is ſeperated, and yet it

imprinteth an image thereof in the mindes of the hearers, to whom
it is declared: ſo the diuine and eternall worde begotten of the Father,
is alwaye
                     •
                   reſident in God, and yet imprinteth his image in the
heartes and mindes of men, to whome it is manifeſted by thoſe
meanes which hee hath appointed for that purpoſe. Thus you ſee a
gappe laide open into theſe high and great ſecrets of God, which wee
ought to marke well, following ſuch phraſes of ſpeach as are taken
from humane things, and vſed by the ſpirit of God in the holy ſcriptures,
to the end wee might more eaſily vnderſtand them. Wherefore
if there were no other reaſon, this were ſufficient to induce vs to
conſider more diligently the excellent worke, and great prouidence
of God, which appeareth in the framing of the voyce and ſpeach of
man, and in the nature and vſe thereof, and in thoſe members and
inſtrumentes of the bodie, which ſerue to that purpoſe. Therefore
AMANA, let this matter be the ſubiect of thy diſcourſe.
            
            
               Of the agreement which the instruments of the voyce and ſpeach
haue with a paire of Organes: what thinges are to bee conſidered
in the placing of the lungs next the heart: of the pipes
and instruments of the voyce. Chap. 14.
               AMANA. When we conſider diligently all the inſtruments created
by God in the body, as well for the miniſtery of the voyce,
as of ſpeach, we ſhall finde amongſt them all thinges requiſite in the
beſt and moſt perfect inſtrument of muſicke that can bee, to make a
good harmony: and we ſhall know, that no Organs are ſo wel made,
or diſpoſed in ſuch good order for the compaſſing of their ſound and
melody, as the inſtruments of the voyce and ſpeach of man are. And
by the conſideration of this concordance, wee are admoniſhed alwayes
to haue the ſame thing in the mouth which wee haue in the
thought, to the end that from ſuch an agreement, as it were in euerie
part of an Organ and of an inſtrument of muſicke,There muſt be an harmony betwixt the heart and the tongue. there ſhould proceede
a good harmony and pleaſant melody. For if there ſhoulde be
diſcord betweene the heart, the tongue, and the ſpeach, the harmony
could not be good, eſpecially before God the Iudge of moſt ſecret
thoughts, no more then the harmony of a muſicall inſtrument quite
out of tune would be pleaſant in the eares of men, & namely of good
Muſicions, who can iudge beſt of concords and diſcords.
               Firſt then wee muſt note, that the breaſt, necke, and head are as it
were the inſtrument and the body of the Organs, within which they

are put and incloſed, and by which they are ſuſtained: next, that the
lungs are as it were their bellows to blow them. Therefore it is made
of two pieces ioyned together, like to a paire of bellowes, to drawe in
and to thruſt forth the aire, and to helpe eche other in reſpiration and
breathing. Wherein we muſt call to minde howe needeful it was, that
the backebone and breaſt, and the building of the ribbes ſhoulde bee
framed in that ſort that we heard before, that they might ſerue to this
vſe, & make roome for theſe bellows to inlarge themſelues, and to do
their duetie.Of the nature of the lungs. Wee ſee alſo what their nature is, what motion they
haue, and from whence they receiue it. For God hath created them
of that nature, that they moue and remoue of themſelues, by the vertue
of the ſoule and life in the body, without which they woulde bee
voyde of motion, and coulde not do their office, as we ſee in dead bodies.
And becauſe the lungs are the bellowes that blowe winde into
the inſtruments of the voyce, without which it coulde not bee made,
therefore they are lodged next to the heart, ſo that they couer it, to
this end that men ſhould be admoniſhed, that their voyce and their
ſpeach is the meſſenger of their heart:Why the heart and ſpeach muſt agree together. and that for this cauſe the heart
and the mouth, and the voice and ſpeach which proceede from them,
alwayes ought to conſent and agree together. For it would be great
diſſoluteneſſe, if the heart, which ought to be the originall and fountaine
of the ſpeach, ſhould thinke one thing, and the ſpeach, which is
the meſſenger of the heart ſhould vtter and declare another. For before
the tongue and mouth ſpeake, or ſpeach be framed in them, it
muſt firſt be conceiued and bred in the heart and minde, and then
brought foorth and pronounced by the tongue and mouth. Therefore
Elihu ſaieth to Iob,
                  Iob 33. 1, 2, 3. 
                  I pray thee heare my talke, and hearken vnto all
my wordes. Beholde now, I haue opened my mouth, my tongue hath ſpoken
in my mouth. My wordes are in the vprightneſſe of my heart, and my lips
ſhall ſpeake pure knowledge. We ſee heere, how Elthu ioyneth the heart
with the mouth, the tongue, the palat and the lippes, all which are inſtruments
of the ſpeach, as we heard before. Therefore there muſt always
be a good & general agreement betweene al theſe things. This
good cōcord beginning in our ſelues, according to euery mans particular
place, ought to ſtretch it ſelf generally to al, that we may al agree
together, as the ſpirite of God ſo often exhorteth vs thereunto in his
holy word.Iam. 4. 11. pſal. 12. 2. And therefore it calleth them, men of double hearts, and
double tongues, that are not vpright in heart, nor true and certaine in
word.Matt. 12. 34, 35. luk. 6. 45. Our Lorde ſaieth, that of the abundance of the heart the mouth
ſpeaketh, and that a good man out of the good treaſure of his heart bringeth
forth good thinges, and an euill man out of an euill treaſure bringeth foorth

euill things. For as the tree is knowen by his fruite, ſo ſpeach maketh
manifeſt both the heart and mind of a man. Therefore hee ſhall be a
great deale better knowen by his ſpeach, then by the ſight of his face.
For his face doth not ſo wel lay open to the eyes his heart, mind, & maners,
as his ſpeach diſcloſeth thē to the eares: as we may iudge by that
which we learned to this effect in the former diſcourſe. Therefore before
the bellows of the lungs blow to frame afterward voice & ſpeach
in the tongue and mouth, the draught muſt be firſt drawne and framed
in the hart, that the tongue & mouth may repreſent and expreſſe
it afterward: otherwiſe they will ſpeake to no purpoſe, but onely giue
teſtimony, that there is litle wiſedome & vpright affection in the hart.
Hereof it is, that Salomon ſheweth oftentimes, that a wiſe mans toong
is not lightly ſet on worke without the direction and counſaile of the
heart and mind, whoſe ſeruant and meſſenger it ought to bee: but a
foole powreth forth al his mind at once. For he vttereth al that commeth
in his mouth, and ſpeaketh before he hath conſidered what hee
ought to ſay, ſo that his words are ſooner ſpoken then thought vpon.
The heart of the wiſe guideth his mouth wiſely,
                  Prouer. 6. 21, 23, 24. 
                  and addeth doctrine to his
lippes. Faire words are as an hony combe, ſweeteneſſe to the ſoule and health
to the bones. The wiſe in heart ſhalbe called prudent: and the ſweeteneſſe of
the lippes ſhall increaſe doctrine.
                  Prouer. 12. 13. 
                  A wiſe man concealeth knowledge: but
the heart of fooles publiſheth fooliſhneſſe.
                  Prouer. 29. 11. 
                  A foole powreth out all his mind:
but a wiſe man keepeth it in till afterward. There are many ſuch like places
in the Prouerbs, which I coulde alleadge to this purpoſe. And wee
know what is commonly ſpoken when a man ſpeaketh of a good affection
and in trueth, that hee ſpeakes from his heart: but if hee be
knowen to be a lyar, craftie, and deceitfull, we ſay that he ſpeaketh not
from his heart. Which is as much as if one ſhould ſay, that the ſame
thing is not in his heart, which he hath in his mouth. Although in truth
when thoſe ſpeaches are thought vpon before, ſuch contrarieties are
found as wel in the heart as in the tongue and mouth. For if they were
not firſt in that, they would not be in the tongue, which is the meſſenger
of the heart. This is the cauſe of that double heart which we ſaid
was in wicked, cloſe, and diſguiſed perſons. You ſee then what wee
haue to note, both in regard of the bellowes that blow the Organs of
mans body, & alſo of the player that ought to blowe and direct them.
Now let vs ſpeake of the inſtruments and pipes into which the winde
& breath of theſe bellows doth enter,Of the pipes and inſtruments of the voyce. & giueth motion & conuenient
ſound to euery one of them. They haue bene named all vnto vs before.
Wherefore we haue to conſider of that pipe which is called the rough
Artery or wind-pipe,Of the wind pipe which is made like to a flute, and in regard of the

matter, is of the nature of a griſtle and of skin. It was neceſſary that it
ſhould be of ſuch matter, becauſe it is to moue when it receiueth in, or
giueth out the aire, and to be inlarged or reſtrained as need requireth.
Needful therfore it was that it ſhould be compounded of ſuch skins as
are eaſie to moue, & to open▪ & ſhut, and which might ſerue for ſoft &
tender ligaments. And bicauſe the voice cannot be framed, if the aire
whereof it is made, be not beaten backe with ſome thing, it was in like
maner requiſite, that ſome griſtles ſhould be mingled therewith, and
linked together: as it was needful for the eares to be made winding in,
that the aire might rebound the better, and receiue the ſounds, as wee
heard before. For this cauſe it is called a rough artery, as wel in reſpect
of the matter whereof it is compounded, as of the figure. For it is
made after the maner of ſmall circles and rings, placed in a ranke one
by another throughout the whole length thereof, like to the taile of a
Creuis: and that with ſuch moderation, that it is thicke, ſlender, and
dri
                     •
                  , according as neede requireth to make the voyce of a reaſonable
bigneſſe. If it be too drie, it malieth the voyce ſhrill and hard to bee
pronounced:From whence proceedeth the change of voice in ſickenes. as experience ſheweth in burning feauers, and in great
droughts. Againe, the pipe thereof is larger beneath then aboue, and
ſo leſſeneth vpward where neede is, like to the pipe of a Bag-pipe, to
the end that the blaſt ſhould neither be too ſlow and weake in aſcending,
nor yet ouer haſtie and 
                     •
                  odaine. For if it be 
                     •
                  lowe and languiſhing,
it will turne to wind without any noiſe and ſound: and if it be haſty
and ſodaine, it will breed ſighes in ſtead of voyce: as it falleth out
to them that are diſeaſed and weake whoſe breath is ſhort, and to old
men, who haue ſmall vertue of reſpiration, and much leſſe of ſinging.
Therfore ſome expound that place of Eccleſiastes where it is ſaid, that
all the daughters of ſinging ſhalbe abaſed,
                  Eccles 12. 4. of the voyce of olde men, and
of the inſtruments which breede and pronounce it, and of their vertue
and ſtrength: although others will haue it to be vnderſtoode of the
eares. But it may be referred to them both. Now the principal inſtrument
of the voice is in ye head of the rough artery, namely in that place
which is commonly called the knot or ioynt of the necke,The Anatomiſts call it La
                     
                        •
                     inx. or Adams
morſel, being faſhioned likeſt to an Almaine flute. I abſtaine frō ſpeaking
more ſpecially of the reſt of theſe pipes & inſtruments, which are
only quils to receiue the blowing of the lungs, as alſo of the 3. griſtles,
which make the diſtinction of the voice, and namely that in the midſt,
which informe, is like to that end of the bag-pipe that is put into the
mouth, or like to the lips of certain pots made to powre out wine, or of
offe pots and ſuch like things, as we may ſee in Apothecaries earthen
pots.
               
                  
Beſides, in the midſt of that griſtle, there is a deepe ſlit or cleft called
glottis, that is, a litle tongue, becauſe it is the proper inſtrument of the
voyce, & hath both the ſides inlarged or cloſed vp by muſcles proper
to that vſe and purpoſe. As touching the griſtle before, it is faſhioned
like to a litle ſhield, ſo that a man may both ſee & touch it in the neck.
That which is behind, is of the faſhion of a ring which is put vpon the
thumb. And as theſe griſtles are dilated & opened, or preſſed & ſhut
by their muſcles, eſpecially both the ſides of that cleft whereof I ſpake
euen now,How the voyce is made great or ſmall. ſo do they make the diuerſities of voices. For as when they
are opened, they make the voice big and obſcure, as it were the baſe
in ſinging: ſo contrariwiſe when they are preſſed, they make it ſmall,
cleere, and ſhrill, like to the countertenor: and as they are more or
leſſe reſtrained or opened, ſo they make diuers notes of the voice, as
the tenor, the meane, & ſuch like. And becauſe the pipes cannot make
this variety of voyces in this cleft, therefore there are chinkes which
ſerue for the ſame purpoſe. In this ſort then, this inſtrument of ye voice,
which is placed in the top of the Artery and called Larinx by the Phyſicions,
being aided by griſtles and their muſcles, and by that litle
tongue whereof I ſpake not long before, together with theſe chinkes,
frameth of it ſelfe as many ſundry voices and notes, as al the pipes and
flutes of a paire of Organs being ſet together, and furniſhed with all
ſortes of pipes,A teſtimony of the prouidence of God. both great, ſmall, and meane. Wherein wee ſee a
wonderfull prouidence of God, whether wee conſider the inſtruments
named by vs, or the place that containeth them. For the arterie,
which commeth vp from the lights to the throat, occupieth but
one part of the necke: and yet it doeth as much alone, taking it
whole with the other inſtruments of which I haue ſpoken, as a whole
paire of Organs. For in a paire of Organs there muſt be many pipes,
ſome great, ſome ſmall, and others of a middle ſort that are greater
or leſſer as it falleth out, according to the diuerſity of notes for which
they are made, becauſe they can not be either inlarged or reſtrained,
opē or ſhut, but as they are firſt framed. Therfore there needeth as many
of each ſort as the parts of Muſike are diuers, and as there wanteth
variety of notes to fill euery place and to furniſh both the baſe and the
meane, the tenor and the counter
                     •
                  enor. But, as might be gathered
by our ſpeach, the pipe and inſtrument of the voyce is made of ſuch
a faſhion, that when a man is diſpoſed, he may inlarge it for the baſe,
and then reſtraine it for a countertenor, or elſe open and ſhut it in
middle ſort either more or leſſe to make the tenor or the meane, & to
cauſe the voice to aſcend & deſcend according to thoſe notes & tunes
which he would haue it make, and that by the meanes before touched.

The like may be done in ſpeach. For as euery one is diſpoſed to lift vp
or to depreſſe his voyce, to inlarge or reſtraine the pipes and inſtruments
thereof, he may ſpeake either higher or lower, bigger or ſmaller,
or clearer, and ſet what ſound, tune, and accent he pleaſe vpon the
ſpeach, which he will pronounce. Wherefore we may very well ſay,
that euery one carrieth about with him and within him ſelfe very
faire and ſtrange Organes,Faire Organs within euery man. vpon which he may play at all houres at
his pleaſure, either in ſinging or ſpeaking: yea they are ſo whole and
perfect, that they want neither the bellowes, nor the croſſe-beame,
nor the cordes, nor the hollowneſſe for ſound, nor the ſeate, nor the
poſtes, nor the porters, nor the bearer of the keyes, nor the table
whereon they are ſet, nor the Organ pipes. For al this is in a few ſmall
inſtruments which diſcharge their dueties, yea they are more perfect
in man then in any artificial Organs. And if any Organ-maker could,
I will not ſay make ſuch, but onely counterfaite them, and make as
many ſundry ſounds and tunes with one pipe, as others do with many,
all men would greatly admire ſuch a workeman and his worke, eſpecially
Organiſts and Muſicions that vnderſtoode the Arte of Muſicke.
How much more then ought wee to admire that great and diuine Organiſt,
that hath made thoſe goodly Organs of mans body, and giuen
them ſuch a good ſound? And how greatly ought wee to deſire, that
we may be the true temples of God, and good Organ players therein,
to cauſe theſe faire Organs to ſound againe, and to ſing and preach
his praiſes by them? For I doubt not but that theſe are the true Organs,
whereby he will be praiſed and glorified by vs. But there is yet
a great deale more to be conſidered of this matter, of which both this
and the former diſcourſe hath bi
                     •
                   made. For theſe Organs being prepared
as I haue ſet them in ſight, haue nothing more then the ſound
of the voyce, as it were an inſtrument without ſpeach. Wherefore we
muſt now make a ſpeaking inſtrument, which hath not his like neyther
in all the workes of nature, neyther in all humane and artificiall
workes. This Arte and office belongeth properly to the tongue, of
whoſe nature & vſe, and of the excellencie, & vtilitie of the Art it hath,
which is ſpeach, thou ARAM ſhalt giue vs ſome profitable inſtructiō.
            
            
               Of the tongue, and of the nature and office thereof: of the excellencie, and
profite of ſpeach which is the Arte of the tongue: what is to be conſidered
touching the ſituation thereof in the head, and neere the
braine. Chap. 15.
               ARAM. The Ancients being deſirous to extoll eloquence very
much, propounded the image of an Orator, as it were of one that

ſpake of gold,The praiſe of eloquence. who in ſpeaking drew out a golden chaine, which comming
from his tongue was faſtened to the eares of a great many men
that heard him, whereby he drew and led them after him whither he
would. Thus they compared the ſpeech and eloquence of an Orator
to a chaine of golde, becauſe of the vertue and power which it hath
with men, being able to keepe and ſtay them, to moderate their affections,
& to guide and gouerne them eaſily without force & violence,
as if one ſhould leade them tyed with a chayne, whome they would
voluntarily follow not being conſtrayned, but onely of their owne
good will, which neuertheles ſhould be ſo drawen that it coulde not
reſiſt. As indeed that perſwaſion which proceedeth frō ſpeech draweth
the willes and affections of men, with a ſweet and pleaſant kind of
violence, which they follow with great deſire, and cannot gaine ſay it.
Now this arte and office belongeth properly to the tongue, of which
we are now to ſpeake.
               The tongue then is a fleſhy & muscly member,The deſcription of the tongue. but ſoft and like to
the ſubſtance of a tad-ſtoole, being full of ſinewes, arteries, & veines.
For it had need haue good ſtore of ſinewes, both becauſe of thoſe ſundry
motions which it hath neceſſarily, as alſo for the ſenſe of taſte and
of touching, which agree to the nature thereof. Likewiſe it had need
of many arteries, that ſo it might haue great abundance of ſpirite and
heate, by reaſon of the diuerſitie of motions which it hath. And to the
end it ſhould not want nouriſhment, it hath in like maner great plentie
of veines: and that it ſhould not drie vp through continual mouing,
it hath humidity to wet and moyſten it.Of ſpittle, and the profite thereof. Whereupon we ought to note
well the prouidence of God in this, that although ſpittle be but an excrement
and ſuperfluitie, which partly diſtilleth from the braine into
the throate, and partly is ſent vp thither from the boyling ſtomacke,
yet it is not vnprofitable, becauſe it wetteth and moyſteneth the
tongue. For being very drye it is more ſlowe in mouing, as wee ſee by
experience in them that are ſubiect to great drought. Therefore God
hath prouided a remedie for that inconuenience, by meanes of two
fleſhie kernels like to ſponges, on eache ſide one at the roote of the
tongue, which are commonly called Almonds, becauſe they are faſhioned
like vnto them: theſe through paſſages ordayened for that
purpoſe, moyſten all partes of the mouth. Moreouer, the tongue is tyed
to a forked bone with many muscles by two branches, which holde
it vp as it were two neere pillars, and that with ſuch a counterpoyſe,
that it can moue and remoue it ſelfe equally on eche ſide. For if it were
tyed by one branch only, it could not keepe it ſelfe vpright, but ſhould
go croſſewiſe only from one ſide. But God hath prouided very wel for

that: and if wee did knowe and conſider it well, we are admoniſhed
thereby,Our ſpeach ought to be vpright. that ſpeach pronounced by our tongue ought firſt to be wel
weighed as it were in a ballance, to the ende it decline not, or turne
on any ſide more then it ought, out hold it ſelfe vpright, and directly
followe reaſon. Moreouer, it can not eaſily be declared, by what
Arte the tongue ſtretcheth foorth it ſelfe ſo diuerſly by the meanes of
muſcles, and how it hath ſo many ſortes of motions from all ſides,
ſo ready, and ſo ſodaine, and for ſo many things as it hath both to
ſpeake and to doe.The profit of ſpeach. But it is farre more difficult, yea impoſſible to tell
the cauſes, howe a man can by the tongue frame ſo many ſortes of
wordes and ſo diuers, which are as it were the markes and paintings,
not onely of all viſible thinges, but alſo of all things inuiſible, and of
all the thoughts of man. For if wee woulde intreate of any matter
one with another, we knowe already by that which hath beene ſpoken,
howe it can hardly be done without ſpeach, as alſo that we cannot
ſpeake without certaine wordes and names to name and ſignifie
thoſe things by, whereof wee minde to ſpeake. For if wee haue no
wordes and names to make them knowen by, we muſt alwayes haue
the things themſelues preſent, that wee may point at them with the
finger, which is impoſſible. And although it were ſo that wee had
them alwayes before our eyes, yet that were not ſufficient. For wee
ſhould be forced to ſpeake to the eyes by ſignes, and yet wee coulde
neuer without compariſon inuent ſo many ſignes, nor counterfait and
imagine ſo many thinges with all the ſenſes and members of our body,
as the tongue alone woulde affoorde vs by meanes of ſpeach. For
it giueth a name to euery thing. Therefore it is able to make the natures
of things knowen, and to ſet before vs as well things abſent as
preſent, inuiſible as viſible, ſpirituall as corporall. In a worde, God
hath giuen this benefite to man, by meanes of the tongue and the
eares, that they can repreſent one to another, and cauſe each other
to knowe and vnderſtand as well diuine things as humane. And although
God made this diuerſity and confuſion of languages amongſt
men,Gene. 11. 7. to puniſh them for their arrogancie and ingratitude, neuertheleſſe
hee hath ſo prouided for this euill, that hee hath manifeſted the
more his great goodneſſe towardes them, and the riches of his eternall
prouidence, by that knowledge of ſo many ſundry tongues
which hee hath giuen them,Actes 2. 3, 4. and chiefely that by them his Goſpell
might be publiſhed. And if this benefite of God be worthy of great
admiration, ought wee not alſo to maruaile much at this, that ſuch
a varietie of ſounds proceeding out of the mouth of man,A miracle of letters. can be comprehended
in ſo ſmall a number of letters, whereby ſo many ſortes of

wordes, and ſuch diuerſe languages are expreſſed? By this meanes
alſo, wee ſee that ſpeach, which can not bee perceiued by any of the
ſenſes but by the eares, is made as it were viſible, ſo that by the helpe
of Letters a man may ſpeake to the eyes, and not ſee them, as hee
may alſo to the eares by meanes of the voyce. And although voyce
and ſpeach flie into the ayre as if they had winges, inſomuch that a
man can neyther beholde them with his eyes, nor ſmell them with
his noſe, nor holde them with his handes, neuertheleſſe ſpeach is
kept ſtill before the eyes, and may be called backe when a man will
by meanes of writing,The benefit of letters. and by the benefite of letters. Yea, it may be
ſent to them that are abſent, and as farre as one will, that they may
vnderſtand it, euen to them alſo that are not yet borne. For wee ſee
how our predeceſſours teach vs after their death by their bookes and
writings, and howe by this meanes their wordes are not onely viſible
vnto vs, but alſo as it were immortall. Wherefore the leſſe we
can conceiue howe this may bee done by the tongue and by letters,
the more ought wee to wonder at this great worke of God in man,
praiſe him for it, and giue him thankes. Nowe albeit the eye of our
vnderſtanding dazell, and can not wholy comprehend this worke of
God, neuerthleſſe we ſee this well enough, that the tongue doeth
ſo helpe to frame the voyce into ſpeach, and to make the diuerſitie of
wordes whereof ſpeach is compounded, as the hand and fingers of
the Organ-player who toucheth the Organs, and of the Muſicion
that playeth vpon an inſtrument of muſicke whatſoeuer it be, ſerueth
to cauſe the ſound thereof to be heard. For although, when one
bloweth the Organs, the pipes thereof will yeelde diuers ſounds and
tunes, if they be open, according as they are either great or ſmall,
long or ſhort, wide or narrowe, as we haue ſaide: yet theſe ſoundes
will be but confuſed, without harmony and melody, if the Organiſt
doeth not play with his handes, thereby to diſpenſe as neede requireth
that winde and breath which is to be diſtributed into the pipes,
and if hee touch not the keyes of the Organs according to thoſe tunes
and notes, which hee woulde haue the pipes to make, following the
Arte of Muſicke. And this we may ſee yet more plainely in a baggepipe.
For although it ſoundeth by reaſon of the winde, within the
leather bagge, which receiueth and keepeth it as it were a little
ſacke, yet it alwayes yeeldeth foorth but one ſound, without diſtinction
and harmony, vntill the Minſtrill play with his fingers vpon
the holes of the pipe that belongeth vnto it. Therfore as there is great
difference betwene a ſimple confuſed voice, & that which is diſtinct &

artificiall,The difference betweene voyce and ſpeech. ſo is there betweene voyce and ſpeech. So that when the
tongue hath receiued the winde and breath, which aſcendeth vp from
the lunges by the rough artery, and is faſhioned into voyce by the
meanes afore mentioned: then it formeth the ſame afterward into diſtinct
ſpeech by ſuch an arte and ſcience, as none can vnderſtande,
much leſſe expreſſe it, but GOD onely, who hath giuen it to the
tongue, in which conſiſteth the chiefe dignitie thereof. For it is that
ſcience, which is the mother of eloquence, which men haue in
ſuch great admiration: and becauſe of this, the artes of Grammer,
Logike, and Rhetorike haue beene publiſhed by the beſt learned
men. For all theſe three Artes are ſpecially appoynted for
ſpeech: the one to make it proper, pure & nete, namely, Grammer: the
other,The vſes of Grā
                     mer, Logicke, and Rhetorike. namely Logike, to knit well together all diſcourſes made
by ſpeech, and all ſentences in them, according as they agree among
themſelues, depend and follow one another, and are grounded
vpon good reaſon: Thirdly, Rhetorike is ioyned vnto them,
to adorne and poliſh ſpeech, to make it more ſignificant and very
eloquent: ſo that whereas Logike maketh ſpeech as it were a
ſimple picture, that hath nothing but bare draughts, which ſerue to
make it whole, and furniſhed in regard of euery part and lineament
thereof, Rhetorike maketh it not onely as it were a picture well
ſet foorthwith faire and liuely colours of all ſortes, but alſo adorned
and enriched with goodly hilles and dales, and ſuch like payntings,
that it may ſhewe better, and bee made fairer and pleaſaunter
to beholde. Wherefore as there is great difference to looke vpon
betweene theſe two pictures, ſo is there of ſpeech in reſpectes of the
eares, as it is propounded eyther more plainely and ſimply, or more
deeked and garniſhed. For this cauſe, ſeeing God hath vouchſafed vs
ſo much honour as to giue vs ſpeech, eſpecially to prayſe and glorifie
him with our tongue, and to benefite the common ſocietie of
men, we muſt not be content onely to ſpeake, but we muſt ſtudie to
ſpeake well, in fit termes, and wiſely, to the glorie of God, and to the
good and profite as well of our ſelues as of them that heare vs. This
cannot be done but by the knowledge of God and of his word, without
which all the Logike & Rhetorik of men is but vaine babbling.We cānot ſpeake wiſely without the knowledge of God and his worde.
But when the one is ioyned with the other, & the artes that teach men
to ſpeak elegantly are appliedto this purpoſe, then is ye vſe therof very
good & worthy of great cōmendation. Therfore we muſt all acknowledge
our ſelues to be as it were Organ-pipes, hauing of our ſelues neither
ſound, nor voyce, nor tongue, nor mouth to ſpeake of God, & of
his works as we ought, and to praiſe and glorifie him, but only ſo farre

foorth as hee being the Organ-player bloweth within, and inſpireth
vs by his holy ſpirit, giuing vnto vs wiſedome and tongue and mouth,
and vertue in ſpeaking. Now heere wee muſt not onely call to minde
what we haue already ſpoken of the cauſes, why the lungs, which is
one chiefe inſtrument of the voyce, and without which it cannot bee
made, is placed ſo neere the heart, but alſo wee muſt conſider howe
neere the tongue, and the other inſtruments of voyce and ſpeach next
vnto it, are vnto the braine, wherein is the principall ſeate of the ſpirit,
and which is chiefly aſſigned to the minde of man, and to that part of
his ſoule that is moſt diuine.Why the tongue is placed neere the braine. For ſeeing God would haue the tongue
to be the meſſenger, and as it were the Interpreter of the ſpirite and
minde, and of all the thoughts thereof, that men might teach one another
both the knowledge of God his worſhip, and of all other good
things, and ſeeing hee would haue ſpeach to be the bond of humane
ſocietie and of that communication, which men ought to haue one
with an other, therefore it was very requiſite, that being the inſtrument
of ſpeaking it ſhoulde be neere the braine, which is the lodging
of all the internall ſenſes, of which, if God will, wee will intreate
heereafter in their place. For as all the externall ſenſes doe carry to
the internall, and the bodily to the ſpirituall, whatſoeuer they perceiue
by ſenſe according to their nature and office, thereby to admoniſh
and inſtruct them, that they may thinke and iudge thereof and
lay it vp in memory: ſo the internall and ſpirituall ſenſes carry the
ſame things afterward to the tongue, that it might declare and make
them knowen to thoſe, vnto whome they would communicate their
minde and cogitation. Hereof it is, that the tongue is oftentimes taken
for doctrine, and for all ſpeach both good and euill: in which
ſence Salomon taketh it when he ſaieth, The tongue of the wicked ſhall periſh.
And Saint Paul calleth ſpeaking with the tongue,
                  1. Cor. 14 2, 14, 15. when one vſeth
ſpech that is not vnderſtoode of the hearers: and ſpeaking with the
ſpirite and with vnderstanding alſo, when ſuch a language is vſed as is
vnderſtoode of euery one, and which ſerueth to the edification of
them that heare it. Therfore the tongue muſt not ſtirre, nor the mouth
open it ſelfe to ſpeake, before it haue receiued a commandement and
charge from reaſon,The miſtreſſe of the tongue. which is the Lady and Miſtreſſe thereof, to guide
and gouern it, whoſe meſſenger and ſeruant it is to giue notice of that
which the reaſon and minde would haue knowen. Wherefore it is very
conuenient that the lady and miſtreſſe of the tongue ſhoulde haue
her lodging ouer and neere about her, and not to be farre from her, to
the end ſhe forget not her ſelfe, nor attempt any thing without a commandement
from reaſon. So that as before wee gaue the heart to be

the gouernour, guide, and counſailour of the tongue: ſo nowe we appoint
the braine as lord and maſter thereof, to the end it ſhould haue a
good guide both aboue and beneath it. For no member in al the body
hath greater neede.Iames 3. 6. Therefore S. Iames calleth the tongue a fire, yea, a
world of iniquitie, which defileth the whole body, and ſetteth on fire the courſe
of nature, and is ſet on fire of hell. Such are the fruits of an vnbridled tong
that is miſled & ill gouerned: as cōtrariwiſe it is an excellent treaſure in
man, when it is moderated & vſed wiſely and ſoberly, and in time and
place conuenient as need requireth. For al theſe things God giueth vs
good inſtructions in the matter and compoſition of this member. For
firſt, he doth not content himſelfe in giuing to man but one only tong
for ſo many offices as are aſſigned vnto it, whereas many other members
are double, and yet ſerue chiefly but for one thing: but alſo hath
made it tender, ſoft and pleaſant, & tied it faſt with many bands, as it
were ſo many ſmall cords and threeds, to reſtraine and bridle it, to the
end it ſhould not runne ouer or be too forward, and that it ſhould not
bring forth bitternes in ſteade of ſweetenes, nor pricke & hurt any body.
Therefore it is made blunt on euery ſide, not ſharpe or forked, like
to the ſtings of ſcorpions & other venimous beaſts. Moreoure it hath
the gummes and teeth, with which it is enuironed and cloſed in on euery
ſide as it were with a quick-ſet, & with a ſtrong rampire to keep
it faſt ſhut within the bounds & limits therof,Why the tongue is ſo faſhioned and fenced on euery ſide. as it were within a caue.
Beſides, it hath lips as it were gates to open vnto it, or to ſhut it vp and
muzzel it, leſt it ſhould take too much licence. Therefore ſeeing God
doth gard the tong ſo on euery ſide, he giueth men to vnderſtand that
they ought not to abuſe it, and teacheth them what care they ought to
haue of this litle member, ſeeing that of al the outward mēbers, none is
ſo hid, couered, cōpaſſed about, & locked vp with ſuch a naturall couering
& incloſure, as that is. And to end our ſpeach, we know, that whē ye
heart & mind, which ought to be ye guides & gouernors of the tongue,
ſhalbe reformed in puritie and true knowledge of God by his grace,
there wil be nothing but good ſpeach & all truth in the tongue, to the
ſetting forth of the glory of his diuine Maieſty, and to the profit of euery
one according to the duetie of true charitie. But if the mind and
heart be euill, and blinded with errour and ignorance, they will bring
forth like fruits and ſpeeches. Nowe hauing diſcoruſed at large of the
firſt office of the tongue, which conſiſteth in framing of the ſpeach, we
muſt conſider of the other two vſes thereof, which are in taſting, & in
preparing meat that is chewed in the mouth for the nuriſhment of the
body. Therefore, thou ſhalt begin, Achitob, to diſcourſe of theſe two
offices, & of thoſe inſtrumēts, which ſerue the tongue to this purpoſe.
            
            
               
               Of the office of the tongue intasting, and in preparing meate for the
nouriſhment of the body: of teeth, and of their nature and office:
of the conduite or pipe that receiueth and ſwalloweth downe
m
                     ••
                  tes. Chap. 16.
               ACHITOB. The more we conſider the worke and prouidence of
God in the compoſition of mans body, the more wee ſhall maruaile
at it, and daily finde therein new matter and occaſion to glorifie
his name. Before we conſidered therof, as of the frame of a houſe: now
we ſhal ſee it as it were a towne or city that hath Milles & Ouens, and
Artificers of all arts & occupations. And, which is more wonderful, we
ſhall perceiue ſuch induſtry in many of the members, that oftentimes
one alone will ſerue for many offices,One member may ſe
                        •
                     ue for many offices. for the due performance whereof
mans reaſon woulde require many members: and yet God hath ſo
well prouided therefore, that one alone doeth better diſcharge them,
and with leſſe trouble then many together could doe. Which may euidently
be knowen by thoſe vſes and offices of the tongue, whereof
we are yet to intreate.
               One, and that the chiefeſt reaſon why the tongue is fitly placed in
the head neere the braine, was declared vnto vs in the former ſpeach:
now we muſt note others, eſpecially why it is neceſſary that it ſhoulde
be in the mouth, as likewiſe in the head. For the tongue could not
haue ſatisfied any one office committed vnto it, if it had bene placed
barely and openly in the face, as the eyes, noſe, or eares are. And ſeeing
it was requiſite to haue it couered, it could haue no better couering
then the mouth,Why the mouth is the fitteſt place for the tongue. as may be prooued by many reaſons. The firſt
is, that ſeeing it is the inſtrument of ſpeach, which muſt be holpen by
many other partes to haue it well framed, as we heard before, it was
to be lodged in a place where it might haue neare at hand all inſtruments
needefull for that ſeruice. Nowe this vſe of ſpeach is proper to
the tongue of man onely, and not to that of brute beaſts: but to the
other twaine following, are common to man with beaſts, namely the
ſenſe of taſte, for which God hath appointed both that and the palat:
for which cauſe it was requiſit alſo that it ſhoulde be neare the braine,
and in the head, as the other inſtruments and members of the ſenſes
are, as alſo in the place appointed for this preparation of bodily foode.
For it muſt firſt iudge of taſtes & diſcerne between good & bad meat,The officer of the tongue.
and betweene good and bad drinkes, to the end, that whatſoeuer is
good for the nouriſhment of the body, may be kept, and that which
is bad, reiected: and that afterward, which is the laſt office, it may
help the teeth & mouth to chew the meat, and ſo to ſwallow it down.

For the iawes and teeth are as it were the ſtones of the mill, which
ſerue to prepare the meate for all the body. Wherefore as there are
two ſtones in euery mill, namely, one beneath, which abideth alwaies
ſtedfaſt, and turneth no way, and another aboue, which alwayes turneth
about to bruze and grind the graines of wheat that are between
them:Of the mill of mans body. ſo in the mil of mans body there are two iawes like to two milſtones,
of which the one is alwayes firme, and the other mooueth. But
there is this difference betweene theſe and milſtones, that the neather
iawe onely mooueth, which is true, not onely in man, but alſo in all
other liuing creatures, except in the Crocodile, who in this poynt
quite differeth from all other liuing creatures that haue iawes and
teeth. Nowe God hath ſo appointed this motion of the milſtones of
mans body not without good reaſon. For ſeeing the braine is ſo neare,
and that there are ſo many goodly members in the head aboue the
vpper moſt iawe-bone, it were to be feared, that the continuall and
great moouing thereof would ſhake them, and bring them into ſome
inconuenience. And that the iawes might bruze and breake whatſoeuer
is put betweene them, as the ſtones of the mill grinde the graines
of corne, the teeth are planted in them to ſerue them in this worke.
And in ſteade of winde or water, which driue artificiall milles about,
this naturall mill of which we ſpeake, hath his muſcles and ſinewes to
mooue it, and to ſet it aworking when neede requireth. For this
cauſe Salomon, meaning to ſhewe the defect of teeth in olde age, and
what ſmall ſtrength olde men haue to chew their meate,Eccles. 12. 3, 4. ſaieth, that
the grinders ſhall ceaſe becauſe they are fewe, and the doores ſhall be ſhutte
without by the baſe ſound of the grinding. Theſe doores are the lippes,
becauſe they ſerue the mouth, and the mill which is within them.
For we vnderſtand by the mouth, all that is from the lippes vnto the
throat and winde-pipe, wherein not onely the mill of mans body is
contained, but alſo as it were a part of the bake-houſe, in which the
meale that is grinded is to be kneaded, and ſo made ready for the ouen,
that afterward it may be baked in the ſtomacke, which is as it
were the ouen and kitchin of the whole body to dreſſe meate for it,Of the kitchin of the body.
wherewith all the members thereof are to bee fedde and nouriſhed.
For foode can not nouriſh the body if it ſtill continue ſuch as it is put
into the mouth, vnleſſe it bee better prepared and dreſſed in ſuch
ſorte, that it may eaſily bee turned into the ſubſtaunce of the body
that receiueth it. As then iawes and teeth are the mill and milſtones,
which bruze and turne to meale the wheate that is put betweene
them, that is to ſay, all kindes of meates, both hard and tender,
for the nouriſhing of the bodie: ſo we may ſay, that the tongue

in this reſpect playeth the miller, and ſerueth in ſtead of a hopper, into
which thoſe graines that otherwiſe would skatter from betweene the
milſtones are put that they may be ground. For when the meate falleth
on any ſide from betweene the teeth, the tongue ſerueth to ſend it
backe againe, that it may be well chewed, and not auoyde the grinding
of the iawes and teeth. Thus wee dayly come to greater knowledge
of ſtrange inſtruments in the body of man. For we heard before
what Organs and what kinde of muſicall inſtrument God hath made
in him for the voyce and for ſpeech: now wee may ſee how there are
within him, a mill and a miller, a bakehouſe and a kitchin. Hereupon
we ought to thinke, that the Maſter and Maker of theſe, hath not created
them that they ſhould be idle, as though he had giuen them nothing
to grinde, or to bake. For he is no ſuch workmaſter as to make any
woorke, and not to ſet it a woorking, or to leaue it vnfurniſhed of
things neceſſary: neither any ſuch maſter or Lord, but that he can caſily
doe it.God miniſtreth food to all creatures. Wherfore although there are as many of theſe milles and ouens,
as there are not onely reaſonable creatures, but alſo beaſtes, and
although he hath vndertaken to maintaine them alwayes, euen from
the creation of the world vntil the conſummation thereof, yet hee neuer
wanted matter to ſet them on worke when it pleaſed him. Hereby
we may know whether we haue a rich father or no, and what cauſe we
haue to feare that he will leaue our milles and ouens emptie, although
we had many houſes full of them, as in deed we haue in our ſelues, our
wiues and children, ſo long as we acknowledge him to be ſuch a one,
and that we yeeld obedience vnto him, as becommeth his children. But
we haue further to note, that as our mill is not without a Miller, and
ſuch tooles as are neceſſary for him, ſo the Ouen and Kitchen haue
their Baker and Cooke. For firſt, the teeth doe not onely ſerue for a
mill, but they diſcharge ſome part of a Cookes office, becauſe the
more they chop the meate, and chew it well, it is the better prepared
for the ſtomack to bake it ſo much the ſooner. Therefore we ſay commonly,
that the firſt preparation and digeſtion of meate is made in the
teeth. For this cauſe God hath giuen a great number of them to man,
and hath made them of bone, and diſtinguiſhed them into ſundry
ſorts, according to that office whereunto he hath aſſigned euery one
of them.Of teeth, and of theirs diuers kindes. For right afore there are foure aboue, and as many beneath,
that are broade, ſharpe, and cutting, which are called Inciſorie teeth,
becauſe they are apt to diuide and to cut the meate as a knife doeth:
and theſe haue but one roote. Then there are other twaine on each
ſide, commonly called Dogge-teeth, becauſe they reſemble the teeth
of dogges, which are broade towardes their roote, but ſharpe and

poynted aboue: and theſe alſo haue but one roote of a reaſonable
length. Their office is to breake the meates and other things, which
by reaſō of their ouer great hardnes could not be cut by the firſt. Next,
the other teeth are appoynted to bruze very ſmall thoſe meats, which
haue alreadie paſſed through the former, euen as milſtones bruze
wheate. Therefore they are ſharpe, broade, hard, and great, and haue
more rootes then the other. And becauſe of the ſimilitude which they
haue with milſtones, they are called by the ſame name both of the
Grecians and Latines, as alſo iaw-teeth and grinders. All teeth are planted
in the iawe-bones by meanes of the gummes, beeing faſtened
within them as it were nailes, ſo that they cannot eaſily bee moued,
ſhaken, or plucked out. And although bones naturally haue no feeling,
yet teeth are very ſenſible, by reaſon of certaine braunches of
ſmall ſoft ſinewes which enter into their ſubſtance. For this feeling
is neceſſary for them, both becauſe they are bare and not couered
with fleſh as other boones are, as alſo for the meates ſake and for i
                     •
                  ſte
                     •
                  
as they that in ſome part are ſeruiceable to the taſte, aſwell as all the
other partes of the mouth. Thus you ſee how the teeth ſerue at one
time both for a mill and a cooke, together with the tongue and the
reſt of the mouth.The tongue like to a baker. Againe, the tongue ſerueth for a baker, hauing
this office layde vpon it, to gather the meate together after it is well
grounde and chewed, and to faſhion it round like to pilles or ſmall
loaues that are yet but dough, to this ende that it may with more

                     •
                  aſe be ſwallowed downe. Wherein it dealeth like a baker, who
firſt faſhioneth his bread into loaues. Next it playeth the part of a baker
and of a peele both together, as that which ſetteth in the meate,
and cauſeth it to deſcend into the ſtomacke, which is the ouen wherein
it muſt bee baked, that afterwarde it may nouriſh the whole bodie
For this cauſe it was neceſſarie that the tongue both in breadth
and length, ſhould bee anſwerable to the whole mouth in ſuch ſort,
that it might touch all partes of it to diſcharge ſo many offices. Wee
ſee then that mans bodie is not onely like to ſuch a frame of a
houſe as wee conſidered of before, but alſo like to a great Citie,
wherein there are milles and Ouens, and Artificers of all occupations.
               Now vpon this that hath beene diſcourſed touching this laſt vſe
of the tongue in preparing and ſwallowing downe meate, wee muſt
further note, that as there is a pipe that reacheth from the lungs vnto
the mouth for reſpiration; and for the breath of the voyce, as hath
beene declared vnto vs: ſo there is another from the ſtomacke vnto
the ſame place,Of the Gullet or We
                        ••••
                     d. properly calle the Gullet, which the Phyſicions

commonly call by the Greeke name 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : whoſe office is to cary
the meates and drinkes into the ſtomacke. And as the other pipe is
in the former part of the necke, that it may goe right to the mouth
to drawe in the aire, ſo this ſecond is behinde in the necke, that it
may keepe more heate, in it, and it is longer then the firſt: Neuertheleſſe,
many thinke that there is but one pipe for bruath and for
meate and drinke: as there are ſome alſo, who albeit they know
well there are twayne, yet they ſuppoſe that the one is for meate,
and the other for drinkes, that the lightes alſo might bee moyſtened
thereby. Yea, there haue bneene skilfull and great Philoſophers,
who ſeeme to haue beene in this errour, or at leaſtwiſe
haue diſputed thereof. But becauſe GOD hath ſo diſtinguiſhed
theſe paſſages, and that the firſt is the breathing pipe, for the reaſon
vttered before, this excellent Woorkemaſter hath made another
litle inſtrument,Of the Epiglt or litle tongue. called Epiglot by the Phyſicions, made of a
grictly matter, reaſonable harde and faſhioned like to a little
tongue that is of a triangle forme, or like an 
                     〈◊〉
                   leafe. This inſtrument
ſerueth to couer the pipe for breath, at the very toppe of
Larinx, as it were a couer of a potte. It ſerueth the pipe to this vſe,
not to keepe euery thing out of it, but to ſuffer no meate or drinke,
or any other thing to enter in in any ſuch quantitie as might hinder
breathing and reſpitation. For a litle thing will ſtoppe a mans
breath and ſtrangle him, as appeareth in thoſe whome Hiſtories
affirme to haue beene ſtrangled, ſome by a litle haire, others by a
ſtone of a grape, ſome in ſupping vp milke, and others by ſuch
like tirfles. Yea, many times wee haue experience of this pevill when
wee eate and drinke, if neuer ſo litle ineate or drinke enter into this
paſſage.Good leſſions for euery one. Therefore God teacheth vs two things thereby: the firſt is,
vpon what aſſenderthreed our life dependeth, ſeeing ſo litle a matter
is ſufficient to depriue vs of it. The other is, to admoniſh vs how quier
and ſober we ought to be in eating and drinking, not glutton like;
and alſoin ſpeaking, when we take our refection. For then is the danger
greateſt, if wee ſpeake whileſt wee eate: becauſe wee cannot
ſpeake without voyce, not haue voyce without breathing nor breath
without opening this litle couer. And becauſe the breathing pipe
is formoſt, the meate & drinke muſt needs paſſe ouer this litle tongue,
as it were ouer a litle drawe bridge. So that if this ſmall couer were lift
vp and opened, in ſtead of going beyong the pipe of breathing, it
would enter into it. But it moſt not bee ſo faſt shut vp, but that breath
may alwayes iſſue out, and that ſome thinne humour and liquor may
enter in, to moyſten and ſupple both the arterie and the lungs: otherwiſe

potions appointed for that purpoſe by the Phyſicions, were vaine
and vnprofitable. Hauing nowe ſpoken ſufficiently of thoſe inſtruments
which are ſeruiceable to voyce and ſpeech, and of all the proper
offices of the tongue, it wilbe thy part, ASER, to morrow, to take in
hande againe, and to purſue our matter of the ſenſes, and of their inſtruments,
and firſt to inſtruct vs what the ſenſe of taſte is, and what
the palat is that ſerueth it.
            
            The ende of the ſecond dayes worke.
         
         
            THE THIRD DAYES
worke.
            
               Of the ſenſe of taſte giuen to the palat: what taſtes are good to nouriſh
the bodie: of the diuerſitie of them: of hunger and thirſt, and of
their cauſes. Chap. 17.
               
                  ASER. It is wonderfull that God cauſeth all things
whatſoeuer they be to ſerue his worke in ſuch ſort,
that nothin is in vain, idel or vnprofitable: wherof
we haue alreadie ſeene many teſtimonies in our
former diſcourſes of the leaſt partes of the bodie.
But which is yet more woonderfull in his prouidence,
hee hath created, made and diſpoſed nothing
throughout all nature without great order, excellent meaſure,
and modration in all things: which gaue occaſion to the firſt Philoſophers
to call the whole frame of the world, Mundus, which is as
much to ſay, as an Ornament, or a well diſpoſed order of all things. Whereby
God would haue vs eſpecially learne to knowe, how greatly order
pleaſeth him, and how he abhorreth all diſorder and confuſion, and
how greatly he deſireth, that men after his example, ſhould obſerue
meaſure and moderation in all their workes. Hereof wee may haue a
goodly inſtruction in this place, if we conſider how all the ſenſes, and
namely, the taſte with thoſe ſauoury reliſhes that agree with it, receiue
their ſtrength, vertue and nature from all the elements, according to
that agreement, which their nature and offices have with them: as alſo
what pleaſure wee take in the reliſh of all things, when it agreeth
with our taſte: and contrariwiſe how it troubleth vs, when it is vnpleaſant
and not agreeable to our taſte.
               
                  
Yeſterday we diſcourſed of the corporall ſenſes, and of their members
and inſtruments: whereupon we ſpake of the tongue, both becauſe
of the agreement it hath with the eares by reaſon of ſpeech, as alſo
becauſe it is the inſtrument of taſte together with the palat,What the palat is. which
is the vpper part of the mouth, made like to a pretie vaute, and to a little
heauen.Iob 12. 11. & 34. 3. Therefore Iob ſaid, Doeth not the eares diſcerne the wordes,
and the palat taſtemeate for it ſelfe? And again, The eare trieth the words,
as the mouth taſteth meate. The ſenſe of taſte then is that ſenſe, whereby
the mouth iudgeth of all kindes of taſtes, which are many in number.
And this is a notable gift of God,Of the prouidēce of God in the varietie of taſtes. in that he hath giuen ſuch reliſhes
to meates and drinkes, whereby not onely men, but alſo all liuing
creatures can preſently know by their taſte what things are good
to eate and drinke, and what are otherwiſe. For if God had not giuen
the ſenſe of taſte to all liuing creatures, that they might iudge thereby
of all meates and drinkes, what would their life bee? But wee are to
know this thing further, that men iudge by their taſte, not onely of
ſuch things as may ſerue to nouriſh them,The ſence of taſte neceſſary for Phyſicions. but alſo of medicines. For
Phyſicions knowe the qualities of herbes and ſimples more by their
taſte, then by any other ſenſe: afterward by this knowledge they iudge
eaſily of their natures and proprieties, and for what remedies and vſes
of phyſicke they wil ſerue. Therefore this iudgement of the taſte is very
neceſſary for the life of man, eſpecially for the nouriſhment of all
litting creatures: becauſe all things which the earth bringeth foorth
are not good to feede them. For ſome things are diuers from nouriſhment,
as earth, clay, wood and ſtones: other things are altogether vnſauery,
and haue no taſte, and ſome haue but a very litle. But God hath
prouided a remedy for this, by the meanes of ſalt, and of ſundry fortes
of ſawces and ſpices, whereby they may be made to haue a pleaſaunt
taſte. There are ſome things alſo, which are cleane contrary, either by
reaſon of their euill taſte, as gall and wormewood, or els becauſe of the
hurt which they may bring with them, as thoſe things that are venimous,
and very poyſon. But God hath very well met with this inconuenience
both by this gift of the ſenſe of taſting, and alſo by putting
into ſuch things as might hurt either mā or any other liuing creature, a
certaine qualitie, which we call reliſh or taſte, that is contrary and very
vnpleaſant to the ſenſe of taſting: as likewiſe hee hath giuen to thoſe
things that are healthful and good to nouriſh, a reliſh that is agreeable
and pleaſant vnto our taſte. This is to be vnderſtoode if our taſte bee
not corrupted, either by ſickeneſſe, or by ſome vnbrideled appetite:
the like is to be ſaid of the ſpittle,Another vſe of the ſpittle. which beſide the vſe before named,
hath this alſo, that it helpeth the taſte. Wherefore if it bee already infected

with ſome euill taſte, it will not well receiue others, but will
cauſe euerything to be of the ſame taſte wherewith it is infected and
corrupted. Now thoſe things are moſt ſauoury, and haue the beſt reliſh,
that haue in them the beſt mixture of heate and moiſture, which
two qualities make the reliſh of things, and without which we ſee that
all extreme colde and dry things haue no ſmacke or taſte, as flaxe or
towe, and drye wood, or water that is very pure. In other thinges,
thoſe that haue more moiſture then heate, haue their taſte leſſe ſharp,
ſo that according as heat and humidity are tempered together, the diuerſitie
of taſtes is framed. For if humidity doth not exceede and ſurmount
earthy dryneſſe, or both of them be conſumed by heate, there is
no taſte. So that as all bodily thinges are compounded of all the elements,
and differ one from another, according as they haue more or
leſſe of the elements, ſo is it in taſtes. For this cauſe this ſenſe of taſte
anſwereth to the element of water,How the ſenſes agree with the elements. and holdeth moſt of the nature
thereof: as the ſenſe of touching hath more affinitie with the earth,
to the ende it might agree better with thoſe thinges that are to bee
felt thereby. For the vigor and ſenſe thereof ought to be cloſe together
and throughout, and ſuch as taketh faſter holde then any of
the reſt. So likewiſe the ſenſe of ſight agreeth with the fire, and
that of hearing with the aire, as wee haue alreadie touched it.
And as for the ſenſe of ſmelling, it agreeth both with the fire and
with the thicke ayre, becauſe ſmelles are ſtirred vp by heate, as
ſmoke is by fire, which afterwardes are by the meanes of the ayre
caried to the ſenſe of ſmelling, whereof wee will ſpeake heereafter.
               But let vs goe on with our diſcourſe of taſting, and of ſuch things as
are apt to nouriſh the body. For wee cannot liue without the helpe of
many things: amongſt which, meates and drinks are chiefeſt: becauſe
that as hunger requireth meate, ſo thirſt deſireth drinke. Wee muſt
therefore vnderſtand, that this ſoule and life which is called Vegetatiue
or nouriſhing, and which is common to man with all other liuing
creatures, hath two principall inſtruments in the body,Of heate and humiditie the preſeruers of life. namely heate
and humiditie: of which, heate is firſt and chiefe, belonging properly
to the vertue of nouriſhing: next, humiditie is ioyned to heate,
that it may feede and preſerue it. For life is preſerued in the body
by heate, which is the chiefe inſtrument thereof: ſo that as ſoone as
heate is gone, it becommeth ſtarke dead. And becauſe this heate
would eaſily and quickly conſume it ſelfe, if it were not nouriſhed and
mainteined, moyſture is ioyned vnto it in liuing bodies, as it were a
bridle to keepe it back, to the end that life might be prolonged, which

otherwiſe woulde faile preſently after it were forſaken of heate, as
heate alſo would decay, if it were not nouriſhed and preſerued by humiditie,
which it neceſſarily requireth. For heate draweth humour
vnto it ſelfe, and ſucketh and drinketh it vp: likewiſe humour refreſheth
heate, and ſlaketh the vehemencie thereof: all which wee
may plainely ſee in a lampe. For let vs compare the light of a lampe
with life, and then let vs conſider, whether this light can bee preſerued
without fire, and whether this fire can continue any long
time and not bee extinguiſhed, vnleſſe it haue two thinges. The
firſt is matter, as namely the wieke of the lampe: which matter
cannot bee firme, if it haue no dryneſſe in it whereof fire may
take holde. For fire beeing hote and drie, cannot haue any fellowſhip
with coldeneſſe and humiditie, without ſome middle qualitie
agreeable to his nature. On the other ſide it will ſoone conſume the
drie matter, on which it lighteth, if the vehement heate thereof bee
not abated and tempered by ſome humiditie, which both reſiſteth
the dryneſſe, and alſo by the coldeneſſe it hath, moderateth the heate
of the fire. Therefore wee ſee, that the matter of the wicke of a
lampe cannot continue long beeing once lighted, if it be not greaſed
with ſome tallowe, or ſome humide matter to preſerue both that
and the fire of which it receiueth light. For when it is burnt out,
the fire alſo dieth with it through want of nouriſhment that might
mainteine it. But it is not ynough although the fire haue meet matter
to nouriſh it. For they muſt be ſo well wrought and mingled one
with another, that there bee neyther too much nor too litle of eyther,
but as much as neede requireth. For if there bee a great
deale of wieke and but a litle oyle and tallowe, it will endure ſo
much the leſſe while: and if there bee too much oyle or tallowe in
reſpect of the wieke, it will ſlake the fire ouermuch, yea it may be
in ſuch great quantitie, that it will put it quite out. But if due
proportion bee kept betweene the cotton and the oyle or tallowe,
the fire will preſerue it ſelfe verie well, and giue a goodly cleare
light.A compariſon betweene a lamp and mans body. The like is done in our bodies. For if they were without
naturall heate, there woulde bee no life in them: and if this heate
had not meete matter to preſerue it ſelfe within them, it woulde
quickely bee extinguiſhed. Nowe ſeeing it muſt bee nouriſhed and
mainteined, this cannot bee done vnleſſe it haue ſome ſolide and
firme matter, which cannot be conſumed ſo quickly, but that it may
preſerue it ſelfe ſometime. Againe, foraſmuch as there is no matter ſo
ſolide and firme, which is able any long time to reſiſt the fire that conſumeth
all, if the violence thereof be not moderated, this matter muſt

of neceſſitie be moiſtened. Here then the meate, which is moſt ſolide,
ſtandeth in ſtead of match or weeke to this naturall fire, from whence
proceedeth life to the body: and drinks are as it were oyle in a lampe,
to moyſten the meate, to the end that this fire ſhould not conſume it
ſo quickly. And becauſe it muſt alwayes be kept burning, (otherwiſe
the light thereof, which is the life, will die together with it) it muſt
haue new matter continually miniſtred vnto it, as it were to a fire that
cannot alwayes continue kindled in the chimney and not goe out,
if it be not preſerued by wood or coale, or in a candle or lampe, if it
haue not alwayes cotton, or weeke and oyle, or ſome other tallowy
and moyſt matter. Therefore wee ſee that when either of them beginneth
to fayle, another is put in to ſupplie the place of it. And thus
as fire and the light thereof are mainteined in a lampe or candle by
meanes of that nouriſhment they haue both in the weeke and in the
tallow thereof: ſo life and that naturall fire which giueth life to the
bodie, are mainteyned by that food, which they receiue ordinarily
in eating and drinking. The meate then in mans bodie, is to nouriſh
and preſerue the naturall heate thereof, as the weeke is in a candle
or lampe: and the moyſture which it receiueth by drinke, is vnto
it as the 
                     •
                  oyle and tallowe.The cauſes of chirſt and hunger. For this cauſe if heate bee ſtronger in a
man, he ſhall feele thirſt, which is an appetite and deſire of that which
is moyſt and colde, that is, of ſuch qualities as are contrary to the fire,
which is hote and dry. For the moyſture muſt be confirmed & ſtrengthened
to moderate the burning heate, as it is when oyle is powred
into a lampe. And if both heate and moyſture conſuming eche other,
beginne to waxe faint and to fayle, they muſt both bee holpen, that
they may gather more ſtrength: as when we put not onely oyle, but
weeke alſo into a lampe. And this is the cauſe of hunger, which is a deſire
of that which is hote and moyſt. But there is difference betweene
the humiditie required in hunger, and that which is required in thirſt,
becauſe the moyſture deſired in thirſt is more thinne and leſſe earthie,
then that which is required in hunger. And if the moiſture be increaſed
ouer much, ſo that the heate decreaſeth and languiſheth, and conſequently
the appetite to meate and drinke and to receiue nouriſhment,
decayeth, it muſt be reſtored againe by phyſicke. For although
all nouriſhment be as it were phyſick to the body,Of phyſicke, and the cauſes therof. neuertheleſſe, there
is this difference, in that foode repaireth the whole perſon and all the
body, whereas phyſicke repaireth onely the inſtruments of the body,
which are to ſerue for nouriſhment. For this cauſe food is alwayes neceſſary
for all, at all times, and in all places: but beſides that all ſtande
not in neede of phyſicke, they that want it, vſe it but at certaine times

as neceſſitie requireth. For if thoſe members that ſerue to nouriſh the
body be well diſpoſed, and diſcharge their office ſo well, that all the
partes of the bodie receiue due nouriſhment, and the whole body bee
healthie and ſound, there needeth nothing but ordinary foode to preſerue
the body, and to keepe it in good health. But if any member be
weakened, and doeth not his duetie well, eſpecially any of thoſe that
ought to ſerue to nouriſh the whole bodie, it muſt be reſtored again to
ſtrength by the meanes of phyſicke. Now albeit the ſenſe of taſte
whereof we haue preſently diſcourſed, be not ſo apt to teach, eſpecially,
the knowledge of ſpirituall and diuine things, as the ſenſes of ſceing
and hearing, of which we haue ſpoken heretofore: yet we may receiue
much good doctrine thereby. For as the body cannot liue except
it haue ſuch corporall foode as agreeth to the nature thereof,Inſtructions from the ſenſe of taſte. ſo
the ſoule cannot liue if it haue not that knowledge, which God hath
appointed for it. And as life is kept in the body by heate, which is the
chiefe inſtrument thereof, to the life of our ſoules conſiſteth and is preſerued
and increaſed by heate, namely, by the loue & charity of God,
without which it cannot liue that life that is agreeable to it owne nature.
For the ſoule that is ſeparated from the loue of God, is dead
in reſpect of the true and bleſſed life, ſeeing God liueth not in it, nor it
in God. For this cauſe this loue muſt be alwayes nouriſhed and mainteyned
therein by the celeſtiall and diuine moyſture, agreeable to
the nature thereof. Wherefore as it is of a heauenly and celeſtiall nature,
ſo the foode thereof muſt be anſwerable thereunto. This foode
therfore cannot be had but of God, who is the life of the ſoule, as the
ſoule is the life of the body: and the meanes which he hath appointed
to miniſter this food vnto it, is his heauenly & eternall word, and thoſe
ſpirituall graces which he communicateth vnto vs thereby. But let vs
follow our matter ſubiect of corporall ſenſes. And ſeeing we haue intreated
of the meanes wherby the body is nouriſhed, we ought to conſider
more particularly of thoſe things that are meet and conuenient to
mainteine and preſerue the body of man, and ſee how God prepareth
them to this end: in which thou ſhalt inſtruct vs, AMANA.
            
            
               Of helpes and creatures meete for the preſeruation and nouriſhment
of the bodie: how God prepareth them to ſerue for that purpoſe: of
their vſe. Chap. 18.
               AMANA. God being carefull ouer the welfare of his creatures
that haue life, hath put in them a deſire to preſerue themſelues,
to the ende they ſhoulde followe after ſuch things as are profitable

for their health, and ſhunne that which is hurtfull and contrarie vnto
it.The equality of heate and moyſture preſerueth life. Nowe this preſeruation conſiſteth eyther in the equalitie of heate
and moiſture, nouriſhers of life, or els in an inequalitie that may
eaſily be reduced and brought to an equalitie by that which we eate
and drinke. For if there bee ſo great exceſſe of heate or moyſture
that the one conſumeth the other, death followeth neceſſarily: if there
be no exceſſe of either, but a good equalitie, the body is very well affected.
But it is very hard to finde a bodie ſo tempered. And although
ſuch a one might be found, yet it could not long continue in yt eſtate,
but that it would quickly change, as we may iudge by that which we
haue learned in the former diſcourſe. But when this change doeth
not bring with it ſo great exceſſe and inequalitie, but that it may
be kept vpright by nouriſhment, the body is neuertheleſſe well diſpoſed,
vntiil ſuch time as the exceſſe is greater then can bee repaired by
foode. For then if foode will not ſerue the turne, wee muſt haue
recourſe to phyſicke: and if the inequalitie be ſo great, that by the
helpe of phyſicke no remedie can be found, there is no other naturall
ayde to be had.
               Nowe this inequalitie that approcheth ſo neere to equalitie,Of the inequality that is in the nature of the body. is
very pleaſaunt, as that which is the pricke and procurer of naturall
pleaſures, neceſſarie for the life of man to incite him to deſire
them, and as it were the ſawſe to make them toothſome. For if
there were alwayes equalitie, wee ſhoulde neuer be affected with
hunger or thirſt, nor with any appetite to eate or drinke. And if
this appetite were not, wee ſhoulde not haue thoſe pleaſures, which
wee receiue by meates and drinkes, and by their diuers taſtes
and reliſhes. So that wee ſhoulde not haue ſuch a notable teſtimonie
of the goodneſſe and bountifulneſſe of God towardes vs, and
of his care, as wee haue by the ſenſe of taſte which hee hath giuen
vnto vs. Wherein alſo he admoniſheth vs in ſuch ſort of our mortall
nature through the neceſſitie wee haue of foode for the preſeruation
of our life,A teſtimonie of the great prouidence of God. as that withall hee ſupplieth this want and neceſſitie,
that wee may the better know and taſte the ſweetneſſe of his loue towards
vs. For, whereto would thoſe creatures ſerue that are good for
our nouriſhment, if we had no vſe of them? And how could wee vſe
them, if we ſtood not in neede of them? Therefore ſeeing the matter
ſtandeth thus, it appeareth euidently, that wee are nouriſhed by ſuch
things as are familiar and like to our nature, and are healed by things
contrarie to that which hurteth vs. For the nearer any thing approcheth
to our nature, the ſooner it is conuerted into it. So that amongſt
thoſe meates that are familiar vnto vs, they nouriſh beſt

that draw neereſt to our nature. For this cauſe babes newe borne that
are litle and tender, haue milke for their foode, which is very meete
for them by reaſon of the agreement that is betweene it and the
matter whereof their bodies are made.What meate is fitteſt for infants. For, as wee haue alreadie
heard, the milke is made of the ſelfe ſame blood wherewith they
were nouriſhed in their mothers wombe, and whereof they were
before ingendred and conceiued: foraſmuch as the parents ſeede, of
which they were framed, is deriued from their owne blood. Wherevpon
it followeth, that the matter of their bodies is of the ſame ſubſtance:
and ſo that food which draweth neereſt vnto it, is moſt natural
and meete for them. For this cauſe we ſaid before, that all things are
not ſeruiceable for meate, drinke and nouriſhment, but thoſe only that
haue a nature agreeable thereto, and that for the reaſons ſpecified by
vs. Here then we muſt call to minde that which we haue already touched
elswhere, namely that ſeeing the body of man is compounded of
all the elements, it is therefore needfull that the nouriſhment wherewith
it is to be preſerued & vpholden, ſhould participate of all the elements,
to the end that all & euery part of a mans body ſhould be maintained
& preſerued by yt which is like to it ſelfe. Therefore God hath wel
prouided to this purpoſe, as we ſee in the matter wherof our bodies are
made. For we haue heard what differēce there is according to the ſundry
parts and diuerſity of members in the body: & yet the whole matter
of thē all is taken from the ſubſtance of the ſame elements, and the
difference betweene them commeth of this only, that ſome parts participate
more of ſome elements,From whence commeth the different ſubſtance of our members. & others of other elements. Hereof it
is, that the hardeſt parts of the body, as the bones, are moſt earthy: and
ſo conſequently of all the other partes, as they haue eyther more or
leſſe of all the elements and of their qualities. For this cauſe all the
parts and members of the body muſt haue food agreeable to the nature
of the elements whereof they participate, according to the portion
of matter which is in euery one of them. Wherein we ſee a goodly
teſtimonie of the bond and agreement that is among all creatures, yea
in all nature it ſelfe, together with the correſpondencie that euerie
creature hath with it like. Therefore if wee want ayre for breathing,
wee drawe it in euen as it is of it owne nature, together
with thoſe qualities which it bringeth with it ſelfe. If wee deſire
drinke, onely to refreſh and to moyſten the bodie and the meate it taketh,
pure water ſerueth that turne, which is common drinke for
all creatures, and ſufficient for the whole life of man, although there
were no other.Men haue more varietie of drinks then beaſts. But God hath giuen this aduantage to men aboue
beaſts, that beſides this drink cōmon to them both, they haue others,

not onely more pleaſaunt to their taſte, but alſo more forceable to
nouriſh them. For if the queſtion bee of taking ſuſtenance eyther
by meate or drinke, we muſt haue ſuch meates and drinkes as are
more firme then the ayre and the water, and which are able to ſuſtayne
the body according to it owne ſubſtance and nature. For as
the water and the ayre, whereof the bodie is made, could not conſiſt
in the compoſition thereof, but woulde ſlide and fall away, if
they were not intermingled with ſome other matter that is more
earthie and ſolide, thereby to keepe and knitte them together: euen
ſo, if foode conſiſted onely in liquide and moyſt things, that had no
other ſubſtance of more earthie and ſolide qualitie, in which the
vertue of heate might remaine, and which might bee conuerted into
the greatneſſe and maſſineſſe of the bodie, the liuing creature would
alwayes haue an appetite, and neuer leaue eating. Therefore God
hath ſo framed thoſe creatures, which he hath giuen to man for meate,
that whatſoeuer is earthy therein doeth not ſtill retaine the nature
of the earth, as if it were nothing but ſimple earth: and ſo likewiſe
that which is of the nature of fire, or of the water, or of the ayre:
but all is ſo well mingled and tempered one with another, that the
taſte and ſauour thereof is pleaſaunt and fitte for all the partes of
the bodie, that are to bee nouriſhed. And according as the qualities
of the elements are mingled one with another, ſo the meates
and drinkes compounded of them, haue their ſundry taſtes together
with their other qualities. For if God had not ſo prouided for
it, man could haue no taſte therein: and if he taſted not, he would haue
no appetite, and ſo could neither eate nor drinke. And if hee coulde
neither eate nor drinke, he could not liue, as wee may iudge by that
which wee haue alreadie hearde.We muſt eate neither too much not too litle. Nowe as hee cannot liue without
eating and drinking, ſo it is requiſite that he eate and drinke with that
moderation, that he take in no more meate and drinke then he ought
to doe. For if he take too litle, he cannot be ſufficiently nouriſhed: and
if hee take too much, inſtead of being ſatisfied, he ſhalbe burdened,
and in ſtead of preſeruing his life, hee will kill himſelfe. Therefore
it is verie neceſſarie that euery one ſhoulde alwayes obſerue great
ſobrietie, otherwiſe God will correct our riot, our gluttonie and drunkenneſſe.
But the danger that commeth by not keeping a mediocrity, is
a great deale more to be feared on the one ſide then on the other. For
there are but fewe that breake not ſquare oftener in eating and drinking
too much then to litle. Nowe to ende this ſpeech, wee haue
farther to gather ſuch good inſtructions as all men haue in thoſe
things which God hath giuen them for nouriſhment,The chiefe end of foode. yea in their

mouth alſo, to the end to render vnto him honour, glorie and prayſe.
Whenſoeuer beaſtes doe eate, their tongue ſerueth to feede them, no
otherwiſe then that of men doeth helpe them: but they prayſe not
God with that tongue which ſerueth to nouriſh them, becauſe he hath
not giuen them that gift of ſpeech, wherewith he hath endued man,
and that for the cauſe which we haue already heard. For as a fountain
cannot be without a riuer, ſo a riuer cannot be without a fountaine. For
this cauſe ſeeing reaſon, of which God hath made man partaker, is as
it were a fountaine in him, and ſpeech as the riuer that iſſueth from
it, the Grecians expreſſe both reaſon and ſpeech with one and the
ſame worde, which Saint Iohn alſo vſed, when ſpeaking of the Deitie
of Ieſus Chriſt,Iohn 1. he ſaid, In the beginning was the worde, and the worde
was with God, and that worde was God. For as all the woorkes of
God are perfect in their kinde, ſo hee maketh nothing without
cauſe, and which hath not his vſe. So likewiſe he giueth nothing to
any creature, but withall he giueth the inſtruments and meanes which
it ought to vſe, thereby to be made ſeruiceable as the thing it ſelfe
requireth. Heereof it is that hee gaue not ſpeech to beaſtes, becauſe
hee made them not partakers of reaſon, without which ſpeech would
ſtande them in no ſteade: ſo that it woulde haue beene a ſuperfluous
woorke of GOD. Therefore ſeeing it is ſo, God requireth not of
beaſtes that they ſhould by ſpeech praiſe him with their tongue, as
he requireth it of men, vnto whome hee hath giuen the meanes to
performe it. For beaſtes haue neyther reaſon to vnderſtande what
is ſpoken, nor ſpeech to vtter any thing thereby, whereas man hath
both the one and the other. He hath both the fountaine, and alſo the
riuer that runneth from it. Wherefore when hee ſitteth downe to
meate, and whileſt hee is taking his refection (to which vſe his
tongue ſerueth him, according as we heard before) and when hee riſeth
from table, truely he is much more brutiſh then any brute beaſt,
if with the ſelfe ſame tongue he doeth not prayſe and glorifie God,
acknowledging as he ought the goodneſſe of that celeſtiall Father,Vnthankful men are like to hogs.
that giueth him that foode, and that nouriſheth him. If he doe otherwiſe,
hee looketh no more from whence the meate commeth vnto
him then doeth the hogge, who with his ſnowte alwayes towardes
the earth, feedeth vpon the akornes that are vnderneath the Oakes,
and neuer looketh or conſidereth from whence they fall. Yea, the
hogge doeth a great deale better diſcharge his duetie in prayſing
GOD then ſuch men doe, that eate and drinke as brute
beaſtes without giuing thankes to God for the benefites hee diſtributeth
amongeſt them. For hee prayſeth God in his kinde, as all

other creatures doe in theirs, according as the kingly Pſalmiſt teſtifieth
in many places of his Pſalmes. Neither doeth God require
more of them then he hath giuen vnto them. But ſeeing he hath giuen
more to man then to all other viſible and bodily creatures, he requireth
ſo much the more of him, and that very iuſtly. For as it is
written,Luke 12. 48. 
                  To whome much is committed, more ſhalbe demaunded of him.
Wherefore man is not onely too too inexcuſable, but more vile and ſauage
then any brute beaſt, if his tongue ſerue him no farther at the
table for the prayſing of God thereby, then if (beaſtlike) his ſnowte
and noſe were in a cratch or manger. For howe ſhall the foode in
the vſe thereof bee ſanctified by the worde of God and prayer, if
hee take it after that ſort? And if it bee not ſanctified vnto him by
that meane, as Paul teacheth, hee vſeth it not as the childe of
GOD, but as a theefe and a very prophane man. For as Euery
creature of God is good when it is receiued with thankesgiuing,
                  1. Tim. 4. 4. ſo it is
defiled to the filthie, not through any fault of the creature, but of
ſuch as abuſe it like to Infidels. But all they abuſe it that giue not
thankes for it to the Creator.Food muſt be receiued with thanke
                        •
                      giuing. Wherefore as euery thing is cleane to
the cleane, that haue their heartes purified by the worde of God
which they haue receiued by faith, ſo nothing is cleane to the defiled
and to infidels. But if theſe men of whome we ſpeake, bee vnwoorthy
to be taken for men, yea, to be compared with hogges, then whom
they are much more vile and deteſtable, wee may eaſily iudge what
is to be ſaide of thoſe that doe not onely not prayſe God or giue him
any thankes, but which is woorſe, blaſpheme, and as it were deſpite
him in liew of recompenſing him for the benefites they haue receiued
of him, which is vſually done by gluttons, drunkards, and ſwearers.
What ſhall wee ſay of ſuch men, but that they deſerue rather to
bee called madde dogges then men?Some more like to madde dogges then men. except wee had rather call
them children of the Deuill, whoſe inſtrument, tongue and mouth
they are. And as for thoſe that ceaſe not to prattle and babble about
vaine and vnprofitable matters, and that take delight in backbiting
and ſlandering euery one, wee may with good reaſon compare
their tongue to the clacket of a mill. For ſeeing euery one of
vs carrieth a mill in his mouth, as wee ſhewed before, theſe men
may truely boaſt that their mill is better furniſhed with all kinde
of inſtruments then others are. But they are not the more to bee eſteemed
for that, but rather the leſſe, for the reaſons which wee
haue alreadie hearde. And when they adde to their clacking euill
ſpeech and backebiting, infecting all tables where they come
with their tongue, they may well bee compared to dogges that doe

not onely barke but alſo bite. But it is time to draw the laſt draught of
the penſill vpon the face of mans bodie, by conſidering the ſenſe of
ſmelling with the member that belongeth vnto it: wherein we looke
to be inſtructed by thee, ARAM.
            
            
               Of the Noſe, and of the ſenſe of ſmelling, and of their profite
and vſe: of the compoſition, matter, and forme of the Noſe.
Chap. 19.
               ARAM. Foraſmuch as beautie is a grace that proceedeth of the
proportion, agreement and harmonie of things, it is then very
ſeemely in mans bodie,What beautie is, and wherein it conſiſteth. when it followeth nature onely, and is without
any blemiſh or defect. Nowe this beautie conſiſteth in ſoure
thinges, namely, in figure, in number, in greatneſſe and in ſituation.
For the members of the bodie are well or ill coloured according
to the diſpoſition of the matter. And the correſpondencie of the
members one towardes another, aſwell in the number, as in the
length and greatneſſe of eache of them well compaſſed and
proportioned together, is one cauſe alſo of beautie: as likewiſe
the placing of euerie one of them in his proper place, moſt conuement
and agreeable to his nature and vſe. For if any thing bee
wanting of all theſe thinges in any member of the bodie, there
is deformitie in ſtead of beautie.
               But if wee conſider onely the beautie of the head and of the face
thereof, whereof wee diſcourſed yeſterday, wee ſhall not finde any
one member that hath not ſingular beautie in it, and that agreeth not
very fitly with the reſt, being of ſo good proportion and meaſure, and
hauing ſuch a great and excellent grace, that a man may truely ſay
that the whole woorke hath in each part thereof ſo great perfection,
that nothing can bee added or taken away, nothing can
bee wiſhed to make it more faire, profitable, excellent or perfect
then it is in it owne nature. To the ſetting foorth of this beautie, the
noſe, whereof wee are to ſpeake, ſerueth very much, yea ſo much,
that hardly any member in all the face or head ſo disfigureth a man,
or maketh him more deformed then the noſe, if it bee euill fauoured,
disfigured, or taken cleane away. But beſides this beautie, which it
bringeth to a mans head, we are to knowe, that it is very ſeruiceable
to the whole bodie,The noſe is very ſeruiceable to the braine. and chiefly to the brayne lodged in the top thereof,
as it were the Lorde and Maſter: that as it giueth motion and
ſenſe to all the members, ſo it might bee compaſſed about with all the
ſenſes, as it were with ſeruitours & men of garde. Therefore as it hath

neere about it, the eyes, eares, tongue, and palat, which are the inſtruments
of ſeeing, hearing and taſting: ſo the noſe is needfull to ſerue the
ſence of ſmelling. Neither is it placed ſo neere the ſenſe of taſting
without the great prouidence of God.Why the ſenſe of ſmelling is placed ſo neere to that of taſting. For there are many things in
nature, which if they be taſted onely are deadly, or at leaſtwiſe very
dangerous and hurtfull, as appeareth chiefly in thinges that are
venimous and poyſonfull. For this cauſe, albeit the ſence of ſmelling
bee not altogether ſo neceſſary for liuing creatures, namely,
for ſuch as are moſt perfect, as the other ſences, ſo that they may
more eaſily want it, neuertheleſſe GOD hath giuen it them, to
the ende it might bee as it were a meſſenger to the taſte to
ſhewe what is good for it and what not, and this chiefly for two
reaſons. The firſt is, to keepe men from hazarding themſelues
through an immoderate deſire to eate and drinke, before they haue
diſcerned by the ſmell of ſuch things as are to be taken, whether they
bee profitable or hurtfull for them. The ſecond reaſon is, to take all
ſuſpicion and feare from them, which otherwiſe might cauſe them
to abſtayne from thoſe thinges that are good and profitable for
them.Of the agreemēt of theſe two ſenſes. And therefore this ſenſe of ſmelling is neerely conioyned,
and hath great agreement with the ſenſe of taſting. For this is a generall
rule, that, albeit euery thing that ſmelleth well hath not alwayes
a good taſte, yet whatſoeuer a man findeth good to his taſte,
the ſame hath alſo a good ſmell: and contrariwiſe, that which is
founde to haue an ill reliſh, the ſame hath alſo the like ſmell. For
the taſte and ſmell are giuen not onely for profite, but for pleaſure
alſo and delight. Neyther doe thoſe thinges which ſerue for delectation,
alwayes bring profite, but ſometime the contrarie, principally
through their fault that knowe not howe to vſe them moderately.
For they are ſo ſubiect to their pleaſures,How men abuſe theſe ſenſes. that they can neuer
keepe meaſure in anything, as wee ſee by experience, eſpecially
in theſe two ſenſes of taſte and ſmell. For as the ordinary meates ſatisfie
not the delicate appetites of men, but they muſt haue new dainties
daily inuented to prouoke their appetite further, and to cauſe
them to eate and drinke more then is needefull, to their great hurt:
ſo men are not contented with naturall odours which nature bringeth
foorth of it ſelfe, but nowe they muſt haue muskes and perfumes,
with infinite varietie of diſtilled waters and artificial ſmelles, in
regard of which, naturall fauours are nothing ſet by. And yet if they
were vſed with ſobrietie, there were no cauſe of reprehenſion, ſeeing
all the creatures of God are good, if they be vſed moderately, and a
they ought with thankesgiuing. Heereof it is that they are oftes

mentioned in Scripture in the good part. And not to ſeeke farre off for
examples,Iohn 12. 3. we haue the teſtimonies of the holy Euāgeliſts, as our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, who was neither nice nor voluptuous, but the
perfect paterne of al ſobriety and temperance, did not reiect nor condemne
pretious ointments and ſweete odours, but ſometime permitted
the vſe of them vpon his owne perſon.How the ſpirites are reſ
                        •
                     eſt
                        •
                     ed with ſweete odours. Moreouer, it is certaine, that
the animal ſpirites in the braine are greatly relieued and recreated by
thoſe good and naturall ſmels that are conueyed vnto them by means
of the noſe, and of the ſenſe of ſmelling placed therein: as contrariwiſe
they are greatly offended by euill odours, yea oftentimes by artificial
ſauours, which commonly cauſe rhumes, catharres, and great headaches.
For the ſpirits of the head are ſubtile, pure, and very neate, ſo
that ſweete ſmelles are good for them, and ſtinking ſauours contrary
vnto them. To this end therefore that the braine might receiue this
benefit of good odours,Of the diuers vſes of the noſe. God hath placed both the ſenſe and inſtrument
of ſmelling ſo neare vnto it: the inſtrument to keepe and conuey
odours vnto it, the ſenſe to diſcerne and iudge of them. Therefore this
ſenſe of ſmelling hath ſome agreement both with the fire and with
thicke aire, becauſe ſmels are ſtirred vp by heate, as ſmoke is by fire,
which are after carried by meanes of the aire vnto the ſenſe, and receiued
and kept by the noſe. Foraſmuch alſo as the braine needeth aire
to nouriſh and preſerue the animal ſpirites, the noſe in this reſpect alſo
ſtandeth it in great ſteade. Therefore God hath created it not only
to ſerue the ſenſe of ſmelling, but alſo for reſpiration, that it ſhould be
the principall pipe and paſſage, by which both the braine and lungs
may draw in or let out breath as neede requireth. For this cauſe the
braine doeth ſtretch out and reſtraine it ſelfe: and as by ſtretching
foorth it ſelfe it draweth in the aire by the noſethrilles, ſo by keeping
it ſelfe cloſe together it retaineth the aire. And ſo the externall aire
being drawen in by the noſethrilles, is diſtributed by the cranies that
are open in the palat, in ſuch ſort, that the greateſt part is drawen into
the lungs, and the reſidue goeth to the braine by the paſſages & holes
that leade vnto it. And although the mouth ſerueth alſo for reſpiration,
yet the noſe is appointed more eſpecially for that purpoſe, and is
much more fit and apte for the ſame. Therefore God hath giuen it
both matter and forme agreeable for that office.Of the matter of the noſe. For firſt concerning
the matter, it is not made all of bone, nor all of griſtles: becauſe if it
were all of bone, a double inconuenience woulde enſue thereof. The
firſt is, that the bones would be in danger of breaking, chiefely about
the end of the noſe when it ſhould hit againſt any hard thing becauſe
they would not bend and giue place eaſily, as ſinewes will do. The ſecond

inconuenience would be this, that the endes of the noſethrilles
could neither open nor ſhut, neither enlarge nor reſtraine themſelues,
but woulde continue alwayes at one ſtay: whereupon two other miſchiefs
would follow. Firſt, the noſe could not open and inlarge it ſelfe
ſo much as were requiſite many times to drawe in great ſtore of aire to
coole and refreſh both the lungs and the braine, eſpecially when they
are heated and ſet on fire. For at ſuch a time there is perill of ſtrangling.
Secondly, foraſmuch as the noſe is giuen to man that it might
ſerue the braine in ſtead of a pipe and ſpowt to purge it of ſlegmatike
humours,How the noſe is in ſteade of a ſpowt to the braine. a man could not by blowing, cloſe it together and ſtraine
it to get the filth out of it, as neede requireth many times. For the humours
that diſtill from the braine are not alwaies very liquide & running,
but ſometimes ſo groſſe & thick, that a man cannot eaſily purge
the braine or noſe, except it be cloſed and ſtrained hard. Thus you ſee
two euident cauſes why it was needeful that the noſe ſhould be compounded
of griſtles, & not of bones onely, at leſt wiſe from the middle
downward. On the otherſide, if this lower part had beene made of
fleſh onely, or of kernelles, or of skinnes, the noſethrilles could not ſo
well haue bin inlarged or rēſtrained, nor continued ſo open, as is requiſite
for the ſeruice of all thoſe dueties and offices already mentioned:
beſides that thoſe parts could not ſo well withſtand the inconueniences
whereunto they might be ſubiect, if they were of a more
tender matter. Laſtly, as it was needefull that one part of the noſe
ſhould conſiſt of that matter for thoſe cauſes ſpoken of, ſo alſo it was
neceſſary that the vpper part ſhould bee made of bones, not onely to
keepe the ſenſe of ſmelling the better, which is in that part, and to be
as it were a buckler vnto it, but alſo to ſerue in ſteade of rampires both
for the eyes and for the braine. As for the inward parts, there are two
noſethrilles diſtinguiſhed one from another by a griſtle which is betweene
them both,Of the noſethrils, and of their parting aſunder. as it were alittle wall to diuide them, to the ende
that if the one be ſtopped, the other may alwayes diſcharge the offices
aſſigned to them both. And to the end they may more eaſily draw in
the aire for the ſeruice as well of the lungs as of the braine, and alſo receiue
in the odours, they are larger at the firſt entrance, and after as
they aſcend vp they waxe more narrow, and that not without good
reaſon of the prouidence of God. For hee hath in a manner taken the
ſelfe ſame courſe that he did in the compoſition of the eares, which he
made large & wide at the entry, hauing that form, & that hole within,
which we heard ſpoken of before, together with the cauſes why. The
ſelf ſame reaſon in a maner may be rēdred here. For as it is to be feared,
that ouer great ſoundes woulde hurt the eares if they entred in all at

once, ſo the lungs and much more the braine might be ouer cooled
by the ayre that ſhould enter in at the noſethrilles, if it ſhould aſcend
vp too faſt at once, too ſodainly, or too vehemently. By reaſon wherof
it is requiſite, that it ſhould be retained in ſome ſort, to the ende
that by the tariance which it maketh, it ſhould bee heated and better
tempered. The like conſideration is to bee had of the vapours and
ſmelles in regarde of the braine, not onely of euill ſauours, but alſo
of thoſe that are good. For ſome are ſo violent by reaſon of the abundance
of heat in them, which falleth out chiefly in ſuch as are moſt excellent,
that if they be not diſpenſed moderately, they hurt the braine.
This commeth to paſſe in ſome perſons, through the weaknes of their
braine. There are others, and namely ſuch as care not for ſweet things,
who take no peaſure, no not in good ſmels, ſo that oft times the ſweeteſt
& moſt delicate odours are hurtful to their head. Now God hath
wel prouided for al theſe things, hauing placed a little bone in the top
of the noſe, which is pierced through like to a litle ſiue. Hereupon it is
called by the Phiſicions the ſiue-bone,
                  Of the ſpungie or ſiue-bone. or otherwiſe, and that more properly,
the ſpūgy bone, becauſe the holes therof are not ſtrait, as are thoſe
of a ſiue, but ſomwhat ſlopewiſe like to the holes of a ſpunge. And this
ſerueth for the better & more cōmodious diſcharging of all thoſe vſes
declared by vs, & for the auoyding of thoſe diſcommodities which we
haue heard of. Whereunto may be added, that the humors which deſcend
from the braine may not fall downe ſo faſt together, but diſtill
better by little and little, and the good humours be kept more eaſily
from falling downe all at once together with the euill.Of the muſcles of the noſethrils and of the ſinews of ſmelling. I paſſe ouer
heere briefely the muſcles giuen to the noſethrilles to mooue them,
as alſo the nerues, which are ſent from the braine to the ſenſe of
ſmelling to bring vnto it the vertue of ſmelling, as the eyes, eares, palat,
and tongue receiue from thence their nerues alſo, which bring
vnto them that facultie and vertue that is meete for their nature.
Wherein wee may further note one goodly point of the prouidence
of God, in that giuing motion and ſenſe to euery member of the
bodie by the ſinewes, hee giueth a ſpeciall and proper ſenſe to thoſe
nerues that are to miniſter vertue and power to euery one of the corporall
ſenſes, which the other ſinewes haue not. For there is none
that giueth the ſenſe meete for ſight, but thoſe that are allotted to
the eyes for that purpoſe. The ſame may bee ſaid of thoſe that are giuen
to the eares for hearing, and to the tongue and palat for the taſte,
and to the noſe for ſmelling. Now to end this ſpeach, wee are to draw
out ſome inſtruction meete for the minde, according as we haue done
in our diſcourſes of the other ſenſes of the body. As then wee iudge

by the noſe & ſenſe of ſmelling which God hath giuen vnto vs, what
difference there is betwene a good and a ſtinking ſmell, and how the
one is pleaſant & delightſome, and the other vnpleaſant & abominable:
ſo likewiſe we ought to conſider what ſmall pleaſure God taketh
in the infection and ſtinch of our ſinnes,Notable inſtructions for the ſoule. and how he is delighted with
the ſweete ſmell of the iuſtice and vertues of Chriſt Ieſus, when wee
are prefumed therewith, and when hee ſmelleth the ſauour thereof
in vs. Therefore whenſoeuer, and as often as we feele ſome ſtinch and
abhorre the ſame, that euil ſmel ought to admoniſh vs of the filthines
of our ſinnes, and teach vs to haue them in greater abomination then
any catrion ſmell whatſoeuer, and to abhorre our ſelues when wee
preſent our ſelues before God, prefumed with ſuch an infernall ſauour.
For if we turne our faces aſide, and ſtoppe our noſe, and euen
ſpit vpon the ground when wee meete with ſome great infection, ſhal
wee not thinke that God turneth his face from vs when he findeth vs
ſo ſtinking and infected? Contrariwiſe, when wee ſmell ſome good
ſauour, it ought to bring into our remembrance the odour of Ieſus
Chriſt his ſacrifice, and of thoſe vertues that are well pleaſing and agreeable
in the ſight of God, and ſtirre vs vp with al indeuour to preſent
him with ſuch ſmels, to the end wee may be of good odour before
God and men. Which the holy worde will teach vs, after hee
hath giuen vs a ſpirituall noſe whereby wee may attaine to the right
ſenſe and ſmel of that good odour of Ieſus Chriſt and of the Goſpel,
working in vs the ſpirit of diſcretion to diſcerne truth from lying, that
our ſoules may be refreſhed, as the braine is by thoſe good ſmels that
are brought vnto it by the bodily noſe, and by the ſenſe of ſmelling
that is therein. Nowe therefore being come to the end of this goodly
matter of the fiue corporall and externall ſenſe, me thinks we ſhould
profit much by a briefe collection of their vſe, and of the commoditie
which they bring to men: conſidering alſo the diuerſitie that is in
their faces and viſages, in which theſe goodly organicall inſtruments
of the ſenſes are planted: and how their faces are images and pictures
of their heart and mind. The diſcourſe of this matter appertainth to
thee ACHITOB.
            
            
               Of the vſe briefly of all the outward ſenſes for the ſeruice of man, namely in
purging the ſuperfluities and ordures of his body: of the diuerſitie that is in
mens faces, and of the image of the mind and heart in them. Chap. 20.
               ACHITOB. When wee taſte ſome pleaſure by conſidering the
workes of God, namely thoſe which wee beare about vs in our

nature, (as indeede ſuch contemplation affoordeth great delight to
their ſoules that are not buried in ignorance) we ought to thinke that
we haue great occaſions and certaine meanes to conſider, what pleaſure
and ioy it would be to ſee and behold the Creator and Workmaſter,
who hath made & giuen to man ſuch excellent ſenſes, ſuch wonderful
vertues & faculties: what delight ariſeth of hearing & ſmelling
only ſome ſmal odour, & of taſting a litle of his prouidence, wiſdome,
goodnes, benignity, grace, & mercy much more, whē they are throghly
taſted & reliſhed of vs. Which may be performed by them that imploy
all care and diligence in meditating in his eternall worde, and in
conſidering the workes of his Almighty power, vntill ſuch time as by
the diſſolution of this mortall tabernacle of the body, they ſhall haue
put on immortalitie to enioy true contemplation, that is, to beholde
him face to face, who onely is able to ſatisfie ſoule with goodnes
and felicitie,Pſal. 16. 11. as the Prophet teacheth vs where he ſaieth, In thy preſence
is the fulneſſe of ioy, and at thy right hand there are pleaſures for euermore.
Now then we may know by that which we haue hitherto heard
in theſe our diſcourſes, what teſtimonies God hath plāted of his great
prouidence in all the partes of our bodies, what care hee hath had and
ſtill hath of man,Of the vſe of the externall ſenſes. and how he hath giuen him as many corporall ſenſes
as he needeth for the vſe and fruition of all thoſe viſible and bodily
creatures which he hath created. For he hath eies, whereby he vſeth
and enioyeth the light, and the pleaſure of ſuch diuerſitie of colours as
may be ſeene in the world, as well naturall as artificiall and compounded,
with the ſundry mixtures of naturall things. Then by the eares he
hath the vſe of al kindes of ſounds, and principally of ſpeech, together
with the pleaſure of harmonies and melodies conſiſting in the variety
of tunes and ſongs, as well of m
                     •
                  ns voice as of birdes and other creatures,
and alſo of inſtruments of muſicke, which are ſo many and of
ſuch diuerſitie amongſt men And by means of the noſe and noſethrils
he hath the fruition and pleaſure of odours and ſmels ſo diuers in nature,
both naturall and artificiall: and by means of the mouth, tongue,
and palat he enioyeth and iudgeth of all ſorts of taſtes, which alſo are
very diuers, and chiefly of meates and drinkes wherewithal he is nouriſhed.
For this good God hath appointed a meane for the preſeruation
of mans life, whereunto he hath ioyned pleaſure with profite, if
men know how to vſe the ſame with moderation and meaſure, rather
to make ſupply no neceſſity then to ſatisfie pleaſures. The like may be
ſaide of all the reſt of the feelings and touchings of al the bodily members,
of which there is great variety.
               But hauing ſpoken ſufficiently of the compoſition of the externall

parts of mans body, and of the outward members, of the natural ſenſes
of man and of their vſes, we ought to conſider alſo what inſtructions
God giueth by them vnto men concerning their infirmitie.Of the fuperſluities that proceede out of the body. For although
the body of man be ſo beautifull and excellent outwardly as
wee haue declared, yet it hath infection within, which of neceſſitie
muſt appeare and breake foorth outwardly, that it may be purged and
vnburdned. For the body cannot reape that profit of the nouriſhment
it receiueth by al the elements, and chiefely of that which it eateth and
drinketh, as that it can cōuert & turne al of it into nouriſhment & ſubſtance,
& auoyd all thoſe accidents & inconueniences whereunto it is
ſubiect by reaſon of the infirmity of it owne nature. Therefore it commeth
to paſſe neceſſarily, that the body is ful of excrements, of much
ſuperfluitie & ordure, which would kill it if it were not diſcharged and
deliuered thereof. For theſe excrements woulde be poiſon vnto it in
ſteade of nouriſhment. Therefore the prouidence of God hath ſo prouided
a remedy for the ſame, that admoniſhing man of his infirmitie,
to the end he ſhould alwayes remember that he is created of clay and
earth, & that he ſhal returne vnto it againe, it hath withal ordained the
meanes whereby man ſhould be comforted & diſcharged of thoſe excremēts
& ſuperfluities which might hurt him. And for this cauſe there
is no member but hath his proper paſſages appropriated for purgation
& ſeruing in his place, yea euen the nobleſt members. For I ſpeake not
only of thoſe members,Of the paſſages meete to purge the body by. which we account moſt vile, abiect, & ſhamefull,
& which nature teacheth vs to couer & hide, being appointed for
the voiding of the groſeſt, vileſt, & moſt filthy excrements, but alſo of
thoſe that are the excellenteſt & chiefeſt in ye head & face, ſo that there
is no part of our body out of which there proceedeth not ſome infection
& filthines. Inſomuch that a man may wel ſay, that our whole body
is within as it were a ſtinking draught or puddle that emptieth it
ſelfe on euery ſide as it were by ſinks & gutters. For if we cōſider it generally,
there is no part that is not ſubiect to ſweat, (which oftentimes
ſauoureth very ſtrongly) and that purgeth not it ſelfby ſweating from
that ſuperfluitie, which it caſteth forth by that meanes. Therefore the
prouidence of God hath ſo wel prouided for this, that the skin hath in
it litle holes called by the Phyſicions,Of the pores in the skinne. 
                  Pores: which are ſo ſubtill and ſo
ſmall, that they cannot be perceiued by the eie. Through theſe pores,
the ſuperfluities that are euaporated by ſweat haue their iſſue, ſo that
it commeth to paſſe oftentimes, that ſicke perſons are cured by this
onely remedy, or at leaſt wiſe they are greatly comforted thereby. But
let vs come to the nobleſt members in the head, and in the goodlieſt
part of man, which is the face. The eies, eares, noſe, and mouth ſerue

for pipes and ſpowts to the braine and head,Of the ſpowts of the braine and head. to purge it of thoſe ſuperfluities
that otherwiſe might oppreſſe it. Wherein wee are againe to
conſider of the prouidence of God, and of that care which he hath of
vs. For ſeeing the head is the principall member of the whole body,
and ſeeing the braine within the head is ſo noble a part, God hath giuen
vnto it more paſſages for the purging of it, then he hath done to al
the other members. Therefore we ſee what ſtore of flegme doth daily
iſſue out by the noſe and mouth, ſo that a man is many times much
troubled both in blowing his noſe & in ſpitting. In this reſpect it ſeemeth
the noſe maketh the face to looke like a Limbeck,The face compared to a Limbeck. albeit the water
that diſtilleth through it hath no very good ſmell, neither is pleaſant
to looke vpon, no more is the ſpittle that commeth out of the
mouth. As for the eares, they are not without their filth, ſo that they
muſt be oftentimes looked vnto and cleanſed, and the waxe that is in
them taken foorth: which differeth much from the waxe that is made
by Bees. For as Phyſicions teſtifie, this eare-waxe is nothing elſe
but the ſuperfluitie of the chollericke humour, which is purged there
by thoſe pipes: as they ſay alſo, that the melancholy humour is purged
by the eyes, which are many times watriſh and very foule by
reaſon of the rhumes and ſundry humours that fall downe vpon them.
Whereby we ſee, howe God doeth admoniſh vs on all ſides through
the infirmities of al our members, what account we are to make of our
ſelues.Good inſtructions for all men. For if the goodlieſt & moſt noble members, if the pleaſanteſt,
moſt delicate, & neateſt parts are ſo foule & filthy, what ſhal we ſay of
the reſt that are the baſeſt & moſt abiect, which are appointed for no
other vſes then to be as it were the draughts & ſinks of the whole body?
But on the other ſide let vs conſider how God by humbling vs on
the one ſide, doth yet on the other ſide prouide for our neceſſities by
thoſe means of purging which he hath appointed for the body of mā.
Where we haue further to obſerue,The profite of care-waxe. that there are ſome ſuperfluities &
excrements purged from the braine, which are profitable for thoſe
members that are aſſigned to be the inſtruments of their euacuation:
as we ſee it plainly in that yellow humour that is purged by the eares.
For it defendeth them againſt fleas, litle flies and other ſmall wormes
and beaſtes, that might otherwiſe enter within them.
               We haue further to cōſider for our better humiliation, that God hath
ſo created al the mēbers & inſtruments belōging to our corporal ſenſes,
as that he admoniſheth vs therby of their nature, & what they can
do of themſelues. For there is not one of thē, but it is in ſome ſort made
hollow, to giue vs to vnderſtand thereby, that they exerciſe their principall
& chiefe office by receiuing frō without, that which belongeth

to their nature, and not by ſending foorth any thing of their owne. For
when the eies ſee, they receiue into them the images of thoſe things
that are before them. And if they ſend foorth any thing, it is ſo farre
from helping them to ſee better, that it hindereth and dimmeth the
ſight, as we ſee when men weepe, or when any humour runneth out
of their eyes. Likewiſe our noſe hath no ſenſe of the odours, by means
of that wind and breath which proceedeth out of it, but when it draweth
in the aire with which the odours are conueyed into it. And ſo it is
of the other ſenſes. Whereby wee are taught to knowe the nature of
our ſoule, which can bring foorth no good thing, if it haue not receiued
it before of God, to whome ſhee can giue nothing but onely receiueth
from him. You ſee then many good leſſons, which wee are
taught by the inſtruments of our ſenſes and by our owne nature: but
wee commonly paſſe them ouer and neuer thinke of them at all, or if
we muſe vpon them ſometimes, we ſay as much indeede, and confeſſe
it in word, but in the meane time we are nothing humbled thereby.
Now then we haue beſtowed doores and windows vpon the frame
of mans body, and may with eaſe beholde the outward excellencie
and ſhew thereof, in regard of ſo many goodly workes as are cut out
and ingrauen in euery externall part of it. We are by and by to looke
vpon the inward furniture, being enriched with all ſortes of rare,
great, and ſumptuous workes. But for the end of our preſent matter,
ſeeing wee are taught that ſo many profitable and pleaſant ſenſes and
members are planted chiefely in the face and viſage of man, it cannot
be without fruit and great admiration at the prouidence of God,The diuerſitie of faces is wonderfull. if we
conſider that amongſt ſo many faces as there are of men, women, and
children, a man ſhall hardly finde two in all the world, that reſemble
each other ſo neere, but ſtill ſome difference will appeare to him that
looketh narrowly vpon them. And if therebe any ſo apparant reſemblance
that a man cannot finde any difference, yet that falleth out very
ſeldome. Neither is this ſeene only in the whole countenance, but
alſo in the ſeuerall parts thereof, and namely in the noſe, whereof there
is ſo great variety,The great variety of noſes. as that you ſhall finde very fewe that are like in all
points: ſo that it is to be wondered at, that in ſuch great ſimilitude of
faces there is ſo great diſſimilitude. For there is great likeneſſe in that
they are all humane faces, made of the ſame matter, and hauing the
ſame partes: but yet they are very vnlike in reſpect of the particular
differences, which are in each of them and of their partes. Now if we
haue occaſion to admire this diuerſitie that is among many, what ſhal
we ſay to the diſſimilitude and difference of countenance that is to be
ſeene in one & the ſame man,Varietie of countenance in one man. as if he had many faces to vſe & change

at his pleaſure, as we ſee men may change maskes before their faces?
It is certaine that there appeareth great difference in the countenance
of one and the ſame man, as he is either yong or olde, ſound or ſicke.
For as a mans yeares alter, ſo there will be ſtil ſome change in his face,
bearing his countenance according to the health or ſickenes that is in
him. But I ſpeake not nowe of this diuerſitie, but of another which
happeneth to men in all ages, and at all times. For there is great difference
to be ſeene in a mans face according as hee is either merry or
ſad, angry or pacified, humble and modeſt, or loftie and proude. For
if hee be quiet and modeſt, hee will haue a ſweete, milde, and gracious
countenance:The deſcription of an angry viſage. if hee bee angry, hee will haue a furious face, as
though hee were transfigured into a ſauage beaſt, hauing fierie eyes
as if hee caſt from them flames of fire: hee will caſt foorth ſmoake at
his noſethrilles, as if hee had a fornace kindled within him: his whole
countenance will be as redde as if fire came out of it. Therefore it was
not without reaſon ſaide of a Philoſopher, that angry and furious
men ſhoulde beholde themſelues in a glaſſe, to the ende they might
know thereby how ſuch paſſions change their countenance, and how
they are transformed thereby and looke hideous and fearefull. And
if a man be lofty and arrogant,Of an arrogant countenance. his viſage will teſtifie the ſame ſufficiently,
eſpecially his eyes and eie-lids, which will be lifted vp, as if
pride and arrogancie had there placed their ſeate. For if wee denie
or graunt any thing that pleaſeth or diſpleaſeth vs, wee declare it by
them, ſpeaking by ſignes, as the tongue doeth by woordes. And
although pride be conceiued and bredde in the heart,Pride is ſeated vpon the eie lids. yet it is ſeated
on the eye-liddes, where it ſheweth and manifeſteth it ſelfe. For
ſeeing it deſireth alwayes to be aduaunced and to be lift vp aboue all,
yea to be alone without any companion, that place is very fitte and
conuenient for it, being high, emiuent, and apparant. But a proud
perſon ought to conſider, that that place is very much declining, to
the ende hee may thinke of the danger of falling downe, as they
that are in ſome high and ſleepe place where they can take no holde.
For it can not bee but that pride will haue a fall, howſoeuer it may
ſeeme long firſt. For that ſentence of Ieſus Chriſt is alwayes true,
who ſayeth,Matth. 23 12. Luke 14. 11. that Whoſoeuer will exalt himſelfe ſhall be brought low, and
whoſoeuer will humble himſelfe ſhall be exalted. The eyes alſo do ſpeake
and teſtifie of the heart within. For if the heart bee humble, modeſt,
chaſte, and well ſtayed, the eyes will be ſo anſwerable thereunto, that
their very lookes will declare ſufficiently howe it ſtandeth affected.
Contrariwiſe, if the heart bee proude, vnchaſte, looſe, impudent,
and laſciuious, the looke and countenaunce of the eyes will openly

bewray the ſame. Alſo wee ſay commonly of ſuch as haue loſt all
ſhame, that they haue brazen and ſhameleſſe foreheads. And it ſeemeth
that the French worde Affronteur, is deriued from thence, becauſe
they that are of that occupation muſt haue good foreheads, they
muſt be bolde and ſhameleſſe, like to harlots and murtherers. And
as ſhame is ſeated and appeareth principally in the forehead and
cheekes,The ſeate of ſhame. ſo is it a note of impudencie when ſhame is baniſhed from
thence: as that which then poſſeſſeth the place aſſigned to ſhame and
modeſtie.
               Therefore the Scripture attributeth a brow of braſſe and of yron,Eſay 48. 4. Ezech. 3. 8. a
hard forehead, and a ſtrong face to them that are impudent and paſt
grace, to ſuch as are vntractable and rebellious. By theſe things then
we know how the face is the image, meſſenger, and witneſſe of all the
affections of the heart, inſomuch that it is very hard for him, do what
he can, to couer and conceale them. Alſo it is the image and witnes
of a good and euill conſcience. For as a good conſcience cauſeth it to
appeare ioyfull and open, ſo contrariwiſe an euill conſcience maketh
it ſadde and hidden, as it were the viſage of a condemned perſon. We
commonly call Phyſiognomy the Science whereby men iudge of the
nature, complexion, and manners of euery one, by the contemplation
of all the members of the body, and chiefely of the face and countenance.Of the true Phyſiognomy.
But there is no Phyſiognomy ſo certaine as that which-wee
haue nowe touched, whereby men may bee eaſily conuinced of that
which they thinke to hide in their heartes, which notwithſtanding is
quickely deſcried in their countenances, as if wee read it in a Booke.
Nowe it is time to enter into our edifice and building, there to contemplate
the internall and ſpirituall ſenſes, which the foule vſeth in
her woorkes and operations. But firſt wee will make the way more
eaſie to attaine to ſo high a matter, by learning briefely what is the
nature, faculties, and powers of mans ſoule, and what are the ſundry
kindes of ſoules, the burthen whereof I lay vpon thee, ASER.
            
            
               Of the nature, faculties, and powers of mans ſoule: of the knowledge
which we may haue in this life, and how excellent and neceſſary it is:
into what kindes the life and ſoule are diuided. Chap. 21.
               ASER. If God hath ſhewed himſelfe wonderfull in the creation,
compoſition, nature, and vſe of the externall ſenſes and members
of mans body (of which wee haue hitherto diſcourſed) both in

the matter whereof they are made and in the forme giuen vnto them,
and in all other things that belong vnto them: no doubt but wee
ſhall haue much more cauſe to maruaile at the excellent workemanſhippe
of his prouidence in the compoſition, nature, and vſe of the
internall ſenſes and members, which lie hidden within the bodie,
whereof the ſequele of our ſpeach requireth that wee ſhoulde intreate.
For theſe are the principall, by meanes of which the other
receiue life, and are kept and preſerued in life. But foraſmuch as
the ſoule giueth life to the whole body and to all the members thereof,
wee are withall to conſider of the nature thereof, what faculties
and vertues it hath, and howe it worketh in all the partes of
the bodie, according to that knowledge which GOD hath giuen
to men, both by the teſtimonie of his worde, and by the effectes of
the ſoule. For neither the bodie nor any member thereof ſhoulde
haue any more motion or feeling then is in a blocke or ſtone, if it
had no ſoule to giue it life. For this cauſe after Iob hath ſpoken of
the creation and compoſition of his body,Iob 10. 12. hee addeth, Thou hast
giuen mee life and grace, and thy viſitation (that is to ſay thy prouidence)
hath preſerued my ſpirite, This agreeth with that, which we
haue heard before of Moſes,
                  Geneſ. 2. 7. where hee ſayeth, That the Lorde made
man of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face breath of life, and
the man was a liuing ſoule.
               
               Firſt therefore wee muſt vnderſtand that there are in man three
kindes of faculties and vertues that worke continually within him
and neuer ceaſe:Three ſortes of faculties in man. the firſt is commonly called Animal, the ſecond
Vital, the third Natural. Of theſe two latter wee will ſpeake heereafter.
Concerning the Animal facultie, it is diuided into three kinds:
the firſt is called Principall,
                  Of the animal power. the ſecond Senſitiue, the third Motiue.
The Principall is diuided by ſome into three kindes, by others into
fiue. They which make fiue ſortes, diſtinguiſh betweene the common
ſenſe, the imagination, and the fantaſie, making them three:
and for the fourth they adde Reaſon, or the iudging facultie: and for
the fift, Memorie. They that make but three kinds differ not from
the other, but onely in that they comprehend all the former three vnder
the common ſenſe, or vnder one of the other twaine, whether it
be the imagination or the fantaſie.Of the ſenſitiue. As for the Senſitiue facultie, it
comprehendeth the vertues of the fiue corporall ſenſes, of which
wee haue ſpoken before.Of the motiue. As for the Motiue vertue, it comprehendeth
the moouing of all the outward parts of the body from one place
to an other, eſpecially of the feete and legges which is to walke, and
of the handes which is to apprehend and to gripe. This moouing

is done by the ſinewes, muſcles, and filaments, as we haue already declared:
but not without knowledge and will, as the other that are
more properly called naturall motions, of which we may ſpeake in their
order. And this motion is led by the imagination in regard of beaſtes,
but in regard of men, by reaſon. But becauſe we haue already handled
at large theſe two laſt powers of the ſoule, namely, the Senſitiue and
Motiue, when we ſpake of the externall members of the body, we wil
now ſpeake eſpecially of the firſt, which comprehendeth the internall
ſenſes ſpoken of by me euen now, which anſwere to the externall ſenſes,
according to the bond, agreement, and communication which the
body and ſoule haue together. And becauſe wee cannot know the faculties
& vertues of the ſoule,How we come to the knowledge of the ſoule. but only by means of thoſe inſtruments
whereby it worketh, as we haue ſhewed in our former diſcourſes the
nature and vſe of the externall members, and howe the ſoule is ſerued
by them: ſo now we will do the like by the internall parts, to the ende
that we may the better knowe the nature of the ſoule by her operations
and inſtruments, as the labourer that worketh by his inſtruments,
and frameth thoſe woorkes that are before our eyes. For the ſoule
being of a ſpirituall nature and not bodily, we cannot ſee it in it owne
ſubſtance and nature, nor haue any knowledge thereof but by the
effectes, by which wee may iudge and conclude of their cauſe, as
alſo by thoſe teſtimonies of the ſoule, which the Lorde affordeth
vs in his worde. And although the vnderſtanding of man can not
attaine to an entire and perfect knowledge of the ſoule, yet that ſmal
knowledge which wee may haue, doeth exceedingly profite end delight
vs. For ſeeing it is the moſt excellent creature that is created vnder
the cope of heauen, yea more excellent then the heauens themſelues,
or any of the celeſtiall bodies, becauſe the ſoule only is endued
with reaſon and vnderſtanding,The knowledge of the ſoule how neceſſary and excellent it is. there is no doubt but the knowledge
thereof is more excellent, profitable, pleaſant, and neceſſary, yea more
worthy admiration then of any other thing whatſoeuer, as that which
alwaies yeeldeth profit to the greateſt things that can be. Therfore we
ought not to ſet light by that knowledge of it which wee may attaine
vnto. For there is in it ſo great varietie, beauty, and harmony, yea it is
ſo wel adorned and ſet forth, that no heauen nor earth is ſo wel painted
or bedecked with ſuch beautifull, liuely, and excellent images and
pictures, as that is. On the other ſide, ſhe is the Miſtreſſe and Authour
from whence proceedeth the inuention of all Artes and Sciences, and
of all thoſe wonderfull woorkes that are made throughout the whole
courſe of mans life. Therefore no man can beholde her or thinke
vpon her without great pleaſure and admiration. And ſeeing the

fountaine and well-ſpring of all the good and euill that befalleth vs
is in the ſoule, there is nothing more profitable for men then to know
it well, to the ende they may labour more carefully to keepe this
fountaine pure and well purged, that all the riuers of their actions
and workes may iſſue and flowe pure and cleane from thence. For
that man can neuer gouerne his ſoule wel,The knowledge of our ſelues very, neceſſary. nor be maſter of himſelfe,
that doeth not knowe himſelfe. If wee deſire to knowe what workes
wee are to looke for of a workeman, what hee can doe, or what may
befall him, what hee is good for, and for what hee is vnmeete, hee
muſt firſt of all bee knowen what hee is. Therefore that ſentence of
which we haue already ſpoken, that ſaith, Know thy ſelfe, ought heere
eſpecially to take place and to bee practiſed. For it is a harder matter
to knowe the nature and qualitie of our ſoule and of our minde,
the vertues and affections thereof, to enquire and conſider of it well,
and to knowe what may be knowen thereof, as alſo the diuerſe and
holow lurking holes, the turnings and windings therein, then to know
the bones, fleſh, ſinews, and blood of our bodies, with all the matter
whereof it is made, and all the partes and members thereof. Seeing
then wee are to make enquirie of the nature and powers of the ſoule
by the effects thereof, according as I haue already ſpoken, and ſeeing
the principall effect is the life which it giueth to all liuing creatures,
let vs firſt conſider of the difference that is betweene the creatures
void of life, and thoſe that haue life in them. Afterward let vs looke
into the ſundrie ſortes of liues that are in liuing creatures, as that
which will helpe vs well to the vnderſtanding of that wee ſeeke for.
Firſt then wee muſt note that all creatures are either ſpirituall or bodily.The diuiſion of creatures.
All they are ſpirituall creatures that are without bodies, and
which cannot be perceiued by any bodily ſenſe, and ſuch are the Angelles
both good and bad, and the ſoules and ſpirites of men. The bodily
creatures are all thoſe that are viſible, and that may bee felt and
perceiued by corporall ſenſes: amongſt which ſome haue no life, and
ſome haue life.Of creatures without life. Againe, thoſe creatures that haue no life, differ in
two reſpects; for ſome of them haue no naturall motion, as ſtones,
metalles, mineralles and ſuch like creatures. Others haue their naturall
motion: among which ſome are mutable, corruptible and ſubiect
to change, others are immutable & incorruptible, continuing alwaies
firme in their eſtate during the courſe of this world. The water, the
aire, the windes and the fire are creatures hauing motion, albeit they
haue no life: but they are ſubiect to corruption, and ſo are all the creatures
that are compounded of the elements, whether they haue life or
no. For being made of contrary matters and qualities they corrupt and

change, not in reſpect of their firſt matter and ſubſtance, which can
neuer periſh, according to the teſtimony of Philoſophers, notwithſtanding
it alter in forme, but alwayes returneth to the firſt nature.
Stones and metalles, albeit they be very hard, yet are they not freed
from corruption and conſuming through vſe.The celeſtiall bodies are immutable. But the celeſtiall bodies
are of that matter and nature, that they mooue continually,
and yet abide alwaies intire and in their firſt forme, not being ſubiect
to any change in reſpect of their bodies, neither do they weare or conſume
away as other creatures do that are vnderneath them. Inſomuch
that none of the celeſtiall ſpheres are either wearied, worne or ſpent
more with all the labour they haue vndergone by the ſpace of ſo many
yeeres, then they were the firſt day of their creation. For we muſt
not take it for a change of their natures and qualities, that according
to their diuerſe courſe, the ſunne, moone, and other planets & ſtarres
are ſometimes further off, ſometimes neerer each to other, that they
haue their oppoſitions, coniunctions, diuerſe and different aſpects, according
to the diuerſity and difference of their courſe and motion. We
may ſay as much of the Eclipſes both of the ſunne and moone. For the
change that is amongſt them is not in their owne bodies, ſubſtance, &
qualities,Of creatures hauing life. but onely in regarde of vs and of our ſight. Concerning the
creatures that haue life, they are for the moſt part diuided into three
kindes: but they that diſtinguiſh more ſubtilly make foure kindes.
And becauſe life is giuen by the ſoule, the Philoſophers make as many
ſortes of ſoules as they doe of liues, and call them by the ſame names.
They call the firſt, the nouriſhing or vegetatiue ſoule or life: the ſecond,
the ſenſitine: the third, the cogitatiue: & the fourth, the reaſonable ſoule,
or the ſoule partaker of reaſon.Of the vegetatiue life. Touching the firſt, there is a kinde of
life, that hath no other vertue in the creature to which it is giuen of
God, then to nouriſh and cauſe it to encreaſe, and to keepe it in being,
vntil this life faile it. The ſoule that giueth life with theſe effects is called
nouriſhing or vegetatiue: & this is proper to al herbs, trees, & plants
that are maintained & kept in their kinds by the ſeeds, or by planting,
ſetting,Of the ſenſitiue. & ſuch like propagations. The ſecond kind of life named ſenſitiue,
is ſo called, becauſe it giueth not only nouriſhment and growth,
as the firſt, but ſenſe alſo and feeling. They that will haue but three
kinds, make but one of this and of that which is called cogitatiue by
them that make foure, who attribute the ſenſitiue ſoule to the ſea
ſpunges, to oyſters, cockles, and to thoſe creatures which the Graecians
and Latins call by a name, which in our language ſignifieth as
much as plant-liuing creatures, becauſe they are of a middle nature
betweene plants and liuing creatures hauing life and ſenſe, as if they

were compounded of both theſe natures together: ſo that they are
more then ſimple plants, and yet are not perfect liuing creatures, as
thoſe are to whom is attributed the cogitatiue or knowing ſoule.Of the cogitatiue. And
this is a ſoule and life, which not only giueth whatſoCuer the two former
imparteth to the creatures in whome they are, but alſo a certaine
vertue and vigour, as of cogitation, of knowledge, and of memorie,
that they may haue skil to preſerue their life, and know how to guide
and gouerne themſelues according to their naturall inclination. This
ſoule is proper to brute beaſtes, whome ſome thinke to be partakers
after a ſorte of reaſon, ſo farre foorth as it concerneth things belonging
to their nature. But wee will proceede no further at this time
in this diſputation: onely let vs note that they which make but three
kindes of ſoule or life, doe giue to brute beaſtes that which wee called
Senſitiue, comprehending them vnder that kinde of life, vnto
which they attribute the ſame vertue and vigour whereof wee nowe
ſpake, and which is diſtinguiſhed by others, from that kinde of
ſoule that giueth onely ſimple ſenſe vnto the creature.Of the reaſonable ſoule. The fourth
kinde of ſoule and life is that of men, which hath all whatſoeuer is in
the former kindes, and ouer and beſides that (which is moſt excellent)
it is partaker of reaſon and vnderſtanding: wherein it agreeth
with the life of Angelles, as wee will declare more at large in place
conuenient, and ſhew alſo the difference that is betweene them. For
this cauſe the ſoule of man giuen vnto him, is commonly called a
reaſonable ſoule, as all the former are called by mans agreeing to
their nature, as wee haue declared. Therefore ſeeing this kinde of
ſoule and life comprehendeth all the vertues and properties of the
reſt, it may bee called Uegetatiue, Senſitiue, Cogitatiue and reaſonable
altogether. But wee muſt note here, that there is great difference
betweene the ſoules of men, and thoſe other of which wee ſpake
before. For beſide that the ſoule of man is partaker of reaſon and
vnderſtanding, with all properties that are in the reſt, it hath that
common with the Angelles, who are ſpirites created of GOD to
liue a ſpirituall life without bodies, that it is immortall alſo as well
as they. But of this immortalitie wee hope (GOD willing) to
intreate at large heereafter, as alſo of the creation and proper nature
of the ſoule. In theſe two pointes then of vnderſtanding and
of immortalitie,The ſoule of man differeth from that of beaſts, in vnderſtanding and immortality. the ſoule of man doeth much differre from that of
beaſtes. For although they haue a ſoule that gyueth vnto them
life, motion, and ſenſe, with all other things touched by mee, yet
it is not partaker of vnderſtanding, nor of an immortall nature

as the Angelles and ſoules of men are, but it is of a mortall nature,
which endeth and dieth with the body. Therefore albeit the ſoule of
man hath in it whatſoeuer is in the reſt, beſide that which is proper
vnto it aboue the reſt, and that which it hath common with the Angelles,
neuertheleſſe it is called onely by the name of that thing which
is the principall, chiefeſt and moſt excellent in it: as alſo the like is
done with all the other kindes of ſoule and life. But mee thinkes we
ought to conſider more fully of that which man hath either common
or diuers in his nature from the ſoule of beaſts, and what are the proper
actions of the ſoule ioyned with the body, and how it is hindered
by the body without any change of nature. For the conſideration
hereof will greatly further our knowledge of the internall and ſpirituall
ſenſes, of which we are to diſcourſe, that wee may ſtep by ſtep
aſcend vp to the higheſt vnderſtanding and knowledge which the
minde of man can attaine vnto concerning the ſoule. Let vs therefore
heare AMANA of this matter.
            
            
               Of the two natures of which man is compounded: how the body is the
lodge and inſtrument of the ſoule: how the ſoule may be letted from
doing her proper actions by the body, and be ſeparated from it, and
yet remaine in her perfection. Chap. 22.
               AMANA. Albeit the greateſt excellencie of man, which farre paſſeth
that of all other liuing creatures, ought to be valued according
to the ſoule that God hath giuen him, differing from the ſoule of
all other liuing creatures, his body being mortall & corruptible as that
of beaſts is, yet there are other points of excellencie in the matter,
forme, and vſe of all the partes and members of which the body of
man is made, that are not found in any of the other, as wee haue ſufficiently
ſhewed in our former diſcourſes vpon this matter. Whereby
God would teach vs, that hee hath prepared and built this lodging
for an other manner of inhabitant then he built the bodies of beaſtes,The ſoule is the proper inhabitant of mans body.
euen for a ſoule that differeth farre from theirs. For ſeeing he maketh
nothing without good reaſon, or that is without his profit, he ſheweth
by the inſtruments prepared for the workeman whom he will ſet on
worke, what maner of one he ought to be, & what workes he hath to
make. And becauſe hee hath appointed workes and offices for the
ſoule of man, which he woulde not haue in the ſoule of brute beaſtes,
hee hath giuen to man ſuch members and inſtruments as hee hath not
giuen to other liuing creatures. As for thoſe inſtrumēts which he hath
common with beaſts, God hath otherwiſe diſpoſed and placed in his

bodie according to the office euery one hath, as wee may learne by
their diſcourſes.
               It is very euident,Two natures in man. that man is not onely this maſſe and lumpe of
skinne, fleſh, ſinewes, bones, and of ſuch other matter gathered altogether
in one bodie, whereof we haue ſpoken alreadie, but that there
is yet in him another nature whoſe ſubſtance is inuiſible, ouer and aboue
this bodily nature which we ſee. For experience ſheweth vs
what difference there is betwixt one and the ſame body when it is aliue,
and when it is dead. When there is no life in it, none of all thoſe
faculties and vertues whereof the former diſcourſe intreated, appeare
within it, as we ſee they doe ſo long as life dwelleth therein. And yet
then the body is not depriued of thoſe members which it had before
death, but keepeth them ſtill, vntill ſuch time as they corrupt and
waſte away of themſelues, and finally faile altogether for want of the
ſoule and life that ſhoulde preſerue and keepe them ſounde. In the
meane time we ſee, that they are without force, and as vnfit for vſe, as
if they were not at all, becauſe they want ſoule and life, which giueth
them vigour and ſetteth thē a working. It is very cleere then by death,
that the body hath no life of it ſelfe, nor any of thoſe faculties and vertues
which life bringeth with it, but that it receiueth them from another
nature then from it owne. And this nature is called Soule, hauing
ſundry offices in man, as we haue alreadie vnderſtood, and will hereafter
handle them more particularly and in order. But in the meane time
we muſt note, that although the ſoule be not bodily, neuertheleſſe it
vſeth a bodily nature and inſtruments which it receiueth from that,
for the performance of thoſe workes that are aſſigned vnto it: which
the ſoule coulde not doe without ſuch inſtruments as are neceſſary
thereunto. For as we heard in the former ſpeech, that among the creatures
of God ſome are ſpirituall, others corporall, ſo we are to knowe
alſo,Two ſorts of ſpirites. that among the ſpirituall creatures, there are two ſortes of ſpirits,
of which ſome, namely the Angels, were created to liue a ſpiritual life
agreeable to their nature,The deſcription of Angels. approching neerer to the nature and life
that is in God then any other: not being vnited or conioyned to any
bodies that belong vnto them, vnto which they ſhould giue life, as if
they were creatures compounded of body and ſpirite. Therefore we
call them not by the name of ſoules, as wee doe the ſpirites of men,
which God hath created to dwell in bodies, to giue them life, and to
be ioyned with them in one perſon made of two natures, to wit, of a
ſpirite and of a bodie.Mens ſoules haue alwaies life in the. Theſe ſpirites, which are alſo called humane
ſoules, can liue wel enough, and preſerue themſelues in their ſubſtance,
hauing life alwayes in them, euen after they are ſeparated from their

bodies. But the like cannot bee ſaide of the bodies, which cannot
liue, nor be preſerued in their ſubſtance without their ſoules and ſpirites.
Therefore Ieſus Chriſt ſayde,Matth. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4, 5. 
                  Feare not them that kill the bodie
and cannot kill the ſoule: but rather feare him that can destroy
both bodie and ſoule in hell. Wherefore albeit wee cannot ſee the
ſoule, neyther when it entreth into the bodie, and is ioyned vnto
it, nor when it dwelleth there, nor yet when it departeth; yet it followeth
not therevppon that it is not at all, or that it commeth
to nothing. For the effectes thereof ſhewe vs the contrarie, ſo
long as that life which it giueth to the bodie continueth therein. And
albeit wee ſee no more effectes of it, when it is ſeuered by death,
yet it followeth not therevpon that the ſame thing ſhoulde befall
it that doeth to the bodie, and ſo corrupt therewith. For it is ſo
farre from corrupting with the bodie, that it keepeth the ſame from
corruption ſo long as it is therein. And being ſeparated, no maruaile
if it effect no more that which it did in the bodie by thoſe inſtruments
which it had, becauſe it hath them no longer.
               Wherefore in this reſpect it is like to an excellent Woorkeman,The ſoule compared to a cunning workman.
who cannot labour in his occupation without ſuch inſtrumentes
as neceſſarily belong thereunto. Yet in the meane ſeaſon the
Woorkeman continueth alwayes in the ſame eſtate, and hath no
leſſe knowledge and arte in him without his inſtruments, then
when hee hath them, albeit hee vſe them not when they are away.
And although hee enioyeth both his inſtrumentes and his
arte, yet can hee not well vſe them, nor perfourme thoſe woorkes
which hee hath to make, if they bee not founde, but corrupted or
ſpoyled, as wee ſee in an inſtrument of muſicke. For if the chaunter
or Muſicion bee very expert in his arte,To a muſicion. and handle his inſtrument
as hee ought to doe, yet can hee neuer deliuer thoſe ſoundes,
tunes and harmonie which otherwiſe hee woulde, if his inſtrument
were good. And yet that ſhall not hinder the Muſicion from
beeing alwayes as skilfull and expert in his arte, as if his inſtrument
were very good and ſounde.To an inhabitant. Likewiſe if a man dwell in a
darke lodging, hee cannot ſee ſo well and cleerely, as in another
that is very lightſome: and yet hee ſhall not haue ſundrie
eyes, but the ſelfe ſame in both places. So that it followeth, that
his dimneſſe of ſight in the one lodging rather then in the other,
proceedeth not of any defect in his eyes, but of the houſe and habitation
wherein hee is. The like may bee ſaide of the ſoule lodged
in the bodie, whoſe actions and woorkes therein are much
hindered if it bee badly lodged, if any part of the lodging bee

not good, or if it want thoſe inſtruments and tooles that are neceſſary
for it. For although it hath the vertue of ſight in it ſelfe,
yet it cannot without eyes ſee thoſe thinges, which by meanes
of them it beholdeth. And although it hath in it ſelfe the vertue
to cauſe the handes and feete to mooue, and to ſet them on woorke
according to their office, yet it cannot doe thoſe woorkes by a
maymed and lame hande, which it will doe by him that hath
both his handes, nor cauſe a lame creeple wanting a foote or legge,
or hauing ſome defect in thoſe partes, to walke as well as an other
that hath all theſe ſounde and perfect. And a man may iudge
of my ſpeech, by that which happeneth not onely to them that
fall into an Apoplexie, but alſo to ſuch as haue ſome quaume about
their heart, ſo that they faint and ſowne, and are for the time
as it were dead: and yet afterwarde plucke vp their ſpirites, and
come againe to their former eſtate. But before they be reuiued, they
ſeeme as though they had no ſoule in their bodies, becauſe it is
not perceiued by the woorkes thereof, as it is when the bodie is
well affected. And this is chiefly to be ſeene in a ſtrong Apoplexie,
or falling ſickneſſe, in which the patient looſeth all motion and ſenſe.
Wherevpon it hath come to paſſe oftentimes, that many haue bene buried
for dead in that caſe, who were notwithſtanding aliue, and ſome
haue recouered and done well afterward, as wee haue many examples
both in common experience, and in hiſtories olde and newe. Nowe
whileſt the ſoule is thus letted from performing her actions by ſuch
inconueniences, who would not iudge, that ſhe were cleane extinguiſhed
with the body? Neuertheleſſe afterward when ſhe can vſe her inſtruments,
ſhee ſheweth plainely that the fault commeth not of her,
but of the inſtruments that faile her.The ſoule is the workeman, the body, the toole. Therefore when we ſpeak of the
ſoule and of the body, we muſt put the ſame difference between them
that is betwixt a Workman and his tooles, conſidering the nature of
both, and what they can doe both ioyntly and ſeuerally. For an inſtrument
hath neither knowledge nor force, nor vertue of it ſelfe, being able
to doe nothing alone, but onely ſo farre foorth as it is ſet on
woorke by ſome Woorkeman. But there is another reaſon in the
Woorkeman. For although hee cannot vſe his arte without thoſe
inſtruments that are neceſſary thereunto, yet hee hath alwayes abiding
within him that arte, power, force, and dexteritie, whereby he
woorketh. So that when wee ſpeake of the ſoule, wee are to conſider
what ſhee can doe of her ſelfe and of her owne nature without
the bodie, and what ſhee cannot doe without it. For we learne
in the holy Scriptures, that when Angels appeared to men,

becauſe they are ſpirits, and haue no ſpeech like to that of men, as being
bodileſſe and wanting inſtruments neceſſary for the framing therof,
therefore they tooke mens bodies to appeare and ſpeake to men
in and by them. No marueile then if the ſoule, which is created to
vſe the members of the body as inſtruments, ſpeaketh not without a
tongue, as it doeth with one, and with the other Organs of voyce
and ſpeech. Now foraſmuch as wee know, that the ſoule giueth life,
motion and ſence to all the body, and that it hath ſundry inſtruments
in the body, in which and by which it perfourmeth thoſe workes for
which they were created of God, we are now to conſider what facultie,
power and vertue it hath in euery part of the body. For albeit that
we cannot aſſigne to the ſoule, eſpecially to the ſpirite and vnderſtanding
which is the moſt excellent part therein, any certaine place of
lodging, as if it were incloſed within any one part, or within all the
partes of the body, neuertheleſſe we may iudge of the nature thereof
by thoſe inſtruments whereby it worketh, and by their nature, and by
the workes it produceth. And in this conſideration we haue a goodly
glaſſe,A glaſſe to ſee God in. wherein wee may contemplate God that is inuiſible, making
him viſible and knowne vnto vs by his workes: euen as the ſoule is
become as it were viſible, and ſheweth it ſelfe to vs by the bodie, in
which it dwelleth, and by the workes which it doeth therein. Therefore
let vs propound vnto our ſelues this whole viſible world as it were
one great bodie, then all the partes as members thereof: next let vs
conſider how the ſoule of all this great body, namely the vertue and
power of God worketh therein, and effecteth all the workes that are
done therein, according to that order he hath ſet therein, as the ſoule
worketh in the bodie of man and in euery member thereof. Thus doing,
as we know that there is a ſoule in the bodie, and another nature
beſide that, which is bodily, and which worketh therein, and this we
perceiue by the effects thereof: ſo let vs marke withall by the works
done in this viſible world, that there is another nature that effecteth
them, which being inuiſible differeth from all this world wee ſee, as
that which is farre more excellent, which filleth the whole, and by
vertue and power is in all the partes thereof, as a ſoule in a bodie. But
in propounding this glaſſe before our eyes, we muſt take heede, that
we fall not into their dotage, who haue thought and affirmed that the
worlde is the body of God,The world is not the body of God. and that himſelfe is the ſoule thereof. For
therevpon it would follow, that God is mortall and corruptible in regard
of his body, and that ſome part or other thereof would alwayes
corrupt, as we daily ſee corporall things doe. Againe, if it were ſo, God
ſhould not be infinite and incomprehenſible as he is: for the worlde

doeth not comprehend and containe him, but he all the world, whereof
he is the Creator, and by whom the world is and conſiſteth. Seeing
then the ſoule is the image of God in man, as the body of man is the
image of this great world, in which God worketh as the ſoule doeth
in the body of man, let vs cōſider how God hath diſtributed the powers,
vertues, and offices of the ſoule in the body, and in euery part thereof,
as he manifeſteth his glory, and vertue in all this viſible world, & in
all the partes of it.How the ſoule in the body reſembleth God in the world. For firſt they agree herein, that as there is but one
ſoule in one body, which is ſufficient for all the partes and members
thereof, ſo there is but one God in the world, ſufficient for all the creatures.
Next, if we cannot conceiue howe the ſoule is lodged in the
body, or how it giueth life vnto it, neither yet howe it worketh & diſplayeth
therein the vertues which it hath, but onely ſo farre foorth as
it teſtifieth the ſame by thoſe diuers effects, which we ſee and perceiue
in euery part and member thereof, no marueile then if wee cannot
with our eyes diſcerne or comprehend how God is throughout all, filling
heauen and earth, how he diſplayeth his power and vertue, howe
he worketh in all his creatures, and how hee guideth, gouerneth, and
preſerueth them by his heauenly prouidence. For if wee cannot comprehend
the creature, nor the nature thereof, how ſhall wee comprehend
the nature of the Creator? And if it be not in our power to know
the workes of God wrought in vs, neither the woorkes of our owne
ſoule,The abſurd collection of Atheiſts. how ſhall we know his works done in the whole world? And if
we be not able to vnderſtand or comprehend them, doeth it followe
therefore that he doeth them not? yet there are many that conclude after
that ſort. For they beleeue nothing but that which they are able to
cōceiue, know, & comprehend by their natural reaſon. And ſo, becauſe
they cānot know how ye ſoule being of a ſpirituall nature is ioyned with
the bodie, which is cleane of another nature, nor conceiue howe it is
lodged and worketh therein, therefore they muſt conclude that they
haue no ſoule, which worketh that in them that is there done. For
they ſee not, neither can they ſhewe howe it worketh by thoſe inſtruments,
which it hath in the bodie, but onely ſo farre foorth, as they
behold the worke. But we ſhall haue occaſion elſewhere to handle
this more at large. For this time let vs goe forward with our ſpeech
of the powers and faculties of the ſoule, conſidering firſt of the braine,
which is the principall inſtrument thereof, and the ſeate of the internall
ſenſes already mentioned by vs, of which wee are to be inſtructed
particularly.
            
            
               
               Of the Braine, and of the nature thereof: of the ſundry kinds of knowledge
that are in man: of the ſimilitude that is betweene the actions
and woorkes of the naturall vertues of the ſoule, and of the internall
ſenſes. Chap. 23.
               ARAM. The woorkemanſhip which God hath wrought in the
whole courſe of nature, aſ well in the nature of the heauens as of
the elements, of liuing things, of plants, mettals and other creatures,
doth vndoubtedly containe in it great miracles, and very excellent
and euident teſtimonies: which ſhewe plainely vnto vs, that
the nature of all things, yea of the whole worlde, commeth not by
fortune and at aduenture, but that they were created and ordeyned
by a more excellent nature then any can be found in al the world.
But there is not a more expreſſe and clearer image of the diuine nature,
then in that part of man, wherein are to be found thoſe great and
marueilous vertues and properties,Of the Animall vertues.
                   which are commonly called Animales,
as namely the thought, vnderſtanding, and knowledge of numbers,
and of order, reaſon, iudgement, memory, with the diſcerning of honeſt
things from thoſe that are diſhoneſt, of good things from bad,
together with the election or reiection of them. Therefore the contemplation
of theſe vertues and powers is very neceſſary for vs,
that by the knowledge of them wee may dayly learne to knowe
GOD the better, by that reſemblaunce and ſimilitude of his
wiſedome, which hee hath vouchſafed to transferre and to imprint
in mans nature: and that wee might bee induced thereby to
glorifie him: and that wee ſhoulde labour to the vttermoſt of our
power, to haue this image ſhine in vs more and more, and daily
to encreaſe in likeneſſe vnto the paterne from whence it is taken.
               Nowe let vs followe that diuiſion which wee haue alreadie made
of the ſundry faculties, vertues, properties and offices which the
ſoule hath in the bodie, namely, the Animall, Vitall and Naturall:
and that diuiſion alſo which wee made of mans bodie, vnto
which many attribute three ſeuerall partes, and call them bellies,
the firſt and higheſt of which they place in the head,Three bellies attributed to mans body. for the Animall
faculties and vertues: the ſecond, which is the middlemoſt
belly, in the breaſt and ſtomacke for the Vitall vertues: and the
laſt, from the Midriffe to the ſhare-bone for the Naturall faculties.
They vnderſtande by the firſt the whole brayne, which they
diuide alſo into ſundrie partes, and call them likewiſe Bellies, and

little Bellies. Wee haue alreadie hearde of the excellencie of the
head, of the place and ſituation thereof, of the goodly outward members
wherewith it is beautified, of the bones whereof it is made, and of
the couering wherewith they are couered, that the braine might haue
his conuenient lodging, and ſuch a one as is requiſite for the nature
and office it hath: that it might be wel fortified and defended on euery
ſide to preſerue and keepe it well, againſt all outward inconueniences
that might come vnto it: and to the end alſo it might haue neere
about it all thoſe ſeruaunts and ſenſes which it guideth and gouerneth,
and all thoſe inſtruments which it ſtandeth moſt in neede of,
both in regard of the workes it is charged with, as alſo for the purging
thereof. Foraſmuch then as it is lodged in the head, we are to know,
that as the head hath a certaine agreement with the heauens, and the
eyes with the celeſtiall lightes,Of the braine & of the image of God therein. as wee haue already touched, ſo is it
likewiſe with the braine. For it is of a more heauenly nature, and approcheth
neerer to the ſpirituall and diuine nature then any other part
of the whole body, as that wherein a man may finde all thoſe excellent
vertues and Animall powers, of which I made mention in the beginning
of my ſpeech, and which are no actions or workes of a brutiſh
nature. Whereof alſo it followeth very wel, that the Woorkemaſter
and authour thereof, cannot bee of a brutiſh nature, without vnderſtanding
and knowledge of order, of things honeſt and diſhoneſt, and
of good and bad. Which teacheth vs moreouer, that hee greatly eſteemeth
of the preſeruation of nature and of humane ſocietie, & deteſteth
whatſoeuer is contrary therevnto, ſeeing hee hath imprinted in man
ſuch an image of his diuine nature, as hee would not willingly haue defaced
& blotted out. Wherfore, although we cannot throughly know,
either the nature of the braine, or the actions thereof, or of the ſoule
which it ſerueth: yet yt which may come to our knowledge will greatly
helpe to confirme more & more this teſtimony of God and of his prouidence,
which is already imprinted in our hearts by the light and law
of nature. Therfore it were very good and profitable for vs, to conſider
diligently of that reſemblance of God, which euery one of vs beareth
in a very ſmall image, that wee may giue him thankes, and referre to
their proper ende all thoſe giftes and excellent partes, which he hath
placed in our nature. Wee are to note then for the firſt poynt,
that as GOD manifeſteth more excellently his diuine nature, and
the glorie of his maieſtie in the heauens, and in the higheſt partes of
this great viſible worlde, then he doeth in other partes more baſe and
terreſtriall,The braine moſt reſembleth the heauens. as we may eaſily knowe by the contemplation of them:
ſo dealeth hee with the head and brayne of man, which is as it

were the lodging of the internall ſenſes already named, which are
farre more excellent and noble then the outward ſenſes. For if liuing
creatures, and chiefly man, ſhould onely and barely apprehend thoſe
things that are before them, without any imagination, thought, or
conſideration of them, thereby to know how to chuſe or reiect them,
as they may be eyther profitable or hurtfull, it would not be greatly
profitable, to haue them preſented to the outward ſenſes. For
this cauſe God hath ioyned vnto them another facultie and vertue,
which is much more excellent and wonderfull then is the ſimple apprehending
of them. This facultie and power is giuen for the knowledge
of things, and that to the inſtruments in the brayne, as it appeareth
by experience in this, that according as the braine and the
partes thereof are well or ill affected, it is perceiued in the internall
ſenſes, of which they are the inſtruments, as wee will expreſſe more
plainely in the ſequele of our ſpeech. But concerning this preſent
matter in hand,Three kindes of knowledge. we are to note, that there are three kindes of knowledge.
The firſt knoweth thoſe bodies onely that are preſent before
it: the ſecond knoweth thoſe alſo that are abſent: and the third thoſe
things that haue no bodies. Wee ſee by experience, that although
plants haue a certaine agreement with other liuing creatures, namely
in this, that they inioy the ſame life with them, which we called before
the Vegetatiue or Nouriſhing life, neuertheleſſe, other liuing creatures
haue this more then they, that they know, ſee, heare, taſte, ſmell
and touch, which things are without them: whereas the whole life of
plants hath nothing but that which is within them, hauing no ſenſe
or knowledge outwardly.Of the firſt kinde of knowledge common to all liuing creatures. Concerning that knowledge, which taketh
notice onely of corporall things that are preſent before it, it is
the ſame that belongeth properly to the external ſenſes, of which we
ſpake before, and which are giuen by God to liuing creatures for
their preſeruation. For ſeeing they are bodily natures, and muſt liue amongſt
bodies, hee hath endued them with a certaine knowledge of
thoſe bodies, to the end they may deſire and follow after ſuch things
as are agreeable to their nature, and eſchewe that which is hurtfull.
Now that which is hidden within anything, is knowen by ſome outward
means. And therfore the bodily ſenſes were giuē vnto thē, to the
end that by them they might know whatſoeuer is external, being annexed
to the things that are perceiued. And although God hath not
giuen to all liuing creatures outwarde ſenſes alike, yet they that are
perfect haue all thoſe fiue ſenſes ſpoken of in our former diſcourſes,
by which they are able to perceiue and knowe all outward things, ſo
that nothing can bee found, which is not comprehended vnder the

knowledge of theſe ſenſes. Wherin God hath ſo prouided, that according
to mans iudgement we ſee, that all perfect liuing creatures ought
to haue iuſt ſo many & not one more or leſſe. For if they had leſſe, they
ſhould not be ſo perfect as they are: and if they had moe, they woulde
be ſuperfluous and for no vſe, at leaſtwiſe ſo farre forth as our ſmal capacitie
could conceiue, leauing in the meane while to the incomprehenſible
wiſedome, and infinite power of God, that which we are not
able to comprehend. For we owe him this reuerence, ſeeing he alone
knoweth all things that are neceſſary and expedient for all creatures.
Now beſides this outward knowledge of things preſent,Of the ſecond kind of knowledge. we ſee plainly,
that there is another knowledge within of things that are abſent.
For our owne experience teacheth vs, that euen then when our externall
ſenſes are retired and withdrawen from doing their dueties, the imagination,
thought, conſideration and remembrance of thoſe things
we haue ſeene, heard, taſted, ſmelt, touched and perceiued with corporal
ſenſes, remaine ſtill in vs both waking and ſleeping: as it appeareth
by our dreames, in which the images and reſemblance of thoſe
things which the bodily ſenſes perceiued waking, are repreſented to
our internall ſenſes when we are aſleepe. We ſee teſtimonies of ſome
part of this knowledge euen in brute beaſtes, which cauſeth them to
haue reſpect to ſuch things as they neede: but yet they haue it not as
men haue, who haue farre greater knowledge, & moe internal ſenſes
then beaſts,Of the third kind of knowledge. as being partakers of reaſon and vnderſtanding. The third
kinde of knowledge, which is of things that are not bodily, is the principal
effect of the vnderſtanding, which lifteth vp all the ſenſes of mā
to the cotemplation of the diuinitie, & of the ſpiritual and ſupernatural
things: which kind of knowledge is proper to man and to no other liuing
creature. Of this knowledge we will intreat more at large hereafter,
when we ſhal ſpeake of thoſe principall and moſt noble ſenſes of
the ſoule, namely vnderſtanding and reaſon. In the meane time that
we may the better know the facultie vertue and office of euery one of
thoſe internal ſenſes of which we will intreate, we are to vnderſtand,
that the ſoule worketh by them in their places, almoſt after the ſame
manner it doeth in the diuers kindes of her naturall faculties and vertues,
according to the nature of euery one of them. For this power and
vertue which we call naturall,
                  Of the naturall vertue and of the kindes thereof. and which before we ſaide was the third
facultie that continually worketh in man and neuer ceaſeth, is diuided
into three ſortes. The firſt is the vertue of nouriſhing, the ſecond of augmenting,
the third of ingendring: and theſe haue ſixe other vertues and
faculties common to them altogether. The firſt draweth vnto it, the
ſecond holdeth faſt, the third digeſteth, the fourth diſtributeth, the

fift aſſimilateth and incorporateth, that is, conuerteth into it owne ſubſtance
that which is diſpenſed vnto it, and ſo turneth it into the ſubſtance
of the bodie that receiueth it: the ſixt driueth forth whatſoeuer
is ſuperfluous. For the nouriſhment which the bodie receiueth would
doe it no good, vnleſſe it had ſome vertue in it to drawe the ſame vnto
it ſelfe, as alſo members and inſtruments meete for this woorke,
as we will declare more at large by the helpe of God, when we ſhal
ſpeake more particularly of this matter. Beſides, it is not enough
for the bodie to drawe foode to it ſelfe, but it muſt alſo retaine the
ſame. And becauſe the thinges that are taken cannot nouriſh the
bodie except they bee turned into the nature thereof, therefore they
muſt firſt bee digeſted and prepared by this meanes, as wee vſe to
prepare ſuch meates as haue neede of dreſſing before wee eate them.
But becauſe they are not ſufficiently prepared by this firſt dreſſing,
they muſt bee once againe dreſſed by the naturall heate that is in the
bodie, without which neyther the heate of the materiall fire, nor
the heate of the ſunne will ſerue the turne, vnleſſe this naturall heare
alſo doe his duetie. Nowe after the meate is thus digeſted and prepared,
it muſt bee diſtributed and parted to all the members, that
euery one may take ſuch nouriſhment as is meete for it. And becauſe
the matter is diuers in the whole compoſition of the bodie, as
namely, bones, griſtles, ligaments, ſinewes, arteries, veynes, fleſhe
and other kindes of matter whereof wee haue ſpoken heeretofore:
therefore muſt the food alſo be ſo conuerted in euery member, as that
it is to bee altered into a ſubſtance altogether like to euery ſeuerall
part it hath to nouriſh. Nowe foraſmuch as all that the bodie taketh
in for nouriſhment, is not fitte for that purpoſe, after that nature
hath taken that which may doe her good, ſhee reiecteth the
reſidue, wich is not onely not profitable, but alſo very hurtfull for
her, vnleſſe ſhee did caſt it foorth, and ſo diſcharge and purge
the bodie thereof. Nowe let vs ſee howe the like is wrought in the
brayne betweene the internall ſenſes and the Animal vertues.Of the Animal vertues and powers in the internal ſenſes. For
firſt there muſt bee ſome facultie and vertue that receiueth the images
imprinted in the ſenſes, the knowledge whereof is as ſingle
and plaine as may bee, becauſe it is onely of thinges that are bodily
and preſent, as I haue alreadie declared. This vertue is called Imagination,
                  Of Imagination.
or the Imaginatiue vertue, which is in the ſoule as the eye
in the bodie, by beholding to receiue the images that are offered vnto
it by the outward ſenſes: and therefore it knoweth alſo the things
that are abſent, and is amongſt the internal ſenſes as it were the mouth
of the veſſell of memorie,Of Memorie. which is the facultie and vertue that retaineth

and keepeth whatſoeuer is committed to the cuſtody thereof by
the other ſenſes, that it may be found and brought forth when neede
requireth. Therefore Memorie is as it were their treaſurer to keepe
that which they committe vnto it, and to bring it foorth in due time
and ſeaſon. Nowe after that the Imagination hath receiued the images
of the ſenſes, ſingly and particularly as they are offered vnto
it, then doeth it as it were prepared and digeſt them, eyther by ioyning
them together, or by ſeparating them according as their natures
require.
                     Of Fantaſie and Common ſenſe. They that diſtinguiſh Imagination from Fantaſie, attribute
this office to Fantaſie: others ſay it belongeth to the Common
ſenſe, vnder which they comprehend both the former faculties,
becauſe the office thereof is to receiue the images that are offered vnto
it, and to diſcerne the things as they are preſented by all the externall
ſenſes, and to diſtinguiſh them as they doe. Afterwarde it is requiſite,
that all theſe things thus heaped together, ſhoulde bee diſtributed
and compared one with another, to conſider howe they
may be conioyned or ſeuered, how one followeth another, or how
farre aſunder they are, that ſo a man may iudge what is to be retained
and what to be refuſed. And this office belongeth to Reaſon, after
which Iudgement followeth,Of Reaſon and Iudgement.
                   whereby men chuſe or refuſe that which
reaſon alloweth or diſalloweth. For it belongeth to reaſon to diſcourſe,
and memory afterward, as I haue alreadie touched, hath this
office to retaine and keepe all. Thus you ſee the ſimilitude and compariſon
that may be conſidered of betweene the actions and workes
of the naturall vertues of the ſoule, and thoſe of the Animal vertues
in the internall ſenſes: which may greatly helpe vs to the better
vnderſtanding of that which wee haue alreadie touched before, concerning
the ſpirituall foode of our ſoules, which properly belongeth
to the internall ſenſes. Nowe becauſe all theſe ſenſes, faculties
and vertues haue their inſtruments in the brayne, before we ſpeake
more at large and particularly of their office and nature, wee muſt
ſee howe theſe partes are placed in the head, and what veſſels and
members they haue in the brayne: and this ACHITOB ſhal teach vs.
            
            
               Of the compoſition of the Braine, with the members and partes thereof:
of their offices, and of that knowledge which ought to content vs, touching
the principall cauſe of the vertues and wonderfull powers of the ſoule.
Chap. 24.
               ACHITOB. The actions, faculties and vertues of the ſoule are ſo
high & obſcure, that their excellency far ſurmounteth ye capacity

of our vnderſtādings. For we haue no other ſoule aboue this yt effecteth
theſe works, whereby we might ſee and know the nature hereof, as by
this we come to the knowledge of corporall things, whoſe nature being
of leſſe excellencie & more baſe, our ſoule which is of a more high
and noble nature is able to know, comprehend and iudge of them. But
becauſe there is no nature in vs more high & excellent then our ſoule,
none can know it as it is,The nature of the reaſonable part in ye ſoule is hard to be knowne. but onely the creator that made it, eſpecially
that reaſonable part of the ſoule, wherein the image of God is more
liuely, and ſhineth more clearely then in the reſt. Therefore we may in
ſome ſort know by this part, facultie and vertue which is the chiefeſt,
what is the nature of the reſt, that are inferiour vnto it. But becauſe
there is no part in vs aboue that, we cannot perceiue and know how it
vſeth the internal ſenſes, with their veſſels and inſtruments, as by this
wee may iudge of the Vital vertue, which it ſheweth vnto vs in the
heart, and of the Nutritiue vertue which it diſcouereth vnto vs in the
liuer, and in other partes and members ſeruing to theſe faculties, as alſo
to the vertue of generation. Therefore wee muſt waite for a more
ample knowledge of our ſelues, chiefly of our ſoules, and aboue all of
that part which is moſt excellent in it, when we ſhall by the goodnes
and grace of God beholde face to face the creator that created it, and
ſhal behold and know our ſelues in him, and contemplate him in all
perfection and truth. But ſeeing we vnderſtood by the former ſpeech,
that all the Animal faculties and vertues, and all the internal ſenſes
(in the knowledge whereof we deſire to be inſtructed more at large)
haue their ſeates and inſtruments in the braine, let vs nowe conſider
howe theſe partes are placed within the head. And firſt of all wee
muſt call to minde what wee hearde before of the outwarde partes
thereof. As for that which is within, there are hollowe places, called
Little Bellies,
                  Of the litle Bellies of the braine. diſtinguiſhed by diſtaunce of place, as it were diuers
chambers in one building. Therefore there are certayne
membranes or skinnes both to diſtinguiſh them and knitte them
together, as alſo to preſerue and keepe them from all hurt and
danger.
               Nowe albeit theſe skinnes haue this office, yet it is much to
bee marueiled at, howe this whole frame can keepe it ſelfe and
continue ſo firme, as it were the roofe of a houſe or Church, conſidering
that the matter there is great, ſpongie, and very tender. The
firſt of theſe skinnes is a thicke couering, which is one of the chiefeſt
skinnes that belong to our body. The ſubſtance thereof is thicke,
and harder then any other skinne,Of D
                           ••
                        a mater, or the hard mother. and therefore it is called the Harde
mother, becauſe it bringeth foorth and preſerueth all the reſt.

The vſe and profite thereof is to wrap and foulde in rounde about the
whole braine, and to keepe it, that whileſt it moueth, it ſhoulde not
be hurt with the bone of the head, which is commonly called the skul.
For nature vſeth to ſet a meane betweene two contraries,Of the skull. as well to
knit them together, as to preſerue both the one and the other. Therefore
becauſe the bones of the skull are hard,Three vſes of the hard Mother. and the braine is ſoft and
tender, God hath placed this couering, which is of a middle ſubſtance
betweene them both, and is ſo tyed to the one and the other, that it
hangeth as it were betweene both, and toucheth neither of them, but
there is ſpace betweene them, to the ende that the motion of the
braine might be free without any let or hinderance. The ſecond vſe
thereof is, to ſerue for a paſſage to the veines and arteries, for the nouriſhing
of the braine and gouerning of the vitall ſpirites. Laſt of all, it
ſerueth to diſtinguiſh the whole brayne, firſt into two partes, namely
into that before, and that behinde: then into the right ſide and the
left. It is of this skinne whereof ſome men thinke Salomon ſpake, when
he made mention of a golden Ewer broken in the extremitie of olde age,
                  Eccles. 12. 6.
and ſo wee expounded it when wee intreated of the marrowe in the
chine-bone.Of Iia mater or ye godly mother. Beſides this skinne, there is another named the Godly
mother, which is fine and very ſlender, wouen of many veynes and arteries,
ſeruing not onely for it owne life and nouriſhment, but alſo for
that of the brayne. Neither doeth it onely compaſſe and wrap in the
braine round about, as the Hard mother doeth, but entreth alſo into
the bowels and windings thereof, to tie and knit it togither on al ſides.
As for the braine,Of the braine and office thereof. which is the fountaine and beginning of the ſinewes
and of the voluntary motion, and the inſtrument of the chiefeſt faculty
of the ſoule, namely, the Animal and reaſonable facultie, it is greater
in man then in any other creature, as that which filleth almoſt the
whole skull. I ſay almoſt, becauſe if it filled it full and wholly, the
motion thereof could not be perfect. His office and vſe is, to woorke
and make fine the Animal ſpirite, which is neceſſary for the whole
body, and to ſerue as an inſtrument to the facultie of reaſon, which is
the chiefeſt facultie and vertue of the ſoule. The firſt part of the
brayne retayneth the name of the whole,The diuiſion of the braine. beeing diuided into
two partes, namely into the right part and the left. The hinder
part is called the little brayne, and that in compariſon of the other
partes. So that when a man conſidereth the whole brayne,
hee ſhall finde within the ſubſtaunce thereof foure Ventricles, or
hollowe places, which are ioyned together by certaine wayes.
Nowe although wee cannot ſee with our eyes, nor well vnderſtande
and conceiue howe the ſoule woorketh by her inſtruments,

neuertheleſſe God giueth vs a certain entrance into ſome knowledge
thereof by the matter and forme which they haue. And therefore it
ſeemeth, that theſe litle bellies of the braine haue ſuch wayes from
one to another, to this ende that by them, the ſpirites that are
made and imprinted by the ſenſible and intelligible kindes and images,
might paſſe and bee communicate one with another.
Nowe becauſe they muſt not onely bee well wrought, but alſo
throughly cleanſed of all excrements, God hath created thoſe veſſels
and inſtruments, in which this woorke is to bee begunne, greater then
the others which are to receiue the ſpirites alreadie wrought and almoſt
perfected. Therefore the two firſt are the greateſt, hauing
their ſituation before, namely on each ſide one, and being in faſhion
like to two halfe moones. The thirde is vnderneath them right in
the middeſt of the braine. The fourth and laſt is vpon the bending
downe of the nape of the necke. As for the two firſt ventricles, they
are ſo conioyned the one with the other, that they end in one common
pipe or paſſage, like to two paire of ſmithes bellowes, And it
ſeemeth that God hath made them of that faſhion, as if hee meant
thereby to ſhew vs, that the ſpirite of the ſaide ventricles hauing receiued
his forme of the kindes and images propounded vnto it, is caried
by this paſſage into the middle ventricle or bellie. I omit to ſpeak
at large of many veſſels and inſtruments, which ſerue the brayne for
ſundry purpoſes, amongeſt the which there is one, which both the
Greeke and Latine Phyſicions call by a name that ſignifieth a Preſſe,
                  Of the preſſe and Ʋault in ye head.
becauſe the blood is preſſed into it for the nouriſhing of the braine:
and another called a Vault, both in reſpect of the faſhion and of
the vſe. For it is like a Vault or arch-roofe fet vpon three pillers,
and is as it were the roofe and couering of the middle ventricle,
that there might bee a more free and eaſie ſpace for the motion of
the Animal ſpirite that is made therein: and alſo that it might more
eaſily ſuſtaine and beare the greate quantitie of brayne, that leaneth
vnto eache ſide of it. I omitte alſo other inſtruments, which
ſerue in like manner to ſtrengthen and ſupport the partes thereof.
There is alſo one inſtrument made as it were of many pieces ioyned
together like little wheeles,Of the Like worme and of his office. which is called Like-worme, becauſe
of the likelihoode it hath with thoſe great white wormes
that are founde in rotten wood. It ſeemeth that this piece was
placed there, to bee as it were the porter, to ſhutte and open the
paſſage of the ſpirites that goe into the hindermoſt ventricle, to
the ende they ſhoulde enter therein meaſureable, and ſo auoyde

the confuſion of the memorie that is placed there: which otherwiſe
would happen if they ſhoulde enter in too ſodainly and too much at
once.Of the paſſage whereby the ſuperfluities of the brain are voyded. There is likewiſe a pipe; to euacuate the groſſe and thicke excrements
of the braine, aſwell by the roofe of the mouth, as by the noſe:
and therefore becauſe it reſembleth a litle baſin, or rather a funnel, it
is called by thoſe names.
               Moreouer, there is a pipe that paſſeth from the middle ventricle
to the laſt, which is as it were the chariot of the ſpirite, to paſſe
from one to another. In all which thinges, and in many others
particularly obſerued by Phyſicions and Anatomiſts, in this part
of the brayne, wee may note a woonderfull woorkemanſhippe
both for the varietie of inſtruments, and for their fitte application to
thoſe dueties that are aſſigned them. Wherefore wee may well
ſay, that it is in this part of man chiefly, wherein GOD doeth
moſt excellent manifeſtly his diuine nature, and the glorie of his
maieſtie. And this wee ſhall better perceiue, by conſidering particularly
and in order vnto which of the internall ſenſes all theſe
partes of the brayne are veſſels and inſtruments, in which the faculties
and vertues of the ſoule are contained and doc ſhewe themſelues.
But as was ſayde in the beginning of our ſpeech,None can here attaine to a perfect knowledge of the eſſentiall power of ye ſoule. let vs
not heere looke for a ſounde and perfect knowledge of that ſubſtantiall
power, whereby the ſoule effecteth ſo many marueilous
woorkes by the meanes of theſe ſenſes. For ſo high a ſecrete beeing
layde vp and hidde in wiſedome and trueth it ſelfe, cannot fall
within the ſmall capacitie of mans ſenſe and vnderſtanding, vntill
the light thereof bee purged from that corporall darkneſſe wherewith
it is couered and compaſſed about during this life.
               Neuertheleſſe by a diligent contemplation of that matter, which
wee haue noted woorthie of admiration, wee ſhall finde ſufficient
wherewith to content our mindes, by cauſing them to looke to
themſelues, in reſpect of that which it hath pleaſed GOD heere
to reueale and manifeſt two manner of wayes. Firſt, becauſe wee
may in ſome ſort take a viewe of nature, by ſearching out therein
thoſe thinges, of which ſhee doeth heere ſet before vs very euident
teſtimonies: euen thoſe thinges which may bee demonſtrated
(although groſſely) according to the capacitie of our dull vnderſtandings.
The ſecond way, which is the chiefeſt and moſt ſure, is by that
teſtimonie which himſelfe affoordeth vs in his worde. For let vs
not thinke that the minde can pronounce any thing for certayne, but
as it is directed by the teſtimonie of GOD, ſeeing the ſenſes which

hee hath giuen vs, come ſhort herein, and are not able to aſcende vp
ſo high. For the excellencie of this creature, and of the nature thereof
is ſuch and ſo great,The mind cannot perfectly know it ſelfe. that it cannot perfectly knowe and comprehend
itſelfe, eſpecially where it is of greateſt dignitie. So that
if wee deſire to haue certaine knowledge, whither ſhould we haue
recourſe in this defect of our ſenſes, but vnto him that is able to
certifie vs truely in this poynt. And who can teſtifie the trueth of
the worke, but the Workemaſter that made it, and therefore knoweth
it better then any other, and all the perfection that is in it?
Why then doe wee not yeelde to GOD that honour in a thing not
to bee comprehended by vs, which wee doe to men of whome
wee are well perſwaded in thinges which wee cannot knowe but
by their teſtimonie? For howe manie thinges doe wee beleeue of
which wee knowe not the cauſes, and for which wee haue no other
reaſon ſhewed vs, but onely the teſtimonie and authoritie of
men, whome wee iudge woorthie of credite, who notwithſtanding
may themſelues bee deceiued, and deceiue others. But GOD
cannot bee deceiued,God cannot deceiue, nor be deceiued. nor deceiue thoſe that giue credite to his teſtimonie,
which hee hath not ſo hidden from men, but that it is manifeſted
vnto them, yea hee hath choſen ſome amongſt them to teſtifie
the ſame from him to others. And if it hath pleaſed him to haue ſuch
witneſſes amongeſt them, a man may ſoone ſee that hee hath choſen
them in whome hee hath cauſed his image to ſhine moſt excellently,
and whome hee hath made more like to himſelfe, aſwell
by the reuelation of his holy ſpirite, in all thoſe excellent graces
and vertues wherewith hee hath indued them, as alſo by thoſe
holy and heauenly woorkes which he effecteth by them, whereby
hee hath as it were marked them with his ſeale to giue them authoritie,
and to cauſe them to bee acknowledged of all for his faithfull
witneſſes and ſeruants. If then wee deſire to haue certaine and
true witneſſes in any ſuch matter, where can we finde them ſooner
then amongeſt the Patriarkes, Prophets and Apoſtles, with all thoſe
Martyres and other holy perſonages,The teſtimony of the ſcriptures moſt firme. whoſe doctrine and life teſtifie
vnto vs howe farre they differ from other men? But aboue all,
howe highly ought wee to eſteeme the teſtimonie of the very
Sonne of GOD, who is to bee preferred before all others? Seeing
therefore wee haue ſo many faithfull witneſſes, let vs keepe
vs to their teſtimonie, wayting for that perfect light, and more
cleare and ample knowledge which ſhall bee reuealed vnto vs in
that heauenly glorie. In the meane time let vs conſider howe wee
are able to comprehende the infinite nature of the Creator of our

ſoule, ſeeing wee cannot conceiue the nature of the ſoule, which he
hath created: and let vs reiect thoſe dogges and hogges, thoſe Atheiſts
and Epicures, who iudge of God and of the ſoule of man ſo farre
foorth onely as they are able to knowe and comprehend by their naturall
ſenſe, whereby they ſee no further into the ſoule of man then
they doe into the ſoules of beaſts, whome themſelues reſemble. But
ſuppoſe they had no other teſtimony of the celeſtiall and diuine nature
of the ſoule, but that which it affoordeth vs daily by thoſe faculties
and vertues where with God hath endued it, and the effectes it
ſheweth vs, yet ought they to learne to iudge otherwiſe. Now to morrowe
it will be thy part, ASER, to beginne the particular handling of
theſe goodly internall ſenſes, whoſe veſſelles and inſtruments wee
haue conſidered of in this ſpeach: as alſo thou art to teach vs who be
the chiefe miniſters of the ſoule for all her actions.
            
            The end of the third dayes worke.
         
         
            THE FOVRTH
dayes worke.
            
               Of the ſeate of voluntary motion and ſenſe: of the office and nature of
the common ſenſe: of imagination and of fantaſie, and howe light
and dangerous fantaſie is: of the power which both good and bad
ſpirites haue to mooue it. Chap. 25.
               
                  ASER. The knowledge of many things is ſo natural to
men, that being borne with them, it is like to a light
attending vpon the minde, as the ſight doeth vpon
the eyes. For the knowledge of numbers and of order,
the Principles and beginning of Artes, the knowledge
and diſtinction of things honeſt and diſhoneſt,
proceede from ſuch a light. And when Saint Paul ſayeth, that the
Gentiles, and all that haue not receiued of God the Lawe of the two
Tables as the people of Iſrael did,Rom. 2. 15. haue notwithſtanding a Law written
in their hearts that doeth accuſe or excuſe them, no doubt but by this
Lawe hee vnderſtandeth that naturall knowledge which men haue
both of God, and of good, and euil, which iſſueth from a higher ſpring
then from the outward ſences, and which euery one hath for a ſchoolemiſtreſſ
within himſelfe, euen they alſo that would extinguiſh wholly

this light if they could. For although God hath imprinted many
ſimilitudes and teſtimonies of himſelfe in all creatures, whereby hee
manifeſteth himſelfe vnto vs, yet ſhould we know nothing more then
the brute beaſts do, if there were not a light in our mindes that cauſeth
vs to ſee and knowe them, and to conclude that which wee doe:
which light is not in beaſts, albeit they haue outward ſenſes as wel as
wee. But it is commonly ſaid, that there is nothing in the vnderſtanding,
which hath not firſt beene in the outward ſenſes: that is to ſay,
that it can know nothing, which is not firſt diſcouered and manifeſted
vnto it by them. But wee muſt vnderſtand that ſaying of ſuch things
as fall vnder their powers and faculties, which being knowen and
noted by the ſenſes, doe awaken and ſtirre vp the vnderſtanding,
which after by that vertue it hath in it ſelfe, proceedeth forward,
namely, from ſignes and effects vnto cauſes, from accidents to ſubſtances,
and from particular things to vniuerſalities. But let vs conſider
how.
               We muſt firſt remember the diuiſion which before wee made of
the animal facultie and power, and thereupon wee note that the ſenſitiue
and motiue powers,Of the ſeate of voluntary ſenſe and motion. whereby the ſoule, vſing the meanes of
the ſinewes and muſcles, giueth voluntary ſenſe and motion to all the
body, haue no ſpeciall place or ſeate in the braine, as the other internall
ſenſes haue, but are diſperſed throughout the whole ſubſtance
thereof. Concerning the chiefe power and facultie we were told before,
how ſome diſtinguiſh betweene Imagination, fantaſie, and the
Common ſenſe: and how others comprehend them all in one. But be
it that we ioyne or ſeparate them, let vs nowe conſider of the nature
and places of each of them.Of the Common ſenſe and of his office. The Common ſenſe is ſo called, becauſe it
is the firſt of all the internall fenſes of which we are to ſpeake, as alſo
the Prince & Lord of all the externall ſenſe, who are his meſſengers
and ſeruants to miniſter and make relation vnto him of things in common.
For it receiueth all the images and ſhapes that are offered and
brought vnto it by them, yea all the kindes and reſemblances of materiall
things, which they haue receiued only from without, as a glaſſe
doth: and al this for no other cauſe, but that they ſhould diſcerne and
ſeuer euery thing according to it owne nature & propertie, and afterward
communicate them to the internall ſenſes. For although all the
knowledge that is in the minde of man proceedeth not from the outward
ſenſes, as we ſhewed in the beginning of our ſpeach, neuertheles
they are created of God, to the end they ſhould ſend to the vnderſtanding
the ſimilitudes of things without, and be the meſſengers of
the minde, and witneſſes of experience: and alſo to the ende they

ſhould awaken and ſtirre vp the mind to behold and marke the things
that are without it, that by conſidering of them, it may iudge of, and
correct the faultes. Wee muſt then obſerue, that the externall ſenſes
haue no iudgement of that which they outwardly receiue but by
meanes of the common ſenſe, vnto which they make relation, and
then that iudgeth: ſo that they ende where that beginneth. In this
manner therefore as the Common ſenſe of all the internall ſenſes is next
vnto the external, ſo is it the meanes whereby they communicate one
with an other. For afterward it caryeth to the other internall ſenſes
whatſoeuer hath beene communicated vnto it by the externall. Now
after this ſenſe hath done his duety,Of Imagination and of Fantaſie. 
                  Imagination and Fantaſie execute
their offices, both which are taken by many for one and the ſame facultie
and vertue of the ſoule, but yet diſtinguiſhed from the Common
ſenſe: others ioyne them both with the Common ſenſe, becauſe theſe
three ſenſes, whether they be diſtinguiſhed or taken all for one, haue
their ſeates, veſſels, and inſtruments in the former part of the braine.
Therefore there will be no danger if we vſe theſe two names Fantaſie
and Imagination indifferently. For Fantaſie is deriued from a Greeke
worde that ſignifieth as much as Imagination: and it is tranſlated by
Cicero into a Latin word, which is as much as Viſion. This faculty therfore
and vertue of the ſoule is called Fantaſie, becauſe the viſions,
kindes, and images of ſuch things as it receiueth, are diuerſly framed
therein, according to the formes and ſhapes that are brought to the
Common ſenſe.
                  Dan. 2. 28, 29. Therefore Daniel called the dreame of Nebuchadnezzar,
the viſions of his head, which hee had vpon his bed, according to
the thoughts whereupon he muſed and fell on ſleepe. For although
this was a heauenly dreame, yet God vſed therein the internall ſenſes,
which hee had giuen to Nebuchadnezzar, vnto which hee repreſented
the image of thoſe things hee woulde haue him to vnderſtand
and knowe, as afterward they were expounded vnto him by
Daniel. Moreouer this facultie of the fantaſie is ſudden, & ſo farre from
ſtayednes,The giddineſſe of Fantaſie. that euen in the time of ſleep it hardly taketh any reſt, but is
alwaies occupied in dreaming & doting, yea euen about thoſe things
which neuer haue bin, ſhalbe, or can be. For it ſtaieth not in that which
is ſhewed vnto it by the ſenſes that ſerue it, but taketh what pleaſeth
it, and addeth thereunto or diminiſheth, changeth and rechangeth,
mingleth and vnmingleth, ſo that it cutteth aſunder and ſeweth vp
againe as it liſteth. So that there is nothing but the fantaſie will imagine
and counterfaite, if it haue any matter and foundation to worke
vpon, without which it can build nothing, as wee may iudge by that
which hath bene already ſhewed, namely that man can neither think,

imagine, or doe any thing elſe, of which hee hath not ſome beginning
and ground in nature and in the woorkes of God, from which
after hee hath his inuentions. But although fantaſie can doe nothing
without this gappe and entrance, yet it is a wonder to ſee the inuentions
it hath after ſome occaſion is giuen it, and what newe and monſtrous
things it forgeth and coyneth, by ſundry imaginations ariſing
of thoſe images and ſimilitudes, from whence it hath the firſt paterne.
So that in trueth,Fantaſie is dangerous. 
                  fantaſie is a very dangerous thing. For if it bee not
guided and brideled by reaſon, it troubleth and mooueth all the ſenſe
and vnderſtanding, as a tempeſt doeth the ſea. For it is eaſily ſtirred
vp not onely by the externall ſenſes, but alſo by the complexion and
diſpoſition of the body.It is very ſubiect to the motions of good or ill ſpirites. Heereof it proceedeth that euen the ſpirites
both good and bad haue great acceſſe vnto it, to ſtirre it either to good
or euill, and that by meanes vnknowen to vs. For as wee haue many
meanes to prouoke one anothers imagination and fantaſie, which are
not in beaſtes, neither can be comprehended by them; ſo theſe ſpiritual
natures (by reaſon of the agreement of their nature) haue one towardes
an other, which wee neyther knowe nor can comprehend,
whereby they haue acceſſe to mooue our fantaſie diuers wayes.
Wherefore as the Angelles haue meanes to repreſent to our mindes
the images of good, heauenly, and diuine things, both waking and
ſleeping: ſo can euill ſpirites greatly trouble them by diuers illuſions:
the proofe whereof wee haue in many,How ſorcerers are deluded by the Diuell. whome badde ſpirites find apt
and diſpoſed thereunto, and namely in ſorcerers, whoſe minde they
trouble in ſuch ſort by ſundry ſtrange illuſions, that they verily thinke
they haue ſeene, heard, ſpoken, and done that which the deuill repreſenteth
to their fantaſie, yea ſuch things as neither men nor deuilles
themſelues can poſſibly perfourme: and yet all that while they ſtirre
not out of their bedde, or out of ſome one place. But the diuell, hauing
once power ouer them, doeth in ſuch ſort print in their fantaſie
the images of thoſe things hee repreſenteth vnto them, and which he
woulde haue them beleeue to be true, that they can not thinke otherwiſe
but that it is ſo, that they haue done ſuch things, and that they
were awake when indeed they ſlept. For as God appeareth to his ſeruants
by heauenly viſions, both when they ſleep & when they wake,
and printeth in their mindes the images of thoſe things which it pleaſeth
him to reueale vnto them: ſo the diuell, who endeuoureth to
counterfait all the woorkes of God to deceiue men, hath his deuiliſh
illuſions for his viſions,The deuill counterfaiteth the workes of God. whereby he mooueth and troubleth the fantaſie
and mindes of thoſe, ouer whome hee raigneth through their
infidelity and wickedneſſe. Therefore it is very needefull, that men

ſhould recommend themſelues to God, to the ende theſe euil ſpirites
may haue no ſuch power ouer them, and that their iudgements may
be ſound to diſcerne the images of thoſe things, which hee repreſenteth
to their mindes, from all Diabolicall illuſions. And ſurely no maruaile
if wicked ſpirites ſo oftentimes deceiue men, when as Iuglers
haue ſo many waies to abuſe them, ſhewing them ſuch ſtrange ſights,
that if they were not wrought by thoſe kinde of men, a great many
woulde take them for miracles. Yea although they be done after this
manner, yet wee wonder thereat, being hardly able by the ſharpneſſe
of our wits to attaine to the knowledge thereof, ſo that many are perſwaded
that ſuch things cannot be done without the power of the deuill.
But let vs returne to our matter.Of the force of imagination. This imaginatiue power of the
ſoule, hath moreouer ſuch vertue, that oftentimes the imagination
printeth in the body, the images of thoſe things which it doeth vehemently
thinke of and apprehend, the experience whereof is very euident,
eſpecially in the longings and imaginations of women with
childe. Many times alſo we ſee ſome that can hardly goe ouer a bridge
without falling, by reaſon of the apprehenſion of the danger, which
they haue conceiued in their fantaſie and imagination. But which is
yet more ſtrange,The ſtrong fancie of women with childe. it falleth out oftentimes, that the fancies and imaginations
of great bellied women are ſo vehement and violent, that
vpon the bodies of the children they goe withall, they print the images
and ſhapes of thoſe things vpon which they haue fixed their fancies,
and vnto which by reaſon of their fancie, they are moſt affectionated.
Wee ſee examples heereof a great many continually. Neither
is it altogether without reaſon which wee vſe commonly to ſay, that
fancie breedes the fact which it imagineth. For wee ſee many fall into
thoſe miſhaps and inconueniences, which they imprint in their fantaſie
and imagination. Wee may alſo obſerue heere, howe wee are
prouoked to yawne and gape when wee ſee others doe ſo, and driuen
into a deſire of many things of which wee ſhould not haue dreamed,
vnleſſe wee had beene incited thereunto by the example of others, or
by ſome obiect preſented to our ſenſes, and prouoking vs thereunto.
Yea,Imagination preuaileth much in beaſts. this imaginatiue vertue can do much in beaſtes, as among other
things wee may ſee it in this, that they deſire rather to make water in
a puddle, or in a riuer, or in ſome other water, or vpon a dunghill or in
a ſtable, then elſe-where. For the things that are offred to their ſenſes
ſoone mooue their fantaſie and imagination, which afterward ſtirreth
them vp, either in reſpect of the agreemēt that is betwixt thoſe things,
namely, water and vrine, or becauſe of their cuſtome to doe ſuch a
thing in ſuch a place, which putteth them in minde and helpeth them

to doe it more readily, by reaſon of the imaginatiue vertue that is in
them.
               Nowe if imagination hath ſuch vertue in beaſtes, wee may iudge
alſo what it is able to do in the minde of man, which is a great deale
more quicke and ready.Good counſaile for euery one. Therefore we ought to eſchew all occaſions
of euill, that may be preſented to our ſenſes, to ſtirre vp our imagination
and fantaſie to wicked and diſhoneſt things. For one only wicked
looke, or one diſhoneſt ſpeach, is ſufficient to trouble our minds with
diuers imaginations and fantaſies. Which as it is well knowne to the
deuil, ſo knoweth he alſo how to giue occaſion, and to offer the means
of ſtirring all the ſtuffe in our fancies. But we keep ſuch bad watch in
this reſpect, that in ſteade of eſchewing occaſions of euil, we ſeeke after
them, and where we ſhould ſhut the doore againſt euill, we ſet it
wide open, that it may enter more eaſily into vs. Wherein wee followe
not the example of the Prophet, who prayed vnto the Lorde,
ſaying,Pſal. 119. 37. 
                  Turne away mine eyes that they beholde no vanitie: but wee rather
take a contrary courſe to whet our ſelues forward to all beaſtlineſſe.
Seeing therefore Imagination and Fantaſie haue ſo little holde
of themſelues, wee haue neede of an other facultie and vertue aboue
that, to be able to iudge of things imagined and perceiued by ſenſe (of
which wee haue hitherto ſpoken) and that is reaſon, the diſcourſe
where of I reſerre to thee, AMANA, as alſo of memorie, which is the
fift and laſt internall ſenſe of the ſoule.
            
            
               Of Reaſon and Memorie, and of their ſeate, nature, and office: of the
agreement which all the ſenſes both externall and internall haue
one with another, and of their vertues. Chap. 26.
               AMANA. They that haue curiouſly ſearched into the nature of
beaſts, haue found in them, eſpecially in ſuch as were moſt perfect,
as many externall and internal ſenſes as are in man: yea they perceiued,
that their braine and all the partes thereof, did not differ much
from that of men, whether wee reſpect the ſubſtance or the faſhion.
But all theſe excellent giftes of nature reach no farther in them,Beaſts ſearch only after corporall things belonging to this life. then
to the vſes of this preſent life, and the neceſſities thereof. For they haue
no reaſon giuen them to enquire after that which is good, to the ende
their will might followe and embrace the ſame. Moreouer their Good,
conſiſteth only in corporall things belonging to the bodie, which they

eaſily knowe and diſcerne, as ſtanding in neede of no other reaſon or
vnderſtanding to make enquirie after it, then of that bare knowledge
and naturall inclination that is giuen them. But the Good that belongeth
to man, is hidden in the ſoule and ſpirite. For this cauſe hee muſt
of neceſſitie enquire after it, that hee may come to the knowledge
thereof, leaſt he chuſe euill in ſteade of good, for want of knowledge
of his proper and true Good, and ſo be deceiued by the appearance of a
falſe Good, which is not ſo in trueth, but in opinion onely and by errour:
whereby the greateſt part of men are commonly beguiled, preferring
the ſuppoſed Goods of the body, before the true goods of the
ſoule, and temporall things before eternall. Therefore as our eyes
ſtand in neede of light to keepe vs, and to cauſe vs to ſee in darkenes,
ſo our ſoule and ſpirite hath neede of reaſon to guide it in the middeſt
of errour and ignorance, that it may diſcerne trueth from lying, the
true Good from the falſe, and that which is profitable from the contraty.
               This facultie and vertue of the ſoule, ſo neceſſary in man, and
which is able to iudge of things imagined and perceiued by the other
ſenſes, (of which we haue ſpoken before) to knowe whether they be
good or bad,Of the ſeate of reaſon and of his office. and what is to be embraced or eſchewed, is called, the
Iudging or diſcourſing facultie, namely, Reaſon, which is the principall
part and vertue of the ſoule, and beareth rule among all the other ſenſes.
For this cauſe he hath his ſeate by good right aſſigned him in the
midſt of the braine, as in the higheſt and ſafeſt fortreſſe of the whole
frame of man, to raigne amiddeſt all the other ſenſes, as Prince and
Lord ouer them all. For it is he that diſcourſeth and iudgeth of trueth
from falſhoode, that knoweth the agreement and diſagreement of
things, that ioyneth together whatſoeuer is to be ioyned, and ſeparateth
that which ought to bee ſeparated, that diſtinguiſeth things
which followe, or are contrary each to other, by comparing one
thing with another, by conſidering all circumſtances, by referring euery
thing whither it ought to be referred. It is requiſite therefore,
that he ſhould keepe his owne place, and not be ſhuffled vp and confounded
with imagination and fantaſie,
                  Reaſon is the iudge of Fanſie. of which hee is the Iudge to
approoue or condemne that which is good or euill, as alſo to correct,
to ſtay, and to keepe them in awe. For if reaſon intermeddle
and mingle it ſelfe with them, it will be ſo troubled, that it will not
be able to iudge as it ought of thoſe things, which they preſent and
bring vnto it, but will bee ſo carried away, as if it were depoſed
and thruſt out of it owne place, and as if maides ſhoulde rule their
Miſtreſſe, and take place before her. The like alſo happeneth vnto it,

when it is carried away with the affections, which it ought to rule,
moderate, and gouerne. But if it be vpright and ſound, after it hath
well conſidered and debated of the whole matter brought and laide
before it by the former ſenſes, it giueth ſentence as Iudge, and iudgeth
finally without appeale. For there is no other iudgement after that.
Hereof it is, that it hath a iudiciall ſeate in the middeſt, wherein being
placed it heareth ſutes and cauſes.Of Memorie and of his office. Beſides, it hath neare vnto it Memorie,
which is in place of a Notary and Secretary, and as it were a regiſter
booke, in which is entred whatſoeuer is ordained and decreed
by reaſon. For as we haue neede of ſuch a Iudge as reaſon is, to conclude
and determine finally in the minde, whatſoeuer may bee called
into queſtion and doubted of, ſo it is requiſite, that the concluſion and
definitiue ſentence ſhould be regiſtred in Memory, as it were in a roll
or booke of accompt, that it may alwayes be ready and found when
neede requireth. For what good ſhould we get by that, which imagination,
fantaſie, and reaſon conceiue and gather together, if it ſhoulde
all vaniſh away preſently through forgetfulneſſe, and no more memorie
thereof ſhould remaine in man, then if nothing at all had bene
done?Dan. 2. The like would daily happen to vs, that befel Nebuchadnezzar,
when God reuealed vnto him by dreame in the viſion of an Image,
what ſhould become of his Monarchie and Empire, and of thoſe that
followed him. For he remembred well, as himſelfe teſtifieth, that he
had dreamed a dreame, whereupon his ſpirite was troubled, whileſt
he laboured to vnderſtand it: but hee was ſo farre from knowing the
ſignification of his dreame, that he remembred not what he had dreamed
and ſeene therein. Where wee ſee, that his imagination and fantaſie
were ſo mooued by the image and viſion repreſented vnto them
in this dreame, that they imprinted in his memory how they had ſeene
a viſion, and that it was very ſtrange and woonderfull. Yea reaſon
it ſelfe iudged, that the viſion and image was of another nature, then
thoſe that are cōmonly in the imagination or fantaſie, or thoſe which
they coyne themſelues in ſleeping and dreaming, and that it had ſome
diuine ſignification. And this did reaſon imprint in the Kings memorie,
who remembred all theſe things generally, but when he beganne
to enquire of the matter more ſpecially and particularly, hee could not
call to minde the kinde and manner of his dreame, but confeſſed that
the thing was gone from him. Afterward, hauing heard and vnderſtoode
Daniel hee knewe that hee ſpake a trueth, and then remembred
what hee had dreamed and was gone from him, becauſe it was
not well imprinted in his memorie, but had paſſed ouer lightly by it.
Heere then wee ſee how neceſſary this ſecretary and regiſter, whome

wee call Memorie, is for the vnderſtanding and ſpirite, not onely
to marke lightly ſuch things as paſſe by it, but alſo to note and ingraue
them,Of the ſeate of memorie. as it were in tables or pillars of ſtone or braſſe. Therefore
hath God aſſigned his ſeate and lodging in the hindermoſt part of the
braine, to the ende that, after ſuch things as are to be committed vnto
it, haue paſſed by all the other ſenſes, they ſhould be committed to
it to keepe, as to their ſecretary. And for this cauſe that part of the
braine is leſſe moiſt, and moſt ſolide and firme, for two manifeſt and
apparant reaſons. Firſt, becauſe it is the fountaine of the marrowe in
the back: bone, of which thoſe ſinews are deriued that giue the ſtrongeſt
motions to al the members of the body. Therefore alſo it was requiſite,
that they ſhoulde bee of a more firme and ſolide matter then
the reſt that are taken from the ſubſtance of other partes of the braine,
which are not to ſuſtaine ſo great ſtreſſe. Secondly, foraſmuch as the
memory is as it were the Regiſter and Chancery Court of all the other
ſenſes, the images of all things brought and committed vnto it by
them, are to be imprinted therein, as the image and ſigne of a ring
or ſeale is imprinted and ſet in the waxe that is ſealed. Therefore it is
needefull that the matter of the inſtrument of Memorie ſhoulde bee
ſo well tempered,Cauſes of good and bad memories. that it be neither too ſoft nor too hard. For if it be
too ſoft, the images will be ſoone ingrauen, but they will not ſtay
there any long time, as they that will be quickely blotted out. Contrariwiſe,
if it be ouer hard, it wil be a harder matter to imprint them
therein. But when it is well tempered, it receiueth the images eaſily,
and keepeth them well. For the Memorie hath two dueties as well
as the hand, namely, to receiue and to hold faſt. Therefore they that
are of a moiſt braine receiue more eaſily into their memories that
which is offered vnto them, and they that haue a drie braine, retaine
and keepe better in memorie.
               But following that which wee haue hitherto ſpoken of all the internall
ſenſes,Of the agreement betweene all the ſenſes. we are nowe to obſerue and note this, that the knowledge
of things which wee haue by the outward ſenſes, is as if wee
beheld the ſhadowes of them: and that knowledge which wee haue
by the common ſenſe, by Imagination and Fantaſie, is as if wee did
looke vpon the images, which repreſent vnto vs thoſe things whereof
they are images moreliuely and cleerely then their ſhadowes can do.
And the knowledge wee haue by vnderſtanding, of which facultie
wee will intreate heereafter, is as if wee viewed, not onely the ſhadowes
or images of things, but alſo their very bodies, which is more.
And that knowledge which wee haue by reaſon is as if, beſides all
this, wee ſawe their effectes and vertues. Therefore there is as much

difference betweene the knowledge that a man may haue by euery
one of theſe faculties and powers, as there is betwixt the ſhadow, and
image, and body, and effects or vertues of one and the ſame thing,
to the end that the nature thereof may be throughly knowen. For all
theſe ſenſes and vertues of mans mind agree ſo well together, that as
the outward ſenſes ſerue the common ſenſe, ſo the common ſenſe ſerueth
Imagination, and imagination fantaſie, & fantaſie vnderſtanding
and conſideration, & conſideration recordation, & recordation conference,
and conference reaſon, and laſtly memorie ſerueth them al, as
they alſo ſerue memory. Therfore it is not without the great wiſdome
& prouidence of God, that the ſeate & ſhop thereof is in the hindermoſt
part of the head, becauſe it muſt looke to the things that are
paſt.The memorie is a ſpirituall eye. So that we haue in that part as it were a ſpirituall eye, which is
much more excellent and profitable, then if wee had bodily eyes
there, as wee haue before, or elſe a face before and an other behinde,
as the Poets fained that Ianus had. Thus we may learne by our ſpeach
what reaſon is, and the diſcourſe thereof, and how it cauſeth the nature
of man to approch in ſome ſort to that nature which is diuine and
heauenly, making man farre to excell all other nature in the world.
For it goeth from things knowen,Of the effects of Reaſon. to them that are vnknowen, and
deſcendeth from generalles to ſpecialles, and from them to particulars,
and mounteth aloft againe by the ſame ſteppes from one to another,
and compareth one with another. For after that Imagination
hath receiued the images and impreſſions of things offered vnto it by
the outward ſenſes, the conſideration of Reaſon followeth, which
enquireth of all that may be in the minde, of the plentie or want that
is there, and cauſeth it to returne to it ſelfe, as if it did beholde and
conſider it ſelfe, to take knowledge what it hath, or what it hath
not, howe much it hath, and of what qualitie and nature it is. After
this, reaſon draweth out and concludeth inuiſible things of viſible,
of corporall things it concludeth things without bodies, and ſeeret
things of plaine and euident matters, and generalles of particulars:
then it referreth all this to the vnderſtanding, which is the chiefe
vertue and power of the ſoule, and that which comprehendeth all
the faculties thereof, as wee will diſcourſe in place conuenient, yea,
that which finally reſteth in the contemplation of the ſpirite,Of vnderſtanding and contemplation. which
is the ende of all enquirie of trueth, and as it were a ſetled and aſſured
view of all thoſe things that haue beene culled out by reaſon, and
receiued and approoued by iudgement.
               Heereof it is that wee ſay,A double diſcourſe of Reaſon in man. there is a double diſcourſe of Reaſon
in man, whereof the one conſiſteth in ſpeculation, hauing Trueth for

the ſcope and ende thereof, and goeth no farther after it hath founde
the trueth. The other conſiſteth in practiſe, and hath Good for his
ende, which after it hath found, it ſtayeth not there, but goeth on
to Will, which is an other power of the ſoule of great vertue, as wee
wil declare heereafter, and is giuen of God to man, that hee ſhould
loue, deſire, and followe that which is good, and hate, eſchew, and
turne from euill. But theſe things ſhalbe handled more at large in the
ſequele of our ſpeeches.
               Now to reſume and finiſh this preſent matter, as wee learne that
man by the diſcourſe of reaſon that is in him, lifteth vp himſelfe aboue
the outward ſenſes, yea aboue Imagination and fantaſie, and knoweth
well that hee is incloſed within the body as in a priſon, which
neuertheleſſe can not altogether hinder him from vnderſtanding and
contemplating the things hee ſeeth not: ſo alſo hee vſeth the helpe
of Memorie to keepe and retaine in his minde whatſoeuer hee hath
knowen by any of the ſenſes, eyther externall or internall. Therefore
is the Memorie compared to a Picture.Memory compared to a picture. For as a Picture by the
ſight of the eyes giueth the knowledge of that which is painted therein,
ſo is it with Memorie, by the ſight of the minde endewed with
vnderſtanding and knowledge: for it doeth not onely looke vpon
things ſimply as beaſts doe, but conſidereth of them, and diligently
enquireth into them, and hauing found them, it placeth them in the
Memorie, and there keepeth them. And the better to haue them in
memorie, it often thinketh and meditateth of thoſe things, it turneth
and toſſeth them to and fro, that they may bee the better imprinted
therein.What remembrance is. For this cauſe ſome Philoſophers attribute vnto man beſide
memorie both recordation and remembrance, which is one recordation
vpon another, whereby we call to mind that which was ſlipped out of
it. For it commeth to paſſe oftentimes, that that which before we haue
ſeene, heard, and knowen, and euen kept a while in our memory, is eſcaped
vs and ſo forgotten, that we thinke of it no more then if wee
had neuer vnderſtoode or knowen it, neither ſhould we euer remember
it, vnleſſe ſome body did put vs in minde of it, or ſome euident
token made vs to thinke of it, Some things alſo there are, which albeit
they are not cleane gone from vs, but are ſomewhat better regiſtred
in our memory, yet wee cannot readily remember them and
bring them foorth, without great and long inquirie. Therefore muſt
the minde turne ouer all the leaues of his Booke or Regiſter of
Memorie, or at leaſtwiſe a great part thereof to finde them out, as
if a Chauncellour or Secretary ſhoulde ſearch all his Papers and
Regiſters,The minde compared to the keeper of Rolles. and all his Rolles of Chauncery, vntill hee had found

that which hee ſought for. And wee ſee among our ſelues, what
notes and obſeruations wee vſe, that they might bee as it were a memoriall
booke vnto our memories. You ſee then why ſome haue attributed
to man both recordation and remembrahce, thereby to put
a difference betweene them, and bare memorie without any other
conſideration, which they ſay is in beaſtes, who forgetting preſently
what they perceiued by their ſenſes, when they ſee thoſe things againe,
that in ſome ſorte putteth them in minde thereof, then they
call them to minde as if they had knowen them before. But nowe
that wee vnderſtand the nature, office, order, and ſeates of the internall
ſenſes of the ſoule, that all may be more caſily perceiued, I thinke
wee ought to ſhewe by ſome familiar examples, howe a man may
knowe, that theſe internall ſenſes are ſo diſtinguiſhed, diſpoſed, and
ordained, and that they haue their ſeats and inſtruments in the braine
in ſuch ſort as wee haue already ſpoken. Let vs then heare ARAM
diſcourſe to this purpoſe.
            
            
               That the internall ſenſes are ſo distinguiſhed, that ſome of them may be
troubled and hindered, and the rest be ſafe and whole, according as
their places and instruments aſſigned vnto them in the body are
ſound or periſhed: and of thoſe that are poſſeſſed with Deuilles.
Chap. 27.
               ARAM. Howſoeuer it pleaſed God to enrich man with heauenly
gifts and graces aboue all viſible creatures, yet foreſeeing the
future pride of mankinde, he alwayes and in all things gaue him great
matter of humilitie and modeſtie, to the end that they which knowe
howe to profit thereby, ſhould neuer forget the graces receiued from
the goodneſſe of their Creator, and ſo neuer become vngratefull towards
him. And truely wee ought to be very carefull to keepe our
ſelues from pride and vaine boaſting of the ſenſes of our mind and ſpirite,
which God hath giuen vs, howe ingenious, excellent, and diuine
ſoeuer they be: yea, rather humbling our ſelues before his Maieſtie,
wee are to yeelde him continuall thankes, and pray that it would
pleaſe him to keepe them alwayes ſound and ſafe, and to augment his
gifts and graces in our minds. For he ſheweth vs by experience euery
day, that hee can trouble our mindes with a ſmall matter, yea the
mindes of thoſe that are moſt witty, prudent, wiſe, and skilfull, and
the moſt diuine ſpirites that can be found amongſt men. Howe many
doe wee ſee daily, yea many times of thoſe that are admired of all

for their ſingular wit,A good admonition to humble vs. great prudence, knowledge, wiſedome, vertue,
credite, and authoritie, that looſe the vſe of their ſenſes and vnderſtanding,
inſomuch that they doe not onely growe fooliſh, as if they
were become litle children againe, but alſo haue leſſe direction & gouernement
in them, then the poore beaſts haue? And how many doe
we ſee, that become frenſie & mad, behauing themſelues as it were
brute and ſauage beaſtes, and continue in that eſtate vnto the death?
The conſideration of theſe things will cauſe vs to vnderſtand better
that which wee haue heard of the diſtinction, diſpoſition, order, and
ſeates of the internall ſenſes of the ſoule, and of their veſſelles and inſtruments.
Wee haue then daily great teſtimonies and very euident
ſignes heere of in frantike and bedleme perſons, in ſuch as are oppreſſed
with melancholy, in furious folkes, and in all thoſe that are beſide
themſelues. For there are ſundry ſortes of them, ſome being
troubled but in one part of the minde onely,Diuers kindes of madde folkes. hauing the other partes
ſound: ſome more troubled then the former, and otherſome that
haue nothing ſound and vntouched. Heereof it is that wee ſee ſome,
whoſe imagination and fantaſie onely are out of frame, inſomuch
that they iudge a thing to bee that which it is not. Therefore they
conceiue ſtrange opinions, which they imprint ſo deepe in their
braine,The imagination troubled. that they are not eaſily rooted out againe. Some imagine
and beleeue that they haue hornes: others that they haue a ſerpent,
or ſome other beaſt in their bodies: others that they are become water
pottes or glaſſes, and thereupon are afraide leſt ſome body ſhould
iuſtle againſt them, and breake them in peeces. There haue beene
ſome that were ſo verily perſwaded in their fancie, that they were
dead, that they coulde neuer after be brought to eate or drinke anie
thing but dyed in that opinion. And yet all theſe did vnderſtand
very well and conceiue what was ſaide vnto them, and remembred
it as well afterward. Whereby it appeareth, that they haue reaſon
and memorie more ſound then imagination and fancie, as Galen and
other Phyſicions mention many examples of ſuch, and our ſelues do
often ſee ſome like to thoſe of whome I ſpeake nowe. There are others
alſo,Reaſon troubled. that haue their imagination, fancie, yea and their memorie
alſo ſound, but their reaſon is ſo troubled, that they can not vnderſtand
nor conceiue that which is tolde them, nor make any diſcourſe
themſelues, neither examine or conclude anie thing by reaſon. Galen
alleadgeth an example of one, who after hee had caſt downe
out of a windowe certaine glaſſes and violles, with other veſſelles of
brittle matter, threwe downe a little childe, which was ſlaine. This
man knew well enough that hee helde in his hand glaſſes and other

veſſelles of ſuch matter, and that the childe hee threwe downe was a
childe, and he remembred well what hee had ſeene, heard, and done:
but hee had not his wittes ſo aduiſed nor his reaſon ſo ſtayed, as to
diſcourſe, conſider, and iudge thus with himſelfe, that bee coulde
not caſt thoſe veſſelles downe but hee muſt breake them, conſidering
the matter whereof they were made, nor the childe, but hee
muſt kill it. I omit many other examples I coulde alleadge to this
purpoſe, which many skilfull Phyſicions ſpeake of in their bookes,
becauſe I meane not to touch this matter but as it were by the way.
Concerning them that looſe their memory,The memory loſt. and yet keepe the
other partes ſound, wee haue many examples of them. For there
haue beene plagues ſometimes, whereby many haue loſt their memories
in ſuch ſort, that they cleane forgat whatſoeuer they knewe
before, yea their owne names, their parents and their friends. And
the diſeaſe called the Lethargie bringeth with it forgetfulneſſe and
want of memorie, as the name it ſelfe giueth vs to vnderſtand in the
Greeke tongue, from whence it is taken. Therefore wee ſee howe
the internall ſenſes of the ſoule may be periſhed ſeuerally one without
an other: whereupon we may well conclude, that as they may
bee all ſound together, ſo they may all bee periſhed at one and the
ſame time. Example heereof is daily ſeene in many that are frenſie
and madde, hauing all their ſenſes troubled, which ſometimes they
had ſound and perfect. Yea there are ſome that behaue themſelues
like dogges and wolues as Phyſicions report, becauſe they thinke they
are transformed into thoſe kinde of beaſts, by reaſon of the violence
of Melancholy, and of that malady, which is thereupon named by
the Graecians Cynanthropie and Lycanthropie. It pleaſed God to puniſh
Nebuchadnezzar with this kinde of chaſtiſement,Dan. 4. to beate
downe his glorie and pride, when his wittes were taken from him,
in ſo much that hee did not thinke himſelfe to be a man any more but
a beaſt, and ſo indeede liued in the fieldes like a wilde beaſt. Nowe
therefore wee may knowe by the ſequele of our ſpeach, and by the
examples which wee haue alleadged, howe the internall ſenſes are
diſtinguiſhed one from an other in ſuch ſorte that euery one hath his
office apart, as the members that are in a mans body. And if any deſire
to knowe more particularly in what parte and place of the braine
euery particular ſenſe hath his lodging and ſeate for to exerciſe his office
in,How a man may 
                        ••
                     dge of the 
                        •
                     eats of the ſenſes. wee may iudge heereof ſomewhat by experience, which
teacheth vs, that they who haue receiued ſome blowe, or are vexed
by ſickeneſſe about the former ventricles of the braine, haue then
common ſenſe, their imagination and fantaſie periſhed, when the

inſtruments about thoſe partes eyther ſuffer or haue ſuffred violence.
If the ſame happen to the middle ventricle, the like is ſeene in the
defect of reaſon: if to the hindermoſt ventricle, the memorie faileth,
as it hath befallen many vpon the receit of a blowe in that
place: yea, which is more then that, experience doeth not onelie
ſhewe this when blowes and diſeaſes light vpon the head and braine,
but it appeareth alſo in the compoſition and making of all that part of
the body. For according as the head ſhall be either well or ill framed
and proportioned either before, in the middeſt, or in the hinder part
thereof, or in all three together, ſo ſhall a man finde greater excellencie,
moderation, or defect, in the internall ſenſes, which exerciſe
their offices in the head, as well particularly as generally. Therefore
it is not without reaſon ſayde in our common ſpeach of him that
hath a good ſpirite, ſenſe, and iudgement, that his head is well
made: and contrariwiſe, that his head is ill made that wanteth theſe
things. For whatſoeuer the inhabitant or workeman is that laboureth,
the lodging in which hee dwelleth, or the tooles and inſtruments
which hee vſeth, are of great moment to further or hinder him
in his worke.
               But nowe that we are in hand with frenetike perſons, and haue
ſaide before, that good and ill ſpirites haue great meanes, and ſuch
as wee can not comprehend, whereby they mooue the imagination
and fantaſie of men,Of ſuch as are poſſeſſed with Deuilles. it ſhall not be altogether fruitleſſe, if we ſpeake
ſomewhat of them that are poſſeſſed with ſpirites. For there are
ſome who thinke not, that the Deuilles in their very ſubſtance enter
into the bodies or ſoules, heartes or mindes of men. I ſpeake not
heere of ſuch as thinke there is neither God, nor Angelles, nor Deuilles,
but euen of them that beleeue all theſe thinges: who neuertheleſſe
thinke, that euill ſpirites trouble the heartes and mindes
of men onely by prouocations, temptations, and illuſions. Others
there are, that referre all the madneſſe of Lunatike folkes to naturall
cauſes, as if they proceeded either from melancholike or cholerike
humours or ſome ſuch like cauſes, as frenſineſſe, madneſſe, and furie,
or ſome ſuch diſeaſes whereby men are carried beſide themſelues.
True it is, and cannot be denied, that many are thought to be poſſeſſed
with Deuilles, when in deede they are nothing ſo. For there are
ſome counterfeit crankes, as many haue beene taken with the maner,
who vpon ſome occaſion haue by meere knauery fained themſelues
ſuch. And ſome alſo there are that bee but melancholy madde,
and carried away by ſome diſeaſe of the braine: but becauſe their
melancholie and furie is very violent and ſtrange, ignorant people

ſuppoſe they are poſſeſſed with ſome ſpirite. Notwithſtanding wee
may not doubt, but that euil ſpirits, deſirous to hurt men both in their
goodes, bodies, and ſoules, vſe al the meanes and occaſions they can
poſſibly inuent and finde out, to execute their malice, when it pleaſeth
God to giue them leaue.The power of euill ſpirites. For they can driue forward and mooue
the hearts and mindes of men, and ſet them in ſuch a fury, that euen
their reaſon and iudgement wil be wholly confounded and as it were
cleane extinguiſhed. Heereupon it commeth, that many being caried
headlong with ſuch madneſſe, teare, and kill themſelues, or their
owne wiues, children, or others, whereof we may daily ſee many examples.
Neuertheleſſe we ſay not, that the naturall light which God
hath giuen them is wholly put out in them, much leſſe in thoſe that
are not ſo farre gone: but the Deuill doeth ſtirre them forward with
ſuch violence, that they are as it were taken perforce from themſelues,
when they are forſaken of God. Which examples ought to admoniſh
vs to call vpon God inceſſantly, that hee woulde gouerne vs by his
ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, who is come to deſtroy the woorkes of the Deuill,
that ſo the light of reaſon and of iudgement may not be darkened
or put out in vs, and that our heartes be not ſo poſſeſſed and puſſhed
on by Satan, that wee ruſh our ſelues through a deuiliſh furie againſt
the will of God. And this did our Sauiour teach vs to demaund
of him when hee ſaide,Matth. 26. 4
                        •
                     . and 6. 13. 
                  Pray that yee enter not into tentation:
and when hee taught vs to ſay, Leade vs not into tentation, but deliuer
vs from euill, For if euill ſpirits durſt ſet vpon thoſe that were ſounde
both in body and ſoule, after that manner which I haue ſpoken of,
according to that power that was giuen them, wee may not thinke
that they ſpare ſuch as are ſicke: eſpecially thoſe that are already
troubled in braine and beſide themſelues. For the Deuill, as our mortall
enemie, continually watcheth for thoſe occaſions that are fitteſt,
and moſt for his aduantage to hurte vs withal. Therefore he intrudeth
himſelfe amidſt our diſeaſes and miſeries, chiefely when there is
weakeneſſe of braine ioyned therewith, vſing againſt vs thoſe weapons,
which hee findeth in our owne nature, as alſo thoſe which his
owne malice and rage miniſtreth vnto him, whereof wee haue a very
profitable example in the hiſtorie of Iob. Hee declareth plainely by
his ſpeach, that if the feare of God had not kept him backe, he had rather
haue ſtrangled himſelf, then liued in that miſerable eſtate wherein
he was. And no doubt, if God had not helde a ſtrong hand ouer
his ſeruant Iob,
                  Iob 7. 15. and brideled the rage and euill will of Satan that perſecuted
him, the Deuill had had great power ouer this good man,
to haue perſwaded him to make away himſelfe deſperately, as Achitophel
                  
and Iudas did. Nowe if the Deuill preuailed ſo farre with
Iob, by that leaue which God gaue him to afflict and trouble him,
wee may well thinke what hee can doe with the wicked and reprobate,
whome GOD wholly abandoneth and giueth ouer vnto
him. We haue a very plaine example in Saul, of whome it is written,
that the ſpirite of the Lord went from him,
                  1. Sam. 16. 14, 15. & 314. and that hee was giuen ouer
of the Lord to an euill ſpirite, which troubled and vexed him, and that
in the ende he fell into ſuch deſperation, that hee vtterly forſooke God
and ſlew himſelfe. We may know alſo by that which the holy Euangeliſts
haue written of ſuch as were poſſeſſed, and were healed by Ieſus
Chriſt and by his Apoſtles, what power euill ſpirites haue ouer thē,
whileſt God ſuffered them to execute their rage and furie. A man may
eaſily iudge, that ſuch perſons are not onely out of their wits through
ſickneſſe, but that euill ſpirites poſſeſſe them. For he ſo troubleth their
minde and ſpirite, that they knowe 
                     〈◊〉
                   more what they doe, then the
verieſt bedlems that can be. And although hee horribly vexeth their
bodies, yet they feele not his torments, or if they doe feele them, yet
they cannot abſtain from vexing thēſelues. So that it is eaſily knowen,
that the deuill is in them, and that it proceedeth not onely of a ſimple
frenzie, or melancholy humour, ſeeing ſome of them haue done ſuch
things as coulde not poſſibly bee perfourmed by the power of man,
whereof ſome of thoſe are witneſſes, whom the holy ſcripture rehearſeth
vnto vs. Wherefore it is out of all queſtion, that euill ſpirites haue
wrought both in them and by them. Therefore we haue good occaſion
offered vnto vs by all that hath beene hitherto ſpoken, to humble
our ſelues before God, and to pray vnto him continually, as wee ſaide
in the beginning of our ſpeech. For being as we are, we ought ſtill to
praiſe God, who diſtributeth his graces as it pleaſeth him, and that by
a moſt exquiſite kinde of iuſtice.Good inſtructions for all men. And when wee ſee thoſe that are
infirme and beſide themſelues, ſome for a certaine time, and by fittes,
others continually and after diuers manners, let vs not mocke or deſpiſe
them, but rather haue pitie and compaſſion ouer them, pray to
God in their behalfe, and ſuccour them aſmuch as wee can, acknowledging
the grace of God towards vs in keeping vs from ſuch inconueniences,
and beſeeching him to preſerue and keepe vs continually.
For whatſoeuer befalleth others, ſhoulde as it were hang before our
eyes, as often as it pleaſeth him to beate them with ſuch ſcourges,
which we our ſelues haue no leſſe deſerued then they that are beaten,
yea oftentimes a great deale more. The Lord ſtriketh whome it pleaſeth
him, that by them others might take inſtruction. Therefore if we
cannot profite by ſuch teaching, nor learne at other mens coſt to feare

and honour him, to call vpon him and to giue him thankes, it is to bee
feared that he will ſend vs aſmuch, that ſo we may learne at our owne
charges. Yea and then alſo he is very gratious vnto vs, if he ſuffer vs to
haue our vnderſtandings, to knowe how to profite by his roddes and
chaſtiſements, and giue vs not wholly ouer into the handes of Satan
our Aduerſarie. But enough of this matter. And nowe that wee haue
ſeene the nature and office of the internall ſenſes of the ſoule, with
their ſeates and inſtruments, the ſequele of our ſpeech requireth (as I
thinke) that we ſhould intreate of vnderſtanding and will, which are
two faculties and vertues in the higheſt and moſt principall part and
power of the ſoule of man, and in regard of which it is properly called
by the name of a reaſonable ſoule and life: as wee ſhall preſently
learne of ACHITOB.
            
            
               Of the reaſonable ſoule and life, and of vertue: of the vnderstanding
and will, that are in the ſoule, and of their dignitie and
excellencie. Chap. 28.
               ACHITOB. Although beaſtes without any iudgement and reaſon
follow after yt which they conceaue to be agreeable to their
nature, and eſchew the contrary, according as their natural inclination
driueth thē thereunto: yet they paſſe not thoſe bounds of nature which
God hath ſet them, nor violate the lawes thereof. Wherby we ſee, that
through a ſecret ſenſe of nature, they draw alwayes towards God their
Creator, in that their nature bendeth ſtill towardes that which God
hath appoynted to bee the chiefe Good, vnto which they can attaine.
And no doubt but God hath giuen them ſuch inclinations to
bee as it were rules to direct them to that which is their proper and
naturall Good, which conſiſteth onely in corporall thinges belonging
to their bodies. Nowe if hee bee thus carefull for beaſtes, we
may not thinke that hee hath depriued Man of ſuch a benefite, but
that hee hath alſo giuen him his inclination to leade him to his proper
Good, and to the trueth which in reſpect thereof is neceſſarie
for him. For what likelihoode is there, that ſuch a woorkeman as
God is, woulde create Man, the moſt excellent creature vnder heauen,
in worſe eſtate not onely then beaſtes, but alſo then all other
bodily creatures, which are nothing in compariſon of the excellencie
which is in him, who notwithſtanding following their naturall
diſpoſition,Pſal. 148. 8. 
                  Prayſe GOD and fulfill his worde, as the Pſalmiſt
ſaith.
               As therefore God hath ordayned and prepared a farre greater Good
                  
formen then for beaſtes, and hath layde vp the ſame in his ſoule and
ſpirite, ſo hath he giuen them the meanes to enquire and finde it out.
But the difficultie that is in finding it out, proceedeth through their
owne fault. For the darknes of ignorance and error, which ſinne hath
brought into their minds, is that which hindereth them, & which had
not taken holde of them, if mankind had continued in the perfection
of his firſt nature. Neuertheles, what defect ſoeuer there be, yet we ſee,
that in the minde of man there ſhineth alwaies this naturall light that
is giuen vnto him aboue that which beaſts haue, I mean Reaſon, which
ſerueth to guide the ſoule and ſpirite amidſt the darkneſſe of errour and
ignorance, to the ende they may be able to diſcerne trueth from falſehood,
and the true Good from the falſe, as we ſee the light ſerueth the
eyes to keepe vs, and to cauſe vs to ſee in darkeneſſe. Therefore we
ſayde before, that there was a double diſcourſe of reaſon in man;
whereof the one is Theoricall and Speculatiue,
                  Of contemplation and action. which hath Trueth for
his ende, and hauing found it goeth no farther. The other is Practical,
hauing Good for his end, which being found it ſtayeth not there, but
paſſeth forward to the Will, which God hath ioyned vnto it, to the end
it ſhould loue, deſire and follow after the Good, and contrariwiſe hate
eſchew and turne away from euill. Therefore when the queſtion ariſeth
of contemplation, reaſon hath Trueth for her vtmoſt bounds, and
when ſhe is to come into action, ſhe draweth towardes Good, and hauing
conferred together that which is true and good, ſhe pronounceth
iudgement. So that reaſon conſidereth of thinges with great
deliberation, and beeing ſometimes in doubt which way to take,
ſhee ſtayeth and returneth as it were to her ſelfe, and maketh many
diſcourſes before ſhee iudge and conclude. But ſinne hath ſo troubled
our ſpirite, that theſe naturall rules, which ſhoulde euermore
cauſe vs to encline to that which is right and good, are greatly
depraued and corrupted. Neuertheleſſe there remayneth in vs a
ſmall remnant of that great Good, which teſtifieth ſufficiently vnto
vs what loſſe and damage wee receiued by our fall. Therefore
both the internall and externall ſenſes ſerue vs not onely for the good
of the bodie, and for this life as they do to beaſts: but alſo for the good
of the ſoule, and helpe vs to lift vp the minde higher, to ſeeke for a
better life, and for a greater Good, then can be found among all the
creatures,The ſenſes of 
                        •••
                     ſerue for ye good of his ſoule. and in which alone the minde findeth true felicitie, agreeable
to ſuch a nature as it ſelfe is. Heereof it commeth, that
it cannot content it ſelfe with that wherwith beaſts are contented, nor
ſtay there where they ſtay. For after the ſpirite is ſomewhat ſetled
vpon that knowledge, which it hath by his imagination and fantaſie,

he lifteth vp himſelfe higher by the meanes of reaſon, namely to the
vnderſtanding of ſpirituall and diuine things. For hee knoweth well,
that becauſe he is as it were ſhut vp in an obſcure priſon, and compaſſed
about with darkneſſe, he is hindered from attaining to the vnderſtanding
and knowledge of many things whereof he is ignorant, and
can neither ſee nor know that which he would ſo neerely, cleerely, and
perfectly as if hee were at greater libertie, nor vſe that naturall vigour
that he hath, being in this priſon of the bodie. In this ſort doeth man
conſider of himſelf and of his nature; and from that knowledge which
he hath of the higheſt and moſt excellent things in nature, there ſpringeth
in him a loue towardes them, inſomuch that the ſpirit aſcendeth
vp and attaineth vnto God, who is the authour and Creator of all. For
this cauſe there ariſeth contention betwixt reaſon and fantaſie.Contention betwixt the ſpirite and fantaſie. For imagination
and fantaſie, being neerer to the corporall ſenſes, draw the
ſoule to thoſe things that are bodily: but reaſon and the ſpirite pricke
it forwarde, and cauſe it to lift vp it ſelfe to more excellent things. For
the ſpirite (which the Philoſophers expreſſe by Vnderſtanding) mounteth
vp vnto thoſe things that cannot be knowen nor comprehended
of imagination and fantaſie, nor of any other ſenſe. Moreouer it keepeth
fantaſie brideled▪ and bringeth it into the right way, which otherwiſe
wandreth farre wide, and entereth into many turnings and windings.
Neither doeth the ſpirite wholly yeeld vnto euery preſent profite,
or decline the contrary, but calleth things paſt to remembrance,
coniectureth and foreſeeth things to come, and ſearcheth out what is
true and what falſe to giue iudgement thereafter, and then to followe
after or to eſchew that which ought to bee followed or fledde from.
Thus you ſee what the reaſonable ſoule bringeth to men, which is
not in beaſtes nor in their ſoule. Beſides, from this vigour and nature
of the ſpirite, ſpeech proceedeth, which being his meſſenger, is wanting
vnto beaſtes, becauſe they are voyde of reaſon and vnderſtanding,
in regard whereof ſpeech is giuen, as wee haue already hearde.
Therefore we vnderſtand by the reaſonable ſoule and life, ſuch a ſoule
and life as hath counſaile,What is meant by the reaſonable ſoule. iudgement and reaſon, and which was created
to this end, that knowing God her Creator, and louing him in reſpect
thereof, ſhe might honour and ſerue him, and finally by degrees
attaine to immortall life and happineſſe, which is appointed for her
ende. For as nothing is more excellent then reaſon, whereof God
hath made man partaker, ſo there is nothing more beſeeming reaſon
then to know, loue, and honour God, ſeeing there is nothing greater,
more excellent, or that may be compared vnto him. Therefore as
man differeth from brute beaſts in reſpect of reaſon, wherewith God

hath indued him, ſo he differeth from them in that he is capable of religion,
created and borne thereto, which conſiſteth in the things alreadie
touched. But beaſts are not capable of any kind of religion, being
altogether voyde thereof: as on the other ſide, there is no man but
he hath ſome ſenſe of it.Proofe that the ſoule of beaſts is mortall, but of men immortal. Whereby wee may gather a good argument,
that beaſts are not onely voyde of reaſon, but alſo that their ſoules are
mortall, and the ſoules of men immortall. For the fountaine and fruit
of the religion and ſeruice of God, conſiſteth not in this mortall life,
and therefore it muſt needes bee in ſome other that followeth. And
for this cauſe Reaſon, which is ſo great and excellent a gift of God in
man, is not beſtowed vpon vs for things of ſo ſmal price and ſo tranſitorie
as theſe are, which we vſe and enioy in this life, and in which it is
wholly buſied: much leſſe for thoſe whereby the life of beaſtes is preſerued,
but in regarde of theſe thinges which I haue nowe declared.
Therefore as God hath not giuen ſuch a life to ſtones as he hath giuen
to trees and plants,What is in plants aboue ſtones, and in beaſts aboue plants, & in men aboue beaſts. nor yet ſenſe, imagination and fantaſie to trees and
plants, as he hath done to beaſts: ſo hee hath not graunted reaſon to
beaſts, as he hath to men, and that not without iuſt cauſe. For as it is
enough for ſtones in regarde of the perfection of their nature, to bee
heauie and ſuch as they are, and ſufficient likewiſe for trees and plants
to haue a Vegetatiue ſoule, ſeeing they want not that which beaſtes
haue more then they: ſo beaſtes ſtand not in neede of that which men
haue aboue them. For it ſufficeth for the preſeruation and defence of
their life and beeing, that they haue ſome kinde of cogitation ioyned
with imagination and fantaſie: although they want reaſon, which is
not neceſſary for them as it is for men, for the cauſes already ſpecified:
and chiefly becauſe they were not created by meanes of the knowledge
of God and of true religion to come to a better life, then their
brutiſh life is.The end of m
                        •
                     n
                        •
                      being. Therefore as man is created, to the end that the light of
the knowledge of God might ſhine in him, and that God might communicate
with him his wiſedome and goodneſſe, ſo he would that the
ſoule of man ſhoulde bee an euident teſtimonie of himſelfe. For this
cauſe it was ſaid in his creation, that God made man after his owne image
and likeneſſe, as wee haue already heard. Seeing then there are
in the reaſonable ſoule ſo cleere and excellent teſtimonies of God, and
that by it eſpecially the difference appeareth betweene man & beaſts,
as alſo in the diuers gouernments of their liues, it behoueth vs to con
                  
                     •
                  ider
thereof very diligently. And albeit this glaſſe of God cannot be
ſo euidently ſeen, as thoſe that are made of ſteele, or of glaſſe and lead
by the hand of man, to repreſent the image of our bodies, neuertheles
the actions and works of the ſoule doe plainly ſhew, that there is ſuch

a power and vertue in vs, which God hath giuen vs more to vſe for
our benefite, then to know it, and that for the cauſes already touched
by vs.Only God knoweth the ſoule perfectly. For the true and perfect knowledge thereof belongeth to God
onely, who being aboue it, hath created and giuen it, and will cauſe vs
to know it better when we ſhalbe in that eternall light, in which wee
ſhal know thoſe things that are nowe hidden from vs. In the meane
time let vs in this life conſider of and diſtinguiſh the actions and
workes of the ſoule, whereby we are ſeuered from beaſts, and which
being very euident teſtimonies of God in vs, gouerne the life of man,
and bring foorth all honeſt ſciences and artes. We haue ſpoken alreadie
of the powers and vertues of the ſoule which by the vſe of corporall
inſtruments labour and manifeſt themſelues: but it appeareth
euidently, that there is in man another higher power, becauſe
we haue many actions and doe many woorkes,What actions men doe, which beaſts cannot. which beaſtes cannot
performe nor imitate. For man hath the knowledge of numbers
and can reckon, hee vnderſtandeth not onely particular things, but
alſo generall and vniuerſall things, he diſcourſeth, that is, gathereth
and concludeth one thing of another, and that very farre, he inuenteth
artes and diſpoſeth them, he iudgeth of his owne reaſons and diſcourſes,
and marking his owne faults, he correcteth them, he changeth his
intents and purpoſes, he diſcerneth vertues from vices, & honeſt things
from thoſe that are diſhoneſt: finally hee deliberateth by a long diſcourſe
of reaſon. As for beaſtes they haue not theſe thinges common
with vs, as they haue the vſe of the ſenſes, as of ſeeing, hearing,
ſmelling, taſting, and other ſuch like things, wherein they oftentimes
excell vs in many reſpectes. For many of them haue theſe
ſenſes more ſharpe then wee haue. And although they haue ſome
imagination, fantaſie and apprehenſion of thinges offered to their
bodily ſenſes, yet that holdeth but for the preſent, and in the place
or fielde where the thinges are offered vnto them.How beaſts diſcourſe. The like may
bee ſayde of thoſe diſcourſes of reaſon, which many thinke are in
the perfecteſt of them. For they haue ſome kinde of diſcourſe, in
that they can paſſe from one thing to another. But all their iudgements
are but of particular things, neyther doe they aſcend higher. In
like maner, they know not things abſent, nor paſſe from thē to others,
whether it be from things abſent to them that are preſent, or from preſent
things to thoſe that are abſent. For they take or leaue incontinently
thoſe preſent and particular things which they know, and make a
ſtop there without any further diſcourſe. So that this intellectuall and
reaſonable power is proper to man onely, and is the higheſt and moſt
ſoueraigne vertue of the ſoule of man. And although the internall

ſenſes are ſeruiceable vnto it, as they are ſerued of the externall ſenſes,
neuertheleſſe it hath proper actions, vertues and motions, which
it can and doeth exerciſe without the helpe of bodily inſtruments,
when it is ſeparated from the bodie. And euen while it is in the bodie,
it is ſometime rauiſhed, as if it were altogether out of it, as it
hath often fallen out to holy men,Ezech. 37. 1. who haue beene rauiſhed in ſpirite
in the contemplation of celeſtiall and diuine things, and that by
the reuelation of the ſpirite of God:Act. 10. 3, 10, 11. 2. cor. 12. 2, 3. inſomuch that Saint Paul teſtifieth
of himſelfe, that Hee was taken vp into the thirde heauen and
into Paradiſe, not knowing whether hee were in the bodie or out of the
bodie, but GOD hee knewe. Wee will conſider therefore in this
chiefe and moſt ſoueraigne part of the ſoule, two faculties and vertues,
namely the 
                     Ʋnderstanding and the Will.
                  Of the Vnderſtā
                        ding and of Will.
                   For it beeing ſo that
man is created to attayne to that ſoueraigne and eternall Good, which
God hath propounded vnto him, therefore hath GOD giuen
him the power and vertue to wiſhe for that Good, to the ende hee
might deſire to applie and ioyne himſelfe vnto it. This power and
vertue is called Will. But the ſoule cannot haue this appetite and
deſire, if firſt it vnderſtand or know not that Good which it ought to
deſire and followe after. For this cauſe hath God giuen vnto it another
power and vertue, which wee call Vnderstanding. And foraſmuch
as our ſpirite ſtayeth not alwayes in one thought, but diſcourſeth
and goeth from one matter to another, it had neede of a receptacle
and ſtorehouſe, wherein it may lay vp the firſt thoughtes when others
come, as if it placed them in a treaſurie, that they ſhoulde
not bee loſt, but might bee founde out, and called foorth when
neede ſhoulde require.The memory cō
                     pared to the rolles of Chancerie. But wee learned by our former ſpeech, that
this office apperteyneth to memorie, which is as it were the Rolles
of a Chauncerie court, in which the ſeales of images framed by
the thought, are imprinted, and vpon which the vnderſtanding
doeth looke as often as it pleaſeth. And euen as it ſerueth to the
other internall ſenſes, vnto which it ſucceedeth in order, ſo alſo it
ſerueth the Vnderſtanding and Will.
               
               Concerning the Vnderſtanding, if we conſider it generally, it comprehendeth
the whole minde: but beeing taken more ſpecially, we
meane a certaine particular office thereof. For it vnderſtandeth the
the thinges that come from without, as we conceiue them: then it laieth
vp that which it hath vnderſtoode in ſome little cofer by it ſelfe
for a time, out of which it may take them againe when neede requireth.
This repetition and taking againe, which is as it were an inquiry,
and ſearching out, is called Conſideration: & from thence it commeth

to recordation and remembraunce, and ſo conferreth together the
thinges it hath vnderſtood, and compareth them one with another:
which being done, a diſcourſe thereof is had with others, after which
diſcourſe it determineth and iudgeth what is true and what falſe, what
good and what euill. Then doeth the Will chooſe that which is good,
and refuſeth the euill. And as we come from the vnderſtanding to the
will by theſe degrees, ſo we muſt aſcend vp by the ſame ſteppes, euen
from the laſt to the firſt, namely from Will to Vnderſtanding. For
Will doeth not follow after or refuſe any thing, which the iudgement
hath not firſt determined to be good or euill: and the iudgement decreeth
nothing before it hath taken aduiſe of reaſon, and reaſon aduiſeth
not before ſhe haue conferred the things one with another, and
throughly examined them. Neither can this conferring bee without
conſideration, nor conſideration without requiring that of Memorie,
which was committed vnto it to keepe, and the memorie will keepe
nothing ſafe, but that which it hath firſt knowne and vnderſtood. So
that the reaſonable ſoule hath all theſe things, namely Vnderſtanding,
Will and Memorie. And vnder this facultie of vnderſtanding, there is
ſimple and particuler intelligence,What degrees are betweene Iudgement and Will.
                   after which Conſideration followeth,
next Recordation, then Conferring, and diſcourſing after that, next
Iudgement, and laſt of all Contemplation, which is as it were the reſt of
the ſoule and ſpirite. Nowe theſe things being ſo excellent and wonderfull,
and ſomewhat obſcure withall, deſerue to bee diſcourſed of
more at large, and to be vttered more clearely. And therefore before
wee goe to any other matter, wee ſhall doe well to conſider of the diuerſity
that is found in the operations and diſcourſes of the Vnderſtanding,
according to that gift of light which is in it, and what is the end
of all diſcourſes. Prepare therefore thy ſelfe ASER to intreate of
this matter.
            
            
               Of the varietie and contrarietie that is founde in the opinions, deliberations,
counſailes, diſcourſes and iudgements of men, with
the cauſe thereof: and of the good order and end of all diſcourſes.
Chap. 29.
               ASER. All things whatſoeuer can be rehearſed, are either of this
mutable and temporary nature, or of the other, which is immutable,
perpetuall and aboue that nature. If the queſtion be of the firſt,
either the varietie and change is ſuch, that no certaine rule or determination
can be giuen, or els there is a perpetuall tenour and conſtancie
in them according to their inbred inclination, through a ſtedfaſt and

continuall order of nature, which is alike in all, according to their natures
and kinds. If the variety and change be very vncertaine, there can
no certain ſcience and knowledge be had of them, nor any determination
ſet down ſo general, but that there wilbe alwaies ſome exception.
For touching the firſt ſort,What knowledge we may haue of variable things. we can haue no ſure knowledge of things
that are infinite, and that haue infinite alterations. And becauſe particularities,
and particular things are infinite in regarde of our capacity,
there can no entire and certaine knowledge be had of them all in ſpeciall.
As for generals, howbeit they alſo are variable, yet ſome rules
may well bee giuen of them, of which the arte followeth afterward:
and yet no ſuch certaine rules, but often it falleth out otherwiſe, as we
may ſee in many artes, and in ſundry experiences. For although it
bee ordinarie for women to loue their children, yet there are ſome
that murder them cruelly. So that howſoeuer it bee very common
to loue them, yet it falleth not out ſo alwayes. Therefore wee may
well ſay of a woman, if ſhee bee a Mother, it is very like, that ſhe
loueth her childe, becauſe it is naturall. But wee cannot conclude
certainely, that it is alwayes ſo, ſeeing wee often ſee the
contrarie. There are alſo oftentimes many ſignes, which haue
ſuch apparant ſignifications, that they ſeeme to ſignifie things vnto
vs certainely enough, wherein neuertheleſſe we are deceiued, as
it falleth out often in our ſuſpicions & opinions, which are not grounded
vpon certaine and firme arguments, and moſt euident reaſons.
Wherefore the knowledge that wee may haue of ſuch thinges cannot
properly be called ſcience,In what things coniecture taketh place. but onely coniecture, opinion, probabilitie
or likelihood, becauſe there is great ſhew of trueth, but yet not
very certaine.
               Nowe albeeit the nature of thinges bee mutable, yet if they alwayes
keepe one and the ſame tenour and conſtancie, which continueth
alike alwayes to it ſelfe, a man may haue a certayne knowledge
of them,Of what things ſcience or knowledge may be had. and that is called ſcience: example whereof wee
haue in celeſtiall bodies and in naturall thinges, which alwayes
keepe one and the ſelfe ſame order and nature, both in the elements,
and in liuing creatures, in plantes alſo and ſuch like things.
For as for the heauens, although they bee mutable creatures, yet
they haue alwayes certayne courſes and motions, which followe
their accuſtomed order without ceaſſing. In like manner we ſee that
all theſe thinges mentioned euen nowe, are diſtinguiſhed in their
kindes, and haue their naturall meanes whereby they are mainteyned
and preſerued. For it is naturall in man to beget man, and by
this meanes mankinde is preſerued. The ſame may be ſaide of other

liuing creatures, of plantes alſo and of ſuch other things which neuer
faile in keeping their order. We haue this light in vs by nature. Wherfore
when I ſee a childe or a man, I may alwayes ſay certainly, that no
painter hath painted and faſhioned him in that ſort, and that it is none
of his worke: but that he was begotten and bred of a man and a woman
that were his parents. For God doeth not nowe create men and
women, as he created Adam and Eue in the beginning, and as wee
ſhewed in our firſt diſcourſe, but by the common order which he eſtabliſhed
at that time, and in regard of which he inſtituted the holy eſtate
of Mariage,In what things wiſedome taketh place. as we will intreate hereafter. But if the queſtion be
concerning immutable, perpetuall and ſupernaturall things, we haue
neede of another light, that is greater and more agreeable to their nature,
which is giuen to men by diuine inſpiration. This light or knowledge
is called Sapience or Wiſedome. For this cauſe Saint Paul writing
to the Epheſians ſaith,Epheſ. 1. 16, 17, 18. 
                  I ceaſe not to giue thankes for you, making mention
of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lorde Ieſus Christ the father
of glory, might giue vnto you the ſpirite of wiſedome and reuelation through
the knowledge of him: that the eyes of your vnderstanding may bee lightened,
that yee may know what the hope is of his calling, and what the riches
of his glorious inheritance is in the Saintes. Wee ſee here how the Apoſtle
ioyneth together wiſedome, reuelation and illumination of the
vnderſtanding,The author of wiſedome. the authour of which hee maketh the ſpirite of God,
by whoſe reuelation and lightning we obtain true wiſdome, of which
the wiſedome of the world is not capable. And therefore afterward he
calleth this wiſedome,Ephe. 3. 19. 
                  the knowledge that paſſeth all knowledge. For although
by our naturall light wee haue ſome obſcure knowledge of
God, as we haue already touched it, yet it cannot ſo farre lighten vs,
nor cauſe vs to aſcend ſo high, except God giue vs this alſo, of which
I ſpake euen now. Therefore howe great ſoeuer the naturall light be
which we haue, yet if we follow it any thing farre, we are preſently cō
                  paſſed
wt darknes,Much darkneſſe mingled with our natural light. which proceedeth not of the things we are to know,
but from our owne mindes, which being preſſed with the heauy burden
of our body, are hindred and made more ſlowe: or els it is becauſe
our minds are troubled, as if ſome cloud troubled the ſight of our eyes.
So that the more light is in our mind, the greater knowledge we haue
there, and the leſſe doubting. If there be no light at all, or ſo litle that it
be no better then none at al, then ignorance ſpreadeth it ſelfe as it were
darknes in an obſcure and troubled night, inſomuch that there is neyther
ſcience, nor opinion, nor likelihood, nor doubting. Heere of it is
that we commonly ſay, ignorant perſons caſt no perils. Thus then as
euery one hath more light in the minde, hee beholdeth obſcure

things more clearely,The cauſe of the diuerſity of knowledge and of ignorance in men. becauſe his vnderſtanding is better, eyther by
the benefite of nature, or by ſtudy and exerciſe, or by a ſpeciall gift of
God. Others ſee nothing at all or very litle, no not into thoſe thinges
that are very cleare & manifeſt, ſo that they are like to men compaſſed
& couered with darknes at Midday. This befalleth thē either through
the ignorance that is in their vnderſtanding, or by reaſon of their blockiſh
ſlouthfulnes that neglecteth exerciſe, or by the iuſt iudgement of
God, who becauſe of their ſinnes hath blinded their minds, giuing thē
ouer to Satan to blind them,2. Cor. 4. 4. who vſeth to ſhut vp the eyes of worldly,
carnal, and vnfaithful men, whom he hath in his power. So that if there
be any errour in the mindes of men, if they approoue and follow after
lying in ſtead of trueth, and euill in place of goodneſſe, this commeth
not from the naturall or ſupernaturall light that God hath giuen
them, nor of the knowledge they haue thereby, how great or ſmall
ſoeuer it be, but of the darkneſſe that is mingled amiddeſt this light,
which ſinne hath made more dark and wholly ouerwhelmed, and the
Deuill dayly increaſeth to the vttermoſt of his power, becauſe hee
woulde gladly haue all light in vs, as well naturall as ſupernaturall,
cleane extinguiſhed and put out. For as brightneſſe breedeth not
clouds and obſcurity, ſo ſcience and knowledge doeth not bring forth
ignoraunce and errour. For contraries are not made one of another.
Wherefore that commeth to paſſe in the lightning of our vnderſtandings,
which wee ſee to happen in the change of light, in regarde
of our eyes. For according to that which is put betwixt, ſo doeth
the qualitie and vertue of the light chaunge in reſpect of our ſight.
If it be a verie thicke bodie, which the light cannot pearce through,
then is it wholly taken from vs, and as it is more or leſſe thicke,
or thinne and tranſparent, ſo doe our eyes receiue more or leſſe
light. In like manner the lightening of our vnderſtanding is wonderfull
variable,Cauſes of the variety of mens opinions. becauſe of the great diuerſitie of thinges that are
ſet before it in this life, to hinder it ſundrie wayes, in ſome more,
in ſome leſſe, according to thoſe obiectes that are offered to euerie
one, or as men procure to themſelues. From hence it is that there are
ſo many diuers opinions ſentences & iudgements amongſt men, in all
deliberations and in al matters, eſpecially when the controuerſy of diſcerning
truth from falſhood, good from bad, & what is to be followed,
what to be fledde. Now concerning thoſe things, which chiefly cauſe
this great diuerſity, we haue firſt to conſider of the compoſition, complexion
and diſpoſition of mans body, whether it bee ſound, or whether
it be ſick. Alſo the Age, ſtrength, or weakeneſſe, the perfection
or imperfection thereof, common cuſtome, the preſent diſpoſition

of vading qualities engendred by nouriſhment, time and place, with
thoſe actions and things that may outwardly happen to the bodie.
For wee ſee by experience, that the vnderſtanding and ſpirite with all
the partes and offices of the ſoule receiue great helpe or hinderance,
according as the bodie, and all the members thereof are well or ill diſpoſed,The manners of men follow the diſpoſition of their bodies.
and that the manners follow the complexion and diſpoſition
of the body. For God hath ſo tempered the nature thereof with that
of the ſoule to make them agree well together, that the one taketh
much of the other, eyther to good or bad purpoſe, according as they
are either well or ill affected. Concerning the ſoule, we haue to conſider
therein all the affections, beſides the nature of the vnderſtanding,
whether it be ſlow and heauie, or quicke and light, and of a ready conceipt
and diſcourſe, and whether it be ſharpe or dull. Againe, conſideration
muſt be had of the teaching and inſtruction which it hath had,
what opinions are already rooted in it, & what perſwaſions haue foreſtalled
it, as alſo how farre the behauiour, cuſtome and authority of others
can preuaile with it. For al theſe things greatly trouble the minds
of men, and procure not onely diuerſitie, but alſo contrariety of opinions,
ſentences and willes of men, which cauſeth them to change
and rechange ſo often, inſomuch that they doe not only differ and are
contrary one to another, but euery one alſo to himſelfe. For wee haue
dayly tryall in our ſelues, that wee-change our opinions from houre
to houre, and minute to minute, inſomuch that whatſoeuer wee
haue nowe approoued, determined and ſet downe for a certayne
decree, wee condemne and reiect it by and by after, and vtterly ouerthrowe
it: and contrariwiſe wee approoue and ratifie that which
we had a litle before condemned and refuſed. Wherevpon we haue to
note, according to that wee hearde before of the diſcourſe of reaſon,
which is the proper effect of the vnderſtanding, that there are two
kinds of it.Two kindes of diſcourſes. For there are diſcourſes, wherein reaſon goeth on by degrees
in continuall order, one diſcourſe alwayes following another,
by conſidering and examining whatſoeuer appertaineth to the matter
in hand, that ſo a certayne and ſounde iudgement there of may bee
rendred afterwarde. Againe, there is another kinde of diſcourſing,
wherin reaſon doeth not only run amaine, but withall skippeth hither
& thither, as though it tooke here a litle and there a litle, taſting onely
of things very ſlightly & by the way, as Bees that flie from one floure
to another, & leaue others betwene vntouched. Which courſe whileſt
reaſon taketh, it omitteth ſome ſtep or other which it ought to trace:
and that eyther through ignoraunce of the right path it ought to follow,
or becauſe it thinketh it needleſſe to ſtay about that which it paſſeth

by, or becauſe it delighteth not, or is not diſpoſed ſo to doe.
               Moreouer, wee muſt know, that there is great diuerſitie of diſcourſes,
according to the varietie of mens vnderſtandings. For ſharpe
wittes ſounde to the bottome, that matter which is propounded vnto
them: wiſe and ſubtill heades, euen by ſmall coniectures farre fetched,
conceiue that which they ſeeke after and attaine thervnto. There
are ſome alſo of ſuch great ſpirites, that conceiue many things at once,
and as it were in the twickling of an eye, and at one looke beholde
all that is pertinent to the matter. Whereby it appeareth, that they
haue a readie imagination and fantaſie, their memorie like to an open
treaſurie, a quicke conſideration, and a perfect and ſounde remembraunce.
For if the imagination and fantaſie bee ſlowe, or the
memorie ſhut vp, or if conſideration ceaſe, or recordation be weake,
the diſcourſe will be backewarde, and fall out but badly, as it is with
children, and thoſe that are very aged, with ſicke folkes, and thoſe
that haue their mindes troubled.Of the end of al diſcourſes. Nowe the ende of all diſcourſing in
the minde, tendeth eyther to the inuention or concluſion of the thing
that a man ſeeketh for. And if hee attaine not to his ende, it is eyther
becauſe hee taketh not the way which hee ought to take, as
they that know not what way to followe, which commeth to paſſe
by diuers meanes: or becauſe his vnderſtanding is not good, but
full of darkeneſſe: or through ſome perturbation that troubleth it
for a time, as when the affections are much moued: or by reaſon of
the varietie of cogitations, which trouble and hinder one another.
There are ſome alſo which goe on without any regarde had to that
thing they ſeeke after, as it falleth out with them that are too much
mooued, and that haue a verie haſtie imagination and fantaſie.
For theſe men goe beyonde the place, where they might finde
the thing which they ſeeke for: and ſo leauing the chiefe matter
behinde, they fall into vnneceſſary and bye matters, into fooliſh
trifling and ſtrange thinges, without all compaſſe of reaſon, and
ſuch as belong nothing to the purpoſe. Wherefore, ſo ſoone as the
diſcourſe is begunne, fantaſie is preſently to bee bridled and kept in,
and the inquiſition alſo of memory, to the end the vnderſtanding may
commodiouſly take holde of that which it is to followe, and that no
ſuch haſtie and light commotion cary it away, and ſo cauſe it to looſe
all. Wherein we may ſay, that it falleth out with the vnderſtanding,
as it doeth with a hounde that is in chaſe. For if hee cannot by ſent
finde out the game he ſeeketh, or if after he hath found it & is in chaſe,
he fall to hunt riot, or if he giue in, either for want of courage, or becauſe
hee is ſpent, or becauſe the courſe is too long, hee ſhall neuer

take the pray for which he was brought to fielde, but loſe it without
recouerie:A compariſon. So in theſe diſcourſes of the minde, whereof we ſpeake,
there are others alſo beſide them that are: alreadie mentioned, who,
becauſe they are of a ſlowe ſpirite, and the matters they ſearch for are
farre off and hard to find, haue not vigour nor force ſufficient to attain
vnto them. The ſelfe ſame thing alſo happeneth to ſome, not ſo much
for want of ſtrength and quickneſſe of ſpirit, as becauſe they are commonly
idle and ſlouthfull, as it is with them that will not be attentiue,
and cannot away to occupie their minds, when they ſhould take ſome
paines to learne. There are many of theſe, who beyng more carefull
for their bodies then for their ſoules, and that they may more freely
attend to the bodie and the deſires thereof, are ſoone perſwaded to
giue ouer all care to ſeeke for and to prouide thinges neceſſary for the
ſoule. And if the bodie be neuer ſo little out of ſquare, yea the verie
feare leaſt they ſhould procure it any griefe, cauſeth them wholly to
abſtaine from labouring the minde in the ſearching out of wiſedome
and trueth, ſo that they voluntary become ignorant. There are others
that haue running heads, who will neuer continue and ſtay in one
thing: and ſome alſo that when they ſhoulde hearken to that which
they are about, haue their wittes a wool-gathering, and, as wee
vſe commonly to ſay, are building of caſtles in Spaine. But aboue all
we muſt herein acknowledge that God diſtributeth his giftes and graces
to men, and beſtoweth witte and vnderſtanding as it pleaſeth him.
Nowe that we haue intreated ſufficiently of the vnderſtanding, and of
the diſcourſes of reaſon therein, let vs ſpeake of Iudgement which followeth
it, and of his office. This then ſhalbe the matter ſubiect of thy
ſpeech, AMANA.
            
            
               Of Iudgement, and of his office, after the diſcourſe of reaſon: and how Beleefe,
Opinion, or doubting follow it: of the difference that is betweene
them. Chap. 30.
               AMANA. If I iudge aright of the doctrine contained in our former
diſcourſes, which handled the nature, powers, faculties and
vertues of the ſoule, I finde that the ſpirite is as it were the chiefe part
therin,The ſeueral powers of the ſoule. in which is the Mind, the 
                     Ʋnderſtanding, & Memory. The Mind
is as it were a white paper, wherein as a man groweth in yeeres and
iudgement, ſo he writeth his cogitations and thoughts, which he hath
by learning and by the inſtruction of wiſedome. Vnderſtanding is framed
by the knowledge of reaſon, and laſt of all Memorie followeth.
For there is great difference betweene that which the ſenſes and the

vnderſtanding are able to doe in the time of infancie, and that which is
done by them in other ages, wherein there is greater vſe of them. And
although the ſeeds of al the operations of the ſoule, are included within
it euen from the beginning of the creation thereof, neuertheles God
hath created it of that nature, that as hee hath ioyned it to the body,
which hath his degrees of growth in euery part thereof, ſo ye ſoule hath
ſome agreement therewith in this reſpect, touching the manifeſtation
of her powers and vertues. If then any man bee endued with an excellent
ſpirite, that is quicke and ready to conceiue, and with a memory
apt to retaine and holde faſt, it is a great meane for him whereby to
attaine to the knowledge of the trueth. But for the perfection of theſe
two great giftes of nature, it is neceſſary hee ſhoulde haue a good and
found iudgement, proceeding from a ſounde diſputing and diſcourſing
of reaſon lightened by the ſpirit of God, and by it purged of errour,
illuſion, and of all vaine opinions, which the nature of man hath
of his owne inheritance, and which hindereth him from iudging aright
of the trueth.
               Nowe the office of Iudgement is to like or diſlike the diſcourſes of
reaſon,Of the office of Iudgement.
                   and the concluſions which are made thereby. For it belongeth
to Iudgement, to iudge whether reaſon diſcourſe and
conclude well as it ought to doe. And therefore it is in the ſpirite
and in the minde, as a rule, or as the skoles in a payre of balance:
and whileſt reaſon is a woorking, it is quiet. But when
ſhee hath concluded and done, iudgement afterwarde examineth
and conſidereth whether there bee any fault in the diſcourſing, or
in the concluſion, or in both, or whether all bee well referred,
before it eyther approue or miſlike any thing. And if it finde any thing
that breedeth feare leaſt it be deceiued, then it beginneth againe to
aduiſe of the matter. Nowe the greateſt cauſe it hath to feare leaſt
it bee deceiued, ariſeth of probable reaſons, which albeeit they bee
like to bee true, yet indeede are not true. And becauſe there are
ſome, which haue ſuch great ſhewe of trueth, that it is a very harde
matter to bee able to diſcerne them from true reaſons, and not
take them to bee ſuch indeede, therefore the Iudgement may
bee often deceiued by this meanes. For it will not eaſily flippe
aſide, but abide conſtant in that wherein it is once ſetled, if it
bee not ledde and induced to allowe or diſallowe of a thing, eyther
by vertue of true and certaine reaſons that may mooue it, or of
ſuch reaſons as are ſo verie likely, and carry ſo greate a ſhewe of
trueth,A ſound iudgement is an excellent gift of God. that they cannot bee knowne and diſcerned for others.
Therefore wee may well ſaye, that a good, vpright and ſounde

iudgement is an excellent gift of God: neither is there any thing
more neceſſary in all artes and diſciplines, yea in the whole courſe
of mans life, and chiefly for the principall end of our being, which
is to know and to ſerue God. For as Good is a thing agreeable to the
Will, ſo is Trueth agreeable to the Minde: whereupon it followeth
likewiſe, that as Euill is contrarie and an enemie to the Will, ſo
is lying in reſpect of the minde. Wherefore if iudgement iudgeth that
the concluſion made by reaſon is true and followeth well, it ioyneth
it ſelfe thereunto, receiuing and imbracing it as agreeable to it ſelfe.
This approbation is called Conſent. But if it iudge the concluſion to
be falſe, it turneth aſide and reiecteth it, and this refuſall may be called
diſſent, becauſe it is contrary to conſent, when there is no agreement
of ſentences,Two kindes of conſents. but diſagreement and contrarietie. As touching Conſent,
we may diuide it into two kindes. For one kinde thereof is firme
and ſtedfaſt, and another weake and vnſtayed. If the conſent bee
firme, certaine and throughly reſolued, it is called Beleefe. But there
is difference betwixt that beleefe or faith, which concerneth humane
matters, and that which is of diuine thinges. For then doe wee giue
credite to humane thinges, when wee take them to bee ſo certaine,
that wee doubt nothing thereof, as namely when wee are ſo perſwaded
eyther by very euident reaſons which remoue all doubting from
vs, or els by teſtimonies which we take to bee moſt certaine. Wherefore
wee may ſay,Agreement betwixt Beleefe and Science.
                   that there is great agreement betwixt this kinde of
beleefe and betweene Science, becauſe there is a certaine reſolution
both in the one and in the other. For Science is a kind of knowledge in
which the demonſtration made vnto vs, compelleth vs to approue that
which is ſpoken, becauſe we ſee the reaſons ſo certaine, that we cannot
gainſay them, nor thinke otherwiſe. The like is done in beleefe, which
is a kinde of knowledge, that cauſeth vs without doubting to giue
credite vnto that which is tolde vs, becauſe wee are ouercome by
witneſſes and by authoritie which wee approue. For if wee doubted
any thing, our conſent woulde bee yet weake, and ſo it coulde not
properly be called beleefe, but rather Coniecture or Opinion. For conſidering
that in this there is ſome kinde of conſent, which inclineth to
one part rather then to another, therefore it tendeth to diſliking, which
is wholly againſt conſent.What Opinion is. For this cauſe wee call Opinion, a knowledge
that moueth vs to encline rather on the one ſide, then on the other,
in regard of the appearance and ſhewe of reaſon that it hath: ſo
that wee are not fully reſolued therein. Nowe albeeit this conſent,
which is called opinion or coniecture, bee not altogether ſo firme,
as that which wee call beleefe: neuertheleſſe it differeth from

                  Doubting,
                  What doubting is.
                   which is as it were a neuter iudgement, hanging betweene
conſent and his contrary, and inclining neither to the one ſide nor to
the other. As for that beleefe which is of diuine things, there is ſuch
a firme conſent required therein, as that all doubting muſt be vtterly
excluded. For faith is not perfect, if it doe not allowe for certaine,
whatſoeuer God hath reuealed vnto men by his worde, which is a certaine
teſtimonie of his will.Of ſaith in diuine things. And although hee hath giuen vnto vs the
ſame meanes to inſtruct vs by in theſe things, that he hath done in humane
things, yet hee goeth further. For hee doeth not onely teach
vs by experience, by reaſons and demonſtrations, which appeare manifeſtly
to-our ſenſes both externall and internall, and of which our
minde can iudge as well as of humane things, but he requireth chiefely
of vs, that wee ſhoulde beleeue his teſtimony, and thoſe witneſſes
which he ſendeth vnto vs, and that wee ſhoulde content our ſelues
with his authoritie. And becauſe heauenly things ſurpaſſe the capacitie
of our vnderſtandings,Of the light of faith. God maketh them capable by the light
of faith, which is a ſupernaturall and diuine light, whereby wee ſee
that in God, which we cannot beholde in all the creatures, and which
our humane reaſon cannot naturally comprehend.
               Now as much as this light is more certaine then all other naturall
light, either externall of the eyes of the body, or internall in reſpect
of the eyes of the ſoule and minde, ſo much more certaine is our ſight
and knowledge of that, which wee ſee and knowe by meanes of that
light. For this cauſe when our vnderſtandings are lightned with this
light, wee beleeue more firmely that which it manifeſteth vnto vs, I
ſay not onely then that whereunto wee may bee perſwaded by all the
humane reaſons which can be alleadged: but alſo then that which we
ſee with our owne eyes, and heare with our eares, and touch with our
hands. For theſe externall ſenſes, and thoſe internall ſenſes alſo whoſe
meſſengers the other are, are not ſo certaine witneſſes to our ſpirite, as
the ſenſes of faith,Of the ſenſes of faith. which are more then humane. For they are heauenly.
Wherefore ſhee hath eies whereby ſhe ſeeth diuinely and not humanely,
which can neuer be deceiued as the eyes of the body may.
The like wee may ſay of her eares and of her handes. For there is no
ſenſe ſo certaine as all hers are, becauſe ſhe receiueth them diuinely
by the ſpirit. Therfore as ſhe hath not in her any imagination or fantaſie
that can deceiue her, ſo ſhe can neuer faile, either in her diſcourſes
or in her iudgements whereupon ſhee reſolueth: becauſe ſhe is alwayes
guided in them by the holy ſpirite, whome ſhe followeth for
her rule in all things, and who aſſureth her by his teſtimony, as if ſhe
bare the markes and ſeales imprinted in her ſelfe, and in their mindes

and hearts in whome ſhee dwelleth. Heereof it is that Saint Paul ſo
often ſaieth,Epheſ. 4. 30. that God hath ſealed vs by his holy Spirite, ſpeaking as it
were of a ſeale imprinted in our hearts and mindes,2. cor. 1. 22. and as of an earneſt
and gage which God hath giuen vs, for the beſt and moſt certaine
aſſurance that can bee. No maruell therefore if the children of
God endewed with this true faith become ſo reſolute, ſo firme and
conſtant, that no authoritie, power, wiſedome, force, eloquence, no
humane reaſons, nor any thing that men or deuils can imagine, think,
ſay, or doe, is able to make them to change their mindes, whereof we
haue moſt euident examples, eſpecially in the perſon of all the Martyres,
who could neuer by any violence in the world be ouercome, but
their faith hath euermore gotten the victory and triumphed ouer all
their enemies. And by this wee may aſſuredly knowe, that it is better
grounded then vpon all the reaſons and perſwaſions of men that may
be.Epheſ. 2. Therefore it is not without cauſe that S. Paul calleth it the gift of
God, neither is it without great reaſon commended ſo much in the Epiſtle
to the Hebrewes.
                  Hebr. 11. For being come to that point, that it hath ſuch
an illumination, as to accompt all that God reuealeth in his worde to
bee more certaine then any thing that wee either ſee with our eies, or
touch with our hands, & hereof to haue a true ſenſe and feeling of the
teſtimony of the holy ſpirit, then doth it exclude al doubting, which is
contrary thereunto, and differeth much from that which we hold only
in opinion,The concluſions of faith are moſt true and vnchangeable. wherein there is as yet no great aſſurance. So that we may
conclude hereupon, that according as faith is more or leſſe in vs, wee
ſhall neuer conclude ill, nor at any time giue ouer our concluſions.
For faith neuer concludeth any thing which God hath not before ſpoken,
whoſe word and authoritie is vnto it, as in deede it ought to be,
in ſteade of all reaſon. For ſeeing it is that wiſedome and trueth which
can neuer faile or lie, it needeth not to doubt in any reſpect to conclude
alwayes therewith, neyther hath it cauſe at any time afterward
to forſake or change the concluſion it hath ſet downe. Wherefore
when our faith is ſhaken and beginneth to alter, it is a ſigne and teſtimony,
that it holdeth more of the nature of opinion then of beleefe,
and that it hath not yet a iudgement throughly reſolued in the concluſion
which it hath taken. So that heere wee may learne what difference
there is betwixt beleefe, opinion, doubting, and infidelitie or
incredulitie.Incredulitie contrary to beleefe and opinion. For ſeeing incredulitie is contrary to beleefe, it goeth
farther then doubting, which concludeth nothing on either ſide, as
both beleefe and opinion doe, but incredulitie concludeth contrarie
to them both. For it giueth no conſent, as beleefe and opinion doe,
but taketh the cleane contrary: and therefore it may well be called

diſſent or diſagreement, as being oppoſite to that conſent that is in
beleefe.
               Now to end this ſpeech, and to take away al doubting that may ariſe
of this word Beleefe or Faith,Of the diuers acceptions of this word Beleefe or Faith. I will only adde this, that wee are to
know that it is diuerſly takē in the holy ſcripturs. For the name which
it hath in the Hebrew tongue, is taken frō the word, whereby they expreſſe
veritie or truth, which they alſo take for conſtancie & aſſurance.
The word which the Euangeliſts and Apoſtles vſe according to the
Graecians in whoſe language they wrote, ſignifieth properly Perſwaſion.
And the name vſed by the Latines, from whome wee haue taken
our Faith, ſignifieth that conſtancie and trueth, which men
keepe in their wordes and promiſes: whereupon they call it the foundation
of iustice. Therefore faithfull ſignifieth as much as true, conſtant,
and firme in that which a man hath ſpoken and promiſed, namely,
when one hath kept his faith. Heereof it is alſo that God is ſo often
in the holy Scriptures called Faithfull, in reſpect of vs, becauſe hee neuer
falfifieth his faith, but is alwayes firme and conſtant in al his words
and workes. But when the Scripture ſpeaketh of Faith in regarde of
men towardes God; it doth not onely comprehend a beleefe, whereby
wee beleeue that to bee true which wee heare, and which is ſpoken
vnto vs, as when one telleth vs ſome hiſtorie, but it is alſo a truſt,
which aſſureth vs,The deſcription of Faith. that God will performe that vnto vs which he hath
promiſed vs. Therefore true faith includeth in it a certaine and vndoubted
confidence of heauenly things, and an aſſured perſwaſion of
the accompliſhment of Gods promiſes towards vs. Now to proſecute
our purpoſe, ſeeing we haue learned, that the knowledge of the truth,
which is the principall obiect of reaſon and vnderſtanding, is verie
hard for men to attaine vnto, let vs conſider of the meanes whereby
wee may bee certaine and ſure of thoſe things which we are to beleeue.
This diſcourſe ARAM. belongeth vnto thee.
            
            
               Of the meanes whereby a man may haue certaine knowledge of thoſe
thinges, which he ought to beleeue and take for true: of the naturall
and ſupernaturall light that is in man, and how they beare witneſſe
of the image of God in him. Chap. 31.
               ARAM, For a man to knowe himſelfe to be ignorant, is a goodlie
ſcience and ſo neceſſary for men, that without it they cannot be
truely skilfull. For the ignorant perſon that knoweth not himſelfe to

be ſuch a one,It is good for a man to knowe his owne ignorance. but ſuppoſeth hee knoweth that which hee doeth not
in deede, is as vnteachable a beaſt as can be: becauſe hee will neuer
ſeeke for a maſter to be inſtructed by, but if any offer themſelues hee
will reiect them, and rather himſelfe take vpon him to teach them.
Therefore Socrates was greatly commended by the ancients becauſe
he ſaide, that hee knewe but one onely thing, namely, that he was ignorant
and knewe nothing. True it is, that if wee ſpeake of things
which may be knowen by the corporall and ſpirituall ſenſes of men,
euen as nature hath giuen them vnto vs, and of things belonging to
naturall and morall Philoſophie, there are many men to bee founde
whoſe knowledge therein is ſo great, that other men in reſpect of
them may ſeeme to bee but poore beaſts. But when we muſt aſcend
vp to the knowledge of things reuealed vnto vs in Ieſus Chriſt, and
in the Goſpell, no ſenſe or vnderſtanding of man is able to comprehend
any thing therein, if the ſpirite of God doe not teach him, and
dwell in him, to ſeale and to confirme in his ſoule the doctrine of thoſe
heauenly myſteries, wherein the skilfulleſt men are no better taught
of themſelues, then thoſe that are moſt ignorant. For that abideth alwayes
true which Saint Paul wrote to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 2. 14. 
                  that the naturall
man perceiueth not the things of the ſpirite of God: for they are fooliſhneſſe
vnto him: neither can hee knowe them, becauſe they are ſpiritually
diſcerned.
               
               Nowe I finde foure meanes,Foure meanes to knowe certainely thoſe things that are to be beleeued. whereby men may be made certaine
of thoſe things vnto which they ought to giue credite, whereof three
of them are naturall and according to naturall Philoſophie, the
fourth goeth further, and is proper to diuinitie. The firſt is generall
experience: the ſecond, the knowledge of principles: the third, naturall
iudgement: of theſe three wee will firſt ſpeake, and then come to the
fourth.Of generall experience. Generall experience is that iudgement which al men of ſound
mindes doe giue all after one ſort, of thoſe things whereof they haue
certaine experience by their corporall ſenſes: as is to be ſeene in naturall
things. For who knoweth not that the fire is hote? And who
woulde not take him for a ſenſeleſſe man that ſhould affirme the contrary?
Yea, who coulde affirme it, being conuinced of the trueth
thereof by his owne ſenſes? Likewiſe who ſeeth not the difference
that is betweene death and life, and what are the effectes both of the
one and the other? For euery one knoweth theſe thinges by a generall
experience common to all. Wherefore this knowledge is certaine:
and where it is ſo, there needeth no other proofe or demonſtration
fetched farther then from ſuch experience. For God hath ſo created
the nature of things, that men muſt needes confeſſe it to be ſo, as

generall experience doth declare it to be. And he that will not beleeue
it, let him take triall thereof himſelfe, and he ſhall know whether it be
ſo or no. So that whoſoeuer would ſtand againſt this common and generall
experience, he ſhould make open warre againſt God and nature,
in denying all order which he hath ſet downe therein. Concerning
the knowledge of principles,
                  Of the knowledge of principles. wee muſt firſt knowe that there is vnderſtoode
by principles, that naturall knowledge that is borne with
vs, which is the ſeede of all Artes, and a beame of the light of God in
vs, to the ende that by this meanes all Artes neceſſary for life, ſhould
be inuented and put in vſe. As for example, euery one knoweth naturally,
that the whole of any thing is more then the halfe, or then a
part of it onely: and that three are moe then two. To be briefe, the
knowledge of numbers, of meaſures, and of other ſuch like things is
naturall vnto vs, and is not found in the nature of beaſtes: and therefore
they haue neither the inuention nor vſe of any Arte, as wee haue
already heard. But let vs proceede farther and conſider, whether there
be no natural knowledge in men, whereby they vnderſtand, that there
is a diuine nature, wiſe, iuſt, true, good, that loueth goodneſſe and hateth
and puniſheth euil, with which nature the ſoule of man hath ſome
agreement, and is as it were an image thereof: for which cauſe he
ought to be made conformable to God, by folowing after wiſedome,
trueth, iuſtice, goodneſſe, and all vertue, and by ſhunning the contrary
vices,Of the naturall knowledge of God in men. In this reſpect, he that followeth this rule obeyeth God, doing
that which is pleaſant and right in his eies: and he that leaueth this
rule, diſobeyeth and diſpleaſeth him, committing wicked and diſhoneſt
things, whereby hee becommeth woorthy of puniſhment. In a
worde, wee may referre to theſe naturall principles, whatſoeuer God
hath imprinted in mens hearts and mindes of the law of nature, which
ſerueth all men for naturall diuinitie, the Bookes of which they carry
printed in their ſoules. And yet out of all queſtion, this diuinitie will
ſcarce ſerue vs but to condemnation, if we go no farther, becauſe the
booke thereof is ſo blotted in vs, that there is not ſo much as one ſmall
peece or leafe thereof whole & ſound, & which is not very much blurred
& torne. Neuertheles that which remaineth is a ſufficient proceſſe
againſt vs before God, and able to conuince and condemne vs at his
iudgement. Of this wee our ſelues may iudge, in that wee ſee, that
there is no nation or people that liue with no religion at all, but they
haue one eyther true or falſe, whereby they labour to appeaſe the
wrath of God, and to be vnder his fauour and protection, according
to that meaſure of knowledge, which they haue of him. Whereby
they plainely declare, that there is a certaine lawe within them taken

from the Booke of this naturall diuinitie, which condemneth them in
their hearts, & vrgeth & conſtraineth them to do that which they do,
euen as we feele our ſelues preſſed and cnndemned by the written law
which God hath giuen vnto vs.The vſe both of the naturall and of the written law. Wherefore if wee knew how to profit
by them both, they would both ſerue vs in ſteade of a Schoolemaſter
to direct & leade vs vnto Ieſus Chriſt. For both of them, if we vnderſtand
them wel, teſtifie ſufficiently vnto vs, that we ſtand in need
of a Mediator, by whom we may haue acceſſe to God and be reconciled
vnto him, ſeeing wee feele our condemnation within our ſelues
and in our owne conſciences. As for the third meane to make a man
certaine of that which hee is to accompt for true, which wee ſaide
was naturall Iudgement,
                  Of natural iudgement. it is the vnderſtanding of that order that ought
to be in things, and of the conſequence of them, whereby to iudge
in ſome ſort of the agreement or diſagreement they haue one with an
other: inſomuch that euery one hath within himſelfe as it were a naturall
logicke, whereby hee is able to iudge at leaſtwiſe of common
things. It remaineth nowe that we learne the fourth meane, which
paſſeth all the former, and that is diuine reuelation, whereof wee haue
made mention, and thoſe certaine and infallible teſtimonies, which
wee learne of the holy Scriptures, I meane the Bookes of the Prophets
and Apoſtles,Of the fourth meane of knowledge. with the confirmation and vnderſtanding of them
by the holy Spirite. For it were not enough for vs to haue the worde
of God deliuered vnto vs by them, except the holy Ghoſt had his
working both in them & in vs. Wherfore although naturally we more
eaſily and firmely beleeue that which our minde is able to ſee, knowe,
and comprehend by the naturall light thereof, then that which goeth
beyond it, yet foraſmuch as God hath made vs capable of vnderſtanding
and reaſon, wee ought to giue no leſſe credite to all that he hath
reuealed vnto vs by his worde, yea much more to this, howſoeuer by
that light of nature which remaineth in vs wee neither ſee nor knowe
howe true and firme it is, and that for the cauſes before vttered. Hereof
it is that in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes,Hebr. 11. faith is called the ſubstance
and ground of things hoped for, and ſuch an euident demonstration of
things not ſeene, that it conuinceth men and cauſeth them to perceiue
and knowe the trueth of them very cleerely. Whereupon wee
haue to note, that this naturall light, and that which wee call ſupernaturall,
are not (to ſpeake properly) two diuers and different lights,
but one and the ſame, as wee ſhoulde well haue knowen, if our nature
had continued in perfection, and in that image of God in which
it was created and framed, farre differing from all other creatures. For
although there is in them ſome image of God,Of the image of God in man. yet they haue not

vnderſtanding to knowe it as it is, neither to knowe God their creator,
who hath imprinted it in them. But it is farre otherwiſe in man.
For God will be knowen of him, and therefore hee hath ſo imprinted
his image in his nature, that hee will haue him to ſee and knowe it.
For this cauſe hee hath giuen him a minde and vnderſtanding able to
to receiue this knowledge. For the greateſt likeneſſe and reſemblance
that man can haue with God, conſiſteth in the agreement with him
in wiſdome and iuſtice, which cannot be but in a nature that is capable
and partaker of reaſon and vnderſtanding. Nowe becauſe God is
good, yea a common and generall Good, hee will not withholde this
good in himſelfe without communicating it, but maketh all his creatures
partakers thereof, eſpecially man, with whome it hath pleaſed
him to communicate this Good of wiſedome and iuſtice, which is the
greateſt and moſt excellent good that is in him. Therefore did God
together with his image imprint his knowledge in the nature of man.
For man could not otherwiſe know this image and ſimilitude, neither
what it is to be like or vnlike to God, if hee had no more knowledge
of God, who, and what manner a one hee is, then other creatures
that want this knowledge, becauſe they are not capable of vnderſtanding
and reaſon, nor of this image of wiſedome and iuſtice which is
in God, and by which man is made like vnto him. Wherefore the
firſt degree of this image and ſimilitude that is in man, appeareth in
that power and facultie of vnderſtanding which God hath giuen him,
and in that wiſedome whereof hee hath made him partaker, and
which hath ſome agreement with the wiſedome of God. So that before
man ſinned, the image of God was ſuch in him, that there was
a perfect agreement of all the powers and vertues of the ſoule betweene
God and him. For the diuine light did ſo ſhine in his minde,
that hee had certaine and firme knowledge of GOD, neither was
there any reſiſtance againſt either in his heart or in his will, but a
ſounde and perpetuall concord and conſent. So that there was alwayes
betweene the minde and the will an vprightneſſe and iuſtice
agreeable with God, neither was the freedome of the will hindered
or driuen forward to euill, becauſe man had not yet made himſelfe
the ſubiect and ſalue of ſinne. As long therefore as man kept this
image of God within him, the Lord dwelt therein as in his own lodging:
and by that meanes would haue giuen to men ſuch perpetual life
& ioy, as ſhold neuer haue bin broken off or extinguiſhed either by ſorow
or by death, if he had ſuffred himſelfe to be alwayes guided by God,
& neuer turned aſide nor ſeuered himſelfe from him. Therefore S. Paul
                  
ſpeaking of this firſt image and the renewing thereof in man, ſaith,
Put on the new man,
                  Epheſ. 4. 24. 
                  which after God is created in righteouſneſſe and true
holineſſe. Seeing then it is thus, there is no doubt but that, if man had
continued in his integritie, the light which is nowe ſupernaturall in
him, woulde haue beene naturall in all that knowledge of God, which
is neceſſary for him to that ende whereunto he was created. For hee
had neuer beene ouerwhelmed with darkeneſſe, which dimmed and
hindered this heauenly light that ſhined in him, and made him the
habitation and temple of God, but had ſeene cleerely the image of
the father, of the ſonne, and of the holy ghoſt ſhining in his ſoule, in
which it was imprinted, the draughts and beames whereof are yet euident
enough in him, I meane to them that conſider of them as it appertaineth,
following the light of the word of God. But foraſmuch
as the darkeneſſe which ſinne hath brought with it, keepeth man from
hauing any ſound and perfect knowledge of God, or of heauenly
things, as he had in his firſt eſtate, it is neceſſary therefore that hee
ſhould reſtore and kindle againe in him, this diuine and perfect life
which hee hath loſt, by the benefite of regeneration and ſpirituall renouation,
as if hee created him anew, giuing him a minde to vnderſtand
his worde, and a will to followe and to embrace it. This is that,
which I thought we were to note and learne concerning the meanes
that bring vs certaine knowledge of ſuch things as we ought to iudge
and accompt for true. Let vs nowe conſider, howe the ſpirit of man
being enriched in meaſure with heauenly gifts and graces, doeth finally
attaine to the ende of all inquiſition and ſearching out of trueth,
which is contemplation, that followeth iudgement, as iudgement
followeth reaſon and the diſcourſe thereof. Therefore doe thou,
ACHITOB▪ take vpon thee to diſcourſe of this matter ſubiect, and
ſo ende all ſpeaches of this dayes worke concerning vnderſtanding,
that afterward wee may looke particularly into the will, which is the
ſecond part and vertue of the higheſt and moſt ſoueraigne power of
the ſoule.
            
            
               How the vertues and powers of the ſoule ſhew themſelues by litle and
litle, and by degrees: of contemplation, and of the good that is in
it: of that true and diuine contemplation which we looke for after
this life. Chap. 32.
               ACHITOB. I was much troubled oftentimes about the vnderſtanding
of theſe two words Soule and Spirite, in ſeeking to find
what difference or agreement they haue one with another: ſeeing that

many times I ſawe one of them taken for the other, and alſo oppoſed
as repugnant one to another.The difference betwixt ſoule and ſpirite. In the ende I learned of skilful men, that
wee might vſe the worde Soule to ſignifie man as hee is borne, hauing
onely the giftes of a humane ſoule, namely, the humane ſenſes, and
thoſe other powers and vertues both animall and naturall, of which
wee haue already ſpoken. And as for the Spirite, that wee muſt vnderſtand
thereby, whatſoeuer heauenly grace and knowledge of the
trueth is giuen to man by the ſpirite of God dwelling in him, which
guideth and leadeth him to the contemplation of the diuine nature,
wherein conſiſteth his good and felicitie. Moreouer wee may ſee in
ſundrie places of the Scriptures according to the Hebrew phraſe,Matth. 10. 39. rom. 13. 1. Eſay 40. 5, 6. Iuc. 3. 6. Rom. 8. 6. the
worde Soule taken not onely for the life of man, and for all things belonging
thereto, but alſo for the whole nature of man: and thus alſo
is the worde Fleſh taken. Therefore when the fleſh is oppoſed and ſet
againſt the ſpirite in man, wee vnderſtand thereby, not the body only,
but alſo the ſoule of man, I meane ſuch a one as it was at the beginning,
when being left vnto it ſelfe it followed the corruption of it
owne nature. And likewiſe by the ſpirite, wee meane that which is regenerated
in euery part of man, whereby hee being withdrawen from
the peruerſe deſires and corrupt affections of his nature, is lift vp to the
contemplation of celeſtiall and eternall things.
               But our God vſeth in ſuch ſort to apply himſelfe to the nature and
abilitie of his creatures, that by little and little, and by degrees he diſpenſeth
vnto them thoſe things, which hee will beſtowe vpon them,
alwayes keeping that order, which hee hath vſed and followed in
the creation of the worde.Geneſ. 1. For, as Moſes teſtifieth, hee firſt created
it of nothing. Then hauing created the matter of all natures, hee
brought it into a woorke, and gaue vnto it a forme, and ſo poliſhing
it by degrees and day by day, at length hee ſet it in that perfection,
which hee minded to beſtowe vpon it. Wee ſee likewiſe, that in the
continuation of his woorkes,How God proceedeth in the creation of his workes. hee beginneth alwayes at the baſeſt
and leaſt thing, and ſo goeth on encreaſing, augmenting and aſcending
vp vntill hee hath placed them in their perfection, whereof we
haue daily experience, principally in plants and liuing creatures. For
the generation of plants commeth of their ſeedes, from which they
take their beginning. And when the ſeede, which is the leaſt part of
the whole plant, is put into the ground, it taketh roote therein and
then commeth foorth, encreaſing dayly vntill it come to thoſe
bounds, that are alotted vnto it by the Creatour, which it can not
paſſe: becauſe it can not attaine to greater perfection being of that
kinde, but then daily falleth to decay, vntill it be wholly conſumed

and returned to the elements from whence it was taken. The like is
done in the generation of all liuing creatures, and namely in that of
man. For what is his beginning? and what is his conception, natiuitie,
childehoode, adoleſcencie, youth, mans eſtate, and then old-age?
Wee ſee howe ſmall his beginning is, and howe hee groweth ſteppe
by ſteppe, and from age to age vntill hee commeth to the flower of
his age, and to his full ſtrength, as plantes doe: and from thence
the neerer hee draweth to olde-age, the more hee fadeth and decayeth
vntill hee come to death, whereby the body returneth to the Elements
out of which it is taken. For as God hath giuen him a beginning,
ſo hath hee appointed him limites, vnto which hee may aſcend
vp vntill hee come to his higheſt, and then hee is to deſcend, as the
ordinance of God ſhall leade him. As for the ſoule, the ſame can not
befall it in regard of bigneſſe, ſeeing it is not corporall as the body is,
neither yet in reſpect of death, ſeeing it is immortall. For it can not be
reſolued as the body may, to returne into the elements, out of which
it is not taken, but it abideth alwayes in that ſubſtance and nature
which firſt it had, becauſe it is of a celeſtiall and diuine nature. But
if the queſtion be of the faculties, powers and vertues thereof, the
ſeedes of which it hath in it ſelfe, wee ſee by experience howe they
ſhewe themſelues more and more perfect, and howe the vſe of them
is greater in one age then in an other.How the powers of the ſoule manifeſt themſelues. For as long as the infant is in
his mothers wombe, no man can perceiue that as yet hee vſeth anie
other vertue and facultie of the ſoule that is in him, then that which
heeretofore wee called the vegetatiue or nouriſhing facultie, by which
hee is nouriſhed as plants are. After, when hee is borne, hee continueth
a long time like to other liuing creatures, as though he had only
a vegetatiue and ſenſitiue ſoule as they haue. Then by little and little
as hee groweth from one age to an other, thoſe vertues of the ſoule
whereby hee differeth from beaſtes, appeare euery day more and
more. And yet hee hath no other ſoule in ſubſtaunce, nor any other
ſenſes and minde throughout his whole life, then hee had when it
firſt mooued: as alſo hee hath no other body. But a man may eaſily
iudge, that this cōmeth not of the nature of the ſoule, but of the inſtruments
it hath in the body, which in the infancie of man, hinder it from
doing that which it doeth by them in other ages.How they haue their degrees in growth. Beſides, wee may
truely ſay, that God hath created it of that nature, that as hee hath
ioyned it vnto the body, which hath his degrees of growth, ſo the
ſoule hath ſome agreement therewith in this reſpect, touching the
manifeſtation of her naturall powers and vertues. Neither is it any

ſtrange thing if God deale ſo with it in this matter. In the meane time
wee ſee, that although the ſoule of man ſeemeth in nothing or very
little to differ from that of plants, as long as it is in the mothers womb,
nor from the ſoule of beaſts during the time of his infancie: neuertheleſſe
afterward it ſheweth very well wherein it differeth from them,
and that it hath certaine vertues, which are not in any other ſoule.
For if this were not ſo, both in reſpect of the age and growth of the
body, as alſo in regarde of that property which is in the nature thereof,
it woulde be alwayes like to that which it is in the beginning, as
wee ſee it is with plantes and beaſtes, in whoſe ſoule wee can perceiue
no more change in the ende and when they growe vp, then
in their beginning and firſt birth. According then to that I haue now
ſaide, we ſee by experience, that in the gifts and graces, wherewith
GOD daily adorneth and enricheth his children, he doeth not communicate
all at once vnto them, but by little and little and by degrees,
as hee iudgeth it expedient, and as they are capable of reaſon and vnderſtanding.
Therefore it is written of Iohn Baptiſt,Luke 1. 80. that the childe
grewe, and waxed ſtrong in ſpirite: which is as much to ſay, as that
according as hee grewe in age, God increaſed the graces of his holie
ſpirite vpon him, wherewith hee had indued him euen from his mothers
wombe.
               And when wee haue profited well in his ſchoole, ſo that wee are
aſſured of, and inſtructed in thoſe things, which wee ought to followe
according to the worde of GOD, wee eaſily attaine to that
Good, which is the ende of all inquirie of the trueth, namely to contemplation,
which followeth iudgement, as iudgement followeth
reaſon and the diſcourſe thereof.The difference betwixt reaſon, and iudgement, and contemplation. For reaſon diſcourſing, is as it were
the inquiſition of the trueth that is ſought for, and iudgement is as the
election that maketh choice of the trueth, and of that which it taketh
to be moſt certaine: and Contemplation is as it were a quiet and ſetled
beholding of all thoſe things which were gathered together by
reaſon, and receiued with approbation by iudgement. For there is
no more place for diſputation, ſeeing all things are certaine and
cleere. Nowe all pleaſure and delight proceedeth from the conuenience
and agreement, that is betwixt the thing that pleaſeth, and
him whome it doeth pleaſe. And becauſe there is nothing more agreeable
to the nature of the ſpirite and minde of man then trueth,
hereof it commeth, that notwithſtanding al corruption that is in him,
there is no man but naturally deſireth knowledge and skill, accounting
ſcience to bee excellent and woorthie of great praiſe, and ignorance
to bee full of ſhame, yea, hee iudgeth it a verie ill thing to bee

deceiued. Wherefore wee may not doubt, but that as knowledge is
more true and certaine, ſo doeth the ſpirite receiue greater pleaſure:
and when it hath found the trueth, it delighteth greatly therein. And
if for the cauſes before touched by vs, it can not find the trueth ſo certainely
as it deſireth, yet it taketh ſingular pleaſure in approching ſo
neere vnto it as it can. For this cauſe the more certaine the trueth is
which it knoweth, it is the more agreeable and pleaſant vnto it, eſpecially
when it knoweth the true ſpring and firſt cauſes thereof. Therefore
as the mindes of men delight more in thoſe things that reſemble
them moſt, of ſo much the more noble and excellent nature they are,
yea more heauenly and diuine, and ſo will take pleaſure in ſuch things
as are moſt excellent and celeſtiall. Contrariwiſe, the more earthly,
vile, and abiect they ſhall be, the more will they delight in mortall,
baſe and contemptible things, and deſpiſe ſuch as are of greateſt value.
For this cauſe many Philoſophers haue eſteemed more of the
ſtudie of Philoſophie and the knowledge thereof,Why ſome haue preferred Philoſophie before riches. then of kingdomes
and great riches, being prouoked and pricked thereunto, by an vnſpeakeable
pleaſure which their ſpirite tooke in the knowledge of
thoſe things that were reueled vnto them therein. On the other ſide,
wee ſee that ambitious men delight more in honours and worldely
greatneſſe, then they woulde doe, at leaſtwiſe in their owne opinion,
in all the skill of the Philoſophers. A couerous man pleaſeth himſelfe
a great deale more in telling and beholding his crownes, then in any
other thing whatſoeuer. It is no maruell therefore if ambitious, couetous,
and voluptuous men, and ſuch like doe commonly deride thoſe
that take delight in learning, and chiefly in the doctrine and contemplation
of thoſe celeſtiall and eternall things, which they ſet before
their eyes, or if they preferre greatly their owne eſtate and condition,
before others that take pleaſure in ſuch things. For they are pearles
caſt before ſwine, which are not valued as they are woorth, but onely
of ſuch as knowe them and their value.
               Nowe if heathen Philoſophers haue oftentimes willingly abandoned
all their goodes, that they might wholly addict themſelues to
the ſtudy of their humane Philoſophie, & to the contemplation of ſuch
things as they could know thereby, notwithſtanding that it was alwayes
accompanied with ſome doubting, and that they could neuer
attaine to a certaine knowledge either of the beginning or ende of
things: what ought Chriſtians to do, when the queſtion is of Diuine
Philoſophie and Wiſedome, the treaſures of which are opened and
offered vnto them in the word of God? For it is without all compariſion
farre more certayne then any ſcience, and containeth in it other

trueths,Of the benefits that commeth by the contemplation of diuine things. and matters that are great deale more profound, excellent,
and more worthy of contemplation. And they to whome God hath
beene ſo gratious, as to giue ſome taſte and experience of theſe things,
are able to iudge well of them, yea farre better then any others. For
it is certaine that euen for a little true knowledge of God, and of the
trueth of thoſe things which hee hath reuealed vnto vs in his doctrine,
wee receiue ſingular delight, with great ioy, and ſweete conſolation.
So that euery man may perceiue, howe much greater the pleaſure
will bee when the knowledge ſhall be greater. If then this ſmall
taſte, which wee may haue in this worlde of theſe delicacies and ſpirituall
delights, bringeth vnto vs ſuch ſingular ioy, we may eaſily iudge
howe great it will be in that moſt happy contemplation, which wee
ſhall haue in heauen with God, when wee ſhall beholde him face
to face, and knowe him as wee are knowen, whereas heere wee ſee
him but as it were in a glaſſe,Of the contemplation that is after this life. and through a cloude. For that is the
contemplation of all contemplations, ſeeing it is the beholding of
God, with whome nothing may bee compared. Then there ſhall be
no cloude of ignorance, when wee ſhall haue, not a likely or probable,
but a moſt certaine and true knowledge. For the trueth ſhall
bee ſhewed vnto vs moſt certaine in GOD who is the Authour and
Father thereof, in whome wee ſhall throughly and perfectly ſee and
knowe the cauſes of all things. For our ſpirites ſhall be helde no longer
in ſuch an obſcure and darke priſon, as heere they are conſtrained
to ſuffer in our mortall bodies.When all men ſhall be of one iudgement. Therefore there ſhall bee no more diuerſities,
diſagreements, or contrarieties of opinions and iudgements,
that ſome ſhoulde condemne that which others approoue, but all
ſhall be of the ſame iudgement. But ſeeing we are fallen into the matter
of contemplation, it ſhall not be vnprofitable, if vpon occaſion
of that diuiſion, which is commonly made of the actiue and contemplatiue
life, wee note, that although the ſpirite deſireth aboue all
things the pleaſure that is in contemplation, as the proper foode and
delight thereof, yet wee muſt alwayes conſider, that wee are not only
borne for ourſelues, but alſo for others, and to this ende, that wee
ſhoulde all in common ſerue one an other, both generally and ſpecially.
For God doeth not onely commaund the performance of that
ſeruice, which hee requireth of vs towardes his owne perſon according
to that which is contained in the firſt Table of the Lawe, but he
commaundeth vs alſo in the ſecond Table to doe that which hee requireth
of vs towardes other men.The actiue life muſt be ioyned with the contemplaiue. Therefore hee will not haue vs
dwell alwayes in contemplation, but wee muſt put to our hand, and
diſcharge vs of our dutie towards euery one, according as he teacheth

vs by his word. Wee are then to learne, that ſo long as wee liue in this
world, we muſt not ſeparate the actiue life from the cōtemplatiue, but
alwayes ioyne them both together, vntil we come to that bleſſed life,
which ſhalbe altogither contemplatiue, when we ſhalbe deliuered frō
al the miſeries and neceſſities, and from al the troubles & lets in which
wee are wrapped and detained in this mortall life. God graunt vs his
grace to vſe all our ſenſes ſo well, both externall and internall, and
all the powers, faculties and vertues of our ſoule and ſpirite, of which
wee haue hitherto ſpoken, that wee may cauſe them all to ſerue to
his glory, and that wee may attaine to that bleſſed contemplation,
which is prepared for all his elect in his celeſtiall pallace: and that to
this ende hee woulde diſpoſe in vs our will, and all the affections of
our ſoule, of the nature of which we will beginne to morrowe to diſcourſe.
And firſt, ASER, I thinke thou art to intreate of thoſe appetites
that are naturally in man, ſeeing Deſire is the proper ſubiect of
the Will, as thou ſhalt inſtruct vs more at large.
            
            The end of the fourth dayes worke.
         
         
            THE FIFT DAYES
worke.
            
               Of the Appetites that are in al liuing creatures, and namely in man,
and of their kindes: and particularly of the Naturall and Senſitiue
Appetite. Chap. 33.
               ASER. As God and all that is in the worlde, is propounded to
the minde of man, that hee might knowe him ſo farre foorth as
is needefull for him, ſo is hee alſo propounded to the will, that hee
might will,The obiect of the will is as large as that of the mind. deſire, and folowe him as farre as his nature is capable
thereof. Wherefore if man had not ſinned, but had continued in his
firſt eſtate wherein God created him, this great and eternall Goodnes
had ſhed in our ſoules that diuine worde, together with his holy ſpirite:
which worde, being the eternall ſonne of God, woulde haue
alwayes taught and ſhewed vs the Father, of whome bee was begotten
before all time; and woulde haue lightened our mindes with the
light of all wiſedome that we might haue beheld and ſeene him: and

the holy ſpirite would haue ioyned our hearts and willes vnto the Father
and to the Sonne, through a mutuall loue repleniſhed with all
ioy and gladneſſe, and through certaine motions agreeable with the
diuine nature. By which meanes there ſhould haue bin in our hearts
a great fire of loue towardes God, and next to him wee ſhould haue
loued all other good things, according to that order which is ſhewed
vnto vs in his heauenly wiſedome and doctrine, and ſhould haue deſired
them for the loue of him. But nowe in the eſtate of naturall corruption
in which wee are, all this goodly agreement, harmony, and
concord which ought to be betweene God and man, is wholly peruerted
and ouerthrowen.What great confuſion is in our corrupt nature. For in place of the true knowledge of God,
there is nothing but ignorance and doubting in our mindes: and as for
the will, it ſearcheth after and deſireth other things whereunto it applieth
it ſelfe, and ſeeketh not after God. Neither doeth it keepe any
order in thoſe things which it hath for obiects, and which it ſetteth
downe in ſteade of the things commanded in his word. So that while
it thinketh to attaine to that good whereunto naturally it aſpireth, it
obtaineth nothing to it ſelfe but a very great euill.
               Nowe when wee ſpake before of the braine, and of the internall
ſenſes of the ſoule, and of the principall part and vertue thereof, we
made ſome mention of the wil, which ought to be directed and ledde
by vnderſtanding and reaſon. It remaineth nowe that we looke more
narrowly into the nature thereof, and of the affections of the ſoule,
of the vitall vertue, of the heart, and of other members, which are
the ſeates and inſtruments thereof, euen as when wee intreated of the
animall vertues of the ſoule, wee conſidered of their ſeates and inſtruments.
Firſt then we muſt marke what hath beene hitherto ſpoken,
namely, that God hath giuen to all his creatures a naturall inclination,
that leadeth euery one of them to that which is naturall and
agreeable to itſelfe.Of the deſires that are in creatures. Beaſts haue an appetite to follow that good that
is fitte for them, and therefore alſo hath God giuen them the knowledge
of that good, and ſenſes meete for that purpoſe, to the end they
might ſhewe vnto them, what is good for their preſeruation to followe
it, and to ſhunne the contrary. Wee haue learned alſo howe
God hath giuen both the one and the other to man, and vnto what
degree concerning both of them, hee hath lifted him vp aboue all
liuing creatures. For as hee hath created him to enioy a farre greater
and more excellent Good then hee hath beaſtes, and hath giuen
vnto him a will to wiſh and deſire it, ſo hee hath endued him with
a deeper knowledge whereby to knowe that Good: becauſe hee
coulde not wiſh for it and deſire it, except hee did knowe it,

and he could not knowe it, if he had not a minde capable thereof,
and endewed with greater knowledge then that is, which hee
hath giuen to beaſts. For this cauſe as they haue a kind of knowledge
agreeable to their nature, and to the qualitie of that Good, which being
fitte for them is the greateſt they can attaine vnto: ſo alſo hath
man a knowledge according to his nature, and to the ende for the
which hee was created. So that the knowledge that God hath giuen
him, ſerueth to ſtirre vp his appetite and deſire of that Good which hee
knoweth: and this appetite alſo ſerueth his knowledge, ſo farre
foorth as man being mooued and pricked forward to loue God, reioyceth
and repoſeth himſelfe in him, huing knowen him to bee his
ſoueraigne Good.
               
               But to the end wee may the better vnderſtand this whole matter,
we muſt note,Three kindes of appetites. that there are three kinds of appetites among the creatures,
which are commonly called, the one naturall, the other ſenſitiue,
and the third voluntary.Of the Naturall appetite. As for the naturall, wee may diuide it
into two ſortes. For there is one generall to all creatures, whether liuing
or without life, which is nothing elſe but a naturall inclination
without any action, proceeding from any ſoule or life: as when wee
ſay, that heauy things deſire to go downeward, and light things vpward,
as wee ſee it in the nature of the Elements, which are without
ſoule and life. But beſide this naturall appetite common to all creatures,
there is an other that hath action ioyned with the inclination,
which neuertheleſſe proceedeth not of any ſenſe. This appetite is proper
to the vegetatiue and nouriſhing ſoule and life, whereof plants
are partakers. For wee ſee by experience, that they haue a naturall
appetite to drawe vnto them, and to retaine that which is meete for
their nature and foode, and to expell the contrary. For if a plant waxe
drie, it deſireth to be watered, and draweth and keepeth humour and
moiſture neceſſary for it ſelfe. Wee ſee the like in mens bodies. For
when the members want nouriſhment, they ſucke the veynes, and
the veines drawe vnto them blood. And as the members deſire their
foode, ſo they deſire to bee vnburthened when they haue too much.
The appetite which we call hunger & thirſt,Of hunger and thirſt. may be referred to this
kind of naturall appetite, if this be excepted, that we can not ſay, it
is without ſenſe and feeling. For beſide the deſire of eating and drinking,
there is withall a ſenſe of this attraction, whereby the members
ſucke the veines, and the veines the blood: and this ſenſe is not
without greefe and diſpleaſure. So that euery liuing creature is ſtirred
vp to ſeeke for his foode, and to take his refection. Wherevpon
wee may diuide this naturall appetite alſo into two kindes,

whereof the one ſhalbe proper to plants that haue no ſenſe,Two kindes of Senſe. and the
other belong to liuing creatures that haue this feeling, of which I
made mention euen now, and which differeth from that ſenſe that is
proper to the outward ſenſes already ſpoken of. The reaſon whereof
is, becauſe it is properly ſuch a kind of feeling, as thoſe creatures haue,
which keepe a meane betweene plants and liuing creatures, beeing
partakers of both their natures, and yet are neither ſimply plants, nor
perfect liuing creatures, as it hath beene already ſhewed. As therefore
we heard in our former diſcourſe, ſpeaking of the growing vp of
mans body, and of the manifeſtation by little and little of the powers
of the ſoule, namely that as long as the child is in his mothers wombe,
he is like to plants, ſo alſo hee hath then great agreement with theſe
middle ſorts of creatures in regard of this kinde of appetite, and of the
manner of nouriſhing whereby it is fedde. For the ſeede, whereof hee
is begotten and conceiued, is nouriſhed and groweth vp as plants do,
vntill ſuch time as the Infant that is faſhioned, haue ſenſe and feeling,
much like to that ſenſe of the aforeſaide creatures, which are partakers
of the nature both of plants and of liuing creatures. For as yet he hath
no vſe of his externall ſenſes,Of the ſeate of the naturall appetite. vntill ſuch time as hee be borne. Nowe
the ſeate of this kinde of naturall appetite, is chiefly in the liuer and in
the ſtomacke, and generally in all the members that ſerue for nouriſhment.
For theſe members haue that appetite that is ioyned with this
kinde of ſenſe, of which I ſpake euen nowe. And as for the appetite of
the other members, which ſerue not for the nouriſhing of the whole
body, but onely for themſelues, it is more like to that appetite that is
in plantes. For they feele neither hunger nor thirſt as other members
doe. And thus much for the natural appetite and the kinds thereof.
Concerning the ſenſitiue appetite,Of the ſenſitiue appetite & kinds thereof. it is that which accompanieth
the ſenſe, and belongeth onely to liuing creatures. There are two ſorts
of this. For either it is made with touching, or without touching. Pleaſure
and griefe belong properly to the firſt kinde, and the inſtruments
and ſeats thereof are in the ſinewes, or els in that ſmall ſinewy skinne,
which giueth the ſenſe. For thoſe things delight the ſinewes which agree
with their nature, and looke what is contrary vnto them, the ſame
affecteth them with griefe, which tendeth to their deſtruction, as delight
procureth their preſeruation. So that heate, colde, dryneſſe, and
moyſture, reioyce, helpe and comfort the ſinewes, or els grieue, hurt
& indamage them, according as they are eyther wel or ill applied vnto
them.The vſe of the ſinewes. Therfore the ſinewes were created, to the end they might be
inſtruments of ſenſe and motion, and that they ſhoulde receiue pleaſure
and paine. Now all theſe ſorts of appetites, are not in the will and

power of man, neither proceed they from his imagination. For whether
he will or no, he ſhall be ſubiect to hunger and thirſt, and ſhall in
the ſame manner feele and perceiue thinges as they are applied vnto
him, if he be ſo diſpoſed in body as he ought to be. True it is he may
wel abſtaine from eating & drinking, & from touching whatſoeuer he
pleaſeth, but this abſtinence in the meane time wil not take from him
that appetite which hee hath, but will increaſe it the more. For it cannot
hinder, but that all the members will ſtill deſire their nouriſhment,
and the body will alwayes haue this ſenſe and feeling. And
as for the ſenſe of touching, it will alwayes feele that which it toucheth,
and euen ſuch as it is when it ſhalbe touched. But there are appetites
of an other kinde, which are bredde without any touch at all,
and follow the thought and imagination of a man. Theſe are properly
called affections, and haue their ſeate in the heart. Therefore they
muſt bee diſtinguiſhed from others that hauing ſence of delectation
and of griefe, are placed in the ſtomacke, or in the ſinewes, or in the
reſt of the body.Of the affections. Now by the affections, we meane properly thoſe motions
of the heart, which follow knowledge, and either ſeeke after or
reiect, that which is offered vnto them: ſo that according to the order
of nature, knowledge goeth before theſe motions. Hereof it is, that we
commonly ſay, that a man muſt know before he loue, and that no man
deſireth that which he knoweth not. But before we enter into a deeper
and more particular conſideration of the affections of the ſoule,
and of the heart, wee muſt note this, that all knowledge is giuen of
God to this end,The ende of knowledge. to deſire that Good which it knoweth, and in deſiring
to followe the ſame, vntill it hath ioyned and knit it vnto it ſelfe, as
neere as is poſſible. For in this manner Good will be good vnto it, and
not otherwiſe. To this ende ſenſuall knowledge is giuen for ſenſuall
goods, and ſpirituall knowledge for thoſe goods that are ſpirituall.
And as the knowledge both of the one and the other is giuen to deſire
it, ſo alſo is it giuen that it might turne aſide and flee from euill,
which is contrarie to good, to the ende that the Will might not
ioyne it ſelfe thereunto, by which meanes euill woulde indeede
become euill vnto it, and coulde not otherwiſe bee auoyded. For
as good coulde not bee good vnto vs, but onely ſo farre foorth as
wee did apply it and ioyne our ſelues therevnto, ſo fareth it alſo with
euill. And becauſe GOD hath not created beaſtes to enioy any other
good then corporall goods, and ſuch as belong to their brutiſh
life, which goeth not beyonde this temporall life, therefore he
hath not giuen them the knowledge or appetite of any other good.
So that as they haue no other knowledge but that which is ſenſuall,

ſo they haue no other appetite but ſenſuall,The beſt thingsin beaſts are ſenſuall. which is guyded
onely by naturall inclination, wherein they haue nature onely for
their Miſtreſſe, which pricketh forwarde both their outwarde and
inwarde ſenſes without any direction at all of Vnderſtanding and of
Reaſon. Therefore this ſenſuall appetite common to all liuing creatures,
cannot properly bee called Will. For as wee cannot call
by the name of Vnderſtanding and Reaſon, that naturall inclination
which is giuen to beaſtes for their direction, ſeeing men onely
are endued with Vnderſtanding and Reaſon,Beaſts haue no Will. ſo is it with Will, the
name whereof agreeth not to that ſenſuall appetite, except wee
woulde call it ſenſuall Will, in reſpect of the reſemblance of Will,
which it hath, wherein it differeth much from the Will in man:
as the ſequele of our ſpeech requireth that wee ſhoulde now learne,
to the ende wee may knowe the thirde kinde of appetite which
wee ſet downe in the beginning of this diſcourſe, namely the voluntarie
appetite, which is proper and peculiar to man, and the
ſubiect of his Will. Thou ſhalt tell vs therefore, AMANA, what
Will is properly, what her actions are, what libertie and freedome ſhe
hath, and what power Reaſon may haue ouer her.
            
            
               Of Will, and of the diuers ſignifications and vſes of theſe wordes,
Reaſon and Will: of the actions, freedome, and nature thereof:
of the power which Reaſon may haue ouer her. Chap. 34.
               AMANA. The loue of GOD towardes men hath alwayes
beene, and is ſuch, that albeeit hee hath iuſt occaſion to hate
vs as ſinners, yet that hindereth him not from louing vs alwayes as
men. For hee conſidereth man otherwiſe in the nature and ſubſtance
with which hee created him, and as hee is his woorke, then
in that diſorder and confuſion, which after entered vpon his nature
by the woorke of Satan in him.Matth. 5. For this cauſe wee ſee that hee
cauſeth his ſunne to ſhine aſwell vpon the euill as vpon the good, ſendeth
raine to the one as well as to the other, and powreth many benefites
vpon all in generall. But beſides this loue, whereof euery one receiueth
fruite, there is another more ſpeciall towardes his elect, whom
hee loueth not onely as he loued vs all in Adam the ſtocke of mankinde,
and as his creatures created after his image, but loueth
them alſo as regenerated and newe creatures in Ieſus Chriſt his
Sonne, the latter and iuſt Adam, GOD and man, and the ſtocke
of ſpirituall men framed againe by him to the image and ſimilitude

of God. Therefore we muſt vnnderſtand, that God hath and doeth
loue men in regarde of the good hee hath put into them, (which is
wrought chiefly through the benefite of ſpirituall regeneration) the
remnant of which Good he ſtill loueth. And in louing that he loueth
himſelfe, becauſe he is the ſoueraigne and onely good, which is worthy
to be loued in reſpect of it ſelfe. Whereby we may ſee, what is the
true fountaine of all loue, and of all the deſires, appetites and willes of
all creatures.From whence the deſires of all creatures ought to be deriued. For they muſt all bee drawen out of one and the ſame
ſpring and fountaine, namely the loue and will of God, and that good
which he loueth and willeth. And the greater the Good is, the more it
ought to bee loued, ſo that euery Will ſhould deſire to ioyne it ſelfe
therevnto, to follow after it, and to haue the fruition thereof. And becauſe
there can be no Good greater then God, therefore no other can
be loued but that. So that whileſt he loueth himſelfe, he loueth all the
good that may bee, becauſe there is none but in him and from him.
Therefore this followeth neceſſarily, that as all good things proceede
from him, ſo they muſt bee all referred to him, and returne thither as
to the Wel-head, euen as all waters returne into the Sea from whence
they came firſt of al. Hauing then learned of our former diſcourſe, that
God hath giuen to man vnderſtanding to know good, and will to deſire
and follow it, it is his duetie alwayes to referre all the good things
he hath, vnto him that is ſoueraigne and eternall Good, and to account
nothing good, as in trueth it cannot be, but him that ought to bee ſo
accounted, and to looke at him as the laſt and moſt bleſſed end.
               We vnderſtand then properly by Will,What Will is, and how it worketh. that facultie and vertue of
the ſoule, whereby we deſire that which is good, and eſchew euill by
the direction and guyding of reaſon. Therefore there are two actions
of Will, wherof the firſt is that inclination to good by which it imbraceth
the ſame, and the ſecond is the turning aſide from euill. And
when it is idle and inclineth to neither ſide, it is depriued of both theſe
actions. Nowe although we ſaide before, that reaſon helde the ſoueraignty
amongſt the powers, vertues and offices of the ſoule, yet wee
muſt know, that reaſon raigneth not ouer Will as Lady and Princeſſe,
but onely as Miſtreſſe to teach and ſhew it, what it ought to followe,
and what to flie from. For the will hath no light of it ſelfe, but is lightned
by the minde,How reaſon is ſet ouer the Will. that is to ſay, by reaſon and iudgement, which are
ioyned with it, not to gouerne and turne it from one ſide to another
by commandement and authoritie, either by force or violence, as a
Prince or Magiſtrate, but as a counſailer or directer, to admoniſh and
to conduct it. And ſo the will deſireth or refuſeth nothing, which reaſon
hath not firſt ſhewed that it is to be deſired or diſdayned. Therefore

the act of Will proceedeth indeede from Will, but it is iudged of
and counſelled by reaſon: ſo that a man may ſay, that it is as it were
begotten by reaſon, and brought forth by Will. But that wee deceiue
not our ſelues in theſe names of reaſon and of Will, we are to knowe,
that both of them are taken diuerſly, as the names of Minde and Vnderſtanding
are.Diuers acceptions of the words, Reaſon & Will. For ſometime they are taken for that vertue of vnderſtanding
which is in the ſoule, and ſometime for the action thereof and
the thing which it doeth vnderſtand: as when we ſay that wee haue
the vnderſtanding of ſomething. So reaſon is ſometime taken for the
minde that giueth direction and counſaile, and for the will which obeyeth
it, and reſtraineth the affections: and in this ſence, it comprehendeth
both the Vnderſtanding and the Will. But ſometime it is taken
onely for that part, which vnderſtandeth and hath knowledge to
conduct and guide, as nowe we muſt ſo take it, in making it the Miſtreſſe
and counſailour of the Will. Beſides, reaſon is alſo taken oftentimes
for the arguments and diſcourſes of reaſon, as when we ſay of a
man, He hath good reaſon in that: or els, He hath proued his ſaying
by good and pregnant reaſons, that is to ſay, by good arguments. And
if we take reaſon ſo, it ſignifieth not only that power and vertue of diſcourſing
which is in the ſoule and in the minde, but alſo the act and effect
therof. The like may be ſaid of this word Will. For it is commonly
taken, not ſo much for that power and vertue which the ſoule hath
to Will, as for the Will it ſelfe, which is the action and effect thereof:
as when one ſpeaking of tyrants ſaith, that their Will is all their reaſon.
For then we meane, that they take nor Reaſon for their counſailer,
neither follow the aduice thereof, but onely their Will, and that
which pleaſeth them. So then wee vſe this worde Will for that which
proceedeth from it:Pſal. 115. and ſo likewiſe it is often taken in the holy Scriptures,
when they ſpeake of the Will of God, whereby we doe not vnderſtand
that power of Will that is in him, but that which hee willeth
and commandeth vs.Matth. 6. And therefore we craue that his Will may be done,
and not that which we will. But ſpeaking now of the Will of man, we
take it not in this ſence, but we vſe it for the power and vertue of Willing
that is in the ſoule, which power is aboue the ſenſitiue appetite,
whereof we haue already ſpoken. For we ſee by experience, that there
are certaine degrees of appetites, and that the appetite of the ſenſes is
ſubiect to the Will, as I hope we ſhall intreate more at large in the ſequele
of our ſpeech.The Will is the chiefeſt appetite
                        •
                     
                   Wherefore the Will is the higheſt and moſt ſoueraigne
vertue of deſiring, farre aboue all other appetites, and that
which woorketh with libertie, after the minde hath ſhewed vnto it
what it ought to follow, and what to eſchew, what to make choyſe of,

and what to refuſe. The actions thereof are to Will, and not to
Will: and the meane or middle thing which ſhee hath betweene
them twayne, is to ſuſpend her action, vntill ſhee decline eyther on
the one ſide or the other. And as concerning the naturall diſpoſition
of the Will, it is to will that good which is truely good, or
that which ſeemeth to bee ſo: and to ſhunne euill, eyther that
which is euill in deede,The Wil aymeth alwaies at good. or that which it thinketh to bee ſo. Nowe
if ſhee chooſe and followe euill for good, it followeth not therefore,
but that ſhee woulde alwayes followe the good, as that which
properly appertayneth vnto her, and reiect euill as her enemie. But
the reaſon why ſhee maketh choyce of euill for good, is becauſe
ſhee is deceiued, taking one for another, which commeth to paſſe
through the ignoraunce and corruption that is in the nature of
man. For albeeit ſhee can will and not will that thing which is propounded
vnto her, yet ſhee cannot ſimply will and not will one and
the ſame thing all at one time, nor yet make choyſe of cleane contraries.
For ſhee can deſire nothing but onely vnder ſome ſhewe of
good, nor refuſe any thing but vnder ſome ſhewe of euill. Wherefore
it may well bee, that it will not deſire that which ſhall bee
ſhewed vnder ſome appearaunce of good, but it cannot hate or reiect
it. Likewiſe it may peraduenture abſtayne from reiecting or flying
from that, which ſhall bee preſented before it with ſhewe of
euill and not of good, but it cannot deſire, loue, and purſue the
ſame.
               Wherevpon it followeth,The Will is free and vnconſtrayned. that our Will is at libertie and free, and
cannot bee conſtrayned: yea God the Creatour and Lorde thereof
woulde haue it ſo, otherwiſe it ſhoulde not bee a Will. It is verie
true, that it followeth reaſon alwayes, becauſe the Will hath no
light of it ſelfe, but onely ſo farre foorth as it receiueth the ſame from
reaſon, which guideth and directeth it. And therefore it neuer applieth
it ſelfe to any thing whatſoeuer, but hath reaſon alwayes for a
guide, whome it followeth. Neuertheleſſe it is not ſo ſubiect therevnto,
as that it may compell it to followe all the reaſons that are propounded
vnto it by reaſon, or tye it to any of them, but that alwayes
ſhee hath her libertie to make choyſe of which reaſon ſhee pleaſe,
out of all thoſe that are ſet before her. And ſo it is alwayes a Will, although
it change ſometime, beeing perſwaded by reaſons to will
when it was vnwilling, or diſſwaded from Will to bee vnwilling. But
in the meane time ſhee willeth whatſoeuer ſhee will, and that as long
as it pleaſeth her to remayne in one opinion. For not onely no creature
whatſoeuer is able to take from her that which GOD her

Creator hath giuen her, but ſhee cannot depriue her ſelfe thereof,
no more then ſhe may not be that which ſhee is. For as God
will haue his image ſhine in the minde of man by vnderſtanding and
wiſedome, of which hee hath made it partaker, ſo hee will haue
his image alſo to ſhine in the Will by that freedome and libertie
which hee hath giuen vnto it.Of the image of God in the Will. As therefore hee cannot bee conſtrained,
but woorketh and doeth what pleaſeth him with all libertie,
as beeyng a Soueraigne that hath no ſuperiour, ſo hee hath appoynted,
that the Will which hee hath giuen to men and Angels, ſhoulde
bee alwayes franke and free, and not bee ſubiect to violence or conſtraint:
to the ende hee might haue them children, not ſlaues, becauſe
hee requireth of them a voluntarie obedience, and ſuch a ſeruice
as is not forced or conſtrayned, but agreeable to his owne nature.
For as hee doeth nothing himſelfe by conſtraint, ſo hee will
not conſtrayne thoſe by whome hee will bee obeyed: neither delighteth
hee in any ſeruice that is not voluntary and proceeding from
a good heart, and from a ſincere and pure affection towardes him.
Therefore ſeeing God hath ſo loued vs, and done vs ſo great honour,
as to create vs after his owne image, and likeneſſe, wee are
vile and ingratefull wretches, if wee doe not acknowledge the ſame,
and cauſe our Will to be ſeruiceable to him that hath beſtowed
it freely vpon vs: as wee ought alſo to perfourme the like ſeruice vnto
him with our minde and reaſon, wherewith he hath endued vs for
the ruling and direction of the Will. But when our Will taketh any other
obiect beſide obedience to God, it proceedeth from the ſame
cauſe that blindeth our minde and reaſon, namely ſinne, which reigneth
in vs through the corruption of our nature, as wee haue already
touched it.
                     Good is alwayes the obiect of the Will. Neuertheles that which I haue ſaid is alwaies true, that the
wil hath Good in ſuch ſort for her obiect, that ſhe cannot truly & without
diſſembling Will that which is euil, if it hath no ſhew or reaſon of
ſome good. But notwithſtanding ſhe hath free libertie, yet is ſhee ſo
ordeyned of God, that ſhee cannot will that which is euill, but onely
that which is good, whether it bee good in trueth, or in opinion
onely. For if ſhee were not created and ordayned of GOD
to deſire and followe after good, there woulde bee no cauſe why
ſhe ſhoulde loue or deſire vertue more then vice, or loue God, rather
then hate him.Diuers degrees in the actions of Will.
                   But wee muſt conſider diuers degrees in the actions
of Will, and in the freedome theereof. For ſome there are
whoſe heart and Will agree ſo together, that there is no diſſimulation,
neither any commaundement of the Will eyther towardes it
ſelfe or towardes any other, but it heartily deſireth or refuſeth that,

which it ſeeketh after or eſcheweth. As we may ſay of an ambitious
man, that hee doeth truely and with all his heart deſire honour and
glorie, as alſo a couetous man doeth riches. But there are other actions
of the Will, wherein ſhe commaundeth her ſelfe, or els the inferiour
powers that are ſubiect vnto her: as wee ſee in a man infected
with the dropſie, who beeing verie drye and thirſtie, deſireth
greatly to drinke. But this appetite that commeth from the ſenſes
of the bodie, is reſtrayned by the Will that hath power ouer it, which
knowing what hurt would iſſue thereof to the ſicke partie, commandeth
this appetite, and appoynteth that hee ſhall not drinke. The
reaſon why ſhe will haue it ſo, is, to the ende that the patient might
auoyde greater euill then that which hee endureth, knowing well,
that to drinke woulde hurt him more then helpe him, becauſe the
thirſtineſſe woulde not bee taken from him,How the W
                        •
                      cō
                     mandeth the appetite. but encreaſed. Wherefore
although the ſenſuall appetite putteth the patient in minde to
deſire drinke, yet Will following the iudgement of Reaſon, oppoſeth
it ſelfe againſt this appetite, and commaundeth it ſelfe to abſtain,
& alſo the outward members, as namely the mouth not to drink,
and the handes not to giue it any drinke. Now if it ſo fall out, that
the Will giue place to the appetite, it is alwayes with her conſent,
and that becauſe ſhee agreeth rather vnto the ſenſuall appetite then
vnto Reaſon. Which agreement proceedeth of her impatiencie and
incontinencie, becauſe ſhe hath not patience to ſtay for the better, but
ruſheth vpon that pleaſure, which at that preſent ſeemeth beſt vnto
her and neereſt at hand. Therfore it is alwayes requiſite that the grace
of God ſhould gouerne our minde and will, to perſwade them euermore
to counſaile and to imbrace the beſt: otherwiſe wee ſhall make
choyce of the worſt, and of euill rather then of good. Which we ſhall
eaſily vnderſtand, if we conſider what good things the wiſeſt and moſt
vertuous men, guided only by the light of nature, are able to propound
to themſelues and to follow: and what difference in that poynt there
is betwixt them, and thoſe whome God doeth guide and gouerne by
his ſpirite. The diſcourſe then of this matter belongeth to thee, ARAM.
            
            
               Of thoſe good things, which both men, guided onely by the light of nature,
are able to propound to themſelues, and to follow; and they alſo that are
guided by the ſpirite of God: of the power and libertie of the Will in her
actions, both externall and internall. Chap. 35.
               ARAM. Among the heathen Philoſophers there haue alwayes
beene ſome great perſonages endued with excellent doctrine,

who ſeemed to haue bene led with a burning affection towards good
and vertuous things: this no man can deny. But if we compare them
that haue had none but naturall light,The difference betwixt the natural and regenerated man. with them who beleeuing the
worde of life, haue receiued that light, which the ſpirite of GOD
hath kindeled in their heartes and mindes, wee ſhall finde very great
difference betwixt them. For they that followe the light of nature,
take not an infinite, ſpirituall and eternall good, which is God,
for the obiect of that good which they deſire, but a finite, carnall
and temporarie good, and that alſo no farther then their reaſon
and ſenſe iudge it good for mankinde, or for the ſocietie of men,
or for themſelues, and thoſe whome they loue. The like reſpect
they haue in eſchewing euill, which they iudge contrary to ſuch a
good. And yet there are very fewe that goe ſo farre, who giue
not themſelues to vertue, rather for their owne profite or glorie,
then for the loue they beare to vertue, or to the benefite of the common
ſocietie of men. And ſurely I thinke, that if glorie had not
more mooued ſo many excellent men, as haue beene heeretofore among
the Grecians, Latines, and other heathen people and nations,
then their loue to vertue, and to thinges profitable for the common
wealth, they woulde not willingly haue incurred ſo great dangers
to effect ſo many valiant deedes as Hiſtories ſpecifie of them:
neyther woulde they haue ſet vertue at ſo high a price, if no glorie
or profite ſhoulde haue redounded to them in following her, or
at leaſtwiſe in ſeeming to ſeeke after her. If any haue beene founde
to haue done otherwiſe, as wee reade of ſome, it is to bee attributed
to a ſpeciall grace that God hath beſtowed vpon them in their ignorance,
more then to others. But yet all this would bee nothing, or
very litle, ſeeing the good which the Will propoundeth to it ſelfe, and
purſueth in this ſort, is not the true and ſoueraigne good, which of it
ſelfe is able to make men bleſſed.
               Wee are then to knowe,What is the chief good that meere naturall men ſeeke after. that the wiſeſt and moſt vertuous
men, guided onely by the light of naturall reaſon, doe not propounde
to themſelues, nor ſeeke after any other good then that,
which conſiſteth in ciuill honeſtie, in worldly honour and glorie, in
this bodily life, and in the commodities thereof, and in thoſe delightes
and pleaſures, which their humane ſenſe and reaſon deſire,
according as ſome delight eyther in the knowledge of thinges,
or in ciuill and morall vertues, or in honours, or in riches and in ſuch
like thinges. Yea the beſt that euer were among the Heathen, and
the wiſeſt of this worlde that are like vnto them, neuer went farther,
neyther in deede coulde. For ſeeing they knowe not GOD

truely, they can neither loue him nor ſeeke after him) either becauſe
they are not throughly perſwaded that there is a God, or if they bee
ſure of that, yet they ſtand doubtfull what he is, whether he haue care
of men or no, and whether he heare and helpe them, when they call
vpon him. And if they be in aduerſity, then they loue him much leſſe.
For if they thinke that their miſeries come from their owne nature,
or at all aduenture, they ſuppoſe they are not bounde vnto him, neither
ought to loue him, ſeeing hee hath prouided no better for their
affayres. And if they thinke, that himſelfe doeth ſende them becauſe
of their ſinnes, they are ſo farre from louing him, that contrariwiſe
they hate him, and ſtorme againſt him: as it is moſt manifeſt
by infinite blaſphemies contayned in the bookes of Heathen Poets,
Hiſtoriographers, and Philoſophers, aſwell againſt God, as againſt
his prouidence, iudgements, and all his woorkes, when they
fell not out to their lyking. Nowe if their Vnderſtanding was ſo blinded
in the Knowledge of God, their Will was much turned out of
the way. For it is alwayes like to a ſhippe carried hither and thither
by diuers tempeſts, which ſeeketh ſtill ſome hauen to arriue at, but
can finde none. So the Will ſeeking after the good which it deſireth,
runneth and skippeth from one to another without order, and
can finde no reſt, except that heauenly light ſhine into the minde,
which may teach it the true good, and frame it to the ſeeking and imbracing
thereof.What good men are taught to ayme at by the heauenly light. Therefore when this light is in the ſpirite of man, it
firſt preſenteth to the Will that infinite good, namely God, in whom
alone ſhee may ſatisfie her ſelfe, and then all other good thinges that
depende of that, all which ſhee deſireth, euery one in his order. Thus
ſhall God haue the firſt place, and the next his creatures, all which
wee ought to loue ſo farre foorth as hee hath created them, and
ſo conſequently are good. And if wee place God in the higheſt degree
of loue, as the ſoueraigne good, with whoſe loue we ought to
be as it were wholly ſwallowed vp, wee will loue nothing but in him
and by him, and for his ſake: and conſequently we will deſire nothing
but according to his Will, becauſe wee can Will or deſire nothing
but that which wee ſhall loue, and wee ſhall loue nothing, but that
which wee ought to loue, neither with any other affection nor to
any other ende. Which is the proper effect of the ſpirite of God in
them that are regenerated and guided by him. And thus when the
darkeneſſe of our minde is driuen out by light from heauen, which
is brought vnto it by Ieſus Chriſt, and the Will inflamed by the holy
Ghoſt, then doe our heartes reioyce in the goodneſſe of God, and our
conſcience reſteth therein, then doe we loue him, and beginne to obey

him, not deſiring any other thing. Therefore we beſeech him to guide
& gouern vs, to reforme vs daily more & more after his own image and
ſimilitude, to ye end we may be made conformable to him both in mind
& will,How we muſt cary our ſelues both in proſperity and aduerſity. & become true temples for him to dwel in. And whatſoeuer he
ſendeth vs, whether it be proſperity or aduerſity, we take and receiue al
as from his hād, giuing him thanks in proſperity, & not abuſing or extolling
our ſelues againſt him: and calling vpon him in aduerſity without
murmuring or deſpiting his maieſty, which we adore alwaies, whether
we vnderſtand & comprehend his iudgements, or no. Likewiſe
we are led by him to loue all good things, according to yt order which
is ſhewed vnto vs by his heauenly wiſdome, namely, other men made
after the image of God as we are, & thoſe vertues, life, & things that are
agreeable vnto him, deſiring thē for the loue of God, & knowing that
we ſerue him in the lawful vſe of all theſe things, yeelding praiſes and
thanks vnto him, as to the author & creator of them. Neuertheles it cō
                  meth
to paſſe that we ſee oftentimes a very great confuſion in the maners
& works, euen of the holieſt & beſt men that may be: but yt is whē
God withdraweth from them his ſpirite & grace,Of the frailety of mans eſtate. although it be neuer
ſo litle a while, or when he doth not manifeſt & ſhew forth his vertue
& power in thē. For without God we can doe nothing, & through him
nothing is impoſſible vnto vs. It is very certain, that there remaineth alwaies
natural infirmity & corruption in man, and that the mind, reaſon
& memory may be troubled by the affections of the heart, which reſē
                  bleth
a fiery ſurnce, & is like to a thick ſmoke aſcending out of a great
fire which would dim the eies & make them as it were blind. And whē
the light of ye mind is thus darkned, reaſon cānot diſcourſe ſo wel, nor
iudgement iudge ſo vprightly, nor memory retaine ſo firmly, or bring
forth ſo readily yt which it hath kept, as if none of them were thus hindred
with darkneſſe, which compaſſeth about the light that ought to
guide thē. Now if there be ſuch a let & impedimēt in regard of ye mind,
the Wil is much more troubled by this fire of affections that heateth &
kindleth it, whereby it is made a great deale more vntoward to follow
the counſel & aduiſe of reaſon, then reaſon is wel affected to admoniſh
and counſel it in that which is to be followed, or to be fled. And when
theſe two principal parts & powers of the ſoule are thus troubled and
moued, it is no maruel if man forget God & himſelf, & if wt al his ſoule
& body he turn aſide from yt which he ought to follow after. As cōtrariwiſe
there is no doubt, but yt as long as the celeſtial & eternal father
diſperſeth his diuine light into our minds by his ſonne, who is his eternal
word and wiſedome, preparing them by his holy ſpirit to receaue
the ſame, and by this meanes alſo kindeleth the heart and Will with

the heate thereof, diſpoſing and framing them to follow this light, no
doubt I ſay, but there will enſue a good agreement and great conformitie
of the minde and heart, of the Reaſon and Will, and of all the
affections, yea of all the ſenſes and members of man. But let vs return
to the ſequele of our ſpeech, which hath an eſpeciall reſpect vnto the
Will, we haue then to conſider more narrowly of the power and freedome
of the Will, both in her internall and externall actions. For the
firſt,Of the power of the Will in all actions. if the queſtion bee of deliberating about any thing, it is in the
choyce of the Will to propound the ſame to the minde, to aduiſe and
conſult thereupon, or otherwiſe not to propounde the ſame vnto it.
After whileſt the matter is in deliberation, ſhe may command eyther
to proſecute the ſame, or to deferre it to ſome other time, or to giue
it ouer quite, and to turne the minde to ſome other thing, as it were a
Prince among his councell. And if the conſultation bee finiſhed, and
ſentence giuen by iudgement, yet may the will ſtay it ſelfe from deſiring
and following after that which is counſelled, and iudged to bee
good by reaſon. So that the whole conſultation lieth in the liberty and
choyce of Will. For men are not drawne by an immutable violence of
nature as beaſts are, but reaſon enquireth what way is to be taken or
left, and wayeth and examineth what good or euill is in euery thing,
Therefore Will may goe about againe with that which was once deliberated
of, to the end the firſt concluſion be not approued & ſtaied in,
but that greater inquiry may be made, to finde out, if it may bee, ſome
better or more profitable thing. And thus when many thinges are
ſhewed & ſet before her, ſhe may chooſe what pleaſeth her, although
it be not that which was beſt approued by iudgement, and which reaſon
vpon very euident arguments counſelled her to follow. For if there
be another ſide that hath ſome ſhew of good, albeit neuer ſo ſmall, ſhe
turneth to that if ſhe pleaſe: ſo that vpon one onely coniecture, or opinion
of good, ſhe will lay holde vpon that, and reiect the other ſide
in which peraduenture the ture good is to bee founde. The chiefe
cauſe whereof is in the corruption of our nature, and in thoſe impediments
of good diſcourſing, and of vpright iudging, whereof wee
haue alreadie hearde, and which hinder reaſon and iudgement diuers
and ſundrie wayes. And this alſo taketh place in reſpect of
Will, which likewiſe hath great occaſions offered to beguile and
deceiue it ſelfe, becauſe all the affaires of men are intermingled
with good and euill thinges. Therefore it is very hard to be able to diſcerne
and ſeparate them well one from another. For men being compounded
of diuers natures, namely of a body and of a ſoule, they propound
alſo diuerſity of good & euil things vnto themſelues: & becauſe

they know corporall and terreſtriall things better then ſpirituall and eternall
things,Why men preferre earthly things before heauenly. therefore they preferre them oftentimes before the other.
Which is the cauſe why there are ſo many that loue this life a
great deale better, and thoſe outward good things belonging therevnto,
then they doe eternall life, and thoſe goods, which are able to
leade men thither, and giue them full fruition therof when they come
thither. Therefore in ſo great diuerſity of good and euill things, it is no
marueile if there came nothing into deliberation, wherein reaſon findeth
not ſome good or euill, which in the end it counſaileth vs to follow
or to auoyde, according to the circumſtances of times, places, perſons,
qualities and other ſuch like things. It commeth to paſſe alſo oftentimes,
that Will refuſeth all counſaile and exhortation to doe that
onely which ſhe pleaſeth,Will ſometime reiecteth all counſaile. thereby to ſhew that ſhee is Lady and Miſtreſſe
and ſubiect to none. And beeing mounted vp to that pride,
ſhee accounteth this Lordſhippe which ſhee taketh to her ſelfe to bee
a great good, and ſo maketh knowne her power and magnificence, as
it were a tyrannicall prince, making choyce in the meane time of a
falſe kinde of good, which is no way good, but a very great euil. And
thus much concerning the libertie of the Will in her internall actions:
which freedome alſo appeareth plainly enough in the outwarde actions.
For after ſhe hath liked of a thing,What freedome the Will hath in outward actions. ſhe may put it in execution, or
ſtay execution: yea after ſhe hath begunne, ſhe may giue it cleane ouer,
or doe not ſo much, or ſo ſpeedily as ſhee might. And although
it falleth out oftentimes, that men are hindered from executing their
Will, yea are forced and compelled to doe the cleane contrary, yet
their Will, if we conſider the matter well, is neither hindred, forced
or conſtrained. For that keepeth it not from willing ſtill that
which it pleaſeth: but the violence offered outwardly, ſtayeth the
effectes and execution thereof. Hereof it is that wee commonly ſay,
that a mans Will is taken for his deede, although it bee not put in execution.
Nowe to conclude our ſpeech, wee knowe that the Will
hath hinderances to let her from chooſing thoſe good things which
ſhee ought to followe, and refuſing thoſe euils ſhee ought to eſchewe
and auoyde. For Reaſon beeing appoynted as Miſtreſſe, to
guide and direct Will by her iudgement,The neere coniunction of Reaſon and Will. the ſelfeſame thinges that
mooue Reaſon and Iudgement, doe mooue Will alſo, as if the one
touched the other, or as if there were a certayne knitting and ioyning
of them together, not vnlike to the linkes of a chayne, of
which if yee mooue or touch one, the like is done to the others that
are neere vnto it, by reaſon of the coniunction they haue one with
another. Wee ought alſo to knowe, that although the Will often

chooſe euill in ſtead of good, yet it ceaſſeth not therefore euer to deſire
good naturally, which is moſt fitte and agreeable to the nature therof:
but it is deceaued in that it hath no skill to diſcerne between true and
falſe goodes,Eu
                        ••
                      ſpirites haue power ouer the Will. and to diſtinguiſh the greater from the leſſe. And as
wee haue hearde, that euill ſpirites may trouble and mooue the fantaſie
and minde, ſo no doubt they can doe the like towardes the
heart and Will, to induce them to euill, and to driue them to doe greater
thinges then weake nature woulde doe of it ſelfe, if it were not
holpen by them, euen to cauſe them to committe ſuch crimes as
nature abhorreth. Therefore wee muſt without ceaſſing watch and
pray that wee enter not into temptation, and if wee bee tempted,
that wee fayle not, neither bee ouercome. And this wee may aſſuredly
beleeue wee ſhall obtayne, if through regeneration by the
ſpirite of GOD our minde bee taught, and our Will guyded by
his light. Nowe then hauing ſpoken enough of Vnderſtanding and
of Will, which are the principall powers of the ſoule, let vs come to
the affections thereof: and firſt it ſhall bee good for vs to conſider
of the diſtinction that ought to bee made betwixt all theſe faculties
of the ſoule, and betweene their ſeates and inſtruments, which
they haue in the bodie. But wee ſhall learne theſe thinges of thee, ACHITOB.
            
            
               Of the diſtinction that ought to be betweene the Vnderſtanding and knowledge,
and the Will and affections in the ſoule, and betweene the ſeates
and inſtruments which they haue in the body: of the agreement that is
betweene the heart and the braine. Chap. 36.
               ACHITOB. The heauens, the earth and all the elementes, the
ſtones, plants, beaſts & al the other creatures that want reaſon &
vnderſtanding, obey God in their kind, but yet they know him not: &
the obedience which they yeld vnto him proceedeth not of any knowledge
they haue of his will, or of iudgement in them to diſcerne good
from euill, but only ſo farre forth as they are drawne by their natural inclination
in thoſe things that concerne their nature.The difference of mans obedience to God from that of other creatures. But Angels and
Men, in whome God woulde haue his image to ſhine in euery part of
them, and after all ſorts, were created by him of that nature, that hee
would be knowne of them, and that they ſhould follow his Will, not
without Vnderſtanding and iudgement thereof, nor without agreement
of their willes with his. Therefore he hath giuen them a nature
that is partaker of Vnderſtanding, and preſcribed vnto them rules of
iudgement and of certain knowledge, which are vnto them as it were

lawes ordained by a ſoueraigne Prince for the ruling of his ſubiectes.
And to the end that theſe lawes ſhould not be in vaine, he hath placed
in man a Will to execute them, and an affection of ioy, that is brought
to him by meanes of the good which he receiueth or expecteth, when
he obeyeth theſe lawes that command nothing but iuſt things. So that
hee would haue the nature of man to leade a ioyfull life, and by this
meanes be preſerued, that he might ſolace himſelfe in the knowledge
of God his Creator, and in obeying him, ſettle and reſt himſelf in him.
As contrariwiſe, it pleaſed him to place there an affection of ſadneſſe,
to take vengeance of rebellion againſt his lawes, and of the tranſgreſſion
of them, to the end there might be a flame of anger and griefe to
deſtroy that nature, when it doeth not conforme it ſelfe to the rule of
his diuine wiſedome and will. Hereby we know by experience, what
difference there is betweene a ioyfull life, and that which is ſad & full
of griefe, and how ioy preſerueth and maintaineth the one, and ſorow
conſumeth and extinguiſheth the other.
               But to the end we may fully vnderſtand theſe thinges, and bee able
to iudge aright of the diuers powers, vertues and offices of
the ſoule, wee muſt diligently conſider, that as GOD hath diſtinguiſhed
the Vnderſtanding from the Will and affections, and
the Animall vertue and life from the 
                     Ʋitall, ſo alſo hee hath giuen
them diuers ſeates and inſtrumentes in the bodie.Difference betwixt Knowledge and Affections. There is likewiſe
great difference betwixt Vnderſtanding and Knowledge, and the
Will and Affections, as we ſee it by experience in common life. For it
falleth out often, that after we know a man, we either loue him or hate
him. And if at the firſt we loued him wel, yet after hee is knowen vnto
vs, we may fall to hate him: or if wee firſt hated him, afterward vpon
better knowledge we may receiue him into our loue. Nowe although
theſe affections of loue and of hatred bee thus mutable in vs, yet the
ſelfe ſame knowledge remayneth alwayes with vs. For if wee did
not ſtill knowe him, wee coulde neyther loue nor hate him: becauſe
as a man cannot loue without knowing the thing loued, ſo
hee cannot hate that which is vnknowen. Therefore it is no difficult
matter to iudge, that the Vnderſtanding differeth from the
Will and affections, and that they are diſtinct offices, and ſeuerall
properties and vertues of the ſoule: which haue alſo their diuers
ſeates and inſtrumentes. For the internall ſenſes are ioyned with
that power which the Soule hath to knowe: and the heart
with the power of the Will and Affections. Heereof it is, that
wee ſee manie endued with great knowledge of honeſt and vertuous
thinges, but they haue no good affection to followe after

them and to put them in practiſe:Of the diſcord betweene the heart and the braine. ſo that their heart agreeth not with
their braine, nor their will and affections with their vnderſtanding &
reaſon. Contrariwiſe, there are others that haue not ſo great knowledge
of goodnes and of their duetie, and yet they haue a good affection
and Will to do wel, but for want of vnderſtanding what is right
and iuſt, they obſerue and keepe it not according to that meaſure of
deſire which is in them. Where wee ſee againe how and in what ſort
there is no good agreement betweene the brayne and the heart, and
betweene thoſe powers and vertues of the ſoule, which wee haue
alreadie named.A compariſon. So that wee may compare the former ſort of men
to one that hath eyes to guide him, but no legges or feete to goe vpon,
or if hee haue any, yet hee will not ſet them on woorke. As for
the other ſort, they are like to blinde men that long to goe and to
walke, and haue legges to carrie them, but they cannot goe whither
they woulde, becauſe they haue neyther eyes nor ſight to direct
them, nor guides to leade them. Nowe by the conſideration
of theſe two ſortes of men, wee may well conclude and iudge
with ourſelues what they are, that want all theſe thinges mentioned
by vs, becauſe they haue neyther ſounde knowledge of the
trueth and of that which is good, nor Will and deſire to haue any,
nor any affection to followe that which is good: whome I woulde
compare to them that are blind, and withal haue both hand and feete
lame at one time. But this matter may yet bee vnderſtoode better,
if wee make this our ſpeeche to agree with that which Saint Paul
wryteth to the Romanes,Rom. 1. 18. where hee ſayeth, That the wrath of God
is reuealed from heauen against all vngodlineſſe, and vnrighteouſneſſe of
men, which withholde the trueth in vnrighteouſneſſe. For wee may vnderſtande
by trueth, thoſe true and naturall impreſſions of the
knowledge of GOD and of his lawe, and of good and honeſt
thinges which are in men as beames of the diuine wiſedome, ſhining
in that part of the ſoule whereby hee knoweth. But becauſe
the Will and the affections of the heart agree not with this knowledge,
and there are no diuine motions, nor celeſtiall flames to
ſtirre vp and to kindle the heart with the loue of God, and to procure
it to followe after that knowledge, therefore men are detayned
in vnrighteouſneſſe, and yeelde not vnto God that honour and
obedience that they owe vnto him. Wherein they ſhew themſelues
vnthankefull and vnrighteous. And therefore the Apoſtle expounding
himſelfe ſaieth by and by after,verſe 21. 
                  That when they knewe God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankefull, but became vaine in their
imagination, and their heart voyde of vnderſtanding was full of darkneſſe.
                  
Whereby hee declareth, that their ingratitude and naughty heart
was the cauſe why they abuſed that vnderſtanding and knowledge
which they had receiued of God, and afterward alſo he depriued them
of theſe excellent gifts of his grace, which he attributeth to the heart
for certaine reaſons which wee are to note. For wee may ſee in many
places of the Scripture, and in their writings and exhortations that folowe
the doctrine and ſtile thereof,How the Scripture taketh the word heart. that the heart is often taken for the
ſeate of the minde, of the vnderſtanding and of reaſon, as well as for
the affections of the ſoule. Neuertheleſſe the Philoſophers and they
that followe them in ſuch diſcourſes, attribute theſe ſoueraigne powers
of the ſoule onely to the braine, which they make the ſeate of
them, as wee haue ſufficiently ſhewed heeretofore: and as for the affections
of the ſoule they aſſigne the ſeate of them to the heart. Now
one body hath not two, but one ſoule. Therefore although it haue
many faculties, powers, vertues, and offices, yet they are all comprehended
vnder thoſe two and depend of them, euen as in one body
there are many members appointed to diuers operations. Nowe becauſe
reaſon ought to be the Gouerneſſe and Miſtreſſe of the affections,
it is neceſſary they ſhoulde agree together. For as reaſon guideth
before, the affections will followe after. Therefore wee may alwayes
iudge of reaſon by the affections which it ought to gouerne, as
of the gouernement of a good Prince by the eſtate of his ſubiects, & of
a good father of a family by thoſe of his houſhold.Matth. 22. 40. Moreouer, ſeeing
the affections proceede from the heart, there is the ſeate of that loue
which wee ought to beare as well towardes God, as towardes men,
which comprehendeth the whole lawe of God and all iuſtice. For he
that loueth God, is not onely afraide to offend and diſpleaſe him, but
deſireth alſo to ſerue & pleaſe him: and he that loueth his neighbour,
doeth not onely abſtaine from procuring him any diſhonour or loſſe,
but laboureth alſo to aduance his honour and profit. Therefore if the
minde be lightened and inflamed with diuine light, and the reaſon
alſo that ruleth therein, then the heart will waxe hote, and burne
with the loue of God and of his neighbour.Of the agreement that ought to be betweene the minde and the heart. Which if it fall out ſo,
the heart will not be ſlacke in ſhewing foorth thoſe heauenly motions
that are within it, & in giuing matter to the ſoule to glorifie God, and
to the tongue and mouth, which will ſpeake out of the abundance
thereof. Likewiſe there will be an accord and conſent betweene it,
and the voyce and tongue, which then will vtter nothing but the
trueth. And this is the cauſe of that which wee were taught before,
namely, that God by his prouidence and wiſe counſaile hath ioyned
neere vnto the heart the chiefe inſtrument of the voyce, which is the

lungs: as the other inſtruments that are higher, are lodged neere
to the braine, and cheefely the tongue, as the Oratours and Embaſſadours
of Kings are placed next vnto them. Wherefore if mans nature
had not beene corrupted through ſinne, but had continued perfect
and ſound, there woulde alwayes haue beene a goodly concord and
conſent betweene the heart and the braine, the voice and the tongue,
the reaſon and the affections.Why the heart is taken ſometime for the ſeate of reaſon. Next, wee muſt note, that ſeeing the
heart is the firſt member of the whole body that receiueth life, and thē
giueth the ſame to others, as alſo the laſt that leaueth life: and ſeeing
it is the ſhop of all the vitall ſpirits, without which neither the braine,
nor the reſt of the members can haue life, or perforume their dueties, it
is not without cauſe, that this member is taken to be as it were the
ſeate not onely of the affections, but alſo of reaſon. Therefore it is taken
in the Scripture one while for the minde, as when Moſes ſaieth to
the people of Iſrael,Deut 29 4. 
                  Yet the Lord hath not giuen you a heart to know: and
another while it is taken for the affections, as when our Sauiour Chriſt
ſaieth,Matth. 22. 37. 
                  Thou ſhalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy ſoule,
and with all thy minde. For wee ſee heere howe he putteth a difference
betweene the heart and the minde. Sometime they are put indifferently
one for another, or one for both, eſpecially the heart, as when
the Lorde ſaide to Salomon,
                  1. King. 3. 12. 
                  Beholde I haue giuen thee a wiſe and an vnderſtanding
heart, the heart is taken for the ſenſes and minde, as it appeareth
very euidently. For the ſame cauſe Saint Paul continuing his
ſpeach of Gods puniſhment aboue mentioned, againſt the vngodlineſſe
and vnrighteouſneſſe of men, hee addeth to that before recited,
this ſaying:Rom. 1. 24, 25. 
                  Wherefore alſo God gaue them vp to their hearts luſtes, vnto
vncleanneſſe, to defile their owne bodies betweene themſelues: which turned
the trueth of God vnto a lie. In which place wee ſee howe the Apoſtle
maketh the heart to be the ſeate of the appetites and of the affections,
and howe hee calleth the vnruly and diſordered affections of
the heart by the name of luſtes; for ſo hee expoundeth himſelfe by
and by after, calling them Vile Affections, vnto which God gaue
them vp. Whereupon wee will note this, that the naturall affections
of the heart, which pricke it forward to the deſire of pleaſure,
and which miniſter pleaſure vnto it,Pleaſure of it owne nature a gift of God. ſhoulde be no ſinne at all
vnto men, but a benefite giuen them of God in the perfection of their
nature, were it not that by reaſon of the corruption which hath raken
holde of it, ſuch deſires and affections cannot containe themſelues
within the limites of their ſound nature: but there is alwayes
ſome exceſſe euen in the perfecteſt, and that being ſinne, is properly
called euill concupiſcence, becauſe it continually prouoketh vs to

euill, and cauſeth vs to goe beyond the bounds which God had ſet to
our affections. Whereof it is come to paſſe, that that which ſhould be
a benefite vnto men in their naturall pleaſures, is become hurtfull vnto
them. Nowe foraſmuch as the order of our diſcourſes hath brought
vs to the tractate of affections which haue their ſeate in the heart, before
wee goe any further, we muſt ſay ſomewhat of the nature of this
part of the body, as we haue done of the braine, to the ende we may
the better know the ſeate and inſtruments of the vital power and vertue
of the ſoule, and of the will and affections, as thoſe which
belong to the animal power and vertue, haue bene declared vnto vs.
Let vs then heare ASER handle this matter.
            
            
               Of the nature and compoſition of the heart, and of the midriffe: of the
tunicles or skinny couerings of the breast, and of the Pericardion,
or cawle about the heart: of the motion, office, and vſe of the
lungs, of the heart, and of the arteries. Chap. 37.
               ASER. It is not without good and iuſt cauſe, that God hath ordained
that reaſon ſhould lodge in the higheſt part of the frame
of man, and that the will and affections ſhould lodge lower, namely,
in the heart. For by this order hee would admoniſh and tell vs, what
part and power of the ſoule ought to beare greateſt ſway therein, and
that vnderſtanding and wiſdome, which teach vs the true rules according
to which wee muſt ſquare our whole life, ought to raigne and
haue the firſt place,The end of mans creation. ſeeing the principall cauſe wherefore God hath
created vs, is to knowe him, to the end that knowing him we ſhould
loue and honour him as wee ought: and as for the affections, they are
to be 
                     〈◊〉
                   and gouerned by wiſedome and vnderſtanding. Wherfore
if this order appointed by God be confounded and turned topſie
turuy in vs, hee cauſeth vs to feele and knowe it well enough. For although
ſinne be the cauſe, yet the impreſſion of that diuine image,
which God hath ſet in the nature of man, cannot be ſo wholy defaced
in vs, but there will alwayes remaine very euident and wonderfull teſtimonies
thereof. And therefore preſently after we haue ouerthrowne
this order, and that the will lifteth her ſelfe vp againſt reaſon, euen then
doth reaſon condemne that fault of hers, and compelleth the heart to
take vengeance thereof, and to puniſh in it her ſelfe diſobedience and
rebellion, with great torments and griefs: inſomuch that either it muſt
conſume away and periſh, or els returne to his due order and place, and
the wil muſt know, that ſhe hath a miſtres, not onely to teach her, but
alſo to correct her when ſhe ſhall do amiſſe, and peruert her order.
               
                  
But let vs ſpeake of that, which more particularly concerneth ſo
wonderfull a part of the body, namely, the heart. Firſt wee muſt remember
how wee diuided before the internall parts of the frame and
building of man into three bellies and lodgings, of which the firſt, I
meane the braine,Of the ſecond belly of the body. was ſhewed vnto vs with all his partes. Nowe we
will come to the ſecond, which is in the middeſt betweene the other
two, namely, in the breaſt, which containeth the veſſelles and inſtruments
of the vitall facultie and vertue, and thoſe are the heart, the
arteries, the lungs, the rough artery, with the appurtenances thereof.
Heere of it is that the name of the heart is oftentimes taken in the holy
Scriptures for the middeſt,Ezech. 27. 4. ionas 2. 4. matth. 12. 40. or for the inward and ſecret part of a thing,
as when it ſpeaketh of the heart of the earth and of the ſea, and of the
heauens. Nowe, as wee haue heard howe reaſon hath his throne and
iudiciall ſeate in the braine, what miniſters and what ſecretary hee
hath neere about him, and in what chambers and lodgings they are
placed, as alſo what miniſters and officers are ioyned with him for the
execution of his iudgements and decrees, namely, the wil and the affections:
ſo alſo wee muſt conſider what manner of lodgings and habitations
are aſſigned to theſe latter ſort in the heart. And although
theſe officers and miniſters are not alwayes obedient to reaſon, but
riſe vp againſt it oftentimes, and doe cleane contrary to that which
it iudgeth and appointeth to be done, yet by that order which God
ſet downe, they were to obey, and to agree well amongſt themſelues,
as he ſheweth it by the diſpoſition of their lodgings. We haue heard
before, that the heart and the lungs are lodged within the breaſt, as in a
ſtrong holde, and are compaſſed rounde about therewith for their
ſafegard and defence. But wee muſt note, that there is a partition
called Diaphragma by the Graecians,Of the midriffe and of his vſe. which ſeparateth the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of the vital partes, from the nouriſhing parts that are in the third belly
and lodging of the body, of which wee wil ſpeake heereafter in his
order. This partition is aboue in reſpect of the naturall inſtruments
appointed for nouriſhment, and beneath in regard of the ſpirituall inſtruments
that ſerue the vitall part. And becauſe it is a great rounde
muſcle of the breaſt about the ende of the neather part thereof, it hath
two vſes, of which the firſt and greateſt is to be an inſtrument of breathing:
the ſecond is to helpe to purge and expell the excrements of
the body.Of the skinnes of the breaſt and of their vſe. Next to that there is a tunicle or skinne which is very thinne
and ſlender, much like to a Spiders webbe, & is ſpread ouer the whole
capacitie of the breaſt, out of which two others proceede that diuide
it throughout, to the end there might be two diſtinct places of receipt,
that if a man had ſome great wound in one part thereof, whereby the

office of reſpiration and breathing which it hath, ſhould vtterly periſh,
yet the other part that is vnhurt, might at leaſtwiſe retaine the one
halfe. Theſe skinnes ſerue alſo to couer and binde together all the
veſſelles and inſtruments contained within the breaſt: and the former
of them, which hemmeth in the ribbes, ſerueth chiefely to defend
the lungs on that ſide where it is ioyned to the bones of the ribbes, to
the ende they ſhoulde not touch the bare bones, when they execute
their office,Of the cawle of the heart. namely, when wee breathe. Concerning the heart, it hath
for his next dwelling houſe a membrane or skinne called by the Graecians
Pericardion, which ſignifieth as much as if in our language wee
ſhoulde ſay in a worde, a compaſſe-heart. And therefore this skinne is
made of the ſame faſhion the heart is, namely, very large and ample
beneath, but afterward it narroweth by litle and litle, ſo that it endeth
pointwiſe,Of the faſhion of the heart. being in proportion like to a pine apple or to a pyramide,
which is the figure of a flame of fire. Whereby it ſeemeth that God
hath made the heart of this faſhion to admoniſh vs, that it is the place
of that naturall fire which is in the body, and appointed to giue it ſo
much naturall heate as is neceſſary for the life thereof. This skinne,
which is alſo called the litle cloſet of the heart, is of ſuch capacitie, that
it is ſeuered from the ſame on euery ſide as much as is requiſite, that
his motion might in no wiſe be impeached. Some thinke, that there
is ſome water within this veſſell,Of the water in the cawle of the heart. or ſome moiſture like to a dew to
water the heart, that it ſhoulde not drie vp through the great heate
that commeth of continuall motion, in which it is without ceaſing.
Nowe becauſe this humour cannot be ſeene but onely in dead bodies,
there be that thinke it is made there onely after death, through the exhalation
and gathering together of the ſpirites, which are there diſſolued.
And in deede it ſeemeth to be a hard matter to knowe this by Anatomy,
becauſe commonly it is not practiſed but vpon dead bodies.
And although a man woulde trie the experiment vpon quicke and liuing
bodies, yet they woulde be alwayes dead before he ſhould come
to that part, or at leaſtwiſe there woulde be ſuch a change and alteration,
that it would be very hard for a man to giue a right iudgement.
Neuertheleſſe this might be knowen by cutting vp that part in ſome
beaſt or other. For there is alwayes ſome moiſture found there euen
before it be ſtarke dead, although indeed it cannot liue long after that
part is opened. But let vs returne to that which we begunne to ſpeake
of the heart, which being the roote and fountaine of naturall heate,
diſperſeth it abroade by the arteries into the whole body, and giueth
life to euery part therof.Of the office of the heart. For albeit the inſtruments of reſpiration ſerue
the voyce, yet they were created principally for the hearts ſake, that

the naturall heate which is in it, might bee refreſhed, increaſed and
fedde by them. For this cauſe hath the Diuine prouidence made the
lungs to be as it were the forge and ſhoppe of reſpiration, to this ende,
that the aire without might bee ſent euen to the heart,Of the lungs and of their vſe. for the cauſes
and endes before ſpoken of. For the aire that is to be brought to the
heart, is firſt prepared in the lungs, to the ende it might moderate
the heate of the heart and ſpirites, and not enter in thither either too
hote, or too colde, or in too great abundance, whereby it might be
damnified or quite choaked vp. Therefore hath God made the fleſh
and ſubſtance of the lungs very light, ſoft and ſpungie, more then any
other part of the body, ſo that it holdeth much of the nature of the
aire, and that for two notable cauſes. For firſt, ſeeing the lungs haue
not their motion of themſelues, neither are faſtned to the body to receiue
motion from it, it was needefull to haue them of ſuch matter,
that they might bee eaſily mooued and followe the motion of the
breaſt. Next, they will receiue the aire more eaſily without any violence,
if at any time it enter in vehemently and in great quantitie.
To conclude this point,How the lungs couer the heart. they are ſo ſeated in regarde of the heart,
that they wrappe it and clothe it both on the right ſide and on the
left, and ſerue to defend it againſt all the neighbour-bones neere about
it.
               But heere wee are to note the agreement and mutuall relation,
which the heart hath with the heauens, in that as the firſt motion of
the whole worlde beginneth by the heauens,How the heart agreeth with the heauens. of which all the other
motions that are in nature doe depend, ſo the heart is that member
in mans body, which firſt receiueth life and motion, and which is the
wel-ſpring and fountaine thereof: whereupon alſo it is the firſt that liueth,
and the laſt that dieth.Of the arteries and their office. And becauſe God hath created it to put
into it the vital facultie and vertue from whence the life of liuing creatures
proceedeth, hee hath alſo appointed the arteries, who receiuing
their originall from the heart, are afterward diſtributed and
ſpread throughout all the members of the body, as the ſinewes and
veines are, to giue vnto the aire and vitall ſpirites neceſſary for life, euen
as the blood is likewiſe diſtributed by meanes of the veines that
come from the liuer, to nouriſh them withall, and as ſenſe and motion
are carried by the ſinewes that are deriued from the braine and
marrowe of the backe bone, as wee haue already ſhewed. Therefore
as the aire hath his motion, and the windes their courſe, euen
ſuch as GOD hath appointed them in the whole body of this great
worlde:How the vitall ſpirites agree with the aire and windes. ſo wee ſee that the ayre and vitall ſpirites are in mans body,
which is the little worlde, as windes that haue their courſe and paſſages

therein, to bee carried vnto all the members, and to be diſtributed
and communicated vnto them by meanes of the arteries. Hereof
it is that they heaue and beate in thoſe places where arteries are appointed
to be, ſo that by their peace and quietneſſe, Phyſitions iudge
of the vertue and ſtrength of the heart, and conſequently of the whole
body, of health and ſickeneſſe, of life and death, and of the whole
poſition thereof. Therefore the heart hath a double motion to ſerue
for this vſe: which I ſpeake, becauſe it hath yet a third motion and
that of another nature,Of the double motion of the heart, and the vſes thereof. of which wee will ſpeake hereafter. But as for
this firſt double motion which is heere mentioned, it is ſo called becauſe
the one is made when the heart giueth out, and the other when
it ſhrinketh in. For when it extendeth it ſelfe foorth, then is it refreſhed
and cooled thereby, and when it gathereth inward and reſtraineth
it ſelfe, then doeth it expell and driue out thoſe fuliginous and
ſmokie excrements, which otherwiſe woulde ſtifle it. This two-fold
motion is naturall, proceeding from the proper nature of the heart,
and not voluntarie as that of the muſcles is, which is gouerned by the
motion of the braine and ſinewes that come from it. For the heart
hath his filaments or ſmall threedes, apt and conuenient for that
purpoſe. Nowe this motion ſerueth not onely for the vſes already
ſpoken of, but alſo for the nouriſhing of the vitall ſpirite, I meane
to drawe the blood wherewith it is nouriſhed, and alſo to prepare
foode for the lungs, thereby to returne ſuch mutuall helpe vnto them
as it receiueth from them. For as the lungs ſerue to ſend breath vnto
it, thereby to coole it and to further it in the execution of that office
which it hath,An admonition to mutuall loue. ſo the heart ſerueth to nouriſh and feede the lungs.
Whereby wee haue a goodly aduerticement concerning that mutuall
agreement that ought to be in vs, and of that reciprocall helpe which
wee owe one to an other, and howe wee ought to acknowledge the
good turnes that are done vnto vs, and doe the like againe to them,
according to that abilitie which euery one ſhall haue ſo to doe. For if
wee deale not in that ſorte, it will be all one with vs in humane ſocietie,
as if one ſhould ſeparate in our body the heart from the lungs,
that the one might not doe his duetie towardes the other: which
queſtionleſſe woulde cauſe the death and ouerthrowe of the whole
body.
               Moreouer, wee muſt note, that betweene theſe two motions of
the heart nowe ſpoken of, there is ſome ſmall ſpace, in which there
is a little reſt: and then doeth the heart reſtraine it ſelfe and drawe
from all ſides rounde about the aire which is drawne in by the lungs,
which it enioyeth and hath vſe of. And for this cauſe the heart,

whoſe fleſh is hard and can hardly ſuffer, hath three kindes of filaments
called Fibres, which ſerue for all theſe motions. Thus you ſee
the heart that is lorde of mans life, howe hee hangeth as it were in his
coffer, and withdraweth himſelfe into his chamber or cloſet, being in
a manner ſeparated from the reſt of the body to which he giueth life,
but onely that hee is ioyned thereunto by veines, arteries, and ſinews,
which hee vſeth as pipes, ſome to receiue the benefites that come vnto
him from others, & ſome to diſtribute his good things by. Wherein
we haue a faire reſemblance of that mutuall communicating which
ought to be among men. For although the heart be as the fountaine
of life, which it imparteth to all the reſt of the members and partes of
the body, yet can it not liue alone, without thoſe neceſſary helpes of
the other members vnto which it is ſeruiceable. Nowe we are to conſider
the ſubſtance, ſituation and countepoize thereof, with the nature
and vſe of the vitall ſpirite: which ſhall be the matter ſubiect of
thy diſcourſe, AMANA.
            
            
               Of the ſubstance, ſituation and counterpoize of the heart: of the
nature and vſe of the vital Spirite, and of the forge, veſſelles and
inſtruments thereof: of the ſundry doores and pipes of the heart,
and of their vſes. Chap. 38.
               AMANA. All men, howe ignorant and brutiſh ſoeuer they be, cary
about with them in their hearts a great teſtimony, that they
haue both a God and a Iudge, who approoueth that which is good,
and puniſheth the euill. For although they neuer heard one worde of
his worde, yet they cannot be ignorant of this, which they ſenſibly
feele and knowe by experience in themſelues, that nothing but euill
can befall them for euill, howſoeuer it be long a comming, and that
they cannot feele the euill which their ſinne hath brought vpon them,
but they will repent them for committing it, and wiſh it had neuer bin
done. This is naturall Diuinitie, which no body can be ignorant of.
Whereunto Saint Iohn leading vs, ſaith very wel, If our heart condemne
vs,
                  1. Iohn 3. 20. 
                  God is greater then our heart, and knoweth all things. And we ſee that
repentance ordinarily followeth ſinne, and that a ſinner can not but
feele ſome heauineſſe and griefe. Yea nature it ſelfe teacheth vs, when
wee are diſpleaſed for ſome thing whereof we repent vs,Whereof the ſtriking of the breaſt aroſe. to ſtrike our
breaſt, becauſe the heart is within it, as alſo to hang downe our eyes
for ſhame. But the vexation, ſadneſſe and ſorrowe, which after the
fault committed, a man is ſtriken with, becauſe of the hurt that taketh
holde of him, and the puniſhment he expecteth or endureth already,

ſerueth not but for a continuall torment vnto him, as if hee were in a
hell, except he change his mind, amend his fault and returne to God againe,
and ſo betake himſelfe againe to that place and order of his,
which God had aſſigned him. Beholde what good inſtructions
we haue in our ſelues, which ought to pricke vs forward to goodneſſe,
and drawe vs backe from wickedneſſe: eſpecially our heart beareth
vs certaine teſtimony of that which is acceptable in the ſight of God.
               Now as we haue heard,Of the ſubſtance of the heart. that the forme thereof is apteſt for the motion
it hath, ſo the ſubſtance & matter whereof it is made, is a kinde of
fleſh that hath none like it in all the other partes of the body. For it is
needful it ſhould be ſo thicke and faſt, that it may the better diſcharge
that office and duety that is laide vpon the heart.The ſituation of the heart. On the other ſide, it is
ſo ſeated in the breaſt, that the foundation and foote thereof is directly
in the middeſt of it: but the narrow end of it bendeth ſomewhat towards
the left-ſide. Which is done in regarde of two great commodities,
wherof the one is, that it ſhould not ruſh againſt the bones of the
breaſt: the other, that it ſhould heate the left ſide the more, ſeeing the
right ſide is holpen by the heat of the liuer, which is on that ſide. And
although the left part of the heart be very bigge, and hard, and conſequently
more heauy then the right, which is more ſubtile, thinne and
ſoft, and therefore lighter, neuertheleſſe God hath giuen it ſuch a
counterpoize,Of the counterpoize of the heart. that both ſides are of equall waight: ſo that although
there be no ligamēt or band to tie it vnto the other parts that are neere
about it, yet without inclining or bending any one way more then other,
it hangeth in the middeſt of the veſſell and skinne that compaſſeth
it round about. For the left part, which of it owne nature is heauieſt,
containeth in it a lighter matter, namely, the vitall ſpirite, and
the right ſide that is not ſo heauy hath in it a more heauy matter,
which is the blood. Whereby wee ſee howe the prouidence of God
hath ſo well framed the counterpoize, that both partes are equall, like
to an euen and iuſt paire of ballance. From whence alſo we may take a
good leſſon concerning the vprightneſſe that ought to be in our heart
and wil,A good leſſon for euery one. and in al our affections, & with what heart we ought to folow
the ordināces of God, & that way which he ſhoweth vs in his word▪
how we ſhould continue and abide ſtedfaſt therein,Deuter. 5. ezech. 20. and turne neither
to the right hand nor the left, as wee are often commanded in the holie
Scriptures. Moreouer, foraſmuch as the skin that cōpaſſeth the heart▪
hath the bones of the breaſt on the one ſide, & the lungs on the other,
it was requiſit that it ſhould be of a matter ſo wel tēpered, that it might
receiue no harme by ye hardnes of the bones, & on the other ſide ſhuld
not be ſo hard as to be able to hurt the lungs, which are of as ſoft & tē
                  der

a fleſh as any is in al the body. Which teacheth vs ſufficiently, that
the prouidence of God hath forgotten nothing in any reſpect.Of the two voide places in the heart, and of their vſe. But we
muſt further know, that there are two capacities or holow places in the
heart diſtinguiſhed one from another by a partition, the one being on
the right ſide, the other on the left. That place on the right ſide ſerueth
to receiue the blood that commeth from the liuer to the heart by
veines, both for the nouriſhing of it ſelfe and of the lungs, and for the
generation of the vitall ſpirites, whoſe forge and ſhoppe is in the other
void place on the left ſide, where the hart doth exerciſe his chiefe
office, which is to ing
                     •
                  nder the vitall ſpirites of the fineſt and thinneſt
blood, which reſolueth it ſelfe there, as if it came of the ſweate that
proceedeth out of the right capacitie.What the vitall ſpirite is. Now the vital ſpirit is as it were
a moſt bright and liuely flame, like to the celeſtiall nature, which carrieth
heat & life to the whole body, and is the inſtrument of the chief actions
& works therof.Of the great artery. In this left hollow place there is a great artery,
which is as it were the ſtocke of al the arteries in the body, which a litle
from the heart diuideth itſelfe into two branches, whereof the one aſcendeth
vpward, to carry the vitall ſpirite into the vpper partes of the
body: the other, which is ſome what bigger, deſcendeth downeward.
By meanes of theſe arteries, which are as it were the pipes of the heart,
the greateſt benefite of all is communicated to all partes of the
body.
               Now becauſe the arteries and veines haue neede one of an others
help, they meet one another, & are ſo linked and ioyned together, that
the arteries are ſeldome alone without the veines. For the arteries being
ioyned vnto the veines doe giue them aire and ſpirite, which
through the vitall heate ſtirreth the blood, and helpeth to bring it to
perfection, and to preſerue it. In like manner the arteries ſucke ſome
ſmall quantitie of blood out of the veines, whereby the vitall ſpirite is
carried,A
                        •
                     example of 
                        •
                     utuall ſuccour. ſprinckled, and increaſed. Wherein wee haue againe a notable
example and goodly paterne of that mutuall communicating, that
ought to be among men▪ without which neither nature nor humane
ſocietie can be preſerued: the like alſo heereof wee ſee betweene the
heart and the lungs, in which there are pipes that paſſe from the one
to the other for their mutuall helping and ſuccouring one of an other.
For the Arteriall veine, that proceedeth out of the right ſide of the
hear
                     •
                  , carrieth the blood to the lungs to nouriſh it: and the veiny artery,
which commeth out of the left ſide of the heart, carrieth ayre
vnto it from the lungs to refreſh it. For after it is brought to the lungs
by the artery or wind-pipe,Of the veiny 
                        •••
                     ery. the lungs communicate the ſame vnto the
heart. Likewiſe by that ſame veiny artey, the ouer-heated ayre and

fumes are carried from the heart: and ſerueth beſides to carry the
ſpirite and the arteriall blood vnto the lungs to heate them. Therefore
this artery is not altogether ſo thicke as the reſt are, nor ſo
thinne as the veines, to the ende it may eaſily enlarge or ſtraiten it
ſelfe, or giue and receiue the ayre, and that through hardneſſe it
hinder not the motion of the lungs, as alſo that the foggy blood may
not euaporate and ſweate through. For this cauſe it is called the veiny
artery, becauſe it holdeth of the nature both of an artery and of a
veine, and hath this office belonging properly vnto it, to carry the
ayre and the ſpirit.
               There are alſo in the heart other ſmall peeces,Of the doores and pipes of the heart. which Anatomiſts
diſtinguiſh from it, as the two little eares, the right and the left,
which are as it were little doores, as there is alſo in all the pipes
thereof, which are ſo ſmall, that vnneth may they be diſcerned by
the eyes. Theſe doores and pipes that are in them 
                     •
                  erue partly to this
ende, that when the heart ſucketh ſuch blood as is neceſſary for it
ſelfe, the veine wherewith it draweth ſhoulde not breake, through
any ouer-great, vehement, and ſodaine attraction: and partly, that
the ayre might enter in more gently and better wrought, according
as neede requireth. For this cauſe alſo it is, why the heart doeth not
drawe the ayre immediately from the mouth, both becauſe if this
ſpace were not betweene, it coulde not drawe ſo much as it wanteth,
and ſo woulde bee choaked, as alſo becauſe it ſhoulde receiue
it in too colde, whereupon it woulde be greatly hurt. Therefore it
hath pipes, paſſages, and inſtruments, not onely to bring this ayre
vnto it, as it is brought to the lungs, but alſo to diſpence and prepare
it as is moſt conuenient for it, as wee haue learned already by
our ſpeach of the rough artery, and of other inſtruments of the voyce
and of reſpiration. Out of which wee are to note two goodly points
of the prouidence and wiſedome, whereby hee doeth admoniſh vs
of that moderation,Goodly inſtructions for al men. which wee ought to keepe in all things, and
how we ought to behaue our ſelues, not only in one worke, but alſo
in all things that wee take in hand. For concerning the firſt, GOD
hath prouided alwaies throughout the whole worke of mans body in
ſuch ſort, that there ſhould be no violēt thing, but hath ſo wel framed,
diſpoſed, and linked all together, that no one part or member ſhoulde
receiue hurt of another, but al might help & ſupport ech other. Therfore
if there be any burthen to cary from one to an other, God hath ſo
diſtributed it by little and little, and by ſuch conuenient means, that
no part is preſſed:Moderation is 
                        〈◊〉
                      be kept in all things. teaching vs thereby, that he loueth moderation and
hateth violence in all things: for which cauſe hee diſpenſeth all and

diſtributeth drop by drop, as it were by deſtillation. And to the end he
may conioyne in one, things of a contrary nature, hee alwayes placeth
between two contraries, things of a middle diſpoſition which are moſt
apt to tie them together and to keep them. Beſides, we ſee howe hee
hath ordred al the parts of the body ſo wel, that one only member and
inſtrument ſerueth oftentimes for many offices & vſes, as we haue already
touched it. Wherin God doth admoniſh vs further of two things
wel worthy the noting. The firſt is, that we ought to looke ſo wel vnto
al things, that we neither forget nor omit any thing that ſhalbe requiſit
& neceſſary. The other, that we ſhould imploy our ſelues about euery
thing that we can and may do, according to thoſe gifts and graces,
which wee haue receiued of God, and that we ſhould vſe al things to
euery ſuch purpoſe as they will ſerue,Superfluitie to be auoided in all things. and ſo auoid al vaine and ſuperfluous
charges. For (as it is commonly ſaid) nothing is to be done by
many things, that can be performed by fewer: otherwiſe there will
be more hindrance then helpe, and greater loſſe then profit. For this
cauſe as God hath not giuen to the body one member leſſe then there
ought to be, ſo he hath not giuen it one more. For if there were either
more or leſſe, it would not only be monſtrous, but there would be eyther
ſome want, or ſome let & hinderance. And when as one member
is able to ſatisfy two offices, he hath not created many to do it, if either
profit or neceſſitie required not the help of many.Good counſell for Princes. Whereupon gouernours
of Common-wealths ought to learne, that their people are not
to bee burthened with vnprofitable and vnneceſſary offices and perſons.
If therefore men woulde learne thoſe leſſons that God giueth
them in their owne bodies, and in the members thereof, they woulde
alwayes keepe a meane in all things, following this heauenly example,
and neuer offend either with too little or too much. But notwithſtanding
wee haue all Nature to be our Miſtres, ſo that ſhee keepe a
ſchoole within vs, and teach vs theſe things her ſelfe, yet wee profite
little thereby. Nowe leauing this ſpeach, ſeeing wee haue taken a
viewe of the nature of the body, and of the naturall motion thereof,
which is commonly called the Pulſe, and what vſe it hath in this corporall
life, as alſo of other things concerning this matter, it ſhall be
good for vs nowe to ſpeake of another motion that is in the nature of
the ſoule, which ſerueth not onely for this life, but alſo for the ſpirituall,
in reſpect of which eſpecially it is giuen vnto it, an image and repreſentation
whereof wee haue had in this motion of which wee haue
already ſpoken. It belongeth to thee, ARAM, to diſcourſe vpon this
matter.
            
            
               
               Of the ſecond motion of the heart, which belongeth to the affections of
the ſoule, and of thoſe that goe before or follow after iudgement: of
the agreement that is betweene the temperature of the body, and
the affections of the ſoule. Chap. 39.
               ARAM. As God is not onely an eternall and infinite eſſence, but
alſo infinitely good and happy, ſo hath hee not reſted in giuing
vnto his creatures life and beeing, as it were imparting to them ſome
part of his being, but it hath pleaſed him alſo to make them partakers
of that Good which is eſſentiall in him, and of his bleſſedneſſe and felicitie,
according as euery one was capable thereof in his kinde.Man was created not onely to be, but alſo to be well. For he
will not onely haue them to be, but alſo to be well. For this cauſe we
ſee, that although men deſire much to be, and therefore are greatly
afraid of death, as of an enemy that ſeeketh to vndoe them, yet many
times it falleth out ſo that they deſire death, to the end they might be
no more, becauſe they thinke it a greater good, or at leaſtwiſe a leſſe euil
to be no more, thē to be miſerable & vnhappy. And by this we may
knowe, that man was not created of God only to be, neither was that
his principal end, but alſo to be bleſſed. For this cauſe as God hath giuen
to the creatures an inclination to preſerue themſelues in their life,
to the end they might be, ſo he hath put into them a natural appetite &
deſire of that which is good, to the ende they might be well, and that
good might be fall them, but man ſpecially is thus affected: which deſire
of good is alſo ioyned with an eſchewing of euill. For in the purſuite
of good, his contrary, which is euil, muſt of neceſſitie be fled from.
And of this naturall inclination to good proceede all thoſe affections
of the ſoule that draw it hither and thither to ſeeke for it: but becauſe
of her badde iudgement, proceeding of the darkeneſſe of ignorance
which is in the minde, ſhe chooſeth oftentimes the cleane contrary to
that which ſhe deſireth,What the affections are. as we haue already touched.
               We call then properly by the name of affections, the motions and
acts of that naturall power of the ſoule, which conſiſteth in following
after good, & eſchewing of euil. For receiuing of God in our firſt creation
to be & to be wel, we haue ſtill ſome naturall ſeedes of the perfection
of theſe two great gifts, which teach vs naturally, that it is a good
thing for one to preſerue himſelfe and his beeing, as alſo to be wel and
happy in his beeing: but this is only generally. For whē we are to come
from theſe generalities vnto particulars, there are wonderful errors and
diſorders throughout the whole courſe of mans life.Two kindes of affections. Now among the
motions of the ſoule, ſome go before iudgement, others follow after:
although oftentimes they are ſo ſodaine & headſtrong withall, that it

appeareth plainly they haue ſhaken off the bridle, & neuer expected &
ſtaied for any iudgemēt. Notwithſtanding it is true, that the hart is not
moued before there hath bin ſome iudgement to determine, whether
that which is then offred vnto it be good or euil. But bicauſe the motions
of our ſpirit & mind are very light & ſodain, and need not ſo long
time, as otherwiſe is requiſit for vs if wee will take good heede to our
matters, hereof it is that they ſeem to vs many times to preuent & goe
before iudgement▪ giuen,What affections goe before iudgement when indeed they follow it. And as for thoſe
naturall motions, which in truth go before it, they are ſuch as are bred
& borne of the diſpoſition of the body, as the deſire to eate in hunger,
and to drinke in thirſt, & ſorrow in time of ſickenes, or the motion of a
melancholike humor, or ioy proceeding from good and pure blood in
the heart. But the other motions follow the aduice of iudgement & as
that is mooued and changed diuerſly by ſuch meanes as haue alreadie
bin declared, ſo the affections alter, and increaſe or decreaſe, or otherwiſe
vaniſh cleane away and come to nothing. Whereof it followeth,
that they are appeaſed by the ſame meanes by which they are moued,
according as they are applied vnto them. But although it behooueth
that the affections ſhould be pricked forward by iudgement, yet it
followeth not thereupon, that they can not be ſtirred vp, except this
mature & ripe iudgement be alwaies there, which ordaineth things to
be done after the diſcourſe of reaſon. For it is enough for them if they
haue another iudgement, that obſerueth not ſuch an exact & diligent
examination, but onely that which fantaſie offereth without any other
diſcourſing. And this iudgement thus moued by fancie, is moſt vſual &
ordinary, and that which moſt guideth & ruleth the affections of men.
Therfore it is a ſodain & tumultuous iudgement, of which a man may
truly ſay, a ſhort ſentence of a ſottiſh iudge. Thus fancie, being very turbulent
& skittiſh, & drawing to it ſelfe confuſedly ſome ſhew and apparance
of opinion & iudgement, whereby it deemeth that which is offred
vnto it to be either good or bad, is the cauſe that wee liue in the
middeſt of marueilous troubles in reſpect of our affections of feare, of
deſire, of ſorrow, of ioy, and that one while we weep, and ſodainly we
laugh againe. And becauſe it hath great power ouer the body, as wee
haue already declared, theſe perturbations doe manifeſtly incline that
way.Agreement betweene the temperature of the body and the affections of the ſoule. We ſee alſo by experience, that there is great agreement betweene
the qualities and temperature of the body, and the affections
of the ſoule: inſomuch that as the bodies of men are compounded of
the qualities of heate, colde, moiſture, and drieneſſe, ſo among the
affections ſome are hote, others colde, ſome moiſt, others drie, & ſome
mingled of theſe diuers qualities. So that euery one is moſt ſubiect to

thoſe affections that come neereſt to the nature, temperature, & complexion
of his body. As for example, the affection of ioy is hote and
moiſt, & therefore they that are hot and moiſt, as children, yong men,
ſound and healthy folkes, and idle perſons, are more eaſily inclined to
that affection. Contrariwiſe, ſorrow is a colde and drie affection, and
therefore they that are colde and drie are moſt giuen to that affection,
and ſuch are olde folkes and they that are of a melancholy humour,
which is earthy, cold and drie. For the like reaſon, they that haue a ſoft
and tender heart, receiue more eaſily the impreſſion of ioy and griefe,
as wax taketh the print of a ſeale: and they that haue a ha
                     •
                  d and hote
heart, quickly receiue ioy & keep it a long time. And on the other ſide,
they that haue hard and cold hearts, receiue ſorrowe and grie
                     •
                  e very
ſoone, and retaine it long, as appeareth in melancholy and melancholike
perſons. And as the affections followe the temperature and
complexion of the body,The affections can doe much with the body. ſo they for their parts haue great vertue and
power ouer the body. Therefore we ſee, that ioy is as it were a medicine
to the body, and foode to the naturall heate and moiſture, in
which two qualities life chiefely conſiſteth, as we haue already heard.
For it greatly preſerueth and increaſeth them: foraſmuch as it ſtrengtheneth
the animall and naturall vertues, ſtirreth vp the ſpirites, helpeth
digeſtion, and generally profiteth the habite and diſpoſition of the
whole body. For the heart thereby ſendeth with the blood, much
naturall heate, and more ſpirites vnto all parts of the body. By meanes
whereof the members are watred and moiſtned by the humiditie contained
in the fountaine of blood: whereupon it followeth, that all the
partes increaſe in bigneſſe and waxe fatte.
                     
                        •
                     oy good for the body, and Griefe hurtful to it. For this cauſe Phyſicions
alwayes exhort ſicke perſons to be as merry as they may, and to auoide
ſorrowe and ſadneſſe, which being colde and drie is contrary to
life, and ſo conſumeth men. For it drieth vp the whole body, becauſe
the heart thereby is cloſed vp and reſtrained: ſo that no great quantitie
of ſpirites can bee made there, and thoſe fewe that are there, can
not eaſily bee diſtributed and diſperſed with the blood throughout
the members. Whereupon the vitall vertue and her companions being
weakened, the liuely colour of the face waxeth wanne and pale,
and in a manner vaniſheth cleane away: and ſo conſequently the
whole bodie becommeth leane and conſumeth, as if it tooke no
nouriſhment, yea death oftentimes followeth thereupon. This agreement
therefore, which is (as we ſee) betweene the temperature and
complexion of the body, & the affections of the ſoule, ought to teach
vs to be very temperate in our eating and drinking, and in all other
things belonging to our life. For as wee arre either temperate or intemperate,

ſo will the qualities be whereof our bodies are compounded:
and ſo conſequently according to the temperancie or intemperancie
that is in vs, the affections of the ſoule alſo will be more moderate
or immoderate, and the perturbations which they ſhall bring
with them, will be greater or leſſe, and more eaſie or vneaſie to be prouoked
or appeaſed. Whereby wee might knowe what great agreement
God hath made betweene the body and the ſoule, For not withſtanding
their natures differ much one from an other, yet ſeein they
muſt be linked together, it is neceſſary they ſhoulde haue ſome agreement
betweene them, to the end they may be conioyned and vnited
in one. It is true, that by the reaſons of humane Philoſophie, we know
well howe the coniunction of corporall things and of their qualities,
what contrarietie ſoeuer it is betweene them, may be effected and
wrought. But as wee cannot ſee or knowe our ſoule, or any ſpirituall
nature, as wee knowe our bodies and bodily natures, ſo can wee not
iudg ſo eaſily of the meanes whereby the body agreeth with the ſoule,How the agreement betweene the body and the ſoule may be diſcerned.
and corporall natures with ſpirituall, but onely as experience and the
effectes giue vs ſome ſight thereof. For wee ſee by experience from
whence the good or ill diſpoſition of the body, and health and ſickeneſſe
proceede, namely, from the good or ill temperature of the
qualities thereof, Wee ſee alſo, that according to the nouriſhment
which the body taketh, & that ſobrietie or gluttoni
                     •
                   it vſeth in eating
and drinking, and according to the abſtinence or the effectes it bringeth
foorth in all things, it is either better or worſe affected and diſpoſed.
We ſee likewiſe the changes and alterations that befall it, according
to the ages and exerciſes it hath. Wherefore although we had
nothing elſe to looke vnto, but to maintaine and preſerue our health,
yet ought we to deſire to be ſober, moderate, and very temperate in
all things, ſeeing moderation beareth ſo great ſway in all the partes of
mans life. But it ought to be more pretious in our eies, when wee ſee
that the temperance or intemperance that may be in our bodies, extendeth
it ſelfe vnto the eſtate of our ſoule, and that it can do much eyther
in the helping and maintaining, or in the hurting and troubling
thereof. For wee knowe already by experience, that which is of a
cholericke nature, is more ſubiect to thoſe diſeaſes that are bredde
of a cholericke humour, then a flegmatike perſon that is of a contrary
temperature, and that a flegmatike bodie is moſt ſubiect to
diſeaſes proceeding of flegme.Naturall qualities breede diſeaſes. The like may bee ſaide of all the other
qualities and complexions. If then euery one encline more to
ſuch diſeaſes, as may proceede from thoſe naturall qualities which
abound moſt in his body, it is an eaſie matter to iudge, what is like

to fall vpon him if they exceede, whereby they are encreaſed much
more. And if that humour which naturally exceedeth moſt in a man
(and of which his temperature and complexion hath his name) cauſe
him to incline moſt to thoſe diſeaſes that may be bred thereof, a man
may iudge into what diſpoſition of body he may fall through exceſſe
of other qualities, which are more repugnant to his nature and complexion,
if there be no ſuch counterpoize and equalitie, that one contrary
may ſerue as a remedy againſt another. But hauing conſidered
of theſe things, we muſt goe forward and proſecute our ſpeech of the
affections of the ſoule, which are as it were health and ſicknes therein,
according as they ſhalbe eyther well or ill moderated, and ſee what
conueniencie there is betweene corporall and ſpirituall phiſicke. Finiſh
therefore this dayes woorke, ACHITOB, with ſome diſcourſe
vpon this poynt, which may ſerue to inſtruct vs in the matter of the
affections of the ſoule, of which to morowe we are to intreate particularly
and in order.
            
            
               Of the Health and diſeaſes of the ſoule: of the agreement betweene corporall
and ſpirituall Phiſicke: how neceſſary the knowledge of the nature
of the body and of the ſoule, is for eueryone. Chap 40.
               ACHITOB. It is alwayes in his power who hath giuen vs beeing,
namely God the ſpring and fountaine of all eſſences, to preſerue
and keepe vs therein, and to take it alſo from vs when it pleaſeth him.
But foraſmuch as he delighteth not in deſtroying the woorkes which
himſelfe hath wrought, hee hath giuen vnto his creatures certaine
meanes to preſerue themſelues in that nature wherin he created them.
And that they might haue thoſe meanes neere at hand, he hath placed
them euen in their owne nature. For they haue by nature an inclination,
that moueth and vrgeth them to keepe and defend themſelues aſmuch
as they can poſſible, from euery thing that may corrupt their
nature, that is contrary vnto it, or that wil bring to an end that beeing,
which they haue receiued of God.Men are more carefull for the health of their bodies then of their ſoules, But that which herein is moſt to be
lamented in man, is his ouer great care and curioſitie in ſearching out
remedies meete for the maintenance and preſeruation of his bodie,
the leaſt griefe and ill diſpoſition whereof ſeemeth vnto him to be very
burthenſome: but as for thinking eyther vpon thoſe means, wherby
God hath appoynted him to attaine to an eternall and bleſſed life,
or vpon the diſeaſes of the ſoule, which in ſteed of life will bring death
vnto it, and are farre more dangerous, ſtubberne, and vneaſie to be cured
then thoſe of the body, he dreameth litle thereof, his care is very

ſmall, he eſteemes them not great, and therefore is very ſlouthfull in
ſeeking remedie for them.
               We are to know then,The affections breed the health or ſicknes of the ſoule. that the affections of the ſoule are as it were
health and ſickneſſe therein, according as they are either temperate
or intemperate. For as there is no euill diſpoſition or ſickneſſe
in the bodie, but contrariwiſe good health, if there bee not ſome exceſſe
in the qualities of which it is compounded, which may deſtroy
that equalitie that is requiſite for the keeping of it ſounde: ſo
is it with the faculties, powers, qualities and affections of the ſoule,
which according to her nature hath her health and her diſeaſes.
Wherefore when the harmonie, conueniencie and temperature of
her powers and affections, is ſuch as her nature requireth, then is
ſhee well diſpoſed and in health: as contrariwiſe thee is ill affected
and diſeaſed, when in place of temperance and mediocritie, there
is intemperance and exceſſe. Nowe according to that which wee
hearde in the former ſpeech of the conueniencie betweene the temperature
and complexion of the bodie, and the affections of the
ſoule, wee ſee that a man of a cholericke nature is a great deale
more eaſily ſtirred vp to anger, then an other that is of a flegmatike
or melancholy nature.How the ſoule receiueth from the body in regard of the diuers temperatures thereof, For ſeeing the cholericke humour is by nature
hote and burning, like to fire, that man in whome this humour
raigneth is ſooner inflamed with anger and wrath, then an other that
is of a contrary nature. For fire will more ſpeedily kindle in a matter
that commeth neerer to it owne nature, and of which it may
more eaſily take holde, then in another that is more contrarie to it.
It is otherwiſe with flegmatike or melancholike men, according as
the humours which rule in them, diſpoſe and incline them more to be
caried with one affection rather then with another. Therefore wee
ſee that they which are of a cholericke complexion, as they are of a
more hote and dry nature, ſo their affections are more ſodain, burning
and violent, like to fire. Flegmatike and melancholy perſons as they
are colder, ſo they are not ſo eaſily mooued, but are more ſlowe and
heauy, and haue alſo other inclinations and other affections. And as
they that are cōmonly ſaid to be ſanguine, are of the beſt temperature
ſo their affections are for the moſt part more cheerful & more temperate.
And as there are diuers mixtions of bodily qualities, ſo there are
ſundry ſorts of temperatures and complexions of the body, and conſequently
of ſoules in regard of their ſaculties and affections. Therfore
alſo there is great agreement betweene corporall and ſpirituall Phyſicke.Agreement betweene corporall and ſpirituall Phyſicke.
For this cauſe the Phyſicions both of the bodies and ſoules of
men are to follow almoſt one & the ſame methode, and obſerue a like

order in their arte & practiſe, euery one according to the ſubiects propounded
vnto them: inſomuch that looke what the one doeth vnto
the body, the other is to deale ſo with the ſoule, ſuch things being applied
as beſt agree with their ſeuerall natures. Wherein they may further
eche others worke greatly, obſeruing that ende at which both of
them aime, which to the one is the health of the body, and to the other
the cure of the ſoule, conſidering that the one may helpe the other, as
hath bin already touched. For if the body be not temperant, hardly wil
the ſoule be: & if the ſoule be intemperate, the body deſireth not to be
temperant. Therefore alſo we ſee, that not only Phyſicions for the body
appoint men diets, both for the preſeruation of their bodily health, and
alſo for ye recouery & reſtoring thereof again, but alſo ſpiritual Phyſicions
doe the like in regard of the ſoules health, ſo farre foorth as bodily
ſobriety wil ſerue greatly to that purpoſe. For this cauſe not only ordinary
ſobriety & moderation, which ought to be kept throughout the
whole life of man,Luke 21. 34. is ſo greatly recommended vnto vs in the holy ſcriptures,
but faſts alſo,Rom. 13. 3. which being more ſtrict abſtinēces, are very profitable,
yea neceſſary oftentimes according to times,Epheſ 5. 18. places and perſons,
For they ſerue to tame and humble the fleſh,Act. 13. 2. that it may be the better
kept in, & leſſe hinder the ſpirit, which thereby is the better inabled to
attend to euery good worke, & to the contemplation of diuine & celeſtial
things.Iudge. 20. 26. Therfore the people of God & holy men faſted oftē, wherof
wee haue many teſtimonies in the ſcriptures.Pſal. 69. 10. And as it is neceſſary
that bodily Phyſicions ſhould know wel the tēperatures & complexions
of mens bodies,Eſth. 4. 16. and their natures, their health and diſeaſes alſo,
with their conuenient and apt remedies: ſo is it needfull, that ſpirituall
Phyſicions ſhoulde knowe the nature of ſoules, of their faculties,
powers & affections, & the natures of vertues, which are their health,
and of vices, which are their diſeaſes, together with thoſe medicines &
remedies that are neceſſarie for the preſeruation & increaſe of vertues,
and for the diminution & aboliſhing of vices. For without this knowledge,
neither of them can be good Phyſicions, but it may bee feared,
leaſt they make ye diſeaſes worſe, or in ſteed of curing the ſick perſons,
kill them outright. But we muſt yet draw more inſtruction out of this
matter here offered vnto vs. For whatſoeuer hath beene hitherto ſpoken
concerning the agreement between the temperature of the body,
and the affections of the ſoule, or concerning the health & diſeaſes of
them both, or the knowledge that is requiſit in Phyſicions to follow a
good method in their art & practiſe for ye healing of their patiēts, I ſay
the vnderſtāding of al theſe things is not only neceſſary for ye Phyſiciōs
both of ſoules & bodies,The knowledge of phyſicke neceſſary for all▪
                   but euen for euery one of vs particularly, For if

we were all skilfull in the art of corporall Phiſicke, I meane not ſuch
skil as is needful for them that make publike profeſſion thereof to all,
but onely ſo much as is neceſſary for the preſeruation of our owne
health, I doubt not but we might eaſily auoyde many infirmities and
diſeaſes, whereinto we fall daily for want of good diet, good gouernment
and the vſe of thoſe meanes, which might either retaine vs in
health, or reſtore it quickly vnto vs, when it is ſomewhat altered or impeached.
Moreouer we ſhould haue this aduantage beſides, if we fell
into any diſeaſe, that we ſhould know the better howe to keepe and
gouerne our ſelues more moderately and wiſely, and obey the Phyſicions
counſell the better, becauſe we ſhould haue greater knowledge
of that which we ought to doe, & of the danger whereinto we might
fall, or which we might eaſily auoyde. Wee may ſay as much of the
ſoules phiſicke, the knowledge whereof is a great deale more neceſſary
for vs, not onely becauſe the ſoule is more noble and precious
then the body, but alſo becauſe it is a harder matter to knowe the nature
and diſeaſes of the ſoule, then of the bodie. And if wee prooue ſo
happie as to be able to comprehend any thing, wee ſhall know daily
better and better what things are in vs of God, and what is his order,
as alſo what there is of Satans, and what is that diſorder and confuſion,
which by meanes of ſinne he hath brought into all things. For
as ſinne is cauſe of that exceſſe,Sinne is the cauſe of all diſorder, diſcaſes and of death. which is in the qualities of which our
bodies are made, and conſequently of the diſeaſes that proceed from
thence, which afterward bring death to the bodie, ſo is it in reſpect
of the ſoule, and of the exceſſe that is in the affections thereof, and in
all the other partes of it, contrary to that nature in which God created
the ſame. And as ſinne is the cauſe of the diſorder and confuſion that
is in both of them, ſo it is the cauſe that one helpeth to ſpoile another,
whereas there ſhould be a pleaſant harmonie and concord, not
onely of the bodily qualities among themſelues, and ſo likewiſe of
the qualities of the ſoule among themſelues, but alſo of the qualities
both of ſoule and bodie one with another. For God hath put, nor onely
into our ſoules, but into our bodies alſo, the ſeedes of all the vertues,
and the pricks and meanes to incite and to leade vs vnto them, in ſuch
manner and forme as ſhalbe declared hereafter. Although wee may
learne ſomewhat by that which we haue heard alreadie of the conueniencie
that is betweene the body and the ſoule, betweene the temperature
of the one and the affections of the other. For if the one bee
anſwerable and correſpondent to the other, no doubt but God ſo diſpoſeth
of the temperatures and complexions of the bodie, as he hath
diſpoſed of the nature of the affections in the ſoule, ſeeing the one is

to ſerue the other through that mutuall agreement, which they ought
to haue one with another. Nowe to morrow wee will proſecute our
ſpeech begunne concerning the affections of the ſoule, to the end we
may fully vnderſtand this goodly and large matter, which may procure
to the ſoule and body, both life and death. And firſt, mee thinkes
wee are to enter into the conſideration of foure things, which are in
the will and in the power to deſire, that is in the ſoule, namely, natural
inclinations, actions, habites, and affections, This ſhalbe then, ASER,
the ſubiect of thy diſcourſe.
            
            The end of the fift dayes worke.
         
         
            THE SIXT DAYES
Worke.
            
               Of foure things to be conſidered in the Will, and in the power of deſiring in
the ſoule: and first, of the naturall inclinations: of ſelfe-loue, and the
vnrulineſſe thereof. Chap. 41.
               
                  ASER. All the actions of the ſoule are bredde of the
powers and faculties thereof: and therefore by the
benefite of nature, which is the gift of God, ſhe hath
receiued powers for all thinges, which ſhe ought to
doe. Now concerning the facultie of knowing in the
ſoule, and in the vnderſtanding part thereof, of which
we haue intreated heeretofore,Three things to be conſidered in the facultie of Knowledge. we finde three thinges worthie of diligent
conſideration, namely, naturall principles, actions, and habites
gotten by long cuſtome. Wee may remember thoſe ſundry degrees,
which we ſaid were in the knowledge of the minde, and how by this
facultie it doeth not only know ſimple and particular things as beaſts
doe, but alſo compoundeth and ioyneth them together: how it compareth
one with another, ſeparateth them and diſcourſeth vpon them:
finally howe it iudgeth, and eyther approueth or refuſeth them. All
which things are actions of the minde, proceeding from thoſe notices,
and naturall principles of knowledge that are therein. Nowe if theſe
actions be ſodaine, and paſſe lightly, ſo that the minde doeth not ſtay
in them, nor acquaint it ſelfe with them, the bare and ſimple name of
action belongeth to them. But if the minde doeth one and the ſame
thing often, muſeth much vpon it, calleth it often to memorie, and accuſtometh

it ſelfe thereunto,How hab
                        •
                     tes are bred in ye minde. ſo that it is in a manner imprinted in it,
and thereby the minde becommeth prompt and ready in regarde of
thelong continuance therein, then doe theſe actions take the name of
habite, which is bredde by the often repeating and reiterating of the
ſame things. Whereby the minde is made more skilful and ready, and
the ſpirites more fitte and apt to performe thoſe exerciſes, vnto which
they haue addicted themſelues, and wherein they haue continued. So
that ſuch a habite is as it were a light in the ſpirite and in the ſoule,
whereby the actions there of are gouerned.
               In like manner wee finde in the Will,Foure things to be conſidered in the Will and deſires. and in that power o deſiring,
which is in the ſoule, foure things to be conſidered, namely naturall
inclinations, actions, habites, and affections which intermingle themſelues
in euery one of the other. All theſe thinges are good of their
owne nature, euen as nature it ſelfe, being conſidered as God hath
created her. But as nature was corrupted through ſinne, ſo is it with
theſe things by reaſon of that diſorder which the nature of ſinne hath
brought vnto them.Of natural in
                        •
                     linations and affections. But let vs firſt ſpeake of naturall inclinations, and
then we will proſecute the reſt. As therefore the minde hath his naturall
principles of knowledge, ſo the will hath her naturall inclinations
and affections, which of their owne nature are good, as they are
taken from that firſt nature created of God: neither woulde they at
any time bee wicked, if there were no exceſſe in them proceeding
from nature corrupted, which afterwarde breedeth in vs ſuch inclinations
and affections as are altogether euill and damnable. We loue
our ſelues naturally, our wiues, our children, our kinsfolkes and our
friendes, yea we are by nature ſo enclined to this loue, that if it were
not in vs we ſhoulde not onely not bee men, but not deſerue ſo much
as to bee accounted and taken for beaſtes, no not for the wildeſt, moſt
ſauage and venemous beaſtes that can be. For we ſee by experience
what great inclination & affection there is in euery one of them towardes
their litle ones. Therefore when S. Paul maketh a beaderoll of
the vices and ſinnes of ſuch men as are moſt vicious and execrable, and
as it were monſters of nature,Rom. 1. 30. 2. he ſaith expreſly, that they are without naturall
affection:
                  Tim. 3. 3. which indeede cannot be cleane rooted out of any nature
liuing, vnleſſe it be altogether monſtrous and vnnaturall: For it
is an affection which is as it were a beame of the loue that God beareth
cowards all his creatures, and which he cauſeth to ſhine in them,
ſo that it is not poſſible, that they which are capable of any affection
of loue, ſhould not loue their owne blood and their like, eſpecially
men. Wherefore if this loue and this affection were well ruled and ordered,
it is ſo farre from being vicious, that contrariwiſe the ſpirite of

God condemneth as Monſters, thoſe men that want it. And therefore
God doth not forbid and condemne this loue and affection in his law,
ſo farre forth as it is ruled thereby, but he approueth it, & appointeth it
to be the rule of our loue towards our neighbour,Leuit. 19. 18. matth. 5. 43. when he ſaith, Thou
ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. But when this loue & affection is diſordered
in vs, it is not only vicious, but alſo as it were the originall and
fountaine of all other vices and ſinnes, whereas if it were well ordered
& ruled according to the will & law of God, it would be as it were the
fountaine and welſpring of all vertues. For wee ſhould not loue our
ſelues but in God and through him, nor conſequently our wiues, nor
our children, nor our friends, nor any other creature whatſoeur: wheras
cleane contrariwiſe, wee ſet God aſide, and ſeeke nothing but our
ſelues and the things of the world. Therefore this loue and affection
being nowe ſo vnruly through ſinne, is ſo violent in vs, that it withdraweth
vs from the loue of God and of his creatures, to loue the deuil
and his wicked workes, becauſe it ſeemeth to vs, that he is a greater
friend vnto vs then God.Of the v
                        •••
                     lines of our naturall affections. For whereas the holy ſpirite doeth reſiſt and
ſet himſelfe againſt our euil affections, and wil haue vs to bridle them,
Satan on the contrary part letteth them looſe, & not onely giueth vs
ouer to follow our peruerſe and vitious affections with full ſway and
libertie, but alſo prouoketh and thruſteth vs forward with great vehemencie.
Whereby we may iudge, what loue and affection a man may
cary towardes creatures in thoſe things wherein they may be contrary
vnto him, and with what fury and rage he may be ledde againſt them
that reſiſt his diſordered affections, ſeeing he carieth ſuch an affection
towardes God his Creator. Therefore Saint Paul ſpeaking of wicked
men that ſhould be in the latter times,2. Tim. 3. 2. ſaieth firſt, That they ſhoulde bee
ſelfe-louers: and hauing ſet downe this diſordered loue as the roote,
after he commeth to the branches & fruits of ſuch a tree, ſaying, That
they ſhall bee couetous, boasters, proude, curſed ſpeakers, diſobedient to parents,
vnthankfull, vnholy, without naturall affection, truce-breakers, falſe
accuſers, intemperate, fierce, deſpiſers of them that are good, traitors, heady,
bie minded, louers of pleaſures more thē louers of God, hauing a ſhew of godlineſſe,
but denying the power therof. And in the Epiſtle to the Romanes he
expreſly mentioneth haiers of God.
                  Rom. 1. Thus we ſee what the loue of mē is
towards thēſelues, being left in ye corruptiō of their nature, in reſpect of
yt which ought to be, if it were not vnruly & diſordred. For man ſhould
loue himſelf
                     •
                   as the gift of God, as alſo his life & being which God hath
giuen him,Of true loue towards a man
                        •
                      ſelfe, & toward
                        •
                      his. & that bleſſed eſtate for the enioying of which hee hath his
being, and that Good wherein it conſiſteth, and whereby he may at
                  
                     •
                  aine
vnto it, and ſhoulde loue no other thing, nor otherwiſe. But the

great exceſſe that is in the loue of our ſelues, cauſeth it to bee cleane
contrary, both to that loue which ought naturally to be in vs, and alſo
to our loue toward
                     •
                   God, ſo that it ouerthroweth and confoundeth all
heauenly order, and the whole courſe of mans life. Neuertheles, when
it ſo falleth out that this loue and affection is moderate in vs, although
in deede it be neuer ſo as it ought to be according to the rule of Gods
will, yet are they acceptable in his ſight, as our other naturall affections
and friendſhips are, which we beare towardes them that belong
to vs: prouided alwayes that they bee ruled and guided by faith and
true loue, and kinded with the flames of the holy Ghoſt, as they were
in Zacharie and Elizabeth towards their ſonne Iohn▪
                   and in ſo many other
holy men, as haue loued both themſelues and theirs according to
God,Gen. 22. wherof we haue a notable example in Abraham. For out of all
queſtion if euer father loued his children, hee loued his ſonne Iſaac.
But he ſhewed euidently by the effect, that he did not onely loue him
with the loue of fleſh and blood, as commonly we loue our children,
but he loued him alſo in God, towards whome yet his loue was farre
greater, ſeeing he was very ready to offer him vp in ſacrifice vnto him,
whe 
                     •
                  he ſo commanded it. But although this naturall loue and affection
bee not ſo pure in vs as in theſe holy men, but that ſtill there is
mingled with it ſome thing of our owne becauſe of ſinne, which wee
hane by inheritance, yet is it alwaies acceptable to God, ſo that hee
be firſt and chiefly loued. For through his mercie he beareth with our
infirmitie, which euermore accompanieth our deſires and willes. As
for thoſe that are guided onely by the light of nature, and are not regenerated
by the ſpirit of God, albeit theſe naturall affections are too
vncleane in them, yet they doe not ſo much diſpleaſe him, as inhumanitie
and crueltie doe, that are cleane contrary to the other, & which
doe vtterly diſpoſſeſſe men of loue and charitie. We may conſider the
ſame things in all the other naturall inclinations. For wee ſee that ſome
are by nature inclined to ciuill iuſtice, ſome to liberalitie, and others
to ſuch like vertues.Naturall inclinations are ſeeds of vertues or vices. Now if theſe inclinations be well guided, they are
goodly ſeedes of vertues, but if they bee not well ordered and ruled,
they corrupt & degenerate▪ ye
                     •
                   they turne into the vices that are contrary
to thoſe vertues. For iuſtice, which is neuer without moderation,
may be turned into ouer great rigour, or into crueltie, as wee ſee it in
many, who being naturally inclined to ſeueritie, which many times
is very neceſſarie iniuſtice, become ſo rigorous and extreme, that
their ſeue ritie, which ought to be a vertue, is turned into crueltie. The
like may be 
                     •
                  aid of other inclinations and affections. Now that which
befalleth theſe inclinations, is procured alſo vnto them by the humors

and qualities of the bodie, which haue acertaine agreement with the
affections. For a ſanguine man, in whoſe nature blood beareth greateſt
ſway amongſt the other humours and qualities, will naturally be
more enclined to loue, to ioy, to liberalitie, and to ſuch other affections
as are moſt agreeable to his nature. But if this complexion bee
not moderated and well guided, it will eaſily paſſe meaſure in euerie
affection, ſo that it will fall into fooliſh and vnlawfull loues, into exceſſiue
and vnmeaſurable ioyes, and into prodigalitie in ſteede of following
liberalitie. The ſame may bee ſaide of all the other temperatures
and complexions for their part, in that they may bee ſeedes and
prouocatiōs either to vertues or to vices, according to that correſpondencie,
which is betweene the bodie and the ſoule, and the temperature
of the one with the affections of the other.The originall of all diſeaſes. Therefore we may wel
conclude, that as diſeaſes ingender in the body of the humours that
are in it, according to their change, mingling and corruption: ſo it
falleth out in the nature of the ſoule and in the affections thereof. For
as good naturall humors become euil by corruption that ſeazeth vpon
them, and turne that health which before they affoorded into diſeaſes:
ſo the inclinations and naturall affections of our ſoule, which of their
owne nature are good and the ſeedes of vertues, are turned into vices
and into their ſeedes, through that corruption which ſinne bringeth
vnto them. Behold then what we haue to conſider of thoſe natural inclinations
that are in the Will & in the deſiring power of the ſoule, &
of the actions thereof, namely to wil and not to will, & to ſuſpend and
ſtay her action, and to commaunde ouer the power of the appetites,
of all which wee haue largely intreated in our diſcourſe of the Will.
Wherefore we will come to the habites, of which thou ſhalt now diſcourſe,
AMANA.
            
            
               Of the Habite of the ſoule in the matter of the affections, and of what
force it is: of the cauſes why the affections are giuen to the ſoule,
with the vſe of them: of the fountaine of vertues and vices.
Chap. 42.
               AMANA. If a man will learne any occupation, hee proues not
a woorkeman the firſt day, but learneth by little and little, and
beginneth to labour therein: afterward by long continuance and cuſtome
he groweth more ready in his arte, and practiſeth it with greater
facilitie and eaſe. A painter waxeth expert in his ſcience by often
painting, and his hand wherewith he laboureth, by long continuance
becommeth more ſteady, more ready and able, ſo that he can handle

his penſill with greater eaſe, and is farre more expert therein then hee
was in the beginning. Wee may note the like in the ſoule, and in the
chiefe powers and actions thereof. For there are ſome of them, which
incontinently folow the nature of the faculties of the ſoule, when they
haue their iuſt times, and are come, as a man would ſay, vnto their ripeneſſe,
as we may ſee by experience in the corporall ſenſes. For not long
after the childe is borne he ſeeth and heareth, the reaſon whereof is
becauſe the ſenſes of ſeeing and hearing are by nature abſolute and
perfect. Therefore in ſuch actions there needeth no exerciſe to cauſe
them to performe that which they doe well, but onely a good vigour
and ſtrength, becauſe in them nature is a great Miſtres that hath all efficacie.
But there are farre more excellent actions, as ſcience, arte, prudence,
fidelitie, and ſuch like, which had neede of vſe and exerciſe to
cauſe them to doe readily and well. This vſe bringeth cuſtome, which
hath in it a facilitie to worke, and a diſpoſition tending therunto. And
then ſuch actions take the name of habite, which is bred by the reiterating
thereof.
               Thus the actions of the Wil & power of deſire in the ſoule, of which
wee haue ſpoken before, when they are often reiterated, ſo that they
grow to be firme and ſtedfaſt, are called habits, becauſe the Will is ſo
accuſtomed thereunto, that it becommeth more conſtant eithet in deſiring
one certain thing, or in eſchewing the ſame. Therefore as the affections
are more or leſſe forward, more ſeldome or often vſed, more
weak or ſtrong,What a habite is. ſo they are called either inclinations or actions, or habites.
But we are to note, that habites extende not themſelues onely to
thoſe things which we doe, but alſo to thoſe which we ſuffer & abide,
which diſpleaſe vs and are contrary to our nature. For cuſtome diminiſheth
& moderateth by litle and litle the ſenſe of that griefe & paine
which they bring vs, whereof we haue trial in all diſeaſes, which commonly
ſeem not ſo grieuous & intollerable after we haue bin long accuſtomed
vnto thē,Of the force of cuſtome. as in the beginning of them. And although pouertie
be a heaui
                     •
                   burthen, neuertheleſſe cuſtome maketh it familiar vnto
vs, and familiarity cauſeth vs to thinke it lighter. Wherefore we ought
not to maruel, if our God doth vſually ſend affliction to his children to
acquaint them therewith, as alſo to the ende they might obtaine
the vertue of patience, which is learned by often ſuffering: inſomuch
that there remaineth a habite in men, which being nothing els but a
common cuſtome, cauſeth them mildly to beare & ſuſtaine all euents.
Whereas there are ſome that like furious and deſperate men are caried
away we great impatience, either becauſe they neuer ſuffered much before,
or if they did ſuffer, yet they neuer accuſtomed thēſelues to beare

their afflictions patiently. Moreouer we know by experience, that although
the way of vertue at our firſt entring thereinto, ſeeme vnto vs
very difficult to tread in, yet afterward we find it very 
                     •
                  aſie, when wee
haue walked in it a certaine time.Sweat is Gentleman-vſher to vertue. For there is no honeſt trade of life in
which we finde not great difficultie. And the more excellent it is, ſo
much the more troubleſome and tedious it will ſeeme to our fleſh,
whereas the path of pleaſure will ſeeme to bee very delectable and
eaſie, becauſe it is a great deale more naturall to our corrupt nature.
But howe harde ſo euer it bee to our fleſh to followe after a
vertuous, honeſt, and ſober life, yet cuſtome will make it eaſie to ouerpaſſe,
as likewiſe to forſake that which is contrarie vnto it. Therefore
it hath not without iuſt cauſe beene giuen out long ſince by
wiſe and skilfull men, that it is very good and profitable to bee accuſtomed
to good thinges, eſpecially from ones infancie: that it
skilleth much howe eu
                     •
                  rie one hath beene brought vp from his
youth: that nothing is of greater force then cuſtome, eyther to good
or to euill, as that which ſeemeth to bee another nature. Nowe vpon
this ſpeech of habites wee are to note further,The cauſe and profite of an habite. that as all other
naturall thinges in the ſoule are giuen vnto it for the good thereof,
ſo is this habite, which is no other thing but a cuſtome rooted
therein. For except continuance of time did confirme this power
of the ſoule, I meane, that it ought not onely to doe a thing, but
to doe it well and as it ought to bee done, that it is to gette a facilitie
therein through vſe and excerciſe, to the ende it may doe the
ſame thing afterwarde more freely and readily, and bee more willing
to occupie it ſelfe about the ſame thing, and that after the
ſame manner, I ſay except this bee ſo, many inconueniences will
enſue thereupon. The firſt is, that it ſhoulde labour altogether in
vaine. The ſeconde, that it ſhoulde alwayes come rude and vnskilfull,
as it were a newe prentice, to the exerciſing of theſe excellent
actions and woorkes. Whereof this woulde followe, that hauing
profited nothing with the time, it woulde not doe any thing perfectly.
And this we ought not onely to vnderſtand of thoſe things which
wee doe willingly but euen of that which wee ſuffer and indure maugre
our willes: where with of all other things we had neede to be beſt
acquainted. For ſeeing wee are compaſſed about daily with ſo many
miſeries, ſeeing wee muſt ſuffer and vndergoe ſo many ſharpe
and vnworthie aſſaults, howe much greater will our miſery be, if long
cuſtome & an habit in ſuffring ſhould affoord vs no eaſe & refreſhing?
But let vs come now to yt which particularly concerneth the affections
of the ſoule, that we may be fully inſtructed in ye nature & ſundry kinds

of them. Firſt wee will note, that wee vnderſtand by affection that
natural power in the ſoule, which openeth it ſelfe towards Good, and
with draweth it ſelfe from euill, as wee haue alreadie declared before.
Nowe when the actions of an affection are growen to bee habites,What affection is, & frō whence vertue and vice firſt ſpring.
then are they called either vertues or vices, according as they are either
well or ill done. And from hence proceede good or ill manners,
of which morall Philoſophie tooke that name, becauſe it in
                     •
                  reateth
of them. For that ſheweth what vertue and vice is, howe manie
kindes there are of them, and what difference there is not onely betweene
vertues and vices, but alſo betweene the ſundrie ſorts of them,
as we haue diſcourſed at large in our firſt Academical aſſemblie.The fountaine of morall philoſophie. But
let vs vnderſtande this, that the knowledge of the ſoule and of the
powers of it, about which wee nowe labour, is the right ſpringhead
and fountaine of that morall Philoſophie and doctrine. This knowledge
therefore is very profitable and neceſſary, to the ende that by it
we may know the originall and beginning of all vertues and vices, of
their whole generation, and their ſundrie kindes. For if wee be well
inſtructed in all the partes and powers of the ſoule, we know the cauſes
of theſe actions: we knowe how the minde iudgeth, how the will
chooſeth and commaundeth, as wee haue alreadie ſpoken. And thus
we ſee, that there are moſt ſure and certaine principles of knowledge,
which ſhine in the minde as it were a light, which are the rules whereby
the ſoule ſquareth out her actions, and which diſcerne betweene
trueth and falſehood, good and euill, to the ende that all the actions
therof might agree with theſe rules, which are the beames of heauenly
wiſedome in our ſelues. For it is an order which God hath ſo ordained
& eſtabliſhed.Why the affections are giuen to the ſoule. And foraſmuch as the ſoule was to dwell in the body,
God gaue vnto it this naturall power of the affections, that it might
bee wakened and ſtirred vp by them as it were with prickes, thereby
to be kept from idleneſſe, and from being lulled aſleepe and oppreſſed
with the heauines of the body, and ſo neglect all care of good things,
& of that which is very expedient & profitable for it ſelf. For this cauſe
the ſoule hath her affections of which ſome ſerue for ſpurres to pricke
her hither & thither, & as oftē as need requireth: others ſerue for a bridle
to keep her back & to ſtay her from ruſhing vnto euill, & from following
thoſe things that are hurtful for her. And indeede we ſtand in
need of ſuch ſpurtes and bridles: but herein we erre greatly in that we
knowe not howe to keepe a moderation betweene theſe twaine.
For becauſe wee make theſe ſpurres too ſharpe, and pricke the
horſe too much which we haue to guide, the bridle on the other ſide is
two grieuous vnto him, ſo that he lifteth vp and girdeth forward ouer

furiouſly. And this commeth to paſſe becauſe wee doe not content
our ſelues with that which is requiſite for the ſuccouring of our naturall
neceſſities, but we adde there vnto infinite ſuperfluities. For vpon
ſome light neceſſitie that might ſoone be diſpatched, we torment
our ſelues a great deale more then neede is, becauſe wee perſwade
our ſelues that our neceſſities are greater then they bee, and ſo ſeeke
after moe remedies and helpes then is requiſite. Of this wee haue
daily experience in that care which wee take for thinges neceſſarie
for this life, which is the cauſe that wee burne continually with inſatiable
couetouſneſſe, which is ſuch a marueilous ſpurre vnto vs,
that wee take very little reſt for it. For if wee woulde bee contented
with enough, it woulde not put vs to that torment, which wee
dayly ſuffer.The affections compared to the windes. But nothing ſufficeth vs: and therefore the affections
are in our ſoule, as the windes vpon the ſea. For ſome windes are
very ſmall, and mooue the water but a little: others are more vehement,
and rayſe vp certaine waues: and ſome againe are ſo tempeſtuous,
and make ſuch horrible ſtormes and guſtes, whereby the
Sea is ſo mooued, that ſea and ſande and fiſhe and all ſeeme to bee
turned topſie toruie. The like may bee ſayde of the motions of the
ſoule. For ſome are ſo light, that they ſeeme to bee nothing els but
ſmall beginnings of moouing. There are others ſtronger which moue
it ſomewhat more. And ſome alſo are ſo violent, that they altogether
trouble the ſoule, euen in ſuch a vehement manner, that they
driue her from her ſeate of iudgement. Therefore theſe two firſt
kindes of motions are properly called affections, and the other that
are ſo violent are termed Commotions and Perturbations.
                  Of commotions & perturbations. For they
bring a kinde of blindneſſe with them, which is the cauſe that iudgement
and reaſon ſee neuer a whit. Whereupon it followeth, ſeeing
neither Reaſon nor Iudgement beare any more rule, that the
ſoule is as if ſhee had no more power ouer her ſelfe, but were ſubiect
to the iuriſdiction of ſome other. The Grecians terme ſuch affections
with a worde that ſignifieth as much as if wee ſhoulde ſay
paſſions. And in deede wee commonly ſay, that a man is paſſionate,
when hee is tormented by ſuch violent affections. For as the
whole bodie ſuffereth when it is mooued, or thruſt too and fro, and
ſtricken on euerie ſide: ſo is it with the ſoule beeng violently mooued
euerie way. And as the moouing is more or leſſe moderate, ſo
ſhee ſuffereth more or leſſe: and if the motion bee verie violent, confuſion
followeth thereupon. Nowe for the ſequele of this ſpeech, let vs
conſider how the affections are more or leſſe moderate, according to
the diſpoſition of the iudgement: and what is the ſpring and originall

of ſo many ſundry affections, as we ſee in men. It belongeth then to
thee, ARAM, to handle this matter.
            
            
               That according to the disppoſition of the iudgement, the affections are
more or leſſe moderate or immoderate: of the cauſe of all the motions of
the ſoule and heart: of the varietie of affections: of the generation: nature
and kindes of them. Chap. 43.
               ARAM. Whatſoeuer we doe or wiſh for, wee doe or deſire it for
ſome Good, whether that which we iudge to bee good bee ſo in
trueth, or in opinion onely. And therein wee reſemble God our Creator,
who is not only good, but alſo goodnes it ſelfe, euen the perfection
of all Good Wherefore if we deſire to know what is the true Good, we
muſt vnderſtand, that there is but one onely true Good, euen the ſame,
by participation of which we are firſt made good, and then of good,
moſt happie. For we cannot be happy and bleſſed, which is the end we
all looke for, but we muſt firſt become good. For as there is no true felicitie
and bleſſednes but in Good, being th ſource and fountaine, yea
the perfection of all happines and contentation, ſo alſo there is no felicitie
nor bleſſe dues but in goodnes, which is as proper to God as his
very diuinitie: becauſe that as he cannot be God except he be good, ſo
he cannot be good with that goodneſſe that is in him, but he muſt bee
God. And as he is the eſſence of all eſſences, ſo he is the eſſential Good,
and the eſſential Goodnes of al Goods and of al Goodneſſes. But although
our nature doeth of it ſelfe alwayes tend to that which is Good, as wee
haue ſhewed in the handling of the chiefe powers of the ſoule, Vnderſtanding,
and Will, neuertheles we differ much, nay we are cleane
contrary to God, when wee come to the election of Good, becauſe of
the bad iudgement we haue, by reaſon of the darknes of ignoraunce
wherewith our mindes are blinded.
               Hereof it commeth, that the more the iudgement is corrupted, infected,
and deeper plunged in the fleſh,How 
                        〈◊〉
                      the iudgement can preuaile ouer the affections. the more euill and carnal are
the affections, the moe in number and the more violent: yea ſuch as
doe not onely trouble and peruert the internal ſenſes of the ſoule, but
the external ſenſes alſo of the body. This we may obſerue in them that
are caried away with loue, who thinke oftentimes, and are verily
perſwaded, that they ſee and heare thoſe thinges, which indeede
are nothing ſo. Contrariwiſe, the purer the iudgement is, and
the higher it is lifted vp from the fleſhe and from the earth, the
fewe
                     •
                   and lighter are the affections which trouble and moleſt it. For
then it taketh greater heed and marketh what trueth or what falſehood,

what good or what euill there is in all thinges. Whereupon
it commeth to paſſe, that the iudgement is not ſo often nor ſo
eaſily mooued. And when it is mooued, it is not ſo violent nor headie,
but more mature and moderate.The originall of violent motion
                        •
                      in the ſoule. For all great, violent, and turbulent
motions proceede of ignoraunce and inconſiderateneſſe, or
through a falſe perſwaſion, which maketh vs to thinke, that the Good
or Euill is greater then indeede it is. And this commeth for want of experience,
which beeing as it were a darke cloude and miſt before
the eyes of our minde, doe greatly trouble it: inſomuch that we ayme
not at that certaine Good, after which wee ought to ſeeke, but contrariwiſe
we propounde to our ſelues many ſortes of Goods, with many
and ſundry endes and meanes to attaine vnto them, which we change
and rechange from houre to houre, very inconſtantly, according to
places, times and occaſions, whereby it is euident that there is no ſtayedneſſe
in vs. Beſides all this, there is another great miſchiefe, namely
that wee haue not that prudence which beaſtes haue by naturall
inſtinct onely without reaſon or iudgement, whereby to knowe how
wee may keepe our ſelues from thoſe tempeſts, which our affections
may moue in vs. For when beaſtes perceiue any tempeſt comming,
they ſodainly withdraw themſelues, and ſeeke for meanes to auoyde
it.A ſimilitude ſhewing the perilous motions of of the ſoule. And they that ſayle on the Sea foreſeeing the tempeſtuous
ſtormes which threaten them, prouide thereafter in good time,
leaft they ſhoulde bee caried away therewith. For otherwiſe they
bring themſelues within the compaſſe of this danger, that afterward
they cannot bee Maſters of their ſhippe, neither arriue at their deſired
hauen, but rather hazarde the breaking of their ſhippe againſt
ſome rocke, or of ſticking faſt in ſome ſande, or of beeing ſwallowed
vp and ouerwhelmed with ſome whitlewindes and tempeſts.
The like may bee ſayde of the motions of the ſoule made by affections.
For there are not ſo manie ſortes of windes, whirlewindes,
or tempeſtes in the Sea, as there is varietie of motions that come
from the affections in our heartes. Therefore wee ought to bee verie
carefull, that when wee ſee and perceiue any beginnings in our
ſoules, wee ſtraightwayes giue not our ſelues ouer into the power
and ſwinge of our affections. But wee are ſo farre from looking to
this, that we throwe our ſelues into the middeſt of the tempeſt, that
it may carrie vs, not whether wee woulde, but whether that
will. For ſeeyng wee enterpriſe our affayres, not by the appoyntment
and decree of an vpright iudgement directed by reaſon,
but at the iudgement and luſt of our corrupt and crooked nature,
wee are ſo much mooued as our nature hath power. For naturall

actions are not bounded by our will, but e
                     •
                  tende themſelues as far
                     •
                  e
as the power and vertue thereof is able to permitte. But it is cleane
contrarie with a prudent and wiſe man.The effects of a prudent and wiſe man. For hee is not deceiued in the
election and choyſe of that which is good, becauſe hee chooſeth
with good iudgement, and propoundeth not to himſelfe many vncertaine
Goodes, but one onely, which is the true and certaine Good.
Like wiſe hee chooſeth not many wayes and meanes to come vnto
it, but a few that are well ſifted out and infallible: beſides, hee is not
gouerned by his affaires and affections, but gouerneth them, neyther
giueth himſelfe ouer into their power, but abideth alwayes in
his owne: inſomuch that if any affection beginneth to mooue by vertue
of his naturall inclination, hee preſently ſtayeth it, compelling it
to giue place and to obey right iudgement. Thus much generally
of the nature of affections: nowe it remayneth, that wee ſhoulde ſay
ſomething of the number and varietie of them. Surely it is very difficult,
yea impoſſible to ſet downe a certaine number of an infinite
thing:Of the variety of affections. although indeede the number of the affections is not infinite
by nature, but onely in regarde of vs, that cannot comprehend them
all. But wee will reckon vp the chiefeſt of them, which are the
fountaine of the reſt.
               Heere then we haue firſt to note,The cauſe of all motions in the 
                        •
                     oule that all motions of the ſoule are in
regarde eyther of ſome good which they ſeeke, or of ſome euill
which they woulde auoyde, becauſe it is contrary to that good.
Therefore euerie motion of it ſelfe tendeth alwayes to that which is
good, or withdraweth it ſelfe from euill, or els ſe
                     •
                  teth it ſelfe againſt
it, as wee haue alreadie hearde in the handling of Will. Nowe euery
good, and euery euill, is eyther preſent, or to come, or paſt, eyther
poſſible or impoſſible. And as wee take the abſence of euill for a
good, ſo wee iudge the abſence of good to bee an euill. For this
cauſe the Diuines make two kindes of 
                     •
                  ayne or puniſhment,Two kindes of puniſhments. whereof
the firſt is the payne of loſſe and damage, and the other is the
paine of ſenſe and feeling. By the firſt they vnderſtande that paine
which a man hath becauſe hee wanteth ſome good that hee ſhould
and woulde haue. For men account it damage, to looſe that profite,
which they ought to haue. By the ſeconde they vnderſtande a
payne which is felt, not onely when ſome good is wanting, which
a man ſhoulde or woulde haue, but when ſome euill is preſent, that
is contrary to this good, which men fe
                     •
                  le by effect. Therefore
they ſay that the payne of the loſſe and damage, is the priuation
of the ioyes of Paradiſe. For although there were no torments of

                     •
                  ell for the wicked, but onely a priuation of that eternall life and

happineſſe, for the which man was created of GOD, yet were
this no ſmall puniſhment to bee depriued thereof. But there is a
great deale more, when the wicked are not onely depriued of a
bleſſed life, but beſides that are detained in perpetuall torments, as
a malefactor that doeth not onely want all good company, but is
withall kept in perpetual priſon and torture. But let vs proceede with
our matter.
               When any good is propounded,Of the generation, nature and kindes of the af
                     
                        •
                     ections. ſo ſoone as euer the ſoule and
minde knoweth it, it is well liked of. And this liking or delight is as it
were a little pleaſant winde of motion in the heart, which beginneth
to ariſe and to followe after this good. Nowe when this pleaſure and
liking is confirmed and waxeth ſtrong, it is turned into loue. And the
motion of that preſent Good, which wee haue already gotten is called
ioy: and the motion of ſome Good to come is called Deſire, which is
incloſed within the bounds of loue. If the matter be of ſome euill, it is
called offence, becauſe the ſoule is offended thereby: and therfore ſhe
is diſpleaſed therewith and diſl
                     •
                  keth it, whereas ſhee is well pleaſed
with Good. If this diſpleaſure or diſlike be confirmed, it is turned into
hatred. And as griefe is for ſome preſent euill, ſo is feare of ſome euil

                     •
                  o come. The motion againſt a preſent euill, is anger, enuy, indignation▪
and againſt an euill to come, is confidence and boldneſſe. Now
all theſe affections haue others vnder them. For fauour, reuerence,
and mercy are compriſed vnder loue, delight vnder ioy, hope vnder
deſire, and deſire vnder griefe. As for pride, it is a monſter compounded
of diuers affections,How the affections are bred or brideled one of another. as of ioy, of deſire, and of boldeneſſe. And as
the affections are quickely bredde one of an other, ſo ſome of them are
brideled and reſtrained by others. For the firſt, enuy, hat
                     •
                  ed and anger
ſpring of loue. For they are motions of the heart that loueth, againſt
him that hateth or hurteth her who is de
                     •
                  re or beloued. And deſire
riſeth of reuenge▪ and the ioy that commeth thereby, proceede from
anger and malice. If a man loue any thing, he wiſheth it would come,
and hopeth alſo that he ſhall enioy it: and contrariwiſe, hee feareth
that it will not come to paſſe. If it come to paſſe, hee reioyceth. If it
come not to paſſe when hee thinketh it will, or when hee expecteth
it, he is grieued. In like manner, great ioy is leſſened through greefe,
and enuy through mercy▪ or through feare. And one greefe altereth
another▪ when it is greater: and feare maketh griefe to be forgotten,
and cauſeth the lame to runne. To be ſhort, theſe ſundry motions of
affections are like to ſtormy waues and billowes, which being driuen
one of another, doe either augment, or diminiſh, or wholy oppreſſe
one another.Goodly ſimilitudes▪
                   Wherefore the like happeneth in the motion of our affections,

that commeth to paſſe in a ſedition and ciuill diſſention, in
which no man conſidereth who is the worthier perſon to obey and folow
him, but who is the ſtronger and moſt mighty. So in the fight of
the affections there is no reſpect had to that which is moſt iuſt, but only
to that which is ſtrongeſt and moſt violent, and which hath gotten
ſuch power ouer the ſoule that it hath wholly ſubdued her to it ſelfe:
which thing wee ought to ſtand in great feare of. But whatſoeuer affections
are in vs, there is alwayes ſome griefe or ſome ioy ioyned
with them. Therefore following our matter, it ſhal be good for vs to
conſider particularly of the nature of theſe two contrary motions, of
which, ioy ſerueth greatly for the preſeruation of life, but griefe drieth
vp and conſumeth the heart, euen vnto the death of it, as wee ſhall
now learne of ACHITOB.
            
            
               That Ioy, or Griefe are alwayes ioyned to the affections: and what
Ioy and Griefe are properly. Chap. 44.
               ACHITOB. The knowledge of the Affections of the heart and
ſoule is very neceſſary for euery one, becauſe they are very euill
and dangerous diſeaſes in the ſoule, but yet being knowen they may
be cured more eaſily. This cauſe hath mooued vs, after wee haue ſpoken
of the heart and of the naturall motion thereof, and of the vſe it
hath in this life of the body, to enter into the conſideration of a ſecond
motion it hath, which ſerueth not onely for this corporall life, but alſo
for that ſpirituall life, in regard of which it was chiefely giuen, and
of which we ſaide, that there was as it were an image and repreſentation
thereof in the firſt motion.The firſt motion of the heart is an image of the ſecond. Now we ſhall better vnderſtand this
by the ſubiect of this diſcourſe propounded vnto vs, being handled
particularly as wee intend to doe. For as by the firſt naturall motion
of the heart, it receiueth ſuch refreſhing as is neceſſary for the ſending
of life vnto the whole body, and for the maintenance and preſeruation
of the ſame, as alſo for the expelling and driuing out of all ſuch
things as might hurt and ſtifle it: euen ſo is it in this ſecond motion, as
farre as wee can conceiue of the nature of it. For ſeeing God hath appointed
ioy as a meanes to preſerue life, hee hath likewiſe put this affection
in the heart, whereby it is as it were enlarged to receiue within
it ſelfe, and to embrace all Good that is offered vnto it: as alſo it reſtraineth
and ſhutteth it ſelfe vp through griefe which is contrary
thereunto.
               Moreouer wee ſhall finde, that there is no affection in vs, which is

not intermingled with ſome griefe or elſe with ſome ioy.Griefe or Ioy in all the affections. For ſeeing
the heart is the proper ſeate and inſtrument of all the affections, when
it is as it were ſtricken and beaten with ſome vnpleaſant thing that is
offered vnto it, then doeth it retire, cloſe vp it ſelfe and feele griefe, as
if it had receiued a wound, then doeth it flie from the thing it liketh
not. Yea the heart doeth alwayes either enlarge or ſhut vp it ſelfe according
to thoſe affections that are within it, the cauſes of which are
in it owne nature, God hauing ſo diſpoſed and willed the ſame, for the
reaſons which we haue already touched. For if the heart be ioyfull,
the ioy that it hath, doeth bring ſo great pleaſure vnto it, that thereby
it is opened and enlarged, as if it would receiue, imbrace, and lay holde
vpon that thing which reioyceth it, and bringeth vnto it that pleaſure,
which it hath in this ioy. Nowe becauſe there is ioy in loue and hope,
the blood and ſpirites are gently and mildely diſperſed by their moouings,
by reaſon of the reioycing at the Good that is preſent, or that is
expected, as if it were already preſent. And foraſmuch as ſuch motions
are made by the enlarging of the heart, whereby we embrace the
thing offered vnto vs,Ioy appeareth in the face. the face alſo appeareth ſmiling, cheerefull, and
ruddy. For a man may eaſily iudge, that the obiect preſented to the
heart, mooueth that power whereby it is ſtirred vp, becauſe that before
the heart doth mooue it ſelfe, it muſt know the thing that offereth
occaſion vnto it to be moued, either with ioy or griefe, or ſome ſuch
like affection. For as wee haue learned already, the outward ſenſes
do firſt perceiue the things that are offered vnto them, and then they
preſent them vnto the common ſenſe, which preſently by a ſingular
prouidence of God ſendeth them to al the other ſenſes, and to al thoſe
powers that are in the ſundry parts of the ſoule and body. This done, if
there be matter of ioy, the heart being ſtriken with that which is acceptable
vnto it, enlargeth it ſelfe, and being thus gently enlarged,
as it were to embrace the ſame, it diſperſeth much naturall heate with
the blood, beſides great quantitie of ſpirites, of which it ſendeth a
good portion to the face, if the ioy be ſo great that it mooueth a man
to hearty laughter.The effects of laughter in the face. For the face it ſelfe is in ſome ſort blowen vp and
enlarged: the forehead is made cleere and ſmoothe, the eyes gliſter
and ſhine, the cheekes become ruddy, and the lippes gather in
themſelues. In a worde, the heart doeth ſo enlarge it ſelfe, that it is
repreſented in the face, as it were in a glaſſe, or in an image framed to
expreſſe the ioy and gladnes which it hath.
               Moreouer, experience teacheth vs ſufficiently, what difference there
is between a cheerfull and a ſad countenance. Therfore when we loue
one, wee embrace him, as if wee woulde ioyne him to our ſelues,

and put him into our boſome and heart, as ſome deere and very pretious
thing. Which wee ſee chiefly in mothers, when they holde their
little infants betweene their armes, and embrace them with great affection
of heart. For this cauſe Saint Paul being deſirous to let the Corinthians
vnderſtand what good will hee bare them, howe louing,
ready and cheerefull his affection was towards them, what ioy he receiued
thereby, as himſelfe ſpeaking plainly doth with his mouth giue
full teſtimony of his heart,2. Cor. 6. 11, 12 writeth thus vnto them, O Corinthians, our
mouth is open vnto you: our heart is made large: you are not kept ſtraite in
vs. And then complaining of them that their heart was not ſo bent
towardes him, he ſaieth: But ye are kept ſtraite in your owne bowels. And
heere we may note,What is meant by bowels in the Scripture. that by this worde Bowels is meant generally all
the internall members and parts of man, eſpecially the heart, and thoſe
that are next vnto it. Now becauſe the heart is the ſeate of the affections,
and the other members neere vnto it ſerue for his vſe, therefore
the bowels are taken in the holy Scriptures for all the motions of the
heart, and for all the affections of men that proceed from it, but chiefly
for loue, alſo for ioy, pitie and compaſſion, which haue their beginning
from loue, whoſe nature is to open the heart: which in ſteade of
opening ſhutteth vp it ſelfe againſt thoſe that are not loued, or that a
man hateth. Therefore as loue or hatred is great or ſmall, hote or cold,
ſo doth the heart open or cloſe it ſelfe. Hereof it is ſaide in the hiſtorie
of the two women that ſtoode before Salomons iudgement ſeat about
their two children,1. King. 3. 26. whereof the one was dead and the other aliue,
that the bowels of the true mother were mooued towardes her childe.
And Saint Paul exhorting the Coloſſians to charitie and compaſſion,Col. 3. 12, 13, 14. The true workes of a Chriſtian.
ſaieth, Now therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloued, put on the bowels
of mercy (that is to ſay of tender affection) kindneſſe, humbleneſſe of
minde, meekeneſſe, long ſuffering: forbearing one another, and forgiuing
one another, if any man haue a quarrell to another: euen as Chriſt forgaue
you, ſo doe ye. And aboue all theſe things put on loue, which is the bond of
perfectneſſe: and let the peace of God (namely that which God hath eſtabliſhed
among his) rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in one
body, and be gracious, or amiable. We ſee here what vertues accompany
theſe bowels of mercy, of which hee ſpake in the beginning, as in
deed al th
                     •
                  ſe vertues and heauenly gifts are ſo knit together, that they
cannot be ſeparated one from an other. And Saint Iohn ſpeaking of
that liberalitie and loue, which ought to be among Chriſtians, ſaieth,
Whoſoeuer hath this worldes good,
                  1. Ioh. 3. 17, 18. 
                  and ſeeth his brother haue neede, and
ſhutteth vp his bowels from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? Then
he addeth, Let vs not loue in worde, neither in tongue onely, but in worke

and in trueth. And to this purpoſe Eſaias ſaith,Iſay 58. 10. 
                  If thou powre out thy ſoule
to the hungry, and refreſh the troubled ſoule, then ſhall thy light ſpring out in
the darkeneſſe, and thy darkeneſſe ſhalbe as the noone-day. All which places
agree very well to that which wee haue touched concerning the
motion of the heart, whereby it is either opened or cloſed vp, as the
affections are diſpoſed that mooue it. But let vs conſider more narrowly
the nature of theſe affections of ioy and ſorrowe, and what difference
is betweene them, ſeeing we haue taken them for the ground
of our ſpeach.What ioy is. For the firſt, let vs know, that ioy is properly a motion or
an affection of the heart, whereby it taketh pleaſure and ſtayeth it ſelfe
in that Good, which is offered vnto it: or if wee had rather thus, it is a
motion of the ſoule, proceeding from the iudgement of ſome Good,
which is already preſent, or certainely neere at hand. And therefore
when the heart is enlarged therewith, not onely laughter is bred, but
all the body alſo leapeth, when the ioy is ſo great that the breaſt cannot
containe nor keepe in the heart. But when the ioy is moderate, it
purgeth the blood by heate, it confirmeth health, and bringeth with
it a liuely and vigorous heate, which is very wholſome and acceptable
to the heart. True it is, that the heart and will often deceiue themſelues
in the choice and election of that which is Good: whether it be
that following reaſon and iudgement corrupted,How the heart chuſeth euil for good. which ſhould ſhew
what is Good, they embrace their errour: or whether it be that Will
being corrupted of it ſelfe through ſinne, letteth looſe the bridle againſt
the iudgement of reaſon, and ſo ſuffereth her ſelfe to be carried
headlong by her euill affections, in following ſome falſe ſhewe of
good. Whereupon it commonly commeth to paſſe, that in ſteade of
ioy which the heart ſhould receiue of Good, vnto which the will tendeth
naturally, it receiueth great ſorrow and griefe after knowledge
taken of the fault. This is the cauſe why we are ſo often admoniſhed
by the ſpirite of God, to renounce our owne ſenſe, reaſon, prudence,
and wiſedome, and to ſubmit our ſelues wholly to the counſaile and
wiſedome of God, and to iudge of good and of euill, of the true and
falſe Goods according to his iudgement, and not according to our
owne: as alſo to renounce our owne deſires to followe his will. As
for griefe or ſorrow, wee may iudge of this affection by the contrary,
which is ioy,What ſorrow is. namely, that it is a motion and an affection of the heart,
whereby it is reſtrained and preſſed either with ſome preſent euill, or
with ſome that is in a manner preſent: which diſpleaſeth the heart as
if it had receiued ſome grieuous wound. Therefore it trembleth and
languiſheth, as a ſicke body, who drying vp with griefe by little and
little, in the end dicth, except hee haue ſome remedy againſt his ſickeneſſe.

For the like happeneth to the heart of man through griefe as
long as it is within it, inſomuch that it neuer forſaketh it, vntil it hath
quite dried vp and conſumed the ſame. And therefore as there is pleaſure
and reſt in ioy, ſo in ſorrow there is dolour and torment. For it ingendreth
melancholy,Of melancholy. and melancholy ingendreth it, and increaſeth
it more, ſo that wee often ſee melancholy men very ſadde, although
no harme hath befallen them, neither can they giue any reaſon of their
heauines. Moreouer, this blacke melancholy humor is of this nature,
that it will make the ſpirit and mind darkiſh, whereby it groweth to
be blockiſh, & the heart looſeth all his cheerefulnes. And becauſe the
braine is cooled thereby, it waxeth very heauy & drowſie. Now when
griefe is in great meaſure,The effect of ſorrowe. it bringeth withal a kind of loathing & tediouſnes,
which cauſeth a man to hate & to be weary of all things, euen
of the light and of a mans ſelfe, ſo that he ſhal take pleaſure in nothing
but in his melancholy, in feeding himſelfe therewithall, in plunging
himſelfe deeper into it, and in refuſing of all ioy and conſolation. To
conclude, ſome growe ſo farre as to hate themſelues, and ſo fall to diſpaire,
yea many kill and deſtroy themſelues. And as the heart by enlarging
it ſelfe with ioy appeareth in the countenance, ſo doeth it alſo
in ſorrow and griefe. For as in ſorrowe the heart drieth vp and gathereth
it ſelfe in, ſo it cauſeth the face, which is the image of it, to retire
and drawe backe, yea it depriueth the face of all colour, and cauſeth
it to fall away. Briefly, it marreth all health, and hath for continuall
companions, ſighs, plaints, groanes, teares, and weeping, and oftentimes
gnaſhing of teeth, as it is written of the damned, becauſe of that
ſorrowe and indignation in which they are, by reaſon of the torments
which they ſuffer. It is true that the moſt of theſe things ſerue as a remedy
againſt ſorrow. For howſoeuer griefe ſhutteth vp the heart as
we haue ſaid, yet by groning, ſighing and weeping the heart doth in
ſome ſort open it ſelfe, as if it woulde come foorth to breathe, leaſt
being wholly ſhut vp with ſorrow it ſhoulde be ſtifled. Againe, teares
are giuen vnto vs to teſtifie our griefe and to manifeſt it to others, that
we may mooue them to haue pitie and compaſſion on vs, and to help
and ſuccour vs. They ſerue vs further to declare what compaſſion we
haue of other mens ſorrowe and griefe,A commendable vſe of teares. which vſe is very neceſſary for
vs to get and preſerue friendſhip one towardes an other, and for our
mutuall comfort and conſolation. For we are greatly comforted, when
we ſee any take pitie and compaſſion of vs. Wherefore when we can
not otherwiſe ſolace them that are grieued, but only by declaring that
wee are ſorrowfull for their heauineſſe, and for thoſe euilles which
they ſuffer, yet doeth that affoorde great conſolation. And although

it ſeemeth an eaſie matter to giue this comfort, yet is it harder then
many thinke it is. For before wee can finde this in vs, wee muſt firſt
haue loue in our hearts, which cauſeth vs to open our bowels, and
mooueth vs to compaſſion towards our like, that we may weepe with
them that weepe, as we muſt reioyce alſo with them that reioyce according
as Saint Paul exhorteth vs thereunto.Rom. 12. 15. For by this meanes we
teſtifie that vnion and coniunction which we haue one with an other,
as members of one and the ſame body, and as if wee felt in our ſelues
all that good and euill which others feele. Nowe becauſe in our definition
of theſe affections of ioy and griefe, we made two ſorts of thoſe
that men feele in their hearts, namely, either of that good and euill
which is preſent, or if that which they looke for, wee muſt conſider
more particularly of theſe things, and ſee firſt, why God hath put theſe
affections in the ſoule, and what is true and preſent ioy, as alſo what
that other kind of ioy is, which hath regard to that which is to come,
which is properly called Hope. Now let vs heare thee, ASER, vpon
this matter.
            
            
               Of the cauſes why God hath placed theſe affections of Ioy and Sorrow
in the heart: of true and falſe Ioy, and of good and badde Hope.
Chap. 45.
               ASER. Men haue commonly ſharpe wittes to know vaine, earthly
and carnall things: but as for heauenly, true & eternall things,
they are able for the moſt part to vnderſtand nothing. So that wee
may compare the eyes of their ſoule to the eyes of an Owle,A compariſon. which
ſeeth clearely by night, but when the ſunne is riſen, ſeeth neuer a whit.
Euen ſo man hath ſome knowledge of the troubleſome things of this
worlde, but his ſight cannot pierce vnto the celeſtial and diuine light.
Therefore it falleth out often, that being beguiled by his owne ſenſe
and reaſon, inſteade of Good and Ioy, hee chuſeth and followeth after
that which is euill and full of griefe. For when the affection of the
heart, which naturally deſireth Good and ſeeketh after Ioy, is miſſed
and deceiued by humane reaſon, it eaſily embraceth euill in place of
Good, and that vnder ſome vaine ſhewe of good, which ſeemeth to be
in that euill thing it chuſeth. And although at the firſt the heart feeleth
not that which happeneth vnto it, yet hath it leiſure enough after
to complaine of the torment, which is alwaies equall both for age and
time, to the fault committed, and to the abuſe of thoſe gifts and graces
which God hath placed in the nature of the ſoule.
               
                  
Foraſmuch then as the heart is the beginning of life, we may well
know, that God hath not without good cauſe placed therein ſuch vehement
affections of ioy & griefe, which ſerue either to preſerue or to
deſtroy it, and haue for their companions hope and feare, as wee wil
declare heereafter. For by theſe affections God would giue vs prickes
and ſolicitours, to cauſe vs to thinke ſeriouſly of that leſſon, which
Dauid giueth vs, when hee ſaieth, Taste yee and ſee howe gracious
the Lorde is:
                  Pſa. 34. 8, 9, 10. 
                  bleſſed is the man that truſteth in him. Feare the Lorde
yee his Saintes: for nothing wanteth to them that feare him. The Lions
doe lacke and ſuffer hunger, but they which ſeeke the Lorde ſhall want
nothing that is good. What man is hee that deſireth life, and loueth long
dayes for to ſee good? Keepe thy tongue from euill, and thy lippes that they
ſpeake no guile. Eſchew euil and do good, ſeeke peace and follow after it. The
Prophet ſheweth here plainely, wherein true life & felicitie conſiſteth:
and the reaſon thereof hee ſetteth downe afterward, namely, that the
Lord looketh both vpon the good and bad, and that as hee preſerueth
the good, ſo hee rooteth out the remembrance of the wicked from off
the earth.Verſ. 19. 21. 22. Therefore hee ſaieth afterward, Great are the troubles of the
righteous, but the Lorde deliuereth him out of all. Malice ſhall ſlay the
wicked, and they that hate the righteous ſhall periſh. The Lorde redeemeth
the ſoules of his ſeruants, and none that truſt in him ſhall periſh.
                  Of the ioy of the godly. Wherefore
as the children of God that are partakers of his promiſes, can not bee
without great ioy in their hearts, which feedeth and preſerueth them,
and cauſeth them to liue happily, through the teſtimonie and taſte
which they haue of the ſweeteneſſe, goodneſſe and fauour of God towards
them: ſo contrariwiſe, perpetual ſorrow dwelleth in the heart
of the wicked, who cannot haue that ioy in them, becauſe they want
that which ſhould bring it vnto them. For howſoeuer it ſeemeth that
there is no ioy in the worlde but theirs, yet they neuer haue any true
ioy, neither indeede can haue. For they ſeeke not for it, neither doe
they knowe what it is. And therefore in ſteade of ſeeking it in God in
whome onely it reſteth, they ſeeke it in creatures, and in al kind of vanitie,
and yet finde nothing but in offending the maieſtie of God. For
this cauſe Ieſus Chriſt hath long ſince pronounced their ſentence ſaying,Lu
                        •
                     e. 6. 21. matth. 5. 4. Eſay 61. 3.
                  Wobe to you that laugh, for ye ſhall weepe. Contrariwiſe, ye that weep
are happy, for yee ſhall laugh. Bleſſed are they that mourne: that is to ſay,
that feele their miſeries, and ſeeke for ioy and conſolation in God: for
they ſhal bee comforted. After ſpeaking to his diſciples, he ſayeth, Verely,
verely I ſay vnto you that ye ſhall weeepe and lament,
                  Ioh. 16. 20, 21. and the world ſhall reioyce:
ye ſhall ſorrow, but your ſorrow ſhal be turned into ioy. And then he
compareth their ſorrowe and their ioy to that which a woman with

childe hath, which is pained ſo long as ſhee is in trauaile, but when
ſhee ſeeth it borne, ſhee receiueth ioy, and ſoone forgetteth her anguiſh.
Whereby the worde of God teacheth vs, that the griefe of
good men ſhall be turned into double ioy, that their ſorrow ſhal be
ſhort, and their felicitie of long continuance. For there is one ioy euen
in being deliuered from euill, although it be not ſo great as when
any Good happeneth vnto vs. But the ioy is doubled, when beſides
this deliuerance, there commeth vnto vs ſome ioy which we had not,
which is procured vnto vs by meanes of that paine and euill which we
ſuffered. Therefore our Sauiour ſaieth further to this effect, Yee are
nowe in ſorrow: but I will ſee you againe, and your hearts ſhall reioyce, and
your ioy ſhall no man take from you. If this ioy can not be taken away, it
is eternall, ſo that death it ſelfe can not aboliſh it. Whereupon it followeth,
that it remaineth yet after death, and that there is an other
life after this in which wee ſhall haue fulneſſe of ioy. Therefore wee
may well call it our owne, ſeeing it alwayes continueth with vs. For
if it were not ſo, Ieſus Chriſt who is the trueth it ſelfe ſhoulde not bee
true. But as hee cannot lie, ſo wee may aſſure our ſelues of his promiſe.
For ſeeing it is grounded on him, and vpon his grace, reſurrection,
and immortall life, we may bee as certainely perſwaded of it, as
wee are aſſured of his reſurrection, and of his eternall ioy and life,
wherein hee liueth and raigneth for euermore. Wherefore all thoſe
to whome it is promiſed, and that are aſſured of the fruition thereof
by faith in him, haue iuſt occaſion to liue in great ioy So that Saint
Paul not without good cauſe ſaieth,Philip. 44. 
                  Reioyce alwayes in the Lorde, and
againe I ſay reioyce. But of the ioy of carnall men wee muſt ſay as Salomon
writeth,Eccles. 7. 4, 6. Prou. 6. 25. 
                  That it is better to go to the houſe of mourning, then to the
houſe of feasting. And that there is away that ſeemeth right to a man,
but the iſſue thereof is the way of death: yea, in laughter, the heart
ſhall be greeued, and the ende of ioy is ſorrowe. The heart of the
wiſe is in the houſe of mourning, but the heart of fooles is in the houſe of
mirth. For they thinke of nothing but of iollitie, whereas wiſe men
meditate on the miſeries of this worlde. Therefore wee may know
howe greatly Epicures,How worldlings deceiue themſelues. and ſuch as giue themſelues to pleaſures and
diſſoluteneſſe beguile themſelues. For they thinke there is no ioy
nor pleaſure but in their life, and that there is no life more ſadde or
melancholy, then that of the children and ſeruants of God. But it is
cleane contrary. For they that feare and honour GOD, haue more
ioy in their heart in the middeſt of their greateſt ſorrowes, by reaſon
of that ſenſe and feeling ingrauen in them of heauenly and eternall
ioy, which thy certainely expect and beginne already to taſte here.

then all worldlings and carnall men can haue in the greateſt triumphs
of al their pleaſures. Now, as there are two kinds of ioy in the
hear of men, ſo are there alſo of ſorrows. For we do not only feele ioy
for ſome Good, or ſorrow for ſome euill, which we now taſte of, but alſo
for that which we attend and looke for. Concerning this latter kind
of ioy,What hope is. it is properly called Hope, which is an affection and motion of
the heart, whereby it wiſheth ſome Good to come, and prepareth to
open it ſelfe and to receiue it. Therefore wee ſaide before, that Hope
was comprehended vnder deſire, vnto which it giueth forme and being.
For Hope is a deſire ioyned with confidence, that the Good which
wee wiſh for will come to paſſe. Therefore the motions of Ioy and
Hope are very like, ſeeing Hope is alwayes mingled with Ioy, neither
is there any difference but in the time,Difference betweene ioy and hope. becauſe the one is of a preſent
Good, and the other of that which is looked for. In the meane time
Hope hath no euidence or ſcience, but is grounded onely vpon coniecture
of opinion, or likelihoode and probabilitie, or poſſibilitie. And
yet there is nothing ſo light, or ſo ſmall, or ſtrange, vnto which the
heart will not eaſily ioyne it ſelfe and take holde of it, when it ſeeketh
for helpes and proppes to ground and ſtay it ſelfe vpon. Neuertheles
there is great difference betweene hauing already, and hoping for a
thing, namely, in reſpect of men, and of hope, which hath no other
grounds, then thoſe of which I nowe made mention. But when the
expectation is grounded vpon God & his promiſes,Of the true and certaine hope. it is as ſure of that
which it expecteth, as if it did already poſſeſſe it: which is very comfortable
to a man, in reſpect of that which hapneth to them, who can
haue no certaine hope or expectation of Good. For although there bee
hope, yet if it be not grounded vpon God, it can bring no certaine ioy,
or of any long continuance. Beſides, when ſuch a one ſhall faile of his
hope, his griefe wil be doubled. Wherefore they that build not their
hope vpon the word of God, can haue no true and certaine hope, but
they feed thēſelues only with their fantaſies, as they that dreame they
find great riches, which vaniſh away whē they awake. Such is the hope
of the wicked, & of al worldly and carnall men. Neuertheleſſe the perſwaſion
of hope,The profite and neceſſitie of hope which holdeth vs vp with the expectation of better
things, is very pleaſant and neceſſary for the life of man, in the midſt of
ſo many miſeries, of ſo many ſharpe & almoſt intolerable paines and
trauailes which accompany them. So that it bringeth great comfort to
men, and is in ſteade of ſawce vnto them, without which they woulde
find al things to be not only without taſte, but alſo of a very bitter and
vnpleaſant taſte. Therefore hath the prouidence of God prouided a
remedy for this, namely, that hope ſhuld breed of very light cauſes, &

ſhould leane & ſtay it ſelf eaſily vpon them: as if it ſelf were very light,
or very hooked and gluiſh, being ready to take hold of, and to retaine
whatſoeuer it meeteth withall, or can lay hands vpon, to ground and
leane thereon.
               Nowe if men finde ſo great comfort in hope ſuch as it is, and being
laide vpon ſo weake a foundation, it is eaſy to iudge, what ioy the
faithful receiue by that moſt certaine hope of eternall life, and of al the
good things that God hath promiſed them: in regard whereof S. Paul
ſaith,Epheſ. 4. 4. 
                  There is one body & one ſpirit, euen as ye are called in one hope of your
vocation.
                  Rom. 5. 3, 4, 5. It is not then without cauſe that he ſaith in another place, We
reioyce in tribulations, knowing that tribulation bringeth forth patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope maketh not aſhamed: becauſe
the loue of God is ſhed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghoſt, which is
giuen vnto vs:
                  Pſal. 25. 3. as if he ſhould ſay, that they which ſtay themſelues vpon
ſuch a hope, ſhal neuer be aſhamed nor deceiued. For the expectation
thereof is neuer fruſtrated, but it hath alwaies a good & a happy iſſue.
For when we perceiue that we are deceiued of our hope, we are aſhamed
and confounded. But this neuer hapneth to true hope, which proceedeth
of a ſound faith in Ieſus Chriſt,Rom. 5. 2. by means whereof we haue acceſſe
through him vnto this grace wherein wee ſtand, and reioyce vnder
the hope of the glory of God, as Saint Paul ſaid alitle before. Therefore he
exhorteth chriſtiās to reioice in hope,Rom. 12. 12. & 15. 13. & calleth God the God of Hope,
praying that he would fil the Romans with al ioy & peace in belieuing,
that they may abound in hope through the power of the holy ghoſt.
And in the epiſtle to the Hebrews,
                  Hebr. 6. 19. hope is compared to a ſure and ſtedfaſt
ancre of the ſoule. For this cauſe God is ſo often called in the holy
Scriptures the hope and fortreſſe of his people and of his.
                  Ier. 17. 7, 13, 17. pſal. 65. 5. and 91. 2, 9. pſal. 31, 1. and 71. Pſal. 118. 8, 9. It is written alſo,
that they which hope in the Lord, do reioyce. For hee that hopeth in him
ſhalbe healed and preſerued. Therefore it is not without cauſe, that the
ſpirite of God ſo often repeateth vnto vs this ſentence, Bleſſed are they
that put their truſt in the Lord: for they ſhal neuer be confounded. It is better
to hope in him then to put any confidence in Princes. But vnfaithful and
wicked men can neuer be partakers of ſuch a Good, becauſe they haue
no ſuch hope.Prou. 10. 28. Iob 8. 13, 14, 15 For it is written, The expectation of the iuſt is gladneſſe,
but the hope of the wicked ſhall periſh. And againe, The hope of the hypocrite
ſhall periſh, his confidence ſhal be cut off, and his truct ſhall be as the
houſe of a ſpider. He ſhall leane vpon his houſe, but it ſhall not ſtand, he ſhall
holde him fast by it, yet ſhall it not endure. But to proſecu
                     •
                  e our matter,
nowe that wee haue ſeene the hope of good men together with their
ioy, let vs conſider what remaineth to the wicked of their vaine and
falſe ioy, namely, Feare, which is the ſecond kinde of ſorrowe mentioned

by vs. Tell vs then, AMANA, what Feare is, with the nature
and effectes thereof.
            
            
               Of Feare, and of the nature and effects thereof towards the body, the
minde, and ſoule, and how it troubleth them: of the true harneſſe
and armour againſt Feare. Chap. 46.
               AMANA. As wicked men can haue no certaine hope of any good
they looke for, ſo they neuer haue any true ioy of any preſent
good, becauſe they alwayes forſake the true Good, and ſtay in that
which is not Good but in their opinion and fantaſie, neither doe they
at any time ref
                     •
                  rre the ende of good things vnto God, but looke onely
vpon the things themſelues. Therefore it is neuer in their power to
reioice in that ioy which they accompt to be their true ioy, but only by
offending God, as we heard before. Which is the cauſe why they ſeek
after nothing more then to hide themſelues,The wick
                        •
                     d can not abide to ſpeake or heare of God. & to depart from him as
much as they can poſſible, ſo that they would neuer heare any ſpeech
of him, but deſire to bury the remembrance of him for euer, becauſe
they can heare nothing ſpoken of him but as of their iudge, neither
think of him, but he awakeneth their cōſcience, which they labor with
might and maine to rocke aſleepe. Wherein they take a cleane contrary
courſe to that which they ought to follow to obtaine the true Good.
For ſeeing God is the ſoueraigne Good of all creatures, what Good can
they finde that is greater, wherein they can fully reioyce and ſatisfie
themſelues? Or what other Good dare they promiſe to themſelues to
finde without him, and when they haue him for their enemy? But
they are like to drunken men, who cannot vnderſtand this Diuinitie,
vntill they haue ſlept out their wine, and are awaked out of their
drunkenneſſe. Then ſhall they knowe what is true and falſe Ioy,
what is good and badde Hope, when their ioy ſhall bee turned into
ſorrowe, their expectation and hope into feare and terrour, wherewith
the wicked ſhall be continually haunted, as the Spirite of God
teacheth vs.
               Nowe, as ſorrow is a griefe for ſome euil which a man preſently
feeleth, ſhutting vp the heart as vnwilling to receiue it: ſo feare is a
ſorrow,What feare is. which the heart conceiueth of ſome looked for euill, that may
come vnto it. Therefore it reſtraineth the heart alſo and cloſeth it vp,
as being deſirous to auoide the euill. Wee ſee then that there is the
ſame difference betwixt ſorrowe and feare in reſpect of euill, that is
betweene Ioy and Hope in regarde of Good. So that we may well ſay,

that Feare is not onely a fantaſie and imagination of euill approching,
or a perturbation of the ſoule proceeding from the opinion it hath of
ſome euill to come, but it is alſo a contraction and cloſing vp of the
heart, which commeth from that which euery one iudgeth to be euill
for himſelfe, when hee thinketh it is at hand and will light vpon him.
Therefore firſt of all it draweth in and ſhutteth vp the heart, and ſo
weakneth the ſame. Whereupon nature being deſirous to relieue and
ſuccour it, ſendeth heate vnto it from the vpper partes: and if that bee
not ſufficient, ſhee draweth away that heate alſo which is in the neather
parts.How paleneſſe, colde and ſhaking are b
                        •
                     ed in the body. By which doing ſhe ſodainely calleth backe the blood and
ſpirites vnto the heart, and then followeth a generall paleneſſe and
cold in all the outward partes, and chiefly in the face, with a ſhiuering
throughout the whole body. For ſeeing the firſt moouing thereof is in
the heart, the other alwayes followeth: ſo that when the heart trembleth,
the whole body doth ſo likewiſe. Whereupon it followeth, that
by reaſon of the great beating and panting of the heart, the tongue
faltereth and the voice is interrupted.How death commeth through feare. Yea it commeth to paſſe ſometimes,
that preſent death followeth a great and ſodaine feare, becauſe
al the blood retiring to the heart choaketh it, and vtterly extinguiſheth
naturall heate and the ſpirites, ſo that death muſt needes enſue thereof.
Therefore we cannot doubt but that feare hath grea
                     •
                   power ouer
all the body, and ouer life it ſelfe. For this cauſe Eſaias, after he had denounced
the iudgement of God againſt the Babylonians, & the comming
of the Medes and Perſians, by whome their citie ſhoulde be taken
and themſelues ſlaine,Eſay 13. 7, 8. ſaieth thus: Therefore ſhall all handes be
weakened, and all mens hearts ſhall melt: which is as much to ſay, as that
their hearts ſhall faile them for feare. And therefore hee addeth, They
ſhalbe afraid: anguiſh & ſorrow ſhall take them, and they ſhall haue paine, as
a woman that trauaileth: euery one ſhalbe amaſed at his neighbour, & their
faces ſhal be like flames of fire.
                  A place of Eſay expounded. But here we will note what he meaneth
by theſe flames of fire. For if the face waxe pale through feare, as it
falleth out for the moſt part, it ſeemeth that it cannot be enflamed, for
then it would be red rather then pale. But we are to know, that when
nature will ſtrengthen the heart, ſhe ſendeth vnto it from all parts, ſuccours
of heat and blood, to encourage it the more. Therefore they that
haue but a little warme blood in the heart are naturally the greater cowardes:The cauſe of cowardlines, and the ſigne of courage.
ſo that it is a better token of courage when the face is pale
through feare, then when it waxeth redde. For this cauſe Cato miſliked
that a child ſhould becom pale in the face through ſhame, in ſtead
of being red: and that a ſouldier ſhould looke red in time of danger, in
ſtead of being pale. For as it is a token of impudencie in a child not to

bluſh for ſhame, ſo is it a ſigne of cowardlineſſe in a man of warre to
looke redde when hee ſeeth himſelfe in any danger. Therefore a pale
countenance ſheweth that the blood and naturall heate are gone to
the heart to ſtrengthen it: but when it is redde, that argueth that the
blood and heate are not much gone inward to ſtrengthen the heart:
whereupon it is made more weake, and ſo the feare of it is greater
and the trembling much more. And becauſe the blood and naturall
heate mount vpward in ſteade of deſcending, therefore doth the face
looke red. Which argueth want of courage and a fainting heart:
as it befell the Babylonians, whoſe heartes were poſſeſſed with feare
and terrour at the comming of their enemies, becauſe God woulde
giue them ouer into their hander. Wee might alſo referre this redneſſe
and inflammation of viſage to the paines and griefs which they
were to endure. For when one is preſſed with griefe, his countenance
is redde and fierie: becauſe men are then as it were ſhut vp in a
fire.
               And as the face is red through Feare, for the reaſons ſet downe by
vs: ſo if the naturall heate leaue the heart and goe downeward, the
feare is not onely encreaſed, but it bringeth withall a looſeneſſe of
the belly. Therefore it is written in the Booke of Iob, where it is ſpoken
of the feare that Liuiathan bringeth vpon men,Iob 41. 16. that the mightie
tremble at his maieſtie, and purge themſelues through his moouings: that
is, through feare of him. Hereupon a heathen Poet, when hee would
note a fearefull and daſtardly fellowe, ſaieth to this purpoſe, That his
heart was fallen into his heeles.
                  Effects of Feare in the ſoule. Nowe if feare mooueth all the body in
this ſorte, no doubt but it greatly mooueth alſo the minde and the
whole ſoule of man. For it ſo troubleth the minde, that it confoundeth
all the thoughts thereof: as wee may trie by this, that many
times the leaſt fancie of euill that entreth into our braine, is enough
to trouble the minde very much. For as imagination and fancie beare
great ſway ouer the affections, ſo they ſhewe what power they haue,
chiefely in the affection of Feare. And ſurely among all liuing creatures,
none hath ſuch a confuſed feare, or is more amazed therewith
then man is. Therefore we may well ſay, that no miſery is greater,
no bondage more ſhamefull, ſeruile or vile, then feare is. For it
maketh men very abiects, flatterers, and ſuſpicious, and ſo daunteth
their courage, that it leaueth them as it were halfe dead, yea, cauſeth
them ſometimes to deſpaire vtterly, ſo that they are as it were
Images deſtitute of counſaile, not knowing which wayes to helpe
themſelues. For this cauſe the holy Scriptures make often mention

of a heart that is powred out like water for feare,Ioſua 7. 5. Pſal. 22. 14. Ierem. 4. 9. or that melteth like
waxe. And in Ieremy it is ſaide, In that day, ſaieth the Lorde, the heart
of the king ſhall periſh, and the heart of the Princes, and the Priests ſhall be
aſtoniſhed, and the Prophets ſhall wonder. For truely if a man be once
poſſeſſed with feare, eſpecially if hee bee enclined thereunto by nature,
but aboue all, if GOD terrifie him, a man may well exhort
him to boldeneſſe and to take courage vnto him, and alleadge all the
reaſons that can be to ſtrengthen him againſt Feare, but it will be to
ſmall purpoſe. Therefore one ſaieth very well, that no harneſſe can
be founde, which is able to incourage feare and to make it hardy. For
if any Armorers had the skil to make ſuch harneſſe, they ſhould want
no cuſtomers. But onely God is able to arme vs againſt this, becauſe
it is he that giueth or taketh away the heart of man, that ſendeth feare
or boldeneſſe, as pleaſeth him. For although hee hath ſowed the
ſeedes of them both in the nature of the body and ſoule of man, with
the meanes alſo that leade thereunto, yet he hath not ſubiected himſelfe
to all thoſe meanes, no more then hee hath to the whole order
of nature: but hath alwayes reſerued in his power both Feare and
faintneſſe of heart, and boldeneſſe and aſſurance, which are their
contraries.The definitions of aſſurance and boldneſſe. For aſſurance is a certaine perſwaſion and truſt, whereby
wee are confirmed in danger againſt euilles that threaten vs and
come neere vs: and boldeneſſe is a confidence, which pricketh forward
the courage either to repulſe euilles, or to followe after good
things, which are excellent and harde to obtaine. Therefore when
GOD is minded to puniſh men, hee taketh away their heartes
whome hee will deſtroy, cauſing them to tremble and to flie for
feare: as it is written in Ioſhua, where Rahab ſpeaking to the ſpies
of the Iſraelites that were ſent to Iericho,
                  Ioſua 2. 9. vſeth theſe wordes: I know
that the Lorde hath giuen you this land; for the feare of you is fallen vpon
vs, and all the inhabitants of the land faint becauſe of you. Contrariwiſe,
our GOD heartneth and emboldeneth thoſe by whome hee
will ouerthrow others, and to whome hee mindeth to grant victorie.
Therefore it is written,Pſal. 53. 5. that hee will cauſe the feare of his ſeruants
to fall vpon his enemies, that the wicked and ſuch as haue
not called vpon GOD, ſhall feare where there is no cauſe of
feare, and ſhall tremble and flie for feare, although there be none
that perſecute them. So that if wee doe deſire to finde a harneſſe
that will arme our heart thorowly againſt all feare, let vs put on
the armour of the true feare of GOD, and of ſounde Faith in
him.Pſal. 112. 1, 7, 8 For as the Prophet Dauid ſayeth, Bleſſed is the man that

feareth the Lorde: the iuſt ſhall liue in aſſured hope: hee ſhall neuer be moued,
hee ſhall not be afraide of euill tidings, for his heart is fixed and beleeueth
in the Lorde: his heart is ſtabliſhed, therefore hee will not feare. For
whoſoeuer feareth God and walketh in innocencie, God is with him:
and hee that hath God on his ſide, what can hee or ought he to feare?
For when hee is with vs, who ſhalbe againſt vs? May hee not well ſay
with Dauid,
                  Pſal 56. 3, 11. and 118. 6. prou. 14. 26. 
                  When I was afraide, I truſted in thee. In God doe I truſt, I will
not be afraide what man can do vnto me. In the feare of the Lorde, (ſaith
the wiſe man,) there is aſſured ſtrength, and his children ſhall haue hope.
Therefore Ieſus Chriſt ſaieth to his Diſciples,Iohn 14. 1. 
                  Let not your heart bee
troubled. And then hee ſheweth them the meanes, ſaying, Ye beleeue
in God, beleeue alſo in me. For nothing but faith in God through Ieſus
Chriſt is able to giue vs this aſſurance. On the other ſide, if wee
be not armed with the feare of GOD, and with true faith, that wee
may be certaine of his helpe and prouidence, and of his loue towards
vs, there is nothing that can aſſure vs: but rather that which is
written in the Lawe will befall vs,L
                        •
                     uit. 26. 36. 
                  I will, ſaieth the Lorde, ſend a
faintneſſe into their heartes in the land of their enemies, and the ſound of a
leafe ſhaken ſhall chaſe them, and, They ſhall flee as fleeing from a ſworde,
and they ſhall fall, no man purſuing them. And in an other place where
mention is made of them that deſpiſe the Lawe of GOD, and rebell
againſt the Lorde, it is ſaide, The Lord ſhall giue thee a trembling
heart,
                  Deu. 28. 65, 66, 67. 
                  and looking to returne till thine eies fall out, and a ſorrowfull mind,
Thy life ſhall hang before thee, thou ſhalt feare both night and day, and
ſhalt haue none aſſurance of thy life. In the morning thou ſhalt ſay, would
God it were euening, and at euening thou ſhalt ſay, woulde God it were
morning, for the feare of thine heart which thou ſhalt feare, and for the
ſight of thine eies, which thou ſhalt ſee. Therefore when wee ſee, that
in many great and dangerous affaires, the boldeſt and moſt couragious
are oftentimes the greateſt cowardes, and moſt aſtoniſhed
and carried away with feare and terrour, and euen many times without
any great cauſe are amaſed and voyde of counſaile, whereas contrariwiſe
cowardes by nature growe to bee moſt hardy in the middeſt
of dangers, thereby GOD ſheweth very well, whether
ſtrength and courage come from him or from men,God is the authour of courage. and who is to
haue the praiſe thereof. But nowe that wee haue ſeene the firſt motions
of the heart, in the affections of ioy, of ſorrowe, of hope, and
of feare, and knowe that they haue reſpect to good or euill, either
preſent or to come, let vs learne in the next place, that as contemplation
conſiſteth in the reſt of the Spirite after the diſcourſe of reaſon
and iudgement, ſo after the heart hath the fruition of that Good
                  
which belongeth vnto it, it is ſtill and quiet, reſting it ſelfe therein:
which reſt is called Delight or pleaſure, of which the order
of our ſpeech requireth that thou ſhouldeſt dilate, ARAM, at this
preſent.
            
            
               Of the delight and pleaſure that followeth euery ioy, and of the moderation
that is required therein: of diuers degrees of pleaſures, and howe
men abuſe them, eſpecially thoſe pleaſures, which are receiued by the
corporall ſenſes. Chap. 47.
               ARAM. It is certaine, that all the affections which God hath placed
in the nature of man, were giuen vnto him in regarde of ſo
many good things, which were meete and conuenient for his will to
long after and to deſire. For ioy and hope, which affoord pleaſure and
conſolation to the heart, were beſtowed vpon him to bee ſpurres and
ſollicitours to induce him to ſeeke after God his ſoueraigne Good,
                  Why God hath giuen men affections. in
whom alone he may finde all delight, reſt and pleaſure. As for ſorow
and feare, they are ſure teſtimonies vnto men of the iudgement of
God, and executioners of his vengeance: to this end that the feare of
euill, which may come vnto them, ſhould keepe them in awe, and that
ſorow and griefe for euill which they haue already committed, ſhould
be vnto them both hangman and puniſhment. It is true that theſe affections
being naturall in euery one, bring forth contrary effects both
in the good and in the bad. For the children of God neuer ſeparate his
power from his goodneſſe, and the feare which they haue of him, is
not ioyned with hatred,The diuers effects of feare in the godly and in the wicked. but with truſt in his mercie, which mooueth
them to be grieued for offending him, and to loue him, to ſeeke him
and to reioyce in him, and to haue him in ſinguler honour and veneration.
But the wicked who feare and tremble, like to malefactors fearing
their iudge, hate and deſpite God, deſiring nothing more then to
eſcape his hands, and to flee from him as farre as they can. If they be
grieued, it is becauſe they may not enioy falſe ioyes, and vnlawfull
pleaſures. Therefore that which is giuen them for Good, is turned by
them into ſinne and euill, and pleaſure into paine and griefe.
               But here we muſt call to minde what we haue ſpoken already concerning
the ſignification of this worde Good, as it is commonly taken,
not conſidering whether it be true or falſe, but onely according to that
opinion which men haue of it. For there are many, whoſe fancie is
ſufficient to affoord them as much pleaſure, as if indeed they enioyed
that Good,
                  A fantaſticall Good.
                   which they thinke to haue. We ſee many ſuch fooles in the
world. For ſome are Popes or Cardinals by fantaſie: others Emperors

or Kings and great Princes, or otherwiſe very riche, or poſſeſſours of
ſome ſuch great Good. And yet ſuch fantaſticall fellowes are better
contented and pleaſed with that which they thinke they haue
in their fooliſhe imagination, then they that haue them in trueth,
vnto whome commonly they ſerue for nothing but to torment
them more. Therefore I knowe not which of them I ſhoulde eſteeme
more fooliſh and fantaſticall.Who are to bee accounted wiſe men. For none ought to bee taken
for truely wiſe men, and of ripe iudgement, but they who
knowe that all thinges in the worlde and vnder the ſunne, are onely
vanitie, as Salomon ſheweth in his booke of the Preacher. Therefore
hee ſaieth thus:Eccles. 2. 1. 
                  I ſaide in mine heart, Goe to nowe, I will prooue
thee with ioy: therefore take thou pleaſure in pleaſaunt thinges: and behold
this alſo is vanitie. I ſaid of laughter, thou art mad, and of ioy, what is
this that thou doest? But to goe forwarde with our matter, let vs conſider
what delight and pleaſure is, ſo farre as men may enioy it in this
life. It is then a reſt which the heart taketh in the enioying of ſome
Good that it liketh: euen as contemplation is the reſt of the ſpirite after
the diſcourſe of Reaſon and Iudgement. Now wee are to note, that
there is no delight and pleaſure in any thing,Of delight and pleaſure what it is, and how it is receiued. except there be ſome agreement
betweene that part or power that receiueth pleaſure, and
that which bringeth the ſame vnto it. This agreement cannot bee
without good proportion of the one with the other, whereby there
is ſome ſimilitude and reſemblance betweene them. For this cauſe
alſo, the thing that bringeth delight muſt not exceede too much,
either in greatneſſe, or in ſmalneſſe aboue the power which receiueth
it, in regarde of that part or inſtrument whereby the pleaſure
is receiued.
               Heereupon when wee ſpake of the eyes and eares, wee ſhewed
that light was to bee diſpenſed to the eyes, and ſounde to
the eares, in good meaſure and moderation. For if the light bee
too great, the eyes cannot receiue it: inſomuch that they will bee
hurt and offended, in ſteade of receiuing delight. On the other
ſide if it bee too little, it will not ſuffice them: and therefore it muſt
bee betweene both. And as euery mans ſight is ſharper and ſtronger,
or more dull and weaker, ſo muſt the light bee diſpenſed according
to that meaſure. The like may bee ſayde of ſoundes in regarde
of the eares, and of all other thinges in reſpect of thoſe ſences
vnto which they agree. And if this moderation bee requiſite for
the outwarde ſences, it is no leſſe neceſſary in reſpect of the inward
ſenſes, and of all the powers of the ſoule. Therefore as God is incomprehenſible
and infinite, ſo is hee receiued with delight of that

part of the ſoule, which commeth neereſt vnto his nature, and
which is moſt incomprehenſible, moſt ample, and moſt infinite in
regarde of other partes, and that is the Spirite and Vnderſtanding.
On the other ſide,How God communicateth himſelfe vnto men. becauſe there is no proportion or agreement
in greatneſſe and infiniteneſſe betweene GOD and the Soule,
ſhee receiueth and comprehendeth him by ſuch meanes, whereby
hee may bee applied vnto her, and ſhee made after a ſort capable
of him. For if hee ſhoulde preſent himſelfe vnto her, ſuch as
hee is in his high and diuine maieſtie, eſpecially man beeing in this
eſtate wherein hee is in this mortall life, ſhee coulde not beare ſo
high maieſtie, as beeing too exceeding great for her. So that inſteede
of receiuing pleaſure, ioy and delight, ſhee ſhoulde not onely
bee very much frighted, but euen wholly ouerwhelmed and
ſwallowed vp as a droppe of water woulde bee conſumed beeyng
throwen into a great fire: as wee may iudge by ſo many examples
as are in the holie Scriptures to this purpoſe. For when God manifeſted
himſelfe to the Patriarkes, hee neuer appeared vnto them
in the greatneſſe of his maieſtie, but tooke vnto him alwayes ſome
ſhape, and vſed ſuch meanes as were agreeable to their nature.
Therefore alſo it is verie requiſite, that GOD ſhoulde deſcende
and applie himſelfe vnto our ſmall capacitie, to the ende wee may
enioy him and his Goodes, and take pleaſure and delight in them.
For this cauſe, hee hath not onely appointed the miniſterie of his
worde and Sacraments to ſhewe and communicate himſelfe vnto vs
by them, applying himſelfe vnto our nature and capacitie, but hath
alſo manifeſted himſelf in fleſh, in the perſon of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt,
to become more like vnto vs, and to drawe neerer vnto vs in our
owne nature, to this ende that wee might enioye him and all his
benefites the better, and receiue more true and entire delight in
them.
               And thus much for this poynt of the agreement that ought to bee
betweene the thing that delighteth, and that which receiueth
pleaſure. Next wee are to note, that a man may take pleaſure by
all thoſe partes whereby hee may knowe, as well by the internall
as the externall ſenſes, and by all the powers of the minde
and ſoule.Of the diuers degrees of pleaſures according to euery mans nature. Whereupon it followeth, that as euerie one is more
or leſſe addicted to any of theſe partes, ſo hee delighteth moſt in
thoſe pleaſures, which hee may receiue by that part vnto which
hee is moſt giuen. Therefore wee ſee that the baſer and more vile
ſort of people, and ſuch as are moſt rude and ignoraunt, are
more mooued by corporall and externall thinges, which moue the

bodily ſenſes, then by ſpirituall and high things, that are more meete
for the ſpirite, and wherein it taketh greater pleaſures. But with prudent
and wiſe men, and ſuch as are more ſpirituall, it is otherwiſe. So
that as euery ones nature is more noble and excellent, or more vile
and abiect, and according to the nature of thoſe things wherein euery
one delighteth, ſo is the delight, either more noble and excellent, or
more baſe and contemptible, more pure & quiet, or more impure and
troubleſome, of longer or of ſhorter continuance, and hath moe or
fewer pleaſures,The delights of the bodily ſenſes. and thoſe either more or leſſe tedious. Now among
thoſe delights which a man may take by the bodily ſenſes, the baſeſt
and moſt abiect of all, is that which is receiued by the ſenſe of touching.
For as it is moſt earthy of all the external ſenſes, ſo are the pleaſures
that are taken by it. That delight which is taken by the ſenſe of
taſting, is a litle more honeſt and leſſe contemptible, and yet is it brutiſh
enough. As for the delight that may bee receiued by the ſenſe of
ſmelling, it is very light, and nothing ſo pleaſant, as the yrkeſomneſſe
that commeth of the contrary, is vnpleaſant. For a good ſmel bringeth
not ſo great pleaſure, as an euill ſmell cauſeth diſpleaſure: beſides, that
this ſenſe of ſmelling is not ſo ſharpe in man as in beaſts. And concerning
thoſe pleaſures, which a man may receiue by the eares, they haue
ſome more beautie and excellency in them. For the more they holde
of the nature of the ayre, they are ſo much the leſſe earthy and brutiſh.
And thoſe which we receiue by the eyes, are yet more excellent
then all the reſt, becauſe the eyes are of the nature of the fire, which
commeth neereſt to the celeſtial nature. And thus much for thoſe pleaſures,
which a man may receiue by the corporall ſenſes, of which the
nobleſt and beſt are baſer and of leſſe excellency then the leaſt of thoſe,
which we may receiue by the baſeſt parts & powers of the ſoule.The delights of ye internall ſenſes. For,
as much as the ſoule is more noble and more worthie then the body,
ſo much is the leaſt thing in it greater and more magnificall, then that
which is moſt noble and moſt excellent in the bodie. And as there are
diuers degrees of pleaſures according to the varietie of the externall
ſenſes, and according to the difference that is betwixt them and the
powers of the ſoule: ſo is it betweene the powers of the ſoule, as ſome
of them are more noble and more diuine then others. For thoſe which
appertaine to the nouriſhing and generatiue powers, are more corporall,
earthy and brutiſh, then thoſe that belong to the vitall partes and
to the heart. And thoſe that are proper to the ſpirite and minde, are
pureſt and beſt of all: among which, that delight that is in contemplation
is the chiefeſt,Cōtemplation is the greateſt delight of the ſoule. as we may iudge by that which we haue alreadie
ſpoken. Wherefore if we would conſider well of all theſe degrees

of delight and pleaſure, and could iudge well of them, we ſhould not
be ſo deceiued in them as commonly we are, preferring the leaſt before
the greateſt, the baſeſt before the nobleſt, thoſe that are moſt earthy
before them that are moſt heauenly,Of the abuſe of pleaſures. and thoſe that fade ſooneſt
before them that continue longeſt. Beſides, the very enioying of euery
one of them ought to ſuffice to make vs know their nature, and the
difference betweene the one and the other, and how farre one is to be
preferred before another. For how do we ſee men giuen ouer to thoſe
pleaſures wherein they delight, not onely in eating and drinking, in
dainty morſels and delicate drinkes, but alſo in other carnall pleaſures
that are more earthy and vile, eſpecially when they are exceſſiue
and vnmeaſurable, as they are in whoredome? For thoſe which wee
receiue in eating and drinking, belong to the ſenſe of taſte, which is
brutiſh enough: but theſe others to the ſenſe of touching, which is a
great deale more brutiſh We know by experience alſo, that theſe ſenſes
are ſooner wearied and tyred with their pleaſures, then any other,
and that ſuch delights commonly bring with them more yrkeſomnes
and loathing, then ioy and pleaſure: leauing many times behind them
a long and ſhamefull repentance for pollutions receiued by them.
The pleaſures that belong to the other ſenſes, as they are of longer
continuance, ſo they weary not a man ſo quickly, eſpecially thoſe that
delight the ſight. Yea the baſer and more vile the pleaſures are, the
ſooner doe they loathe a man,Againſt the immoderate vſe of pleaſures. as they know by experience that are giuen
to whoredome. For how inſatiable ſoeuer they be, yet can they
not but be glutted therewith: neither are they able to continue their
vnrulineſſe ſo long in that pleaſure (howſoeuer they want no goodwill)
as in the pleaſures that come by eating and drinking. Neither
can the greateſt gluttons, drunkards, and daintie mouthed perſons follow
ſo long together after the delights of their gluttony, drunkennes,
and daintie diet, as they may after thoſe which they receiue either in
ſmelling, or in hearing, or in ſeeing. As for the pains yt are to be taken
in the obtaining and vſing of theſe pleaſures, the more earthy & brutiſh
the delight is, the greater labour is to bee had about it: and the
more exceſſiuely the pleaſure is vſed, the greater hurt commeth thereby,
as wee daily ſee in gluttons, drunkards, and whoremongers, by
the teſtimonie of thoſe diſeaſes which take holde of them through
their exceſſe. Thus then we may learne by the vſe of thoſe pleaſures,
which are receiued by the bodily and outward ſenſes, which of them
are to be preferred before others, with the agreement neceſſary therein,
and the moderation that alwayes ought to bee obſerued in them.
But to goe forward with our matter, we are now to compare together

the delights and pleaſures that are receiued by the ſpirituall and internall
ſenſes, and to vnderſtand what difference there is betweene the
vſe of the pleaſures of the ſpirite and of the body, and howe the one
driue away the other. Nowe let vs heare what ACHITOB will tell
vs of this point.
            
            
               Of the compariſon of pleaſures receiued by the internall ſenſes: and howe
men deſcend by degrees from the beſt to the baſeſt pleaſures: of the difference
betweene the vſe of ſpirituall delights and corporall: and howe the
one chaſe the other. Chap. 48.
               ACHITOB. Experience daily teacheth vs, that we need but a little
griefe to diminiſh a great pleaſure, or otherwiſe to take it
cleane away, and to change it into great diſpleaſure, yea to turne a
great ioy into extreame ſorow and ſadnes. But few there are that meditate
and knowe the cauſe thereof.The cauſe why a little griefe is ſtronger in vs thē a great pleaſure. The trueth is, we can thinke of no
other cauſe, then of the corruption of our nature, of the eſtate and
diſpoſition of our bodie, of the courſe of our age and life, which decline
continually and waxe worſe and worſe. Therefore a ſmall griefe
findeth greater ſtrength within vs to cauſe our heart to giue back and
to cloſe vp it ſelfe, and wholly to caſt vs downe, then a great ioy and
delight is able to open and inlarge it, and to ſuſtaine and holde vs vp.
For a little force will throwe downe this ſhaking and reeling bodie,
but there had neede to bee a great deale of ſtrength to vnderproppe
and ſtay it vp firme and ſtedfaſt. On the other ſide wee can more
eaſily want pleaſures, then not feele their contrary griefes. For
wee doe not perceiue ſo much the want of a good which we haue
not, as the preſence of an euill, which wee ſuffer. For in the firſt,
it ſeemeth that wee want nothing, but in the other the ſenſe is afflicted,
and the ſounde eſtate and diſpoſition thereof is cleane taken
away and ouerthrowne. Nowe if wee deſire to feele ſuch
griefes as little as we may, and to approach as neere as our nature will
permit, to true delight and pleaſures, wee muſt withdrawe our ſelues
from vile and abiect things, and contemplate moſt high and excellent
things.
               Nowe as we haue learned by the former diſcourſe, that thoſe delights
and pleaſures which are receiued by the chiefeſt ſenſes that ſauour
leaſt of the earth, are of longer continuance then the other, ſo
we are to knowe,Of the pleaſures of fantaſie. that the pleaſures of the fancie are more ſtable and
firme then thoſe which come by the corporall ſenſes. Hereof it is, that

men are cloyed a great deale ſooner not onely with the pleaſures
of eating and drinking and of other more abiect thinges, but alſo of
ſweete ſmelles, of muſicke, of harmonicall ſoundes, and of the beholding
of goodly ſights, then with thoſe good that are in the fancy and
in opinion, whereby the minde is deceiued, as namely the getting
and poſſeſſing of ſiluer, of riches, of power, of honours, and of glorie.
For theſe Goods are goods rather in opinion then in truth. But becauſe
fancie propoundeth them vnto her ſelfe for Goods, therefore ſhee taketh
pleaſure and delight in them. Therefore the couetous man delighteth
in his golde, ſiluer, and riches: and the ambitious man in his
power, gloy and honours, which are the pleaſures of fancie: and
with which ſhe is not ſo ſoone wearied, as the bodie is with corporal
pleaſures: but contrariwiſe, the more ſhee hath, the more her delight
encreaſeth,The pleaſures of reaſon and of the minde. and becommeth inſatiable. But the pleaſures of
reaſon, of the minde and of the ſpirite, continue a great deale longer
then they: becauſe the ſpirite is not wearie or tyred, but is recreated
and refreſhed. But none can iudge well of this, but thoſe
that haue had experience thereof. No maruaile therefore if ſuch
men as are addicted to theſe other more baſe and earthly pleaſures,
mocke and deride them that contemne their delightes, and make
ſo great account of theſe ſpirituall and heauenly pleaſures, that
they are content to renounce all the reſt, and to forgoe all the goods
in the worlde that they may enioy theſe, as wee ſee it was with thoſe
holie perſonages that haue taſted of them. As for thoſe carnall and
beaſtlike men, wee may ſay of them as wee doe of hogges, that
delight more in a puddle or ſinke, then in pretious ſtones or ſweete
odours, namely that they followe that which is moſt agreeable
to their naturall diſpoſition, becauſe they want iudgement to diſcerne
the value of thoſe thinges which they contemne and make no
account of.
               Nowe among the pleaſures of the ſpirite, thoſe that conſiſt in
contemplation are of their nature by which wee ſhall become bleſſed
in the the life that laſteth for euer. Therefore it is no ſtraunge
thing, if manie of the Philoſophers affirmed, that this kinde of life
was the beſt of all and moſt excellent: and if Ariſtotle placed the
end of all Goods and of beatitude in contemplation. Now if theſe Philoſophers
that neuer knewe what was the true and chiefe Good, did
notwithſtanding mount vp ſo high, what a ſhame is it for vs to whom
the ſoueraigne Good is reuealed from heauen, if wee ſtaye and as it
were rotte in theſe baſe, brutiſh and ſuppoſed pleaſures? Therefore
we muſt conſider, how we come downe by degrees from the higheſt

vnto the loweſt ſteppe, by reaſon of this heauie burthen wherewith
our nature corrupted through ſinne, is ſore charged: wherevpon ſhe
is driuen downewarde to ſeeke for delights and pleaſures,How we deſcend from true pleaſures to falſe delights. and to recreate
her ſelfe in theſe earthly things. But according as ſhe retaineth
more or leſſe of her firſt puritie and nobilitie, ſo ſhe keepeth higher, or
deſcendeth lower from the contemplation of the higheſt and moſt
excellent thinges, to thoſe that belong to the affections of this life.
Therefore ſome take pleaſure in the adminiſtration either of the common
wealth, or of their domeſticall affaires. There are others, who
not beeing able to ſoare vp ſo high, delight themſelues in the knowledge
and remembrance onely of thoſe thinges that were done by other
men, yea many times in hiſtories and fables. Some take pleaſure
in handy-works, and in ſuch artes and occupations as belong to thē.
There are many, that cannot apply their mindes to ſo good things as
thoſe, but giue them the bridle to recreate and delight themſelues either
in vnprofitable ſports and paſtimes, or in vile and abiect idlenes.
Yea there are others that come lower. For they ſuffer themſelues to be
ouercome by the allurements of their corporall ſenſes, ſo that they fal
into brutiſh pleaſures, as if they were become brute beaſtes, and as if
their minde and ſpirit were wholly ſwallowed vp and plunged in the
moſt bottomleſſe gulfe of immoderate and exceſſiue pleaſure. And
when a man is come downe ſolowe, hee can deſcend no lower. But
yet he may ſeeke after pleaſures croſſe-wiſe,Of pleaſures which men ſeeke croſſe-wayes. and turne cleane out of
the way from reaſon and iudgement, feeding and delighting his fancie
and imagination with falſe opinions. From hence it is that he hath
found out nobilitie, renowne, glory, popularitie, fauour of Princes,
and all other vaine things that conſiſt in externall goods. Yea if hee
could, he would gladly be depriued of that ſpirite and minde which
God hath giuen him, that he might not retaine and keepe any grauitie
or ſeueritie beſeeming his nature, but plunge and giue ouer himſelfe
with full ſaile to follow all kinde of pleaſure, voluptuouſneſſe and
delight. For his nature is become ſo nice and tender, that he can away
with nothing that would moleſt him: ſo that euery litle burthen waieth
very heauy vpon him. Againe, it is already ſo preſſed with the fardell
of corruption, that of it ſelfe it draweth downeward continually,
and needeth not be driuen that way by any other meanes. Therefore
a great many, that of themſelues would not ſeeme to ſtoope ſo lowe,
fearing to looſe any part of their reputation, if they ſhould not keepe
that grauitie that beſeemeth their perſon, finde meanes to doe that by
others which they durſt not doe of themſelues. Hereof it commeth,
that they delight in Mummers, fooles, tumblers, and othes of like

trades, which are not onely vnprofitable for the life of man, but very
hurtful alſo, by reaſon of the corruptions which they bring with them.
In all which thinges wee may ſee the vanitie of our corrupt nature,
and of thoſe pleaſures it taketh delight in. But there are other notable
reaſons, whereby we know what difference there is betweene
the pleaſures of the minde and ſpirite, and thoſe of the corporall
ſenſes.Of the vſe of the delights of the ſpirite. For the ſpirite needeth no ſpace of time wherein to intermit
his pleaſures, and then to take them in hande againe, but onely
changeth them from one to another, namely from the greater to the
leſſe, or from the leſſe to the greater. In the meane time I ſay, there
is no intermiſſion, but it is continually buſied: onely it changeth from
one delight to another. For ſeeing our ſpirite is in continuall motion,
it can in no wiſe ceaſe from doing, vnleſſe the power from whence
the motion thereof proceedeth, bee ſtayed by ſome impediment of
the inſtruments which it vſeth.How the ſpirit is hindred in his actions. As in deede it falleth out in a drunken
man, whoſe ſpirite and minde is as it were buried by thoſe vapours
that trouble it, of which the braine is full. The like is in an Apoplexie,
or falling ſickneſſe. For theſe are violent thinges, and ſuch as reſiſt
the nature of the ſpirite. But preſently after the violence ceaſſeth
which hindereth his power, hee falleth to his accuſtomed action
againe, for the doing whereof he needeth no externall ayde, but
onely that all lettes and impedients ſhoulde bee remoued and taken
out of the way. Which being remoued the ſpirite and minde cannot
bee idle, but neceſſarily thinketh of ſomewhat continually, about
which it is occupied. Therefore whoſoeuer laboureth to ſtay it altogether
from thinking, ſo that it ſhoulde not bee buſied about ſomething,
it is all one as if he went about to change the nature of the fire,
and to keepe it from burning, after it hath founde conuenient matter
and is alreadie kindled. For either it will bee vtterly extinguiſhed,
if the impediment it hath bee ſtronger then it, or els beeyng
of greater force it will make way for it ſelfe. Therefore we had need
to bee well aduiſed alwayes what matter wee miniſter to our ſpirite,
and looke that it bee agreeable to the nature thereof, and beſeeming
the ſame, leaſt it ſhoulde bee diſtracted and wander after
thoſe thinges that might hurt it.How the ſpirite muſt bee occupied. And when wee woulde recreate
the minde, ſeeing it is in continuall action, wee muſt ſo change the
matters about which it is to bee employed, that they bee good and
honeſt, howſoeuer they be diuers and ſundrie. But it is not ſo with
the corporall ſenſes. For they muſt neceſſarily haue ſome ſpace of
time to reſt in euen from their pleaſures, and to ceaſe for a while
from vſing them: becaue they are more freſh and pleaſant after they

haue abſtained for a time. But the ſpirite cannot reſt. In the meane
time the pleaſures of the bodie, and thoſe of the ſoule and ſpirite
haue one another in chaſe.How corporall and ſpirituall pleaſures chaſe each other. Therefore they that are addicted to corporall
pleaſures, haue leſſe knowledge and feeling of thoſe that are
ſpirituall: and contrariwiſe they that delight in ſpirituall pleaſures abſtaine
from thoſe that are corporall. For theſe delights are in continuall
combat one againſt another, ſo that they cannot be acquainted together,
becauſe they are contraries. This combat is ſuch another as
that which is betweene the fleſh and the ſpirite.
               Moreouer, wee ſee by experience, that thoſe delightes which wee
receiue of naturall thinges haue more force and are purer, and continue
longer then artificiall pleaſures. For let a man ſhewe vs the
goodlieſt woorkes that can bee, either of golde or of filuer, or pictures,
or garments, or houſes as curiouſly wrought as can bee deuiſed,
eyther for beautie or coſt, yet when wee haue ſeene them
foure or fiue times, wee beginne to bee full of it, and take not ſo
great pleaſure therein as wee did. But who is euer wearie of beholding,Natural pleaſures are more purethen artificiall.
I will not ſay the heauens, the ſunne, the moone, and the
ſtarres, but the earth, the ſea, riuers, mountaines, valleyes, gardens,
trees, herbes and flowres? The cauſe heereof is the agreement
of nature. For wee being naturall, naturall things are more agreeable
vnto vs then artificiall. And becauſe wee were created and
made, not by the hande of a Paynter and mortall man, but by the
hande of the liuing God, who paynteth liuing images and pictures,
therefore wee take greater delight in his handie woorkes, then in
the woorkes of any other, howe excellent a woorkeman ſoeuer hee
bee. And indeede they are are of farre greater perfection then thoſe
that are made by the arte of man. Therefore Arte laboreth alwayes
to follow nature, and to expreſſe her workes as neere as it can: inſomuch
that they are accounted the beſt woorkemen, and men delight
moſt in their doings, that come neereſt vnto nature. Howe
much more then ought wee to like the woorkes of nature, and
conſequently God himſelfe, who is the Author and Creator of nature,
and of all her woorkes? For the leaſt woorke of his in nature
is more excellent in his kinde, then the perfecteſt woorke that
humane arte is able to ſhewe. Nowe if wee come from his naturall
woorkes, to thoſe that are ſupernaturall and aboue the reach of nature,
wee ſhall finde in them a great deale more matter of all kinde
of delight.Degrees to aſcend vpto ſound and perfect delight. For if wee coulde conſider aright of theſe thinges, we
woulde aſcende vp from artificiall thinges, and from that delight
which they affoorde vs, euen vnto naturall thinges, and from theſe

vnto the Author and Creator of them and of all nature, and there
wee woulde ſeeke for our true delight and pleaſure. Herein nature
her ſelfe is our good Miſtreſſe, as ſhee that leadeth vs thereunto as
it were by the hande. But our inconſiderateneſſe, our blockiſhneſſe
and ingratitude is the cauſe, why wee cannot learne this leſſon of
her, and why wee haue not the maruellous and excellent workes
of GOD and nature, in ſuch due admiration as wee ought to
haue.
               Whereupon it commeth to paſſe alſo, that wee take not ſo great
delight and pleaſure in them, and that cuſtome, which ought to increaſe
this delight in vs, is a meane rather to diminiſh the ſame. And
by this meanes alſo wee are kept from that admiration, which wee
ought to haue of God the Woorkemaſter of them, and of that delight
and pleaſure, which wee ſhoulde finde in him, if we mounted
vp ſo high and ſought him there. But becauſe wee are alwayes muſing
about vile and abiect thinges, wee haue no leaſure to conſider of
and to contemplate higher and more woonderfull thinges. Nowe to
ende this dayes ſpeech, ſeeing wee are taught that God hath giuen
vs the affections of ioy and of ſorowe, to induce and mooue vs to
ſeeke him, to the ende that by eſchewing the euill that is contrary vnto
vs, we might attaine to that ſoueraigne Good, which he hath prepared
for vs, and to that true delight, pleaſure and bliſſe, which wee
may finde in him, let vs knowe, that we haue good occaſion to pray
vnto him inceſſantly, that he woulde vouchſafe ſo to lighten our ſenſes
and minde, and to rule all our affections and willes in ſuch ſort, that
we may at the length attaine thereunto. For then we ſhall not onely
be deliuered from all ſorowe and griefe, but haue the full fruition of
perfect ioy and perpetuall delight. And to the ende that we may goe
forwarde to morowe with our matter of the affections of the heart
and ſoule, thou ſhalt intreate, ASER, of the affections of loue, which
follow thoſe of which we haue alreadie ſpoken.
            
            The ende of the ſixt dayes worke.
         
         
            
            THE SEVENTH
dayes worke.
            
               Of the affections of loue, of the nature, kindes and obiect of it: of the
beginning of friendſhippe: of the vertue and force of alluring that
is in likeneſſe and in beautie: of the agreement that is betweene
beautie and goodneſſe. Chap. 49.
               
                  ASER. If wee know not throughly the affections of
our ſoule, which, by reaſon of the corruption of our
nature, are ſo many diſeaſes in vs, wee ſhall neuer
know our ſelues well, nor the image of God, which
is imprinted in our ſoule, nor the affectiō of his goodnes
towards vs.The knowledge of the affections very requiſite. Likewiſe wee can neuer learne what
pure and ſound parts of the nature of the affections remain yet in man,
& what is added thereunto by reaſon of ſinne that is in vs, neither yet
what vertue & vice are, except we truly know the nature of the affections.
Moreouer, without this knowledge, we can neuer make choice of
good from euil, or of truth from lying. For being, as we muſt needes be
during this life, ſubiect vnto and toſſed on euery ſide with an infinite
number of ſtrange paſſions, if they be vnknowen vnto vs, we cannot
diſcerne amongſt a multitude of contrary opinions, which of them is
ſoundeſt, euery one of thē pretending ſome ſhew of good & of truth.
Therefore as we ſaw yeſterday the affections of ioy and of ſorow, of
hope and of feare, and of delight and pleaſure, which folow ioy, wherby
we may conceiue the contrary vnto it, namely griefe and torment
which follow ſorow, ſo this day we are to proceede in learning what
other affections there are of the heart and ſoule.
               I wil begin then with the affection of loue,What loue is. which is a motion wherby
the heart luſteth after that which is good indeed, or which ſeemeth
vnto it to be ſo, deſiring to draw the good to it ſelfe, to the ende it may
enioy the ſame. This affection commeth neere to the nature of hope,
but it is a great deale more hote. Therefore after the heart is once moued,
it preſently draweth vnto it that thing which is offered for good,
labouring as it were to haue the fruition of ſome great Good. But
let vs conſider howe this affection is bredde in the heart. After that
Iudgement hath iudged a thing to bee good,How loue is engendred. ſo ſoone as the ſame
thing is preſented to the Will, it doth by and by moue, allure, and draw
the ſame vnto it ſelfe by a certaine naturall agreement, euen as the
like is betweene the minde and the trueth, and betweene the eye and
beautie. This motion of the heart and will, hath euen then ioyned

with it a certaine kinde of reioycing, as teſtifying thereby, that the
thing pleaſeth it, and is very good and agreeable vnto it. Now when
this reioycing is confirmed, it is called loue, which is an inclination or
a proceeding of the will towards that which is Good. For it fareth with
the Will, as if it went before to meete with the good that is comming,
to receiue and to embrace it. Wherupon ariſeth a deſire of coniunction
to knit the ſame thing to it ſelfe: and this loue is called, Cupiditie, Luſting,
or Coueting. But becauſe this affection is ſo out of ſquare in this
our corrupt nature, theſe names are commonly taken more in the euill
then in the good part.Of the kindes of deſire. Nowe this affection of deſire or coueting,
hath reſpect either to that good which we enioy alreadie, or which
we haue yet in hope onely and in expectation. If it be already preſent,
this cupiditie breedeth a deſire to retaine and keepe it ſtill: if it be yet
in expectation, it bringeth forth a deſire and longing to enioy it. And
in this ſort we loue all thoſe things, which we eſteeme and take to bee
profitable for vs, either for the ſoule, or for the body, or for the external
goods.Of the loue of men towards God. For this cauſe many loue God, becauſe they know that it is he
who giueth good things vnto men. But this is not that true loue wherwith
we muſt loue him. For although they are very wicked and too
vnthankfull, which loue him not, at leaſtwiſe with ſuch a loue and for
that cauſe, yet if we goe no further, we loue our ſelues more then wee
doe him in this kind of loue, ſeeing the chiefe cauſe for which we loue
him, is not in reſpect of himſelfe, but of vs. For we loue him by reaſon
of that good, which we receiue from him. But true loue is that, which
cauſeth vs to loue a thing, becauſe it is good in it ſelfe, and not in reſpect
of any profite that may come vnto vs thereby. With this loue
we ought to loue God, and our neighbours and friendes: and of this
loue wee haue a very cleare and manifeſt image in the loue of Fathers
and mothers towards their children.The loue of parents towardes thir children. For they loue them, not becauſe
they haue reſpect to ſome good, which they may receiue of them,
but becauſe they are their children. For although they receiue nothing
but trouble by them from the time of their childehood, and expences
rather then profit, yet that letteth them not from louing them
tenderly and with great affection. Nowe if by this loue grounded vpon
ſuch a cauſe, we iudge the like of the loue of God towards vs,The loue of God towards men. ſeeing
it is hee that hath imprinted the ſame in the heartes of parents towards
their children, as an image of his loue towards vs, we conclude
well. For ſeeing he is the fountaine of all true and perfect loue, all other
loues are but as it were little riuers, which flowe from this liuely
ſpring. But there is none ſo expreſſe an image thereof in all the creatures,
as in the loue of fathers and mothers towards their children. For

doeth God loue vs in reſpect of any profite, which hee looketh for at
our hands? Hereof it is that he ſetteth forth himſelfe vnto vs as a Father,
to the end we may the better know, that he loueth vs with a right
fatherly loue. Therefore alſo hee will haue vs to call him Father, and
ſo to accoūnt of him: yea hee will not haue vs to take any other for
our Father of whome to depende wholly, but him alone. And no
doubt but we ſhoulde receiue wonderfull ioy and conſolation, if we
coulde as well feele within vs that loue which this good Father beareth
vs, as we feele the loue which we beare towardes our children.
Now when loue is reciprocall and mutuall,The originall of friendſhip. ſo that he which is loued
doeth alſo loue for his part the partie that loueth him, then is friendſhip
bred of loue, wherein there is mutuall beneuolence and goodwil.
Wherefore as God loueth vs, ſo muuſt we for our partes loue him, ſeeing
this is the chiefe cauſe why he hath created man according to his
image and ſimilitude, and hath giuen him a ſoule that is immortall,
and endued with vnderſtanding and reaſon, to knowe him firſt and
then to loue him. Therefore if wee conſider by what ſteppes wee aſcend
vp to God, we ſhall finde, that as by the loue which he firſt bare
vs, we deſcended from the higheſt to the loweſt, ſo likewiſe we mount
vp againe from the loweſt vnto the higheſt by that loue which wee
beare him.In what ſort by loue we aſcend vp to God and deſcend againt. For our ſoule deſcendeth from the higheſt, which is God,
vnto the loweſt, which is the bodie, by the loue of the Creator towards
her, who by meanes of this deſcending and coniunction communicateth
his bleſſedneſſe both with the ſoule and with the bodie.
And as ſhe came downe from him, ſo through the knowledge which
ſhe hath of God, and loue which ſhe beareth him, ſhe aſcendeth vp again,
& returneth to her firſt birth. Cōcerning thoſe degrees by which
we come thither, we begin firſt at materiall and corporal things, as the
beginning of mans generation and birth teacheth vs: then we come
to the ſenſes of the bodie, by that vſe which we haue of them. Afterwarde
we vſe imagination and fantaſie, and from that we come to
reaſon and iudgement, next to contemplation, and laſt of all to loue.
Heereby we may learne alſo to know the ſteppes of deſcending, ſeeing
they are the ſame, but begunne at the contrarie ende. Wherefore
if iudgement bee gouerned and ouercome by the affections, and reaſon
by fantaſie, the eſtate of the ſoule is wholly ouerturned and peruerted,
as if the bodie beeing minded to walke, ſhoulde ſet the
head vpon the ground, and lift the heeles vpwarde. So likewiſe is
it if in ſteede o mounting vp to God by loue, we deſcend in ſuch ſort
to the creatures,Of the vnion that is in loue. that we aſcend vp no more to him, that wee may bee
one with him. For loue maketh all things one. Therefore if we be vnited

with God, there muſt needes be perfect friendſhippe betweene
him and vs. For as he loueth vs, ſo we loue him, and then our ſelues for
loue of him. And from the loue of our ſelues ſpringeth our loue towards
our wiues and children, as though they were a part of vs, as
alſo towardes our like and towards our woorkes.Similitude is a cauſe of loue. For ſimilitude and
likeneſſe is a great cauſe of loue, ſeeing that when one reſembleth
vs, it is as if wee our ſelues were another: becauſe ſimilitude maketh
many things to be as one and the ſame thing. Wherefore ſeeing
God hath created vs to his image and likeneſſe, it cannot bee but
that he loueth his image and ſimilitude in vs, and vs alſo in reſpect of
that, as if it were himſelfe. For this cauſe the more this image is reformed
and renewed in vs, the more (no doubt) hee loueth vs: and the
like alſo may be ſaid of our loue towards him.Beautie draweth loue. In like manner beautie
hath great vertue to procure loue, and that for many cauſes. For firſt,
the beautie which appeareth without in any body, is as it were a witneſſe
and teſtimonie of the beautie in the ſoule, according to that
which we haue already ſpoken of the agreement of the powers & affections
thereof with the temperature of the bodie. For God hath created
all things in ſuch manner, that he hath commonly ioyned beautie
and goodnes together. And as it is written in Geneſis,Gen. 1. 
                  That he created
nothing but that which was verie good, ſo there was nothing made,
but it was very beautifull in his kinde. Therefore as there is agreement
between the body & the ſoule, ſo bodily beautie is as it were an image
of the beautie of the ſoule, and promiſeth after a ſort ſome good thing
of the inwarde beautie.Beautie a flower of goodnes. For internall perfection breedeth the external.
Whereupon the internal is called goodnes, and the external beauty,
which is as it were a floure of goodnes that is the ſeed. It is true that
this which we ſay doeth not alwayes fall out ſo, but that oftentimes a
man may ſee the cleane contrary: whereupon wee haue this common
prouerbe, Proper fellowes at the gallowes, and faire women in the ſtewes. For
ordinarily the goodlieſt mē, & ſuch as are beſt furniſhed with the gifts
of nature in the diſpoſition of their body, are moſt wicked and vicious:A caueat for faire women.
& more beautiful women are ſtrumpets, then foule womē, at leaſtwiſe
they are in greateſt danger, and haue much more a doe to keepe their
chaſtitie. For there is alwaies great ſtrife betweene chaſtitie and beautie,
which is ſo much the more increaſed, as beautie is the greater, becauſe
it is ſo violent,The force of Beautie. that oftentimes many deſire willingly to die for
the beautie of others: and ſome are ſo toſſed and tormented, that they
become ſenſeleſſe and out of their wits, being ouertaken with looking
vpon a beautifull face, which hath ſuch prickes, that they pearce euen
to the liuelieſt part of their heart and ſoule.
               
                  
Wherevpon it commeth to paſſe that poore ſilly louers are ſo tormented
and ful of paſſions, that they ſtand altogether amazed, and are
like to them that are roſted by a ſoft fire: yea their ſoule is ſo ſubiected
to their concupiſcence and deſire, that ſhe muſt obey them, as if ſhee
were ſome poore chambermaide and drudge. Whereby wee may
know what good there is in ſuch beautie, and what good commeth
with it, alſo what coniunction & agreement it may haue with goodneſſe,
and whether a man may not truely ſay according to our common
prouerbe, That beauty without goodnes is worth nothing. But we are
to conſider what is the cauſe hereof. For we ſpeake not of that which is
now done,The cauſes of the abuſe in beautie. but of that which ſhould be done, if the nature of man had
continued ſound: and of that which yet would moſt commonly bee
put in vre, were it not that euill education, beſides that naturall corruption
which is already in euery one, did infect euen that little good
of naturall inclination which remaineth in man. But howſouer it be,
bodily beautie doeth alwaies promiſe more good of the ſoule, then
deformitie doeth. If it fall out otherwiſe, it is becauſe God will ſhew,
that all good things come from his onely grace and not from nature:
and therefore he doeth not alwayes followe one courſe and one ſelfeſame
order without any change. Beſides, he commonly recompenceth
in one thing, that which is wanting in another, ſo that he ſupplieth that
in the ſpirite, which is wanting in the body, or in the body which is
wanting in the ſpirite. On the other ſide, becauſe many abuſe that
beautie of the body which God hath beſtowed vpon them, as they do
all other his giftes, hee letteth them fall oftentimes into great vices,
whereby they ſhew the deformitie of their ſoule,Beautie maketh vice more vgly. which bringeth alſo
their bodily beautie into great obloquie and ſhame. For as beautie
cauſeth vertue to appeare more faire, when it is ioyned therewith, ſo
contrariwiſe, it maketh vice more vgly and loathſome to looke vpon.
Therefore Socrates had reaſon to ſay, that it was good for euery one
to beholde himſelfe in a glaſſe,A good vſe of Looking-glaſſes. that they which ſawe themſelues faire
ſhoulde bee the more afraide to blotte their beautie with vices, and
that they which were foule ſhoulde labour to beautifie themſelues
with vertues. Nowe ſeeing we are entered into the cauſes why beautie
draweth loue, following this matter, we woulde knowe of thee,
AMANA, what other thinges are to bee conſidered heerein, with
the ſundrie degrees and kindes of beautie, and what is the proper effect
of loue.
            
            
               
               Of other cauſes why Beauty procureth Loue, and of diuers degrees
and kindes of Beauty: howe it is the nature of Loue alwayes to
vnite, and what other effectes it hath: howe Loue deſcendeth
and aſcendeth not: what power it hath to allure and breed Loue.
Chap. 50.
               AMANA. Many amongſt the Philoſophers haue made three
kindes of good, or of good things: namely, that which is pleaſant,
profitable, and honeſt. Hereupon, foraſmuch as Loue is a deſire
of good or goodly things, or at leaſtwiſe of things ſo accompted: they
haue alſo made three kinds or fortes of Loue,Three kindes of Loue. of which the firſt is towards
delightful and pleaſant things, and ſuch are thoſe things which
tickle and delight our ſenſes, being properly called the goodes of the
body. The ſecond kinde of Loue is towardes profitable things, as honours,
riches, greatneſſe and ſuch other like things, called externall
goodes or the goodes of fortune. The third kinde is towardes honeſt
things, as wiſedome, prudence and other vertues, which are the goods
of the ſoule. As for the two firſt kindes of Loue, wee may well place
them amongſt the perturbations of the ſoule, becauſe ſo many euill
affections ſpring from them, that al confuſion proceedeth from them,
yea euery mans life is thereby made miſerable. But to loue and deſire
good and honeſt things, is that which truely maketh a man famous.
For this loue maketh the chiefe part of his ſoule excellent, euen that
part whereby he is man, and which is fartheſt remooued from bodily
matter and from obſcuritie, and neereſt to diuine brightneſſe, I meane
the ſpirit and vnderſtanding, which of all the other partes and powers
of man, onely is voide of the blot of mortalitie. The conſideration of
the diuers degrees and ſundry ſortes of beautie doth prepare the way
whereby we may come to this laudable and honeſt loue. For by them
wee may aſcend vp from the loweſt to the higheſt, and turne our corporall
and earthly loues into ſpirituall and heauenly.
               They that are moſt ignorant know that Loue is a deſire of beauty,
and that Beauty draweth Loue.God created the world by Loue. Yea ſome of the learned Heathens
haue taught, that it was Loue which mooued God not onely to create
the world, but alſo to create it beautifull, and of ſo goodly a forme in
euery part of it. And the name whereby it is called, yeeldeth teſtimony
of the beauty of it. For worlde ſignifieth as much as a goodly and
well decked ornament. Therefore ſeeing God hath created and framed
it by loue, no doubt but loue is diſperſed and ſhedde throughout the
whole world, and is continually drawen and procured by beauty, to

the ende it might bee conformable and like to the fountaine from
whence it came. On the other ſide, all beautie is as it were a beame of
that infinite and diuine beautie that is in God: and therefore as the
diuine forme draweth vnto it true and perfect loues, ſo the image and
ſimilitude thereof draweth the images of loues. And that loue whereby
almightie God was mooued to create all things, proceeded from
his owne goodneſſe. Nowe foraſmuch as beautie is a beame of that
goodnes which is ſhed ouer all, as the ſunne ſpreadeth his light by his
beames, the goodlier any thing is, ſo much the more amiable & louely
it is. For the mother of Loue is goodneſſe, and the mother alſo of
Beautie is goodneſſe: ſo that both of them are bredde and borne as it
were of one mother.Diuers kindes of beauty and loue. And according to the diuerſity of natures created
by God, ſo are there diuers kindes of beautie, which are all as it
were beames, flames, and lights of that heauenly and infinite beautie,
which is fountaine of al the reſt. The firſt, chiefeſt, and moſt excellent
kinde of all, is that beame of heauenly beauty, whereby the ſpirit and
minde is adorned and poliſhed with vnderſtanding and contemplation.
The ſecondis, in that illumination whereby the ſoule receiueth
knowledge. Therefore the vnderſtanding mounteth vp to thoſe two
firſt degrees of Loue; which is drawen by ſuch beauties: and from
thence proceedeth the loue of ſpirituall things. The third kind, which
is as it were an other beame of diuine beauty, appeareth in the effectes
of lower degrees, which are in that fruitfulneſſe, which God
hath giuen vnto the creatures, putting into them ſeedes to preſerue
and to encreaſe their kindes. The laſt and loweſt, yea, the moſt troubleſome
and earthly kinde, is in corporall matters, which are purtraited
and painted with great varietie of formes and ſhapes. And as the
vnderſtanding aſcendeth vp to the two firſt degrees, of which I haue
already ſpoken: ſo the imagination ſtayeth it ſelfe in the two laſt, and
from thence proceedeth the loue of the body and of bodily things,
and the affection to beget of that goodly thing, thereby to drawe
out a forme like to that beautie towardes the which a man is affectionated.
               Nowe when wee ſhall conſider aright of all theſe degrees and
beames of beauty, it is certaine that wee wil ſtriue to aſcend vp from
the loweſt to the higheſt, whereas commonly wee deſcend from the
higheſt to the loweſt, feeding our ſpirites with corporall and terreſtriall
loues,Loue tendeth to vnitie. which differ from their nature, in ſteade of ſpirituall and
celeſtiall loues, which is their proper foode. But we muſt note further,
that the greateſt, laſt, and chiefeſt force of loue, is of many and diuers
things to make one and the ſame. Therefore he that loueth our friend,

or doth him any good, ſeemeth to do that to vs which is done to him,
and we eſteeme of it, as if we receiued it our ſelues. For it is the nature
of loue, which way ſouer it turne, alwayes to ioyne and knit vnto it
ſelfe: as on the contrary ſide hatred is of this nature, that it will euermore
diſioyne and ſeparate. For this cauſe Ieſus Chriſt prayed ſo earneſtly
for his vnto his Father,Iohn 17. 21. 
                  to the ende (ſaieth he) that they all may be
one, as thou O Father arte in mee, and I in thee; euen that they may be alſo
one in vs. And Saint Iohn ſaieth likewiſe of him,Iohn 11. 52. 
                  that hee ſhoulde gather
together in one the children of God which were ſcattered. For ſeeing hee
came to deſtroy the workes of the deuill,1. Iohn. 3. 8. (as he ſaieth elſwhere) and
ſeeing it is the nature of this enemy of mankind to ſcatter, to diſioyne
and ſeparat, by reaſon of the enuy & hatred which he beareth to God
& men, it muſt needs be that Ieſus Chriſt ſhould gather together that
which the deuil hath ſcattered, and vnite in one that which he hath ſeparated:
to the end that as man was one with God, before he was ſeueuered
by ſinne through the enuy and malice of Satan, ſo hee might returne
into vnity and vnion with his Creator by the aboliſhing of ſinne,Sinne the cauſe of our ſeperation from God.
which is the cauſe of the ſeperation, and by the likeneſſe of vertue with
God through the meanes of Ieſus Chriſt. Therefore ſo great goodnes
& beneficence of God toward vs, ought to enflame our loue towards
him, and moreouer to encreaſe the ſame, when wee daily feele new benefits
powred vpon vs, which proceed & come from his burning loue
and charitie wherewith he loueth vs, although he receiue no benefite
thereby. For we are to vnderſtand, that although he which hath receiued
a benefit from another, ought to carry greater loue towards him,
then hee that beſtowed the benefite is bounde towardes the other
to whome hee hath done a good turne, yet the contrary oftentimes
falleth out.A double ground of loue. The cauſe whereof is, becauſe his loue that beſtoweth a
good turne proceed
                     •
                  th from his owne bountie and goodneſſe, whereas
the loue of him that receiueth a benefite, commeth of neceſſitie.
So that the one hath a great deale better foundation then the other.
For that loue which proceedeth of neceſſitie reſpecteth our ſelues, becauſe
wee loue for the good which wee haue receiued, and not in regarde
of the perſon from whome the good commeth. And this loue
proceedeth from the loue wee beare to our ſelues, ſo that it ought rather
to be called Loue of concupiſcence, then true Loue. For as wee
loue the perſon that doth vs good, becauſe of the good which wee receiue,
ſo we loue him, and wiſh his good, not ſo much for it ſelfe as for
ourſelues, and for that profite, which wee hope will come to vs thereby.
But after wee haue begunne with this kinde of Loue, it ſerueth
vs oftentimes as a ſteppe for to paſſe by afterwardes vnto true and

perfect loue. For acquainting our ſelues to loue them that doe vs
good, wee learne afterward to loue them, not onely for loue of that
good which they doe vnto vs, but alſo becauſe of themſelues: inſomuch
that we will not ceaſe to loue them although it fall out ſo that
they can doe vs no more good, yea although they ſtand in neede of
the like good at our hands againe. Now when wee are come to this
degree, our loue is a great deale more pure, yea, then is it true loue
which nowe loueth not the perſon beloued onely for loue of it ſelfe
but for loue of him, euen with the like loue wherewith it hath beene
and yet is loued of him. And as he that loueth, is voide of true Loue,
if he loue onely in reſpect of the good hee receiueth,Loue is free. ſo hee that doeth
good, loueth not with true loue, if hee do it to receiue ſome profite
thereby, and with hope of recompence, and not meerely for his loue,
to whome hee doth it. For ſuch a man reſpecteth himſelfe more then
him whom he pretendeth to loue. Such is the loue of hypocrites towards
God. Therefore they honour and ſerue him as hirelings doe,
ſo long as hee vſeth them wel, and they ſee rewarde: as Satan accuſed
and ſlaundered Iob before God,Iob 1. 9. as though hee ſerued him for no other
cauſe but for the benefites, which hee receiued of his goodneſſe.
Whereupon it pleaſed God to take trial of that loue which his ſeruant
bare vnto him, to confound the ſlaunderer, and to propound to euery
one in the perſon of his ſeruant Iob, an example and patterne of true
feare,Two ſortes of hired loue. of true loue, of true faith, and of true patience. We ſee then that
there are two ſorts of hired loue, becauſe it may be ſuch, not onely in
reſpect of him that receiueth a benefit, but of him alſo that beſtoweth
it, when hee doeth it for the cauſes aforeſaide. But he that doth good
onely of charitie and loue hath no ſuch ſcope, but looketh only to the
good, which he delighteth to communicate to others in reſpect of that
goodnes which is in himſelfe. Therefore he hath a more ſure and excellent
beginning of his loue, namely, his owne goodnes and will, then
he hath that receiueth the good, whoſe loue beginneth at neede and
want. That Loue alſo which is grounded vpon goodneſſe goeth on
more eaſily, and with greater courage from good to better, then that
which commeth from neceſſitie proceedeth to good. For he that doth
good, imparteth the ſame frankely of his owne good will becauſe hee
will do ſo: and therefore it redoundeth to his great honour. But hee
that receiueth a good turne, taketh it becauſe hee hath neede of it: and
therefore hee muſt acknowledge himſelfe bound to his Benefactour.
For this cauſe he is ſomewhat aſhamed of his neede and want. For as
Saint Paul witneſſeth, according to the ſaying of Ieſus Chriſt, It is a
bleſſed thing to giue rather then to receiue.
                  Actes 20. 35. Therefore that may well bee

ſaid in this reſpect, which is commonly ſpoken, namely, that although
Loue be of the nature of fire, which alwayes mounteth vpward,Loue deſcendeth but doth not aſcend. yet
doeth it deſcend but neuer aſcend. For Fathers and Mothers alwayes
loue their children, yea their childrens children better then their children
loue them. The like may be ſaide of others that are in the place
of parents. And by a greater reaſon this may be ſpoken of the loue of
God our Father towardes vs, as alſo of the loue of Chriſt Ieſus. For
he did not onely loue vs before we loued him, yea, euen then when we
were yet his enemies, but nowe alſo wee come farre ſhort of loui
                     ••
                  
him as hee loueth vs. Therefore hee is called by Saint Iohn,
                  1. Iohn 4. 8. not onely
louing and charitable, but euen Loue it ſelfe. For as he is the Creator
of all things, ſo he loueth, perfecteth, and preſeueth them all, and turneth
them vnto himſelfe.Loue breedeth Loue. But among all other things which drawe
Loue, nothing is of greater force then Loue it ſelfe. For as one fire
draweth another, ſo is it with loue: for one draweth and engendreth
another. Therefore if wee would be loued, wee our ſelues muſt loue.
But when the contrary falleth out, nameely, that we are hated of them
towards whome wee are well affected, it is becauſe hee that is loued
doeth not knowe nor feele the loue that is borne him. For likeneſſe
hath ſuch force and vertue in loue, that it is as it were the mother therof.
For ſeeing euery one by nature loueth himſelfe greatly, and ſimilitude
is as it were the ſame in many, it cauſeth him that reſembleth vs,
to be as it were our ſelues: whereupon it followeth, that the ſame likeneſſe
which cauſeth vs to loue an other, induceth him alſo to loue vs.
And againe, loue cauſeth him that doth loue to engraue & imprint in
his heart,The heart of a louer compared to a looking glaſſe. that face and image which he loueth: ſo that the heart of him
that loueth is made like to a looking glaſſe, in which the image of the
party beloued ſhineth and is repreſented. Therefore when hee that
is loued and beholdeth and acknowledgeth himſelf in him that loueth
him, he is mooued and whetted on to loue him againe, as one within
whome he knoweth himſelfe to be as it were Inhabitant, yea, as a ſecond
ſelfe. Moreouer, he that loueth, doth as it were depriue himſelfe
of himſelfe, and giue himſelfe to him whome hee loueth. Therefore he
that is beloued accompteth him deere, and is as carefull of him as of a
thing of his owne. So that if wee loue God, we ſhall be in his heart,
as if our image were engrauen there: and his image alſo ſhall bee in
ours, yea, hee will be carefull of vs, as of his owne children, as wee
likewiſe wil be very careful of his honor and glory. And the more we
know his loue towards vs, the liker we ſhalbe vnto him, and ſhall loue
him the more: as he in like maner wil loue vs the more. Nowe becauſe
men can neither ſee nor know one anothers heart and wil to iudge of

their loue,Loue ought to ſhew it ſelfe by workes. we muſt declare the ſame by outward workes. For none
but God knoweth the hearts and willes of men. Neuertheleſſe he wil
haue vs to manifeſt by workes our loue towardes him and our neighbours,
as hee hath ſhewed vs his loue by giuing himſelfe with all his
benefites vnto vs. Therefore wee muſt yeelde teſtimony of our loue,
by obeying his worde and keeping his holy commaundements, the
fulfilling of which conſiſteth in true and perfect charitie. But foraſmuch
as the loue of men is ſo diſordered nowadayes, wee are to take

                     〈◊〉
                   heede, and to looke diligently that wee deceiue not our ſelues,
by louing that which wee ought not to loue, eſteeming that to bee a
good thing which is wicked, and well done that which is ill done:
to the ende, that our loue be not inordinate, and bestowed vpon falſe
and euil things, and ſo prooue a vicious deſire rather then true loue.
Therefore it ſhall be good, if following our matter, we conſider what
this affection of cupiditie or deſire is properly, and what are the kinds
of it, and how wee may ſeparate it from Loue. Let vs then hear ken
to ARAM diſcourſing of this matter.
            
            
               Of Deſire and Coueting, and of the kindes of it: of the infiniteneſſe
of mens deſires, and what Good is able to ſatisfie and content it: of
the difference betweene Deſire and Loue, and of the vtmost limit
and ende of Loue. Chap. 51.
               ARAM. As at the entry of a forreſt ſome one path may ſeeme to
be broade and beaten enough, yet afterward when a trauailer is
well entred into it, he beginneth to looſe it by little and little, and being
amazed the farther hee walketh on, the more he wandreth out of
his way: euen ſo when as ſenſualitie inuiteth vs to the fruition of ſome
obiect, we thinke it an eaſie matter to attaine thereunto, and hope to
get ſome great good thereby: but the further wee enter into and follow
that path, which our concupiſcence doth ſhew vnto vs, the worſe
we find the way to be, and can ſee nothing before vs but a large field
full of thornes and thiſtles, which notwithſtanding ſeeme for a time
vnto ſore eies to be faire floures of very goodly fruit. But the taſting of
them alwayes bringeth with it a long and late repentance in the ende.
Nowe as the body of the ſunne when he firſt riſeth may be eaſily looked
vpon, but after being mounted vp certain degrees in the Zodiake,
dazeleth the eies of them that behold it: ſo we may in ſome ſort know
our euill when it beginneth firſt, but when it hath gathered full force
it wholy dimmeth our reaſon,Euils muſt be reſiſted in the beginning. and yeeldeth to no counſaile. Therfore
before any paſſion grow to be ſtrong, wee muſt labour, that whatſoeuer

ſhall be raſhly deſired, may be ſuppreſſed by a prudent and an
aduiſed diſcourſe.
               We haue heard by our former ſpeech,What Deſire is. that Deſire and Coueting
is an appetite or longing to obtain ſome Good, which we iudge is profitable
vnto vs, or to preſerue it if wee haue it already.Diuerſitie of Goods. For this cauſe
we muſt always conſider aduiſedly what Goods we want, whether they
be neceſſary for vs or no, whether we ſeeke after them, either becauſe
we need them, or for profite ſake, or elſe o
                     •
                  ly to ſatisfie the vanitie of
our minde, and our fooliſh and carnall affections. For there are ſome
Goods ſo neceſſary for vs, that without them wee can neither liue, nor
preſerue our life. The neceſſitie and want of theſe is fitly called naturall,
and ought rather in deede to be termed appetites then deſires. In
the number of theſe Goods are meates,Good
                        •
                      belonging to this life. drinkes, clothing, dwelling places,
Phyſicke, fire, water, & ſuch like things which mans life cannot be
without. Therefore our appetite to theſe things is awakened as it were
by a certaine naturall inſtigation, which pricketh and prouoketh the
ſoule to make it deſire & ſeeke them, ſo that they ſtay not vntill iudgement
haue giuen ſentence, but proceede on forward as wee may ſee
by experience in hunger and thirſt. It is not therefore without cauſe
ſaide, that the belly hath no eares. But there are other goods not altogether
ſo neceſſary for mans life, which yet wee cannot be without
when neede requireth, and they ſerue to this vſe, that men might liue
more commodiouſly and better at eaſe: as wine, exquiſitenes in dreſſing
and preparing of meates, ſpices, and many ſuch like things. For it
is certaine, that although there were no wine nor any artificial drinke,
yet nature would be content and coulde well away with water: and
although meate be not ſo delicate, nor ſo well and finely dreſſed as it
might be, yet will it nouriſh well enough, ſo it be naturall. The ſame
may be ſaide of the reſt, of which there is great vſe in the life of man,
and of thoſe pleaſures and delights which wee take by all the corporall
ſenſes. The deſires of theſe things are not to be condemned, ſeeing
they are naturall alſo, prouided alwayes that moderation be kept
in them. For God hath not created any creature, which hee will not
haue man to vſe, ſo that hee abuſe it not, but being contented with
thoſe pleaſures which hee permitteth vnto him, keepe himſelfe within
the limits thereof, and fall into no exceſſe, neither laſh out beyond
all reaſon and meaſure.
               There is yet an other ſort of goods wherof we haue ſpoken before,Goods of fanci
                        •
                      and in opinion onely.
which is more in fancie & in opinion thē in any other thing, namely, ye
getting and poſſeſſing of ſiluer, of riches, of power, of honor, & of glory.
Theſe goods fil men ful of innumerable deſires, which haue neither

meaſure, terme, nor ende, inſomuch that amongſt all creatures liuing
none is ſo burthened with them as man: who notwithſtanding might
wel ſatisfie himſelf with a few, if he could be content with that which
wil ſuffice nature and followe her. And therefore of all theſe ſortes of
deſires mentioned by vs, we may well ſay, that thoſe which concerne
naturall things haue ſome limitation, but ſuch as concerne things
found out and inuented by men, haue no bounds nor meaſure at all in
them. For what ende is there in the coueting of riches, honours, glory
and ſuch like things? True it is, that of their owne nature, and as being
the creatures and giftes of God, they are not ill: but they become
ſuch through the fault of men, I meane through their inſatiable coueting
and abuſing of them, and through that falſe opinion, which commonly
we haue of them. For we propound theſe things to our ſelues,
that we may liue with greater eaſe, pleaſure, and reſt: but it falleth out
cleane contrary. For being ſuch goods as reach not vnto the ſpirit, they
cannot profit the ſame: or if they do reach vnto it, yet the profit that
commeth by them is very light and vaine. For they are not able to
ſound the bottome thereof, it is ſo profound and capable: much leſſe
are wee to thinke that they can make vs happy. Nay, they are ſo farre
from performing this, that it is impoſſible to beleeue how troubleſom
it is to the ſpirit to ſearch and finde them out, and to obtaine & keepe
them.The effects of ambition and couetouſneſſe. For after that ambition and couetouſneſſe be once mooued and
pricked forward through falſe opinions and vaine iudgements, they
growe and waxe diſordered out of meaſure. For the ſpirit thinketh in
it ſelfe, that if once it could get either thoſe honours and glory, or that
mony and riches which it wiſheth for, it ſhoulde be very happy, and
liue at great eaſe and reſt. But when it hath obtained that, it is not only
in the ſame eſtate wherein it was before, but oftentimes farre worſe,
and leſſe contented. The reaſon is, becauſe the ſpirit conſidereth not,
that thoſe things which it laboureth to get, are vnable of their owne
nature to affoorde that which it requireth of them. Whereupon, not
knowing his owne vice and fooliſh imagination, it it perſwaded, that
this falleth out ſo in reſpect of the greatnes & excellencie of that thing
whereunto it aſpireth, and therefore not hauing gotten ſo much as is
requiſite fully to ſatisfie the deſire it hath, it ſetleth it ſelfe to get more.
And when it hath proceeded in this ſort, yet is it alwayes newe to beginne,
being as farre from contentation, yea a great deale further then
it was before. So that we may conclude, that deſire or coueting is bottomleſſe,
and voyde of all ſtay. Therefore wee muſt knowe, that the
meere wants of this life, doe neither breede nor encreaſe theſe deſires
in vs, but they proceede from a falſe opinion and perſwaſion, which

we haue of them. For it is certaine, that the opinion wee conceiue of
thoſe wants, which we imagine wee may haue, breedeth ſuch a fear
                     •
                  
in vs, as engendreth and encreaſeth theſe deſires.Of the falſe opinion of want. And the carking
care to preſerue thoſe things that are without vs, namely, externall
goods, proceedeth from the ſame fountaine. For our foreſight ſtretcheth
it ſelfe not onely to vrgent neceſſities, or to ſuch as wee verily
thinke are to come to paſſe, but euen to all thoſe that may any way
happen: ſo that we propound to our ſelues all the wants in the world,
as if heauen and earth ſhoulde faile vs. Beſides, many doe not onely
looke to thoſe neceſſities which they may feare, but alſo to thoſe
pleaſures, which they would haue. For they ſuppoſe that by meanes
of power, riches, authoritie, and dignities, they may attaine to the
fruition of all the pleaſures and delights they wiſh for. And when a
man hath taſted of pleaſure, this taſte doth breede an other deſire to
continue therein, and to preſerue thoſe meanes whereby they may alwayes
enioy ſuch pleaſure. Whereby wee may iudge howe the deſire
and coueting that is in man, wandereth and goeth aſtray, when as
notwithſtanding it is giuen him of God, to the end he might wiſh for
that which hee iudgeth to bee good for him, and that hee might followe
after it, and hauing obtained the ſame, might holde and keepe
it faſt.
               Now Foraſmuch as God is the true,The right vſe of coueting. ſtedfaſt, and firme good of
man, hee doeth naturally wiſh and deſire him: and becauſe this good
is infinite, it falleth out thereupon that the largeneſſe, length, and
depth of our coueting is infinite, and can be filled with no other thing
but with God. Wherefore when it is come thither, there it ſtayeth
and reſteth it ſelfe. But whileſt it wandreth hither and thither, there
wil be no end, but one deſire begetteth another: inſomuch that there
are infinite kindes of them, which take their particular names of thoſe
things which they couet.The diuerſe kinds of Deſires. For the vnmeſurable coueting of honours
is called ambition: of golde and ſiluer, couetouſneſſe: of meates and
drinkes, gluttony and drunkenneſſe: the vnlawfull and immoderate
deſire of coniunction betweene man and woman, is called Whoredome:
which alſo hath diuers kindes vnder it, according to the degrees
of their filthineſſe and enormities in whome it aboundeth. The
vertues oppoſite and contrary to theſe vicious deſires, are iuſtice, liberalitie,
continencie, chaſtitie, and temperance: of which vertues and
vices, and of others proceeding of them, we haue diſcourſed at large
in our fiſt morall inſtitution. Therefore to conclude that which hath
beene hitherto ſpoken of Loue and of Deſire, I thinke wee ought to
make two ſortes of Loue, the one in vertue the other in vice.Two ſorts of Loue. For that

Loue proceeding of Deſire and Coueting, ſuch as we ſee commonly
in men, is falſe and fained. And becauſe it counterfaiteth often the actions
of true loue, therefore wee ought to be very wary, that it beguile
vs not, and that wee take not the one for the other. Concerning the
firſt, wee muſt remember, that all loue is begotten of Good, that it
bendeth and draweth towardes Good, as wee haue already learned.
Now Good is of that nature, that it breedeth in vs a deſire to bee ioyned
vnto it, in regarde of that agreement which it hath with vs: of
which agreement and coniunction commeth delight, and then bleſſedneſſe
and felicitie.The laſt ende of Loue. So that the vtmoſt bounds and limites of Loue
is to be knit together in vnitie as much as may be. And the ſtraighter
and cloſer the bond of loue is tied and conioyned in one and the ſame
eſſence, ſo much the more truely and perfectly is loue come vnto his
ende, and conſiſteth in the perfection of his nature. Therefore the deſire
of coniunction which is in Loue is giuen to man, to the ende hee
ſhoulde wiſh and couet to be vnited with God his true Good, that being
made as it were a little God like vnto him, hee might be partaker
of his eternall bleſſedneſſe. This is the true, firme, and fruitfull coniunction
of loue, and the great and excellent reward thereof. For all
the reſt are nothing in compariſon of this, but onely vaine and fruitleſſe.
Nowe the Loue of the body deſireth the coniunction of the body,
and the loue of ſoules deſireth to be ioyned with ſoules, that there
may be as it were one ſoule in many bodies. And this coniunction is
the greateſt, trueſt, and of longeſt continuance, which cauſeth but one
heart and one will among friends, as if they were one onely body, and
one onely ſoule, and as if hee that loueth were the ſame party that is
beloued. Therefore it is written of the firſt Chriſtians that were in the
Church of Ieruſalem,Acts 4. 32. that the multitude of them that beleeued were
of one heart and one ſoule; neither any of them ſaide, that any thing
of that which he poſſeſſed, was his owne, but they had al things common.
Neither is it ſaide without reaſon in common Prouerb,Communitie among friends. 
                  that all
things are common among friendes: which is the cauſe that a friend calleth
and accompteth as his owne, whatſoeuer belongeth to his friend,
whether it be in proſperitie or in aduerſitie. Therefore alſo it is commonly
ſaid, that a ſtedfaſt friend is tried in doubtfull matters. Wherevpon
it commeth to paſſe in true loue, that friends lift vp into great
dignitie, are more carefull of thoſe whome they loue (how baſe ſoeuer
they be) and of their affaires, then of themſelues and of their particular
eſtate. Moreouer we are to knowe, that as it is the nature of
Loue to ioyne together,Loue bringeth equalitie. ſo doeth it alſo bring equalitie with it, ſo
farre foorth as the nature of thoſe things that are conioyned, will

beare: inſomuch that the higheſt ſtoope downe to the loweſt, to lift
them vp vnto themſelues, & they that are equall aſſociate themſelues
together. Therefore, as we haue often ſaide, that the fountaine and
patterne of all true loue is in God, ſo in this point it doth chiefly ſhew
it ſelfe vnto vs. For hee abaſeth himſelfe to our ſmallneſſe, as though
he would reach vs his hand from heauen, to drawe and lift vs vp vnto
himſelfe by the meane of Ieſus Chriſt, vnto whome and by whome
wee are truely vnited with him. But heere wee are to knowe, that the
deſire, luſt, or coueting which is bredde of Loue groweth to bee vicious
through the corruption of our nature, which otherwiſe being directed
by good meanes and by reaſon according to the will of God,
and ayming at the right Good which is God,Loue muſt firſt beginne at God. woulde cauſe vs to loue
God firſt for his owne ſake, and then his creatures in him, and for the
loue of him. Neither ſhoulde wee euer couet worldly goods with an
vnbrideled deſire, but woulde rather accompt all mortall things vnworthy
to bee cared for by our immortall ſoules. Whereunto wee
ſhall be the rather perſwaded, if following that which wee haue begunne
to ſpeake of true and falſe loue, and of the difference betweene
them, wee conſider what good things are to be found in the one aboue
the other, what ſundry rewards men propound vnto themſelues
in loue, what knowledge is required therein, and howe the one is encreaſed
by the other. This then ſhall be thy matter ſubiect, ACHITOB,
which thou ſhalt take to make an end of our diſcourſing of the
nature of Loue.
            
            
               Of the good things that are in true Loue, of the diuerſe valuations
of Loue, and of the benefits which it procureth: what knowledge
is requiſite to allure Loue, and howe one Loue groweth by
another: of the friendſhip that may be both betweene the good
and the bad. Chap. 52.
               ACHITOB. Good is loued ſo much as it is knowen, and as wee are
able to vnderſtand what it is. For things are firſt knowen, to the
end they may be loued.Three meanes of knowledge. Now there are three meanes of knowledge in
our ſoule, namely, by ſenſe, by reaſon, and by the mind. From the ſenſe
ſpringeth appetite, which is common to vs with beaſts: from reaſon
groweth election, which is proper to man: and from the minde and
ſpirite, in which the image of the diuine eſſence is engrauen, proceedeth
the will. As then ſenſe knoweth none but ſenſible and corporall
things, ſo the appetite deſireth only the ſame things: and as the mind

of it owne nature enclineth to the contemplation of ſpirituall and
intelligible things, ſo the will feedeth and contenteth it ſelfe onely
with eternall and heauenly goods. Now Man, that is to ſay the ſoule,
by nature reaſonable, being placed as it were in the middeſt of theſe
two extreames, and ſuſtaining wonderfull aſſaults and combates
through the impreſſion of theſe two contraries, taketh part one while
with the deſires of this ſide, an other while of that, according as hee
inclineth by his election either to this part or to that, by ſtooping
downe to the ſenſe, or by lifting vp himſelfe to the minde. But becauſe
of the darkeneſſe of errour, which ſhadoweth his reaſon, it is
very neceſſary that the ſpirite of God worke mightily therein, to this
ende that by the power and vertue thereof, the naturall affection of
earthly things, which offer violence to all the powers of the ſoule,
might be tranſported and lift vp to the deſire of celeſtiall and eternall
things.
               Truely forſomuch as Good is the obiect of Loue, good reaſon it is
that wee ſhould lift it vpward, and ſeparate it from the earth as much
as we may. For as ſo many raſh affections, which are the ſpring of all
vices,The benefites that come of true loue, whoſe ſcope is God. haue their beginning from earthly loue: ſocōtrariwiſe celeſtiall
and heauenly loue adorneth the ſoule with two excellent ornaments,
namely, wiſedome and vertue, the ground of all true Beauty, in
which all good, all contentation and felicitie conſiſteth. And this
loue which hath God for his ende and ſcope, hath three great benefites
among many others, which are not to bee found in any other
loue, eſpecially in that of concupiſcence. For firſt, there is no good ſo
excellent in the enioying of earthly things, but it is mingled with
ſome thing that may diſpleaſe vs, or ſome way harme vs. Whereupon
taking it to be a leſſe benefite, and not altogether ſo good for vs,
wee are of this iudgement,The firſt benefite of true loue. that it is the leſſe to bee wiſhed for of vs.
But there is no ſuch thing in God. Therefore if the ſoule of man did
beholde him by contemplation, not ſuch a one as hee is (for that is
impoſſible) but as ſhee might contemplate him notwithſtanding ſhe
is encloſed in this body, ſhee woulde bee rauiſhed in her loue with
greater vehemencie, then ſhee is ſtirred vp to embrace that, which
of all mortall and tranſitorie things ſhee iudgeth beſt and moſt certaine.
For ſhe ſhould know, that God is a Good, wherein there is nothing
mingled, that may breed yrkeſomneſſe, or be hurtful, but is altogether
profitable and full of pleaſure. Although it can not be gainſaide,
but that the contrary ſeemeth to come to paſſe oftentimes, when
we ſee that they which loue God as they ought, & which by means of
this loue are driuen forward & induced to procure his honor and glory

with all their might, are commonly moſt viſited with griefes, loſſes,
and ſorrowes. Whereof it commeth to paſſe, that many are alienated
from this loue, becauſe they greatly diſlike that troubleſome eſtate.
But we muſt know, that this humane and friuolous conſideration proceedeth
only of this,Diuers eſtimations of Loue. that the price of loue is diuerſly valued. For there
is one kinde of loue that is perpetuall and firme, and another which is
temporary, according as the preſent motion of the heart pricketh one
forward to followe any thing, becauſe at that inſtant it ſeemeth vnto
him to be good, or in regard of the profit, which he ſeeth therein, or of
the appearance of good, which he imagineth is in it. As for example,
we know well, that health is a greater good, then is the ſwallowing
downe of dainty morſelles, the pleaſure whereof paſſeth away very
quickely.
               And yet it commeth often to paſſe, that our appetite ſtirreth vs forward
with ſuch vehemencie, that meere lickeriſhnes cauſeth vs to eate
ſuch meats as we know are contrary to our health. The reaſon hereof
is, becauſe we compare not the good that is in taſte and in dainty fare,
which ſodainely paſſeth away, with that which is in health, which is
of a longer continuance: or elſe becauſe wee thinke there will not
come ſo great hurt thereof as there may come, or elſe we hope eaſily to
remedy the ſame.The cauſe of mens errour from the true Good. And thus is it with them that conſider not what
great good there is in God, but forget him, or els ſuppoſe that they cā
                  eaſily
recouer that which they ſhal loſe, by folowing after a terreſtriall
and tranſitorie Good, which cauſeth them to turne aſide from God.
For if they thought well vpon it, and knewe what loſſe they receiued,
they would neuer ſuffer themſelues to be gouerned by their appetites
and worldly deſires. But the bare imagination and conſideration of
honors and of earthly goods doth ſo dazell the eyes of their mind, that
they can not knowe the greatneſſe and excellencie of celeſtiall goods,
which they forſake for thoſe other. Whereas contrariwiſe, if they
were not altogether blinde, they ſhould perceiue, that this light affliction
of good men, which paſſeth away in a moment, bringeth foorth
in them an eternall waight of moſt excellent glory, and maketh them
partakers of God, who is the perpetuall & ſtedfaſt reward of their true
and holy loue.The ſecond benefite that is in true Loue. Now touching the ſecond benefit, which being in his
loue, is not to be foūd in the loue of creaturs, we are to know, that this
latter is alwayes in feare and care for that thing which it loueth, leſt
ſome euill ſhould befall it. So that notwithſtanding any ſecuritie that
may be had, yet there is alwayes ſome vexation in al loue towards men
and towards mortall things. But in that loue which is towardes God
there is nothing but delight without care, griefe, or diſquietneſſe. For

we are very certaine, that all things are moſt ſafe there, full of ioy
and laſting happineſſe.The third benefit. And for the third, wee ſee that in the loue of
concupiſcence, there is commonly enuy and euill iealouſie (which is
one kind of it) becauſe many couet that which one alone would wholy
poſſeſſe. But it is cleane contrary in the true loue of the ſoule, wherein
is vprightnes and fellowſhip. For he that loueth vertue and a vertuous
man, is ſo farre from being iealous, that he would not onely haue
many companions, but wiſheth that all the men in the worlde were
like affected with him. The ſame may be ſaid of him that loueth God.
For he would haue al men his companions in that amitie, & iudgeth al
thoſe to be miſerable & wretched, which are eſtranged from it. As for
that friend, who would alone loue his friend, hee loueth not perfectly,
but rather loueth ſome thing in him that is profitable to himſelfe, as
namely to enioy alone whatſoeuer good he iudgeth to be in his friend:
which is the nature of the loue of concupiſcēce that looketh inwardly
to it ſelf. But true friendſhip looketh outwardly vpon him whom it loueth,
inſomuch that he which loueth doth die by litle and litle in himſelfe,
but that which he loueth, liueth in him. Wherfore S. Paul not only
knowing the nature of true loue, but alſo hauing felt by experience
the vehemencie therof,Galat. 2. 20. ſaith, I liue, yet not I now, but Christ liueth in me.
For he that truly loueth, careth no more for himſelfe, but for that thing
which he loueth.The higheſt degree of Loue. This degree of loue may be rightly called Rauiſhing,
in which the louer is ſo rapt out of himſelfe, that he ſorgetteth himſelfe
altogether, being wholly in him whom he loueth, and he whom he loueth
being in him.Knowledge requiſit in Loue. But as we ſaid in the beginding of our ſpeach, Good
is loued ſo far forth as it is knowen, & as we can vnderſtand what it is,
therfore it is neceſſary that the knowlege of it ſhould be ſo great, that
it be ſufficiēt to draw loue, which encreaſeth by thinking often of that
thing which is beloued. For thereby it is planted & rooted more deeply
in the heart. Wherefore there is nothing more contrary to loue then
forgetfulnes, the mother of ingratitude, eſpecially in our loue towards
God. For the more we thinke of him, the more do we call to minde his
goodnes towards vs: whereupon alſo our loue doeth encreaſe & is inſlamed
in vs towards him. And the greater and more burning our loue
is, the nearer are we vnited & linked vnto him. Therfore we may well
conclude, that we loue God according to that meaſure of knowledge
which we haue of him and of his benefits, and according as we conſider
and remember them: and if we want theſe things, we loue him not
as we ought. Now whē we are ioyned vnto the thing that is deare vnto
vs, according to the end of loue, we know it a great deale better, becauſe
we behold it neerer: and then are we ſaid to enioy it.
               
                  
Hereupon we may note two kinds of knowledge in loue:Two ſortes of knowledge in Loue. the one
firſt, the other laſt. By the firſt, we beleeue that thing to be good, which
we do know: & by the laſt we haue experience of it, which is of great
force in al loue: becauſe the fruit thereof is the fruition of the thing beloued.
This enioying, is the action of delight and of pleaſure, which is
not onely of the will, but alſo of the vnderſtanding, as it is in GOD.
And if wee take it ſo, Loue ſhall be as the meane betweene the firſt
knowledge which is onely begunne, and the laſt, which is full and
perfect: which conſiſteth in the vnion of him that loueth with him
that is beloued, and wherein the deſire that is in loue, and which afflicteth
and tormenteth the party louing, is alwayes aboliſhed, not the
loue it ſelfe: but being vnited, the greater number and the more excellent
it findeth the goods in regarde of thoſe which the firſt knowledge
affoorded, the more is it encreaſed and inflamed. Heereof it is
that we put a difference betweene Loue and the Deſire that is in loue,The difference betweene Loue and Deſire.
becauſe when wee loue a thing, wee deſire therewithall the fruition
and poſſeſſion thereof. And if there be delaie made, ſo that wee cannot
enioy the thing ſo ſoone as wee woulde, this delay tormenteth
vs by reaſon of the deſire, which preſſeth and pricketh vs forward to
get the poſſeſſion of it. But this torment commeth not of Loue, then
which there is nothing more ſweete and pleaſant, but of that deſire
which endeth in the vnion and fruition of the thing beloued. In the
meane time as long as this deſire laſteth, the loue from whence it proceedeth,
cauſeth the torment to be abated, yea it is not without ſome
pleaſure, eſpecially when there is ſome hope that at length it may bee
obtained and brought about. And the more confident this hope is,
the greater ſolace, yea the greater delight and pleaſure it bringeth
withall. For as loue hath great delight in vnion and fruition, ſo is it
not ſmall in hope, becauſe it propoundeth vnto vs the enioying of the
thing as being preſent, euen as if our imagination had already led vs
vnto it. Therefore foraſmuch as the hope of Gods children is certaine,
they are nowe beeing in this worlde as it were bleſſed in heauen, although
the deſire which they haue of greater goodes hoped for yet,
and to be enioyed in that full vnion and coniunction which they ſhal
haue with God in the life euerlaſting, cauſeth them to groane and to
ſigh continually with all the creatures,Rom. 8. 22. waiting for their full and perfect
deliuerance from all corruption and from this miſerable life. So
that wee can not doubt but that our loue towardes GOD will bee
farre greater and much more vehement, when as wee ſhall haue
this full fruition of God our ſoueraigne Good, and when wee ſhall
bee perfectly vnited vnto him by true Loue, not ſeeing him obſcurely

in a glaſſe onely,1. Cor. 13. 12. or knowing him in part, as we do nowe, but
beholding him face to face, and knowing him as we haue bin knowen
of him. For the knowledge which we haue nowe of him is yet but begunne,
in reſpect of that which we ſhall haue fully and wholly in that
glorious and immortall life. And then alſo wee ſhall be wholly ſwallowed
vp with his loue. By the ſame reaſon we may wel beleeue, that
the loue and charitie which the godly beare one towardes another in
this mortall life and pilgrimage, ſhall be a great deale more enflamed
in the other life, then euer it was in the holieſt and moſt perfect that
euer was amongſt them in this world. For the better men friends are,
the more ſtedfaſt and firme is their friendſhip, which among good
men is alwayes of long continuance: but contrariwiſe with the wicked.
And to ſpeake properly there is no friendſhip betwixt them,Of friendſhip betweene wicked men. but
onely ſome familiaritie and fellowſhip, or to ſpeake better, a conſpiracie
againſt right, and common peace. Howſoeuer it be, whether familiaritie
or fellowſhip, it is very ſhort and weake, becauſe it hath no
good foundation. Wherefore they can not long continue vnited and
knit together. We haue daily teſtimony heereof in worldly and carnall
men, who hauing made for a time profeſſion of very great friendſhip,
vpon a Yea or a Nay, aſſault one another euen vnto death.
But wee are not greatly to maruaile at it. For ſeeing their amitie and
vnion is ill grounded, as it cannot be of long continuance, ſo they can
receiue no great ioy or delight. But it is contrary in the friendſhip of
good men, as that which hath a farre better foundation, namely, God
and his word.What foundation the friendſhip of good men hath. Wherefore if the better men that friendes be, the greater
their friendſhip is and more firme euen in this world, no doubt but
it will be greater, more burning and conſtant in that bleſſed and eternall
life, which wee expect, where we ſhal be much better men and
more perfect then wee are heere, better linked one with an other, as
alſo we ſhall be altogither a great deale more conioyned with and in
God.1. Corint. 13. 8▪
                   For this cauſe Saint Paul had good reaſon to ſay, that Loue
doeth neuer fallaway, though prophecyings be aboliſhed, or tongues ceaſe,
or knowledge vaniſh away. Wherefore in this reſpect hee concludeth,
that loue is the greateſt of theſe three, Faith, Hope, and Loue. But wee
haue ſpoken enough of the nature of Loue for the ſubiect of our diſcourſe
of the naturall hiſtorie of man. Nowe I thinke it will not bee
vnprofitable, if wee ſay ſomewhat of other affections that are neere
neighbours vnto Loue and ioyned with it, as of fauour, reuerence, honour
and pitie, which haue ſuch good or ill qualities in man, as the nature
of that loue hath which bringeth them foorth, as ASER will giue
vs to vnderſtand.
            
            
               
               Of fauour, reuerence, and of honour: of their nature and effectes: of thoſe
outward ſignes whereby they ſhew themſelues: of pitie and compaſſion, and
how agreeable it is to the nature of man. Chap. 53.
               ASER. I cannot marueile enough at the drowſines of many great
ſpirits, who are ſo delighted with the vaine dreames of their own
fancies, that they employ all the giftes and graces of their minde, to
lift vp euen vnto the heauens the pleaſures that are receiued in the
loue of humane and mortall things, eſpecially in the fruites of concupiſcence,
and yet the leaſt of them cannot be gotten without a thouſand
troubleſome diſcommodities, beſides that they leaue alwayes in
man an inſatiable deſire of them. I would aske of them gladly, when
the moſt voluptuous man of them all, hath not, euen in the middeſt of
his pleaſures, ſighed and bene ſubiect to paſſions, deſiring ſome other
thing beſides: or when there was euer founde betweene twaine that
loued ech other corruptly, that conformitie of wils, that communication
of thoughts, thoſe continual agreements, & that concord of life,
which is neceſſary in all true loue: eſpecially ſeeing it is a hard matter,
yea impoſſible to ſee a wicked man, that is not daily at variance with
himſelfe, inſomuch that if he could leaue himſelfe, as two men forſake
eche other, there are many, who vpon euery occaſion woulde leaue
themſelues to take another body,A ſimilitude ſhewing the vanity of the loue of worldly delights. or another ſoule. And as when one
being very deſirous to eate, and thereupon falling aſleepe, dreameth
that he is feeding and yet is not ſatisfied, becauſe it is not a dreame of
meate that will content the ſenſe and appetite, which ſeeketh to bee
appeaſed, but ſubſtantiall meate it ſelfe: euen ſo it falleth out when
men dreaming in ſpirite, which is as pernicious a thing as the ſleepe of
death, giue themſelues by a certaine natural inclination which they
haue to the loue of Good, to ſeeke for the beautie, contentation & delight
thereof vpon earth, when they are not to be found in the whole
worlde. As for their ſhadowes, which in ſome ſort appeare in corporall
and earthly things, and in thoſe delights which proceede of them,
they doe not feede their mindes with ſound and good thinges, but rather
abuſe and deceiue them. Therefore we ought to take great heed,
that wee ſet not our heart and affection rather vpon thoſe miſerable,
corruptible and deceiueable pleaſures, wherein worldlings and carnal
men doe glory, then vpon that great and infinite brightneſſe, of
which the ſunne is but a very ſmall beame, and vpon thoſe ſingular,
bleſſed, and heauenly trueths, which the worde of life doeth teach
vs, and which are the onely true and ſolide meates that can content

and ſatisfie our ſpirits eternally.
               It is certaine, that nature mooueth vs to ſet our affection chiefly vpon
ſome one thing rather then vpon another: foraſmuch as loue is
a gift beſtowed by the Creatour vpon all natures at the time of their
birth. Nowe vnto Loue many other affections are ioyned, among
which Fauour commonly hath the firſt place.What ſauour is. This affection is a
kinde of good will and liking, which ſpringeth from a iudgement
conceiued of ſome Good, ſo that wee may call it a loue begunne.
For in this iudgement of Good, wee eſteeme well of him, towardes
whome our fauour is extended, and iudge him woorthie of
ſome good thing, and by this meanes wee beginne to loue him.
Wherefore although fauour may bee without true loue, yet loue
cannot bee without fauour. Notwithſtanding, when wee fauour
one before wee loue him, euen then wee enter into the way that
leadeth to loue him. And for the leaſt ſhadowe of loue in our heart
towardes another, wee fauour him: as wee ſee it in thoſe that are
linked vnto vs by ſome degree eyther of conſanguinitie, or of affinitie,
or by meanes of ſome acquaintance and knowledge. Now
foraſmuch as GOD loueth vs, he beareth vs fauour alſo, although
not in the regarde or for the iudgement of any good,Why God fauoureth vs. which hee
ſeeth in vs or in our corrupted nature: but becauſe of the loue hee
beareth vs in Ieſus Chriſt, his welbeloued, in whome by his grace
hee hath made vs acceptable to himſelfe. Therefore this fauour
bringeth with it the perfection of all Good vnto vs. For what can
hee want that is fauoured of God, who can doe all things? This
fauour which God beareth vnto vs, is called grace and bleſſing in
the holy Scriptures, which comprehendeth all thoſe benefites which
wee receiue of his goodneſſe. For they proceede all of this fauour,
and this fauour of the loue hee beareth vs in Ieſus Chriſt. Reuerence
alſo commonly accompanieth loue,Of reuerence. whereby we vnderſtand
an affection proceeding from the iudgement of ſome great good,
that hurteth vs not. For if wee thought it woulde hurt vs, there
woulde bee feare ioyned with hatred, and not true reuerence. For
although there is euermore in all reuerence, ſome feare mingled
with ſhamefaſtneſſe, neuertheleſſe this feare bringeth no hatred
with it. This reuerence is bredde in vs by comparing the greatneſſe
of another with our ſmalneſſe, as if wee admired thoſe excellent
thinges that are in him. For as the heart doeth enlarge it
ſelfe through the conſideration and opinion it hath of it owne
greatneſſe, ſo doeth it reſtraine and cloſe vp it ſelfe vpon the reputation
and conceipt of another mans greatneſſe, ſo it bee good,

or at leaſtwiſe without hurt. Therefore if wee compare our greatneſſe
with ſome other mans that is farre greater, we know our owne
ſmalneſſe thereby.
               Whereupon it commeth to paſſe,The caauſe of humilitie. that we doe not onely eſteeme
woorſe, but euen diſlike and contemne our ſelues: by which
meanes wee become more humble, whereas before wee were
puffed vp with pride through the opinion of our greatneſſe, of
which wee haue experience as often as wee compare our ſelues
with GOD, and lift vp our ſpirite euen to the conſideration of
his diuine maieſtie, comparing that with our baſeneſſe. For then
beeing rauiſhed with admiration of his highneſſe, and infinite greatneſſe,
wee honour and reuerence him by reaſon of his power, vnto
which wee ioyne alſo his wiſedome and goodneſſe. And according
to that reuerence wee beare towardes him, wee reuerence thoſe alſo
in whome wee ſee the ſame giftes and graces ſhine. For power breedeth
reuerence, and goodneſſe loue. Wherfore if we iudge, that power
and greatnes are ioyned with goodnes and tempered therewithall, we
ſhal not onely be moued to reuerence, but this reuerence alſo will engender
loue, as it is in the hearts of the faithful towards God: becauſe
that as they conſider him almighty and the greateſt of all, ſo they behold
him moſt wiſe and moſt good. But as I haue already touched, if
we thinke that this greatneſſe or power either is or wilbe hurtful vnto
vs, there is another kind of reuerence, which only hath feare that breedeth
hatred, as it is in them that conſider the power of God only, & the
rigour of his iudgement, not meditating of his clemencie and benignitie.
Therefore as the great excellency, which in all things appeareth in
God, eſpecially in power, wiſdome and goodnes, induceth vs to reuerence
him aright:A good leſſon for princes. ſo if we would haue men to honour & reuerence vs,
there muſt bee excellent vertues in vs, in which men may ſee the image
of God to ſhine, that ſo he may be honoured & reuerenced in vs
& we in him. For therein conſiſteth that true honour, & that true reuerence
which we ought to ſeek for & to deſire. And although reuerence
hath reſpect principally to the diuine maieſtie (at the name of which
euery knee ought to bow) and to thoſe ſuperiorities which are images
thereof, vnto which they that are of leſſe degree, eſtate and condition,
ought to giue honor,Reuerence requiſite in true friendſhip. & ſeruice, neuertheles mutual reuerence is neceſſary
in al true friendſhip, aſwel in reſpect of ye party beloued, as of him
that loueth. And indeed we ſee howe that true friendes reuerence and
honour one another, and all becauſe of that good opinion which they
haue conceiued eche of others deſert. Concerning this word Honour,
it is properly a token, whereby we teſtifie that we iudge him to bee

endued with vertue whome we honour. Wherefore as the conſideration
of vertue breedeth honour,Of honour and of maieſtie. ſo honour breedeth reuerence, and
then honour and reuerence breede maieſtie, which is the higheſt degree
of honour, and encreaſeth continually according as thoſe vertues
and good things excell, which induce vs to honour them. For if
the vertues be meane, wee honour them with a more ſimple honour,
if greater, we adde thereunto reuerence: and then maieſtie is that honour
which can be giuen to the greateſt of all. And as this affection of
honour is in our heart, wee ſhew it foorth by diuers outwarde ſignes,
whereby we ſignifie and teſtifie, that we acknowledge their greatnes
and excellencie whom wee honour, and that we ſubmit our ſelues
thereunto. Therefore the more humble and modeſt a man is, the readier
he will be to yeelde reuerence and honour to them vnto whom it
is due. Contrariwiſe, the more drunken a man is with the loue of himſelfe,
the more he will preſume of himſelfe: and the greater this preſumption
is in him, the leſſe wil he deſire that another ſhould be more
excellent then himſelfe, and wilbe the hardlier perſwaded to beleeue
it is ſo. Therefore he will hardly yeelde to giue him honour and reuerence.
But Saint Paul admoniſheth the children of God to goe before
one another in giuing honour,
                  Rom. 12. 16. 
                  and to be of like affection one towardes another,
not being high minded, neither wiſe in themſelues, that is to ſay, arrogant
and ſelfe-weening, preſuming very much of themſelues. So that as
pride or humilitie aboundeth in vs, God, our ſuperiours and friendes
ſhalbe more or leſſe honoured by vs. As for thoſe ſignes, whereby we
teſtifie this honour and reuerence, we are to note that they are many,
according to the diuerſities of nations and countries, and of their maners.Of the ſignes of honour and of reuerence.
Moſt commonly we vſe to bend the knee, in teſtimonie that we
abaſe and ſubmit our ſelues to thoſe vnto whom we doe this honour.
Likewiſe we vncouer the head, which is a token of ſeruitude, according
to the cuſtome of the Grecians and of the Romanes. There are
many other ſuch like ſignes, as to riſe vp, to giue place, to accompanie,
to ſalute, and infinite others, which would be too long to rehearſe,
and without profite: all which we call bearing of honour and reuerence,
or yeelding of reuerence. Wherefore although God looketh
chiefly to that which is within, and not to that which is without, yet
will he haue vs by externall ſignes to declare that honour, which we
owe and beare vnto him, and by them to yeeld him homage. Thus he
requireth that we ſhould teſtifie our faith and our loue towards him,
by confeſſion of mouth and by all good workes, that there may be alwayes
an agreement betweene the body and the ſoule, betweene the
heart, mouth and hands, and betweene the workmaſter that worketh,

and his inſtruments and woorkes, to the ende that the one may bee
knowen by the other. For if the outwarde ſignes agree not with the
heart, we make them falſe witneſſes, as the tongue is when it lieth.
For they beare witneſſe to that which is not: which is right hypocriſie,
diſpleaſing God and men. Therefore we muſt beware of this vice,
and take heed that we make no other outward ſhew, then will ſtande
with the affection of the heart.
               Now hauing ſpoken of honour, reuerence and maieſtie, by reaſon
of that coniunction which they haue with loue, as alſo of fauour and
grace,Of Mercie and Compaſsion. it remaineth now that we ſhould ſpeake ſomewhat of Mercie,
and compaſſion, ſeeing that alſo hath great agreement with loue.
Mercie then is a griefe conceiued in our heart in reſpect of ſome euil,
which (as we thinke) is befallen one that hath not deſerued it: and
this we call alſo pitie and compaſſion. Now becauſe this affection moueth
vs to aide, ſuccour, and to doe good to them that are afflicted, as
alſo to pardon ſuch as haue offended vs, therefore Mercie is often taken
in the holy ſcriptures for ayde, ſuccour, fauour, grace, beneficence,
good will, benefiting, friendſhip, benignitie, as alſo for the affection
and inclination of the heart to doe good and to ſuccour all them that
haue neede of helpe, and this proceedeth of charitie. Therfore Saint
Paul ſaith,Rom. 12. 8, 9, 10. 
                  He that ſheweth mercie, let him doe it with cheerefulneſſe. Let
loue be without diſſimulation. Abhorre that which is euill, and cleaue to
that which is good. Be affectioned to loue one another with brotherly loue:
not ſlouthfull to doe ſeruice: feruent in ſpirite, ſeruing the Lorde: distributing
to the neceſſities of the Saintes: giuing your ſelues to hospitalitie.
Whereby he admoniſheth vs, that all the ſuccours which we giue to
others, ought to proceede from a ſincere and cheerefull affection of
the heart, which ſhould prouoke vs to perfourme the ſame: and this
cannot be in vs without the affection of pitie, of mercie and of compaſſion.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
In regard whereof the name of almes is taken from a worde,
which in Greeke ſignifieth Mercy: and therefore alſo almes ſignifieth
aſmuch as mercie, or that ſuccour that is done of mercy and compaſſion,
wherewith we are affected in reſpect of the miſerie of our like.
Whereupon it followeth, that as euery one is of a more tender heart,
ſo he is more mercifull: as contrariwiſe hardneſſe of heart extinguiſheth
mercie and compaſſion. As for this word Compaſſion, it ſignifieth
aſmuch as alike compaſſion, that is, a like ſenſe and feeling of euil
and of griefe, as if we our ſelues ſuffered that which we ſee others endure,
by reaſon of that coniunction which we ought to haue one with
another,1. Cor. 12. as members of one and the ſame body, among which there is
ſuch agreement that if one ſuffer all feele it, and ſo all are carefull for

it. Therefore it is written in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, that brotherly
loue continueth.Heb. 13. 3. 
                  Bee not (ſaith he) forgetfull to lodge ſtrangers. Remember
them that are in bondes, as though ye were bound with them: and
them that are in affliction, as if ye were alſo afflicted in the bodie. Wherefore
we may well conclude, that this affection of mercie is very neceſſary
for men, yea as ſweet, as milde, and as profitable an affection as any
can be amongſt them, which they haue receiued of God for their
mutual ſuccour and conſolation, in the midſt of ſo many miſeries as
commonly happen in the life of man.Math. 5. 7. And this hee commaundeth
vs expreſly in infinite places of his woorde,Luke 6. 36. that the image of his vnſpeakeable
mercy might ſhine in vs by our mercy towards others.Prou. 21. 21. Hitherto
we haue ſpoken of man,Iam. 2. 13. as of man and of thoſe affections that
are moſt humane in him, now others remaine, which often make him
more brutiſh, then any ſauage beaſt that is. For ſeeing they come of the
opinion of euill, they prouoke and ſtirre him vp greatly, making him
marueilous wilde and vntamed. To the end therefore that we may enter
into the diſcourſe of this matter, we will firſt ſee what Offending
and Offence is in the heart and ſoule, & conſider what degrees it hath,
and what good or euill may be in this affection. This we ſhall learne
of thee, AMANA.
            
            
               Of offence in the heart and ſoule: of the degrees of offence, & of the good and
euil that may be in this affection: of contempt that is bred of it, and of mockery,
which followeth contempt. Chap. 54.
               AMANA. The Philoſophers haue ſet downe foure cauſes of al the
troubles of the ſoule, from whence all the reſidue proceed, & into
which they returne and haue their end:Foure cauſes of all the troubles of the ſoule. namely, immoderate deſire,
vnbrideled ioy, vnmeaſurable griefe, and extreame feare. Theſe, as they
ſay, proceede through imprudence or ignorance of the minde, and
puſillanimitie of heart, from the opinion of good or euill things, preſent
or to come, which we imagine to be in the things of this worlde,
being vnperfect and of ſmall continuance. Now foraſmuch as theſe
foure cauſes are the ſprings of all vices and ſinnes, into which men
plunge themſelues in this life, they are called perturbations of the
ſoule, which if they be not maſtred by reaſon, doe ſo carie the ſoule
hither and thither, that in the ende they conſtraine the reaſonable
power thereof to giue ouer all authoritie and libertie, and to obey
the luſtes of the ſenſuall and vnreaſonable Will. Nowe deſire and
ioy, they commonly accompanie the periſhing goodes of the bodie.
For they are of that nature, that they inflame the ſoule with

an inſatiable luſt, inſo much that the obtaining of one thing is the beginning
of a new and vehement deſire of hauing another.The nature of corporall goods. And the enioying
of them beſotteth the ſpirite with a ſugred poiſon of fained delight
and pleaſure, vnder the yoke of which it eaſily ſuffreth it ſelfe to
be ouercome, to be bound and to be gouerned, As for griefe & feare,
although they alſo be not farre remooued from ſuch falſe and vading
goods of the body, yet for the moſt part, they reſpect thoſe aduerſities
and miſeries, which in our opinion wee iudge to be in the want and
priuation of thoſe goods. For they fill the ſoule with trouble and diſquietneſſe,
as ſhe that thinketh her eſtate to be moſt miſerable, if ſhe
obtaine not the ende of her carnall and inordinate affections. So that
if the body endure neuer ſo little, ſhee caſteth foorth ſtrange cries
and complaintes. And although the bodie ſuffer nothing at all,
yet is ſhee alwayes in extreme feare, leaſt ſome euill ſhoulde befall
it.
               But theſe very paſſions may bee diuided into good and badde.How the paſsions may be good.
For honeſt deſire, modeſtioy, and moderate griefe and feare, are naturally
in vs, for the preſeruation of our being. Yea all theſe affections
are endued with the qualities of commendable vertues, if they reſpect
the ſoueraigne Good of man, as we may learne by our former
ſpeeches touching this matter, which were chiefly of good affections,
and of ſuch as are moſt natural in man. Therefore following our matter
ſubiect, we muſt from hencefoorth conſider of a great number of
other affections of the heart, which for the moſt part make men more
beaſtlike then the very beaſts themſelues, that are voyde of all vnderſtanding
and reaſon, yea then the wildeſt beaſtes that are. All which
affections take their beginning from the opinion of euill, as theſe that
are good proceed from the opinion of Good. For the feare of euil doth
wonderfully prouoke a man, & when he is touched therwith, he waxeth
very ſauage and wilde. Now the firſt ſting and byting of euill is offence,
by reaſon that the heart is offended, euen as when one ruſheth
againſt a thing & hurteth himſelf.Of offence. Therfore by offence we vnderſtand
properly a certaine griefe of the ſoule & of the heart, which commeth
through ſome touch of euill that agreeth not to our nature. This firſt
ſence of griefe is like to the firſt pricking of ones bodie: and is contrarie
to the firſt pleaſure, which we receiue of ſome Good that is offered
vnto vs, and is agreeable to our nature. So that as this pleaſure,
when it is confirmed, is turned into loue, ſo out of this firſt feeling
of griefe, which I call offence, the other affections that are
ioyned with griefe doe budde foorth afterwarde, namely, anger,
hatred, enuie, indignation, reuenge, crueltie and ſuch like. The euill

that may offend vs,What euill may offend vs. is whatſoeuer we iudge to be contrary to vs and
to our nature, as well in regard of the body as of the ſoule. For as the
bodie is offended by thoſe euils which trouble the harmonie and temperature
thereof, and which bring griefe and hurt vnto it: ſo is it with
the ſoule, and with all the powers, ſenſes and affections thereof. For
ſhe may be offended in her imagination and fantaſie, in her reaſon, in
her will, and in her affections. Nowe becauſe euery one followeth his
affections, or his natural inclination, and not the right rule and iudgement
of reaſon, it is an eaſie matter to offend and diſpleaſe many, and
that in many things, but not ſo eaſie to pleaſe them. For there is but
one onely reaſon, or at leaſtwiſe it hath no great diuerſitie in it. But
the naturall diſpoſitions of men are infinite, and wonderful diuers and
diſagreeing, yea cleane contrarie one to another. And becauſe there
is nothing in all the life of man, in which both good and euill are not
mingled together, or at leaſtwiſe ſome ſhew of them, therefore alſo
there is nothing that may not be taken both wayes,Why men are ſo eaſily offended. eyther this or that
way. Whereupon that which pleaſeth ſome, diſpleaſeth others: beſide
that the want of the true knowledge of things, and of examining
throughly what good or euill is in euery one of them, is the cauſe of
this errour that beguileth men ſo. But howſoeuer it be, we ought to
be very warie that we offend no man by doing euill, and by turning
aſide from the dueties of true charitie. And that which offendeth, is ſo
much the more grieuous,What offences are moſt grieuous. as it pearceth more inwarde and deepe into
the thing offended. For the chiefeſt part of any thing is that which is
moſt inward. Wherefore that which entreth in ſo farre toucheth the
quicke indeede, and ſo offendeth and hurteth. For this cauſe that offence
and hurt is very grieuous: but thoſe offences that are in the will,
are greateſt of all. As for thoſe that are in the reaſon, they are not ſo
grieuous: and thoſe that are in the other ſenſes, eſpecially in the ſenſes
of the bodie, are leſſe then they. Nay, we thinke not our ſelues offended
at all, if our will be not offended. Therefore we will ſuffer many
things done by ſome, which we will not abide in others, according
as we eſteeme them to be friendes or enemies, and as wee are well or
ill affectioned towards them. Likewiſe many things pleaſe vs that are
done or vttered by our ſelues, which would offend vs if they were ſpoken
or done by others. And foraſmuch as there is no offence but
where there is ſenſe and feeling, therefore they are ſooneſt offended
and moſt difficult to pleaſe,Of the nature of mankind, & how hardly it is pleaſed. that are moſt tender and delicate both of
body and ſoule, whether they be ſo naturally, or through cuſtome, or
of weakneſſe. And ſurely amongſt all liuing creatures man is moſt teſtie,
and can ſuffer leaſt. For hee can beare with nothing, and himſelfe

is intolerable to all. Wherefore if all men generally be ſo harde to
ſerue, no marueile if there be nothing ſo well, ſo iuſtly and holily
ſpoken that can pleaſe a whole people, or a great multitude. But
ſome are ſo accuſtomed to contemne all things, that they are offended
at euery thing, and grieued without any iudgement or diſtinction.
Yea there are ſome to be found amongſt them, that thinke it a
poynt of great wiſedome to doe ſo, and to like of nothing howe well
ſoeuer it be done. Nowe when men are ledde with ſuch a frowarde
and peeuiſh affection, they are very carefull to enquire diligently into
all things, but with an vniuſt iudgement, to ſee if they can finde any
thing to condemne: thinking thereby to ſhewe their great witte,
which notwithſtanding none will commend but fooles and ignorant
perſons. For they muſt needes be ſo who admire ſuch a kinde of people,
whereas they ought thereby to be moued not onely to deſpiſe
them, but alſo to hate and condemne them. For as we vſe to ſpeake
in common prouerbe. That it is an eaſier matter to reprehende then to
imitate, ſo it is eaſier for euery one to condemne all, or to commende
all indifferently, then to diſcerne aright betweene the good
and the euill, and to giue a good iudgement thereof: becauſe there
is none ſo ignoraunt, or blockiſh, or malicious, which cannot doe
the firſt with eaſe, but the laſt is not ſo eaſily done but by men of good
wittes and vpright of heart. Nowe hauing ſaide, that offence is the
firſt ſenſe and feeling of euill, let vs ſhewe that it is not without certaine
degrees, by which it aſcendeth vp higher. The loweſt degree
then that is in it, is ſimply to turne aſide from that which diſpleaſeth
it:Of the degrees of offence. and this degree may bee called Diſlike or Trouble. The
next aboue that, is when offence waxeth hote in it ſelfe, and kindleth
the heart in ſuch ſort, that all the body is mooued therewith. And
when offence is as it were ſhut vp, that it cannot range at will, then
it turneth into rage, and offereth violence to it ſelfe, extending it
ſelfe euen vnto thoſe that haue not offended it at all. For it is ſtirred
vp and waxeth ſharpe in it ſelfe, and by this meane it encreaſeth
more and more continually. So that in the ende it is like to a madde
dogge, which byteth as many as it meeteth withall. And although
this affection doeth then teſtifie ſufficiently, that it ſauoureth wholly
of the corrupt nature of man, neuertheleſſe if it were well ordered
and did not exceede meaſure, it were commendable, ſo that wee
might iuſtly place it amongeſt the affections of nature beeing ſound,
which ought to bee the ſeedes of vertues in vs.How offence may be wel
                        •
                      vſed. For God hath giuen
it vnto man, to the ende he ſhoulde preſently withdrawe himſelfe, as
ſoone as hee perceiueth any euill, euen at the firſt taſte and touch of it,

that ſo it may goe no farther, leaſt through cuſtome he growe into
a liking of euill, and afterwarde followe it with might and mayne.
For if he ſodainly retire, as if he touched a ſerpent and feared to be
bitten, he will depart ſo farre from it that it cannot hurt him: but
if he ſtay in it and like it neuer ſo little, hee cannot withdrawe himſelfe
in ſuch due time, but that hee ſhall feele ſome hurt thereby. For
euill is like to thornes, which a man cannot come neere vnto, or handle
them, but hee ſhall bee pricked: as likewiſe no man can touch
pitch and not be defiled therewith.The remedy to cure offences. But the remedie to cure offence
ſo farre foorth as it is vicious, is the moderation of the heart, whereby
it becommeth ſo deepe and ſo well tempered, that it is able with
eaſe to ſwallow vp and to digeſt thoſe troubles and offences, which
others can in no wiſe beare or endure. But nowe that we know what
this affection is, we may eaſily conceiue howe it breedeth contempt.
For contempt is an offence and diſpleaſure conceiued of ſome euill
that cannot hurt,What contempt is. and thereupon is eſteemed to be vile and abiect. So
that it proceedeth of an euill whereof wee are not afraide. For we vſe
not to deſpiſe them whome we feare, but them onely of whome we
make ſmall account, becauſe they haue not abilitie to hurt vs howſoeuer
they want no good will. Therefore although wee deſire not
to doe him good whome wee deſpiſe, yet wee will not hurt him, if
there bee in vs but onely a ſimple contempt of him. Wee thinke
it enough for vs to mocke him, and to ſhew what ſmall account wee
make of him, and what ſmall regard is to be had vnto him.
               Heereof it is that proude perſons are ſuch great deſpiſers and mockers
of others. For ſeeing they eſteeme of none but of themſelues,
it cannot bee but that they diſdaine others, and ſo conſequently
mocke them.Of mockery. For deriſion and mockerie followe contempt, and
they are expreſſed by manie outwarde ſignes, and by diuers kindes
of behauiour, which oftentimes are hardlier borne withall and ſuffered,
then greater euils and iniuries which men may receiue: as
indeede they are blowes and woundes, which pearce euen vnto
the heart and ſoule. Therfore contempt and mockery engender commonly
anger in them that cannot digeſt them with modeſtie and
patience: as the true ſeruants of GOD doe, and followers of Ieſus
Chriſt, who ſuſtained ſo patiently all the contempts and reproches
that were offered vnto him, that no euill worde or voyce euer
came out of his mouth, whereby hee gaue any ſignification or ſigne
of wrath,Eſay. 53. 7. but was alwayes quiet and dumbe, as it were a ſheepe before
her ſhearer, according as Eſaias had foretolde. Which ought
to be vnto vs an example of all modeſty and patience, to the ende we

may know how to bridle our anger and wrath in time conceiued againſt
all them that offend, contemne and mocke vs. But let vs now
conſider of other affections, which we ſaid were ioined with grief, and
followed offence. And firſt let vs learne what anger is, what are the
nature and effects of it, and for what vſe it may ſerue man: and this we
ſhall vnderſtand of thee, ARAM.
            
            
               Of anger, and of the vehemencie and violence thereof: of the difference
that is betweene anger and rancour: of the affection of reuenge that
accompanieth them: of the motions of the heart in anger, with the effects
thereof: wherefore this affection is giuen to man, and to what vſe it
may ſerue him. Chap. 55.
               ARAM.Diuers opinions of the Philoſophers touching the affections. There hath beene alwayes great contentions and diſputions
amongſt th
                     •
                   beſt learned of all the Philophers, to knowe
whether the affections and paſſions of the heart and ſoule were neceſſary
to pricke forward and to helpe men to the effects of vertues, or otherwiſe
hurtful and contrary vnto them. Ariſtotle and all the Peripatecians
mainteyned, that all the affections of the ſoule were not onely
naturall, but giuen alſo by nature to great purpoſe: as among
the reſt, anger and choler, which ſerued for a pricke to prouoke
and ſtirre vp fortitude and generoſitie. And becauſe vertue was a
habite of that which is good and comely, yea the mediocritie of the
affections, therefore it ought not in any ſort to bee without theſe motions,
neither yet to be too much ſubiect to paſſion. For the priuation
and want of deſire, would haue made the ſoule vnmoueable and without
cheerefulnes, euen in honeſt things: as ouer vehement deſires altogether
trouble it, and ſet it as it were beſide it ſelfe. The Academikes
and Stoikes contended harde againſt this opinion, alleadging
manie great arguments againſt it: as this among the reſt: That all
is eyther vertue or vice, and that there is no meane betweene
them: that one of theſe cannot bee the cauſe of the other, ſeeing
they are directly and in all thinges contrarie, hauing nothing common
betweene them, and therefore that vertue neuer proceeded
of vice. And concerning Fortitude and Generoſitie, which were
bred in the heart by mature conſultation & election of reaſon, that theſe
vertues could by no meanes bee holpen by anger or choler, but rather
troubled and hindered in their actions, becauſe ſuch paſſions
did neuer vſe any conſultation, but performed all things inconſideratly
and at aduenture. There are many yet to bee founde amongeſt vs,
that woulde take part with either opinion of theſe Philoſophers,

but vnleſſe they ſtudie throughly the booke of nature, and haue the
ſpirite of God for their maſter and teacher, they ſhall neuer be able to
yeeld cauſes and certaine reaſons of their reſolution, nor of the wonderfull
effectes wrought by the powers of the ſoule, as we may learne
by the ſequele of our ſpeech.
               Firſt then we muſt know,What anger is. that Anger is a vehement motion of the
heart, becauſe it ſeeth thoſe good things which it hath, to be contemned,
wheras it iudgeth them not to be ſuch as ought to be ſo lightly ſet
by. And herein it thinks it ſelfe deſpiſed. For euery one valueth himſelf
according to the opinion of thoſe good things which he iudgeth to
be in himſelf: therfore there is no anger which commeth not of offence.
But all offence is not anger.How it differeth from offence. For offence is more general, & anger more
ſpeciall, albeit they are commonly confounded and taken one for another.
But there are many things that diſlike vs, with which notwithſtanding
we are not angrie, becauſe there is no contempt of vs ioyned
with them. For oftentimes we are grieued by thoſe things that haue
neither ſenſe nor vnderſtanding, when ſome thing happeneth againſt
our minde and offendeth vs: and it ſeemeth that wee are prouoked
to anger againſt them, but this is not anger properly, ſeeing
there is nothing but ſimple offence without contempt of vs. Alſo it
falleth out often, that our blood is heated, and our heart pricked forward
and inflamed to doe ſome great worke, for the performance
whereof it is requiſite that it ſhould be much moued, but this is only a
kindling of the heart without anger and offence, becauſe it is not ſtirred
vp thereunto by any euill. But when a man letteth looſe the
bridle vnto this affection in ſuch ſort, that hee accuſtomes himſelfe
thereunto,Of rancour. this vſe and cuſtome turneth it into rancour, which is an inueterate
anger that hath taken roote in the heart. Nowe the better
that a man thinkes of himſelfe, the ſooner hee is offended at euery
thing, and the readier he is to bee moued to anger, as taking himſelfe
to bee deſpiſed. This is a very vehement and violent affection.
For it ouerthroweth very often the whole minde and ſoule,The violence of anger. ſo that it
forgetteth all right, iuſtice and equitie, all good will and amitie, and
pardoneth not, no not women or children, neither yet kinsfolkes or
friends Therfore Salomon ſaith,Prou. 27. 4. 
                  That anger is cruel, and wrath is raging:
but who can ſtand before enuie?
                  Ecclus. 8. And Eccleſiaſticus, Contend not with a cholerick
man: for he eſteemeth the ſheading of blood, as a matter of nothing &
hee will fall vpon thee in a place where there ſhall be none to helpe thee.
To bee ſhort,The fruites of anger. after that anger hath once got the bridle at will, the
whole mind and iudgement is ſo blinded and caried headlong, that an
angry man thinks of nothing but of reuenge, inſomuch yt he forgetteth

himſelfe, and careth not what he doeth, or what harme wil light vpon
himſelfe in ſo doing, ſo that he may be auenged. And many times hee
will murmure againſt heauen and earth, and againſt all the creatures,
becauſe they are not mooued to reuenge his quarell: yea, which is
worſe, he deſpiteth God himſelfe and waxeth wroth againſt him, blaſpheming
him, becauſe he taketh not pleaſure in ſeruing his reuenging
minde. Which is as much as if he ſhould ſpette againſt heauen: and
therefore it is very neceſſarie, that his ſpettle, proceeding from ſuch
a ſtinking mouth, ſhoulde returne and fall backe vpon his owne
face. And when this paſſion of anger is verie vehement, it leadeth
a man euen to furie and rage, and procureth vnto him not onely manie
diſeaſes, but oftentimes death it ſelfe. Therefore although wee
knewe not what hurt this affection doeth to the ſoule, yet the euill
which it bringeth to the bodie, ought to bee of ſufficient force
to turne vs from it.What effect it hath in the body. For it is a vice that hath woonderfull effectes in
the bodie, and ſuch as are verie vnbeſeeming a man. For firſt of all
when the heart is offended, the blood boyleth round about it, and
the heart is ſwollen and puffed vp: whereupon followeth a continuall
panting and trembling of the heart and breaſt. And when theſe
burning flames and kindled ſpirites are aſcended vp from the heart
vnto the braine, then is anger come to his perfection. From hence
commeth change of countenance, ſhaking of the lippes and of the
whole viſage, ſtopping of ſpeech and ſuch other terrible lookes to
beholde, more meete for a beaſt then for a man. For this cauſe the
Philoſopher that counſelled an angry man to beholde his face in a
glaſſe, had reaſon ſo to doe. For hee that beholdeth his owne face
and countenance when he is in choler, ſhoulde finde matter enough
to be appeaſed. Now becauſe anger is a griefe proceeding of the contempt
of thoſe good thinges that are in a man, who thinketh that it
ought not to be ſo, therefore hee deſireth to ſhew that they are not
lightly to be eſteemed of, which he ſuppoſeth may be done this way,
by making his power knowne, eſpecially in hurting. Whereupon
this appetite of reuenge is engendered,The fountaine of the appetite of reuenge. which is common to anger
with offence, hatred and enuie: ſo that anger is alwayes mingled with
ſorow and with deſire of reuenge. And indeede reuenge is a motion
of the heart, whereby it doeth not onely turne aſide and withdrawe
it ſelfe from that which offendeth, but laboureth withall eyther to
repell it, or to ouercome and vanquiſh it, and to puniſh him that is
the cauſe of it. Wherefore we may note herein two motions, as there
are two reſpectes, namely, the one to eſchew the euill that offendeth,
and the other to purſue with great violence him that is the authour

thereof. Hereof it is, that ſome when they are angry become pale,
becauſe the blood retireth vnto the heart:The cauſes of looking pale and red. and theſe are moſt couragious,
and moſt dangerous. Others waxe redde, becauſe the blood
aſcendeth vp to the head: therefore theſe are not ſo full of ſtomacke,
nor ſo much to be feared, in reſpect of thoſe cauſes, which were ſhewed
before when we ſpake of Feare. But howſoeuer the difference is,
yet in anger the blood doeth not wholly goe backe vnto the heart, as
it doeth in feare and ſorow, but diſperſeth it ſelfe outwardly. For the
heart is as if he ſtroue to goe out of his hoſte or campe, not vnlike to
a Prince or Captaine that is deſirous to marche forwarde in battell aray:
whereupon hee ſendeth foorth the blood and the ſpirites, as his
men of warre, to repell the enemie: which is not done without great
mouing and tumult, and much ſtirring in the heart, which ſetteth
it on fire, and inflameth the blood and ſpirites.
               Whereupon it followeth, that by reaſon of this motion of the
blood, and of the confuſion of the ſpirites, which enſue thereof, the
actions and motions of all the members of the bodie are troubled.
But the braine is chiefly offended,How anger troubleth the braine. becauſe that alſo is heated by
the inflamed blood, and by thoſe burning ſpirites which mount vp
thither, by whoſe motion it is ſtirred vp and diſturbed, as alſo by
the ſinewes which come euen to the heart. For howe hote ſoeuer
the heart and breaſt are or may bee, yet man abideth alwayes ſtill
and quiet, if the heate pearce not vp to the braine. For it falleth
out herein as it doeth with a drunken bodie, who is not ſaide to bee
drunke, becauſe hee hath taken in ſtore of wine, except it aſcende
vp into his head, and trouble his braine and ſenſes. Heereof it is,
that vehement anger is often accompanied with frenſineſſe, and
with the falling ſickeneſſe. And becauſe the heart beeing inflamed,
the blood and ſpirites alſo are ſet on fire, they cauſe the whole bodie
to tremble, yea the very bones themſelues. For the blood that
boyleth in the breaſt, puffeth vp and thruſteth forwarde the Midriffe,
whereupon it followeth, that the motions of angrie men are
verie troubleſome, like vnto thoſe of drunkardes. Nowe becauſe
there are many meanes to ſtirre men vp to anger and wrath, and ſeeing
it is ſo dangerous a paſſion, it is very needefull for vs to haue manie
good remedies againſt it, as indeede there are many to be found.
Although wee ſhoulde not ſtande in neede of ſo manie,The beſt remedy againſt anger. if wee
woulde onelie conſider who wee are, and compare our ſelues with
God, and marke narowly howe many wayes wee offende him daily,
what cauſes wee giue him to bee bitterly incited and kindeled
with wrath againſt vs, and howe hee beareth with vs, turning his

anger into pitie and compaſſion towardes vs. For if wee enter into
this conſideration, firſt we ſhall be greatly aſhamed that we are angrie,
ſecondly our anger will bee eaſily appeaſed. For who can deſpiſe
vs as wee deſerue, and moue vs to anger, ſeeing wee deſpiſe
God vnto whome wee owe all honour and reuerence, and whome
wee ought to ſet at ſo high a price aboue all other things, that we
ſhoulde eſteeme all the worlde as nothing in reſpect of his value?
And yet wee ſhewe plainely, howe farre we are off from this, ſeeing
we ſtande in ſo little awe to offende him, yea, are more afraide
to diſpleaſe men then him. Beſide, wee commit no offence againſt
him, in which there is not great contempt of his maieſtie, euen hie
treaſon againſt his diuine maieſtie. Whereas if wee feared, loued
and honoured him as wee ought to doe, we ſhoulde rather feare to
offende him then to die. But there is nothing which wee care for
leſſe. Wherefore queſtionleſſe before him, who is a terrible auenger
of his contempt, wee are all loſt, if hee ſhoulde purſue vs in
his anger, as wee deſerue, and as wee purſue others, and not
change his anger into mercie. If wee conſider well of theſe things,
we ſhall knowe what occaſion we haue to ſwell with pride like toads,
and to thinke ſo well of our ſelues as we doe, or to be ſo ſoone kindled
with choler againſt them that haue offended vs: wee ſhall know what
excellencie and dignitie can be in vs that are but duſt and filth, whereby
we ſhould be ſo ſoone prouoked when we ſee our ſelues deſpiſed
and wronged of others. Moreouer, when we know, that we are vtterly
vndone, except GOD extende his grace and mercie towardes
vs, ſhall wee not, in ſteade of anger and reuenge, bee aſhamed
to craue pardon of him, if wee continue ſtill to bee angrie, and
vſe no pitie and fauour towardes them that haue offended vs, as we
deſire that God ſhould ſhew fauour vnto vs? And indeede what cauſe
haue we to hope for it vpon any other condition?Ecclus. 28. For it is written, that
the Lorde will take vengeance of him that reuengeth himſelfe, and
will obſerue his offences narrowely. Forgiue thy neighbour his
miſdeede, and when thou prayeſt, thy ſinnes ſhall bee forgiuen thee.
Shall man keepe anger againſt man, and will hee aske remiſſion
at the Lordes handes? Hee will take no pitie vpon his like, and
ſhall he demaund pardon for his ſinnes? Seeing hee that is but fleſh
keepeth his anger, and yet ſueth vnto God for pardon, who will blot
out his iniquities?Another remedy againſt anger. But this ought not to be forgottten of vs, to cauſe vs
to abſtaine from all anger towards them that by offring vs iniury prouoke
vs thereunto, namely, yt we acknowledge thē to be ye ſcourges of
God to chaſtice our faultes, which are worthy of greater puniſhment.
               
                  
Thus let vs alwayes looke to the firſt cauſe of our affliction, and to
God who viſiteth vs iuſtly (whatſoeuer the meanes are which hee vſeth)
and not to ſecond cauſes and to the next meanes, to the ende
that we doe not as dogges doe, which runne after the ſtone throwne
againſt them, that by byting it they may be reuenged of it, not looking
vnto him that threwe it. For if we conſider that the blowe giuen
vnto vs commeth from God, we will let the ſtone goe, and not
followe after it with anger and reuenge, but turne vnto God who
threwe it, not to ſtirre vp our ſelues to deſpite him, or to bee auenged
of him, but to craue for pardon and grace at his handes. And
this is the right way which wee are to take for the quenching of
our choler, that ſo wee may bridle our anger, and keepe our ſelues
quiet. Nowe for the ende of this matter, it remayneth that wee
ſhoulde knowe whether this affection bee altogether vicious, and
wholly proceeding from our corrupt nature, or whether it haue within
it any ſeede of vertue,Why the affection of anger is naturall, & what good commeth by it. as well as the reſt. It is certaine, that it
is giuen of GOD to man, to ſtirre him vp to the deſire of excellent
things, to the ende that when hee ſeeth himſelfe deſpiſed and
reiected for baſe actions and abiect things, and is grieued for the
ſame, hee ſhoulde endeuour to leaue and forſake them, and to addict
himſelfe to better and more noble things, which can not bee
contemned, nor hee deſpiſed in regarde of them. And this kinde
of anger is verie good. For beeing angrie in this ſort, our anger is
turned vpon our ſelues onely, to blame and reprehende our ſelues
for our ſlouth and looſeneſſe, and for our other vices and imperfections:
and by this meanes our anger ſhould not bee ſinne, but being
acceptable vnto God, it woulde be vnto vs a Schoolemaſter, and
as a ſpurre to ſollicite and perſwade vs vnto vertue, and to ſuch things
as beſeeme vs, and that eſtate whereunto we are called. If then wee
would be angrie according to the will of God, let vs firſt be angrie againſt
our ſelues for our faultes and imperfections: and when wee
haue iuſt occaſion to whet our ſelues againſt others, let our anger bee
turned againſt their vices, not againſt their perſons. And ſuch an
anger will ſhewe zeale for the honour of God, and the ſaluation
of our neighbours. Nowe the ſequele of our ſpeech requireth, that
wee ſhoulde ſpeake of hatred and of enuie, which for the moſt part
followe offence and anger. Let vs then heare ACHITOB diſcourſe of
theſe affections.
            
            
               
               Of Hatred, and of the nature and effects thereof: of a good kinde of
Hatred, and of the remedy to cure the euill Hatred: of Enuy, and
of the kindes and effects thereof: of the difference betweene good
and euill Enuy. Chap. 56.
               ACHITOB. Foraſmuch as nature, wiſedome and goodnes teach,
that men ought to be knit together by loue, as wee haue ſeene
heretofore, and that we are by the ſelfe ſame nature framed and faſhioned
thereunto, as wee may learne by that which we haue heard of the
forme and diſpoſition of the heart, wee muſt needes confeſſe, that the
ſpirite of man can bring foorth nothing more vnworthy it ſelfe, then
to ſuffer it ſelfe to be ouercome of Hatred and Enuy, which are ſo contrary
to loue, that they comprehend vnder them all generall iniuſtice
and wickedneſſe of men. For from theſe wilde plants nothing can
proceede (by reaſon of the corruption of mans nature) but effects that
draw vs cleane contrary from wiſhing well to our neighbour. So that
if we plucke out of our heart the cauſe of this naturall obligation concerning
the ſuccour we owe one to another, namely, Loue, what can
be either found or placed there but hardneſſe, inhumanitie, crueltie,
and all kinde of barbarouſneſſe, which are to bee accompted and taken
for monſters in mans nature? For howe ſtrange and monſtrous a
thing were it, to vnclothe a mans heart of Loue, and to put vpon it
hatred, enuy, extreame backebiting, bitterneſſe and crueltie, which
proceede all from one fountaine? Neuertheleſſe we ſee, that men are
enclined rather to Hatred then to Loue: but let vs ſearch out the cauſe
thereof.
               There are many that take Hatred to be an inueterate anger,What Hatred is. becauſe
it is a habite of anger, wherby the heart eſcheweth ſomething as
euil, and deſireth to repell and driue it away. Wherefore this affection
is directly contrary to loue, & ſo likewiſe is anger. For it is an offence
rooted in the hart, which cauſeth it to wiſh greatly his hurt by whom
it taketh it ſelfe to be offended. Nowe becauſe contempt doeth often
accompany hatred, and enuy is neuer without it, beſides that it breedeth
ſtrife, contentions, manſlaughters and murthers, therefore in the
holy Scriptures hatred is often taken for all theſe things.The cauſes of it. As for the vehement
cauſes of hatred, they are in euery one according as a man eſteemeth
of the things he hateth. Therefore prowd and enuious perſons
are alwaies very much enclined to hatred. Some men alſo are of
ſuch a hatefull nature, that they ſcarce wiſh wel to any body: and ſurely
theſe are very deuilliſh natures. Some likewiſe are giuen thereunto

of cuſtome, which they haue gotten by reioicing at other mens harms.
But the cauſe why it is eaſier for vs to hate then to loue,Why it is an eaſier matter to hate then to loue. and why Hatred
taketh deeper roote in our heart then loue, is becauſe hatred findeth
a better ſoile there, and a more apt foundation to bee laide vpon,
then loue doth, and that chiefly for two reaſons. The firſt is the corruption
of mans nature, which being left vnto it ſelfe, fauoureth more
of the nature of Satan, who is hatefull, a lyar, and enuious from the beginning,
then of the nature of God, who is loue, trueth, and charitie.
Therefore Saint Iohn ſaith,1. Ioh. 3. 10, 12. 
                  that Cain hated his brother and ſlewe him, becauſe
he was of the deuill, and Abel was of God. This hatred will be
alwayes in thoſe that haue one and the ſame Father that Cain had, againſt
all good men and children of God. The ſecond is, becauſe
the infirmitie of our nature will not permit vs to enioy any good
things in this worlde, that are pure and of long continuance: and
therefore they ſuffer vs to haue but a little ſenſe and taſte of them. But
it is cleane contrary in regarde of euilles. For they quickely finde
whereupon to ſtay and to plant themſelues within vs, and to ſpreade
their rootes ſo deepe and broade, that they cannot eaſily be plucked
vp. Whereupon they are felt a great deale more, and continue longer
in our heart and memory. Not without cauſe then doe men ſay,
that the pleaſures, ſeruices, and good things done vnto vs are madeof
feathers, and therefore they are eaſily carried away by reaſon of their
lightneſſe: but offences, euilles, and diſpleaſures are made of lead, and
therefore they abide in the bottome of the heart by reaſon of their
waight. And foraſmuch as loue proceedeth of that which is good, and
hatred of euill, whether it bee euill in trueth, or in opinion onely, as
euill is commonly greater and of longer continuance then Good, for
the cauſes ſpoken of, ſo is it with Loue and Hatred, and with their
rootes and long abode.
               Now of Hatred commeth backebiting and euill ſpeaking,The fruits of Hatred. which
being kindled, bringeth foorth bitterneſſe and crueltie: and as loue
whetteth a man on to doe well, ſo contrariwiſe Hatred turneth men
aſide from well doing, and prouoketh them to hurt. For this cauſe it
ſoweth the ſeedes of enmitie, and laboureth craftily to cauſe the party
hated to fall into danger. For it deſireth to hurt him, and to bring
euill vpon him, either by it ſelfe or by an other, ſecretely or openly.
In a worde, ſeeing it is wholly contrary to Loue, wee may without
any long diſcourſe knowe the nature thereof, by that which
hath beene ſpoken of the nature of Loue, taking it cleane contrary
thereunto. But let vs ſee whether the affection of hatred bee altogether

together euill of it ſelfe, or whether a man may reape any profite
thereby.
               We may ſay of this as we did of anger,Of a good kinde of hatred. and of other affections already
ſpoken of. For it is giuen to man to cauſe him to withdrawe
himſelfe from all euill that may hurt him, to flee from it and to repell
it,Rom. 
                        •
                     2. 9. as being contrary vnto him.Amos 5. 15. Therefore Saint Paul ſayeth, Hate
that which is euill, and cleaue to that which is good. For true and perfect
hatred ſhoulde hate nothing but that which is euill indeede, as true
loue ſhoulde loue that onely which is good indeede. But contrariwiſe
wee commonly hate the Good and good men, and loue the
Euill and the workers thereof. Beſides, wee are faulty in this, that
in ſteade of hating mens vices, wee hate their perſons. Wherefore it
is needefull, that in this matter of Hatred, wee ſhoulde put that in
practice which wee haue already ſaide of Anger, namely, that wee
ſhoulde aboue all things hate our owne vices, and that euill which
is in vs and in ours. But wee that practiſe the cleane contrary,
change Loue into Hatred,How loue is turned into hatred. and Hatred into Loue. For when wee
ſupporte and beare with our owne vices, or with the vices of our
friendes and kinſemen, which are not to be ſuffered or borne withall,
it ſeemeth that this toleration proceedeth from the loue wee
beare either to our ſelues or to others: but it is farre otherwiſe. For
if wee loued our ſelues well, and our neighbours as our ſelues, wee
woulde bee carefull to remooue all hurtefull things farre from our
ſoules, and to furniſh them with that which is conuenient and wholſome
for them, and ſo likewiſe for our friendes: whereas wee procure
vnto them that which turneth to their diſhonour, hurt, and ouerthrowe,
by nouriſhing them in their vices through our diſſembling
and bearing with them. And thus much for that profite, which
wee may receiue by this affection of hatred, being well guided according
vnto the will of GOD, and to a ſound and reaſonable nature.
               Nowe againſt the paſsion of euill Hatred, amongeſt a great number
of remedies which may very well bee applied thereunto, we haue
two principall ones,Remedies againſt the euill kinde of hatred. that are very good and profitable. The firſt remedie
is, the example of the loue of GOD, and of Ieſus Chriſt
towardes vs, of which wee haue ſpoken already, with thoſe holie
Preceptes which doe commaunde Loue and forbidde Hatred.
The ſecond remedie is, the contempt of all earthly things, and the regarde
that is to be had vnto the things that are Celeſtiall and Eternall.
For if wee ſhall ſet light by all mortall and corruptible things,
and lift vp our heartes to higher thinges, wee ſhall verie eaſilie

breake off all hatred and enmitie, neither wil we take any thing greatly
to heart, but when we ſee God offended.
               Now as concerning Enuy,Deſcription of Enuy. that alwayes accompanieth hatred, it
is an affection quite contrary to mercy, which is a ſorrowe conceiued
by reaſon of the miſeries of an other, whereas Enuy is a griefe ariſing
of other mens felicitie. Therefore it doth naturally reioyce at another
mans harme,Diuers ſorts of Enuy. and is grieued at his good: ſo that according to the varietie
of good things that may befall other men, ſo there are diuers kinds
 of Enuy. For firſt, ſome are enuious, when other mens profite is ſo
 great that it hindreth theirs. There is alſo a kinde of enuy at the wellfare
of another, which albeit it neither hurt nor hinder vs, yet wee are
grieued becauſe the like is not befallen to vs, or not rather to vs, or not
aſwell to vs as to another to whome it is happened. And this is a ſpice
 of couetouſneſſe. There is yet a third kinde of Enuy, which maketh
vs vnwilling that others ſhoulde obtaine that good which wee haue,
or which wee deſire, or haue wiſhed for but coulde not get it. And
when the queſtion is of thoſe good things, which it ſeemeth we ſhuld
enioy but doe not, or which we thinke belong to vs, but are beſtowed
vpon others, then is our enuy greater, and may alſo be called iealouſie,
 Moreouer, there is a fourth kinde that is worſt of all, to which the
name of Enuy agreeth more properly, as being often bredde of the
former kindes, when a man giueth them the bridle, and ſuffereth them
to raigne too much ouer him. This enuy is a griefe conceiued at anothers
good without any regard of it owne profite, but onely becauſe
it iudgeth it ſelfe hurt when others receiue good or do good. And this
is the very enuy of the Deuil and of his children: which is an affection
that is mingled of hatred and of ioy. For it hateth vertue, and reioyceth
at vice, and at the proſperitie of the wicked. Contrariwiſe, it is
grieued at the felicitie of good men, and glad of their miſeries. But
what kinde ſoeuer of enuy is in a man, there is in him griefe, and as it
were a biting that gnaweth him, by reaſon that the heart in this affection
ſhrinketh in as it were, and cloſeth vp it ſelfe at the good and benefit
of another.Enuy is neuer without griefe. So that ſorrowe is alwayes ioyned therewith. The
goods againſt which enuy ruſheth moſt, are ſuch as are in greateſt reputation
amongſt men, as honour and glory, inſomuch that it is more
moued at the good renowme, honour and praiſe giuen to men, in reſpect
of the good things that are in them, then at the good things
themſelues, in regarde of which men are honoured and eſteemed. For
the enuious man careth not for the vertues that bring renowne and
glory, but onely for the honour and glory which follow them, as the
ſhadow doeth the body. Foraſmuch then as a prowde man deſireth

ſtill to be preferred before all, therefore hee is more greedy of theſe
goods, of honour, and glory, then of true goods of which the other
are but ſhadowes. Hereof it is, that a prowde man is naturally enuious,
becauſe enuy ſpringeth from ſuch a deſire of preferrement: yea,
it is commonly bredde of pride. Yea, the farther a man is off from that
which hee woulde be thought to be, and the leſſe endued with thoſe
good things for which he woulde be honoured,Againſt what good things Enuy is moſt bent. the more enuious he
is. But amongſt al the good things againſt which enuy ſtriueth moſt,
and for which it is moſt ſtirred vp, thoſe of the ſoule are the chiefeſt,
becauſe they are more excellent then thoſe of the body, and ſuch as
neuer haue end. Therefore alſo the reputation and honor which men
obtaine by their meanes abide with them continually. But the contrary
falleth out in corporall and externall goods, as they that haue more
narrowe bounds. Wherefore, as they cannot growe to that greatnes
vnto which the other doe, ſo their vſe alſo is nothing ſo great, and conſequently
the price and reputation that proceedeth from them is not
ſo great. Therefore if the queſtion be of honour and glory, no man of
any good iudgement but will more willingly giue ouer that which
may be gotten by corporall and outward things, then that which foloweth
knowledge, wiſedome, vertue, and the other goods of the
ſoule. So that enuy may ſtand vs in ſteade of a witneſſe to teſtifie and
ſhewe vnto vs, which are the greateſt goods of all, ſeeing it is alwayes
buſied about the higheſt, nobleſt, and moſt excellent Good. Now as
there is no wicked affection, which carrieth not about, it owne torment
to take vengeance thereof by the iuſt iudgement of God, ſo this
of enuy paſſeth all the reſt in this reſpect. Therefore it was well ſaide
of them that taught, that enuy is moſt iuſt, becauſe of ſelfe it is the
ſame puniſhment to the enuious man,How an enuious body is tormented. which it deſerueth. For firſt, it
is vile and ſeruile, becauſe an enuious man knoweth this in himſelfe,
that he iudgeth the good things in an other to be greater and more
excellent then his owne, or at leaſtwiſe, hee feareth leaſt it ſhoulde ſo
come to paſſe. Therefore there is no affection in a man, which he dare
leſſe diſcloſe then this of enuy: ſo that hee receiueth leſſe comfort in
this then in any other. For by opening our heart to an other wee receiue
ſolace and comfort: whereas the enuious perſon iudgeth his
affection of enuy to be ſo vile, that hee dare not diſcouer it, but hideth
and concealeth it as much as hee can. If hee be angry or hate any one,
he will declare it a great deale ſooner. And albeit feare be thought to
be diſhonourable, yet will a man rather diſcloſe this affection, then
he will enuy. The like may be ſaide of ſorrow and of loue. But the
enuious body is conſtrained to bite on his bridle, to chew and to deuoure

his enuy within himſelfe, and to locke vp his owne miſerie in
the bottome of his heart, to the ende it breake not foorth and ſhew it
ſelfe,The countenance of an enuious man. whereby the body receiueth great detriment. For it becommeth
pale, wanne, ſwart, and leane, the eyes ſinke into the head, the lookes
are aſkew, and the whole countenance is diſfigured. And within the
heart the furies are encloſed, which giue him ſo ſmall reſt, that greater
torment can not be imagined. Therefore Salomon ſaieth very well,
That a ſound heart is the life of the body:
                  Prouer. 14. 30. 
                  but enuy is the rotting of the bones.
And Eccleſiasticus ſaieth,Ecclus. 30. 17, 24. 
                  That death is better then a bitter life: that enuy
and wrath ſhorten the life, and that carefulneſſe bringeth age before the
time. To conclude, although al the euil affections trouble and corrupt
the minde very much, yet none of them offendeth it ſo much as enuy
doth. Which commeth not to paſſe ſo much becauſe it ſelfe iudgeth
or eſteemeth good to be euill, as becauſe it deſireth that others ſhould
ſo eſteeme thereof. But howſoeuer this vice be very vile and infamous,
and hurtful both to the body and ſoule, yet in this affection of enuy, we
muſt put a difference betweene that part of it, which proceedeth from
ſound nature, as it was firſt giuen of God to man, and that which is in
it through the corruption of nature.Of a good kinde of enuy. For there is a kind of enuy, which
ſerueth vs in ſteade of ſpurres to pricke vs forward, and to worke in vs
a wil and deſire both to obtaine and to keepe great good things. And
this enuy is very good, when wee apply our ſelues to the true Goods,
and are not grieued at the proſperitie and vertues which wee ſee in others,
but are mooued by their example to deſire and to ſeeke after the
ſelfe ſame Goods, yea greater if the meanes be offered, prouided that
all be referred to the glory of God, to our owne ſaluation, and to the
profite of our neighbours. Vnto this kinde of Enuy Saint Paul exhorteth
vs, when he writeth to the Corinthians, ſpeaking of the diuerſity
of gifts wrought by the ſpirite of God in his Church.1. Cor. 12. 31. 
                  Be enuious of the
best gifts: albeit in our vſuall tranſlation it be Deſire, yet the Greeke
worde ſignifieth to enuy: but the ſenſe is in a manner all one. And the
ſame Apoſtle ſpeaking of the reliefe & collection made for the poore,
ſaieth,2. Cor. 9. 2. 
                  Achaia was prepared a yeere agoe, and your zeale hath prouoked
many: that is to ſay, the emulation and enuy, which they haue conceiued
by your example: and this was a good, holy, and chriſtian enuy.
But if we ſeeke our owne glory, and in that reſpect are grieued
that others excell vs in vertues, and in the gifts and graces of GOD,
onely becauſe we would haue that honour which they haue, and be equall
with them, or aboue them, this is a peruerſe and Satanicall affection,
declaring euidently that we ſeeke our ſelues and our owne glory
more then the glory of God. For if we had reſpect to that which wee

ought, it woulde be all one to vs who were the inſtruments either
our ſelues or others, ſo that God were glorified, and that were well
done, which ought to be done. As for the euill ſorts of enuy of which
wee haue ſpoken, they are placed by Saint Paul amongſt the woorkes
of darkneſſe and of the fleſh,Roman. 13. galat. 5. 21. where he ſaieth, that They which are defiled
with them ſhal not inherit the kingdome of God. But foraſmuch as in this
diſcourſe we placed Iealouſie amongſt the kindes of Enuy, and yet it
is often taken in the good part, proceeding as it were of true loue, as
Zeale alſo is bredde thereof, it ſhall be good for thee, ASER, to begin
the dayes worke to morrow with a treatiſe of theſe two affections.
            
            The end of the ſeuenth dayes worke.
         
         
            THE EIGHT
dayes worke.
            
               Of Iealouſie, and of the kindes thereof: howe it may be either a vice
or a vertue: howe true zeale, true iealouſie, and indignation proceede
of loue: of their natures, and why theſe affections are giuen
to man. Chap. 57.
               
                  ASER. The holy Scripture applying it ſelfe to the capacitie
of mans vnderſtanding,Eſay 3. 16. and 48. 4. deſcribeth mens affections
oftentimes by thoſe teſtimonies,Ezech. 3. 8, 9. which their
outward members affoorde, conuincing them of vices
rooted in their heart, by the carriage of their eies,
of their eie-liddes, of their forehead, and of their
whole countenance. Which is to this ende chiefly, that when they
know, that men may reade one in anothers face as it were in a Booke,
that which is couered and hidden in the heart, they ſhoulde perſwade
themſelues, that God ſoundeth and ſeeth more eaſily the moſt ſecret
thoughts of their heartes, and that they can hide nothing from him.
Likewiſe the holy ſpirite to condeſcend to our rudeneſſe,Pſal. 34. 15. and to teach
vs to knowe God by our ſelues,1. Pet. 3. 22. not onely by our ſoule which we ſee
not,Eſay 29. 23. but alſo by our body which wee ſee, ſpeaketh often of his high,
infinite,Exod 13. 14. and incomprehenſible maieſtie, as it were of a man, attributing
vnto him eies,Iob 40. 4. eares, a noſe, a mouth, armes, legges, feete, hands,
a heart, and bowelles. Moreouer, albeit this pure, ſimple, and eternal
eſſence be in no wiſe paſſionated with affections, yet the ſame heauenly
word doth not only attribute vnto him wrath, reuenge, anger,

iealouſie and other affections, but doth oftentimes propound him vnto
vs as an yrefull man,Exod. 15. 7, 8. hauing the face, behauiour, and whole countenance
of one greatly ſtirred vp to wrath & reuenge,Iob 9. 17. yea euen to great
fury. Which is done to this end, both, that by the knowledge which
we may haue of the nature of theſe affections whereunto wee are enclined,
and of the effectes which they bring foorth, and cauſes from
whence they proceede, wee ſhoulde meditate the ſame things to bee
in God when wee offend him, and knowe what rewarde wee are to
looke for: and alſo to teach vs that right rule of all our affections,
which wee haue in his diuine goodneſſe.
               Nowe if wee remember what hath beene declared vnto vs of the
nature of Loue, wee heard that true and pure loue was without iealouſie,
and that this affection ſprang of the loue of concupiſcence: and
yet it was tolde vs yeſterday, that Iealouſie was placed amongſt the
kindes of enuy. Let vs then ſee what this affection is properly, and
whether all iealouſie be vicious.What Iealouſie is. I vnderſtand by Iealouſie, a feare
which a man hath, leſt an other whome hee woulde not, ſhould enioy
ſomething. This commeth to paſſe two wayes, namely, either becauſe
wee our ſelues woulde enioy it alone, or elſe becauſe we would
haue ſome other, to whom we wiſh the ſame thing to enioy it alone:
the reaſon heereof is, becauſe we iudge it hurtfull either to our ſelues
or to thoſe whome wee loue, if others ſhould enioy it. As if the queſtion
were of ſome honour, or of ſome other good, which we would
haue to our ſelues alone, or for ſome one whome wee loue, and ſhould
be greeued that an other enioyeth it, and thereupon enuy him, either
becauſe wee are afraide hee ſhall enioy it, or becauſe hee enioyeth it
already, heerein appeareth enuy and euill iealouſie, which bringeth
with it great miſchiefes.Iames 4. 1, 2. For as Saint Iames ſaieth, From whence are
warres and contentions among you? are they not hence, euen of your lustes
that fight in your members? yee lust, and haue not: ye enuy and are iealous,
or haue indignation, and can not obtaine: ye fight and warre and g
                        •
                     t nothing.
Wherefore to auoide this enuy and euill iealouſie, wee muſt
conſider of what nature that Good is, which ſtirreth vs vp to this affection.
For according to the nature thereof, our iealouſie may be either
a vice or a vertue. For if the queſtion be of ſome Good thing, which belongeth
in ſuch ſort to mee alone, or to any other whome I loue, that
none may enioy it except it be vniuſtly, and to the diſhonour of God,
it is no euill iealouſie if I feare leſt any ſhoulde abuſe it,A good kinde of iealouſie. or bee grieued
when it falleth out ſo. If it concerneth ſome body whome I l
                     ••
                  ue, who
is abuſed by another to the diſpleaſure of God, and to the diſhonour
and hurt of the party beloued, I haue yet greater occaſion to feare, to

bee greeued, and euen to bee iealous both ouer my owne Good,
and ouer the good of the partie beloued. And as I haue iuſt cauſe
of Iealouſie in this caſe in that thing which properly belongeth vnto
mee, ſo alſo I haue like occaſion when an other vniuſtly enioyeth
that Good which belongeth to him whome I loue, and of
whome I ought to bee carefull, and be greeued when any reproch
or wrong is offered vnto him. As for example: ſeeing the huſband
hath ſuch an intereſt in his wife, and the wife in her husband,
as no other eyther may or ought to haue the like, both of them haue
iuſt cauſe to beware that no other haue the fruition heereof but
themſelues, to take the matter heauily if it fall out otherwiſe, and
to bee very much offended and full of indignation againſt him that
ſhoulde attempt any ſuch thing. For that can not be done, as not
without the great diſhonour and dammage of the parties ſo knit together,
ſo alſo not without the great diſhonour of GOD, whoſe
lawe and couenant is thereby violated.What mutuall loue ought to be betweene man and wife. On the other ſide, that mutuall
loue which ought to be betwixt the husband and the wife, doth
binde them to deſire and to procure the honour and profite eache of
other, and to keepe backe all diſhonour and hurt that may befall
them. Wherefore both of them haue iuſt cauſe to bee offended with
thoſe that ſeeke to procure any blemiſh in this reſpect. The like may
bee ſaide of fathers, mothers, and children, and of all that haue anie
charge ouer others, or that are linked together by friendſhip. But
on the other ſide a man muſt beware, that he be not too ſuſpicious, and
that hee carry not within himſelfe matter of Iealouſie, and ſo torment
himſelfe and others without cauſe: as likewiſe hee muſt bee
very carefull, that hee giue no occaſion of Iealouſie to any other.
               And thus you ſee howe there may be a good iealouſie, notwithſtanding
that in this caſe it be mingled with loue and anger. For Iealouſie
cauſeth the party that loueth, to be angry with him by whome
that thing which hee doeth loue, receiueth any diſhonour or detriment.
Therefore this anger commeth of loue, which inciteth him
to ſet himſelfe againſt him that offendeth the thing beloued. So that
theſe affections are alwayes commendable, ariſing of this cauſe and
being ruled according to that Zeale and Iealouſie, which the holy
Scripture attributeth vnto GOD in regarde of vs. For hee is called
a iealous GOD,Why Iealouſie is attributed to God. not onely in regard of his honour and glory, which
hee will not haue giuen to any other beſides himſelfe, (and indeede
all the creatures ioyned together are not able to diminiſh or to adde
any thing thereunto whatſoeuer they doe) but alſo becauſe hee loueth
vs, hee is iealous of our ſaluation, and deſireth to reſerue vs

wholly to himſelfe, and to make vs partakers of his immortall bleſſedneſſe.
Therefore hee will not haue vs ſpoyle him of his glorie,
and forſake his ſeruice, in regarde of that hurt and dammage which
ſhoulde befall vs thereby. For hee beareth that affection towardes vs,
which a good Father doeth towardes his children, who loueth them
not for any profite comming to him thereby, but only for their owne
good, and becauſe hee both will and ought to loue them. This loue
then, which God beareth vnto vs, cauſeth him to be iealous ouer vs,
when, through impietie and wickedneſſe of life, wee leaue him and
ioyne our ſelues vnto his aduerſary the deuill. Whereupon hee doeth
not onely become angry, but is full of indignation alſo, both againſt
him and vs.What Indignation is. For indignation is a griefe wrought in vs, when wee ſee
ſome good thing befall to an vnworthy perſon, and him that is worthy,
depriued thereof. This affection therefore proceedeth from the
ſame roote from whence compaſſion ſpringeth, namely, from the
iudgement of that which is good, and from the loue thereof. But the
diuerſitie of both their obiects cauſeth them in ſome ſort to be contrary
affections: foraſmuch as indignation is bred in regarde of ſome
good that hapneth to one that is vnworthy of it, and compaſſion or
pity ariſeth of ſome euill that befalleth or is procured to him that hath
not deſerued it.From whence Zeale proceedeth. And of theſe two contrary affections mingled together,
a third affection is bred, which in holy Scripture is called Zeale
and Iealouſie, being taken in the good part.
               Hereof it is, that the loue and compaſſion which God hath of his
children, when he ſeeth them go about to bereaue themſelues of that
good, which he wiſheth them, and the indignation that hee hath in
regarde of the good, which hapneth to the wicked in the accompliſhment
of their euill deſires, (for to them euill is in ſteade of good) cauſeth
him to be mooued with iealouſie and to bee auenged thereof. For
this cauſe the Prophet Ioel ſaieth,Ioel 2. 18. 
                  Then will the Lorde be iealous ouer his
land, and ſpare his people. And the Prophet Eſay, hauing declared to Ezechias
the deliuerance of Ieruſalem, and the ſuccour which GOD
would ſend him againſt Senacherib,
                  Iſaiah 9. 7. ſaith, That the zeale of the Lorde of
Hostes will perfourme this. In like manner, when the true children and
ſeruants of God beholde a confuſion in ſteade of that order which
the Lorde woulde haue obſerued, and which hee hath preſcribed vnto
his creatures, they are greatly mooued in regarde of that zeale,
which they beare as well towardes GOD, as towardes their neighbours.What Zeale is.
For Zeale is nothing elſe but an indignation conceiued in reſpect
of thoſe things, that are vnwoorthily done againſt him that is
deare vnto vs, and whome wee loue. Therefore if wee loue GOD

and his Statutes, if wee loue the Common-wealth, our Princes,
our Parents, and all others whome wee ought to loue, wee will
bee iealous for them, and can not beholde without indignation aniething
done againſt them, that ought not to bee. This Indignation
and Iealouſie will induce vs to ſet our ſelues earneſtly againſt all
iniuſtice, and to ouerthrowe it with all our might. With this Iealouſie
Saint Paul was affected towardes the Corinthians when hee
wrote thus vnto them,2. Cor. 11. 2. 
                  I am iealous ouer you, with godly iealouſie: for
I haue prepared you for one huſband, to preſent you as a pure virgine
vnto Christ.
               
               This kind of Zeale is very requiſite in all the true ſeruants of God,
but chiefely in them that haue any publike charge,A good leſſon for Princes and Paſtors. whether it be in
the Church or in the Common-wealth. For except they bee endued
with great Zeale towardes the glory of the Maieſtie of GOD,
towardes iuſtice and all vertues, they will neuer haue that care
which they ought eyther of the honour and ſeruice of GOD, or of
publike benefite, or to reprooue, correct, and puniſh vices, or laſtly,
to maintaine good Diſcipline, vpright iuſtice, and good conuerſation,
in ſuch ſorte as becommeth them. For this cauſe hath GOD
giuen to the nature of man, this affection of Zeale and Indignation
for the communion that ought to bee in the ſocietie of men, to
the ende there ſhoulde bee a right and indifferent diſtribution of all
good things, ſo that none of them ſhoulde light vpon the vnwoorthy
that vſe them ill, but to ſuch as deſerue them and knowe howe
to vſe them aright.
               Nowe when theſe affections are thus ruled, they are very good
and profitable:The abuſe of Indignation and of Zeale. but commonly they are abuſed vnto vice. For Indignation
is quickely bredde of Enuy, which being vniuſt, is alſo of a
corrupt and badde iudgement, ſo that an enuious bodie thinketh
that whatſoeuer good thing an other hath befallen vnto him, hee is
vnwoorthy of it. And ſo in like manner the Zeale that is without
true knowledge, bringeth foorth moſt pernicious effectes. For it
proceedeth from a loue which iudgeth not aright of the thing that
mooueth it, but eſteemeth it to bee euill and woorthy of hatred,
whereas it is good and woorthy of loue. Of this Zeale Saint Paul
ſpeaketh when hee ſayeth of the Iewes,Rom. 10. 2. 
                  I beare them recorde, that
they haue the zeale of God, but not according to knowledge. For being
deceiued in their iudgement, and calling themſelues defenders and
louers of the lawe of GOD, they perſecuted the Goſpel, (which
was the accompliſhment of the Lawe) and alſo them that beleeued
in Ieſus Chriſt: inſomuch that their very Zeale was through their

ignoraunce turned into Crueltie and Tyranny, which is a very dangerous
zeale, and ought moſt carefully to bee ſhunned of vs, as
that whereinto the beſt minded men of all doe commonly fall, when
they are blinded with ignoraunce: as the Apoſtle Saint Paul propoundeth
himſelfe in this caſe for an example before hee was conuerted.1. Timot. 1. 13.
For hee freely confeſſeth, that hee was a blasphemour, a
perſecutour,
                  Act. 26. 10, 11. 
                  and an oppreſſour, but hee did it ignorantly, and through
vnbeleefe.
               
               There haue beene many ſuch, not onely amongeſt the Iewes,
but euen among the Heathen. For albeit their Religion was altogether
ſuperſtitious and idolatrous, yet they alwayes maintained and
defended it with very great zeale, perſecuting ſuch as profeſſed
Chriſtianitie among them, and condemning them as the vileſt and
moſt deteſtable men vpon the earth. But if the Lord be greatly offended
when as wee beare hatred and enuy againſt any body, wee cannot
doubt but that this doeth likewiſe diſpleaſe him, when we commit
theſe things, being blinded with ignoraunce: and that hee is
carried with greater indignation againſt vs, when wee maliciouſly
cloake theſe vices with a falſe title of zeale, of religion, and of his glory,
thereby to reuenge our ſelues, and to exerciſe our cruelties much
more eaſily. But let vs nowe proceede to conſider of other affections
of the heart, and firſt of Reuenge, Crueltie, and Rage. And
becauſe Reuenge is appointed to puniſh offences, and euery vice findeth
a Iudge within it ſelfe, wee will ſpeake alſo of the affection of
Shame which commonly followeth euery vile acte. It belongeth
therefore to thee, AMANA, to intreate of this matter.
            
            
               Of Reuenge, Crueltie, and Rage, and what agreement there is among
them: what Shame and Bluſhing is, and why God hath
placed theſe affections in man: and of the good and euill that is
in them. Chap. 58.
               AMANA. If euery one might be a Iudge in his owne cauſe, and execute
his own decrees, the malice of men doth declare ſufficiently,
that there would be no iuſtice obſerued in the world, but robbery publikely
put in practice, inſomuch as the ſtrongeſt would alwayes carry
away the ſpoile. For that blind loue, which euery one beareth towards
himſelfe, cauſeth vs that we cannot ſee clearly either into our owne, or
or into other mens affaires, ſo that wee are alwayes more ready to
doe wrong to others, then to depart from anie thing of our owne.

Euen ſo, if wee might be ſuffered to reuenge thoſe iniuries, which oftentimes
without cauſe wee ſuppoſe wee haue receiued, it is certaine
wee woulde obſerue neither meaſure nor meane, but ſuffering our
ſelues to be guided by the paſſion of anger and wrath, wee would fall
into more then brutiſh crueltie and rage.Hebr. 10. 30. For as God hath reſerued
vengeance to himſelfe, and promiſed to recompenſe it, ſo no man
carrieth that minde to doe it iuſtly that is in him, neither indeede can
any: becauſe it is the ſpirite of a man that offereth iniury to an other,
whereas the body is but the inſtrument of the minde, and as it were a
ſworde vnto it, which the ſpirite manageth and cauſeth to cutte.
Whereupon it followeth, that the party offended can not reuenge
himſelfe of his chiefeſt and greateſt enemy. For God onely is able to
take vengeance of the ſoule,Matth. 10. 28. and to throwe it together with the body
into hell fire. Moreouer, when wee thinke to hurt the body of our enemy,
which is but the executioner of the euill diſpoſition of his Spirite,
wee hurt our owne ſoule, making it guiltie of the iudgement
of God,Luke 21. 19. prouer. 20. 22. who forbiddeth vs all reuenge and commaundeth vs to poſſeſſe
our ſoules in patience, and neuer to requite euill for euill, but to
waite the Lordes leaſure, being aſſuredly perſwaded that he will ſaue
and deliuer vs.
               Nowe looke what the affection receiueth and embraceth, the
ſame doeth it deſire to returne and ſend backe againe where it did receiue
it, whether it be good or euill. Therefore as a good affection
both wiſheth and doeth well to him of whome it receiueth good will
and beneficence: ſo a naughty affection deſireth to returne euill receiued,
vnto him of whome it hath receiued it. For this cauſe when the
heart is wounded with griefe by any one, it deſireth to returne the
like to him that hath hurt it, and to rebite him of whome it is bitten.
This affection is a deſire of reuenge,What reuenge is. which being put in execution,
is reuenge accompliſhed: namely, when wee cauſe him that hath offended
vs to ſuffer that puniſhment, which in our iudgement he hath
deſerued. This puniſhment is to damnifie him eyther in ſoule, or in
body, or in his goodes, yea, ſometimes by all the meanes that may
bee. And when power to reuenge is wanting, there are ſome that
fall into outrageous ſpeeches, into horrible and execrable curſings,
crying out for vengeance eyther at GODS hand, or of ſome other
that can perfourme it. Euery offence therefore that ingendereth hatred,
anger, enuy or indignation bringeth with it a deſire of reuenge,
which is to render euill for euil, and to requite griefe receiued with the
like againe.
               And when the offence is growen to that paſſe, that nothing can

aſſwage the extremitie thereof,What Rage is. nor ſtay it from breaking foorth into
reuenge and hurting by all the meanes that may bee, then is this
Reuenge turned into Rage. For a man in ſuch a caſe is not much
vnlike to a madde dogge. For becauſe Reuenge can not take that
effect which it woulde haue, it vexeth and cloſeth vp as it were the
hart, bringing great griefe & great torment to the whole body, ſo that
a man ſo affected is as if his heart & body were ready to burſt aſunder.
               Nowe,Of Crueltie. when the heart is hardened with Reuenge, it is turned
into Crueltie, which is a priuation of pitie and compaſſion. For
when Offence and Anger are ſet on fire, they exclude all good
thoughtes out of the minde, and perſwade to all kinde of Crueltie,
of which there are three degrees.Three ſortes of Crueltie. For there are ſome that procure it,
who neuertheleſſe woulde not execute it themſelues. There are others
that execute it. Beſides, there is a third kinde of Crueltie, when
wee faile in perfourming our duetie towardes them that are in neceſſitie,
whome wee both ought and might helpe and ſuccour, whether
this come of euill will or through negligence. For thereby wee
ſhewe that wee are without pitie and compaſſion. Heereof followeth
inhumanitie, which is as if wee ſhoulde lay aſide all humane affection
and bee transfourmed into brute beaſts. Therefore wee may
well conclude, that all priuate Reuenge proceeding of enuy, or of
hatred, or of anger, is vicious and forbidden by God, who commaundeth
vs to render good for euill, and not euill for euill. For hee
hath ordained the meanes, whereby hee will haue vengeance execucuted
among men. Therefore hee hath appointed Magiſtrates to execute
it according to his Lawe, and following his ordinaunce, not
with any euill affection, but with iuſt indignation proceeding from
loue, and from true zeale of iuſtice. For to puniſh the wicked is a very
acceptable ſacrifice,How magiſtrates ought to puniſh. ſo that there be no intermingling of our own
paſſions withall, and that wee exerciſe not our enuies, rancours, and
reuenges vnder the name and title of Iuſtice and of the glorie of God.
For if wee doe ſo, wee ceaſe to exerciſe the puniſhments and corrections
of the Lorde, and put our owne in practice. Wee muſt therefore
followe his example. For hee ſuffereth not euill to goe vnpuniſhed,
if men auoide not puniſhment by his grace and mercie, and by thoſe
meanes which he hath appointed for the obtaining thereof. Therefore
it is often ſaide of the wicked in the Scripture, that GOD will
returne into their boſome the euill which they haue done: and his
children and ſeruantes deſire him alſo to perfourme the ſame. But
when hee doeth it, hee is not mooued with any euill affection, but
onely with the loue hee beareth to iuſtice and vertue, and to his children,

and with pity and compaſſion towardes them in regarde of
the iniuries done vnto them.With what affection God puniſheth offendors. And as himſelfe commeth in iudgement
to take vengeance, ſo hee woulde haue them that ſupplie his
place among men, vnto whome hee hath committed the ſworde for
the defence of the good and puniſhment of euill doers, to followe
his example. But whether they doe ſo or no, there is no ſinne that
can auoide puniſhment, and that findeth not a Iudge euen in him
that committed it, to take vengeance thereof, by meanes of the affections,
which God hath placed in man to that ende. Among which
Shame occupieth a place, which we ought well to conſider of.
               Concerning this affection,What Shame is. there are ſome that are aſhamed in
regarde of ſome feare of diſhonour, of which there followeth no
dammage: or in reſpect of ſome griefe or perturbation of the ſoule,
ariſing of ſome thinges that ſeeme to bring ſome diſhonour with
them. Foraſmuch therefore as Shame is a feare of diſhonour, it is of
great force in them that loue honour. For the more they loue it, the
more doe they feare diſhonour, which is the contrary thereof, as a
very great euill. And for this cauſe there is in Shame not onely a feare
of villanie, but indignation alſo, after the committing of ſome fault.
For hee that is faulty, chafeth, and is angry with himſelfe, becauſe
of the diſhonour hee receiueth through his offence. And this kind of
Shame is the ſimpleſt and lighteſt, and may be called Bluſhing, being
very common eſpecially in children and virgins. Now for aſmuch as
herein the ſpirits withdraw themſelues vnto the hart, as vnto a center,
and preſently as it were in the ſame inſtant returne backe againe, the
face is painted with a vermillion colour,Bluſhing commendable in ſome perſons. which is very pleaſant and
comely, namely, in that age and in thoſe perſons. Therefore is this colour
rightly called the colour of vertue. For God hath placed this affection
of ſhame in the nature of men, to the end it ſhould be vnto them
as a bridle to ſtay them from committing vile things, and as a Iudge
and Reuenger to puniſh them after they haue done ſuch things. Therfore
alſo there is yet another kind of ſhame more vehemēt,A ſecond kind of Shame. which approcheth
neare vnto the affection of anger, and is mingled with wrath
and feare. For it is a motion of the heart, in which he that feeleth himſelfe
guiltie of any diſhoneſt crime or act, is angry with himſelfe for
the ſame, and puniſheth and reuengeth himſelfe vpon himſelfe: and
withall feareth the iudgements of others, and the rebuke and diſhonour
that may come vnto him for it. For as we haue heard already, God
hath placed in the nature of man ſundry affections, of which ſome
are ſweete and pleaſant, to the end they ſhould be vnto vs as it were
ſpurres vnto vertue: others are bitter and vnpleaſaunt, that they

might bee vnto vs in ſteade of puniſhmentes, and that the greefe
which they bring might teach vs to knowe more cleerely what diuerſitie
there is betweene vertue and vice, and what difference wee
ought to put betweene good and euill deedes. Therefore there is not
a woorſe thing in man, nor any diſeaſe more dangerous to the ſoule
then impudencie, which is wholly contrarie to Shame and Bluſhing.
For whoſoeuer is once paſt all Shame,Impudencie a very dangerous diſeaſe. hee hath no care at all of his
honour, much leſſe of the honour of GOD. Heereof it is that the
holie Ghoſt by the Prophetes doeth greatly accuſe the impudencie
of the wicked, ſaying vnto them by way of reproch, that they had
whoores foreheads,Ierem. 3. 3. and woulde not bee aſhamed: that they were
impudent children and ſtiffe hearted,Ezech. 2. 4. and 3. 7. and that they did glorie in their
wickedneſſe after they had done euill, in ſteade of being aſhamed
and amending their faults. Nowe whereas wee ſayde, that Shame
painteth the face with a vermilian colour,The cauſe of redneſſe in the face in bluſhing. wee are to knowe, that
the paſſions and affections of the ſoule breede great change in our
bodies, as they that mooue the ſpirits and the naturall heat, by opening
and ſhutting vp of the heart: whereby the ſpirits are eyther inlarged
or reſtrained.
               Thus it commeth to paſſe, that the colour of the face is changed,
it being a propertie of the heart to ſet in it certaine markes
and ſignes of the affections that are in it, as wee haue already heard.
Therefore doeth Shame paint the cheekes with redneſſe, becauſe the
danger that ſpringeth of feare is of that nature, that the heart ſtandeth
in neede of helpe to repell and driue it away, namely, of that heate
that retireth backe vnto it. Nowe foraſmuch as there is perturbation
in Shame, by reaſon of the opinion and feare of diſhonour and
blame, heate is drawen vp to the head, and ſo from thence it is diſperſed
ouer the face. And although Shame doeth not trouble the
heart and minde ſo much as feare doeth, yet doeth it confound the
head, and cauſeth it oftentimes to forget what it thought and was
purpoſed to haue done. As wee ſee it ſometimes in very wiſe and
skilfull men, when they are to ſpeake or to doe ſomething before
perſonages or companies whome they reuerence. And this is incident
for the moſt part to ſuch as are moſt modeſt, and to them that
preſume leaſt of themſelues, who indeede can not heare their owne
praiſes without ſhame and bluſhing,A cauſe of feare in men. ſuch is their nature and modeſtie:
or elſe it is becauſe their hearts are very litle, which maketh them
alſo fearefull.
               Nowe although too much ſhamefaſtneſſe, when it is cauſeleſſe, is
woorthy of blame, becauſe it often keepeth them that are ouertaken

therwith from doing many good things, & from imploying the giftes
which they haue receiued of God as it becommeth them: yet is it more
praiſe-woorthy then impudency, which as it maketh men altogether
ſhameles & braſenfaced, ſo it vſually accompanieth proud & arrogant
perſons. For it is cleane contrary to modeſty. Seeing therfore we learn,
that ſhame is a feare of diſhonour and blame, and of doing that that
might procure it, we muſt take good heed that we iudge aright of that
which is to bee accounted vile and diſhoneſt, and of that which may
bring vnto vs honour or diſhonour, praiſe or diſpraiſe. For our nature
being ful of darknes through ſinne that raigneth in it, our natural iudgment
is not ſo intire and vpright as it ought to be, to iudge well either
of that which is truely honeſt, and which bringeth with it honour and
commendation, or otherwiſe of the contrary vnto it. Whereupon it
commeth to paſſe, that we oftentimes take one for another, & ſo light
vpon that, which we leaſt ſought for or deſired. Therfore let vs know
and learne this, that there is nothing honeſt but vertue, nor any thing
diſhoneſt but vice: and that as nothing is more beautifull and of greater
renowme then vertue, ſo nothing is more ilfauoured, diſhonourable
and infamous then vice. But foraſmuch as there is great diuerſitie
of opinions, what is to be accounted honeſt and diſhoneſt, what vertue,
what vice, what praiſe what diſpraiſe, let vs learne to frame our
iudgement out of the law and word of God,The rule of all true iudgement. which is the rule of all iuſtice
and trueth. Otherwiſe it will come to paſſe, that we ſhalbe oftener
aſhamed of well doing then of euill doing, and of vertue then of
vice: which were a vile ſhame, and ſuch a one as that we ought to be
greatly aſhamed thereof. For in well doing we muſt neuer be afraide
of that ſhame,Shame of well doing. which the wicked think to bring vpon vs, but rather account
it honourable and glorious. Yea themſelues ſhall bee aſhamed
and confounded when their vices and vile actions ſhalbe diſcouered
by our honeſtie and vertue: whereas if we ioyne with them, we ſhall
cauſe them to bee voyde of ſhame when they doe ill, yea, they will
boaſt and vaunt of it before vs. But enough of this matter. Now foraſmuch
as arrogant and proude perſons are fartheſt off from vſing aright
any of thoſe affections of the heart, of which wee haue hitherto
diſcourſed, eſpecially of ſhame, I am of opinion that we are to looke
into the nature and effects of the paſſion of pride. Therefore, ARAM,
this ſhal be the ſubiect of thy diſcourſe.
            
            
               
               Of Pride, with the conſideration thereof as well in nature entire, as corrupted:
of the originall thereof, and of ſuch as are most inclined therevnto:
what vices accompanie it, how great a poiſon it is, and what remedie
there is for it. Chap. 59.
               ARAM. There is nothing more eaſie then for a man to deceiue
himſelfe. For looke what a man earneſtly deſireth, hee ſuppoſeth
it is alreadie as it were come to paſſe, or at leaſt hee promiſeth to
himſelfe that he ſhal eaſily obtaine it. But oftentimes things fall out
otherwiſe then men looke or hope for.The cauſe why men deceiue themſelues. Now the chiefe cauſe of their
errour heerein is that preſumption, which commonly they haue of
their owne wiſedome and vertue, whereby they are lift vp with vaine
confidence and puffed vp with pride. For when men are caried away
with an inordinate and blinde loue of themſelues, they are ſoone perſwaded
that there is nothing in them worthy to be deſpiſed, yea they
thinke that their ignorance is wiſedome: inſomuch that knowing nothing,
they ſuppoſe they know all things, and hauing no dexteritie to
performe one commendable work, they preſume very inconſideratly
to ſet their hand to euery great matter. But the more care & diligence
they beſtow, being led with a deſire to ſhew great skil and thinking to
winne honour and renowne, ſo much the more they diſcouer their ignorance
and blockiſhnes, purchaſing to themſelues ſhame and infamie.
Now the trueth of God teacheth vs to conſider otherwiſe of our
ſelues, namely, that we want both ſound vnderſtanding, and ſtrength
alſo to accompliſh any good thing. Which knowledge ought to keep
vs backe from all preſumption, and ouerweening of our owne wiſedome
and ſtrength, and take from vs all matter of pride and glorie,
to leade vs vnto modeſtie and humilitie. This rule wee ought to
follow if we will attaine to the white of good iudgement and well
doing.
               Now as ſhame and confuſion is bredde of ſome vile and diſhoneſt
fact,What pride is. as we haue heard, ſo vice fetcheth his beginning from pride. I call
pride a puffing vp of the ſoule and heart, proceeding from the opinion
of ſome excellent good thing in vs more then is in others, whereby
a man is in eſtimation & honour, whether this good thing be preſent,
paſt, or to come. But we are to conſider of two fountains and firſt
cauſes of this inflation and affection of the heart, namely of one that
proceedeth from nature pure and intire, and of another that commeth
from nature as it is corrupted.Two kindes of pride. So that we may boldly ſay, that there is
a kind of pride which is no vice but a vertue, or at leaſtwiſe the ſeede

of vertue. For there was no vicious or euill thing in the firſt nature as
it was created of God, but euery thing in it was vertuous, and the ſeed
of vertue, as we haue alreadie ſhewed in the former diſcourſes alreadie
made by vs. Wherefore that naturall pride of man, beeing ſuch as
hee ſhould haue beene if hee had continued in his firſt nature, woulde
bee an excellent vertue, and as it were the mother of all the reſt,
whereas nowe it is the moſt vgly and monſtrous vice that can bee
founde in the whole nature of man corrupted, by meanes of which
it is become the father of all vices and ſinnes. For ſeeing GOD
hath done this honour to man aboue all other bodily creatures, as
to create him in regarde of his ſoule, of a celeſtiall and diuine nature
(for which cauſe the verie Heathen affirme that mankinde is
of the linage and parentage of God) hee woulde not haue him ignoraunt
of the excellencie of his beeing, and of thoſe great and
woonderfull benefites, which hee hath receiued of him in his creation,
and of which hee hath made him partaker chiefely for three
cauſes.Three cauſes why God created man ſo excellent. The firſt, to this ende that knowing what grace and honour
God his Creatour hath beſtowed vpon him, hee might be moued
continually to acknowledge and honour him as it becommeth
him. The ſecond, to the ende that knowing the excellencie of his
nature, and of the ſtocke from whence hee came, hee ſhoulde loue
himſelfe in God his Creator, and in him thinke himſelfe woorthie of
true goodes, euen of the greateſt and moſt excellent that may bee,
namely of heauenly and eternall goodes: and that hee ſhoulde
knowe that hee was created for them, and that through the knowledge
and conſideration thereof he might be prouoked to wiſh for and
to deſire them with great courage. The thirde, that by this meanes
hee might feare to degenerate from ſo high and noble a linage as
that is from whence hee is deſcended, and to fall from ſo high a degree
of honour and dignitie into diſhonour and ſhame, and to looſe
thoſe excellent goodes whereunto hee was allotted, if hee committed
any thing vnbeſeeming ſo noble and ſo excellent a nature as was
the nature of God according to the image of which hee was creted.Of a good kind of pride.
This then is that holie pride, which ought naturally to remaine
in man, and whereby hee might well haue deſired to bee
like vnto GOD, eſpecially in goodneſſe, and that by thoſe
onelie meanes by which the Lorde woulde haue him bee brought
vnto this ſimilitude, and which himſelfe had taught him: namely
obedience, and that ſo farre as was agreeable and meete for
his nature. But our firſt parentes giuing eare to him, who firſt
degenerated from this holie pride, vnder colour of beeyng equall

not to the goodnes but to the power and greatnes of God, were ſoon
perſwaded to beleeue the promiſe, which this lyar had made vnto
them of a farre greater and more excellent eſtate, then was that wherin
God had created them: inſomuch as their humilitie and obedience
whereby they were vnited and conioyned in great glory with God,
was turned into arrogancie and diſobedience. Whereupon doubting
of the trueth of Gods worde, they hearkened to the Diuels counſel,
propounded vnto themſelues the ſelfe ſame meanes and degrees to
make themſelues equall with God their Creator, which this wretch
and his angels had taken before, and whereby he fell from the higheſt
eſtate of glorie to the moſt bottomleſſe gulfe of miſerie. And this
is that baſtardly and earthly pride that is entred into mans nature, of
which it is ſaide,Ecclus. 10. 14, 19. 
                  That pride is the originall of ſinne, and hee that hath it
ſhall powre out abomination, till at laſt he be ouerthrowen. And a litle after:
Pride was not created in men, neither wrath in the generation of women.
And indeede God hath made man of a milde and communicable
nature, apt to ſocietie, and to liue with companie not ſolitarily as
ſauage beaſtes vſe to doe.Of the euil pride.
                   Therefore there is nothing more contrarie
to his nature, and to that ende for which he was created, then this vicious
pride, whereby he is ſo puffed vp and ſwelleth in ſuch ſort, as if
he were of ſome other nature and condition then humane, and as
though he meant to liue in ſome other eſtate and degree then of a man.
By which doing hee degenerateth from that firſt nature in which hee
was created:Ecclus. 10. 7. whereupon Eccleſiaſticus concludeth, That pride is hatefull
before God and man. Now the more arrogant and proude a man is,
the more ignoraunt may he bee ſaide to be of true goods, and ſuch as
are eternall; and whereas he ſhould wiſh for and long after theſe, his
whole affection is turned to the deſire of worldly glory and of earthly
things. Which deſire proceedeth from that inconſiderate loue that euery
one beareth towards himſelfe, which keepeth a man from the
knowledge of himſelfe. For if be knew himſelfe well, he might ſee
in himſelfe nothing but ſuch matter as ſhoulde cauſe him to abaſe and
to humble himſelfe, not to be puffed vp and to preſume of himſelfe in
any reſpect.Who are moſt giuen to pride. Hereupon it followeth, that they are naturally moſt enclined
to pride, which are moſt ignorant, moſt rude, moſt abiect, moſt inconſiderate,
moſt haſtie and headſtrong. For they that are skilfull and
wiſe, ſharpe witted, moderate and well ſtayed, who looke into and
take a viewe of themſelues, and know well what is within them, ſuch
men vnderſtand and are able to iudge very well, that there is nothing
in man that ſhould cauſe him either to ſwell or to be blowne vp with
pride. Therefore we commonly ſee, that they which haue moſt excellent

vertues in them, that haue greateſt gifts of God, and could finde
in themſelues moſt matter of pride, are notwithſtanding moſt modeſt
and moſt humble. And contrariwiſe the greateſt blockheads, and
ſuch as are moſt vnapt to euery good thing, moſt deſtitute of all good
and excellent giftes of nature, are for the moſt part the loftieſt & moſt
proude: ſo that a man may well ſay of them that they are proude peſants,
eſpecially when they are blowne vp like bladders with ſome
winde of proſperity, when their noſes are perfumed, or their eies dimmed
with ſome ſmoake of honours, or of worldly wealth. Many other
cauſes of pride might be noted in the nature of man.Cauſes of pride. For thoſe that are
of a hote and burning nature, as cholericke perſons are more ſubiect
to this vice then many others, and that chiefly for two reaſons. For
holding of the nature of fire, which alwayes aſcendeth vpwarde, if
they followe their naturall inclination, they will take alſo of the nature
thereof, aſpiring continually vnto high matters. And as the fire
is light, quicke and violent, ſo will their iudgement and all their affections
be, which will carie them away headlong and greatly trouble
them. It is very requiſite therefore, that water ſhould be caſt vpon this
fire.What vices follow pride. Now as pride breedeth arrogancie, ſo enuie, ill will, anger, rancour,
and deſire of reuenge doe followe and accompanie it, together
with impatience, indignation, ſelfe-will, obſtinacie, and other ſuch
like vices. For a proude perſon waxeth enuious at the good of another,
as if he thought himſelfe only worthie, or as if hee accounted all
greatneſſe in others a hinderance to his owne. And becauſe hee ſuppoſeth
that he is neuer ſo well eſteemed of as he deſerueth, he waxeth
very angry, being deſirous to reuenge himſelfe if there be any meanes.
Beſides, to the end he might alwayes ſeeme to be better then others,
he neuer ceaſſeth boaſting and bragging. For pride being nothing els
but winde that puffeth vp the heart (euen as fire cauſeth water to
ſwell and to ſend forth great waumes) if the proude man ſhould not
finde ſome iſſue for this winde, hee woulde burſt aſunder. Therefore
he ſpeaketh bigge, he chideth and threatneth, thundreth and lighteneth,
and waxeth ſo inſolent, that both for his wordes and deedes hee
becommeth vntolerable vnto all. And becauſe he cannot giue place to
any, if he ſtand in cōtention for any thing, he holdeth his opinion with
inuincible obſtinacy: inſomuch that no authority whatſoeuer, no truth
how apparantly ſoeuer it be laid before him, no benefit or profit ſhalbe
able to turne him from that which he hath once imagined. For his
deſire to be preferred before all, and in all matters is ſo hote and feruent,
that he feareth nothing more then to be accounted inferiour in
any one matter to any other body whoſoeuer he be. And this cauſeth

him alſo to bee vnteachable and vnapt to learne. For by reaſon of
his pride, he is aſhamed to learne. Beſides, the ambition and inſatiable
deſire of glorie that is in him, cauſeth him that hee cannot ſuffer
any admonition, but continueth reſolute in that which he had once
taken hold of. And he is ſo farre from ſuffring patiently, that any man
ſhould condemne him, or any word or deede of his, that hee will haue
his vices taken for vertues, and looketh to bee commended for them.
Yea ſome are ſo paſſionate, and caried away with ſo great impatience
and furious indignation, that they ſtorme and rage not onely againſt
men,Pride lifteth men againſt God. but alſo againſt God, euen ſo farre foorth as to deſpite and blaſpheme
him openly. For the ignorance & inconſideratenes that engendreth
pride is ſo blockiſh and raſh, that it giueth vs no leiſure to conſider
of and to iudge what good things are in vs, neither from whence
they come, or who it is that giueth them, or in what manner, or for
what reaſon. To be ſhort, God commeth not at all into our thought,
neither doe wee attribute anything vnto any other beſides our ſelues.
And although many proude perſons diſſemble theſe damnable affections,
and dare not oftentimes lay their heartes ſo open, but rather
thinke there is no ſuch matter in them, neuertheleſſe it is ſo in trueth
and in effect, ſo that all men woulde iudge them to bee ſuch, if they
were able to ſee and knowe as God ſeeth and knoweth. Moreouer,
we are to note, that pride is ſuch a vice, that it is a harder matter for
a man to bee at peace and concord therewith, then with any other
whatſoeuer.Prou. 13. 10. Whereupon Salomon ſaieth, That onely by pride doeth
man make contention. Yea there is alwayes ſtrife and diſſention amongeſt
the proude themſelues, when euerie one deſireth to bee
preferred one before another, and cannot. As for humbling and abaſing
themſelues, there is no talke of that, vnleſſe they drawe a little
backewarde that they may the better leape forwarde, and debaſe
themſelues, that they may aſcende vp higher. And as for friendſhip,
a proude man hath neuer any in him that is true and ſounde, but
onely that which is counterfeite and fayned, towardes them that
ſubmit themſelues vnto him through flatterie.Pride bred of vertue. But that which is
moſt dangerous in pride, is when it is bredde of humilitie, of modeſtie,
and of vertue. For there are manie, who conſidering their
owne modeſtie and other vertues, and condemning pride and other
vices, are delighted therewith after an inſolent manner, and
are puffed vp with pride thereby. Whereby wee ſee what windings
and ſlipperie turnings are in that olde ſerpent the Father of pride,
into howe manie faſhions hee changeth himſelfe, and in what
manner hee hath infected and poyſoned our heart. For hee hath

brought it to this paſſe,A ſimilitude. that as venimous beaſtes turne all they eate
howe good ſoeuer it bee into venime, ſo the proude man turneth
all his thoughtes, wordes and deedes into pride. For hee draweth
and referreth euery thing to his owne honour and glorie: and
therefore Saint Chryſoſtome verie aptly compareth Vaine-glorie to
a Mothe. For as the mothe marreth and conſumeth that cloth
in which it is bredde, ſo vaineglorie ſometime ſpringeth of vertue,
and afterwarde corrupteth it. For there is no vertue ſo excellent,
which is not turned into vice and made abominable before GOD,
ſo ſoone as it is mingled therewith.
               Seeing then pride is ſuch an horrible monſter, as that which
breedeth and bringeth foorth ſo manie other monſters, wee ought
to ſeeke diligently after all remedies for it that may poſſibly bee
had, whereby it may bee tamed and kept vnder, and ſo our ſoules
cured of ſuch a dangerous diſeaſe and plague. Nowe foraſmuch
as it proceedeth of ignoraunce and of inconſiderateneſſe, and
through the want of the due knowledge of God and of our ſelues,
wee muſt redreſſe this euill by the vertues contrarie to theſe vices,A remedy againſt pride.
namely by the true knowledge of God, of his worde and of our
ſelues. Which wee ſhall obtaine if hee deale ſo gratiouſly with vs
as to fill vs with his holie ſpirite, and to giue vs an humble heart,
that renouncing all pride and all arrogancie, wee may learne to
walke in his feare, and in all obedience to his holie will, ſo that wee
wholly conſecrate our ſelues vnto him both in bodie, ſoule, and ſpirite,
in will, heart and all our affections. Nowe hauing ſpoken ſufficiently
of that matter into which wee fell whileſt wee handeled the ſecond
bellie, which God hath placed in man for the lodging of the vital
partes, and namely of the heart, which is the ſeate of the affections,
it remaineth, that we conſider of the third beilie, which is the ſeate of
the naturall powers and vertues of the ſoule: of which thou ſhalt beginne
nowe to diſcourſe, ACHITOB.
            
            
               Of the naturall powers of the ſoule, and what ſundrie vertues they
haue in the nouriſhment of the bodie: of their order and offices: of
their agreement and neceſſarie vſe: where the Vegetatiue ſoule is
placed in the bodie, and what Vertue it hath to augment the ſame.
Chap. 60.
               ACHIT. The diſpoſitiō & placing of ye principal parts of our body,
& of yt nobleſt mēbers therof, is a goodly ſchole, wherin we may

learne, how much more carefull wee ought to be of heauen then of
the earth, and of the ſpirite then of the bodie. We haue already heard,
how the internall partes of man were deuided into three bellies and
lodgings, of which the two former, namely the braine and the heart,
together with the vertues, offices and works of the ſoule in them, haue
beene declared vnto vs. It remaineth that we conſider of the laſt lodging
of the bodie, which properly beareth the name of belly, & which
is the ſeate of theſe naturall powers and vertues of the ſoule, which we
call Vegetatiue and nouriſhing,Three kindes of the Vegetatiue facultie in the ſoule. and is diuided into three kinds, namely,
into the vertue of nouriſhing, of augmenting or growing, and of
engendring. Nowe when we ſee this order and diſpoſition in our nature,A profitable meditation.
we ought ſeriouſly to thinke, that ſeeing God hath placed the
heart betweene the head and the belly, the 
                     Ʋitall vertue of the ſoule
betweene the Animal and Nutritiue, and the will betweene the vnderſtanding
and the moſt ſenſuall part in vs, therefore the heart, affections,
and will ought to looke alwayes on high, and not downward,
to the ende they ſhould ioyne to the moſt noble, celeſtiall and diuine
part, and not to that which is moſt baſe, ſenſual, and earthly. Whereunto
that alſo ought to induce and leade vs, which we learned before
of the agreement between the higheſt and middlemoſt of theſe principal
and more noble parts of the body, vnto which this laſt is inferiour
in all kinde of excellencie, beautie, and dignitie.
               This belly of which wee are nowe to diſcourſe,Of the third and laſt belly of the body. containeth all the
members and inſtruments that ſerue for nouriſhment and generation:
whereupon it is termed the Kitchin and Nurſerie of the body, and the
ſeminary and welſpring of mankinde. But before we enter into a particular
conſideration of theſe members and inſtrumentes, wee are to
looke into the naturall powers of the Vegetatiue ſoule that is in them.
And firſt we will note that which we ſpake of elſewhere,The office of heate in man. of the office
of heate and moyſture in the nature of the bodie, that as moyſture
keepeth heate within it, ſo heate drinketh and ſoaketh vp moyſture
as much as it may, digeſting and diſpelling it by the vertue and action
of it owne nature. Now whileſt this moyſture is thus digeſted by the
heate, there is a ſeparation made of that which is profitable in the bodie,
from that which is ſuperfluous, and conſequently, hurtfull to the
bodie. That which is profitable for it, is the iuyce and humour that agreeth
with it, in regarde of the ſimilitude and likeneſſe that is betweene
them. Whereupon it followeth, that all moyſture that is greatly
diuerſe or contrary to the body, is hurtfull for it, as alſo all drye
matter, which likewiſe hurteth the health and life thereof. So that
this vertue of the ſoule, which we call naturall, or otherwiſe Vegetatiue,

and which comprehendeth vnder it the vertue of nouriſhing,The power, order and office of the Vegetatiue ſoule.
of augmenting and of engendring (euery of which hauing ſixe others
tending all to one ende as we heard alreadie) this vertue I ſay, cauſeth
that which is profitable for the nouriſhment of the bodie, firſt to
bee diſtributed vnto the members, and then to bee turned into the
bodily ſubſtance of the liuing creature, becauſe that vertue and power
of the ſoule doeth imbrace and receiue it, acknowledging it alreadie
to bee a part of the bodie. Therefore the vertue of drawing
nouriſhment that is in the ſoule, hath for an helper the vertue of retaining
and keeping, vntill there bee a conuenient change thereof
made by the facultie, and power of digeſting, and as it were dreſſing
of it. For otherwiſe the attractiue and retentiue power, were
to ſmall purpoſe. Now when the meate is digeſted, ſo much of it as is
pure muſt bee ſeparated from that which is impure, by the vertue of
purging: and that which is impure, muſt bee deliuered ouer to the
expulſiue vertue to bee caſt out, and the reſt which is pure to the vertue
of diſtributing, after which the vertue of incorporating executeth
his office and duetie.
               Thus you ſee howe all theſe particular vertues, ſeruing to the generall
vertue of nouriſhing, doe their dueties one after another according
to that order, which nature hath aſſigned them. For except
this agreement and order were kept, there woulde bee great confuſion,
and the bodie coulde not receiue his due nouriſhment. Therefore
doeth one of them attende vpon and helpe another, yea all of
them tende to one and the ſame ende by diuers meanes. For after
the meate is receiued, attracted and retained, it muſt bee digeſted
before it bee ſeparated; ſo that the expulſiue vertue is to attende vpon
this ſeparation and diſtinction. Neither can the attractiue or
drawing vertue doe his office well, vnleſſe the bodie bee firſt emptie:
neither the vertue of concocting or preparing, if the bodie bee
not purged of the meate receiued before. And if any of theſe vertues
doeth not his duetie, the reſidue are made more dull, ſlowe and
languiſhing. For there is ſuch agreement betwixt them, and they
are by ſuch equal proportion tempered throughout the whole bodie,
that nothing can befall any one of them, but the reſidue will feele it.
Neither can that which is wanting in one bee ſupplied by an other.
For GOD hauing aſſigned to euerie one his proper office,
they deale not one in anothers affaires, but euery one abideth in his
owne office, and goeth not beyonde his appoynted boundes and limites:A ſimilitude taken from 
                        〈…〉
                     .
as the like is to bee ſeene in the printing houſe and amongeſt
them that ſtampe money. For if the Compoſitor faile in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
of his letters, the Printer that putteth ynke vpon the fourmes, doeth
not correct the faultes of the Compoſitor. And if the Printer doeth
not diſtribute his ynke well, hee that draweth the ſheetes from the
preſſe correcteth not his fault. For euery one hath his office apart,
with which onely hee medleth. So likewiſe in Coyne, if hee that cutteth
prepareth and fineth the mettall faile in his duetie, hee that cutteth
it in pieces will correct nothing, but diuideth it as it is deliuered to
him. Then hee that maketh it flatte, that it may bee fitte for him
that ſtampeth it, doeth nothing but that which is committed to his
charge: and if hee that ſtampeth it, findeth it not ſo flat or ſo round,
as it ought to be, yet doeth hee nothing but marke it, and ſo leaueth
it as he found it.
               Moreouer,A good leſſon for euery one. wee are to note well, howe God giueth vs euen in
our nature, a goodlie inſtruction concerning that order and concord
that ought to bee amongeſt vs all, by doing euery one his duetie, and
helping eche other ſo farre as wee may. For wee may learne three
principall poyntes in that order, which God hath ſet betweene the
vertues of the Vegetatiue ſoule for the nouriſhing of the bodie,
which ſerue greatly for the preſeruation of humane ſocietie, Firſt,
howe euerie one ought to behaue himſelfe in his office, and not
leaue others to performe that woorke which is enioyned him. Secondly,
howe euerie one of vs ought to keepe his ranke and order,
not making ouer much haſte nor beeing too ſlacke, and without anie
confuſion of offices, or vſurping any thing of that which belongeth
to others. Thirdly, the consideration of thoſe inconueniences
which may befall euery common-wealth and ſocietie of men, if
this order bee not well kept and obſerued. For the like will happen
vnto it, that doeth to a bodie, which is not nouriſhed as it ought
to bee, and in which the naturall vertues doe not their duetie, as I
haue declared. For from thence proceedeth all the confuſion that
is in the life of man, and all thoſe miſeries which wee dayly ſee
therein.
               Concerning the ſeates of theſe vertues of the nouriſhing ſoule
mentioned by vs,Of the ſeates of the naturall vertues. wee are to knowe, that although they bee greater
and more apparant in ſome partes then in others, yet they are
ſpredde throughout the whole bodie, but after a diuerſe manner. For
in perfect liuing creatures, the concoction of the meate is firſt made
in the ſtomacke, that ſo it may bee prepared for the liuer; the ſeconde
is made in the liuer, that it may bee turned into blood: the
thirde is in all the members, that it may bee changed into their
ſubſtance. So that there is no ende or ſtay in the bodie of concocting,

and conſequently of purging the meate, and of caſting out
that which is ſuperfluous. For the heate doeth continually warme,
and as it were ſeethe the moiſture: neither is there any meate ſo pure,
which hath not alwayes ſome excrements and ſuperfluities, that are
to be ſeperate and eiected.
               Heereof it is, that the whole body of liuing creatures is as it were
bored through, and hath diuers pipes to the ende there might be more
open paſſages for the auoyding of theſe excrements according to that
purging which is done day and night by the partes appointed therevnto,How excrements are voyded.
as wee haue alreadie touched it, ſpeaking of thoſe members
whereby ſuch purging is performed after a diuers manner, eſpecially
when wee ſpake of the braine. Nowe beſides that purging which is
vnder the armepittes and in the groyne, we ſee howe the thinneſt excrements
voyde at euery part of the bodie, as wee may iudge by that
filth which daily is ſeene in the head, handes, feete and in all the reſt of
the body. For wee cannot buſie our ſelues ſo much in waſhing and
cleanſing all the partes and members of the bodie, but ſtill wee may
finde ſomewhat to waſh and to make cleane. Therefore wee ſtande
in neede of daily nouriſhment, that whatſoeuer diminiſheth continually
from vs, may from time to time bee reſtored and made good againe.
But this vertue of nouriſhing, is the firſt and ſimpleſt of all the
naturall vertues of the Vegetatiue ſoule. For there are two others neceſſary
for the life and preſeruation of liuing creatures, of which we
haue already ſpoken, namely the power of augmenting, and that
other of engendring.Of the growing of bodies. So that liuing creatures are not onely nourished
by that foode which they receiue, but they growe bigger and
begette their like. For there is no liuing creature that hath a bodie,
but it groweth vp vntill it come to a certaine greatneſſe and
meaſure. For this cauſe the vertue of augmenting and growing
was added to the nouriſhing vertue: and the vertue of engendering
to them both,Wherein the natural vertues differ ech from other. but ſo as they differ in manie poyntes. For
firſt, although the vertues of nourishing and of augmenting agree
in this, that they are both giuen to euerie liuing creature,
yet they differ heerein, that the vertue of nouriſhing continueth
alwayes ſo long as the creature liueth, euen from the beginning
of it vnto the end. But the vertue of growing greater, although it beginne
with the other, yet hath it a ſet time limited, wherein it ſtaieth:
and as before the creature waxed bigger and increaſed in greatneſſe
and vigour, ſo after it commeth to the appoynted time, it beginneth
to fall and to diminiſh, and as it were to retire backe, and
to reſtrayne it ſelfe. And as for the vertue of engendering, it

differeth from both the other, firſt in that it is not giuen ſo generally
to all liuing creatures as they are, and then in that it beginneth not ſo
ſoone. For it commeth then when the liuing creature through nouriſhment
and growth, hath attayned to thoſe vertues that are neceſſary
for generation.
               Beſides, it hath this common with the vertue of augmentation, that
it hath certaine limites and bounds, vnto which after it is once come,
it weakeneth and in the ende decayeth vtterly. Wherein it differeth
from the nouriſhing vertue. Nowe the vertue of growing greater
hath as many other particular vertues vnder it for the execution of
it owne office, as the vertue of nouriſhing hath according as
was touched before. Whereby wee learne, that bodies growe
not greater, neither augment by the heaping vp of much matter
outwardely applied, as when a houſe is ſet vp, wee ſee timber
ioyned to timber, and ſtone to ſtone in the building of it, but
this is done by the ſame hidden and ſecrete arte and cunning in
nature, whereby wee are nouriſhed. For in this poynt there is
no difference betweene the vertue of nouriſhing, and that of augmenting,
but onelie heerein that in nouriſhment the meate is turned
into the ſubſtance of the bodie,How meate nouriſheth the body. and in augmenting the foode
beeing thus turned, doeth from within ſtretch foorth the quantitie
of the bodie outwardly. And ſo this vertue of augmenting dependeth
of the nouriſhing vertue. For meate nouriſheth as it is a ſubſtance
with qualities meete for nouriſhment, and augmenteth by
reaſon of the quantitie it hath. For this cauſe hath God created the
bodies of liuing creatures with ſuch a ſubſtance, that as they haue
ſundrie paſſages and holes in them like to ſponges, to the ende to
purge by them, ſo he would that the ſubſtance they receiue by their
foode might paſſe by the ſame holes, that they might augment and
grow greater. So that all of them haue their pores and litle holes albeit
they appeare not to the eye, whereby nouriſhment entreth and extendeth
it ſelfe in greatneſſe, length, and thickneſſe. The conſideration
hereof hath cauſed ſome skilfull men,How mettals and ſtones growe. to place mettals and ſtones
in the ranke of liuing creatures, becauſe they growe in the earth, as
the bodies of plants and liuing creatures doe. Neither is their opinion
without ſome ſhewe of reaſon. For wee knowe that they grow and
increaſe and that inwardly: which ſeemeth not to bee done without
drawing vnto themſelues ſome inward nouriſhment, as liuing creatures
vſe to doe. Beſides they haue alſo their pores and paſſages to
ſtretch foor
                     •
                  h and augment themſelues by. Notwithſtanding all this
there is greater reaſon to place them in the ranke of thoſe natures and

creatures, which augment and grow greater by adding and ioyning
of matter vnto them, as wee ſee fountaines and riuers to increaſe:
and ſo likewiſe fire. Which albeit it ſeemeth to be nouriſhed and augmented
with that matter which is put vnto it, yet is it not nouriſhed
as liuing creatures are by meanes of that foode which they receiue.
For they haue their boundes of growing ſet them which they cannot
paſſe, as wee ſee the like alſo in plantes: but fire hath no limites,
as that which alwayes increaſeth, as long as it findeth any matter to
burne.
               Whereby we may conclude, that naturall heate in man or in other
liuing creatures, is not the cauſe of their nouriſhing and growth, but
onely the inſtrument;The true cauſe or nouriſhing in creatures. and that the true cauſe, in regarde of ſecond
cauſes, is in the ſoule next after God, who is the firſt cauſe of all
things, yea the cauſe of cauſes. Therefore it is hee that hath alotted
out to euerie man the terme firſt of his life and growth, and
then of his declining and death: ſo that according as hee will eyther
prolong or ſhorten our life, and cauſe vs to encreaſe or diminiſh,
ſo hee diſpoſeth the ſeconde cauſes, and thoſe meanes whereby
hee will bring it to paſſe. Nowe wee muſt conſider what inſtrumentes
the ſoule vſeth to execute in the bodie of man, her naturall
woorkes of nouriſhing and augmenting it, (of which wee haue nowe
ſpoken) and after what manner ſhee vſeth them. Firſt then wee will
looke into the ventricle and ſtomacke, and ſee what figure, what Orifices
and filaments it hath. This matter then, ASER, belongeth to
thee to intreate of.
            
            
               What inſtrumentes the Soule vſeth in the bodie about the naturall
woorke of nouriſhing and augmenting: of the Ventricle or ſtomacke,
and of the figure, Orifices, and Filaments it hath: of the coates
of the ſtomacke, and of what ſubſtance and nature it is: of the
cauſes of hunger, and of appetite: of the inferiour Orifice.
Chap. 61.
               ASER. Wee ſhoulde bee very happie if wee knewe howe to followe
that order in all our doings, which God hath ſet downe in
all his woorkes, and whereof he giueth nature vnto vs for a Miſtreſſe.
But if the ſimplicitie of our vnderſtanding bee not able to attaine to
ſo high wiſedome, at the leaſt we may knowe howe farre ſhort euery
one of vs commeth of our duetie, and from whence proceedeth all
the confuſion that is in the life of man, and all thoſe miſeries which
wee commonly beholde. On the other ſide, nothing coulde hinder vs

were it not a voluntarie and malicious ignorance, in that wee conſider
not, what a marueilous and excellent Woorkemaſter, God the
Creator ſheweth himſelfe to bee, in this part of the ſoule whereof
our preſent diſcourſes are, and in that order, which hee hath
ſet therein, and in thoſe vertues which hee hath beſtowed vpon
it. For his woorke is ſo excellent, and woorthie of ſo great admiration,
that no wiſedome or power whatſoeuer is able ſo much as to
imitate it. Wherefore wee are to account it a very great and noble
bleſſing, to haue onely ſome knowledge of it, and to bee able to
comprehende ſome thing thereof by our vnderſtanding. For there
will be alwayes enough whereat to marueile greatly, and namely in
the conſideration of thoſe inſtruments, which the ſoule vſeth in the
nouriſhment and growth of bodies, as we ſhall know in the ſequele
of our diſcourſes.
               Therefore as heeretofore wee haue handled and ſpoken of the
diuers powers of the ſoule, and of thoſe inſtruments it hath in regarde
of the Animal and Vital partes, as of the braine, heart, head,
and other externall members of the bodie, ſo nowe wee are to conſider
of the internall inſtruments, which ſerue the naturall powers
of the ſoule.The inſtruments of the naturall powers of the ſoule. And firſt, it hath the liquors and humours of the bodie
tempered together by a certaine Lawe and reaſon of the Creator
that created them. Secondly, the other inſtruments of the ſoule,
are thoſe members both externall and internall, which are framed and
haue their ſeuerall proportion, euery one as neede requireth, for the
office aſſigned vnto them by God their Creator. For before the ſoule
bee clothed with the bodie, theſe inſtrumentes are faſhioned and
made fitte for it by nature in thoſe things wherein it coulde doe nothing
of it ſelfe. For the ſoule cannot create her bodie. But after
that God hath created the bodie for it, and that by his appoyntment
nature hath diſpoſed and fitted the ſame for the ſoule, ſo farre foorth
as is requiſite, before it can ſhewe what vertue it hath, and ſettle
it ſelfe to worke in the bodie, then is ſhee left to doe that which
ſhee is able to performe by the powers of her preſence, and to exerciſe
her ſelfe therein, beginning alwayes at the leaſt and baſeſt
of her offices, before ſhee apply her ſelfe to the chiefeſt, by
diſplaying her principall powers. For whileſt the childe is in his
mothers bellie, the ſoule practiſeth vpon it her Vegetatiue and
nouriſhing vertue by which it is nouriſhed and groweth in greatneſſe,How the ſoule vſeth the inſtruments of ye body.
as wee ſee the like in plantes. And when it is borne, it receiueth
beſides from the ſoule the power of moouing and of ſence,
as we ſee beaſtes haue: and laſt of all by litle and litle the ſoule diſplayeth

her other principall vertues. But to ſpeake of our matter
ſubiect, and to handle particularly thoſe inſtrumentes of the
ſoule, which ſhee vſeth in the nouriſhing and augmenting of the
bodie, wee will beginne at the Ventricle, commonly called the ſtomacke.
               Nowe becauſe this name is vſed diuerſly,Of the Ventricle and ſtomack
                        •
                     
                   wee are to note, that
the Phyſicions, who diſtinguiſh the partes of the bodie more exactly
and properly, apply this name of ſtomacke more ſpecially to
the vpper mouth of it, and call the whole by the name of Ventricle,
whereof wee will ſpeake anon. Oftentimes alſo they take
the ſtomacke for the whole paſſage and pype, called Oeſophage or
the throate: but commonly the whole Ventricle is called by that
name. Therefore I will vſe it indifferently, thereby to apply my
ſelfe the better to the vſuall manner of ſpeaking. Wee are to
knowe then firſt of all, that amongeſt all the members ſeruing to
nouriſhment, GOD hath appoynted this to bee the firſt, as that
which receiueth the meate and drinke ſent vnto it by the throate.
And to the ende wee may the better knowe the prouidence of
God, in the offices and commodities of this member, I will firſt
ſpeake ſomewhat of the figure and forme thereof, then of the ſituation
of it,Of the figure of the ſtomacke. and laſt of all, of the ſubſtaunce of it. The figure of
it is rounde and long much like to a bagge-pipe, as that which is
beeing ſomewhat larger at the bottome, and ariſing vpwarde towardes
the left ſide, groweth narrower by litle and litle. For ſeeing
it was to occupie the whole pace that is betwixt the liuer and the
ſpleene, it was requiſite that it ſhoulde bee long, to the ende
it might not trouble that place which is aſſigned vnto them, but
giue them place. Likewiſe it was requiſite that it ſhoulde bee
rounde, both becauſe the rounde forme is moſt capable, and alſo
becauſe it will not ſo eaſily be broken and marred as other formes
will be.
               Vnto the ſtomacke is ioyned this narrow, pipe called Oeſophage, to
the end it might receiue into it thereby, all kinds of meate and drink,
as wee declared when we ſpake of the pipes in the throate, and of
meates and drinkes.Of the mouths of the ſtomacke. For this cauſe there are two mouthes or doores
in the ſtomacke, called Orifices, of which the one is called the higher
Orifice or mouth, becauſe it is vppermoſt, and the other for the
ſame reaſon is called the lower Orifice. The firſt is to receiue
the meate that is ſent to the ſtomacke by the Oeſophage. And
this is that which the Phyſicions call by the proper name of ſtomacke,
as wee hearde before, although commonly it is called

the heart.How the name of the heart is abuſed. For when wee feele any weakeneſſe there, or anie
deſire to vomite, wee commonly ſay that wee are ill at the heart,
or that ſomething lyeth vpon our heart. But this ſenſe of griefe is
not at the heart, but in that part of the Ventricle, which is called the
vppermoſt Orifice or ſtomacke, whoſe ſeate and place is on the left
ſide neere to the backe-bone. And this Orifice or mouth of the
ſtomacke, is a great deale more large then the nethermoſt, becauſe
the meate is oftentimes not well chewed, beſides many great
and hard morſels that are ſwallowed nowe and then. Againe, this
part is verie ſenſible,The originall of appetite. becauſe there is the originall and place of appetite,
by reaſon of thoſe nerues of which it is chiefely made, that
growe together like vnto nettes. Heereof wee may note this, that
the prouidence of God hath ſo well prouided for all the members
and inſtruments of nouriſhment, that there is not one of them, but
it hath ſome ſmall sinewe to giue it ſenſe, whereby it may feele
and perceiue what humours are hurtfull vnto it, that by the griefe
which it receiueth, men may be moued to haue recourſe to ſuch remedies
as are able to releeue it.
               But to returne to our matter,The doore of the vpper Orifice. wee are to knowe, that the vpper
Orifice hath the Midriffe ioyned vnto it, which is in ſteede of a
doore to cloſe and ſhutte it vp, that when it is full of meates and
drinkes, they ſhoulde not aſcende vp againe by the throate. Concerning
the nethermoſt Orifice it is both by the Greeke and Latine
Writers called by a name that ſignifieth a Doore-keeper,Of the lower Orifice. being
made to let out the meate concocted in the Ventricle together with
the ſuperfluities and excrementes. Therefore alſo it is narrower then
the vpper Orifice, and compaſſed about with a certaine kernelley
fleſhe, to the ende that nothing ſhoulde paſſe by which were
not well digeſted before, and that by meanes of the mouth of it
made in the manner of a ring. It is ſituated on the right ſide vnder
the hollowneſſe of the liuer, a little lower then the other Orifice.
But it is not at the very bottome of the Ventricle, but a little
higher, to the ende the foode beeing retayned and kept at the bottome,
might bee heated and digeſted there. So that after the ſtomacke
hath receiued into it the meate and drinke, both theſe doores
as well aboue as beneath are ſhut, that the heate within might be retained
and kept cloſe.Of the ſmall ſtrings of the Orifices. For this cauſe there are certaine filaments or
ſmall ſtringes, of which ſome are direct and ſtraight, hauing in them
a marueilous ſecret vertue of nature to drawe vnto them: others are ouerth
wart, and paſſe cleane croſſe the former through certaine little
corners that lie long-wiſe. Their office is to cloſe vp the vpper part

from the body of the ſtomach. Beſides, there are other crooked filaments,
which through oblique corners paſſe alongſt the ſides of both
the other: and theſe, becauſe they cloſe the whole body of the ſtomacke,
haue power of retaining, and ſerue to ſhut vp the mouth of the
ſtomacke. So that theſe filaments or threedes in regarde of their office,
may be compared to the ſtrings of a purſe whereby it is ſhut. And
becauſe the ſtomacke, being cloſed and ſhut vp, digeſteth the meate
a great deale better then if it were gaping and wide open, therefore
nature hath prouided in this ſort.The ſtomake compared to a pot on the fire. Wherein wee ſee it reſembleth a pot
ſet to ſeething, which retaineth the heate, and ſeetheth that which
it containeth better when it is cloſe couered, then when it is without
a couer.
               Now we are further to knowe, that the ſtomacke is made of two
coats or skins one within an other, conſiſting partly of a fleſhy, and
partly of a ſinowy ſubſtance. The innermoſt is fuller of ſinewes and
thicker, hauing ſtraight filaments within, wherewith as it were with
fingers, it draweth the meate downeward: and without, it hath certaine
oblique filaments, which compaſſe it about, and ſerue to holde
it in. The outward coate, which is more fleſhy, hath ouerthwart filaments
that ſerue for expulſion. For when the ſtomacke is ſometime
ouercharged with meate, ſo that it is not able to embrace and keepe
it for digeſtion, then by meanes of the expulſiue vertue, it driueth out
that which is ſuperfluous, and prouoketh a man to vomite, to the end
it be not ſtifled through the waight and burthen of the meate it beareth.
For this cauſe the throate is a pipe appointed for the moouing of
things vp and downe, not hauing any attractiue force in it, but being
onely a meere way and place of paſſage, through which meates and
drinkes paſſe to and fro as neede requireth.
               Concerning the ſeate of the ſtomach,Howe the ſtomacke is placed. it is placed in the middeſt
of the body betweene the liuer and the ſplene, and that in ſuch ſort
that the liuer embraceth and warmeth it on the right ſide, and the
ſplene doeth the like on the left ſide.Of the ſubſtance of it. As for the ſubſtance of it, it is of
the nature of ſinewes, that is cold and drie. For it is very conuenient it
ſhould bee ſo, firſt, becauſe of the ſenſe and feeling, that it might bee
incited by ſuch things as agree with it, reiecting all others: ſecondly, in
regarde of appetite, that it might be the greater and of more efficacie.
Moreouer, it was requiſite that it ſhoulde be of ſuch matter, to
the ende it might bee the harder, and receiue the leſſe hurt from the
hardeneſſe and ſharpneſſe of meates.How it is warmed by other neighbour partes. And beſides the naturall heate
which it hath of it ſelfe, it is heated alſo by the neighbour partes, to
the ende it may the better perfourme that duetie that lyeth vpon it.

For this cauſe it hath on the right ſide the liuer, which is vnto it in
ſteade of a boyling pot or cauldron: and on the left ſide it hath the
ſplene for the ſame purpoſe: the muſcles of the chine bone are behind
it, and before is the skinne commonly called the Kell. Likewiſe as the
heart is not farre from it, ſo the midriffe lying ouer it, doeth greatly
heate it by continuall motion. Whereby we ſee, how the prouidence
of God hath well fenced and clothed it on all ſides, that it might
haue as much heate as is needefull for it. Touching this skinne called
the Kell,
                  Of 
                        〈◊〉
                      Kell or Kall. it is a double coate or couering, ſpreading it ſelfe wholly ouer
the intralles, being in faſhion like to a purſe, by reaſon that it is double
and wouen like to a nette, conſiſting of fatte, of veines, of atteries
and of a skinne. Moreouer, the ſtomach is warmed by the ſpirits
that enter into it in great abundance, by reaſon that it is knit vnto the
neighbour partes by veines and arteries.The cauſes of appetite in the ſtomach. Nowe becauſe it ſerueth to
the nutritiue facultie, the naturall vertue thereof is to deſire foode,
the ſenſe and feeling of which appetite is in the vpper Orifice, into
which many ſinewes are wouen that come downe from the braine.
Therefore when the members of the bodie being empty deſire nouriſhment,
and labour to drawe it from the veines, and the veines from
the liuer, and the liuer from the ſtomach, and the ſtomach from the
Orifice, then is there a certaine contraction and wrinckling as it were
of the Orifice, by reaſon of the veines that ſucke it. In which contraction
and gathering together of the ſtomachs mouth, there is by
meanes of the nerues a kinde of ſenſe and griefe,The originall of hunger. which we call Hunger,
whereby liuing creatures are ſtirred vp to ſeeke after foode and
nouriſhment. I make no repetition heere of that which hath beene
ſpoken before, namely, of the drawing, reteining, altering, and expulſing
vertues of the vegetatiue ſoule. For by our diſcourſes wee may
eaſily vnderſtand, how euery one of them doeth his duety both in the
ſtomach and liuer, and in all the other members of the body. But the
altering vertue is the chiefeſt, whoſe office is to change in the ſtomach,
and to conuert into iuyce and liquor, that meate which it hath
receiued.
               This liquor is called by the Phyſicions Chylus, which is a Greeke
worde, and reſembleth the reme of a ptiſame: it is concocted in the
ſtomach, vntill it bee ſo well prepared that it may be ſent vnto the liuer.
Which concoction is firſt and principally made by the naturall
vertue of the ſtomach, as it appeareth in this that euery ſtomach doth
after a wonderfull manner embrace and warme all the meate, which
it receiueth,The ſtomach compared to a wombe. euen as the whole wombe embraceth her burthen and
fruite vntil it come to ripeneſſe: and when the time of birth is come,

the expulſiue vertue thereof driueth it foorth. So fareth it with the
meate in the ſtomach, excepting this difference, that the ſtomach
needeth not ſo long a time to finiſh his worke in, as the wombe doth.
Afterward this naturall vertue of the ſtomach, is holpen and warmed
by thoſe meanes before declared. And when the ſtomach hath finiſhed
this firſt concoction,The office of the lower Orifice. whereby the meate receiued is ſo duely
prepared that it may bee ſent into the liuer, then the lower Orifice
and doore called the Porter, openeth it ſelfe, and ſendeth this liquor
into the intralles and bowelles, which are ordained as well to
receiue it, as to purge foorth the ſuperfluities and excrements. Therefore,
AMANA. thy ſpeach ſhall be of theſe, that ſo wee may goe
forward with our matter of thoſe inſtruments of the vegetatiue ſoule,
which ſhee vſeth in her naturall workes.
            
            
               Of the intralles and bowelles, and of their names and offices: of
the nature of the three ſmaller guttes, and of the other three that
are greater: of the instructions which wee may learne by theſe
things. Chap. 62.
               AMANA, If there were no other reaſon but this, that the pooreſt
and baſeſt perſons amongeſt men are the creatures of GOD,
and created after his image and likeneſſe, as well as the richeſt,
mightieſt, and higheſt in dignities and honours, and that as well
the one as the other, are members of the bodie of mankinde, it
were enough to with-holde vs from contemning any perſon,The poorer ſort are not to be contemned. of what
condition, eſtate or qualitie ſoeuer hee bee, ſo that his vocation bee
of GOD, and profitable for mankinde. For in contemning any
creature and his eſtate, GOD, who created him and ordained his
vocation, is contemned and iniuried thereby, conſidering that hee
is his worke, which cannot be mocked, but the workemaſter that
framed it muſt needes bee ſcorned. Beſides, wee are to conſider,
that many of them that are taken to bee the vileſt and baſeſt perſons,
are a great deale more profitable and neceſſary, and ſo likewiſe their
callings and offices, then many others that are in greater reputation,
and more honourable according to mans iudgement, who notwithſtanding
might more eaſily be ſpared, then thoſe of whom there
is leſſe accompt and reckoning made.
               The like may be ſaid of the vſe of the members of our bodies, and
of the neceſſitie and need which we haue of them that are accompted

moſt vile and abiect: which albeit they be leſſe honourable then the
reſt, yet are they more neceſſary for this life of ours, then many others
that are a great deale more noble and more excellent. For wee
may liue without eies,The neceſſitie of the bowelles. without eares, without handes, without feete,
and without many other goodly members: but not without the intralles
and bowelles, which are but the ſinkes and wide-draughts of
our bodies, although there be but one of them onely wanting. For
there is not one of them but it is profitable, yea neceſſary for vs, inſomuch
that no other can doe that office which lieth vpon it: the Lord
hauing ſo diſpoſed it, that euery one of them muſt diſcharge his owne
office by himſelfe.
               Of theſe intralles and guttes there are ſixe in number,The number and names of the guttes. neere
vnto the ſtomacke, namely, three ſmall and three great ones, being
all of a round and hollowe figure, according to the greatneſſe and
thickeneſſe of euery one of them. They are called the inſtruments of
diſtribution and purgation, becauſe they diſtribute the foode, and
ſend foorth the ſuperfluities and excrements. Nowe to conteine all
theſe in their place, they are couered and wrapped about together
with the other entralles of the naturall partes, with two coats or couerings,The bowelles haue two couerings.
namely, with that which is called the Kell, whereof mention
was made in the former diſcourſe, and which couereth the bowells,
ſtretching it ſelfe euen to the priuie partes: ſo that it executeth the
ſame office vnto them, that it doeth vnto the ſtomacke, as wee were
giuen to vnderſtand. Beſides, there is an other coate or skinne called
Peritone,
                  Of the Peritone or inner 
                        •
                     ine of the belly ioyned to the kall. becauſe it is ſpread round about the lower belly, and enuironeth
the ſtomach, the bowelles, the kall, the liuer, the ſplene, and
the kidneys: in a worde, it couereth all the members from the midriffe
downe to the ſharebone. The vſe of this is great. For firſt it ſerueth
for a couering to couer all the members: then it ſerueth alſo for the
muſcles that are laide vpon them. Moreouer, it cauſeth the ſuperfluities
of drie meates to deſcend more ſpeedily. Fourthly, it keepeth the
ſtomacke and bowels that they ſwell not eaſily:The vſes of it. and fiftly, it knitteth
together and conioyneth all the members within it, as we haue ſeene
howe the other partes of the body are ſeparated and clothed with
skinnes and membranes. For this cauſe it is framed and faſhioned like
to an egge, and hath his beginning from the ligaments, which binde
together the turning ioynts of the reines, and is knit vnto them. So
that the vſe of it is to tie and knit vnto the backe the members of the
inferiour belly. Nowe concerning the intralles and bowels, although
they 
                     •
                  e vnited to the ſtomacke, and ſo ioyntly followe each other, yet
they 
                     •
                  iffer in figure, in ſituation, and in offices. True it is, that their

ſubſtance differeth little from that of the ſtomach.The ſubſtance of the bowels. For they are of a
certaine whitiſh fleſh, hauing no blood in any of them: neither is
there any other difference, but onely in this, that the bigger guts are
more full and fatte,The bowels are made of two coates. and the ſmaller are otherwiſe. Againe, they haue
all this in common together, that they are made of two coates, which
God hath giuen them for the greater preſeruation of them, and of the
life of liuing creatures. For oftentimes vlcers and ſores breede, chiefely
when ſome great inflammation hath gone before, ſo that they putrifie
and fret, and one of the coats be ſpoiled. Neuertheleſſe a man
may liue by the other that continueth ſound, and diſchargeth well enough
all his dueties.
               Nowe foraſmuch as they are inſtruments appointed for the purging
of the body, the fibres or little ſtrings both of the inner and vtter
coats, are all in a manner croſſe-wiſe, except ſome fewe intermingled
long-wiſe, to the ende that the purging might be moderated in ſuch
ſort,Of the three 
                        〈◊〉
                      gut
                        •
                     . as that it neither be too much nor too little. The three ſmaller
are placed vppermoſt, which becauſe they were made that the meate
being turned into liquor might be conueyed through them, therefore
it was requiſite they ſhoulde be ſo ſlender, and that chiefely for two
cauſes. The firſt, to the ende the paſſage might bee more eaſie: the
other, becauſe that in the very paſſage ſome concoction is made of
the liquor and foode: ſo that they are the ſooner warmed, by reaſon
of their ſlender and thinne making.Of their names. Nowe concerning the name and
peculiar office of euery one:The Duodene or ſtomacke gut. the firſt is called Duodene; becauſe of the
length of it, which is without any folding or turning. It is as it were
a part of the ſtomach hanging downe, or as a changing of the ſtomach
into a gut, being twelue fingers long, whereupon it was ſo called
by the ancient Phyſicions, although nowe there is none found of
that length. It beginneth at the porter of the ſtomach, and is ſo ſeated
beſide the liuer, that looke where that leaueth, and the other following
(called the hungry gut) beginneth, there is a paſſage from
the bladder of gall, to bring the yellow humour thither called choller,
to the end it might help forward the meate, and make cleane the gut.
The ſecond,The hungry gut. called the hungry gut, is ſo termed, becauſe it holdeth but
a litle foode in regard of the other following, ſo that it may be ſaid after
a ſort to faſt: whereof there are three cauſes. The firſt is, the great
number of Meſeraicall veines and arteries, which are in greater number
about that gut then about the reſt. Whereupon they ſucke out
more ſpeedily the liquor and foode which paſſeth through that, then
if they were fewer in number. The ſecond cauſe is, becauſe the liuer,
which is neereſt to that gut, doeth likewiſe drawe nouriſhment from

it, which is ſooner done then from the reſt that are farther off. The
third is, the falling downe of the chollericke humour into it, which
intermedleth not it ſelfe with the liquor and foode, but glideth
downe by the ſide of this gut vnto that which is called Colon, to the
ende it may thruſt forward the excrements and purge the humours:
which it perfourmeth becauſe it is ſharpe and biting. Now by reaſon
it continually prouoketh this gut to expulſion, it falleth out to be more
empty then the reſidue.
               Then followeth the third ſmall intralle,The Ileon or folded Gut. called Ileos by the Graecians,
both becauſe it hath many fouldings, as alſo for the manifolde
knitting of it to the Meſenterium from whence ſundrie veines
come into this. The hungry gut and this haue both one office: onely
heerein they differ, that the hungry Gut is ſooner ſucked then
this, which retaineth a longer time, that liquor and foode that it
receiueth. For this cauſe it is of a greater length, and hath more
foldings and turnings, to the ende it may the better concoct the liquor,
and bee tempering with the foode the longer time: whereby
it ſhall not neede to bee filled, and ſtuffed preſently with other
meates. And heerein wee haue to note the good forecaſt of nature.
For if wee were preſently to returne againe to the Table after we had
taken our meate, wee ſhoulde doe nothing all our life time but eate
and drinke. Therefore ſome of the ancient Philoſophers haue in this
reſpect acknowledged the prouidence of GOD, ſaying that theſe
foldings, plites, and windings were made to this ende, that men
might not liue ignorantly as beaſtes that are deſtitute of all knowledge:
which would follow vndoubtedly, if they were of neceſſitie to
attend alwayes vpon the belly.
               Nowe let vs ſpeake of the other three great Guts, which followe
the ſmall ones.Of the three great Guts. Theſe then are lower, more fleſhie and thicke, becauſe
their chiefe office is to receiue the excrements of the aboue named
Guts, and to retaine the ſame vntill the iuſt time come to ſend
them foorth: euen as it is the office of the three former to diſtribute
the liquor and foode by the Meſeraicall veines. The firſt of theſe
great ones is called the Blinde Gut,The blinde Gut. becauſe that being large and
great, it hath but one way, both to receiue in, and to let out the
matter receiued: whereupon it is commonly called by ſome the
Sacke or Budget Gut. His office is to receiue the excrementes from
the laſt leſſer Gut, and hauing drawne out ſome nouriſhment from
them to caſt foorth the reſt to the other Gut called Colon. For this
cauſe the doores and holes of theſe three laſt Guts, concurre well

together in a hollowe place.
               Nowe becauſe this blinde Gut is wide and round, and hath many
foldings, among other things it ſtandeth in ſteade of an other ſtomach,
to keepe and to preſerue meate in it againſt ſome want and
neceſſitie to come,The fift gut called Colon, or the great gut. and to diſtribute it to the neighbour-members
after a long hunger. Whereunto the Gut called Colon doeth alſo
helpe, both by reaſon of the capacitie of it, as for the oblique ſituation
thereof, as alſo becauſe it keepeth within it foode and nouriſhment.
Concerning the name of it, the Greeke worde from whence
it is taken ſignifieth Gaine, becauſe it is greater and more capable
then any of the reſt: or elſe it may ſignifie as a man woulde ſay,
Cut, becauſe it is as it weree cut into ſundry holes, and hath diuers
turnings. For it receiueth the excrementes, and to the ende they
ſhoulde not paſſe away by and by, it ſendeth them by little and little
through ſtraight paſſages. The chollericke humour deſcendeth
out of the hungrie Gut into this, whereby the dirt is both coloured
and driuen foorth.
               Of this Gut called Colon,
                  The colike and Ileacke paſſions. the Colike paſſion taketh the name:
as the Ileaca paſſion doeth of the Gut Ileon. Nowe becauſe this Gut
is puffed vp more then any of the reſt, and is very painefull to them
that haue it ſtopped, it hath certaine ſtraight threedes wouen amongeſt
the ouerthwart Fibres, which ſtrengthen the coates and skinnes
thereof, to the ende they ſhoulde not breake or cracke, when they
are blowen vp and ſtrained. Whereby wee ſee againe howe the
counſaile of Gods prouidence hath notably prouided for all things,
whoſe excellent maieſtie hath not deſpiſed theſe moſt baſe, earthly,
and brute parts.
               Nowe it remaineth that wee ſhoulde conſider of the third Gut,The ſtraight gut.
called the Straight Gut. For although it proceede from the Gut
Colon, yet it differeth from it both in place and figure, and is
called the Straight Gut becauſe of the ſtraightneſſe of it. Some call
it the Fatte Gut, becauſe it is paſſing fatte in beaſtes. It reacheth
vnto the very fundament, at the ende whereof is placed a muſcle,
being faſhioned rounde like to a Ring, to keepe in, and to
retaine ventoſitie and excrementes vntill Nature pleaſe: to this
ende that expulſion of them might not bee made vpon euery occaſion,
and in euery place indifferently, againſt our wils, and contrary
to naturall and ciuill honeſtie.The vſe of it. For the vſe of the ſtraight
Gut is to carrie and throwe foorth cleane out of the bodie the filth,
dregs, and groſſeſt excrements thereof, being ſuch as are altogether

vnprofitable, and hurtfull to the body. Nowe foraſmuch as it is the
loweſt gut and moſt burthened, by reaſon that it muſt holde all the
groſſe excrements of whatſoeuer entreth into the body by the mouth,
and is oftentimes very much blowen and ſtretched vp, therefore the
diuine prouidence hath giuen vnto it more threedes and fibres of all
ſortes then to any of the reſt, and hath made it ſtrong and able to
beare the charge. So likewiſe his heauenly counſaile hath prouided,
that amongſt all the members of the body, thoſe ſhould be ſtrongeſt,
that haue the greateſt burthen and ſtreſſe to beare. And for this cauſe
alſo this ſtraight gutte hath this muſcle, which the Phyſicions call
Sphincter,
                  Of the muſcle Sphincter. being taken from a Greeke worde that ſignifieth to reſtraine
and cloſe vp, becauſe it is an inſtrument of voluntarie motion,
that openeth and ſhutteth as wee will, when neede requireth.
               Nowe for the ende of this ſpeech, if wee conſider well of thoſe
partes whereof wee haue ſpoken, wee ſhall finde that wee carrie about
with vs ſundrie ſortes of ſinkes, which are oftentimes ilfauouredly
looked vnto. And this ought to put vs in minde of our infirmities
and of thoſe goodly ſhoppes wee haue in our bodies full of ſtinking
drugges,A leſſon againſt pride. which ought to take from vs all matter of pride. Moreouer
wee may learne here, that which was ſpoken of in the beginning
of this diſcourſe, namely, the vſe of theſe members, and the neceſſitie
of the baſeſt and leſſe comely partes. Therefore if there were no
other reſpect to be had but this of neceſſitie, wee ought to be ſo farre
from deſpiſing them, eſpecially the workemaſter that hath made and
diſpoſed them, as that wee ought rather thereby to acknowledge
his great prouidence, and the care hee hath had of vs, ſeeing it hath
pleaſed him euen from the high degree of his maieſtie, to prouide for
the leaſt and laſt neceſſities and infirmities of our bodies.Againſt the contempt of inferiour perſons. So likewiſe
by admiring his ſo great bounty and goodneſſe towardes vs, wee
haue good occaſion by his example, to doe the like one towardes an
other, in the performance of all dueties appertaining to a holy and
true friendſhip. Nowe that wee may proſecute our matter ſubiect,
let vs looke into the other naturall powers of the ſoule. Firſt let vs
conſider of the Meſentery, of the Meſeraicall veines; of the ſweete
bread, of the liuer, and of their natures and offices. The handling of
theſe things belong to thee, ARAM.
            
            
               
               Of the Meſentery and Meſareon: of the Meſeraicall veines, of the
Pancreas or ſweet bread, and of their nature and office: of the liuer,
and of his nature and office: of the rootes, bodies, and branches of the
veines, of their names and vſes, and of the ſimilitude betweene them
and the arteries. Chap. 63.
               ARAM. When we conſider how the prouidence of God reacheth
ſo far vnto thoſe things that are profitable & neceſſary in our bodies,
that it forgetteth not, neither omitteth the leaſt thing that is in
them: we ſhould be very blinde of vnderſtanding, if we doubted that
our God prouided not aſwell for all things that are profitable and neceſſary
for our ſoules, for the ſpirituall foode and growth of them, and
for their perfect purging and ſaluation. For albeit there is no ſuperfluity
or excrement, in that ſpiritual food wherewith the ſoule is nouriſhed,
yet is it requiſit and needful, that the ſoule be purged from thoſe excrements
and filthines of ſin, wherwith the deuil hath infected & filled
it. And ſo indeed is it purged in Ieſus Chriſt, who hath waſhed & clenſed
vs from our ſins by his blood, & doth daily purge vs by his holy ſpirit,
and by thoſe means which he hath ordained in his church. Therefore
I am out of doubt, that God meant to put men in minde of theſe
things, by the order & neceſſitie which he hath appointed in the nature
of their bodies, both in regard of their food and of their nouriſhment:
and that we ſhal alwaies find good and holy inſtructions for the ſoule,
by conſidering the nature and office of euery part of the body. Let vs
then conſider of other inſtruments of the naturall powers of the ſoule,
then hitherto we haue ſpoken of.
               After the entrals & guts,Of the Meſentery. the Meſentery foloweth, which is placed in
the midſt of them, whereupon it is ſo called of the Graecians, as if you
would ſay, dwelling in the midst of the guts. And becauſe it is carried and
lift vp into the middle of all theſe veſſels,Of the Meſareon. it is alſo called by ſome Meſareon,
which name ſignifieth the ſelfe ſame thing in Greeke. Others
take Meſareon to be the higheſt part of the Meſentery, which is alſo
called Calicreas by the Graecians, becauſe the fleſh of it is very pleaſant
to eate, according as the name giueth vs to vnderſtand. So that it is
no entrall or gut, but a coat and folded couering in the midſt of them:
or rather a thicke white fleſh, of a ſinowy and kernelly ſubſtance, that
beareth fat, diſtinguiſhing the entralles, and knitting them vnto the
backe.The chiefe vſe of it. But it was chiefely created to beare vp and ſuſtaine the Meſeraicall
veines and arteries, with the ſinewes that are in that member:
which becauſe they are in danger of breaking, through the vehement
motions of the body & ſuch other accidents, therefore the prouidence

of God would not haue them without a foundation, prop, and defence
to countergard them. For this cauſe he hath fortified and faſtened the
branches and diuiſions of the veins, by ſuch a member and inſtrument,
which ſerueth in ſteade of a band and ſtay both to the great and little
ones.Other vſes of the Meſentery. Beſides, his action and vſe alſo is to faſten and keepe the entralles
euery one in his place, and to conuey vnto the liuer by the meſeraicall
veines, that are called the handes thereof, that liquor which
the Graecians call Chylus, of which wee haue already ſpoken. For as
the bodies of trees haue their rootes, which ſpread abroad in the earth
to drawe nouriſhment from thence: euen ſo there are branches diſperſed
throughout the Meſentery, and deriued from the liuer veine,
which are ioyned to the bowelles, as it were ſmall rootes to drawe
foode,Of the Meſeraicall veines. being much like to haires or cob-webs. Theſe braunches or
ſmall rootes are the Meſeraicall veines, ſo called, becauſe they are
placed in the vpper part of that member and inſtrument that is called
Meſareon,
                  Their vſe. whereof I ſpake euen nowe. Their office and nature is to
draw and ſucke out nouriſhment from the guts, and to carry it to the
liuer, from whence they haue all their beginning, as appeareth by
Anatomie: howſoeuer there are that thinke, that ſome of them come
not from thence. The fleſh of the Meſentery is kernelly and fatty, not
only ſeruing in ſteade of a munition and defence, as hath beene ſaid,
but alſo to moiſten the entralles and guts, and to preſerue the heate
both of the bowelles and veines. So likewiſe the arteries are ioyned
to the veines, to giue them heate, and to the guts alſo to concoct the
liquor and nouriſhment. Beſides, the nerues and ſinewes there, ſerue
to giue ſenſe to the guts. There is moreouer a kernelly fleſh, which
the Phyſicions call Pancreas,
                  Of the Pancreas or ſweet bread. becauſe it doeth wholly reſemble fleſh,
as the Greeke name importeth. It is placed in the hollow part of the
liuer, that it might be as it were a cuſhion vnto it, and a preſeruer of
the diuided partes thereof, by filling the void places that are betwene
the ſtomach,The vſes of it. the liuer and the ſpleene, to the ende it may vphold and
protect the meſeraicall veines, and keepe euery thing from breaking either
by falles or by violent motions. Nowe touching the liuer, it is a
very noble member.Of the liuer and excellencie thereof. For it is the principalleſt member of all the naturall
partes, and the chiefeſt inſtrument belonging to the vegetatiue
and nouriſhing power of the ſoule. It is the firſt of the nobler partes
that is made perfect, when the childe is framed in the mothers womb:
it is the author, ſhop, and forge of the blood, the originall and fountaine
of the veines. Therefore the ſubſtance of it is a ſoft and red fleſh,
like to blood newly preſſed out & clodded. Neuertheles in it own nature
it is perfect fleſh, hauing ſundry, different veins diſperſed throughout

as it were threeds, & arteries alſo ioyned vnto thē for their refreſhing.The ſeconde coction is made in the liuer.
Now after the ſtomach hath finiſhed the firſt concoction of meat,
and turned it into liquor as it hath bin declared vnto vs, the ſecond is
made in the liuer, after it hath receiued this liquor ſo prepared by the
ſtomach and guts as we ſaid, and turned it into blood. This concoction
is perfected in the ſmall veines, that are diſperſed throughout the
body of the liuer. And becauſe God hath inioyned this office to this
member, he hath compounded it of ſuch a fleſh & matter, as hath giuen
vnto it this proper and peculiar vertue, to conuert into blood that
foode and nouriſhment that is brought vnto it, to the end it may bee
the inſtrument of the generation of that thing wherewith the body is
nouriſhed. Hauing thus transformed the liquor receiued, it maketh
it redde like vnto it ſelfe: as contrariwiſe, blood is made white in the
breaſts of a woman, both by reaſon of their nature and ſubſtance, as
alſo for other cauſes touched by vs. The temperature of the liuer is hot
and moiſt, ſuch as becommeth the blood and concoction it hath to
performe, which is like to boiled meat. Now foraſmuch as this inſtrument
and member is the chiefeſt in the kitchin of mans body, GOD
hath giuen vnto it ſuch a nature and property, as if there were in it a
harth,Foure degrees of concoction in the liuer. a table, a knife, and a wagoner, as ſome name them, hauing regard
to the diuerſe actions thereof, and to the ſundrie degrees of concoction
made therein. They call the firſt action or degree of concoction
by the name of a harth, becauſe it ſerueth to heate the foode, as a
harth doth in a kitchin. The ſecond is called a table, namely, when the
food beginneth to gather it ſelfe together in the liuer, and is there placed
as it were vpon a table to be ſent vnto the members. The third action
hath the name of a knife giuen vnto it, becauſe it diuideth & maketh
a ſeparation of the humors. And the fourth is as it were the wagoner,
becauſe there is the carriage and conueiance of all from thence
into the hollow veine. For the naturall vertues and powers gouerne
the humors very well, conducting and leading them to their due places.The fountaines of the blood and veines, ſpirites, and arteries.
For this cauſe the liuer is the fountaine of blood, and the ſpring
of all the veines by which it is diſtributed throughout the body as the
heart is the fountaine of the vital ſpirits, & the originall of the arteries,
whereby the ſpirits neceſſary for the body are conueied into it, as the
blood from the liuer. Wherfore euen as the arteries are a kind of veins
to carry and to diſtribute the aire, breath, and vital ſpirites: ſo likewiſe
the veines proceeding from the liuer, are ordained to diſtribute the
blood into all partes of the body. Theſe two are lincked together
with ſuch a neere alliance and agreement, that the veines adminiſter
matter to the vitall ſpirit, which is ingendred in the heart of the pureſt

and moſt ſpiritual blood, as the ſpirit likewiſe helpeth the blood by his
heat in the arteries. Therfore they haue mouths ioyning each to other,
to the end the ſpirit, as it were a litle flame, may receiue noriſhmēt out
of the veines, and that the veins may draw ſpirit & heat from the arteries.Our life compared to a lamp.
For as we haue already touched, our life is much like to a flame in
a lamp, that receiueth food from the oile put into the lamp: euen ſo the
vital ſpirit, which is as a flame within vs, draweth & taketh noriſhmēt
from the veins. Wherein we haue a goodly example of that mutual ſocietie,
which we ought to haue one towards another in this life. Now
of thoſe veins that deriue their originall frō the liuer,Two great veines in the body. there are 2. principall
ones that are very great, of which the others are but as it were
branches, that from the liuer ſpread thēſelues vpwards & downwards
through all the partes of the body. Theſe two veines comming out of
the liuer take their beginning from many little veines, which being as
it were their rootes, ioyne together afterward into two trunks or great
bodies, that diuide themſelues againe into diuers boughs & branches,
whereof ſome are greater and ſome leſſer, after the maner of trees. The
firſt is called the Port-veine,
                  The Port-veine. becauſe it is as it were the doore of the liuer
out of which it proceedeth, being placed in the hollow part thereof.
The vſe and profit of it is to receiue nouriſhment prepared by the
ſtomach and guts, & then to keep it vntill the liuer hath turned it into
pure blood, for to ſend it afterward to all the body by the other great
veine called the Caue or hollow veine.The hollow veine. And this proceedeth from the
outſide of the liuer, reſembling the body of a tree, and diuiding it ſelfe
into two great branches, of which the leſſer aſcendeth vp to the vitall
and animall parts, and to the ends of them, and the bigger branch deſcendeth
downe alongſt the hinder part of the liuer, vpon that part of
the chine bone that is betweene the kidnies, and ſo goeth to thoſe
partes that are contained vnder them. Foraſmuch therefore as the
arteries and veines are the principall inſtruments, whereby the ſoule
giueth life vnto the body, ſome learned men expound that of the vitall
and naturall parts,Eccles. 12. 6. which Salomon ſpeaketh of the ſiluer coard not
lengthened, of the golden ewer broken, of the pitcher broken at the
well, and of the wheele broken at the ciſterne.
               Wee haue already ſpoken of the ſiluer chaine and of the golden
ewer, when wee diſcourſed of the chine bone of the backe, and of the
marrowe of it.A place of Salomon expounded. Touching the reſidue, they vnderſtand by the well
the liuer, which is the fountaine of blood: and by the pitcher, the
veines, becauſe they are the veſſelles whereby the blood is taken
out of the liuer and drawne thence, that it may be diſtributed to all
the bodie: and by the ciſterne is vnderſtoode the heart, and by the

wheele, the head. For we may already perceiue by that which wee
haue already ſaide of the heart, howe ſeruiceable the liuer is vnto it,
conſidering that the heart is the fountaine of the vitall ſpirits and the
originall of the arteries, (as the liuer is of the bloud and of the veines)
and that the vitall ſpirits are engendred in the heart of the pureſt and
moſt ſpirituall bloud, which it draweth and receiueth from the liuer.
Moreouer, theſe vitall ſpirites are by meane of the heart ſent vnto the
braine and the head, to ſerue the animal powers that haue their places
and inſtruments there, and to ſerue all the ſenſes as well ſpirituall as
corporall. Therefore the head is aptly compared to a wheele, both
for the roundneſſe of it, as alſo becauſe it draweth and receiueth the
vitall ſpirites from the heart, which ſendeth them vnto it, as the water
is drawne from his fountaine, well, or ciſterne by meanes of the
wheele. Further, as it is needefull, that there ſhoulde bee a coard to
reach from the wheele downe to the well, and a pitcher or bucket at
the ende of the coard to drawe water withall: ſo the arteries reaching
from the heart vp to the head, are like to the coarde and pitcher,
whereby the braine draweth vitall ſpirites from the heart. For the
great artery,Of the arterie Aorta.
                   called Aorta by the Phyſicions, which commeth out
of the heart, and is diuided into two great branches, of which the
one goeth vpward, to carry the vitall ſpirite to the ſuperiour partes,
and the other downeward to doe the like belowe, foraſmuch as it
ioyneth vnto the heart, may bee taken for the pitcher that draweth
from thence the vitall ſpirites, as from a well; and the branch that aſcendeth
vpward may bee taken for the coard ioyned vnto the wheele.
               The like may bee ſeene in the liuer. For the great veines of it are
as it were the pitcher, and the veines that aſcend vp vnto the head,
as likewiſe the arteries, are the coarde that draweth vp the blood
from out of the liuer. If then wee ioyne that which wee haue already
heard of the ſiluer chaine or coarde, and of the golden ewer, with that
which wee ſpeake nowe of the pitcher and of the well, of the wheele,
and of the ciſterne, wee may bee well aſſured, that Salomon hath
moſt wiſely comprehended in ſo ſmall a number of wordes, all the
internall partes of the body, and all the powers both animall, vitall,
and naturall, together with all the inſtruments, which they haue in
the bodie and in the members thereof. For firſt beholde, the braine
ſignified by the golden ewer: then the pith of the chine bone and the
chine bone it ſelfe by the ſiluer coard: uext, the liuer by the well, which
hath alſo his pitcher: and laſtly, the heart which is ſignified by the
ciſterne. As for that particularly ſpoken of the pitcher and wheele
broken, which drawe water out of the well and ciſterne, it is all one as

if he had ſaide, that when the fountaine of blood in the liuer waxeth
drie and decayeth, the wheele aboue, namely, the head, is broken,
becauſe all the ſenſes both exteriour and interiour, and the animal vertues
faile in the body. For the ſoule wanteth ſound inſtruments to giue
life, motion, and ſenſe vnto it, they being worne & conſumed by thoſe
meanes and cauſes, which we ſhal vnderſtand heereafter. But to follow
our purpoſe, and not to depart from the matter, we muſt intreate
of the nature of blood, and of other humors in the body, & of their diuerſity
and nature. This then, ACHITOB, ſhal be the matter ſubiect
of thy diſcourſe.
            
            
               Of the blood and of other humours in the body: of their diuerſitie and
nature, & of the agreement they haue with the elements: of the ſimilitude
that is betweene the great garden of this great world, and
that of the little world, touching the nouriſhment of things contained
and preſerued in them. Chap. 64.
               ACHITOB. If in many of our diſcourſes wee ſawe great teſtimonies
of the image of the great worlde in man, the matter we haue
now to handle will ſet before our eies ſuch as are moſt cleere and euident.A ſimilitude.
For looke howe the ſea is as it were the great fountaine and
womb of all waters, and of the floods & riuers that iſſue out of them to
water the whole earth: ſo likewiſe the liuer is as it were the fountaine
of the blood and veines, which are like to brooks and riuers, to carry &
diſtribute the blood throughout the whole body, to the ende that all
the partes of it might be moiſtned, ſoaked, and nouriſhed according
to their ſeuerall natures. So that the liuer in mans body, & in man, who
is the litle world, is as the ſea in the great world, and the veines are like
to the floods & riuers. Neither are the parts of the body by this means
moiſtned, watred, and nouriſhed with blood only, but alſo with all the
other humors, wherewith it is tempered, and without which the body
cānot liue. For the blood carieth al the reſt with it. But that we may the
better vnderſtand this matter, and what is the proper nature of blood,
we muſt firſt know what a humor is, & how many kinds of it there are.
               We vnderſtand by a Humor,
                  What a humour is. a liquide & running body into which
the foode is conuerted in the liuer, to this ende that bodies might bee
nouriſhed and preſerued by them. And as there are foure elements of
which our bodies are compounded, ſo there are foure ſorts of humors
anſwerable to their natures, being al mingled together with the blood:
as we may ſee by experience in blood let out of ones body. For vppermoſt
wee ſee as it were a litle skimme like to the floure or working of
new wine, or of other wine when it is powred foorth. Next, we may

ſee as it were ſmall ſtreams of water mingled with the blood. And in
the bottome is ſeene a blacker and thicker humour, like to the lees of
wine in a wine veſſell. So that if we knowe how to conſider wiſely of
theſe things, it will bee eaſie for vs to vnderſtand the diſtinction of
theſe ſundry humours,Of the nature of blood. and their nature. Now concerning the firſt of
them, wee are to knowe that the proper nature of blood is to bee hote
and moiſt: wherein it anſwereth to the nature of the aire. It is temperate,
ſweete, and fatty, as alſo the beſt and chiefeſt part of nouriſhment.
For albeit all the other humours doe nouriſh likewiſe, and are
carried of the blood, neuertheleſſe that humour which is properly called
blood, is the chiefeſt part of nouriſhment. For it is requiſit that nouriſhment
ſhould be ſweete, or at leaſtwiſe tempred with ſweet liquor.
Next,Of the cholericke humour. that thinne skimme which is ſeene on the top of it, reſembling
the floure of wine, is that humour that is called yellow choller, or the
cholericke humor which is hot and drie, of a bitter taſte, and anſwering
to the nature of fire, which is of the ſame nature. For it is bred
of the hotteſt and drieſt parts of that liquor, in which the nouriſhment
of the body conſiſteth, when through their great heate they boile together.Of the flegmaticke humour.
Moreouer, thoſe ſmal ſtreams of water, which we ſee mingled
in the blood, proceede of the flegmaticke humour that is colde and
moiſt, like to water of whoſe nature it holdeth. For this humour is
in part concocted for the turning of it into blood, but not wholly perfected.
Hereof it commeth that the colour of it remaineth white, much
like to water, and without taſte, or as ſome affirme, it is ſome what
brackiſh,Of the melancholicke humor. but not fatty. Laſtly, the blacke humour and moſt earthie
which looketh like the very bottome of a deepe, redde, and thicke
wine, or like the lees in a veſſell full of wine or oyle, is the melancholike
humour, or as ſome terme it, blacke choller, being colde and
drie like to the earth, with which it hath ſome agreement, and of
taſte ſomewhat ſharpe.
               Nowe in this diuerſitie of theſe humours mingled altogether with
the blood,The agreement betwixt the humours and the elements. two things are worthy to be well marked. Firſt, the agreement
and conformity which they haue with al the elements of which
the body of man is compounded: ſo that each of them hath his proper
element agreeable to his nature, to the end they may nouriſh and preſerue
all the parts of the body, according to the nature of the elements
of which they hold. The other point is, not only the diſagreement, but
euen the manifeſt contrariety that is between al theſe humors, as there
is betwixt the elements: & again the vniō that appeares to be betwene
thē in the midſt of this contrarietie, as the like is among the elements,
whoſe nature they followe. Moreouer wee ſee, that betweene light

and darkeneſſe, day and night, colde and heate, drieneſſe, and moyſture,
betweene the diuerſe and contrarie ſeaſons of the yeere, beſides
ſundry other ſuch contrarieties that are in nature, & in al other things,
I ſay betweene theſe ſo contrary, God frameth notwithſtanding ſuch
a wonderfull concord, tempering and knitting them in ſuch ſort one
with an other, that they are ſo farre from defacing and deſtroying
each other, as contrariwiſe they coulde not poſſibly bee preſerued,
except they were tied together with ſuch a knot and coniunction.
Nowe beſide that which wee haue heere ſpoken of the nature of theſe
humours, wee haue further to note, that they doe not onely agree
with the elements in qualities, but alſo in regarde of their places in
mans body, I meane in the whole maſſe and diſtribution of the
blood, and in the coniunction they haue together, euen as the elements
haue their places each after other.How the humours and elements agree in places. For as the fire of it owne nature
is light, and therefore laboureth alwayes to aſcend vpward, to attaine
to his naturall place: ſo the cholerike humour, which agreeth
with the nature thereof, occupieth the higheſt place among the humours
mingled with the blood, as we may perceiue by that that hath
beene already ſpoken of the floure and skimme of blood, according
to that compariſon which wee made betwixt blood and wine. The
like may be ſaide of the reſt. For as the aire is lighteſt next to the fire,
and the neereſt element vnto it and to the reſt of the celeſtiall fires: ſo
the blood properly ſo called, keepeth the place of the aire among the
humours of the body. For it is not ſo light as the fire, nor ſo heauie
as the water or the earth. And ſo conſequently the flegmatike and
melancholike humours occupy the lower places according to their
degrees, as the water and the earth doe in this great world. For this
cauſe all theſe humours beſides their common offices and effects, haue
others more ſpeciall agreeable to their nature, as (God willing) we wil
declare heereafter. And namely, the flegmatike humour that holdeth
of the nature of the water, is to be conſidered of. For as in this great viſible
world, there are waters both aboue and beneath, I meane thoſe
that are contained and retained within the clouds in the ayre, & thoſe
that are in the ſea & in riuers, kept within their bounds aſſigned them
for their courſe: ſo the like is to be foūd in the litle world, which is mā.
               Nowe hitherto haue wee learned, howe the water and the other
humours are carried with the blood throughout the body, aſwell
vpwarde as downewarde, by meanes of the veines which water
all the partes of it, howe high or lowe ſoeuer they be, and therewithall
carrie vnto them their foode and nouriſhement. And this agreeth
fitly to the woonderfull worke of GODS prouidence in

nature,Agreement betwixt the great garden of the world, and that of the litle world. which, of the vapours ariſing out of the earth, gathereth
the cloudes together, and theſe like to ſponges ſucke vp vapours
from the waters of which themſelues are engendered, and which
afterward they cary about (as it were in chariots) to diſtribute them
into all quarters of the worlde, according as it ſhall pleaſe God to diſpoſe
of them, by ſending his bleſſing vpon the earth by the meanes
of raine, wherewith being watred, it nouriſheth all thoſe herbs, trees,
plantes, and fruites which it bringeth foorth, not onely for the ſuſtenance
of men,A goodly contē
                     plation in nature. but alſo of beaſts. Let vs then imagine before vs a garden
wherein is infinite varietie of trees and plantes of all ſortes, and
that this garden is watred either by raine from heauen, or by pipes and
conduites whereby the water is brought thither and diſperſed in all
places thereof. We ſhall ſee that in this great diuerſitie of nature, there
is but one and the ſame nouriſhment for them all, and but one place.
And albeeit the liquor that affoordeth this nouriſhment to ſo many
ſorts of plants be but one, neuertheleſſe it is conuerted into the nature
of all thoſe things which it nouriſheth, ſo that the nature of it is changed
according to the diſtinct propertie of each of them. For there are
plants and herbes of all qualities, and of all taſtes and colours. Some
are hote, others colde, ſome drie, others moiſt, either in the firſt, or ſecond
or third or fourth degree, or elſe are tempered and intermingled
according to their ſeuerall natures. As for their taſtes, ſome are ſweet,
others ſharpe, or bitter, or of no certaine taſte. In a worde, there are of
all kindes of taſtes, both ſimple and compound. And yet the humour
or liquor is but one that receiueth all theſe qualities, as in wormwood
it becommeth bitter, and in the Vine or Figge-tree ſweete. And if the
herbes bee either for food, or for phyſicke, or of a poyſonfull nature,
the ſame may be ſaide of the humour that nouriſheth them. The like is
ſeene alſo in colours. Neither doe wee obſerue all this by experience
onely in ſome great diuerſitie of trees, and of all ſortes of plantes, but
euen in eche of them ſeuerally. For I pray you what difference is there
in euery herbe, or in euery ſeuerall tree, I meane betweene the roote
and the ſtalke, the body and the branches, the boughes and the leaues,
the floures, ſeedes and fruites? And yet all theſe ſundry partes receiue
nouriſhment from one Mother, and from one and the ſame ſubſtance
and liquor.Of the heart of plants. Moreouer we ſee, that as man and all other liuing creatures
haue their heart in the midſt of their bodies, which is the fountaine of
life, ſo all trees, herbes and plantes haue their heart in the middeſt of
them according to their nature, without which they could not liue.
For we call their heart the inwarde part, within which their pith remaineth,
which is vnto them as the heart is to liuing and ſenſible creaatures.

Whereupon we haue further to note in regard of thoſe herbes
that haue weak ſtalks, eſpecially hollow ones, or ſuch as haue ſtrawes
inſteede of ſtalkes, that the prouidence of God hath giuen vnto them
knots, ſeuered as it were into ſundry ſmal knees which are vnto thē in
place of their ſtomack, and of other nutritiue members to reteine their
nouriſhment the longer, & to concoct it the better, as alſo to ſtrengthē
them thereby. And this we may euidently ſee in all ſorts of corne and
pulſe. Euen ſo doth nature, or rather the prince therof worke in a mans
body,The body of man compared to a garden. which is as it were a garden that hath a ſoule. Wherein the Creator
of this whole frame ſheweth himſelfe no leſſe wonderful, nay rather
much more then in this great garden of ye whole earth, and of the
great world, of both which he is the Gardener that watreth them, to
nouriſh all the fruits they bring forth, & to cauſe them to grow. For frō
whence proceed, or are nouriſhed the bones, griſtles, ligamēts, ſinews,
arteries, veines, fleſh, kernels, fatte, together with all the other partes of
which the body is compounded? May not the like be ſaide of the eyes
& of their coats and humors, of the eares, noſe, tongue, teeth, belly, ſtomack,
guts, liuer, ſpleene, kidneies, & of all the other bowls and inward
parts? And if we come to the hands and feet, and to the other outward
members, & to al the other parts called Inſtrumentall, & diſtinguiſhed
according to their office, we ſhall finde that onely through the alteration
of their foode into liquor, they all receiue ſuch nouriſhment as
is proper to eche of them. Yet notwithſtanding one and the ſame ſuſtenance
is offered to ſo many ſundry members, beeing made familiar
and of the ſame nature with that part vnto which it is ioyned. For if it
goe to the eyes, it becommeth of the ſame temperament, that the
nerues and ſpirites belonging to the ſight are of, which bring the facultie
and vertue of ſeeing vnto the eyes: as likewiſe it is of the ſame
temperament with the coats and humors of which the eyes are compounded,
being diuided and diſtributed to eche ſundrie part by a naturall
propertie inherent in them. The like is done in the eares and in
other members and inſtruments of the corporal ſenſes, and in all the
other partes of the body, euen to the very nailes and haires thereof.
Wherein truely wee ſee wonderfull alterations, and a moſt admirable
woorke of Gods prouidence, whether it bee conſidered in the
whole earth, and in this great world, or in man, who is the litle world.
Now for the ſequele of our ſpeech, before wee come to ſpeake of the
ſpeciall offices and effectes of the three humours ioyned with the
blood, of which wee haue heere ſpoken, wee are to conſider beſides
this diſtribution made of the nouriſhment by meanes of the
veynes, as it hath beene tolde vs, of another meane by which theſe

humours, and eſpecially the flegmatike, aſcend vp vnto the braine:
whereby it commeth to paſſe that in man, as well as in the great
world, there are waters aboue and belowe, which are the cauſe that
mans life ſwimmeth in the middeſt of a great danger.Mans life in the midſt of two waters. Alſo wee are to
knowe why the ſoule and the blood are often taken eche for other,
and to be inſtructed in the temperature of the humors, neceſſarily belonging
to the bodie for the health and life thereof: as likewiſe to
conſider of the cauſes of health and ſickneſſe, and of life and death.
But this ſhall bee for to morowe, when thou ASER, ſhalt vndertake
the diſcourſe of theſe things, ſo farre foorth as is requiſite for vs to
know.
            
            The end of the eight dayes worke.
         
         
            THE NINTH
dayes worke.
            
               Of the vapours that aſcend vp to the braine, and of the waters and cloudes
conteined therein, and in what perils men are thereby: why the ſoule and
blood are put one for another: of the temperature of the humors neceſſary
for the health and life of the body: of the cauſes of health and of diſeaſes,
and of life and death. Chap. 65.
               
                  ASER. It is the ſaying of an ancient Philoſopher, that
they which ſaile vpon the water, are not aboue two
or three fingers breadth diſtant from death: namely
ſo farre off as the thicknes of the plankes and timber
of the ſhip is, in which they are caried into the Sea.
For if that timber were taken from vnder them, they
cannot auoyd drowning vnleſſe they can ſwimme like fiſhes. But not
to ſaile on the ſea, or vpon a lake or riuer to approch neere to death,
we haue it a great deale neerer vs, when we cary about vs infinite cauſes
and meanes, whereby we are euery houre in danger of ſtifling, and
as it were of drowning, and that both waking & ſleeping, eating and
drinking, within doores and without, at all times and in al places wherſoeuer
we become. Inſomuch that of what eſtate and diſpoſition ſoeuer,
men are, we are oftentimes aſtoniſhed to heare tydings of a mans
death, ſooner then of his ſickeneſſe, whom wee ſaw not long before,
mery, cheerefull and in good health.
               
                  
Now we may learne ſome chiefe cauſes hereof by this dayes handling
of that matter Subiect, which was yeſterday propounded to bee
diſcourſed vpon. And firſt we muſt know, that beſides the diſtribution
of all the humours together with the blood into all parts of the bodie
by the veines, and that for the cauſes before learned, there is yet
another meane whereby theſe humors, eſpecially the flegmatike humour,Vapours aſcending vp to the braine.
which is of the nature of the water, aſcend vp vnto the braine,
by reaſon of vapours ariſing vpward out of the ſtomacke, like to the
vapour of a potte ſeething on the fire with liquor in it, and like to vapours
that aſcend vp from the earth into the ayre, of which raine is engendred.
Now when theſe vapours are come vp to the braine, they returne
to their naturall place, and into the nature of thoſe humours of
which they were bred, as the vapours that are held in the aire turne againe
into the ſame nature of water of which they came. Therefore as
the waters are contained within the cloudes in the region of the aire
allotted vnto them,Watry clouds in the braine. ſo is it with our braine which is of a colde nature,
and of a ſpongie ſubſtance fitte for that purpoſe. So that we alwayes
carie within it as it were cloudes full of water, and of other humours
that diſtil and runne downe continually by the members and paſſages,
which God hath appointed to that ende, as wee haue alreadie hearde.
And theſe places albeit they ſerue eſpecially to purge ſeuerall humors,
as hath beene tolde vs, yet oftentimes they voide them altogether,
both by reaſon of their mingling and coniunction, as of their ouer great
abundance. Yea many times they are ſo plentifull, namely the flegmatike
humour, that becauſe the braine cannot ſufficiently diſcharge
it ſelfe of them by the ordinary way, theſe humors ouerflowe on all
ſides whereſoeuer they can finde any vent and iſſue, euen as when a
thundering cloude burſteth aſunder. So that the water runneth not
downe as it were a milde and gentle raine, but as a mighty flood that
bringeth great ruines with it, or as a riuer paſſing his ordinary courſe,
breaketh downe both banke and wall, and ouerfloweth euery where.
Therefore we may well ſay, that many times we haue floods of water
encloſed within our heads and braines, when wee neuer thinke of it,
nor yet conſider in what danger we are. Which the more ſecrete and
vnknowen it is vnto vs, the more perillous it is, and greatlier to be feared,
eſpecially conſidering it is ſo neere vs, and that wee haue fewer
meanes to auoyde it, as wee haue daily examples in many, who being
in health and mery, are ſodainely choked by catarrhes, which like to
floods of waters,Inconueniences that come from the braine. runne downewards, as the very name deriued from
the Grecians doeth import as much: or by ſome ſodaine Apoplexie,
how healthy ſoeuer before they ſeemed to bee. Others alſo there are,

who if they be not preſently choked with ſuch floods from the brain,
yet they are taken with palſies, lameneſſe, and impotencie in all their
members, or at leaſtwiſe in ſome of them, as if ſome waterflood had
caried them away, ſo that nothing had beene ſaued but the bare life,
and that more fraile and miſerable then death it ſelfe. I ſpeake not of
gowtie perſons, who although they be not aſſaulted with ſuch great
and vehement floods of waters, and with euill and ſuperfluous humours,
ſo that ſome few droppes onely (of which they are ſo called)
fall vpon ſome partes of them, yet are they greatly tormented & conſtrained
to crie out, and that oftentimes in extreme diſtreſſe. Which
conſideration ought to ſtirre vs vp to know wherein our life and preſeruation
thereof conſiſteth, and of whom we holde it. And on the other
ſide, although we had no examples of floods and inundations of
waters, of earthquakes and ſuch other iudgementes of God whereby
he puniſheth men,Inſtruction for euery one. neuertheles theſe water-floods which we alwaies
carie about vs, ought to admoniſh and induce vs to feare him, to call
vpon him by prayer, and day and night, yea hourely, to recommend
our life vnto him, ſeeing he can take it from vs by ſtopping our breath,
yea by a very ſmall matter: or at leaſt depriue vs of all motion and
ſenſe, as though our bodies had neither ſoule nor life in them, but
were like to poore dead carkaſes. For the doing hereof hee needeth
not to thunder or lighten from heauen againſt vs, but onely to cauſe
a ſmall ſhowre of water to powre downe from our head, which is the
higheſt, the goodlieſt and moſt noble part of all the bodie, and as it
were the heauen of the litle world: or if it pleaſe him to cauſe a fewe
droppes onely to diſtill downe vpon the ſinewes and ioyntes, it will
torment men more grieuouſly then if they were in ſome continuall
torture, as the daily ſongs of ſuch gowtie perſons doe teſtifie, who are
impatient and voyde of the feare of God.Teſtimonie of the prouidence of God. Now beſides this profitable
aduertiſement, which euery one may take by that which hath bin
here vttered, wee ought on the other ſide to conſider the prouidence
and goodneſſe of God towardes men, in that as he holdeth vp in the
aire and cloudes, the water that hangeth ouer vs, not ſuffering them
to breake downe vpon vs all at once to ouerwhelme all the earth by
them, with all the beaſtes and other creatures conteined in it, but diſtributeth
them by good and iuſt meaſure: ſo dealeth he with the humours
that aſcend vp continually, and are kept in our braine, where
they haue their veſſels to retaine them in, as it were in ſponges, which
yeeld foorth water according as they are either looſened, or reſtrayned
and cloſed together. And as for that which is ſaid of the teſtimony
which we haue of the frailtie of our life, appearing in the principal and

moſt noble part of our bodie, as the like was ſhewed vs before in that
inſtruction, which we learned by the office that God aſſigned to our
lungs, and to the paſſages allotted by him for the taking in end letting
out of the aire: ſo wee haue a very notable leſſon in the conſideration
of the liuer and of the blood, of which that is the forge and
fountaine, and of the diſtribution thereof into all the partes and
members of the bodie by meanes of the veynes, as wee hearde yeſterday.
For as a man may iudge by outward appearance that the life
of man conſiſteth in his breath, and that he giueth vp both ſoule and
life when hee dyeth, as it were in giuing vp the laſt gaſpe: ſo it ſeemeth
alſo, that it is placed in the blood, as that which goeth as it
were with the blood, ſo that when the blood is drawen out of a mans
bodie, the life alſo may ſeeme to bee drawne out therewithall. Herevpon
as the ſoule is oftentimes in holy Scripture put for the life,
becauſe it giueth life to the bodie, ſo it is alſo put for the blood,
and the blood likewiſe called ſoule, becauſe it is the inſtrument and
meanes whereby the ſoule giueth life: and when the Lorde forbiddeth
his people to caſe the fleſh with his ſoule,
                  Gen. 9. 4, 5. 
                  that is the blood thereof.
Whereby his meaning is to teach men, to abhorre the effuſion
of mans blood: and therefore hee ſayeth further, I will require
your blood, euen the blood of your ſoules. Wherefore hee that ſheadeth
blood, doeth as much as if hee drewe the ſoule out of the bodie.
Nowe foraſmuch as the blood is ſo neceſſarie vnto life, wee are
likewiſe to vnderſtande, that as it is either pure and ſounde, or vnpure
and corrupted, ſo is it diſpoſed either to health or ſickneſſe,
and to life or death. For as the naturall life of man conſiſteth, eſpecially
in heate and moyſture, ſo a man may eaſily iudge, that as
euery thing is bred by meanes of them, chiefely liuing and ſenſible
creatures, ſo nothing can bee preſerued in this bodily life without
theſe two qualities, that are proper to the ayre and to blood, as wee
haue alreadie hearde. But theſe qualities muſt bee ſo tempered,
that there bee no exceſſe on either ſide. And for this cauſe GOD
woulde haue all the humours to bee mingled together with the
blood,The mixture of the humors neceſſary. that ſo it might bee tempered as is requiſite for the life of
man. For if it bee too hote and drie, or too moyſt and colde, it cannot
doe that office, for the performance whereof it is ordayned: but
in ſteede of bringing health and life, it will breede diſeaſes, and
in the ende cauſe death. For naturall death commeth onely of diſeaſes,
amongeſt which olde age is to bee reckoned, which is an incurable
ſickneſſe that laſteth vntill death. Neither doe diſeaſes
proceede, but onely of the diſtemperature that is in mens bodies,

and in the humours of which they are compounded.The cauſes of health and of ſickneſſe. For as long
as they are in a good, moderate and proportionable temper, and
are diſtributed to all the partes of the bodie, according as neede
requireth, ſo that none of them exceedeth, then is there an equalitie
in all the bodie, which doeth not onely preſerue it in life, but
in health and good diſpoſition. For there is the like concorde and
harmonie betweene theſe humours, that is betweene the partes of a
good conſort of muſicke agreeing well together, or of an inſtrument
of muſicke well tuned, from which you ſhall heare nothing
but pleaſaunt melodie. Whereas if all the partes thereof agree not
well together, there will bee no muſicall harmonie, but onely a
very vnpleaſant diſcorde. The like may bee ſaide of all the concordes
and diſcordes that may fall out in the humours of our bodies.
And therefore GOD had ſo tempered them in the firſt creation of
man as was requiſite, ſo that hee, woulde haue preſerued him in
a perpetuall life, if by true obedience hee had alwayes beene knit
and vnited vnto God his Creatour.Sinne the cauſe of all the diſcord in the world. But ſince man fell at variance
with God through ſinne, all this goodly concorde, which God
had placed not onely in mans bodie, but alſo betweene the reſt of
his creatures, hath been troubled and turned into diſcord by meanes
of ſinne. So that all this, goodly temperature and harmonie of the
humours in which mans bodie was created, was diſſolued and broken
aſunder, and that in ſuch ſort that it was neuer ſince ſounde
and perfect in any man, of howe good conſtitution ſoeuer hee hath
beene. For euen in the beſt complexions there is alwayes ſome defect
or exceſſe in ſome of the humours: ſo that if there were no other
cauſe,The cauſes of death. yet no body coulde naturally bee immortall. For alwayes in
the ende the exceſſe or defect that is in it, woulde cauſe it to decay,
and finally bring it to corruption. But beſides this, there are ſo many
other wantes and ſuperfluities throughout the whole life of man,
whereby this euill alreadie become naturall, is ſo much augmented,
that there die moe without compariſon of ordinarie, diſeaſes
and of violent death, then of olde age and naturall death: and all this
by meanes of ſinne.
               Therefore we may well conclude, that health is the effect and fruite
of peace and concord betweene all the partes and humors of mans bodie,
and ſo conſequently is life: as contrariwiſe, ſickneſſe & death proceed
of diſcord, diſſention, and warre betweene them. For as concord
bringeth peace, and peace all good things with it, ſo contrariwiſe,
diſcord breedeth warre, and warre a heaped meaſure of all miſeries
and euils. Wherefore a ſounde body of a good conſtitution is like

the bodie of a whole people and ſocietie, that hath the members agreeing
well together, ſo that euery one keepeth his ranke, not hurting
one another. But a ſicke and diſeaſed body, is like to the body of
a mutinous and ſeditious people, that breaketh the order it ought to
keepe,A politike inſtruction. and goeth beyond the appoynted bounds. Therefore we haue
a goodly image of peace, and of that peaceable life whereunto men
are created and borne; in the diſpoſition and temperature of the humors
and members of our bodie, whereby wee ought to learne what
great account we are to make of peace, amitie and concord, and howe
we ought to hate and abhorre all warre, diſcord, and diſſention, ſeeing
the one is as it were health and life, and the other as diſeaſes and
death. Now let vs ſee the vſe and profite, the particular and ſpeciall
properties of the humors ioyned with the blood: and what veſſels are
aſſigned vnto them, together with their nature and offices. It belongeth
to thee, AMANA, to handle this matter.
            
            
               Of the vſes and commodities of the humors ioyned with the blood, and
what veſſels are aſſigned vnto them in the bodie, and of their nature
and offices: and first of the cholericke humour, of the gall and veſſell
thereof: next of the melancholike humour and of the ſpleene: then
of the flegmatike humour, and of the kidneyes and other veſſels, which it
hath to purge by. Chap. 66.
               AMANA. As we ought to labour to cut off all diſcord, and to nouriſh
all concord, that wee may enioy peace and thoſe benefites
that proceede thereof: ſo wee muſt be very carefull to preſerue all the
partes of our bodie in ſuch a temperature, as may keepe them in a harmonie
and concord, that we may liue in health. For this cauſe as God
hath tempered all the humors one with another, ſo he hath aſſigned
to euery one his proper place & ſeate, both to withdraw it ſelf therin,
and to performe the office enioyned vnto it, and alſo to purge and
clenſe it ſelfe, and to diſcharge the body of ſuperfluities and corruptions
that otherwiſe might hurt it. Nowe we haue alreadie heard, how
he hath aſſigned the liuer to be the ſeat of the blood, becauſe he hath
appointed the blood to water all the body, and to giue life and nouriſhment
vnto it, out of which alſo the vital ſpirits ariſe, as ſmal & mild
windes proceed out of riuers and fountaines.
               As for the cholericke humour,Of the cholericke humor. it is ioyned with the blood for the
concoction of humors that abound, and to awake and ſtirre vp the bodie
leaſt it become heauie, ſleepie and dull, as alſo to penetrate and open
the paſſages when it goeth with the blood, and therewithall to

nouriſh thoſe members that agree with the nature of it, as the lungs,
with whoſe nouriſhment cholericke blood doeth better agree then any
other. Whereby it appeareth euidently, that this humour holdeth
of the nature of fire, which giueth vnto it this quickneſſe and
vertue. And becauſe it is hote and drye, it ſerueth alſo to temper the
moyſture of the blood, and to meete with all colde that might come
vnto it, and helpeth to preſerue it in his naturall heate. Nowe foraſmuch
as it is not all caried and diſtributed with the blood, but the
greateſt part of it remaineth for other vſes, God hath aſſigned a veſſell
vnto it, into which it retireth and is contained therein ſo farre foorth
as is requiſite. The ende hereof is, that the blood ſhould not bee infected
with too much choler mingled therewith, as alſo that it might
deſcend into the guttes, by thoſe paſſages that are giuen vnto it to
that purpoſe to be voyded by them, and to prouoke them to diſcharge
thoſe excrements which they receiue, and ſo to purge the whole body.
For this cauſe there is a bladder in faſhion like to a long peare,Of the Gall and of his bladder. placed
vnder the middeſt of the liuer, about the hollowe part of the right
ſide of it, within which it is halfe hidden. This bladder is the veſſell
into which that yellowe humour withdraweth it ſelfe, and is conteined
therein, which wee call Gall. And as this bladder hath his filaments
and threedes, both to draw vnto it and to reteine, as alſo to
expell forth, ſo it hath two branches comming out of the necke of it,
the one vpwarde to draw away the cholericke humour in the purifying
of the blood, the other downeward towardes the guttes to carie
this humour vnto them, both for the thruſting forwarde of nouriſhment,
and for the caſting foorth of the excrements. For it was neceſſary,
that the great abundance of this humour ſhould retire into ſome
place in the purging of the blood: and therfore it was as requiſite that
it ſhoulde haue a fitte veſſell to retire into, wherein it was not to remaine
vnprofitable.The vſes of the cholericke humour. For beſides the vſes alreadie ſpoken of, it ſerueth
not onely to cleanſe all the guttes of ordure, but alſo to heate the liuer,
and to hinder the putrefaction of the blood. Beſides, experience ſufficiently
ſheweth, how needefull it is that the blood ſhould haue ſuch
a veſſell wherewith to purge it ſelfe. For when the paſſages thereof are
ſtopped, great diſeaſes followe thereupon, as inflammation of the liuer,
and the dropſie, but eſpecially the yellowe iaundies. For when
this humour is not duely ſeparated from the blood, ſo that it is not
purged thereof as nature requireth, then doeth it beginne to corrupt:
whereupon it cannot ſend ſuch foode to the members as is neceſſarie
for them, but that which is corrupted by this gall, whereby they are
driuen out of their naturall diſpoſition. And this wee may ſee chiefely

in the yellowe iaundies by reaſon of this yellowe and bitter humour,
that maketh the bodie yellowe, into which it is diſperſed by
meanes of the veynes, in ſteede of beeing nouriſhed with good
blood.Of the melancholicke humor. The like may bee ſaide of the melancholicke humour, which
is as it were the lees of the blood. For if the blood bee corrupted and
infected, great inconueniences enſue thereof vnto the whole bodie,
through which this humour is diſperſed after the ſame manner that
the cholerick humour is: inſomuch as it becommeth blacke thereby,
as the cholericke humour maketh it yellowe, and for the like cauſe,
breeding the like diſeaſe, the difference of humours onely excepted.
Nowe becauſe we haue not in our vſuall ſpeech a ſpeciall name to declare
this difference, this diſeaſe is commonly called the blacke iaundies.Of the ſpleene.
Therefore God hath aſſigned the ſpleene for a ſeate to this
blacke humour, which beeing placed on the left ſide conteineth this
humour in it, hauing proper pipes and paſſages, both to drawe from
the liuer this dregges of the blood, and alſo to communicate the
ſame vnto the ſtomacke, thereby to prouoke appetite, as likewiſe
to purge it ſelfe by diuers meanes. The chiefe vſe of it is to receaue
the groſſe and muddie blood, and to that ende there is a great veine,
which beeing the pipe of this blood, goeth from the Port-veine to
the ſpleene, which is nouriſhed with the beſt of it, and concocteth
the aboundance of this humour. Therefore God hath created it
with ſuch a fleſh as is meete and apt for that office: and further
hath holpen it with certaine arteries, whereby it is heated and made
warme. And when it hath taken ſo much of this groſſe blood to
nouriſh it ſelfe withall as is requiſite, the reſt is partly reteyned ſtill,
and partly thruſt out and ſent to the bottome of the ſtomacke, by a
veyne ſeruing for the ſame purpoſe, to the ende that from thence this
humour may bee voyded out of the bodie.What effects follow the oppilation of the liuer. Now when theſe veines
are ſtopt, daungerous diſeaſes follow thereupon, chiefely when this
happeneth to the firſt veine whereof I ſpake euen nowe. For when
the liuer is not purged, his whole office is hindered, and it ſelfe
decayeth by little and little, by retayning ſtill the excrementes
thereof: from whence the vapours aſcending vp to the brayne trouble
it very much, and cauſe it to fall into very ſtrange and fooliſh
conceiptes. And when the body is burdened with this humour, it
cauſeth that man to bee very melancholicke, and ſadde, and many
times bringeth that yrkeſomneſſe vpon him, that he deſireth nothing
but death. It was very requiſite therefore, that God ſhoulde
giue both a veſſell and paſſages to this humour, which is not without
his great commodities, if it bee tempered and diſtributed as it

ought to bee.The commodities of the melancholike humour. For it ſerueth to ſtay and to retaine the floting ſpirites,
which ariſe out of the blood, leaſt if they ſhoulde bee made
more pure and ſubtill, then is expedient for the bodie, they vaniſh
and paſſe away altogether. It is profitable alſo to thicken the blood,
and to helpe to reſtraine and keepe it from running ouer haſtily: beſides,
it nouriſheth therewithall the melancholicke members,
which holde moſt of the nature of that humour, as namely, the
bones and the ſpleene.
               Likewiſe, the drineſſe both of this and of the cholericke humour
ſtandeth the blood in ſome ſteade: and the coldneſſe thereof ſerueth
to coole and moderate the heate of the blood, and of the cholericke
humour.Of the flegmatike humour and profite of it. As for the flegmaticke humour, which is alſo called Pituita,
it is not without his commodities. For firſt, it is the matter whereof
the blood is made, when it is by little and little concocted better: it
mitigateth the heate of the blood, and is vnto it in place of nouriſhment,
and in ſteade of a bridle to reſtraine the burning and deuouring
heate thereof from preſent conſuming of all. Beſides, it keepeth
the blood from beeing too thicke and drie: and beeing caried
with the blood, it nouriſheth the flegmatike and colde members,
ſuch as the braine is. And as the other humours ioyned with the
blood, haue their ſuperfluities and veſſels to keepe them in and
to purge them, ſo is it with this. For this humour is not onely caried
with the blood to keepe it from ouermuch thickneſſe, that it
may the better paſſe through the veynes: but there proceedeth alſo
from the whole maſſe of blood, an excrement like to very thinne
water, which by reaſon of the thinneſſe of it, can no way bee profitable
to the bodie. For it is a water that differeth as much from
blood, and from the flegmatike humour ioyned with it, as whay
doeth from milke, when the butter and cheeſe with all the ſubſtaunce
that can bee had from it, is drawen out of it. For it is
like to ſweate, with which it hath ſome reſemblaunce. Therefore
it hath his proper place aſſigned vnto it in the kidneyes,Of the kidneyes. which
drawe to themſelues the watriſh matter from the blood, thereby
purging it from water that woulde corrupt it, and fill the veynes
in ſteade of good blood: as wee ſee it in the dropſie, which bloweth
vp the bodie that is ſtuffed with water in ſteade of good nouriſhment,
which by the veynes it ſhoulde drawe from the blood, if
the liuer were well affected, and if all the other partes that ought
to helpe it, did well performe their dueties. And to the ende, that the
kidneys may the better do their dutie, God hath not only created two,
but hath ſo placed them by his prouidence, that the right kidney is

higher then the left, ſo that they doe their dueties one after another.
For if they wrought both together, if they were both in one place, &
if both drewe vnto themſelues with equall force, in ſteede of mutuall
helpe, they woulde greatly hinder eche other: which inconuenience
the prouidence of God doeth very well meete with. And
as all the inwarde partes, of which wee haue hitherto ſpoken, haue
their pipes both to drawe from the liuer that humour that is meete
for them, and to ſende it where neede requireth, and alſo for to
purge themſelues: euen ſo the kidneyes haue their paſſages apt and
meete for the performance of all theſe things. For firſt they haue Emulgent
veines,Emulgent vcines. ſo called becauſe they drawe this wateriſh ſuperfluitie,
as a child ſucketh milke out of the breaſt, and hauing receiued this
water ſeparated from the blood, they ſende it vnto the kidneyes. It
is true,How the vrine is made yellow. that a little blood paſſeth together with it to nouriſh the kidneyes
withall, with which there is ſome yellowe choller mingled,
that ſerueth afterwarde to helpe expulſion, and the water beeing coloured
therewith, is made yellowe and brackiſh, and then it is rightly
called Vrine. Nowe after the kidneyes haue drawen from the liuer
this water, whereby the blood is purged, and themſelues alſo
in part nouriſhed with ſome little of the blood, and that by meanes
of the veines and paſſages giuen vnto them for that purpoſe, they
haue two other paſſages,Of the Vreteres and of the bladder. called Vreteres, or Vrine pipes, whereby
they purge and diſcharge themſelues of that water that is called Vrine,
after the blood is wholly ſeparated from it. This done, theſe
pipes ſende the water vnto the bladder, which is a veſſell meete for
the receipt thereof, and which doeth as it were diſtill the ſame by litle
and litle through theſe pipes that enter into the bladder, both on the
right ſide and on the left. Moreouer the bladder hath a necke and paſſage
neere to the two vrine pipes, whereby it diſchargeth it ſelfe of
this humour, after it hath kept the ſame awhile, voyding it forth of the
body as a ſuperfluous excrement. For if this were not ſo, after the body
were full of this water ouerflowing in it, not onely many partes
and members woulde bee broken, but men alſo ſhoulde bee ſtifled,
by reaſon of the compreſſion and contraction of the Midriffe. I
ſpeake not heere of the ſtone which wee carie in our kidneyes, or of
that which oftentimes breedeth both in the kidnes and in the bladder,
I meane of ſuch ſtones as bake there as it were in a Tilekill,
or potters fornace. I omitte alſo the paſſions of the kidneyes,
and the extreame paines proceeding from thence, which are further
inſtructions vnto vs of our infirmities and miſeries, and of the frailetie
of mans life: but the handling of theſe things properly belongeth

to the Phyſicions.Of the necke of the bladder. I will onely adde to that which I haue ſpoken of
the necke of the bladder, where the Vrinary pipes ende, that the
hole thereof is full of wreathings and turnings, to the ende it may the
better holde and keepe in the water. And for this cauſe alſo it hath a
muskle, as well as the fundament, to open and to ſhut, and to yeelde
and retaine the vrine according to natures will, euen as it is with the
other excrementes that are purged by the bowels. Wee propounde
theſe things as it were a generall Anatomie of the bodie, becauſe
if I ſhould lay them open at large and by peece-meale, eche member
hath in it ſufficient whereof to make a great booke. For as I haue
alreadie declared, the artificiall woorkemanſhip of mans bodie is incredible
and incomprehenſible, if a man conſider all the partes of
it. For there is nothing, bee it neuer ſo ſmall, but the woorke of it is
very marueilous, the vſe great, and ſo fitted to the purpoſe as cannot
poſſibly be better. But wee neede not diſcourſe more particularly
of the compoſition and nature of mans body, and of the partes of
it,What it is to be a naturall diuine. ſeeing our intent is not to become Phyſicions, but in ſome ſort naturall
Diuines, by learning to knowe the prouidence of God in his
woorkes, eſpecially in our creation, compoſition, nouriſhment and
preſeruation, that wee may glorifie him in them, as becommeth vs.
Nowe in all that wee haue hitherto propounded of the foure naturall
humours of the bodie, wee haue ſpoken of them according as
naturally they are, and ought to bee without corruption, and ſuch as
are neceſſary for the life of man. But foraſmuch as they are of great
vertue and power in regarde of the affections and manners of men,
whether they abide in their right nature, or whether they be corrupted,
wee muſt ſpeake ſomewhat of their corruption, and of the
hurt that commeth thereby, not onely to the health and life of the bodie,
but alſo to that of the ſoule: conſidering withall what are the
ſundry naturall temperaments of men. Marke therefore, ARAM, what
you haue to ſay vnto vs concerning this matter.
            
            
               Of the names wherby the humors of the bodie are commonly called, with the
cauſes wherefore: of the compariſon betweene the corruption and temperature
of the humors of the body, and betweene the manners and affections
of the Soule: of the meanes whereby the humours corrupt, and of the
Feuers and diſeaſes engendred thereby: of the ſundry natural temperatures
in euery one. Chap. 67.
               ARAM. The nouriſhment of mans body hath many degrees,
and paſſeth through many pipes and veſſels, before it bee perfect

and conuerted by true generation into the proper ſubſtaunce
of euery member whither it is caried, as wee may iudge by that
which wee haue alreadie hearde to this purpoſe. But there is ſuch
an accorde betweene all the members of the bodie, whereby euery
one executeth his office, and ſuch a communion of all their
powers, that eche member keepeth his ranke and order, neyther
doeth any one retayne, and keepe to it ſelfe more nouriſhment
then is requiſite, but ſendeth as much as is needefull vnto the reſt,
euen vnto the nayles, and haires and vttermoſt excrements. Nowe
if through ſome defect or corruption falling out in their nature,
any of them breake the order of this equall diſtribution, a common
detriment ſeazeth vpon the whole bodie, and vpon all the
members generally, ſo that thoſe partes alſo taſte of the hurte,
that offered wrong vnto the reſidue. For they cannot liue alone,
nor without helpe from others.What communion ought to be among men. The like is ſeene in the Common-wealth,
and in the members thereof. For what is the cauſe that ſome
are readie to burſt for farneſſe and multitude of meates, whereas others
are emptie and die of hunger? that ſome haue ſo much wealth,
that they are greately troubled therewith, and others are ſo poore?
Nay, what is the cauſe of all the confuſion in the worlde, but
that euerie one raketh to himſelfe, and no ſuch equalitie and communion
is obſerued, as becommeth the eſtate of euerie one?
Wherefore as ſundrie diſeaſes are bredde in mans bodie, whereby
in the ende it is vtterly ouerthrowen, when there is no ſuch
communion betweene the members thereof, nor any ſuch diſtribution
of the nouriſhment as there ought to bee: ſo is it with the
bodie of the Common-wealth, when ſome oppreſſe others, and
when euerie one hath not that that belongeth vnto him. For, firſt
there followeth great confuſion, and of confuſion, ſubuerſion, as
diſeaſes followe faultes committed by the members, and after diſeaſes
death it ſelfe.
               Nowe the infinite number of infirmities and ordinarie diſeaſes,
whereby moe violent deathes are procured then naturall, by reaſon
of the defectes and exceſſes brought in by ſinne into the whole
life of man, cauſeth men to ſpeake diuerſely of the foure humours
of the bodie, neceſſarie for the preſeruation and nouriſhment
thereof. For they are more often taken for the vices and exceſſes,
whereby they are corrupted, then for the true naturall humours,
which are the chiefe inſtruments of the ſoule, whereby it
giueth life and nouriſhment to the bodie.Why the humors are taken in the euill part. The cauſe whereof, as
I thinke, is becauſe men doe ſooner and more eaſily perceiue and

marke what is euill and hurtfull vnto them, then that which breedeth
their good and profite. And indeede it falleth out commonly,
that they knowe not the good thinges they haue vntill they
haue loſt them, or elſe are become hurtfull vnto them. No marueile
then if they knowe not from whence theſe good things come,
or of whome they haue receiued them, and ſo become ingratefull
towardes GOD. Wherefore let vs not woonder when God
withdraweth them from vs, or ſuffereth them to corrupt and to
bee ſpoyled that they might hurt vs in ſteede of helping vs, to the
ende that by this meanes wee might learne to acknowledge that
good which before wee knewe not, and not to deſpiſe it when wee
haue it, I meane that wee ſhoulde learne this by the euill that ſucceedeth
after wee haue loſt the good.The cauſe of mens ingratitude. For wee are ſuch ſcholers as
cannot otherwiſe imprint in our mindes thoſe good thinges which
God beſtoweth vpon vs, but by beeing depriued of them, and by our
owne hurt.
               Heereof it is that wee alwayes learne to our owne coſt, as wee
ſay, becauſe wee cannot conceiue ſo well, as wee ought to doe of
the free goodneſſe of God. Nay, it were well if all coulde learne aright
by their owne harmes. For there are but fewe that profite thereby
as they ought. Howe manie are there that in ſteede of amendment,
waxe woorſe through the chaſticements of God? But in
the meane time our vſuall manner of ſpeaking teacheth vs, that
men haue more knowledge of corrupt humours that hurt them,
then of the good ones that nouriſh them, and continue in their
naturall ſoundneſſe, ſeeing their names are more often taken in
the euill part then in the good. Nowe when wee ſpake before of
theſe humours in the bodie, it was as they are and ought to bee naturally,
and ſuch as beeing voyde of corruption, are neceſſarie
for the life of man. And foraſmuch as they are of great force in
regarde of the affections and manners of men, whether they abide
in their owne nature, or whether they bee corrupted, wee
will ſpeake ſomewhat more of their corruption, and of thoſe
hurtes which they bring to the health and life of the bodie: afterward
we wil conſider of their effects in the ſoule.The agreement betweene the maners and humors of the body. But we muſt here
cal to mind what we heard before of the agreement between the maners
and affections of the ſoule, and the temperature of the bodie,
and howe the one ſerueth the other. Whereby we may gather, that
it is ſo with the affections in regarde of the ſoule, as it is with
the naturall humours in regarde of the bodie. For according

as theſe humours are well or ill tempered, ſo is the bodie well or
ill affected: and according as they increaſe or diminiſh, ſo the
health of a man is more ſounde and ſtedfaſt, or more craſie and inconſtant,
and ſo readie to turne into more grieuous and dangerous
diſeaſes. The like may bee ſayde of the ſtayedneſſe or vnſtayedneſſe
of the affections of the ſoule, and of the ſpirituall health and
diſeaſes thereof. For this cauſe, if wee ought to bee ſo carefull
to reduce our bodie to a good temperature when there is anie defect:
and beeyng ſo, to preſerue it in the ſame eſtate ſtill, and
ſo likewiſe for the equalitie and agreement that ought to bee betweene
the humours from whence it commeth, ſo that wee deſire
to obtaine health when wee are ſicke, and to keepe it well
when wee haue it: then ought wee to bee much more carefull for
the temperature and moderation of the affections of the ſoule,
and of the ſpirituall health that proceedeth thereof. And therefore
in the corruption of the bodily humours, wee are to conſider
diligently of the corruption of manners, and of the affections of
the ſoule. For there is great agreement betweene the one and the other.
               But to come to the chiefe poynt of this preſent ſpeech,By what meanes the naturall humors corrupt. wee are
firſt to note, that the naturall humours corrupt two manner of
wayes, when they leaue the order of nature and change their naturall
properties. For that commeth vnto them, eyther becauſe their
proper ſubſtaunce degenerateth without any mixture of other humours,
or through the mixture of ſome other vicious and corrupt humour.
Nowe howe much the more requiſite the humour is, and neceſſarie
for the bodie of man beeing in his naturall ſoundneſſe, ſo
much the more hurtfull is it when it is corrupted. Therefore foraſmuch
as the blood, which is properly ſo called amongeſt the humours
of the bodie, is more conuenient, apt and neceſſary for the life
thereof then any of the reſt, as hath beene declared vnto vs, it followeth
that the corruption thereof is more dangerous then of anie
other humour. Nowe it degenerateth from his owne ſubſtaunce,
when (the pores beeing ſhutte) it putrifieth within the veynes,
and is turned into a certayne cholericke humour, not naturall but
corrupted:The originall of Feuers and other diſeaſes. whereupon the continuall Feuer ariſech. Beſides, it
corrupteth after another manner, namely, through the mixture
of ſome other humour, as when the firſt maſſe of blood is corrupt
through the aboundance of a rawe humour that is not well digeſted
in the liuer, whereof the dropſie followeth, as likewiſe
the yellowe iaundies is bredde of the blood corrupted through

too great aboundance of the cholericke humour.The corruption of the flegmatike humour. In like manner
the flegmaticke humour is corrupted in his ſubſtaunce, when
it ouerfloweth and giueth vpwarde in mens bodies, and continueth
rawe for want of good concoction and digeſtion: it being ſometimes
more thinne, and ſometimes more thicke. From hence commeth
ſpettle, ſnattines of the noſe, catherres, & diſtillations, and oftentimes
vomiting, when it is groſſe & thicke. Beſides, this flegmatike
humour corrupteth through the mixture of the cholericke or melancholicke
humour: and then it waxeth ſalt or ſharpe, according to the
humour that is mingled therewith. And as the continuall feuer is
bredde of blood corrupted in ſubſtance, ſo the quotidian ague proceedeth
of the corruption of the flegmaticke humour.Of the cholerike humour. As for the cholericke
humour it degenerateth of it ſelfe, when it burneth and is turned
into a vicious melancholike humour that is like aſhes, thicke and
biting. And becauſe this alteration groweth by little and little, either
by reaſon of age, or of violent motions in them, that are naturally very
cholericke, it commeth to paſſe that ſuch perſons are in their olde
age ſubiect to a furious kinde of anger. On the other ſide, this cholericke
humour corrupteth when it is mingled with ſome other humor,
as when it is mixed with flegme, which as it is either more thinne, or
thicker, ſo is the colour of the choller more or leſſe yellow, pale, or
greene. The like may bee ſaide of the mixture of all the other humours.
               Nowe as the tertian ague, I meane the right and perfect tertian, is
engendered of the cholericke humour corrupted in his ſubſtance: ſo
the baſtard tertian is bredde of the ſame humour, when it is mixed
with a vicious and corrupt flegmatike humour.From whence all ſortes of agues proceede. And truely this is very
ſtrange, that the corruption of euery ſeuerall humour doeth in this
ſort breede ſundrie kindes of agues according to the diuerſitie of the
humours. For as there are foure ſundry ſorts of humours, ſo there are
foure kinds of ordinary agues that haue their ſeuerall relations to ech
of theſe humours. So that as the continuall feuer is bredde of blood
corrupted, and the quotidian of flegme, and the tertian of the cholericke
humour, ſo the quartane proceedeth of the melancholicke humour
corrupted.
               Nowe beſides theſe ordinary feuers, there are others mingled and
compounded, according as the putrified humours of which they are
bredde, are mingled and compounded together. From hence ſpring
demy and double tertians, and quartanes and ſuch like. And ſometime
one and the ſame man ſhall haue ſundry ſortes of feuers in one
diſeaſe, according to the diuerſitie and abundance of corrupt humors

that are in him. Wee may ſay as much of all other diſeaſes that are
bredde of corrupt humours, according as they are either ſimpler, or
more mingled and compounded.The corruption of the melancholie humor. Therefore as the other humors corrupt
in ſuch ſort as we heard before, ſo when the melancholicke humour
putrifieth, either it burneth of it ſelfe, or elſe by the mixture of other
humours, inſomuch as it waxeth groſſe and biting, and holdeth
of the nature of aſhes.
               Nowe when a body ſubiect to choller,From whence madneſſe commeth. flegme, or blood, waxeth
melancholicke, that man, by reaſon the fumes can not euaporate
and get out, falleth into frenſies and madde fittes, and thoſe of
diuers ſorts. For as the melancholike humour is mixed, either with
blood, or with flegme or with choller, ſo is the melancholie perſon
more or leſſe merry or ſadde, heauier or lighter, colder or hotter, and
his fits and furies either more moderate, or more vehement and violent.
But howſoeuer it be, we ſee by daily experience, that there are
many ſorts of melancholike perſons, of madde, ſenſleſſe, and furious
people. And beſides the mixture of vicious humours, wee muſt conſider
alſo the ſundry naturall temperaments of euery one. For as wee
ſee that wines are diuerſly tempered according to the varietie of countries,
lands, and aire where they grew, and that albeit they are always
wine, yet there is great difference in the one from the other, both in
ſubſtance, nouriſhment, colour, ſmell, vertue, and ſtrength: euen ſo is
it with the humours of the body. For the ſame humors are more pure,
or more moderate, or more noble and exquiſit in ſome then in others,
according to the natures of their bodies, and not onely of their owne,
but alſo of their parents bodies from whence they were deriued. For
children commonly take much after their parents. I ſpeake nothing
of that which the temperament may take of the heauens, and of all
the celeſtiall bodies, and chiefly of the ſpeciall grace of GOD, the
prince of nature, who ruleth ouer all temperaments and complexions.
But it is time, that following our purpoſe, wee conſider what
effectes the humours haue towardes the ſoule, and that wee looke
into the diuerſities of the temperatures and complexions of men,
according vnto the nature of thoſe humours that raigne moſt in
them, and to that diſpoſition which naturally they doe woorke in
them eyther to vertues or vices. This wee ſhall learne of thee
ACHITOB.
            
            
               
               Of the diuerſe temperatures and complexions of men, according to the
nature of humours that beare moſt ſway in them: of the diſpoſition
whereunto they are naturally mooued by them either to vertues or vices:
of the meanes to correct the vices and defects that may be in our
naturall inclinations. Chap. 68.
               ACHITOB. It is not without great ſhew of reaſon, that the Philoſophers
made three principles and beginnings that effect mens
actions,Three chiefe workers of mens actions. namely, powers, habits, or qualities, and affections, or paſſions. For
we ſee plainely by experience, of how great force theſe things are in
man ſo long as he liueth. Concerning powers, they come to vs by nature,
and are effectiue principles of all actions both good and badde: yea
by them we knowe in children, during their yong yeeres, the ſignes
and tokens of ſome vertue or vice, that will raigne moſt in them afterwards,
which we commonly call Inclination or Diſpoſition. The paſſions
and affections are likewiſe naturall in vs, being forcible prickes
to prouoke men to embrace either good or euill, whereof we haue already
ſpoken ſufficiently. As for the habites or qualities, they are accidentall
in man, as they that are gotten by a long and continuall cuſtome
of doing good or euill, whereupon alſo they take their names of
good or euill habits.
                  He ſpeaketh of ſuch goodnes and vertues as were 
                        •
                     o eſteemed of by the heathen that knew not their naturall corruption. Nowe wee commonly ſee ſome to be naturally
enclined to one vertue and not to another, or to one vice and not to an
other. For it ſeemeth ſometimes that nature hath bredde ſome to be
temperate, others to be liberall, and contrariwiſe. And when a man
endued with natural powers tending to good, obtaineth qualities anſwerable
thereunto, hee is woorthy of commendation, becauſe vnto
his inclination hee hath added greater helpe, namely, care and ſtudy,
by meanes whereof he is come to ſome perfection. So likewiſe hee
that being naturally borne impotent, attaineth to thoſe vertues that
are contrary to his impotency, deſerueth greater praiſe: becauſe fighting
as it were with nature, he remaineth conqueror ouer himſelfe, and
becommeth vertuous with greater difficultie. But contrariwiſe, if a
man that is naturally ill diſpoſed to ſome particular vice, doeth adde
further a habite to his badde inclination, hee is woorthie of blame,
becauſe hee hath not reſiſted euill, but pleaſing himſelfe therein hath
made it greater. As likewiſe hee that hath excellent graces and giftes
of nature to doe well, and ſuffereth them to vaniſh away through
his negligence and cuſtome in euill, is much more to bee blamed,
becauſe that voluntarily hee ſuffereth himſelfe to bee ouercome of
vice.
               
                  
But wee muſt conſider of theſe things ſomewhat higher, and by
the ſelfe ſame reaſon iudge of the natural temperaments, which in the
former ſpeech wee heard were diuerſe in euery one. For wee ought
to acknowledge one God, Prince, and Authour of nature, who ruleth
in all and ouer all.God ruleth in all, and ouer all. Therefore as he hath appropriated to the ſoule
thoſe inſtruments, which he hath giuen vnto it in the body, to worke
in them and by them: ſo himſelfe diſpoſeth and ordereth thoſe inſtruments,
which he will vſe amongſt men, yea, euen from their mothers
wombe,Ierem. 1. as it is written of the Prophet Ieremy, and of the Apoſtle
Saint Paul,
                  Galat. 1. whome our Sauiour alſo called achoſen instrument to be are
his name before the Gentiles,
                  Actes 9. 15. 
                  and Kings, and children of Iſrael. No doubt
therfore, conſidering the agreement which we haue heard is in the affections
of the ſoule with the temperature of the body, but that the
more temperate the complexion of euery mans body is, and the neerer
it approcheth to the perfecteſt temperature, the more quiet and
moder
                     ••
                  e, the more gracious and comely will his affections and maners
be naturally, yea all his geſtures and whole behauiour. True it is,
as we haue elſe-where touched, that no body is ſo framed, or hath
ſuch an harmony and equalitie throughout, but that there is ſome
diſagreement & inequalitie. But we account thoſe natures to be well
tempered, which approch neereſt to the perfect temperature: and as
euery humour ruleth more or leſſe in euery one, ſo he is called either
ſanguine, or flegmaticke, or cholericke, or melancholicke. Againe,
as the other humours beare ſway next vnto the principall, ſo is a man
ſaide to be either flegmaticke ſanguine, cholericke ſanguine, or melancholike
ſanguine. The like may be ſaide of the other humours according
to their temperature, as alſo of the affections which haue
ſome agreement with them.The nature of flegmatike perſons. Heereof it is, that when there is exceſſe
of the flegmatike humour in men, their natures are commonly ſlouthfull,
they ſhunne labour and giue themſelues to bodily pleaſures, they
loue dainties, and delicate meates and drinkes, they are tender and
effeminate, and cleane contrary to ſtowt and valiant men. And if
there be exceſſe of the cholericke humour, their natures are eaſily prouoked
and ſtirred vp to wrath:The nature of a cholericke complexion. but their anger is as a fire of thornes,
that being ſoone kindled & making a great noiſe, is by and by quenched
againe. Their geſtures alſo are more quicke and vehement, and
their haſtineſſe is commonly fooliſh and turbulent: they bablemuch,
and are like to veſſels full of holes, vnable to hold in and keepe anie
ſecret matter: they are fierce in aſſailing, but inconſtant in ſuſtaining
the aſſault, in ſome ſort reſembling the nature of dogges, which
barke and bite if they can, and afterward flie away. And if there bee

exceſſe of the melancholike humour,The nature of the melancholicke body. the natures of ſuch are ſadde, ſtill,
hard to pleaſe, ſuſpicious, conceited, obſtinate, ſome more and ſome
leſſe. And if the cholericke and melancholike humours be corrupt and
mingled together, their natures become monſtrous, prowd, full of enuy,
fraud, ſubtilties, venemous and poiſonfull, hatefull and diabolicall.
And when the malignant ſpirits know mens natures thus diſpoſed,What natures are moſt abuſed by euill ſpirites. no
doubt but they take occaſion thereby to intermingle themſelues, if
God permit them, and purpoſe to vſe them for the puniſhing of men:
I ſay, they will ioyne themſelues vnto them, and make them their inſtruments,
as God on the other ſide vſeth thoſe natures that are moſt
moderate and beſt tempered, making them inſtruments of his glorie.
               Now we may call to mind what we learned before almoſt to the
ſame ende, touching the meanes whereby euill ſpirites might trouble
the imagination, fantaſie and mindes of men. We may ſay as much of
the humours of the body, whoſe motions and nature they knowe very
well. Whereby they can ſo much the more eaſily abuſe them in their
damnable worke and will, as wee may iudge by the example of him
that was poſſeſſed and lunatike,Matth. 17. 15. mar 9. 20. luke 9. 39. of whom the Euangeliſts make mention,
and whome they call by thoſe two names. And by that which
they wrote of him, it ſeemeth that he was ſubiect to the falling ſickeneſſe,
that returneth oftentimes according to the courſe of the moone,
which naturally hath great affinitie with the humors, and great power
ouer them. And therefore it is very likely, that the euill ſpirit which
tormented this poore lunatike, watched the occaſions of his diſeaſe to
afflict him the more, and to cauſe him to fall either in the fire or in the
water, as he did indeede, thereby to worke his death if he had could.
Which example ſheweth vnto vs what is the malice of the deuil,How vigilant the Deuil is to hurt vs. what
pleaſure hee taketh in hurting of men, what meanes and what occaſions
he ſeeketh for and maketh choice of, and what acceſſe vnto vs
we may offer him through our corrupt nature, through our vices and
ſinnes, and through our inclinations and manners that are naturally euill
and peruerſe, if God letteth him looſe the bridle by his iuſt iudgement:
ſeeing he ſpareth not the little children, as it appeareth in that
which is written of him, of whom we ſpake euen now. For this cauſe
we ought to take good heede, that we giue not our common enemie
thoſe occaſions that he ſeeketh to haue from vs, to the ende that hee
abuſe vs not, nor any thing that is ours, and which God hath beſtowed
vpon vs.What profit we reape by the knowledge of our complexions. This is the reaſon why the conſideration of our temperature,
complexion, and naturall inclination is very neceſſary for vs:
becauſe the knowledge hereof affoordeth vnto vs many good inſtructions
that may ſtand vs in great ſteade throughout our whole life, as

well for the preſeruation of the health of our bodies, as for the rule
and gouernement of our affections and manners, as alſo in regarde
of the familiaritie and acquaintance which wee haue one with an other.
For through the contemplation hereof, wee may knowe, not
onely the cauſes of health and ſickeneſſe, of the life and death of the
body, but alſo of that of the ſoule. For as the good humours corrupt
in our bodies according as wee haue heard, and breede in them ſundry
diſeaſes, which finally leade them vnto death: euen ſo by means
of ſinne all thoſe good and naturall affections, which ought to bee
the ſeedes of vertues in vs, are corrupted and turne into vices, that
are the diſeaſes of the ſoule, and bring vnto it the ſecond and eternall
death: as contrariwiſe vertues are the health and life thereof.
               But as GOD hath prouided corporall medicines for the bodie,
ſo hee hath prepared ſpirituall Phyſicke for the ſoule againſt all the
diſeaſes thereof. Therefore when wee conſider with our ſelues vnto
what vices wee are inclined by nature, wee muſt labour to correct,
and bridle them, and to quench ſuch inclinations, as much
as wee can, through ſobrietie, vigilancie, and continuall practiſe to
the contrary: leaſt wee nouriſh and encreaſe them, when as wee
ought to diminiſh and wholy to aboliſh them. For the common prouerbe
is not without reaſon, that Education paſſeth Nature, or that
it is another nature. Wee ſee by experience what Education and
Inſtruction are able to doe both to goodneſſe and vice, according as
they are either good or euill. For as there is no nature ſo good, which
can not bee corrupted and peruerted through euill education and
teaching: ſo there is none ſo vicious and euill, which can not, at
the leaſt in ſome meaſure, (through the helpe and grace of GOD)
bee corrected and amended by good education,What natures we are to eſchew. inſtruction, and
diſcipline. And becauſe conuerſation and familiaritie are of great
efficacie in this point, wee are diligently to conſider with what perſons
and natures wee acquaint our ſelues, and bee carefull to eſchew
ſuch natures as are vicious, prowd, fierce, enuious, hatefull, malicious,
ſuſpicious, diſloyall, and traiterous, as well in regarde of the
corruption of manners wherewith wee may bee infected by them,
as alſo in reſpect of other harmes that may befall vs, by reaſon they
are vnſociable natures, or at the leaſt very difficult to conuerſe withall,
being indeede ſuch as towardes whome no man can beare any
true loue or firme friendſhip. But when wee haue vſed all the diligence
wee can poſſible about theſe things,The true meanes to cure our vices. the chiefeſt point wherein
the whole conſiſteth, is this, that wee haue recourſe to Ieſus
Chriſt the eternall ſonne of GOD, to the end that by his holy Spirit,

hee woulde correct, repreſſe, and quench in vs all the vicious affections
and diſordered motions, that wee haue contrary to his holy
will: according to that promiſe which is made vnto vs, wherein it is
ſaide,Matth. 7. 11. that if fathers knowe howe to giue good gifts to their children and
ſuch things as are neceſſarie for them,
                  Luke 11. 13. 
                  much more will our heauenly Father
giue his holie Spirite to them that aske it of him. And this is the
true meanes wee ought to keepe for the correcting of theſe vices and
defectes, that are in our naturall inclinations. Now wee haue ſpoken
ſufficiently of thoſe things which concerne the naturall powers of the
ſoule, in reſpect of the nouriſhment and growth of the body, and of
thoſe inſtruments which it hath in the ſame for the performaunce of
her actions. It remaineth nowe that wee conſider what effectes it
hath in Generation. Firſt then ASER, thou ſhalt handle the reſtauration
and reparation of all natures by that vertue and power of Generation
that is in them, and namely, in man: to the end wee may
after proceede with thoſe other points that concerne this matter.
            
            
               Of the restauration and reparation of all natures created by the Generatiue
power and vertue that is in them, and namely, in man:
what Generation is, and what the Generatiue power of the ſoule
is: what the ſeede is, and how Generation proceedeth of ſtrength
and of infirmitie. Chap. 69.
               ASER.Pſal. 127. 1. When Salomon ſayeth in the Pſalme entituled with his
name, Except the Lorde builde the houſe, they that build, labour
in vaine, wee muſt not thinke that by the building whereof he ſpeaketh,
hee vnderſtandeth a frame of ſtone and wood to make a lodging
and dwelling place of it, but hee reſpecteth ſpecially that building
that conſiſteth of houſes and families, through the generation of
children, and their good education and inſtruction: as himſelfe ſheweth
plainely when by and by after hee ſayeth in the ſame Pſalme,
Beholde,
                  Verſe 3. 
                  children are an inheritance from the Lorde, and the fruit of the
wombe a rewarde. Whereby wee haue a ſure teſtimony, as in many
other places of the Scripture, that wee muſt acknowledge the Generation
of children to come from God, and not from nature, and the
fruitfulneſſe and barrenneſſe both of men and women.
               By our former ſpeeches we may learn what was the creation of the
the firſt man and firſt woman, with the lawfull coniunction betwixt
them, by means whereof God would haue mankind preſerued & multiplied

by good order, and not by a brutiſh confuſion, ſuch as is amongſt
the beaſts. Now it remaineth, that folowing the order of our
diſcourſes, we ſpeake of generation, whereby we ſhall know the vertue
that God gaue for that purpoſe to our firſt parents, when hee ſaide
vnto them,Geneſ. 1. 28. 
                  Bring foorth fruit and multiplie and fill the earth. Which hath
had ſuch power and vertue, that from thence haue iſſued all the men,
women,The vertue of the bleſſing of God for generation. and children, that haue bene ſince the beginning of the world,
that are now, and that ſhall be vnto the end thereof. The like alſo proceeded
from the bleſſing which God gaue not onely to al other liuing
creatures, but alſo to al herbs and plants. For we haue already heard,
how after the liuing body is growen vp to his full vigor and ſtrength,
it beginneth then by little and little to faile, and to tend vnto death,
whereby in the end it falleth away altogether. For, according to that
compariſon and ſimilitude, which hath bene already propounded vnto
vs of a lamp, the flame whereof cannot be ioyned ſtil with the week
except there be ſome cleauing moiſture to knit the parts together: ſo
there is in a liuing body a certaine humiditie that holdeth of the nature
of the aire, which moiſture is very good, and is diſperſed throughout
the whole body, hauing his propagation of the ſeede, and ioyning together
all the parts of the body.Of the Radicall humour. This is commonly called the Radicall
humour, becauſe it is as it were the roote of life, and hath the celeſtial
and quickening heate brought immediately and directly vnto it: ſo
that when this moiſture is extinguiſhed, the heate alſo vaniſheth, and
fadeth away. And looke as the heate drinketh vp and conſumeth by
litle and litle this humidity, ſo doth the heate it ſelfe diminiſh and languiſh
away, becauſe his foode faileth that is in the moiſture: euen as
the flame leſſeneth and looſeth his vigor,Of the defect of mans life with the cauſes therof. as the oile, or tallow, or wax
faileth in a lamp, or in a candle. And although this radicall humiditie
be nouriſhed by the ordinary food which the body daily receiueth, neuertheleſſe,
foraſmuch as that nouriſhment which euery member receiueth,
is not ſo pure nor ſo fit, nor ſo naturall as the radicall humour
it ſelfe, neither can wholy reſtore that which diminiſheth and conſumeth
thereof, it muſt needes bee that life ſhoulde faile in proceſſe of
time, by reaſon that neither the vigour of the heate, nor the pureneſſe
of his nouriſhment continueth ſound and entire. For the ſame thing
agreeth to this radicall humour, which we ſee by experience in wine,
which ſo long as it is pure and in his naturall ſtrength, doeth eaſily
turne a litle water into it owne nature, ſo that it can not be perceiued
that there is any water at all in it. But if yee continue ſtill powring in
of water and mingling it therwith, it will weaken by litle and litle, and
alwayes looſe of his pure ſubſtance, ſo that in the ende it will bee no

better then water. And thus the radicall humour and the naturall
heate deſtroy one an other. For the humour that is gotten by ſuſtenaunce
differeth much from the Radicall that was conſumed by naturall
heate. Whereupon it followeth alſo, that this naturall heate
hath not ſo good and pure nouriſhment as before, ſo that it muſt
needes growe weaker: and being thus weakened, it hath leſſe vertue
to concoct well, and to turne that humour into nouriſhment
wherewith it ought to be maintained. By this meanes it commeth to
paſſe, that the radicall humiditie & naturall heate faile and periſh both
together. Wereby wee may eaſily vnderſtand why mens bodies abide
not alwayes in their ſtrength, but faile and waxe old, and ſo death followeth
olde-age. Wee haue already ſpoken ſomewhat before both of
the length and ſhortnes of mans life, and of naturall & violent death:
but we will ſpeake more fully of them hereafter, God willing.
               Nowe wee are to conſider, howe the prouidence of God hath
prouided for this defect of nature through that vertue of Generation,
which by his bleſſing hee hath giuen vnto it, and whereof I ſpake euen
nowe, to the ende, that the whole race and ſeuerall-kindes of
things created ſhoulde not periſh.What is meant by nature. Whereupon wee may well ſay,
that that nature which hath this vertue, is no other thing then the
bleſſing of God, whereunto all honour is to be giuen. For as GOD
hath created all things by his mightie worde, ſo by the ſelfe ſame
worde hee hath created and placed in the firſt kindes of the creatures
that hee hath created, thoſe ſeedes whereby hee woulde haue euery
one preſerued both in the whole and in his ſeuerall kinde.Geneſ. 1. And therefore
as in bleſſing the earth after hee had created it, and commaunding
it to bring foorth herbs, trees, and plants with their fruits according
to their kindes, hee did therewithall endue it with vertue to doe
ſo, as it hath alwayes done ſo hitherto, doeth ſo daily, and will doe
ſo to the end of the worlde: euen ſo is it with that bleſſing which hee
hath giuen to all the plants, and to all liuing creatures, and namely,
to man and woman, and with that commaundement which he hath
giuen them to growe, to multiplie and to fill the earth. Wherefore
wee ought without ceaſing to conſider and to contemplate God the
Creator in the generation of all things, and principally in that of man,
as if we beheld him daily purſuing his worke of creation. For although
he worke now by other meanes then he did in the firſt creation of the
whole frame, yet he is no leſſe nowe the Creator of all men, and of all
other creatures that grow daily in the world by generation, then hee
was of the firſt man and firſt creatures, which he created of nothing in
the beginning. For he created vs all in Adam and Eue, and ſhut vs vp

as it were in a ſtore-houſe, or in a ſpring or fountaine, or as in one
ſtocke of mankinde, out of which hee produceth men continually.
               Wherefore wee ought diligently to conſider of this woorke of
GOD, and of this vertue which hee hath giuen to Nature by his
worde and bleſſing to ingender like, and to encreaſe the whole race
and kinde thereof. For this cauſe as it is the office of Nature in the beginning
to nouriſh bodies, and then to cauſe them to encreaſe and
augment: ſo in the ende it is her duetie to preſerue the ſeuerall kindes
of things as long as ſhee may,What Generation is. by Generation of the like. Whereby it
appeareth, that Generation is a worke of liuing creatures after they
are come to their growth and vigour, as wee ſee the like alſo in plants
themſelues. For in the beginning of the Spring al their vertue is in the
root, & from thence it commeth after into the boughes & leaues, next
into the floure & fruit,What the generatiue power is. and laſtly into the ſeed, which being ſowen, another
plant is brought forth like vnto the firſt. Wherfore wee may ſay,
that the Generatiue vertue is a power in liuing creatures that engendreth
his like, being ordained for the preſeruatiō of the ſame kind. So yt
wee muſt diligently meditate and often ſet before our eyes this goodly
order of nature, according whereunto the nouriſhing facultie is firſt
giuen to the ſoule for the preſeruation of euery particular. Next, the
power to cauſe it to grow and to augment to a iuſt & ſufficient greatneſſe:
and laſtly, the generatiue vertue whereby the kind is preſerued.
For albeit the order that is throughout the whole courſe of nature bee
an euident teſtimony, that neither the worlde nor any thing therein,
ſtandeth vpon chance or fortune, yet among others this is moſt ſingular
and excellent, in that the ſame kinds of al things abide continually,
& that euerie one begetteth & multiplieth his like, without any maner
of confuſion amongſt them: which could not be eſchewed, if ſo be that
creatures were bredde and borne at aduenture, without the counſel
and prouidence of their Creator, & of him that wrought ſuch a worke.
               Nowe wee are to vnderſtand,What ſeede is. that the ſeede is a body that hath
in it ſelfe a vegetatiue ſoule, which body in Generation is turned
into an other like to that from which it is taken: and becauſe nouriſhing,
growing, and engendering are the effectes of foode and ſuſtenance,
they are contained vnder the name of a vegetatiue ſoule,
which is a facultie and power,What is meant by a vegetatiue ſoule. that not onely conuerteth foode into
the ſubſtaunce of the liuing bodie, for the good thereof, and by that
conuerſion augmenteth, that it may attaine to a conuenient bigneſſe,
but alſo engendereth an other body of the ſame forme and
kinde. And therefore after that this vegetatiue power hath doone
that duetie which it ought to perfourme about the growth of the liuing

body, then hath it time and meanes enough to gather together
into a ſmall roome many of thoſe qualities that keepe the ſoule in the
adminiſtration of the bodie, out of which it can ſoone drawe and
engender a like kinde, ſo farre foorth as the qualities of the matter
will be able to beare. For when they are repugnant to the qualities
meete for that kinde, whatſoeuer commeth thereof degenerateth, as
we ſee it in the earth, when in ſteade of wheate, whereof it receiued
the ſeede, it bringeth foorth darnell, or ſome other hearbs of an other
nature, and as wee ſee it alſo in monſters, that are borne both of women
and of other liuing creatures.Of the cauſe of monſters. For there are in many countries
(namely, in Sicilia, and in the kingdome of Naples, and in Flaunders,
as many Authours worthy of credite haue teſtified) women in whom
haue beene bredde oftentimes ſundry kindes of beaſtes in ſteade of
children, and ſometimes together with the childe either liuing or
dead. Which thing commeth to paſſe in ſuch women as abound with
euill humours that are putrified and corrupted, either by reaſon of
the ayre, or of badde meate, or of exceſſe in eating: as in ſuch bodies
wherein wormes, and ſuch other filthineſſe breedeth. The Aſtrologians
referre this vnto conſtellations, as they doe all other things. I
leaue the ſecret iudgements and puniſhments of GOD, whereby
ſuch things may come to paſſe: neuertheleſſe theſe things ought to
admoniſh women to pray vnto God, to recommend themſelues to
him, and to be ſober. The moone calfes in the womb, which fall out
often, proceed alſo of the like cauſes. In like maner it falleth out oftentimes
that the kinde degenerateth through corruption of the ſeede.
               But to go on forward with our matter of the Generation of liuing
creatures, and namely, of man, wee muſt knowe that foraſmuch as
the male hath naturally more heate in him then the female, hee
is alſo by nature the chiefeſt in Generation. For this cauſe when
the holie Scriptures ſpeake of mankinde, it is ordinarilie comprehended
vnder the name of man. And when mention is made of his
generation, they ſpeake as though all proceeded onely from man:
as when Malachie ſpeaking of his creation ſayeth,Malach. 2. 15. 
                  Did not hee make
one? and wherefore one? becauſe hee ſought a godly ſeede. And Saint
Paul, He hath made (ſaith hee) of one blood, all mankind. Neuertheleſſe
GOD hath put in nature ſuch a temperature betweene the male
and the female, that if both their natures were altogether alike, there
could be no Generation. For it conſiſteth in force and in infirmity.
But the wiſdome of God hath ſo wel prouided, as that it knoweth how
to draw ſtrength out of weaknes, ſo that the one can do nothing without
the other in generation, becauſe he hath ſo willed and ordained it.

Nowe I leaue to thee, AMANA, to diſcourſe vnto vs more particularly
of ſuch things as are moſt worthy to be noted in this maruailous
worke of God, and of the principall cauſe why he hath giuen to man
the Generatiue power.
            
            
               Of the powers of the Generatiue vertue, and of their offices: of the
principall cauſe why God gaue to man the power of Generation: in
what ſenſe the reines are taken for the ſeate of Generation: how we
ought rightly to conſider of the generation of man. Chap. 70.
               AMANA. As noueltie cauſeth a man through the errour of iudgement,
to thinke that rare things are greater and more woorthie
of admiration: ſo moſt men imagine thoſe matters to bee ſmall and
not worthy to be wondered at, which fall out daily before their eyes.
But ignorance is the cauſe of both theſe effectes.Two effectes of ignorance. For as a man admireth
that which hee neuer knewe coulde be perfourmed, ſo hee maketh
no reckoning of that thing which he vſually beholdeth, becauſe
hee hath alwayes beene ignorant of the ſecrets of nature, or rather of
his Author and Creator, who appeareth woonderfull in the leaſt of
his woorkes, euen in the very Ant or Piſmire. This ſelfe ſame ignorance
is the cauſe that ſo fewe contemplate as they ought the forme
and faſhion of their beeing, or that giue due glorie to him who daily
bringeth them into the worlde by ſuch woonderfull workemanſhip.
Neither is it poſſible that men ſhoulde giue ſuch glorie to GOD as
they ought, except they eſteeme all thoſe workes which hee effecteth
daily amongeſt them, to be ſo many miracles woorthie admiration,
which way ſoeuer they turne their eies. Moreouer, let them
knowe, that what meaſure of knowledge ſoeuer they are able to get
of his woorkes, yet that which they doe knowe is very little, yea,
almoſt nothing, in regarde of that whereof they are ignorant: euen
in that which concerneth their creation and generation.
               Nowe following that which wee haue already heard touching
this matter, we are to conſider a maruailous prouidence of God, in the
ſimilitude that is betweene the creature engendering, and that which
proceedeth from it. Where by the way we may obſerue this, that there
is greater reſemblance in the Generation of plants then in that of liuing
creatures, and more in that of beaſts then in that of men: foraſmuch
as plants are void of imagination,Of the ſimilitude that is in generation. and that imagination which
is in beaſts is more firme and ſtaied then that which is in men, becauſe
our mindes are more floting and vnſtable. But it is woonderfull

to conſider what great ſimilitude there is, inſomuch as we commonly
ſee, that the infirmities of ſome members in the parents are founde
alſo in their children: and that oftentimes they expreſſe their very
lookes, countenances, and geſturs. Which alſo may ſerue for a further
confirmation of that which wee haue already touched, concerning
the agreement of euilles with the complexion and temperature
of the humours of mens bodies. Againe, it appeareth by the ſtrength
or weakeneſſe that is founde to bee as well in children as in their fathers
and mothers, that the ſeede of which they are begotten deſcendeth
not onelie from the braine,From whence the ſeede commeth. as ſome haue thought, but that
it is alſo taken from all the other members, and from all partes of
the body. And becauſe it is a profitable ſuperfluitie taken from the
nouriſhment of the blood ſcattered throughout the whole body after
the fourth digeſtion, it hath peculiar veſſelles in the body, ſome to
drawe it, others to perfect and preſerue it for generation, and ſome
to expell it out. And as this expulſiue vertue is neceſſary in Generation
on the behalfe of the male, ſo in regarde of the female it is requiſite
that there ſhoulde be a vertue to containe and preſerue, and ſecondly
to change, mingle, and temper it with the womans ſeede, ſo
farre foorth as ſhall bee expedient for the temperature of the whole
bodie,The ſeuerall vertues of the generatiue power. and of euery member thereof. Beſides, there muſt bee another
vertue to faſhion into members all this matter mingled and
tempered, and to giue vnto them that figure and ſhape which agreeeth
to euery one of them. Laſtly, there is an other vertue requiſite,
which ſhoulde driue out the childe after it is faſhioned, at the time
which GOD hath appointed in nature for that purpoſe. And theſe
are all the partes with their offices, which are to bee founde in the
Generatiue power of the vegetatiue ſoule. Nowe becauſe there are
ſo many ſortes of them, it is very meete that they ſhoulde haue ſundrie
places and diuerſe inſtrumentes in the bodie for the exerciſe of
them. For this cauſe there are, to ſerue all theſe offices, ſundrie partes
and many members, compoſed with woonderfull Arte, and diſtinguiſhed
in moſt admirable faſhion both with figures and qualities.
               But our meaning is not to make any long particular narration,
both by reaſon of the matter which woulde bee very long, as alſo becauſe
ſinne hath made the Generation of man ſo full of ſhame, that
men can hardly ſpeake of it, or of thoſe members that ſerue thereunto,
eſpecially of one part of them, without ſhame. Neuertheleſſe,
as before wee haue conſidered the counſaile and prouidence of God,
in that hee hath ioyned to man created to immortalitie, that part
wherein the light of his diuine wiſedome ſhall ſhine, the loue of God

ſhall be feruent, and righteouſneſſe ſhall dwell for euermore, with
the kitchin of mans body, whoſe vſe ſhall paſſe away after this life: ſo
wee muſt conſider the cauſe why hee hath ioyned vnto this kitchin
the Generatiue power,The chiefe cauſe why the generatiue power was giuen to man. and wherefore hee hath giuen it to man. Let
vs knowe then, that as man was created for an other ende then plants
and beaſtes, ſo God hath giuen to him the power of Generation to
an other ende then hee hath to them, vpon whome it is beſtowed
onely for the preſeruation of their kindes. For it was eſpecially giuen
him, becauſe the Creatour of the whole worlde purpoſed to collect
and gather together a perpetuall Church out of mankinde, that is,
a companie of men begotten after this manner, to bee dedicated and
conſecrated vnto him. Therefore wee ought diligently to meditate
and to thinke often vpon this woonderfull counſaile of GOD,
and to yeelde him praiſe, in that hee hath manifeſted himſelfe vnto
vs, and of this weake and corrupt maſſe of fleſh hath aſſembled and
culled out an euerlaſting Church: and in that hee aydeth, nouriſheth
and preſerueth vs, yea, is carefull ouer vs, and heareth vs calling
vpon him. Neyther doeth hee onely preſerue the whole courſe
of nature for our ſakes, but alſo giueth himſelfe vnto vs: which are
ſuch benefites as exceede all the imagination and eloquence of man.
Wherefore wee ought ſo much the rather to awaken our mindes to
conſider them well, and bee very much diſpleaſed with our ſelues,
becauſe wee do
                     •
                   not ſo well as wee ought, beholde this preſence
of GOD in that obſcuritie and darkeneſſe wherein wee liue; as alſo
becauſe wee are no more ſtirred vp to loue, ſerue, and honour
him, in regarde of that true and great loue wherewith hee loueth
vs.
               But to goe forward with our matter of Generation, wee muſt
call to minde what wee heard before of the vſe of the kidneis for the
purging of blood, in reſpect whereof wee call all that part of the body
wherein they are ſeated,Of the ſeate of Generation. by the name of Reines. And by reaſon
of the neereneſſe that is betweene them and the ſeede veſſels ſeruing
for Generation, which are many in number, all that part is taken,
chiefely in the holy Scriptures, for the ſeate and ſpring thereof, and
as it were for the ſeminary of mankinde. Therefore it is written in the
Hebrewes,
                  Hebr. 7. 10. that Leui was yet in the loines of his father Abraham, when
Melchiſedec met him.
                  Geneſ. 35. 11. And Moſes ſpeaking in the perſon of the
Lorde, of the promiſe made to Iacob, ſayeth, Kings ſhall come out
of thy loines. Dauid alſo minding to ſhewe what knowledge God
hath of men whome hee hath created,Pſal. 139. 13. ſaieth, Thou hast poſſeſſed my
reines: thou haſt couered mee in my mothers wombe. And Iob declaring

the ſelfe ſame thing more fully, and ſpeaking of the ſeed whereof he
was begotten,Iob▪ 10. 10, 11▪
                   after hee had ſaide, Haſt thou not powred mee out as
milke? and turned mee to cruddes like cheeſe? he addeth preſently, Thou
hast clothed mee with skinne and fleſh, and ioyned mee together with bones
and ſinewes. This is that couering whereof the Pſalmiſt ſpake, which
was giuen him of God in his mothers wombe after her conception.
Whereupon wee haue to note, that theſe holy men ſpeaking in this
manner, teach vs ſufficiently what is the chiefe part of man, which
they accompt to be the true man.What is man properly. For they declare vnto vs euidently
that the ſoule which dwelleth in the body is truely man, and that
the body in compariſon thereof is but his couering, and the lodging
wherein hee dwelleth. Therefore the Heathens themſelues compared
mans ſoule to one placed in a garriſon, in which hee is to abide
vntill hee be called from thence by the Prince and Captaine that placed
him therein: meaning thereby to teach vs, that wee muſt abide
in this life and diſcharge our duetie therein, ſo long as it ſhall pleaſe
God, who hath brought vs into it, to haue vs to continue therein.
               Truely, if wee conſider well of thoſe maruailous woorkes, which
GOD effecteth daily in the Generation of men, wee may well ſay,
that it is a great miracle of God in Nature, and ought to be diligently
conſidered of, as Dauid teſtifieth that hee did ſo in his owne perſon.
Therefore he ſaieth,Pſalm. 139. 5. 
                  Thou holdest mee ſtraight behinde and before,
and layeſt thine hand vpon me: ſhewing throughout the whole pſalme,
that there is nothing in man ſo hidden and couered, which is not
diſcouered before GOD, and which hee knoweth not and ſearcheth
not vnto the bottome, to the ende that men deceiue not themſelues
through their hipocriſie, thinking to hide themſelues before
him. For this cauſe hee ſayeth in the beginning, that he is ſo knowen
to GOD on all ſides, both within and without, that there is not
ſo much as one motion in him, nor one thought or affection, which
is not wholly manifeſted vnto him. And to prooue and confirme his
ſaying, hee taketh his argument from the creation of man, giuing
vs to vnderſtand thereby, that foraſmuch as GOD is his Creatour
and Maker, it can not bee but that he ſhoulde throughly know
his worke. Whereby wee haue a certaine teſtimonie of that which
wee ſpake in our former diſcourſe, of the creation of all thoſe men
that are dailie created by Generation, according to the order of
Nature appointed by GOD. For the Prophet doeth no leſſe acknowledge
that GOD hath made him, then Adam the firſt man
did. So that looke what the Prophet ſpeaketh of his owne perſon,
it is alſo to bee vnderſtoode of euerie one, both in regarde

of his creation, as alſo of that knowledge which GOD hath of all
things in man, be they neuer ſo hidde and couered. Afterward hee
addeth,Verſe▪ 6. that this knowledge is too woonderfull for him, and ſo high that
hee cannot attaine vnto it. Nowe wee may iudge well, both of the
compoſition of mans body, and alſo of the nature of the ſoule, by
thoſe diſcourſes which wee haue already made. And if wee did conſider
but of the body by it ſelfe, yet had wee iuſt cauſe to ſay as much
as Dauid ſayeth heere. What then might be ſpoken if wee ioyned the
ſoule with the body, and conſidered onely of that which might generally
be knowen by ſuch meanes as are already ſet downe? For by
that which we doe knowe, wee ſhall iudge well enough howe farre
this knowledge exceedeth our capacitie, and what remaineth yet behinde,
which we cannot comprehend.
               Foraſmuch then as the Prophet woondereth ſo much at this great
and high skill, whereof God giueth vs ſo excellent teſtimonie in the
creation and generation of men, wee ought not to thinke it ſuperfluous
and vnprofitable, but well beſeeming a Chriſtian man, to enquire
after that which God would haue vs know, and which we may
know, and to conſider well of his woorkes wherein he manifeſteth his
prouidence and wiſedome, eſpecially in man, who is, as wee haue
heard, the chiefeſt of all his workes amongſt the viſible creatures, and
as it were an other worlde created within this. Nowe as Dauid from
the creation of man, inferreth the knowledge which God hath of
him, ſo Iob in the ſame place that I alleadged euen now concludeth,
that foraſmuch as God is the Creator and Artificer that made man, he
delighteth not in deſtroying his woorke.Iob▪ 10. 8. 
                  Thy hands (ſaieth hee) haue
made mee and faſhioned me wholly round about, and wilt thou destroy mee?
Which is as much as if he had ſaide, is it poſſible that I who am the
woorke of thy hands, ſhoulde be brought to nothing by thee? For
beſides that this were againſt nature,Pſalm. 36. and 138. the Scripture teſtifieth vnto vs
in many places, that he is not onely a preſeruer of that which he hath
made, but alſo that hee leaueth not his woorkes vnperfect: and that
hee is ſo farre from defacing them, that contrariwiſe it is his manner
to leade them to perfection.A good leſſon to be learned from our creation. Whereby wee ought to learne, that the
onely conſideration of the worke of our creation ought greatly to ſolace,
comfort, and confirme vs in all afflictions and aduerſities, how rigorous
ſoeuer the hand of God ſhould be vpon vs. For firſt, we ought
to be throughly reſolued of this, that no affliction can come vnto vs,
but by his good will and from his hand, whatſoeuer the means and
inſtruments are, of which hee maketh his roddes and ſcourges, and
by which he ſtriketh and beateth vs. Nowe then ſeeing the hand that

toucheth vs is the ſame that hath made and faſhioned vs, wee knowe
well that he ſetteth not himſelfe againſt a ſtrange woorke vnknowen
vnto him, but againſt his owne wherewith he is very wel acquainted.
Whereupon we may certainly conclude, that it proceedeth not of crueltie
and furie that he ſtriketh vs, nor yet without good cauſe: as hee
that is neither cruell, nor furious, nor voyde of reaſon. So that it followeth
neceſſarily, eyther that we haue giuen him great occaſion, or
that it is very requiſite for vs.The afflictions of Gods children turne to their good. But howſoeuer it be, he euer knoweth
well howe to turne all the afflictions of his children to his glorie, and
to their great honour and profite, as we haue many notable examples
hereof in all the ſeruaunts of God, and namely in thoſe two perſonages
Dauid and Iob, of whome wee haue ſpoken in this our diſcourſe.
Which we continuing ſo farre forth as it reſpecteth the work of mans
generation, are to conſider more narrowely of the admirable ſecrete
of nature therein, ſo much as daily experience and diligent ſearche
hath learned men to knowe. Tell vs then, ARAM, of the faſhion of
a childe in the wombe.
            
            
               Of the faſhion of a childe in the wombe, and how the members are framed
one after another in the mothers bellie: of the time and dayes, within
which a childe is perfectly faſhioned.
               ARAM. I cannot marueile enough at the pride and preſumption
of many, who thinke themſelues to bee ſuch great Philoſophers,
and ſo skilfull in the knowledge of natural things, that they perſwade
themſelues, that nothing is ſo ſecrete in nature which they knowe
not, and whereof they are not able to ſhewe the cauſes and reaſons.
But experience ſheweth vnto vs daily, how farre ſhort they are of that
which they thinke, and in what ignorance the beſt learned are wrapped
at this day. For how many things are daily manifeſted vnto them,
which the greateſt ſearchers of nature, that euer haue beene, were ignorant
of, vnto whome notwithſtanding they that nowe liue are but
diſciples? And how many things doe continually come to paſſe, into
which the chiefeſt, ſharpeſt ſighted, and moſt expert haue no ſight at
all,No mans knowledge perfect. or very ſmall? And among them that ſuppoſe they haue good
knowledge, howe are they deceiued oftentimes? Howe many are
doubtfull in many thinges whereof they haue but ſmall coniectures,
whereupon they geſſe at all aduenture, and as they imagine? We may
eaſily iudge hereof by this, that continually one reprehendeth & correcteth
another, and that the later writers condemne ſundry things in
the former. But not to ſeeke afarre off for examples, we may ſee them

daily in the ſcience of the Anatomie of mens bodies. For there was
neuer yet Phyſicion or Anatomiſt either olde or newe, that attayned
to perfect knowledge, and coulde render a reaſon of euerie
thing that is but in one bodie, notwithſtanding that they are continually
conuerſant in that matter. Therefore, to leaue vnto God that
ſecrete which is hidden from our vnderſtanding, let vs conſider of
that which wee may knowe touching the forme of a childe in the
wombe.
               If wee looke narrowely into that order that nature followeth in
the framing of man, who is the little worlde, wee ſhall finde it like
to that which the Authour of nature obſerued in the creation of the
worlde, which Moſes calleth the generations of the heauens and of
the earth.Gen. 2. 4. For in the beginning the earth was without forme and voyd,
and couered with a great gulph of waters,The creation of the world, and of man compared together. ſo that the earth and waters
and matter of all the elements, and of all creatures created afterwardes,
were mingled and confounded together in this great heape.
Vnto this the Almightie afterwards added a forme, and created ſo manie
goodly creatures, and of ſo diuers natures and kindes as are to bee
ſeene in the whole worlde, which hee hath adorned with them, and
endued with ſo great beautie that it hath receiued the name of that,
which is as much as Ornament or Order of things well diſpoſed. After
the ſame manner doeth nature, or rather God by nature, woorke
in the creation and generation of men. For the ſeede of which they
are formed, and which is the matter prepared, diſpoſed and tempered
by the ſame prouidence of God for the worke he hath in hand,
receiueth not faſhion preſently vpon the conception, but remaineth
for a time without any figure or lineaments, or proportion, and
ſhewe of a humane body, or of any member thereof. The naturall
Philoſophers and Phyſicions, who haue ſearched moſt carefully
into this woorke, and haue had greateſt experience, they ſay that
there are certaine membranes and skinnes that are wrapped round
about the infant in the wombe, which ſome commonly call
the Matrix, others call the Mother: and that within theſe skinnes
(which are three in number as ſome Anatomiſtes ſay, others but
two) as it were within certaine bandes, the fruite is preſerued vntill
the birth.An argumont of the prouidence of God. Wherein wee are to acknowledge the prouidence
of GOD, who hath ſo diſpoſed of nature, that euen from our
mothers wombe, ſhee is in ſteade of a mother to vs, folding vs vp
within bandes before ſhee that hath conceiued vs can perfourme the
ſame.
               But let vs proceede on with our matter, ſo farre foorth as wee haue

learned of the faſhion of the childe in the diſcourſe of Philoſophers
and Phyſicions. They ſay then, that after the wombe hath receaued
the ſeedes ioyned together, of both which the childe is to bee
framed, it commeth to paſſe that the heate of the Matrix warmeth
all this matter as it were in a litle fornace, and ſo rayſeth a skinne
ouer it which beeing as it were roſted by little and little, waxeth
cruſtie and harde rounde about the ſeede.Of the forme of an infant. This cauſeth the whole
matter to reſemble an egge, by reaſon that this skinne compaſſeth
about the ſeede, which boyleth inwardly through the abundance
of naturall ſpirites that are within it.Of the Afterburthen. This is that skinne
which is commonly called the Secundine, or After-burthen, beeing
ioyned on euerie ſide to the wombe, by reaſon of a great number
of Orifices, veynes and arteries reaching thereunto, to the ende
that by them the blood, ſpirites, and nouriſhment ſhoulde bee
conuayed to the infant. For as the whole wombe imbraceth the
ſeede, ſo likewiſe it heateth and nouriſheth the ſame. Therefore
this skinne that ſerueth in ſteade of little bandes hath two vſes:
the firſt is to take faſt holde of the wombe: the other, to ſerue for
the nouriſhment of the burthen, and of the childe. For this cauſe
there are two veynes and two arteries in it (beſides a paſſage in the
middeſt) which are as it were the rootes of the burthen, and make
the Nauill.
               This woorke with other circumſtances belonging thereunto,The firſt ſixe dayes work from the conception. which
wee omitte for breuitie ſake, is brought to paſſe the firſt ſixe dayes
of the conception. After this skinne, they that make three, ſpeake
of a ſeconde skinne that is in the middeſt, which they ſaye was
created to receiue the vrine of the childe, which in the former monethes
is voyded by the Nauill, and in the latter moneths by the
ordinarie paſſage. This voyding place is ordayned to this ende,
that the vrine might not frette and rent in ſunder the tender skinne
of the infant, who is therefore couered with a thirde skinne next
to the other, and that is very tender. So that the vrine toucheth not the
infant, but is voyded by the middle way, as I haue alreadie declared.
Thus you ſee the beginning of the conception, before the burthen
bee wholly formed like to an infant. Whereunto that ſaying of
the Prophet hath relation:Pſal. 139. 16. 
                  Thine eyes (ſayeth hee) did ſee mee when
I was without forme: for in thy booke were all things written, which in continuance
were faſhioned, when there was none of them before. Then
hee compareth the ſecrete partes ſeruing for generation, eſpecially
the bellie, and wombe of the woman, vnto the earth, and to an obſcure,
ſecrete and hidde place, euen to deepe and darke caues in the

ground. For as the earth hauing receiued the ſeede in which is the vigour,
keepeth, cheriſheth, & increaſeth the ſame: euen ſo fareth it with
the wombe and with the mother. On the other ſide, as theſe parts are
loweſt in regard of the trunke of the body, and of all the receptacles
and veſſels thereof, ſo are they very ſecret and hidden, and as it were
in the midſt and center of the body, if the whole be conſidered together,
namely the trunke with both endes thereof. For this cauſe the
worke that is there wrought by God, is ſo much the more marueilous,
becauſe euen in that obſcure place, it receiueth the goodlieſt and
moſt perfect forme that can be imagined. And who will not bee abaſhed
to conſider, that out of that ſlymie ſeede of man there ſhoulde
come bones, ſinewes, fleſh, skinne, and ſuch like things ſo diuers one
from another? But yet it is a farre greater marueile to ſee all this great
diuerſitie of matter, to bee framed in ſo many ſundrie members,
and of ſo many ſundry formes, and that with ſuch excellent beautie,
ſo profitable and ſo fitte for thoſe offices that are aſſigned vnto them,
as wee haue learned in our former diſcourſes. Nowe as God did not
create all creatures in one day, although he coulde well haue done it,
if it had ſo pleaſed him, ſo doeth he in the generation of men. For albeeit
that the members are faſhioned all at once,All the members receiue their forme together. ſo that not one of
them is framed before another, neuertheleſſe becauſe there is great
varietie betwixt them, both in reſpect of their dignitie, and of their
ſtrength, nature their mother doeth not ſet them forwarde all alike.
For in diſplaying her power generally towards all the partes of the bodie,
it commeth to paſſe, that her worke, and the figure giuen vnto it,
appeareth ſooner or later in ſome members more then in others. Hereof
it is that the greateſt and chiefeſt members appeare naturally before
the reſt, albeit they are not the firſt that are faſhioned. So likewiſe
all the members are not beautified and made perfect at the ſame time,
but ſome after others, according as they haue heate and nouriſhment.
Nature therefore obſerueth this order, that the worthieſt partes and
ſuch as haue in them the beginning of motion, ſhew themſelues firſt,
and then thoſe members that are profitable, and ſeruiceable to the former,
and are created for their cauſe. And according to this order the
higheſt partes are ſeene ſooner then the loweſt, and thoſe within before
them without, and they that receiue their ſubſtance from the ſeed
before thoſe that haue it from blood. Theſe alſo amongeſt them that
are moſt excellent are firſt, notwithſtanding many times they haue
their accompliſhment and perfection after the other, as it appeareth
in the Nauill.The nauill firſt made perfect. For although the heart, liuer, and braine, beeing the
chiefeſt partes of the bodie, haue their beginning before that, yet is it

the firſt amongeſt them all that appeareth perfect. Nowe then after
the Nauil with his pipe or paſſage is formed and faſhioned within the
firſt ſixe dayes, the blood and ſpirite are next drawen by thoſe veines
and arteries, whereof we ſpake euen now, to be ſent to the ſeede, and
mingled therewith, that the principall members might be figured, as
the liuer, the heart, and the braine, which begin firſt like to little bladders,
and ſo conſequently the reſt which are faſhioned by litle and litle
according as they receiue nouriſhment. For the veines whereby
the burthen is nouriſhed, may well be likened to ſmall rootes, whereby
plants are cheriſhed: as alſo the burden it ſelfe may bee compared
vnto plants in this point, as we haue alreadie learned. So that the ſeed
receiuing this forme alreadie ſpoken of in the firſt ſixe dayes, during
which time it is called by no other name then ſeede, nine dayes after
that the blood is drawne thither, of which the liuer and the heart receiue
their forme: ſo that after twelue dayes added to the former, a
man may diſcerne the lineaments and proportion of theſe two members,
and alſo of the braine, albeit they are not then altogether faſhioned.
At this time the burthen is called Faetus of the Latines,When the ſeed is called Embryon.
                   and Embryon
of the Greekes, which is as much in our language as Sprouting
or Budding. Next after this, within the ſpace of other eighteene daies,
all the other members are faſhioned and diſtinguiſhed. So that about
fiue and fourty dayes after the conception, the members receiue their
perfect faſhion: and then doeth the burthen beginne to liue not onely
as plants liue,When the burthen is called a child or infant. but alſo as other liuing creatures. For it hath ſenſe &
feeling about the ſixe and thirtieth day, and from that time forward it
is called an infant. But as yet it is voyde of motion. For by and by after
it is formed, it is very tender, vntill that by vertue of the heate it
waxeth more dry and firme, which is by reaſon that the moyſture,
wherby it is made ſo ſoft and tender, conſumeth away by litle and litle,
ſo that the nayles beginne to take roote at the fingers endes, and
the haires in the head.When the childe f
                        ••
                     ſt moueth. Now after the childe is come to the thirde moneth
if it bee a male, or to the fourth if it bee a female, it beginneth to
ſtirre it ſelfe according to the teſtimonie of Hippocrates, becauſe then
his bones are more firme and ſomewhat harder. But this is not alwaies
alike in all women with childe. For there are ſome that alwayes feele it
ſtirre about the two and fourtieth day, others neuer feele the ſame vntill
the middeſt of the time from the conception to the birth. Yea in
the ſame woman the ſame time and order is not alwayes obſerued.
For according to the ſtrength and good complexion of the child, and
the nature and diſpoſition of the mother, theſe things change, and not
onely becauſe of the ſexe. Neuertheleſſe it is moſt ordinary and vſuall

for male children to moue within three moneths or thereabouts, as
likewiſe to bee borne at the ninth moneth: whereas females are commonly
ſomewhat ſlower both in ſtirring and alſo at their birth, the
reaſon whereof is this, becauſe male children are naturally a great
deale more hote then females.
                     Galens opinion of the birth of ſonnes. 
                  Galen attributeth the cauſe of the generation
of ſonnes to the ſtrength and heate of the ſeede, and ſaieth
that they are caried on the right ſide of the wombe, as the daughters
on the left, which is the colder ſide, as being fartheſt remooued from
the liuer. He yeldeth alſo this reaſon why ſome children are more like
the father, and ſome the mother, becauſe of the greater ſtrength of
ſeede which they haue either from the one, or from the other. And
when it commeth to paſſe, that the wombe receiueth ſeede at two ſundry
paſſages which it hath, then are twinnes engendred either at one
conception or at twaine, ſo that the later bee not long after the former,
according to the opinion of the Philoſophers, and namely of Ariſtotle,
who rehearſeth many examples thereof in his ſeuenth booke of
the hiſtorie of liuing creatures, ſaying that a whore was deliuered
of two children, whereof the one was like the father, and the other
like the adulterer. But nowe wee are to conſider of the childe-birth,
which is as wonderfull a woorke of God in nature as any other. It belongeth
then to thee, ACHITOB, to ende this dayes worke by a diſcourſe
tending to this purpoſe.
            
            
               Of Child-birth, and the naturall cauſes thereof: of the great prouidence
of God appearing therein: of the image of our eternall natiuitie
repreſented vnto vs in our mortall birth. Chap. 72.
               ACHITOB. Men are of that nature, that they cannot acknowledge
what they are themſelues, or what they haue receaued
of God, except they bee brought backe to that firſt duſt and earth,
out of which they are taken, euen to their firſt creation and generation.
Therefore the holy ſpirite doeth eſteeme it a thing not vnworthy
his diuine maieſtie often to inſtruct and to admoniſh vs by his worde,The word profitable for all.
and that ſo plainely and familiarly, as no man, be hee neuer ſo skilfull
or ſo ignorant, but he may greatly profit in this ſchoole, at leaſtwiſe
be made altogether inexcuſable, if he learne not that which the ſpirit
doeth there teach him. For concerning them that are moſt ignorant,
he ſpeaketh very plainly to be vnderſtood of them, propounding that
vnto them whereof they cannot be ignorant, although they woulde,
at leaſtwiſe which they cannot eaſily know. And as for the skilfuller
ſort, who by their knowledge are able to vnderſtand more then others,

they are ſo much the more guiltie, if they will not giue credite
to the woorkes of God, as they are propounded vnto vs in the holy
ſcriptures. For what idole of nature ſoeuer they frame to themſelues,
yet muſt they alwayes come to this firſt beginning of man, which is
clean contrary to the reaſon of humane ſenſe and vnderſtanding, and
ſo giue glory vnto God: otherwiſe the fruite of all their ſtudie will bee
nothing els but confuſion and ignorance. Now the more we conſider
of the daily generation of men, the more like we ſhall find it in all admiration
to their firſt originall and creation. For who coulde euer, I
ſay not beleeue, but onely thinke or imagine, that out of preſſed milk
and cruds as it were, ſuch as the beginning of man ſeemeth to bee,
there could proceede any liuing creature at all, eſpecially ſuch an image
of God as man is? And yet we ſee this daily come to paſſe. Now
from whence commeth this milke? Wee cannot for ſhame ſpeake
it without bluſhing. So that if the worke and prouidence of God bee
woonderfull in the conception and faſhioning of man,Mans birth a woonderfull worke of God. and in the life
and preſeruation he affoordeth him in his Mothers belly, as wee haue
ſhewed heeretofore, ſurely it is no leſſe admirable in his natiuitie and
birth, as we may now vnderſtand.
               Wee haue already heard, howe by the faculties and powers of the
ſoule, and generatiue vertue thereof, the ſeede is retained and preſerued,How the childe is nouriſhed in the wombe.
and how the child is formed thereof in the wombe. Now all this
while it is nouriſhed by blood, which is drawne vnto it by the veins of
the nauill ordained to that end: and therfore alſo the iſſue of this blood
commonly ceaſſeth in women with childe, as that which is then diuided
into three partes. For the childe draweth the pureſt thereof to it
ſelfe, and is therewithal nouriſhed. Secondly the wombe by veins leading
directly to the breaſts, ſendeth that part which is leſſe pure, wherof
the milk is prepared that feedeth the child after it is borne. The third
part which is the worſt, ſtaieth ſtill in the wombe, and ſo ſoone as the
child is borne, it iſſueth forth alſo. This foode which the childe receiueth
thus in the wombe, cauſed Galen to allege an ancient ſentence
out of Athenaeus, ſaying, That the childe receiueth more from the mother
then from the father, euen as the plants draw more from the earth then
they doe from the husbandman. For this menſtrual blood firſt encreaſeth
the ſeede, and after ſerueth towardes the growth of the members by
miniſtring food vnto them. And for this cauſe this Authour teacheth,
that naturally the loue of the children is very great towardes their
Mothers, and ſo of the Mothers towardes their children, as alſo
in reſpect of the exceeding great mixture of their ſubſtaunce. But
when the childe is nowe encreaſed and growne ſo great and ſtrong,

that he is well able to moue himſelfe, and to receiue his foode at the
mouth, as he is waxen greater, ſo he muſt haue more ſtore of nouriſhment
then he is able to draw in at the nauil. Likewiſe foraſmuch as naturall
heate is more augmented, he had neede of the more aire, and to
receiue it in by reſpiration and breathing, ſo farre foorth as is neceſſary
for his refreſhing.The cauſe of child-birth. Whereupon the childe ſtirreth and moueth with
greater ſtrength and violence, ſo that it breaketh the skinnes & bands
wherein it was wrapped, and ſome veines alſo, and ſo maketh an iſſue
and way for it ſelf, as that which cannot any longer be kept in the
wombe. Now when the child feeleth that aire entring in which it deſireth
and ſeeketh, for the reaſon before alleadged, it mooueth it ſelfe
towardes the mouth of the wombe;Which is the eaſieſt kinde of child-birth. which is the moſt naturall and
eaſie way of birth, by reaſon that it is borne with the head forwarde.
Nowe ſo ſoone as it is come into the light it cryeth, as if it did prognoſticate
and foretell of the miſeries of that life into which it is entered.
The Philoſophers and Phiſitions referre the cauſe of this weeping to
that motion which driueth it to the birth,Why children cry when they are borne. as alſo to thoſe handlings
and touchings wherewith it is receiued, which cannot bee without
ſome ſenſe of griefe conceiued by this litle tender bodie. Which body
ſo long as it is in the wombe, is bowed round as it were in a lumpe, ſo
that the heeles of it ioyne to the buttockes, and the handes lay faſt
holde of the knees, towards which it doeth bow downe the head ſo
lowe, that the eyes are ioyned to the thumbes as if they were faſtened
to them, and the noſe is thruſt down betweene the knees. Now when
it hath attained to the ninth moneth, ſo that it may no longer tarie
there, for the reaſons before mentioned, it turneth it ſelfe in the womb,
firſt with the head downeward, and ſtretching out the legges and other
members vpward. Then when the houre of child-birth approcheth,
the babe by kicking and turning it ſelfe more violently, maketh
many ruptures by litle and litle, ſo that the skinnes wherein both the
Vrine and the ſweate are contained burſting aſunder, whole ſtreames
guſh out, which ſhew that the birth is hard at hand. For preſently vpon
the renting and breach of the After-burthen through the violence
of the childe, becauſe there is nothing els that holdeth it vp, the babe
falleth downe, euen as an apple or a peare falleth from the tree when
it is ripe. And as the childe doeth his beſt to come foorth at that time
which God hath preſcribed vnto it, ſo the wombe and the mother of
the child doe their partes as much as lieth in them to performe by the
prouidence of God,A teſtimonie of Gods prouidence in the wombe. who hath prouided accordingly. For during the
ſpace of thoſe nine monethes wherein the childe is contained in the
wombe, it is ſhut vp, and embraceth the burthen as cloſe as it may.

And when the time of birth commeth, the wombe doeth not onely open
it ſelfe by litle and litle, but all the top of it doeth gather it ſelfe as
cloſe together as it can, and ſo thruſt the babe towards the mouth of it,
wherunto alſo the neighbour parts lend their helping hand. The woman
likewiſe laboureth, and helpeth as much as ſhe is able; and the
childe falling downward with his head turned towardes the mouth of
the wombe, maketh way for all the reſt of his bodie, and ſo caſteth
it ſelfe foorth, at whoſe iſſuing out, the humour wherewithall it was
before abundantly moiſtened, helpeth very much, by reaſon that both
the childs body, and the way alſo is thereby made more gliding and
ſlippery. Wherein wee haue a great argument of Gods prouidence to
be obſerued. For the childs head being of a round faſhiō, his comming
forth cannot be ſo hindred, as we ſee it is when the child offreth it ſelfe
croſſe-wiſe, or when the armes or legs come forwarde. Beſides, all the
reſt of the members are greatly benefited hereby, both becauſe ye way
is alreadie made before them, as alſo becauſe themſelues are thereby
the better placed to preuent all impediments with which otherwiſe
they might encounter. For we ſee by experience what inconueniences
fall out in childbirths, in what dangers the mothers & children are, &
how often the death of the one or the other, or of both enſueth, when
the child commeth otherwiſe then by this order, which is moſt naturall
& moſt ordinary. Wherefore women with child haue great occaſiō
offred to recommend themſelues vnto God, eſpecially at that time. For
howſoeuer the child cōmeth, we muſt then acknowledge the almighty
hand of God, & his help & aſſiſtāce both towards the mothers & their
children. For let there be neuer ſo good concord and agreement in the
ioynt-labour of ye child, of the mother, & of the womb, yet the work being
ſo difficult, who wil not wonder that euer it could be borne? Who
would euer beleeue yt a child ſhould come forth, or yt it could be drawn
out of the mothers belly, without cleauing the ſame aſunder in the
midſt, or without the death of the one of them if not of both, but
that wee ſee the experience thereof daily before our eies? Galen,
                  Gal. de vſ
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 15. who
made ſuch an idol of nature, confeſſeth that he knoweth not how the
child can find any iſſue and paſſage out, & therfore wondreth at it very
much, Auicenna thinketh that there is an opening of ſome bones, but
he is deceiued: for it cannot be ſo, neither hath experience euer ſhewed
the ſame.An argument againſt Atheiſts. Wherfore both Philoſophers & Phyſicions, but eſpecially Epicures
& Atheiſts, muſt needs be driuen into an aſtoniſhment at this,
& haue their mouthes ſtopped & cloſed vp, except they wil open them
to giue glory to God,Pſal. 139. 17, 18. & 22. 9. & to acknowledge and magnifie his great prouidence
& goodnes towards men, ſinging with Dauid, O God how precious

are thy thoughts vnto me! how great is the ſumme of them! If I ſhoulde
count them they are moe then the ſand. It was thou that didſt draw me out of
the wombe: thou gaueſt me hope, euen at my mothers breaſts. But wee haue
here to note, that there are many cauſes which haſten forward ye child-birth,
but we ſpeak here of thē that are moſt cōmon & ordinary. Children
that are borne at the ſixt moneth or ſooner, liue not, as not hauing
then their whole perfection. They yt are borne in the ſeuenth moneth
may liue, for then is the fruit perfect. And yet they that are borne at
the eight moneth, commonly die: and the reaſon is, becauſe the child
ſtirreth very much in the ſeuēth moneth, preparing it ſelf for the birth.
So that if the child be of a ſtrong nature it commeth thē into the light:
but if it be yet weake, it cannot come forth, but tarieth two moneths
longer in the womb to gather new ſtrength. For it remoueth from the
one ſide of the wombe to the other. Therfore when the child after the
ſeuenth moneth is preſently borne in the eight, it cannot liue. For nature
was weak in the firſt endeuour: neither could it be to purpoſe, before
the matter receiueth motion after the criticall time, with which
name the Philoſophers call the ſeuenth moneth. Moreouer, double
motion weakneth the ſtrength of the childe. For it had remoued vnto
the other ſide of the womb as is ſaid, & preſently after it came into the
light: but the nature of the child cannot ſuſtaine two brunts one in the
neck of another, ſo that death followeth thereupon. The Aſtrologians
likewiſe allege theſe reaſons why the ſeuenth moneth is critical, namely,
either becauſe the ſunne is caried into a ſigne that is oppoſite to the
ſigne of conception: or els becauſe euery planet anſwering his ſeueral
moneth, the eight moneth is giuen to Saturne, who is an enemie to
them that are borne.Two things to be conſidered of in our birth. Now for the end of this matter, we wil conſider
two things in our generation & birth, which offer vnto vs great cauſe
both of humilitie and of ſpiritual ioy. Firſt then we ſee how God would
haue vs humbled in our generation, by creating vs of a matter that is
but ſlime and dung, wherunto notwithſtanding he hath giuen ſuch an
excellent and goodly forme, to the end that his powerfull vertue, wiſdome,
iuſtice, and kindneſſe ſhould bee ſo much the better manifeſted
vnto vs, and that in our ſelues, ſo that we ſhal not need to ſeeke for teſtimonies
thereof elſewhere. So that as our beginning ought to take
out of our heart all ſwelling and pride, euen ſo the forme and beautie
wherewithall God hath honoured this mire of which hee hath made
men, and the great graces which hee hath communicated with them,
eſpecially in regarde of the ſoule which hee hath ioyned to the body
ought to teache vs to acknowledge and to celebrate inceſſantly his
prouidence and great goodnes towards vs. To conclude, wee ought

to conſider the image and ſimilitude we haue of our eternall natiuitie
in this our mortal birth,What ſimilitude there is betweene our ſpirituall and our natural birth. and that birth whereby we are borne vnto an
immortal life, as here on earth we are borne to enioy a life that is ſubiect
to mortality. For firſt, as man is formed and faſhioned in dark places
in the belly of his mother, that afterward he might come forth and
enioy the light of the world: ſo likewiſe being come hither, he is after
a manner ſo vpon the earth, as if he were to be borne againe. For this
worlde is vnto him as his mothers wombe, wherein the light is to him
as darkeneſſe and as a very obſcure night, in compariſon of that other
diuine and eternall light, in which he is to enioy a happie and an
immortall life. And therefore as the childe is prepared in the darkeneſſe
of his mothers bellie, that after hee may come foorth into the
light of the world, ſo are we prepared in this dim light, that wee may
attaine to that other diuine light, which is farre greater and more excellent
without compariſon. Againe, when the time of birth approcheth,
the life and vigour of the wombe, which is as it were the childs
mother, withereth and decayeth, and the childe likewiſe is as if hee
were dead, in regard of that kinde of life which he enioyed in his mothers
bellie. For as he liueth no more after that faſhion, ſo hee is in an
eſtate that differeth much from the former. So fareth it with man
when hee is to depart out of the life of this worlde, as if hee were to
bee deliuered of it in childbirth for another life. For hee dieth in regarde
of this life, to the ende he may liue another life, which as farre
excelleth this, as this is better then the other, which hee enioyed before
in his mothers bellie: yea it is ſo much the better & of higher price,
in that the length of time of this ſecond and bleſſed life ſhalbe eternall
and endles. Moreouer, as a childe commeth out when hee is borne, ſo
doth a man when he dieth. And in comming forth both of them enter
into a new and vnacquainted light, & into a place where they finde all
things much altered and farre differing from thoſe which they vſed to
haue in their other kind of liuing. For which cauſe both the one & the
other being troubled and ſcared wt this nouelty, are vnwilling to come
forth of their clapper & to forſake their cloſet, were it not that they are
vrged & conſtrained thereunto by the arte, lawes & rights of nature,
wherby God hath better prouided for our affaires then wee our ſelues
could conceiue or cōprehend, both in our natiuity & life, & alſo in our
death. The ignorance whereof cauſeth our ſpirit to abhorre the departure
out of this life,Why we abhorre natural death. in regard of this great chāge that is therein, becauſe
it knoweth not what good is brought to it thereby, no more then the
litle child knoweth wherefore he is borne into the world, or what he
ſhall finde there. And therefore albeit nature preſſeth to come foorth

neuertheleſſe according to that ſenſe which it can haue, it weepeth by
and by after it is borne, as if it were fallen into ſome great inconuenience,
and that ſome great euil were fallen vnto it: as we doe alſo at our
death, for the cauſe before alleged, not conſidering that it is our ſecond
and better birth▪ Thus you ſee what I haue thought requiſite to
be noted in the diſcourſe of our generation: and to morow, God willing,
we muſt looke into the life and death of mans bodie. But it ſhall
not be without profite, if firſt we ſpeake ſomewhat of the cauſes why
God created man naked, and with leſſe defence for himſelfe then hee
did other liuing creatures. It belongeth then to thee, ASER, to ſpeake
of this matter.
            
            The end of the ninth dayes worke.
         
         
            THE TENTH
dayes worke.
            
               Why God created man naked, and with leſſe naturall defence then hee did
all other liuing creatures: how many wayes he recompenceth this nakednes:
of the generall beautie of the whole bodie of man, ioyned with profit
and commoditie. Chap. 73.
               
                  ASER. As often as men ſhall conſider in ſuch ſort as
becommeth them, that they are borne men, and not
brute beaſts, they wilbe ſuffciētly admoniſhed of the
ciuil and ſociable nature, in which God hath created
them, & of that humanitie for which he hath endued
them with ſuch a nature, ſo that they wil keepe them
ſelues from being transformed into ſauage & cruell beaſts to hurt one
another, as commonly they do. Truly it is not without ſome great and
notable cauſe, yt among al liuing creatures there is not one to be found,
that hath a more delicate & tender skin, & leſſe furniſhed wt couerings
for the defence thereof, then man hath: conſidering that God himſelfe
created him as his principall woorke amongeſt all viſible creatures,
and made him as it were Lorde of the whole worlde. And yet hee is
of that nature, that the skinne wherewith he is clothed is not ſo ſufficient
a garment for him as is neceſſary to keep him from heat & cold,
& from other inconueniences that might happen vnto him, except he
be clad with ſome other couering then that which he bringeth frō his

mothers belly. For hee neither hath feathers as birds haue, nor wooll
as ſheepe haue, nor briſtles as ſwine haue, neither yet any skin or hide
ſo hard, nor ſo well couered and furniſhed with haire, as foxes, wolues,
beares, bulls and other foure footed beaſts haue. Neither hath he any
skales as fiſhes haue, nor any ſhells as cockles, ſea creuiſſes, tortoiſes,
and ſuch other creatures haue.The firſt point to be conſidered touching mans nakednes.
               
               But we haue foure things to conſider of touching this point. The firſt
is, that if man had not ſinned after that God by creation had in great
larges made him partaker of his heauenly giftes and graces, he ſhould
not haue bene ſubiect to the want either of garments, or of any ſuch
like thing whereunto he is nowe after a ſort brought in ſubiection, at
leaſtwiſe he ſhould haue had all theſe things without paine and griefe.
For this cauſe it is ſayd in Geneſis, that after our firſt parents had tranſgreſſed
the ordinance of God, by eating of the forbidden fruite, they
knewe that they were naked and couered themſelues with leaues. And for a
puniſhment of their offence it was ſayd vnto them,Gen. 3. 19. 
                  that they ſhould eate
their bread in the ſweate of their face: vnder which worde of bread was
comprehended all things whereof they ſtood in neede for the maintenance
& preſeruation of their life: as we vnderſtand it in that prayer
which we dayly make to God, when wee demaund of him our dayly
bread.The ſecond point▪
                   The ſecond point which we ought to note in this matter touching
the nakednes of man, is this, that God would admoniſh him,
not onely by the whole frame and compoſition of his body and of all
his members, but alſo by his very skinne, that he created him to liue in
company and felowſhip, and in peace with thoſe of his owne kinde, to
helpe all and to hurt none. Therefore hee did not create him with naturall
weapons, as he did other liuing creatures, vnto whome he gaue
all things neceſſary for their defence & preſeruation. For ſome of them
haue ſtrength and weapons by nature to reſiſt their enemies: others
wanting this haue ſwiftnes to conuey themſelues out of all dangers:
and ſome wanting both theſe, haue yet ſubtiltie & places of refuge to
defend themſelues withall. As for man, God hath placed him in this
world vnarmed and naked, ſo that if men be diſpoſed to hurt and to
warre one vpon another,Man by nature hath leaſt defence for himſelfe. they muſt deforme themſelues, and borowe
weapons from others, wherby they transforme themſelues & become
monſtrous, as though they were transfigured into ſauage beaſts & into
monſters. For they haue not (as hath bene ſaid) hard & ſtrong hydes
as ſome brute beaſts haue, neither prickles & darts in them as Hedgehogs
and Porcupines haue. Neither are their feete, hands & nailes like
to the hoofes of Horſes, Aſſes, & Mules, or to the tallents of birds that
liue by praye, or to the pawes of wild beaſts, neither yet are their teeth

like to theirs. God hath not giuen them ſharp bils like to birds, neither
hath he armed them with ſtings or with venim, as he hath done venimous
beaſts. True it is that man hath an aduantage aboue other liuing
creatures, namely his hands giuen him of God for ye doing of any work
that he will,A commendation of the hand of man. as we haue already declared. Wherefore if he be to fight
againſt beaſts, his hand will furniſh him with moe weapons, then all
theirs are, which they haue by nature, although they bee put all together.
For he can not only make weapons of all ſorts, but handle them
alſo, & manage them as pleaſeth him in his own defence, both againſt
beaſts, as likewiſe againſt thoſe of his owne kind. And I would to God
he vſed them but in his owne defence, and did not abuſe them as hee
doth to his own hurt very vnnaturally.The third point. But let vs proceed forward and
come to the thirde cauſe, why God hath thus created man all naked:
which is, that he would admoniſh him thereby of his naturall infirmitie,
in regarde of thoſe wants and neceſſities that hemme him in on euery
ſide, vnto which he is more ſubiect thē any other creature. Which
inſtruction ought to worke two things eſpecially in him:A double vſe to be made of our wants. firſt, it ought
to induce and mooue him to that peaceable and ſociable life with his
kinde, for the which God created him. Secondly, by this meanes he is
the more bound to acknowledge the prouidence, bountie & liberality
of God towards him, whereby he bringeth to paſſe, that the neceſſitie
and want, which ſeemeth to be greater in man then in any other liuing
creature, declareth him to be the richeſt, and beſt prouided for, yea to
be Lord of all. For all the garments of beaſtes of what quality ſoeuer
they be, and whatſoeuer els they poſſeſſe, belong to him. Whereas if
men were not ſubiect to ſuch neceſſities as are incident vnto them,
what vſe ſhould they haue of ſo many creatures as God hath created
for them? or what ſeruice ſhould they haue of their hands? For here again
we ſee how that by them he prouideth for their garments, by ſetting
on work ye skins, wools & hairs of al other liuing creatures, beſides
the ſilkes of wormes, and other matter which the fruits of the earth affoord
vnto them, as flaxe, hempe & ſuch like. And if neceſſitie did not
teach them the vſe of all theſe things, howe woulde they conſider the
power, wiſedome, goodnes and prouidence of God in his works, & in
his creatures, to praiſe him & to giue him thankes? For although they
haue neceſſitie & want for their ſchoolemiſtres, to the end they might
learne this ſcience in their ſchoole, yet doe they profit very litle thereby,
but rather become moſt ingratefull towards God their Creatour,
who is ſo bountiful and liberal a father towards them. Whereupon we
haue further to note, that God hath not giuen to men many thinges
belonging particularly to beaſts, becauſe he hath inriched them with

ſo many other things, of which all other creatures are altogether deſtitute.
For beſides the helpe he hath of the compoſition and placing
of thoſe members, which he hath giuen to their bodies, being ſo conuenient
to performe that which beaſts cannot doe with theirs,Wherin men excell all other liuing creatures. he hath
endued them with ſpeech and reaſon, whereby, not onely all that is in
other creatures which is not in them, is more then recompenced, but
they haue more in them, then all other liuing creatures haue being put
together. For albeit they haue no fethers & wings to flye and mount aloft
by as birds haue, yet how many means haue they to aſcend and to
deſcend to goe & to come whither they wil? And as for ſwiftnes and
nimblenes, how many beaſts are there with whoſe ſwiftnes they may
help themſelues? And although they haue not finnes wherby to ſwim
in the ſea, & in waters like fiſhes, yet they haue skil & hands, whereby
they can make & guide ſhips, and ſo conuey themſelues whither they
wil. Now as for ſtrength which they want to cary heauy burdens afarr
off, how many waies is it recompenſed both by land & by water, and
that by means aſwel of beaſts whoſe ſeruice they vſe, as of artes & ſciences
wherin they are skilful? When by we ſee that God hath put more
within a man, namely in ye ſenſe & vnderſtanding wherwith he hath indued
him,The fourth point▪
                   then he hath put without in al beaſts. Concerning ye fourth
point of which I haue to ſpeak touching this matter, it is this, that as it
pleaſed God to giue vnto man a farre more excellent body for beautie
then he did to any other liuing creature, ſo he would haue this beautie
alſo to appeare in al the parts therof. For firſt this body, was not faſhioned,
either to flye in the aire as birds do, or to glide vpon the earth, & to
draw it ſelf vpon the belly as creeping things doe, nor to march vpō al
foure as fourefooted beaſts do, nor with the head bending downward
as theirs is, but to ſtand and goe vpright with the head lifted vpwards
towards heauen, to the end he might be admoniſhed, that his true beginning
& birth came higher thē from the earth, & frō other corruptible
elements,What we ought to learne by the proportion of our bodies. namely frō heauen. He is alſo admoniſhed hereby, that
he is not borne to ſerue his belly as brute beaſts doe, & to follow after
gluttonie, drunkennes, whoredome, & ſuch other carnal & more then
brutiſh pleaſures, wherein licencious men commonly obſerue leſſe
moderation then beaſts that are altogether without reaſon and vnderſtanding.
For although the matter whereof a mans body is compounded,
diffreth nothing from that whereof the bodies of brute beaſts are
made, neuertheles ſeeing it pleaſed God to lodge within it a ſoule of a
diuine and celeſtial nature, that is farre more excellent then all natures
and creatures with bodies, he would it ſhould haue a lodging agreeable
to the nature of it, whereby alſo man might bee admoniſhed

of his excellencie, and that he was created, not onely to looke downe
vpon the earth as beaſtes doe, but to lift vp his eyes vnto heauen, and
to beholde therein the high workes of God his Creator, and to doe
the like in the reſidue of the whole world. For as we haue heard, man
is not properly this body which we ſee,What man is? but chiefly the ſoule and ſpirit
which we ſee not, and which hath the body for his lodging. So that
if we conſider both the houſe and the inhabitant, wee ſhall ſee that
the things giuen of God to beaſtes and denied to men, doe bring
great beautie both to beaſtes becauſe they haue them, and to men becauſe
they haue them not. For if the beaſtes were depriued of their
armour and naturall ornaments, they ſhould loſe all their beautie and
profite that redoundeth vnto them: as likewiſe man ſhould be deformed
an vgly, if in any ſort hee were made partaker of that which is
proper & agreeable to other creatures. But becauſe God hath created
man ſo that he might be eternal and immortall, he hath armed him inwardly,
euen in that part that ſhalbe the meanes vnto him of eternall
life. Neither would hee clothe him with naturall garments, nor arme
him with corporall weapons, both becauſe that had bene ſuperfluous
hauing giuen vnto him that which is farre better, as alſo becauſe his
beautie had bene thereby much diminiſhed, and his ſpirit ſhould not
haue bene ſo well knowen as now it is, by meanes of that skill and of
thoſe artes of which God hath made it capable. For what could he inuent
and doe, and wherein ſhould he ſhew that naturall light and dexteritie
that is in him, if nature had furniſhed him with all thoſe things,
wherewith his reaſon giuen vnto him, is able to inrich him? But to conclude
our ſpeech, hauing ſpoken ſufficiently of the creation, generation,
and birth of man, let vs looke into this beautie that is in the forme
and figure of mans body, by calling to remembrance our former diſcourſes.
And let vs know, that both for the matter, & alſo for the forme
and compoſition thereof, there is not the like worke in all the worlde,
none ſo goodly,The excellent frame of mans body. ſo proper, nor ſo well vnited & knit together: none ſo
wel proportioned & poliſhed in euery reſpect, & in euery part thereof.
So that when we conſider thereof from one end of it vnto ye other,
we ſhal find that the workemaſter that made this body, hath throughout
the whole worke ioyned beautie and profit together. But there is
yet another excellencie worthy of great admiration, in that hee hath
not only beautified this body with ſo goodly a ſhape as we ſee it hath,
but hath alſo endued it with vertue and abilitie to make other bodies
altogether like it ſelfe, as we heard yeſterday. Wherefore men ſhewe
indeede,Who they be that know not themſelues. that they knowe nothing of the excellencie of their nature,
and that they haue altogether forgotten or at leaſtwiſe very ill conſidered

of that inſtruction, which God hath giuen them by the compoſition
of their bodies, but principally by the ſoule that is lodged
therein, if deſpiſing celeſtiall and eternal things for which they are created,
they affect, and ſeeke after earthly and tranſitorie things, preferring
the earth before heauen, as commonly they doe. Which is all one
as if they declared openly, that they are diſpleaſed that God hath
made them men, and not beaſtes ramping on the earth, or marching
vpon all foure, and turning their ſnoute alwayes downeward, becauſe
they haue nothing in them that ſauoureth of a diuine and celeſtiall nature
as man hath: and ſo they deale no otherwiſe then as if they would
reproch God for that honour, which hee hath beſtowed vpon them,
by creating them differing from brute beaſtes, vnto whome notwithſtanding
they had rather be like. But enough is ſpoken of this
matter. And ſeeing wee may be ſufficiently inſtructed by all our former
diſcourſes, what are thoſe principall partes, powers and offices of
the ſoule, I meane the animall vitall and naturall vertues, as alſo what
inſtruments they haue in mans body, let vs nowe looke into the life
and death thereof, and conſider more narowly then hitherto we haue
done, what are the cauſes both of the one and the other.
            
            
               Whether the life of the body can proceede either of the matter, or of the compoſition,
forme, and figure, or of the qualities thereof, or els of the harmony,
coniunction and agreement of all theſe: whether any of theſe
or all of them together can be the ſoule: of the length and ſhortnes, of the
diuers degrees and ages, and of the end of mans life: of death, and of
the cauſes both of life and death: of the difference that is betweene naturall
and ſupernaturall Philoſophie in the conſideration of things.
Chap. 74.
               AMANA. Ieſus Chriſt purpoſing to teach vs, that we cannot haue
life but in him, & by him, who is the life, and who hath the words
of eternal life,Ioh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4▪
                   compareth himſelfe to a Vine, & his diſciples vnto Branches.
For as the branch hath life & vigor, and beareth fruite, ſo long as it
remaineth in the vine, & receiueth nouriſhment from thence, ſo if it receiueth
no ſap from thence, or if it be cut off, it withereth and dyeth.
We may ſay the ſame of the members of the body, if the ſoule be not
in euery one of them, and if it giue not life, vertue, and vigor to them
all for the performance of their offices. For if it fall out ſo, that it withdraweth
it ſelfe altogether from any one part of the body, that part is
without life: as we ſee by experience in a member dried vp, or putrified,
or cut off from the body. And ſo is it with the whole body, when the

ſoule is ſeparated frō it. But we are to handle this matter more at large.
               By our former diſcourſes wee may learne the nature both of the
ſoule and of the body, what is that vnion and coniunction which they
haue together, albeit their natures, ſubſtances, and eſſences are diuers
and very different: alſo we haue learned that the one of them, namely
the ſpirituall eſſence, is a great deale more excellent then the other,
which is corporall.The ſoule proceedeth not of the matter. Wherefore we may well conclude, that the life
in the body proceedeth not of the matter whereof it is made, nor of
the qualities ioyned vnto it, nor yet of the compoſition forme and figure
thereof. For if the life and ſoule were in the matter of the body,
the larger and greater mens bodies were, and the more matter they
had in them, the more life and ſoule, the more wit, ſpirit and vnderſtanding
ſhould be in them. But we ſee by experience that it is farre
otherwiſe, and that there is no more life & ſoule in a great body then
in a litle. And if it were ſo that the life proceeded from the matter, a
dead body ſhould bee as well a man,Nor of the qualities. as a liuing body. We may ſay the
ſame both of the qualities ioyned to the matter according to the nature
of the elements, as alſo of that conformation and agreement that
is betweene all the members both within and without: And as for the
harmony coniunction and concord that floweth from the diuerſitie of
theſe qualities,Nor of the harmonie. and from their temperature, it may be increaſed and diminiſhed.
Wherefore that cannot be the effect of nature, which cauſeth
a thing to be that which it is, and giueth vnto the ſame thing his
forme and kinde, that continueth alwayes in his eſtate and naturall
diſpoſition. For if it were otherwiſe, the nature of kindes might bee
changed, which neuer any of the Philoſophers did ſo much as imagine,Nor of the compoſition of the body.
or thinke to affirme. And as for the compoſition and figure of
the body, there is yet leſſe reaſon to ſay it commeth from thence, foraſmuch
as that continueth the ſame in a dead body which it was in a
liuing. Againe, thoſe liuing creatures, that reſemble moſt the nature
and forme of the members of mans body, and the matter thereof, are
oftentimes farther off from the nature of humane ſenſe and vnderſtanding,
then they that do leſſe reſemble thē. Which we may eaſily know
by conſidering the natures of a Hog and of an Elephant.The nature of a Hog. And of an Elephant. For they that
through want and famine haue bene conſtrained to eate mans fleſh,
haue teſtified that no fleſh or meate whatſoeuer approcheth neerer in
taſte, or is more like it then the fleſh of a Hog. And if we conſider the
inward members and parts, there is no beaſt, if we will giue credite to
them that haue had the experience thereof, that hath them liker to
thoſe in man, then the Hog hath, both for ſubſtance, diſpoſition, forme
and figure. Contrariwiſe, wherein doeth the Elephant reſemble man

either for forme or compoſition of body, or of the members both internal
and external, in compariſon of a Hog? And yet there is no beaſt
more teachable then the Elephant, or that approcheth neerer to the
ſenſe and vnderſtanding of man: as on the other ſide there is no beaſt
further off in this reſpect, nor more hard to be taught and more brutiſh,
then is the Hog. And if any man thinke that the induſtry and docilitie
of an Elephant proceedeth, either from the greatneſſe of the
matter whereof it is made, or from the abundance of the qualities ioyned
vnto the matter, or from the harmony, coniunction and concorde
that is betweene them, or laſtly, from the compoſition, forme & figure
of his body and of the members thereof, wee will oppoſe vnto him the
Ant, which is one of the leaſt among the creatures of the earth, as the
Elephant is the greateſt of all, as farre as we know. The like may be ſaid
of the Bee. For, are there many creatures although greater in ſubſtance,
that yet haue ſuch induſtrious & ingenious natures, as theſe litle
beaſts haue, that are to be reckoned among the ſmalleſt of them? And
by this it appeareth plainly,The ſoule of a beaſt differeth from the ſubſtance and nature of his body. yt the ſoule of beaſts is of ſome other ſubſtance
& nature then their bodies, notwithſtanding there is great difference
betwixt ye ſoule of beaſts & the ſoule of mē. But we haue further
to note touching the ſoule of man, yt the ſpirit doth not only not folow
the nature of the body, but which is more, gouerneth, carieth & recarieth
it whither it pleaſeth: yea, it withſtandeth the affections, which approch
neereſt to ye corporal & terreſtrial nature.The facultie of ſenſe commeth not from the body. And as for ye facultie of
ſenſe & of the ſenſes, it is a vertue that ſurpaſſeth all bodily power and
vertue, & all things depending of the body, ſo that there is no facultie
of the body that is able to expreſſe the actions thereof. What ſhall we
ſay then of the vertue of vnderſtanding, which is the higheſt and moſt
ſoueraigne facultie that is in man? Which wee cannot ſay is a body
compounded of matter and forme. For that thing is the fountaine and
original of life, which firſt mooueth a liuing creature to the works belonging
vnto life. So that when wee inquire what this fountaine and
ſpring is, then doe we ſeeke to know what the ſoule is. Nowe we may
ſoone know by that which hath bene ſpoken, what the ſoule is not:
but as yet we cannot perceiue what the proper ſubſtance and nature
thereof is. And in deede it is not that which wee haue to ſpeake of at
this time, hereafter we may ſay ſomewhat of that matter. Let it ſuffice
for this preſent,The cauſe of the life of the body. that we know that the true cauſe of the life of the body,
in regard of ſecond cauſes, is in the ſoule next vnto God, who is
the firſt and principall cauſe of all things. Therefore it is hee that hath
ordained and limitted to euery liuing creature his appointed time
wherein to liue and to grow, and next to decreaſe and to dye: and as

it pleaſeth him either to prolong or to abridge their life, ſo doeth he
diſpoſe of the ſecond cauſes and meanes whereby hee will haue it
brought to paſſe. Wherefore although euery one hath his certaine
bounds and terme of life ſet him, yet none but God onely can attaine
to the knowledge thereof. For all come not to the laſt age, which hee
hath appointed to be the ordinarie end of euery ones life, following
thoſe degrees into which it is diuided,The degrees of mans age. according to that diuiſion
which we make of dayes and yeeres. For the infancie of man may be
reſembled to the morning, and to the ſpring time of the yeere: mans
age to midday and to the ſommer: olde-age to the Euening and to
Autumne: and death to night and to winter. Therefore Iob ſayth very
well,Iob 14. 5. ſpeaking of man, the number of his moneths are with thee: thou hast
appointed his bounds, which he cannot paſſe. Nowe if it be demaunded
what is the ordinarie terme of life appointed by God, we are to know,
that nature by the ordinance of God appropriateth the matter being
in the forme of members, vnto the ſoule, that is, to giue life vnto the
whole body. Nowe when the ſoule is entred into it and hath taken
poſſeſſion thereof,The cauſe of the length and ſhortnes of life. by little and little it prepareth and maketh fit the
internall inſtruments, vntil at length it hath brought them to that perfection,
which the qualitie, conſtitution and compoſition of the matter
is able to receiue and to beare. And after theſe inſtruments are come
to their greateſt perfection, by vſage they waſte and conſume away, returning
by little and little vnto their firſt nature, & ſo in the end wholy
corrupt and dye. Thus you ſee how the members are appropriated in
the belly of the mother, howe the ſpirits and humors are fitted in the
time of infancie: after which the flower of age in youth is as it were
the vigor and vſe of the perfection of the inſtruments, and olde-age is
the decreaſing age, wherein they decay continually & become worſe
and worſe, euen vntill they come to their corruption, which is death.
And this death we call naturall,What naturall death is. when following this courſe it attaineth
without violence to theſe bounds. Nowe although this bee no
long courſe, yet there are but very fewe that hold out to the vttermoſt
end thereof, in regard of them that ſtay by the way: of whome ſome
are cut off, euen before they haue begunne their courſe, others preſently
after they haue begun it, and ſome in the midway: and that through
ſo many ſortes of ſickneſſes with other inconueniences and accidents,
that a man cannot poſſibly comprehend or conceiue them all. Therefore
Moſes ſayd long ſince,Pſal 90. 10. 
                  that the time of our life is threeſcore yeeres
and ten, and if they be of ſtrength, foure ſcore yeeres: yet their ſtrength is
but labour and ſorowe: for it is cut off quickly, and we flee away. And after
hee hath compared man to a ſtreame of water caried violently away,

to a Morning dreame, to the graſſe that floriſheth and groweth in the
Morning, and in the Euening is cut downe & withereth, he giueth the
reaſon of all this, ſaying,Pſal. 7. 8, 9. 
                  for we are conſumed by thine anger, and by thy
wrath are we troubled. Thou haſt ſet our iniquities before thee, and our ſecret
ſinnes in the light of thy countenance: for all our dayes are paſt in thine
anger: we haue ſpent our yeeres as a thought. Iob alſo agreeth well with
Moſes in this point when hee ſayeth,Iob 14. 1, 2. 
                  Man that is borne of a woman,
is of ſhort continuance, and full of trouble. He ſhooteth forth as a flowre, and
is cut downe, he vaniſheth alſo as a ſhadow, and continueth not. Nowe it is
certaine, that if we looke to the cauſes of the life & death of men layd
downe by vs, we ſhal thinke that all this is done naturally, & that there
is a certaine order of nature, vnto which we muſt all be ſubiect, and a
naturall neceſſitie which none can eſchew. But wee ſee that Moſes
mounteth aloft, and ſearcheth higher for the cauſe: for hee ſeekth it in
God and in his determination, yea in his wrath conceiued againſt our
ſinnes. Therefore the children and ſeruants of God, that haue bene inſtructed
in his worde, doe not onely conſider of that in death, which
prophane men beholde there: but they mount vp euen to this higheſt
cauſe, and behold there the wrath of God againſt ſinne, & againſt all
mankinde for the ſame. So that wee may knowe by that whith hath
bene ſayd,Of the true difference betweene naturall and diuine Philoſophie. what difference there is betweene humane and naturall
Philoſophie, and that which is diuine and ſupernaturall: and wherein
they deceiue themſelues, that ſtay altogether in naturall Philoſphie.
And hereby alſo wee may learne the cauſe why ſo many become Atheiſts
and Epicures thereby,The cauſe of ſo many Atheiſts. whereas it ſhould ſerue them in place of
ſteps and degrees to cauſe them to aſcend vp to that Philoſophie that
is ſupernaturall and heauenly. For their noſes are altogether poring in
this baſe kitchin, of which we haue intreated in our former diſcourſes:
as though God had not created men for another life and end then hee
hath done beaſts. Whereupon we may imagine, what true ioye and
conſolation they can haue, I ſay not only in death, but alſo throughout
their whole life, ſeeing their life, wil they nill they, muſt paſſe through
ſo many dangers and miſeries. For whether they will or no, they muſt
be ſubiect to this ſentence paſſed from God againſt all mankinde, in
the perſon of our firſt parents,Gen. 3. 17, 18. when hee ſayd to Adam, Curſed is the
earth for thy ſake: in ſorow ſhalt thou eate of it all the daies of thy life. Thorns
alſo and thistles ſhall it bring forth to thee, and thou ſhalt eate the herbe of
the fielde. In the ſweate of thy face ſhalt thou eate bread, till thou returne to
the earth: for out of it waſt thou taken, becauſe thou art duſt & to duſt ſhalt
thou returne.
                  Iob 5. 6. Therefore Eliphaz ſayth in the booke of Iob, that miſerie
proceedeth not out of the duſt, & that affliction buddeth not out of the earth.
                  
Which is aſmuch to ſay,The cauſe of barrennes. as that the cauſe of barrennes of ground proceedeth
not from the earth, but from the ſinne of man. Wherefore
men cannot lay the blame vpon any other beſide themſelues, as being
the cauſe of all the euils which they ſuffer, becauſe they beare the matter
of them in themſelues. Now if any thinke, that this ſentence pronounced
by God againſt all mankinde is not ſo much executed vpon
the wicked that are without God, as vpon others, becauſe wee ſee
commonly that they are richeſt, & liue in greateſt eaſe, in pleaſures &
in delightes, we muſt know that they are not therefore exempted from
thoſe miſeries, whereunto the life of man is ſubiect, and which are all
comprehended vnder this ſweate of the face mentioned in the holy
Scriptures. For there is not one of them to be found, that can ſo ſaue
himſelfe, but that he hath alwayes his part & portion in theſe things.
And if we could conſider wel the whole courſe of their life, who ſeeme
to be the happieſt amongſt them, and had the patience to waite vntill
the end of their race, we ſhould ſtill finde by experience the trueth of
that we ſpeake of. But let vs goe on with our ſpeeches touching the
cauſes of the length and ſhortnes of this bodily life, and of naturall
death, as alſo of that which is violent, whereof wee haue not yet ſpoken.
Alſo let vs conſider of the things that are chiefly required for the
vpholding of this bodily life, and without which it could not conſiſt.
This then ſhallbe the matter ſubiect, of which thou, ARAM, ſhalt take
vpon thee to diſcourſe.
            
            
               Of the cauſes generally of the length and ſhortnes of bodily life: of naturall
and of violent death: in what manner the life of man conſiſteth in his
breath: of the principall things required to life, and without which it
cannot be: of the difference betwixt the life of men & the life of beaſts:
of the image of the ſpirituall death in the corporall: of the true comfort
which we ought to haue therein. Chap. 75.
               ARAM. This lawe was layde vpon nature by GOD the Creator
thereof, that the things which it ſhould bring forth in this inferiour
world, ſhould haue ſmall beginnings at the firſt, and after growe
by litle and litle, & when they were come to their full greatnes ſhould
ſtand a while at a ſtay, and then fall by litle and litle, and returne to
their originall and firſt beginning: as we ſee a patterne hereof and an
example twiſe a day in the Ocean ſea. For after it is mounted vp to the
higheſt, and hath ſpread it ſelfe in length and breadth as much as it
may, it returneth againe vnto the fountaine and wombe from whence
it came, and there cloſeth vp it ſelfe. For God hath compaſſed it with

certaine bounds beyond which it cannot paſſe.Nothing abideth ſtill in the ſame ſtate. So likewiſe euery thing
hath his courſe and ſet time of continuance: neither doe we ſee any
thing vnder the Moone, either of the workes of God, or of the inuentions
of men, which keepeth not this courſe. And ſo is it with the body,
which being created by litle and litle, decayeth after the ſame maner,
as it were by the ſame degrees by which it mounted vpward. And
that which we ſee in euery particular body, the ſame we perceiue to be
in the whole frame and courſe of the world, & in all the eſtates thereof.
For the world hath had his infancie, next his youth, then his mans
eſtate, and now he is in his olde-age. For we ſee howe all things decline
dayly, and continually waxe worſe and worſe, as it were approching
to their end. In like maner if we would conſider the courſe and
eſtate of all Common-wealths, Principalities, Kingdomes, and Empires,
and of all the greateſt and chiefeſt Monarchies, that euer were
from the creation of the world, we ſhould finde that all of them were
very ſmall and weake in their beginnings, and that afterwards they
increaſed and mounted vp vntill they came to their higheſt degrees:
and after they had attained thither, they deſcended & fell by litle and
litle continually, vntill in the ende they were wholy ruinated. Nowe
the firſt cauſes of all theſe things proceeding from God and from his
eternall counſell, we know that the ſecond cauſes are in the nature of
euery thing that hath beginning and muſt end, and chiefly in the nature
of mens bodies.
               By our formmer ſpeech wee haue learned already howe this corporall
life conſiſteth in the preſeruation of thoſe inſtruments which
the ſoule vſeth in the body: and that the chiefeſt of them is heate, the
ſecond moyſture agreeable to the heate, which muſt needes haue
ſomething to feede it and keepe it in a moderate ſtay. Laſtly wee learned,
that the nouriſhing and cheriſhing of the heate is the preſeruation
of the moyſture: and therefore thoſe liuing creatures that are beſt
able to mainteine and keepe theſe two qualities within themſelues,
are of longeſt continuance in life.The cauſe of the length of life. So that the chiefe naturall cauſe of
the long continuance of life, conſiſteth in euery mans compoſition,
namely if it be hot and moyſt by due proportion, both in the ſinewes
and in the marrow, in the liquors and humors, and in the ſpirits. The
ſecond cauſe conſiſteth in the long continuance of this temperature,
which being interrupted and marred by diſeaſes, the inſtruments of
life are thereby alſo ſpoyled, & ſo they failing, life it ſelfe muſt needes
ceaſe. Whereupon death enſueth: euen as when the inſtruments and
tooles of ſome handicraftes man are worne and faile him, it cannot be
but that his arte and occupation ſhould alſo be at an ende. So that

death is a defect of thoſe inſtruments of the ſoule,What death is. whereby life is prolonged.
For the ſoule leaueth the body by reaſon of the defect of inſtruments,
and not for any diſagreement that is betweene the body
and it, as may appeare by this, that it was not any proportion or agreement
that ioyned the ſoule and the body together. For albeit a workeman
vſeth his inſtruments, yet there is no proportion and agreement
betweene him and them, in regard of the matter and forme of him and
of his tooles: vnleſſe peraduenture this proportion may be imagined 
                     〈◊〉
                  
be betweene the arte of the workeman, as he is a workeman, and betweene
the aptneſſe of the toole he vſeth, whereby it is made fit for
the doing of that which the workeman hath in hand. Seeing then all
life conſiſteth both in heate, as we haue already ſayd, and alſo in moyſture
requiſite for the heate,Naturall death. wee call that naturall death, when heate
faileth by reaſon that the moyſture is dryed vp through the heate that
drinketh it vp, which heate alſo in the end vaniſheth away, euen as a
lampe doeth when the oyle of it is conſumed. But that is called a violent
death,Violent death. when through ſome accident, either the moyſture is
drawne out of the body, or the heate is put out and extinguiſhed either
by ſome inward, or els ſome outward oppreſſion and violence.
Internall violence is either by poyſon, or by gluttony and drunkennes,
or by ſuch exceſſe: as a when a lampe goeth out becauſe there is too
much oyle powred into it. And if this oppreſſion be done outwardly,
it is called externall; as when the ayre and breath that refreſheth the
heart, is ſhut vp and reteined, either in the ſharpe artery, or in the
mouth. For it is as if a fire were ſuddenly couered and choked by ſome
great heape of ſtones, or of earth, or of aſhes layde vpon it. We heard
before, that if the Lungs had no reſpiration by the mouth & noſtrils,
no man could breath, but he ſhould be choked by and by: as we ſee it
by experience in them that are ſtrangled. The reaſon hereof is, becauſe
the pipe that reacheth from the Lungs to the throat,Of the windpipe. is ſo cloſed vp, that
it is altogether ſtopr, or at leaſt ſo narrow and ſtrait, that there is not
ſpace enough for the ayre and breath to paſſe in and out by. We ſee alſo
dayly how this windpipe is troubled, if whiles wee eate or drinke,
there fall into it a litle crumb of bread, or meate, or els a drop of water
or of wine, or of any other drinke, yea although it were but a little
drop of our owne ſpettle. For the breath that aſcendeth vp from the
lungs by this pipe, will not ſuffer any other thing to enter in thereat,
except it be as ſubtill and thinne as the ayre is, but it driueth it vpward,
inſomuch as when that happeneth to any man, hee is in great paine
and as it were ſtifeled for the time. We ſee the like alſo in the cough.
For from whence proceedeth it but onely of thoſe diſtillations that

deſcend from the braine vnto the lungs by this pipe?From whence the cough commeth. And truely the
conſideration of all this, ought to be vnto vs in place of an other ſpeciall
teſtimony of the infirmitie of our nature, that wee may alwayes
learne the better by this to humble our ſelues. For what an excellent
gift is this life, which God hath giuen to man? and yet a matter of
nothing will depriue him of it. For let his breath onely bee taken
away, which is but a little winde, and beholde hee is ſtifled and
dead by and by. And for the taking away of his breath, and ſo of
his life withall, there needeth nothing elſe but the ſtopping of his
mouth and noſethrilles, or of his windepipe onely, which is ſoone
done, and hee is diſpatched preſently without all help and remedy by
man. Therefore Eſay hath a good ſpeach: depart (ſaieth he) from the
man whoſe breath is in his noſethrilles:
                  Eſay 2. 22. 
                  for wherein is hee to be esteemed?
In a worde, his meaning is, that man is but as it were a little winde and
blaſt, as if hee had his life in his noſethrilles, and as if it were as eaſie
a matter to take away his life as his breath. Moreouer, the mixture
and temperature of all the elementary qualities and of all the humours
is ſo neceſſary for life, as wee haue already heard, that if anie
one be wanting,The blood neceſſary for life. our life can not continue. But the chiefeſt and moſt
neceſſary of all, are heate and moiſture placed in the blood, which
is ſo neceſſary for the maintenance of life, that after it is out of the
body death followeth preſently.
               Concerning the members of the body, it hath beene tolde vs already,
that there are ſom of thē without which the body can not keep
life, nor bee kept therein, amongeſt which the heart is the chiefeſt
of all,The difference betweene the death of beaſts and of man. for the reaſons, which wee haue already heard. Nowe theſe
things ſtanding thus, wee muſt conſider what difference there is betweene
the death of bruite beaſtes, and that of man: namely this,
that the ſoule of beaſtes periſheth vtterly in their death, as doeth the
vigour of mens ſenſes in the death of man. But the ſoule of man ſuruiueth
after the death of his body, and continueth alwayes in beeing
and in life. For, conſidering that beaſtes doe in this life all
that can bee done by them, according to thoſe giftes, which they
haue receiued of nature, therefore they liue and die heere altogether,
hauing nothing beſtowed vpon them for an other better life.
But foraſmuch as GOD hath giuen vnto man a diuine and immortall
ſpirite, which hath heere great impediments and can not well
exerciſe all his offices, it is requiſite that it ſhoulde haue an other life
wherein it may diſplay all the vertues it hath, and enioy whatſoeuer
GOD hath prepared for it, euen that which is moſt agreeable and
proper to the nature thereof. Wherefore wee may ſay, that the

death of man is a ſeparation, or a departure of the ſoule from the body:
wherein GOD propoundeth vnto vs a perfect image of our ſeparation
and departure from him, which commeth by the meanes of
ſinne. For wee ſee what becommeth of the body when the ſoule is
gone from it, and what it is during the time that it is ioyned therewith.An image of our ſpirituall death in the bodily.
The difference is very great. Let vs then propound our ſoule,
as if it were in the place of the bodie, and imagine that God were inſteade
of the ſoule in it, as wee fee the ſoule is in the body. Then let
vs conſider what might be the eſtate of the ſoule both when it is ioyned
with GOD, and when it is ſeparated from him. For there is
greater difference betweene the ſoule ſeparated from GOD, then
betweene a body ſeparated from his ſoule. Foraſmuch as there is no
bodie ſo ſtincking nor ſo infected, when it is ſeparated from the ſoule,
as the ſoule is when it is ſeparated from GOD, if wee will compare
ſpirituall things with corporall things. And contrariwiſe wee may
iudge of the eſtate thereof when it is ioyned with God, by the eſtate
of a body ioyned with his ſoule, and by that difference which is betweene
a dead body and a quicke.
               Nowe if wee woulde well conſider theſe things, and compare
the corporall death of the bodie with the ſpirituall death of the ſoule,
wee woulde abhorre ſinne in greater meaſure then wee doe, and bee
more afraid of it then of anie thing that may come vnto vs.Only ſinne hurteth the ſoule. For there
is nothing either in heauen or earth, that can hurt vs but ſinne: as in
deede nothing can bring dammage to vs, but that which can hurt the
ſoule. But it is ſinne onely that is able to hurt the ſoule, becauſe by
it thoſe meanes are taken away from the ſoule, whereby GOD beſtoweth
ſpirituall life vpon it. Therefore wee ought not to thinke
that bodily death can anie way hurt the ſoule, vnleſſe it be in regarde
of the euill life paſt. It is true, that ſeeing GOD hath created
man to bee of ſuch a nature, as to be compounded of a bodie and of a
ſoule, and that his true and perfect eſtate conſiſteth heerein that they
ſhoulde liue vnited and ioyned together, it is very like that there is
ſome euil in the ſeuering of thē aſunder, eſpecially if any of them corrupt
and periſh, and the euill may ſeeme to be doubled, if both of them
ſhould corrupt & periſh, as many epicures and atheiſts would haue it.
For if it be euill to haue but halfe a beeing, the euill and imperfection
is much more, not to be at all, ſeeing there is nothing more goodly
or more excellent then to haue a beeing. And if it be an excellent
thing to bee,What it is to be well. then to bee well, is a farre more goodly and excellent
thing. For therein conſiſteth the perfection and abſolute felicitie of
man. Nowe there is no ſound or perfect eſtate of anie man, but

onely that in which, and for which GOD created him. And although
man bee fallen from that eſtate, yet it hath pleaſed GOD
not onely to reſtore him againe thereunto by his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt,
but alſo to make it vnto him more entire and more perfect, yea much
more ſure and ſtedfaſt then it was in the beginning. For this cauſe,
if beſides the benefite of creation wee conſider alſo that of regeneration,
and of the reſtauration and repairing of man, wee ſhall
finde therein ample matter of true and ſound conſolation againſt
death.A comfort againſt death. For wee knowe that this tabernacle of our body, which is
infirme, faulty, corruptible, fraile and tending to putrifaction, ſhall
bee deſtroyed and as it were pulled downe, to the ende, that afterwardes
it may bee reſtored vnto a perfect, firme, incorruptible and
celeſtiall glorie. Wee ſee that by death wee are called backe againe
from a miſerable exile, to the ende that wee may dwell in our countrie,
euen in our heauenly countrie. In a worde, wee are aſſured by
death to enioy ſuch a bleſſed and permanent eſtate, as the like whereof
appeareth no where vpon the earth. And if the brute beaſtes, euen
the inſenſible creatures as Saint Paul teacheth vs,Rom. 8. 22. as wood and
ſtone, hauing ſome ſence of their vanitie and corruption, doe waite
for the day of iudgement that they may bee deliuered from the ſame:
ſhall not wee bee very miſerable, hauing both ſome light of nature,
and alſo boaſting that wee are inſpired with the ſpirite of GOD, if
wee doe not lift vp our eyes aboue this earthly corruption, when the
queſtion is concerning our beeing? Shall wee not contemne and
diſdaine the vanitie of the worlde, to aſpire after the good beeing
of the immortalitie to come? Let vs knowe then that wee can not
finde any true and ſound conſolation without this conſideration and
hope which is moſt aſſured to them that beleeue in Chriſt Ieſus.
Therefore they that went not beyond the boundes of naturall Philoſophie,Naturall philoſophie affoordeth no found comfort againſt afflictions, or death.
coulde neuer enioy anie true conſolation, either againſt the
miſeries of mans life, or againſt corporall death. And although they
beleeued, that together with the body whatſoeuer is in man, was extinguiſhed,
or otherwiſe that after the death of the body, the ſoule remained
immortall, yet notwithſtanding ſome haue done nothing elſe
but mourne and complaine in this life, inſomuch as they haue laid violent
handes, as it were, vpon Nature, reuiling her and calling her the
ſtepmother rather then the mother of mankind: & others haue doubted
of their future eſtate and condition, not being able to learne and
knowe whether their ſoules ſhould liue either in ioy and reſt, or els in
paine & torment, but only by opinion. Of which if we would diſcourſe
at large, and conſider particularly of their reaſons, we ſhould be confirmed

more and more in that true conſolation, that ought to bee in
the heart of euery Chriſtian againſt the honour of death. Therefore
I greatly deſire ACHITOB, to heare thee diſcourſing vpon
this matter.
            
            
               Of the chiefe conſolations, which the wiſeſt amongſt the Pagans and Infidels
coulde drawe from their humane reaſon and naturall Philoſophie
againſt death: of the blaſphemies vſed by Atheiſts and Epicures
againſt God and Nature: what Nature is, and who they bee
that attribute vnto it that which they ought to attribute vnto God.
Chap. 76.
               ACHITOB. Trees haue their ſeaſons, in which they beginne
to budde and afterwards do bloſſome: which bloſſome in conuenient
time taketh the forme and faſhion of the fruite, and after that
it continueth growing, vntill it becommeth ripe: and beeing come
to the greateſt maturitie and ripeneſſe that it can haue, it falleth down
of it ſelfe, and ſtill conſumeth more and more. The ſame may bee
ſaide of leaues. But this happeneth not to all, nor yet altogether after
the ſelf ſame maner to all thoſe vnto whō it doth happen. For ſome
fruits periſh euen in the very bud, or els in the floure: and ſome after
they are come to the faſhion of fruit. And of theſe latter ſort, ſome fade
away ſooner, ſome later, according to their ſundry accidents. For ſome
are eaten by wormes, other by noiſome flies, and ſome through diuers
kinds of creeping things, which bred in the fruite it ſelfe. Againe, ſome
are ſhaken downe violently, either through great & mighty ſhowres,
huge ſtormes, bluſtering windes, or els by haile and tempeſt, beeing
plucked forcibly from the trees before they can come to any ripeneſſe.A profitable contemplation in nature.
By all which things God propoundeth vnto vs, a goodly picture
and repreſentation of the whole courſe of mans life, yea of all
eſtates and conditions of men in the worlde, both generally and
particularly. For although in our former ſpeech wee hearde what
order nature vſually followeth in naturall thinges, and namely, in
that which reſpecteth the eſtate of Empires and Monarchies, yet
if wee looke well into it, wee ſhall there finde alſo this very difference,
which we haue obſerued to bee betwixt naturall death, and
that which wee call violent death. For as amongeſt men all come
not to the vttermoſt of olde age, but manie are ſtayed by the
way, ſo is it with eſtates. Wee ſee ſome men aſcende vp through
all degrees, euen vntill they attaine to the higheſt: and then by
the ſame degrees deſcend againe, vntil they come to the ende and

period of all. But we ſee others that are ſtaied in aſcending, or if they
come to the higheſt degree, are ſodainely throwne downe. Moreouer,
among thoſe fruites which attaine to maturitie and ripenes, all
haue not one and the ſelfe ſame time of rypening, but euery one hath
his proper ſeaſon: and thoſe that are moſt forward and ſooneſt rype,
are of ſhorteſt continuance; and quickly gone. This ſelfe ſame thing
alſo we ſee to be obſerued in the life of men, and in the courſe of this
world.The miſerable eſtate of Atheiſts that haue no hope of another life. Wherefore if we had no hope of another life beſides this, our
eſtate would be more miſerable, not onely then the eſtate of beaſtes,
but alſo then that of trees. For as trees decay yeerely in regard of their
flowers, fruites and leaues, ſo they are yeerely renewed, whereas many
men periſh after that manner, that being once dead they ſhall neuer
be raiſed vp and renewed againe to glory. For although they haue
ſome opinion of another life, yet if by the certaintie of faith they doe
not apprehende the fruition of eternall happineſſe, which is prepared
for the bleſſed through the grace of Chriſt Ieſus, they can neither liue
nor die without ſome doubt of that which they deſire moſt to be perſwaded
of.
               When the greateſt and moſt skilfull Philoſophers, the wiſeſt and
moſt vertuous perſonages that haue byn amongſt the Heathen, went
about to comfort either themſelues, or their friends in their great afflictions,
and chiefly in death, this was thought to be one of their ſtrongeſt
reaſons, that the lawes of nature are vnauoydable, and that it muſt be
ſo. For they had no hope of the reſurrection of their bodies: as indeed
it is a doctrine yt humane Philoſophy doth not vnderſtand. And as for
the immortalitie of the ſoule, albeit the beſt Philoſophers, and moſt
learned men amongſt them were of that opinion, which alſo was for
the moſt part generally receiued of the people, yet they were neuer ſo
aſſured thereof, but that ſtill there remained ſome doubt in them, becauſe
they had no certaine knowledge of it, but onely ſo much as they
could get by their naturall light and humane Philoſophie. Therefore
when ſuch as excelled others amongſt them laboured to comfort and
ſtrengthen men againſt the feare of death, and would perſwade them
that there was no euill in it, they vſed for their principal reaſon this diſiunctiue
ſpeech,Philoſophicall reaſons againſt the feare of death. ſaying: Either man is wholly extinguiſhed by death, or
els ſome part of him remaineth afterwards. If he periſh altogether, ſo that nothing
of him continueth ſtill, then he feeleth no ill: and ſo death hurteth him
not, but deliuereth him from all thoſe euils whereunto he is neceſſarily ſubiect
in this life. But if ſome part of him abideth ſtill, ſo that he die not altogether,
then is death no death vnto him, or at leaſtwiſe it is not euill vnto
him, ſeeing his principall part, which is his ſoule, and in regard of which he is

man, liueth and abideth whole and ſound. Nowe theſe are very leane
and ſlender conſolations. For ſeeing GOD hath created man of
that nature that hee is compounded of body and ſoule, no doubt but
his true and perfect eſtate conſiſteth heerein, that theſe two natures
be vnited and lincked together:Sinne the cauſe of death. as in deede they ſhoulde haue done,
had it not bene for the ſinne of our firſt parents, who thereby brought
vpon man both bodily and ſpirituall death. And it is againſt reaſon to
thinke, that a ſeparation of theſe two natures ſo well knit together
coulde bee made, and that one of them ſhoulde corrupt and periſh,
and all this without griefe. Nowe if they periſh both together, the
euill that followeth thereupon is the greater. For nothing can bee imagined
to bee more goodly and excellent then to haue a beeing.
Nowe can any body call that thing excellent which ceaſeth to bee,
or which hauing a beeing, fadeth incontinently? But what a horrour
is it to a man onely to thinke of death? And howe much more will
his horrour bee encreaſed, when he ſhall thinke that hee muſt ſo vaniſh
away by death, that no part of him afterward ſhall haue any more
beeing, then if hee had neuer beene at all? And what profite ariſeth
to him that was neuer borne,Atheiſts more miſerable then beaſts. more then to the brute beaſt? But yet
the eſtate of this man is more miſerable. For to what ende ſhoulde
the reaſonable ſoule ſerue, which God hath giuen him, as alſo the
vnderſtanding, reaſon and all the other vertues wherewith God hath
endued it aboue the ſoule of beaſtes, but to make him more miſerable
and wretched then if hee had beene created a beaſt? For ſeeing
beaſtes haue no minde, vnderſtanding or reaſon, to conceiue and
knowe what a benefite and gift of GOD it is to haue a beeing and
to liue, they haue no ſuch vehement apprehenſion either of death as
men haue, or of the loſſe of any good thing, which they are in danger
to looſe. And by this reaſon it followeth, that the more blockiſh
and brutiſh men are, the leſſe miſerable they ſhoulde bee: as contrariwiſe,
the greater ſpirites they haue, and the more they acknowledge
the excellencie of mans nature, and thoſe gifts wherewith God
hath endued it, ſo much the more miſerable and wretched ſhoulde
they be, inſtead of receiuing greater ioy and conſolation. Whereupon
it commeth to paſſe, that they are more ready to deſpite and blaſpheme
God, then to praiſe and glorifie him for thoſe graces and benefits
wherewith hee hath adourned mankinde. We ſee howe Epicures
and Atheiſts, and all they that conſider in man this preſent life
onely, and goe no further, drawe neere to this point of which wee
ſpeake.The common ſayings of Atheiſts. Therefore ſome of them ſay, that it were beſt for a man not
to bee borne at all, or elſe to die ſo ſoone as hee is borne. Others ſet

themſelues againſt nature and ſpeake euill of her, ſaying that ſhee is,
rather a badde ſtepmother then a good mother to mankinde. And
becauſe they knowe not what GOD is, they ſet vpon Nature,
through whoſe ſides they wound him, ſpeaking euill of him, and
blaſpheming him vnder this name of Nature. Thus you ſee what
comfort and conſolation they finde, who looke for no other life after
this. And as for thoſe other that haue but ſome bare motion and
ſlender opinion of the immortalitie of ſoules, what greater ioy or
contentation can they haue? Nay there are three things that doe
greatly diminiſh their comfort. The firſt is, their doubting wherewith
they are continually poſſeſſed, which hindereth them from hauing
any aſſurance of the ſame. The ſecond is the ſeperation of the
ſoule from the body, whereby they conceiue and imagine, that the
bodie doeth ſo turne into corruption, as that it wholly periſheth without
anie hope of the reſurrection thereof, or of conioyning it againe
with the ſoule from which it was diſioyned. The third is the ignorance
of the eſtate of ſoules after this life. For albeit they were verie
certainely perſwaded that our ſoules are immortall, yet they haue
no aſſuraunce of their eſtate, neither knowe they whether they liue
in ioy and reſt, or in paine and torment, but onely by opinion, as
they eſteeme by euery ones merites, which they meaſure according
to that knowledge they haue, and that iudgement which they are able
to affoorde of their vertues and vices.Naturall reaſon not ſufficient to ſtay the conſcience. Therefore, whatſoeuer
they thinke or hope, ſeeing they are not very ſure and certaine, neither
indeede can bee, if they haue no better aſſuraunce then by their
naturall light and reaſon, they muſt needes bee ſubiect continually
to ſorrowe and griefe, which way ſoeuer they turne themſelues.
For if they are of opinion, that there are puniſhments for ſuch as
haue ledde an euill life in this worlde, who can aſſure them that they
ſhall bee exempted and freed thereof? For howſoeuer they labour
to enforce (as it were) their conſcience, and ſtriue neuer ſo much
to rocke it on ſleepe, and flatter themſelues in their ſinnes, yet can it
not affoorde them anie ſuch peace and quietneſſe, as will altogether
ſatisfie and content them.
               And as for perſwading themſelues that there is no puniſhement
for the wicked, they are neuer able to doe it. For the ſame naturall
light and reaſon whereby they iudge ſoules to bee immortall, doth
likewiſe conſtraine them to acknowledge, that there is a God a iuſt
Iudge, who ſuffereth not euill vnpuniſhed, as alſo he will not paſſe
by that which is good without accepting of it as it is. So that ſeeing

they cannot aſſuredly know, that God will approue and receiue their
workes as good, or refuſe them as euill, they muſt of neceſſitie bee alwayes
in feare,Two ſorts of Atheiſts. whatſoeuer they beleeue. Therefore as the one ſort
endeuour with all their power to bee perſwaded of this, that mens
ſoules are mortal as well as their bodies, and that after death there remaineth
no more of the one then of the other, thereby to deliuer thē
                  ſelues
of this feare, and of the torment that accompanieth feare: ſo the
other ſort that haue a better opinion of the immortalitie of ſoules, labour
to perſwade themſelues that there is no Hell nor puniſhment for
ſoules after this life, but that they are onely poeticall fictions and
fables. But although Poets vſed fictions in that which they wrote
of Hell, and of thoſe infernall furies and torments, yet they deriued
the grounde and foundation of them from that teſtimonie, which
God hath planted in the nature of vs all. So that none ought to flatter
and ſeduce themſelues by meanes of ſuch opinions as ouerturne all
nature: for that were to take away all difference betweene good and
euill,Why there muſt needes be a ſecond life. vertue and vice, things honeſt and diſhoneſt. For if there bee no
reward either for the one or the other, or if it be all one, it followeth
either that there is no difference betwixt all theſe things, or that there
is no iuſtice in God. But both theſe are impoſſible, whereupon it muſt
needes be concluded, that not onely there is another life after this, but
alſo that in the ſecond life there is ioy, reſt, and felicity for the one, and
greefe, paine, and dolour for the other. Wherfore we muſt not thinke,
that becauſe the Kitchin and Nurſerie of this mortall bodie is by the
appointment and prouidence of God, ioined with the ſoule that is immortall
and diuine, therefore there is no other life for man beſides this
bodily life, or that the ſoule which giueth life and mainteineth it in
the body, is no more immortall then the body that receiueth the ſame
from it, and that the body in like maner ought not to expect another
life after this. But I hope that theſe things ſhall hereafter bee better
declared vnto vs in thoſe diſcourſes, which wee are eſpecially to make
touching the immortalitie of the ſoule. Now to end this ſpeech, foraſmuch
as in this and in our former diſcourſes, we haue oftentimes made
mention of Nature, which for the moſt part men ioyne as companion
with God, when they ſpeake of the counſels of his prouidence ouer all
things created according to that common prouerbe, that God and Nature
haue made nothing in vaine, I ſay in this reſpect it ſhall be good for
vs to know,What Nature is. what Nature is, to ſpeake properly, and into what deteſtable
errour they fall, who attribute that to it, which appertaineth to
God alone. And firſt they that vſe this prouerbe might ſpeake more
directly and Chriſtianly, if they attributed the whole to God only, not

ioyning vnto him nature for a companion, as though he had neede of
her helpe, and coulde not well finiſh all his woorkes alone, and as
though hee had not beene able to haue done all that hee hath done,
without her. It may bee they will ſay, that they doe giue this honour
vnto God, and that they ſpeake not of Nature, as Galen and many other
Heathen Phyſicions and Philoſophers, or rather Epicures and Atheiſts
doe, who place Nature in God his ſtead: but that they ſpeake
of her as of a means created of God, by which he performeth all theſe
things. But there is no ſuch neceſſitie to ioyne Nature with God as his
fellow worker. For when hee created the firſt man, what Nature had
he with him that did helpe him to make this worke? Beſides, the verie
name of Nature doeth it not declare,Nature is a creature. that it is a thing borne & created,
and ſo conſequently hath her creation and birth from God as all
other creatures haue? For if we take Nature for that diuine vertue and
power, which appeareth in the workes of the creation, & in their preſeruation
and order, we muſt of neceſſitie take it, not for a thing that
is borne and bred of others, but that giueth birth and beeing vnto others.
And if we take it ſo, then God and Nature ſhalbe taken to be all
one. Wherefore in this reſpect it were better to let the name of Nature
alone: and to ſpeake of God onely, to whom Nature is but a ſeruant,
and ſeeing that by him it was created, and that all things were
made before Nature had her being. Otherwiſe we are like to fall into
that errour of Galen and others his like in theſe dayes,The error of Galen, & ſuch like Atheiſts nowe adayes. who albeit they
be conuicted and rauiſhed with admiration, through the contemplation
of thoſe wonderfull workes, which they beholde in all the partes
and powers of mans body, are notwithſtanding ſo vngratefull, that inſteade
of yeelding vnto God that honour that belongeth vnto him, it
ſeemeth they woulde deſpite him to his face, and ſeeke all poſſible
meanes to put out their owne eyes, and wholly to blinde their vnderſtandings,
to the end they might not be conſtrained to acknowledge
that there is a God, the Creator & maker of this ſo excellent a piece of
worke, and ſo to glorifie him as becommeth them. Nowe rather then
they would giue him this honour, they will make an idole of Nature,
thereby to caſt a vaile before mens eyes, that they ſhould not ſee and
acknowledge God in his workes. They will rather put out their owne
eyes then follow this Nature, which they forge vnto themſelues as a
ſoueraigne Miſtreſſe, whereas ſhe is but the meanes to leade them to
God her and their Creator, of whom ſhee is but a ſeruant, and a verie
ſmall image.
               Thus much I thought meete to bee knowen concerning Nature,
that wee might learne to ſpeake better and more reuerently both of

God and of his woorkes,What we are to iudge of Nature. and that we might know that Nature is nothing
els but the order and continuance of the woorkes of God. Now
that wee are inſtructed in the cauſes of life and death, and what true
comfort and conſolation we may haue againſt the horrour therof; and
ſo haue finiſhed our diſcourſes concerning the frame of the body, and
of the powers and faculties of the ſoule therein, we muſt enter into a
particular contemplation of the nature of the ſoule, and learne what
is the creation and immortalitie thereof, ſo farre foorth as the minde
of man is able to comprehend, and as the worde of trueth ſhall affoord
vs ſure and certaine doctrine thereof. Firſt then, it is neceſſary
and very profitable for vs to conſider, that there is but one ſoule in
one bodie, which hath all thoſe powers and vertues of which the effects
are daily ſeene: alſo what place the ſoule hath in the bodie, and
what vnion there is betweene them. Nowe ASER, this ſhall bee
that matter Subiect, which thou ſhalt haue to continue our ſpeech
withall.
            
            
               That there is but one Soule in euerie ſeuerall bodie: that one and the ſame
ſoule hath in it all thoſe vertues and powers, whoſe effectes are
dayly ſeene: of the ſeate of the Soule in the bodie, and of the principall
inſtrument thereof: of the vnion of the bodie and Soule: of
the diuers degrees of nature, and of the excellencie that is in it; of
the fountaines and bounds of all the powers and vertues of the Soule.
Chap. 77.
               A SER. Saint Paul maketh a prayer in the end of his firſt Epiſtle to
the Theſſalonians, which agreeth very well both to that matter
whereof wee haue alreadie intreated, touching the nature as well of
the ſoule as of the body, and to that alſo which wee haue yet to handle
concerning the nature, creation, and immortalitie of the ſoule.
Now the very God of peace (ſaith he) ſanctifie you throughout:
                  1. Theſ. 5. 23. 
                  and I pray
God that your whole ſpirite, and ſoule, and bodie, may be kept blameleſſe vnto
the comming of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Where firſt he ſheweth vs, that
none but God, who onely is holy, ſanctifieth vs through Ieſus Chriſt
his ſonne the moſt Holy,
                  Dan. 9. 24. and that by the vertue of his holy ſpirite.
Moreouer hee teacheth vs, that as we are to acknowledge all ſanctification
alreadie begunne in vs to proceede from God alone, ſo wee
muſt expect from him the accompliſhment of that woorke, which
he hath begunne in vs. For as hee is the beginning, ſo from him muſt
proceede the perfection, which comprehendeth all the partes of
man. Therefore the Apoſtle heere maketh a diuiſion of three members,

placing the ſpirite firſt,Man diuided into three parts. in the ſecond place the ſoule, and in the
third the bodie. Then he teacheth vs, that the entire and abſolute ſanctification
of all theſe partes of man ſhall be in the comming of Ieſus
Chriſt, in which it ſhall obtaine the laſt perfection. Nowe we vnderſtand
already ſufficiently by our former diſcourſes, that man is compounded
of two diuers natures, namely of a body and of a ſoule: and
yet heere wee ſee that Saint Paul ſetteth downe three partes, and ioyneth
the ſpirite vnto the ſoule, as if they were two diuers and different
thinges, as well as the ſoule and the bodie are. Therefore wee
muſt ſearche out the cauſe of this diuiſion of man after this manner.
But before wee enter into this matter, it ſhal be very profitable
for vs to refreſh our memorie with thoſe things wee haue alreadie
intreated of, ſo farre forth as they may ſerue for the vnderſtanding
of this, and that according to the matter ſubiect propounded to diſcourſe
vpon.
               Wee hearde before howe the bodie is the lodging and inſtrument
of the ſoule, and howe the ſoule ſerueth it ſelfe with all the members
thereof,One ſoule in one bodie. and ſetteth them on worke. And as for the Soule, albeit there
be but one in each ſeuerall body, neuertheleſſe that one ſoule hath
diuers faculties, powers and vertues, which wee alſo call partes
and offices thereof. Wherefore as wee ſaye not, that there are ſo
many bodies in one bodie of a man, as there is diuerſitie of partes,
members and offices therein, but account them all ioyntly together,
as one and the ſame bodie: euen ſo wee meane not that
there are ſo manie ſoules, as there are powers and offices in the
Soule, or according to that varietie of effectes that appeareth in euerie
part and member thereof, albeeit wee knowe verie well,
that they are diſtinguiſhed one from another both in time and
place. For we perceiue by the effectes thereof, that the ſight is in the
eyes, hearing in the eares, vnderſtanding and cogitation in the
braine, and the like is to bee ſayde of all the other partes and members
of the bodie, according to the nature and office of euerie
one, and according to the offices of the Soule in them: as wee
haue alreadie ſhewed when wee handeled all the powers thereof
particularly. Moreouer, wee ſee howe the childe, ſo long as
it is in the Mothers wombe, differeth almoſt nothing at all from
plantes: and after it is borne, howe it differeth but a little from
brute beaſtes, as elſe-where it hath beene alreadie declared vnto
vs. Neuertheleſſe, as in euerie bodie there is but one and the ſame
kinde, faſhion and eſſentiall forme of nature, whereby it commeth
to bee that which it is: ſo there is but one onelie Soule in

euery liuing creatures body, by which it doeth liue, but yet this ſoule
is diſtinguiſhed according to the vertues and offices thereof. Wherein
it falleth out with the ſoule as it doeth with a man that hath many
charges and offices,The ſoule like to a man yt hath many offices. or that exerciſeth many Artes and occupations,
which hee practiſeth in ſeueral places, at ſundry times, and by diuers
inſtruments and ſeruants. Yea, the very varietie of thoſe inſtruments
which the ſoule vſeth, and the repugnance that is betweene the actions
thereof, doe ſhewe manifeſtly that there is but one workemaſter
from whome the whole proceedeth, and which gouerneth and moderateth
all, as a liuing creature ought to doe. For there could not be
ſo great agreement in ſuch diuerſitie, if there were diuers workemen,
and ſo many ſoules as there are effects and actions in all the partes of
man. Beſides, if there were ſuch diuerſitie of kindes of all things, as
there is diuerſity of effectes, the number of them woulde bee infinite:
whereupon there woulde great confuſion follow in the ſearching out
of nature, and of naturall things. Therefore ſeeing there is but one
ſoule in euery body, we muſt learn whether it hath any certaine place
and ſeate in the body, or whether the whole body be the lodging for
it.Of ye ſeate of the ſoule in the body. Now as euery forme of each body is in the whole body, ſo the ſoule
is wholly in the whole body, in which the true forme & principall eſſence
of man conſiſteth. For if there were any part thereof that had no
ſoule within it, that part ſhould haue no life: as we ſee it by experience
in a member that is dry, or putrified, or cut off from the body. So that
as an Husbandman hath his ſundry inſtruments for the trimming of
the ground,The ſoule compared to an Huſbandman. and by them effecteth diuers works, according to the vſe
of each ſeueral inſtrument: ſo fareth it with the ſoule in the bodie. For
the husbandman worketh another woorke with his plough, then hee
doeth with his harrowes, and otherwiſe with his ſpades and ſhouels
then with the other aboue named inſtruments: ſo that according to
the diuerſitie of his tooles he worketh diuers workes. And yet all this
while there are not ſo many husbandmen as there are ſundry inſtruments,
but one alone vſeth all theſe to ſerue his turne. And hee that
ſhould demand in which of all his inſtruments the Husbandman were,
ſhould he not (thinke you) mooue an impertinent queſtion? For hee
may be both without his inſtruments & alſo with them: and when he
vſeth them, he applieth them to himſelfe, and himſelfe vnto them. And
to aske which of his inſtruments is the chiefeſt, were not to ſpeake very
much to purpoſe. For euery one of them is principall in his vſe, and
for that worke whereunto it it is applied: and ſo is it with the ſoule and
with the inſtruments thereof. For it can be both with them, and without
them, in that maner that hath beene already declared. And as the

plough is the chiefe inſtrument which the Husbandman hath to cutte
and diuide the grounde into furrowes, and the pickaxe to digge in
hard places,The chiefe inſtruments of the ſoule. ſo the eye is the chiefe inſtrument, the ſoule hath for ſeeing,
the eare for hearing, the brayne with the thinne, cleare, and bright
ſpirits therein, for all kinde of vnderſtanding and knowledge, and the
heart for the fountaine of life. Nowe becauſe the ſoule hath ſo many
ſundry powers, offices and actions, it is alſo taken in diuers ſences and
ſignifications, but eſpecially in the holy ſcriptures, as (God willing)
we ſhal learne hereafter. In the meane time that vnion which it hath
with the body, is marueilous, and ought to be diligently conſidered of
vs. Wee are to know then, that all things whatſoeuer are ioyned together
in nature, are alwaies ſo knit and vnited by ſome means: which
meane conſiſteth either in this,Two kinds of vniting things together. that the eſſence of two extreames doe
participate one of another, & ioyne together, or els in the agreement
of action and of worke. Now as the bond of the firſt meane is between
the elements themſelues, and alſo betweene them and that matter
whereof bodies are compounded, becauſe there is betweene them an
agreement and participation of nature, euery one in his degree, according
as they are neerer or further remoued off one from another: ſo
we haue the bond of the ſecond meane, betweene the body and the
ſoule,Of the vnion betweene the ſoule and the body. namely the agreement of action and worke. Let vs then conſider
of the coniunction and agreement that is betweene a workeman
and his worke, together with thoſe inſtruments whereby he effecteth
his worke. For there is an agreement and coniunction betweene the
painter and his picture, by reaſon of the penſill wherewith hee woorketh.
And the like may be ſaid of all other workmen. Euen ſo the form
and kinde of all things is as it were the Workemaſter in regard of the
matter: and the qualities and faſhioning of the matter, are the inſtruments
whereby the Species or kinde of any thing is vnited and knit vnto
the matter.How the ſoule is ioyned to the bodie. Now the ſoule is ioyned to the body as light is vnto the
aire. For by reaſon of the coniunction of the aire and light together,
the aire is made cleare and lightſome: and yet the aire and light remaine
whole and perfect, without any mixture or confuſion of the one
with the other. For they are not mingled together as the elements are
in naturall mixtures, or as hearbes that are beaten together into powder,
or drugges of the Apothecary in a medicine, that lie mingled and
confuſed one within another. But the vnion and bond of two ſubſtances
ioyned together, is a great deale more neere in other kinds and creatures
then in the ſoule, wherein it is remooued farther of, by reaſon
that the nature of corporall things admitteth of a neerer coniunction
and agreement among themſelues, then there can be naturally betweene

corporall and ſpirituall thinges. So that the greater agreement
of natures there is, the ſtraiter is the bonde and vnion-betweene
them. Nowe wee may knowe of what nature euerie kinde
of thing is by the offices and actions thereof. As if the queſtion
were touching the nature of that ſoule,Diuers degrees of nature in ye ſoule. which heeretofore we called
the Nouriſhing and Vegetatiue Soule, it appeareth by the office
and actions thereof that it is hote, and that it taketh part (as alſo
all the actions thereof) of the nature of fire, which is the higheſt
and pureſt element, and that which approcheth neereſt to the celeſtiall
natures. But that kinde of ſoule, which wee called Senſitiue
and Cogitatiue, ſuch as it is in brute beaſtes, aſcendeth yet
higher and by agreement is linked neerer to the heauens, and to the
nature of heauenly bodies. And therefore beaſts haue not onlie ſenſe,
but ſome kinde of knowledge alſo, whereby they doe in ſome
ſort marke and perceiue the courſe of the heauens, and heauenly
bodies, and doe ſeeme after a ſort to vnderſtande them. For they
haue knowledge both of the day and of the night,Beaſts haue ſome kinde of knowledge. of Winter and
of Summer, yea, they haue ſome ſenſe and perſeuerance of the alteration
of ſeaſons, according as they fall out by the courſe of
the ſpheres: but yet not by any ſuch knowledge and vnderſtanding
as is in man. Nowe ſenſe and knowledge cannot proceede of
the power of the elements, but is deriued from ſome higher thing.
For it is by meanes of a more celeſtiall power that beaſtes are diſtinguiſhed
from plants, holding more of the excellencie of their
Creatour, declaring it a great deale more. But man hee mounteth
vp much higher. For hee aſcendeth vp aboue all the heauens, euen
vnto God and to thoſe ſpirituall natures, by meanes of reaſon and
vnderſtanding, which make his ſoule capable of heauenly light and
wiſedome, and of diuine inſpirations.
               Whereupon it followeth that the originall and birth of the
Soule is celeſtiall.The originall of the powers of the Soule. And therefore in this diuerſitie of the faculties
and powers of the ſoule and life of man, wee muſt note this, that
the lower kindes of the ſoule and life are not the Well-ſprings and
fountaines of the higheſt, as if thoſe powers and faculties did firſt
ſet theſe latter awoorking; or as if the higheſt did ſpring of the
baſeſt, and receiued their vertues from them: but they are onelie
certaine aydes and degrees of helpe, whereby the higheſt and
chiefeſt deſcende and aſcende. So that the Vegetatiue and nouriſhing
life and vertue, is not the originall of the ſences, and ſenſitiue
vertue: but onelie a degree by which the facultie of ſenſe is deriued
to the bodie, and by little and little aſcendeth vp to her powers

and offices. The like may bee ſayde of the vnderſtanding and
of reaſon in regarde of the ſenſitiue facultie. For euerie ſort and
kinde of life, and euerie power of the ſoule hath beginning of it
ſelfe,An admirable worke of God. and certaine boundes within which it is conteined. Wherein
we haue to conſider a marueilous woorke and prouidence of GOD,
in that hee hath ioyned and linked togethet in man things that are
ſo diuers. For wee take this as graunted, that the ſoule of man is a
ſpirituall nature and not corporall, that it is immortall, and created
for the contemplation of celeſtiall and eternall things. On the other
ſide, wee ſee, howe this ſo excellent and diuine a nature is ioyned to
that part and power that is called Vegetatiue and Nouriſhing, which
ſeemeth rather to bee corporall then ſpirituall, to bee more terreſtriall
then celeſtiall, and to bee as it were the Kitchen of the bodies
of liuing creatures, and the Store-houſe and Originall of their generation.
So that there is no man of any ſounde minde, who knowing
this marueilous coniunction of nature in thinges ſo diuers, and
conſidering that it cannot come to paſſe by happe-hazard and at aduenture,
but hee muſt needes bee rauiſhed with great admiration,
and acknowledge an admirable prouidence of God the Creator and
Lord of nature.
               But they that are inſtructed in the holie worde,Why God hath ioyned the body to the ſoule. and in the doctrine
of the Church, haue yet a further conſideration of theſe
thinges. For they knowe well, that albeeit this Kitchin of mans
bodie ſhall haue no neceſſarie vſe in the life to come, neuertheleſſe
God hath eſtabliſhed this order, and woulde haue it thus ioyned to
the ſoule and ſpirite, to the ende that thoſe beginnings of eternall
life, and of that true and perpetuall wiſedome, which hee hath put
into vs, ſhoulde bee kindled and inflamed in this mortall life. For
they ſhall not ſhine foorth in anie there, who haue not heere had
ſome beginnings, but haue ſuffered thoſe to bee cleane extinguiſhed,
which they haue receiued of GOD. For this cauſe doeth the
voyce of God and of his heauenly doctrine ſounde in mens eares,
and to theſe endes hath hee ordayned that gouernement, which
ought to bee amongeſt them, and hath bounde and fortified it with
manie bondes and rampires. Wherefore wee ſtande in neede of doctrine
of inſtruction and diſcipline,The naturall knowledge of mans body very profitable. vnto which things the conſideration
of mans nature may greatly helpe vs. For there is no ſcience
or humane wiſedome, howe great ſoeuer it bee, that is able
to rehearſe and comprehende the great profite, which this conſideration
can affoorde to men, euen ſo farre foorth as they may verie
well learne and knowe. And of this wee may the better bee

reſolued, if we conſider well of that which hath alreadie bene handled:
yea we may the better iudge hereof, if wee perfectly vnderſtand
that diuiſion of man made by S. Paul, and mentioned by vs in this
diſcourſe. Therefore, AMANA, proceede you in the reſidue of this
matter, giuing vs firſt to vnderſtand what is the nature and offices of
thoſe pure, animal, cleare and bright ſpirits, which we ſaide were ſeruiceable
to the ſoule for all kinde of vnderſtanding and knowledge.
Afterwardes you may more eaſily inſtruct vs at large and teach vs,
what difference there is not onely betweenethe ſoule and the inſtruments
thereof, whereby it worketh, but alſo betweene the inſtruments
themſelues, and their nature and offices, and which of them are
neareſt, or remoued fartheſt from the ſoule.
            
            
               Of the nature and varietie of the animall ſpirites, and how they are onely
instruments of the ſoule, and not the ſoule it ſelfe: of the nature of thoſe
bodies wherein the ſoule may dwell and worke: of the difference that is,
not onely betweene the ſoule and the inſtrumenes by which it woorketh,
but alſo betweene the instruments themſelues, and their natures and
offices, and which of them are neerest or farthest of: of the degrees
that are in the vnion and coniunction of the ſoule with the bodie.
Chap. 78.
               AMANA. It is requiſite that workmen ſhould haue inſtruments
anſwerable to thoſe works which they are to make: and if they
haue taken in hand but one ſingle and ſimple worke, they neede but
one toole fitte for that purpoſe: as to ſawe timber, there needeth but
a ſawe. But they that are to make many workes, or one woorke that
is full of varietie, ſtand in need of many inſtruments: as painters, ioyners,Why the ſoule worketh with ſundry inſtruments.
carpenters, maſons and ſuch like. The ſame may bee ſaide of the
ſoule: and therefore it hath many members in the body, that are giuen
vnto it as inſtruments to ſerue for thoſe woorkes, which it hath
outwardly to perfourme. Moreouer, the ſoule hath humours to preſerue
and vphold the members, and to keepe them alwayes ready for
their worke, by thoſe meanes which we haue heard already: beſides,
it hath vital ſpirits of which the animall ſpirites are bred, which ſerue
in ſteade of a light to garde and conduct it in the actions both of the
external and the internall ſenſes. And as there is great force in a toole
or inſtrument to cauſe a good or euil worke, ſo is there in the humors,
ſpirites, and members of the bodie, whereby we are made fitte to exerciſe
and to execute all actions whether they concerne life and ſenſe,
knowledge and vnderſtanding, or will and affections. For it fareth in

this matter as it doeth in the diſpoſition of the aire, which the thicker
and more obſcure it is, the leſſe cleare will the light appeare vnto vs:
and contrariwiſe the more pure and thinne it is, the brighter and more
ſhining it will ſhew it ſelfe vnto vs.
               Nowe for this matter, wee muſt call to minde what wee heard
concerning the generation of ſpirites both Vitall and Animall, in
thoſe diſcourſes of the nature and office of the heart. And as they
are thinne vapours, engendered of blood, concocted, and ſette on
fire through the vertue of the heart, that they might bee as it were
little flames, hauing diuers actions in diuers members: ſo according
to the puritie and impuritie of the blood in the compoſition of the
bodie, wee are to iudge of the ſpirites that proceede from them.
And albeeit they haue all one and the ſame fountaine, namely the
heart in which they are bredde, neuertheleſſe they change according
to thoſe places and members wherein they woorke, and being
ſo changed, they haue diuers and ſeuerall actions. Wee vnderſtand
then by the Vitall ſpirite,Of the Vital and Animal ſpirites and of their operations. a little flame bredde and borne in the heart
of the pureſt blood, whoſe office is to carie naturall heate to the other
members, and to giue them vertue and ſtrength to put in practiſe
thoſe actions and offices, which they exerciſe by the ſame heat.
It hath beene tolde vs alſo before, that the arteries ſerue to carie
this vitall ſpirite to all the members. But wee are farther to learne,
that when the vitall ſpirites bredde in the heart, are in part tranſported
to the braine, others are engendered of them, which are
called Animall ſpirites, in that ſence in which wee called thoſe
Animall faculties and powers, from whence the Soule deriueth
her veſſels and inſtrumentes in the brayne. For after the ſpirites
ſent by the heart, are come thither, they are made more cleane
and bright through the vertue of the braine, and agreeable to the
temperament thereof: and then beeing infuſed into the brayne
by meanes of the ſinewes, they are inſteade of a light whereby
the actions of the ſences are incited and ſtirred vp, as alſo thoſe
motions which are from place to place. And as wee haue hearde,
that a good temperature of the blood and of other humours doeth
much helpe forwarde and profite the manners and conditions of
men, the ſame may bee ſaide of the heart and of the ſpirites proceeding
from the ſame. For when the heart is in good temper, ſo
that it is not troubled either with anger, or ſadneſſe, or any other euill
affection, it is manifeſt that the ſpirites are a great deale the better
in the braine.
               Nowe let vs conſider the woonderfull woorke of God wrought

in man by meanes of the Vitall and Animall ſpirites.The effects of the Vital and Animal ſpirits in man. For what are
the chiefe actions effected in him? Are they not the preſeruation of
life, nouriſhment, and generation: and then ſenſe and motion,
with cogitation and the affections of the heart? And what were
all theſe thinges without ſpirites? Hence it commeth that in the
holy Scriptures the heart is taken for the fountaine not onely of
life, but alſo of all the actions of men, as it hath beene alreadie
declared vnto vs. And for this cauſe alſo ſome haue ſayde, that
theſe ſpirites and little Vitall and Animall flames were the ſoule
it ſelfe, or the immediate inſtrument thereof, that is to ſay, the
verie next whereby it woorketh immediately, ſo that there is none
betwixt them twayne.The Vital & Animal ſpirits are not the ſoule. But the latter is more certaine and more agreeable
to trueth then the former. For if the ſoule were nothing
elſe but the Vitall and Animall ſpirites, it ſhoulde fayle and periſh
with them as the bodily life doeth: and ſo it ſhoulde not bee
immortall. But ſeeing they are but the inſtruments thereof, as the
humours of the bodie are, and namely the blood from which
they proceede, the ſoule can well bee without them: albeeit they
cannot bee without it, and although it cannot without them perfourme
the woorkes it doeth with and by them. And foraſmuch
as God hath giuen them to bee as it were a light, it is certaine
that the light of theſe ſurmounteth the light of the Sunne, Moone
or ſtarres: and that all theſe lights haue great agreement one with
another.
               But it is yet a farre more woonderfull woorke of GOD,A wonderfull worke of God. when
not onelie the ſoule vſeth theſe inſtrumentes for the life of man,
but alſo when the celeſtiall ſpirite ioyneth it ſelfe vnto them, vſing
them in the elect, and making them more cleere by his heauenly
light, that the knowledge of God might bee more euident,
that their aſſuraunce and truſt in him might bee more firme,
and that all the motions of his children might bee kindeled the
more towardes him. So likewiſe the euill ſpirite knoweth well
howe to take occaſion by the badde temperature of the humors to
abuſe men, as wee haue alreadie declared, thereby to ſet forwarde
their ruine, when hee poſſeſſeth the heart, troubleth and poyſoneth
the ſpirites in that and in the brayne. Whereupon hee attempteth
to hinder reaſon and iudgement, to bring men to furie
and madneſſe,1. Sam. 18. 10. & 31. 4. and to thruſt forwarde their heart and their other
members to committe foule and execrable factes. Whereof wee
haue examples in the furie of Saul,
                  2. Sam. 17▪ 23. and in his death: in the death
of Achitophel,
                  Matth. 27. 5. of Iudas, and of manie others whome hee hath

brought to ſlaye themſelues: as likewiſe in manie other horrible
factes dayly committed by men. Therefore it is very requiſite,
that wee ſhoulde diligently conſider our nature, and bee carefull
to gouerne and guide it well. Wee are to knowe that our ſpirites
are the habitations of the holy ſpirite, and therefore wee are
to pray to God through his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus, to repell and keepe
backe euill ſpirites farre from vs, and to inſpire his diuine and celeſtiall
ſpirite into our ſpirites, heartes, and mindes, that it may
guide and gouerne them. And this agreeth verie fitly with that
prayer,1. Theſſ. 5. 23. which wee hearde alreadie vttered by Saint Paul, touching
the entire ſanctification of the whole man, whome hee diuided into
ſpirite, ſoule and bodie. So that, if wee haue throughly taſted of
the former diſcourſes, as well concerning the nature of the bodie as
of the ſoule, wee may perceiue wherefore the Apoſtle hath thus
diuided the whole man. For firſt wee cannot doubt but that the
ſoule beeing the principall Woorker, is ſuch a ſubſtaunce and nature
as dwelleth in a bodie apt and meete to receiue life in. I ſpeake
this purpoſely, becauſe all ſortes of bodies are not capable of ſoule
and life: and they that are capable, are not yet capable of euerie
kinde of ſoule and life, but onelie of ſuch as are agreeable to their
nature, hauing thoſe inſtrumentes in themſelues which may bee vſed
by them according to their nature. Wherefore the ſoule of man
muſt of neceſſitie haue another bodie, with other inſtruments and
of another nature, then the ſoule of beaſtesmay haue: and the ſoule
of beaſtes another then the ſoule of plantes, according as euerie one
of them differeth from other both in nature and offices. But of
what nature ſoeuer eyther the ſoule or the bodie is, the ſoule hath
this propertie▪ like a buſie woorkeman to bee in the bodie, hauing
all her inſtrumentes therein.A compariſon of the ſoule and a workeman. Nowe when a woorkeman woorketh
with his tooles, hee muſt haue within himſelfe the vertue and skill
to doe that which hee doeth, becauſe it is not in the inſtrumentes
whereby he worketh. For albeit they be appropriated and fitted to the
woorke that is wrought, yet of themſelues they can doe nothing at
all, except they bee ſet on woorke by the woorkeman, becauſe
they haue not in them any vertue to woorke. But this power
and facultie is onelie in the woorkeman, to whome it belongeth
to perfect his woorke. So if the vertue of woorking were not in
the ſoule, it coulde woorke no more with inſtrumentes then without.
Therefore albeit it ſeemeth that the natural heate, the humors and
the ſpirits woorke in the body, and effect ſomething therein, yet wee
muſt knowe, that they doe nothing there of themſelues, but that they

receiue of the ſoule whatſoeuer they haue.A ſimilitude. As when a Paynter
draweth a picture, his penſill and colours haue it not of themſelues
to doe that which is done by them, but of the Painter. The
ſoule then is the Woorkeman that worketh, receiuing her vertue and
facultie of working not from without, but euen in the ſelfe-ſame bodie
in which it is. Therefore, to ſpeake properly, we may ſay that ſhee
dwelleth in the bodie, becauſe ſhee abideth therein, as in her houſe
with all her implements and houſhold inſtruments: ſo that ſhee muſt
needes haue the bodie appropriated and made fitte vnto her nature.
For euery ſoule cannot be indifferently ioyned to euery forme and figure
of a bodie, to exerciſe and execute therein the woorkes of life:
but it muſt woorke by that order of nature, and according to thoſe
lawes which the Creator of all things hath ordained from the beginning
of the world.Againſt the tranſmigration of ſoules. Whereupon wee may note, that if wee had no other
reaſon but the conſideration heereof, againſt the Pythagoricall
tranſmigration of ſoules from one bodie to another, it were ſufficient
to make knowne the greatneſſe of this foppery, and what error there
is in that opinion. For if it were ſo, there would be no difference betwixt
the ſoules of men, of beaſtes and of plants, neither ſhoulde
there bee any proprietie and aptneſſe of bodie, and inſtruments more
to one ſoule then to another. Whereupon all nature touching this
poynt and order appoynted by God heerein, ſhoulde bee confounded
and ouerthrowen.
               But to returne to our matter,The apteſt inſtrument for the ſoule. foraſmuch as the temperature of liquors,
humors and qualities, (vnder which I alſo comprehend the ſpirites)
is moſt inward and profound, aſwell in the body as in the workmanſhippe
of nature, it is vndoubtedly the fitteſt inſtrument the ſoule
hath, and ſuch a one as is neereſt linked by agreement and coniunction,
with the workman that vſeth the ſame. Inſomuch that if the ſoule
want this inſtrument, it departeth away: and if the ſoule bee gone
and ſo bee wanting to it, then muſt it alſo neceſſarily fayle preſently,
although the members abide yet after the departure of the
ſoule. For the confirmation and ſtrengthening of the members
both internall and externall, is ſeparated farther from the Soule:
but the mixture of the humours and ſpirite that is in the members,
is more neere and more inwarde. True it is, that the humours
and qualities are inſtrumentes of the ſoule, as well as the members:
but the humours are ſuch inſtrumentes as ſet the reſt on
woorking,The neceſſary vſe of the humours. I meane the members, yea, by meanes of them the
ſoule vſeth the members. Wherefore if the humours fayle; the
members are verie vnprofitable, as it appeareth in them that

are drie or puffed vp, or taken with the palſie, or oppreſſed with any
other maladie. For the members are fitte inſtruments for outwarde
vſes and excerciſe, but the temperature and mixture of the humours
and ſpirites, is ordained to preſerue ſuch inſtruments, to the end they
might alwayes bee apt and readie to doe their dueties.The humors are in continuall motion. Therefore the
humours and qualities are in perpetuall motion, but the members
are not. For the humours muſt alwayes keepe the members in a readineſſe
to woorke, if neede require. Nowe in the conſideration of all
theſe things, wee ſee wonderful degrees in the vnion and coniunction
that is betweene the bodie and the ſoule, and the inſtruments
which it vſeth in the bodie. For as all the elements haue their combinations,
and are linked together, according to that agreement of
nature which they haue one with another, euery one in his degree
from heauen downe to the earth, and ſo likewiſe all the humors and
qualities of all things: euen ſo is it with the ſoule and bodie, and with
thoſe inſtruments and meanes whereby they are ioyned and knitte together,
euery one in his degree, according as their natures are more
or leſſe corporall or ſpirituall,What partes of the body come nereſt to the ſoule. terreſtriall or celeſtiall. For as the vitall
and animall ſpirites approch neereſt to the nature of the ſoule, ſecondly,
the humours come neereſt to the nature of the ſpirites, thirdly,
the members next to the humours: ſo all of them keepe their ranke
and order in their degrees, and in that coniunction which the bodie
and ſoule haue together, as alſo the inſtruments whereby the ſoule
woorketh in the bodie: whether wee conſider them either in aſcending
vpwarde from the loweſt to the higheſt, or els in deſcending
from the higheſt to the loweſt, as wee conſider the vnion and coniunction
that is betwixt all the elements from the earth to the heauens,
and from the heauens to the earth. Whereby wee dayly ſee more
and more the great marueiles of God, and by what meanes and arte
hee ioyneth the heauens with the earth, and bodily natures with
ſpirituall. This beeing thus, wee are to learne, that all the inſtruments
of the ſoule are prepared for it in the bodie, as it were for a
Woorkeman that is to doe ſome woorke, and that there is none but
the ſoule that doeth vſe them. So that it is verie euident, that the
ſoule is the perfection of this aptneſſe of the bodie, and that there
is great agreement betweene the ſoule and the bodie, and betweene
all the partes and faculties of both. Foraſmuch then as there
is ſuch a coniunction, and that GOD hath created them both to
bee glorified in them, Saint Paul hath good cauſe to pray for ſanctification
in them both, to the ende that God might be ſerued and honoured,
and that both of them might be glorified in the day of the

Lorde. But that our ſpeech may yet bee better vnderſtoode, wee
muſt conſider in what ſignification the names of ſoule, ſpirite and
heart are commonly taken, namely in the holy Scriptures, and
howe wee may and ought to vſe them. This will helpe vs greatly
to attaine to the knowledge of the nature and immortalitie of
the ſoule, wherein wee are to bee inſtructed before wee diſſolue
our preſent aſſemblie. Teach vs therefore, ARAM, what diuiſions the
ſcripture maketh of the whole man, aſwell in regarde of the ſoule as of
the bodie, and in what ſignifications the names of ſoule, ſpirite and
heart are taken, with the cauſes wherefore.
            
            
               Of the diuiſions of man made in the holy Scriptures, as well in reſpect of
the ſoule as of the bodie: in what ſignifications the names of ſoule, ſpirit
and heart are vſed therein, and the cauſes why: of the intire ſanctification
of man: howe the ſoule is taken for the life, and for the members
and inſtruments of nouriſhment, and for nouriſhment it ſelfe
Chap. 79.
               ARAM. Foraſmuch as God ſo honoureth our bodies, as to call
them Temples of his holie ſpirite,1. Cor. 6. 19. I thinke they cannot bee
ſuch in deede, except they bee wholly dedicated and conſecrated
vnto him, ſo that wee ſeparate them from all filthineſſe and
pollution, by giuing our ſelues to all kinde of ſanctimonie and honeſtie
of life. For then is the body wholly ſanctified, when all the ſenſes
and members applie themſelues onely to good and holy woorkes
commaunded by God, and when they abſtaine from the contrarie.
Whereupon it commeth to paſſe,Of the entire ſanctification of mans bodie. that the eyes turne aſide from beholding
all vaine things, and take pleaſure onely in ſeeing that, which
may rauiſh man with admiration at the excellencie of the woorkes of
God, and induce him to well-doing. The like may bee ſayde of
ſoundes, of voyces, of wordes, in regarde of the eares. And as for
the tongue, it is not polluted with vile ſpeeches, with lying, ſlandering
and blaſphemie: but prayſeth God, and rehearſeth his works
and woonders, ſpeaking alwayes with a grace to the edifying of all.
In like manner, the mouth ſerueth man for the ſelfe-ſame vſe, as the
ſtomacke alſo and the bellie, with all the reſt of the members that
ſerue for the nouriſhing of the bodie, are not defiled through gluttonie
and drunkenneſſe.The body liueth not to eate, but eateth to liue. So that the bodie liueth not to eate, but eateth
to liue, and to make ſupplie to thoſe neceſſities vnto which GOD
hath made it ſubiect. Therefore it obſerueth ſobrietie, and is contented

to miniſter to the naturall affections, that God may bee ſerued
in this life. Neither doeth it abuſe the members of generation to
whoredome and villanie, but conteineth them within their office and
lawfull vſe. And as for the feete and hands, with all the reſt of the externall
members, it keepeth them alſo within the compaſſe of their
duety. But ſeeing the whole body & all the members therof, take from
the ſoule all their actions and vſes, they cannot bee ſanctified for the
ſeruice of God and of holy things, vnleſſe the ſoule be firſt ſanctified,
which giueth vnto them life, motion, and ſenſe.
               For this cauſe Saint Paul ſpeaking of the ſanctification which he
wiſheth to the Theſſalonians,1. Theſ. 5. 23. before hee maketh any mention of
that of the bodie, hee beginneth with the Spirite and Soule, as wee
haue alreadie heard. Now becauſe the ſoule hath diuers powers, he
vſeth two wordes the better to note them out, eſpecially the chiefeſt
of them. For as it hath beene alreadie declared vnto vs, albeit
the ſoule hath manie powers and offices in the bodie of man, yet
there are not ſo manie ſoules in the bodie, as there are faculties
and effectes thereof, but one onely ſoule which doeth all that.
For this cauſe the name of ſoule is diuerſly taken in the holy ſcriptures.The name of Soule taken diuerſly.
Sometime it is taken for that ſpirituall ſubſtaunce that is ioyned
with the bodie to giue life vnto it, and for all the powers
thereof: and ſometime againe for one part of thoſe faculties and
powers. The like may be ſayd of the name of ſpirite, and of heart,
and that for the ſame reaſon. Thus doeth the Scripture ſometimes
diuide the whole man into two partes onelie, namelie into bodie
and ſoule:Math. 10. 28. as when Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth: Feare yee not them which
kill the bodie, but are not able to kill the ſoule: but rather feare him, which
is able to destroy both ſoule and bodie in Hell.
                  Gen. 6. 17. And often alſo the ſame
holie worde taketh the one of theſe two partes for the whole,eſai. 40. 6. luc. 3. 6. leuit 4. 2. euen
in that ſignification wherein wee take the name Perſon in our
tongue.ezech. 18. 4. For this cauſe wee reade ſo often in the worde, All fleſh
and euerie ſoule,
                  rom. 13. 1. for euery perſon.Gen. 14. 21. & 46. 27. Alſo, Giue mee the Soules, for
giue mee the perſons: And all the Soules of the houſe, for all the
perſons thereof. Nowe becauſe the vnderſtanding and the will are
the principall faculties and powers of the ſoule, when the Scripture
meaneth to ſet them downe diſtinctly, and to expreſſe them
together with the nature and vertue of the ſoule, it taketh the ſpirite
for the one, and the ſoule for the other: namely the ſpirite for the reaſon
and vnderſtanding, & the ſoule for the wil & affections. For otherwiſe
how ſhould euery man be entire & ſoūd, vnles his thoughts were
pure & holy, all his affections rightly ruled, & finally his whole bodie

made obedient, and ſeruiceable to euerie good woorke? For wee
haue hearde alreadie what Lordſhip is attributed to the reaſon and
to the vnderſtanding: then howe the will and affections are in the
middeſt to commaund, and laſtly the bodie to ſerue and obey. So
that a man is then altogether pure and ſounde,When a man is perfectly ſanctified. when he thinketh nothing
in his minde, deſireth nothing in his heart, neither executeth
any thing with his members, but that which pleaſeth God. Wee
haue a place in Eſay which teacheth vs verie clearely, that the ſpirite
and ſoule are ſo taken and diſtinguiſhed as wee ſay:Eſay. 26. 8, 9. 
                  The deſire of
our ſoule (ſaith he) is to thy name, and to the remembraunce of thee. With
my ſoule haue I deſired thee in the night, and with my ſpirite within me will
I ſeeke thee in the morning. We ſee how firſt he attributeth deſire to the
ſoule, thereby to declare the affection of the people towardes the
Lorde. Then hee maketh mention of the remembrance and memorie
that hee hath of God, which is in the minde. So that it ſeemeth
hee comprehendeth the vnderſtanding, and will in the firſt verſe
vnder the name of Soule. Afteward in the verſe following, he diſtinguiſheth
them more ſpecialy, attributing deſire to the ſoule, then watchfulneſſe
and diligent inquiſition to the ſpirit, which is not without
thinking and diſcourſing that appertayne to the minde. Wherefore
the Prophet minding to ſignifie how he was wholly addicted to the
Lordè, with all his ſenſes and vnderſtanding, and with all his
heart and will, and that all his affection was towardes him, hee vſeth
this diſtinction betweene the ſoule and the ſpirite. Likewiſe
wee finde theſe two names Soule and Spirite, ioyned together in
this ſignification in the Pſalmes: and I am perſwaded, that for the
ſame reaſon the bleſſed Virgine ioyned them together in her ſong,
when ſhe ſayd,Luk. 1. 46, 47. 
                  My ſoule magnifieth the Lord, and my ſpirit reioy
                        •
                     eth
in God my Sauiour. Nowe as the Scripture vſeth this diſtinction the
better to expreſſe the faculties and powers of the ſoule, ſo Saint
Paul▪
                   ſometimes diſtinguiſheth them into three,The ſoule deuided into three partes. that they may the
better bee knowen: as when hee writeth to the Epheſians in theſe
woordes,Ephe 4. 17, 18. 
                  This I ſay therefore and testifie in the Lorde, that ye henceforth
walke not as other Gentiles walke, in vanitie of their minde, hauing their
cogitation darkened, and beeing ſtrangers from the life of God through
the ignorance that is in them, becauſe of the hardnes of their heart. We ſee
here that in the firſt place he putteth the mind, by which he meaneth
vnderſtanding and reaſon, which is the principal faculty and power of
the ſoule, & that which is ſo much magnified by the Philoſophers, that
it is called of thē the Queene, Damé & Miſtres. Neuertheles S. Paul teſtifieth
clearely, that all of it is vanity without Chriſt: ſo that a man

may well iudge, what wee are to eſteeme of the reſt that is in man.
Therefore alſo wee ſee, howe from the minde hee commeth to the
thought, whereby hee comprehendeth both imagination and memory,
and all the faculties and powers of the internall ſenſes, which
he teſtifieth to be ſhadowed with darkeneſſe,Iohn 1. 9. and 8. 12. and 9. 5. and 12. 46. ſo that there is no heauenly
light at all therein without Ieſus Chriſt, who is the light of the
world. For which cauſe alſo he affirmeth that they are eſtranged from
the life of God: that is to ſay, from that life by which he liueth in his,
and which he commaundeth and approoueth. Afterward hee referreth
the cauſe thereof to their ignorance, which he ioyneth with darkneſſe
and with the thought obſcured thereby. Finally hee commeth
to the will and affections, which he comprehendeth vnder the name
of heart, to whoſe hardneſſe hee referreth their ignorance as to the
fountaine thereof. For by reaſon that through their malice and contumacie
they reiect the light of God that is offered to their hearts and
mindes, they blinde themſelues by the iuſt iudgement of God, by
which alſo they are made blinde, as they iuſtly deſerue, ſeeing they
loue darkeneſſe more then light, and lying more then the trueth.
               Now when al theſe faculties of the ſoule are reformed with the body,
according as we haue already declared, then is man come to that
entire ſanctification of which Saint Paul ſpeaketh in the place before
alleadged, which is requiſite for the true children and ſeruantes of
God. But it ſeemeth that in all theſe diuiſions and diſtinctions of the
faculties and powers of the ſoule reherſed out of the Scriptures, there
is not one of them wherein any mention is made of the naturall powers,
by which the ſoule giueth life and nouriſhment to the body, notwithſtanding
that this office alſo is aſſigned vnto it as well as the reſt.
Heereof three reaſons may be rendered.Why the naturall powers are not mentioned in theſe diuiſions. The firſt is, that the word of
GOD maketh expreſſe mention of the chiefe faculties and powers,
which moſt properly belong to the nature of the ſoule, and are giuen
vnto it more ſpecially to knowe and honour God by, and which appertaine
not onely to this life, but alſo to the other. The ſecond is, becauſe
theſe naturall powers may bee comprehended vnder the vitall,
and vnder the ſeate of the affections, by reaſon of that communication
which they haue both with the ſpirites, and with the humours vſed
by the ſoule in the body, not onely to nouriſh it and preſerue life
in it, but alſo to ſerue for all other things ſpoken of before. The third
reaſon is, that foraſmuch as theſe naturall powers are more terreſtriall
then celeſtiall, and more corporall then ſpirituall, and the vſe and
profite of them endeth with this humane life, we may comprehend
them vnder the name of body, as things more neerely ioyned to it for

the vſe of this life, and of which it ſhall haue no neede after this life,
when it ſhall bee made incorruptible and immortall. And becauſe
this power of the ſoule appeareth more in this life, then any of the
reſt, therefore it is better knowen. For this cauſe the name of ſoule
is oftentimes taken not onely for this naturall power which wee call

                     Ʋegetatiue and Nutritiue, but alſo for the life it ſelfe, and for all
the commodities and deſires thereof, yea, for the whole eſtate of
life.
               We may call to minde what wee heard before of the ſoule which
is in the blood. And when Reuben ſayde to his brethren that woulde
haue ſlaine Ioſeph,
                  Geneſ. 37. 21. 
                  Let vs not ſtrike his ſoule, it is as much as if hee
had ſaide, Let vs not kill the ſoule. Nowe it is certaine, that the
ſoule can neither bee ſlaine nor ſtriken: therefore by the ſoule hee
meaneth the life. And ſo his ſpeech was all one as if hee had ſayde,
Let vs not take his life from him: as himſelfe declareth it by and by
after in the verſe following where hee ſayeth, Shead not blood.
Alſo when Moſes ſpeaketh of the Lawe that requireth puniſhment
like to the euill committed, as hee ſayeth, Eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand, and foote for foote, ſo hee ſayeth, Soule
for ſoule,
                  Deut. 19. 21. that is, life for life. And to ſeeke the ſoule of one, in many
places of Scripture ſignifieth to lye in waite for the life, and to
purſue it vnto death:Ierem. 11. 21. as it is written of the enemies of Ieremy, and
of Herod againſt Chriſt Ieſus.Matth. 2. 20. There are infinit ſuch like places, both
in the olde and newe Teſtament, in which the ſoule is taken for this
corporall and naturall life. Nowe becauſe the ſoule giueth life by
meanes of the ſtomach, belly, and other members and inſtruments
of nouriſhment, of which wee haue ſpoken before, therefore it
is often taken for them alſo:Eſay 5. 14. as when Eſay ſayeth, Therefore Hell,
(that is to ſay the graue) hath enlarged his ſoule, and hath opened his
mouth without meaſure, and their glorie, and their multitude and their
pompe, and hee that reioyceth among them, ſhall deſcend into it. The
Prophet propoundeth heere the graue as a great and horrible monſter,
that hath a throate, with a ſtomach and belly, as it were a deepe
gulfe and bottomleſſe pit to ſwallowe vp and to conſume all. And
therefore as hee ſayeth, that hee hath opened his throate or mouth,
ſo hee ſayeth, that hee hath enlarged his ſoule, that is to ſay, his ſtomach
and belly, that it may bee more capable to receiue greater ſtore
of meate. The ſame Prophet in an other place, meaning to ſet downe
the vaine hope, that ſhall deceiue them that band themſelues, and
enterpriſe any thing againſt the people of GOD, and that looke
for aide and deliueraunce from any other beſides him,Eſay 29. 8. ſayeth, that

                  They are like to an hungry man, who dreameth that hee eateth, but when
hee awaketh, his ſoule is emptie: or to a thirſtie man, who dreameth that
hee is drinking, but when hee awaketh, beholde hee is faint, and his ſoule
longeth. Which is as much as if hee had ſayde, that ſuch a one ſuppoſing
hee hath well eaten and well drunke, findeth his ſtomach and
his belly emptie, and is ſtill as hungrie and thirſtie as hee was before.
Alſo when Ieremy ſaieth,Ierem. 31. 25. 
                  I haue ſatiate the weary ſoule, and haue repleniſhed
euery languiſhing ſoule, it is certaine that by the ſoule he meaneth
the members and inſtruments of nouriſhment, with the bodie
that receiueth it and the life that is preſerued: for the ſoule neither
eateth nor drinketh.Ezech. 7. 19. But Ezechiel ſheweth vs this yet more clearely,
ſaying, They ſhall not ſatisfie their ſoules, nor fill their bowelles. For
himſelfe expoundeth that by the worde Bowelles, which before hee
called ſoules.
               Moreouer, wee haue further to note, that foraſmuch as the ſoule
can no more giue life to the body without foode, then without theſe
members and inſtruments by which it diſtributeth and deliuereth the
ſame, it is likewiſe taken not onely for the foode of the bodie, but alſo
for thoſe inſtruments and meanes whereby men get and obtaine
foode. Therefore it is written in the Lawe of the hired ſeruant that is
poore and needy,Deut. 24. 15. leuit. 19. 13. 
                  Thou ſhalt giue him his hire for his day (that is, the
ſame day hee laboureth) neither ſhall the ſunne goe downe vpon it: for
hee is poore, and therewith ſustaineth his ſoule: as if hee ſhoulde ſay,
it is his life and foode whereby hee muſt bee ſuſtained. So that hee
which beguileth him of his hire, taketh away his ſoule and life from
him, as much as in him lieth. It is written alſo, That no man ſhall take
the neather nor the vpper milstone to pledge:
                  Deute. 24. 6. 
                  for this gage is his ſoule. By
which phraſe of two milſtones that ſerue to grinde the corne, the
Lorde comprehendeth all thoſe inſtruments wherewith men get their
liuing by their labour, of what occupation and trade ſoeuer they be.
For as a man can not grinde without a milſtone or without corne, to
haue meale for breade to maintaine life withall: ſo poore Artificers
and Handicraftſmen can not grinde, nor conſequently liue, if thoſe
tooles and inſtruments bee taken from them, whereby they muſt get
both their owne liuing, and the liuing of their wiues and children.
Therefore God ſayeth that ſuch a gage is the ſoule, by which he vnderſtandeth
the life, and by life the foode and nouriſhment that preſerueth
it, and conſequently the inſtrumentes by which poore men
and Artificers get their liuing. To conclude, it ſeemeth that this
kinde of phraſe vſed by the Hebrewes, agreeth well enough with

our common ſpeech, in which we often take the life for foode and
charges to maintaine life. As when wee ſay, that a man getteth and
purchaſeth his life or liuing with the ſweate of his face. We ſay likewiſe,
that we giue life to thoſe whome wee feede, and take life from
them whom we depriue of foode and nouriſhment, and of the means
to get it. But wee muſt learne ſome other ſignifications of this worde
ſoule, taught vs in the holy Scriptures. And firſt, what is meant by a
liuing ſoule, and what by a naturall, or ſenſuall body: and what is a
ſpirituall body: and howe the name of ſoule is taken for the deſires of
the fleſh, and for all things belonging to this life. Therefore it belongeth
to thee, ACHITOB, to diſcourſe vpon this matter.
            
            
               What is meant by a liuing ſoule, what by a ſenſuall and naturall body,
and what by a ſpirituall body: howe the name of ſoule is taken for all
the deſires of the fleſh, and for all things belonging to this life: and not
onely for the whole perſon aliue, but alſo for the perſon being dead,
and for a dead corps: and lastly for the ſpirite ſeparate from the bodie.
Chap. 80.
               ACHITOB. Men may well ſtudy in the ſchooles of the moſt
skilfull and excellent Law-makers, Philoſophers, Oratours, and
Doctors that are in the worlde, yet they ſhall reape ſmall profit thereby,
except they come to that ſchoole where the ſpirite of God is our
maſter and teacher. For this cauſe Ieſus Chriſt, after he heard the confeſſion
that Peter made of him,Matth. 16. 17. ſaide thus vnto him, Bleſſed art thou
Simon, the ſonne of Ionas: for fleſh and blood hath not reueiled it vnto thee,
but my Father which is in heauen. Nowe in that hee oppoſeth fleſh and
blood to the Father in heauen, hee declareth ſufficiently, that according
to the manner of the Hebrew ſpeach, hee vnderſtandeth by theſe
two words, whatſoeuer is in man, that is of man. As when Saint Iohn
ſaieth,Iohn 1. 12, 13. that as many as receiued Christ, to them hee gaue power to bee the
ſonnes of God, euen to them that beleeue in his name, which are borne
not of blood, nor of the will of the fleſh, nor of the will of man, but of
God.
                  1. Cor. 2. 11, 12▪
                   And to confirme this it is ſaide elſewhere, What man knoweth
the things of a man, ſaue the ſpirite of a man which is in him? euen ſo the
things of God knoweth no man, but the ſpirite of God. Now we haue receiued,
not the ſpirite of the worlde, but the ſpirite which is of God, that wee
might know the things that are giuen to vs of God. To this purpoſe when
Saint Paul oppoſeth a ſpirituall man, to him whome he called before a
naturall man, and altogether vncapable of the ſpirite of God, he ſaith
that the ſpirituall man diſcerneth all things, and is iudged of no man.

For being ſuch a one, he hath certaine knowledge of heauenly things,
to be able to diſcerne light from darkeneſſe, and trueth from lies, that
hee be not deceiued by a falſe ſhewe of trueth. Neither is hee iudged
of any body, becauſe the trueth of God is not ſubiect to the iudgement
of men, how skilfull and conceited ſoeuer they be, without the
ſpirit of regeneration.
               Nowe then as wee haue heard, that the ſoule is taken in ſundrie
ſignifications declared by vs, wee may nowe knowe, that it is taken
oftentimes in the holy Scriptures for al the vertues, for al naturall gifts
and graces, for all affections and deſires, for all pleaſures and commodities,What is meant by liuing ſoule.
and for other things appertaining to this life. For this cauſe liuing
ſoule ſignifieth in the Scriptures as much as creature,
                  Geneſ. 1. hauing ſoule
and naturall life, and it is ſo taken for all liuing creatures of what nature
and kinde ſoeuer they be. And Saint Paul in the place alleadged
and in the fifteenth of the ſame Epiſtle,1. Cor. 15. 44. calleth a naturall man and a
naturall body, that man and that body, which liueth with ſuch a ſoule
and ſuch a life: vnto whome hee oppoſeth diuerſly, a ſpirituall man
and a ſpirituall body.What is meant by a naturall and by a ſpirituall man. For by a naturall man hee vnderſtandeth a man
not regenerated by the Spirite of GOD, and by a ſpirituall, a man
regenerated: and by a naturall body hee meaneth a body that liueth
by this corporall life, ſuch as it is in this worlde before the death and
reſurrection thereof. By a ſpirituall bodie, he vnderſtandeth not only
ſuch a body as men haue that are already regenerated in this life,
but alſo ſuch a one as it ſhall bee after the reſurrection, when it ſhall
bee fully regenerated and made immortall, and like to the glorious
body of Ieſus Chriſt. For beſides the humane ſoule wherewith it liueth
heere, and in regarde of which Saint Paul called it naturall, it
ſhall haue alſo a diuine vertue, that ſhall wholly change in it all corruptible
and mortall qualities, and all humane infirmities, vnto
which it is ſubiect in this life, into incorruptible and immortall qualities.
And ſo doeth the Apoſtle expound it ſaying in the ſame place,
The bodie is ſowen in corruption, and riſeth in incorruption: it is ſowen
in diſhonour, it riſeth in glorie: it is ſowen in weakeneſſe, and is raiſed
in power. It is ſowen a naturall bodie, and is raiſed a ſpirituall bodie:
there is a naturall bodie, and there is a ſpirituall bodie. As it is alſo written,Geneſ. 2. 7.
                  The firſt man Adam was made a liuing ſoule: and the laſt Adam
was made a quickening ſpirite. Whereupon wee haue to note, that
Saint Paul ſpeaketh ſtill of the ſelfe ſame bodie, which remaineth alwayes
one in ſubſtance. But foraſmuch as it altereth in qualities and
kinde of life, therefore as hee calleth it ſpirituall, in regarde of the
Spirite of Chriſt, and of his ſpirituall and heauenly vertues, by which

hee changeth the firſt qualities of it, as the Apoſtle teacheth vs by
ſuch as are oppoſed againſt them: ſo it is alſo called an animall or naturall
body, of the ſoule, which giueth vnto it onely that naturall
life that it hath in this worlde, and not that ſpirituall and immortall
life, which it ſhall haue after this. For the ſoule, which nowe can
giue none but this mortall life by reaſon of ſinne, ſhall then haue another
vertue, when ſinne ſhall bee wholly aboliſhed, to giue vnto
the body an immortall and bleſſed life, by meanes of that ſpirituall
and diuine vertue of Ieſus Chriſt, whereby it ſhall bee quickened,
that it may quicken the body with the ſame life. But becauſe this
worde Animal deriued from Anima, that ſignifieth the ſoule, is not
very common in our Engliſh tongue, wee finde in the vſuall tranſlation
of theſe places of Saint Paul alleadged by vs, theſe wordes naturall
and ſenſuall inſteade of animal, which the Greeke worde properly
ſignifieth.What is meant by an animal or naturall man. Therefore in expounding the ſence of theſe kindes
of ſpeech vſed by the Apoſtle wee muſt vnderſtand, that hee doeth
not call animal, or ſenſuall and naturall, the body of man onely, or
man by reaſon of his body onely, but the whole man compounded
of body and ſoule. For hee is altogether animal, that is, naturall and
ſenſuall both in body and ſoule without Chriſt Ieſus: but being in
him, ſo long as hee liueth in this worlde, hee is both animal, that
is to ſay, naturall and ſenſuall, and alſo ſpirituall. Firſt, hee is animal,
both becauſe hee is not yet perfectly regenerated, as alſo becauſe
hee is not yet immortall and glorified, as hee ſhall bee after his reſurrection.
On the other ſide hee beginneth euen nowe to bee ſpirituall,
becauſe hee hath a beginning of regeneration wrought in him,
which being once made perfect, hee ſhall bee regenerated much
more abſolutely, and made wholly conformable to Ieſus Chriſt
both for immortallitie and eternall happineſſe. For then hee ſhall be
no more animal, naturall, ſenſuall, and ſpirituall altogether, but
onely ſpirituall, according as I haue already declared. Wherefore let
vs knowe, that euery one ſhall retaine ſtill the ſelfe ſame body and
ſoule, which hee hath in this life, but by reaſon of that change of
euill qualities, which being in both ſhall bee made in the other life,
Saint Paul calleth it ſpirituall, and not for any conuerſion that ſhall
bee of the bodie into the ſpirite. For as a man is called animal, in regarde
of the ſoule that is giuen him, becauſe the ſoule is the chiefeſt
thing in him: ſo hee is called ſpirituall in reſpect of the other life, and
of the excellencie that ſhall be added to the ſoule, and by the ſoule to
the body, through the heauenly and ſpirituall vertue and power of Ieſus
Chriſt.
               
                  
Nowe then ſeeing the ſoule is taken in the holie Scriptures for the
naturall life,The ſoule put ſo the affections. which is not without affections, wee may ſee it ſometimes
alſo put for them. Therefore when the worde of God woulde
expreſſe a great affection of loue,Gen. 34. 3. it ſayeth of the ſonne of Sichem,
that his ſoule claue vnto Dinah: and after it is added, that hee loued
her and ſpake to the heart of the maide, that is to ſay, kindely, and
as her heart coulde wiſh.Gen. 44. 30. In like manner it is written of Iacob, that
his ſoule was bound to the ſoule of Beniamin his ſonne: to ſignifie,
that hee loued him tenderly, as his owne ſoule and life. And of Ionathan
it is ſaide,1. Sam. 18. 1. that his ſoule was knit with the ſoule of Dauid:
which phraſe is afterward expounded by the Scripture where it is
ſaide, that Ionathan loued Dauid as his owne ſoule. Wee are alſo
commaunded to loue GOD with all our ſoule,Deut. 6. 5. as alſo with all our
heart and minde.matth. 10. 39. Therefore Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth, that whoſoeuer
ſeeketh and ſaueth his ſoule,mar. 8. 35. ſhall loſe it, but hee that hateth and
loſeth it for his ſake,luke 9. 24. ſhall finde it and ſaue it vnto eternall life.iohn 12. 25. In
which wordes, the ſoule is not onely taken for the life, but alſo for
all the commodities thereof, and for the deſires of the fleſh, ſuch as
are glorie, honours, riches, pleaſures, delights, eaſe, and all kinde of
proſperitie: for the obtaining of which things many turne aſide from
the way of ſaluation, and take the path that leadeth to deſtruction.
Alſo we reade many places in the Scriptures, in which the ſoule is taken
not only for the whole perſon liuing, but alſo for the perſon dead,
yea for the dead body, and ſometimes for the ſpirite ſeparated from
the body.
               But wee muſt well conſider in what ſence there is mention made
of the death of the ſoule.How we are to vnderſtand that the ſoule dieth. 
                  Balaam wiſheth that his ſoule might die the
death of the iuſt:Num. 23. 10. but hee ſpeaketh after the manner of the Hebrews,
who vſe many times to ſay My ſoule and thy ſoule, for my ſelfe and
thy ſelfe: or for my perſon and thy perſon, according to that before
mentioned, that the name of ſoule and of fleſh, are often taken for the
whole man, and for that which wee call Perſon. For this cauſe whereas
Moſes ſayde,Gen. 22. 16. that GOD ſware by himſelfe, Ieremie and Amos
ſay,Ierem. 51. 14. that hee ſware by his ſoule,Amos 6. 8. in the ſame ſence and ſignification.
Likewiſe,Leuit. 21. 1. the name of Soule is not onely taken for a liuing perſon, but
alſo for him that is dead:The name of ſoule put for the dead body. as when it is written in the Law, Let none of
you be defiled by the dead among his people, it is in the Hebrew, ouer the
ſoule of his people, that is, ouer the dead body of any of the people, by
touching it after it is dead.Iob 33. 18, 22. And when Iob ſaieth, that the ſoule of a man
draweth to the graue, and his life to the buryers, and that God deliuereth

his ſoule from going into the pit, he taketh not the name of ſoule for that
ſpirituall eſſence that giueth life vnto man, but for the life it ſelfe; or
for the man and body it ſelfe, which is laide in the graue after death.
So that his meaning is no other then to ſay, that God deliuereth man
from death, whereby otherwiſe he ſhould be brought into the pit. And
when Dauid ſaith,Pſalme 30. 3. 
                  Lord, thou haſt brought vp my ſoule out of the graue,
hee ſheweth after very euidently what he vnderſtandeth by his ſoule
when he ſaieth,Pſalm. 56. 13. and 22. 20. 
                  Thou haſt reuiued me from them that goe downe into the
pit. Hee taketh this worde Soule in the ſame ſenſe when he ſaieth, that
God deliuered his ſoule from death and from the midſt of lions: and when
he prayeth him to deliuer his ſoule from the ſword, his deſolate ſoule from
the power of the dogge. For it is eaſie to iudge by theſe wordes, that he
taketh not the ſoule in theſe places for the eſſence of the ſoule and
proper ſubſtance thereof: becauſe the ſoule can not be ſmitten with
the ſword, nor deuoured of lions, nor carried away by dogges. Therefore
ſeeing the ſoule is ſo often put in the Scripture for corporall life
which endeth with the body, and which the ſoule giueth vnto it by
meanes of thoſe inſtruments, which it hath in the body, the name of
Spirite is many times vſed therein,What is meant by Spirite in the Scriptures. to ſignifie more ſpecially this eſſence
and ſpirituall ſubſtance, which wee call the ſoule, and which
may be ſeparated both from the body and blood, as that which liueth
after the death of the body.Pſalme 31. 5. Therefore Dauid did ſo vſe the word
Spirite,luke 23. 46. when he recommended his ſoule to God by the ſame wordes,
which Ieſus Chriſt vſed vpon the croſſe. Afterward Saint Steuen tooke
it in the ſame ſenſe when he ſaide,Actes 7. 59. 
                  Lorde Ieſus receiue my ſpirite. For
this is that ſpirite of which Salomon ſaieth,Eccles. 12. 7. that it returneth to God that
gaue it, after that the body is returned to the earth and to duſt of which
it conſiſteth. And yet this difference is not alwayes obſerued in the
Scriptures. For as wee haue already heard, both the heart, and ſoule,
and ſpirite are oftentimes generally and indifferently put for all the
partes and powers of the ſoule, and not onely for thoſe of men, but alſo
of beaſtes: as when the Wiſe man attributeth ſpirit vnto them, hauing
regard to this corporall life. For when Salomon ſpeaketh ſo, it is in
conſideration of this life that conſiſteth in breath, which is alſo called
Spirit in the holy Scriptures, which vſe one & the ſame word to ſignifie
both wind and breathing, and whatſoeuer we call ſpirit, taking it
both for the ſoule of man, for the Angelicall natures, and for the Diuine
nature.Iob 27. 3, 4. Therefore Iob ſpeaking of this preſent life ſayth, So long
as my breath is in me, and the ſpirit of God in my noſethrilles, my lippes ſurely
ſhall ſpeake no wickedneſſe, and my tongue ſhall vtter no deceit. But when
Saint Paul ſaieth,Rom. 8. 16. 
                  The ſame ſpirite beareth witneſſe with our ſpirite, that

wee are the children of God, hee taketh the worde Spirite in an other
ſence then Iob did in the place nowe alleadged. For in the firſt place
hee taketh the name of Spirite for the Spirite of GOD, and in the ſecond
place for the Spirite of man, which ſignifieth the humane ſoule.
It is true that in this place hee taketh it for the ſoule and for the ſpirit,
ſuch as it is in regenerate men: but when hee ſaieth elſewhere, that
the ſpirite of man knoweth the things of man,1. Cor. 2. 11. hee taketh the ſpirite
ſimply for a humane Spirite, and for the vnderſtanding part thereof.
Likewiſe the name of ſoule is put, not onely for this naturall life and
for the will and affections, but alſo for the ſelfe ſame thing that is
comprehended by this worde Spirite, when one woulde ſignifie
thereby the greateſt excellencie of the ſoule. As when Dauid ſayeth,
Our ſoule waiteth for the Lord,
                  Pſal. 33. 20, 21. 
                  for hee is our helpe and our ſhield. Surely
our heart ſhall reioyce in him, becauſe wee trusted in his holie name.
And againe, My ſoule reioyceth in the Lorde, and is glad in his ſaluation.
                  1. Pet. 2. 11, 12.
And when Saint Peter ſayeth, Abſtaine from fleſhly luſtes, which
fight against the ſoule, and haue your conuerſation honeſt among the Gentiles,
hee taketh the name of Soule for the ſpirituall man, who hath
his minde and all his affections well ruled according to the will of
GOD. As then wee haue heard in what ſort the ſoule may die, in regarde
of this corporall life, according to the phraſe of the Scriptures
and of the Hebrewes, ſo by this which Saint Peter ſaieth, that fleſhly
luſtes fight againſt the ſoule, wee may learne after what manner the
ſoule may be ſaid to die and to be ſlaine. For nothing can bring death
vnto it but ſinne. Wherefore it is not ſaid without good reaſon in the
Booke of Wiſedome,Wiſd. 1. that the mouth that telleth lies ſlayeth the ſoule.
Albeit then the ſoule is immortall, in that it can neuer be without life,
no more then the Angelles, who are ſpirites like to it: neuertheleſſe it
is after a ſort mortall,How the ſoule is after a ſort mortall. ſo farre forth as being farre off ſeparated from
God through ſinne, it liueth no more that bleſſed life, wherewith it
ſhoulde liue if it were vnited and ioyned vnto him by true faith and
ſincere obedience. For it ſhoulde enioy the ſelfe ſame life, which the
heauenly Angelles, with the ſoules and ſpirites of the bleſſed doe enioy.
As contrariwiſe the ſoules of the wicked liue with the ſame life
that the Diuelles doe, which is called dead, becauſe it is a more accurſed
life then death it ſelfe, and therefore called the ſecond and eternall
death.
               Nowe wee may thinke our ſelues ſufficiently taught touching the
diuerſe ſignifications in which the name of Soule is taken. It ſeemeth
to mee, that wee haue ſpoken enough of the Anatomy of the bodie
and ſoule, of which the moſt of our diſcourſes hitherto were made:

which may ſuffice for the contentation of euery one, that will keepe
himſelfe within the bounds and limits ſet downe vnto vs by the wiſedome
of GOD in his word. But to finiſh this whole matter concerning
the ſoule, which we haue chiefly conſidered in her parts, powers,
and effects, we are further yet to be inſtructed in the creation, generation,
nature, and immortalitie thereof. And becauſe they are marueilous
difficult matters, and ſuch as are not without great contrarieties
of opinions euen amongeſt the learned, I am of opinion that theſe
things are to be diſcourſed of, according to that manner of teaching
of the ancient Academickes,The ancient Academicall kinde of teaching. which wee followed in our firſt meeting:
namely, vpon the theame propounded vnto vs, to ballance the arguments
on the one part, with the reaſons of the other ſide, that ſo we
may diligently ſearch out the trueth. Notwithſtanding it ſhalbe lawfull
for vs to deliuer our opinion, ſo long as wee ground it vpon the
infallible teſtimonie of the worde of God, leauing to euery one his
libertie to iudge which is beſt, and to embrace and follow the ſame.
For our entrance therefore into ſo goodly a matter, thou ſhalt beginne,
ASER, to morrowe to declare vnto vs what thou ſhalt thinke
good concerning this propoſition, namely, whether the ſoule is begotten
with the body, and of the ſeede thereof: or whether it be created
apart and of another ſubſtance, and what is requiſit for vs to know
therein.
            
            The end of the tenth dayes worke.
         
         
            THE ELEVENTH
dayes worke.
            
               Whether the ſoule of man is engendred with the body, and of the ſame
ſubſtance that the body is of: or whether it be created by it ſelfe and
of another ſubstance: whether it be needfull for vs to know what the
ſoule is, and what is the eſſence thereof, or onely to know of what qualitie
it is, with the workes and effects thereof. Chap. 81.
               
                  ASER.P
                        •
                     at
                        •
                     n Phad. I am of opinion, that in diſcourſing philoſophically
concerning the knowledge of the ſoule, we
ought to practiſe that which Socrates ſaide, being
tired with the conſideration of the nature of things,
namely, to bee very carefull leſt it happen to vs as it

doeth to them that are buſie beholders of the Sunne eclipſed, whoſe
ſight is dazeled thereby except they beholde the image thereof in
water, or in ſome ſuch like thing. For euen the Spirite that is wholly
giuen to the vnderſtanding of it ſelfe, is often as it were amazed
and carried farre out of the way of true contemplation, vnleſſe it
knowe howe to conſider it ſelfe in the glaſſe of all brightneſſe,The word of God the true glaſſe for the minde.
layed open in the ſacred worde of GOD, and not ſtay altogether
in the diſcourſes of naturall Philoſophie and humane reaſon,
which many times blinde euen the ſharpeſt wittes of men. True
it is, that wee haue many things in Nature that affoorde vs euident
teſtimonies of the creation, nature, and immortalitie of the ſoule,
which haue greatly mooued, not onely thoſe Philoſophers that
haue borne greateſt reuerence to GOD, and acknowledged him
to bee the Creatour of all things, but euen thoſe alſo that were moſt
prophane, and made the greateſt Idole of Nature. Neuertheleſſe
the knowledge of ſo high and difficult a matter,Who know the ſoule beſt. coulde neuer bee
perfectly comprehended, but of them onely that haue heard the doctrine
of the Spirite of GOD, and haue receiued the teſtimonies of
his worde, as certaine demonſtrations of thoſe thinges, which the
ſenſe of man is not able to conceiue. For in deede wee can not
pronounce anie thing certaine of ſo high a nature as is that of the
ſoule, except it bee by his teſtimonie who hath created it, and who
onelie knoweth it, as the workeman knoweth his worke. Yet wee
ought not to contemne naturall reaſons founde out by the learneder
ſorte, which are as it were beames of that true light: but rather diligently
conſider of them, as helpes that may greatly further vs in
the vnderſtanding of that wee ſeeke, and ſerue for the confounding
of ſo many Atheiſts as impudently dare to deny the immortalitie of
the ſoule, and that iudgement of God, which ſhall be to the euerlaſting
happineſſe and ioy of the good, and to the perpetuall griefe and
torment of the wicked.
               Nowe albeit the ſoule of man hath no partes nor members into
which it may bee diuided as the body may, neuertheleſſe in the ſequele
of our diſcourſes concerning the Anatomy of the body, wee
haue alſo made as it were an Anatomy of the ſoule, in regarde of her
faculties, powers, and offices, whereby wee may attaine to ſome
good meaſure of knowledge touching the nature thereof, and of the
difference that is betweene it and the ſoules of all other creatures that
haue ſoule and life. But there remaine yet very great difficulties concerning
the creation and ſubſtance thereof, vpon which points it ſhal
be very profitable for vs to be well reſolued.
               
                  
Wee knowe well enough by that which wee heard before, that
the ſoule of man can not bee of any corporall nature, or compounded
of any corruptible nature, as the body is. For if it were ſo, then muſt
it neceſſarily bee mortall as the body is, and be farre from doing that
which it doeth. Beſides, it woulde followe thereupon that the ſoule
of man differed in nothing from the ſoule of beaſtes. But wee knowe
by the effectes of it that there is great difference betweene them, yea
greater then betweene heauen and earth:The ſoule is not bred of corporall ſeede. which being ſo, it followeth
well, that it is not engendered with the body of the ſame ſubſtance
with it, and that the ſubſtaunce of the ſoule is not deriued from the
ſame ſeede. Againe, if the ſoule bee created of ſome other ſubſtance,
and not begotten with the body of any humane ſeede, a man may
aske from whence then commeth that pollution that is in it through
ſinne, whereby the whole race of mankinde is corrupted, and what
power Originall ſinne ought to haue ouer it. For if GOD daylie
createth ſoules for thoſe humane bodies that come into the worlde
continually, as wee doe beleeue, and that to place and lodge them
in thoſe bodies euen from the wombe, ſurely hee createth them no otherwiſe
then hee did all other creatures,Geneſ. 1. which hee created good.
Whereupon it followeth, that hee created not ſoules corrupted and
infected with ſinne, but pure and ſound, as thoſe were of our firſt
Parents before ſinne entred into the worlde. Neuertheleſſe wee ſee
that the chiefe corruption and infection in man through ſinne, is in
the ſoule. For if the ſoule were not infected, the body ſhoulde not
bee ſtained therewith, as that which is but the lodging and inſtrument
of the ſoule, and as it were the ſeruant thereof. Wherefore
when the ſoule is cleane and pure, the whole man, both bodie and
ſoule is altogether pure: but when that is defiled, all is defiled. From
whence then, will ſome man ſay, doeth the ſoule receiue this infection
of ſinne, wherewith ſhee is polluted after her creation? Hath ſhe
it of her ſelfe, or of the body after ſhee is lodged therein, and of the
corruption of that ſeede, of which the body is begotten? Theſe are
very profound queſtions and woonderfull difficult, about which many
great Diuines haue troubled themſelues a long time. But the wiſer
ſort enquire ſoberly into them,Modeſtie requiſite in ſearching the trueth. ſo as they giue euident teſtimony of
that modeſty, wherewith they ſeeke after the vnderſtanding of the
great ſecreats of God, rather then make profeſſion that they haue
found them out. Others there are, who one while with coniectures
according to their fancie, an other while with reaſons drawne from
the nature of things, ſet downe for a certaine trueth whatſoeuer commeth
into their minde.
               
                  
Nowe then being to heare what reaſons can be alleadged, wee
will omit and paſſe ouer, as well them that walke wholy in the darkeneſſe
of ignorance, as thoſe that will not goe faire and ſoftly, and as
it were feeling with the hand, but runne on ſwiftly whither they
pleaſe, without feare of downefalles. Wee wil take a middle courſe,
neither too high nor too lowe, keeping our ſelues within the limites
of the worde of trueth, which teacheth vs that wee incurre originall
ſinne, becauſe wee are all the children of Adam, to whome, and to
whoſe poſteritie God gaue originall iuſtice,How we become guiltie of original ſinne. which made man obedient
to God, and the body ſubiect to reaſon. But it was giuen him
with this condition, that if he kept not the commandement of God,
both he and his poſterie ſhoulde bee depriued of that gift and priuiledge:
euen as if ſome nobleman hauing committed treaſon ſhoulde
be diſgraded from the title of Nobilitie, both hee and his children.
This depriuation of gifts beſtowed vpon man by God, of which wee
ſhoulde haue beene the Inheritours,What originall ſinne is. but for the ſinne of our firſt Parents,
is called by the Diuines, Originall ſinne. To proceede then
with our former matter, firſt I ſay, that in my minde, it is not ſo neceſſarily
required of vs to knowe what the ſoule is, or what is the eſſence
and ſubſtance thereof,How wee muſt learne to know the ſoule. as to knowe of what qualitie it is, and
what are the actions and woorkes of it. And that this is ſo, wee may
iudge by that bountifulneſſe, which GOD the Lorde of nature vſeth
towardes vs, and which hee manifeſteth vnto vs on euery ſide
by manifolde ſignes and teſtimonies. For whatſoeuer is expedient
for vs, the ſame hee propoundeth vnto vs both very abundantly, and
with ſuch facilitie, that wee may eaſily finde it out and bring it into
vſe. Wherefore wee can haue no more euident token, that a thing is
not profitable or not very neceſſary for vs, then this that it is rare, farre
off, and hidde from vs, yea very hard to finde out and to attaine to the
vſe of it. So that when wee are admoniſhed to knowe our ſelues, we
muſt not referre this to the knowledge of the eſſence of the ſoule,
which wee are not able to knowe or comprehend, but to the knowledge
of the effectes and woorkes of it, thereby to knowe howe to
frame our manners and our whole life, to the ende that chaſing vice
away, we might followe after vertue. And this by the grace of Chriſt
Ieſus, will leade vs to that life in which wee ſhall bee perfectly wiſe
and good, and liue immortall and bleſſed with GOD for euermore.
               Then, as wee ſhall ſee the Creatour of all things face to face, who
otherwiſe is incomprehenſible vnto vs, ſo wee ſhall knowe our ſelues
perfectly in him.When wee ſhall know our ſ
                        •
                     lues perfectly. True it is if wee vnderſtand well the principall cauſe
that is taught vs in his worde, why hee created man after his image

and likeneſſe, and gaue him an immortall ſoule partaker of vnderſtanding
and reaſon, wee ſhall bee well inſtructed in that point wee
deſire to knowe touching the nature of the ſoule. So that although
wee can not throughly knowe or define what is the eſſence or ſubſtance
thereof, neuertheleſſe ſeeing it was created of GOD, that
being ioyned vnto him it might haue eternall happineſſe; wee muſt
needes ſay, that it is a ſubſtance in ſome ſort capable of the diuine
nature, and that may bee ioyned therewith. For being indued with
the knowledge of the diuinitie, the loue of the ſame is bredde within
it, by which loue the ſoule is ſo ioyned vnto GOD, that it is indued
with perpetuall happineſſe.
               And thus wee may ſay,What the ſoule is. that the ſoule of man is a ſpirit that giueth
life to the body whereunto it is ioyned, and which is capable of the
knowledge of GOD to loue him, as being meete to be vnited vnto
him through loue, to eternall felicitie. But let vs conſider the diuerſitie
of opinions of the beſt learned, as well vpon this matter, as vpon
the doubts mentioned by vs in our ſpeech.Varietie of opinions touching the eſſence of the ſoule. For the firſt, there are many
who thinke, that wee take our generation and birth of our fathers
and mothers, not onely in regard of our bodies, but alſo of our ſoules:
and that ſoules are produced of ſoules, as bodies are begotten of bodies,
being ledde by the reaſons before ſpoken of. For they can not
conceiue howe originall ſinne, which is the pollution of our nature
that before was good and pure, by reaſon of the hereditary corruption
of the firſt father of men, can bee deriued from Adam to all his
ſucceſſours, and from father to ſonne, if the ſoules of children take
not their originall from the ſoules of their Parents, as the bodies do of
their bodies: conſidering that the ſoule is the chiefe ſubiect of originall
ſinne, and of all the reſt that proceede from it, as riuers iſſue from
their fountaine. Wherefore, as wee ſet Adam before our eyes for
the firſt ſtocke or roote of all mankinde, in regarde of mens bodies
that haue all their beginning from him: ſo theſe men doe the like
with his ſoule, and the ſoules of all other men, as if ſoules were deriued
from ſoules, and bodies from bodies. And in deede at the firſt
bluſh a man might thinke, that Chriſt Ieſus was of this minde when
hee ſaide,Iohn 3. 6. 
                  That which is borne of the fleſh, is fleſh, and that which is borne
of the ſpirite, is ſpirite: if it bee ſo that the name of fleſh in that place
ought to be taken for the whole man, comprehending vnder it the
body, ſoule, and ſpirite, and whatſoeuer excellent thing is in man, being
conſidered in his corrupt nature, as the worde fleſh is commonly
taken in the holy Scriptures, when it is oppoſed to the ſpirite, or to
God. And for this cauſe many do not take this worde fleſh ſo largely,

neither in this place, nor in any other like to this, as if the ſpirite of
man and the chiefe power of his ſoule were comprehended therein:
but they reſtraine it to that part which they call ſenſuall, vnder which
they vnderſtand not onely the body of man, but alſo thoſe powers of
the ſoule, which we haue common with beaſts. Therefore they doubt
not to ſay, that the ſoule, which is called 
                     Ʋegetatiue and ſenſitiue, like to
that of plants and beaſts, is produced of the ſame ſeede that the body
is: and that it is aſwel contained in the ſeede, as the matter and nature
of which the body is compounded. Whereupon it would follow, that
in this reſpect there is no difference betwixt the ſoule of man and the
ſoule of beaſts and plants. They ſay well, that euery liuing creature
hath but one onely ſoule, albeit there be diuers powers thereof in certaine
creatures,Why one ſoule is called vegetatiue, another ſenſitiue, the third reaſonable. in ſome more, in ſome leſſe. Hereof it is that they call
that of plants by a more ſpeciall name Vegetatiue, becauſe it hath but
this vertue and office only of which it taketh the name. And albeit the
ſoule of beaſts hath the ſame vertue alſo, yet they call it not by the
ſame name, but onely ſenſitiue, vnder which they place the vegetatiue
ſoule that is in plants, as a power and propertie thereof. So likewiſe although
the ſoule of man hath both theſe together, yet they call it not
either vegetatiue or ſenſitiue, but onely reaſonable: vnder which they
place the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue ſoule that is in beaſts, for powers and
properties thereof, as before I ſaid, they placed the vegetatiue vnder the
ſenſitiue. But I woulde very gladly, AMANA, bee inſtructed in that
which thou canſt deliuer very well to this purpoſe, following this excellent
matter: which will ſerue greatly to cauſe vs more ſpecially to
vnderſtand the nature and immortalitie of the ſoule, the chiefe obiect
whereat we aime.
            
            
               Whether there be any thing mortall in the ſoule of man: of the diſtinction betweene
the ſoule and the powers of it: of the opinions of Philoſophers, and
what agreement is betweene them touching the ſoule of brute beasts, and
the nature and ſubstance of it: of their opinion that deriue the ſoule of
man and the ſoule of beaſts from one fountaine: of them that aſcend higher,
and of their reaſons. Chap. 82.
               AMANA. That which wee read of Ieſus Chriſt his ſaying to Nicodemus
in theſe woordes,Iohn 3. 12. 
                  If when I tell you earthly things, yee
beleeue not, howe ſhoulde yee beleeue, if I ſhall tell you of heauenly things?
may giue vs occaſion to ſay in like maner, that if wee can not knowe
the earth, neither the body and ſoule of man, nor the nature and vertue
thereof, howe ſhoulde wee attaine to the knowledge of Heauen

and of thoſe ſpirituall natures, of God and of his workes? And if wee
can not comprehend in our ſelues the woorkes of our ſoule howe
ſhall wee vnderſtand the woorkes of GOD in the whole world?
And if wee be not able to conceiue them, doeth it followe therefore
that hee doeth them not? and yet there are many that conclude
after that manner. For they beleeue no more then they are able
to knowe and comprehend by their naturall reaſon, according as
they deale alſo with their ſoule. For becauſe they vnderſtand not what
is the proper eſſence of it, neither can ſee it after it is entred into the
body and ioyned therewith, nor yet when it departeth away, therefore
they conclude, that it is no other thing, but as it were a fire that
laſteth ſo long as there is matter agreeable to the nature of it, and is
quenched when that faileth.
               But for that which you deliuered to vs, ASER, of the ſayings
of certaine touching the diuerſe kindes of ſoules, and the powers of
euery one of them, it ſeemeth to mee that (vnderſtanding them as
you ſay theſe men doe) one of theſe three things will followe of
their opinion.Of the diſtinction of the ſoule from the powers there of. For they muſt of neceſſitie yeelde to this, either that
the ſoule of man is partly immortall and partly mortall: or that a man
hath three ſoules, one immortall and two mortall: or laſtly, that the
powers of the reaſonable ſoule, which wee call Senſitiue and Vegetatiue,
are not of the proper eſſence and ſubſtance thereof, but onely
of the body, and that they are inſtruments of the reaſonable ſoule,
as members thereof. For I doubt not but they will readily confeſſe
this, that the ſoule is immortall: and if that part of the ſoule which
they call Vegetatiue and Senſitiue, be of the ſelfe ſame eſſence and ſubſtance,
in that reſpect it ſhall be mortall. Nowe if wee ſo diſtinguiſh
all theſe three ſortes of ſoules in man, that wee make three kindes of
them, the firſt and principall ſhall be immortall, and the other two
mortall. And if they will ſay, that they take not the vegetatiue and
ſenſitiue ſoule in man, for two diuerſe kindes of ſoules, but onely
for two ſundry powers of the reaſonable ſoule, I demaund of them
whether theſe two powers are ſo ioyned vnto it, that it may be a ſoule
as it is, both without them and with them, euen as before we ſaid that
it might be with the body and without the body. I doubt not but euery
one will anſwere mee to this queſtion, according to that opinion
hee hath conceiued of the nature of mans ſoule. If the queſtion be
made touching the ſoule of beaſtes, the Philoſophers agree well amongſt
themſelues heerein, that it is of the ſame matter of which their
bodies are compounded,The ſoule of the beaſt is of a corporal ſubſtance. whether it bee deriued and taken from the
ſame, or whether it bee the proprietie of the matter. Therefore

they meane, that it is the Vitall ſpirite onely therein that giueth life
vnto them, which is of a corporall matter and ſubſtaunce: or elſe that
it is the temperature or temperament of the whole bodie generally,
which is the proprietie of that matter. And ſo the ſoule in beaſtes
ſhalbe the life it ſelfe, of which the Vitall ſpirites, or the temperament
are the inſtrumentes. Which ſeemeth to agree well with that which
Moſes ſaieth,Gen. 9. 4. 
                  That the ſoule of the fleſh in the blood thereof,
                  Leui. 17. 14. that is to
ſay, the life, according as we ſhewed when we ſpake of the nature of
blood, and of thoſe meanes by which it giueth life to the creatures.
For when Moſes ſpeaketh ſo, a man might ſay that it is as much in effect
as if he ſaide, that the blood is as it were the pipe and inſtrument
that conueyeth life to the bodie, and that the Vitall ſpirites are the
thing that giueth motion & ſenſe to the bodie, which is the ſame that
we call Soule: neither is there any inconuenience to yeelde to this in
regard of the ſoule of beaſtes. And albeeit wee ſee not with the eye
howe theſe Vitall ſpirites, or the temperament of all the partes of the
bodie, doe giue vnto it that life which it hath, yet a man may iudge
and haue ſome knowledge heereof by the things wee ſee in nature,
which haue ſome agreement and reſemblance with this. For we conceiue
well,The Vitall ſpirite compared to the flame of a lampe. howe the flame is nouriſhed by the oyle and match that
is in a lampe, or by the waxe and weeke that is in a candle. In which
we ſee two ſortes of matter differing one from another, ioyned both
together. Beſides, we ſee how that by meanes of this coniunction, and
of the temperature and agreement that theſe two matters haue eache
with other, the flame being kindled in them, is nouriſhed and preſerued.
So likewiſe we propound the Vitall ſpirite in the bodies of liuing
creatures,It is engendred of the blood in the heart. as a thinne flame engendered of the blood by vertue of the
heart: and this flyeth as it were throughout all the partes of the bodie,
diſtributing vnto it Vitall heate, which quickeneth it, and endueth it
with that vertue by which it hath motion and ſenſe, and exerciſeth all
her actions, ſo that euery member doeth his office. Nowe we ſee well
in this compariſon the matter that is in the lampe or in the candle, and
the temperature and agreement that is betweene the partes of it, and
howe the flame is fedde and mainteyned after it is lighted. Wee may
ſee alſo from whence this flame is brought to the lampe, and how this
matter is lighted, and that neither the matter, nor the agreement and
temperature thereof breede this flame of themſelues, but that it is
brought from elſewhere.
               In like manner, we may eaſily conceiue that which hath beene told
vs of the vitall ſpirite, and of the blood whereof it is bredde, and of the
vertue and power of the heart in the generation of it. But one may

ſay vnto mee, that there is great difference betweene the compariſon
we made of a lampe or candle, and of his flame, and betweene that
which we haue ſpoken of the generation of the vitall ſpirite, becauſe
this flame, which we cal the vitall ſpirit, ſpringeth of the ſelf-ſame matter,
by which it is nouriſhed & preſerued, & is kindled there. And therfore
it were requiſite that we ſhould further knowe what is the cauſe
of this, as alſo why the life and motion that are therein, are inflamed
by this vital ſpirite, and not by any other means whatſoeuer, whether
it be the blood or the fleſh. And yet this ſpirite is as well of a corporall
and bodily matter, as all the reſt, of which the body is compounded:
ſo that it hath his originall of the ſelfe-ſame elements from whence
that matter is deriued, out of which it ſpringeth. But of ſuch inquiſitours
I woulde likewiſe demaund, from whence the heauens, the
Sunne and Moone, with the other planets and ſtarres haue their motion,God the author of nature.
their light and properties. It is very certaine they can yeeld mee
no other true cauſe, but that God hath created them of that nature,
that hee hath ſo framed them, and that hee alwayes preſerueth them
ſuch, by the diuine vertue and power of his prouidence. So I ſay to
them, that wee ought not to ſearche for any other cauſe or reaſon of
that we mentioned before, or goe any further, or mount higher in the
inquiſition thereof. But foraſmuch as that which wee haue nowe
deliuered of the nature and matter of the Soule, is proper to that
Senſitiue and Senſuall ſoule which wee attribute to beaſtes, we muſt
come more particularly to that that is proper to men, which wee
call the reaſonable ſoule. This is that matter and poynt, about which
the greateſt and moſt ingenious wittes haue moſt laboured and diſputed
from time to time.Sundry opinion of the reaſonable ſoule. For they that affirmed the ſoule of man
to bee no other thing then the Vitall and Animall ſpirites, by means
of which the body receiueth life, or the temperature and temperament
of the humours, and matter of which the bodie is compounded,
theſe men put no difference betweene the ſoule of beaſtes, and
the ſoule of men. And as for them that take it to bee the breath, or
a fire of which the naturall heate proceedeth, they iumpe in opinion
with the former, who place it in the Vitall ſpirites. And they that
ſay it is in the harmonie of the whole bodie, are of the ſame minde
with them that place it in the temperament. So that according to
the opinion of all theſe, the ſoule of man is nothing els but naturall
heate, or els the Vitall ſpirite that is in the blood: as the Phyſicions
commonly take it, whoſe conſideration reacheth not farther
then to that they can comprehend by their naturall reaſon, following
therein Hippocrates, who agreeable to this opinion ſaieth, that the

ſoule is daily engendered, after that manner, which wee haue alreadie
declared. But they that more diligently looke into the properties
and excellent giftes,The ſoule proceedeth not frō the elements. wherewith the reaſonable ſoule is endued,
know aſſuredly by their naturall reaſon, that theſe opinions are very
vnworthy the noble excellencie thereof, and that they are of no force
in regarde thereof. For they iudge very well, that the vnderſtanding
and reaſon with the diſcourſes thereof, that the iudgement and ſuch
memory as it hath, that the diſcerning of good and euill, of thinges
honeſt and diſhoneſt, of vertues and vices, with the knowledge of humane
and diuine thinges whereof it is partaker, are woorkes and actions,
which cannot proceede from ſuch matter as the elements
are, as we haue touched elſe-where. Whereupon it followeth, that
it is ſome other thing then the Vitall ſpirite, or the temperament of
the bodie: and that it is of a farre differing nature from that of beaſts,
which conſiſteth in theſe thinges. And by the ſame reaſon alſo they
conclude, that if the ſoule of man were of any ſuch matter as to be the
Vitall ſpirite, or the temperament of the bodie, it would follow that it
were mortall like to the bodie, and that nothing ſhoulde remaine of
it after the death thereof. Which thing they finde to be too much contrarie
vnto that, which a man may iudge of the nature and ſubſtance
of the ſoule by thoſe effectes of it, that were euen nowe mentioned:
which effectes are ſuch as cannot agree to a corruptible and mortall
nature, nor to any other then to a celeſtiall and immortall nature,
like to that of the Angels aud bleſſed ſpirits, which are endued with
ſuch vertues. But I deſire to heare thee, ARAM, vpon the things now
ſpoken of, that thou maieſt goe on with the matter of our diſcourſes.
            
            
               Of the opinion of Galen, of Plat
                     •
                  , and of Ariſtotle, touching the ſubstance
and nature of mans ſoule: of the opinion of Occam touching
the Vegetatine and Senſitiue power thereof, and of the distinction of
ſoules he maketh in man: of the ſentence of the Platoniſts, and of Origen
touching the creation, birth and nature of the ſoule: of the coniunction
of the Soule with the bodie, and the eſtate thereof in the ſame.
Chap. 83.
               ARAM. The Ancients ſpeaking of man, often call him a great
miracle: and indeede the more wee bend our mindes to conſider
of it, the more marueilous weſhal find it to be. Inſomuch as in the
particular contemplation of the ſoule, which is truely man, I woulde
gladly aske whether it were better, either to diſcourſe Philoſophically
of this matter hauing ſtore of argument, or by way of admiration to

crie out with S. Paul,
                  Rom. 11. 33. 
                  O the deepenes of the riches, both of the wiſedom, and
knowledge of God! Neuertheleſſe being drawen on with the ſame deſire
that hath hitherto pricked vs forward, to ſearch out and to be inſtructed
in the trueth, according to my knowledge I will goe forward
ARAM, with thy ſpeech.
               For the cauſes then alleged by thee, out of them that conſider more
diligently ye properties & excellent gifts of the ſoule,Galens opinion of the ſoule. although Galen,
who otherwiſe was a prophane man in reſpect of the knowledge of
God, and an idolatrous worſhipper of nature, durſt not boldly determine
what the reaſonable ſoule was, yet as for that which is commonly
called the vegetatiue or nouriſhing,
                  Gal. d
                        •
                      pl
                        •
                     s▪ Hip. and the ſenſitiue or ſenſuall
ſoule, he feareth not boldly to affirme, that it is no other thing then
either the naturall and vitall ſpirits, or the temperament. But as for
the reaſonable ſoule, he leaueth it in doubt whether it be of a bodilie
nature, or of ſome other that is not corporall, and which ſubſiſteth by
it ſelfe being ſeperated from the bodie. Neither doth he conclude
any other thing, but that it is either a ſhining ſubſtance, and an ethereall
body, that is to ſay, of a more pure and celeſtiall nature then any
of the elements: or els that it is of a nature that is not corporall, but
yet hath this body, by which he meaneth the animal ſpirit, to be as a
chariot to carie it.Platoes opinion touching the ſoule. 
                  Plato before him ſayd, that ſoules were litle portions
taken from the ſubſtance of the celeſtiall fires: and hee maketh
three parts of a mans ſoule, diuiding them according to the principall
parts of the body, and thoſe inſtruments which they haue in the ſame.
Which diuiſion is vnderſtood of ſome, as if he made ſo many ſorts of
ſoules, as we haue ſhewed that there are principall powers and offices,
which haue their ſeuerall ſeats and places aſſigned vnto them in
the body. Therefore Galen mainteineth, that the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue
ſoule is no other thing then the temperament of the liuer and of
the heart, which are aſſigned to be the ſeats and chiefe inſtruments of
the nouriſhing and vitall power and vertue. And as for the animall or
reaſonable power, whoſe ſeat is commonly placed in the braine, we
haue alreadie ſhewed his opinion. Now of this part, there are many,
euen of them who greatly magnifie it, that are not yet well reſolued
whether they ought to take it for the animal ſpirit, or for the temperament,
or for an incorporeall nature that commeth elſwhere then from
the body.Ariſtotles opinion of the ſoule. 
                  Aristotle he calleth the ſoule by a new Greeke name, that
ſignifieth aſmuch as a perpetuall motion, and ſayth that it proceedeth
from a fift nature and beginning, which he calleth Heauen. But he
ſpeaketh not ſo plainly, that a man may iudge by his words, what he
thinketh of the reaſonable ſoule in man, whether it be mortall or immortall.

Neuertheleſſe he confeſſeth, that there is great difference betweene
that power of the ſoule, which we call more ſpecially by the
name of ſpirite, and betweene the other twaine, which he calleth the
Nutritiue and Senſitiue powers. For he vſeth this worde Powers, and
affirmeth, that theſe two firſt proceede onely from the bodie, and are
bredde there, and that the Vegetatiue ſoule and power is more in the
ſeede and burden, then the Senſitiue. But as for the third, hee ſaieth
plainely, that it onely commeth from without els-where, and that
this onely is diuine, not communicating her action with any corporall
action.
               Thus we ſee ſufficient agreement betweene the Philoſophers and
the Phiſitions concerning the Vegetatiue and Senſitiue ſoule or power:
but there is not ſo good accord about the reaſonable ſoule and power.
Yea many great Diuines & Doctors agree with them in the two firſt
points.
                     Occams opinion of the ſoule. For this cauſe Occam ſaith plainly, that there are two diſtinct
ſoules in man, the one reaſonable, the other ſenſuall: the reaſon is, becauſe
it is manifeſt, that the Senſitiue ſoule hath no actions, but inſtrumentall,
that is to ſay, by meanes of thoſe inſtruments whereby ſhee
exerciſeth her actions, and from which ſhe hath them. Whereupon he
concludeth, that this ſenſuall ſoule ſeemeth to haue her originall and
generation from the ſeede, and that it is either the temperament, or
ſome facultie and power in the bodie. He confirmeth this opinion by
another argument taken from the contrarie appetites and deſires of
the reaſonable and ſenſuall ſoule: out of which he draweth this concluſion,
That it is very likely that theſe are two diſtinct ſubſtances, becauſe
it ſeemeth inconuenient, in one and the ſame nature not diuided or diſtinguiſhed
to place appetites ſo wholly contrary each to other, Hee addeth farther,
that it is a thing very agreeable to nature, that euery liuing creature
ſhoulde beget his like: therefore man begetteth man like himſelfe, at
leaſtwiſe in reſpect of the Senſitiue ſoule, if not of the reaſonable
ſoule. Whereupon it followeth, that the Vegetatiue and Senſitiue ſoule
proceede from the nature of the ſeede.Of the creation of ſoules according to the Platoniſts. The Platonicall Philoſophers
were of opinion, that ſoules were bred in heauen, and were taken out
of the diuine nature as a portion thereof, and that there they were inſtructed
and adorned with ſundry ſciences, with knowledge and vertue:
and that afterwarde beeing giuen of God, they deſcended from
thence into the bodies of men, as into ſtinking, filthy, and contagious
priſons. Whereof it followed, that through the infection of theſe priſons
they were corrupted by euill affections, as it were with the filthineſſe
of them. So that they forgate all thoſe gifts and celeſtial vertues
where with they had been endued and adorned in their firſt birth, and

which they had brought with them. And being thus detained as priſoners
in this darke and filthy priſon, they could no more vſe all thoſe
goodly gifts, but onely ſo farre foorth as they were taught and inſtructed
againe by doctrine, which in reſpect of them may be compared
to a light brought to priſoners kept in a darke dungeon, to light & refreſh
them. For this cauſe thoſe that were of this opinion affirmed, that
the knowledge of men is but a remembrance and calling againe to
minde of that which their ſoules had learned and did know in heauen
at their firſt birth, before they entred into their bodies, according as
we heard euen now. For being deſcended into this baſe and obſcure
priſon, and hauing forgotten that which they knew, their memories
are rubbed vp by doctrine and inſtruction beſtowed vpon them,
which kindleth againe theſe celeſtiall ſparkles of their mind, and portions
of the diuine fire, by inflaming them and cauſing them to burne,
that were almoſt vtterly quenched. Wherupon like Philoſophers they
conclude, that ſoules ſo infected by deſcending and entring into their
bodies, cannot returne againe nor be receiued into heauen, and into
the place aſſigned for the bleſſed ſpirits, vnleſſe they returne pure and
cleane, & decked with the ſelfe-ſame ornaments wherwith they were
adorned at their firſt birth. And this (they ſay) may bee wrought by
good inſtruction, by vertue & by good workes: or otherwiſe they ſay
they haue ſundry purgings being ſeparated from their bodies. Some diuines
among the Grecians haue followed, at leaſt wiſe in ſome part, the
opinion of theſe philoſophers,
                     Lib 11. chap. 23. of the citie of God. & by name Origen, of whom S. Auguſt.
thus writeth: But we may marueile much more, that ſome beleeuing with
vs, that there is but one only beginning of all things, & that no nature which
is not God, can haue any being but from the Creator, neuertheles would not
beleue rightly and ſimply this point of the creation of the world that is ſo good
and ſimple, namely, that God creating all thoſe good thinges that were after
him, although they were not the ſame that God is, notwithſtanding they were
al good. But they ſay, that the ſoules not being parts of God, but made of God,
ſinned in departing from the Lorde, and ſo by ſundrie degrees according to
to the diuerſitie of ſinnes, from the heauens vnto the earth, haue merited
ſundry ſortes of bodies to be as it were their chaines and fetters. This ſay
they, is the world, and this was the cauſe of making the worlde, not to the
ende that the good things might be created, but that euill things might be
ſtayed and repreſſed.
                  
                     Origens opinion of ſoules. 
                  Of this opinion is Origen, who is worthily to be blamed.
Theſe are the very wordes of this great Doctor of the Church.
And by that which followeth in the ſame place, hee plainely confuteth
Origens errour, who in his firſt booke of Beginnings writeth,
that things without bodies were firſt made of God: and that amongſt

ſpirituall things, our ſpirites or mindes were alſo created,
which declining from their eſtate and dignitie were made or named
ſoules, of which the Greeke worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   ſignifieth, as it were to grow
colde, and to decline from a better and more diuine eſtate; beeing ſo
called, becauſe it ſeemeth that the ſpirite or mind is waxen cold, & fallen
from this natural and diuine heate. Therfore the ſoule lieth now in
this eſtate and condition, but when it is repaired & amended, it ſhal returne
againe to the condition of a ſpirite or mind. Which being ſo, it
ſeemeth that the departing and declining of the ſoule is not alike in
all, but is turned either more or leſſe in the ſoule: and that ſome ſpirites
or mindes doe yet retaine ſomewhat of their firſt vigour, other
ſome, either nothing at all or very litle. Theſe ſoules by reaſon of many
defects of the ſpirit, ſtood in need of more groſſe and ſolide bodies:
ſo that for their ſakes, this viſible world was made & created ſo great,
that it might containe all thoſe ſoules which were appointed to bee
exerciſed therein. And foraſmuch as all of them did not depart alike
from goodnes, the Creator of all things tooke vnto himſelfe certaine
ſeedes and cauſes of varietie, to the ende that according to the diuerſity
of ſinnes, he might make the worlde variable and diuers. This is
Origens ſentence concerning ſoules, which ſelf-ſame opinion we may
reade alſo in Saint Hierome writing to Anitus: whereby wee may ſee
howe this opinion agreeth in part with that of the Platoniſts. For the
greateſt diſagreement betweene them conſiſteth heerein, that theſe
Philoſophers attributed the cauſe of the infection of ſoules to the bodies
into which they were ſent frrom heauen. And Origen, with many
that followed him, ſuppoſed that the ſoules were ſent into bodies as
priſoners, to bee puniſhed for their offences committed in heauen.
From ſuch fancies haue iſſued ſo many dreames about ſoules as are to
be read in infinite writings. But doe thou, ACHITOB, take occaſion
hereupon to continue our diſcourſes.
            
            
               Of the opinion of the Platonists, and ſome others touching the ſubstance of
mens ſoules: in what ſence not onely the Poets and Heathen Philoſophers,
but alſo S. Paul haue ſaide, that men were the generation and Image of
God: of their errour that ſay, that ſoules are of the very ſubſtance of God:
of the tranſmigration of ſoules according to the opinion of the ſame Philoſophers.
Chap. 84.
               ACHITOB. It is woonderfull to conſider, howe harde a matter
it is to finde out the trueth of ſuch thinges, as are commonly
diſputed of, becauſe notwithſtanding any ſolution or anſwere that is

made, yet ſtill ſome doubt may ariſe in our mindes: inſomuch as there
is no poynt howe doubtfull ſoeuer it bee, but that a man may alleage
likelihood both with it and againſt it. But this commeth to paſſe, eſpecially
in matters of greateſt reache, the difficultie of which is ſo
much the harder to be defined, as the true knowledge thereof is more
neceſſary for vs. Thoſe men therefore are happie, who are aſſured of
that which they beleeue, by certaine teſtimonies cut of the worde of
trueth: eſpecially when the queſtion is concerning the ſoule, which is
the inſtrument of God whereby he worketh in vs, and lifteth vs vp to
the contemplation of his diuinitie.
               Nowe my companions, by your three former diſcourſes wee may
gather both what agreement and what difference there is amongeſt
thoſe whome you haue mentioned, touching their opinions, as well
in regarde of the birth of ſoules, as of their diſtinction, diuiſion, and
corruption. For they agree herein, that they are not engendred with
the body, neither of the ſame ſeede and matter, at leaſtwiſe the reaſonable
ſoule: but ſay that it is of a celeſtiall, diuine and immortall nature.
But herein they diſagree, in reſpect of the nature of the matter,
and about the time, creation, and birth of the ſoule, and alſo in regard
of the meanes, by which it is defiled and infected with ſinne. The
Platoniſts affirme,The Platoniſts opinion of the ſoule confuted. that the ſoule is ſo extracted out of the diuine nature,
that it is a part and portion thereof. Which thing cannot agree
with the nature of God, becauſe it would folow therupon, that it were
not one, but might be diuided into diuers parts: and that thoſe partes
of which the ſoules ſhould be created, might be ſubiect to the pollution
of ſinne, a thing too contrary to the nature of God. Or elſe they
muſt ſay, that there is but one ſoule in all and through all, and that God
is this ſoule. And this were to f
                     •
                  l into their opinion who ſaid, that God
was the ſoule of the world,God is not the ſoule of the world. and that the worlde was his bodie: which
is farre from the trueth. For if it were ſo, then muſt God bee mortall
and corruptible in reſpect of his body, and that ſtill one part or other
ſhould be corrupted, as we ſee corporall things daily to corrupt. On
the other ſide, God ſhould not then be infinit and incomprehenſible,
as he is: neither is it the worlde that comprehendeth and containeth
him, but it is he who comprehendeth & containeth the world. Wherfore
neither is the world God, neither is God the world, but the Creator
thereof, and he by whome it is and doeth conſiſt. So that foraſmuch
as all theſe opinions are very ſtrange, and vnwoorthie the diuine
nature, they deſerue not that we ſhould ſtay any longer in them,
as they that ouerthrowe themſelues. But I knowe well, that ſome
would haue that place alleged out of the Poet by Saint Paul, to ſerue

their fantaſticall opinion,Act. 17. 28. where it is ſaid, that We are the linage and generation
of God.
                  Arat. For Saint Paul doeth not alleage it onely as an opinion
of an Heathen Poet,Phae. but doeth alſo approoue and confirme
the ſame, taking his argument from thence, that our ſoule beeing of
a ſpirituall and diuine nature, wee ought to make the ſame account
of God,How men are the linage of God. whoſe linage and generation wee are. Nowe albeeit
the Apoſtle ſpeaketh thus, yet his meaning is not that the
ſoules of men are of the verie ſubſtaunce and eſſence of God, as
wee ſay that the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, are one
and the ſame eſſence and ſubſtance in the the vnitie of God, beeing
diſtinguiſhed, and not diuided into three perſons. Neither doeth he
meane, that the ſoules are engendred of the proper eſſence and ſubſtance
of God, or that they proceede from it, as wee ſay that the
ſonne is begotten of the Father, and that the holy ſpirite proceedeth
from the Father and the Sonne, according as it is teſtified vnto vs in
the holy Scriptures. But hee woulde haue vs learne, that the ſoule of
man is of another nature and ſubſtance, not onely then the bodie of
man is, but alſo then the ſoule of beaſtes, and that the nature and
ſubſtance thereof is celeſtiall and diuine, not becauſe it is drawen
from the very ſubſtance and eſſence of God, but by reaſon of that
difference which is betweene the ſoule of man, and the bodies and
ſoules of beaſtes: and alſo in regard of that agreement which is betweene
it and the diuine nature, both becauſe of the immortalitie of
the ſoule, as becauſe it approcheth more neere to the nature of God
then of any other creature, except the Angels, whome wee ſay
alſo are of a diuine nature and celeſtiall, for the like reaſon. For if the
Angels and ſoules of men were of the proper ſubſtance and eſſence
of God, they ſhould not bee creatures, but Gods themſelues, equall
in ſubſtance and eſſence with him, as wee ſay of the Sonne begotten
of the Father, and of the holy Ghoſt proceeding from them
both, in the matter of the vnitie & trinitie of the diuine nature: which
by this meanes ſhoulde bee diuided into partes, and ſo nothing at all
reſemble the fountaine and ſubſtance from which they are drawen,
as I ſhewed euen nowe. And albeit the Philoſophers and Heathen
Poets did not ſo well vnderſtand this matter as Saint Paul, neuertheleſſe
when they ſayde, that the ſoule of man was of the diuine nature
and part thereof, it is very likely they had regarde to the reaſons
touched by mee, not meaning that it was of the very ſubſtance and
eſſence of God. I ſpeake of them that were of greateſt vnderſtanding
and that wrote beſt: and namely of them that did beſt vnderſtande
the Philoſophie of Plato. For hee confeſſeth and teſtifieth

plainly, that the Angels themſelues both good and bad, whome in his
language he calleth dae
                        •
                     ones,
                  
                     Platoes opinion of Daemones, or celeſtial ſpirits. as the other Grecians doe, are creatures
of another eſſence and ſubſtance then God is of, and that they are
not immortall of themſelues, but haue their immortalitie of God
their Creator, who both giueth it and preſerueth them in it, and could
take it from them if hee would, and diſſolue them as well as hee hath
made them. Nowe if he ſuppoſed God to ſpeake ſo to his Angels, and
to declare theſe things vnto them, a man may eaſily iudge, that hee
placeth not the ſoules of men aboue the Angels, whome hee taketh to
be of a more excellent nature, as he ſheweth euidently by that which
he hath written of them both. In which writing wee may ſee manie
things touching theſe matters, which come neerer to the doctrine
of the holy Scriptures and of true religion, then in the writings of
many others, who yeelded no further then they were able to knowe
and conceiue by naturall things, without going any further. For they
doe not conceiue ſo well either of the nature of God, or of that of Angels,
or of the ſoules of men, as this Philoſopher doeth. Moreouer, we
are to know, that Plato had other helpes, and more light them from
his natural reaſon, whereby he attayned to the vnderſtanding of that,
which others were ignorant of, who buſied themſelues onely about
nature and naturall things.
                     Plato dwelt with the Egyptians. For hee conuerſed with the Egyptians,
as Pythagoras did before him, of whome they learned manie
points touching diuine things, which they ſhould neuer haue learned
of the Grecians, nor out of their Philoſophie. For the Egyptians had
great acquaintance and familiaritie with the people of Iſrael that
dwelt in their land, and with many of the ancient Patriarkes, of whom
they had learned manie things of the diuinitie, and of the nature of
ſoules. But all they that haue beene deſtitute of the chiefe light of
the ſpirite of God, haue ſtill mingled many dreames a middeſt their
writings, as we haue alreadie heard, and ſhall heare more in the ſequele
of our ſpeech. Yet firſt we will note, howe not onely manie
amongſt the Heathen Philoſophers, but alſo amongſt the Chriſtians
haue imagined that the ſoules of men are the ſubſtance of God. I
omit to ſpeake of the Heretikes, as the Priſcilianiſts, and ſome others
that haue been of this opinion,Lactautius lib. 2. cap. 13. but I wonder at Lactantius, a man of a
right Chriſtian heart, who ſeemeth to haue beene of this opinion.
And there haue beene ſome, that reaſoned after this manner, that
if it bee to bee vnderſtood, that of the breath iſſuing foorth out of the
mouth of God, the ſoule was created and inſpired into the body of
man, then it followeth thereupon, that it is of his verie ſubſtance, and
equall to that wiſedome which ſayeth,Ecclus. 24. 5. 
                  I am come out of the mouth

of the most High. But that wiſedome ſaieth not, that ſhee was breathed
out of the mouth of God, but that ſhee came out of it. Now
as when we breathe, we make a blaſt, not of our nature whereby we
are men, but of this ayre rounde about vs, which wee drawe in and
out by breathing:The Soule created of nothing. ſo the Almightie God made a blaſt, not of his nature,
nor of this creature of the aire rounde about vs, but euen of nothing.
Which was ſaide very fittely to haue beene inſpired or breathed,
when it was created in the bodie of man by God, who being
himſelfe incorporeall, and not of a bodily ſubſtance, made the
ſoule alſo incorporeall: but yet he beeing vnchangeable, made the
ſoule mutable, becauſe himſelfe beeing vncreated made that a creature.
               But let vs goe on with the Philoſophie of the Platoniſts. Wee haue
heard their opinion touching the birth of ſoules, their entrie into the
bodie, and the pollution which they receiue thereby: namely, that the
ſoules of men are created long before their bodies, but are afterwarde
ſent into them when they are begotten and borne in the worlde, at
which time they are defiled,Of the tranſmigration of ſoules. as hath beene declared. But further, according
to the opinion of Pythagoras, who is ſayde to bee the firſt Authour
thereof, they imagined, that after a ſoule was once entred into
a bodie, it neuer ceaſed to goe from body to body, entring into one
bodie out of another. So that when it went out of one bodie it entred
into another, whether it were of a man, or of a beaſt, or of a plant.
For they put no difference betweene the bodies of any liuing creatures
whatſoeuer: but ſpake, as if euerie ſoule were fitte for euerie
bodie: ſo that according as euerie ſoule guided and gouerned
it ſelfe in that bodie in which it had liued before, it was receaued
into another bodie, beeing ſuch a one as it had deſerued, eyther
by her vices, or by her vertues. Therefore thoſe that had taken
the way of vertue, entered into humane bodies woorthie their
vertue, into ſuch as had beene called to honourable offices and eſtates:
and as vertue had preuayled moſt with euerie one, ſo were
they more or leſſe honoured in their bodies. And if ſo bee they had
ledde a brutiſh rather then a humane and reaſonable life, they paſſed
into the bodies of plantes, or of beaſtes, whoſe nature reſembled
the life which they had ledde in their former bodies.The regeneration of the Pythagoreans. This
Tranſmigration of Soules they called Regeneration, becauſe it was
vnto them as it were a generation and newe birth, in reſpect
of their life and conuerſation, which before they ledde in the
worlde. Moreouer, they accounted this regeneration to be a kinde
of purgation and ſatisfaction, becauſe that by this meanes

euery ſoule was puniſhed or rewarded, honoured or diſhonoured, according
to her worthineſſe or vnworthineſſe, and that ſo long vntill
ſhee were reduced to her firſt and right eſtate. There haue beene
Heretikes of olde,A fond opinion of certaine Heretikes. who following the opinion of the Platoniſts,
affirmed, that no ſoule coulde bee fully purged and bee at reſt, and
ceaſe from paſſing out of one bodie into another, vntill ſuch time as
it hath done and finiſhed whatſoeuer can bee done in the worlde,
whether good or euill: accounting both euill deedes and good deeds,
vices as well as vertues to bee a kinde of penance and purgation of
ſoules. Beſides, theſe Heretikes affirmed, as the Libertines their ſucceſſours
doe the like in our dayes, that there was no ſinne but onely
in the opinion and fancie of men, and that it is but a conceipt in their
minde that breedeth this opinion.
               Nowe when I thinke vpon this manner of regeneration and paſſage
of the ſoule from one bodie to another,Againſt the tranſmigration of ſoules. I muſe howe it is poſſible
that euer any men, eſpecially thoſe that are taken for ſuch great
Philoſophers, ſhould fall into ſuch foppery, and aboue all how Plato
ſhoulde bee of that opinion, who is by them ſurnamed, The diuine,
For firſt of all, we haue alreadie learned by our diſcourſes of the nature
both of body and ſoule, that the ſoule cannot dwell nor exerciſe
her offices in any other then in the bodie of a man, ſeeing that
is the true forme and perfection of man and of that kinde, without
which hee cannot bee man. Wee may ſay the ſame of the ſoule of
beaſtes and of plants. For if euery creature had not his proper forme,
and ſome thing in which the perfection of it conſiſteth, without
which it cannot bee that which it is, and by which it differeth in
kinde from other creatures, there woulde bee a woonderfull confuſion
throughout all nature, yea the whole order thereof woulde
bee ouerturned. For all kindes of nature ſhoulde bee confounded together,
neither ſhoulde there be anie one kinde certaine and diſtinct:
which thing is contrary to all naturall reaſon, and to all order appointed
by God. Therefore it is a very hard matter to beleeue, that euer
any man of a ſounde minde and good iudgement, would admitte of
ſuch a fantaſticall opinion. But wee may learne of thee, ASER, in
proceeding with the matter of our diſcourſe, what thou haſt learned
of skilfull men concerning this that Plato hath written of tranſmigration
of ſoules.
            
            
               
               The chiefe cauſes, as learned men thinke, that mooued Pythagoras, and
Plato to broache the tranſmigration of ſoules and transformation
of bodies: the ancient opinion of the Iewes touching the ſame thing.
Chap. 85.
               ASER. The worlde was neuer without certaine wittie men, that
boaſted they coulde anſwere vpon a ſodaine to any thing that
ſhoulde be demaunded of them. And there haue beene alwayes
ſome others, that in euery controuerſie and diſputation mainteyned
one while this part, and by and by the contrary: which hath giuen
occaſion as I thinke, to certaine of the auncient Philoſophers to beleeue,
that a man can know nothing perfectly, and that no man ought
certainely to determine any thing otherwiſe then vpon his bare and
ſimple opinion. But in my minde this conſideration will finde but
fewe defenders nowe adayes, except it bee amongſt the ignoraunt,
who leauing all ſearch of things, liue onely at all aduenture, or elſe
amongeſt them that beleeue euery thing that is tolde them, and
are ledde with euerie ſentence, which they heare of others, without
any further inquirie made of the reaſon thereof. Nowe as we would
bee loath to periſh with the ignoraunt, ſo wee muſt beware that
wee commit not our ſelues and our beleefe ſo eaſily to the daunger
of other mens errours. And in deede oftentimes wee iudge not aright
of their meaning, namely when the queſtion is concerning the
ſenſe of their writing. As I purpoſe to let you ſee my companions, in
that which hath beene alreadie ſpoken of Plato.
               
               I haue learned of manie skilfull men,Why Plato inuented the tranſmigration of ſoules. that Pythagoras and Plato
neuer beleeued that tranſmigration of ſoules into manie bodies,
which we reade in their writings, but that by theſe fayned kindes of
ſpeech, their meaning was rather to withdrawe men from beaſtly
affections, vnwoorthie their nature, and thereby to paint out and
to expreſſe the diuerſitie of thoſe affections, and to ſet them as it were
before their eyes: thereby to declare vnto them, howe by reaſon
of their vnruly affections they reſemble all other creatures, and
chiefely brute beaſtes. Wherefore wee may with good reaſon call
man a little worlde, if there were no other cauſe but this, albeeit
in this reſpect it ſtandeth not with his honour and credite. For
there is no kinde of beaſt whatſoeuer, nor yet of any other creature
vnto which hee doeth not in ſome ſort transforme himſelfe by his affections
and by his maners and vices. For when he pleaſeth, he tranſformeth
himſelfe one while into a ſheepe, then into a woolfe, againe

into a foxe, or into a hogge, or into a dogge, or into a beare,
or into a Lion, or into ſome other ſuch like beaſt. Moreouer, ſometimes
hee transfigureth himſelfe, not onely into one kinde of beaſt,
but into many together,, and yet thoſe very differing and contrarie
the one from the other. And as he can at his pleaſure transforme himſelfe
into an Angell, ſo doeth hee likewiſe turne himſelfe into a Diuell.Mans nature compared to a Monſter.
It is not then altogether voyde of reaſon that Plato ſayeth, that
the nature of man is as it were a monſtrous nature: yea hee compareth
it to a Monſter, whoſe vppermoſt part reſembleth a Virgine:
whoſe breaſt, which is the middeſt, is like to a Lyon: and the
loweſt part, to a barking and bawling dogge. For hee compareth
the higheſt part to a Virgin, becauſe hee placeth reaſon in the head, as
in the proper ſeate thereof, and of the animal powers of the Soule, for
their nature and office ſake. Next, hee ſaieth that the breaſt reſembleth
a Lion, becauſe he taketh the heart to bee the ſeate of the Vitall
power of the Soule, and alſo of the affections, that often may well
bee likened to a Lion and to furious beaſtes. Laſtly, hee compareth
the lower partes to dogges, becauſe that part is appoynted
to be the ſeate of the naturall and nouriſhing power of the ſoule, and
of the generatiue vertue, as that which is very brutiſh and giuen
to all carnall pleaſures,How mē become like to beaſts. and chiefely to fornication. If then a man
cannot moderate his affections and concupiſcences, hee maketh
himſelfe like to ſo many beaſtes, as hee hath affections holding of
their nature. This alſo is the cauſe, why the ſpirite of God in the
holy Scriptures, ſo often compareth men to ſundry ſortes of beaſts,
to teach vs that they are as it were transformed into them, and into
hideous and horrible monſters, to the ende they might bee the
more aſhamed of themſelues: and that knowing howe they turne
themſelues into beaſtes and into Diuels by their vices, they ſhould
learne alſo, howe contrariwiſe through vertue they become men
of beaſtes, and angels of Diuels. Therefore it is very like, that
Pythagoras and Plato had reſpect to this which hath beene ſaide
in thoſe transformations and tranſmigrations of ſoules of which
they ſpake. I thinke alſo that the Poets, following the ſame inuention
haue for the like reaſon, fayned the transformations of
men into diuers beaſtes, and into other creatures forged by them:
but men through ignoraunce haue taken them in a wrong ſence,The ignorant wreſt the ſence of good writers.
and ſo reaped ſmall profite by them. No marueile then if this hath
happened both to Philoſophers and Poets in their doctrine and
manner of teaching, ſeeing there are ſo manie that profite ſo little
by the doctrine of the holie Scriptures themſelues, and by

the ſtudie thereof. For were there euer any Heretikes, that did
not wreſt the ſence of manie places of Scripture to make them
ſerue for their hereſies? And doe wee not dayly ſee the like in
all ſeducers and falſe prophetes? It is verie certayne, that there
were neuer anie ſo abſurde and ſtraunge hereſies, which the fauourers
of them haue not laboured to mainteyne by the holy Scriptures
themſelues.
               But to returne to our purpoſe, what meaning ſoeuer the Authors
and inuenters of ſuch things had, their doctrine was ſo vnderſtood,
that manie helde this opinion, that mens ſoules paſſed from bodie
to bodie, as we haue heard. Inſomuch that this errour howe groſſe ſoeuer
it were, came not onelie to the Iewes, but to the Chriſtians alſo,
who boaſt of true religion, and of the authoritie and knowledge
of the holy Scriptures. I ſpeake not of the Manichees auncient Heretikes,
who were open mainteiners of this opinion. But what ſhall wee
ſay of them, who not onely haue their braines infected with this follie,
but, which is woorſe, imagine they can confirme and prooue it by
teſtimonies out of the worde of God? As where it is reported, that
when Herode hearde the fame of Chriſt Ieſus ſpread throughout
all Iudea,Math. 14. 2. hee ſayde,marke 6. 14. 
                  This is Iohn Baptist: hee is riſen againe from
the dead, and therefore great woorkes are wrought by him. And Saint
Luke ſayeth expreſſely,Luke 9. 7, 8. 
                  That Herode doubted, becauſe that it was
ſayde of ſome, that Iohn was riſen againe from the dead: and of ſome,
that Elias had appeared: and of ſome, that one of the olde Prophets was
riſen againe. We reade likewiſe that when Ieſus Chriſt demaunded of
his diſciples,Mat. 16. 13, 14. ſaying, Whome doe men ſay that I,
                  luke 9. 19. 
                  the Sonne of man am?
they anſwered, Some ſay, Iohn Baptist: and ſome Elias: others, Ieremias,
or one of the Prophets: and ſome that one of the olde Prophetsis riſen againe.
                  Of the Iewes opinion of the tranſmigration of ſoules.
A man my iudge by theſe ſpeeches, that not onelie Herode
was tainted with this Pythagoricall and Platonicall opinion, but alſo
that it was very common among the Iewes with whome hee conuerſed,
and whoſe religion hee followed, at leaſt in part and in outwarde
ſhewe. For Ieſus Chriſt was knowen well enough in Iudea,
and in Galilee, and amongſt all the Iewes, as it appeareth by
the teſtimonie of the Euangeliſts. They knewe his kinred according
to the fleſh, and coulde tell that he was brought vp in Nazareth
in the countrey of Galilee:Mark. 6. 3. for which cauſe they called him
him a Galilean,matt. 13 55, 56 a Nazarean,iohn. 6. 42. a Carpenter, the ſonne of a Carpenter,
and the ſonne of Ioſeph and Marie. They ſaide that they knewe
his brethren and ſiſters, whereby according to the Hebrewe manner
of ſpeaking, they meant his couſins, Neeces and his kinred: taking

occaſion thereby to deſpiſe and reiect him. But on the other ſide,
many ſeeing the woorkes and miracles which hee wrought, were
conſtrayned to paſſe farther, euen Herode himſelfe, hearing onely the
fame that went of him throughout the countrey: ſo that ſome tooke
him to bee that Chriſt, others, to be ſome great Prophet. And of them
that helde him for a Prophet, it appeareth by thoſe ſundry opinions
that were among the people, that they did not thinke him to bee a
Prophet borne at that time, but that ſome one of the olde Prophets
was riſen againe in him, not in bodie but in ſpirite. For they knewe
well whence hee iſſued in reſpect of his bodie, as that which was
commonly knowen throughout the countrey. Therefore it is eaſie
to iudge that they ſpake of reſurrection in regarde of the ſoule, as
the skilfulleſt Interpreters expounde theſe places, referring theſe
ſpeeches of Herode and of the people vnto that Pythagoricall opinion,
of the tranſmigration of ſoules from bodie to bodie. For according
thereunto, thoſe ſoules that had behaued themſelues vertuouſly
in their firſt bodies in which they dwelt, were ſent into other
more honourable bodies, endued with greater giftes of God
according to their deſeruing. Nowe becauſe Saint Iohn the Baptiſt
had not the gift of miracles annexed to his Miniſterie, neyther
did woorke anie all his life time, it might bee thought that
this gaue occaſion to Herode to thinke thus of him, that beeing riſen
againe from the dead after a Pythagoricall manner, hee had
this gift and vertue added vnto his former graces, that ſo he might
haue the greater authoritie. Neither ought wee to thinke it verie
ſtrange, if a great part of the Iewes were infected with manie
fooliſh and naughtie opinions, ſeeing they were not onely corruptly
inſtructed by their teachers, but alſo had ſectes amongſt them
there, which plainely denied the reſurrection of the bodie, the immortalitie
of ſoules, and that there was any Angel or ſpirite. Therefore
wee ſee their great brutiſhneſſe who woulde ground their tranſmigration,
vpon that which is ſaide in the Scriptures touching the opinion
of the Iewes in this point, which notwithſtanding is openly
reprehended and condemned by the ſelfe-ſame worde of GOD.
True it is, that the ignorance of the true ſenſe thereof gaue occaſion
to many to fall into ſuch dreames. For the Lorde ſpeaking thus by
Malachie,
                  Mala. 4. 5. 
                  Beholde I will ſende you Elijah the Prophet, before the comming
of the great and fearefull day of the Lorde, the Iewes vnderſtood
this place diuerſly. Some of them thought, that the auncient Prophet
Elias, who was rapt vp into heauen, ſhoulde be ſent againe in
proper perſon: others vnderſtoode it onely of the tranſmigration of

his ſoule and ſpirite into an other body.Iohn 1. 21. For this cauſe they asked of
Iohn Baptiſt whether hee were Elias: but Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe expounded
thoſe wordes of Malachy,
                  Matth. 11. 14. and 17. 12, 13 and declared vnto the Iewes
that Iohn Baptiſt was that Elias which ſhould come, and that although
hee were come yet they did not knowe him. For when he ſpake ſo of
him, hee meant not that hee was the very perſon of Elias in body and
ſoule, or that the naturall ſoule and ſpirite of Elias was entred into his
body: but his meaning was according as the Angel ſpake to Zachary,
when he tolde him of the Natiuitie of Saint Iohn his ſonne,Luke 1. 15, 16, 17. ſaying, He
ſhall be filled with the holy Ghoſt, euen from his mothers wombe. And many
of the children of Iſrael ſhall he turne to their Lorde God. For he ſhall go
before him in the ſpirite and power of Elias. A man may eaſily iudge by
theſe words, that he meant not to ſay, that the naturall ſpirite of Elias
ſhoulde enter into the body of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, but that God would
giue a ſpirite adourned with ſuch giftes and ſpirituall graces, and
with ſuch zeale and conſtancie as he gaue long before to Elias. Therefore
he addeth power vnto ſpirite, thereby to declare the better what
is meant by Spirite. And before he ſhewed the meanes whereby this
ſpirite ſhoulde be giuen him, when he ſaid, that hee ſhould be filled
with the holy Ghoſt from his mothers wombe: that is, with the gifts
and graces thereof, as the Scripture calleth them ordinarily. Afterwardes
alſo, the Angell declareth more at large, after what manner
Saint Iohn came in the power and ſpirite of Elias, ſignifying that hee
ought to behaue himſelfe and to doe as Elias had done in his time, and
as Malachy had foretolde of him. Moreouer, we haue in the Scripture
other kindes of ſpeaking, that agree very fitly with this of the Angel,
ſo that the one may well ſerue to open the other. For it is written of
Moſes,
                  Numb. 11. 25. that the Lorde did ſeparate of the ſpirite that was vpon him, and
did put it vpon the ſeuentie ancient men, whom he appointed vnder him
to be an helpe and comfort vnto him in the gouernement of the people
of Iſrael: and when the ſpirite reſted vpon them they prophecied
continually. Euery one knoweth, that the ſpirite of Moſes whereof
the Lord ſpeaketh, is not his naturall ſpirite: but that he meaneth by
this ſpirite, part of the gifts and graces which Moſes had receiued of
the Lord, ſuch as were neceſſary for their charge: as likewiſe he gaue
to Moſes according to the charge committed to him. Some alſo vnderſtand
this ſeparation of the ſpirite of Moſes, to be onely a communication
of the graces of the ſpirite of God, like to thoſe which Moſes
had receiued for his charge that was giuen to thoſe, who were ioyned
vnto him for his helpe. Nowe if wee take it in this ſenſe, we may
ſay, that God vſeth this manner of ſpeech, the better to let vs vnderſtand

thereby the nature of his gifts and graces, and the meanes hee
obſerueth in diſpenſing of them. For hee doeth not onelie diſtribute
ſo much as is needefull for them whome hee mindeth to employ
in his woorke, but giueth alſo vnto them ſuch manner of graces
as are requiſite for the worke,1. Cor. 12. 11. as Saint Paul teſtifieth. Beſides
all this, his purpoſe is alſo to teach vs what agreement there is betwixt
all his giftes: as likewiſe what vnitie proceedeth heereof betwixt
them that are partakers of theſe gifts, whereby wee may perceiue,
that they come all from one ſpirite, which, albeit God thereby
powreth out his graces in ſo great abundance, is yet a fountaine and
ſea that is not onely not dried vp,The fountaine of Gods graces diminiſheth not. but not ſo much as any way diminiſhed.
               Thus wee ſee howe one and the ſame Spirite of GOD gouerned
Moſes, and the reſt that were ioyned with him, inſpiring them
all with his grace, and diſtributing to euery one according to his
meaſure: as the winde is diſpenced into many Organ-pipes all at
once, according to their ſeuerall capacitie, and according to that
ſound which euery one is to yeelde for the making of a good harmony:
or as many Candles or Lampes are lighted by an other, with
the ſame fire wherewith that was firſt tined. Alſo wee are to vnderſtand
in this ſence,2. King. 2. 9. the requeſt that Eliſeus made to Elias, when hee
demaunded a double portion of his Spirite, becauſe hee ſucceeded
him: in regarde whereof hee ſtoode in neede of ſuch giftes and graces
of Gods Spirite, as Elias was guided by, that hee might faithfully
execute his charge as hee had done before. Thus wee ſee howe
places of Scripture expound one an other, and howe little they help
the Pythagoreans: of whome I woulde not haue made ſo long a
diſcourſe, if this foppery were driuen out of mens braines, and namely,
among Chriſtians. For to this day there are too many fantaſticall
heades (I ſay not amongeſt true Chriſtians) but amongeſt
them that falſely beare that name, who are as much or rather more
infected heerewith, then any Pythagoreans or Platoniſts in former
times. And for this cauſe, AMANA, I leaue you to goe on with this
point, that afterwardes wee may returne to our chiefe matter of the
nature, generation, and immortalitie of the ſoule.
            
            
               
               Of the Pythagoreans of theſe dayes amongst Christians, and of their fooliſh
opinions: of the opinions of many doctors and diuines touching the
creation and ordinary generation of mens ſoules: of the moderation
that ought to be kept in that matter: of the cauſe of the filthineſſe and
corruption of mans ſoule. Chap. 86.
               AMANA. There was neuer yet any opinion, errour, or hereſie ſo
ſtrange or monſtrous in the world, which hath not always found
men enow to receiue it, ſo that there were authours and maſters to
broach it abroad. For God doeth thus puniſh the curioſitie, ingratitude,
malice, and peruerſeneſſe of men, and that contempt of his word
and trueth, which is ordinarily in them, together with the pleaſure and
delight they take in vanitie and lies. Wherefore God through his iuſt
iudgement deliuereth them vp into a reprobate ſence, inſomuch as
they can not but reiect the trueth continually and embrace that which
is falſe,Eſay 29. 14. according as he often threatned them,2. tim. 3. 2, 3. and foretolde it by his
Prophets and Apoſtles.2. theſ. 2. 10, 11. And this is the cauſe why the Pythagoreans
do at this day find men voide of ſenſe and vnderſtanding who cleaue
to their fantaſticall opinions, and why Epicures and Atheiſts are neuer
without a great number of diſciples.
               Now albeit theſe men be in truth moſt blockiſh & groſſe beaſts, yet
we cannot perſwade them ſo, nor many others alſo, who imagin they
know much.The Pythagoreans of our time. For there are euen doctors and ſome that read lectures in
Vniuerſities, who keepe not their opinion of the tranſmigration of
ſoules ſo ſecret to themſelues, but they make ſome profeſſion therof, at
leſtwiſe amongſt their ſchollers and familiar acquaintance. There are
ſome alſo, who, boaſting of the knowlege of tongues & of the turning
ouer of many antiquities, haue publiſhed this fancie of theirs in books
written by them: yea they themſelues are perſwaded, and they would
make others beleeue the ſame with them, that their ſoules are the very
ſoules of ſome famous perſonages that haue liued heretofore in the
world, & that they haue alredy paſſed through many excellent bodies,
which haue done great things: as likewiſe they promiſe to themſelues,
that they ſhal bring to paſſe great matters, ſeeing they haue their ſouls.
True it is, that according to our maner of ſpeaking we ſay ſometimes
of ſuch as agree in manners with others who haue liued before them,
that their ſoules whom they reſemble is entred into them, & that the
others are raiſed vp in their perſons.Of the true tranſmigration of ſoules. For example ſake, if there be a cruel
tyrant like to Nero, we ſay that Neroes ſoule is entred into his body,
and that Nero is raiſed vp in him. But yet euery one knoweth well enough,
that we vſe to ſpeake ſo by reaſon of the agreement of natures
and of manners, not becauſe of any tranſmigration of ſoule.
               
                  
And this may be ſpoken in reſpect of that Deuilliſh ſpirite, which
poſſeſſeth the wicked and ruleth in them: as wee ſay of the Spirite of
Gods ſeruants in regarde of his vertue, that it is giuen to ſuch as reſemble
them and haue receiued the ſame graces from aboue. For as
the holy Spirite, who wrought heeretofore in others, worketh nowe
alſo in them that haue receiued like grace: euen ſo it is ſaide of that euill
ſpirite in regarde of the wicked, who are all led with the ſelfe-ſame
ſpirite of Sathan. Wherefore he doth ſuch workes in them whome hee
nowe poſſeſſeth, as he wrought heeretofore in their predeceſſours. So
that in this ſenſe it skilleth not though wee ſay that the ſpirite of one
entreth into another, who ſucceedeth him in the ſame wicked works.
But the Pythagoreans of whome I nowe ſpeake, take it not ſo, but as
hath bin already declared. And to ſet the more colour vpon this ſo
ſtrange an opinion, their prophaneneſſe is ſuch, that they dare to alleadge
thoſe places of Scripture, which were ſpoken of in the former
diſcourſe, whereby they labour to perſwade themſelues and others
alſo with them, that the worde of God confirmeth the ſame.
No doubt therefore, but that they who haue yet ſuch toyes in their
head, are not without others alſo: yea, there is no queſtion, but that
there are wonderfull puddles of errours and of very ſtrange hereſies in
their fantaſticall braines, ſo that they are ougly monſters among men,
and would be abhorred of euery one, if that which they carry encloſed
in their frantike heades might be ſeene with corporall eies. But leauing
this point, wee are to returne to our principall matter into which
we haue made ſome entrance, namely, the nature and originall, the
pollution, purgation, and immortalitie of the ſoule of man: concerning
which thing, we haue heard the opinion of the Philoſophers, and
of many that follow them. Whereupon we haue to obſerue this, that
notwithſtanding any errour in opinion which they helde, yet they alwayes
came to this point, that they concluded the immortalitie of the
ſoule.
               Nowe as touching the ancient Doctors of the Church and the late
Diuines, they haue written diuerſly of the originall of mens ſoules
and of their entrance into their bodies: about which point there haue
beene and are at this day, great diſputations and controuerſies namely,Of the creation and generation of ſoules.
amongſt the Phyſicions and the Diuines. Some haue beene of that
opinion touching the generation and beginning of the ſoule with the
body, whereof we haue already ſpoken. But ſome reſtraine this to
that ſoule which they call Vegetatiue and Senſitiue, as hath bin ſhewed
vnto vs, others comprehend alſo the reaſonable ſoule therewithall.
And beſides that which wee haue ſpoken already touching originall

ſinne in the ſoule, they ground themſelues vpon that which is written
in Geneſis, howe that after God had created man, who was the laſt
in the creation of all the creatures, he reſted the ſeuenth day from the
worke which he had made, after he had accompliſhed whatſoeuer it
pleaſed him to doe. Therefore they conclude, that from that time forward
God created not any newe creatures, but hauing ſet ſuch an order
as it pleaſed him to appoint in the nature of things created, he preſerued
the ſame afterwardes by his prouidence, whereby he worketh
alwaies in the guiding and conſeruation of his creatures, although not
after that manner whereby he worketh in the creating of them. And
thus he reſted in regarde of the worke of creation,How God reſted the ſeuenth day. ſo as he created no
more any creatures in ſuch ſort and maner as he did the firſt creatures
in the beginning. Neuertheleſſe, he reſted not in reſpect of the worke
of his prouidence, which neuer ceaſeth, but daily createth all thoſe
creatures that come newly into the world, by meanes of thoſe ſeedes,
which he hath put into euery one of them according to their kindes,
and by other meanes which hee hath ordained to that purpoſe. Hauing
then laide this foundation, they conclude that mens ſoules are
not daily created of nothing, nor in ſuch maner as the ſoule of the firſt
man was created, but by that meanes which God then appointed for
the preſeruation of mankinde. But becauſe they knowe well enough
that there is great difference betwixt the ſoules of men and of brute
beaſts, they agree that God vſeth other means in the procreation and
producing of mens ſoules, then in that of beaſts, by the concurring of
his generall action, whereby he ſuſtaineth and preſerueth the natures
of all things, according to that naturall diſpoſition which he hath indued
them with from the beginning, agreeable to that which is written,Actes 17. 28.
that In him we liue, and mooue, and haue our beeing. Therefore as
God vſed other meanes in the creation of the ſoule of man, then he did
in that of beaſtes, and placed it alſo in the body of man after an other
faſhion that was ſpeciall and peculiar vnto man: euen ſo in the procreation
and production of mens ſoules, he hath his ſpeciall order for
them, which differeth from the order vſed in the generation of the
ſoules of beaſts. And indeede he ſheweth very euidently, that he ruleth
after another faſhion in the production of men, and namely, in
regard of the ſoule, then in that of beaſts, by the excellent gifts wherewith
their ſoules are adorned, not onely in that their ſoules doe farre
exceede the ſoules of beaſts, but alſo in that one ſoule excelleth another
in the nature of man: as wee ſee it in many to whome God hath
giuen heroicall ſpirites, which are gifts that cannot proceede from the
body. And ſo much for the opinion of theſe men.
               
                  
Others do not only deny the reaſonable ſoule to be taken from any
portion either of the diuine nature and eſſence,Another opinion of the creation of the ſoule. or of the body of man,
but they ſay farther, that God by his diuine power and vertue createth
it of nothing, after that the body of the infant is made perfect in the
wombe of the mother, hauing all the parts and members thereof. And
being thus created of God, he preſently placeth it within that body,
which he hath appointed for the lodging of it, that it may dwel therein
vntil after the death of the body it depart immortall out of it, as it
was created immortall, and was ſo indeede when it entred thereinto.
Theſe men ground themſelues vpon that which we reade in Geneſis,
where it is ſaide, that after God had faſhioned man of the duſt of the
earth,Gen. 2. 7. 
                  he breathed into him the breath of life, & he was made a liuing ſoule.
For it appeareth plainely by this testimonie of Moſes, that the ſoule of
the firſt man was not only not created together with the body, as the
ſoule of beaſts was, but alſo that it was giuen vnto him of ſome other
nature and ſubſtance. For if there were no more in it then in that of
beaſts, and if it had no kinde of participation with the diuine nature,
why ſhould God inſpite it into the body of man after another faſhion
then he did that of beaſts? and what ſhould that inſpiration or breathing
of God, ſignifie and import? Wee haue heard already what ſome
anſwere vnto this. For they deny nothing of all this, but they ſay onely,
that God did then eſtabliſh this order nowe ſpoken of, which hee
daily continueth in the generation of man. I omit heere many other
opinions touching this matter, which come not ſo neere vnto the
trueth: namely, a great controuerſie betweene the Doctors in Diuinitie
and in Phyſicke, touching the vegetatiue and ſenſitiue ſoule, and
the time when the burthen beginneth to bee nouriſhed and to haue
ſence thereby: conſidering that it is a great deale better to inquire of
theſe things to ſobrietie, and to leaue the reſolution to GOD, who
knoweth that which is hidde from vs, then by vaine queſtions and curious
diſputations to thinke to determine of the matter according to
trueth, and to the contentation of euery one. For as we haue before
touched, we can knowe nothing either of the generation, or original,
or of the ſubſtance and nature of our ſoule, or of the immortalitie
thereof, but onely by thoſe teſtimonies which by the effects it aftoordeth
vnto vs, and which God ſetteth downe in his word. Wherefore,
according to that which hath beene already handled, wee muſt diſtinguiſh
thoſe things vnto which our mindes may in ſome ſort reach,
and of which wee may haue ſome knowledge, from them that are ſo
hidden from vs, that wee can not knowe or iudge of any thing, but
like blinde men, by groping and geſſing.
               
                  
This is a matter then of which wee muſt ſpeake very ſoberly,The nature of the ſoule is not curiouſly to be ſearched after. and
with great reuerence of God, contenting our ſelues with that which
it pleaſeth him to make knowne vnto vs by the meanes aforeſaid, and
goe no further by deſiring to knowe that which wee can not conceiue
or comprehend, vntill ſuch time as God himſelfe ſhall giue vs more
ample and cleere knowledge thereof. And I ſuppoſe wee ſhall not
erre, if wee ſay the like touching the queſtion propounded by vs in the
beginning of our ſpeech about this matter, namely, of the meanes by
which the reaſonable ſoule ſhoulde bee infected with originall ſinne,
ſeeing it is not engendered of that corrupt ſeede of which the bodie is
bredde.How the ſoule is ſtained with ſinne. Let it then ſuffice vs to knowe, that albeit the ſoule can not
be defiled with ſinne, as it is created of God, yet as God created all
mankinde in Adam, ſo when he fell, all the reſt of the worlde fell
with him, and in him was bereaued both of originall iuſtice, and of
other gifts which he loſt by his fall. So that albeit mens ſoules are created
and produced of God pure and entire, yet they keepe not that
puritie ſtil, neither can they be the ſoules of men and ioyned vnto their
bodies, and ſo become members of mankinde in them with any other
condition, then with that into which the firſt Father brought all his
children by his ſinne, as we haue before touched. Wherefore we muſt
not ſearch for the cauſe of that original ſinne wherewith they are infected,
either in their creation, becauſe they are created by God of a diuine
and immortall eſſence: or in the generation of the body and in
that ſeede of which it is engendred, as if the ſoule took her originall &
infection together with the body frō the ſeede. Moreouer, we muſt not
(as the Pythagoreans do) ſearch for the corruption of ſoules in their entrance
and coniunction with their bodies, as if they receiued it from
them: but we muſt ſeeke it in that blot of ſinne vnto which the whole
race of mākind was made ſubiect through the fall & corruption of the
firſt ſtocke, and in that decree of God, whereby hee hath condemned
all mankinde by his iuſt iudgement, without any further enquirie after
the meanes and manner how it came to paſſe. For this cauſe Saint
Paul doth bring vs backe to this conſideration, when, in propounding
vnto vs the firſt ſtock of mankind,Rom. 5. 12, 15. he ſaith, that by one man ſinne entred
into the world, and by ſinne death. And then hee propounded vnto vs this
ſtocke of ſinne, ſo on the contrary ſide, he propoudeth to vs the ſtock
of iuſtice and righteouſneſſe, namely Chriſt Ieſus the; new man, who
is an other ſtocke of mankinde regenerated, renewed, and reformed
after the image of GOD. Therefore hee ſaieth, that as by the diſobedience
of one man,
                  Verſe 19. 
                  many were made ſinners, ſo by the obedience of one,
many are made righteous. Now as humane Philoſopie knoweth not,

either the corruption of all mankinde ſuch as it is, or the fountaine
thereof,Humane philoſophie is blinde. ſo it is ignorant of the meanes whereby it muſt bee reſtored,
neither knoweth it that the wound is ſo great and mortall, as that it
cannot be cured but onely by the hand of God. For which cauſe hee
was to giue vs his owne ſonne to be the Surgion and Phyſicion. The
ignorance heereof, is the cauſe why humane Philoſophie ſo greatly
magnifieth the nobilitie and excellencie of the ſoule, as it is well worthy
being conſidered in the firſt nature, in which it was created. But
the ſequele of this matter wee will heare of thee, ARAM.
            
            
               Of thoſe powers and properties, which the ſoule of man hath common with
the ſoule of beastes: of thoſe powers and vertues, which are proper and
peculiar to it ſelfe, according to the Philoſophers: of the difference and
agreement that is betweene humane philoſophie and Christian doctrine
touching theſe things. Chap. 87.
               ARAM Amongſt the heathen, they that were moſt ancient, and
neereſt to the true Church of God, and conuerſed moſt with his
ſeruants, had greater knowledge and better vnderſtanding of the nature
of God, of Angelles, and of mens ſoules, and of other matters
belonging to true religion, then they that were fartheſt off and ſucceeded lateſt after the other.The cauſes of errours. For the farther off that the doctrine of
heauenly things was drawne from the fountaine of it, the more hath
it beene altered and corrupted both by ignorance ouerwhelming it,
and by falſe vnderſtanding of it, as alſo becauſe euery one hath added
to and taken away what ſeemed him beſt: and that, either to boaſt
themſelues that they may ſeeme ſome body, or to couer their thefts,
that none might knowe from whence that thing was firſt taken and
borrowed, that ſo they might bee thought to bee the firſt members
thereof: or laſtly, to pleaſe and ſatisfie the curioſitie and vanitie of the
minde of man. No maruell therefore, if there were heathen Philoſophers
among the ancients, who beleeued and taught many things agreeable
to the worde of God, and if there be now ſome amongſt vs,
who boaſt of their ſtudy in philoſophie, and yet haue no part of that
firſt innocencie and puritie, but haue their mindes filled with ſtrange
opinions contrary to all reaſon and trueth. We ſee wel enough by experience
what impietie raigneth in this our age. For there are an infinite
number to be founde of whoſe religion no man can iudge, except
it be heerein that they thinke there is none at all, and therefore mocke
at all religion, what ſhewe ſoeuer they make to the contrary. But I
knowe not why they ſhoulde not bluſh for ſhame, when they heare

from heathen Philoſophers ſo many goodly inſtructions as they haue
left vs, concerning the nature and immortalitie of the ſoule.
               It is true that the reaſon of man cannot of it ſelfe contemplate the
ſoule in her firſt & perfect nature, in which it was created: but it doth
conſider of it as it is at this preſent, and yet as though it were verie
ſound. Whereupon the Philoſophers greatly magnifie the nobilitie
and excellencie thereof. Therefore when they are to conſider of thoſe
points vpon which they ground the powers and vertues of the ſoule,
for the firſt they take the vegetatiue vertue, which it hath common
not onely with the beaſts,Three faculties vnder the vegetatiue vertue. but alſo with the plants: and this comprehendeth
three other faculties vnderneath it, namely the vertue of nouriſhing,
ſecondly of encreaſing, & laſtly of procreation, as it hath bene
already declared vnto vs. This vertue with the reſt that are comprehended
vnderneath it, is the baſeſt, moſt earthy and vileſt of them all: beſides
that it followeth the ſenſitiue vertue, which may be referred aſwell
to the internall as to the externall ſenſes.Two parts of the ſenſitiue vertue So that we may diuide
it into two parts, and more properly call that the ſenſitiue vertue, which
the ſoule hath in taking knowledge of corporall things, by corporall
ſenſes, and by their vſe in the body. The other part that belongeth to
the internall ſenſes may more ſpecially be called, the cogitatiue vertue.
And becauſe theſe two powers ſerue to encreaſe knowledge and vnderſtanding, they are as it were the fountaine thereof, or rather helps
and inſtruments.How the Aſtronomers referre the powers of the ſoule to the ſtarres. The Aſtronomers, who referre all to the vertue of
the ſtarres and planets, place the influence of the vegetatiue power
with the parts of it, vnder the Moone, of which the ſoule (as they ſay)
receiueth it: the other two parts of the ſenſitiue power, of which I
ſpake euen now, they place vnder the Sunne, as they doe the fourth,
which is the will and vertue of deſiring, vnder the planet Venus. The
fift, which is called the angry faculty, giuing heart & courage to a man,
and moouing him to wrath, vnder the planet Mars. Then for the ſixt,
they place the vertue that giueth motion from one place to another.
For the ſeuenth, that which the Phyſicians call the vitall vertue, and
others the ſpirituall, becauſe it conteineth vnder it the power of reſpiration,
and both theſe are attributed to the ſame, becauſe it is a propertie
of the ſenſitiue power to moue and breathe. Now all theſe powers
of the ſoule are common to man with beaſts, or at leaſt wiſe there is no
great difference. But theſe which now follow are proper and peculiar
vnto him,Powers proper to the 
                        •
                     eaſonable ſoule. namely the reaſonable power, of which the other that enſue
are kindes, of which number the Philoſophers or Aſtronomers place
in the firſt ranke the vertue of ſpeech,
                  Of ſpeech. where by the ſoule expreſſeth her
conceits,Of ſpeech. thoughts & affections. And although all mē vſe northe ſame

words to vtter their thoughts ech to other, by reaſon of the diuerſitie of
languages that is amongſt them, notwithſtanding as the things which
they vnderſtand & conceiue, and by which they are moued to ſpeake,
are al of one ſubſtance and nature amongſt all nations, ſo all the conceits
and affections of men, which are ſignified by their language, are
alike in their ſoule and minde, where they are written and ingrauen.
This vertue they attribute to Mercurie, as the other that followeth to
Iupiter, which they call the practicke and actiue vertue, whereby a man
that hath his will at libertie, doeth by counſaile and ſetled reaſon, exerciſe
and bring to paſſe through arte, prudence, and wiſedome, thoſe
things of which he hath ſure knowledge.Of the ſpeculatiue and actiue vertue. For it is not enough to haue
the contemplatiue vertue, vnles the actiue alſo be ioined vnto it to declare
it by effect.
               Thus you ſee where they place free will, which comprehendeth
vnder it, firſt election, then action, which is the practicke that followeth
it. And becauſe the practicke dependeth of the theoricke, which is
the ſpeculatiue and contemplatiue vertue, and goeth before the actiue
vertue, therfore they ioyne this to that, and ſo referre it to the planet of
Saturne which is melancholicke. And this is that vertue of the ſoule,
whereby man hath vnderſtanding, knowlege, & wiſedome: & it comprehendeth
the ſeats of ſuch things as the minde is able to vnderſtand
and comprehend, as alſo thoſe generall rules and principles, which it
muſt afterward bring into vſe and practiſe. For this cauſe this ſpeculatiue
vertue muſt of neceſſitie go before the actiue, becauſe the practike
is not very certain and ſure without the theorike.Of the politike vertue. Afterward followeth
that which they call the pollitike vertue, which hath for her ſubiect al
morall philoſophie. They vnderſtand by this vertue of the ſoule, that
whereby a prudent, wiſe, and well experienced man, moderateth his
naughty deſires, & pernicious affections through his vertue, & wherby
he declareth by practiſe and ſetled reaſon, that vertue & goodnes,
which is requiſit in the publike ſocietie of men, & that not onely in his
priuate behauiour,The kindes of it. but alſo in his publike affaires. The principall vertues
contained vnderneath it, are prudence, iuſtice, fortitude and temperance,
which are commonly called cardinall vertues, becauſe they are
chief, & containe vnder euery one of them many other vertues, which
depend of them, as branches do of their ſtock. He is accompted a ciuil
good man & a iuſt, that hath this vertue which is diuided into ſundry
kinds, according to the diuerſity of eſtats that are in common ſocietie.
For it is ſufficient for a priuate perſon to haue ſo much of it, as whereby
he may know how to guide himſelfe honeſtly according to his eſtate.
If he be a father of a family, he hath need of that prudēce & skil which

is neceſſary for the gouernment of his houſe. If he haue any publicke
charge concerning ciuil affaires, it is needful for him to haue that art &
skil, and thoſe vertues without which he cannot wel execute his office,
according to that place & degree in which he is ſet. For if he occupieth
the roume of a Lawier or Counſailour at the Law, he muſt haue skill
and knowledge of the lawes. If he be a captaine or ſouldier, he muſt be
skilful in military diſcipline. If he be a iudge & magiſtrate, it is neceſſary
likewiſe, that he vnderſtand what belongeth to his office. If he be a diuine
and paſtour in the Church, the ſcience of Diuinitie, which is the
knowlege of the holy ſcriptures, is neceſſary for him, not only ſo much
as is requiſit for his owne ſaluation, but alſo that he may be able to inſtruct
others, and to direct them in thoſe things that appertaine to religion.Of the heroicall vertue.
Beſides, to al theſe vertues they adde the heroicall vertue, which
is no vulgar & common vertue, but very rare and excellent, & if I may
ſo ſpeak, rather diuine then humane. In regard wherof they that were
endued with this vertue among the Heathen, were placed in a ranke &
degree by themſelues betweene God and men, and were accompted
and taken for demy-gods. And theſe are thoſe vertues, which the philoſophers
by experience find to be in the reaſonable ſoule, which are no
fained or imaginatiue, but true vertues: neither are they found in the
ſoule of beaſts, as thoſe are of which we ſpake in the firſt place. Wherfore
albeit man hath the vertue of deſiring common with beaſts, yet he
hath reaſon to moderate his deſires, which is wanting in beaſts. Nowe
al this doctrine touching the vertues of the ſoule, accordeth well with
the doctrine of Chriſtianitie, ſo farre foorth as the ſoule agreeth with
that nature in which it was firſt created of God. But that which the Aſtrologians
affirme of the influences and infuſion of vertues into the
ſoule by the planets, as we heard, I take it to be a bird of their owne
braine, whereby they attribute to the creatures that which belongeth
to the Creator only.Againſt the aſtronomicall influence of vertues. For although he vſeth the creatures according to
that order, which he hath placed in them, neuertheles when the queſtion
is of the reaſonable ſoule, wee muſt aſcend vp higher then the
heauens, vnto which it can not be ſubiect as the body is, ſeeing it is
of a farre more excellent nature. For how ſhould the heauens, ſtarres,
and planets giue that to the ſoule, which themſelues haue not? I verely
beleeue that when God created the ſoule of the firſt man, & placed it
in his body that was before created of the nature and ſubſtance of the
corruptible elemēts, he took not thoſe vertues, with which he indued
and adorned it, either from the heauens or from the planets. And ſeeing
he created al mankind in this firſt mā after his image, which he imprinted
in his ſoule, no doubt but that which yet remaineth in mans ſoule,

proceedeth from the ſame fountaine: as alſo what euil ſoeuer is befallen
ſince, whereby this image abode not perfect, it proceedeth from
ſinne, and from the nature of man corrupted by ſinne, and not from
the heauens or planets. And as the Aſtrologians eaſily beleeue whatſoeuer
they haue imagined touching this point, and woulde haue the
will of man ſubiect to their influences and conſtellations: ſo the other
Philoſophers abuſe themſelues greatly,Philoſophers eſteeme too highly of mans nature. in magnifying the vertues of
the ſoule more then they ought to be eſteemed in this corrupt eſtate of
mans nature, not iudging the corruption to be ſo great as it is. Heereof
it is alſo that they faile in regarde of vertue, which they attribute altogether
to the libertie of man, as if he coulde by his owne vertue moderate
his affections, & make himſelfe iuſt and righteous. Which fault
proceedeth from hence, in that they content themſelues with a iuſtice
that ſeemeth ſo to be before men, and put no difference betweene diuine
and humane iuſtice: that is, betwixt that which is able to ſtand &
approoue it ſelfe in the iudgement of God, and that which men approoue.What iuſtice God approoueth.
For there is no iuſtice able to ſatisfie the iudgement of God,
but that of Ieſus Chriſt, which it pleaſeth him to impute vnto his children,
and in regard thereof to accompt them iuſt. But let vs returne to
our matter.
               We haue further to note, that beſides the forenamed vertues, the
Platoniſts attribute to the ſoule foure others,Foure contemplatiue vertues according to the Platoniſts. which they cal contemplatiue
vertues, as thoſe that belong to the contemplatiue life, vnto which
they are referred by them. The firſt is named the purgation or ſecond
death of the ſoule: for the firſt death of it ſay they, is her deſcending into
the body of man, into which it is throwen as it were into a priſon, &
in a maner buried in vices. Therefore they ſay that the ſoule ſtandeth
in neede of this ſecond death, whereby ſhe being purged from her vices
is as it were dead vnto them, that ſhee may liue vnto vertue. The
ſecond kind of theſe vertues is called pure or purified, becauſe the ſoule
being purged from all her euill affections, exerciſeth good works by
the ſame. The third is called by them an exemplarie or patterne-vertue
in the minde of God: whereby they meane, that as God conceiueth
and knoweth the Idaeas, kindes and images of all ſenſible & intelligible
things, ſo he ſendeth downe from heauen this vertue into the
ſoule of man, who is thereby purged and purified as we haue alreadie
heard. And for the laſt they adde a fourth vertue, which they account
greateſt and chiefeſt aboue the other, and therefore they call it Diuine,
becauſe it bringeth to the ſoule a vertue to doe more then humane
workes, euen ſuch as we call miraculous works. Which foure kindes
of vertues appeare euidently to haue beene drawen by them from

chriſtian doctrine, but yet diſguiſed after their faſhion. As touching
the firſt, it agreeth to that which the worde of God teacheth vs of
regeneration,Howe thoſe agree in ſome ſort to foure chriſtian vertues. and mortification of the fleſh, whereby wee die to ſinne
and to the deuill, that we may liue to righteouſneſſe and to God. The
ſecond agreeth to good woorkes proceeding of faith, which being
done in the ſame purifie the heart, and to chriſtian holineſſe, which
accompanieth and followeth iuſtification by faith. The third agreeth
to giftes and graces inſpited by the holy Ghoſt, and to the infuſion of
them into the ſoules of Gods true ſeruants: and the fourth agreeth to
the giftes of prophecie and to that vertue of working miracles, which
hath beene heeretofore in the holie Prophets, Apoſtles, and Diſciples
of Ieſus Chriſt. But to conclude this whole point, wee are to
obſerue this, that what praiſe ſoeuer may bee giuen to the Platonicall
Diuinitie, yet it is in no reſpect to bee compared with Chriſtian Philoſophie:
becauſe this is pure, and true, and endited by the Spirite
of GOD, but the other impure, diſguiſed, and counterfaited by
men, who haue mingled with their Philoſophie, many things which
they coulde eyther heare or learne out of the holie Scripture.
               Moreouer, as concerning the whole doctrine of the Philoſophers
touching the nature and vertues of the ſoule, we may truely ſay, that
of it ſelfe it reacheth higher, then thoſe politicke vertues of which we
made mention euen now. For when a ciuil, good, and wiſe man hath
attained to that politicke vertue and to the higheſt degree thereof, he
is able to goe no farther, except hee be holpen elſewhere, euen by
the illumination of the holy Spirite. And indeede all thoſe other vertues
of the ſoule propounded by the Platoniſts, are but dreames and
opinions in the ayre, by which the Spirite of errour laboureth to diſguiſe
the doctrine of the holie Scriptures, which leadeth vs to thoſe
true ſupernaturall vertues, which the ſoule receiueth by the inſpiration
and infuſion of the giftes and graces of the holie Spirite, who is
the true Doctour, of whom wee muſt learne this Philoſophie, which
is not naturall, but ſupernaturall. Nowe then being inſtructed and
guided by him, hauing diſcourſed of the creation and nature of the
ſoule, let vs enter into this goodly field of the immortalitie thereof,
in which we knowe there are many ranged battailes of enemies, who
waite to enter into the combat with vs. It belongeth therfore to thee,
ACHITOB, to beginne the skirmiſh.
            
            
               
               How men can haue no certaine reſolution of th'immortalitie of the ſoule,
but by the Word of God: of the peruerſeneſſe of Epicures and Atheists
in this matter: Of the chiefe cauſes that hinder men from beleeuing
the immortalitie of the ſoule, and of their blockiſhnes and euill iudgement
therein: How wee must ſeeke for the Image of God, after which
man was created in his ſoule. Chap. 88.
               ACHITOB. We are now fallen into a time, which diſcouereth vnto
vs not onely falſe religions, but euen an Atheiſme, that is farre
worſe. For they that are altogether without Religion are farther diſt
                     ••
                  t
from true pietie, then they that follow a falſe religion: and yet at
this day there are as many or moe that declare themſelues to be Atheiſts
and Epicures, as there bee of ſuch as are taken for good Chriſtians.
And if in outward ſhew they pretend ſome exerciſe of Religion,
it is but to couer themſelues with the vaile thereof, to the ende they
might not bee eſteemed and accompted for ſuch as they are in trueth.
But in their heart and with their companions they doe but make a
mocke of the holy Scriptures, and of al thoſe teſtimonies that we haue
in them of another life beſides this, of Heauen of hell, of the bleſſed immortalitie
and eternall death of the ſoule. Now it is an eaſie matter to
conuince ſuch felowes of error and lies.
               But this is a thing worthy to be bewayled in all the affaires, opinions
and counſailes of men, that when any queſtion ariſeth of the
trueth and of that which is Good, no proofes or teſtimonies, how rich
or of howe great authoritie ſoeuer they bee, ſeeme ſufficient to vs and
worthy to bee beleeued. And yet if the queſtion be of any euil, falſehood
and lyes, no teſtimony, how ſlender and bad ſoeuer it be, but ſatiſfieth
vs very well.Why men encline to lies rather then to the trueth. For by reaſon that we are euil and ignorant, ful of
blindneſſe and darkeneſſe by nature, we are alwayes the readier, to follow
that which is like our ſelues, namely wickednes and falſehood,
lies and error: as we ſee it by experience in Atheists and Epicures, and
in all infidels and ſcorners of God and of his Word. For there are many ſkilfull in Artes and humane learning, and in naturall Philoſophie,
who reprehend and condemne Epicurus, Lucretius, Pliny and other
ſuch like Philoſophers, Epicures and Atheiſts, in that which they haue
taught and written of naturall things belonging to this life, and call
them ignorant men and voyd of experience. But in that which they
haue ſpoken againſt the prouidence of God, the immortalitie of
ſoules, and all Religion, aboliſhing them wholie by their falſe doctrines
and by Philoſophie, they imbrace and praiſe them, for the ſkilfulleſt
and moſt excellent Philoſophers that euer were, as hauing deliuered

men from the greateſt torments that could ſeaze vpon them,The diueliſh infection of Atheiſme.
and brought vnto them the greateſt good that could befall them, by
taking from them all feare of God, of hell, and of all puniſhment after
this life, and all opinion and hope of Paradice and of a better life
after this. In a worde, they extoll them, as if they onely had found
the beane in the cake, as wee vſe to ſay, and as if they onely deſerued
to be the Kings of beanes among their fellowes. Foraſmuch then
as we are entred into this matter of the immortalitie of the ſoule, and
ſeeing at this day ſo many Atheists herein followe the opinions of
theſe Epicurian Philoſophers before named, I ſay not onely more
then they doe all the beſt Philoſophers, but alſo then the authoritie of
the holy Scriptures, and the teſtimonie of God in them: we cannot
gather too many arguments, whereby at leaſtwiſe to cauſe them to
ponder the matter more diligently, if they will not be confounded
wholy by naturall reaſons, ſeeing they make ſo ſmall reckoning of
that celeſtial and heauenly doctrine. It is true that it will bee a very
hard and difficult matter to perſwade ſuch in this point, as giue no
more credite to this teſtimonie of the word of God, then they doe to
all humaine and naturall reaſons that can bee alleadged vnto them.
For although the arguments of thoſe Philoſophers that maintaine the
immortalitie of the ſoule, are ſtrong and waightie, yet they can neuer
wholy and fully aſſure men of their immortalitie, except this teſtimonie
of God take all doubting from them.Reaſons to proue the immortalitie of the ſoule. But that argument of
all others is moſt forcible, which hee hath giuen vnto vs in the reſurrection
of Ieſus Chriſt, whereby his ſoule was vnited againe vnto his
body, and ſo wrought thoſe heauenly workes which followed his reſurrection
and aſcention into heauen: and namely by the gift of the
holy Ghoſt, which hee ſent vnto his Apoſtles, and by the effects
thereof, which according to the promiſe of Ieſus Chriſt appeared ſo
great and manifeſt throughout the whole world, and that in ſo ſhort
a time, that no prudence, wiſdome, ſkill, eloquence, authoritie, power
or force of man, was able to hinder that vertue, or the courſe of the
Goſpel. But becauſe Epicures and Atheiſts accompt theſe things
for fables, and are of ſo peruerſe and monſtrous a nature, that they had
rather ſight againſt nature it ſelfe, and cleane to the worſt opinions
moſt vnworthy the nature of man, then to follow the reaſons of
the beſt Philoſophers grounded vpon a more ſure foundation, let vs
at leaſtwiſe put them to ſome further trouble by vrging them to be fully
reſolued in that opinion, which is contrary to the immortality of the
ſoule. For certainly I doubt not but they wilbe alwaies without reſolution.
And in deed frō whēce ſhould they fetch this reſolution of theirs,

ſeeing they haue no certaine ground of their falſe opinion, and ſeeing
there are ſo many and ſo forcible reaſons to the contrary?Why men beleeue not the immortalitie of the ſoule. But wee
muſt note, that the principall cauſe that keepeth men from beleeuing
the immortalitie of the ſoule is, partly their ignorance, partly their malice,
and peruerſeneſſe. For ſome there are ſo blockiſh, that they meaſure
all things according to the knowledge and reach of their bodilie
ſenſes: ſo that they ſet downe with themſelues to beleeue nothing,
but that which they are able to knowe and perceiue by them. Others
there are who beſides this are ſo wicked and peruerſe, that they would
not onely haue their ſoules not to bee immortall, but wiſh alſo that
there were no God, to the ende they might haue no Iudge. For by
reaſon they are ſo wholly addicted to the worlde, and to their carnall
pleaſures, they would haue no other God, or other life after this:
but wiſh that all life might end with their delights, and the ſoule with
the body, that ſo they might haue no accompt to make to any Iudge.
Therefore they are of that number, whereof mention is made in the
Booke of Wiſedome,Wiſd. 2. 1, 2, &c. who make theſe diſcourſes, ſaying, Our life
is ſhort and tedious,
                  The ſayings of Epicures. 
                  and in the death of a man there is no recouery, neither
was any knowen that hath returned from the graue. For we were borne at
all aduenture, and wee ſhall be heereafter as though wee had neuer beene:
for the breath is a ſmoke in the noſethrilles, and the woordes as a ſparke raiſed
out of our hearts. Which being extinguiſhed, the body is turned into aſhes,
and the ſpirite vaniſheth as the ſoft ayre. Our life ſhall paſſe away as
the trace of a cloude, and come to naught as the miſt that is driuen away
with the beames of the Sunne, and caſt downe with the heate thereof. Our
name alſo ſhall be forgotten in time, and no man ſhall haue our woorkes in
remembrance. For our time is as a ſhadowe that paſſeth away, and after
our ende there is no returning: for it is faſt ſealed ſo that no man commeth
againe. Come therefore, & let vs enioy the pleaſures that are preſent, and let
vs cheerfully vſe the creatures as in youth. Let vs fill our ſelues with coſtly
wine & ointments, and let not the floure of life paſſe by vs. I omit other ſpeeches
of a voluptuous, wicked, & vniuſt life, which they purpoſe to lead,
exerciſing al iniuſtice, violence, & cruelty, without al regard had to any
right or iuſtice, either to poore or rich, yong or old, but chiefly againſt
the ſeruants of God, who approue not their kind of life, but reproue &
condemne it.Verſe. 21, &c. Therefore it is ſaid after al the diſcourſe, that they imagined
ſuch things and went aſtray. For their owne wickednes blinded them. They
do not vnderſtand the myſteries of God, neither hope for the reward of righteouſnes, nor can diſcerne the honor of the ſoules that are faultleſſe. For God
created man without corruption, and made him after the image of his owne
likeneſſe. Neuertheleſſe, through enuy of the deuill came death into the

world:
                  Wiſd. 3. 1. 
                  and they that hold of his ſide, proue it, But the ſoules of the righteous
are in the hands of God, and no torment ſhall touch them. In the ſight of the
vnwiſe they appeared to die, and their end was thought grieuous, and their
departing from vs, deſtruction: but they are in peace. Wee ſee then that
theſe men go no farther then they can ſee with their bodily ſenſes:The corrupt opinion of Atheiſts and Epicures. and
becauſe they ſee that man liueth by breathing and cannot liue without,
and that hee dyeth when his breath faileth, they thinke that the
ſoule of man is but a litle winde and breath, and ſo is ſcattered and vaniſheth
away as it were winde and breath, or as a cloude in the ayre.
The ſame iudgement they are of in regard of the blood, becauſe life
leaueth the body with the blood, as if it had no other ſoule but the
blood, or breath. And foraſmuch as the eye diſcerneth no difference
betweene men and beaſts in death, they iudge alſo that there is no difference
betweene their ſoules. But if they be reſolued to giue credit to
nothing but to their corporall ſenſes, and in death conſider only what
difference there is betweene men and beaſts, they wil not beleeue that
either beaſts or men haue any ſoule at all that giueth them life, becauſe
they ſee nothing but the body onely. And then by the like reaſon we
muſt conclude, that not onely the whole man is no other thing but
this body which we ſee, but alſo that there is nothing in all the world,
but that which may bee ſeene by the eyes and perceiued by the other
ſenſes, and ſo all that which we haue not ſeene and knowen by them
ſhalbe nothing.Atheiſts may wel be compared to beaſts. Which being ſo, men ſhal differ nothing from beaſts,
as indeed we can ſay no better of theſe men. For beaſtes thinke of nothing
but that which they beholde and perceiue by their ſenſes, and
goe no further: which is ſo farre from all ſcience and diſcipline, and
from all iudgement of man, as nothing can be more. Therefore they
that beleeue nothing but their corporall ſenſes, deſerue to be compared
not onely to little children, or to fooles, who when they ſee pictures,
or their face in a glaſſe, ſuppoſe they are liuing men, becauſe
they goe no farther then they ſee, but euen to the brute beaſtes, who
haue leſſe ſenſe and vnderſtanding then children. It is woonderfull to
conſider howe men take ſuch great pleaſure & paines to become brutiſh.
For if they doe but ſee a ſmoke come out of a place, they will
iudge that there is ſome fire within, although they behold it not: and if
they ſmell any ill ſauour, their noſe will tell them that there is ſome
place infected, or ſome carion lying not farre off, albeit they ſee it not.
What is the cauſe then, that when by their ſenſes they perceiue ſomewhat
more in men then in beaſtes,Reaſons to ſhew the ſoule of men to differ from that of beaſts. they are not induced thereby to
thinke, that of neceſſitie there muſt be ſome what within them, which
cauſeth them to differ much from beaſts? Which is not by reaſon of

the bodie, but of the ſoule, that is not ſeene but onely by her actions,
workes and effects. Whereupon it followeth, that if their actions differ
from the actions of that ſoule whereby beaſtes liue, the cauſe alſo
from which they proceed, muſt needes differ: and ſo conſequently,
that there is great difference betwixt the ſoule of men and the ſoule of
beaſtes. For let them conſider onely the diuerſitie of artes, which
man exerciſeth with his hands, and the varietie of ſo many wittie and
woonderfull workes as are wrought by him, which cannot proceede
but from a great ſpirite, and from a paſſing excellent nature, the like
whereof is not to bee ſeene in beaſtes, or in anie thing they can doe.
Beſides, doe they not ſee how the ſpirite of man diſcourſeth throughout
all nature? what reaſon is in him, and howe his ſpeech followeth
reaſon? which are ſuch things as haue a certaine vertue, and
the image of a diuine ſpirite ſhining in them. Wherefore, albeeit
wee ſhoulde make man wholly like to a beaſt, by reaſon of his bodie,
both in regarde of his birth and death, yet wee muſt needes
confeſſe, that hee is of a farre more excellent nature in reſpect of
that great and manifeſt difference, which wee ſee is in his ſoule. If
then the ſoule of man bee mortall as well as that of beaſtes, to
what purpoſe ſerue thoſe graces which it hath aboue the other?
and from what fountaine ſhall wee ſay they flowe in it, and to what
ende were they giuen vnto it? But for this time I will leaue theſe
Atheiſts, hoping that to morowe wee will not leaue any one naturall
reaſon able to vrge them in their demnable opinion, which ſhal
not bee laide out at large. And I demaund of them that haue anie
taſte of the holy Scriptures, and yet ſeeme to doubt of the immortalitie
of the ſoule, or at leaſtwiſe are not fully reſolued therein, howe
man is ſaid to be created after the image of God, if he ſhall be altogether
diſſolued and brought to nothing? and where ſhall we then ſeeke
for this image in him? It is certaine, that this is not in the body, ſeeing
that God is a ſpirituall nature and ſubſtance, and not corporall. Then
it followeth,The image of God is to bee ſought in the ſoule. that this image is to be ſought for in the ſoule, and not in
the body. And if it be in the ſoule, we muſt neceſſarily conclude, that it
differeth very much from the ſoule of beaſts. For indeed if they were
both one, why ſhould it rather be written of man then of beaſtes, that
he was created after the image of God? And if man bee the image of
God, eſpecially in regard of the ſoule, it muſt needs be then of a diuine
and immortall nature: otherwiſe there would be no good agreement
betweene the image and the thing of which it is an image. Therefore
a corporall thing cannot bee the true image of a ſpirituall thing, if
there bee no reſemblaunce or agreement of nature betwixt them.

For although a corporall image ſhoulde bee of another matter then
the thing is of, which it doeth repreſent, neuertheleſſe, there is alwayes
ſome reſemblaunce when both the one and the other is of a
corporall matter, and when the image hath ſome agreement in
forme with the thing repreſented. Now if any bee deſirous to ſeeke
for the image of God in a corporall thing, wee ſhall finde as many of
them as there are creatures in the whole world. And yet it is not ſaid of
any creature, no not of ye ſunne it ſelfe, nor of the moone or ſtarres, t
                     •
                  at
haue no ſoule, nor yet of the liuing creatures themſelues, which are
endued with ſoule and life, that God ſaide in their creation, Let vs
make them after our image and likeneſſe, neither that hee created them
after his image, as it is writtē of man. If then there be no immortalitie
of the ſoule of man, where ſhal we find the image of the immortalitie
of God who is immortal? And if there be no immortality in man, but yt
his ſoule is, ether the temperament of his bodie, or his vitall ſpirite, as
in beaſts, God ſhall haue no image that ſhall more neerely reſemble
him in man then in beaſts: neither ſhal he haue any ſpiritual image
agreeable to his nature, in any creature vnder heauen.
               Nowe if any reply and ſay, that this image is to bee fought for,
not in the immortalitie of the ſoule, but onely in reaſon and in the other
vertues, where with it is adorned aboue the ſoule of beaſts, I ſay,
that theſe things are in ſuch ſort linked together, that they cannot bee
ſeparated.An anſwere to an obiection. Wherefore hee that taketh away the one, taketh away the
other: becauſe the ſoule of man ſhoulde not haue that which it hath
more then the ſoule of beaſts hath, if it were not of another nature thē
theirs is. And we know well, that whatſoeuer it hath more, is not like
to any creature vnder the heauens: and that it cannot agree but to
God, or to natures that haue ſome participation with the diuine nature,
which cannot be mortall, but immortall. So that when wee ſee
ſo many ſignes and tokens, which teſtifie vnto vs, that man hath a celeſtiall
and diuine birth, it followeth that hee hath in himſelfe ſome
greater thing, that is more noble and excellent, then can be ſeene, or
touched with hands. It is true, that they who ſtay onely in the corporal
ſenſes, as we haue ſaide, ſhall neuer pearce to the contemplation of
theſe things: but they delight rather, for their confirmation in that
beaſtly opinion, to heare the common bye-worde vſed amongſt the
vulgar ſort, that no man knoweth what becommeth of the ſoules of
men after the death of their bodies, nor into what countrey they goe:
becauſe no body as yet euer brought any newes from thence, and
therefore no marueile if no man either doe or can knowe what is
done there. Which ſpeeches albeeit they be very friuolous, yet are

they heard many times from them that thinke themſelues to be none
of the meaneſt. Therefore it will not be peraduenture without profite,
if we anſwere them more at large to morow, going forward with our
reaſons & arguments of the ſoules immortalitie againſt the Atheiſts:
of which matter, ASER, thou ſhalt begin to ſpeake.
            
            The end of the eleuenth dayes worke.
         
         
            THE TVVELFTH
dayes worke.
            
               Of thoſe who deſire the returne of Soules departed, to teſtifie their immortalitie:
what witnes haue beene ſent vs of God out of another worlde to
reſolue vs therein. Chap. 89.
               
                  ASER, We ſaide yeſterſtay, that they who ſtay onely
in their corporall ſenſes, as brute beaſtes doe, propound
commonly againſt the immortality of ſoules,
that which is vſually ſpoken of the common people,
namely, that it is not known what becomes of mens
ſoules after the death of the bodie, or to what countrey
they goe, becauſe none euer returned from thence to bring anie
newes.A reaſon of Atheiſts confuted by a ſimilitude. Wherefore (ſay they) no bodie can tell what is done there, neither
can any thing be knowen. Nowe before wee make anſwere to
ſo friuolous and falſe an argument, I would gladly demaund of them,
whether there were nothing at all of thoſe new-found Ilands, (which
were lately found in our time) before they were diſcouered by them
who not onely were neuer there, but did not ſo much as once heare
of them before. For no body went thither from hence, neither did any
come hither from thence: ſo that there was no more intelligence
betweene them and vs, then betweene the liuing and the dead, or betweene
them that are altogether of another world: therefore alſo their
countrey is called the New world. Nowe then ſhall it be thought, that
this people were not at all, becauſe they were not knowne of vs, not
their manners and kinde of life? And yet now the time ſheweth euidently,
that notwithſtanding any diſtance of place that hath beene
betweene them and vs, there were meanes ſufficient to communicate
and trafficke together, and thoſe more eaſie then any is betweene the
ſoules alreadie departed out of their bodies, and vs who yet remaine in

the world with our bodies. For concerning the diſtance and difficultie
of the places, who doubteth but that it is farre greater betweene heauen
and earth, Paradiſe and Hell? Therefore alſo Abraham ſpeaking
of the place and eſtate of the elect and reprobate in another life,Luke 16. 26. ſaith
to the rich man, There is a great gulfe ſet betweene you and vs, ſo that they
which would goe from hence to you, cannot: neither can they come from
thence to vs. And this we may ſay in like manner of our ſelues, and of
thoſe that are already departed into another life, in regard of their returne
vnto the liuing. For it is ordained, that they ſhall not returne againe
into the worlde, as alſo that they ſhall depart hence but once.
And they that goe from hence, doe it not with ſoule and body ioyned
together: for it is not a voyage like to thoſe which wee make in this
world, when we goe from one countrey to another. Now as the Lord
hath determined how long the ſoules ſhall abide in their bodies in this
life, ſo hee hath ordained and ſet the time in which they ought to depart
and the place where they are to be receiued, according to the eſtate
of euery one, euen vntill they returne into their bodies at the reſurrection.
If they be ſoules of the reprobate, they are deteined in Hel
in eternall fire, where there is weeping and gnaſhing of teeth: if
they be the ſoules of Gods elect, they ſhine as the ſunne in the kingdome
of heauen, in a life accompanied with perpetual ioy and happineſſe.
But wee muſt vrge them better that require teſtimonie for the
immortalitie of ſoules by their returne into this world, or of ſome that
haue come from another world. For it is an eaſie matter for vs to bring
them as credible witneſſes as any can bee, to tell them moſt certaine
newes, if they will beleeue them, according as they deſerue it. And for
the firſt, haue wee not Ieſus Chriſt, who firſt came downe from heauen
and became man, to bring vs newes, and to declare the ſame vnto
vs in his owne perſon, not onely before his death, but alſo after his
reſurrection? Beſides, how many other witneſſes haue we, that haue
teſtified moſt certainly of the ſame?marke 16. 14. Math. 28. 9. luke 24. 36. iohn 20. 19, 20▪ act. 1. 2, 3, 10. 1. Cor. 15 6. who ſaw with their eyes and touched
with their hands, euen to the number of moe then fiue hundred,
according as Saint Paul teſtifieth? Moreouer, they that were raiſed as
wel by him as by Elias and Elizeus, and by the Apoſtles and diſciples,
may they not ſerue vs alſo for good withneſſe to aſſure vs, not onely
that ſoules are immortall, but alſo that their bodies ſhall riſe againe,
and that God is of ſufficient vertue & power to doe it as he hath promiſed?
I omit here the teſtimonie which the Angels haue giuen both
of the reſurrection and aſcenſion of Ieſus Chriſt: beſides that of the
holy ſpirite, which is the chiefeſt of all, with ſignes and giftes wherewith
he came accompanied, and thoſe woorkes and effectes that followed

them. Wherefore ſeeing wee haue for this point the worde of
God that is moſt certaine & cleere, which teacheth vs what we ought
to beleeue and hold, let vs reſt our ſelues in the teſtimonie thereof, and
not deſire to make further inquiry.Exod. 3. 6. mat. 22. 32, 33. mar. 12. 26. luk. 20. 37, 38. For it is he that ſaid to Moſes, I am
the God of Abraham, of Iſaac, and of Iacob. Whereupon Ieſus Chriſt
concludeth, that Abraham, Iſaac and Iacob doe liue yet after their
death, ſeeing God is the God of the liuing and not of the dead, that is
to ſay, of them that are yet in being, and not of them that are nothing
at all. For otherwiſe, if all men ſhould ſo periſh by death, that nothing
of them ſhould remaine in life, at leaſtwiſe in regard of the ſoule, then
ſhould he be the God of nothing. And although it ſeemeth that Ieſus
Chriſt alleaged this place againſt the Sadduces, not onely to proue againſt
them by the doctrine of Moſes, the immortality of ſoules, but
alſo the reſurrection of bodies, we may well gather, that if it be fitte to
proue that bodies ariſe, it is much more ſtrong to aſſure vs of ye immortality
of ſoules. For when the Lord ſpake theſe words, Abraham, Iſaac
and Iacob were not aliue in regarde of their bodies, but onely of their
ſoules. And yet Ieſus Chriſt alleaged it to confirme alſo therby the reſurrection
of the dead, although at the firſt ſight it may ſeem not to be
very fit & firm to proue that ſo much as the immortality of ſoules. But
if it be narrowly looked into,The reſurrection of the dead proued. his argumēt ſhalbe found to be very well
deduced & grounded vpon inuincible reaſon. For Ieſus Chriſt had reſpect
to ye promiſe which God made to thoſe holy Patriarkes of whom
he ſpake, & which was not made only to their ſoule, but to the whole
man together compounded of body & ſoule. Wherfore al they to whō
it was made, & to whom it appertaineth, ſhould not haue ye whole effect
of it, nor the ful fruition of that which it cōtaineth, if they were not
whole inheriters therof both in body & ſoule. For if it were otherwiſe,
the promiſe ſhould be accompliſhed but in one part of man, & not in
the whole man. Wherupon it followeth, that ſeeing the promiſe is not
of a tēporal benefit, but of an eternal, therefore ye whole man that muſt
enioy the ſame, muſt of neceſſitie liue an euerlaſting life beeing of the
ſame nature that the benefit is of, which he muſt inherit. Wherefore ſeeing
the courſe of mans life is brokē off by death in regard of the body,
the body muſt neceſſarily riſe again to liue again wt his ſoule in a better
& longer life, to the end yt the whole man may poſſeſſe yt inheritance,
which is promiſed him of God: or els ye promiſe made by God to his ſeruants
is altogether vain, or ye teſtimony which the holy ſcripture beareth
is wholly falſe, & ſo alſo the ſcripture that propoundeth the ſame
vnto vs. But none may once think either of theſe two laſt points, without
great horror of blaſphemy contained in thē. So that the firſt point

concludeth very ſtrongly, according to that groūd which it hath moſt
certaine in the word of God. Whereunto may be added further, that
ſeeing the ſoule of man is created, not to liue alwaies without a body,
as the Angels do, nor yet to wander from body to body, but to be knit
and ioyned to that body, which is aſſigned to it of God, it muſt needs
be, that being part therof, as of her lodging, ſhe ſhould once againe returne
thither. Beſides, ſeeing the body hath ſerued the ſoule, either in
obeying God,2. Theſſ. 1. 6, 7. or in diſobeying of his wil, the nature of Gods iuſticerequireth,
that it ſhould be rewarded alſo with the ſoule, according to
the qualitie of thoſe workes whereof it hath bin an inſtrument. Therefore
according to that which we haue diſcourſed of this matter, the reſurrection
of the body doth ſo depend of th'immortality of ſoules, that
it foloweth neceſſarily vpō this: ſo that if we haue aſſurance of the one,
we ought to haue it of the other, ſeeing both of them are certainely
grounded vpō the iuſtice of God, which cānot be iuſt vnleſſe he iudge
men both in body & ſoule according to his word, & according as euery
one liueth. But ſeeing the matter of th'immortality of ſoules, & that
of the reſurrection of bodies are ſundry queſtions, and that wee are to
handle but one of them, we muſt returne to our firſt point of the ſoule
touching th'immortality thereof, which is eaſily beleeued of al that approue
of the doctrine of holy Scriptures, & that giue credit to ye word
of God. For they are throughly reſolued therof. Yea we may know by
the writings of al antiquity, that the common opinion of all people &
nations of what religion ſoeuer they haue bin, hath bin this, that mens
ſoules were immortal. Wherfore in regard of this point, we are to fight
only againſt Epicures & Atheiſts. And becauſe they wil not beleeue the
word of God, but deride it as tales made vpō pleaſure: I am of opinion
that now we are to ſearch chiefly for thoſe teſtimonies, which God
hath giuen vs in nature touching th'immortality of the ſoule: euen the
actions and effects therof, by meanes of which we come to the knowledge
of hidden and ſecret cauſes, from whence they proceed. Therefore
conſider Amana, what you mind to ſpeake vnto vs of this ſubiect.
            
            
               Of naturall reaſons, whereby the immortalitie of ſoules may be proued againſt
Epicures and Atheists: and first of the argument taken frō the
facultie of knowledge which the ſoule hath, and from that knowledge of
eternitie which is in it: how it appeareth, that it is not begottē of this corruptible
nature, becauſe it aſcendeth vp vnto God: and how by a ſpecial
benefit of God, it is daily created, & not by the vertue of nature. Cha. 90.
               AMANA. Seeing Epicures & Atheiſts giue credit to natural Philoſophy
in things whoſe cauſes it proueth by their effects, they haue

no reaſon to refuſe it in the conſideration of the nature of mens ſoules.
Now it is verie certaine, that if we will take this courſe, beſides the teſtimonies
of God in his word touching the immortalitie of the ſoule,
which way ſoeuer we turne our eyes, whether aboue vs or beneath vs,
on the right hand, or on the left, we ſhall finde euery where arguments
and reaſons concluding the ſame. For we haue nature, and the neceſſitie
of cauſes, proportion and ſimilitude, life, the excellent dignitie of
man, the goodnes of God, and the profit of mankind proceeding from
his bountifulneſſe, which with one common conſent, and as it were,
all with one voyce teach vs, and crie out that the ſoule cannot bee
mortall.
               Firſt then we obſerue,How we know the hidden things in nature. that the true & naturall eſſences of all things
are not knowne of vs by themſelues, but continue hidde in the ſecret
cloſets of euery one of them, vnto which our minde being burthened
with this maſſe of the body, and ouerwhelmed with the darkeneſſe of
this life, is not able to reach. Therefore we muſt enquire by the accidents
adhering vnto them, and principally by their actions, whereby
our reaſon diſcourſeth, and concludeth of euery thing, what it is, and
of what qualitie. For euery thing hath his actions, and workes, according
to it owne ſubſtance and nature, and by them declareth and maketh
it ſelfe knowne: ſo that if wee conſider the actions of the ſoule,
we ſhall by them know the nature and immortalitie thereof.An argument taken from the knowledge of the ſoule to proue it immortall. Let vs
then conſider her firſt and principall action, which is to know, and this
importeth alſo to vnderſtande, to comprehende, and to conceiue.
Whereupon we haue to note, that there is no power of Knowing, that
can attaine to the knowledge of any thing, but it hath ſome agreement
and proportion with the nature of the ſame thing: becauſe knowledge
is as it were the image of things, which is imprinted in the ſoule
as in a glaſſe. Now it is certaine, that a looking glaſſe cannot repreſent
the image and ſimilitude of a ſpirituall thing, becauſe it ſelfe is a
corporall thing, which hath no agreement in nature with that which
is ſpirituall. Likewiſe it cannot repreſent any thing belonging to the
other ſenſes, but onely that which concerneth the ſight: and therfore
it cannot repreſent either ſoundes, ſmelles, or taſtes, becauſe the vſe
thereof is onely for the eyes, neither doeth it agree with any of the other
ſenſes, but onely with the ſight. And as for our externall ſenſes,
they cannot perceiue thoſe things that haue neither quantitie nor bodily
ſubſtance, becauſe they themſelues are corporal. Neither yet can
they perceiue things that are abſent. And the internall ſenſes, as the
fantaſie & the imagination, cannot perceiue ſpiritual things, as namely,
either God or Angels: but onely the ſpirite of a man doeth perceiue,

know and comprehend them, which power and facultie no other
creature vnder heauen hath. For if it were otherwiſe, it could not
in any wiſe comprehend a thing, that ſurmounteth it with an infinite
greatnes, and with which it hath no agreement at all. For further confirmation
of that which I ſay,Eternitie conſidered diuer
                        •
                     ly. let vs conſider of Eternitie, as it is whole
and entire in it ſelfe: then let vs diuide it into that which was ſince
the creation of the worlde, and finally into that which followed the
ſame, and which ſhall be for euermore. When our ſpirite entereth
into the conſideration of that which was before the creation, our
thought is not able to comprehend it, ſo that it is ouerwhelmed
with the greatneſſe thereof: but wee doe well vnderſtand and comprehend
that part of eternitie, which ſhall followe vs heereafter
throughout infinit ages. Whereby it appeareth, that this firſt conſideration
of it, is too great for our ſoule, as hauing no proportion therewith,
nor yet agreeing thereunto: but it is otherwiſe with the ſoule
in the conſideration of that other eternitie, for the fruition whereof
it was created. For the ſoule is not eternall as God is, as though it
had no more beginning then he had: and therefore it hath no agreement
with him in this reſpect. The ſoule then entereth into a bottomleſſe
gulfe, when it diſcourſeth of an eternitie, of which it is
not partaker: but it hath agreement with the eternitie of God as angels
haue, in that it is created immortall, to liue an eternall life with
him: which appeareth in that it is able to comprehend the ſame. Therfore
Saint Iohn in the beginning of his Goſpel leadeth vs euen to the
gates of this firſt eternitie: but foraſmuch as it is a gulfe in which we
ſhall be ſwallowed vp, if we enter farther into it, hee proceedeth not
forward, but ſtayeth vs there: and calleth vs preſently vnto the means
whereby. God manifeſted himſelfe, telling vs how he did this by his
eternall worde: and firſt by the creation of the worlde, then by thoſe
other meanes, which hee ſetteth downe afterwarde: all which our
ſoule comprehendeth well, and ſo cannot the ſoule of beaſts do. Wherfore
when we conſider God in his eſſence and nature before ye creation
of the world, & the time that was before that, wee are then ouerwhelmed
therewithall, & ſee no whit at all into it. But if we enter into the
conſideration of the times after the creation of the world, & into thoſe
which ſhal follow ſtil after vs vnto all eternity, wee looke into it more
cleerely, and are not ſo much dazeled therwithall, becauſe our ſoule is
more capable of this conſideration, then of the other, which was before
all creatures.A ſpeciall difference betweene the ſoule of man and 
                        〈◊〉
                      beaſts. From hence wee may conclude, that the ſoules of
beaſts and plants that haue not in them this cogitation or apprehenſion
of eternitie, are produced and taken out of the power and vertue

of that matter, of which they are engendered: but the ſpirit of man
is more ſpecially bredde in the bodie by God, aboue all the powers of
the matter and nature of the ſame.A firme proofe of the ſoules immortalitie. For nothing ariſeth higher, or paſſeth
beyond that thing of which it receiueth eſſence, and beeing, and
thoſe powers and ſtrength that it hath: for if it did, then ſhould it not
receiue being from thence, but of ſome other thing before and aboue
that, or elſe farther off, vnto which it tendeth. We ſee this in all the
ſenſes both externall and internall, which are common to vs with
beaſtes. For they know nothing elſe, beſide that which is of this nature
which we ſee, neither doe they aſcend higher: but our ſpirite not
content with the ſight and knowledge of the heauens, ſtarres and Angels
themſelues mounteth vp to God, and being come thither can go
no further. What other thing els doeth this ſignifie, and declare vnto
vs, but that the ſoules of beaſts are engendered of this corruptible and
mortall nature, beyonde which they cannot lift vp themſelues, but
that ours are produced of God aboue the power of this nature?A fitte compariſon. And
ſo that may bee ſaide of our ſoule, which is ſpoken of a ſpring water,
namely, that it aſcendeth as much vpwarde as it deſcendeth downeward,
but can goe no higher. For when a man woulde carie the water
of a ſpring any whither, and would haue it mount vpwarde, it will
be an eaſie matter to bring it as high as the ſpring-head from whence
it floweth: but no higher, except it bee forced by ſome other meane
then by it owne courſe and naturall vertue. Notwithſtanding it will
eaſily deſcend lower. And ſo fareth it with our ſpirite. For as it came
from God, ſo it is able to mount againe to the knowledge of him,
and no higher: but it deſcendeth a great deale lower. And as for
our ſenſes, they remaine lower then the woorkes of nature, and
pearce not to the depth of them, but are alwayes buſied about the
externall face of them. Neither is it to bee doubted, but that Moſes
meant to teach vs theſe things by that which hee rehearſeth of the
meanes vſed by God in the creation of man, which differed from that
hee kept in the creation of all other creatures, either liuing or without
life. For we haue heard what deliberation and counſaile he vſed, before
he put hand to the worke:Gen. 1. 26. how he faſhioned the body, and how
he placed the ſoule therein by and by after. Therefore in that the Prophet
deſcribeth the creation of the bodie apart, and then that of the
ſoule, he giueth vs to vnderſtand, that wee muſt ſeeke for ſomething
more high and excellent in that of man then in that of beaſtes, whoſe
ſoules were created with their bodies, and of the ſelfe-ſame matter
with them. Moreouer, he teacheth vs this very plainly when he ſaith,
that God created man after his owne image and ſimilitude: which hee

did not ſay of beaſts, as we haue alreadie heard. Therefore there muſt
needes be in the ſoule of man ſome other power and vertue, then that
by which it giueth life to the bodie, and which is common to it with
thoſe of brute beaſtes. So that as God gaue to this dead bodie taken
out of the earth, a ſoule that endued it with life, motion, and ſenſe: ſo
hee imprinted and ingraued his image into this ſoule, vnto which immortalitie
is annexed.Why man was ſaide to be a liuing ſoule. Therefore when Moſes ſayeth, that man was
made a liuing ſoule, no doubt but by the name of ſoule he meaneth
another nature and ſubſtance then that of the bodie. And in that he
calleth it liuing, hee declareth plainly, that the bodie hath not of it ſelf
and of it owne nature, that life wherewith it is endued, but from the
power of this ſoule. And although hee there maketh not any ſpeciall
mention of the other vertues thereof, it is becauſe hee conſidered
the capacitie of the people with whome he liued, vnto whom he
would frame himſelfe, being content to ſpeake openly of that power
of the ſoule, which appeared beſt without, and which the externall
ſenſes might moſt eaſily know & perceiue by the effects thereof. But I
thinke it will not be vnfit for this matter, if wee returne to yt question,
which before we touched concerning the creation of the ſoule, namely,
whether, ſince it was created by God in the firſt creation of man, it
be ſtill created after the ſame ſort as it were by a new miracle, in them
that are daily borne in the worlde, or whether it bee naturally created,
but yet of God by a certaine order appointed for that ende by
him. Nowe albeeit it bee very requiſite, that we ſhould bee ſober and
not raſh in this matter, for the cauſes alreadie ſet downe, notwithſtanding
we will here propound the opinion of ſome learned men, grounded
vpon that order,How God dayly createth ſoules. which God hath accuſtomed to obſerue in his
workes and in his creatures. For ſeeing he hath ſet a law in nature for
all other creatures according to which he createth & produceth them,
& not by any new miracle, it is more likely that he createth ſoules naturally,
and that he hath ordained a ſtedfaſt law for mankind, but differing
from that of beaſts, ſo much as his creation differed from theirs.
For hauing once eſtabliſhed an order, he vſeth not to change it into a
diuers or contrarie order, but keepeth ſtill the ſame, except it bee that
ſometimes he vſeth extraordinarie meanes by way of a miracle. For
although all his woorkes bee great miracles, and chiefely man;
neuertheleſſe,What a miracle is. wee call none by that name, but onely thoſe which
he woorketh by ſupernaturall meanes, not againſt, but beſide the
common order of nature. But that which I ſay, derogateth nothing
from the nature & immortalitie of mans ſoule. For although it be placed
in that matter which is alreadie prepared and appropriated for the

faſhioning of the body, yet he doeth this aboue the vertue of the matter
and of the worke of nature, by a lawe which he hath eſtabliſhed to
that effect. For this cauſe he doeth not onely giue a ſoule to them that
are begotten by lawfull marriage, but to thoſe alſo who are brought
foorth in whoredome, whether it be adultery, inceſt, or any other ſuch
like. For although that honeſtie, which is enioyned mankind by God,
be not kept in ſuch a birth and generation, but contrarieth the ſame,
yet it is not contrary to the lawe of generation ordayned by God: as
that generation is which is by buggerie,Buggery violateth the law of nature. wherein not only the Law of
honeſty is violated, but alſo the law of nature. We will conclude then,
that it is not only true, that our ſoule is not brought forth by the power
of nature, but by the benefit of God only, but alſo that it is expedient
and very behoofefull, yea neceſſary for mankind that it ſhould be true:
and becauſe it is behoofefull and neceſſary, it is true alſo without all
queſtion. For God hath omitted nothing that is agreeable to his glory,
and profitable and expedient for mankinde. For ſeeing the ſoule is
placed within the bodie, not by the vertue of nature, but properly and
peculiarly by a ſpeciall benefite of God, man oweth the chiefeſt and
beſt part of himſelfe, not to nature, but to God. Which is the cauſe why
he ſhould acknowledge him as the onely father of his ſpirite,God is the onely father of our ſpirite. & conſecrate
the ſame wholly to him alone: not yeelding any right and intereſt
therein to any other beſides him onely, who is ſoueraigne, almightie,
and the onely father of ſpirites. For if the queſtion be of the
body and of all the ſenſes thereof, many may claime an intereſt therein
vnder God, namely Fathers & mothers, the children themſelues, nature,
the kinred, the countrey, friends, kings, Princes & Lords. But the
ſoule belongeth to none but to God alone, which he willeth & commandeth
ſhould be reſerued to him only for our happines, becauſe he
only is the author and creator thereof. If it be ſo then, that our ſoule is
not begotten or produced by this nature, which is the handmaide of
God and worker vnder him, but by God alone, it followeth very well,
that nothing in nature can extinguiſh it, but God onely who is able to
do it if he pleaſe. Now it is not likely or credible that God would make
a thing by it ſelfe, and that after a different manner from other
things, which ſhould haue nothing beſides the creation of it, & then
within a while after would deſtroy it. For if it were otherwiſe, why
woulde hee obſerue another meane in the creation of man, then in
that of beaſts? Why would he not rather haue beſtowed vpon nature,
the power of the generation and corruption of mans ſoule, as he hath
done that of other liuing creatures? Wherefore woulde hee ſeeme
to reſerue that thing as proper to himſelfe, which hee woulde

make ſubiect to the law and common condition of other things? Thus
much then for thoſe arguments, which we may take from the knowledge
that God hath giuen to mans ſoule, & from his conſtant worke
in the creation of it, to proue the nature and immortalitie therof. Now
we are to conſider what arguments we haue to the ſame purpoſe, in
that vertue of deſire, which is giuen vnto it. Theſe things then we may
learne of thee Aram.
               
            
            
               Of the argument for the immortalitie of the ſoule, that may be taken from
that naturall deſire thereof, and of perpetuitie, which is in it: of another
argument to the ſame purpoſe: of the deſire which men haue to continue
their name and memory for euer: an argument to the ſame ende
taken from the apprehenſion and terror which men may haue both of the
death of the body, and alſo of the ſoule and ſpirit. Chap. 91.
               ARAM.Three things vnſeperable. Theſe three things are ſo linked and knit together, namely
Gods religion, his diuine prouidence, and the immortalitie of the
ſoule, that they neither may nor ought to bee ſeperated in any wiſe.
For if our ſoules were not immortall, no rewarde or puniſhment for
good or bad doings were to be looked for: and then God ſhould not
ſeeme to haue any care ouer vs, which if he haue not, why ſhould wee
worſhip him? Our hope ſhould be in vaine, and religion vnprofitable.
But if without the grace and goodnes of God we cannot liue, and if
he wilbe ſought vnto of vs by prayer, then religion is very neceſſary,
and the immortalitie of the ſoule certaine. And euen as a man cannot
renounce thoſe excellent giftes, which naturally are planted in his
ſpirit and minde, and in that reaſon which God hath beſtowed vpon
him, but hee muſt renounce himſelfe, and become like to the bruite
beaſt: ſo fareth it alſo with him, when he renounceth his immortalitie.
But ſeeing we are now in handling the powers of the ſoule, to ſhewe
that it dieth not, and ſeeing wee haue ſpoken of knowledge, wee will
conſider what arguments to the ſame ende may bee taken from the
vertue of deſiring that is naturally in it.
               Heretofore we learned, that all knowledge both in man and beaſt,
is giuen to this ende, that they ſhould deſire whatſoeuer they know to
be good, and eſchue that which they know to be euil. Concerning
the knowledge of our ſences, they conceiue well ynough what it is to
be preſent, and ſo do the ſences of beaſtes, of which and of our whole
nature, we may iudge both by our external and internal ſences that are
common to vs with them, & ſo we may diſcerne of all ſuch like things.
But the appetite or deſire of beaſts goeth no further then the time preſent.

For that naturall deſire of their owne preſeruation which is in
them, proceedeth not frō any knowledge which they haue of things,
but from the workemanſhip of nature, and from that naturall inclination
which they haue thereunto, without any motion of reaſon or vnderſtanding.
               Whereupon it followeth, that their deſire to preſerue themſelues,
and their power of procreation proceedeth not from their
knowing vertue, that is the chiefeſt in them, but from the vegetatiue
vertue, which is the baſeſt & moſt abiect. But man goeth a great deale
further. For man hath knowledge of perpetuitie and of eternitie, as we
heard in the former ſpeach: and becauſe he knoweth that eternitie is
a good and profitable thing for him,The deſire of perpetuitie, an argument of the ſoules immortalitie. he doth alſo deſire the ſame. This
deſire then is naturall: and if naturall, it followeth alſo that it is a very
meete and conuenient thing for vs, and ſo conſequently, that it is
not giuen to man without cauſe and to no purpoſe. Wee muſt then
conclude hereupon, that it may be accompliſhed, and that of neceſſitie
it muſt be ſometime or other. For if it were otherwiſe, to what purpoſe
ſhould this knowledge ſerue which man hath of ſo great a benefite,
and which alſo mooueth him to deſire the ſame, if he could neuer
attaine to the fruition thereof? And why ſhould God teach the
ſame to men, if he would not make them partakers of it? Were it not
rather to debaſe, then to aduaunce them aboue beaſtes, whereas hee
hath created them Lordes, and as it were his laſt and principall peece
of worke, in his worke of creation? Should it not ſeeme to be not onely
a vaine thing, but alſo (if I might ſo ſpeake) as though God delighted
to torment men, to cauſe them to deſire that thing, of which they
ſhould neuer haue any participation? Were it not better for them, at
leaſtwiſe as good, that in this reſpect hee ſhould haue created them
like to bruite beaſtes? For ſo they ſhould liue a great deale more quiet,
and not torment themſelues as they doe, after a thing, which is altogether
vnpoſſible for them to attaine vnto. Nowe wee haue a very
euident ſigne and teſtimony in vs,Another deſire, which is to continue our memory for euer. of the continuall being of this
deſire of enternitie, in that longing which men haue to make their
name eternall as much as may be, and that their memory might remaine
in all ages that ſhall follow long time after them. And which
is more, this affection is ſo naturall, and imprinted ſo deepe into mens
hearts, that euen they who deny the immortality of ſoules, and who
thinke that euery man doeth wholy vaniſh away by corporall death,
doe couet notwithſtanding the immortality of their name, and to
haue a good report amongeſt men ſtill after their death. Heereof
wee haue very good proofe in the laſt will and Teſtament of Epicurus
                  
himſelfe, the Captaine and ſtandard-bearer of all Atheiſts and
Epicures, who haue receiued their name of him. For hee appointed
therein, that the day of his natiuitie ſhoulde be yeerely celebrated,
and that at certaine times aſſigned by him, a banket ſhould bee made
for thoſe of his ſect, in remembrance of his name. Whereby wee
ſee that this dogge himſelfe, who made no difference betweene
the death of men and of beaſtes, and who denied vtterly the immortalitie
of the ſoule of man, coulde not for all that plucke out of his
owne ſoule the deſire of immortalitie: but doeth what lay in him to
make himſelfe immortall after his death, by the perpetuitie of his
name and memorie.Another deſire of perpetuitie, appearing in funerals. We may take the like argument from that which
men vſually appoynt at their death, touching their funerals, ſepulchres
and tombes. For why is it, that they will haue ſumptuous funeralles,
and ſtately and magnificent tombes? Why haue manie cauſed
Churches and chappels to bee erected, themſelues to bee engrauen,
and their eſcutchions to be hung vp, where they haue laide
themſelues? It is certaine, that if they deſired not to make their
name as immortall as they coulde, and their memorie eternall among
men, their death would not bee ſo ambitious, neither would
they leaue behinde them ſuch markes of their ambition, and of
their deſire of immortalitie. And as great men affoorde this teſtimonie
of their deſire, ſo the common people are not without
ſome one or other for their part. For a poore Artificer, as a Tayler
or Shoemaker, or ſome ſuch like, if hee bee able hee will appoynt
to haue a ſtone layde vpon his graue, in which his name
ſhall bee ingrauen, and his marke, or ſome ſuch like thing: to
this ende that the Suruiuors, and they that come after him, ſhould
knowe that hee once liued and was in the worlde, and that hee
woulde ſtill liue, at leaſtwiſe in name and memorie. And this
is further confirmed by them, who albeeit they cannot continue
their name and memorie by any good deedes and valiant
actes, yet they ſtriue to make themſelues immortall by wicked
and execrable dooings. As among others wee haue the example
of Herostratus, who ſet on fire the Temple of that great Diana
of Epheſus for no other cauſe, but onelie that hee might
bee ſpoken of, and that the memorie of him might remaine and
continue for euer amongeſt men: as in deede it hath done, notwithſtanding
the contrarie endeuour of the Epheſians, who by
a publicke Edict ordayned, that his name ſhoulde neuer be written
in any place.An obiection. But it may bee obiected vnto mee, that this argument
deriued from the deſire of men to continue their name,

to proue the immortalitie of ſoules thereby, is not very fit, nor of great
force: becauſe this deſire is rather found in men that are moſt fooliſh,
vaine, carnal, and wicked, then in the wiſer ſort of men, and ſuch as are
more graue, ſpirituall, and vertuous. For who couet more this immortalitie
of name and memorie, then they that are moſt vainglorious and
ambitious, vnto whoſe ambition death it ſelfe can bring no end, but it
reuiueth and liueth ſtill therein? We ſee alſo, that they who leaſt of all
beleeue the immortalitie of ſoules and ſcoffe moſt at it, are greatlieſt
affected with this ambition, and labor moſt to become immortall after
that maner,The anſwere to it. becauſe they expect no other immortalitie. All this I
confeſſe is true, yet mine argument continueth ſtill firme. For firſt we
haue alwayes this teſtimonie from them, that they know and acknowledge
a certaine immortalitie and perpetuitie, and deſire to enioy the
ſame as much as they may, thinking to continue the ſame euen after
their death: which knowledge and deſire is not to be found in brute
beaſts. And whereas the vaineſt and worſt men are more moued with
this fooliſh deſire, then the wiſeſt & moſt vertuous men are, the reaſon
thereof is good and euident. For the wiſeſt men and ſuch as are endewed
with moſt vertue make leaſt accompt of this temporary and
fading immortalitie, which is but as it were a winde that goeth from
mouth to mouth, or is but in paper, parchment, wood, ſtone, braſſe, or
in ſome ſuch corruptible matter: becauſe they expect a better perpetuitie
that is more certaine, more glorious, and of longer continuance,
of which they are certainely perſwaded.Of the true immortalitie. Which perſwaſion can not
be vaine in them, ſeeing it is grounded vpon the teſtimony of Gods
Spirit, which ſaith, that the iuſt ſhalbe had in euerlaſting remembrāce,
not onely before men, but alſo before God and Angelles. But the other
ſort of men buſie themſelues about an immortalitie, which deſerueth
not to be accompted ſo much as a ſhadowe and image of true immortalitie:
becauſe the deſire thereof is infected and corrupted with
that darkeneſſe of errour and of ignorance, which ſinne hath brought
vpon the minde of man, with thoſe peruerſe affections that proceede
from the ſame, and with their euil educcation and inſtruction, who are
not taught in the word of God. By means whereof this natural deſire of
true immortalitie degenerateth into a fooliſh deſire greedy of fame &
name amōg men: (euen as whē good ſeed falleth into bad groūd) but
ſtil it proceeds from a good beginning & fountaine, if it were not corrupted.
As we ſee alſo that it falleth out with the greater part of men in
that natural deſire they haue of skil & knowledge, which albeit it be in
them by nature, yet they turne it into a vaine and fooliſh curioſitie,
that endeuoureth to knowe that which is not onely not profitable,

but very hurtfull and dangerous for them, in ſtead of ſeeking to know
that which is more profitable and neceſſary. But beſides that which
wee haue already ſpoken, our affections alſo tell vs plainely, what the
nature is as well of our ſpirite, as of our ſenſes both internall and externall:
and what difference there is betweene them. For if the Spirite
entreth into a cogitation of it owne death, the internall ſenſes,
with fancie and imagination are not greatly moued or troubled therewith,
but paſſe it ouer well enough, as if they had no feeling thereof,
ſuppoſing that this corporall life will laſt a long time:An argument taken from the apprehenſion of death to prooue the immortalitie of ſoules. but the ſpirit is
ſo confounded and troubled, that it feareth and flieth nothing more
then it. And ſurely I doubt not, but that they who being preſſed and
oppreſſed with great euilles, deſire death through a blind fury of their
mind, and wiſh to be wholly extinguiſhed, woulde change their purpoſe
and abhorre that kinde of death, and thinke it to be a greater miſchiefe
then all thoſe which they ſuffer, if they might haue leaſure and
means for ſome ſmall time to come out of their diſpaire, and to returne
to their right minde, that ſo they might haue ſome reſt from the troubles
of their ſpirite, and thinke ſeriouſly vpon the death thereof. And
as all the ſenſes are preſently troubled, and as it were carried out of
themſelues through the cogitation of corporall death: ſo the ſpirite
contrariwiſe, if it be found, quiet, and well ſetled, abideth firme, and
derideth the ignorance, error, and terrour of the ſenſes, correcting and
reproouing them for the ſame. We may then conclude from the euidence
of theſe things, that the death of the Spirite is contrary to the
nature of it, and therefore is afraide of it, and abhorreth euen to thinke
of it, or to make any mention thereof. But the ſenſes care not but for
this bodily life, which the Spirite contemneth in regarde of the other:
whereby it appeareth, that the death of the body doth affect & touch
it nothing at all, but the body onely, and thoſe things that are ioyned
vnto it, as namely both the external and internal ſenſes. For this cauſe,
thoſe men that are carnall and ledde moſt by their ſenſes, thinke little
either vpon the one or the other, except it bee when they ſee themſelues
in danger of corporall death. For, perſwading themſelues that
they ſhall liue long in this worlde, or at leaſtwiſe gathering to themſelues
as much hope thereof as they can, they thinke nothing at all in a
manner of death during the whole life, no more almoſt then if they
were borne immortall, vntill ſuch time as they ſee in good earneſt that
they muſt diſlodge. Then are they awaked out of their ſleepe, and if
they be not altogether become brutiſh, they are conſtrained to thinke
both vpon the death of the body,Of the ende of good and euill men. and the death of the ſpirite: and the
leſſe they are prepared againſt them both, the more aſtoniſhed and amaſed

they are in themſelues. Contrariwiſe good and iuſt men, who
of a long time, yea all their life haue thought vpon both, finde themselues
leſſe troubled a great deale, becauſe they are reſolutely perſwaded
and aſſured of a better life. Moreouer, wee finde by experience,
that when the ſpirit is troubled with affections, or cōfounded through
fancies and imaginations, or ignorant, vicious, prophane, wicked,
without feare of God and voide of religion, it is a great deale more
mooued at the cogitation and remembrance of corporall death, then
if it be ſound, well diſpoſed and ſetled, quiet, skilfull, innocent, religious,
and fearing God. Whereupon we may conſider & learne, which
of theſe two iudgements is more certaine and true, either that of a ſpirite
that is troubled, diſeaſed, ignorant, euill, without feare of God, and
voide of religion: or that of a ſpirite, which hath all thoſe perfections
rehearſed by vs, contrary to theſe vices. It is an eaſie matter to iudge.
Therefore if we attribute more, as in reaſon wee ought, to that Spirite
whoſe iudgement is moſt true and certaine, the concluſion that I haue
made, ſhalbe confirmed thereby. And as by the difference of deſires,
we may eaſily iudge of the nature & eſſence of mans ſoule, ſo we may
do the like by thoſe delights wherein it taketh pleaſure. But I leaue
thee, ACHITOB, to go forward with the diſcourſe of this matter.
            
            
               Of the argument that may be taken from the delights and pleaſures of the
ſoule to prooue the immortalitie thereof: an argument to the ſame ende
taken from the inſatiable deſires and pleaſures of men, euen from ſuch
as are most carnall: of the testimony which they may find euen in their
vices to prooue the immortalitie of their ſoule. Chap. 92.
               ACHITOB. It hath beene a ſaying heeretofore, that it belonged
not to a vile perſon to deny God. Which Prouerbe came of this,
that the nobilitie and gentlemen were ſo ill taught, and ſo ignorant of
true nobilitie, that they reſerued this occupation to themſelues as proper
to their eſtate, turning it to their glory, and endeuouring to bee
feared by this meanes.The right Armes of Mach
                        •
                     au
                        •
                     llian Nobilitie. And ſurely theſe were faire Armes, and goodly
ſcutcheons to ſet foorth the Nobilitie of their eſtate by, namely, horrible
and execrable blaſphemies, which the very Iewes and Turkes
would neuer ſuffer among themſelues. I woulde to God wee might
nowe ſay rightly, that this was once, but is no more: and ſo likewiſe,
that there were not ſome among them that think themſelues the greateſt
men, who haue this in their thoughts, if they dare not ſpeake it openly,
that it belongeth not to men of courage to beleeue in God and
in his word, or to thinke that there is a iudgement to come, at which

men ſhall appeare: but that this appertaineth to the ſimple and fooliſh,
not to theſe great and noble ſpirites, which flie aboue the clouds,
and indeede know more then they ought, to leade them into hell.
               But as by the difference of appetites and deſires,An argument of the pleaſures of the ſoule to ſhew the immortalitie thereof. wee haue ſhewed
them that the ſoule cannot be mortall, which concludeth a diuine prouidence
and a ſecond life, as we declared before, ſo it is an eaſie matter
to prooue the ſame by thoſe pleaſures in which the ſoule taketh
delight. For by how much the more thoſe things that bring delights,
do reſemble the vertue of the ſoule that is delighted, and the greater
affinitie, proportion and agreement they haue with it, ſo much the
greater, ſweeter, and more pleaſant are the delights, as alſo more firme
and of longer continuance. Indeede it may be obiected vnto me, that
if we looke to this we ſhal find, that the greateſt part of men take more
pleaſure in thoſe delights which they can receiue by their ſenſes, which
are more earthy and brutiſh, then in others that are more naturall to
the ſpirit, and more ſpirituall and heauenly: and therefore the iudgement
that we can gather from hence of the nature and eſſence of the
ſoule,Some more like to beaſts then men. may ſeeme not to agree to this we ſpeake of. It is very certaine
that ſome men are of ſuch a brutiſh nature, that a man may well doubt
whether they be men or no, and whether they deſerue not rather to
be reckoned in the number of beaſts, to which they are more like then
to men, except it be for their face: in which reſpect alſo a man may
compare them with Apes. For if they bee led by the ſame deſires and
luſtes, and ſatisfie themſelues therein as brute beaſts, and goe no further,
wherein doe they differ from them? and to what purpoſe ſerueth
that which God hath beſtowed vpon their ſoules more then vpon the
ſoules of beaſts, if they content themſelues with a brutiſh life & pleaſure
as they do? For where is the vſe of reaſon & vnderſtanding which
God hath beſtowed vpon them more then vpon beaſts? And if they
vſe them no more then beaſts doe that are altogether voide of them,
who can knowe whether they are partakers of them more then they?
And ſo conſequently, how ſhal that definition cōmonly giuen of man,
agree to them, wherein he is called a liuing creature partaker of reſon?
Therefore when we enquire of the nature and ſubſtance of the ſoule,
wee muſt followe that rule, which is vſually propounded in ſearching
out the nature and eſſence of all other things. For when a man would
haue true knowledge of them, hee taketh not in ech kind of them that
which may bee in ſome of the ſame kinde, leſſe perfect and monſtrous.
As if there bee occaſion to iudge of the nature of mans body,
no man will take them that haue ſome defect of Nature, or that
are more deformed and monſtrous then others: but the ſoundeſt,

goodlieſt, and moſt perfect bodies. We muſt doe the like when wee
ſearch into the nature and eſſence of the ſoule. For to know it wel, we
muſt not make choice of men that are borne brutiſh, ſo that a man can
knowe nothing in them whereby they differ from brute beaſts, except
the outward ſhape of a man.How we muſt iudge of the nature of the ſoule. Yea there are ſome borne with leſſe ſenſe
and gouernement of themſelues, then beaſts haue. The like may bee
ſaide of them, who being better borne, voluntarily become brutiſh of
themſelues. For this cauſe, we muſt chiefly conſider what effectes the
nobleſt and moſt excellent ſoules bring foorth, if wee wil iudge of the
nature of al other ſoules that are of the ſame kind. For albeit the ſoules
of ſome men are more brutiſh then of others, yet it followeth not but
they are al of one and the ſame nature & ſubſtance, ſeeing they are all
of one kind: but the difference betwene them proceedeth from hence,
that ſome are more degenerated from their true and proper nature,
then others are. Neuertheles this changeth not their naturall eſſence,
but that alwayes continueth one and the ſame in all: as the ill diſpoſition
of bodies taketh not from them that nature & eſſence which they
haue common with others, notwithſtanding they differ from them, as
a ſicke and deformed body differeth from a ſound and perfect body.
               Nowe there is no doubt,Of the true pleaſures of the ſoule. but that the nobleſt and moſt excellent
ſoules take more pleaſure in the internall ſenſes then in the externall,
and more in reaſon then in fancie and imagination, but aboue all in
the contemplation of the Spirit. And among thoſe things, which the
Spirit doth contemplate, it delighteth moſt & ſtayeth longeſt in them
that are ſpirituall and eternal, that are higheſt & of greateſt ſoueraigntie.
And as the ſpirit longeth moſt after theſe pleaſures, and retaineth
them with greateſt affection, ſo it is leſſe wearie in ſearching for them
and in the contemplation of them. Whereupon it followeth, that ſpirituall
and eternall things are more conformable to the Spirite, then
thoſe that are corporall and temporary: and that it hath greater participation
and agreement with heauenly things then with earthly. For
it is maruailouſly delighted and contented with ſpirituall things, as if
they were his owne things, which is by ſimilitude, proportion, and agreement
of nature: as contrariwiſe, both the internall and externall
ſenſes pleaſe themſelues in corporall things, and are not able to comprehend
or attaine to the other, but onely by coniecture. Whereas if
the Spirite were as mortall as the ſenſes, then the excellenteſt Spirites,
and ſuch as approch neareſt to the heauenly Spirites and to the nature
of God, woulde giue themſelues to tranſitorie and corruptible things
as much as the ſenſes doe, and would ſearch after them as earneſtly as
it doeth after true and perfect pleaſures. But wee ſee by experience,

that they aſcend vp a great deale higher. Yea the Spirits euen of moſt
carnall and brutiſh men,An argument from inſatiable pleaſures for the immortalitie of the ſoule. in that they neuer meete with any pleaſures
in tranſitorie things that doe fully content and ſatisfie them, thereby
giue euident teſtimonie, that they are borne to enioy greater pleaſures
then they can find in all this nature, and that they are of another
nature, ſurpaſſing them, which mounteth aboue corporal and temporary
things. For who euer ſawe an ambitious man ſatisfied with honours,
or a couetous wretch with riches? And from whence commeth
this that they are ſo inſatiable, but onely becauſe the ſpirite that God
hath giuen them, is of ſo noble a race and of ſuch an excellent nature,
that howe much ſoeuer it be fallen from his firſt nature and nobilitie,
yet it can neuer content it ſelfe with any thing, that is of another nature
more baſe and vile then it owne, as that which is too much vnworthie
and vnbeſeeming the Spirite, and very much diſagreeing from the eſſence
of it. For although, being buried in this body, as in a ſinke of all
carnall and brutiſh affections, it can not ſo well perceiue it owne nature,
dignitie, and nobilitie, nor acknowledge the ſame ſo well, as the
nobleſt and moſt excellent ſpirites, and ſuch as are fartheſt from this
ſtincking puddle, are able to do: neuertheles without thinking therevpon
as it were, it hath euermore a ſecret ſenſe of it owne nature and
dignitie, which keepeth it from being contented with any thing whatſoeuer,
although it be with neuer ſo great liking and abundance, except
it enioy that thing which is moſt proper and agreeable to his natural
diſpoſition, which is of a more high, noble, and excellent nature,
then any thing proceeding from this mortall and tranſitorie maſſe.
But becauſe it is buried in this darkneſſe, which ſinne hath brought
vpon the mindes of men, the ſame thing happeneth to the ſpirite, of
which wee haue already ſpoken concerning the immortalitie and eternitie
of name and renowne. For the right and naturall deſire of true
and immortall honours, and of eternall riches agreeable to the nature
of mans ſoule, is degenerated into this falſe and corrupted appetite of
worldly honours and temporall riches. Notwithſtanding this is manifeſt
heereby, that as euery Spirit always ſearcheth after God as a blind
man goeth by groaping, as wee haue heard already: ſo it ſeeketh after
riches and honours agreeable to it owne nature. But becauſe that
darkeneſſe with which it is ouerwhelmed, hindereth it from knowing
them well, and ſo conſequently from taking that way, which it ought
to enter in that it may attaine vnto them,A corrupt ſpirite taketh the ſhadow of things for the things themſelues. therefore it changeth them
into others, that are of a differing and cleane contrary nature. So that
it can neuer finde out or attaine to that which it ſeeketh, becauſe it is
ignorant thereof, and ſo ſeeketh for it vnder a maske, which it taketh

for the true face, and vnder a ſhadow, which it taketh for the very body:
whereby it commeth to paſſe that the maske and ſhadow remaine
with it, inſtead of the very face and body that are loſt by means of thē.
In which the ſame thing hapneth to the ſpirite that doth in the matter
of religion, when it forgeth vnto it ſelf new & ſtrange gods, and idoles
inſtead of the true God whō it ſearcheth after, becauſe it knoweth not
who he is, although it ſeeketh him, & deſireth to find him. Wherefore
being thus deceiued, & not knowing it, neither the means whereby it
is deceiued, it ſtill deſireth, becauſe it perceiueth very well whether it
wil or no, that it hath not attained to that which it wanteth, as indeede
it might wel know the ſame, if it were not becom very brutiſh, by reaſon
that it neuer findeth any contentation in any thing that it doeth, or
can attain vnto.An argument taken from vices for the immortalitie of the ſoule. By which things we may further learne, that men ſhall
find euen in their vices, teſtimonies of the nature, eſſence and immortality
of their ſoules, wherby they may be conuicted, & namely in their
ambition & couetouſnes, which ought to admoniſh them of that that
hath bin ſet downe, & to cauſe them to thinke more diligently therevpō.
We may ſay the ſame of their luſt. For although it be in the number
of thoſe pleaſures that are moſt earthy & brutiſh, & which the ſenſes
themſelues both externall and internall ought to be ſooneſt wearie
of, for the reaſons before heard: neuertheles they ſhew plainely how
inſatiable this appetite is in them, in that no kinde of luſt can content
them: inſomuch as they are caried headlong there withall euē beyond
the bounds of nature, within which brute beaſts containe themſelues.
And truly all theſe things ought to driue vs into admiration, and cauſe
vs to conſider the iuſt iudgement of God vpon men, & how he is reuē
                  ged
of them for diſhonoring him, & their own nature, by ſuffring it to
degenerate & wax beaſtlike, in forſaking ſpirituall, heauenly, & diuine
things, for thoſe are corporall, earthly, and brutiſh. Therefore God depriueth
them of that vnderſtanding which he had giuē them,How God puniſheth vicious de
                     
                        •
                     ires. that they
ſhoulde torment themſelues after ſuch things as vexe their ſpirite, as it
were damned ſoules, and that ſo much the more miſerably and with
leſſe contentation, as they enioy more of them. For what a torment is
ambition and couetouſnes, and other affections and vices that accompany
them? And if we ſpeake of luſt, we ſee what is the vengeance of
God vpon them, who going beyond the bounds of nature, ſo diſhonor
their bodies and their owne nature, that there is no eſſence or nature
whatſoeuer, vnto which they may be compared. For none doe ſo
much peruert their nature as they: I meane not beaſts only, but not the
deuilles themſelues. And although they be ſo beaſtlike, as to conſider
no more of the nature and eſſence of their ſoule then they doe of

beaſts, yet the very figure of their bodies ſhould make them to thinke,
that God hath not made it differing from beaſts, and namely in creating
the head and face vpwards, but that hee hath alſo endued them
with a ſoule differing from theirs, to the ende it might be correſpondent
to the body in which it is. But it belongeth to thee, ASER, to
proſecute this argument, thereby to ſhew vnto vs the immortalitie of
the ſoule.
            
            
               Of the testimonie that men haue of the immortal nature of the ſoule in their
very body, by the compoſition and frame thereof: of that which is in the
motion and reſt of their ſoule: how the creation of the whole world ſhould
be vaine, & how there ſhould be no prouidēce of God no religion no diuine
iuſtice if the ſoule were mortall: of the multitude and qualities of the witneſſes
that ſtand for the immortalitie thereof. Chap. 93.
               ASER. That good king Ezechias complaining in his ſicknes, ſaid,
Mine habitation is departed,
                  Eſay 38. 12. 
                  and is remooued from me like a ſheepeheards
tent: I haue cut off like aweauer my life. This holy man compareth
his body and the life of man in it, to a tabernacle and lodge, or to a tent
and pauillion, which are no firme lodgings but remoueable, and ſuch
as may be tranſported from one place to another, as ſouldiers carry away
theirs, when they raiſe their camp to pitch it in ſome other place.
And indeed a mans body in this world is as it were a lodging aſſigned
for his ſoule to abide in a while, not to dwell there alwayes, as it were
in one place. For this life, is like to a militarie life, and as a continuall
warfare, vntil ſuch time as we depart hence, and that God cutteth it off,
(after wee haue finiſhed our appointed dayes) as a weauer cutteth off
the threedes at the end of his web after it is finiſhed. Therefore Saint
Peter alſo calleth his body a tabernacle when he ſaith,2. Pet. 1. 13, 14. 
                  I thinke it meete
as long as I am in this tabernacle, to ſtirre you vp by putting you in remembrance,
ſeeing I knowe that the time is at hand that I muſt lay downe this
tabernacle, euen as our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt hath ſhewed mee. Saint Paul
alſo vſeth the like manner of ſpeech when hee ſaieth,2. Cor. 5. 1, 2. 
                  For wee knowe
that if our earthly houſe of this tabernacle be deſtroyed, we haue a building
giuen of God, an houſe not made with hands, but eternall in the heauens. For
therefore we ſigh, deſiring to be clothed with our houſe, which is from heauen.
And to this agreeth that which is written in the epiſtle to the Hebrews,
For here we haue no continuing citie,
                  Hebr. 13. 14. 
                  but we ſeeke one to come. Here truely
are notable teſtimonies of the ſecond and eternall life, againſt them
that doubt of the immortalitie of the ſoule. But according to that
which is giuen vs in charge to diſcourſe of touching this matter, wee

muſt bring them other teſtimonies euen in their bodies, ſeeing their
ſpirit cannot mount vp to celeſtiall and diuine things.
               We may eaſily iudge,An argument taken from the frame of mans body to prooue the immortalitie of his ſoule. if there be any light of nature remaining in
our minde, that God would haue vs knowe, by the compoſition and
ſtature of our bodies, howe the ſoule and ſpirit dwelling within them
ſhoulde be affected, and whither it ought to looke. For why woulde
God lift the head & face of men vpwards, and not the head of beaſts,
but that hee woulde admoniſh them thereby, that they are of a celeſtiall
nature? and that they muſt alwayes looke, not to the earth as
beaſts do, but to heauen, as to their natiue country, from whence they
receiued their Originall, in reſpect of their principall part, which al Atheists
and Epicures doe renounce? And if the body be lifted ſtraight
vpward, the ſpirite is much more, which aſcending by degrees from
inferiour things, maketh no ſtay vntill it come to heauenly and diuine
things: and hauing at length attained vnto them, it ſtayeth there and
contenteth it ſelfe therein.Another argument taken from the motion and reſt of the ſoule. In regard whereof, as in naturall things we
knowe by their moouing and reſting which is their naturall place, ſo
by the ſame reaſon wee may iudge of the naturall place of mans ſoule,
which is in perpetuall motion, and can finde no reſt here below on the
earth, as the ſoules of beaſts can: which becauſe they are altogether
earthy, and al their natural and proper good comming from no higher
place then from the earth, their ſnowts alſo are continually bending
towards it: and the more earthy and brutiſh they are, the more downwards
do they alwayes bend. This we may eaſily perceiue, if we compare
not onely the beaſts of the earth with birdes, which holde more
of the nature of the ayre, and liue moſt therein, but alſo if wee compare
the beaſts of the earth one with an other. For albeit all of them
haue their ſnowts inclining towards the earth, yet the hogge hath his
head more bending downeward then others haue. For it is faſhioned
and bowed after ſuch a faſhion, that no beaſt can leſſe lift vp the head
and ſtretch it towardes heauen then the hogge, neither is any ſo much
troubled as that is, when by force it is compelled to looke vpward.
The ſame may bee ſaide of the moule, and of other ſuch like beaſts.
Therefore if the Good that is proper and peculiar to the nature of man,
conſiſt not in this eternitie and celeſtiall immortalitie of which wee
ſpeake, to what purpoſe is his head lift vpward, and his eies looking
towards heauen, eſpecially ſeeing God hath ioyned theſe things with
a ſoule that is partaker of reaſon and vnderſtanding?Of a fiſh called 
                        Ʋranoſcopos.
                   For among the
beaſts, we find one fiſh, that hath the eyes ſet in the top of the head,
and therefore it is called by the Graecians Vranoſcopos, which ſignifieth
as much as a Beholder of heauen, or looking towards heauen. But becauſe

it is not partaker of vnderſtanding and reaſon, more then other
beaſts are, and ſeeing the ſoule of it differeth not from theirs, we
may eaſily iudge, that the eies of it were not ſet in that place for the
ſame reaſon that man hath his lifted vp towardes heauen. Shall wee
ſay then that God hath created man and endewed him with ſo many
graces and ſingular properties, to make him more wretched then
beaſtes in this life, who otherwiſe is ſo miſerable, and compaſſed about
with ſo many euilles on euery ſide? For whereto ſerueth the diſpoſition
of his nature, but to torment him the more by looking vp towardes
heauen, and by that knowledge which hee hath more then
beaſts haue, thereby encreaſing in him a vaine deſire of ſuch a happineſſe
as hee can neuer enioy? And which is woorſe, the more noble
ſpirite that any one hath, the more learned and vertuous hee is, or the
more and longer oppreſſed he is with the miſeries of this life, the more
woulde this vaine deſire pricke and torment him. And if there bee
ſome, who like beaſts paſſe ouer al theſe things without any ſenſe and
feeling, this befalleth them, either becauſe they are of a heauy, ſleepie
and blockiſh ſpirite, or elſe becauſe they are drunken with that
which is commonly called Fortunes fauour, namely, with the honours,
riches, and pleaſures of this world. So that wee muſt conclude
vpon this ſpeech, that becauſe beaſts do here all that they haue
to do, according to thoſe powers and gifts that are naturally in them,
therefore they liue and die heere: but becauſe the Spirite giuen to
man, can not doe heere according to his naturall diſpoſition, it followeth
neceſſarily, that as it is borne in an other place, ſo it muſt haue
another place wherein to effect that which it hath to do.Except the ſoule be immortal, man is created in vaine. And contrariwiſe,
if the ſoule of man be mortall, all that hee hath to doe is in this
life, as it is with beaſts: and then alſo it followeth, that hee was created
in vaine and without cauſe. For God created nothing, but hee propounded
to himſelfe the ende for which hee created it, and that ſuch
an ende as is agreeable to the nature and dignitie of euery one of his
woorkes, elſe all things ſhoulde haue beene created in vaine by him.
Nowe if he created man onely to liue in this worlde, as hee did other
creatures, then did he not in his creation propound to himſelfe an end
beſeeming the excellencie of ſuch a nature. Which thing the greateſt
Philoſophers amongeſt the heathen haue after due conſideration bin
conſtrained to confeſſe. And if man, for whoſe ſake the whole viſible
worlde was created, and who only can, will, and knoweth how to
vſe all things contained therein, was created and receiued this life in
vaine, what ſhal we think of al other things that wee created becauſe
of him, and for his ſake? Shall not the whole worke of creation be in

vaine, and vnworthy the infinite maieſtie and wiſedome of God the
Creator? and hee that is the Gouernour of the world, ſhall hee not be
ſpoiled of all prouidence? Who ought not to abhorre the very cogitation
of ſuch a thing?The immortalitie of the ſoule is linked to the religion & prouidence of God. And yet the religion of God, his prouidence,
and the immortalitie of our ſoule are ſo faſt linked and ioyned together,
and depend in ſuch ſort one vpon an other, that they can not be
ſeparated, neither indeede is it lawfull to ſeparate them. For he that
aboliſheth the one, ſhaketh alſo that faith which wee ought to holde
of the reſt: becauſe if our ſoules be not immortall, there is neither puniſhment
nor reward, either for vertue or vice, or for the good or ill
deedes of men. For wee ſee euidently, howe all things are mingled
and confuſed in the courſe of this preſent life, that they are turned into
a common robbery, that the woorſt men make themſelues Maſters
and Lordes of the worlde, as if it were created onely for them,
that they might bee in it as gods vpon the earth: and contrariwiſe
that good and iuſt men may ſeeme to haue beene created onely for a
pray to the wicked, and to be leſſe accompted of them then the brute
beaſts. Which if it were ſo, then ſhoulde God haue no care of men:
and if hee haue no care of them, howe ſhall hee be their GOD and
Creator, and why ſhoulde they rather then beaſts call vpon him and
honor him? For if it were ſo, what hath hee done, or what doeth hee
yet more for them vnto whome he hath giuen his lawe and commandement
to call vpon him, to honour and ſerue him, then he doeth for
beaſts to whome hee hath giuen no ſuch lawe or commaundement,
and who do not call vpon him nor honour him according to the ſame
as men doe? And what may wee accompt all religion, all feare and
reuerence of God to be, all holineſſe, honeſtie, and vertue, but ſuperſtition,
and a vaine and fooliſh opinion and fancie of the mind of man?
Notwithſtanding there hath alwayes beene a common teſtimonie
and conſent of religion among all nations,An argument taken from the conſent of all people. euen amongeſt the moſt
barbarous and rudeſt people that euer werefound. Neither euer were
any ſo ill taught, but they haue put ſome difference betweene vertue
and vice, and betweene honeſtie and dishoneſtie. It can not be then,
but that religion and vertue, naturally engrauen in the heart of man, are
good things, yea farre better then their contraries. Whereas if God
had no more reſpect to the one then to the other, & were not to iudge
thereof, to what purpoſe ſerueth this difference which men make betweene
them? and what profit ſhall they reape to themſelues by eſteeming
better of that which is good, then of euil? Good men ſhould not
only receiue leſſe profit by vertue then by vice, but further they ſhould
be damnified by the ſame: & wicked men ſhould euer haue the better,

yea they ſhould be rewarded inſteade of being puniſhed.Other reaſons to the ſame end. For the beſt
and iuſteſt men are commonly a pray vnto the wicked. And who ſhall
deliuer them out of their hands, ſeeing for the moſt part they are the
ſtrongeſt, and haue in a maner the gouernement of the worlde in their
power, ſo that the moſt innocent perſons are at their mercie as it were,
except God ſhould let them haue iuſtice either heere in this worlde or
in ſome other? And if God ſhoulde faile in doing iuſtice, vpon what
right ſhould the iuſtice that men vſe againſt malefactors be grounded?
Shall there be more iuſtice in men, who are altogether iniuſtice themſelues,
then in God who is the fountaine of all iuſtice, yea iuſtice it
ſelfe? All this muſt be ſo, or elſe we muſt confeſſe, that all theſe things
teſtifie vnto vs, that God hath care ouer vs, and that there is an other
place and time of rewarding euery man according to his workes, then
in this worlde, and heere in this life. For this cauſe Saint Peter calleth
the day of the laſt iudgement, in which all ſhall appeare before God,
the time of the reſtauration of all things foretolde of God by the mouth of all
his holy prophets ſince the worlde beganne.
                  Actes 3. 21. For conſidering that al things
are ſo confuſed and troubled in the worlde, that it ſeemeth there is no
difference betwixt the bleſſings and curſes of God pronounced in his
lawe, and that all things are turned topſie turuy by the malice of men,
the Lord hath ordained a place and time, in which hee will put an end
to this diſorder, and wil reſtore al things to their right eſtate and good
order. Now if the Lord hath appointed that euery one ſhalbe rewarded
at that time and place, it followeth that then and there alſo wee
muſt ſearch for the end for which man was created, and that his ſoule
ſhall liue there. And if the ſoule then liueth, and in that place, it followeth
well alſo that there is the end of it.What the end
                        •
                      of a thing is. For we take the ende for that
which is the laſt and moſt perfect in euery thing. So that if the queſtion
be of the authoritie of men, and multitude of witneſſes for the confirmation
of that, which hath beene hitherto ſaide of the immortalitie
of the ſoules of men,Of the multitude and qualitie of witneſſes to prooue the immortalitie of the ſoule. wee ſhall haue for this purpoſe all thoſe, who
from the beginning of the worlde amongeſt all people and nations,
haue beleeued and thought that there is a God, that there is a Diuine
nature and prouidence, and conſequently any religion: yea euen thoſe
barbarous and ſauage nations, which were found out of late dayes in
thoſe new Ilands, commonly called the new found world. And if the
qualitie of the witneſſes is to be conſidered, we ſhall ſtill haue almoſt
all on our ſide. For if wee looke vnto the moſt barbarous and ſtrangeſt
nations that are, the teſtimonie of nature which all of them carry
in their hearts, compelleth them to range themſelues on this ſide.
And if we come to others that haue bin more ciuil & better inſtructed,

we ſhall haue a greater aduantage. Or if the queſtion be of the greateſt,
and of ſuch as by the conſent and teſtimonie of all, were accompted,
and were indeede beſt learned and moſt vertuous, we ſhal not only
finde them to haue beene on our ſide, but alſo that they haue condemned
as ignorant men and vnworthy to liue, them that haue beene
of a contrary opinion, betwixt which men and the other there is great
difference.What kinde of Philoſophers Atheiſts and Epicures were. For thoſe among the Philoſophers that denied the immortalitie
of the ſoule, were ſuch as did aboliſh alſo all diuine nature and
prouidence, and all religion, and ſuch as placed the ſoueraigne good
of men in pleaſure: which kinde of men were alwayes woorthily taken
to be the vileſt and moſt abiect, and as it were the skumme and
dregges of the profeſſours of Philoſophie. For to the ende wee may
the better vnderſtand this, by mine aduiſe we will conſider of the beſt
arguments that are alleadged by Philoſophers to prooue the immortalitie
of ſoules, that they who will not credite the teſtimony of the
holy Scriptures, may feele themſelues vrged in their conſcience with
the ſayings of Ethnickes and heathen men, who ſhall riſe vp in iudgement
againſt them, to aggrauate their condemnation. Now it belongeth
to thee, AMANA, to followe this matter.
            
            
               Of an other argument for the immortalitie of the ſoule taken from that naturall
desire which men haue of knowledge: of Aristoteles opinion touching
the nature and immortalitie of the ſoule: of other reaſons of Philoſophers
to prooue that the ſpirite can not be of a corruptible and mortall nature:
and how iuſt men ſhould be more miſerable, and ſhould haue more
occaſion to feare and to eſchew death, then the vniuſt and wicked, if the
ſoule were mortall. Chap. 94.
               AMANA. There is in all men a naturall deſire of knowledge and
wiſedome: yea a man may perceiue that moſt barbarous men deſire
naturally to knowe, vnto what Art ſoeuer they apply their ſpirite,
iudging the ſame to be commendable & honeſt, as contrariwiſe they
accompt it vnbeſeeming a man and diſhoneſt, to be ignorant, to erre,
and to be deceiued. From this deſire the wiſeſt and moſt famous among
the Philoſophers tooke a very good argument to prooue the
immortalitie of the ſoule. For ſeeing this deſire is naturall, and that
in this worlde all the knowledge and wiſedome that men can haue,
is very ſmall, and as it were nothing in reſpect of that which they
want, they conclude neceſſarily, that there muſt needes be ſome other
place and time then in this life, wherein that which is heere begunne
but ſlenderly, is to be accompliſhed and made perfect.
               
                  
The reaſon from whence they deriue their argument,An argument taken from the deſire of wiſedometo prooue the immortalitie of the ſoule. is that common
ſaying, that God and Nature the miniſter of God doe nothing
without cauſe. Wherefore ſeeing this deſire of knowledge and wiſedome
is naturall in man, it can not be in vaine, neither is it giuen vnto
him, but that it ſhould attaine to ſome end and perfection. For to what
purpoſe ſerued the corporal eies of liuing creatures, and for what cauſe
ſhould they be giuen them, if they could neuer ſee, or were to liue alwaies
in darknes? So likewiſe, why ſhould the eies of the ſoule & mind
be giuen to men, thereby to behold celeſtiall and diuine things, which
cannot be ſeene with bodily eies, if they could neuer view them, but in
ſuch darknes as they do heere behold them? To what end alſo ſhould
man be naturally pricked forward with a deſire to know the truth and
to haue skill, if he could neuer ſoundly enioy his deſire, but ſhould remaine
always in ignorance for the greateſt part of thoſe things, which
he deſireth to know, & which are of ſo great waight, that whatſoeuer
he is able to vnderſtand and know in this world, is nothing or very little
in regarde of that which yet remaineth behinde for him to knowe?
For not to ſpeake of thoſe things in which all humane philoſophie
muſt acknowledge her ignorance, let vs come to that vnderſtanding
which wee may haue by the holie Scriptures reuealed vnto vs of God.
For although the knowledge wee haue by them, ſurpaſſeth without al
compariſon all humane philoſophie and ſcience,1. Cor. 13. 12. yet Saint Paul compareth
it to a knowledge that is very obſcure, to a light that is ſeene
through thicke and darke cloudes, and to an image repreſented vnto
vs in a glaſſe, in compariſon of that moſt high and perfect knowledge
and vnderſtanding, which is reſerued for vs in another life, and whereof
we haue here but a very little taſte and weake beginning. Therefore
if wee could neuer goe further, would it not be a vaine and ridiculous
thing, if God had giuen this deſire onely to men, and neuer woulde
vouchſafe to let them haue the effect of it? And if it were ſo, that God
had not ordained an other time and place, for the finiſhing of that
which is heere beginne in this life, it ſeemeth that the complaint
made by ſome of the greateſt Philoſophers againſt Nature, ſhoulde
not be without ſome ground of reaſon.An obiection made by ſome Philoſophers. For what iuſt cauſe is there,
that hee ſhoulde giue a longer life to ſome beaſts then to men, ſeeing
it skilleth not whether beaſtes liue long or no, becauſe long life cannot
make them more learned or more wiſe then they are at their
birth? But it is otherwiſe in man. For ſeeing that knowledge and
wiſedome are his greateſt Good, whereby hee approcheth neerer
to the nature of God, and of which all his other good things chiefely
depend, it ſeemeth to ſtand with reaſon, that God ſhould haue giuen a

longer life to men then to beaſts, that ſo they might the better attaine
to ſo great a Good, ſo neceſſarie for them, in regarde of which eſpecially,
they are preferred before beaſts and differ from them. For wee
ſee by experience, that wee muſt die ſo ſoone almoſt as wee beginne
to taſte of Sciences,The anſwere. and to waxe wiſe. But we haue no cauſe to make
this complaint againſt the wiſedome, prudence, and goodneſſe of
God, who hath granted vs life long enough, wherein we may learne
heere as much as wee neede (if wee coulde vſe it well) both to paſſe away
this life, and alſo to attaine to the other, in which wee ſhall abound
in knowledge and wiſedome, and be fully ſatisfied therewithall.
And although God had giuen vs a life twice as long in this world
as that wee nowe enioy, ſo that we might liue as long as the ancient
Patriarkes, whoſe yeeres were ſo many, eſpecially before the flood
as Moſes teſtifieth, yet all that which wee coulde poſſibly learne during
the time of ſo long life, woulde bee very little in compariſon of
the knowledge reſerued for vs in that Eternitie. For the eies of our
ſpirite and minde are not able to endure ſo great brightneſſe of heauenly
knowledge and wiſedome, whileſt it is heere ſhut vp and as it
were impriſoned in this body of ſinne, and in a manner wholly ouerwhelmed
with darkeneſſe: but it fareth with the ſpirite in this reſpect,
as it doeth with the Owle in regarde of his eies, and of the light of the
ſunne. Therefore euery one hath better cauſe to aſſure himſelfe, that
God hath appointed an other time and place for the full accompliſhment
of this deſire of knowledge and wiſedome, that is ſo firmely engrauen
in the nature of men, then to accuſe God, as if he offered them
iniurie to depriue them thereof by the ſhorteneſſe of their life. Now
let vs come to other particular reaſons of Philoſophers concerning
this matter wee haue in handling.Ariſtoteles opinion touching the immortalitie of the ſoule. Although Aristotele ſo famous amongeſt
them be very obſcure and wauering where hee handleth the
ſame, ſo that it is a very hard matter to vnderſtand what was his opinion
and reſolution therein, neuertheleſſe hee dares not plainely
ſay, that the ſpirit of man is of a bodily nature and corruptible matter,
or that it is mortall as the body is. But in one place hee ſaieth, that if
the Spirite be able to vnderſtand without the fantaſie, it may bee ſeparated
from it: but if it cannot vnderſtand without it, then it cannot
be ſeparated. Which is all one as if hee ſaide, that if the ſpirite
could vnderſtand without the ſenſes, and the vnderſtanding and reaſon
without fantaſie and imagination, then a man might certainely
conclude, that there is a difference in nature and ſubſtaunce betweene
theſe things, and that there may a ſeparation bee made: ſo that the
deſtruction of the one doeth not bring with it a corruption of the other.

Wherefore none may conclude the mortalitie of the ſpirite that
is capable of reaſon and vnderſtanding, by the mortalitie either of
the externall or internall ſenſes. But Aristotele leaueth it doubtfull
in this place, whether this ſeparation may bee made yea or no, and
whether a man may conclude thereupon, that the ſpirite is of an other
nature and ſubſtaunce then the ſenſes are, and ſo conſequently
immortall. But it followeth not, that if the ſoule being in the body
vnderſtandeth things bodily, that is to ſay, by the bodily inſtruments
that are outward, and then by the conueiance of the internall ſenſes,
therefore it can vnderſtand nothing but that which they declare and
bring vnto it.How the vnderſtanding commeth to ye knowledge of outward things by the ſenſes. For after the internal ſenſes haue gathered together the
images and ſimilitudes of thoſe externall things that are offered vnto
them, and ſo retaineth them faſt being ſecluded and ſeparated from
all matter, the vnderſtanding is to receiue from thence the firſt and
ſimple knowledge of things. So that as the qualities of externall
things are the matter ſubiect of the internall ſenſes, ſo their images
conceiued by the internall ſenſes, and purged from all bodily matter,
are the matter ſubiect of the vnderſtanding and ſpirit. And the
ſpirite labouring about them draweth out certaine motions, and
knoweth many things from them, which can not mooue the ſenſes,
and which the ſenſes can not know. And yet the ſpirite is firſt mooued
by theſe images, as the ſenſes are by externall things. But wee
muſt declare theſe things ſomewhat more familiarly. We vnderſtand
already, howe corporall things are the ſubiect and obiects of the corporall
ſenſes, and that the bodily ſenſes receiue and know them corporally,
euen ſuch as they are preſented vnto them, euery one according
to his nature and office.Howe the outward ſenſes looke vpon things. But they cannot receiue or perceiue any
more then that which is laied open vnto them, and manifeſteth it
ſelfe outwardly.How the internal ſenſes receiue the ſame things. Nowe after the outward ſenſes haue thus receiued
them and their matter couered with their qualities, the internall ſenſes,
to which the externall are ſeruiceable, conceiue the images
without the matters and qualities of thoſe things whereof they are images.
For the eye cannot ſee either the ſunne or the light of it, nor
yet any other creature diſcouered by the light, except it bee preſent
before it. But the Fantaſie and imagination receiue and conceiue
the images of things, euen in darkeneſſe, although the things of
which they are images, appearant to the eyes, nor yet are perceiued
at that preſent by any corporall ſenſe. We ſee then already how theſe
images are ſeparated from the matter of which they are images, and
how the internall ſenſes behold them without their matter & bodies,
as the external ſenſes look vpon them being ioined with their bodies.
               
                  
Then hauing receiued them thus purged from their corporall
matter, the ſpirite receiueth them yet more pure, and goeth further
in the knowledge and vnderſtanding of them then all the ſenſes doe,
comprehending other things, of which the ſenſes can haue no knowledge
or apprehenſion.How the Spirite receiueth them from the internall ſenſes. And thus the Spirite beholdeth and vnderſtandeth
corporall things corporally, that is by meanes of thoſe inſtruments
which it hath in the body, and ſpirituall things it beholdeth ſpiritually
without thoſe inſtruments. Whereupon it followeth, that although
it vſeth the ſenſes and ſuch kinde of inſtruments, neuertheleſſe
it is not ſo tied vnto them that it can not be ſeparated, or do nothing
without them, or not knowe and vnderſtand that which they are not
able to conceiue or know.Other reaſons for the immortalitie of the ſoule. So that it is no hard matter to beleeue, that
the ſoule is of another nature and ſubſtance, as a man may iudge alſo
by this that it is the fountaine and beginning of motion begunne by it
ſelfe, and not by any other, but as we haue already declared. Likewiſe
by this, that it is capable of the knowledge of infinite things, of
which it retaineth the memorie, and that it inquireth into ſecret things
ſeparated from all corporall matter, which can not be perceiued by any
ſenſe: and that it doeth ſo many and ſo great things without the
helpe of any bodily nature. Whereupon the Philoſophers conclude,
that it is of a ſimple nature, not compounded, and ſo conſequently that
it is immortall. For that nature, which is adorned and decked with
ſuch vertues, and with the facultie to vnderſtand, the like whereof is
not in the body, and which can vnderſtand by it ſelfe without the vſe
of the body, can not be compounded of an earthly and mortall nature,
nor haue any part thereof mingled with it ſelfe, but it is ſtayed and ſuſtained
by it ſelfe,The ſoule can not be diuided. it ſubſiſteth of it ſelfe and is immortall. Heereof alſo
it followeth, that if the ſoule of man be of ſuch a nature, then it cannot
be rent in ſunder or diuided, or pulled into peeces, or haue any thing
in it that can be ſeparated from it: and ſo it muſt needes be that it can
not die or periſh. And therefore the beſt and moſt excellent Philoſophers
holde that ſentence as immooueable, which Aristotle ſaieth in
an other place, namely, that the ſpirite is a thing ſeparate and diſtinct
from the ſenſes and from the body, as an immortall thing from a mortall:
and that it commeth from without, and elſe-where then from the
body, as we haue already touched it in another place. Whereby to my
thinking, he hath declared very plainely, that he did not take the ſoule
of man to be mortal. But yet it is ſomewhat hard to iudge what his opinion
was, becauſe he doth not ſhew himſelfe ſo openly as the matter
requireth. Yet whatſoeuer he thought or reſolued with himſelfe, the
ſoule ſhal not be therfore any whit the more mortall or immortall. For

the immortality therof depēdeth not vpon his opinion, or of any other
mans whatſoeuer. Neuertheleſſe ſeeing ſo ſubtill and ſharpe a Philoſopher
durſt not affirme that it was mortall, euerie one of anie ſound
mind may wel iudge, that hee knew there were too many arguments
to the contrary, and thoſe ſo waightie, that they deſerued to bee diligently
examined, and were not ſo lightly to be reiected. For hee was
not ſo ſhamefaſt and modeſt, but he durſt boldly reiect and condemn
the opinions and ſentences of all others that were as wel in his time as
before him, how great and famous perſonages ſoeuer they were, when
he thought he could doe it with any ſhew of reaſon, inſomuch as hee
ſpared not his maſter Plato. Therefore albeit we had no other reſolution
from him touching this matter, but this only that he was in doubt,
and durſt affirme nothing on either ſide, yet his authoritie ought to
preuaile much with vs againſt them who depende onely of humane
Philoſophie and reaſon, and are ſo eaſily induced to approue rather of
the mortalitie then of the immortalitie of the ſoule. For at leaſtwiſe
they may imagine, that ſo great a Philoſopher who is in ſuch woonderful
eſtimation amongſt all learned men, did not iudge their reaſons
friuolous and vaine, who mainteined the immortalitie of the ſoule, as
our Epicures and Atheiſts thinke, becauſe they are more blockiſh and
foole-hardie. And therefore they boldly condemne that which either
they will not or cannot conceiue and comprehend, not conſidering
what a confuſion of things their opinion worketh in all mankinde.Other reaſons for the immortality of the ſoule. For
beſides that which wee haue ſpoken to this purpoſe alreadie, if it were
ſo that the ſoule were mortall, the wickedeſt and moſt deſperate men
ſhould haue that which they deſire moſt, and which is moſt expedient
for them: and that ſhould befall the beſt and iuſteſt men, which
they abhorre moſt, and flee from as very hurtful for them: contrary to
that which Salomon ſaith in the Prouerbes,Prou. 10. 24. 
                  That the wicked ſhall fall into
the euill he feareth, and that the deſire of the iuſt ſhalbe accompliſhed. In
regard whereof good men ſhoulde haue farre greater reaſon to feare
death, then the wicked to deſire it. For what good man is there of noble
courage, who will not greatly abhorre death, when hee thinketh
with himſelfe, that it conſumeth and ſwalloweth vp the whole man,
as if he were buried in perpetuall darkneſſe? What conſolation will
ſerue him, and what comfort can a man offer him, that will be able to
ſurmount the feare and horrour of death, but that he will expect and
ſuffer it with great impatiencie and deſpaire, when he ſhal be through
neceſſitie brought vnto it? As for that conſolation, which is taken
from the neceſſitie of nature, and from the common condition of all
men, it is very leane if there be no other. We ſee by them who are ſo

greatly tormented, that they wiſh and aske after death, as after a
hauen wherein they may bee deliuered from that tempeſt and torment
in which they are, although the greefe which they ſuffer
breede ſuch vowes and deſires in them, yet if they haue but a ſmal
reſpite, they gather ſome conſolation to themſelues by ſome aſſurance, that their griefe will in time ceaſe, or els that time and cuſtome will make it lighter vnto them, and will teach them to beare it
patiently.
               To be ſhort,Euery one naturally deſireth life. life is acceptable and beloued of euery one, that
ſuch as are moſt miſerable and wretched cannot bee brought to
leaue it but with great griefe, no not thoſe who deſtroy themſelues
with their owne handes. Whereby wee may iudge, howe
much more bitter it is to them that haue not all theſe occaſions to
deſire it. For euery one may imagine, what extreame griefe it
woulde bee to a good man, who for liuing honeſtly all his life time,
and for all the good which hee had euer thought, ſpoken or done,
ſhoulde not onely receiue no honour nor recompence in this world,
but which is woorſe, (as it commonly falleth out among men)
ſhoulde receiue nothing but euill for good. And yet in the meane
time hee ſhoulde ſee the woorſt men, that wholly giue ouer themſelues
to diſhonour and deſpite God, enioy the honours, riches,
and pleaſures of this worlde: and contrariwiſe himſelfe to haue nothing
but diſhonour, ſhame, confuſion, famine, pouertie, miſerie,
ſorowe, torment, and oftentimes cruell death. What comfort
can ſuch a bodie haue, if hee thinke that there is no other rewarde
after this life, nor anie better eſtate for him then for the
moſt wicked and abhominable perſon in the worlde? And although
none of all this ſhoulde euer happen to good men, yet what contentation
coulde they finde in all the rewardes, which they ſhoulde
receiue in this worlde for recompence of their vertue? It is an eaſie
matter to iudge by this, that the memorie of the name and prayſe
of well-doing doeth not alwayes take effect, neither is it alwayes
due to them that haue it, but oftentimes verie vniuſtly giuen. But
from thee, ARAM, wee ſhall receiue more full inſtruction touching
this matter.
            
            
               
               Of that praiſe and reward which wiſedome and vertue may receiue of men
in this world: how miſerable it is, if there be no better prepared for them
els-where: how death would be more grieuous and lamentable to the best
learned and wiſeſt men, then to the ignorant and fooliſh, if the ſoule were
mortall: how the beſt and moſt certaine iudgement of men is for the immortalitie
of the ſoule: of them who not beleeuing the ſame, ſay that it
is good for men to be in ſuch an errour. Chap. 95.
               ARAM. If the Philoſophers might draw many arguments of great
waight from the natural deſires of men, to proue the immortality
of ſoules, this which we haue now to propound of ye purpoſe & reward,
which euery one naturally deſireth, is of great conſideration touching
this matter. For it is very certain, that the beſt & moſt iuſt among mē,
albeit they could auoide all hurt from wicked men, wherewith commonly
they are rewarded from procuring their good, yet they ſhould
not enioy any true and ſound contentation in any of theſe rewardes,
which they might haue in this world as a recompence of their vertue.
But rather whileſt they were expecting and hoping for them, they
ſhould be euer in doubt and feare of miſſing them, by reaſon of the inconſtancie
of men, and of the vncertaintie of all humane things. So
that nature might well ſeeme to haue giuen vnto them this deſire of
praiſe and of reward, if they ſhould neuer enioy their deſire els-where
but in this preſent life. Whereof wee may eaſily iudge by the reaſons
that are to be ſet downe.Reaſons taken from reward and praiſe to proue the immortality of the ſoule.
               
               For the firſt, the memory of a mans name and the praiſe for wel doing,
doth not alwaies come to paſſe, neither doth it fal out aright in regard
of all, but is for the moſt part very vniuſt. For how often is glorie
and honour attributed to vices, yea to very execrable crimes and to
the wicked, whereas it ought to be giuen to vertue and to good men?
And if theſe haue ſometime any commendation, yet it is very ſparing.
But it falleth out much woorſe, when vertue receiueth blame in ſtead
of praiſe. And when ſomething is giuen to them vnto whom it appertaineth,
it cannot be ſtretched out farre, by reaſon of the diuerſity and
contrarietie of natures, of minds and of opinions, of the manners of
men, and of people and nations. For howe often commeth it to
paſſe, that ſome condemne and blame that which others approoue
and prayſe? Yea manie times one and the ſame man will contradict
himſelfe through the inconſtancie of his iudgement, nowe
diſprayſing that which before hee had prayſed, and contrariwiſe.
On the other ſide, albeit fame and commendation ſhould be neuer ſo

great, yet it could not bee of any long continuance, conſidering that
time conſumeth, and bringeth an ende to all that is vnder the heauens.
Moreouer, we ſee what great alterations are daily wrought by time:
and although praiſe were perpetuall among the liuing, yet what
could it profite the dead?The dead haue no feeling of praiſe. or what feeling can they haue of that, more
then of blame and infamie? For the praiſe which good kings and
Princes haue purchaſed by their vertues, and the memorie they haue
left behinde them among men, can profit them no more in regard of
the world, then the memorie of that infamie and diſpraiſe, which tyrants
haue left behind them can doe them any hurt. For how wel or ill
ſoeuer men ſpeake and thinke one of another, the dead haue no ſenſe
at all thereof. Yea it is likely, that they care not greatly for it, and that
they reſt neuer the leſſe at their eaſe for all that. Therefore wee may
well conclude, that notwithſtanding all the praiſe and reward which
wiſedome and vertue can receiue from men in this world, yet they are
ſtill very miſerable, if there be no better prouided for them elſe where.
And if wiſe and vertuous men hope for another rewarde, they muſt
needes beleeue a ſecond life, in which they ſhall bee recompenſed for
their good and iuſt works. But further, when a learned and wiſe man
hath by his ſpirite diſcourſed and gone through the heauens, the planets
and ſtarres, beaſts, men, and through all nature, yea hath reached
to the Angels, and euen to God himſelfe the Creator and king of the
whole worlde, and hath paſſed through all hiſtories both new & old,
and hath gotten the knowledge of all things contained in them, that
haue come to paſſe in the world:Death moſt lamentable to the beſt men, if the ſoule were not immortal. I pray you let vs conſider what hee
can be tolde of, that wilbe more grieuous, more bitter and feareful vnto
him, then of death, and what conſolation can he receiue when hee
ſhall vnderſtand, that his ſoule which hath ſeene and beheld ſo great
riches, ſo many goodly and excellent things, and which hath beene as
it were the ſtorehouſe and treaſurie of them, ſhall be wholly extinguiſhed
in the middeſt of ſuch a goodly, pleaſaunt, and wonderfull ſcaffold
and theatre, that is ſo excellently adorned with all kinde of beautie,
ſo that it ſhall neuer be againe at any time or in any place, nor ſhal
haue any more ſenſe and feeling then the ſoule of a beaſt hath. What
is he, who after ſuch a conſideration of death, ſhould not haue great
cauſe to feare it, in ſo great miſery as may befall him in this life? Doe
we thinke that theſe men among the Heathen who haue heeretofore
ſlain themſelues to eſchew the hands of their enemies, and that ſhame
and infamie which they feared to receiue among men, and who haue
accounted it an acte of great vertue and conſtancie to kill themſelues
in that maner for the auoyding of ſhame, would haue done that which

they did, if they had not thought that there had beene another life beſides
this?
                     Cato beleeued the immortality of the ſoule. At leaſtwiſe Cato Vticenſis for his part part teſtifieth this vnto
vs, who the ſame night in which hee had purpoſed to kill himſelfe
(which he did becauſe he would not fal into the hands and ſubiection
of Iulius Caeſar, againſt whom he had taken Armes in that ciuil warre)
cauſed thoſe Dialogues of Plato to bee read vnto him, in which hee
mainteineth and confirmeth the immortalitie of the ſoule, according
to the doctrine of his maſter Socrates.
                  What comfort it is to beleeue a place of reſt after this life. We may then iudge by the contrarie,
what conſolation it is to a good and wiſe man, againſt all the
miſeries that can befall him in this world, if he knoweth and is aſſuredly
perſwaded, that there is a reſting place prepared for him, not therein
to be depriued of all ſenſe of good and euill, as they imagine who
ſeeke for reſt in death without all hope of another life, but a place of
happines for them that with a good heart and Will haue giuen themſelues
to vertue and holineſſe, which is appointed by God, who is aliuſt,
almightie, and algood. For what reſt can that thing find, which
is not at all? So that if man bee no more after the death of the bodie,
then death cannot bring him any reſt at all. And therefore wee
may ſay of this reſt, that as God is not the God of the dead but of the
liuing, according to the teſtimonie of Ieſus Chriſt, ſo reſt is not for
them, that are not, but for them that are. For reſt preſuppoſeth a beeing,
becauſe the thing it ſelfe muſt needes be, as well as the reſt that
belongeth to it: otherwiſe neither of them both ſhould haue any being.
Thus then we may iudge, after ſo many reaſons taken from nature,
and hauing had ſo many teſtimonies as haue hitherto beene alleged,
from the authoritie and ſayings of men, on which ſide the truth
is moſt certaine, whether with them who haue all good and wiſe men
on their ſide, or with the other, who haue none but fooliſh and wicked
men.
               Wee haue then in this matter which now wee follow,What ſtore of teſtimonies ſtand for the immortality of the ſoule. the iudgement,
authoritie and ſentence of all the greateſt and moſt excellent
men in the world, with the greateſt and chiefeſt part of all mankinde.
Vnto whoſe teſtimony we may further adde religion, iuſtice, holines
and all vertues, which are ſo grounded, and laide vpon the immortalitie
of mans ſoule, that if this foundation bee taken from them, they
are altogether ouerthrowen. For albeit they haue their chiefeſt foundation
in God, neuertheleſſe he hath ſo ordained and ordered them,
that they cannot take place, if there be no immortalitie of ſoules, and
that for the reaſons alreadie declared. It followeth then well, that
trueth is on their ſide. For trueth will rather ſtande for them, then for
vices, villanies, and notorious wickedneſſe, vnto which the mortality

of the ſoule is more agreeable then the immortalitie. And if all the
Philoſophers were not able to attaine to the knowledge of the ſoules
nature, nor define the immortalitie thereof, wee ought not to bee
greatly abaſhed, if ſuch as were moſt ignorant, vile, and abiect of
them (as they are called by ſome of the beſt of the Ancients) abuſed
themſelues ſo groſſely, and ſpake ſo vnreuerently, ſeeing many of
the greater ſort and of good account, fell ſo ſhamefully, and ſhewed
themſelues to be woorſer then beaſtes in ſome things whereof a man
may iudge by the outwarde ſenſes. For haue there not ſome beene
founde, who albeeit they ſawe the ſnowe white, yet they durſt maintaine
that it was blacke, and that pepper was white, and although
they felt the fire hote and burning, yet affirmed that it was colde?
But for this time let vs leaue the opinions of Philoſophers,Of ſuch as ſay, it is good to keepe men in this opinion of the immortalitie of the ſoule, and yet themſelues beleeue it not. and ſpeake
ſomewhat of them, who although they doe not beleeue the immortalitie
of ſoules, nor yet all that is ſpoken of GOD or of religion,
ſay notwithſtanding that it is good for the life of man, that men
ſhoulde bee of that opinion, without which humane ſocietie could
not be kept inuiolable, neither would men do any thing, as they
ought, if they were not as it were with a bridle kept backe by this
feare, that there is another life after this, and that there are gods
to take vengeance of ſuch as haue done euill. And therefore they
ſay, that feare ws the firſt that made gods. Heereof they conclude,
that religion is nothing, but onely in opinion, yea, that it is
nothing elſe but ſuperſtition, which proceedeth from this fooliſh
opinion. But ſeeing this errour ſerueth for the benefit of mans life,
it is good, ſay they, to vpholde it, and to confirme men therein.
And they that vſe this ſpeech, are none of them that are taken to
bee fooles and ignoraunt perſons, but of the greater and skilfuller
ſort of people, yea of the wiſeſt men of the worlde according
to the iudgement of men.How wee muſt iudge of a wiſe man. For when wee ſpeake of good men and
ſuch as are wiſe, wee muſt iudge of them according to the matter
which wee handle, and according to the iudgement of God in his
worde. Therefore, if according to this reaſon wee iudge of theſe
men of whome wee nowe ſpeake, they ſhall be found to be the groſeſt
and moſt blockiſh beaſts that the earth beareth. For all ſcience,
wiſedome, and greatnes, ſeparated from vertue, are not the things
themſelues indeed, but brutiſhneſſe rather, and vile baſeneſſe. And
if we iudge otherwiſe, what is all the knowledge, wiſedome & greatneſſe,
that is in all men, in reſpect of that which is in one Deuil onely?
For what want the deuils from being Angels like to thoſe bleſſed
Angels that continue ſtill in their obedience vnto God? If there

be any queſtion made for greatneſſe of ſpirite, they are all ſpirite.
If for ſuch wiſedome and knowledge as the cunning and wiſe men
of this worlde haue, of whome haue worldly wiſe men learned their
skill but of them, in compariſon of whom they are but young ſchollers?
If the queſtion bee for greatneſſe, what King or Prince in the
worlde is ſo great as they?Ioh. 12. 31. For who is called the prince of this
worlde by Ieſus Chriſt,2. cor. 4. 4. the God of this worlde by Saint Paul,
principalities,Ephe. 6. 12. powers, worldly gouernours, and the princes of the
darkneſſe of this worlde? Are not the deuils ſo called, who rule and
gouerne the great ones of the whole worlde, that are great indeede
according to men, but not according God? What then doe they
want of beeing celeſtiall Angels, but vertue and goodneſſe? But
becauſe theſe men of whome wee ſpeake nowe, beleeue not that
there are Angels or diuels, wee will beate them with other arguments.
For of theſe men alſo there bee ſome that ſay, wee muſt hue
as the moſt doe, but followe the opinion of the feweſt. Nowe
then, when they woulde haue men to bee perſwaded to vertue, and
to doe their duetie by lying and errour, namely, by intertayning
in them an opinion of religion, and of a ſecond life, although there
bee no ſuch thing, is not this, a very proper meanes to call all trueth
into queſtion,The inconueniences which follow the former opinion of perſwading men to goodneſſe by falſe meanes. and to trample all vertue vnder foote? For if any
propounde the immortalitie of ſoules vnto men, not as if it were
a true matter, but as a fayned and falſe thing, which yet they would
haue them beleeue as true, to the ende that through the feare of
Gods iudgement they might bee kept backe from euill, and lead
vnto goodneſſe, euerie one may gueſſe eaſily, howe men will diſpence
with themſelues, when they once knowe, that whatſoeuer
is ſpoken and propounded vnto them, is but as a ſcarre-crowe to
make them afraide, as wee vſe to deale with little children and with
birdes by puppets and ſtrawe-men, and ſuch like things. And who
will firſt perceiue and finde out theſe ſubtilties, ſuch as are moſt ignoraunt
and fooliſh, or the other that are more skilfull and wiſe? It is
eaſie to iudge, that they who haue beſt wittes and are beſt learned will
ſooner perceiue the ſame then the other.
               Now what wil follow hereupon, but that they being freed from the
feare which held them in before, ſhall by the ſame means be let loofe
and ſundred from the bond of all religion and vertue, as if it were clean
broken: as it hath & daily doth happen to them that mainteine this opinion,
and to thoſe alſo that haue beene taught and inſtructed in their
ſchoole. And conſequently this alſo will follow, that the quicker and
ſharper wit a man hath, and the greater knowledge & vnderſtanding

is in him, the more wicked and badde man hee will proue. For if hee
vnderſtand that religion is but religion in name, and indeed is nothing
but fooliſh ſuperſtition, and if hee iudge as much of the immortalitie
of the ſoule: hauing thus ſhaken off all religion, he will caſt away all
feare of God, and not ſuffer himſelfe to be brideled in any ſort, either
by any terrour of the iudgement to come, or reuerence of the deitie,
but onely by the feare of mens lawes. And if this take place in men,
we may wel thinke what licence they will take to themſelues to commit
the greateſt ſinnes and abominations in the worlde, eſpecially if
they be in darknes, and thinke that no man ſeeth them, and that there
is no other iudge that perceiueth them, to whome they muſt one day
giue an account. And if they be ſo great, that by their power they may
violate all lawes both diuine and humane, as tyrants commonly vſe
to doe, who ſhall ſtay them from liuing like ſauage beaſtes among
men? So that as euery one by dexteritie of ſpirite, by doctrine and inſtruction,
ſhall approch neerer to that perfection for which man was
created of God, the more enclined, readie and armed he will bee to
commit all kinde of malice and wickedneſſe. For how can hee doe otherwiſe,
when that ſecret of the ſchoole ſhall be diſcloſed vnto him,
and when he ſhall learne, that whatſoeuer is here taught concerning
religion, vertue and honeſtie amongſt men, is but fained and inuented
for the nonce to keepe men in feare? Surely this will cauſe him to let
looſe the raines to all licenciouſneſſe. Nowe what corruption of the
ſpirite and mind of man is there comparable to this? or what will ſooner
turne it aſide from that perfection in which the ſoueraigne & chief
good of it conſiſteth? Therefore ſeeing the caſe ſtandeth thus, this opinion
of theirs cannot be true, but ouerthroweth it ſelfe. For whatſoeuer
corrupteth the ſpirite and turneth it from his perfection, is contrarie
to the nature thereof.
               Wherefore wee muſt conclude,That which corrupteth the ſpirit is contrary to the nature of it. that it is farre otherwiſe, and that
this ſaying of theirs is as true, as if one ſhould ſay, that the perfecter a
man is, the more he is vnperfect: the better he is, the worſe he is: and
the more truly he is man, the further off he is from the nature of a man,
and more like to the nature of ſauage beaſts. Who then can doubt of
the truth of the ſoules immortalitie after ſo great a multitude of arguments,
and of ſo ſtrong and ſo mightie witneſſes, who fight in battel
aray, as it were a ſtrong armie, againſt them that vpholde the contrarie?
But we haue other no leſſe worthie to bee conſidered of, which
we beare within our ſelues, and which are ſo common to all, that there
is no man whatſoeuer, but hee feeleth and perceiueth them, whether
he will or no. Therefore it ſhall bee good for vs to ſpeake ſomewhat

thereof alſo, to the ende that the matter we haue nowe in hande, may
be the better and more perfectly vnderſtood, to the confuſion of Epicures
and Atheiſts: and that we may ſtill acknowledge more and more
the teſtimonies of the image of God in vs, and who we bee, and what
good or euill things are prepared for vs in the immortalitie of the ſecond
life, according as we ſhalbe conformed & reformed to the will of
God, or els as we ſhalbe remoued from that image & giue credit to impietie
and lies. Now it belongeth to thee, ACHITOB, to diſcourſe of
this matter.
            
            
               Of thoſe internall teſtimonies, which all men cary within themſelues, to conuince
them that doubt of the immortality of the ſoule, & of the iudgement
to come, which ſhalbe in eternall happines for the good, and perpetuall torment
for the euill: how the very Heathen acknowledged as much by reaſons
taken from the teſtimonies of nature. Chap. 96.
               ACHIT. The manifold miſeries & ſcourges of Gods wrath wherwith
men are daily oppreſſed, ſhould miniſter vnto thē iuſt occaſion
to think, how odious their ſinnes and wickednes are to God, & that
he will not leaue them vnpuniſhed, neither in this life nor in the life to
come. For as he giueth to his children of his goodnes, and of thoſe good
things which he hath prepared for them in another life, by the benefits
which he communicateth vnto them in this: ſo he ſetteth before our eies
teſtimonies of his wrath and of his iudgement, and of thoſe euils & torments
which he hath prepared for the wicked in another life, by them
wherewith he vſeth to correct and puniſh them here in this world. But
beſides this, euery one hath within himſelf teſtimonies either of eternal
bleſſings or curſes to come: which may eaſily conuince them that will
not receiue ye authority of the ſcriptures, nor any natural reaſon to proue
the immortality of the ſoule. For they beare about them all their witneſſes
& their owne condemnation; and therefore it wilbe an eaſy matter
to conuince them,The difference betwixt conuincing and con
                     
                        •
                     ounding a man. although not to cōfound them. I ſay to conuince thē,
becauſe a man is then conuinced, whē he is compelled to acknowledge
in his conſcience, that he hath no reaſon whereby he is able to gainſay &
withſtād ye truth declared vnto him, which cōdemneth him. But yet if he
be obſtinat, headſtrong, malicious and peruerſe, he neuer ceaſeth for all
that to kick againſt the prick, & to perſeuere in his obſtinacy, & peeuiſh
malice. For when reaſon faileth him, he armeth himſelf with impudēcy,
like to a bolde murderer, and to a ſhameleſſe ſtrumpet that cannot be
made aſhamed. But howſoeuer wicked men labour to blind their mind,
and to harden their heart againſt the iudgement of God, yet the ſame is
neuer declared vnto them, but they feele themſelues pricked & prieſſed

therewith will they nill they: not that it fareth with them as it doeth
with Gods children, who are touched therewith vnto repentance, but
as Saint Paul ſpeaking of the wicked and obſtinate ſaith, that God hath
giuen them a pricking ſpirite, becauſe they haue a bitter heart, which
ſtirreth them vp to whet themſelues as it were more and more againſt
God, and to deſpite him, when they feele themſelues preſſed and vrged
by his word and by his iudgements.
               Now then God hauing created Angels and men,Internal teſtimonies of the immortality of the ſoule. that they ſhoulde
know him and follow his will, gaue them a nature endued with vnderſtanding,
and hath ſet within them rules of iudgement, and of certaine
knowledge, which are vnto them as lawes in nature, and hath alſo placed
in them the will with the affections, as miniſters and practiſers of
thoſe rules and lawes. This ſelfe-fame diuine prouidence hath appointed
alſo that the affection of ioy ſhould be naturally in men, which
commeth vnto them by reaſon of ſome good which they receiue or
looke for, when they obey his lawes that commaundeth them to doe
iuſt things: as contrariwiſe, he hath put in them the affection of ſorow
and heauineſſe to take vengeance of their rebellion againſt his lawes,
and of the tranſgreſſion of them. For as God hath decreed, that the nature
of man ſhould leade a ioyfull life, and ſhould by this meanes of ioy
be preſerued in the knowledge of God his creator and in his obedience,
and ſo reſt in him: ſo alſo he hath appointed flames of wrath and griefe
to deſtroy this nature, when it doeth not conforme it ſelfe vnto the rule
of his heauenly wiſedome and will. Therefore wee may well ſay, that
we cary about with vs, as it were our paradiſe and our Hell, and haue
alreadie in this worlde true beginnings of them both. For ſo long as we
conforme our ſelues to God and follow his wiſedome and will, ſo that
we ſubmit our will to his, and deſire not to bee wiſe but in him and by
him, nor iudge any thing good or euil, but according to his iudgement,
neither will any thing but that which hee willeth, and take no pleaſure
but in obeying and pleaſing him, wee cannot bee thus affected
towards him,The cauſe of true ioy in the ſpirite. but we ſhall receiue an vnſpeakeable ioy by that mutuall
participation of loue which is betweene him and vs, and by that taſte
which wee receiue thereby of his goodneſſe, bountie, grace, and fauour
towardes vs, which is the toppe of all happineſſe. For as the nature
of men was created of God, to the ende it might be conformable
vnto him, ſo alſo it was ordained by him that it ſhoulde liue, not to
be extinguiſhed and vndone through griefe, which is an euill that corrupteth
and conſumeth as well as diſeaſes. Therefore if it were conformable
to God, ſo that mens hearts agreed vnto reaſon and right
iudgement, they ſhoulde alwayes reioyce in well doing, both before
and after the 
                     〈…〉
                   and ſo wee 
                     〈…〉
                   as it were

in Paradiſe. And although God be euery where in regard of his nature
and diuine eſſence,Where God is ſaid to be eſpecially. which is infinite, neuertheleſſe wee meane according
to the ſtile of the holy ſcriptures, that hee is properly and ſpecially
there, where hee ſheweth himſelfe good, gracious, and fauourable.
For this is more proper to his nature in regard of vs, and that which maketh
him more louing and amiable to vs, and which is moſt neceſſarie
for vs, and in regard whereof he calleth himſelfe properly our God and
our father. But as he kindleth the ſparkles of loue in their hearts that are
vpright and ſincere, that loue & honour him, which worketh in them ſo
great ioy and conſolation, that all other ioy and pleaſure are nothing
vnto them in reſpect of that: ſo contrariwiſe, if wee turne aſide and ſeparate
our ſelues from him, oppoſing our ſelues againſt his wiſedome
and will, as rebellious ſubiects to their Prince, violating all his
lawes and ſtatutes, he kindleth in vs fire-brands of his wrath and furie,
which woorke in vs extreame griefes,The true cauſe of grief & torment. ſo that wee cannot beare them,
but are conſumed by them. For in this corruption and peruerſeneſſe of
nature, our heart burneth with the flames of this infernall fire with
which it is kindeled, and which ſtriue againſt reaſon and right iudgement,
euen before it hath committed the fault: neither doeth it feare afterwards
to commit the ſame, howe great and enormious ſoeuer it bee.
But foraſmuch as it belongeth to the iuſtice of God, to deſtroy that nature
which is diſobediēt vnto him, he hath eſtabliſhed this order, namely,
that ſorow & griefe (as it were the hangman) ſhould puniſh and deſtroy
them that are guiltie, as criminall perſons are puniſhed by the appoyntment
of iuſtice. Wherefore although wicked men are oftentimes
blockiſh and lulled aſleepe, and as it were voyde of all ſenſe and
feeling, ſo that they feele not this griefe to the quicke, neuertheles in the
ende it is throughly felt of them, ſo that it vtterly deſtroyeth them. For
it is like to a fire, which hauing beene couered or ſmoothered, afterwardes
kindeleth againe, and gathereth ſtrength, when it is vncouered
and receiueth aire, if it haue matter whereupon it may woorke. For beſides
that naturall griefe which hath this office, God addeth thereunto
horrible feare and terrour, whereby hee ouerwhelmeth the wicked,
as if hee thundered vpon them: ſo that euen heere they feele their
Hell, and the fire of Gods wrath taking holde of them, yea they carie
about them their infern all furies, which are vnto them inſteede of
Hangmen.
               Thus wee may learne,How men cary about them the matter of two fires. howe wee carie about with vs the matter
of two fires, the one celeſtiall and diuine, the other infernall and
diueliſh. Wherefore let vs conſider well with our ſelues, which of them
we had rather haue kindeled in vs, and which we ought to deſire moſt,
eyther that which giueth vs both light and heate, and preſerueth vs

in the hope of true life: or elſe that which burneth and conſumeth vs,
and doth wholly depriue vs of that life. Now ſurely they are very wretched,
who deſire not that which is moſt agreeable to their own nature,
& vtterly deteſt and abhorre the other. For as we delight in the fire, becauſe
it giueth vs light and warmeth vs: ſo we feare greatly to be burned
and conſumed by it.Deut. 4. 24. heb. 12. 29. Now both theſe ſorts of fire we finde in God. For
he is a fire to giue light and warmth to them that approch & draw neere
vnto him, and deſire to walk in his light, but contrariwiſe, he is a conſuming
fire,Eſay 66. 24. matth. 22. 13. & 25. 30. ioyned with ſmoke and obſcurity, to them who by rebellion
& diſobediēce ruſh againſt him. For this cauſe the fire of hell & of Gods
wrath, which is prepared for the deuill and for all the reprobate, is called
eternal fire in the holy ſcriptures, that is neuer put out: & the pains
and torments of the damned are likewiſe called darknes without, where
ſhalbe weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. And to the end we might know
the nature of this fire the better, God hath put ſparkles thereof within
vs. Wherefore we are only to conſider what matter we bring to kindle
and encreaſe either the one or the other: either for the preſeruation of
our nature and life, appointed vnto vs by God, or els for the ouerthrow
and deſtruction thereof. And by the ſenſe and feeling, which wee may
haue here of that ioy, gladnes and contentation, which the knowledge
of God and obedience to his will bringeth to our heart, wee may alſo
iudge whether there be a paradiſe, and another life and other ioy beſides
this, which we receiue by corporall pleaſures, as beaſts doe. For this ioy
that commeth to vs from ſuch pleaſures, is common to vs with them, &
vſually it endeth in ſorowe and ſadneſſe. But they haue no other that
commeth vnto their ſoule, of which they may haue any appehenſion
as we haue. And by the ſame conſideration, we may alſo in ſome ſort
iudge of that happines in which we ſhall be in the other life, when this
ioy ſhalbe perfect in vs wherof we haue here but a very ſmal taſte, in reſpect
of that we ſhal haue, when we ſhalbe fully reformed according to
Gods image, ſo yt both our vnderſtanding, reaſon, & wil ſhalbe made cō
                  formable
vnto him, becauſe we ſhalbe wholy ſwallowed vp in his loue.
Contrariwiſe,A ſure argument in the wicked of their future torment in another life. if here we feele a Hel which we cary about vs, and which
greatly tormenteth vs after we haue offended the maieſty of God, eſpecially
when we haue cōmitted ſome horrible crimes, this alſo is another
argument whereby we may iudge whether there be not a Hel, and vengeance
from God to be executed vpon his enemies in another life. For
that ſorow, which our crimes committed doe breede in our hearts, is
within vs as a brand of this fire of Gods wrath, which is daily kindled in
vs more & more. Wherfore if there be in vs already ſuch a vehemēt heat
thereof, when as yet the Lord doeth kindle but a litle the fire-brands of
his wrath in our heartes, how great ſhal it then be, when all his wrath

ſhalbe ſet on fire? Certainly they are very dull that doe not well conſider
and vnderſtand it. Now we haue heard heretofore how the heathen
Philoſophers concluded the immortalitie of mans ſoule by the nature
thereof,Naturall reaſons to proue the immortalitie of mens ſoules. affirming that it is not created or compounded of corruptible
matter, but is of a celeſtiall and diuine nature, by reaſon of that
knowledge which it hath, not onely of particular and corporal things,
as the ſoule of beaſtes hath, but alſo of vniuerſall and ſpirituall things,
and namely, of God, of numbers, of order, of the difference betweene
vertue and vice, and betweene honeſt and diſhoneſt things.
For the knowledge of al theſe things is ſo naturall to mens ſoules, that
they are within them, albeit they haue not receiued thē from without,
eyther by doctrine or inſtruction. Whereby a man may eaſily iudge,
yea it followeth neceſſarily, that they are created of a more excellent
nature then is that of the elements, of a nature that is incorruptible
and perpetuall. Wherefore it is verie euident, that this knowledge,
thus naturall to mens ſoules, is a certaine teſtimonie, that they
are not borne at all aduenture, but are created by great arte, and by
a woonderfull prouidence of that diuine and eternall nature by which
they haue their beeing, namely God their Creatour, for which cauſe
alſo the knowledge of him ſhineth in vs. So alſo we may well iudge,
that God hath not in vaine placed in our nature the knowledge of the
difference that is betweene vertue and vice, betweene things honeſt
and diſhoneſt, and that griefe which is to take vengeance in vs
of thoſe vices and crimes of which wee feele our ſelues guiltie. And
therefore the Heathen themſelues concluded, that there was not
onelie a diuine iuſtice and nature which diſcerned good men from euill,
but alſo that there was another life after this, in which this iudgement
ſhould bee made. For they conſidered what great torments
the wicked feele in their heartes and conſcience, after they haue committed
horrible crimes: and that there is none ſo audacious and obdurate,
not the greateſt mocker and contemner of God and of his
iudgments that can be, who can always exempt himſelfe from this dolour
and paine, notwithſtanding hee labour with all his might to the
contrarie. For there is alwayes a certaine ſecrete vertue of Gods iuſtice,
which goeth beyonde them all, and euermore puniſheth the
wicked. Nowe it is certaine, that theſe things come not thus to paſſe at
all aduenture.
               In like manner,The naturall knowledge of good and euill an argument of our immortality. it is not poſſible, that this knowledge which men
haue to diſcerne vertues from vices ſhoulde bee a caſuall thing, and
come thus to paſſe at aduenture, without the certaine prouidence of
God. For if it were ſo, that there were no puniſhment appoynted for
vices, and no more benefite or ioye prepared of God for the good

then for the euill, it ſhould follow that all this knowledge ſhoulde bee
giuen to man in vaine. For it ſhould doe him no more good then if hee
were without it as brute beaſts are. Moreouer, ſeeing all the wicked are
not puniſhed in this life, it followeth neceſſarily, that there is another
life wherein they ſhalbe puniſhed, and in which alſo God wil acknowledge
the iuſt, and cauſe them to enioy that good which he hath prepared
for them. For God cannot bee God, but he muſt bee all-good, aliuſt,
and almightie. If hee be good, hee cannot hate the good or them
that doe it, but loue them ſo, as that hee cannot doe otherwiſe. For
howe ſhoulde hee not loue his like? And as he cannot hate goodneſſe
or good men, ſo hee cannot loue euill, nor the wicked that follow after
it; but hateth them neceſſarily as contrarie to his nature. Nowe
Loue is of that nature,The nature of loue and hatred. that it cannot but deſire and procure the good
and honour of him whome it loueth: as contrariwiſe, hatred cannot
but deſire and procure the hurt and diſhonour of him whome it hateth.
It followeth then neceſſarily, that God beeing good and iuſt, loueth
good and iuſt men, deſiring and procuring their honour and
their good: and contrariwiſe, that he hateth vniuſt and wicked men,
deſiring and procuring their confuſion and ruine. And if hee haue this
deſire and this will, no doubt but hee can eaſily and doeth alſo execute
the ſame, ſeeing hee is all-iuſt and almightie. Truely this concluſion
cannot ſeeme to bee ill grounded, and thoſe Heathen Philoſophers,
who thereupon haue concluded the immortalitie of ſoules,
and the iudgement of God in another life, had good reaſon ſo to doe.
For it is taken not only from the nature of man and from that image of
God after which he was created, but alſo from the very nature of God.
So that whoſoeuer gaineſayeth the ſame, hath no more reaſon then
if he ſaide, that there is no God, and that God is not God, and that
man is not man, and that he differed in nothing from a beaſt, neither
God from the deuill. And ſo not onely all nature ſhoulde bee ouer-throwen,
but God alſo, the author and Creator thereof. For we ſee almoſt
vſually, that the wickedſt men haue the greateſt honors in this
world, and liue moſt at their eaſe, as we haue alreadie ſhewed. If then
there be a God, and any prouidence and iuſtice in him (now who can
ſo much as thinke there is none, but hee may alſo perſwade himſelfe
withall that there is no worlde nor any creature, and that himſelfe is
not the ſame he is?)The neceſsitie of another life after this. it muſt I ſay, of neceſſitie follow, that if God be,
there is alſo another life, in which that iuſtice ſhalbe perfourmed, which
is not heere executed, and in which both iuſt and vniuſt ſhall receiue
euery one the reward of his iuſtice or iniuſtice. For it is impoſſible, that
God who is ſo good and ſo iuſt a nature, ſhoulde create mankinde in
that ſort, as if he had created the beſt and iuſteſt part thereof, onely to

miſery and wretchedneſſe, and the woorſt to ioy and happineſſe. Now
continuing our diſcourſe of thoſe internall teſtimonies, which euerie
one of vs beareth within him of the immortalitie of the ſoule, we will
ſpeake to morrow of conſcience, which preſſeth men to ſtand in awe
of God and of his iudgements. It is your part, ASER, to intreate of
this matter.
            
            The ende of the twelft dayes worke.
         
         
            THE THIRTEENTH
dayes worke.
            
               Of the teſtimonies which euery one may take from his conſcience: of that feare
vnto which all men are naturally ſubiect to prooue the immortalitie of the
ſoule, and a iudgement of God vpon the iuſt and vniuſt: howe that which
the Atheiſts ſay, that feare cauſeth gods amongeſt men, ſerueth to ouerthrow
their damnable opinion. Chap. 97.
               
                  ASER. The wicked may flatter themſelues, and labour
as much as they liſt to rocke themſelues aſleepe
in their impieties and horrible vices, yet
they cannot preuayle ſo much, but they haue continually
a warning-peece ringing in their eare, and
an Apparitour rapping at their doore without ceaſſing,
ſo that they cannot alwayes ſleepe at their eaſe. For that is
euer true,Gen. 4. 6, 7. which the Lorde ſaide to Cain, Why art thou wroth?
and why is thy countenance cast downe? If thou doe well, ſhalt thou
not bee accepted? and if thou doest not well, ſinne lyeth at the doore.
Which is as much as if hee had ſayde, that if Cain doeth as Abel
doeth, hee ſhall bee receiued of GOD with that honour that hee
is receiued, and ſhall goe with his face looking vpwarde: but if
hee doe otherwiſe, his ſinne will awake him well enough, and not
ſuffer him to haue anie reſt in his conſcience, but will ſo preſſe
him,A ſimilitude. that hee ſhall bee as a man that lyeth alwayes in a portall,
or neere vnto it, who can take no reſt for anie long ſeaſon, by reaſon
of commers and goers that goe in and out by it, or that knocke
at it euerie houre to haue it opened.Sorow euer followeth ſinne. And therefore it is commonly
ſayde, that Repentaunce euer followeth after ſinne. For, howeſoeuer
it may bee ſlowe in comming, yet it cannot bee without great
heauines and ſorow: which no vniuſt perſon can eſchew, but he ſhalbe

ſure to feele it very ſharpe and vehement. For he muſt needes feele and
haue experience in himſelfe, that of euill nothing but euill can befall
him in the ende, and that when he feeleth what euill ſinne bringeth vnto
him, he cannot but bee grieued that he hath committed it, and wiſh
that the thing were to doe againe. Therefore euery wicked man feeleth
himſelfe accuſed and condemned by his owne conſcience, which is a
certaine teſtimonie vnto him, that there is a God and a Iudge, whoſe
iudgement he cannot auoyde. But before we proceed in this diſcourſe,
it ſhalbe good for vs to know what conſcience is properly.
               Wee are then to knowe, that although ſinne hath greatly troubled
the minde which God hath giuen vs, by the darkeneſſe of errour
and ignoraunce wherewith it is filled, yet it coulde not ſo wholly blind
it, but ſtill there remayned in it ſome ſparkles of that light of the
knowledge of God, and of good and euil, which is naturally in men, and
which is borne with them. This remnant that yet remayneth is commonly
called by the Diuines Syntereſis: which is taken from a Greeke
word,What conſcience is. that ſignifieth as much as if wee ſhould ſay, Preſeruation, whereby
that remnant of the light and law of nature that remaineth in vs, is ſtill
preſerued and kept in our ſoule after ſinne. And ſo this worde Syntereſis
ſignifieth that knowledge of the Lawe which is borne with vs:Why it is called Syntereſis.
                  
and it is ſo called, becauſe it alwayes keepeth in man, yea in the
moſt wicked that can bee, an aduertiſement or inſtruction, which
telleth him what is right and iuſt, and that there is a iudgement of God.
Some diſtinguiſh betweene Syntereſis and Conſcience, others take
them both for one and the ſame thing, calling this Syntereſis, the
very conſcience it ſelfe: whereas others ſay it is the naturall iudgement,
and ſome the light of our minde and ſpirite. The Philoſophers,
who had ſome obſcure knowledge, ſaide, that there are certaine
Anticipations in our nature, by which they meant the ſelfe-same
thing in a manner. For by theſe Anticipations they vnderſtande thoſe
principles of knowledge and naturall informations, which being as it
were rules, wee haue not learned of any Maſters, neither by vſe or experience,
but wee haue drawen and receiued them from nature, whom
God hath appoynted in this reſpect to be our miſtres. For this cauſe the
Philoſophers vſed this word Anticipation,
                  Of the Philoſophers Anticipations. or ſom other of the ſame ſignification
in the language wherein they wrote, before we receiue theſe
natural rules from nature, as from our mother, before we receiue any other,
either by learning of our maſters, by vſe, or by ſtudie. For to Anticipate,
ſignifieth as much as to preuent and to take before. It is true, that
theſe rules of nature are in greater number, and more certayne, in ſome
then in others: and ſo are poliſhed and encreaſed more by ſtudie, by
vſe, by experience, and by exerciſe. Nowe by what name ſoeuer this

light of our mind, and this naturall cenſure is called, by which we iudge
what is right and iuſt, or otherwiſe, ſure it is, that of it owne nature it is
alwaies caried to that which is true & good. And from hence commeth
the approbation of vertues, & diſlike of vices, from which alſo the lawes
and commandements of men touching maners doe afterwards flow, &
ſo the conſcience that is within euery one, to the ende it may argue, reprooue,
and condemne him for his owne faults. So that there is no man
but he hath a Iudge within himſelf, except he be altogether depriued of
ſenſe and humane vnderſtanding, and ſo being turned into a brute beaſt,
committeth all vncleannes euen with greedines, as S. Paul ſpeaketh to
the Epheſians.
                  Epheſ. 4. 19. And although ſome men that are moſt forſaken of God
fall ſometimes into this ſenſleſneſſe, yet it continueth not alwayes with
them, but God afterwards rowſeth them vp well enough, & cauſeth thē
to apprehend & feele the rigor of his iudgements. For although nature
were ſo put out & ſmothred in them, that no ſparkle of naturall light to
rectifie their iudgement, appeared in them, nor yet any flame of Gods
wrath, which burneth the hart that is turned aſide from him, yet he hath
other means to kindle the fame againe and to ſet it on flaming, euen after
ſuch a maner,Atheiſts compared to drunkards and madde folks. that it amaſeth them, as if it thundred down vpon thē.
Therfore it fareth with thē as it doth with drunkards & frantik perſons,
who know not whether they haue any ſoule or ſenſe, any mind or conſcience,
ſo long as they are drunke & out of their wits, vntil ſuch time as
they haue ſlept their ful, & are reſtored againe to their right wits. So that
howſoeuer this word Conſcience is vſed, it is properly a iudgement that is
in our mind, whereby we approoue that which is wel done, & reprooue
the contrary. According then as our iudgement is vpright and ſound, or
weake & corrupted, good or euill, ſo alſo haue we our conſcience either
more right or more crooked.A ſit ſimilitude. But as it cannot otherwiſe be, but that they
who haue eies ſee the light, although they will not ſee it, or ſay they doe
not ſee it: ſo it cannot be but that the eies of the mind beholdeth the natural
light that is in it, and thoſe things that are diſcouered vnto it thereby,
ſeeing it proceedeth from God, who is the fountaine of al light, and
who will neuer ſuffer it to be ſo cleane extinguiſhed in man, but that ſtill
there remaineth ſufficient to condemne him withall.The wicked alwaies condemne themſelues. Therefore the very
Heathen coulde ſay, that a wicked perſon could neuer be abſolued by
himſelf, nor yet eſcape and flee from his own iudgement and condemnation,
he being iudge of himſelfe. So that although the wicked and
vniuſt, oftentimes eſcape the iudgement of men, yet they can neuer ſaue
themſelues from their own iudgement, which their conſcience alwaies
executeth after the perfection of their proceſſe. For it exerciſeth foure
offices againſt them.Foure offices of the conſcience. The firſt is, the office of an Accuſer: the ſecond, of
a witnes, & ſo it is as good as a thouſand, as we vſe to ſpeake: the third,

of a Iudge, the fourth, of an executioner and hangman. For ſeeing the
iudgement of the conſcience is ordained and eſtabliſhed by God from
heauen, in that which is well done there alwayes followeth to it, tranquilitie,
reſt, and ioy of heart: and in that which is wickedly done, dolor
and torment, which puniſheth the offence & taketh vengeance of him
that hath committed it.The more wicked a mā is, the greater is his feare. Heereof it is that none liue in greater feare, then
the greateſt contemners of God, that are moſt giuen ouer to all kindes
of vice and wickednes, and who declare moſt euidently by their works,
that no feare of God or of his iudgements holdeth them in. For they
liue as if they carried death alwayes in their boſome, howe good a face
ſoeuer they ſet vpon the matter outwardly. And becauſe they caſt all
feare of God farre from them, he vouchſafeth them not the honour to
giue them a heart to feare him as they ought, but hee beateth downe
their pride in ſuch ſort, that he cauſeth them to ſtand in feare not only of
men, of tempeſts, of thunders and of lightnings, but hee terrifieth them
alſo by dreames, and maketh them to tremble at their owne fancies, yea
they quake oftentimes at flies, and mice, and ſuch contemptible things:
but yet ſo as this feare commeth from a higher cauſe. For it is ſent of
God, who thus derideth his aduerſaries, making himſelfe terrible in his
creatures to them that know him not, neither feare him as their Creatour
and the Creator of thoſe his creatures.The Deitie prooued by that feare which is naturally in men. I ſay then, that although we
had no other teſtimonie in vs of any God, or of any diuinitie and diuine
nature, and ſo conſequently of his iudgement in a ſecond life, yet
this ought to ſuffice vs, that commeth from feare, which is a naturall
perturbation in man, as we haue heard. For whoſoeuer feareth, declareth
plainly thereby that there muſt of neceſſitie be ſome power aboue
him that is able to hurt him. For he that is aſſuredly perſwaded that nothing
can hurt him, is voide of feare.
               Nowe there is no humane power, or creature whatſoeuer it be, that
is able to deliuer men from all feare, no not the greateſt Emperours,
Kings, and Princes themſelues, who are moſt feared and redoubted, and
who cauſe all men to tremble vnder them, being as it were terreſtriall
gods amongſt other men.The greateſt perſons liue in moſt feare. Nay theſe men themſelues are ſo farre from
being deliuered from all feare and terrour, that very ſeldome any liue
in greater feare then they doe, as they declare plainely in that they muſt
alwayes haue a great garde of men about them, and yet can not euer
auoyde thoſe daungers which they feare. For it often commeth to
paſſe, that they are ſlaine, eyther by poiſon, or ſworde, or by ſome other
kinde of violent death, and that by ſuch as ſhould haue kept them,
or whome they truſted moſt, as is to be ſeene by dayly experience. But
albeit there were no other feare then the feare of death, which is commonly
greateſt in the wicked, and which they can not finally auoyde,

yet they can not but liue alwayes in feare. And liuing ſo, they muſt acknowledge
will they nill they, that there is ſome other power greater
then their owne, which cauſeth them to feare, and before which they
muſt one day appeare. For if it were otherwiſe, why ſhoulde they
feare? Nowe whileſt wee ſeeke for this power, wee muſt of neceſſitie
come to one ſoueraigne power, vnder which all other principalities are
raunged, and which hath no other aboue it ſelfe. And being come
thereunto, wee muſt withall conclude, that this power can not be
humane, but muſt needes bee diuine, and ſo conſequently eternall
and infinite: or at leaſtwiſe they muſt confeſſe, that they cannot comprehend
this power.The Atheiſts prouerbe, that feare made gods, turned againſt themſelues. This being ſo, I thinke wee may fight againſt
the Atheiſts with the ſame reaſon whereby they woulde perſwade
themſelues, that there is neither God nor Diuinitie, but onely in the
opinion and fantaſie of men: and that their feare, vnto which they
are alwayes ſubiect, hath put this opinion of God into their heades.
Therefore they alleadge that which a Heathen Poet ſayde, agreeable
to this opinion of the Epicures, namely, that feare was the firſt that
made Gods in the worlde. For men being poſſeſſed therewith, and not
finding ſuch helpe amongeſt all the creatures, as can deliuer them
from all thoſe dangers which they feare, they muſt ſeeke for an other
without the creatures, which can not but bee a diuine power, if there
be any at all, as in trueth there is. Whereunto if Epicures and Atheiſts
will giue no credite, I would fain know of them, what is the cauſe
of this terrour and feare, which is of ſuch vertue and power in the hearts
of all, that no creature whatſoeuer, being partaker of reaſon and vnderſtanding,
can goe beyond it, or is able to plucke it wholly out of
his heart, and vtterly to extinguiſh it: as euery one feeleth by experience
in himſelfe, and as theſe men of whome wee ſpeake, confeſſe
by their owne ſayings. Therefore I can hope for no better from them in
defence of their impietie, but that they ſhould ſtirre maliciouſly againſt
the teſtimonies of their owne conſcience.
               Wee ſay then that feare is not without a ſpeciall prouidence of
GOD giuen to men after an other manner then vnto beaſtes,The difference betwixt the feare in men and in beaſts. who
in deede haue ſome feare put in them, to the ende to keepe themſelues
from hurtfull things before they take and vſe them: but this apprehenſion
of theirs goeth not beyond the euils which may befall them
in this life, as that doeth in men, which reacheth a great deale further.
For they that haue committed ſome horrible crime, can not bee
without feare although they did it ſo ſecretely that no bodie coulde
come to the knowledge of it, or elſe were ſo mightie and powerfull,
that they ſtoode not in awe of any humane power whatſoeuer. Now
if they that haue not this authoritie and aſſuraunce ſhoulde replie

vpon me, that they are afraid leaſt men ſhould come to the knowledge
of the fact committed by them & ſo they ſhould be puniſhed, I demand
of them from whence this feare commeth, but from an apprehenſion
which (will they, nill they) is in them, and proceedeth from a certaine
ſenſe and feeling of nature, which cauſeth them to feare that their offence
ſhalbe diſcouered by ſome other meanes then humane? As if nature
teſtified vnto them, that there is ſome diuine prouidence and vengeance,
which watcheth ouer offences, and diſcloſeth them how ſecret ſoeuer
they are, and cauſeth them to be puniſhed. As experience teacheth
in many, whoſe ſecret crimes haue bin diſcouered by woonderfull and
incredible meanes, ſo that all men are aſtoniſhed at it, and are conſtrained
to confeſſe, that there is a diuine iuſtice, which wil not ſuffer horrible
facts to remaine alwaies hid and vnpuniſhed. Therfore how ſecret and
cloſe ſoeuer they carry the matter, this diuine iuſtice rappeth continually
at the doore of their conſcience, as it were an Apparitor or Sergeant,
calling them to iudgement: ſo that whether they will or no, they muſt
alwaies liue in feare. And this alſo hath bin the cauſe that hath alwayes
induced men (I ſpeake not of Atheiſts,Strong reaſons againſt Atheiſts. who are brute beaſts & not men)
to ſeek after ſome power out of their own nature, & aboue all creatures,
to gard and defend them from the euill which they feare. For, notwithſtanding
their diuerſity of opinions touching the diuine nature, all with
one conſent from time to time haue euermore yeelded publike & conſtant
teſtimonie, that there is ſome diuine eſſence and power, that can
help or hurt them. Whereupon it followeth, that they can not be without
feare of it, or els not without ſom hope, that by the help therof they
ſhalbe kept from the euil which they feare, & obtaine that good which
they deſire. Wherefore if Epicures and Atheiſts ſay, that feare was the
firſt ſhop in which the gods were forged and made in the world, I will
take their ſaying againſt themſelues. For hereby they are compelled at
leaſt to confeſſe,Feare is a natural teſtimonie of a diuine eſſence. that feare hath conſtrained men from time to time to
ſeek after ſome god: and that the ſame is a publike teſtimony of nature,
which hath cauſed thē to lift vp the eies of their mind beyond the reach
of brute beaſts, & forced them to think that there is ſome diuine power
and nature. And by the ſame reaſon alſo they may learne, that this is no
light fancie & vaine opinion entred into the braine of man, but a naturall,
firme, and conſtant notion and knowledge, which no age of man
could euer aboliſh, nor any thing els in the world. Yea this hath bin daily
confirmed in them more and more, and ſhalbe continually, notwithſtanding
theſe ſwiniſh Epicures grunt in their ſties, & theſe dogged Atheiſts
barke againſt God and his prouidence, againſt his iudgement &
the immortalitie of ſoules, which is the principall foundation of religion,
and the eſtabliſhment and preſeruation of humane ſocietie.
               
                  
Nowe then after ſo great a multitude of ſtrong arguments & powerfull
teſtimonies, which like a mighty armie fight in battel aray to maintaine
the truth of the ſoules immortalitie, who can doubt there of in any
wiſe? Let them that vphold the contrary bring forth their arguments &
teſtimonies againſt ours, & place them in the frōt of the battel, as it were
army againſt army, that all may know on which ſide not only the number,
but the ſtrength alſo is the greateſt. For the greatnes of the number
would do ſmall good, vnles ſtrength alſo were ioyned therunto. For we
muſt not ſo much reckon as waigh the ſentences, nor conſider ſo much
how many men affirme a thing, as what maner of perſons they are, & of
what waight their teſtimony is, as alſo what they affirme, & with what
reaſons. If we fal into this conſideration, I doubt not but that euery way
the aduantage will be on our ſide for the trueth: namely, in regarde of
multitude, authoritie, nature, reaſon, and which is more, the teſtimony of
God, who alone is ſufficient. Nowe to the ende that this may bee well
knowen vnto vs, let vs heare, AMANA, the beſt arguments that our
aduerſaries can bring for the ground of their errour.
            
            
               Whether Epicures and Atheists be reaſonable beaſts yea or no, and what reaſons
they bring to ouerthrow the immortalitie of the ſoule: of the falſe opinion
of Pliny touching the ſame, and of his friuolous and brutiſh reaſons to
this purpoſe: of the brutiſh concluſion, vnbeſeeming the whole race of mankinde,
which he maketh of this matter, and of the iudgement of God vpon
him. Chap. 98.
               AMANA. Many men, by reaſon of their ignorance in the Latine
tongue,What this worde Animal ſignifieth. think that Animal is a beaſt, whereas it ſignifieth a liuing
creature, and comprehendeth vnder it aſwell men as beaſts, euen euery
creature endued with a liuing ſoule. And therefore when they woulde
ſhew the difference that is betwene men and beaſts, they take the contrary
ſpecies or kind for the whole, & ſay that a man is a reaſonable beaſt,
not conſidering that they ſpeake contraries. For there is as great difference
betwene a beaſt and reaſonable, as betweene a man & brutiſh, or
brutiſhnes. For-ſeeing it is the naturall property of euery beaſt of what
kind ſoeuer it be, to be brutiſh, it cannot bee that any ſhould bee reaſonable,
except peraduenture Epicures and Atheiſts will ſay that they bee
ſuch beaſts. And indeede they ſhould haue wrong offered them, to bee
reckoned among mē, ſeeing they do voluntarily make themſelues brutiſh.
If then they will not confeſſe, that they are beaſts altogether vncapable
of reaſon,Atheiſts are reaſonable beaſts. I demand of them whether they be reaſonable beaſts,
and whether they will argue this matter whereof we intreat, with reaſons
or no, ſeeing they wil not reſt in the iudgement of humane reaſon,
and of naturall Philoſophie, and ſeeing all the holy Scriptures, holy Doctors,

wiſe Ancients, and moſt notable perſonages, ſeeme vnto them to
be no better then toyes and fables. Let vs come then to the reaſons of
theſe vnreaſonable beaſts without reaſon.
               Is there any point in all humane Philoſophie that is better grounded
and laied vpon ſo ſtrong, firme, and well concluding reaſons, and
that hath moe or ſo many reaſons as this, whereof wee diſpute at this
preſent? Howe many things doe theſe fellowes beleeue according to
naturall Philoſophie, for which they haue not ſo many nor ſo euident
reaſons? And howe many things ſhoulde bee doubted of, except ſo
many arguments coulde bee brought for their proofe and confirmation,
as wee haue alleadged, and as might yet bee found out for this
matter? Nowe what can they alleadge on the contrary ſide? For
if they beleeue nothing but what they ſee, and whereof they haue experience,
I demaund of them, howe many things there are in humane
Philoſophie where of they are throughly reſolued, and yet haue no experience
at all in them, neither can haue any certainetie, but onely as
they giue credite to ſuch as haue written of them, who yet are deceiued
themſelues oftentimes, & ſo haue deceiued others? And yet they are not
ſo hardly brought to beleeue their reaſons, as to giue credite to them
that maintaine the immortalitie of ſoules, which is a matter of ſo great
conſequence and waight.Atheiſts ſitly reſembled to Spiders. And as Spiders turne into poiſon the ſweeteſt
liquors they ſucke, ſo they maliciouſly gather the reaſons, teſtimonies
and places, not onely of Poets, Philoſophers, and others, but
alſo of the holie Scriptures, which they thinke will ſerue to confirme
them daily more and more in their errours, and in their falſe and wicked
opinions, howe little likelihoode ſoeuer they ſeeme to haue, and
howe flenderly ſoeuer they make for them. In the meane ſeaſon they
diſſemble and make ſhewe that they ſee not all the other reaſons that
fight directly againſt them, which being in number infinite, are ſo
cleere and ſo certaine, as nothing can bee more. There are many of
them that haue no other reaſon but their opinon, who can alleadge
no other thing but this, It is not ſo, or, I beleeue it not, or, I doubt
of it, or, Peraduenture it is otherwiſe. And in trueth none of them all
in a manner haue any reaſons of greater ſhewe, or that can vrge them
that haue neuer ſo little iudgement, as wee may eaſily iudge by the
examination of one of their cheefe Maiſters and ſtrong Pillers, I
meane Pliny,
                  Plinies brutiſh opinion touching the immortality of the ſoule. by whome we may iudge of all the reſt. For if hee, who
is ſo much eſteemed among them, ſhewed himſelfe to be ſuch a groſſe
and blockiſh beaſt, and ſo farre from reaſon in that which hee wrote
touching this matter, a man may ſoone gueſſe what can bee in the others,
who are no body in reſpect of him, or at leaſtwiſe haue not
gotten ſo great credite and authoritie. But let vs heare the reaſons of

this venerable Doctor. Firſt, he derideth all that men haue ſpoken or
written of the beeing of ſoules after the death of the bodies, accompting
all this to be but toyes and dreames: and then hee propoundeth
his reſolution, that there remaineth no more of a man after his corporall
death, then there was of him before hee was conceiued and
borne.
               After that he laugheth at the vanitie of men in that they are ſo fooliſh
as at the very time of their death voluntarily to flatter and beguile themſelues,
in promiſing to themſelues life euen after life: ſome by the immortalitie
of the ſoule, others by the transfiguration thereof, and a
third ſort by attributing ſenſe to the dead and by honoring their ſoules,
and making a god of that, which hauing beene a man, is now nothing
at all. I maruaile not if Plinie mocked at many fooliſh opinions that
were among the Heathen touching this matter, and namely, the foo
                  
                     •
                  eries
of the Pythagoreans and Platoniſts, which I doubt not but hee
meant by the transfiguration of ſoules.Plato his opinion of the creation of ſoules. whereof hee maketh mention.
For Plato was ſo farre from yeelding that the ſoule of man was mortall,
that hee will not confeſſe the ſoule of beaſts to bee ſo, becauſe
according to his opinion of the creation of ſoules, hee thinketh that
there is but one kinde of ſoule for all ſortes of bodies that haue life, and
that ſoules paſſe and repaſſe from one to an other, as wee heard, vntill
that being well purged they come to the place of the bleſſed. Likewiſe
this Authour of the naturall hiſtorie had reaſon to deride the follie and
vanitie of men in deifying them that died, and in making them immortall
gods, that had beene before but mortall men. But from theſe fond
opinions he had no reaſon to conclude, that if ſoules did not paſſe and
repaſſe from bodies to bodies, and if men coulde not become gods after
their death, therefore they ceaſed to be men any longer, and nothing
remained of them but their aſhes, ſo that their ſoules alſo periſhed
as well as their bodies.Plinies reaſons againſt the immortalitie of the ſoule. But what reaſons hath hee to vpholde this
concluſion? For the firſt hee alleadgeth, that men breathe not otherwiſe
then beaſts doe,Plin. lib. 7. ca. 55. becauſe hee ſeeth nothing of the ſoule of either
of them, and goeth no further then to the externall ſenſes, as if the
ſoule of men as well as of beaſts were nothing elſe but a breath. Wherby
we ſee what a groſſe beaſt he ſheweth himſelfe to be. We may ſay
the ſame of him, in that he requireth both the internall and externall
ſenſes after the death of a man, and the ſame offices which the ſoule performed
in the bodie when it dwelled therein, concluding that without
theſe things there could be no good for mā after death. Then he taketh
this for an other argument, that there are many other things in the
world, which liue a great deale longer then man doth, and yet we attribute
no immortality vnto them. After, he demandeth whither mā goeth

after death, what lodging he hath, and what a multitude of ſoules there
ſhould be in the world from the time it hath bin a world, if al they ſhuld
liue that haue bin: & ſo concludeth that they ſhould be but as it were ſo
many ſhadows. We haue ſufficiently anſwered all theſe goodly arguments
before, when we ſpake of brutiſh men, who reſt only in the witnes
of their ſenſes, and go no further then beaſts doe. Beſides, what an
argument is that for ſo great a man, to ſay that we attribute not immortalitie
to many things that out-liue men, and therefore why ſhould wee
rather beleeue it of mens ſoules? There are not only many beaſts, whoſe
life is longer then the life of men, but alſo many trees, and therefore wee
muſt aske of man, why we ſhould think that he is rather capable of reaſon,
and more excellent then other creatures are, & that he hath a ſoule
of another nature & more noble then they? But I will further vrge theſe
arguments againſt himſelfe, according as we made anſwere to the complaint
of ſom Philoſophers, who accuſed nature becauſe ſhe had grāted
lōger life to many beaſts then to mē, ſeeing it was ſo neceſſary for them.
For ſeeing Nature hath endued man with ſo many goodly gifts and ſo
excellent, wherewith ſhe hath not adorned beaſts, certainly ſhe ſhould
be a ſtepmother, and no true mother, or if ſhe were a mother yet ſhee
ſhould be a very cruel mother, if ſhe had giuen longer life to beaſts then
to men, & had not reſerued a better & a longer for them. But this reaſon
would not greatly moue Pliny, who is the man himſelfe, that gaue theſe
goodly titles to nature,Pliny blaſphemed God vnder the name of Nature. vnder which name, he blaſphemed God whom
he knew not. Neuertheles this argument wil be of force with them that
waigh it aright, conſidering the prouidence and goodneſſe of God towards
mankinde. He addeth further, that this fantaſticall opinion is entred
into mens braines, becauſe they woulde neuer faile but be eternall.
But this pretended reaſon is ſo far from confirming his opiniō, that contrariwiſe
it greatly weakneth the ſame, in that it agreeth with the argument
for the immortalitie of ſoules, that was taken from this natural deſire
which God hath not giuen to men in vaine, as hath bin ſhewed vnto
vs by good reaſons. Moreouer he iudgeth it great follie to keepe bodies
in hope that they ſhall liue and riſe againe, according to the vaine
promiſe of the Philoſopher Democritus,Democritus beleeued the reſurrection of bodies. who did not riſe againe himſelfe.
But I maruel not if Pliny ſpake ſo of the reſurrection of bodies, ſeeing
he held that opinion of the mortalitie of ſoules: & ſeeing thoſe Philoſphers
who maintained the immortalitie of ſoules, did not ſo much as
once dreame of the reſurrection of bodies, except this Democritus only,
at whom I much more woonder, then at all this which Pliny writeth of
the mortalitie of ſoules. For it ſeemeth that Democritus could not learn
this of reaſon and of natural philoſophy, vnles it were ſo that he builded
his doctrine vpon the ſame foundation that he took from his Motes, cō
                  cerning

the matter of which all things are made. For according to this
opinion hee taught, that all the eſſences that euer were, ſhoulde in
time haue their beeing againe by the meeting together of thoſe matters,
of which they had beene compounded. Surely a very fond opinion
for a Philoſopher, ſo that Pliny may well derde it; although the
argument hee maketh againſt him is not ſtrong enough to ouerthrowe
his imagination. For hee woulde haue had Democritus to haue confirmed
his opinion by his owne reſurrection. But his Philoſophie did
not inſinuate ſo much that it ſhoulde haue beene done ſo quickely, but
after the reuolution of many Ages, which Pliny ſhoulde haue ſtayed
for before hee coulde haue euicted Democritus of his fooliſh opinion,
if hee had no better argument to ouerthrowe it. Nowe if this Philoſopher
did not lay this ground for his opinion which I haue mentioned,
I woulde haue thought that hee might haue vnderſtoode the ſame by
ſome ſpeech come to his eares, of the doctrine of the holie Patriarkes
and of the Hebrewes touching this matter, by meanes of the Aegyptians
amongeſt whome thoſe good Fathers long dwelt, becauſe they
that wrote the liues of the Philoſophers,What Philoſophers went into Egypt to learne wiſedome. put Democritus in the number
of them that deſcended into Aegypt to learne the wiſedome of that
people, as Pythagoras, Plato, Orpheus, Socrates and Pherecydes with others,
did the ſame. But let vs returne to Pliny and heare his other reaſons
ſuch as they be.
               He accounteth it great follie in men to thinke, that by death a man
may enter into a ſecond life: and thereupon breaketh foorth into an exclamation,
as if men were out of their wits ſo to thinke. But he would
haue found it no leſſe impoſſible, that generation ſhoulde come of corruption,
and that of ſeede, which is but as it were a little ſlime, a man
coulde be engendered, or a beaſt, if experience had not taught the
fame. And becauſe hee hath not ſeene a ſoule liue after the death of the
bodie, nor a dead man riſen againe, therefore hee concludeth, that
there is neither immortalitie of the ſoule nor reſurrection of the bodie.
But wee may call to minde that which was vttered to this purpoſe,
when wee ſpake of the ſimilitude that is betweene our firſt and ſecond
birth. I omit that which he ſaieth of the reſt and quietneſſe taken away
for euer from men that are borne, if that diuiſion of the ſoule ſeparated
from the body which ſome Heathen Philoſophers made, ſhoulde take
place, namely, when they ſo diuided it, that the ſence of ſoules remained
aboue, and their ſhadowes beneath among the dead: for all
this is but fopperie. Neuertheleſſe the argument taken from the common
conſent of men touching the immortalitie of ſoules remaineth
ſtill, and is confirmed euen by Plinie himſelfe in this place, although
peraduenture hee neuer thought it.
               
                  
Let vs then come to the finall concluſion which hee maketh of
this whole matter.The concluſion of Plinie touching this matter. Hee calleth it deceit of woordes, and fooliſh
credulitie, whatſoeuer men ſpeake or beleeue of their immortalitie,
and accompteth it as a poiſon that deſtroyeth the chiefe good of Nature,
which as hee ſayeth is death, adding further that by this meanes
death ſhall doubled, or (as ſome reade it) the greefe of him that
is to die ſhall be doubled, when hee ſhall thinke vpon that which is
to come. For if it bee a ſweete and pleaſant thing to liue, to whome
can it bee pleaſant to thinke that hee did once liue? Therefore hee ſetteth
this downe for his laſt reſolution, that it is more eaſie and certaine
for euery one to beleeue himſelfe and that whereof hee hath experience
in himſelfe, then to truſt any other: and to fetch his aſſurance
from that which a man was before hee was borne. Thus wee
ſee howe hee laboureth to perſwade, that no man can bee bleſſed
in the life to come, becauſe the cheefe good thing hee can haue in
nature is taken from him, except hee bee wholly like to beaſtes in his
death, and except hee beleeue that there remaineth no more of him
after death, then there was before his conception and natiuitie. And
to confirme and aſſure himſelfe in this opinion, hee woulde haue euery
one to fetch an argument and proofe heereof from the ſimilitude
of that eſtate in which hee was before hee was conceiued or borne, to
compare it with that which followeth his death, that a man may iudge
of the one by the other. But what reaſon is in that? For is there the ſame
reaſon from not beeing to beeing, that is from beeing to not beeing?
Wee knowe well howe man is come from not beeing to beeing, but
can wee heereby bee ſo aſſured, that hee ſhall bee no more after hee
hath beene, as we knowe hee hath beene after a time wherein he was
not? And whereas hee woulde haue vs giue more credite to our owne
experience in our death, then to all that can bee ſaide by others, I
woulde demaund of him what that is of which wee haue experience,
and whether wee ought to conclude, that wee die wholly as beaſtes
doe, becauſe to the ſence of man wee ſee no difference betwixt their
deaths and the death of man. It ſeemeth this is his meaning. But as
they of his coate aske who euercame from the dead, to teſtifie that
ſoules are immortall, ſo we may aske of him, who euer returned from
thence, to aſſure vs of that which euery one may haue experience of in
his death, and whether they perceiued themſelues to bee altogether
like to beaſtes after the ſame. For they can haue no more certaine teſtimonie
of this by their ſenſes, then they haue of the other point. Alſo
I woulde gladly aske of him howe hee founde himſelfe, when hee
was choked neere to the mountaine 
                     Ʋeſuuius with ſmoake,The iudgement of God in Plinies death. and with
the ſmell of brimſtone iſſuing out of the ſame: and what conſolation

he found in death, which hee ſayeth is the greateſt good of Nature.
Whereby hee ſhewed howe ſmally hee had profited in the knowledge
of God the Creatour of Nature,Plin. Nep▪ epiſt. ad O
                        ••
                     . Ta
                        •
                     . by the contemplation of his workes
therein. No maruaile then if knowing him no better, hee called her
ſtep-mother and cruell mother, ſeeing that according to his Philoſophie,
the greateſt good which ſhee bringeth to men, is death: and
ſeeing ſhee neuer doeth them a better turne, then when he bringeth
them backe againe to that eſtate in which they were before they were
conceiued or borne into the world. According to which concluſion,
a man may wel approue of that deſperate ſentence of theirs who affirmed
reſolutely, that it were good for men, either neuer to be borne,
or to die preſently after their birth. So that the firſt and cheefeſt benefite
of nature ſhoulde be, neuer to bee borne: and the ſecond, to be
borne before the time, or to be as ſoone dead as borne.
               Moreouer it ſhould follow by Plinies Philoſophie,The abſurd conſequents of Plinies opinion. that nature had
made men with ſuch a condition, that they can not but be miſerable,
if they liue after this life, and if death doe not wholy deſtroy them,
and if they be not reſolutely perſwaded of this, to haue no hope at all
of another life. For that which he ſayeth importeth as much. Is not
this then a goodly reſolution and concluſion of ſo great a ſearcher of
nature, whereof he hath written the hiſtorie? With what eies did hee
looke vpon all that which hee might haue ſcene? Howe much differed
they from the eyes of beaſtes? and what profite reaped hee by that
knowledge which hee had more then they? In trueth wee haue in this
man a wonderfull example of Gods iudgement vpon the learned and
wiſe men of the worlde, who ſo vilely abuſe that reaſon, knowledge,
and vnderſtanding which GOD hath giuen them. And foraſmuch
as this dogge was permitted to vomite out ſuch horrible blaſphemies,
both againſt God and againſt Nature, and yet receiued no puniſhment
for the ſame from man, therefore GOD himſelfe tooke vengeance
of him by ſmoke, whereby hee was choaked to death. For ſeeing he
eſteemed the ſoule to be no better then a little winde or breath, he deſerued
well to looſe the ſame in the middeſt of ſmoake and brimſtone.
But we haue ſpoken enough of him. Nowe you may, ARAM, tell vs
ſome more lies rather then reaſons, wherewith Atheiſts fortifie themſelues
againſt the trueth of this matter we haue in hand, and howe wee
ought to conſider of the iudgements of God vpon them.
            
            
               
               Of them who ſay, that we can not knowe by the light of nature but that
the ſoule is mortall: of them that alleadge a place of Salomon againſt
the immortalitie of the ſoule: how we ought to conſider of the iudgements
of God vpon Epicures and Atheiſts: howe the abſurdities,
which followe their doctrine, declare plainely the groſeneſſe of it: of
the force of thoſe arguments that were produced before for the immortalitie
of the ſoule. Chap. 99.
               ARAM. It is a great matter when men iudge of things, not according
to reaſon, but according to their affections: becauſe then
their eares are cloſed vp againſt all reaſons, as wee haue the example of
the Iewes, who were the enemies of Ieſus Chriſt. For after they had
once reſolued not to acknowledge him, neither to receiue him for the
true Annointed of the Lorde, but to reiect and condemne him with all
his doctrine and workes, no reaſon was euer ſufficient to remoue them
from this their purpoſe. But to confirme them in their obſtinacie there
needed no great arguments, no not in ſhew, as it appeareth in that difficultie
of theirs to beleeue his reſurrection. For neither all theſe witneſſes
of which they had ſo great a number, nor all their doctrine, nor
all their holineſſe, nor all their ſignes and miracles, were of any force
with them in regarde of that teſtimonie, which the theeuiſh and murdering
ſouldiers corrupted with money gaue them to the contrary,Mat. 28. 12, 13. and
that by a lowd lie which ouerthrew it ſelfe.
               Therefore we may eaſily iudge what the minde of man is, when it is
corrupted and peruerted, and when men ſuffer themſelues to be carried
away with their euill and froward affections, ſo that God doeth euen
blindfold and forſake them. We ſee many ſuch examples in this matter,
which we now hādle touching the immortalitie of the ſoule. For on the
contrary ſide, what are the ſtrongeſt reaſons, which theſe doggiſh Epicures
& Atheiſts, enemies to God, to mankind, and to all nature, againſt
whom we now diſpute, can alleadge for themſelues? What would they
do if they had as much againſt vs, as we haue againſt them? How would
they lift vp themſelues againſt thoſe that maintaine the contrary, and
tread them vnder their feete? We heard in the former ſpeech the ſtrongeſt
arguments vpon which their error leaneth, wherby we may know
what a badde foundation it hath.Againſt them who ſay that the ſoule can not be knowen to bee immortall according to nature. Others there are who ſay, that in the
light of faith the ſoule is immortall, but in the light of nature it is mortal:
ſo that whileſt they would ſeeme Philoſophers, they ſhew themſelues
to be ignorant and groſſe beaſts. For there is but one only truth both of
nature and of faith, trueth neuer being double, but alwayes one. Therefore
if the ſoule be immortall in the light of faith, it can not be mortall
in the light of nature, but onely in the darkeneſſe thereof.
               
                  
For wee ſee howe this ſmall remnant of naturall light, that yet remaineth
in the corrupt nature of men, ſendeth them with one common
and publike conſent to this trueth of the immortalitie of mens ſoules:
ſo that none, beſides thoſe in whome it is as it were vtterly put out,
and whome God hath by his iudgement wholly reiected and caſt into
a reprobate ſenſe, but acknowledge the ſame. Howe then would
this light of nature ſhewe it ſelfe, if it had ſtill continued in integritie?
Therefore I demaund of theſe men, what it is which they call naturall
light, and whether it be not the reaſon of man: and if it be that reaſon
whereby men differ from beaſtes, I aske againe of them, whether any
thing that may be knowen by arguments and reaſons, although they
were all gathered together and examined narrowly, hath greater and
more euident light of reaſon then this hath. Neuertheleſſe I agree with
them heerein, that the light of faith maketh vs a great deale more
certaine of all this matter, then any reaſon that can be alleadged: becauſe
that is the light of Gods Spirite, which illuminateth the eies of
the minde a great deale more cleerely then any naturall light can doe,
as being grounded vpon the teſtimonie of God himſelfe.Of them that alleadge Salomon againſt the immortalitie of the ſoule. Some alſo
there are, who perſuade themſelues, that Salomon putteth no difference
betwene the ſoule of men and of beaſts, and that he doeth not affirme,
that one of them is more or leſſe mortall or immortall,Eccles. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21. then the other. I
conſidered in mine heart (ſaith the Wiſeman) the ſtate of the children of
men, that God had purged them: yet to ſee to, they are in themſelues as beaſts.
For the condition of the children of men, and the condition of beaſts are euen
as one condition vnto them. As the one dieth, ſo dieth the other: for they
haue all one breath, and there is no excellencie of man aboue the beast: for
all is vanitie. All goe to one place, & all was of the dust, and all ſhall returne
to the duſt. Who knoweth whether the ſpirite of man aſcend vpward, and
the ſpirite of the beaſt deſcend downeward to the earth? But they are greatly
deceiued that thinke to defend their impietie by this ſaying of Salomon.
For it is moſt certaine, that his meaning is not to conclude that it
is ſo indeede, as hee ſpeaketh in that place: as it appeareth manifeſtly
by his finall reſolution in the ſame Booke made of the matter hee
hath in hand, wherein he concludeth touching the body of man, that
dust returneth to the earth as it was,
                  Eccles 12. 7. 
                  and that the ſpirite returneth to God
that gaue it. Nowe wee may well thinke, that this excellent man, or
rather the Spirite of God which ſpake by him, woulde not contradict
himſelfe, eſpecially in the very ſame Booke. Wherefore wee muſt reſt
in the concluſion he maketh therein, in which hee giueth vs the meaning
of al his former ſpeech. And as for the place alleadged by vs, which,
as Epicures and Atheiſts thinke, maketh for them, he would giue vs to
vnderſtand thereby, what a man may iudge of the life and ſoule both of

men and beaſts, and of the difference between them, according to
that wee ſee and perceiue by our corporall ſences, and that may bee
comprehended by the minde and reaſon of man, if wee haue no other
teſtimonie that looketh beyond this life, in which theſe dogges and
hogges, and all carnall and brutiſh men ſtay themſelues. For if there
remained no more of man after his death then there doeth of a beaſt,
both the one and the other woulde come to one paſſe. Nay the life of
man ſhoulde bee ſo farre from happineſſe, that it woulde bee a great
deale more miſerable then that of beaſtes. So that it ſhoulde ſeeme
to bee better for men to paſſe away the time merrily, and to liue like
beaſts, according to the Philoſophie of Epicures. And although they
ſhoulde take this courſe, yet in the ende all woulde be but vanitie, according
to Salomons theame, which hee handleth in his Booke of the
Preacher. Therefore being to ſet downe the concluſion of his Booke,
hee ſaieth,Chap. 12. 1. 
                  Remember nowe thy Creatour in the dayes of thy youth, whiles
the euill dayes come not, nor the yeeres approch, wherein thou ſhalt ſay, I
haue no pleaſure in them. Nowe if there were no difference betweene
the ſoule of men and the ſoule of beaſtes, both which the Prophet calleth
by the name of Spirite, taking ſpirite for ſoule, what profit ſhould
men reape by this inſtruction and exhortation? For what greater benefite
coulde hee looke for, who from his youth had giuen ouer himſelfe
to the ſeruice of God, and had alwayes remembred him, then he
that forgat him and turned himſelfe away from him? Thus ye ſee how
Epicures and Atheiſts feare not to prophane the holy Scriptures, by
ſnatching at ſome places of them very maliciouſly, to the ende to ſet
ſome colour vpon their damnable opinion againſt the immortalitie of
the ſoule. But wee ſee what a goodly bulwarke they are able to make,
euen all one with the reſt of the arguments, which wee haue already
heard of the ſame matter. And although they alleadge heere in defence
of their cauſe, Lucian and Lucretius, two other Patriarkes and Patrons
beſide Pliny, whome they accompt as principall pillers of their impietie,
yet wee can heare from them no other arguments woorthie to be
ſo much as once thought vpon, beſides thoſe which wee haue already
handled.The iudgement of God vpon Lucian and Lu
                           •
                        retius two Arch-Atheiſts. But wee may obſerue the like iudgement of GOD vpon
them, that was vpon Pliny the great ſearcher of Nature. For Lucian,
according as Suidas teſtifieth, was torne in peeces and eaten of dogs:
and Lucretius being madde and franticke ſlew himſelfe.Euſeb. Hier. Crin. de P
                        ••
                     at. For hauing abuſed
ſo vilely that good wit and skill, which God had giuen him, did he
not worthily deſerue to looſe it vtterly, and to haue leſſe of it then brute
beaſts? Hee became ſo brutiſh, that hee woulde not acknowledge,
that any either GOD or man had brought ſo great a benefite to the
whole race of mankinde, or that was for this cauſe more woorthie of

greater prayſe then Epicurus was,The doctrine of Epicurus commended by L
                           •
                        
                        cretius.
                   becauſe by his Philoſophie and Doctrine
hee aboliſhed all diuine prouidence, and ſo conſequently all
Diuinitie and immortalitie of the ſoule, all hope of an other life, all
religion and conſcience, all difference betweene vertue and vice, betweene
honeſt and diſhoneſt thinges, and reduced all nature both Diuine
and Humane, into meere brutiſhneſſe. This beaſtly fellowe
thus admiring Epicurus concludeth, that men can not but be wretched
and miſerable all their life time, ſo long as they haue anie opinion
of all theſe thinges, becauſe they will holde them in continuall
feare, and ſo conſequently in perpetuall torment: but being diſpoſſeſſed
of all ſuch thoughtes, and ſo of all feare of GOD, it will followe
thereupon, that they ſhall haue no more conſcience to reſiſt or
gaine-ſay them, whatſoeuer they thinke, ſpeake, or doe. And ſo
their conſcience ſhall not torment them with any feare and terrour,
eſpecially of any iudgement of GOD, but will ſuffer them to bee in
quiet, and not hinder in any reſpect their carnall pleaſures and brutiſh
affections.
               Nowe when they are come to this point, they accompt themſelues
happie.Epicures thinke themſelues kings and gods. For then they are all of them, not onely as Kings and Princes,
but euen as it were gods, fearing no other power aboue themſelues,
and hauing no bodie to hinder their pleaſure, but that they
may freely followe their owne heartes luſtes. So that the laſt and beſt
concluſion of all this Philoſophie will bee this, that men can not bee
happy except they become very beaſts, and being ſpoiled of all things
wherein they excell them, waxe altogether brutiſh and retaine nothing
at all of mans nature, but onely the outward ſhape of a man.
Therefore wee may iudge by the examples of theſe perſonages of ſo
great skill, and ſo highly eſteemed among men, what man can doe
by his naturall light, if it bee not guided by GOD but vtterly forſaken
of him: ſeeing thoſe ſelfe ſame men who haue beene ſuch great
inquiſitours and admirers of nature,The blaſphemie of Atheiſts. haue fallen into ſuch execrable
beaſtlineſſe, and ſuch horrible blaſphemies, as in a manner to ſay, that
God or Nature had brought men into the worlde, onely to make
them more miſerable and more wretched then all other creatures: ſo
that they can finde no better happineſſe and felicitie for themſelues,
then during their life to become like to beaſtes, or plants or ſome other
inſenſible creatures: or elſe after their death to bee brought to nothing,
as they were before their conception and birth. Is it poſſible
for a man to thinke of a ſtraunger thing, more againſt GOD more
vnwoorthie mankinde, or more iniurious to all nature? For the Atheiſts
themſelues that reiect God, doe yet confeſſe if they be Philoſophers,
that nature doeth nothing without cauſe: or if they confeſſe it

not, they haue teſtimonies enow in nature to conuince them of it. And
yet if their doctrine were true,The abſurdities that follow the opinion of the Atheiſts. God and Nature haue done woorſe in
the creation and production of men, then to doe ſome thing without
cauſe. For this were a cauſe moſt vnwoorthie of God and of Nature,
to create and bring foorth men into the worde onely for this cauſe and
to this ende, that they ſhoulde bee more miſerable and more wretched
then all other creatures: and to make mankinde onelie to beholde
in him the perfection of all miſerie and vnhappineſſe, as though God
and Nature tooke pleaſure in beholding ſuch cruell paſtime, as is the
viewe of mans miſeries in ſuch a curſed eſtate. Wherefore ſeeing all
the doctrine and Philoſophie of theſe dogges bringeth with it ſo many,
ſo ſtrange, ſo beaſtlike, and ſo horrible abſurdities, euen once to thinke
of them, being ſo vnbeſeeming God, all mankinde and whole nature,
and ſo contrary to al the teſtimonies, which the whole world affordeth
vnto vs in the behalfe of Gods eternal prouidence ouer al his creatures,
I thinke there is no body, except hee be as brutiſh as the Authours and
Teachers of ſuch kinde of Philoſophie and doctrine, but hee can eaſily
iudge, that it is altogether impoſſible to bee true, or to haue any foundation
& ground in reaſon, ſeeing it confoundeth and ouerthroweth al
reaſon & al nature. Which cauſeth me to be ſo much the more abaſhed,
that there are men found euen among Chriſtians, yea a great number,
who rather followe the falſe opinion of theſe maſties, and giue greater
credite to theſe ſottiſh and vain arguments which they propound, both
againſt God and all diuinitie, and againſt all nature and trueth, then to
the true ſentence of ſo many vertuous, learned, & holy men, as haue bin
in the world from the beginning, and to the common and publike teſtimony
of all mankind, and of al people and nations. But if God hath not
ſpared the very heathen, who ſo ſhamefully abuſed that knowledge,
which he gaue them of his works in nature, and of the teſtimonies of his
diuine nature & prouidence manifeſted vnto them therein, but puniſhed
them with ſuch a horrible iudgement, as to deliuer them vp into are probate
ſenſe, & into a woorſe eſtate then is that of brute beaſts: we are not
to maruell if he deale ſo and more hardly at this day with them that deſerue
a great deale more then they did, becauſe he hath manifeſted him
ſelf more cleerly without all compariſon to theſe men, if they would ſee
and know him: yea we ought to thinke it more ſtrange if he dealt otherwiſe.
For the moe means he affordeth vnto men to know him, the greater
iudgement they deſerue when they abuſe the ſame, and labour to
blind themſelues by their own ingratitude & peruerſe malice.Of the force of arguments alleaged before for the immortalitie of the ſoule. As for vs,
we cannot (God be thāked) doubt in any ſort of the immortalitie of the
ſoule, ſeeing wee ſee on our ſide the aduantage, euery way in defence
therof: namely, multitude, authoritie, nature & reaſon, and which is moſt

of all, the teſtimonie of God who alone is ſufficient. I doubt not but that
ſome, to whome God hath giuen more knowledge and greater graces
then to vs, are able to alleage other arguments and reaſons for the confirmation
of this matter, which we haue omitted. For truth is not vnprouided,
but hath great abundance of all ſorts. But wee haue alleaged the
chiefeſt, taken out of the writings of learned men that haue written beſt
of this matter, eſpecially of them that in our time haue written moſt
Chriſtianly.
               And although there are other reaſons then thoſe which wee haue
ſet downe, yet I thinke there are enow in our diſcourſes to ſtoppe the
mouthes of all Epicures and Atheiſts, at leaſtwiſe to conuince them,
if we cannot confound them. For what can they alleage againſt them,
that is of any great ſhew or ſtrength? It may eaſily bee iudged by their
beſt arguments diſcourſed vpon by vs. What will they haue more? Do
they expect or deſire of vs, that we ſhould point with ye finger at ſoules
when they depart out of bodies that dye? Then they ſhoulde bee no
ſoules and inuiſible ſpirits, but bodies that may be ſeene. And yet vnles
they may behold them comming forth, as they do ſmoke from the fire,
they will not beleeue that they depart at all from the bodies, or that
they haue any beeing at all. Surely I think that theſe men who would
ſo faine haue ſoules to bee mortall, and to bee extinguiſhed by death
with their bodies, would not beleeue that they were departed, and that
they once liued, their bodies being dead, no not although they had ſeen
them come foorth viſibly: but woulde perſwade themſelues that they
were ſome illuſions, and that their eyes had ſome miſt before them: ſo
ſtrong is a lying perſwaſion in a man, when he wil iudge of a thing, not
according to reaſon,The ſumme of this whole book. but according to his affection. Now ſeeing we are
come to the end of our purpoſe, namely to lay before our eies as it were
a naturall hiſtory of man, by the conſideration of the matter of his body,
of the diuerſitie of that matter, and of the forme that God hath giuen
it, together with the profite and vſe both of the one and the other:
and alſo by a deſcription of the partes, powers, vertues and faculties of
his ſoule, therby to be inſtructed at large in the nature and immortality
thereof, by cauſing the ſoule to behold her ſelfe in the glaſſe of her marueilous
actions, and all to this ende that wee ſhould know our ſelues as
it becommeth vs, there remaineth nothing now but that wee ſhoulde
draw out a generall inſtruction from theſe aduertiſements and leſſons,
which God giueth vs in the admirable compoſition of our nature: to the
end that hereafter we ſhould become more fitte for the contemplation
of this diuinitie, by the conſideration of the wonderfull works thereof
in the heauens and in the earth, of which we deſire (if God giue vs grace
hereafter) to diſcourſe. Therfore doe thou, ACHITOB, put an ende to

the cauſe of our preſent aſſembly & meeting, by ſome goodly diſcourſe
vpon all theſe matters of which we haue intreated.
            
            
               Of the image of God in the ſoule of man, and of the image of the worlde in
mans body: of the coniunction that is betweene God, the Angels, and men:
of the ſundry degrees of Good that are therein: of thoſe leſſons and inſtructions,
which we ought to receiue from the wonderfull compoſition and coniunction
of the ſoule and body. Chap. 100.
               ACHITOB. If we could diligently conſider of the naturall hiſtorie
of man, which we haue proſecuted hitherto, we ſhould finde in it
a goodly glaſſe, wherein we might beholde God who is inuiſible, making
him after a ſort viſible vnto vs, and come to the knowledge of
him by his woorkes, euen as the ſoule is made as it were viſible to vs,
ſhewing it ſelfe vnto vs by the body wherein it dwelleth, and by thoſe
woorkes which it effecteth in the ſame.The world compared to mans body, and God to his ſoule. Therefore firſt let vs ſet before
our eyes the whole frame of the world, as it were a great body: then all
the partes of it, as the members thereof: and laſtly, let vs conſider God,
as the ſoule of this great body, woorking in the ſame, and doing all his
works there according to that order which he hath ſet therein, euen as
the ſoule hath his operation in the body of man and in all the members
thereof. Thus doing, as we know that there is a ſoule in the body, and
another nature beſides that which is corporall, which woorketh in the
ſame, as we perceiue by the effectes of it: ſo by the woorkes done in
this viſible world, we may iudge that there is another nature that doeth
them, which being inuiſible, is ſome other thē this whole frame which
we behold, and farre more excellent, filling the ſame, and being in al the
parts of it, as the ſoule is in the body.
               But whileſt we propound to our ſelues this glaſſe to looke vpon, let
vs beware we fal not into their fond dreames,Againſt ſuch as ſay that God is the ſoule of the world. who both thought and affirmed,
that this world was the body of God; and that he was the ſoule
thereof, dwelling in it as the ſoule of man doeth in his body. For if it
were ſo, then ſhould God bee mortall and corruptible in regarde of his
body, ſo that ſtill ſome part or other of him ſhould periſh, as we ſee that
corporall things daily corrupt. On the other ſide, God ſhould not bee
infinite and incomprehenſible as hee is: for the world doeth not comprehend
and containe him, but hee comprehendeth and containeth
the whole world. Wherefore neither is the worlde God, nor God the
world, but the Creator of it, by whom it is and conſiſteth. And albeit we
behold him not with our eyes in his nature and diuine eſſence, yet wee
muſt not therefore conclude, as Atheiſts doe, that hee is not at all, no
more, nay much leſſe, then the ſoule is, becauſe thoſe woorkes

whereby hee manifeſteth himſelfe in the worlde, are farre greater
without compariſon, then thoſe which the ſoule woorketh in mans
bodie. Beſides that, all the woorkes of the ſoule are the woorkes of
God,The image of God in mans ſoule. ſeeing it receiueth from him that life and vertue that is in it. Foraſmuch
then as the ſoule is the image of God in man, as his bodie is
the image of all this great worlde, in which GOD woorketh as the
ſoule doeth in mans bodie, let vs conſider diligently, howe God hath
diſtributed the powers, vertues and offices of the ſoule in the bodie,
and in all the partes of it, as he manifeſteth his glorie, vertue and power
in this viſible worlde in all the partes of the ſame. For the firſt,
there is agreement heerein, that as one onely ſoule is in one bodie,
and is ſufficient for all the partes and members thereof: ſo there
is but one God in the worlde, who is ſufficient for all his creatures.
Againe, if wee cannot conceiue howe the ſoule is lodged in the bodie,
howe it giueth life vnto it, diſplaying all her vertues, and doing
all her woorkes therein, but onely ſo farre foorth as ſhee giueth
vs inſtructions and teſtimonies thereof by thoſe diuers effects which
wee ſee in euerie part and member of the bodie: no maruaile then if
wee cannot beholde with the eye, nor comprehende howe GOD
is euerie where, filling heauen and earth, and howe hee diſplayeth
his power and vertue, woorking in all his creatures, guiding and gouerning
them, and preſeruing them by his diuine prouidence and
vertue. For if wee cannot comprehende the creature, or the nature
thereof, howe ſhall wee comprehende that of the Creator? Ieſus
Chriſt ſaide to Nicodemus,
                  Iohn 3. 12. 
                  If when I tell you earthly things, yee beleeue
not, howe ſhoulde yee beleeue, if I tell you of heauenly things? Wee may
ſay the like heere, that if it be impoſſible for vs throughly to know the
earth, or the bodie or ſoule of man, or the nature and vertue thereof,
howe ſhall wee knowe the heauens and ſpirituall natures, or God
and his woorkes? For if it bee beyonde our reach to diſcerne them in
our ſelues no not the woorkes of our ſoule, howe ſhall wee comprehende
his woorkes in the whole worlde?Of that coniunction which is betweene God and his creatures. Notwithſtanding, if wee can
well conſider of that coniunction and agreement that is betweene
God and his creatures, with the the diſpoſition of thoſe ſundry degrees
which euerie one of them holdeth in this coniunction, euen from the
higheſt and moſt celeſtiall things, that approch neereſt to the nature
of God, vnto thoſe thinges that are loweſt and moſt terreſtriall,
then ſhall we ſet God as it were preſent before the eyes of our ſpirite,
and by the contemplation of him woonderfully content all the partes
of our ſoule. Therefore to proſecute this poynt, let vs note, that
GOD created and faſhioned in his Angels, images of himſelfe
that are altogether ſpirituall, (as indeede himſelfe is all ſpirite)

and not incloſed or ſhut vp in any bodies that are of an earthly and corruptible
matter. Beſides, it pleaſed him to make another kinde of his image
in the nature of man, which ſhould holde the ſecond degree next
to the Angelical nature, in which hee repreſented himſelfe more excellently
then in any other viſible nature and creature, namely in a nature
that came neereſt to his owne, next to that of Angels, and in which the
bodily and viſible nature was ioyned vnto a ſpirituall and inuiſible nature.
Now for the better vnderſtanding hereof, wee will ſet downe a
coniunction of three kinds of good things, which are in diuers degrees.
The firſt is,Of God, the firſt & greateſt Good. God the creator, who is the greateſt of all, and the ſoueraign
good of all his creatures, and is a nature without any qualitie or accident
whatſoeuer. For all that is in him, is ſubſtantiall and eſſentiall. This Good
is ſuch a nature, as hath all his mouing of himſelfe, and receiueth it not
from any other then from himſelfe, but giueth mouing to all creatures
according to their nature and meaſure. And yet all the motions in God
are without any change, either of time or place, or howſoeuer: ſo that
hee abideth ſtill immoueable,Mal. 3. 6. and may alwayes ſay, I am the Lorde, I
change not, as it is in Malachie. For he is euer one. And ſeeing he is the
Original of all mouing, he muſt of neceſſitie, bee firme and ſtable: becauſe
otherwiſe he could not giue motion to others, as we haue dayly
experience hereof in our ſelues. For if we would moue one of our feete,
the other muſt abide ſteddie and firme, and both the one and the other
muſt alwayes haue ſome ſtay whereby to take their motion. Nowe becauſe
God cannot haue ſtay from any other, hee hath it in himſelfe, in
that manner which hath beene declared alreadie. For as hee is alwayes
one, ſo all things are preſent to him, yea hee is euery where, by reaſon
that hee is eternall and infinite without beginning and without ende,
Iudge of all and is iudged of none, gouernour of all, and gouerned by
none.Of ſpirituall natures, which are ye ſecond Good. Secondly, we haue thoſe ſpirituall natures and creatures, which
are a great Good, but not the greateſt and chiefeſt Good, which cannot
be found but in the Creator. This ſecond Good hath qualities, becauſe
all things in it are not ſubſtantial. It hath alſo motion, but receiueth the
ſame from the firſt Good, of which it dependeth, and then it giueth the
ſame to others. This motion is in time, but without place: and this Good
both iudgeth and is iudged, gouerneth and is gouerned. The Angels
and humane ſoules are this great Good, and theſe ſpiritual natures, which
are ſpirites hauing all theſe things. But there is betweene them that difference
before ſpoken off, namely that Angels are ſpirits, which were
created to liue an immortal life, and not to bee ioyned vnto any earthly
bodies: and that the ſpirite of men are created to dwell in bodies and
to giue them life. Therefore I let paſſe Angels for this time, and purpoſe
to ſpeake onely of the ſpirite of man, which is not immutable as

God is, but may receiue change of qualities: as wee ſee in that it
beeing created good, became bad, and of euill, may alſo become good
by the grace of God. But no ſuch thing can befall God For hee cannot
but bee good in the higheſt degree, and the ſoueraigne good of euery
creature: becauſe goodnes is not accidental to him, as it is to a creature,
but ſubſtantial and eſſential. And as God is the ſoueraigne mouer, who
giueth motion to all creatures in this great world: ſo the ſoule and ſpirite
of man giueth mouing to the whole body of man, who is the little
world, and to all the members thereof: neither hath it this motion from
any other creature beſide it ſelfe, as the body receiueth the ſame from
it,The ſpirit of a man moueth not in place. but onely of the Creator. Nowe although this motion bee made in
time, yet it is not made by any change of place. For what motion ſoeuer
there is in the ſpirite, yet it abideth alwaies in his place, ſo long as it
dwelleth in the body, which it gouerneth vnder God the great gouernour,
by whome alſo it is iudged, as it ſelfe iudgeth the body, and all
that is vnder the ſame. Laſtly followeth the body, which is another
Good, but not ſo great as the ſpirit. This hath not only quality but quantitie
alſo, whereas the ſpirite hath onely qualitie without quantitie. For
to ſpeak properly, no nature hath quantitie, except it be corporal. Therfore
the ſoule of a great man is not greater then the ſoule of a little man,Of the body which is the 
                        〈◊〉
                      Good.
in regard of corpulency, becauſe it hath none as the body hath. So that
when we ſay, that a man is of a great ſpirite, we meane it not in regard
of bodily quantitie, as when we ſpeake of a great body: but wee conſider
in him the experience of giftes agreeable to his nature, wherewith
he is endued aboue others. And in taking it ſo, it will often come to
paſſe, that the leaſt bodies ſhall haue the greateſt ſpirites, and the greateſt
bodies the leaſt ſpirites. And by the ſame reaſon we conſider in a little
infant, euen as ſoone as he hath receiued mouing in his mothers bellie,
the ſelfe-ſame ſoule that is in all the ages that followe his infancie,
vntill his olde-age, and in death it ſelfe. But according as thoſe inſtruments
whereby it worketh during life, are fitte for their offices, and as
afterwarde when they waxe olde, they faile of their naturall force and
vertue: ſo the ſoule ſheweth her powers and wonderful effects in them
and by them, continuing ſtill one and the ſame in ſubſtance and nature,
as theſe things haue beene at large declared vnto vs. And as for the motion
of the body, it is made both in time and in place, and is gouerned
and iudged, but it ſelfe, neither gouerneth nor iudgeth.
               Thus wee may ſee, howe theſe two good things, the ſpirite and the
bodie, of which the one is greater then the other, are vnited and ioyned
together in man, as if he caried heauen and earth linked together.
Wee may learne alſo howe in this coniunction the ſpirite occupieth the
middle betwixt God and the bodie, and agreeth with them both. Wee

ſee alſo the admirable workes of the ſoule during this coniunction, all
which are ſo many teſtimonies of the wonderfull workes of God, and
of his prouidence ouer all nature. Moreouer, we behold a very goodly
diſpoſition and excellent order in all the powers and faculties both of
ſoule and body.
               Let vs then make our profit of all theſe things,The right end of our creation. and of theſe inſtructions
and leſſons which God giueth vs in them, to leade vs to the principall
end for which man was created, namely to know and to honour his
Creator. Wherefore we ought chiefly to conſider, that ſeeing God in
the wonderful compoſitiō of our nature hath placed the heart between
the head and the belly, and the vital vertue of the ſoule betweene the animal
and the nutritiue vertue, and the will betweene the vnderſtanding
and the moſt ſenſual part that is in vs, therefore the heart and will
muſt alwayes looke vpward and not downeward, to the end that they
may ioyne themſelues to the nobleſt and moſt diuine part, and not to
the baſeſt, moſt ſenſuall and earthly part. For they are in mans body, as
if they were placed betweene heauen and earth: ſo that as man holdeth
the middle place between Angels and other liuing creatures, by reaſon
of that communication of nature, which he hath with them both: ſo fareth
it with the heart and the will, betweene the head and the belly, and
betweene reaſon with that part which is capable thereof, and the ſenſuall
part which is without reaſon.Mans will muſt looke vp to the head, not downe to the bellie. Wherefore if the will of man be ioyned
with reaſon, which is celeſtial and diuine, and followeth the ſame,
it will become like vnto it, and ſhalbe able eaſily to gouerne the ſenſual
part vnderneath it, to be miſtreſſe ouer it, and to compel it to obey. But
if the Will deſpiſe reaſon and the counſaile thereof, and if inſtead of
mounting vpward towardes the nobleſt part, it deſecendeth to the ſenſual
part, and ioyneth it ſelfe thereunto, then ſhall the Will be made like
to that, and ſhal ſerue it in place of commanding it. And by this meanes
the Will ſhall become altogether brutiſh, wheras contrariwiſe it might
make the ſenſuall and earthly part as it were celeſtiall and diuine, by
drawing it with it ſelfe, if it woulde obey reaſon rather then the affections
of the fleſh, and if it would looke more towardes heauen then
towardes the earth, as men commonly vſe to doe. For as they are in
the middeſt betweene Angels and beaſtes,Man is a middle creature between Angels & beaſts. if they woulde looke more
towardes heauen, from whence their ſoules haue their Originall,
then towardes the earth out of which their bodies are taken, they
ſhould become celeſtial and diuine, like to the Angels, and finally like
to God, who hath created them after his owne image. But if inſteede
of beholding the heauens, vnto which their faces are lifted, they looke
downe to the earth as brute beaſts doe, hauing more care of that then of
heauen, they ſhall become altogether earthie and brutiſh like beaſtes.

Therefore it ſtandeth euery one in hand to bethinke himſelfe ſeriouſly,
which way he aymeth, whither he deſireth to come, and whom he had
rather reſemble, either the angels or beaſts. Let vs then conſider wel of
our nature, and of that order which God ſetteth downe therein, and
follow the ſame, and beware that we doe not peruert it. Let vs learne to
acknowledge the image of God in vs, and to beholde his great wiſedome
therein, as it were in a little world. Firſt let vs know by our ſoule,
which is a ſpirituall and no corporall nature, that God is a ſpirite and of
a ſpirituall nature,A ſpirite is not ſhut vp in a place. which is not ſhut vp and incloſed in any place. For
neither our ſpirite hath any abiding in a place as if it were incloſed and
ſhut vp therein, notwithſtanding that it remayneth in a place as it
were, in regarde of that coniunction which it hath with the bodie.
Neuertheleſſe, it is not ſo incloſed therein, but that it is able, not onli
                     •
                  
to raunge through heauen and earth, and throughout this whole
viſible worlde, but euen higher and farther, ſo that the whole world
is not of ſufficient bigneſſe to containe the ſame, or to content and
ſatisfie it, but that it will goe beyond it. What then ſhall wee thinke
of GOD who hath created it? And howe forgetfull ſhall man bee
of himſelfe, if whereas the whole worlde is not great enough for
his ſpirite, hee content himſelfe with a little angle of the earth, and
doe after a ſort burie himſelfe therein?It is inuiſible. Likewiſe, let vs knowe and
beleeue that God is inuiſible, ſeeing our ſoule is ſo, and cannot bee
ſeen with bodily eyes. For it is not painted with any colour, neither hath
it any corporal figure, whereby it may be ſeene and knowen, which is
doen onely by the acts and deedes of it.
               Let vs not ſeeke then to knowe the eſſence and nature of God by
the eyes, but onelie by the ſpirite. For hee cannot bee ſeene by them,
but onelie by the eyes of faith, neither can hee bee founde or conceiued
by corporall ſenſes.The coniunction of our ſoule and body is a wonderful work of God. Againe, wee ought not onely to conſider,
but euen to woonder howe hee hath ioyned our ſoule with the
bodie, and diſtributed the vertue thereof into all the partes and members
of the ſame: and howe hee doeth ſo excellently knitte together
and conioyne ſo manie members, ſo diſtant one from another, euen
from the one ende vnto the other: all which receiue life and vertue
from the ſoule according to their nature and office, and are all gouerned
by one and the ſame ſpirite. Let vs conſider then howe hee
woulde haue that part of the ſoule, which is partaker of reaſon,
to haue the principalitie and dominion ouer the part in which he hath
placed the affections: to the ende that the chiefeſt ſhould commaund,
and the other obey, as himſelfe hath the Lordſhippe and ſoueraigntie
ouer all his creatures, as they that muſt obey him.
               
                  
Let vs not then ſuffer the ſpirite to bee brought into bondage by
the perturbations of the affections, neither let vs ſuffer them to bee
ſo lifted vp againſt reaſon, as to bee able to turne the vertue of the ſoule
againſt it. In like manner, let vs remember, how God worketh in our
mindes, in ſuch ſort as that the knowledge of thoſe things which wee
knowe firſt, is not aboliſhed by the vnderſtanding of other things we
learne after, but they are all kept together very ſurely in the chiefe part
of the ſoule, and that in good order, by meanes of the memorie, without
confuſion one with another, euen as if they were written and
engrauen in a table, or in a piller of braſſe. Wherefore
we ſhould be very vngratefull and brutiſh, if any
thing in the world cauſe vs to forget God, and if
we haue not his benefites towards vs in
perpetual remembrance.
            
            FINIS.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            
         
      
   