
      
         
            
            
            TOM TEL-TROTHS MESSAGE, AND HIS PENS COMPLAINT.
            A worke not vnpleaſant to be read, nor vnprofitable to be followed.
            Written by IO. LA. Gent.
            Nullum in correcto crimine crimen erit.
            LONDON Imprinted for R. Howell, and are to be ſold at his ſhop, neere the great North doore of Paules, at the ſigne of the white horſe. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORSIPFVLL MASTER GEORGE DOVVSE GENTLEMAN, IO. LA. WISHETH FRVITIon of endleſſe felicitie.
            
               IF writings may quittance benefits, or goodwill more then common curteſie, then accept I beſeech you, theſe firſt fruites of my barren braine, the token of my loue, the ſeale of my affection, and the true cognizance of my vnfained affection. And for ſomuch as the plot of my Pamphlet is rude, though true, the matter meane, the manner meaner, let me humbly deſire, though ſlenderly I deſerue, to haue it patronized vnder the wings of your fauour; in requitall whereof I will be,
            
               Yours euer to command, IO. LA.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS.
            IVdiciall Readers, wiſe Apolloes flocke,
            Whoſe eyes like keyes doe open learnings locke;
            Daigne with your eye-lampes to behold this booke,
            And in all curteſie thereon to looke:
            Thus being patronized by your view,
            I ſhall not be aſhamed of his hew.
            Oh graunt my ſuite, my ſuite you vnderstand,
            That I may you commend, you me command.
            
               IO. LA.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TOM TEL-TROTHS Meſſage, and his pens complaint.
            
               THou that didſt earſt Romes Capitall defend,
               Defend this ſacred relique of thy wing,
               And by this power Diuine ſome ſuccor ſend,
               To ſaue the ſame from carping Momus ſting:
               That like a tell-troth it may boldly blaze,
               And penſill-like paint forth a iuſt diſpraiſe.
            
            
               Goe naked pen the hearts true ſecretarie,
               Imbath'd in ſable liquor mixt with gall,
               And from thy maſter theſe rude verſes carrie,
               Sent to the world, and in the world to all:
               In mournfull verſe lament the faults of men,
               Doe this, and then returne heart-eaſing pen.
            
            
               
               
                  Time ſits him downe to weepe in ſorrowes ſell,
               And Truth bewailes mans preſent wickednes,
               Both Time and Truth a dolefull tale doe tell,
               Deploring for mans future wretchednes:
               With teare-bedewed cheeks help, help therfore,
               Sad tragicke muſe to weepe, bewaile, deplore.
            
            
               Mee thinks I ſee the ghoſt of Conſcience,
               
               Raiſde from the darke graue of ſecuritie,
               Viewing the world, who once was baniſht thence,
               Her cheeks with teares made wet, with ſighs made dry:
               And this did aggrauate her griefe the more,
               To ſee the world much worſe then twas before.
            
            
               She wept, I ſaw her weepe, and wept to ſee
               The ſalt teares trickling from her aged eyes,
               Yea and my pen copartner needs would bee,
               With black-inke teares, our teares to ſimpathize:
               So long wee wept that all our eyes were drie,
               And then our tongues began aloud to crie.
            
            
               
               Come ſad Melpomene thou tragicke Muſe,
               To beare a part in theſe our dolefull cries,
               Spare not with taunting verſes to accuſe,
               The wicked world of his iniquities,
               Tell him his owne, be bold and not aſhamed,
               Nor ceaſe to ſpeake till thou his faults haſt blamed.
            
            
               I ſeeme to heare reſounding Ecchoes tatling,
               Of miſdemeanors raigning heere and there,
               And party-coloured Pyes on greene bowes pratling▪
               
               Of fooliſh faſhions raging euerie where:
               Then blame not my muſe what ſo ere ſhe ſay,
               Sith birds and Ecchoes mens fond faults bewray.
            
            
               O world, no world, but rather ſinke of ſinne,
               VVhere blind and fickle Fortune Empreſſe raigneth;
               O men, no men, but ſwine that lie therein,
               Among whom vertue wrong'd by vice complaineth:
               Thus world bad, men worſe, men in world, worldly men,
               Doe giue occaſion to my plaintife pen.
            
            
               
               Sinne like the monſter Hydra hath more heads,
               Then heauens hie roofe hath ſiluer-ſpangled ſtarres,
               And in his iawes mens ſoules to hell he leads,
               VVhere fierie fiends meete them in flaming Charres:
               This Pirate like a Pilate keepes each coaſt,
               Bringing his gueſts vnto their helliſh hoaſt.
            
            
               If all the earth were writing paper made,
               All plowſhares pens, all furrowes lines in writing,
               The Ocean, inke, wherein the ſea-Nimphes wade,
               And all mens conſciences ſcribes inditing:
               Too much could not be written of mans ſinne,
               Since ſinne did in the firſt man firſt begin.
            
            
               But as the Aegyptian dog runs on the brinke,
               Of Nilus ſeuen-fold ouer-flowing floud,
               And ſtaying not, now here, now there doth drinke,
               For feare of Crocodiles which lurke in mudde:
               So ſhall my pen runne briefly ouer all,
               Reciting theſe miſdeeds which worke mans thral.
            
            
               
               Nature that whilome bore the chiefeſt ſway,
               Bridling mans bodie with the raignes of Reaſon,
               Is now inforc'd in vncoth walkes to ſtray
               Exilde by cuſtome which encrocht through treaſon:
               Inſtead of Art, Natures companion,
               Fancie with cuſtome holdes dominion.
            
            
               
                  Ouid could teſtifie that in his time,
               
                  Astraea fled from earth to heauen aboue,
               Loathing iniuſtice as a damned crime,
               VVhich ſhe with equall poiſed ſchoales did proue:
               And this pen in my time ſhall iuſtifie,
               That true religion is conſtrainde to flie.
            
            
               The two leafe-dores of quondam honeſtie,
               VVhich on foure vertues Cardinall were turned,
               By Cardinals degree and poperie,
               Are now as heretike-like reliques burned:
               Now carnall vice, not vertue Cardinall,
               Plaies Chriſtmas gambals in the Popes great hall.
            
            
               
               VVell, ſith the Popes name pops ſo fitly in,
               From Pope ile take the Latin P. away,
               And Pope ſhall with the Greeke η then bgin,
               VVhoſe type and tippe that he may climbe ile pray:
               Pray all with mee that he may climbe this letter:
               For in this praier each man is his detter.
            
            
               I paſſe not although with bell, booke, and candle,
               His bald-pate Prieſts and ſhoren Friers curſe,
               My plaintife pen his rayling text ſhall handle:
               Nor doe I thinke my ſelfe one iot the worſe:
               Yea though my pen were in their Purgatorie,
               Yet ſhould my pen hold on his plaintife ſtorie.
            
            
               Oh what a world is it for one to ſee,
               How Monkes and Friers would religious ſeeme?
               VVhoſe heads make humble congies to the knee,
               That of their humble minds all men might deeme:
               Theſe be the ſycophants whoſe fained zeale,
               Hath brought in woe to euerie commonweale.
            
            
               
               The Monkes like monkies hauing long blacke tailes,
               Tell olde wiues tales to buſie ſimple braines,
               The baudie Friers do hunt to catch females,
               To ſhriue and free them from infernall paines.
               Thus Monkes and Friers, fire-brands of hell,
               Like to incarnate diuels with vs dwell.
            
            
               But I as loath, ſo will I leaue to write,
               Againſt this popiſh ribble rabble route,
               Hoping ere long ſome other will indite,
               Whole volumes gainſt their ſtander-bearers ſtout:
               Poets and Painters meane while ſhall deſcry,
               VVith pens and penſils their hypocriſie.
            
            
               As thus my pen doth glance at euerie vice,
               Needs muſt I heare poore Learnings lamentation,
               VVhich whilome was eſteem'd at higheſt price,
               But now reiected is of euerie nation:
               She loueth men yet is ſhee wrong'd by men,
               Her wronged loue giues matter to my pen.
            
            
               
               
                  Pallas the nurſe of Nature-helping Art,
               Whoſe babes are Schollers, and whoſe cradels, ſchooles,
               From whoſe milch teates no pupils would depart,
               Till they by cunning ſhund the names of fooles:
               She, euen ſhe, wanders in open ſtreetes,
               Seeking for ſchollers, but no ſchollers meetes.
            
            
               Englands two eyes, Englands two Nurceries,
               Englands two neſts, Englands two holy mounts,
               I meane Englands two Vniuerſities,
               Englands two Lamps, Englands two ſacred founts,
               Are ſo puld at, puld out, and eke puld downe,
               That they can ſcarce maintaine a wide ſleeu'd gowne.
            
            
               Lately as one CAME ore a BRIDGE, he ſaw
               An OXE ſtand ore a FORDE to quench his drouth:
               But lo the Oxe his dry lips did withdraw,
               And from the water lifted vp his mouth.
               Like Tantalus this drie Oxe there did ſtand,
               God grant this darke Aenigma may be ſcand.
            
            
               
               The Liberall Sciences in number ſeauen,
               Which in ſeauen ages like ſeauen Monarchs raigned,
               And ſhin'd on earth as Planets ſeauen in heauen,
               Are now like Almesfolkes beggerly maintained,
               Whilſt in their roome ſeauen deadly ſins beare ſway,
               Which makes theſe ſeauen Arts like ſeauen ſlaues obey.
            
            
               
                  Grammer the ground and ſtrong foundation,
               Vpon which Lady Learning builds her tower,
               
                  Grammer the path-way and direction,
               That leadeth vnto Pallas ſacred bower,
               Stands bondſlaue-like of Stationers to be ſold,
               Whom all in free Schooles erſt might free behold.
            
            
               And Rhetoricke adornde with figures fine,
               Trickt vp with tropes, and clad in comely ſpeech,
               Is gone as Pilgrime to the Muſes nine,
               For her late wrong aſſiſtance to beſeech.
               Now rich Curmudgions beſt orations make,
               Whilſt in their pouches gingling coyne they ſhake.
            
            
               
               
                  Logicke which like a whetſtone ſharpes the braine,
               
                  Logicke which like a touch-ſtone tries the minde,
               
                  Logicke which like a load-ſtone erſt drew gaine,
               Is now for want of maintenance halfe pinde.
               And ſith in Colledges no maides may dwell,
               Many from Colledges doe her expell.
            
            
               
                  Muſicke I much bemourne thy miſerie,
               Whoſe well-tunde notes delight the Gods aboue,
               Who with thine eare-bewitching melodie,
               Doeſt vnto men and beaſts ſuch pleaſure moue:
               Though wayling cannot helpe, I wayle thy wrong,
               Bearing a part with thee in thy ſad ſong.
            
            
               
                  Arithmeticke ſhe next in number ſtands,
               Numbring her cares in teaching how to number;
               Which cares in number paſſing ſalt-ſea ſands,
               Diſturbe her minde, and ſtill her corps incumber:
               Care addeth griefe, griefe multiplies her woe,
               Whoſe ebbe ſubſtracting, brings reducing floe.
            
            
               
               
                  Geometrie as ſeruile prentiſe bound,
               Vnto the Mother earth for many yeares,
               Hath long ſince meated out the maſſie ground,
               Which ground the impreſſion of her foot-ſteps beares.
               Great was her labour, great ſhould be her gaine,
               But her great labour was repaid with paine.
            
            
               
                  Astronomie not leaſt, though laſt, hath loſt
               By cruell fate her ſtarre-embroidred coate:
               Her ſpherie globe in danger's ſeas is toſt,
               And in miſhap her inſtruments doe floate.
               All Almanacks hereof can witneſſe beare,
               Elſe would my ſelfe hereof as witneſſe ſweare.
            
            
               But how ſhould I with ſtile poeticall,
               Proceede to rime in meeter or in verſe?
               If Poetrie the Queene of verſes all,
               Should not be heard, whoſe plaint mine eare doth pierce?
               Oh helpe Apollo with apologie,
               To blaze her vndeſerued iniurie.
            
            
               
               
                  Horace did write the Art of Poetrie,
               The Art of Poetrie Virgill commended:
               
                  Ouid thereto his ſtudies did applie,
               Whoſe life and death ſtill Poetrie defended.
               Thrice happie they, but thrice vnhappie I,
               They ſang her praiſe, but I her iniurie.
            
            
               O princely Poetrie, true Propheteſſe,
               Perfections patterne, Matrone of the Muſes,
               I weepe to thinke how rude men doe oppreſſe,
               And wrong thine Art with their abſurd abuſes.
               They are but droſſe, thine Art it is diuine,
               Caſt not therefore thy pearles to ſuch ſwine.
            
            
               The ſugred ſongs that ſweete Swannes vſe to ſing,
               Floting adowne Meanders ſiluer ſhore,
               To countrie ſwaines no kinde of ſolace bring;
               The winding of an horne they fancie more.
               No marueile then though Ladie Poetrie,
               Doe ſuffer vndeſerued iniurie.
            
            
               
               Like to Batillus euery ballet-maker,
               That neuer climbd vnto Pernaſſus Mount,
               Will ſo incroach that he will be partaker,
               To drinke with Maro at the Caſtale fount.
               Yea more then this to weare a lawrell Crowne,
               By penning new gigges for a countrie clowne.
            
            
               When Marſias with his bagpipes did contend,
               To make farre better Muſicke then Apollo:
               
               When Thameras in ſelfe conceit would mend
               The Muſes ſweete ſongs note, what then did follow?
               Conuicted both, to both this was aſſignde,
               The firſt was hangd, the laſt was ſtroken blinde.
            
            
               And may it happen to thoſe baſtard braines,
               Whoſe baſe times ſtriue to better Poetrie,
               That they may ſuffer like deſerued paines,
               For theſe be they that worke her infamie.
               Thus hauing blazd falſe Poets in their hew,
               Deare Poetrie (though loth) I bid adiew.
            
            
               
               As Poetrie in poeſie I leaue,
               I ſee ſeauen ſinnes which croſt ſeauen Liberall Arts,
               Which with their fained ſhew doe men deceaue,
               And on the wide worlds ſtage doe play their parts:
               As thus men follow them, they follow men,
               They moue more matter to my plaintife pen.
            
            
               Theſe mincing maides and fine-trict truls ride poſt
               To Plutoes pallace, like purueyers proude;
               Thither they leade many a damned ghoſt,
               With howling conſorts carroling aloude:
               And as one after one they poſt to hell,
               My plaintife pen ſhall their abuſes tell.
            
            
               Firſt praunceth Pride with principalitie,
               Guarded with troupes of new-found faſhions:
               Her hand-maides are Fancie and Vanitie:
               Theſe three a progreſſe goe throughout all nations:
               And as by any towne they paſſe along,
               People to ſee them gather in a throng.
            
            
               
               Now fine-ruft Ruffines in their brauerie,
               Make cringing cuts with new inuention:
               New-cut at Cardes brings ſome to beggarie,
               But this new-cut brings moſt vnto deſtruction:
               So long they cut, that in their purſe no groate
               They leaue, but cut ſome others purſe or throate.
            
            
               Bedawbd with gold like Apuleius Aſſe
               Some princk and pranck it: others more preciſe,
               Full trick and trim tir'd in the looking-glaſſe,
               With ſtrange apparell doe themſelues diſguiſe.
               But could they ſee what others in them ſee,
               Follie might flie, and they might wiſer bee.
            
            
               Some gogle with the eyes, ſome ſquint-eyd looke,
               Some at their fellowes ſquemiſh ſheepes-eyes caſt:
               Some turne the whites vp, ſome looke to the foote,
               Some winke, ſome twinke, ſome blinke, ſome ſtare as faſt.
               The ſumme is infinite, eye were a detter,
               If all ſhould anſwere I, with I the letter.
            
            
               
               Many deſire to foote it with a grace,
               Or Lion-like to walke maieſticall:
               But whilſt they ſtriue to keepe an equipace,
               Their gate is fooliſh and phantaſticall.
               As Hobby-horſes, or as Anticks daunce,
               So doe theſe fooles vnſeemely ſeeme to praunce.
            
            
               I will not write of ſweatie long ſhag haire,
               Or curled lockes with friſled periwigs:
               The firſt the badge that Ruffins vſe to weare,
               The laſt the cogniſance of wanton rigs.
               But ſure I thinke as in Meduſaes head,
               So in their haires are craulling Adders bred.
            
            
               Men Proteus-like reſemble euery ſhape,
               And like Camelions euery colour faine,
               How deare ſo ere, no faſhion may eſcape
               The hands of thoſe whoſe gold may it attaine:
               Like ebbe and flow theſe faſhions goe and come,
               Whoſe price amounteth to a maſſie ſumme.
            
            
               
               The ſharp-ſet iawes of greedie ſheeres deuoure,
               And ſeaze on euery cloath as on a pray,
               Like Atropoſe cutting that in an houre,
               Which weauers Lacheſe-like wrought in a day.
               Theſe ſnip-ſnap ſheeres in al ſhieres get great ſhares,
               And are partakers of the deareſt wares.
            
            
               When fig-tree leaues did ſhroude mans nakedneſſe,
               And home-ſpun cloath was counted clothing gay,
               Then was mans bodie clad with comelineſſe,
               And honour ſhrouded was in rude aray:
               But ſince thoſe times by future times were changed,
               Thouſands of faſhions through the world haue ranged.
            
            
               Ambitious thoughts, hearts haughtie, mindes aſpiring,
               Proud lookes, fond gates, and what not vndeſcreete,
               As ſeruants waite mens bodie ſtill atyring.
               With far-fetcht gewgawes for yong children meete:
               Where with whilſt they themſelues doe daily decke,
               Brauado-wiſe they ſcorne to brooke the checke.
            
            
               
               Some couet winged ſleeues like Mercurie,
               
               Others round hoſe much like to Fortunes wheele:
               (Noting thereby their owne vnconſtancie)
               Some weare ſhort cloakes, ſome cloakes that reach their heele.
               Theſe Apiſh trickes vſde in their daily weedes,
               Bewray phantaſticke thoughts, fond words, foule deedes.
            
            
               Bold Bettreſſe braues and brags it in her wiers,
               And buskt ſhe muſt be, or not buſt at all:
               Their riggiſh heads muſt be adornd with tires,
               With Periwigs, or with a golden Call.
               Tut, tut, tis nothing in th'Exchange to change,
               Monthly as doth the Moone their faſhions ſtrange.
            
            
               It ſeemes ſtrange birds in England now are bred,
               And that rare fowles in England build their neſt,
               When Engliſhmen with plumes adorne their head,
               As with a Cocks-combe or a Peacocks creſt.
               Theſe painted plumes men in their caps doe weare,
               And women in their hands doe trickly beare.
            
            
               
               Perhaps ſome women being foule, doe vſe
               Fowles feathers to ſhroude their deformitie:
               Others perchance theſe plumes doe rather chuſe,
               From weather and winde to ſhield their phiſnomie.
               But whilſt both men and women vſe theſe feathers,
               They are deem'd light as feathers, winde and weathers.
            
            
               Some dames are pumpt, becauſe they liue in pompe,
               That with Herodias they might nimbly daunce:
               Some in their pantophels too ſtately ſtompe,
               And moſt in corked ſhooes doe nicely praunce.
               But here I doubtfull ſtand whether to blame
               The ſhoomakers, or them that weare the ſame.
            
            
               In countrie townes men vſe fannes for their corne,
               And ſuch like fannes I cannot diſcommend:
               But in great cities fannes by truls are borne,
               The ſight of which doth greatly God offend.
               And were it not I ſhould be deem'd preciſe,
               I could approue theſe fond fann'd fooles vnwiſe.
            
            
               
               A Painter lately with his penſill drew
               The picture of a Frenchman and Italian,
               With whom he plac'd the Spaniard, Turk and Iew,
               But by himſelfe he ſat the Engliſhman.
               Before theſe laughing went Democritus,
               
               Behinde theſe weeping went Heraclitus.
               
            
            
               All theſe in comely veſtures were atired,
               According to the cuſtome of their land,
               The Engliſhman excepted, who deſired
               With others feathers like a lay to ſtand.
               Thus whilſt he ſeeketh forraine brauerie,
               He is accuſed of vnconſtancie.
            
            
               Some call him Ape, becauſe he imitates,
               Some foole, becauſe he fancies euery bable:
               Some liken him to fiſhes caught with baites,
               Some to the winde, becauſe he is vnſtable.
               Then blame him not, although gainſt Engliſhmen,
               This Engliſhman writ with his plaintife pen.
            
            
               
               But huſh no more, enough's enough, fie, fie,
               Wilt thou thy countries faults in verſe compile?
               Deſiſt betimes, leaſt thou peccaui crie,
               For no bird ſure his owne neſt will defile.
               Well, ſith thou brak'ſt his head and mad'ſt a ſore,
               With ſilence giue a ſalue, and write no more.
            
            
               The world began, and ſo will end with Pride,
               With Pride this poynt began, with Pride it ends:
               And whilſt in pleaſures Chariot ſhe doth ride,
               My plaintife pen page-like ſtill by her wends.
               Thus hauing painted out Prides royſting race,
               At this poynts end a periods poynt I place.
            
            
               Now pyning Enuie whining doth appeare,
               With bodie leane, with viſage pale and wan,
               With withered face, and with vnkeamed haire,
               She doth both fret, and fume, ſweare, curſe and ban:
               She fareth ill, when other men fare well,
               Others proſperitie is made her hell.
            
            
               
               She peepes and pries into all actions,
               And ſhe is neuer well but when ſhe iarres:
               She is the mother of all factions,
               She broacheth quarrels, and increaſeth warres:
               Anger is hot, and Wrath doth roughly rage,
               But nothing Enuies heating hate can ſwage.
            
            
               This Trull inticed Pompey to contend,
               And with great Caeſar ciuill warres to moue:
               This dame allured Kings their liues to ſpend,
               In bloodie broyles and braules deuoyd of loue:
               Incenſing ſubiects gainſt their gouernours,
               Sonnes againſt Sires, Captiues againſt Conquerors.
            
            
               As Iron doth conſume it ſelfe with ruſt,
               By eating which it ſelfe it ſtill doth eate:
               So doth the enuious man ſoone come to duſt,
               And doth conſume himſelfe whilſt he doth fret.
               Thus Enuie ſtill conſpires to end his life,
               That liuing with another, liues at ſtrife.
            
            
               
               We reade that Enuie twixt two men did grow,
               And that the one of them one eye would loſe,
               So that he might pluck both eyes from his foe,
               And plucking both eyes out his eyes might cloſe.
               O who would thinke a man ſhould beare the minde,
               To loſe one eye to make another blinde!
            
            
               What trade ſo baſe but there is Enuie in it,
               When Minſtrels with blinde Fidlers daily ſtriue?
               What ſtrife is there but Enuie doth begin it,
               When iuſling Iacks to walls their betters driue?
               The truth hereof I ſhall not neede to ſweare,
               Sith Heſiode old hereof doth witneſſe beare.
            
            
               What is the cauſe that many mop and moe,
               That many ſcoffe, and ſcorne, and gibe, and ieſt,
               With rimes and riddles rating at their foe,
               Flouting the baſe, and powting at the beſt?
               What is the cauſe? the cauſe one line ſhall ſhow,
               Enuie is cauſe, which in mens hearts doth grow.
            
            
               
               Knowledge within the hart of man doth dwell,
               And loue within the liuer builds his neſt:
               But Enuie in the gall of man doth ſwell,
               And playes the rebell in his boyling breſt.
               O would to God men had no gall at all,
               That Enuie might not harbour in the gall.
            
            
               Enuie and Charitie together ſtroue,
               Which of them two a man ſhould entertaine:
               The one with ſpight, the other ſought with loue;
               The firſt in gall, the laſt in hart would raigne:
               So long they ſtroue that Enuie loſt the field,
               And Charitie made Enuie captiue yeeld.
            
            
               Enuie adiew, and welcome Charitie,
               The bond of peace and all perfection,
               The way that leades to true felicitie,
               Filling the ſoule with moſt diuine refection.
               Enuie ſhall goe, Ile cleaue vnto thy lore,
               Thee will I ſerue, and thee will I adore.
            
            
               
               Next followes Wrath, Enuies fierce fellow-mate,
               Attired in a roring Lions skin,
               Ietting along with a giant-like gate,
               Which aye a tyrant terrible hath bin.
               A butcher-like within his hands doth beare
               Their harts, which he with woluiſh teeth doth teare.
            
            
               Wrath moued Herod with blood-thirſtie hart,
               To ſlaughter infants from their mothers breſt;
               Like lambes ſcarce can'd, or doues new-hatcht to part,
               And with liues loſſe to leaue both damme and neſt.
               O had King Herod knowne what would enſue,
               He had not done what he did after rue.
            
            
               He ſhed their blood, their blood did vengeance craue;
               They firſt too ſoone, he laſt too late did dye;
               They led the way, he followed to the graue;
               Both they and he a pray for wormes did lye.
               Yet thus they differ, wormes them dead did eate,
               But him aliue the wormes did make their meate.
            
            
               
               Wrath in Caligulaes mad head did grow,
               Making him wiſh that Rome had but one head,
               That he might ſmite off that head at a blow,
               Whoſe pompe he ſaw like many heads to ſpread:
               But whilſt he thought Romes heads in one to lop,
               Romes heads in one his flower of life did crop.
            
            
               Wrath is the cauſe that men in Smith-field meete,
               (Which may be called ſmite-field properly)
               Wrath is the cauſe that maketh euery ſtreete
               A ſhambles, and a bloodie butcherie,
               Where royſting ruffins quarrell for their drabs,
               And for ſleight cauſes one the other ſtabs.
            
            
               VVrath puffes men vp with mindes Thraſonicall,
               And makes them braue it braggadochio-like:
               VVrath maketh men triumph Tyrannicall,
               With ſword, with ſhield, with gunne, with bill and pike:
               Yea now adaies VVrath cauſeth him to dye,
               That to his fellow dares to giue the lye.
            
            
               
               
                  Mars is the Chieftaine of this wrathfull hoſt,
               VVhoſe embrewd ſtandard is with blood dyed red;
               Of many he ſpares few, and kils the moſt,
               And with their corps his bloodie panch is fed.
               Tara tantara, ſa, ſa, kill, kill, he cries,
               Filling with blood the earth, with ſcrikes the skies.
            
            
               VVraths fierce fore-runner is Timeritie,
               And after VVrath Repentance ſhortly followes:
               The firſt rides gallop into miſerie,
               The laſt procures ſadnes, deſpayre and ſorrow.
               VVho therefore doe deſire to liue at reſt,
               Let them not harbour wrath within their breſt.
            
            
               VVraths contrarie is Lady Patience,
               VVho conquers moſt when ſhe is conquered,
               She teacheth beaſts that they by common ſence,
               Might teach to vanquiſh, being vanquiſhed.
               Rammes running back with greater force returne,
               And Lime moſt hot, in moſt cold ſprings doth burne.
            
            
               
               Patience a coſin hath calde Sufferance,
               Neerely a kind, becauſe ſhe is ſo kinde;
               She is moſt like a Doue in countenance,
               And like an Angell in her humble minde;
               All Phaenix-like ſhe is but rarely found,
               Would God ſhe might be ſeene on Engliſh ground.
            
            
               Then naked ſwords themſelues would neuer cloath,
               With wounded skinnes of men whom men did maime:
               Then quarrellers would after quaffing loath,
               VVith ſtabs and ſtrokes to kill or make men lame.
               Then, then I ſay, ſwords might in ſcabberts ſleepe,
               And ſome might laugh which are conſtrainde to weepe.
            
            
               As thus my pen writing of Vice ſpares none,
               It brings into my ſight a lazie Gill,
               A ſleeping ſluggard and a drowſie drone,
               VVhich ſnorts and ſnores, and euer ſitteth ſtill:
               Some call her Sloth, ſome call her Idleneſſe,
               A friend to neede, a foe to wealthineſſe.
            
            
               
               They tearme her Mother of all other vices,
               Bearing a ſpawne of many new-bred ſinnes:
               Many ſhe lures, and many ſhe entices,
               Whereof moſt part is trapped in her ginnes:
               She is the But at which foule Luſt doth ſhoote,
               And where ſhe toucheth there ſhe taketh roote.
            
            
               I once did heare of one Lipotopo,
               
               (Whoſe pace was equall with the ſhell-houſde ſnaile)
               That to a fig-tree laſily did go,
               Whoſe broad-leau'd branches made a ſhady vaile:
               Thither this lusking lubber ſoftly creeped,
               And there this lazie lizard ſoundly ſleeped.
            
            
               But as one Goffo by the fig-tree went,
               He wakened him from out his drowſie ſleepe,
               And earneſtly did aske him what he ment,
               Vnder that fig-tree all alone to keepe.
               As thus he did Lipotopo awake,
               Yawning and gaping thus he idly ſpake.
            
            
               
               Good friend it is a paine for me to ſpeake,
               Becauſe I vſe nothing but only ſleeping:
               Yet vnto thee my minde Ile ſhortly breake,
               And ſhew the cauſe of my here daily keeping.
               The cauſe is this, that when theſe ripe figges fall,
               My gaping mouth might then receiue them all.
            
            
               As thus he ſpake, Goffo from off the tree
               Pluckt a ripe fig, and in his mouth did put it:
               Which when he gan to feele, my friend (quoth he)
               I pray thee ſtirre my iawes that I may glut it.
               
                  Goffo admiring this his lazineſſe,
               Left him as he him found in idleneſſe.
            
            
               O would my pen were now a penſill made,
               And I a Poet might a Painter bee,
               That picture-like this patterne might be laide
               Before mens eyes, that it their eyes might ſee;
               By which they ſeeing Sloths deformitie,
               Might flie from ſloth and follow induſtrie.
            
            
               
               Now doth appeare dame niggard Auarice,
               Who being loden with gold gapes for gold:
               She raiſeth cheape things to the higheſt price,
               And in Cheapſide makes nothing chaepe be ſold,
               Which coyne, her cheſts fild full, fulfill her eye,
               Whilſt poore folkes periſh in great miſerie.
            
            
               She hath been troubled long with one diſeaſe,
               VVhich ſome a Dropſie call, or drouth of gaine;
               She drinkes and drinkes againe, yet cannot eaſe
               Her thirſtie ſickneſſe and her greedie paine:
               Still is ſhe ſicke, yet is ſhe neuer dead,
               Becauſe her ſickneſſe ſtill is nouriſhed.
            
            
               Her bodie groſſe, engroſſeth all the corne,
               And of the groſſeſt wares makes greateſt gaine:
               Yea Grocers now adaies as men forlorne,
               Auerre that they gainſt her haue cauſe to plaine:
               Yet doth ſhe liue, yet doth ſhe tyrannize,
               Becauſe her coyne her works doth wantantize.
            
            
               
               This Auarice a coſin-germane hath,
               VVhich many Londoners call Vſurie,
               VVhich like a braue comptroller boldly ſaith,
               She will bring England into miſerie:
               VVho vnder colour of a friendly lending,
               Seemes of her bad trade to make iuſt defending.
            
            
               They hand in hand doe walke in euery ſtreete,
               Making the proudeſt Caualiers to ſtoope:
               If with their debtors they doe chaunce to meete,
               They pen them vp within the Poultries coope.
               And if for gold lent, men would counters pay,
               In VVoodſtreets Counter there them faſt they lay.
            
            
               Now Charitie which is the band of peace,
               Is turned to a Scriueners ſcribling band,
               To Indentura facta, or a leaſe,
               To racking houſes, tenements and land:
               All this can gold, all this can ſiluer do,
               And more then this if neede require thereto.
            
            
               
               From whence comes gold but from the earth below?
               VVhereof, if not of earth are all men made?
               Like will to like, and like with like will grow,
               Growing they floriſh, floriſhing they fade.
               But where are gold and men? in hell, wher's hell?
               On earth, where gold and men with gold do dwell.
            
            
               The prouerbe old I doe approue moſt true,
               Better to fill the bellie then the eye:
               For whilſt rich miſers feedes on monies view,
               Sparing they liue in wilfull penurie:
               Yea more then this, they liue vpon a cruſt,
               VVhilſt in their heaped bags their gold doth ruſt.
            
            
               Come plaintife pen and whip them with thy rod,
               And plainly tell them their Idolatrie,
               VVhich make their gold their loue, their life, their god,
               VVhich with their gold deſire to liue and die.
               Tell them if to no better vſe they turne
               Their gold, they with their gold in hell ſhall burne.
            
            
               
               Thus leauing Vſurie and Auarice,
               As Sathans limmes or fire-brands of hell,
               As rauening wolues that liue by preiudice,
               Or greedie hogs that on mens grounds do dwell:
               I poſt to that which I had almoſt paſt,
               But now haue ouertaken at the laſt.
            
            
               The name of her whom heere I meete withall,
               Is Gluttonie the mother of exceſſe,
               Which making daintie feaſts, doth many call
               To eate with her the meate that ſhe did dreſſe:
               Who beeing ſet to eate her toothſome meat:
               Eating doth eate and neuer ceaſe to eate.
            
            
               This trull makes youngſters ſpend their patrimonie,
               In ſauced meates and ſugred delicates,
               And makes men ſtray from ſtate of Matrimonie,
               To ſpend their ſubſtance vpon whoriſh mates:
               That by their lauiſh prodigalitie,
               She may maintaine her fleſhly vanitie.
            
            
               
               With gobs ſhe fils and ſtuffes her greedie gorge,
               And neuer is her gaping ſtomacke fed,
               Bits vnchaw'de in her bulke as in a forge,
               Kindle the coales whereof foule luſt is bred:
               Thus doe we ſee how lazie gluttonie,
               Conſorts her ſelfe with Ladie Lecherie.
            
            
               One other mate ſhe hath call'd Dronkenneſſe,
               A bibbing ſwilbowle and a bowzing gull,
               VVhich neuer drinks but with exceſſiueneſſe,
               And drinkes ſo long vntill her paunch is full:
               She drinkes as much as ſhe can well containe,
               VVhich being voyded, then ſhe drinkes againe.
            
            
               But when the drinke doth worke within her head,
               She rowles and reekes, and pimpers with the eyes,
               She ſtamps, ſhe ſtares, ſhe thinks white black, black red,
               She teares and ſweares, ſhe geeres, ſhe laughes and cries:
               And as her giddie head thinks all turnes round,
               She belching fals, and vomits on the ground.
            
            
               
               Some men are drunke, and being drunke will fight,
               Some men are drunke, and being drunke are merrie,
               Some men are drunke, and ſecrets bring to light,
               Some men are drunke, and being drunke are ſorie:
               Thus may we ſee that drunken men haue paſſions,
               And drunkenneſſe hath many fooliſh faſhions.
            
            
               Fiſhes that in the ſeas doe drinke their fill,
               Teach men by nature to ſhun drunkenneſſe,
               VVhat bird is there that with his chirping bill,
               Of any liquour euer tooke exceſſe?
               Thus beaſtes on earth, fiſh in ſeas, birds in skie,
               Teach men to ſhun all ſuperfluitie.
            
            
               VVould any heare the diſcommodities,
               That doe ariſe from our exceſſe of drinke:
               It duls the braine, it hurts the memorie,
               It blinds the ſight, it makes men bleare-eyd blinke,
               It kils the bodie, and it wounds the ſoule,
               Leaue therefore leaue, O leaue this vice ſo foule.
            
            
               
               Now laſt of all though perhaps chiefe of all,
               My pen hath hunted out lewde Lecherie,
               VVhich many ſinnes and many faults doth call,
               To bee pertakers to her trecherie:
               Her loue is luſt, her luſt is ſugred ſower,
               Her paine is long, her pleaſure but a flower.
            
            
               VVhen chaſt Adonis came to mans eſtate,
               
                  Venus ſtraight courted him with many a wile;
               
                  Lucrece once ſeene, ſtraight Tarquine laid a baite,
               VVith foule inceſt her bodie to defile:
               Thus men by women, women wrongde by men,
               Giue matter ſtill vnto my plaintife pen.
            
            
               Thouſands of whores maintained by their wooers,
               Entice by land as Syrens doe by ſeas,
               VVhich being like path-waies or open doores,
               Infect mens bodies with the French diſeaſe:
               Thus women woe of men though wooed by men,
               Still adde new matter to my plaintife pen.
            
            
               
               VVhilome by nature men and women loued,
               And prone enough they were to loue thereby,
               But when they Ouids ars amandi proued,
               Both men and women fell to lecherie:
               By nature ſinning art of ſinne was found,
               To make mans ſinne ſtill more and more abound.
            
            
               If that I could paint out foule lecherie,
               In her deformed ſhape and loathſome plight,
               Or if I could paint ſpotleſſe Chaſtitie,
               In her true portraiture and colours bright:
               I thinke no maid would euer proue an whore,
               But euerie maid would chaſtitie adore.
            
            
               Then maried men might vild reproaches ſcorne,
               And ſhunne the Hars creſt to their hearts content,
               VVith cornucopia, Cornewall, and the horne,
               VVhich their bad wiues bid from their bed be ſent:
               Then ſhould no olde Cocks, nor no cocke-olds crow,
               But euerie man might in his owne ground ſow.
            
            
               
               Then light-taylde huſwiues which like Syrens ſing,
               And like to Circes with their drugs enchant,
               VVould not vnto the Banke-ſides round houſe fling,
               In open ſight themſelues to ſhow and vaunt:
               Then then I ſay they would not masked goe,
               Though vnſeene to ſee thoſe they faine would know.
            
            
               But in this Labyrinth I liſt not tread,
               Nor combate with the minotaure-like luſt,
               Hence therefore will I wend by methods thread,
               And wend I will becauſe needs wend I muſt:
               Farewell, nay fare-ill filthie lecherie,
               And welcome vndefiled chaſtitie.
            
            
               
                  Vesta I do adore thy puritie,
               And in thy Temples will I tapers beare,
               Thou O Diana for virginitie,
               Shalt be the matrone of my modeſt feare,
               That both in one, both beeing Goddeſſes,
               May of my maden-head bee witneſſes.
            
            
               
               O may my fleſh like to the Ermiline,
               Vnſpotted liue, and ſo vnſpotted die,
               That when I come before the ſacred ſhrine,
               My vntoucht corps themſelues may guiltleſſe trie:
               Then ſhall I glorie that I haue bin taught,
               To ſhun the ſnare wherein moſt folkes are caught.
            
            
               Thus hath my pen deſcribed and deſcry'd,
               Sinne with his ſeuen heads of ſeuen deadly vices,
               And now my plaintife pen hath verified,
               That ſinne from vertue mortall men entices▪
               
               If any wicked Momus carpe the ſame,
               In blaming this I paſſe not for his blame.
            
            
               Dictator-like I muſt confeſſe I write,
               And like a Nomothetes criticall,
               Perhaps my pen doth crabedly endite
               In plaintife humors meerely Cinicall:
               But ſooth to ſay, Tom-teltroth will not lie,
               VVe heere haue blaz'd Englands iniquitie.
            
            
               
               And for becauſe my pen doth liquour want,
               Heere (being drie) he willing is to reſt,
               Not for that he doth further matter want,
               For ſo to thinke were but a ſimple ieſt:
               And if (as he hath not) he haue offended,
               He hopes (as you) ſo he wilbe amended.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   