
      
         
            
            
            THE POLITICKE AND MILITARIE DISCOVRSES OF THE LORD DE LA NOVVE.
            VVhereunto are adioyned certaine obſeruations of the ſame Author, of things happened during the three late ciuill warres of France.
            With a true declaration of manie particulars touching the ſame.
            All faithfully tranſlated out of the French by E. A.
            AT LONDON Printed for T. C. and E. A. by Thomas Orwin. 1587.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO THE RIGHT HONOrable his verie good Lorde, George Earle of Cumberland, Baron Clifford, Lord Bromflet, Aton and Veſcie, &c. E. A. wiſheth all increaſe of honour and true felicitie.
            
               ANTIGONVS being aſked whom he thought to bee the worthieſt Captaine in his time, anſwered, Pirrhus if he were of more yeres, not daring to pronounce him abſolutelie the worthieſt vntill he had experience to match with his valour: euen ſo if it were demaunded at this daie who iuſtlie deſerued the name of a politike & expert Capptaine, I think (without preiudice to anie other) that the Lord de la Noüe, the author of this preſent treatiſe, whoſe wiſe gouernment in time of peace being no leſſe commendable than his long ſeruice in time of warres to the Church of God hath bene profitable, is not in ſilence to be ouer-paſſed. Howbeit leaſt I ſhould (right Honorable and my verie good Lord) ſeeme rather to blemiſh than amplifie the vertues of ſo worthie a man through the baſeneſſe of my ſtile and vnpoliſhed phraſe, I leaue the ſame to bee notefied by thoſe whoſe great knowledge and ripe iudgement I

doe iustlie preferre many degrees before mine owne, being the rather thereto induced by the like example of Menedemus the Lacedemonian, who was wont to ſaie that the qualitie and condition of the praiſer ought to be as well regarded as that of the praiſed. Inſinuating thereby that it was vnfit verie for anie man to commend the thing wherein his iudgement might fayl, or his education be therto not anſwerable. In as much therefore as his owne works may in ſome meaſure make manifeſt what is to bee thought of his perſon, I doe preſent them to your Honors view and patronage in this our vulgar tongue faithfullie and trulie tranſlated out of the French, deſiring though not deſeruing like fauourable acceptation, as I had good meaning to offer the ſame. For therein I am fullie perſwaded the indifferent and not curious reader ſhall finde matter ſufficient for the reeſtabliſhing of a ruinous common weale, if it be put in practiſe: wiſe counſaile for maintenance thereof: and laſtly approued documents requiſite whether in ciuill or forraine warres, which albeit they were written perticulerlie to releeue and reſtore the declining estate of the realm of France, are alſo in my opiniō not vnneceſſary for ours or any other that may fal into the like, if God who is the protector and guider of all Realmes ſhoulde not continue among vs vnity and godly peace. A work no doubt worthy the writer, and yet at the firſt

publiſhed without his priuitie or allowance, being collected and diſgeſted into one volume out of a heape of papers caſt aſide by the induſtrie & paines of the L. of Freſnes, whom, as himſelf reporteth, the miſerie of the time and troubles of his owne natiue Countrie, enforced as a baniſhed man to keepe companie with the ſaid Lord de la Noüe during his captiuitie in a forraine land, dedicated to that excellent Prince & patterne of pietie Henrie of Burbon King of Nauarre, throrough whoſe roiall patrimonie together with the iuſt deſert of the author himſelfe it hath receiued friendly entertainment among the better ſorte of the French Nation: as I doubt not but it ſhall finde the like heere among vs Engliſh men, being ſhrouded vnder the couert of your L. honorable protectiō, to the which I commit the ſame: thus crauing pardon for my boldneſſe moſt humblie I take my leaue of your Lordſhip, to whom I wiſh long life with all encreaſe of honour.
            
               Your Honors moſt humble and heartie well willer,
E. A.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the King of Nauarre.
            
               SIR, it doth many times ſo fall out, that thoſe things which we imagine to be moſt hurtfull vnto vs, do redound to our greateſt benefit. This when Chion (a man in his daies of good eſtimation among the Greekes) had tried in himſelfe, hee did by a Letter of his (yet extant) giue thankes to the contrarie winds, which maugre his head had detained him at Conſtan
                  •
               inople, from whence hee ment to haue ſailed to Athens, becauſe the ſayde ſ
                  •
               aie procured him the benefite of entering a league of friendſhip with Xenophon who during his aboade, ariued there with his troopes after his returne out of Perſia, confeſſing that he had more profited in the companie of that gallant Captaine, then hee ſhoulde haue done in the ſchooles of the moſt famous Philoſophers of all Grecce. After the example therefore of that ſo notable a perſonage, my ſelfe will giue thankes to the miſeries of this time, becauſe that forcing me to become a Philoſopher in a ſtrange land, they haue wrought me this good, to haue paſſed away eight or nine moneths in the companie of the Lord De la None. For beſides that hee is endued with all thoſe good partes which Chion noteth in Xenophon, as well in reſpect of his learning, as alſo for his knowledge and experience in armes: the examples of his vertues and ſweetneſſe of his conuerſation did ſo helpe me to diſgeſt both the publike calamities and mine owne perticular diſcommodities, that during life I cannot but yeeld praiſe to God for ſo great a benefite. Howbeit the thing that made me moſt deſirous of his friendſhippe, was a conſideration that the farther he was through his afflictions driuen out of France and from your Maieſtie, the more did his affection to your ſeruice & the welfare of the whole Realme ſeeme to increaſe: for whether he walkt or ſlept all his imaginations tended nolie to the finding out of ſuch meanes as might beſt redreſſe the calamities that oppreſſed our miſerable Countrie, and his ordinarie deuiſes to the ſeeking out of anie thing that might aduance the reeſtabliſhing of the ſtate in her former

dignitie: A matter at this day ſo lamentable, as it ſeemeth rather to bee wiſhed than hoped for. Injoying therefore that ſweete familiaritie wherewith it pleaſed him to honour mee, and being on a time in his cloſet I chaunced to laie my hand vpon a heape of papers throwen aſide in a corner, as things not regarded, and finding that they deſerued to bee more diligently gathered together, I began very gladly to reade them ouer: but he would not ſuffer me, ſaying they were but ſcriblings whereon he had employed the moſt tedious houres of his leaſure during his long and ſtraight impriſoment: likewiſe that among them there was nothing worth the ſight, becauſe his continuall exerciſe in warrefare wherein he had employed himſelfe, had denied him all opportunitie to endite well, as alſo that in theſe diſcourſes eſpeciallie (as neuer meaning other than to paſſe awaie the time) he had taken no paines with the poliſhing or filing of them, & that he was determined neuer to take thē in hand again: ſo as at that inſtant I could not obtain anie thing of him. But the taſt that I had then gotten did ſo ſet me on edge that all his deniall & deſpiſing of them did the more confirme mee in my deſire, neither did I euer qeaſe vntil by ſundrie meanes I had gotten ſometime one 
                  〈◊〉
                ſometime another, ſo long til at lēgth I had gathered all this booke.
            Afterward hauing more carefullie conſidered of the value of my bootie, accounting it more precious & profitable than to be kept in the bottome of a hutch. I did what I might to perſwade the author thereof to publiſhe it: but in the ende ſeeing that hee made ſo ſmall account of the ſame, that there was no meanes to obtaine his conſent, I aduentured vnwares to him to goe through with my enterpriſe, as wel for the commendation which I hope ſhall redounde vnto him, as for the commoditie that all Fraunce may reape thereby. For this booke is repleniſhed with moſt notable aduertiſementes to both great and ſmall, to the ende they emploie all their power and endeauours to redreſſe and aſſure this ſtate which without diſſimulation is verie neere to vtter ruine and deſtruction, It openeth the meanes to attain to a good & ſtedfaſt reeſtabliſhment: It intreateth of concord which is the only 
                  •
               iment that is able to ſoulder and knit againe together the diſſolued members of this fraile auncient building: It dooth at large diſcourſe of martiall diſcipline, and withall

teacheth how to vſe and well employ our weapons: It exhorteth euery one in his vocation to embrace pietie & to honor Iuſtice: It teacheth Princes, Lordes, and generally all gentrie the true path & high way to climbe to vertue, and to recouer the auncient honor of France, as alſo how to eſchue the danger of ſhame and miſerie. To be brief, whatſoeuer is moſt rare and excellent throughout all the moſt famous Philoſophers and Hiſtoriographers, concerning the conduct and good ordering of a great eſtate, either the inſtruction of ſuch as make profeſsion of honor is founde to bee herein ſet downe in as pleaſant a language and delectable varietie of matter, & withall ſo accōmodated to the humour of our nation, that I hope to get the goodwilles of al thoſe that ſhal reade this diſcourſe, as hauing bene the occaſion that they are not fruſtrated of the fruite and pleaſure herein to be reaped: And this will they accompt to be the greater, if they vouchſafe but to behould and conſider of the horror of the place where ſo exquiſite a matter was conceiued and brought into the world. For who is he that waying the miſerable captiuitie wherein the Lord of la Nouë was deteined when he wrot theſe remembrances, being paſt hope, or at the leaſtwiſe voyd of all apparance that euer he ſhould get foorth, oppreſſed with ſickneſſe of bodie and anguiſh of minde, & beſides all this moſt ſtraightly kept: who I ſay is he that viewing him in this miſerable captiuitie will not admire his wonderfull conſtancie and valiant courage, which had bene rare euen in the moſt vertuous ages, that could in the middeſt of ſo many calamities and apparitions of moſt terrible things: yea as it were in the bottome of the gulph of death, thinke vpon the commoditie of his countrie, and in ſuch bitter bondage maintaine his ſoule in ſuch libertie, that to heare him in his diſcourſes it might ſeeme his priſon had no power but ouer his paſsions, and ouer all that might moleſt or empeach the tranquilitie of his mind: either, as Plato ſaith, that thoſe that are in heauineſſe and agonie of death beginning to put of their mortall bodies, haue the powers of their ſoules more excellent then in their perfect health; ſo the incōuenience of this priſon hauing quailed and ſuppreſſed his bodie, did helpe him to purge his vnderſtanding, by vnclothing him of the cares of this life & nouriſhing him with moſt beautifull and high meditations farre more

commodiouſly then he could haue done in his full libertie: which verifieth my ſaying in the beginning viz that the things which wee doe moſt feare and thinke to bee our greateſt harme▪ doe ſometimes turne vs to greater proſperitie and good. For ſo much of our bodily eaſe as afflictions do take frō vs, ſo much ſtrength and reſolution doe they adde vnto our ſoules, whereas contrariwiſe there is no courage ſo valiant or forcible but proſperitie will weaken and extenuate, witneſſe Mecenas, who as Sencca ſaith, had bene one of the chief men in the world if too much eaſe had not gelded him: for he vſeth that worde to ſhewe how ſore vertue is weakened through too much felicitie. And in deede if the outward apparance or common opinion did not dazle our eyes, wee ſhould perceiue that thoſe whome God doth moſt rigorouſly chaſtiſe in this worlde, are often times the ſame whom he moſt ſweetly inſtructeth: alſo that the calamities wherewith hee afflicteth them are not in deede any calamities. But like as it is a pleaſure to behold two good Fencers trying each other, and employing whatſoeuer their actiuitie or knowledge well to aſſaile and better to defend: euen ſo doth the Lord delight to make thoſe whom he hath endued with moſt graces, to fight and withſtand the ſoreſt aduerſities, and to exerciſe their vertue by diuers profes, the which the more violent that they bee, the more doe they ſhewe forth the weakneſſe and ſmall effects of all whatſoeuer that we call euill fortune againſt a valiant hart armed with the feare of God. And who hath more practiſed this then your ſelfe Sir, or who is able to ſhew better tokens hereof. But leaſt I ſhould paſſe my boundes, I will ſpeake only of our author, whoſe example may be a ſufficient proofe of the ſaying of Seneca. That an honest man cannot eſchue aduerſities, although he may well conquer and ouercome them. And notwithſtanding ſomtimes he ſeemeth in the ſight of the ignorant to be wretched or vnhappie, yet in the middeſt of all his miſhappes he ſtil enioyeth perfect felicitie which hath ſworne ſo loyall amitie vnto him, that whatſoeuer chaunceth him yet is ſhe ſtill about him, with him and in him, and doth vpholde his ſoule in ſo pleaſant a ſeate, that in whatſoeuer eſtate ſhe be, ſhe is ſtill like vnto her ſelfe, as being lifted vp ſo high aboue all accidents of humaine affayres, that ſhe can in no wiſe be by them taynted. But to returne to that which I firſt began to ſpeake of concerning

the commoditie of this booke, ſuch eſpetially as ſhall hereafter vndertake to write the hiſtorie of our time may find great profite therin, and learne how to put in practiſe the precept of Tacitus, who willeth that neither loue nor hatred take any holde of the Hiſtoriographers pen. For they ſhall ſee, that notwithſtāding our authors long empriſonment, yet he doth in ſundrie places ſpeake honorably of the Spanyards, alſo in matter concerning our ciuill warres, he vſeth ſuch ſinceritie in the liuely deſcription of the trueth, that he rather noteth the faults of that ſide where vnto himſelfe leaned, then of the others: and commendeth in thoſe againſt whome he bare arms, anything that he findeth worthie cōmendation as earneſtly as the deſarts of thoſe on whoſe ſide he fought: in ſuch maner that our age may thinke it ſelf happie, that in the middeſt of her moſt furious paſsions and partialities, ſhe could recouer this platforme of obſeruations of the hiſtorie, therby exempted from the vniuerſal contagion of hatred & fauor. As alſo it is to be hoped that this exāple may wakē ſūdry others, who ſeeing how agreeable a voyce the ſame that is ruled by reaſon, is, in reſpect of taunts and inuectiues full of bitternes which (as the ſmall belles of the Choribantes) are good for nothing but to trouble the moſt ſettled braynes, will endeuour in their writings to ſet forth that which God may haue giuen them for the inſtruction of the poſteritie, rather then the vehemencie of diſordinate affections, whereof our age reapeth but too much reproach and hurt. I will ſtrayne my ſelfe no farther in the perticuler ſetting downe of the fruits that may be reaped in this booke, as well for common commoditie as priuate benefite, for they doe ſufficiently appeare of themſelues. Howbeit, in as much as it may ſo fall out that the author, conſidering what ſmall accompt hee made of his writings, in liew of reioycing in the commendations that hereby ſhall redound vnto him, may finde fault that I haue thus publiſhed them of mine owne head, and withall that I haue therevnto ſet his name, which hee choſe rather to make famous by armes, as thinking it (according to the auncient error of the French Nobilitie) no honor that men ſhould know how farre he honoreth or eſteemeth of learning; either els vpon ſome perticuler hatred againſt this booke, as ſtill putting him in minde of his captiuitie, I doe preſume Sir, moſt

humbly to beſeech your Maieſtie to aduowe my doings, and to bee my warrant in this that I haue preferred the publique commoditie before the perticuler deſire of the Lorde of la Noüe, who although hee bee but a bad valewer of his owne workes, is neuertheleſſe ſo affectionate a ſeruant vnto you, that he can no way miſlike any thing that hee ſhall finde to like you: as alſo to the ende that France receiuing this booke as it were at your hands, and adioyning the authors deſart to your aucthoritie, may loue and credite it the better. True it is that the ouer vehement mindes ſhall not finde theſe diſcourſes to their appetities. For ſo farre are they from fauouring their paſsions, that in deede their only ſcope tendeth to the aboliſhing of the ſame. But all thoſe that doe in pietie behold this poore ſtate fallen from her ancient felicitie: all thoſe that mourne becauſe France, which was wont to be the terror of the whole world, is now become a reproach to the ſame: all thoſe that are wearie of bathing their ſwords in the blood of their brethren, parents, and friends: To be briefe, all good Frenchmen that bee good ſeruaunts to the King and his Crowne, will take great delight when they ſhall ſee their good entents aduanced forwarde with ſuch holy and wiſe aduices as they ſhall finde in this booke. For the author hereof hath not after the maner of ſome both auncient and late Philoſophers waſted his time in forging an Idea of 
                  Ʋtopian perfections: but hath onely ſtudied ſo to accommodate himſelfe to our taſt and diſpoſition, and propounded his counſailes with ſo euident a facilitie and profite, that if wee profite not thereby, whether in publique or priuate, wee can blame none but our owne ſtubborneſſe and negligence. For in my opinion that man ſhall bee ouer farre out of taſte of all good reading, that ſhall not in theſe diſcourſes perceiue a ſpirite free from all paſsions and partialities, dedicated wholy to the honor of God, the ſeruice of his King, and the peace of his Countrie. This is it that hath embouldened me to offer them vnto you Sir, thinking that as well in conſideration of their argument, as in reſpect of the great bonds wherein the author ſtandeth your moſt bounden, they doe by right apperteyne vnto you. Not daring therefore to paſſe the ſtrict prohibition whereby my inſufficiencie forbiddeth mee to offer any thing of my owne, I do moſt humbly deſire your Maieſtie to receiue them

as ſome acknowledgemēt of my vowed ſeruice. And I beſeech God Sir after ſo many deaths wherewith you haue bene beſet euen from your infancie, from which he hath preſerued you, to graunt vnto you a long & moſt happie life in perfect peace and aſſured tranquilitie, to the glory of his moſt bleſſed name, the honour of your Maieſtie, and the contentaiton of all good French men your faithfull and affectionate ſeruants.
            
               From Lauſanna 
                  this firſt daie of Aprill. 1587.
               
               Your moſt humble, obedient, and faithfull ſeruant
De Freſnes.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The Argument and ſomme of euery ſeuerall diſcourſe herein conteyned.
            
            
               1 THat the realme of France doth by little and little runne into decay, and is neere to a great ouerthrowe, vnleſſe God of his goodneſſe vphould it. Alſo, that as yet there be ſome remedies to raiſe it vp againe, in caſe they may bee with ſpeede accepted. Pag. 1.
               2 That by Concord ſmall things doe encreaſe, and by diſcord great things doe decay. pag. 28.
               3 Of the inconſtancie whereby many doe vſe to hate, condemne and deteſt their neighbours, becauſe of their contrarieties in religion. pag. 45.
               4 What meanes and proceedings are moſt fit to vſe in the redreſſe of an eſtate. pag. 53
               5 That inſtruction or good bringing vp are neceſſarie for all young gentlemen. pag. 71
               6 That the reading of the bookes of Amadis de Gaule and ſuch like, is no leſſe hurtfull to youth then the workes of Machiauell to age. pag. 51
               7 That our ouer ſmall conſideration of the good things that wee haue, and our ouer eager couetouſneſſe of the good things which we haue not, doe multiplie our miſeries. pag. 85
               8 That the pouertie of the French Nobilitie proceedeth not ſo much of the warres which haue continued theſe fiue and thirtie yeeres, as of their owne ouerſight in the miſpending of their goods. pag. 101
               9 That the Frenchmens great affection to forraine warres, is at this time more hurtfull then profitable. pag. 115
               10 Of three falſe opinions that miſleade ſundrie of the Nobilitie. pag. 128
               11 Whether there bee any meanes ſo to reforme the muſters of France, as to reape any ſeruice of the ſame. pag. 145
               12 Of the multiplying of priuate quarels, with the abuſes therein committed, which greatly want reformation. pag. 157
               13 That his Maieſtie ought in time of peace to enterteyne at the leaſt foure regiments of footmen, reduced into the number of 2500. men, as well for the preſeruation of martiall diſcipline, as to bee alwaies aſſured of a great bodie of olde Souldiers. pag. 169
               14 Of the French Legionaries. pag. 176
               15 That the ancient maner of aranging the horſe in hay or file is now to ſmall vſe: alſo that it were neceſſarie they ſhould take the vſe of Squadrons. pag. 184
               16 Of the vſe of Camarades, which among the Spaniſh footmen are of great accompt. pag. 190
               17 Of the rewards ordinarily beſtowed vpon the Spaniſh ſouldiers when they haue done any notable peece of ſeruice, which they tearme their Aduantages. pag. 194
            
            
               
               Foure militarie Paradoxes.
               1 That a ſquadron of Reiſtres ſhould beate a ſquadron of Speares. pag. 198
               2 That 2500. Corcelets and 1500 Harquebuziers may more eaſely retire three French leagues in a plaine field then 2000. Speares. pag. 203
               3 That it is expedient for a Captaine to haue ſuſteyned an ouerthrow. pag. 210
               4 That daily experience haue taught ſuch meanes to fortifie Houlds as are moſt profitable, in reſpect of the ſmall charge thereof, and no leſſe defenſible then ſuch ſtately ones as the Ingeniors haue aforetime inuented. pag. 215
               19 That the continuation of the wicked proceedings of the warres of theſe daies doe make a iuſt cauſe to ſeeme vniuſt. pag. 220
               20 That a King of France is of himſelfe mightie enough, though he neither couet nor ſeeke other greatneſſe then his owne realme doth afford him. pag. 226
               21 That alliances of Chriſtian Princes with Mahumetiſtes, the capitall enemies of the name of Chriſt, haue euermore bene vnfortunate: alſo that we ought not to enter any firme confederacie with them. pag. 234
               22 That the Chriſtian Princes well vnited, are able in foure yeeres to expulſe the Turkes out of Europe. pag. 245
               23 Of the Philoſophers ſtone. pag. 291
               24 Againſt thoſe that thinke that godlineſſe depriueth man of all pleaſures. pag. 312
               25 That euery man according to his capacitie and vocation may vſe contemplation. pag. 334.
            
            
               Obſeruations of diuers things happened in the three firſt troubles of France, together with the true reporte of the moſt parte of the ſame.
The firſt Troubles.
               That the Proteſtants, but for the late accident at Vaſsie, had bene preuented in the beginning of the firſt ciuill warre. pag. 346
               Whether the Lord Prince of Conde in the firſt troubles committed ſo great an ouerſight as many haue giuen out, in that he ſeaſed not vpon the Court or Paris. pag. 350
               Of three things which I noted that happened afore the armies tooke the field: The one pleaſant, the other artificiall, and the third lamentable. pag. 352
               Of the Prince of Condees promiſe ſomwhat raſhly made to the Queene Mother that hee would depart the Realme of France, and why it was not performed. pag. 357
               By what occaſion the warre did firſt breake foorth betweene the two armies. pag. 362
               Of the good diſcipline which for the ſpace of two moneths only was obſerued among the Prince of Condees troopes both of hotſemen and footmen: Alſo of

the originall of Picoree or Prowlinge. pag. 361
               Of the reaſons that moued the Prince of Condees armie to breake vp after the taking of Boiſgency: alſo how hee conuerted that neceſſitie into profite, and of the purpoſes of the King of Nauarre. pag. 366.
               That but for the forraine ayde that the Lord of Andelot brought in, the Proteſtants affayres had bene but in bad caſe and many mens mindes ſhrewdly daunted, as well through the taking of Bourges and Roan, as for the ouerthrow of the Lord of Duras. pag. 372
               Of the Prince of Condees purpoſes when he ſawe his forraine ſuccour approach, and how he came before Paris, from whence after he had there ſoiorned eleuen daies and done nothing, he departed toward Normandie. pag. 375
               Of ſixe notable occurrences in the battaile of Dreux. pag. 379
               Of the ſiege by the Lord of Guize layd to Orleance: alſo of the Lord Admirals iourney into Normandie. pag. 384
            
            
               The ſecond Troubles.
               Of the cauſes of the taking of armes in the ſecond troubles: alſo how the purpoſes wherevpon the Proteſtants had built themſelues proued vayne. pag. 388
               That the P. of Condees attempt of three things ſet a proud face vpon the beginning of his enterpriſe, wherat the Catholiks were at the firſt aſtonied. pa 394
               Of the moſt notable occurrēces happened at the departure frō S. Denis. p. 396
               Of the voyages of both the armies toward Lorrain: but to ſeueral intēts. p. 400
               Of the returne of the two armies toward Orleance & Paris: alſo of the courſe that the Prince of Conde tooke in victualling, marching and lodging of his men. pag. 403
               Of the new forces out of ſundrie Prouinces that met at Orleance, which inuited the Prince of Conde to vndertake the voyage to Chartres. pag. 406
               The ſecond peace concluded at Lon-iumeau. pag. 409
            
            
               The third Troubles.
               Of the Proteſtants diligent retreat in the laſt troubles: alſo of the Lord of Martigues braue reſolution when he came to Saumure. pag. 411
               That the reſpite which his Maieſtie gaue to the Prince of Conde, without ſending any armie againſt him was a meanes for him to preuaile of a great Prouince, without the ſupport wherof he could not haue cōtinued the warre. p. 415
               Of the firſt progreſſe of both the armies, when being in their prime they ſought with like deſire to fight. pag 418
               That both the armies endeuouring to ouercome each other could not ſo much as come to battaile: alſo that the ſharpneſſe of the wether parted them, almoſt deſtroying as well the one as the other in fiue daies. pag. 425
               Of the death of the Prince of Conde at Baſſac. pag. 430
               Of the notable paſſage of the D. of Bipont from the borders of Rhine euen into Aquitaine. pag. 434. The ſiege of Poicters. pag. 438
               Of the battaile of Montcontour. pag. 442
               That the ſiege of S. Iohn d'Angely was the ſpringing againe of the Proteſtants. pag. 446
               That the towne of Rochel ſtood the Proteſtants in this warre in no leſſe ſtead then Orleance had done in the former. pag. 447
               That in 9. moneths the Princes armie marched almoſt 300. leagues, compaſſing in maner the whole realme of France: alſo what ſucceſſe they had in this voyadge. pag. 449. The cauſes of the third peace: The compariſon therof with the former: alſo whether the ſame were neceſſary. pag. 454.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE POLITICK AND MILITARIE DISCOVRSES of the Lord De la Nouë.
            
            
               The firſt Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the realme of France doth by little and little runne into decay, and is neere to a great ouerthrow, vnleſſe God of his goodneſſe vphold it. Alſo, that as yet there be ſome remedies to raiſe it vp againe in caſe they may bee with ſpeede accepted.
               
               
                  THE mindes of euery man ought to In what conſiderations this diſcourſe is neceſſarie, and ought to bee publiſhed. be firmely and ſtedfaſtly reſolued that God is the author of all politick gouernements, which he hath eſtabliſhed to the ende that through good order all humaine ſocietie may bee preſerued and mainteyned in pietie and iuſtice: alſo that it is he that vpholdeth them in their beautie, force and dignitie, vntill that vpon mans contempt of his lawes and corruption of their maners, he powre foorth his wrath vpon them, whereof doe enſue the ſubuertions and alterations of Monarchies and Commonwelths. Thoſe men therefore doe much deceiue themſelues, who vnder the ſhadowe of whatſoeuer mightineſſe or power, either els in conſideration of their long continuance, doe imagine that the ſame ſhould make them perpetuall: For they bee matters which are neither ſufficient, neither can plead preſcription againſt the iuſtice of the almightie, who limite
                     •
                  h the bounds of all eſtates which they cannot paſſe, when the tyme of correction is come: as by hiſtories (the light of tyme and regiſter of things paſſed) doth ſufficiently appeare. Yea, there be many worthie perſons yet liuing which haue ſeene the late beautie and eminencie of France in the tyme of Frances the firſt and Henry the ſecond, who would be forie to be brought to conceiue any euill opinion thereof, notwithſtanding the multitude of diſorders

happened, either to confeſſe that the foundations of the ſame are ſhaken: but it were their dueties rather to mourne then to diſpute and replye againſt ſo viſible and ſenſible apparances of ſubuertion. For the moſt part of the rootes of this ſo great trée doe lye bare and halfe withered: many of the braunches are dead: fewe leaues doe remaine, and the fruite is growne almoſt wilde. And to all this infirmitie haue tyme together with the late miſhaps brought it. Their beſt therefore were to confeſſe the truth, & to their powers to labour to mainteyne ſo much of it as is yet good & in ſtrength and force. I knowe that the foretelling of the falles, which cannot be done without laying open the ſhame therof, will ſeeme but an vnpleaſant diſcourſe to him that loueth and honoreth his countrie and nation. But ſeeing ſuch perils doe alreadie aſtoniſh ſo many hearts; alſo that the cauſes which plunge vs therein doe appeare in all mens eyes, were it not a great cowardlineſſe in this vrgent neceſſitie to ſit ſtill and ſay nothing? True it is that many men through default of good intelligences doe ſtand halfe amazed in the middeſt of all theſe miſeries. And like as the inſenſible waters doe runne downe the riuers vntill they fall into the Ocean wherein they bee buryed, euen ſo thoſe men by little and little rowling themſelues into the preſent confuſions which carie them away, being deſtitute of right vnderſtanding, doe goe forwarde, one after another vntill they fall headlong into the gulfe of deſtruction. It is a profitable peece of worke, when a houſe is on fire to ſhewe it to thoſe that ſee it not: likewiſe to vrge ſuch as ſee it and feare it, to helpe to quench it: alſo to admoniſh other ſuch as without any great conſideration do peraduenture kindle it, that they do not well: to be briefe, to exhort euery one to helpe the maiſter of the houſe for the ſafegard thereof, together with the preſeruation of his whole familie.
               Sundrie Philoſophers in their writings haue ſet downe the cauſes of tranſlations and alterations of eſtates, as Ariſtotle in his Politiques, who likewiſe haue touched the meanes how to preſerue the ſame: wherin they haue bene ſo diligent and curious as to procéede euen to the ſmalleſt cauſes, whereof whoſoeuer would perticulerly diſcourſe, had néede of tongue enough. But becauſe wee are in greater neceſſitie of the truth then of wordes, my counſaile is that we goe and drawe it out of the true philoſophie where we ſhall finde it more liuely painted foorth then in any other doctrine whatſoeuer. The holy Scriptures doe among other

make mention of thrée notable vices which for the moſt part Three cauſes of the ſubuertion of Commonwelthe. do concurre and ioyne together: and for the which God doth with open puniſhments and deſtructions ouerthrow commonwelths: namely, Impietie, Vniuſtice, and Diſſolution, which a very learned perſonage of our tyme hath very well noted, whoſe opinion alſo being ſo well grounded I will both allowe and follow. Impietie ſayth he, ouerthroweth the conſcience: Vniuſtice either Impietie. publicke or particuler, ſubuerteth all pollicie and common ſocietie of mankinde: Diſſolution doth diuerſly trouble and ſpoyle families, ſo that through the mixture of all theſe miſchiefes, muſt horrible confuſions doe enſue. Néedes muſt we confeſſe (though with mourning and ſorowe) that they all doe ſo aboundantly raigne throughout this poore realme, that without the helpe of the deuine bountie wee are in daunger of great ſhipwracke euen at hand.
               It were not here amiſſe to ſpeake ſomewhat of Religion, but I intend not ſo to doe, but onely to warne our nation to conſider that notwithſtanding the diuerſities thereof, yet they ought not to eſteeme one of another as of Turkes. For ſeeing both partes doe confeſſe that they worſhip one ſelfeſame God: that they ad
                  
                     •
                  owe one ſelfeſame Ieſus Chriſt to be their Sauiour: and that the Scriptures and foundations of their faith bee all one, there ought likewiſe to be ſuch brotherhood & charitie betweene them, that ceaſing all hatred, crueltie and warres, they ſhould grow to ſome reconſiliation. Can we not be content with aboue 200000. men of warre periſhed through the furie of theſe diuiſions? Was there euer more terrible Sacrifices then theſe? I thinke that all that haue any taſte of religion ſhould be hereby induced to pacifie themſelues; as alſo that thoſe whoſe felicitie conſiſteth in reuenge ſhould now bee glutted with ſo much blood as haue bene ſhed.
               But I will at this tyme ſpeake onely of three horrible vices, Atheiſme the firſt braunch of Impietie. which are as it were the dependances of Impietie, and haue infected all France. The firſt is Atheiſme, the ſecond Swearing and Blaſphemie, and the laſt, a pernicious vſe of Magicke and ſundry other kindes of Diuinations and Sorceries. All and euery whereof doe diſhonor and contemne Gods moſt holy name, and merueilouſly prouoke him. Concerning Atheiſme it is no newe vice, but of auncient continuance, yea it raigned in the time of King Dauid as himſelfe teſtifieth ſaying.

                     
                     There is no God as fooliſh men affirme in their mad mood, Pſalm. 14. & 53.
                     
                     Their drifts are all corrupt & vayne, not one of them doth good.
                  
               
               It is a terror euen to thinke that there ſhould bee any humaine creatures, eſpecially in theſe daies wherin the light of the holy Scriptures doth ſhine ſo bright, that durſt diſaduowe their Creator: but it is no great meruaile: for the ſame Scriptures doe teach vs that in the latter daies there ſhall be many ſuch people, whom, notwithſtanding they do ſufficiently bewray themſelues, it were good neuertheleſſe to ſee paynted out in ſuch ſort as they are deſcribed in the wiſedome of Salomon, who ſayth thus. The wicked haue ſayd within themſelues. The daies of our life are ſhort 
                  Wiſdome. 2. 
                  and ful of heauineſſe, neither haue there bene any knowne to returne from the dead: for we are borne of nothing, and hereafter we ſhall be as if we had neuer bene, for our bodies ſhall be turned into aſhes, and our ſoules ſcattered as the ſoft ayre, and in tyme our names ſhall be forgotten. Come therefore, let vs take and enioye the goods that are here, and vſe the creature lightly, as in our youth. Let vs fill our ſelues with precious wine and parfumes, and let not the flower of our tyme fade away. Let vs crowne our ſelues with Roſes before they be withered. Let there be no medowe which our intemperancie goe not ouer, and euerywhere let vs leaue the tokens of mirth, for that is our portion and our lot. Undoubtedly among all our corruptions nothing ſeemeth more prodigious thē the liues of thoſe that ſpeake and liue after that ſort. For he whoſe ſoule is polluted with any hereſie or ſuperſtition, yea euen he that followeth the lawes of the heathen, doe yet ſeeke ſaluation and bowe his knees before ſome Godhead that he hath forged to himſelfe: whereas contrariwiſe theſe men doe flee from and contemne all, ſo brutiſh are their ſences become. They had neede to be pitied, for of all that doe caſt away themſelues, they are the moſt caſtawaies.
               If any man ſhould aſke who begat this generation, it were not much amiſſe to aunſwer, that it haue bene our warres for religion, The originall of Atheiſme in France. which haue made vs to forget all religion. Neither can either the one or the other ſay It is our aduerſe partie that ingendreth Atheiſts, for they meete on all ſides. The duetie of Kings is to ſuppreſſe them, & euery ſocietie ought alſo to purge it ſelfe, becauſe there fall but ſmall bleſſings vpon thoſe places where ſuch venimous hearbes doe multiplie. Of Swearing and blaſphemie, the ſecond braunch of Impietie.
               
               As touching the ſecond vice, Contempt of God ingendreth it, and cuſtome ſhapeth it. Yea it ſo happeneth that the moſt part

of thoſe that growe guiltie thereof, doe become ſo ſenceleſſe that they thinke it to be but a ſlight fault. Our good Kings in tymes paſt, as S. Lewes and others did make decrées for the ſuppreſſing thereof, notwithſtanding I ſuppoſe that in thoſe daies none but a fewe vnthrifts vſed much ſwearing. Afterward this plague tooke hold of the Gentrie, eſpecially of the Souldiers, who (as it is ſayd) in their late iourneys brought the great othes out of Italie, but within theſe fortie yeres, the 
                     •
                  lood hath ſo ouerflowed and daylie encreaſed, that now the little children of ſeuen or eight yeeres of age haue ſkill enough to abuſe the name of God; yea euen the peaſants who liue fartheſt from the Court and Cities, where corruptions doe dwell, (following the common courſe) can curſe the heauens as well as the Souldiers, who aboue all other doe beare away the bell for this iniquitie. To bee briefe. Turne vs which way we wil, we ſtill heare nothing but blaſphemie and forſwearing of God. Thus doe we ſee that euill example with want of correction hath bred perſeuerance in this deteſtable vice. Neuer did any auncient Hiſtoriographer write that it was (any thing néere) ſo common in any age as it is at this day. If wee conſider the Iewiſh nation, we ſhall finde them but ſmally taynted therewith, for whoſoeuer among them did blaſpheme, he was ſtoned to death. The Heathen did but ſieldome ſweare, and held their othes in great reuerence. The Sarazens which embraced Mahomets lawe, durſt not tranſgreſſe herein for feare of Gods puniſhment; and euen to this day the Turkes that ſuccéeded them doe abſteyne from blaſphemie. Surely all theſe nations ſhall in the laſt day riſe againſt vs Chriſtians, and eſpecially againſt vs Frenchmen, who endued with more knowledge then thoſe blind people, doe offend tenne tymes more then they. If a man bee atteynted of treazon againſt his worldly Prince, euery one will crye out, he is worthie puniſhment, but vnto him that blaſphemeth and teareth in peeces the name of God (which is treazon againſt his heauenly King) no man vpon earth ſayth one word, notwithſtanding it bee written that ſuch a one ſhall not be holden guiltleſſe.
               Some worldly wiſe man may come foorth and ſay, that although Aunſwer to thoſe that thinke it not meet ſo fore to inſiſt vpon puniſhment of ſwearing and blaſphemie. this error be chaſtizeable, yet it is none of thoſe that procure the loſſe of eſtates; alſo that in caſe we could finde meanes to redreſſe ye other abuſes of France, this might afterward be well enough prouided for. In my opinion thoſe wiſe men doe reſemble

ſuch as becauſe they haue many bookes, and haue ſeene their cloſures and red their titles, doe weene themſelues to be learned: for they looking ſuperficially onely into the cauſes doe neuer conſider that the principall things that bring miſerie and diſorders into whole Countries, are ſuch offences as are committed directly againſt God: notwithſtanding, they ſee that where the Magiſtrates do looke that his holy name be had in reuerence, the Commonwelths doe floriſh and abound in all wealth: but if they ſhewe themſelues negligent therein, the ſcourge ſhall neuer depart from their houſe: neither ſhall it ſtand them in any ſtead to ſay: I will for my part rule my tongue well enough: for they be ordeyned, not for themſelues only, but alſo for the inſtruction and correction of others. Did they neuer reade that which is written in the 3. booke of Moſes? Whoſoeuer curſeth his God, ſhall 
                  Leuit. 24. 
                  beare the paine of his owne ſinne, and the blaſphemer of the Lords name ſhall dye the death: the whole congregation of the people ſhall ſtone him, whether he be a citizen or a straunger. Theſe are his words that maketh the foundations of the earth to tremble, the Sea to runne backe, and that ſhooteth foorth his moſt fearefull thunderbolts againſt the proudeſt Cities. Let them therefore doo all that they can and employe their whole power to baniſh this euill, leaſt by ſupporting it they make themſelues guiltie therof.
               The third vice that dependeth vpon Impietie is not ſo generall Of Magicke and ſundrie ſorts of Diuinations, the 3. braunch of Impietie. or euident as the former, notwithſtanding it bee as abhominable in the ſight of God. For when the vnlawfull meanes of Diuinations and Magick arts haue alienated man from God, they plunge him in ineuitable deſtruction. Herein doth the deuill vſe two kindes of ſnares. By Witchcrafts which is the groſſer ſort, he doth ordinarily drawe vnto him the rude and ſimply malitious perſons, who either for the ſatiſfying of their deſired reuenges, or for the atteyning vnto other purpoſes, doe ſo ſuffer themſelues to be ſeduced by him that they grow to acknowledge and confederate themſelues with him. He doth often ſhewe himſelfe vnto many in ſundrie ſhapes, as experience teacheth by the cōfeſſions, procéedings and iudgements giuen againſt them: and let ſuch as doubt hereof reade the writings of Bodin againſt them, wherein they ſhall ſee what horible miſchiefes and villanies againſt both God and man thoſe miſerable creatures doe commit; which after they haue renounced their Creator doe ſubmit themſelues to him; who laughing them to ſcorne doe drawe

them into euerlaſting deſtruction. The ſame Author reporteth that their Captaine being taken in ye tyme of Charles the 9. cō
                  feſſed yt in France there were aboue thirtie thouſand Sorcerers. It is horrible to ſee ſo voluntarie a proteſtation to the irreconſiliable enemy of God and man: but when malice aboundeth, there is nothing whereto it will not ioyne. Such as are more ſpiritually wiſe and haue in them ſome ſeedes of pietie, muſt haue other pollicies that may beare ſome fayrer ſhewe to bring them into theſe pathes of perdition: for if any man ſhould at the firſt ſhewe them the diſhonor that they commit againſt God, it may be they would refrayne themſelues: but as the ſleights of the deuill are merueilous, ſo doth he drawe them on by fayrer pretences, vntil they find themſelues ſo ſnared that they cannot eſcape. The cauſe of theſe mens miſhap conſiſteth in their corrupted affections, which driue them by vnlawfull and damnable waies to ſeeke their accompliſhment. One would knowe what ſucceſſe he ſhould haue in ſome great enterprize: another how he might eſchue ſome euident daunger: The couetous and ambitious man muſt know how to atteyne to his deſires: he that hateth and ſeeketh to doe harme, the like: One ſeekes to lengthen his life, another to ſhunne death: This man deſireth to know the iſſue of the warre: that man whether the eſtate may be preferued: with infinite other ſuch things as mans imagination can conceiue. To be briefe, mans vanitie hath of vanitie it ſelf made Oracles wherwith to ſatiſfie his curious frowardneſſe: hereof are ſprung vp ſo many kindes of Magicke, Enchauntments, Witchcrafts and 
                  Infinite ſorts of Magicke. 
                  Sorceries, that we ſay that there is nothing in heauen, in earth, neither vnder the earth which the man that is plunged in this error doth not vſe, in hope to finde ſome inſtruction or eaſe: although ordinarily he is fruſtrate of his expectation, becauſe therin he can meete with nothing but falſhood and deceipt. And what els is to bee looked for out of the inſtructions of the deuill, conſidering The decree of God againſt ſuch. that himſelfe is a lyer and deceiuer: But that we may the better knowe how theſe abuſes are to bee reiected, let vs heare what Moſes ſayth. When thou ſhalt, ſayth he, be entred into the 
                  Deut. 18. 
                  land which the Lord thy God ſhall giue thee, beware that thou followe not the abhominations of thoſe people, neither ſhall there bee foūd in thee any perſon that ſhall paſſe his ſonne or daughter through fire, or that ſhall enquire at the Southſayer, or that ſhall obſerue dreames, or the ſinging of birds, neither ſhall there be any Sorcerer

or Enchanter, or any that ſhall ſeeke counſaile at familier ſpirits, or that ſhall aske the truth at the dead: for all theſe things be abhomination to the Lord, and for ſuch abhominations will the Lord driue them out before thee. This was no lawe deuiſed by any Lawyer, but an expreſſe inhibition of almightie God, wherein wee may note three things. Firſt, that theſe impieties be the inuentions of ſuch as haue forſaken God. Secondly, that he deteſteth them eſpecially aboue all other offences: and thirdly, that he doth grieuouſly chaſtize them with moſt terrible puniſhments. But in our daies if any man couet to ſee where theſe accurſed vanities are practized, let him goe to the Courtes, where he ſhall finde ſome Where Magicke and her trayne doe ſoiourne. of all ſorts and callings that are not only affectionate thereto, but do euen runne mad after Soothſayers, as they did after one Noſtrodamus and others, whoſe lyes were receiued for trueth. Thence let him walke all ouer France, and he ſhall finde that among the Nobilitie, Clergie, and men of lawe, there bee many ſecret diſciples of this profeſſion, of whom I ſuppoſe ſome doe not thinke to doe ſo much miſchiefe as they doe, and yet in theſe caſes the leaſt tranſgreſſions are reputed moſt heynous ſinnes, as witneſſeth the holy Scripture, which to the end to aggrauate the heynouſneſſe of any offence doth ſay that it is as the ſinne of the Soothſayers. And vndoubtedly the encreaſe and tolleration of ſuch abhominations, is one of the moſt euident tokens of the ſubuertion of any Commonwelth: wherefore it is requiſite that euery one that is polluted with this or the reſt doe clenſe themſelues: For it is a hard matter for him to bee a good Citizen of France, that for ſo wicked a cauſe doth voluntarily baniſh him ſelfe out of the holy Citie of God.
               
               Now muſt wee ſpeake of Vniuſtice, which is a publicke and Iniuſtice, the ſecond cauſe of the deſtruction of Commonwelths. particuler oppreſſion vſed by ſuch as bee in auctoritie or mightie ouer the poore and weake, who alſo through their pride, couetouſneſſe and wealth doe practize all violence, deceipt and extremitie againſt the ſimple. Theſe diſorders haue bene ſo long continued againſt the poore, that now it is openly ſayd that they are no longer ſhorne, but euen flayne with a thouſand extraordinarie oppreſſions and newe impoſtes heretofore vnknowne, in ſuch ſort that ye coyne now wreſted from them is watered with teares and accompanied with moſt ſorowfull complaints. And notwithſtanding whatſoeuer knowledge that men haue of Gods finall ſuccour to the oppreſſed, either that he doth chaſtize their

oppreſſors, yet will they not ceaſe therefrom, but ſtill continuing the ſame courſe, they doe day by day proceed to augment the miſeries of others, vntill they bring them to ſuch a paſſe as themſelues doe tremble thereat. Thus haue we procéeded from yeare to yeare in ſo wofull an eſtate, that without ſpeedie remedie France muſt growe halfe deſert. Then if we marke the men of lawe which are ordeyned to miniſter iuſtice to euery man, wee ſhall ſee a many of them helpe themſelues with this holy vertue, to entrap the wealth of thoſe that either through follie or neede haue entangled themſelues in the moſt ſubtile nets of pleading, neither can any man expreſſe the extortion that vnder ſuch colour is committed. Moreouer, there runneth a great rumour of ſome gouernors of Townes and Caſtles, and paraduenture of whole Prouinces, who to the ende to mainteyne their pompe and fill their coffers, doe vſe newe lawes to the detriment both of the King and Commons: as if the purpoſe of offices tended either to make an outward ſhewe, or to glut them with wealth, and not rather to make their vertues to ſhine in ſuch functions both to the reliefe of many & to their maiſters honor. But if there be any behauiour that may be termed rage, it is the behauiour of the men of warre, who are ſo farre out of ſquare, that hauing habandoned all humanitie, they make no leſſe hauock in their owne countrie, then in the enemies land where all is made a pray vnto them: in ſuch wiſe that the forraine warres of France for theſe eightie yeres haue not waſted ſo much, as the ſouldiers robberie haue done ſince theſe ciuill warres began. Yea, and there be ſome gentlemen who as I thinke doe imagine that the true tokens of Nobilitie doe conſiſt in making themſelues to bee feared, and in beating & preſumpteouſly taking from their ſubiects any thing yt may be cōmodious vnto themſelues, as if they were their ſlaues. The great cities, what do they but encroch to themſelues all the cōmodities that they may: thunder foorth their priuiledges, & lay all the burthen & charges vpō the poore country people, who being beſides pinched by the ſubteltie of the receiuers, it is a merueile wherevpon they liue and finde themſelues. To be briefe, if wee looke generally into the particuler dealings of each one toward other, wée ſhall finde plentie of fraude and vyolence, as if a man were brought into the world only to hurt his like. Well, let that which is ſpoken ſuffize to teach vs that vniuſtice draweth néere to her full period: For there is as little care of oppreſſing

the Poore, the Widowe, and the Orphane, as there is feare of the threats written againſt ſuch as commit it. And yet we muſt thinke that when oppreſſion is growne vniuerſall and continual, then God haſteneth his iudgements to deſtroye vs, becauſe wee will not amend when we are inſtructed and taught, and that doth the Prophet well ſhewe when he ſaith. The Lord ſhall enter into iudgement with the auncients of his people, and with their Princes, 
                  Eſay. 3. 
                  for ye haue waſted the vine, and the ſpoyle of the poore is in your houſes. Why doe you oppreſſe my people, and bruſe the face of the poore, ſaith the Lord of hoasts. This decree might be a ſufficient warning to the oppreſſors, if they were as eaſie to be taught, as paraduenture they be incorrigible.
               The third vice afore mentioned, is diſſolution, vnder which tearme I doe comprehend Adulterie, Pompe, Pride, Gluttonie 
                  Exceſſe the third cauſe of ſubuertion of Commonwelths. Two fountaynes of exceſſe. 
                  and Drunkenneſſe. Which to thoſe that delight in worldly proſperitie, are merueilous pleaſant imperfectiōs. And although in our age, nature is much enclyned to ryot and vanitie, yet may wee ſay that the euill example giuen in moſt eminent places, together with impunitie, haue bene great helpes to encreaſe this miſchiefe, which taketh the ſurer roote when it is practized and borne out by the mightie. Now, among the vices aboue mentioned, Adulterie hath the preeminence. And beſides that it corrupteth The kindes thereof. Adulterie. the bodie and poluteth the ſoule, it is ordinarily accompanied with ſickneſſe, prodigalitie, murder, and other inconueniences that drawe on each other. In all places they are ſo addicted thereto, that they care no more for concealing of it, as in tyme paſt when honeſtie held them in ſome ſhame. In theſe daies they ſeeke onely to couer the filthineſſe thereof with beautifull titles or pleaſant aunſwers, yea they goe further in ſome, euen notable places. For they accompt this vice as a neceſſarie ſpurre, wherewith when one is pricked and can guyde himſelfe cunningly, or atteyne to any worthie price that he hath deſired, he is exalted: he is enuied: he is ſayd to haue a good capacitie and quicke vnderſtanding. After this ſorte doe they make blacke white, attributing pureneſſe to that which is filthie and foule. Youth which is eaſely catched with theſe baytes, holpen by cuſtome, and not reſtrayned by lawes, doth more and more ſtirre vp their appetites hereto, and hauing once taken ſo bad a trayne, the ſtate of manhood and age doe nouriſh rather then aboliſh it. This vice doth naturally reſemble the Cancre which by little and little gnaweth

the fleſh: for if once it begin to take hold of any, it ſo encreaſeth the corruption of his affections, that it is afterward a hard matter to purge him againe. God for ſuch like iniquities in old tyme rooted out whole nations from before his face, as well to ſhewe that he abhorreth them, as alſo to teach Magiſtrates not to leaue them vnpuniſhed.
               Concerning Pompe and Superfluitie, the roote thereof ſpringeth The pompes & ſuperfluities of the Court, Commons, Gentrie and women. in the Court, where vanitie doth ſo abound, that thoſe perſons which will bee any thing accompted of, muſt tranſforme themſelues into ſundrie faſhions and colours. For the outward ſhewe of things are in ſuch eſtimation, that many tymes men iudge of the perſon by his apparell; ſo as it ſeemeth wee would ſay, that the chiefeſt perfections are hidden vnder the coſtlieſt garments. Kings & Princes did not ſo ſoone chaunge their auncient ordinarie ſimplicitie into Italian gliſtering brauerie, but their ſubiects immediatly imitated them, yea and ſome endeuoured to exceede them: and this miſchiefe hath ſtooped ſo lowe that pompe and pride appeareth euen in ye meane citizens of ſimple townes. Herewith hath the Nobilitie eſpecially empouriſhed her ſelfe ſo ſore, that ſhe can no longer ſo mainteyne her ſelfe to doe the King any ſuch ſeruice as in tyme paſt. Neither doe women for their parts forbeare theſe ſuperfluities: for weening with outward ornaments to breede themſelues more beautie, commendation and honour, they haue not ſince bene ſo carefull to adorne themſelues with the beautifull giftes of vertue which doe farre exceede the others.
               At the tayle of all theſe vanities commeth Pride, which although Pride. it be borne with man, doth neuertheleſſe whet it ſelfe and encreaſe with their ſmoake: or rather according to the opinion of others, engendreth them. But howſoeuer it is, the one ſtill agreeth with the other: ſo that of this vnreaſonable preſumption or ouerweening of themſelues groweth the contempt of others, and thence come iniuries, quarels and manifold murders.
               An other braunch of Diſſolution is table exceſſe and great Table exceſſe and great furniture. furniture, wherein many doe ſuffer themſelues to bée willingly led away, as taking this path which is ſo full of intemperance to be the only meanes to liue in pleaſure and fame. All which bad cuſtomes do perticulerly corrupt and ſpoyle whole families, and being mixed with publick errors doe make the diſeaſe of the vniuerſall bodie more incurable. Doe we then thinke that God will

long ſuffer theſe corruptions which are to him ſo odious? It is not like: but rather are we to feare leaſt the iudgement comming ſo ſlowly will bée the more grieuous. How many kingdomes, where they haue atteyned the fulneſſe of al vice, haue bene ouerrunne and giuen in pray to ſtraungers? The hiſtories doe verefie it, and the multitude of examples might terrifie thoſe who hauing power to repreſſe the miſchiefe (at the leaſt in part) doe ſuffer it to encreaſe euery where.
               Thus may wee ſee ſome of the moſt manifeſt miſchiefes that haue and ſtill do infect France, briefly ſet downe according to the A cōcluſiō gathered of the former ſpeeches viz. that France is in manifeſt perill in that the cauſes of the ſubuertion of Commonwelths doe in ſo many ſorts beare rule therein. Tokens of Gods wrath. Two obſeruations meet for the curious. purpoſed order, which are ſufficient to make all men thinke (except the corrupt or ſenceleſſe) her daunger to bee moſt euident, conſidering how ſore the foundations of Piety and Iuſtice, which ſhould vphold her, are decayed & ſhaken. The ſinnes afore mentioned are ye true cauſes that prepare to put her to a great iumpe. Neither want wee other ſignes and foretellings, which threatening vs, doe warne vs to endeuour to turne away the wrath of God from vs. Alreadie haue appeared horrible Comets and other ſtrange ſights in the ayre, Earthquakes, the bringing foorth of Monſters and feareful voyces, which haue bene felt, heard and ſeene, and being ſo prodigious, ought to terrefie vs. But if the curious doe for their ſatiſfying craue more curious and vaine obſeruations, my ſelfe will alleadge them twaine that I haue obſerued in a certaine mans writings. The firſt, that wée are now vnder the Climactericall raigne of the Kings of France, namely the ſixtie and three, which noteth vnto vs ſome alteration to bée made. The ſecond, that all the roumes made in the Pallace of Paris to place the pictures of our Kings, which ſome do imagine to haue bene fatally ſo builded, are now full.
               But to leaue thē to deſcant vpon theſe vanities, I will ſpeake Of the Periode of Commenwelths. of another forewarning more to bee conſidered, which the Prophet Daniel maketh mention of: viz. of the commō period, which in ſome mens iudgement, he attributeth to all eſtates, and is vnto them as it were a limite that they cannot paſſe. At the leaſt we ſee within that tyme woonderfull alterations. And it is comprehended within the compaſſe of 500. yéeres. Which experience hath ſufficiently verified in diuers, eſpecially in the auncient people of the Iewes, as Iaſper Peucer hath diligently noted. Bodin likewiſe in his Commonwelth, following the opinion of Plato, hath noted that the number of 494. which he tearmeth perfect,

and is ment of yeeres, is a terme which fewe Commonwelths doe eſcape without encurring moſt daungerous alterations. Lib. 1. Diuinat. cap. 7. & lib. 4. cap. 2. Now, if wee will applye this to our ſelues, and count how long it was betweene the time that this Realme came to bee ſettled and aſſured in the familie of Hugh Capet the author of the ſecond chaūge (which happened vnder Henry the firſt his graūdchild, who dyed in the yeere 1060.) and the death of Henry the ſecond, in whoſe raigne many great corruptions, as well in maners as pollicie, were conceiued, which afterward were brought foorth with incredible encreaſe, we ſhall finde fiue hundred yeeres fully compleat. But the chaunges of moſt excellent vertues into moſt infamous vices are moſt daungerous, becauſe other do ſtill followe on which breede deſtruction without remedie. Yet muſt we not ſay but this tearme is ſometyme farre ouerpaſſed (which procéedeth of Gods great goodneſſe) as wee may now ſee in our Realm, that haue perſeuered in forme royall aboue 1100. yeres. As alſo that ſometymes God in his wrath doth ſhorten it becauſe of mens horrible ſinnes. And although the knowledge of the tyme be to them a ſecrete article which God hath reſerued to himſelfe, yet the conſideration of ſo many as well waightie, as trifling matters concurring to one ſelfe end, ought to driue vs to thinke vppon his iudgements. But much more ſhould wee bee thereto induced, in that wee ſee the prophecie of Moſes daylie drawe to performance againſt vs. And yet notwithſtanding our ſo many experiences and ſufferings wee cannot become wiſe. Theſe be his words. If thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord 
                  Gods ſentence concerning the periods and reuolutions of publick and priuate eſtates. Deut. 28. 
                  thy God to keepe and doe all his commaundements, all theſe curſes ſhall light vppon thee. Thou ſhalt be curſed in the Citie and in the field: the Lord ſhall ſend thee hunger and ſcarcitie▪ and the plague ſhall take hold of thee vntill it hath conſumed thee from the face of the earth. The heauen that is ouer thy head ſhall be of braſſe, & the earth vnder thy foote of Iron: the vermin and the ruſt ſhall conſume all the trees and fruites of thy earth. The straunger that is within thee ſhall get ouer thee and be the highest, and thou ſhalt stoope and be vnder him: he ſhall lend to thee vppon v
                        •
                     urie, and thou ſhalt not bee able to lend to him. The Lord ſhall cast thee downe before thy enemies, and thou ſhalt get from them by a contrary way, and thou ſhalt flee through the hedge. A nation that is farre from thee ſhall riſe against thee whoſe language thou ſhalt not vnderſtand: an impudent people which ſhall not honor the older, neither haue compaſſion

of the infant. The ſame ſhall deuour the fruite of thy cattell, and the fruite of thy field, & ſhall leaue thee no remainder of thy Corne, Wine, or Oyle, neither of the flockes of thy ſheepe vntill it hath deſtroyed all. To be briefe, thou ſhalt ſerue thy enemie whom thy Lord ſhall ſend thee in hunger and thirst, in nakedneſſe and want, who ſhall put a coller of Iron about thy necke vntill he hath wholly rooted thee out. Theſe be part of the threatnings denounced againſt thoſe that harden themſelues in wickedneſſe, whereof we doe alreadie ſo feele the effects, that there want no more but the laſt wounds to fulfill our vtter oppreſſion. And ſith Gods worde hath prooued ſo true in this bitter correction, let vs feare leaſt it ſo doe likewiſe in our deſtruction.
               I ſuppoſe there bée ſome Courtiers, who being but ſmally Obiections againſt the maxime taken from Moſes. ſatiſfied by my ſpeeches, will rather ſcorne mée, becauſe I endeuour to decide matters of eſtate with Theologicall principles, and would better like that I ſhould haue propounded ſome out of Polibius, Plutarke and Xenophon, to the ende by them to haue iudged of the caſualties of Kingdomes: and willingly I would haue leaned to their opinions: but to the end not to be deceiued Aunſwer. I haue thought this way that I haue taken to be the better▪ For notwithſtanding mans wiſedome (which neuertheleſſe is giuen from aboue) doth ſhine in prophane bookes, yet is it very vayne in reſpect of the heauenly wiſedome that appeareth in the holy Scriptures. Howbeit, to the ende the better to ſatiſfie The Maximes of Philoſophers concerning the alterations of Cō
                     monwelths. euery one, I will ſomewhat touch the opinions of theſe great perſons concerning the matter now diſcourſed vpon. The matters, ſay they, namely Ariſtotle, which breede innouation, alteration or deſtruction, eſpecially in Monarchies, are theſe, when there happen debate betwéene brethren or mightie men of the Realme: when the Princes are vnder age or in contempt: when the Magiſtrates doe robbe the common people: when wicked and vnwoorthie perſons are put in office and the good reiected: when the ſuperiours do oppreſſe their inferiours with grieuous iniuries: and the tributes layed on the peoples neckes are inſupportable: when Princes through their diſhoneſt actions doe become contemptible to their ſubiects: when Iuſtice is ſo cowardly and corrupt that impunitie of vice beareth ſway: when wee ſee an vnproportionable encreaſe in one member of the eſtate▪ when dignities and offices are ſet to ſale: when pouertie is ſo v
                  
                     •
                  erſall that not onely the priuate are poore, but the common is

poorer: when martiall diſcipline is neglected: when concord quaileth among Citizens and maners are vtterly depraued: when lawes are out of force and that the Prince is ruled by wicked or ignorant Counſaylers: and when forrainers are in greater fauour and authoritie then the naturall borne ſubiects. Theſe are in parte the cauſes by them noted, which breede ſundrie alterations in eſtates and bring them to naught. All which things The application of theſe principles to the conſideration of the ſtate of France may eaſely be ſeene to concurre in ours, and thereby may wee iudge of the ſickneſſe thereof. But albeit wee are not altogether to contemne the Philoſophers opinions, yet muſt wee rather cleaue to thoſe of the Scriptures, which ſearch out the originall cauſes in mans tranſgreſſions: For GOD deteſting the ſame doth withdrawe his fauour and protection from whole Realmes, and then ſpring vp confuſions. Whether therefore wee looke into the firſt cauſes, or into thoſe that enſue, wee ſhall in all bée ſure to finde matter and tokens of deſtruction. How is it then that wee feare not ours, when all iudgements both deuine and humaine doe foretell it? Howbeit, in as much as there is no diſeaſe ſo great, but the ſicke perſon may conceiue ſome hope of recouerie, wee are not altogether to diſpayre, but diligently to ſearch among both ordinarie and extraordinarie, deuine and humaine remedies, for ſuch as may bee moſt profitable for our reſtauration. And of thoſe will wee ſpeake in the ende, after wee haue firſt layd open ſuch diſſipations as oftentymes happen vnto the mightieſt Monarchies.
               Some there are that notwithſtanding they knowe there bee An other obiectiō of theirs that thinke that we ought either very gently or not at all to touch the wounds of an eſtate, namely of our owne country. Two ſprings of great deſolation in an eſtate. great diſſipations, yet doe they make them but ſmall, eſpecially when they applye them to their owne countrie, as well in reſpect of their charitie thereto, as alſo becauſe they bee loath to bee the reporters of ſo many miſchiefes. In ſuch affayres as this, wee muſt not flatter neither our ſelues, nor other men, but freely declare what paſſed experience doth ſhewe. Among many deſolations happening to an eſtate readie to fall, the two worſt are theſe.
               The firſt, when one mightie nation, or many, being of diuers diſpoſitions and language doe come to vſurpe, and bring into bondage: then is it not to bee demaunded how many miſeries the ſubdued muſt endure. The other, when a Kingdome renteth it ſelfe in many péeoes, and that the quickeſt or ſtrongeſt

doe ſeaze each vpon his owne portion, which they gouerne in diuers maner, and for the maintenaunce of themſelues doe leane to ſtraungers: then likewiſe enſueth a great ouerthrowe of all things, and the calamities doe long endure.
               Of theſe two only will I now diſcourſe, as being thoſe which A diſcourſe vpon the firſt cauſe or originall of the deſolation of an eſtate. threaten vs and are the worſt, neither is it to any purpoſe to replye that France cannot incurre theſe inconueniences: For ſith ſo many and ſo deteſtable miſchiefes, together with ſo many and ſo diuers partialities haue ſet in foote, we muſt imagine them (without ſpeedie remedie) to bee the open ga
                     •
                  es vnto newe maiſters. If wee doe throughly marke the accidents happened in ſundrie eſtates, we ſhall finde that many haue decayed when ciuill diſſention hath ſo beaten them downe that they haue not bene able to defend themſelues againſt ſtraungers. The kingdome of Iuda 
                  A confirmation gathered in the conſiderations of the ſubuertions of many mightie Monarchies, as of the Iewes, Romaines, Grecians and Hungarians. being mightie and floriſhing vnder Dauid and Salomon, and deuided vnder Roboam, it followed that the Kings of Iſraell and Iuda held almoſt continuall warres againſt each other, and ſo weakened themſelues, euen in good maners, that the Aſſyrians led them into captiuitie. Soone after that the Romaine Empire was deuided in it ſelf, the ſeate tranſported to Conſtantinople, & that vice augmenting, the vertue of Princes decayed, the Northerne nations roſe vp and rent it in ſundrie péeces, neither is it poſſible to rehearſe the calamities of them that liued in thoſe daies. In the kingdome of Hungarie which in tymes paſt hath bene ſo floriſhing and mightie, when thoſe that ſhould ſuccéede ſtraue who could carie it away, the Turke ſtepped in betwéene them and became Lord of the greateſt part thereof. And although the Turkes conqueſtes are extraordinarie deſtructions, yet muſt wee in theſe examples note Gods puniſhments, with the cauſes that bring them in, thereby to take warning that vnleſſe we preuent them there will bee no want of ſuch as ſhall put them in execution: Yea, which ſhall come and bereaue vs of our libertie, life, and land. And who doubteth not that many nations The ſecond confirmation taken of the affections of the nations our neighbors. our neighbors doe but lye in waite for ſuch occaſion▪ Is not the Spanyard, who ſeeketh to force all men to ſtoope vnder his ſcepter and contemneth the French, mightie enough to bring vs vnder? Will the Germaynes that diſtayne vs, be ſlowe to ſuch a bootie? How ſuddenly will the Italians that behold vs, be readie to catch whatſoeuer may fit them? The Engliſh calling to mynd their auncient loſſes, may then haue their remedie: yea the Scots
                  
and Suitzers which now bewayle vs, may peraduenture ſeeke to plucke away each of them ſome one ſmall feather. Finally, the Flemmings that did loue vs, whoſe hate we haue perforce procured, how ioyfully will they ſkippe in our neckes? I take him to be very ſenceleſſe that doth not feare it.
               But ſome man will ſay that it is an eaſie matter in words and Obiection againſt that which is afore ſayd. Aunſwer. writing to raiſe vp many nations, which neuertheleſſe wee ſieldome ſee in effect come to paſſe. Hereto I aunſwer that whenſoeuer God is determined to thunder vpon the ſinnes of men, he doth much ſooner ſtirre vp thoſe whom he pleaſeth to vſe as miniſters of his vengeance. And in caſe the report of hiſtories bee true, with what celeritie I pray you did the Goths, Huns, Alans, Francons, Burguignions and Wandales fall vpon Italie, Gaule, Spayne & Affricke? Such was their furie and ſpeede, that in ſhort ſpace they ſubdued and waſted all thoſe great Prouinces. The like alſo did the Sarazens two hundred yéeres after in the conqueſt of Spayne. Haue not we alſo had tryall in France during the Engliſh warres that that only nation (which in deede by enheritance at that tyme poſſeſſed almoſt the third parte thereof) brought it into ſo miſerable eſtate that they were like to haue bene maiſters of all? Let vs then feare leaſt that which hath alreadie happened to others, doe fall vppon vs, conſidering that our iniquities are ſo readie to the harueſt.
               Concerning the diſmembring of an eſtate by the ſelfe nation, Diſcourſe vppon the ſecōd cauſe of the deſolation of a cōmonwelth. Hiſtories which verefie this diſcourſe. among whom many tymes the ſtraunger hath his ſhare, it is no leſſe a kinde of miſerable deſtruction then the former. This did the Empire of Conſtantinople finde ſoone after that Baldwine Earle of Flanders was made Emperour: For then did Alexis Comnene (as Carion reporteth) erect ye Empire of Trebizond. Theſſaly ſhaking off the yoke of Michael Angel yeelded to ye 
                  Paleologues. Achaia, Attica, Peloponeſſus, Aetolia, Caramania and Epirus had their ſeuerall gouernors, whom they often chaunged according to the ſundrie euents of warres and ſedition. Eſpecially Attica, Achaia and Peloponeſſus were gouerned ſometymes by the Grecians, ſometymes by the Sicilians and Florentines, ſometyme by the Genowayes & Venitians, euen as the hazard of warre fauoured: notwithſtanding moſt of them made there no long aboad. The Bulgarians, Ruſcians and Seruians had their Deſpottoes, who being ſometymes friends and confederates with the Emperors of Conſtantinople and by and by againe enemies, did with continuall

roades waſt Thracia and Macedonia. Theſe confuſions did deſerue the name of théeueries rather then of warres, becauſe both the ground of them was vniuſt, and the practiſes wherewith they holpe themſelues moſt wicked. For they ſought all meanes to rent and teare the Empire in péeces, whereby the Emperour of the Turkes had oportunitie to ſeaze vppon Conſtantinople and the other Prouinces. The ſame author in an other place ſaith thus. I will likewiſe rehearſe the calamities that oppreſſed almost all Italie, as a puniſhment for the ſinnes that therein rayned: which happened during the mortall deuiſions betweene the Emperours and the Popes, when the names of Guelph and Gibeline were the markes of each faction. For ſo many miſchiefes were there then committed, ſo much blood ſhed, ſo manytownes destroyed, and whole Countries layd waſt, that whoſoeuer ſhall reade the histories thereof cannot but meruaile. Then did there ſpring vp many pettie Tyrants in moſt townes, acknowledging no ſuperiour, but leaning ſome to the Popes and ſome to the Emperours, exerciſing all cruelties againſt both friends and foes, vntill that Italie, rather wearied then ſatiſfied with ſo many miſeries, did after a long tyme take an other courſe. I will alſo repeate one domeſticall example, namely the deuiſion betwéene the houſes of Another hiſtorie which more neerely toucheth France, ſet downe at large in the French Anales. 
                  Burgundie and Orleance, which was ſo ſharpe as it induced the Engliſh warres, which brought France to ſo lowe an ebbe that it was almoſt vtterly deſtroyed, yea it had diſmembred the ſtate into ſundrie morcels, if Gods great goodneſſe had not holpen. In the meane tyme for the ſpace of fortie or fiftie yéeres it was made a pray: euery one ſeeking either to kéepe himſelfe, or to encreaſe his owne power, either els to deſtroye his enemie. All publique force, mightineſſe or iuſtice whereto men might haue recourſe, being vtterly extinguiſhed. To be briefe, it was a Countrie habandoned to euery one that could catch any part thereof, all which miſeries doe warne vs that wee may yet happen to trye them once more. For ſtraungers may ſee ſo good ſport that they may fall vppon vs againe.
               But it is farre more likely that our eſtate ſhould incurre the other The extreme miſerie of France, if once it come to diſmember it ſelf. diſmembring whereof I haue ſpoken. And the reaſon is, becauſe the French, being by nature fierce, and hating forraine bondage, will rather become ſubiect to it ſelfe, and ſo of this one great bodie make many péeces. For the aſſurance whereof, the vſurpers would put themſelues into the protection of ſuch of their neighbours as could moſt commodiouſly mainteyne them, and withall

were moſt conformable to the opinions that they ſhall haue embraced. When I doe more néerely conſider this, I finde no condition ſo miſerable, diſordered, and confuſed as ours: which being ſuch would burie all iuſtice, lawfull authoritie, reſpect, feare, good maners and concorde, and to the contrary encreaſe all malepertneſſe, ambition, trecherie, violence, Impietie, guile and ſedition: And who could delight to liue among ſuch ſtormes, vnleſſe it were ſome barbarous minded perſon? Among all theſe alterations I imagine ſome Prince to ſeaze vppon ſome one Prouince: ſome Lord vppon ſome Townes: ſome head Cities to conuert their Parliaments into Ariſtocratyes of ſome of their nobleſt and principall Citizens: and others to growe into Commonwelths. Among the Nobilitie alſo other ſorts of Gouernements Oligarchiall or Monarchiall. One would become a prince ouer his owne Caſtles, an other a Tyrant ouer other mens. One quarter of the Countrie would growe into Cantons, an other commit it ſelfe to ſome warlike Capteyne, as for thoſe that ſhould at ſuch a tyme finde themſelues ſeazed of the ſtrong holdes of the greater Townes, thinke whether they would haue any parte herein: All which diuerſities of gouernments, humours and qualities of men muſt néedes bring in mortall warre and diſſention, which would not bee ended while wee and our children were conſumed.
               Of theſe my ſpéeches ſome man might imagine that I preſuppoſe Whether the Realme could ſubſiſt though ſuch partialities ſhould diſmember it. that the royaltie ſhould then bee as it were made voyde: becauſe that ſo long as that remaineth in authoritie the aforeſayd confuſions can no way come néere vs. Truely my ſelfe would be as loath as any man that the ſame ſhould bee ſo much as contemned: For ſith wee haue liued 1100. yéeres vnder that gouernment, it were our partes to reuerence it, as a lawfull power ordeyned by God, whereto whoſoeuer doth not voluntarily yéeld obedience, the ſame is guiltie before him. Beſides that wee are to thinke no other gouernment more meete to guyde the French then that. But becauſe the matter whereof I entreate doe leade me from bad cauſes to thoſe worſe effects yt enſue, it hath alſo cauſed me to ſet downe ſuch things as might happen, to the ende that imprinting in vs ſome feare, wee ſhould endeuour ſo to behaue our ſelues as they might not come to paſſe. But if wee ſtill perſeuer any tyme in our imperfections and diſorders, let vs not doubt but God will take away his good Angell from France, whereby wee ſhall

ſee the royall dignitie diſobeyed, and in ſmall fauour with the ſubiects, and the ſame likewiſe exempt of all loue and humanitie toward them, which will bee the accompliſhment of the deſolations aforeſayd. For the eſchuing of which inconueniences, we ought moſt zealouſly to pray to God long to continue our King, and in him to encreaſe all true Pietie, Juſtice, wiſedome, and affabilitie, graunting vs likewiſe to bee as affectionate toward him as were the Romaines to the good Emperours Traian and Titus: for if the Realm ſhould fall vnto children, eſpecially now that the lawes are out of force, Magiſtrates contemned, maners corrupt, hatred and ambition exceſſiue, it muſt needes be in great daunger.
               Now let vs proceede to the remedies, and ſee whether there The laſt part of this diſcourſe which entreateth of the remedies. be any ſo ſufficient as to warrant vs from deſtruction. In my opinion there be ſome, if we can finde the way to take hold of them in tyme. For in this tempeſt wherein wee are toſſed wee muſt not ſhrinke vp our ſhoulders and ſay, All is loſt, but wee are valiantly to helpe one another. But to what remedies ſhall wee haue recourſe? To Philoſophers rules? Or to paſſed experience of ſuch meanes as haue ſerued to vnderproppe this Realme when it hath bene ſhaken? Either els to the politique counſailes of the wiſe that now liuing doe knowe our griefes? For that were the way that wiſedome would teach. Hereto I aunſwer that wee may reape The firſt and principall poynt. profite out of all, but it is neceſſarie that wee beginne further of. In as much as wee ſee that for our tranſgreſſions God hath withdrawne his fauour from vs, it is requiſite that wee appeaſe him to the ende he may returne vs it againe, otherwiſe all humaine remedies are in vaine: for what power, wiſedome, or counſaile is there that can alter any thing that he hath decréed againſt vs? In the holy Scriptures wee haue a notable example of his mercie toward the Niniuites that were heathen people: for when his Example. wrath was kindled againſt them, and he had by the Prophet Ionas, to the ende to terrefie them, pronounced the ſentence of their Ionas. 3. deſtruction, they were ſo touched to the quicke that their King and all the people hauing faſted, wept and prayed, and turned from their wicked way; he withdrewe his plagues, which alreadie hung ouer their heads, & tooke them to mercie. How often did the Iewes féele his woonderfull compaſſions, when for their wickedneſſe and Another example. tranſgreſſions his ſcourges euen light vpon them? Whē they and their Kings through true repētance turned vnto him, he tooke pitie of them & conuerted their pitifull eſtate into proſperitie. Wherof it

followeth, that our ſoueraigne and onely meanes to auoyde theſe calamities that doe now aſſaile and threaten vs, is to imitate thoſe whom I haue named. For as it is one great comfort, when a man knoweth that his griefe is not altogether incurable, and that there be meanes to heale him, much more doth it increaſe when he finddeth the ſame to bee eaſie. The ſame is in vs, and conſiſteth in knowledge, will, and execution, whereof euery one through holy perſwaſions and example of the greateſt, may bee made capable: For when men ſhall ſee firſt the King, and then the Princes and ſuch as are in authoritie either Ciuill or Eccleſiaſticall, in earneſt and without hypocriſie to make ſhewe as well generally as perticulerly that to God onely wée ought to haue recourſe, and withall effectually to declare a hatred of vice & loue of vertue, embracing the politique vnion and eſchuing diſcord, vndoubtedly the inferiors will ſtudie to doe the like. But what will the Catholickes ſay: Obiection againſt the former remedie. Doe not wee what wee can to appeaſe the wrath of God with ſolemne Proceſſions, Pilgrimages, Faſtings, Prayers and Offerings? And the like may the Proteſtants ſay concerning their Prayers, Meditations, Abſtinences, and ſinging of Pſalmes and Himnes, wherewith they alſo endeuour to appeaſe him. Undoubtedly we muſt bring more then the outward ſhewe vnto God, who Aunſwe
                        •
                     
                   being the ſearcher of the hearts doth ſee the clenneſſe or vnclenneſſe therein couteyned. But let vs heare the Prophet Eſay and he will teach vs how wee ought to guyde our ſelues, in giuing to vs the ſame admonition that he gaue to the people of Iſrael. Marke the words of the Lord by his mouth. My ſoule, ſaith he, hateh your 
                  Eſay. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  ſolemne feastes and ſacrifices. When you ſhall lift vp your hands I will turne my eyes from you: and when you ſhall multiplie your prayers, I will not heare you, for your hands are full of blood. Waſh you and bee cleane, take away the corruption of your thoughts out of my ſight. Ceaſe from doing euill and learne to doe good, ſeeke iudgement, helpe him that is oppreſſed, doe right to the fatherleſse, and defend the cauſe of the widow. Then come vnto me ſaith the Lord. Though your ſinnes be as red as ſcarlet yet will I make them as white as ſnowe. Hereby it appeareth that wee muſt come ſincerely vnto God and amend our liues in deede, if we will obteyne his bleſſings; for to ſeeke to ſatiſfie him with diſſembling ſhewes, is the way to diſpleaſe and prouoke him.
               It may be there are ſome that will ſay, that to propound rules The ſecond conſideration of the firſt remedie afore mentioned, with an aunſwer to thoſe that call it a Paradoxe. of deuinitie for the reeſtabliſhing of Commonwelths, is no more

but to ſet downe Paradoxes: but thoſe men in my opinion are farre deceiued. For as Iuſtice, Wiſedome, Fortitude, and Temperance are the ſtrong pillers that vphold the ſtate, ſo muſt wee thinke that Piety is the foote and foundation of them all: for if they be not fixed in this moſt woorthie vertue, they cannot but ſhake, becauſe it is neceſſarie to begin the worke with ſuch a foundation. Greater reaſon, then they, haue I to ſay that it is no Paradoxe, but rather a woonder that now in France there be ſo many that contemne thoſe things which ſtirre vp to integritie of life and reuerence to God. At the leaſt I am aſſured that there are many good men as well of the one ſide as of the other, which euen long after ye reeſtabliſhmēt of good order and the preſeruation of the eſtate, and will not reiect my opinion. Leauing therefore vnto thoſe that haue farre more learning, cunning, and experience then my ſelfe, the propounding of more excellent matter that may ſerue to ſo good an ende, & contributing to this worke onely ſo much as I may, according to my ſmall capacitie; and through my conceiued feare leaſt wee ſhould fall into ſuch daungers as threaten vs, I ſeeke in tyme to lay them open: becauſe it is much eaſier to preuent ſuch miſchiefes as haue bene foreſeene, then thoſe that happen vnlooked for.
               Hauing thus diſcourſed vpon the firſt and moſt healthſome remedie, Diſcourſe vppon other neceſſarie remedies. I will proceede to ſpeake of the reſt which alſo are neceſſarie, and whereof the Philoſophers haue made mention. Ariſtotle who had as good iudgement in pollicies as any other whoſoeuer, doth generally ſay that if we can finde by what meanes eſtates are corrupted and decayed, wee ſhall alſo knowe the meanes whereby they may be clenſed and preſerued. Conſidering that of contrary cauſes doe proceede contrary effects, alſo that corruption is contrary to conſeruation. Hereby may the ſimpleſt eaſilie knowe how to put this rule in practiſe. As for example: If the ſale of Iudiciall Reformation of ſundrie abuſes propounded as it were by the way. offices doth breede the ſale and peruerting of Iuſtice, then ought we to forbeare ſelling of them, and ſo to giue them freely to good men. If pompe, ſuperfluous expences, and vnreaſonable giftes haue for their maintenaunce inforced Princes to lay intollerable and vnſupportable tributes vppon their ſubiects, then muſt they moderate their affections, to the ende oppreſſions may ceaſe. If impunitie of vice doth multiplie and encreaſe it, then muſt correction deminiſh it. Euen ſo is it in many other cauſes. Howbeit Ariſtotle to the ende the better to lay open this matter, propoundeth yet other meanes. As, that nothing be done contrary to

lawe and cuſtome, eſpecially that miſchiefes, how ſmall ſoeuer, bee preuented in the beginning. That thoſe that bee put in publique au
                     •
                  thoritie doe behaue themſelues modeſtly, as well toward them that beare no ſway in the Commonwelth, as to them that doe: in doing no iniurie vnto any, but liuing peaceably among the reſt. That thoſe vpon whom the ſafetie of the Commonwelth doe depend doe continually watch and ſtand vpon their guard, and many tymes giue cauſe of feare, to the end the Citizens may be the more readie and intentiue to doe whatſoeuer is meete for publique ſafetie. To beware that there happen no contention or debate betwene the mightie, alſo that others which are no partakers be preuented before they meddle. That by the lawes there be order taken that no man waxe too mightie. And that priuate perſons frame their liues to that forme of gouernment whereto they be ſubiect. Many other rules there bee that helpe to this effect, which are to be ſeene in the fifth booke of this Philoſophers Politiques, in the workes of Plutarke, and in other good authors; for I haue here gathered together only thoſe that firſt come to hand.
               But if wee haue but our owne lawes and olde obſeruations, yet That the remedies to reſtore France are eaſie. were the ſame ſo ſufficient as we neede not to borowe any other, if we would put them in practize: Which if we doe not, then are all other remedies in vayne. The moſt ſinguler precept therefore that tendeth to the reſtoring of this eſtate, is to be willing to reſtore it. This doe I ſay becauſe that within theſe fiue and twentie yeeres wee haue vſed ſo many practizes hereabout, that now wee thinke thoſe to be but in ieſt that ſpeake any thing in good earneſt. Such procéedings muſt wee chaunge: for neceſſitie hauing taken place (who preſcribeth a law to the greateſt) we muſt now perforce do yt which before of our own accord we would not. No mā hath herein ſo great intereſt as his maieſtie. For the ſtate of his Realme being well reformed, himſelfe ſhall bee better beloued and obeyed of his ſubiects: more mightie, ritch and quiet. As alſo it is he that may doe more then lawe, force, or any man whoſoeuer. When he hath choſen what he will ſay or doe (which the grace of God, his owne ſinguler wiſedome wherewith he is adorned, and the aduiſe of the wiſe, may inſtruct him in) it were a good precept that at the Court and in Paris (which are the two lightes that ought to lighten all France) order might be firſt throughly eſtabliſhed, to the end all others might direct themſelues according to theſe two moſt ritch preſidents. So long as the citie of Rome kept her ſelf ſound,

her inferiours floriſhed in vertue, but when ſhe came to be corrupt, the infection was ſpred all ouer. Yet minde I not hereby to inferre that all diſorders haue their originall from the rulers, for many doo ſpring from the ſubiects: but it is to bee perceiued that ſome of the principall fetch their beginning from the principall perſons, and ſo doe remaine.
               There is yet an other ſoueraigne precept, without the which all The third remedie, which is moſt neceſſarie. the reſt are to ſmall purpoſe: and that is to ſeeke ſome meanes how to take order in the controuerſies of Religion without force of armes. For vntil ciuill warre be baniſhed, it is but a folly to ſpeake of redreſſe, becauſe the ſame worketh a greater breach in the countrie, in maners, in lawes and in men in ſixe moneths, then may poſbly bee repayred againe in ſixe yéeres. Among other the fruites thereof this is one, That it hath engendred a million of Epicures and Libertines. Secondly, it hath made moſt part of the French nation ſo wilde, cruell and ſauadge, that where they were before but ſhéepe, they haue now put on the ſhape of Tygers. Theſe two reaſons might fully ſuffiſe to perſwade euery one that is poſſeſſed of any one ſparke of conſcience or charitie, to deſire and wiſh that we might be brought into concord by fayre and peaceable meanes. For ſo long as diſcord holdeth our ſwords drawne, we doo nothing but eſtabliſh a new Kingdome of Impietie, Iniuſtice, Crueltie and Theft, wherein many théeues and wicked perſons do riſe and grow ritch with the ſpoyle of the innocent, and glut themſelues with blood. A man may truely ſay, that if all the French nation were deuided into ſixe parts, wée ſhould finde that fiue of them doe daylie mourne and pray to God to graunt peace vnto France, and a good politique redreſſe vntill an Eccleſiaſticall may bee had: which diſpoſition being in maner vniuerſall, maketh the difficultie to attaine to that poynt a great deale the leſſe. The ordinarie obiectiou hereto, is, that two Religions cannot poſſibly conſiſt in one Commonwelth. And when we aſke wherefore, it is annſwered, becauſe of their repugnancie, which bréedeth perpetuall contention. But I Aunſwer to the obiection, That it is vnpoſſible for two Religions to conſiſt in one commonwelth. would knowe of them whether vice and vertue, good and bad bée not alſo contraries, and yet we muſt not for the remedying thereof bring a whole Realme into diſſention.
               In the tyme of the good Emperours Conſtantine and Theodoſius, alſo when the two holy Biſhops Auguſtine & Ambroſe floriſhed in the worlde, were there not in the Romaine Empire both Pagans, Iewes, and Arrians, whom the true Chriſtians were

driuen to permit to liue after their owne rites and conſciences, rather then for thoſe contrarieties to kindle cruell warres and moſt 
                     •••
                  lent perſecutions? Are wee more wiſe or mightie then thoſe Emperours, or more holy and zealous then thoſe holy Biſhops? I thinke wée had néede of a good Orator to perſwade that. So that ſith they haue ſo farre exceeded vs in perfection, wee are not to bée blamed though wée guyde our ſelues by their rule as well in matters of pollicie as of the Church. And notwithſtanding vnder the Children of Conſtantine there chaunced ſome ſeditions and troubles for Religion, yet doth it appeare that the Arrians were euer the authors thereof: for the true Church hath ſieldome bene ſeene to vſe perſecution. Which this excellent ſentence of Auguſtine very well verefieth, that ſayth. He that perſecuteth is of the deuill, but he that is perſecuted is of God. It is ſayd that King Frances the firſt, when the Suitzers were at warre among themſelues for Religion, counſailed them to appeaſe ſuch controuerſies by modeſt conferences and gentle meanes; which ſince they haue happely put in practiſe and ſped well by it: for thereby haue they mainteyned concorde among themſelues, and mightilie enriched their Countrie, and yet are become neuer the worſe. This ſole example might ſtoppe their mouthes that vpholde that fire and ſworde muſt determine our debates, alſo that gentle meanes are vnprofitable. But I cannot thinke that ſuch counſailes can procéede from any other then moſt cruell and hypocriticall mindes. To bée briefe, I thinke aſſuredly that if their Maieſties, their What the chiefe & principall members of the ſtate may and ought to doe in the reſtauration thereof. Counſaile, the Princes and the Court of Parliament of Paris, would vnfainedly labour for a generall reconſiliation and redreſſe, notwithſtanding whatſoeuer contrarietie, the ſame might eaſilie be brought to perfection. Are they to be reſtrayned by the authoritie of the Popes precepts, who by his Nuncios ſeeketh vnceſſantly to trouble France? Muſt they feare the rage of ſome of the Clergie, that crye out, Kill, murder, haue no pitie vpon the Proteſtants our aduerſaries? Can the power of the Spaniſh Empire, (which they haue prouoked out of ſeaſon) force thē to ſheath their French ſwords in the bowels of France? Shall the feare and complaynts of the Proteſtants (which are not without ſome groūd) ſo terrefie them yt they ſhall deſiſt? Or may the ſecret practizes, which tend to ſtirring vp of great matters, feare them? Truely all this ſhould not let thē from eſtabliſhing ye ſoueraigne law that bringeth health to al Frāce which is ye law of peace & concord. Only it is requiſite

the King be armed with his grandfathers magnanimitie to daunt all ſuch as dare propound any pernitious Complois againſt the Commonwelth, as alſo to harten thoſe that are deſirous to ſay & do well. The Queene mother likewiſe is to remember that ſhe rather thē any, is able to fixe the nayle in the turning wheele of deuiſion, which would be to her life a Crowne of moſt excellent commendations. The Princes likewiſe muſt call to minde that domeſticall power acchieued by a vertuous peace, is as aſſured and happie as that which is purchaſed with doubtfull and infortunate warre. This great Senate which maketh ſuch account of fame, is to thinke that it ſhall loſe the ſame that it hath obteyned, vnleſſe it bring forth ſuch excellent Senators as with pure hart and franke ſpeech will freely vphold, as did our Cato, (l'Hoſpitall) publique equitie. But if to the contrary they ſhewe themſelues obſtinate and ſlacke in readineſſe and labour, they ſhall be the firſt that ſhall feele by the contempt and diſobedience of the inferiours, (whom they haue ſuffered by warres and corruption to tranſforme themſelues into barbarous conditions) how great an ouerſight it is, not to cut off, when they may, the way to ſuch confuſions as tende to the ſubuertion of the whole. A King by encreaſing his dominion atchieueth great honor, but much greater doth he obteyne by vniting and clenſing it when it is deuided and infected: for the firſt is compaſſed by force, the other by diſcretion. Such braue exploytes (as worthie their greatneſſe) are to them reſerued, to the end in the ſame to employe themſelues. So did Charles the 7. to whom the reeſtabliſhing of good order and auncient cuſtomes in his Realme through wiſedome, was no leſſe glorie then was the recouerie thereof from the Engliſh nation, partly by force and partly by fortune.
               Now, in caſe diſcord were baniſhed from among vs, peace eſtabliſhed, Meanes to confirme the ſtate after that it is ſet vpright. and a good reformation begun, yet muſt wee (as I thinke) beware how wee reenter into any forraine warre but vppon either great neceſſitie, or a iuſt and good occaſion, but rather to kéepe peace with our neighbours: for otherwiſe it is not poſſible to reſtore good maners and order. For ſo doe I imagine that in ſixe yeeres it may be halfe reeſtabliſhed, and in tenne altogether. Great and ſtrong bodies that are well founded, and haue ſome good parts yet ſound, doe riſe vp againe as woonderfully as they were ouerthrowne. The chiefe is to begin well, for a good beginning is Reaſons that ſhould moue vs hereto. halfe the worke. Neither is there any doubt but God will proſper our endeuours whē he ſeeth vs wel diſpoſed to take away the euill

& to reſtore that which is good. The feeling of our miſeries ought ſufficiencie to mooue vs, as alſo ſhould the bad reputation whereto we are growen among all Chriſtian nations, who now doe hate vs as much for the vices that they impute vnto vs, as in tyme paſt they commended vs for our vertues. Now they ſtand no longer vpon the reproouing of the French inconſtancie and inſolencie, as in tyme paſt: They paſſe on a great way further, yea ſo farre as all whatſoeuer diſordinate or diſſolute behauiour, whether in maners or in politique gouernment, is attributed thereto. This mightie kingdome which heretofore was the refuge of the oppreſſed, and a ſchoole of all learning and honeſtie, whether our bordering neighbours ſent their youth to bee inſtructed, is now by them tearmed a denne of diſſolution which they feare to come néere. Such as trauaile forraine Countries, can (if they liſt to confeſſe it) be good witneſſes of the reproches wherewith we are taxed. Yea, which woorſe is, often tymes the common voyce attributeth like imperfections both to the good and bad. I am aſhamed to write what I haue heard, euen of ſuch as are very modeſt, who ſpake rather of compaſſion then reproach. Let vs cōſider how many kingdomes haue through farre leſſe diſorders then ours bene deſtroyed. And ſith God through his patience doth yet giue vs ſpace to riſe againe, let vs not let ſlippe occaſion, but ſpéedely take hold thereof, leaſt our ingratitude and negligence procure the taking of thoſe remedies from vs which we may haue deſpiſed. In the meane tyme let vs not faint, for I ſuppoſe there is no Eſtate in Chriſtendome, that yet hath better matter then we, but it is now ſo mixed together, as if a man ſhould make a mangle of Diamonds, Rubies, Iron, Lead, Gold, Siluer, Marble, Braſill, Pearle, Corrall, Tyle and Slate. But each thing being reduced into order and applyed to his owne vſe, the inferiour matter would ſerue to make moſt beautifull and excellent workes, wherein the ſuperiour being gathered together and adioyned, would alſo ſhine as moſt ritch ornaments. God who hath preſerued our aunceſtors from ſo many deſtructions, and giuen power and counſaile to our Kings in their greateſt extremities, vouchſafe to defend vs from the miſchiefes which threaten vs, and encreaſe the vertues of our King, and graunt him grace to be the reſtorer of his kingdome.
            
            
               
               The ſecond Diſcourſe.
               
                  That by Concord ſmall things doe encreaſe, and by diſcord great things doe decay.
               
               
                  THis moſt excellent ſentence, ſo common among many nations, and which experience hath ſo often taught to bee true, The notable ſaying of the Pagan Micipſa ought to waken thoſe that are, or ought to be beſt inſtructed. was heretofore alledged by one Micipſa a King of Numidia, who lying vpon this death bed taught his children that the moſt ſoueraigne meane to preſerue themſelues and the Realme which he left them, conſiſted in the obſeruation of this rule. Himſelfe liued many yéeres in peace and proſperitie, ordering his doings with great diſcretion, and giuing the worlde to vnderſtand that he knewe how to vſe ſuch things as tended to the encreaſe of an eſtate, and could withall iudge of thoſe that might demiuiſh, the fame. As alſo that which enſued his death was a great helpe to confirme that which he had ſayd in his life tyme▪ for his children either forgetting or contemning his inſtructions, continued not long without debate among themſelues, which bre
                     •
                   their vtter ruine. In this example it were good to note ſome words ſpoken by this King before he pronounced this ſentence, as Saluſt reporteth. I leaue vnto you, ſaith he to his children, a Realme both ſtrong and ſtedfast, if you be good, but very weake if you be bad: for by concord doe ſmall things encreaſe, and by diſcord doe they runne into decay. Wherein his entent was to ſhewe that of goodneſſe (that is of vertue) procéedeth Concord, and thence proſperitie: and contrariwiſe of vice groweth hatred, of hatred diſcord, and ſo deſtruction. This deſerueth to be conſidered: to the end not to bee The conſideration of this ſentence. ignorant in the cauſes that bréede goodly effects, neither in ſuch as engender the contrary. Truely I cannot but woonder of the knowledge that the heathen had of many good rules, which carefully put in practiſe doe greatly helpe mans life, wherein alſo they haue reuealed their wiſedome: notwithſtanding, me thinkes that to the ende well to knowe wherein the perfection of vertue doth conſiſt,

we ought not ſo much to depend vpon thē, as to ſeeke it in the wiſdome of God from whēce all other barbarous & prophane nations haue from time to time collected ſome ſmall parcels, which bréede light to their vnderſtandings & beautie to their works. There ſhal we finde the ſoueraigne concord to be the ſame which we ought to hold with God; for the man that careth not for the contrarying of him, can hardly agrée with men in any thing yt reaſon (which ought to be his guide) cōmaundeth. But for yt the diſcourſe of this poynt apperteyneth rather to the Deuines then to a politicke man, I wil hold my peace, notwithſtanding I think yt the cōſideration of ſupeeriour matters doth greatly auaile to ye diſplaying of the inferiour.
               Wee ſhall not, as I thinke, néede many words to declare what What concord is. 
                  Concord is, which reſembleth not other liberall artes or ſciences, whereof fewe men haue knowledge: for it is very cōmon, neither is there any but may make ſome tryall thereof. Wee may in fewe words ſay that it is a cōmendable affection which bindeth & ſtrictly ioyneth vs with our like in all neceſſarie & honeſt dueties. Without ſuch conſent it were very hard for any ſocieties, either great or ſmall, long to continue, by reaſon of thoſe contrarieties, which as naturally do méete in thoſe perſons wherof the ſame be compoſed, & would procéed to alteration, if by this holy vertue they were not ruled. If we caſt our view vpon vnſenſible creatures, we ſhall ſee that the agréement of the elements among themſelues doth mainteyne It is diſperſed all ouer the world. thē in their being, whereas diſcord ouerthroweth thē. Of the tēperature of the humors of mans bodie procéedeth health; & of diſtemperature diſeaſes. Yea the foules of the ayre, the beaſtes of the earth & the fiſhes of the ſea without an inſtinct of Concord natuturally imprinted in them, would deſtroye each other. Farre more thē is man boūd, man I ſay, who participateth in reaſon, to haue the vſe thereof in great recommendation: as knowing the woonderfull commodities that it bringeth, euen to inferiour creatures.
               Before we come to entreat of publique concord, we wil ſpeake The kindes thereof, and firſt of the domeſticall. a little of the domeſticall: which is as it were an apprentiſhip & ſtep toward the other, as alſo it is to be preſumed yt he which ſhall haue duely practized it in perticuler matters, will take a delight to vſe it in ſuch as are generall. And this ought greatly to induce houſeholders very carefully to haue an eye yt it beare ſway in their houſes, to the ende their children, who are the citizens that they leaue to their commonwelth, may in tyme be accuſtomed to reiect all ſuch Vpon what conſiderations it is founded. vayne contentions as may diſpoſe their mindes to perturbe it.

Howbeit, peraduenture the reſpect of their owne commoditie will further vrge them to the maintenance thereof. For vnleſſe it bee ſome fewe ouerthwart perſons (as we tearme them) all others can ſufficiently feele the fruite that commeth of it. And admit that families bee compoſed of ſundrie perſons, ſome to commaund, others to obeye, yet muſt there bee no reſpect to exempt one more then another from the vſe of this vertue. The maiſter and miſtris Of Domeſticall concord. of the houſe muſt haue it written in their hearts, and ſhewe it forth by their gentle and moderate commaundements. The children and ſeruants each in his degrée by frée and voluntarie obedience, are to ſhewe themſelues touched with the ſame affection. It is requiſite for brethren and ſiſters, which be to liue a certeyne ſpace together, to obſerue an honeſt equalitie betwéene themſelues, and yet deferring ſo much as ſhall be requiſite vnto him that hath the priuiledge of elderſhip: for through ſuch mutuall concord families doe floriſh. And what perſon is well borne that reioyceth not in the view of ſuch goodly examples? This mooued Dauid to ſay:

                     Oh how happie a thing it is, and ioyfull for to ſee
                     Brethren together faſt to hold the band of amitie. Of Ciuill concord.
                     
                  
               
               This may bee applyed as well to great ſocieties as vnto ſmall domeſticall aſſemblies. For that which is conuenient to the one, is alſo conuenient to the other, in reſpect of the ſimilitude betwéene the whole and the parts. But order requireth that we begin firſt to inſtruct by the ſmaller things: whereby are wee to learne, that ſith honeſt men doe ſo delight to ſee vnion mainteyned either in familie or citie, they will take much more pleaſure in putting it in practiſe: becauſe there is more pleaſure in action then in contemplation only, eſpecially when it is of it ſelfe approued and of others commended.
               After ye pleaſure followeth yt profite: for it ordinarily falleth out Of the profite and pleaſure that it breedeth. that thoſe houſes wherein concord doth beare ſway, doe encreaſe, and that encreaſe is the ſecond thing that houſeholders ſhould reach vnto, as to liue well, is the firſt. No man can denye but induſtrie and diligence are the two moſt neceſſarie inſtruments to atteyne to wealth. And yet may we ſay the ſame to be vnfruitfull in whatſoeuer companie where diſcord taketh hold: euen as in a Similitude. Galley the labour of the ſlaues were to no purpoſe, if halfe ſhould rowe one way and halfe another: but when all with one minde and at one tyme hale toward one ſelfe porte, the nauigation is performed. I will not ſearch any examples in antiquitie to prooue this Example in generall.
                  
my ſaying, becauſe euen at this inſtant wee ſee enough before our eyes. Namely, many families, as well of Gentrie and Citizens, as of Huſbandmen and Farmers ouerthrowne with diſcord, and many alſo enriched through the good concord of kinſemen. Notwithſtanding, to this purpoſe I cannot ouerſhip one notable example mentioned by Liuie, which although it bee not practiſeable in A perticuler example. this our corrupted world, yet is it meete to be conſidered. It is of a certeyne Romaine that kept in his owne houſe ſixteene of his children, all maried, and their families, who liued together a long tyme in perfect peace and amitie, and encreaſed their ſubſtance. Which are effects in truth woorthie Chriſtians rather then Paynims.
               This when I doe conſider, I am aſhamed to ſee that a mans childe cannot in theſe daies bee a weeke maried, but he muſt haue Defaults in the concord required in vs. his ſtable a parte and forſake his fathers houſe, to goe build (as he imagineth) ſome newe Monarchie in another place. And the cauſe of ſuch ſeparations is, becauſe men either cannot, or will not liue in concord. I once heard one ſay that he knewe thrée gentlemen that after their fathers deceaſe kept houſe together, holding their goods in common, which they mightely encreaſed, and neuer parted houſehold till their children were maried, and inſtructed in this excellent doctrine of vnion through their long practiſe. And this I thought good to ſet downe, not ſo much to induce others to do better, as to ſtirre thē vp by the cōſideration of difficult things to employe themſelues in ſuch as are eaſie. I thinke there bee fewe but will commend this goodly kind of life; but peraduenture there may be many that wil contemne ſuch encreaſe of goods as come ſo ſlowly: becauſe in theſe daies we ſee them come in ſo ſuddenly. But ſay they what they will, yet ought wee not to order things according to preſent couetouſneſſe and confuſions. Rather ſhould they bée guided by reaſon, and after the ſimilitude of naturall order which kéepeth meaſure and tyme, for thoſe are the iuſt waies, and for the moſt part ſuch as bee ſo forward, are accompanied with ſome iniuſtice.
               Moreouer, we muſt ſet no more by ritches then by a good name, The meanes to mainteyne concord. and that doth he get that beareth himſelfe modeſtly and in all facilitie among his equals: for therby do men iudge that thoſe mindes that are ſo well diſpoſed in ſmall matters cannot bee badly bent in great. As alſo it is to bee preſumed that he which can well agrée with his father, will not greatly diſagrée with his Kings commandements,

alſo that he that can liue peaceably with his brethren wil not lightly fall out with his companions: or that can ſubmit him ſelfe to domeſticall cuſtomes, will obeye publique lawes. Hath it not bene ſeene that out of ſmall families, ſuch perſons haue bene choſen as haue bene thought méete to appeaſe the controuerſies of a whole ſtate, becauſe of the good concord of their owne houſes? There bee examples enowe of tyme paſt, and euen now may wée finde ſome ſmall experiences. But in my opinion this is enough concerning the fruites that ariſe of domeſticall concord. For there are but fewe but knowe that it bringeth great.
               Now will I enter into a larger field and diſcourſe vpō the publique Of publique concord. 
                  concord, which is ſo neceſſarie for the helping of our poore France, which through the baniſhment therof is almoſt rent in péeces, that me think all good men ſhould bend their whole vowes and endeuours to the calling of it back againe. And when we ſhall haue ſhewed how other eſtates are thereby encreaſed and redreſſed, men will be farre the more affectionate to put it in execution. Plato the Philoſopher ſayth, that the greateſt miſchiefe that can befall any citie is ſedition, which is no other but diſcord. Whereof it followeth A ſentence. that concord, being the contrary muſt needes be a great benefite to them that enioye it. Likewiſe it is vnpoſſible to thriue by their commodities, before this foundation be layed: yea we ſee that the greater plentie of power, wealth, and habilitie that is in a ſtate, if this good temperature be away, is but matter of greater ruyne. Some wiſe men in old tyme knowing this, did vſe to ſend to ſuch of their friends as had the gouernment of commonwelths a ſheafe A notable Embleme. of Arrowes bound together, to the ende to admoniſh them that as theſe ſo ſmall péeces of brittle ware being knit together made a ſtrong bodie not eaſely ſhaken, ſo if the mindes of their people conſented well together & were vnited in themſelues, yt which of it ſelf were but weake, would become mightie & ſtrong. The experience here of hath bene ſeene in the Grecians, who ſo long as they agréed among themſelues, did withſtand the power of the Kings of Perſia, which was incōparable, for ſometymes they brought in nauies of 1000. ſayle, an other tyme by land 600000. men, who all were ouercome by ſmall armies of ſuch men as loued like brethren, and which accōpted ye bondage of their fellow countrimē as their own, ſo good concurrence was there betweene thē: & ſo long as this continued they mainteyned themſelues in credite & felicitie. Plutarke reporteth, that before the tyme of Aratus, all the townes of the Achaians 
                  Another example.
                  
were of ſmall accōpt, each trafiking & doing their affaires apart, and taking no care but for themſelues: but after he had ioyned Plut. in the life of Aratus. them together, and vnited ſundrie other ſmall Townes vnto them by perfect concord, they grew into a great and mightie body in Peloponeſſus, and oftentimes did reſiſt ſuch tyrants as ſought to vſurpe their libertie, wherby they became terrible to their neighbours.
               But if anie man imagine that examples taken of Monarchies A thirde example. would better fit our eſtate, to the end to content him, I will alſo aleadge ſome ſuch. The firſt of the kingdome of the Lacedemonians, wherein Licurgus eſtabliſhed moſt excellent diſcipline, which among all other things commended proweſſe & concord: whereof alſo a long time they continued ſo good obſeruers, that their Citie ſéemed to be but one ſole family, ſo ſteadfaſt and good was their vnion. By that did they increaſe and purchaſe ſuch fame, that all Greece did oftentimes ſubmit it ſelfe to their conduct and iudgement. Many other might likewiſe be herevnto added, as wel Romanes as other Nations, whereof ſuch as vſe the reading of hiſtories cannot be to ſéeke, and therefore it were but a ſuperfluous repetition here to heape them vp againe. Onelie it ſhall ſuffice to remember that ſuch Monarchiall eſtates haue from time to time increaſed as much by concord as by anie other vertue that euer they put in practiſe. And although the Romanes in the daies of their firſt kings did ſometimes diſagrée with their next neighbors, yet doe we ſée that afterward they grew into moſt firme accord, as with the Sabins, for of the two Nations they became but one people, but farre better ordered and a greate deale more mightie than they were before.
               From this antiquitie let vs deſcend euen to our daies, and vnto A fourth example. that which is euident in our owne eies, to the end thereby to be the better perſuaded, & conſider the ſtate of the Suitzers, for that may be vnto vs a cléere ſpectacle wherein we ſhall perceiue the praiſe of concord and fruites thereof. The hiſtories do teſtifie that the thrée little cantons, Schuitz, Vri & Vnderualde, whoſe habitations are onely in villages, were the firſt authors of that their vnion, whereinto the reſt are ſince incorporated. Which euer ſince hath ſo well continued, that at this daie their bodie ſéemeth as it were inuincible. I muſt alſo commend the concord of Germanie, which, notwithſtanding their controuerſies in religion and ſtrife for dignities, hath neuer altered, and in déede it now flouriſheth as much as

euer it did.
               What excuſe then maye wee alleadge, wee Frenchmen, as a ſufficient diſcharge for that we haue ſo long fought one with another, conſidering how other nations can vpholde themſelues in conford and amitie? Trulie it is time we ſhould take inſtructions for remedie of our calamities by the felicitie of others, to the end to make vs ſeeke meanes to returne into that which now hath forſaken vs. The waie is alreadie found, if wee woulde put it in practiſe. That is to grow into concord among our ſelues, for ſo ſhall we riſe againe and increaſe.
               I knowe ſome will ſaie that it is but a diſcourſe, to affirme that Obiection againſt the former counſel & aduice. Anſwere. France grew great by concord, for their increaſe procéeded of the Frenchmens valiancie. Whereto I aunſwere, that I will not denie but that force together with iuſtice and good order were cauſes of the increaſe, yet muſt they néedes confeſſe that if theſe mightie pillers had not had for their baſe and foundation, mutuall concord betwéene the king, the nobilitie, and the commons, it muſt néedes haue yéelded vnder the waight of ſo great a burthen. Our firſt aunceſtors did ſufficientlie ſhew forth the profite that therein Confirmatiō by the examples of the ancient Frenchmen. they reaped, in that they knew howe to vſe that vertue: For they were many diuerſe nations, inhabiting the bankes of leſſer Germanie: who not hauing felt the Romanes bondage, neither willing in anie caſe to trie it, did aſſemble and gather themſelues together, and named themſelues Francons. Then they planted themſelues along the Rhine, from whence they ſtepped into Gaul which they ſubdued. Thus hath a certaine learned man written in a treatiſe of the originall of the Frenchmen, which opinion I thinke to bee more likely than that which the other writers report.
               Heereby it appeareth that concorde hath beene one of the chiefe cauſes that of many Nations we were made but one: and if wee will farther marke the increaſing thereof, wee ſhall finde that ſame occaſion hath likewiſe ſtoode them in greate ſteade. This doe I ſpeake in generall, becauſe the perticular effectes which haue from time to time enſued, woulde bée ouer painefull to rehearſe, and maye likewiſe bee troubleſome. Onelie I will by▪ the waie report the bleſſed concord that was among Another example. the French nation in the time of king Lewes the twelfth, Frances the great, and Henrie the welbeloued, which continued aboue

ſixty yeres, not ſo much to refreſh the remembrance of diuerſe yet liuing, who haue ſéene the moſt part of that time, as for the inſtruction of ſuch as haue beene onely beholders of the laſt diſorders, to the ende to labour them the more earneſtly to long after a good vnion of heartes, as yet ſo ſtrangelie alienated. It is moſt euident that all theſe thrée Princes did greatly loue their people, eſpecially Lewes: and thoſe charges that hee layed vppon them procéeded through the vrgent neceſſitie of warres, notwithſtanding ſome haue bene but raſhly enterpriſed.
               The lyke or rather more was theyr loue ſhewed to theyr nobilitie, as well in reſpect of the acceſſe and familiaritie that they allowed them about their perſons, as alſo of the worthie rewardes beſtowed vppon them. Likewiſe we neuer ſawe vertue in greater eſtimation, than at that time. But what obedience, honour, and affection, did as well the nobilitie as communaltie than beare to their kings? More coulde not haue bene wiſhed: for they were neuer wearie of ſounding forth their prayſes, beholding of theyr perſonnes, and hazarding themſelues to all daungers for them.
               Then if we woulde but conſider the accord that was among the ſayde ſubiectes, what ſhoulde wee doe but wonder how they could ſince ſo farre diſagrée? To be briefe, that all partes of this mightie Realme dyd together yéelde ſo pleaſant a harmonie, as euerie man was gladde to dwell therein, yea, euen ſtraungers flocked to participate in that felicitie. And notwithſtanding in the time of King H. the ſecond many things beganne to alter, yet did vertue beare ſuch ſwaie, that the outward forme at the leaſt ſeemed fayre.
               After this manner dyd the Frenchmen liue vntill the yeare 1560. when Concord beganne to flie from among them, after whoſe departure vertue and iuſtice haue not ſo much ſhewed themſelues abroade, nay they are gone to ſoiourne heare and there among their priuate friends, where they aſſure themſelues of better entertainment. This, in my opinion, may ſuffice to proue that through concord ſmall things doo increaſe, and great are maintained and kept.
               Now let vs compare that time with this which wee now ſo often Beginning of the diſcords of France. haue triall of, and we ſhall ſee the difference to be no leſſe than betwéene a faire bright Sunne ſhine day in the ſpring time, wherin

nothing appeareth but flowers & greene graſſe: and a foule Winters daie in the which the clouds & tempeſts darkning the aire, nothing is to be ſéene but ye graſſe depriued of her ornamēts, ſéeming to be white with froſts and ſnow. But like as by the order which God hath eſtabliſhed in nature, after foule weather commeth faire, ſo are we to hope for a more fortunate world after this, when once we haue through a holie conuerſion appeared his wrath.
               If a man enter into ſpeech hereof by and by a number come in The originall thereof. and ſaie. Oh, what is it that hath troubled and diuided vs, but diuerſities of opinions in Religiō? Likewiſe there are others which on the other ſide doe replie that it is not the nature of Religion to bring forth ſuch and ſo many calamities: but rather that the cauſe is to be impeuted to the mallice of man, who loueth darknes more than light, and to their ignorance that think that ſuch contrarieties ſhould be decided by fire and ſword, when in deede they ought to be determined by gentleneſſe and clemencie.
               I would thinke that experience ſhould make vs wiſe in this difficultie, Frutes of diſcorde. which ſhall nothing let me from proſecuting my purpoſe & declaring what diſcord doth ingender. Neither will I goe to ſéeke exāples hereof in foren lands, neither in times paſt, but in our own Countrie and age: for if anie man be deſirous to behold the image of all miſchiefe, hee néede not ſeeke farther than into France, where this tragedie haue bene plaied, the actors whereof beeing Frenchmen, who euer ſince they were ſezed of this curſed paſſion, doe neuer ſticke to hurt each other. And like as a continuall feauer weakneth and pulleth downe the ſtrongeſt bodie: euen ſo the continuance of our warres hath almoſt abated & depriued the Realme of the principall of her greatneſſe, mightineſſe, and beautie. Wherin appeareth the truth of the other parte of the ſentence alreadie alleadged, viz. that by deſcord great thinges doe periſh and runne into decaie. Now notwithſtanding hatred ordinarilie ingendereth diſcord, Diuers effects according to the diuerſity of the French mens paſſions toſſed with diſcorde. where amitie for the moſt part bridgeth forth concord, yet hath not this bene the cauſe that hath driuen many of thoſe that are entered hereinto: but rather ſome haue bene vrged by zeale, others by perſecution, and othes by ſome duty that they ow to other men. As alſo we haue ſéene many diuerſe effects, ſome more gentle than other ſome, whereby the authors of the ſame deſerue commendation in that they haue in theſe vnmercifull calamities borne themſelues more moderatlie. I dare not rehearſe the horrible cruelties committed in all places (notwithſtanding ſome haue felte them

more than others) for the remembrance of them cannot but either bréede great horrour or exaſperation. Yea, ſome ſuch haue beene wrought as may be tearmed to bee againſt nature: as when ſome haue deliuered their néereſt kinſmen to the ſlaughter, or dipped their handes in the bloud of their owne friends. I thinke if anie man had in the dayes of king Frances the firſt foretolde thoſe thinges that haue ſince happened, he had ben ſlame as a ſpreader of lies, and yet haue our beaſtly mindes bene ſuch, that we haue euen extolled and magnified the prodigious actions which blind rage hath committed. I beſeech God we neuer fall againe into the like abhominable gulfe of inhumanitie.
               
                  Thucidides a wiſe hyſtoriographer dooth briefely deſcribe the The image of France in the ſtate of olde Greece. Thucid. li. 8. manner howe the Grecians behaued themſelues in their ciuill warres. Whoſe ſaying I haue thought good here to inſert, to the end we may compare the forepaſſed miſchiefes with thoſe of our time, thereby to diſcerne in which of theſe times mallice preuayled moſt. After it was knowen (ſayth he) that anie riot was committed in one place, others waxed bolde to doo worſe, to the end to worke ſome noueltie, to ſhew themſelues either more diligent than others, or elſe more inſolent and hot in reuenge: and all the miſchiefes that they cō
                     mitted did they diſguiſe with gaie titles, as tearming raſhneſſe, magnanimitie: modeſtie, cowardlineſſe: headlong indignation, manhood and boldneſſe: counſaile & wiſe deliberation, cloked daſtardlyneſſe: Thus he that ſhewed himſelfe moſt furious, was accounted a loyall friend, and he that reproued him ranne into ſuſpition. If anie one of the contrarie faction propounded any thing that were good and honeſt, it was not liked of▪ but if they were able indeede to impugne it, they had rather be reuenged, than not to be wronged. If by ſolemne oth they made any attonement, the ſame laſted vntil the one ſee himſelfe the ſtronger, whereby he might violate, infringe, and ouercome it through mallice. Yea, he reporteth much more, which to auoide tediouſneſſe I omit.
               Now therefore would I know whether we haue not bene equal with the Grecians in like actions? I thinke that none dare denie it: but that we haue ſurmounted them in crueltie it is moſt euident. Such Frenchmen as after ſo many ruines ſhall remayne, maye iuſtly make that exclamation that Ageſilaus made for Greece. O poore France how vnhappie art thou, that haſt with thy own hands ſlayne ſo many of thy good men, as might haue ſufficed in a daie of

battayle, to roote out all thy proudeſt enimies, which ſeeke thy ouerthrowe: Truely wee muſt confeſſe that diſcorde hath brought not one ſickneſſe but many, and thoſe moſt greate and daungerous.
               And becauſe there be ſome, who as it ſémeth, would willingly cloke and conceale ſome, and haue vs to counterfait health, I How many calamities diſcord hath brought into France. haue thought good to ſet before their eyes that which a writer of our time, intreating of our miſeries, hath ſet downe: for any thing that tendeth to good inſtructions ought to be read and read againe in many places. Marke therfore his words: Publike diſcorde hath ingendered among vs irreuerence to God, diſobediēce to Magiſtrates, corruption of manners, alteration of lawes, contempt of iuſtice, and the decaie of learning and knowledge. It hath bred horrible vengeance, ignorance of conſanguinitie and kindred, obliuion of amitie, violence, ſpoyle, waſting of Countries, ſacking of townes, burning of houſes, confiſcations, theft, baniſhment, proſcription, cruel deſtruction, chaunge of gouernment, with infinite other exceſſes and intollerable miſeries, pittifull to the eie, and wofull to the eare. I thinke that he ſayth but the truth, & as all good friendes ought to doe, to the end we ſhould not account our wounds, which are moſt daungerous, and as it were mortal, to be of ſo light cure & ſo leaue the ſoueraigne medicines, and vſe ſuch as be but ſlight and friuolous. Neither do I heare report Why theſe miſchiefes are here ſet downe. all theſe iniuries, to the end to awaken the wrath of thoſe that haue ſuſtayned them, for I haue a farre other meaning, which tendeth rather to roote out the remembraunce of them all: but I doe it onely to the end that ſeeing our ſhame, we might bee aſhamed. Which is as much as if a man ſhould ſhew to the father his child ſprauling on the ground al bloudy with the ſtripes that in his rage hee had giuen him, & ſo ſaie to him. Now that you are pacified looke vpon the goodly peece of work that you did in your choller: for now you may ſee that you haue endomaged your ſelfe. Were not this enough to make him aſhamed, and withall, to with-hold his hands another time.
               Now the better to laie open the miſchiefes ariſing of diſſention, I might alleadge the examples of that that hath fallen out in Italy, in the time of the factions of the Guelphs and Gibelines: 
                  What ſhould teach France the conſideration of her euill warres. in England in the warres betwéene the two houſes of Lancaſter and Yorke, and in Germanie when the Popes maintayned theyr

factions againſt the Emperours: But all this is not able to teach vs ſo much as the leaſt warre of ſixe that wee haue had experience of alreadie: becauſe that the thinges that a man ſéeth, feeleth, and is imployed in, doe make a farre deeper impreſſion in the mind than the ſimple bare rehearſall of things paſe. And this ſhal make me to contayne my ſelfe in the bounds of our owne Countrie: & that the rather becauſe we muſt of neceſſitie aſcende euen vnto the moſt ancient times to finde lyke monſters as are two of thoſe that haue bene formed in our diuiſions. Whoſe names if any man deſireth to Monſters bred in ciuill warres knowe, the one is called Murther, the other Couetouſneſſe. The firſt can neuer be ſatiſfied with bloud, neither the other with riches. So as notwithſtanding the peace that hath bene often concluded, hath ſomewhat brideled them, yet haue they ſtill entrapped ſomewhat ſecretly. I thinke that during the horrible proſcriptions of Silla, and ſlaughters of Marius, the like were bredde at Rome and deuoured the Romaines, where ours were no ſooner cōceiued, but they were borne in France, and ſince haue ſpoyled the Frenchmen. Thus is Rome the fatall ſhop wherein are forged the ſwordes of ſlaughter that haue alreadie ſhed ſo much bloud, where alſo are hammered the counſels of deſtruction which haue ben moſt miſerable vnto thoſe that haue followed them.
               The remembrance of all this filthineſſe and diſorders ought to A neceſſarie & profitable exhortation. bréede a great compunction in our hearts, and pricke vs forward to embrace vertue which heretofore hath beene ſo familiar with vs, neither is it to be doubted but that if wee woulde ſet our affections therevpon, we ſhould ſhortly ſée it in as great honour all about, as euer it was: for notwithſtanding the Frenchman doth go aſtraie, yet at length he returneth to his waie, and the true meanes to return is by calling agayn our guide, whoſe name is Cōcord ſhe wil ſet vs in our right path where we ſhall finde Piety and Iuſtice ready to receiue vs gladly: but withall let vs take héede of leauing her leaſt we goe aſtraie againe: for if we follow her ſhe will leade vs aright▪ and ſoone into the goodly and large fields of plentie and felicitie, where honour and contentation, who doe there make theyr aboade, ſhall receiue and feſt vs worthilie.
               This wil ſome man ſay is ſoone ſaid, but not ſo ſoone done. Wherto I anſwere yt the effect is difficult, but to them onely that do thē
                  ſelues lay ye block in ye way, as it were by a volūtary contemning of ye counſailes yt reaſō offreth thē, coueting rather to yleaſe thēſelues

in ſuch vnruly appetites as feede onely vpon diſcords, contentions and hatred: howbeit wee muſt remember that all theſe vehement rages and practiſes of reuenge (the true nurſes of diſcorde) are Whether it be a hard matter to bring peace againe into France. no other but (as the Philoſophers tearme them) defectes of the mindewhich ſuffering it ſelfe to bee lead by the ſenſes, is moued at euerie chaunce that happeneth: whereas it ought conſtantly to beare whatſoeuer in honeſtie it maye or ſhoulde, to the ende that by preſeruation of order and tranquilitie, the naturall courſe of mans life may with more facilitie be performed.
               I haue many times noted, that after we had put vp our ſwords into our ſheaths and began to be conuerſant againe one with another, eſpecially with our parents and friendes of the contrarie partie, we did together bewayle the miſerable time paſt, wherein the one might haue chaunced to haue ſlaine the other, whoſe lyfe he had holden as deere as his owne, and wiſhed that in all our dayes wee might neuer haue the lyke calamities agayn. Then haunting with ſuch as we had leſſe acquaintance of, we light vpon mildneſſe and a miſlyke of paſſed furies. A third manner of men did we ſometimes méete withall, which were the moſt violente of euerye faction, and yet did we finde in them farre more moderation than wee coulde imagine. Then ſayd I to my ſelfe: Muſt it not needes be that there is ſome furie hidden in the bowells of France that thus intangleth vs? ſith ſo many preparations to vnitie and concord cannot any whit profite vs, or bring vs to the inioying of this felicitie? Yet was I not quite out of hope, but that at length wee might attayne thereto.
               All this made and yet maketh me to imagine that want of viſiting The meanes how to reduce concorde and expell diſſenſion. each other when occaſion requireth, maketh vs to grow ſauage one to another: for in abſence we ſet before our eyes onely the iniuryes paſſed, whereto commeth reporte, ſuſpition and ſlaunder, ſo that though one were as white as ſnow, yet by ſuch blemiſhes he may be made as red as ſcarlet. We ought likewiſe to conſider that notwithſtanding our warres haue continued aboue 24. yeeres, yet doe we ſtill returne to our Fathers houſes, and neceſſitie compelleth vs to be conuerſant again, not with our friends onely, but alſo with thoſe that haue bene our ſharpeſt enemies. Wherefore it is requiſite that wee reſolue our ſelues to mildneſſe, and ſith wee are to liue and die, not among the Italians or Spaniards, but euen in the ſame lande wherein we are ingendered, let vs endeauour to do

it peaceably, rather than by languiſhing in tumults to bee repleniſhed with terror.
               Some man may obiect that ſith miſtruſt is one of the principall Whether wee muſt bu
                        •
                     y all diffidence. ſinowes of wiſedome, it muſt not in ſo daungerous a time be layde vnder foote. Truly my counſayle is not altogether to burie it, but rather to leaue it to euerie mannes libertie to vſe it conueniently as occaſion may require: howbeit I woulde haue the occaſions to bée ſuch as may beare ſome apparaunt likelyhoode of truth, and not to reſt vppon euerie trifling imagination, vntill that time haue purged the hearts from rancour, & blotted inueterate hatred out of remembrance. For we muſt thinke: ſirſt that in the end men wil be wéerie of euill willing and of euill doing, becauſe thoſe things are of themſelues tedious and noyſome.
               Secondly, that ſome wil conuerwhen any ſmal ſpiritual motion touch them, & make them know that it is a moſt harde matter for thē to loue God whom they ſée not, ſo long as they abhorre thoſe that beare his image, and whome they ſée. For this cauſe muſt we not deſpaire of anie, vnleſſe in them appeareth ſome euident tokens of mallice, and rooted crueltie conioyned with obſtinacie. Of whom wee may ſaie, The Phiſition hath giuen them ouer, their familiaritie is vnfruitfull, yea, euen dangerous.
               
               Before wee ende this diſcourſe, wee muſt alſo ſpeeke ſomewhat of counterfaite concorde, and peraduenture it will not hurt to ſet Of falſe concord. downe ſome warnings vppon that point, to the ende men bee not abuſed, as they that for want of waying and well looking to, doe take counterfaite coine for good gold, for in this ſo corrupt a world wherein wee liue, we muſt looke verie neere vppon thoſe thinges that beare a fayre ſhew: becauſe that vnder ſuch a cloake miſchiefe for the moſt parte lurketh. When therefore wee chaunce to ſee a good agreement betwéene ſome, with whome wee are requeſted to enter ſocietie, let vs diligently enquire whether the ende wherevnto eyther of them doth tend bee good or badde. For if it be bad, then may wee conclude that agreement to bee falſe, and ſo conſequently of ſmall continuance and to be eſchued. This may better be made manifeſt by examples.
               The firſt therefore that I will beginne withall ſhall bee of land Examples. theeues and robbers, and of ſea rouers. A man woulde ſometimes thinke ſuch a fraternitie and ſteadfaſt amitie to bee betweene them, as in his opinion there coulde none bee more excellent.

But if we come to conſiderwhat theſe people be, who for the ſatiſfieng of their peruerſe deſires, do confederate themſelues together, and trouble publike tranquilitie with their murther and ſpoyles, in reſpect whereof they are feared and hated as mortal plagues, what ſhall we iudge of their vnion, but that it is a perillous conſpiracie? Lewde and licentions women, that dwell euen by perniſſion in ſundrie Cities, eſpecially in Italy & Spaine, are ſo familiarly acquainted together, that it ſéemeth their league to bee of perpetuall continuance. But ſo farre is it from being accounted concord, that in déed it is rather diſcord, cimented together with poiſon: & I beléeue that almoſt all men condemne ſuch confederacie, and would be loth the pleaſant name of concord ſhould be blemiſhed in ſuch ſocieties. Notwithſtanding ſtill there be ſome that let themſelues be caught in ſuch ſnares. Thus much concerning thoſe perſons that haue embraced infamous kinds of life, who both by diuiue and humane Offurious concord. conſtitutiōs are to be reproued. There is another kind of concord which is furious, as appeared among the peaſants in Germanie, who in the yere 1525. armed themſelues to ſacke the gentrie and ſpoile the rich. They liued one with another as brethren, yea, they died couragiouſly together, notwithſtanding their procéedings and purpoſes were abhominable. In this rank I thought good to place alſo the confederacie of the mad Anabaptiſts of Munſter, who aſſembled to the number of nine or ten thouſand perſons. Heare wil I likewiſe adde the ſeditious aſſotiations of whole communalties or part of the ſame, for they to the end to cut their throates that diſpleaſe thē, doe together, as did yt 
                  Sicilians agrée againſt ye 
                  Frenchmē, who for ye puniſhing peraduēture of 500. guiltie perſons ſlew 5000. innocēts: with ſuch people we are rather to haue diſcord, thā 
                  cōcord: becauſe their vnion aimeth at nothing but the alteration of lawfull ſocieties. I doubt not but if ſome good Father being affectionate to his conuent, ſhould reade this, he would by and by ſaie: It had not bene amiſſe among theſe to haue placed the Lutherans and Huguenotes, whoſe whole agréement tendeth onely to the deſtruction of our holy orders. To this will I aunſwere. Sir, I haue forborne that, becauſe there is no reaſon to place thoſe that are not cō
                     uict among the condemned: but if you with ſome of your brotherhoode will diſpute with them, and by good and forcible reaſons of diuinitie confute them, when you haue ſo done I wil obey you, but as your friend I counſaile you not to doe it for feare leaſt Marots wordes proue true,

viz. That neuer any Papiſt ſpake well of Luther: alſo if they ſhoulde come to diſpute, one of them muſt needes proue an heretike. For if you ſhould chance to be ouercome, you might well inough giue ouer the wallet, becauſe no man would giue you ought. But the beſt both for you and them, is to liue at the leaſt in politike concord, and to content your ſelues with the miſchiefes that you haue done each to other, conſidering that mans life is of it ſelfe miſerable inough, though thereto you adde no new miſeries.
               
               Now let vs ſpeake of thoſe that haue attained ſuch a degrée of abuſe in their lawful vocations, that we may ſay of them, that vnder Of tyranous concord. the authoritie of lawes and gouernment, they peruert all equitie & iuſtice. Of ſuch aſſemblies we finde many kindes, wherof to auoid ſuperfluous rehearſall, I will note onely ſome of the chiefeſt. The firſt is a framed tyrannie, wherein the publike actions doe tende to ſtrengthning of it with all mens harmes. In this we muſt imagine two ſorts of men, namely, the tyrannizers & the tyrannized. Concerning the laſt, inaſmuch as force euer maiſtreth them, they muſt hūmbly ſtoop, waiting vntil it pleaſe God to raiſe vp lawfull meanes of remedie. But for the firſt who liue in ſo ioyful and pompeous vnion together, I doe not thinke it either méete or honeſt to ioyne with them, or to participate with them in ſacking, murthering, and robbing the innocent: much better it were to eſchue ſuch concord. But who be thoſe that haue ſo liued▪ The hyſtories do tell vs and furniſh vs of examples enow both old and new. I will content my ſelfe with the alleadging of one onely, which is of Caeſar Borgia, 
                  Examples. 
                  Pope Alexander the 6. his baſtard ſonne, who in horrible wickedneſſe was equall with the tyrants of olde time, who alſo is the goodly patterne that Machiauel propoundeth to teach Princes how to rule. This man repleniſhed all Italy with bloud and vice, & found but ouer many defenders and adherents to aſſiſt him. Truly that man had but a ſlender diſcretion and leſſe vertue, that coulde haue ſought to liue in ſuch a tyrannous concord. Heere might wee place a Democratie, vtterly depraued, as was the Athenians whē 
                  Solō
                   was condemned to death. Likewiſe a corrupt Oligarchie as alſo was ye 
                  Athenians, when the Lacedemonians eſtabliſhed ye 30 gouernors, who afterward grew to be tyrants & murthered all the beſt citizens. Next will I heare ſet downe the Senates & tribunal ſeats of iuſtice, moſt part of the Senators whereof haue conſented to cōmic al iniquity. Such a one did ye 
                  Romane Senate reſemble in ye
                  
time of Nero: for all ſuch deteſtable cruelties as he practiſed (yea, euen when he ſlew his mother) did they vniuerſally a
                     〈…〉
                  e, accounting them as workes of pietie, and healthſome to the common wealth. But had it not rather bene impietie for a man to haue laboured to be of their order, and ſo to haue prophaned himſelfe in ſuch a falſe concord▪
                  
               
               Now will I ſpeake ſomewhat of men of warre in a common Inſolent concord, wealth, who are as it were the gard therof, whē paſſing the bounds of diſcipline, they doe confederate and vnite themſelues together, and ſo taking vppon them the ſpoile and robbing of the people, vpon mallice rather than neceſſitie, doe deſtroie all. Of this vnion a man may ſay, that the greater it is, the more noiſome & hurtfull.
               For the laſt example of falſe concord, which alſo is no leſſe peruitious than the firſt, I will ſet downe the ſame that was among Of hereticall and ſciſmatical concord. the Biſhops aſſembled at two or three Councels, holden vnder the children of Conſtantine the great. For the ſaide Biſhops being in manner al Arrians, or men infected with ſome other hereſie, did by a common conſent condemne the Councell of Nice (which was the moſt notable that euer was holden) & thoſe that continued the ſoundeſt in points of religion. That which was concluded in their aſſemblies was a plaine conſpiracie againſt the truth, & no holie vnion of wils, notwithſtanding they ſhrouded themſelues vnder that beautifull title.
               Of all which matters here deducted, euery man, eſpecially they that raſhly do ſhip themſelues ſimply into all ports, may learne not The concluſiō of this diſcourſe. to ſuffer themſelues to be circūuented with outward ſhews, which for the moſt part intangle the wiſeſt, that hereafter they be not forced to vſe this phraſe, I thought it not. Wee are alſo to note that notwithſtanding thoſe that vnite themſelues in maner afore mentioned, are ſometimes of opinion to perſeuere a long time, they neuertheles do deceiue themſelues, becauſe euill thinges bee of ſuch a nature, that many times when they are growen to a certain degree & not gouerned with any thing that good is, they 
                     〈◊〉
                   turne to ouerthrow Why true cō
                     cord doth continue. one another. But the concord that continueth, is the ſame that is between honeſt men, which alſo proceedeth frō the motions of an vpright reaſon, illuminated from aboue, which maketh 
                        •
                     s affectionate one to another: for being fed with ſo perfect a radicall humour, it remayneth euer quicke and freſh; as the trees that are planted along the riuers ſides. God grant therfore yt we, euen we Frenchmē
                   may

haue the ſame continually lodged in our hearts, to the end to helpe to reſtore our Countrie to her auncient beautie.
            
            
               The third Diſcourſe.
               
                  Of the inconſtancie whereby many do vſe to hate, condemne, and deteſt their neighbours, becauſe of their contrarieties in religion.
               
               
                  THE onelie diſputations holden about Of pretended zeale wherewith they couer hatred and mallice. this matter in diuerſe Countries within theſe few yéeres, were ſufficient to ingender great hatred, yea, euen among néereſt kindred. But when to the contention of wordes they ioyne déedes, (from whence haue proceeded infinite iniuries) then are the paſſions coroborated, and many mens heartes ſo poiſoned, that in the time of peace they cānot ſatiſfie their hatred againſt ſuch as agrée not vnto their religious opinions, neither their cruell reuenge in the time of warre. In this matter when we come to demand what cauſe hath and yet doth ingender and bring forth theſe extremities, many doe ſufficiently declare that it is the zeale that euerie one beareth to his own religion, that cauſeth them to be perſuaded that all doctrine thereto repugnant is ſpotted with impietie, and therefore they abhorre both it and all that profeſſe it. Now to the end not to ſtumble in this ſo rough a waie, I haue thought it nothing amiſſe to open the ſignification of the word Zeale, as alſo to ſhew the fruites that ſhould procéede from ſo good a trée. Zeale 
                  Definition of zeale. in my opinion, is an ardent affection of the ſoule which tendeth to the honour of God and the ſaluation of our neighbour, whereof it alſo followeth, that it is offended when he is diſhonoured. Moſes 
                  Exod. 31. and Saint Paule did greatly declare the zeale that they did beare, euen to Gods people, when the one of them ſaid, Lord forgiue them this treſpaſſe, otherwiſe blot me out of the booke which thou haſt written. And Saint Paule, who wiſhed to be ſeparated from God, that his 
                  Rom. 9. 
                  brethren according to the fleſh, who glorified God might bee brought into the waie of ſaluation. By theſe ſpeeches, which ſome take to bee exceſſiue, we are to vnderſtand the vehemencie of their affection. Likewiſe may Helias and Phinees bee vnto vs examples of the

wrath that ſome conceiue when they ſée impietie and wickedneſſe to abound. F
                     ••
                   it moued the one of them to put to death all the 1. King. 18 Prophettes of Baal, and the other Zambry and the Madianite. 
                  Num. 25. And ſuche zeale is commended in the holy Scriptures, becauſe it was guided by the wiſedome of God.
               
               In this miſerable worlde wherein we nowe liue are there fewe to be found that imitate Moſes and Paul, either that followe the examples Abuſe of the former examples, and the meanes to amend them. of Helias and Phinehes, notwithſtanding many would vſe the ſame for a cloake to their violent paſſions, as peraduenture not conſidering that thoſe wer perticular actions, procéeding of inward motions, or expreſſe commandements, and ſo not to be made conſequents. Moreouer, thoſe dayes had eſpeciall reaſons for ſuch kinde of iudgements, which cannot well agrée with ours. But the lawe of Charitie which is perpetual and the foundation of the two aforenamed wiſhes ought to reduce vs to the ſame practiſe, and ſo might we aduowe our zeale to be good, when leaning vppon the ſaid Charitie it is guided by knowledge, which are the two principall markes to diſcerne the true zeale from the falſe. The Apoſtle Saint Paule teacheth vs to eſchue that which is without knowledge, for being deſtitnte thereof, it aimeth rather at reuenge, than Charitie, as in himſelfe it appeared when he aſſiſted at the death of Rom. 10. Act. 7. 
                  Steuen.
               
               Now will it be eaſie for vs to knowe the markes of falſe zeale, if we doe but conſider of the vices that are oppoſite to the aforeſaide Markes of falſe zeale. vertues, which are Ignorance, (wherewith mallice is oftentimes mixed) and hatred of our neighbour: for whoſoeuer diligentlie obſerueth not thoſe differences, the ſame doe runne into errour. Of theſe affections, which euerie one attributeth to pietie, are ingendered the iudgements that we make of our neighbours, whereof the moſt part are wonderful raſh: for many there are who ſéeing ſome one that conſent not with them in pointes of religion, doe not onely The iniquitie of foreiudgements. charge him that he walketh in errour, but alſo imediatly account him a prophane and wicked man. This opinion hauing once gotten holde in the minde, is hard to be rooted out againe, and is the cauſe of breach, as well of brotherly loue as of publike concorde. We muſt therefore take heede that in our ſelues wee conclude not ſo haſtilie vpon the condemnation of thoſe whō we will not vouchſafe to take leiſure to know throughly. If we were to enquire whether a horſe or a dogge were good or bad, we would haue a time of triall before we would iudge, how much rather ſhould we put that

rule in practiſe concerning men? otherwiſe we muſt make leſſe account of them than of the ſayd beaſts. But ſee how diuerſe do now gouerne thēſelues herein. If a man ſay to one, This man is a Proteſtant, by and by he will anſwere, Then is he a wicked heretik. and ſaie to another, This man is a Papiſt, and he alſo wil ſay, Then is he naught. And why do you thus reproue him? Becauſe ſaie they, his religion is contrarie to ours. Truely this readineſſe is ouer readie.
               Well, whether this iudgement may be falſe or true, yet are we Of the moderatiō that is to be obſerued in foreiudgemēts in the meane time to vſe great moderation in both. When he that is blinded with ignorance ſhall condeinne the true doctrine and the maintayners thereof, his zeale ſhall not ſo iuſtifie him, that he may not iuſtly be accuſed to be a prophaner of the truth, neither wil it any whit auayle him to alledge his good intent, becauſe the ſame can not alter the nature of things. But is there not matter ſufficiēt, not to laugh at, but euen to bewayle him, who being ſpiritually blind, doth not ſo think, but rather noteth the cléereſt ſighted of blindnes? Wel may it be ſaid vnto him, Thou Phiſitiō that iudgeſt thy neighbor to be ſick, & in ſtead of ſeeking to cure him, wouldeſt that he were knocked on the head, enter into a little conſideratiō of thy ſelfe, & thou ſhalt perceiue that it is thou that doeſt aboūd in diſeaſes, & thoſe moſt dangerous. Thinke therfore thrice before thou ſay once to another: Thou art an heretike. But in truth it is a word in theſe dayes Of the inſolen cie of thoſe that call others heretikes. common in moſt mens mouths, and ſome there are from whom if we ſhould take the vſe of yt tearme, their beades from their girdles, and hatred from their hearts, they would be as much aſtonied as a couetous wretch that hath loſt his purſe. And yer are theſe men leſſe to bee blamed than ſome that willingly doe erre, in that they know the thing that they reiect, not to be reprouable. Before theſe laſt mens eyes will I ſet a ſaying of the Prophet Eſay, Curſed bee you that call euill good and good euill, or that make darkneſſe light, or light darkneſſe: to the end ſo hard a ſentence terryfieng their conſciences Iſay. 3 may withdrawe them from iniquitie to righteouſneſſe. Others there bee alſo which beeing well inſtructed, doe neuertheleſſe Of the inſolē
                     cie of ſome which forget the dutie of Charitie. growe into ſuch arroganice, that to thoſe that yet walke in the paths of ſtraunge doctrine, they giue ignominious names, and do greatly diſdayne them: Whereby they ſhewe theyr owne abuſe of Charitie which in liew of pride and inſolencie, ſhould bee meeke as Saint Paule ſaith.

It were rather their partes to haue compaſſion of them, with all gentleneſſe to take them by the armes, and by little and little, remouing the vaile that blindeth their ſight, to ſhewe them the gulfes wherein they doe inconſideratlie plonge and caſt themſelues awaie. For it is horrible crueltie, ſéeing the ſoules in euident danger, to curſe the bodies. One thing there is that moueth theſe men, namelie, the falſeneſſe of the doctrine, which in truth is to bee condemned. But they ouerſkipping this conſideration, doe build their hatred vpon the perſons that are deceiued therein, and doe neuer thinke that they may in time be lightned and conuerted, as ſome of thoſe were that conſented to the death of Ieſus Chriſt, who afterward worſhipped him as God, notwithſtanding they had before crucified him as an heretike and ſeditious perſon. Reaſon woulde wee ſhoulde preſume of our neighbour that he will riſe rather than periſh, vnleſſe we ſée anie euident tokens of hardneſſe of heart in him. Yet doe I not here meane that he ſhoulde bee flattered in his imperfections, neither take awaie all place from perticular iudgementes A reſtraint of the former ſpeches. procéeding of a good conſcience, becauſe as well the one as the other woulde be hurtfull, for ſo ſhall I couer the diſeaſe that ought to be opened, to the end to be the better cured. But let him that will iudge kéepe himſelfe within the rules of charitie. For it ſo falleth out, that thoſe which through preſumption doe condeme others, God condemneth by iuſtice.
               Other ſome of theſe inconſiderate zelators are of a verie bad opinion. That is, that they are perſuaded, that thoſe whoſe religion they haue reproued in themſelues, are not to be accounted their An other dangerous foreiudgment of zeale without knowledge. neighbours, no more than the Turkes or Tartarians, wherein they are groſely deceiued. And in caſe they were as diligent in reading the Scriptures, as they are to cleaue to the readineſſe of their paſſions, they would be of another minde. For there ſhould they find that the word neighbor ſtretcheth indifferentlie to all men, becauſe mankinde is conioyned together with a ſacred bonde of communitie, to the end that by that bond men ſhuld be ſtirred vp to loue each other. It is enough therefore for any one to be our neighbour, becauſe he is a man. For it lieth not in vs to blot out common nature. And who is he how barbarous ſo euer, that beareth not the Who is our neighbour. image of God printed in his ſoule, although it may be that it is almoſt blotted out? And for this cauſe ought wee among ſo many blemiſhes, and in ſo noble a creature, ſtill to conſider the excellent marke that God hath imprinted, to the end we hold not that to

be abhominable which himſelfe can crowne with his grace.
               In olde tyme the Phariſies violating the lawes of nature, acco
                     ••
                  pted An ould error renewed in our dayes. none for their neighbours but their kindred, friendes or benefactors, reſtrayning within that ſmall number, the thing that ſhould be common to all. But Ieſus Chriſt corrected their falſe interpretation by the example of the Samaritaine that relieued the poore Iew whom he found woūded by the way, whom alſo a Prieſt and a Leuite had denied of all mercie: thereby ſhewing that euery one is bound to doe good euen to the vnknowne, alſo that he is our neighbour that vſeth moſt humanitie toward vs. Beſides that we are to note that in thoſe daies there was greater enmitie betwéene the Iewes and Samaritaines, then is in theſe daies betwéene the Chriſtians and Turkes. How then will they excuſe themſelues that with the only names of Catholick and Proteſtant are ſo ſharpened one againſt another, that they diſaduowe each other to bee their neighbours? Yet are there ſome ſo bitter as to affirme that Aunſwer to ſome mens obiections. they haue reaſon ſo to doe: and if you aſke them why, they will aunſwer, that he that is vowed to Satan is woorthie all rigour and vnwoorthie any fauour. Oh proude pecocke! what worſe canſt thou ſay of a Caine or of ſame deteſtable Sorcerer? Knoweſt thou not that it is written in the Epiſtle of Iude, that when Michael the Archangell contended with the deuill about the bodie of Moſes he durſt not curſe him, but ſayd; The Lord reproue thee? For although he applye this place to thoſe that doe malitiouſly backbite their ſuperiours, yet may it alſo bee appropriated vnto thee that doeſt denounce eternall damnation againſt thy like. Why is not thy implacable wrath ſatiſfied when thou doeſt imagine his ſoule to bee deſtinate to eternall torments? This ſhould cauſe thee to pitie his bodie, as wee doe the tranſgreſſor that is condemned to bee broken vppon the whéele. Correct thy crueltie, that thy ſelfe bee not condemned.
               Hereby doe we ſee that the errors of the minde doe enforce the Correction of the former error. hatred of the hart. But Ieſus Chriſt doth giue vs a farre other leſſon in that notable ſermon that he made to the Iewes when he ſayd vnto them. You haue heard that it hath bene ſayd, Thou ſhalt loue 
                  Mat. 5. 
                  thy neighbour and hate thy enemie: But I ſay vnto you. Doe good to thoſe that hate you, and pray for them that ſcaunder and perſecute you, that you may be the children of your father that is in heauen. For if you loue thoſe that loue you, what reward is it? Doe not the Publicanes euen ſo? And if you ſalute your brethren only, what ſinguler

thing doe you. Doe not the heathen the ſame? Be ye therefore perfect, euen as your father which is heauen is perfect. I thinke if thoſe men that are ſo hard harted did often reade theſe words, their ſtomacks Confirmation of this correction. would come downe when they ſee the ſoueraigne maiſter commaund ſo holie things, and that with ſuch méekeneſſe. Sith alſo himſelfe ſpeaking of the moſt of them that crucified him ſayd: Father forgiue them, for they wot not what they doe: Let vs at the leaſt, ſetting before vs this example, ſay for them that doe vs no harme and to whom wee wiſh no good, Father forgiue vs, for wee wot not 
                  Luke. 23. 
                  what we doe. All theſe hatreds whereto diuers do ſeeke to lay ſome ground are to ſay the truth, no other but Iewiſh dealings, that is to ſay, a ſubuertion of the lawe of common charitie through falſe deſtinctions agréeing with the lawe of our owne appetites.
               I doubt not but ſome will bee ſorie that we ſhould endeuour to Aunſwer to thoſe that will not be reſtrayned by the rulé of chriſtian charitie. reduce them to ſuch méekeneſſe, therein peraduenture reſembling a certeyne Abbot whoſe only felicitie conſiſted in moleſting all the world with law matters, whom a French king vtterly forbad that exerciſe: but he aunſwered that now he had not paſt fortie matters, all which he would ceaſe ſith his maieſtie ſo ſtraightly commanded him, neuertheleſſe he beſought him to leaue him one halfe doſen for his paſtime and recreation. And ſo would they that we ſhould leaue them ſome, vpō whom to diſcharge a little of the aboundance of their choller. Howbeit, herein they deceiue themſelues: for God will not be cōtent with halfe obedience, but will haue it perfect and altogether from the hart. But they will replye that theſe be euangelicall counſailes, but no obligatorie precepts. This is another ſtarting hole digged out of the ſchoole of Sophiſtrie, & is of no valew. Howbeit hereof it enſueth not, that we muſt quite burie vp all hatred: but wee ought ſo to guide it that it take no hold of things prohibited. Such as abound in this paſſiion may find ſcope enough to walke in, yea vntill they bee wearie. Firſt they may diſcharge their ſtomackes againſt the deuils, who of all creatures are the worſt, neither neede they feare to exceede therein. For we cannot too much de
                     •
                  eſt any thing that is ſo repugnant to God. Next they may hate all and euery the ſinnes which ſprout forth in the world as graſſe in the medowes: becauſe they bee the ſtinges of death. The ſame may they doe to all impious doctrines, for that God by them is forgotten and diſhonored: The wicked likewiſe, generally conſidered, may be ſomewhat abhorred, as thoſe that alter and polute publique ſocieties, although peeticulerly the rule of charitie

afore mentioned be to be obſerued toward them. But if any, hauing mallice to ſell, would ſeeke any more familier or ordinarie ſubiect to employe himſelfe vpon, I would ſay vnto him. Friend, open the cloſets of thy ſoule and of thy hart, peraduenture if thou ſeekest well, thou mayſt finde matter enough whereon to exerciſe thy ſelfe, as ambition, 
                  Againſt whō we ſhould exerciſe our hatred. 
                  intemperance, pride, crueltie, vniustice, ingratitude, lying, deceipt, with other vices: whereof thy ſelfe wilt be abaſhed. There ſtay thy ſelfe, for hatred is the meanes to tame thoſe monsters whom thou makest as thou kneweſt not of, and which doe diffame thee. So knowe that thy hatred ſhall be fruitfull and ſweete, wherein powring it foorth vpon thy neighbours, it breedeth thee hurt and trouble.
               
               Like as thoſe that be well taught, hating mens imperfections How wee ought to loue our neighbors. can neuertheleſſe loue them, euen ſo is it meete that wee ſhould in like for behaue ourſelues toward our like, and not vtterly withdrawe our loue from their perſons, although wee condemne their errors and wickedneſſe: for many tymes they doe through grace chaunge, and from their vnpure waies come to thoſe that bee pure. This charitie whereof I ſpeake is nothing repugnant to ciuill Iuſtice, neither doth it aboliſh the indignation that wee are to beare vnto the contemners of God: for if it were contrary to pietie and publique order, then were it not humaine but inhumaine. Alſo the proportion betwéene the ſame and deuine charitie is good, for the one ſayth: Thou ſhalt loue God with all thy hart, and the other: Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe.
               
               Concerning conuerſation, whereof ſome make ſuch ſcrupuloſitie, Of connerſation with our neighbours. alleadging for their excuſe. This man is an hereticke, or that man is an Idolater: me thinkes they doe ouer raſhly denye it to thoſe that haue an immortall ſoule as themſelues, and doe weare the eſpeciall badge of Gods people: which is Baptiſme. If they thinke others defiled and themſelues cleane, is it not a part of humanitie to viſite them to make them alſo cleane? They will aunſwer, that they feare leaſt ſpiritual vncleanneſſe ſhould infect them. But examining the matter a little néerer, wee ſhall finde that that is not the matter, but rather that it is a certeyne vyolent hatred that kéepeth them from caſting any good looke vpon thoſe whom they accompt prophane, which they ſeeke to ſhroude vnder the cloake of conſcience. I thinke that diuers doe herein faile through ignorance, as being perſuaded by ſome falſe teachers ſo to doe: but there bee others that make themſelues very ſcrupulous vppon a méere péeuiſhneſſe, to the ende to ſeeme the more holie,

and yet in marking them well wee ſhall knowe them to be as they are, as Plutarke ſaith. Lyons at home and Foxes abroade: that is to ſay, In outward ſhewe Hipocrites and inwardly repleniſhed with pride and vengeance.
               We cannot hold any better rule in this caſe, then to imitate our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who made no difficultie to haunt with all perſons A rule to followe in this caſe. according to the rule of his vocation, notwithſtanding ye Phariſies found fault with him for it when they ſayd to his deſciples. Wherefore doth your maister eate with Publicanes and ſinners? But Ieſus hearing them, ſayd: The whole neede not the Phiſition, but thoſe that be ſicke. By which his example he teacheth vs to take compaſſion of thoſe whom wee finde in the poſſeſſion of ſinne and error, whom we may in ſome meaſure helpe by inſtruction, if they receiue it. Some there are that ſay that he was neuer conuerſant with Heretickes. But I would faine aſke theſe newe Doctors what the Phariſies and Sadduces were? For he taught the one ſort and did many tymes diſpute of the ſcriptures with the other. Wee ſhall finde that the firſt did woorſhip ſtraunge Gods, and the ſecond denyed the immortalitie of the ſoule. Moreouer, what were the Apoſtles pilgrimages but continuall communications with the Gentiles, to the end to reclaime them from their errors? Then muſt not wee be ſo cruell, ſith thoſe whoſe followers we boaſt our ſelues to be, vſed ſo great méekeneſſe toward all. Some man may Expoſition of the place of the Apoſtles touching conuerſation with heretickes. here replye with S. Paule writing to Titus cap. 3. ſaying: that he muſt after the firſt and ſecond admonition flee the companie of an hereticke: whereto I aunſwer: firſt that his meaning is that he be ſo indeede, and not by imputation. Secondly, that he be well knowen, and by lawfull and eccleſiaſticall procéedings manifeſtly and ſufficiently conuict ſo to be. Thirdly, that we ſee him ſo obſtinate, that notwithſtanding whatſoeuer exhortations either priuate or publique, he will not amend, but endeuoureth to infringe the vnitie of the Church in making others to goe aſtray. Then is it méete to put in practiſe his precept: for of the frequenting wt ſuch a man can there come no fruite, but rather moſt euident daunger. But all that erre are not noted with that marke. Sith therfore we ſee the world ſo bent, that not only in townes and villages, but euen in families and ſmall houſeholds, the dwellers doo differ in their opinions concerning the maner of the true ſeruice of God, let vs not woonder, neither be offended thereat: for euer ſince the birth of the Chriſtian 
                  Againſt offence taken of the contrarieties of religion. 
                  Church haue there appeared ſuch diuiſions, which haue continued

ſometimes in ſecrete, ſometimes openly, and ſo will continue to the worlds ende.
               In ſuch occurrences the beſt courſe that we can holde to auoyde Rules to followe. the ſhipwrack of our ſoules, is to ſeeke the way that leadeth to ſaluation, which is not to be found but in the truth, & the truth in the holy Scriptures. This being found, thoſe that feele themſelues adorned and clothed with ſo holy a knowledge, are to employe ſo precious a gift of God to the benefite of their neighbours, and not thereof to gather an argument to deſpiſe and diſdaine them: to the ende they may haue their part in this bleſſing of Chriſt, who ſaith: Bleſſed are the mercifull for they ſhall obteyne mercie. And as for thoſe whoſe inconſiderate zeale doth many tymes moue them to Mat. 5. wrongfull iudgements and condemnations, let them remember the ſaying of S. Paule. That whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne. That Rom. 14. is to ſay, that no worke, how goodly a ſhewe ſo euer it maketh, if it be not done of an vpright conſcience, grounded vppon the word of God, is good. A Deuine might haue written a whole booke vppon this argument, but I am content only to haue ſpoken a word or two by the way, as well in ſome ſorte to ſeeke to moderate our bitterneſſe, which doth but too much deuide vs, as alſo to kindle a new our charitie, to the ende the ſame may ſerue at the leaſt to reunite vs in a good politique concord.
               
            
            
               The fourth Diſcourſe.
               
                  What meanes and proceedings are moſt fit to vſe in the redreſſe of an eſtate.
               
               
                  IF peraduenture wee ſhould méete with ſome Sith all France calleth for reſtauration, thoſe men are not receiueable that oppoſe themſelues there againſt. one that ſhould ſay, that France is not in the way of deſtruction, what aunſwer ſhall wee make him? Forſooth that he is both blinde and deaffe. For which way ſoeuer we looke, we can ſee nothing but confuſion and miſerie, neither can wee heare the ſound of any thing but complaints and lamentations. But if ſome other ſhould then ſay that we ought to leaue it in the ſame eſtate wherein it now is, and neuer ſeeke any meanes to relieue it: might wee not iuſtly tell him that he is an enemie to vertue, in that he abhorreth not ſo many vices & miſchiefes as doe on all ſides infect and torment vs? Let vs therefore leaue thoſe that are ſo doltiſh or corrupt, & harken to the

voyce of the people yt ſoundeth of nothing but Reſtauration. Yea euen all other the liuing, though vnceaſonable, creatures, if they could expreſſe their deſire, would ſay the ſame, conforming them ſelues to the ſaying of S. Paule: That all creatures doe mourne and labour, wayting to be deliuered out of the bondage of corruption. But Rom. 8. there he meaneth to ſpeake of the vniuerſal miſerie & finall renouation, where our France now groueth after her owne perticulerly.
               All ſorts both great & ſmall do confeſſe that ſhe is very ſick, & do Diuerſe opinions touching the remedies for this reſtauration. wiſh ſhe were healed; but as touching the meanes to do it, they are at debate among themſelues. For ſome would haue her let blood extremely: Others doe thinke it better to miniſter more gentle and eaſie medicines. In this contrarietie we muſt therfore ſeeke which be the fitteſt for the ſtate wherein we are. For the chiefeſt part of a good iudgement conſiſteth in knowledge how to chooſe yt that may moſt profite. To the finding wherof I thinke there is nothing that can better cōduct vs then ye experience paſſed among vs, conioyned with perfect diſcretion, which is the rule of all politick actions. And vnder the conduct of ſo ſafe guides wil I begin to enter the carrier.
               Touching the firſt that are ſo violent in their opinions, and propound Refutation of the opinions that counſell violence. nothing but ſword and fire, I cannot me think like of them. For notwithſtanding they ſeeme to deſire the generall benefite; yet doe they indeede rather ſeeke their owne contentations and perticuler profit. Wherin ſeeing reaſon reſiſteth their vehemēt nature, they haue recourſe to force, with the which, if it lay in them, they would not helpe themſelues much better then a mad man with a ſharpe ſword. It is ſtraunge to ſee that men in the gouernment of brute beaſtes, can vſe moderation and patience, and yet in the regiment of their like, endued with reaſonable ſoule and which are perſuaſible, nothing may ſerue but cruelty! In the correction of things hurtfull we are ſometymes forced to ſhewe rigour, which is not to be blamed, if the cauſes ſo require, and that withall wee put away all deſire of reuenge. But to guide the inſtruments of rigour with enuious paſſions, is the way to marre and ouerthrowe all. And this haue we throughly experimented in our poore countrie, who is ſo oppreſſed with thoſe calamities, which through the rage of her owne children ſhe hath ſuffered, that now ſhe doth clutter but with one wing. And what is the cauſe thereof, but theſe vyolent counſailes: from whence are procéeded murders, manſlaughters, beginnings of warres, depopulatiōs, wrongfull cōdemnatiōs, ſackings, and other miſchiefes, with which meanes ſome ſay that we ſhould

helpe our ſelues for the ſauing of the ſtate from deſtruction and expelling the inconueniences alreadie happened. Howbeit, in the ende we haue found ſuch remedies to bee farre worſe then the ſickneſſe, and more meete to encreaſe thē to decreaſe the diſeaſe. They are not therefore to bee termed remedies, but rather moſt cruell reuenges, and deſtructions which haue rauiſhed and caried away whatſoeuer the moſt excellent commodities of this realme, namely the flower and aboundance of men. What can thoſe men now ſay that take ſuch felicitie in the warre & are ſo readie to perſwade it, for now I proteſt that they ſée that notwithſtanding it hath bene ſixe tymes renewed, it bringeth vs no commoditie, but rather plungeth our France in all deſolation.
               But what will ſome paſſionate Catholicke ſay: How can wee 
                  Anſwer to a replication made by two ſortes of men againſt the former reſutation. 
                  roote out thoſe of the new opinion, if wee may not helpe our ſelues with our weapons? Truely my maisters, may we aunſwer, firſt it were requiſite you ſhould proue it a iuſt matter and for the common commoditie, to polute your hands in the bowelles of your fellowe countrimen, before you bee permitted to make ſuch a butcherly ſlaughter. Were it not better for you by clemencie to bring them to concord, and by good examples in life to endeuour to cōuert them? It may be alſo that ſome Proteſtant, offended at things paſſed will ſay: Wee muſt haue no peace with theſe Papistes that haue done vs ſo much miſchiefe, before our ſwords haue made cruell reuenge. To them would I priuatly ſay: Why are not you yet wearie, hauing tasted ſo many paines & miſeries, but that you muſt reenter againe into newe? Let vs rather make warre againſt our imperfections then mainteyne them in our land, and endeuour to mollifie the hearts of thoſe that hate vs, by instructions, ſeruices & mutuall dueties: and ſo will God ſend vs an aſſured peace.
               
               Thus me thinkes wee ſhould aunſwer thoſe men that are ſo ſharp ſet vpon blood. When vpon euill will we ſeeke warre, it muſt needes be vniuſt: but when to repulſe crueltie and defend our innocencie wee are forced to beare it, it is excuſable, becauſe neceſſitie conſtrayneth. But among all the Frenchmens furies, there haue none bene ſo terrible as the maſſacres. They were, ſay ſome, the laſt remedies to reſtore France to vnion. And yet did neuer any thing happen that ſo farre diſunited it. Hereby wee might bee taught to refraine therefro, becauſe ſuch vyolent waies in liew of reſtoring, doe deſtroye. And when all is ſayd, ſuch counſailors deſerue not the name of reformers, but of deformers.
               
               If the correction of any abuſe come in queſtion, ſome are not content

with the rooting of it out, but they muſt alſo ſpoyle, driue away and kill thoſe whome they pretend to bee the abuſers; without deſtinction Aunſwer to an other obiectiō touching ſtraungers: eſpecially Italians, out of whoſe deſtruction ſome thinke the peace of Frāce would growe. of perſon or treſpaſſe. And if the Italians (who are mightely multiplyed in France) bee ſpoken of, they wrappe them all in one offence and ſay that they muſt be thus and thus vſed. But they ſhould firſt thinke, that as among the French there bee both good and bad, ſo are there among them of both ſortes. And a man may affirme that ſuch of them as applye their mindes to goodneſſe, doe prooue moſt excellent, as alſo thoſe that are giuen to miſchiefe are aswicked. Moreouer, is it poſſible to imagine any greater confuſion and vniuſtice, then for the puniſhment of ſome tenne or twelue guiltie perſons, to giue in pray a thouſand innocents to vnbridled furie▪ If ſome Italians haue brought wicked cuſtomes and inuentions into France, watch them, and finding them guiltie, puniſh them: but doe not imitate them, for ſo might ye afterward be aſhamed to condemne them. Some accuſe them to bee the aucthors of impoſitions and extraordinary taxes, which haue almoſt oppreſſed the whole communaltie. It is a curſed crime, and thoſe that are ſo vnthankfull to France where they are ſuſteyned and growe into welth, as to be the occaſions of cauſing it to be eaten vp and ſo oppreſſed, are vnworthie to dwell in it. But we muſt marke well who they bee, and not impute the fault of a fewe vnto all. What muſt we then doe? For ſooth we muſt not repoſe any credite in them: but in the gouernment of the ſtate, vſe ſuch Princes, Lords & notable perſons as alwaies haue bene accuſtomed to counſell our Kings. Neuertheleſſe, if peraduenture there chaunce to bee ſome among them who in reſpect of their ſinguler vertue and fidelitie might deſerue to perticipate in the chiefeſt honors (whereto the hiſtories do teſtifie that in tymes paſt diuers ſtraungers haue atchieued) who would debarre them? And herevpon I would demaund of them what Frenchmen were more affectionate to the eſtate then one Iames alſo Theodore Triuolſſe: one Prince of Melphy, one Duke Horatius Ferneſius, & aboue all, the valiant race of the Stroſſyes, of whom the laſt (who deſerued to march in the firſt ranke of ye beſt Frenchmen) did voluntarily ſacrifice his life for the turning aſide of thoſe ciuill warres that began againe to threaten our France.
               
               I would wiſh we had halfe a doſen ſuch ſtraungers euen in our priuie councell. They haue, will ſome man ſay, (I ſpeake of thoſe that traficke) al the greateſt Farmes of the Realme. I do not meruaile thereat, ſith they are giuen them. If a Frenchman could find

any ſuch commodities in Italie, he would poſt thether apace. The beſt remedie for that, is to preferre our owne nation before them. This is not yet all, for theſe men can in fiue or ſixe yeres make thē ſelues ritch. Truely if they atteyne to their wealth with either our publique or priuat detriment, they are to be condemned: but if their labour, diligence and induſtrie doth aduance them thereto, you may not blame them, but rather thinke your ſelues very doults that can not do the like. And yet if we will looke well to ſome of our French men, we ſhall finde that they haue made as good a harueſt as ye reſt. To be briefe, ſith the moſt part of them are incorporate among vs, as hauing both houſes, wiues and children, were it not great crueltie indiſcretly to rent away ſuch a member. France hath alwaies bene very courteous to ſtraungers, and ſo in my opinion ſhe ought ſtill to bee, namely to thoſe that we ſee doe cloth themſelues with the naturall affections of the homeborne, and that bring forth good example & better fruite. But the reſt, who as bloodſuckers doe ſucke vs vp and then goe their waies, or that bring in pernitious nouelties, they are to be accuſed, & being conuict, to be made taſte of the ſeueritie of the lawes of France. For the puniſhing of a few would correct many. Howbeit, in the ſtate wherein our Commonwelth now ſtandeth an Italian Frenchionized, is as much to bee eſtéemed as a Frenchman Hiſpaniolized.
               
               But it is not the ſtraunger only whom they would haue to be ſo hardly entreated, for when their paſſions prick them, they ſet them Aunſwer to an other obiectiō of thoſe that ſtomacke the Lawyer, the Nobilitie and the Clergie. ſelues againſt the naturall Frenchmen. Some ſay that ye ſeate of Iuſtice wherevpon a certeyne forme of Iuſticers doe ſit, are now but traps & ſnares, wherein with the bayt of lawes and cuſtomes, both ritch & poore are caught & ſpoyled, & therfore that we muſt baniſh one part of thē & rob the reſt, ſo to ſaue and reuenge our ſelues of their rapine, & reſtore iudgements into their auncient ſimplicitie: Others raging againſt Friers & Muncks do charge them that they are the examples of all diſſolute life, idleneſſe & hipocriſie, who when they haue liued of other mens labours, doe alſo betray their conſciences, and therfore ſay that wee ought to ſet fire in the fower corners of their couents. Some of the Commons complayning of the arrogancie of the Nobilitie would entreate thē after the maner of the Suitzers, (yet the Suitzers haue not done ſo much as theſe do thinke) ſo to eſtabliſh a quiet Cōmonwelth. Part of the Nobilitie likewiſe diſdayning the pride & inſolencie of the inhabitants of ſome mightie cities, alſo their redineſſe to Commotions, doe wiſh
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
In this caſe would I wiſh his Maieſtie to eſtabliſh ſuch a lawe Againſt thoſe that counſaile ciuill warres. as was vſed at Locres that had relatiō to another. That is, that euery one that would propound any new matter in that Commonwelth, was forced to appeare before ye people with an halter about his necke: Then after the propoſition heard, if it were allowed, the halter was taken away & he let go free, but if it were miſliked, thē was he ſtrangled, to ye end by this rigorous puniſhmēt to admoniſh euery one not to be ouer haſtie to bring in pernitious nouelties that might bréede alteration or innouation of the ſtate. The like were it meete his Maieſtie ſhould ordeyne, namely that whoſoeuer would counſaile ciuill warre ſhould come in like ſort before him, his Princes & Counſaile, aſſiſted with three hūdred perſons accompted honeſt men & diſcréet & true Frenchmen, taken frō among the bodie of the Nobilitie, the bodie of Iuſtice and the bodie of the Cities, to the end as his propoſition ſhould be by them found to be profitable or hurtfull, he might be entreated: ſo peraduenture the iſſue might be ſuch yt by this example many would be terrified & reſtrained frō the perſuading of warre, through the continuation wherof France hath accelerated her deſtruction & doth frame her ſelf to forrein bō
                  dage. Much more might be yet ſpokē to ye weakning of this opiniō, but this may ſuffiſe for thoſe yt will not diſpute or argue thervpon.
               Now let vs ſee what we are to iudge of the other two opinions which do ſeeme more receiueable. Many men are perſuaded yt that Conſideration of the ſecond aduice, contrary to the former. which cōmendeth the gentle & eaſie remedies is to be followed, as being moſt conuenient for vs. And this are they mooued to beléeue by the conſideration of ye ruines yt the rigorous haue brought vpon vs: for thereof do they conclude yt contrary effects muſt be atteyned by cōtrary meanes. Secondly, they cōpare France to a body which by long ſickneſſe is growne into ſo weake & feeble an eſtate that it cannot ſcarce ſtand: & do ſay that the rules of arte do forbid the miniſtring of ſo ſtrōg medicines to him yt is ſo weake leaſt they throw him quite downe. And yt with like reaſon, politick rules do not permit ye application of ſo vehemēt remedies vnto a languiſhing & half waſted eſtate. They ſay moreouer yt during euē our ſmall peace we might perceiue yt many things begā alreadie to recouer, which teacheth yt gentle procéedings are merueilous proper to help to reduce France into yt good order which we deſire. And indéed this way ſéemeth as eaſie as ye firſt ſéemed hard. But for wāt of following therof we are fallen into wonderfull calamities, ye remēbrance whereof hath made mē ſo timerous yt euen words only do make thē afeard.

So that if wee but ſpeake of reforming of this or that, by and by they imagine that wee are about to begin to deſtroye them: ſo ſore haue the paſſed iniuries encreaſed diſtruſt. This is the reaſon why the moſt moderate rules, waies and decrees are moſt fit and neceſſarie How we muſt vſe this aduice. to begin withall, to the end to giue to vnderſtand to thoſe that yet are but wilde, that wee purpoſe for the reeſtabliſhment of thoſe things that are in confuſion to proceed with temperance, for ſo by yéelding ſomewhat to their imaginations and feare, we ſhall make them afterward more readie to obey whatſoeuer ſhall be ordeyned, neither neede wee feare to finde any great repugnancie when men ſhall perceiue that the reformers doe meane well. For now many things are chaunged ouer as they were in tymes paſt whē ſome of the members only had bene diſpleaſed. Now doth the whole bodie complaine, and the patient who before would not knowe his ſickneſſe, cryeth out after the Phiſition.
               It is vnpoſſible, will ſome ſay, to ſee ſo great conſent in ſeeking Aunſwer to thoſe that thinke it vnpoſſible to reforme the ſtate. reformation: for ſuch as gaine by diſorders would haue them ſtill to continue. Hereto I aunſwer, that wee knowe well enough there will be contrariers. But on the other ſide, when men ſhall ſee the greateſt number well diſpoſed, being gouerned by authoritie and lawe, the reſt will ſoone be brought into order. The principall ſigne hereof is example and authoritie royall, couragiouſly commaunding: without which nothing will be performed. And now will I Diſorders that neede reformation. ſet downe ſome of the diſorders of our eſtate, therby to ſée whether the ſame bee as eaſie to remedie, as many doe imagine they bee: ſo from the leſſer and moſt eaſie I will procéede to the greater and hardeſt.
               The firſt place will I attribute to ſuperfluity in aparrell that exceedeth 1. Superfluiti
                        •
                      in apparell. euery where, whereof proceedeth generall pouertie: which to redreſſe ſeemeth but ſmall difficultie, and yet it cannot bee touched but two millions of men will crye out and exclaime. What meanes is there then to prouide for it? Euen to laugh at all thoſe lamentations, complaints and rages. For from a foole if you take his bable, he will ſtorme, and yet is it requiſite to do it leaſt he hurt others. But, which is yet worſe: theſe exceſſes that we ſpeake of doe hurt thoſe eſpecially that commit them, though at the firſt they be as pleaſant, as in the ende they be pinched, when their liuing is morgadged out. He that would perticulerly touch all theſe kindes of folly, (as the inuenters of auriculer confeſsion haue deuided mortall and veniall ſinnes into an infinite number of rootes and

braunches) ſhould neede a whole volume. It hath in all ages bene a hard matter to cut off the things that men haue eſteemed to bee their principall delights, yea ſome hiſtories doe reporte that euen the Romaines were much troubled therewith. Yet is there great difference betwéene vs and them. For they excéeded when they had aboundance of all things, but wee doe it now that we haue almoſt nothing: Neither doe I feare that we ſhall enter into ſedition for this poynt. They that keepe the Cuſtome houſe at Lions will ſay, that vnleſſe euery man may haue libertie of apparell the King ſhall loſe aboue three hundred thouſand crownes of yeerely rent. But if we turne ouer the leafe, wee ſhall finde that there is yeerely tranſported out of the Realme aboue fower millions of Francks, which is caried into Italie for ſuch warres, and doe cauſe the King and his ſubiects to ſpende aboue twelue millions in ſuperfluous apparell that might well bee ſpared. In the tyme of Phillip the Conqueror vnder whom France floriſhed and was aloft, Veluet was out of vſe with them, neither had they any ſtore of Silkes, at the leaſt fewe men did weare them. Neuertheleſſe, the great men were neuer better obeyed, each one in his degrée, then in thoſe daies. So long as nothing but ritch garments doe procure reuerence and loue, there is but ſmall ſted faſtneſſe therein, and therefore there muſt be ſtronger bonds to bring vs to our dueties. Yet doe I not meane that we ſhould order our garments after the ſimplicitie of olde tyme: for now doe many things abound that were then very rare. The third parte of the Nobilitie at the leaſt could wiſh there were ſome good order taken herein, ſo ſhould they bee better furniſhed with money and leſſe endebted. And I beleeue they could be content rather to ſpend that which they doe conſume in ſuch ſuperfluities, in the Kings ſeruice in the field, where their expenſes ſhould be better employed, thē to empoueriſh themſelues in theſe follies: and in liew of ſo many gay hoſen and cloakes brodered with gold and ſiluer, to buy good horſes, armour & furniture, therewith to bee worthely furniſhed in theſe honorable neceſſities. So ſhould wee finde aboue 1200, gentlemen able without pay to accōpanie him, which are yet good relickes of our decayed France, and might worke as great miracles as euer did S. Mathurin of l' Archant. And as theſe doe cure fooles (as yt report goeth) ſo would the others heale certeyne dolts yt think vs Frenchmen to be euen in the Hoſpitall. Who thē would make any ſtirre for theſe things: Peraduenture the women, who are wonderfully affected to theſe

goodly ornaments, and would bee very forie they ſhould be cut off. Indeede they ſhould bee allowed much more then men, as well to content their curioſitie, as alſo becauſe they loue to haue ſomewhat that may giue a gloſſe to their beautie. Howveit, Ariſtotle ſaith that women are the one moitie of the Commonwelth, and therefore ought to bee brideled by good lawes, but they will not beléeue him, but ſay that he is an hereticke.
               There be many other ſuperfluities which I will not ſpeake of, Other ſuperfluities, namely exceſſiue expences. as hauing touched them els where. Only I haue choſen this kind which is as hurtfull as common, which alſo I haue layed open to the ende to ſhewe that ſith it may bee amended, ſo may others likewiſe that make vs worſe and more needie. Which if any man deſire me to name, I muſt report theſe; exceſſiue expences waſted in ſumptuous Feaſtes vppon ſmall occaſion: Maſkes, Playes, ſuperfluous retenues, ſtately builoings, precious moueables: with many other pomps and pleaſures which all do ſtand in great néede of reformation, becauſe that many doe paſſe their dueties and habilities: neither ſhould a man lye, that ſhould ſay, that they are readier to ſpend 1000, crownes in ſuch vanities, thē to giue half a one to a poore ſoule that dyeth for hunger; or tenne to a friend that ſtandeth in great neede. The cauſe whereof is ouermuch ſelfe loue and want of charitie toward others.
               Now will I ſpeake of matters which ſeeme neceſſarie to be touched, Of the principall remedies for this diſorder. if we minde to reforme the eſtate, notwithſtanding it be daungerous ſtirring of thē. There be that thinke that if in this our pouertie thoſe mén be not viſited that haue ſo vnreaſonably enritched themſelues by our confuſions, the King ſhall bee defrauded of a woonderfull cōmoditie that would ariſe of the reſtitutions that diuers Of viſitations. ſhould be forced to make, which alſo being applyed to good vſes, would ſtop great gaps. This propoſition is plauſible & grounded vpon equitie, but ye execution therof is very difficult, cōſidering the great nūber of thoſe whoſe conſciences are larger then a Friers 
                     •
                  léeue, ſome in receiuing too much, others in ſeruing their owne 
                     〈…〉
                  es, and others in catching and ſnatching. And vndoubtedly, if wée ſhould driue them to giue accompt of their adminiſtration paſt, it would bréede ſome iarre. Yet if there were but a fewe exchetors in this number, (who now ſhould deale faithfully in their offices, if they could remember what ſhipwracke they had once almoſt fallen into) was ſhould bee ſure enough from any warre there about. But to cloſe with thoſe that weare Swordes: that

can both commaund and ſtrike: and that haue authoritie, friendes, and intelligences, vndoubtedly it would breede great alterations. Was it not one of the cauſes that moued Caeſar to take armes, becauſe they would haue viſited him and his partakers, about the wealth that he had gathered in Gaule? When the Gracchies propounded and purpoſed to put in execution the law Agraria which cut off the poſſeſſions of the ritch, what bloodie ſedition did enſue? For although a thing be lawfull yet is it not expedient to put it alwaies in vſe, becauſe that neither the indiſpoſition of the affayres can beare it, neither the tyme require it.
               Some will ſay that it is a gentle way, to redemand that thing by lawe that hath bene vſurped againſt lawe. True. But if we doe well marke the conſequences, wee ſhall finde them ſo daungerous, that it were a great ouerſight for the gathering vp of a fewe ſmall profites, to encurre great loſſes. For ſith they that will not loſe the goodes that they haue gotten, will not for the kéeping of them abſteyne from vyolence, the ſureſt way were now to wincke at ſome incurable miſchiefes and to looke vpon thoſe that be curable. The lawe of obliuion which wee haue alwaies placed firſt in our outcryes, which alſo the Romaines and Athenians after their ciuill warres did put in practiſe, doth warne vs in theſe chaungeable tymes to forget many things.
               The like conſideration is there to bee had of the Clergie: for as many did affirme that it were good to take away halfe their goods 2. Of the Clergie. (which moſt of them doe abuſe) to diſcharge the Kings debts, conſidering that the people in reſpect of their pouertie are not able to doe it: theſe great words, as tending to deminiſh their temporall poſſeſſions, did ſo terrefie them, that calling together their wittes, they haue with wonderfull ſleights oftentymes ouerthrowne theſe motions, wherein men began to take ſome ſmall taſte, ſhewing that they could neuer be any whit enclined to relieue his maieſtie, vnleſſe he firſt ſet free the Church of Rome from the oppreſſions of the Proteſtants; & after the rooting out of thē they would worke merueiles. To be briefe, by ſuch meanes and deuiſes they haue ſo runningly giuen vs the turne, (as we vſe to ſay) that they are beſt in reſt whiles the others are by warre purſued. And ſometymes when they haue bene diſpoſed to take the bit in the mouth, what haue they done? It was ſeene in the States holden at Blois in the yéere 1577. For they there ſo played their parts that they ſet one part of France againſt the other, while themſelues indged of

the blowes: Yea ſome went ſo farre as to to ſay that the Clergie poſſeſſed aboue fifteene millions of Francks in yerely rent, ſo that if any ſought to oppreſſe them, they would make thoſe that had bitten them to let goe well enough. Theſe examples doe ſhew that it is not for vs to vſe force againſt thoſe that are able by force to reſiſt. But I preſume that in as much as they are Frenchmen, they will neuer ſee their King fall in neceſſitie, but will ſuccour him, in caſe they finde that by courteſie they be required. Beſides that ſeeing they employe not the Church goodes to that vſe to the which they were bequethed, they ought not to refuſe to helpe him whoſe aunceſtors haue permitted them the poſſeſſion of the ſame.
               The ſame moderate procéeding is in my opinion to bee taken 3. Of the Proteſtants. with the Proteſtants, becauſe all the extremities that haue bene practiſed againſt them to reclaime them (as the ſpeech goeth) haue brought them with force to defende themſelues. For it is not poſſible that ſo bloodie a worke of conuerſion can bee perfected according to the firſt intent of thoſe that began to frame it, and therefore the beſt way is to leaue it. If we preſume that they erre, they muſt be reformed by the words of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and not by the perſecutions and fires that haue many yeeres flamed in France. Fire belongeth to Sodomites, and not to thoſe who in the middeſt thereof call vpon the ſonne of God only. Our Kings hauing by their Churchmen bene perſwaded that the rooting of them out of their territories ſhould be an acceptable ſacrifice vnto God, thinking to doe well, haue done their endeuours, and to that effect conſumed more money, men, and tyme then Caeſar did in his Conqueſt of Gaule, Spayne, and England. Sith therefore experience teacheth that all this haue nothing profited, ſhould wee not ſeeke more milde & conuenient waies to preſerue, rather then to deſtroye men? His maieſtie might doe well to ſay to his Clergie: My maiſters, ſeeing the materiall ſword hath not in ſo many yeeres bene able to bring your counſaile to paſſe, labour you another while with the ſpirituall, which is teaching and preaching, adding thereunto good life, to redreſſe pietie and godlineſſe. I would thinke that either part ſhould take the ſame courſe to conuert one another, which ſo many excellent perſonages haue done heretofore: As Irineus, Policarpus, Athanaſius, with other good Shepheards, that haue guided an innumerable quantitie of poore ſoules (which before were the bondſlaues of ignorance and ſinne) into the way of ſaluatiō. With the ſword you may well bereaue ſome of them of their liues, but

the taking of perſwaſions out of the hart cannot be compaſſed by any materiall inſtrument: but rather by better perſwaſions of truth. Obſeruing this rule, it were moreouer requiſite, to the ende to ſee ſome apparant reſt in the Church., that his Maieſtie ſhould call a nationall, franke and free counſaile (for the Pope will neuer agree to any generall, which he feareth as thunder) conſiſting of honorable Deuines, charitable and louers of concord, who being holily aſſembled may finde ſome indifferent meanes able to reduce vs to a Chriſtian vniou, which we all ought to wiſh, where before we fled one from an other through deuiſion. Our maiſters may peraduenture hereunto aunſwer, that the Catholicke Romiſh religion muſt not bee brought into queſtion or argument, but rather the newe opinions, as being full of error: But if any Heretick will diſpute let him come to the facultie of Deuinitie, there ſhall he bée talked withal with the great teeth. Hereto I ſay that our maiſters haue too great an aduauntage, when they are in their maine Bulwarkes, as at Rome, in the Spaniſh Inquiſition, and in Sorbonne. For there is not ſo ſubtile a Goſpeller, but ſhould loſe his la
                     •
                  
                  tine. Yea Ariſtotle himſelfe with all his Greeke, if he were in the ſtay ſhould finde himſelfe hardly beſet: for there haue they more important arguments then thoſe of the firſt figure. For when they heare any that oppugneth their opinions, and pricketh them with the ſtinges of the Scripture, by and by they deliuer him a ſillogiſme to diſſolue, which is either of fire, water, or halter, whereto he muſt aunfwer in perſon, not in figure, ſo as a poore condemned man before he bee conuict is forced corporally to yéeld to the force of their arguments which doe neceſſarily conclude in death. The beſt way therfore were to giue ouer all theſe paſſed euill cuſtomes, and to followe thoſe remedies that I haue propounded, or others more meete to attaine to liue in peace withall: for feare leaſt our maiſters endeuouring to compell others to admit their heauenly opinions happen to loſe their earthly poſſeſſions, as alreadie they haue done in a great parte of Europe. As alſo wée doe alreadie in France ſee the ritcheſt members of their Demaines in the handes of the Catholicke warriours, who hauing receiued ſuch benefites for the rewardes due vnto their ſeruices, it will ſhortly followe that (if the ciuill warres doe continue) neceſſitie and couetoufneſſe will procure many of them to appropriate to themſelues the things whereof before they were but farmers, as heretofore it happened in this Realme in the tyme of Charles the Simple.
                  
This briefe aduertiſement I thought good to giue them, as being aſſured that they would bee loth either by power or pollicie that any man ſhould preſume to thruſt his hand inio their cauldron, eſpecially the Proteſtants, who as they ſay, haue no right or authoritie in the impoſition of hands.
               Concerning the lawe, which is a very vnproportionate member, Of the lawe. it would deſerne ſeuere reformation, were it not that wee are partly the cauſe that many of the miniſters thereof doe abuſe it: becauſe that to recouer and recompence themſelues they doe (as ſome ſay) ſell by retayle that which they haue bought by great. But the moſt eſpeciall remedie for this, were by little and little and that without iniurie, to ſuppreſſe halfe this mightie armie with all their ſuperfluous formalities, which bréede ſo many delayes. So would it followe that halfe their ſuites would fléete away with the ſtreame. But what exceſſe is there in the order of receiuers, as well in the multiplicitie of offices as in their fees: which ſay they that knowe it, do amount yerely vnto 1200000. crownes: Is not this waſt of treaſure, conſidering that vnder 100000. would ſuffiſe to mainteyne a reaſonable number that might haue that office. The whole reuenues of ye great Duke of Florence or Saxonie amount to no more: which make mée to wonder at our France, ſeeing the leaſt péeces of our ruines doe counteruaile ſome ſmall Kingdomes.
               To atteyne therefore to the correction of all theſe diſorders and Meanes to apply the remedies. many other that are to bee ſeene in other vocations, it were requiſite his Maieſtie ſhould duely and without partialitie call the generall Eſtates, by whoſe meanes he might take good aduice and neceſſarie reſolutions, ſo ſhoule they reape but a fewe curſes of thoſe whome they ſhall haue a little plucked and he the profite. For whatſoeuer men ſay, or in whatſoeuer ſorte wee take the Frenchmen, they ſtill loue their King. Here might riſe a doubt that might breede blame to the vſe of moderate meanes, if the ſame were not opened and decided. That is, that many would thinke much that as well vnder the colour of clemencie, as alſo induced through a falſe feare, leaſt by touching them wée might bring out of taſte ſundrie perſons to the preiudice of the Eſtate, we ſhould leaue ſo many vices vnpuniſhed. Truely they might reaſonably bée reiected, if they tended to reſtrayne politicke iudgements, without which Cōmonwelths cannot conſiſt. But it is to be conſidered yt there is a difference betwéene the courts of ordinarie iuſtice

(which ſhould alwaies, if it were poſſible, beare an equall courſe) and the meanes and proceedings which cuſtomably are holden in the correction of diſorders happened as well in gouernment, as vniuerſally in maners: for in theſe things ſometyme we are forced to accommodate our ſelues to thoſe perſons, that are either ouer many or ouer mightie: to thoſe meanes and power that are ſmall: Alſo according to the tyme when an eſtate is deuided, for that cauſeth releaſe of all ſeueritie, attending more fit oportunitie to vſe it. But when the lawe commaundeth that blaſphemers, murderers, adulterers and theeues be puniſhed, wee muſt not haue regarde to ſo many circumſtances: for it is our dueties to obeye it, becauſe it is God that ſpeaketh: and in truth, that is the way whereby wee ſhould begin to reforme deformed eſtates.
               Now it remaineth that we diſcourſe of the other opinion which The thirde aduice conſiſting of the two former. mixeth clemencie with rigour. The allowers thereof doe ſay that the meeteſt remedies for France muſt bee ſo compounded if wee purpoſe to reape any profite of them. For as the vyolent which do empayre the diſeaſe are to be reiected, ſo likewiſe y• gentle through want of ſtrength to deminiſh it doe proue vnfruitfull. They doe conſider that the miſchiefes and diſorders are tyed to the whole bodie of France, euen as the ruſt is tyed to the Iron: Alſo that as for the getting of it of and making the Iron bright, it is requiſite not onely to waſh and drye it, but alſo to powre oyle vppon the ruſt to eate it, and then diligently to ſkoure and cleanſe it: ſo likewiſe the vices that haue taken footing doe not auoyde, as wee ſay, ſimply, but muſt be forcibly thruſt out as a ſtraunger ſhould bee thruſt out of a houſe from whence he is vnwilling to departe. If, ſay they, our calamities were like to the calamities of an offender, who hauing receiued the ſentence of his condemnation, doth ſuffer one only officer to leade him where he liſt, it might eaſely be baniſhed: but reſembling rather an vntamed Horſe, who when the rider toucheth him with the ſpurre, endeuoureth with his hinder heeles to ſtrike him, or with his teeth to byte him, muſt by him that mindeth to breake him frō the ſame be led luſtely, and ſomewhile ſtroken with the rod, and ſomewhile chidden and threatned with a ſharp voyce: ſo muſt we thinke that moſt of our vices are haughtie and proude, and knowing that you feare them, they doe face you: but if you applye vnto them the ſeueritie of the lawe with ſome puniſhment, they are afearde and doe hide themſelues. Moreouer, when they that miſlike of offences doe ſee that wee doe with too much len
                     ••
                  ie

and too ſoftly proceede to correction, they imagine ſome ſecrete winking thereat, and ſo are offended at the Magiſtrate: by reaſon where of they conclude that a moderate ſeueritie muſt bee added to the remedies, or els neuer to hope for much profite.
               This aduice vppon better examination doe I finde to bee very The confirmation hereof. well founded, and by applying it to ſome matters propounded may better appeare, as the Surgions doe applye their oyntments vnto wounds, to the end by their effects to gather the more knowledge of their vertues. But if any ſeeke to accuſe mee of taking delight in taxing of diuers perſons, I will aunſwer that if we endeuour to wipe away the blemiſhes happened in any degree, wee muſt firſt ſhewe them. Neither will I bring for example hereof any other then thoſe of the ſame bodie whereof I am a member, namely the Nobilitie and men of warre. Let vs now therefore looke vpon the miſdemeanours of the latter ſorte againſt the people in the tyme of peace when they goe to their muſters or returne home againe, either when they chaunge garriſon: There ſhall we ſee that notwithſtanding themſelues haue their pay, yet for the moſt parte they will pay nothing, yea and muſt be ſet at the twentie ſouſe meſſe, as we tearme it, and at their departure their hoaſt muſt ſhewe them courteſie. This oppreſſion may peraduenture ſeeme to bee but ſmall, but I thinke it amounteth to aboue 1200000. Franckes by the yeere. Neither may it be remedied by verball perſwaſions, or publique prohibitions, but rather with armed iuſtice muſt ſome of them bee ſeuerely corrected to the ende to terrefie the reſt. Or who doubteth but there be ſome Capteynes of the Infanterie, who hauing pay for one hundred men doe ſcarce retaine thirtie in their 
                     •
                  andes, and yet doe ſcorne the others that haue no ſkill in turning the Staffe, calling them doults▪ Theſe exceſſiue theeueries, which redound to the great hinderance of the Kings ſeruice, can no way be reformed but by exemplary puniſhments. At the leaſt if they yet robbed Gentleman like, it were ſomewhat tollerable, conſidering the courſe of the tyme: but to proceede thus farre is but clowniſh theft. The Souldier may peraduenture ſay: They vſe our ſeruice, but of money we heare no newes: In this caſe being depriued of the benefite of their pay, they are to bee exempt from the rigour of lawe, ſo that they liue with diſcretion: But when vnder colour of non payment they ſhall exceede to all violent and infamous actions, they are not to bee excuſed, as not hauing any further priuiledge but to liue moderatly

vpō the people as is aforeſaid. There are likewiſe of the Nobilitie who either for their priuate quarels, either to the end co encroach the ſpoyle of ſome fat benefite, doe without reaſon beare Armes, whereof doth often tymes enſue many murders, neither is there any Prouince in the Realme free from this abuſe: Then if you ſende ſome inferiour Sergeant at the mace to forbid them, neuer was pilferer better ſwinged then he ſhall bée: To ſend likewiſe the gouernors letter, that is as could, becauſe in theſe daies the gouernors in liewe of commaunding, doe pray, and this haue our diſſentions brought to paſſe. What is then to bee done in the reſtraynt of theſe pettie warres, which followed in the countrie, do kindle againe hatred and breede partakings? For ſooth euen truſſe vp fiue or ſixe of theſe warriers, ſo to make fiue or ſixe hundred wiſe. To be briefe, ſith by the continuation of eiuill warres, impudencie, mallice, and diſobedience are ſo ſore encreaſed, we muſt not now thinke with proclamations and decrees to ſuppreſſe them, vnleſſe thoſe alſo to whom it doth appertaine doe take the rodde in hand therewith to miniſter waight to their wordes. And although in this reformation, conſidering things in generall, we are to proceede with much moderation for feare of Commotions or trouble, yet if wée perticulerly looke into many vitious qualities which hinder the reeſtabliſhment of order, I think it not amiſſe to mixe ſome ſower with the ſweete.
               Thus may wee iudge which remedie may bee moſt profitable, whether this or the more moderate: For my parte I ſuppoſe that Concluſion. in ſome matters the mixed were neceſſarie, although in other ſome the moderate: as being aſſured that there will be leſſe difficultie in making this difference then in ſetting the matter in hande. But wee driue of ſoo long, for our miſchiefes are growne to that paſſe, that wee are no lenger to conſult how to cure them, but rather to wonder that we haue not alreadie done it.
            
            
               
               The fifth Diſcourſe.
               
                  That inſtruction and good bringing vp are neceſſarie for all young gentlemen.
               
               
                  SUch as haue noted the ſingularities of The originall of the difference that appe
                        •
                     reth betwee
                        •
                     e the auntient Nobilitie and that of our daies. 
                  France, among the reſt haue ſet downe that parte of the Nobilitie giuen to iuſtice and valiauncie, wherewith it hath alwaies bene adorned, not to bee the leaſt, wherein they haue had reaſon. For if wée conſider the tymes paſt wee ſhal by the apparant effects which from age to age haue appeared, perceiue that out of this great ſtocke haue procéeded ſuch excellent men as haue greatly profited and ſtoode their Countrie in ſteade. But as all that hath bene is ſubiect to varietie and chaunge, ſo hath it fallen out that the moſt parte of thoſe that haue ſucceeded in their aunceſtors goodes, haue not neuertheleſſe inherited their vertue: but rather being halfe buryed in common corruption, are degenerate and gone aſtraye from the auncient maners, whereby is greatly deminiſhed the commendation and good reputation in olde tyme attributed, as well in generall as perticuler, to thoſe that beare ſo fayre a title.
               Now, if wee ſhall ſeeke the cauſes that haue engendred ſo many imperfections in this vniuerſall bodie, wee ſhall finde that the moſt notable hath bene their ſmall care to ſee their young Children well inſtructed in honeſt diſcipline, though withall I ſuppoſe that ſome haue likewiſe erred in weening to atteyne thereto, whereof it hath enſued that the beginning being bad, that which hath bene added hath bene of the ſame.
               If the Parents for their excuſe doe alleadge that therein they haue followed the cuſtome: that will not iuſtifie them, conſidering that in ſo neceſſarie occaſions they ought to bée directed by the inſtructions of the wiſe, who did ſo greatly accompt of this, that to the ende the poſteritie ſhould remember it, they haue treated very

largely thereof in the moſt parte of their bookes that they haue left vs. I knowe well enough that naturally euery man hath a certaine inward motion to keepe and exalt that which he hath begotten, but when this affection is 
                     〈…〉
                  lpen and guided by learning, it may better atteyne to the deſired purpoſe. And therfore it is not amiſſe briefly to heare the opinions of the auncient Philoſophers and Lawgiuers, to the end this iudgement being confirmed, wee may afterward be the better diſpoſed to doe that which ſhall be requiſite.
               All the moſt renowmed Philoſophers as Licurgus, Socrates, 
                  Why the good Politickes did carefully commend the good bringing vp of children. 
                  Plato, Ariſtotle, Xenophon and P
                        •
                     utarke doe affirme that the negligence in the well inſtructing of youth doth corrupt Common welths, alſo that the vices which in youth are rooted in them can hardly be corrected. Whereas contrariwiſe when vertue doth in tyme take place, it afterward fructifieth wonderfully. They alſo not only blame the fathers that through couetouſneſſe, ſloth or ignorance do deny their children that good bringing vp that they owe them, but likewiſe haue an euill opinion of thoſe Commonwelths that want order and diſcipline for the inſtruction of youth. Yea and they further alleadge that the beſt natures wanting good bringing vp, doe growe very pernitious, likewiſe that they cannot in age be crowned with honor, if in youth they neuer learned to walke in the path of vertue. To bee briefe, they all are of opinion that as Plants and Trees for want of huſbandrie and proyning do grow wilde, ſo youth if it bee not poliſhed by good cuſtomes doe waxe rude and vitious. This in briefe is one ſmall morſell of the inſtructions by them left in generall as well to the Parents as Magiſtrates: to exhort and ſtirre them vp diligently to ſee youth brought vp and inſtructed in all honeſt diſcipline. But what neede we ſeeke ſo great proofes and confirmation hereof ſith no man calleth it in doubt? Rather ought wee to declare how wee ſhould proceede in this bringing vp, to cauſe it to fructifie in the beautifull actions of vertue. Herein likewiſe it is requiſite to helpe our ſelues with the doctrine of the ſame Philoſophers, who haue ſo well diſcourſed vpon euery thing that belongeth to all partes of ciuill life that (the heauenly precepts onely excepted) it is vnpoſſible to deuiſe any better direction. I will therefore here ſet downe ſome ſayings out of Plutarke to this purpoſe. There is nothing, ſaith he, In his treatiſe of the bringing vp of children. 
                  that bringeth ſo ſoone to vertue and maketh a man happie, as good instructions, in respect whereof all other goodes whatſoeuer are but

ſmall. Nobilitie is a goodly matter: but it is but a benefite of our auncestors. Ritehes are moſt precious, but they conſiſt in the power of fortune: Glorie is reuerent, but vncertaine and chaungeable: Health is pretious: but ſubiect to chaunge. Contrariwiſe, knowledge is the onely deuine and immortall qualitie in vs. For there are in mans nature two principall partes, vnderstanding and ſpeech, whereof vnderſtanding is as it were the maister that commaundeth, and ſpeech the ſeruant that obeyeth, but this vnderstanding is neuer habandoned to fortune. It cannot bee taken away by ſ
                        •
                     launder, corrupted by ſickneſſe, nor wasted by age, becauſe it only waxeth young in age. Warre which as a vyolent ſtreame taketh away and ſcattereth all things, can not carie away knowledge. Alſo the aunſwer that Stilpon the Megarian made when Demetrius hauing taken the towne of Megara, demaunded whether he had loſt any thing of his: ſaying, No, for warre cannot take away vertue, deſerueth remembraunce. Hereby may wee knowe the ineſtimable benefite that proceedeth of good bringing vp, which although it bee moſt neceſſarie, yet are there other thinges, that as ſaith the ſame Author, muſt concurre therewith to make a young man perfect in vertue. Now he nameth three, Nature, Reaſon and Vſe. By Nature, he meaneth inclination: by Reaſon, doctrine of precepts: and by Vſe, exerciſe. The beginning, ſayth he, doth come to vs by nature: the encreaſe, by the precepts of reaſon: and the accompliſhment, by vſe and exerciſe: And the tyme of perfection, by all there conioyned. If there bee defect in any of theſe three partes, nature muſt bee of force therein defectiue and deminiſhed. For Nature without doctrine and nurture is blinde, Doctrine without nature is defectiue, and Uſe without the two former is vnperfect. This inſtruction ought well to bee noted, as conteyning the principall matters that Parentes are to conſider in the faſhioning and diſpoſing of their Children to vertue. And although they can not bee alwaies founde ſo well together as a man would wiſh, yet ſhould not that diſcourage them from proceeding to approach to the beſt and eſchue the worſt.
               Some Parents there are whoſe Children they finde to bee of Of the faults that parents commit. ſo lumpiſh and heauie a nature, that they thinke it but loſt labour to goe about to teach them the things that they preſume they can neuer learne. But herein doe they erre, for vpon thoſe that want the power of nature is moſt arte and labour to be employed, there with to ſupplye the firſt defectes: ſo ſometymes in tyme the one

amendeth by the other. Experience daylie teacheth vs that when a Horſekeeper is diſpoſed to take paines, he doth in one yeere ſo forme and teach, euen a great carte Horſe, that he maketh him ſhewe ſome actiuitie and become profitable in certaine péeces of ſeruice: Is there leſſe hope then to bee conceiued of a young childe? Who although he haue ſome naturall imperfections (wee meane not ſuch as may hinder the principall actions of either the minde or bodie) yet with continuall exerciſe may bee brought into frame to learne ſufficient ciuilitie to keepe himſelfe from diſhonoring his Parentes. Likewiſe in doctrine and nurture I will here note another error that often happeneth and Plutarke reproueth: There are now, ſayth he, ſome Parents, who through want of experience doe commit their children to ſuch maisters as falſely profeſſe 
                  In the ſame treatiſe. 
                  themſelues to bee that which they are not: ſometymes alſo they knowe the inſufficiencie of ſuch maisters and yet will put them in truſt, therein imitating the ſicke man, who refuſing the ſkilfull Phiſition repoſeth himſelfe vpon ſuch a one as by ignorance killeth him. Others there are alſo who through couetouſneſſe for ſparing a little wages, doe chooſe ſimple maisters, therein ſeeking a good penyworth of ignorance. Uppon which ſaying, Ariſtippus on a tyme ieſted with ſuch a father: For when this father aſked him what hee would take to teach and inſtruct his ſonne: he aunſwered, a hundred Crownes: A hundred Crownes, quoth the father, O Hercules
                        •
                     ! that is much, Why! I can buy a good ſlaue for a hundred Crownes. True ſayd Ariſtippus, and ſo thou maieſt haue two ſlaues: Thy ſonne and him whome thou haſt bought. Truely that father is very vnwiſe, that trauaileth continually to gather much goodes, and yet will denye a ſmall parte thereof for the inſtructing of thoſe that muſt one day poſſeſſe them. But what commeth of this nigardlineſſe? After his death they prodigally waſt that, which with ſo greate labour hee hath gathered together: or els become extreame couetous for lacke of good teaching how to vſe ritches. But thoſe men are to bée moaned, who hauing many Children and being poore cannot ſatiſfie their deſire to haue them well inſtructed, but are forced to put them ſome here and ſome there into other mens handes, where they may bee in daunger of euill example: Albeit thereof they are to haue an eſpeciall care, that they miſtake not: but of that wée will ſpeake more at large in an other place.
               Youth likewiſe doe faile in that which concerneth the vſe and Of Childrens faultes.
                  
exerciſe of the good things that they haue begunne to learne: for when they ſhould put them in practiſe, to the ende to ſettle a good foundation in them, they growe careleſſe, or ſuffer themſelues to bée led away by the force of vitious affections, which ſtriue to ſuppreſſe in them the rudiments of doctrine and vertue. Then therefore is the tyme that Parents ſhould eſpecially beware of diſcontinuance from that which cannot bée formed in them without continuance. A man when he hath planted a tree, is very carefull to proyne and looke to it vntill it hath brought foorth fruite, and then is he ſatiſfied in that he ſeeth it is not barren, neither his labour loſt.
               The like care is to bee had of young Children; for to the ende to bée aſſured that they haue profited, wée muſt firſt ſee moſt euident teſtimonies, and then is the care the leſſe. Oh how happie are the Children whoſe fathers, euen from the cradle, are ſo fauourable as neuer to ceaſe their inſtructions vntill the yéeres of diſcretion: to the ende their mindes and handes haue no leſſe perfection then their bodies growth, force and health? For ſith the conduct of their life is afterward to bée grounded vppon themſelues, it is very requiſite to procure that the foundation bée good. Thus much in generall briefly what is, after the doctrine of Plutarke, to be obſerued in the inſtruction of youth.
               Now muſt wee ſee the maner how the French gentrie doe behaue Application of the aforeſayd to the French Nobility, and firſt to careleſſe ignorance and couetous parēts. themſelues in the nurturing thereof, ſo to knowe wherein they doe ill and wherein well. Then to ſhewe what may be added, for the eſtabliſhing of a better order then any that yet is vſed in ſo neceſſarie a matter. But before wee ſpeake of thoſe that herein doe ſhewe their good affection to their Children, I muſt ſay ſomewhat of the others that doe but little or not at all diſcharge their dueties therein. Truely thoſe bee ſuch people as would bee ſent to ſchoole among beaſtes, to the ende by their example to learne to haue more care of that which themſelues haue engendered: for when they ſhall ſee with how vehement loue the brute beaſtes doe kéepe and nouriſh their young ones, they muſt bée very ſenceleſſe if they bée nothing mooued therewith. Many fathers there are that thinke the greateſt bondes wherein their Children bee eſpecially bound vnto them, doe conſiſt in that they haue begotten and fedde them. Neither is it to bée denyed but that the ſame bee very great, neuertheleſſe one more there is which muſt not bée forgotten, and is no leſſe to bée confeſſed, namely, inſtruction in pietie

and vertue. For of this benefite is man onely participate, where all other benefites are common alſo to beaſtes. Man is borne to a better ende then to liue, that is, to liue well: and that muſt he bee taught to doe, ſith he hath reaſon to comprehende it. And therein alſo doth fatherly loue manifeſt it ſelfe, and childlike duetie encreaſe. But many fathers doe fayle herein through ignoraunce, contenting themſelues with kéeping their Children at home, clothing them and giuing them their fill of meate and drinke, as if they were to care for their bodies onely: And the cauſe of this retchleſneſſe proceedeth of their owne ill bringing vp in their youth. Others there are whoſe heartes are poſſeſſed with ſuch extreame auarice, that they are ſo farre from being willing to ſpende ſome one crowne vpon the teaching of their children, that they euen thinke to haue done much for them, if they giue them foode: therein ſhewing themſelues vnworthie of iſſue.
               The Lacedemonians had a law, whereby thoſe Children were diſcharged from relieuing ſuch Parentes in their age, as were careleſſe in ſeeing them inſtructed in their youth: which they ordeyned to the ende to make them more readie to fulfill the precepts of nature, as being aſſured that he which denyeth his childe inſtruction and correction, leaueth him to bee a pray to vice which afterward draweth him to deſtruction.
               Other fathers there are ſo fondly minded as to weene that there commeth but ſmall profite of putting their Children to Schoole, thinking it enough for them to bee able to write and reade a little. One ſhall bee ſo great a Huntſeman, that all his delight ſhall bee in Houndes and Forreſtes. An other, a quareller with his neighbours, and rough to his ſubiects: One that ſhall allowe of no other kinde of life, but to bee luſtie in his houſe: An other altogether giuen to ſuites and lawe, as thinking nothing more conuenient for him then to encreaſe his ſtate with ſubtelties and barreting guiles. To bee briefe, euery one louing his profeſſion would that his children ſhould take the ſame courſe, whereby to bee like to himſelfe, as if he were aſhamed that they ſhould paſſe him in the knowledge of vertue. Thus doe the falſe ſhewes of pleaſure, profite, and honor abuſe men, and binde and reſtrayne them to the ſame obiect whereto euill cuſtome hath made them moſt to encline.
               Now let vs ſpeake ſomewhat of thoſe whoſe willes are good to

haue their children taught, and thereto doe employe themſelues, and yet cannot alwaies atteyne to their deſired purpoſe. Of thoſe ſome deceiue themſelues, others are abuſed by the degenerating of cuſtomes. Concerning the firſt, they are eaſely ſatiſfied with a Of the parents that are well affected to the inſtitution of their children. fewe outward beautifull demonſtrations that they happe to ſee in their children, and neuer ſeeke further but thereby to iudge that they haue well profited, which they haue not done, in that their inward man, that ſhould be eſpecially looked vnto, is not well ordered.
               The ſeconde imagining that good examples ſhould alwaies ſhine in Princes Courtes, forreine Countries, or warres, do very inconſideratly caſt their young ſeede into thoſe fieldes which they thinke to bee fruitfull. But experience teacheth them that many tymes reporte is a lyer, and many graines are quite loſt. Howbeit, the better to lay open this matter, we are to vnderſtand that thoſe French Gentlemen that loue vertue and honour, ſo ſoone as their children bee of age able to trauaile abroade, doe ordinarily ſende them foorth to learne that which at home they cannot. And their maner is either to make them Pages to Princes and Lordes: either to put them among the Princes footmen, either to ſende them into Italie or Germanie, either els to commit them to the Uniuerſities: all which are fit meanes to inſtruct them in ciuilitie, warfare, learning, or knowledge of 
                     •
                  ongues, whereby men climbe to honour, ritches and vertue. And ſith there are no other ordinarie waies but thoſe, men are conſtrayned to take them; yea and they are to be commended, who led by a good deſire doe ſo trayne vp their Children: But as in all places the corruption of maners is greate, ſo without eſpeciall good heede wee finde that thinking to gather Honey, they bring home nothing but Gall.
               Firſt for thoſe that become Pages. It may be ſayd that going Of Pages. into diuers Courtes they ſee many gay things, as Tryumphes, Feaſtes, Combats, &c. They learne to apparell themſelues hand▪ ſomely: to ſpeake according to the diuers qualities of perſons: and to order their geſtures. They doe moreouer ſee many honeſt exerciſes: but it is to bée doubled that they doe not ſo well beare away thoſe things, as they priu
                     •
                   in their mindes other bad faſhions which abound in the ſayd Courtes, whereto alſo their age is enclined. For they go
                     〈…〉
                  e diſſolute in ſpéeches, incontinent in deedes, blaſphemers of GOD, and aboue all, ſcorners and iniurious,

and finally moſt expert in lying and working a thouſand deceipts. But ſome will ſay that their Maiſters and their Eſquires haue an eye to them, yea but too faintly. And when the ſayd Pages are growne a little craftie ſo as they can couer their mallice, and with all that they haue atteyned ſome ſmall derteritie in any other matter, their hidden vices will not appeare vntill the ſnme haue taken ſure roote. But if any Lords haue a more watchfull eye to correct, it is much if there be two of the ſixe: ſo farre are we growne to neglect the true care that wee ought to haue of youth. The onely remedie therefore to bee vſed herein is, firſt that parents ſuffer not themſelues to be ſo bliuded with a vaine opinion of greatneſſe that they couer rather to place their children in the ſeruice of a Prince, where is but ſmall good rule, then in the houſe of a Lord or Gentlemen that will haue a rare to inſtruct them in all honeſtie. Secondly, that if they may, they ſometymes looke to them, to the ende to iudge of their corruption or amendement, and according as they fiude to take them home, or leaue them ſtill abroade. And thirdly, not to ſuffer them to bée Pages aboue fower or fiue yéeres, then to kéepe them at home a while, ſo to make them forget whatſoeuer had they ſhall haue learned, and to confirme them in vertuous behauour, before they ſettle thē in any vocation wherein to continue.
               Many there that are ſent to the regiments of footemen, and they goe thether at fiftéene, ſixtéene, or ſeuentéene yeres of age. In Of Apprentizes in armes. tyme paſt being a little elder they were made archers in the bandes of Ordinaunce, and then did all thoſe companies conſiſt of Gentrie onely, and the Capteynes had a care to kéepe them in good order. As alſo many went into the bands of footment of Piedmont, who had moſt excellent orders. Contrariwiſe, now that diſcipline is reuerſed euen among the footemenl it is perillous for the inſtruction of youth. For hauing for the moſt part none but vnthriftes to their maiſters, euill examples doe in tyme drawe them into diſorder, and in liew of faſhioning them bring them quite out of faſhion. And to what purpoſe is it to learne to diſcharge a Péece, to knows what warding, ſentin
                     •
                  ll, or ſkirmiſh doe meane, and to ſhewe the braue countenaunce of a So
                     〈…〉
                  ier, if in counterchaunge herof they habandon themſelues to Sundrie 
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  es: among which, blaſpheming of God, quarelling with friends, playing away all euen to the ſhert, filthie luſt after Harlots, and for the fulfilling of all diſorder, an vnbridled libertie to 
                     •
                  eate, robbe and deuoure the people without compaſſion, doe beare the greateſt ſway. Theſe abuſes doe the

moſt part of our footmen commit, except it bee peraduenture ſome olde regiment and auncient garriſon that liue in better diſcipline. The beſt remedies therefore for parents in this neceſſarie euill, is, not to ſende their children alone, neither to ſuffer to enroule them ſelues in the firſt companie that they liſt to chooſe, but to hearken whether any of their neighbours will likewiſe ſend theirs, and ſo to ioyne thrée or fower of them together as it were ſworne companions, with prohibition, the one not to leaue the other. For being ſo together, ſhame will reſtrayne them from euill, and withall they ſhall ſtill ſuccour one another in their neceſſities, if beſides their fathers be acquainted with any honorable Capteyne, they ſhould direct them to him, with earneſt requeſt to haue a care to rep
                     〈…〉
                  ue them when they doe amiſſe.
               Some there are lik
                     •
                  wiſe that take vpon them to trauayle into Of ſuch as trauaile into ſorraine coūtries. forreine countries, vpon a certeyne conceiued opinion that others drugges are better then thoſe of their owne land: Others alſo doe allowe thereof in reſpect of the learning of common languages, ſeruing to communication with ſtraungers. Such as trauaile into Germanie where the cuſtomes and behauiours doe farre differ from ours, at their returne are found to be dull and rude, ſo that for the refyning of them againe their parents muſt ſend them into other places, wherof ariſeth double labour, double tyme and double charges. And it doth oftentymes come to paſſe, that ſome hauing bene brought vp in the groſſe maners of Germanie, and then returning to finde the vnbridled libertie of France; doe ſo vnconſideratly flye vpon it that they ſtray out of the right courſe. And as for the voyadges into Italie, there be more that vndertake them, eſpecially to bee inſtructed in many honeſt exerciſes which doe there abound. But among thoſe Roſes they méete with many Thornes, becauſe that a thouſand baytes of luſt being as it were ſowne in the goodlieſt townes, youth which is deſirous of noueltie and fierie in affection cannot be kept from going to taſte, yea euen to glut it ſelfe with theſe ſweete poyſons, and ſo by continuance doe become moſt indurate therein. Thus is the habitation of Italie to thoſe that applye themſelues to goodneſſe more profitable, and to thoſe that applye themſelues to lewdneſſe hurtfull and worſe then that of Germanie. But what counſell is to be giuen or remedie to be prouided againſt theſe inconueniences? The fitteſt is to ſende the younger ſorte, whoſe maners are not yet formed, into Germanie where ſimplicitie doth take moſt place, and let the others that are

alreadie any whit grounded in godlineſſe or loue of honeſtie, goe into Italie, notwithſtanding the prouerbe: That neuer good horſe nor bad man amended by going to Rome. This likewiſe muſt Parents yet note, that they keepe them not there aboue two yéeres, ſo to be the more aſſured that forreine wickedneſſe take not ſo déepe roote but that it may eaſely be plucked vp againe.
               Now doth it reſt that I ſpeake of ſtudie in famous Uniuerſities, Of Students in Vniuerſities. whether many Gentlemen doe ſend their Children to bee inſtructed in learning▪ which alſo they the rather doe becauſe the life that they there leade is ſomewhat better ordered then in the aforename
                     〈…〉
                   places, where much vanitie is learned as well as ciuilitie. They perſwade themſelues, and not without reaſon, that the liberall Sciences are a great ornament to Nobilitie, and maketh it more worthie to adminiſter all publique functions: which is the cauſe that they ſeeke to haue them at the firſt watered with ſo good liquour. Howbeit this notwithſtanding, among many that there ſpend their youth, fewe doe reape any great profite: which procéedeth of that that the fathers doe take them away ſo ſoone, euen at the tyme that they begin with iudgement and diſcourſe to attaine to the depth and conſideration of the excellencie of Sciences. And in my opinion, the chiefe cauſe that leadeth Parents ſo to doe, is for that they ſee that Eccleſiaſticall promotions are not giuen to the learned, but to thoſe that can beſt court the Cardinals and Biſhops, or the Kings fauourites: and the offices of Iuſtice in liewe of being conferred to the beſt deſeruer, are ſould to him that hath moſt money. This conſidered, and likewiſe perceiuing that the greateſt honors are gotten with the ſword, they will haue their children betymes to accuſtome themſelues to Armes. And peraduenture they are not herein altogether inexcuſable. One thing more there is that bringeth them out of taſte with keeping them long to ſtudie. That is, that when they come to conſider the countenances and ſimple and vnpoliſhed faſhions of Schollers in reſpect of the ciuilities, courteſies and dexterities of thoſe young Gentlemen that haue made but two iourneys to the Court, they thinke that their children ſhall neuer come tyme enough: who alſo for their partes neede no great force to fetch them from the Colledge: becauſe the inclination to libertie, together with ſo many fayre bragges, whereat they leuell a farre of, which alſo the world preſenteth to their viewe, maketh thē but too deſirous to get foorth.
               I will not ſpeake of the delayes made in Colledges in the teaching
               
                  
of children, for it is wel inough knowen, that there is no good thing but hath ſome bad mixed withall. Herein cannot the parents better prouide, than with themſelues wel to aduiſe of what profeſſion they will haue their children to be, to the end to accomodate their ſtudies to the ſame vocation: as beeing aſſured that hee that Of thoſe that bring vp their children at home and of others that are forced to put them forth. is vowed to the warre néede not to procéede ſo farre in ſtudie of the ſciences, as thoſe that thereby ſéeke to growe and inrich themſelues. They muſt alſo haue a care that they put their children to learned tutors and well conditioned, leaſt in lieu of knowledge they ſhould reape ignorance, and corruption in ſtead of temperance.
               Other Gentlemen there be, who ſéeing diſorders euery where, had rather kéep their children at home, and there to ſpare for no ſtipends vnto ſufficient maiſters, than to ſend them forth. This is a good way for thoſe that be very rich, who alſo haue opportunitie to giue them companions of their owne age, with whom they profite better than being alone. But ſo cannot the poore that haue inough to do to cloth and feede theirs, whom alſo neceſſitie, as is aforeſaid, forceth to make them pages where they may: as wel to haue them faſhioned, as to eaſe their owne charges. It is ſufficiently knowen that there be many valiant Gentlemen of 7. or 800. Frankes rent, that haue foure or fiue children apeece ready growen, ſitting about their hearths, what can they do with them but intreat their friends that are better able than themſelues to giue them their finding and inſtruction, which is the moſt commodious way for them that they can chooſe: whereof doth inſue a great bond both of the Father and the child to him that ſheweth thē this curteſie, as alſo a great loue of him toward them, in that he findeth himſelfe to be thought worthie the gouernment of others. The Lords that inhabite each prouince of this Realme, doe owe that liberall honeſtie to their poore neighbours: for if they be vertuous, can they anie where better ſow ſo good ſéede than in their neighbors lands? & it may ſo light as it ſhall yéeld fruit ten folde. Some ſuch haue ben a mans page as afterward hath ſaued the life of him, yt brought him vp. And although ſome frée heart can neuer be wearie of imploying it ſelfe in ſuch actions as purchaſe ſo ſure bondes: yet muſt it proceede according as abilie may affoord, ſo to auoide ſuch inconueniences as we haue ſometime ſéene in the houſes of ſundry thoſe Princes & Lords that haue entertained euery page yt haue ben offered them. Wherof the nūber was ſo exceſſiue, that it extinguiſhed all care, not onely of inſtructing, but alſo of clothing them, ſo as ſomtime you might finde

ſome of thē all tattred, playing at ſcales with the ſtable boies. Theſe are briefly the moſt ordinarie formes of proceeding in the inſtruction of yong gentlemen heretofore practiſed, wherin are declared the errours therein committed, the commodities & diſcommodities thereof ariſing, and the remedies that may be vſed.
               Now muſt we draw forth ſome publike diſcipline for the afore named, whereby they may be inſtructed in good manners & honeſt exerciſes Of the publick diſcipline of young Gentlemen. with moſt commoditie, leaſt perill & greateſt fruit. The auncient lawgiuers that haue preſcribed lawes to all ſorts of common wealths, do will that children be taught in publike places, touching withall euery thing that is neceſſarie for them to learne, whereby to become vertuous and good citizens. Ariſtotle in his Politiks treateth therof at large, as alſo doth Plutarke in his ſmall works. They ſay that man conſiſting both of bodie and ſoule, muſt alſo be inſtructed & exerciſed in that which belongeth to thē both. For that neglected, the ſoule ſtūbleth in ignorance which is the mother of many vices, and by idleneſſe diſeaſes increaſe, and the body waxeth delicate and tender. Among the auncient nations in old time none were ſo curious in the well nurturing of their youth as the Lacedemonians, & ſo long as they obſerued their cuſtomes, they had infinite vertuous perſons, yea, their women & children became famous. The like affection ought to be among the kings that raigne in theſe daies, eſpecially toward their nobilitie: frō whence do proceed their Princes, mightie Captains, gouernors, and chiefe officers, Embaſſadors and inferior Captains, whoſe ſeruice they vſe in defence of their crowns. For in caſe they deſire to reape worthie ſeruice of all theſe whē they be men, they muſt firſt haue ſome care of thē when they be children: becauſe ye Prince being ye cōmon father of his ſubiects, ought to procure that they be good. Whereof I do conclude that to the end to ſee good fruit proceed of the well nurturing of the Gentrie, the parents diligence only doth not ſuffice, but that it is alſo requiſite that publike orders do concur therewith, to the end that the one mixed with the other a more proſperous iſſue maye inſue. In olde time our kings founded many goodly colleges, to the end al their ſubiects indifferētly might be inſtructed as wel in diuine as humane learning. As alſo we may ſay that in olde time Princes houſes were ſchooles, wherein yong gentlemen were trained vp in ciuilitie & good maners: when like wiſe the ordinances of the men of war did in parte ſerue to inſtruct them in martial feats. But now inaſmuch as in thoſe places they find not ſo exquiſite nurture as might be wiſhed for, it were expedient

to proceed to ye remedy propoūded: yt is, yt it might pleaſe his maieſty in ſūdry parts of ye realm to eſtabliſh certain places dedicated to ſuch inſtructiōs, which beſides the ordinary fruit, might alſo yeld this cōmodity, yt parēts ſhould not be driuē wt ſo great expenſes, and vncertain ſucceſſe to ſend their children ſo far away, as hauing euē at their gates, as it were, moſt excellēt ſchooles of al good exerciſes: for there is neuer a yere but there go 3. or 400. yong Gentlemen out of France, ye moſt of good houſes, into forein countries to ſée & learne, which proceedeth of valiāt minds with extreme deſire of knowledge. But euery thing wel waied, ye ſaid viages do breed more incōueniēce than profit: For they cary ye coine out of ye realme, & return fraught with vices: beſides that, of all yt go the one halfe do neuer returne, but are taken away either by ſickneſſe or other caſualties.
               It wer inough in my opiniō, to ſēd their childrē at ye age of 15. yeres to places ſo ordained, becauſe thē they begin to grow méet for ye exerciſes of ye bodie yt require ſtrēgth, & that in the meane time vntil they come to that age, their fathers cauſe them to be taught either in their own houſes or at the vniuerſities. Theſe places whereof I meane to ſpeak, might be named Academies, wherof I wold in euery head city of this realm appoint one, were it not yt we are not yet diſpoſed to do too much good at once: & therfore to begin withal, I would wiſh that 4. might be erected in the 4. quarters of the realm: which would moſt conueniently be at Paris, Bourdeaux, Lyons, & Angiers, whether al ye other prouinces might haue recourſe. Or it were not amiſſe to eſtabliſh thē in 4. of the kings houſes wherto the king doth but ſeldome repaire, namely, at Fontain beleau. The caſtle of Moulins. Pleſſis of Tours, & at the caſtle of Congnac: for ye lodgings are large & worthy roial works. In thē might be taught many kinds of exerciſes as wel for the bodie as the mind. For the body, to learne to backe a horſe, to run at the Quintain ſomtime armed, & ſomtime vnarmed, to handle their wepōs, to vault, & leap, wherto might alſo be added ſwimming & wraſtling, for al theſe make a man ſtrong & 
                     〈…〉
                  mble: Some Catholikes there are that would haue yong Gentlemen alſo to dance galiards amōg thēſelues only, notwithſtāding dancing be but vain, ſo to learn to form the actions & to haue ye bolder grace abroad. Theſe alſo might be the exerciſes of the mind, which are no leſſe neceſſary than the reſt. To haue in our own language, lectures out of the auncient writers yt intreat of moral vertues, policy, & war. They might alſo be inſtructed in ye Mathematiks, Geography, fortificatiō, & ſome moſt vſual languages. And this is profitable for a gentleman, I meane to know ſo much as he can make vſe of. Furthermore, becauſe mās life

conſiſteth as well of trauaile as of reſt, it is méete yt his idle time be emploied in ſome honeſt occupations, to ſettle & content his mind, leaſt it wander into bad cogitations and reſolutions. Which moued Ariſtotle to wiſh young men to learn muſick: ſo as there ſhould alſo be maſters appointed to that end: likewiſe to play vppon inſtruments, or to practiſe the penſill. And for the teaching of all theſe Of maiſters and Rectors. things, I thinke 8. or 10. maſters to ſuffice, who had néed to haue good ſtipends according to the ſeuerall qualities of the perſons. For euery one knoweth yt he that can teach to manage a horſe deſerueth more than a Painter. Likewiſe inaſmuch as it is requiſite to haue good orders in euery ſocietie, eſpecially in a houſe wher ſo many perſons muſt meet, to the end that obedience & ciuill honeſtie may the better be obſerued, it were good alſo to chooſe for thoſe foure places, as many vertuous Gentlemen to be ſuperintendents of the ſaid Academies, to whom as well the maſters as ſchollers ſhould yeld al reuerence, who alſo ſhould ſée to the ordering of all things. Euerie of them to haue 2000. frankes maintenance, to the end to kéep reſidence vpon the place. Neither ſhould their office continue aboue 3. or 4. yeres, which expired, to make choice of new. For if the youth yt might haue recourſe thether ſhould not be ſo brideled, they woulde hardly beare thēſelues modeſtly, conſidering the libertie that already they begin to take. The authoritie alſo of ye abouenamed might extend, ſéeing any lewd, & as it were vncurable ſchqller, to banniſh Expences. him the Academie, & to driue him thence. The charges for the maintenance of euery Academie wold not amount to aboue 3000 crownes, & ſo the whole foure to 12000. by yere, which were but a ſmall matter in reſpect of the great fruit yt would ariſe of the ſame.
               But ſome good common wealths man will ſaie, that it were better to deuiſe how to diſcharge the king of his debts than to put him in Confutation of a common obiection. new charges. To whom I anſwere, that thus he ſhould pay one of the greateſt debts that he oweth, which is to adorne his nobilitie wt vertue. Beſides that, who ſo liſt to looke well ſhall ſée an infinit nū
                  ber of yéerely expenſes much worſe beſtowed. Howbeit, to the end not to burthē the realme, which is alredie but ouercharged, the redieſt way to do this, were to take the firſt benefices that ſhall fal wt
                  out charge of ſoule, & be in his Maieſties gift, & out of them to appoint paiment. For as wel they be giuē to ſuch as ſpēd ye reuenues in prophane or rather ſo filthie vſes, as it is a ſhame to ſay. The clergy do ordinarily cōplaine yt the noble men catch at ſpiritual promotions, which then they would not do, becauſe yt being inſtructed

and at their charges, they would not ſéeke to trouble publike order For thoſe that embolden themſelues to ſuch things, do it for want of good nurture. Afterward when the affaires of of France might The execution and fruit of this order. be brought into better order, the king might diſcharge the clergie of this bond.
               Now doth the difficultie reſt in the finding of ſo many maſters, For vnleſſe it bee at Paris the other townes are in a manner vtterly vnprouided. At the firſt peraduenture we muſt fetch ſome out of Italy, eſpecially ſuch as can teach to manage a horſe, to vſe weapons, or to vault, although I ſuppoſe that among the Prouinces there be many poore gentlemen ſufficient for this purpoſe. But before theſe Academies ſhal haue ſtood thrée yeres in vſe, themſelues will haue framed more maiſters than wee ſhall néede. For the Frenchman is readie to learne artes and ſciences, eſpeciallie if hee ſée them in account, and that thoſe that haue ſkill bee maintained. Furthermore, notwithſtanding the maſters that ſhould teach, haue their ſtipends out of the common purſe, yet ſhould they not bée debarred from taking by permiſſion ſome honeſt rewards of their diſciples, to the ende to make them the more diligent to teach them well. As alſo the ſuperintendent might to his beſt auaile boorde ſome young Gentlemen, which would redound to their benefite & their parents commoditie. To bee briefe, there might be ſuch diſcipline, that ſuch as ſhould commit anie diſhoneſt act, ſhould bee corrected, either by exhortations, puniſhmentes, or ſhame, as hath bene ſayd, to reforme them of their miſdemeanours. Perticulerlie to diſcourſe of the orders to be obſerued in theſe exerciſes were but ſuperfluous. Onely we ſhoulde thinke, that except the principall feaſts & ſondaies, no daie ſhould be exempt from bodilie actions. It is alſo to be conſidered, that inaſmuch as the eſcuiry cannot haue horſes inow to teach all, euerie young Gentleman, eſpecially the rich, at his cōming ſhould bring one either broken or vnbroken. For either with the one or with the other they maye alwayes exerciſe themſelues. Beſides that, it wil be a commoditie to their parents to ſend their horſes to be there brokrn, whether great horſe or curtals. Neither doe I doubt, but by ſuch time as a young Gentleman ſhall haue continued foure or fiue yeres in ſuch a ſchoole, he wil be able to ſhew himſelfe in anie Princes court: For beeing ſkilfull in ſo many honeſt exerciſes, and withall inſtructed in other thinges that are not comprehended but by the vnderſtanding, who will not wonder at eighteene or nineteene yeeres of age to ſée ſuch towardneſſe?

Now if either in the court or other where we ſée one indued with ſuch qualities, we like of him & wiſh him good luck: What thē would we do if we ſhould ſée all the prouinces of the Realme plentifull in ſuch fruits. What a contentation might it bee to our king to ſée himſelfe inuironed with a nobility, not in name onely, but in vertue? As alſo what an honour for the parents that haue erected ſo goodly pillers for the vpholding & glorie of their families? Likewiſe our youth being thus inſtructed, we ſhall not néede to feare to ſend it into any place whereſoeuer, becauſe it ſhall be of good proofe: and in liew of ſpoiling it ſelfe, it ſhal chooſe the beſt in other places wherby to profit. Neither ſhal there néed aboue ſixe ſuch in a whole band of ſouldiours to bring the ſame into liking with all commendable exerciſes: whereas nowe for the moſte part they all imploy their vacaunt leiſure, either in trifling or hurtful paſtimes: ſo ſhold the aſſēblies which oftē meet in the prouinces to decide controuerſies, or to leauy grayne, bee conuerted into ſweete and pleaſant contentions betweene yong gentlemen, ſometime in townes and ſomtimes in lords houſes, to runne at the ring, or to fight at barriers, with ſuch other exerciſes whereby to winne the priſes allotted to the moſt actiue: then would they alſo maintaine chalenges, and of theſe communications in ſo honeſt recreations ingender acquaintance and fruitfull amity. I will leaue to the iudgements of ſuch as haue haunted the courts and warres, to note howe ſoone the yong men that I haue ſpoken of, will grow both good courtiers and better ſouldiers. For beeing already ſo well inſtructed in the actions both of the body and minde, ſuch a preparation would make them capable of that in two yeeres which others (who beſides the helpes of nature haue but ſmall learning) can not comprehend in ſix. Finally the report of this good order beeing ſpred through forrein countries, we ſhould haue great reſort of ſtrangers to participate in the ſaide inſtructions, which woulde greatly redound to the glory of our country.
               This is one ſmall meanes in ſome ſort to keepe the vniuerſall corruption (which as an ouerflowing ſtreame ſeeketh to winne Concluſion. ground) from further infecting of our nobilitie: Beſides we might conceiue this hope, that by continuance of ſuch an order we ſhould by litle and little ſee good manners reſtored. As alſo that age ſeeing youth ſo modeſt and wel taught would be afeard to tranſgreſſe and haue a greater deſire to vnderſtande what is worthy themſelues. Only it remaineth to perſwade his maieſtie to prouide either

theſe or better eſtabliſhmentes, which I aſſure my ſelfe, hee would not be againſt, in reſpect of that ſinguler affection which he beareth vnto his nobility, who hauing beene euer heretofore ready to ſacrifice their liues for his ſeruice, woulde be much more bent thereto when by new benefites their bands ſhall be encreaſed.
            
            
               The ſixt Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the reading of the bookes of Amadis de Gaule, & ſuch like is no leſſe hurtful to youth, than the works of Machiauel to age.
               
               
                  I Haue heretofore greatly delighted in reding Machauels 
                  Aduice vppon Machiauels writinges. 
                  Diſcourſes & his Prince, becauſe in yt ſame he intreateth of high & goodly politike & martial affaires, which many Gentlemen are deſirous to learne, as matters méete for their profeſſiōs. And I muſt néeds confeſſe yt ſo long as I was cō
                  tent ſleightly to runne thē ouer, I was blinded with ye gloſſe of his reaſons. But after I did with more ripe iudgement throughly examine them, I found vnder yt fayre ſhew many hidden errors, leading thoſe that walke in them into the paths of diſhonour and domage. But if any man doubt of my ſayings, I would wiſh him to reade a booke intituled Antimachiauellus, the author whereof I know not, and there ſhall he ſée that I am not altogether deceiued. Of the bookes of Arnadis. Neither doe I thinke greatly to deceiue my ſelfe though I alſo affirme the bookes of Amadis to be verie fit inſtruments for the corruption of maners, which I am determined to proue in few words, to the end to diſſuade innocent youth from intangling themſelues in theſe inuiſible ſnares which are ſo ſubtilly laide for them. Euermore haue there bene ſome men giuen to the writing & publiſhing of vanitie, wherto they haue bene the ſooner led, becauſe they knew their labours would be acceptable to thoſe of their time, the greateſt ſort whereof haue ſwallowed vp vanitie as the fiſh doth water. The auncient fables whoſe relickes doe yet remaine, namely, Lancelot of the lake, Pierceforeſt, Triſtran, Giron the courteous, & ſuch otheas doe beare witneſſe of this olde vanitie. Herewith were men fed for the ſpace of 500. yeeres, vntill our language growing more poliſhed, & our mindes more tickliſh, they were driuen to inuent ſome nouelties, wherewith to delight vs. Thus came ye bookes of Amadis into light amōg vs in this laſt age. But to ſay ye troth, Spaine bred thē, & France new clothed thē in gay garments. In ye 
                  The originall. daies of Henrie the ſecond did they beare chiefeſt ſway; & I think if any man would then haue reproued thē, he ſhould haue bene ſpit

at, becauſe they were of themſelues playfellowes and maintainers to a great ſort of perſons: whereof ſome after they had learned to Amadize in ſpéech, their téeth watered, ſo deſirous were they euen Their fruit. to taſte of ſome ſmall morſels of the delicates therein moſt liuelie and naturally repreſented. And although many diſdayned and reiected them, yet haue but ouer many, hauing once taſted of them, made them their continuall foode. This ſuſtenaunce hath ingendered euil humours that diſtempered thoſe ſoules which peraduenture at the firſt thought not to haue growen ſo weake.
               My iudgement therefore of theſe bookes in generall, ſhall bee Thsir author. this. I thinke (vnleſſe I be deceiued) that hee that compoſed them was ſome courtly Magitian, cunning & ſlie, who to the end to bring his arte into eſtimation, and withall to procure vnto thoſe that bee dealers therein, both honour & feare, hath cunningly fayned 1000. meruayles which he hath couered and wrapped vp in a number of pleaſant, deſired, and vſuall matters, ſo as the one running among the other, the whole might be the better receiued. I knowe there are ſome that will finde my opinion to bee verie ſtrange, becauſe they wéene that the author of the ſayde bookes intent was no other but to leaue to the poſteritie a portrayture of the exerciſes of the Courts in his time, and withall to forge a ſpurre wherewith to pricke forward young Gentlemen, and to incite them to entertain loue and practiſe armes, as the two onely moſt beautifull obiectes, that may delight, faſhion, and cauſe them to climbe to honour. But their iudgement is too ſimple, as ſtaying rather vppon the conſideration of the beautie of certaine outward matters, than vppon the truth of the inward. For notwithſtanding I graunt that the inſtructions and examples of this fabulous hiſtorie, may alſo be propounded, to the end to teach both to loue and fight, yet will I ſaie that the moſt of thoſe loues are diſhoneſt, and almoſt all the combats full of falſehood, and not to be practiſed, ſo that the following of thoſe rules is to walke in errour. All therefore that I pretend to ſhew may far better appeare by deducting the particularities that I haue noted.
               I will begin with the perſons of Alquif, Vrgand, and their like, inchanters and witches, there tearmed Sages, as alſo the Magicall The proofe of the former point in the conſideratiō of the firſt fruites of theſe books, or deuilliſh arts which they vſed aſe called Perfect wiſedome. Yea I thinke if the author durſt he would haue named them Prophets, which name they deſerued, but with this tayle, of Satan. When theſe Sorcerers or Witches came to any Princes court, they were

cheriſhed and wonderfully honoured, yea, they were admired as if they had newly come out of heauen, neither did themſelues fayle to named the poiſon of Impietie. ſéeke méete occaſions for to come, as when they muſt parte two knights fleſhed to murther each other to miniſter paſtime to ye Ladies, either to bring inchanted armour to ſaue a young Prince that was to receiue the order of knighthood, either to ſet a whole Court in an vprore by ſome terrible ſight, and then to appeaſe and qualifie it agayne.
               But I doe amiſſe in going about to ſpecifie their myracles. For we muſt imagine that Iupiter and Minerua in olde time did neuer ſo much as theſe. Moreouer, when there was any queſtion of enquiring after things to come, they were ſtraight ſought vnto, as the Painims vſed to go to the Oracle of Apollo. We are not therfore to meruaile that they were much made of, ſithence we ſee them thus indued with a ſupernaturall power. For theſe kindes of Magitians are accounted good and ſuccourable. But the author forgeth alſo others, as Archalaus the Enchanter, Melie, and many The inetnt of the author of theſe bookes of Amadis. more that delighted onely in dooing miſchiefe. Whereby we may eaſily perceiue that he maketh Magicke arts matters indifferent, thinking them lawfull or vnlawfull, according as they be vſed well or ill. Yet, it ſeemeth hee allowe the vſe thereof among the Chriſtians, and diſalloweth it among Painims. Theſe doth he ſaie to haue drawen their knowledge out of the bookes of Medea, who in olde time was a notable ſorcereſſe. But his Vrgande the vnknowen he ſayth, to be inſtructed by the wonderfull precepts of great Apollidon, whom he faineth to haue ben as another Zoroaſtes, wherein he ſpeaketh better than he is aware. For Apollidon may be the ſame Apollion mencioned by Saint Iohn in his Reuelation, namely, the Deuil, whom we may ſaie to haue beene the common ſchoolemaſter to them all, becauſe that ſo pernitious arts, repleniſhed with fraude and lying, cannot procéede out of any other ſhop than his. We muſt therefore ſettle our ſelues, and beware we bee not ſnared in the writinges and perſuaſions of thoſe that after they haue maſqued and diſguiſed impietie, would harborowe it among vs who are to driue it awaie as a moſt horrible monſter. Moſt men when they heare ſpeaking of inchauntments and ſorceries, doe at the firſt ſcorne or deteſt them: but if they ſuffer themſelues ſo farre to be led as to delight to talke of them, or to ſée ſome of their proofes, they doe by little and little take a cuſtome not to abhorre them.

Like vnto ſuch as hauing long eſchued ſerpents, do neuertheleſſe by ſeeing & hādling thē, come at ye lēgth to weare thē about their necks, notwithſtāding nature doth ſomwhat therat rapine. Some may ſay Why the reading of thoſe bookes is pernitious. yt of a flie I make an elephāt, alſo yt if yt reading of theſe follies which euery one accoūteth but fables, wer ſo dangerous, our great learned men ſhould likewiſe abſtain frō reading ye bookes of Iāblichus, Porphirie, Pſellus, Apolonius Tianeus, & ſuch like, who haue at large intreted vpō Magick, & the cōmunicatiō yt may be had wt 
                  Demons, as alſo of yt ſacrifices yt they require. Whereto I anſwere, yt there is great differēce betwéene thoſe yt peraduenture neuer read any other bookes but Amadis, wherin the ſuger yt is diſpearſed al ouer, maketh thē to ſwalow great morcels of Alloes at vnawares: & ye others who grounded in learning, age & experience, do ſeeke for ſome roſes in ye large forreſts of thorns. For the firſt not knowing the ſnares, are ſodainly taken, wheras the others perceiuing thē a far of, doe ſéeke to break thē. Truly ye youth of our courts wtin theſe 10. yeres, had not ben ſo redie to féed their curioſitie wt ſuch meruailes, had not the laid books of vanitie prepared thē. And this is it that hath cauſed Aſtronomers & inchanters to be ſo well welcome. Many account it no inconuenience to ſée & learn thoſe things yt procure mirth & meruailes: but they perceiue not yt the ſame is the beginning of yt game, & that the poiſon lieth in ye taile. There be other paſtimes enow though we meddle not with thoſe wherin the magitiās cūning varlets come to play the feats of paſſe & rapaſſe: & ſuch as enter familiarity wt thē, do neuer eſcape their paimēt, not in Apes coine (as yt prouerb tearmeth it) but in much worſe, which theſe petie tranſfigured maumets (that come to play wt the ſimple) do liberally deliuer them: For in the end they catch the ſoules, infecting thē with a fooliſh beliefe, which by little & little carieth thē frō 
                  God. The prophet Balaam, though a falſe Prophet, did neuertheles ſaie very well, That the people of Iſrael was bleſſed, becauſe they had among thē neither Southſayer, deuiner, nor inchanter, If we will inioy yt like bleſſe we muſt alſo imitate that people, as wel in reiecting the perſons at yt writings, which are as baits to inure vs in diuelliſh myſteries. Thus much of the firſt & principal poiſon hidden among the the fruits of Amadis delightes. The ſecond fruit termed, The Poiſon of pleaſure.
               
               Concerning the ſecond, which I tearme the Poiſō of pleaſure, which alſo is much more open than ye other, & wtal ſo ſubtil & penetratiue, yt to eſchue harme therby, we muſt firſt vſe very good preſeruatiues: it conſiſteth in many ſorts of diſhoneſt luſts, which therin are ſo liuely deſcribed, yt young men in the cōſideration of thē are deceiued, as the

birds were in ye ſight of Zeuxes counterfait fruits. The French tranſlators haue ſtudied wel to poliſh their tranſlatiōs, alſo haue added as I ween (for the true Spaniſh) āguage is too ſimple) all yt faireſt ornamēts Impudent and foule loues. yt they were able to borow of Rhetorike, to ye end ye new might be of the more efficacy to perſuade yt things wherto many are but too willing to be perſuaded: & hauing made it more copious & wantō, it is not to be demanded whether the ſound therof be pleaſant to the eare, through yt which being once paſſed, it tickleth ye moſt tēder affectiōs of the hart, which it moueth more or leſſe according as the perſons are diſpoſed therto. Oh what a goodly inſtructiō is it for ladies, to ſee yong princeſſes frying in amorous flames, for ſome knight whō they neuer ſaw vntil within two houres before, for albeit ſhame & modeſtie ought to reſtrain thē wtin the bounds of ſhamefa
                     ••
                  nes, yet doth the author make thē confeſſe, & euē at the firſt that the violent ſtings of the God Cupid (whō they do blame) haue wounded thē ſo deep, as not being able to get out at the doore they muſt créepe forth at the window, into ſome delicate garden to eat Apricocks. But this I haue noted, that fortune haue ben to them alwaies ſo favorable, that neuer anie of thē toke harme, ſo that wel we may apply vnto thē this ſong,
               
                  Your pace it is ſo ſwift Guillemette, your pace it ſo ſwift.
               
               But for the knights they are more quick vpon ye ſpur. For ſo ſoone as the beame of beautie haue dazeled their conceits, they are not only in a continual heat, but alſo euen roſted & roſted (as the good old wiues of our townes do ſay of the ſoules in purgatorie) ſo yt they neuer ſtand ſtill, vntil they haue foūd ſome remedy to refreſh thē. Neither do theſe loues in all theſe difficulties want ſome ſubtill Dariolets, yt is to ſay, The infamous bauldry of a blotter of paper. cunning bauds. And I beleeue Homer, in ye perſonages that he hath brought in to deſcribe ſundry offices did neuer make any to play their parts better than can theſe: who know more inuentions thā a very for of ſubtilties, to catch the birds with the ſnares of pleaſure. This comedie thus plaied, the author imploieth al his aloquence to ſhew yt mans felicitie cōſiſteth herein, & it is of no ſmal force to infect delicate youth with ye daily reading of theſe follies, do harbor them in their harts: I wéen yt in the monaſterie of Franciſcans at Paris (which is the fruitfulleſt clapper of Monkes betwéen this & Rome) there is none, but if he had as often read the diſcourſe of Amadis, as ye old miracles of the golden legend, & the new fables of ye 
                  cōformities of S. Frances, wold féele himſelfe pricked to the quick wt theſe daungerous temptations. Much rather thē ought ſuch yonglings as trot vp & down ye delights of the world to forbeare them.
               
                  
It may be alleadged that moſt of the loue trickes there intreated of, doe tend to mariage. I graunt it. But before they procéede to publike mariages, almoſt all of them doe commit ſecrete follies as Pollution of holy Matrimonie. it were for a learning, whereof oftentimes proceede ſuch claps as blemiſh honeſtie. Howbeit, who ſo on the other ſide wil note the 
                     •
                  a liances of Floriſel, Don Rogel, and many other knights that were more eager vpon this game, than is a promoter after his praie, ſhal finde goodly leſſons to kindle incontinencie, which alreadie flameth but too much in young breaſts. The author not content to teach how to abuſe lawfull loue, and to practiſe vnlawfull, hath alſo fayned fantaſticall, which neuertheleſſe, ſayth the ſtorie, haue brought forth their effects. As that of Amadis of Greece and Queene Zahara. For ſome Magitians perceiuing that they glaunced each at other, although Amadis was maried, yet taking pitie of their paſſions, as alſo to take awaie the ſpot of adulterie, did inchaunt them them both in goodly delightfull gardens, where forgetting themſelues, they neuertheleſſe forgat not to beget two pretye babes, named Anaxartes and Alaxſtraxeree, and then hauing vnwitched them agayne, let them goe where they liſt, without remembring anie thing that had paſſed betweene them. What elſe is this but a ſecret repreſentation of Mahumets paradiſe? Whereof this author thought good to giue the Chriſtians of his age ſome ſmall taſte as peraduenture ſomewhat ſauouring of Mahumetiſme (for then was all Spaine full of Sarazens) to the ende they might accuſtome themſelues to feede both their bodies and mindes with carnall thoughts and deedes. I leaue it therefore to the iudgement of ſuch as are indued with anie integritie, whether the reading of ſuch bookes ſtuffed with ſuch filthie follies, bee not daungerous both to young and olde: for hauing once redd them, they cannot afterward ſo cleanſe themſelues, but ſtill there will remayne ſome ſpottes to ſtaine their conuerſations.
               I once heard a good Gentleman ſaie, that they contayned a hidden propertie in the generation of Hornes, and I doubt himſelfe had had experience thereof. For he wore two pettie horne buddes Whereto ſuch bookes are meete. hidden behinde his eare, which another of the ſame occupation had there faſtned in ful paiment of the lyke ſome, which not long before he had receiued of him in pure and true loue, and therefore the better to be beleeued, ſith he ſpake as a crafteſmaſter. Truly my counſayle were to baniſh and ſend all ſuch bookes into Sicil, where the men keepe continuall watch for feare of ſurpriſes bye night. So

ſhould we ſee whether their vigilancie could warrant thē that this Productiue cauſe ſhould not fructifie among them. Some atturney of Amadis may peraduenture make this obiection, that diuers though they neuer reade thoſe bookes, can neuertheleſſe do as bad as the reſt. I think there be ſuch, but I giue them double blame, in yt their inclinations are ſo ready without help to run into miſchiefe,
               Now let vs proceed to lay open ſome other bad drugs that are to be found in this ſhop. And in my opinion this may chalenge the 3. The thirde fruict, named the poyſon of reuendge. place, which is a miſerable cuſtome brought in by this author, who auoweth that the higheſt point of knights honour conſiſteth in cutting one anothers throate for friuolous matters. And of theſe tragedies he maketh a ſoueraigne paſtime for Kings, Ladyes, Courts, & Cities. Oftentimes we ſee in the liſts the father againſt the ſon, the brother againſt the brother, the vnkle againſt the neuew, where when they haue hewen one vpon another two long houres, they haue both through faintnes fallen downe all tainted in bloud. Somtime he faineth they knew not one another, another time that they aſſailed each other to trie themſelues. But what groſe & villanous ignorance & trials are thoſe which procure the perpetrating of ſo horrible paricides▪ It may be anſwered that they be the inſtructions of the great Apollion aforenamed, who beeing a murtherer from the beginning, delighteth wholy in committing of murther. In old time the Romanes toke pleaſure in forcing men to fight to outrance before them, but theſe were trangreſſors that had deſerued death. Where contrariwiſe ours are the ſonnes of Kings, Princes & Lords that counterfait ſwordplaies: which can perſwade vnto youth that read theſe examples, nothing but yt they ſtil muſt be fighting with one or other, to the end to be eſteemed of & feared. And peraduenture ſuch impreſſions haue multiplied the quarels in our France within theſe 30. yeres, to ſuch quātitie as we now ſée. Alſo it may be ſayd & that iuſtly, that ſuch ſpectacles, through cuſtomable beholding the ſhedding of mans bloud, haue made our courts pitileſſe & cruell. Let therfore thoſe that deſire to feed their eies with bloud, imitate the manner of England, where they bring in wilde beaſts, as Beares and Buls to fight with dogges, which paſtime is without compariſon farre more lawfull.
               This likewiſe was another cuſtome of the knights of thoſe daies, That if any one had made promiſe to goe about any aduenture with 
                  The fourth fruict, named forgetfulneſſe of trew duetie and abolition of all good orders. 
                  one of theſe pilgrimes, who alwaies trauailed alone with them: though their ſoueraigne Lord, or their father or mother ſhould cōmand thē
                  
euen with lordlike authoritie & fatherly power, to deſiſt therefro to the end to ſerue in ſome other neceſſarie ſeruice, yet if they gaue it ouer, it was a perpetuall infamy to thē, for they were bound by the order of knightood to folow their gētlewomā, who ſomtimes was of a reaſonable diſpoſition. Theſe be new lawes which vpon a brauerie tend to blot out of mens mindes the ſame which nature hath ſo liuely engrauen and ſo highly commended vnto them. In this reſpect therefore are theyalſo to be buried in obliuion.
               I know I ſhall be accuſed of ouerſeuere cenſuring, or elſe of ſlandering of our chronicler of Amadis: for whoſe iuſtification it wil be ſayd that in many places of his bookes he greatly extolleth Chriſtian 
                  Defence of the cenſure aforeſaide. pietie. Whereto I anſwere, that he cannot well excuſe himſelfe touching this point. But by that which he ſayth, it is to be iudged that he diſcourſeth not thereof but onely for a cloake to ſhroube himſelfe, and that he hath read but little in the Bible. For he propoundeth a wilde and ſauage religion, that dwelleth onely in deſerts and hermitages, which he ſhould haue deſcribed more ciuill & domeſticall. But how ſhould he deale ſincerely in diuine matters, that handleth humane ſo profanely.
               Finally, I will yet ſet downe one point concerning the exerciſe of armes, which hee maketh ſo vnlyke to common vſe, that it is rather a mockery and abuſing of youth in giuing them ſuch precepts: The laſt fruict named partinent ſables. for although the wiſer ſort do account ſuch knightly proweſſes and giantlyke ſtrength, wherewith the reader is ſo importuned, to bee but fables, yet the more vndiſcréete, vnder ſo ſweete a charme of wordes cannot forbeare, but remember ſome ſuch draughts as are moſt conformable to their affections, to the end afterward as occaſion may ſerue to try them, thinking thereby to be more actiue than others. True it is that ſometime by the ſcoffes that they incurre, they are reclaimed from theſe errours. But wee are not to permit them to proceede to theſe experiences, but rather to propound vnto them true documents, and to hide from them the falſe, ſo to keepe them from failing. When a man hath beſtowed all his time in reading the bookes of Amadis, yet wil it not all make him a good ſoldiour or warriour. For to attaine to be the one or the other, he ſhall neede nothing that therin is contayned. I wil not otherwiſe ſpeak of theſe mightie blowes that cleaue a man to the waſte, or cut aſunder a Vantbraſſe arme and all: neither of thoſe ſhockes or fals that doe a man no harme, but that he may riſe and leape againe vpon his horſe back, as he were become a leopard, neither of their continual

combats of two houres long, together with their fooliſh enterparliestneither of their imaginarie valiancies yt make one man to kill 200. becauſe the matter it ſelfe ſheweth it to tend onely to terrifie women and children: yea, whoſoeuer will looſe ſo much time as to read the whole ſtorie, may plainly ſee whether I do iuſtly or wrōgfully reproue al theſe braue & magnificent follies. Howbeit among all that I haue here ſaid, I doe not comprehende thoſe exerciſes in armes, which are the paſtimes of our nobilitie in time of peace, but contrariwiſe I do commend them, in that they are beſides the pleſure both honeſt & neceſſary. And euerie one that liſt to cal to mind how during the raigne of good king Henrie the ſecond, through the frequenting of the ſame, they grew more expert and valorous, will endeuour to renue the practiſe thereof. Here might I alleage many other vanities wherwith theſe bookes are ſtuffed, were it not that I feare to bring my ſelfe too farre in liking with them, whiles I ſeeke to bring others out of taſt thereof. Thoſe which I haue here traced may ſuffice to turne away their minds, yt are any whi
                     •
                   affected to honeſt and vertuous matters, from ſpending their time in the ſame. For they polute themſeluts, wening to reape delight, and through loitering in reading of lies, do diſdaine thoſe wherein the truth doth moſt euidently ſhine forth.
            
            
               The ſeuenth diſcourſe.
               
                  That our ouer ſmall conſideration of the good things that we haue, and our ouer eager couetiſe of the good things which we haue not, do multiplie our miſeries.
               
               
                  I Will not extend this propoſition to all ſorts of men How great cauſe the French Nobilitie haue to cō
                     tent them ſelues. as I well might: for my pen beeing wearie cannot run into ſo many places. It ſhall therfore ſuffice me to frame it to thoſe of mine owne profeſſion whom I wiſh to reforme, becauſe herein they faile more than any others. Neither do I thinke that I ſhall need to bring in anie greate proofes: for the diſquietueſſe of their mindes, which force their bodies hether and thether, vp & downe, in right and wrong, are teſtimonies ſufficient.
               Now I thinke our nobilitie haue ſmall cauſe of diſcontent, conſidering how God hath lodged them in one of the goodlieſt gardens in

the world (more temperate than the fortunate Ilands ſo famous among the the ancients) wherein nature dooth moſt abundantly ſhed forth her pleaſures and delights. So as although ſhee hath not ſo much wealth as Spaine, who ſucketh the golden paps of both the Indies: though ſhe haue not ſo many Priuiledges as Pologne, which choſeth princes, & beareth lordly dominion ouer her vaſſals: and although ſhe be not ſo ingenious as Italy which knoweth much dexteritie and curteſie, yet al this notwithſtanding, ſhe wanteth not wit inough to guide her, force inough to defēd her, or welth inough to maintaine her. If wee beholde the infinite number of goodlie houſes, well contriued and prouided of all thinges requiſite, which ſhe poſſeſſeth: likewiſe her honorable exerciſes both of wepons and learning, the toles ſeruing to make the bodies more nimble: her pleaſures as of hunting and muſick, with her ſecret conuerſation: finally, a thouſand goodly rewards of vertue wherewith ſhee doth oft ſee her ſelfe crowned: we ſhal be forced to ſay that ſhe ought many times to lift vp her eies to heauen and to yeld thanks to God for ſo good a ſhare: but it falleth out that few do enter into theſe generall conſiderations, & fewer into the particular. To the end alſo the better to perceiue how the moſt part do ordinarily beare themſelues. Faults herein committed. I will propound this example, namely of a Gentleman of 3 or 4000. frankes rent, already well entered into his youthful age, and formed according to our cuſtomes, which are but too eaſily larned. If he be in his own houſe, nothing will pleaſe him, neither can he euer be quiet vntill he hath ſet feather in the winde to go ſee the world, which deſire, if it be moderated, I do not blame: but I miſlike his taſt of yt which he ſhould taſt better of. If he light vppon any court, where after he hath a while trotted vp & downe, he hath attained a litle fame & knowledge, hee thinketh it a ſmal matter, in reſpect of other ſtings that pricke him & ſtill make him to loke forward, but neuer behind him. Then comming to learn the vſe of his weepon, he ſtill thinketh his eſtate ouer baſe, and ſo aimeth at ye vncertaine. If he chance to returne & play the good huſband at home, & that he haue laied the foundation of a compleat family, he wil not make ſo much account of his wife, children & reuenues of his houſe as he ought, as taking the firſt goods to be ouer common, & the ſecond ouer ſmall. Hauing attained to olde age, wherin hee ſhoulde after the tediouſneſſe of ſo long a iourney, take his reſt and reioyce that he hath gotten ſo neere to his ende, then is the time that moſt cares, anguiſhes, and feares doe greatly torment him:

ſo as few things delight him though many diſpleaſe him, and thus doth he liue miſerably vntill be come to hide his head in his graue. Thus do we briefly ſee a ſmal portraiture of many mens liues, who becauſe they cannot well know the good they haue therein, doe inioy ſuch a benefit but coldly and without commoditie. Truly if euerie one would often waigh the good wherof he may make account, he ſhould find the ſame as waightie as he thinketh them to be light. But when he caſteth it at his heels, like vnto forgotten ſinnes (as the prouerbe goeth) it yeeldeth but ſmall profite. The Philoſopher Remedies for theſe faultes. 
                  Plato ſayd, that he thanked God for three things: That he made him to be borne a Grecian & not a Barbarian: an Athenian rather than the citizen of anie other towne: & in the time of Socrates: but for how many things more yt he ſpeaketh not of, did he giue thanks? And in thus recording his felicities, his ſoule grew the more quiet & ſatiſfied. The like ought we to do & that often, to the end to baniſh our inſatiabilitie & ingratitude, which without miſery doe make vs miſerable. And whereas ſome do think that after ſome ſort they do acquit themſelues hereof, yet if they looke wel, they ſhall find great difference between yt which they do & that which they ought to do. For they imitate not ſo much as Plato, in noting that which is cō
                  mon & generall, but do ſtill addreſſe themſelues to ſome perticular thing that pleaſeth them. He that is ſkilfull in the arte of war; will thinke onely vpon that benefit whereby he atchieueth praiſe. The lawier will likewiſe dwell within the boundes of his knowledge, through the which he filleth his coffers. Neither wil the Marchant eſteeme of any other thing in himſelf, then his dexteritie & diligēce which make his trafick to flouriſh. Al which conſiderations are not vtterly to be reproued. But euen as a banquet is not made with bread only without any other thing therto adioyned: ſo likewiſe to ye end the rather to ſatiſfie euery man with his owne eſtate, we are to ſet before our eies all whatſoeuer we can gather together, either the great or ſmall bleſſings that God hath bellowed vpon vs. And the more plentifull that we ſhall find them to be, the greater are we to account our felicitie. When we loke ouer our rentals, we find written great rents due vnto vs, asalſo a number of ſmal of a halfepeny and a farthing, which how ſmall ſo euer, we neuertheleſſe blot not out: becauſe that gathered together, they help to make perfect ye bodie of our reuenues: no more are we likewiſe to race out of our remēbrance the leaſt benefite that we inioy, becauſe the thinking ther vpō maketh our life the more ſweet & pleaſant. The meanes therefore

well to graue in minde both great & ſmall, is to ſteale frō our ſelues, & to beſtow one onely halfe houre of the daie in the meditatiō of the ſame. For ſtill we ſhall find ſo much new matter, that ye ſame will inuite vs cheerefully to labour in ſuch abundance.
               But in the obſeruation of this rule, it may bee there bee ſome who peraduenture would thinke to deale with God as they doe with men. For they are loth to ſift the pleaſures that they haue receiued, becauſe ſo they become debters: likewiſe that they would imagine, their entrie into ſuch accompts with him, (and theſe I rather terme ſmall and vnperfect recordations of his benefites, which wee are as well able to number as the ſtones of a Citie) to be an ouercharging of themſelues with obligatiōs & an oppreſſion of their miſtaken libertie. In theſe caſes are their imaginations falſe, and themſelues haue but ſmall knowledge of the nature of God, who aſſuredly at ſuch tyme as we moſt turne ouer the booke of receipts of his benefites, doth then giue vs moſt: becauſe that our ſmall preparations to acknowledgement doe mightely moue his liberalitie. It ſéemeth that I haue ſomewhat paſſed the bounds of my firſt ſpeech: but this digreſſion is not amiſſe, ſith that from Earth wee haue climbed into Heauen, which is the true ſpring from whence a whole Iliade of goodneſſe deſtilleth vpon vs, of the greateſt parte whereof, through our ſenceleſneſſe, wee are vtterly ignorant.
               Now will I returne to our Gentrie afore ſpoken of, who Continuation of the reherſall of the good of the French Nobilitie to the ende to induce them to a trew enioying thereof. ſtraye fartheſt out of the way, whom alſo I would gladly bring backe to the right path: And this is it that I will ſay to them. Why doe you thus vexe your ſoules with a thouſand cares throughout the whole courſe of your life, vpon certaine conceiued phantaſies that your ſtate is vnperfect and full of blemiſhes? Open your eyes and throughly examine it, ſo ſhall it vaniſh and your ſelues bee better at reſt. When you walke vp and downe the Pallace of Paris, and ſo goe by the Painters ſhoppes, you can bee content to ſtay two whole howers to gaze vpon ſome goodly peece of worke there ſet to view, which ſometyme mooueth you to commend both the worke and the workeman. Much rather ought you ſo to deale with that goodly portraiture of your ſelfe, clothed in ſo many ornaments, for feare leaſt ignorance or inconſtancy ſhould cauſe you to be accuſed before the ſoueraigne Painter, which giueth to euery of his workes the comelineſſe that is proper and conuenient to the ſame. And as it is he that hath formed the Kings and Princes whom the Communaltie adoreth, ſo hath he with

the ſame hand moulded all thoſe whom pouertie oppreſſeth. All which vnproportionable diuerſitie is no let, but that the earthen veſſell is as profitable for the baſe and mechanichall vſe thereof, as is that of the fineſt and beſt wrought golde for the high and magnificent vſe of the ſame. Let vs now looke whether he hath bene nigardly and not bountifull toward you. Truely you ſhall finde no: alſo that you muſt vtterly abandon thoſe your deceiueable thoughts: for they are the ſame which the auncient Serpent inuēted to deceiue our firſt mother. But it is your ſelues that are to be conuicted of ingratitude, in that you are contrary to the couetous man whoſe hart and eye are euermore in his coffers, where you neuer enter into the ſecret cloſets of your owne harts, to the ende to conſider of ſo many kindes of benefites incloſed: which if you would doe, you ſhould finde your ſelues not ſo poore as you weene for.
               
               I will as it were by the way repeat ſome of thoſe which I ſuppoſe A recapitulation of ſome of theſe benefites. you thinke leaſt vpon. And beginning with ye ſpirituall which are the principall, I will ende with the leſſer, that are more ſubiect to decay. If I ſhould now aſke you vpō your cōſciences how often in a wéeke you think vpon the ineſtimable benefite of ye knowledge of God wherewith you are endued (for in that you are Chriſtians I cannot doubt thereof) you will peraduenture aunſwer me that it The heauenly and ſpirituall. were much if once in a moneth you ſhould earneſtly thinke therevpon: & yet this knowledge, or rather faith, doth teach and certefie you yt ye are fellow burgeſes of heauen, & that by Ieſus Chriſt you haue bene plucked out of the pawes of yt great Pharao the deuill, & the bondage of Egipt which is the figure of Hell How thē can you haue ſo ſmall mind of ſo excellent a benefite? whereof Dauid ſayd:
               
                  Of thy precepts I will ſtill muſe and thereto frame my talke,
                  As at a marke ſo will I ayme thy waies how I may walke.
                  My only ioye ſhall be ſo fixt and on thy lawes ſo ſet,
                  That nothing can me ſo farre blind that I thy workes forget.
               
               For notwithſtanding he had among ye treaſures yt he had heaped together aboue 100. millions of gould, yet did he accompt thoſe of Gods ſeruice much more precious & tooke greater felicitie therein. Imitate him therefore, & oftner open the coffer of your vnderſtanding and harts, to the end to contemplate ſuch ritches which onely ſuffice to make you happy. Next will I deſcend to morall vertues, Vertues. of ſome whereof I thinke you not vtterly vnprouided. And put the caſe you haue Fortitude, which ſignifieth Proweſſe, which alſo is of great recommendation among our Nobilitie: alſo Temperance which is familier with the good: Alſo I meane that the

portion which you haue be grauen in your harts, rather then printed in your faces. Euen with this onely may you bee aſſured that you ſhall not bee degraded from your title, notwithſtanding you ought ſtil to labour to obteyne more. You will not accompt a Marchant of ſilkes poore, becauſe he hath in his coffers none but Crimſon and white Ueluets, for you ſhould doe him wrong: euen ſo thinke of your ſelues that you are not poore in conditions, ſo long as theſe two vertues doe fructifie in you, which alſo may ſerue to engender more: Yea and the more are you to eſteeme of theſe benefites, becauſe no furie of contrary fortune can bereaue you of them. I will alſo ſpeake one word of your Health, which me thinkes ye Health. cheriſh no more then ye doe adogge, whome ye hazard againſt all ſortes of wilde beaſtes: for many tymes you giue it for a pray to moſt mortall diſeaſes, wherein you ſhewe your ſmall iudgements in ſeeking to heape together vaine things, and yet cannot preſerue thoſe that are neceſſarie. Remember the prouerbe: There is no treaſure to health. And imagine a Prince groning in his bed, who offereth all his wealth for the recouerie of that which you cōtemne. So will you peraduenture confeſſe that you are more happie then wiſe. As for your reuenues, your continuall lamenting of your Ritches. want doth ſhew that you are not very well content therewith: And yet is your rent perhaps twelue hundred crownes by yeere, with a goodly houſe, well furniſhed, where as your father liued honeſtly & merely with the one halfe. You will either tell me, or thinke with your ſelues, that when you haue on your gay garments you are an other maner of man thē your father was. Truely I graunt it, & I thinke your fathers head was fraught with wit that could of ſo ſmall wealth keepe his houſe furniſhed: Whereas contrariwiſe I ſuppoſe that your vnderſtanding is troubled with ſixe ounces of folly at the leaſt, conſidering that hauing ſo many commodities, your houſe is neuer but emptie, and yet I would wiſh you not to wéepe, for there bee at the leaſt fower millions of perſons in this Realme that haue not the tenth parte ſo much as you, and yet ſhed neuer a teare for it. You haue but ouer much if you could vſe it. What will you ſay of ſo many of your good Parents and Frends▪
                   And what accompt they make of you where you haue bene conuerſant? Yea, what will you ſay of your Libertie? which is a thing comparable to Life, through the which you may take pleaſure in the beautie of the ſeaſons, & more in the conuerſation of men. You muſt needes aduowe that the poſſeſſions of theſe onely benefites

(notwithſtanding you poſſeſſe much more thē I will note, as wel to auoyde flatterie, as not to bee tedious to the reader) doe ſuffice to make you bleſſe the giuer, content your ſe ues with your eſtate, and reioyce with other men: to which effects you ſhall atteyne by often meditation in the ſame. But if you diſdayne this profitable counſaile, and returne to your accuſtomed neglecting of that which is certaine to the ende to ſeeke the vncertaine, you will driue me to appropriate vnto you the deploration of the miſer and to ſay of you. Oh miſerable man! who in the middeſt of ſo much wealth accoumpteth himſelfe needie and poore! I haue ſayd enough, it is your partes to thinke vpon it.
               But I would wiſh euery man to knowe that this my admonition tendeth not to puffe vp the naturall pride of any that hath The vſe of this diſcourſe. conſidered of himſelfe, whereto many are eaſely led: but rather to reclaime thoſe that are too eager in the labourſome purſuite of ſuperfluous goods, as alſo from their delicate complaints, in which waies I will not denye but my ſelfe haue heretofore walked as farre as others. But age, learning and ſiniſter experiences hauing ſtayed mee in the meditation of ſuch things as I haue noted and many more. I haue thereby learned, firſt that Gods liberalitie aboundeth toward vs, which wee neuertheleſſe by contempt of his goods do abuſe: and ſecondly that it is not altogether vnprofitable, when in the ende a man by his owne errors doth amend.
               This Diſcourſe is not finiſhed.
            
            
               The eight Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the pouertie of the French Nobilitie proceedeth not ſo much of the warres which haue continued theſe fiue and thirtie yeres, as of their owne ouerſight in the miſpending of their goods.
               
               
                  WE ſhall not neede any large diſcourſe to ſhewe The ſtate of both auncient and new Nobilitie. how farre the French Nobilitie are fallen from the auncient wealth wherwith their houſes were adorned in ye daies of the good Kings Lewes the 12. and Frances the firſt, as being a thing whereof fewe be ignorant. For if wée liſt to conſider of them either generally or in perticuler, wee ſhall ſee them vnfurniſhed and wanting of ſundrie neceſſarie things, except it be ſome houſes which haue lately riſen,

& a few others that by good huſbandrie, benefites or couetouſneſſe haue mainteyned and enriched themſelues. And I dare affirme that if all that beare this title were deuided into tenne partes, and neerely viſited, it would bee found that eight of them haue bene decayed by the alienations of a great part of their goods, morgages of their landes, or other debts, and that onely the other two partes haue wherewithall ſufficiently to maintaine their eſtate wherein is no correſpondent proportion kept. I thinke I ſhould not doe amiſſe though I declared that which might ſeeme better to be concealed. For as well our forreine neighbours doe imagine thriſe more then there is and ſay, that wee are ſo affected to our King, that we will according to our callings imitate his liberalities and expences. This therfore that I now ſpeake tendeth only to make vs wiſer and more readie to repayre our domeſticall decayes, as well to eſchue other mens ſcoffes as to expell ſundrie cares out of our mindes, and relieue thoſe wants that oppreſſe vs.
               Now, although it bee ſo that all doe agree in the confeſſion of Originall of the pouertie of the Nobilitie. this pouertie, yet when wee come to ſhewe how it commeth, there is a contrarie difference therein: For one ſaith one thing, and another another: yea euery one ſeeketh to accuſe the vyolence of the long warres which as Monſters doe deuoure all, rather then them ſelues. Thus doe wee ſee how readie each one is to ſeeke ſtarting holes whereby to cléere himſelfe of his fault, in liewe that he ought with vpright iudgement to examine from whence ſuch diſorders doe proceede. To excuſe a mans ſelfe is a very common matter, and ſuch as euery one is willing to doe: becauſe the excuſe ſeemeth ſomewhat to blot out the ſpottes that may blemiſh his good renowme: But becauſe to accuſe bringeth ſhame, it is neuer put in practiſe vntill it needes muſt, whereof it falieth out that that matter lyeth long hid in ignoraunce which ought ſooner to haue bene knowne. The prouerbe falleth out many tymes true, which ſayth: That the euill which we knowe well is as it were halfe healed. Let vs Referred to the warres. therefore ſeeke the cauſe of our owne, and that will be to vs a readie way and preparation to finde remedie. Thoſe that doe attribute it to the ruine and charges of warre, doe ſay that there be yet liuing many honorable perſons that haue ſeene in what wealth and proſperitie the French Nobilitie liued vntil the tyme of Henrie the ſecond: For ſo long as we had peace there was nothing to be ſeene among the Lords & Gentrie but liberalitie, magnificence, viſitations, with other ſuch honeſt expences, ye witneſſes of wealth.

And yet all this notwithſtanding they ſould no landes, as well for feare of reproach, as alſo becauſe of the moderation vſed in ſuch things. Likewiſe, whenſoeuer there was any warre proclaymed, it will hardly bee beléeued what goodly furniture euery one caried with him, as appeared in the voyadge into Germanie. But as nothing in this world is long permanent, ſo in the warres that were renewed in the yeere 1552. betweene the Emperour Charles the fifth and King Phillip, which laſted ſeuen yeeres, it was driuen to great expences, as well for the ſelfe honor, as in reſpect of the loue it bare to ſo good a Prince as was King Henry. Then enſued the vniuerſall ciuill warres all ouer the Realme, comparable to violent ſtreames, which ſo encreaſed the ruine thereof, that now all that the Nobilitie is able to doe, is to maintaine it ſelfe, liuing miſerably in it owne houſe. And hereof is growne the pouertie thereof. Theſe be their reaſons, which alſo I will not vtterly reie
                     •
                  . For This pouertie hath other ſpringes then the warres. I will ſtill confeſſe that theſe ſtormes haue bred part of our pouertie, but that it is wholly procéeded thereof, I doe not aduowe: and I will hereafter ſhewe that it had other helpes of greater importance to ſet it forward. So as their argument concludeth but in parte. Now let vs examine what may haue bene the ruine in the firſt warres. It was not great, for the Nobilitie that then ſerued were neither euill paide, neither deſtitute of honeſt rewards procéeding of the Kings liberalitie. True it is that ſome perticulers being too forward did in parte vnfeather themſelues, as alſo that the frontier Nobilitie encurred ſome loſſes. But the greateſt number continued in good ſtate. In the ciuill warres there fell out more loſſes, which neuertheleſſe lighted not vpon vs. Beſides that in our pettie peaces ſince concluded it had ſtill meanes to repayre the breaches. Withall that France is ſo fruitfull and well peopled, that whatſoeuer the warre waſteth in one yéere is repayred againe in two. Sith therefore ſuch diſcommodities haue ſtill bene accompanied with ſome remedies, as alſo that they haue aſſayled but the leaſt parte of the Nobilitie, wee are not to accompt this miſchiefe either ſo vniuerſall or great. But, in my opinion, the cauſe why all the blame is layd vpon the warres, is firſt becauſe the ſame is by nature hurtfull: ſecondly, that the vyolence that moueth it is horrible and terrefieth: and thirdly, becauſe men are glad to haue a ſhroude to hide their euill huſbandrie, or els artificially to pleade pouertie as the couetous doe. A man that hath had a long continuall agew, being cured thereof, will remember it a long tyme,

and feare the like diſeaſe, and yet the corruption of the humours whereof it proceeded did growe by little and little through his intemperance of life, whereof he tooke no heede. The like doe wee in thinges breeding our pouertie. For ſome there are that wee finde out by and by and they make vs to lament: but others which are neither ſo common nor agreeable with vs, wee let eaſely ſlippe, as if wee were inſenſible, and will not knowe them. And I dare affirme that if the ruines of warres and martiall charges that ſo wee complaine of, haue brought vs fower ounces of pouertie, our fooliſh and ſuperfluous continuall expences which wee doe not greatly repent vs of, haue procured vs twelue.
               In this propoſition we are to conſider that the French Gentleman doth excéede in any thing whereto he is affected, and will ſpare Superfluous and exceſſiue expenſes in aparrel, the only ſpring of pouertie. for nothing. Then that moſt of them ſpend not in one thing only, but in fower or fiue, ſo diuers are their minds, and that is the cauſe that drieth vp the liuelieſt ſprings of ritches. Now, one of the principall thinges wherein they ouerflowe is apparell, wherein they haue neither rule nor meaſure: yea cuſtome hath wonne ſo much, that a man dare not almoſt appeare in any good companie vnleſſe he be guilt like a Challice: for thereby many perſwade themſelues to bée the more honored.
               The Courtiers were they that brought in theſe inuentions, who in the meane tyme doe ſharpe pennance for their labours, in that there is no yéere but ſuch large expences doe ſende at the leaſt one doſen of them into the Litter, who for the pleaſure of ſeeing themſelues a fewe daies couered with ſilke and ſiluer, muſt many moneths after beare the griefe of finding themſelues houſeleſſe, or ſo haled by Uſurers, as they could not be worſe in ye gallies. Two other things there be beſides the ritches of apparell, which greatly encreaſe charges. The one, that men will haue diuerſitie: the other, that from two yéeres to two yéeres the faſhions doe chaunge and muſt be renued, & who ſo doth not frame himſelfe hereto is laughed to ſcorne. To be briefe, either the hand muſt ſtil be in ye purſe, or the land at gage. Next to the Courtiers come the Gentlemen, who are not altogether ſo exceſſiue as they, although they take paynes to imitate them. And as for thoſe that neuer ſtirre out of the countrie, vnleſſe it be a few very good huſbands, they likewiſe do ſo followe the cuſtome, that euery one farre excéedeth his porte. And yet is all this but halfe charges. For the women alſo will haue

their ſhare in ſo many gay ornaments, which yet became them better then the men, who haue larger meanes to beautifie themſelues with vertue. Some are content with honeſt ſufficiencie, others delight onely in aboundance: and ſome doe ſo farre paſſe the boundes of reaſon, that their poore huſbands may ſcratch their heads when they ſee pouertie come poſting to them vpon Indian ſtones, and Italian clothes of golde.
               
               This cuſtome began vnder Frances the firſt, and did mightely encreaſe vnder Henry the ſecond: but ſince, their exceſſe hath bene ſuch, as to apparell their Lackies and Pages in cloath of ſiluer. Our aunceſtors were without compariſon farre more moderate, yea our Kings ſought to make their Maieſties venerable rather by grauitie, iuſtice, wiſedome, fortitude, liberalitie, and a trayne of worthie and learned perſonages, then by any ſumptuouſneſſe of apparell, which alſo inuited their ſubiects to the like imitation. Subiects and Prouinces enſue the maners of Princes. And vntill the great ones doe begin to cut off theſe ſuperfluities, they will ſtill continue to the great detriment of the Nobilitie.
               Some man may ſay: Is it not decent that euery one ſhould goe according to his dignitie? Yes truely, and I thinke it were great inciuilitie and an vnwoorthie matter to doe otherwiſe. I reprooue only the exceſſe therein vſed, which puffe vp our mindes to vanitie, and in the ende breede deſtruction. Neither muſt we imagine that our fathers went apparelled like Artificers: For when they came to any Feaſts or great aſſemblies, their garments were according to their calling: and yet free from ſuperfluitie, and ſuch as laſted long. Now, if in the Court we ſee any man weare a garment of a yeere olde, we ſay of him: We know him well enough, he will not bite vs, he is a two yeeres birde: ſo that with ſuch ſcoffes he is forced to giue it ouer. And it may be ſayd that among Courtiers the age of an ordinarie garment is three moneths: and of an extraordinarie, ſixe: and among the reſt of the Nobilitie, ſomewhat longer tyme. For the newe fangles that doe after enſue doe make them ridiculous. To the ende likewiſe the better to knowe the diuerſitie thereof, reſort you to the Frippery at Paris, where you ſhall finde a moſt plentifull ſtorehouſe. So that if a man were diſpoſed vpon this medlie to frame Antiques, there were no pleaſanter deuiſe to bee ſeene. This inconſtancie in apparell argueth a woonderfull lightneſſe of minde, whereof enſueth the purgation of the purſe, and laughing ſport to ſtraungers. For when we come into their countrie

and they ſee our great Ruffes, womens Verdugalles, mens long heare, and the ſword at the backe, they runne after them as the little children at Paris do after maiſter Gonin. It is a hard caſe to empoueriſh our ſelues with theſe péeuiſh follies, and then to bee laughed to ſcorne too.
               It may bee replyed that ſcoffes, the ordinarie paſtime of the world, are mutually lent and payed againe: alſo that our Nobilitie Againſt ſu
                        ••
                      as ſcorne forrein Nobilitie, for that it imitateth not their inconſtancie. trauailing to Venice, and there ſeeing the Nobilitie couered with cappes like the coffin of a pye and girt in broad girdles, euen laugh outright. I denye it not: but withall, this I will ſay, that when ſome of them doe afterward come to conſider that the ſimplicitie of their garments ſwelleth vp their coffers with treaſure, alſo that wiſedome and grauitie ſhine in their Senate, and that their Statutes are inuiolably obſerued: and contrariwiſe that wee with our ſhort hoſe and long dublets haue made our lawes leape out at the windowes, becauſe they ſpeake too loude: alſo that our coffers are for the moſt part as voyde of golde as the head of a paſſionate louer is of reaſon, they conclude that our ſelues doe better deſerue to be mocked.
               Let vs now come to the ſecond article of our vayne expences, Expenſes in building. conſiſting of the immoderate affections that ſundrie beare vnto ſtately buildings. For although it hath bene ſo from the beginning, yet was it but little in reſpect of our tyme, wherein we ſee the qualities of the buildings and the number of builders farre to ſurmount the olde tyme. And eſpecially our Nobilitie haue therein exceeded, rather vpon vayne glorie then any neceſſitie. I ſuppoſe it is not much aboue threeſcore yeeres ſince that Architecture was reſtored in France, where before men lodged but groſſely. But ſince that the faire fruites of this arte hath bene reuealed, many haue endeuoured to put them in practiſe. If none but great or ritch men had employed onely the aboundance of their Crownes vpon ſuch workes, it had not bene to be reproued, conſidering they were ornaments both to towne and countrie. But after their example the meane wealthie perſons, yea euen the poore haue coueted to ſet hand to the worke, and as it were at vnwares haue bene forced to doe much more then they thought for: and that not without repentaunce.
               The Lawyers likewiſe and eſpecially the Treaſorers haue likewiſe encreaſed the deſire of the Lordes to building. For ſay they: How is this? Theſe men that are not ſo well grounded as wee

doe build like Princes, and ſhall we ſit ſtill? So as it were vpon ſpite one at an other, we haue a multitude of goodly houſes made and that oftentymes with the loſſe of the reuenues, which are fallen to other men, through that vehement paſſion that vrged them to heape vp ſtone vpon ſtone. How many haue there bene that hauing begunne ſtately buildings, haue left them vnperfect, as hauing learned to bee wiſe in the middeſt of their follie▪ In euery Prouince wee ſee but too many examples. It may bee that ſome when they haue ſeene themſelues ſo well clothed and ſpangled in golde, haue ſaide: This cage is too narrowe for ſo fayre a foule, it muſt haue a more ſtately one. To which diſcourſe ſome flatterer may haue replyed. Sir, it is a ſhame your neighbour, who is no better then your ſelfe ſhould be better lodged. But take hart, for he that beginneth bouldly hath finiſhed halfe his worke, neither can a wiſe man want habilitie. Then he feeling himſelfe clawed where it itched, by and by in his minde conceiued a purpoſe which he began with pleaſure, continued with labour and charges and ended with ſorrowe. So as it hath often fallen out, ſuch a one hath builded a houſe fit for a Lord of 25000. Franckes rent, whoſe heire hath not found aboue ſeuen or eight hundred, and being aſhamed to lodge his pouertie ſo ſtately, hath ſould it to buy an other more fit for his liuing. And him that would not ſo ſell, to bee driuen to feede vpon ſmall loues, as wee ſay, and when his friends came to viſite him, to entertaine them with diſcourſes of Architecture. When Fryer Iohn of Antomeures (who was one of the pleaſanteſt Monckes of his tyme) entred into any of theſe ſo ſtately houſes or Caſtles, finding but a leane kitchin, he vſed to ſay. Oh! to what purpoſe are all theſe goodly Towers, Galleries, Chambers, Halles and Cloſets, ſith the cauldrons are ſo colde and the ſellers ſo emptie? By the Popes worthie pantofle, (for that was his accuſtomed oath) I had rather dwell vnder a ſmall roofe, and out of my chamber heare the melodie of the ſpits, ſmell the ſauour of the roſt, and ſee my cubbord garniſhed with flagons, pots and goblets, then to dwell in theſe great Pallaces, to take large walkes and picke my teeth fasting after the neopolitaine maner. I like of their opinion that counſaile that if any will build, it be vpon condition that he ſell little or none of his goods: And who ſo doth otherwiſe I referre him to the cenſure of Fryer Iohn of Antomeures. I knowe that one of the ſingularities in France is the ſtately buildings diſpoſed ouer the fieldes, which is not els where to bee ſeene. But he that ſhould withall reckon how many men

theſe magnificencies haue ſent to the wallet, would ſay it were déere ware.
               The third article that here I minde to ſet downe is a conſequence of the exceſſe afore going. For when a Gentleman hath Expenſes in moueables. built a goodly houſe, it is not all: he muſt garniſh it with mooueables conuenient: otherwiſe it were but as a body without a ſoule. So that if he were earneſt to haue it finiſhed, he is no leſſe eager to furniſh it within, and ordinarily curioſitie ouercommeth all conſideration of things neceſſary. He cannot reſt till he hath gotten Flemiſh hangings and millan beds: and thereto will euen his friend prouoke him: reſpecting rather at vnawares the beautifying of his follie, then the bottome of his purſe which many tymes is but flat.
               In olde tyme if a Gentleman together with his wiues good huſwiferie, at the ende of his daies left his houſe well furniſhed to his Children, it was a great matter. Now wee are ſo haſtie, that in two yéeres wee muſt haue it decked vp, which impatiencie hurteth much: as therein obſeruing neither tyme, quantitie nor qualitie of things: but onely noting what our neighbour doth, and ſatiſfying our owne deſire without meaſuring of our habilities. Euery man delighteth to ſee a proper houſe and handſomely furniſhed: But it followeth not therefore that it is neceſſarie to haue ſuch ritch mooueables. For handſomneſſe conſiſteth in well diſpoſing of thoſe thinges that wee haue, conioyned with clenlineſſe. Wee doe ordinarily ſee the houſes of ſimple Burgeſes and Marchants, euen in the lowe Countries, ſo handſomely decked vp, and that with little, that Noblemen might be aſhamed to keepe theirs ſo foule, and it is only care and diligence (things of ſmall price) that doe breede this.
               The Lord Marſhall of S. Andrewes was moſt ſumptuous in precious moueables, which cauſed diuers Princes, Lords, Gentlemen and others, to endeuour to imitate him in ſuch inſupportable magnificence, to the ende they might bee wondered at as he was, but ſome of their Children haue bewayled their fathers follie: and this complaint hath encreaſed when byting vſurie with her long talents hath catched euen out of ſome Princes Caſtles ſuch ritch booties.
               The fourth article that I haue reſerued to ſpeake of, is the ſuperfluity Expenſes of mouth and ouer great retenue. of the mouth expences, and the ouer great traines of moſt of the Nobilitie: wherein reſteth no leſſe diſorder then in the reſt.

They whoſe mindes doe ſomewhat aſpire to 
                     〈◊〉
                   or doe lone great traynes, weening peraduenture that he that rideth with ſixe horſes muſt haue more curteſies thē he that rideth but with three. Others alſo that delight in good companie, haue a great care to haue their tables alwaies well furniſhed. Now is there nothing wherein we vſe leſſe repugnance then in that contention which euery one taketh in himſelfe to vſe either the one or the other: Neither were it much to bee miſliked in the Nobilitie in caſe they excéeded not the bounds of their habilitie, but it is in them ſo eaſie a matter to faile of that, that of tenne you can hardly finde two that can bridle themſelues therein. Among thoſe that meane to followe the Court or Armes, there bee fewe but eate vp their whole reuenues of one yeere, ſome in ſixe moneths, and ſome in eight, by reaſon of their great traynes and other expences. And although ſome maintaine or enritch themſelues in ſuch places, the number is but ſmall: except thoſe that be benefited by the King or Princes: or thoſe that in the warres doe helpe them ſelues with the large priuiledges thereof, yet all the reſt doe feele the diſcommodities, in reſpect of the continuall charges that they are compelled to be at. Which notwithſtanding, fewe doe amend, but contrariwiſe ſtill they ſeeke ſome newe occaſion of expences. What hath moued aboue three hundred Gentlemen yet liuing importunately to ſue vnto our Kings to giue them the order of S. Michell, ſaue onely a deſire to encurre newe charges, to the ende not to diſgrace their newe dignitie. Howbeit, there be aboue a hundred who finding that the continuation thereof led them the hye way to the Hoſpitall, haue layd vp their collers in their coffers, and moderating their vertues haue taken vpon them again their auncient courſe of life, and haue found eaſe therein. Who ſo likewiſe will count the Gentlemen of the Chamber, and of the bodie, the Eſcuryrie: the Coronels and Captaines, that likewiſe are more then we thinke for had, neede to ſtudie, Arithmeticke. But thinking that ſome of them are to their coſtes growne wiſe, I wil now ſay no more. Neither wil I thinke but the ſeeking of offices proceedeth from ſome ſpring: Namely, from a deſire that the Nobilitie hath to be well accoumpted of and to encreaſe. But their iudgement is amiſſe, to think that a dignitie may make a man worthie of honor, which is not truely atchieued but by vertue. As for thoſe that for the moſt part doe n
                     〈…〉
                  r ſtirre out of the doores, they haue likewiſe ſo ſuffered themſelues to bee led away by cuſtome, that he whoſe father (who was farre ritcher

then he) kept but ſixe ſeruants, hath aboue fifteene. But to what purpoſe doe ſo many gay garments, with ſo large and well furniſhed a houſe ſerue, if a man haue not alſo a great trayne to make himſelfe bee termed My Lord? They may for their diſcharge ſay that their fathers had not half ſo much rent as they, which is true. But withall that which then coſt but fiue ſouze coſteth now twentie. As alſo it is but an abuſe to relye vpon ſome ſmall encreaſe of rent, and to haue no conſideration of other diſcommodities. An auncient man ſpeaking of the Romaines, hauing noted the maner of their life, ſayd: That they built as if they ſhould neuer dye, and in their almoſt ordinary banquets, fed as if they ſhould liue but one day. I thinke that among vs there bee the like which put the ſame in practiſe: but if the Ciuill warre holde but a while, it will cure them well enough of this diſeaſe. I might yet note many other exceſſiue charges that moſt of the Nobilitie is at, in matters breeding pleaſure, yea I might frame a fifth argument, but I will forbeare, leauing to their iudgements that knowe what it is worth, how much money is ſo conſumed. If now any be diſpoſed to argue and gainſay me as not being ſatiſfied with that which I haue alleadged, my Experiēce proueth the former diſcourſe. deſire is that he aſke of the people as Tenniſplayers doe: then if he enquire of Gentlemen that trauaile the worlde, their owne experience wil make their tongues to teſtifie well for me: For a great number of them doe walke, ſome an ordinary pace, others a trot, and others in poſt directly into the gulfes of pouertie: for cuſtome and their affections concurring together, it is vnpoſſible to holde them backe. The aduertiſement of an auncient Poet is excellent, who ſayth.
               
                  Happie is he whom other mens harmes doe make to beware.
               
               Yet haue we not much vſed it: but how ſhould wee doe it, conſidering that notwithſtanding wee feele the miſchiefes euen vpon our ſhoulders, we can hardly bee brought to amendment? It were enough to breede ſhame, that a Gentleman for the leaſt occaſions of expence that happeneth ſhould be driuen to ſell or morgage his land, who then perſwadeth himſelfe that a ſmall debt is but a ſmall matter. Which alſo I will graunt him, but when he continueth in doing it againe, as it oft happeneth in tenne yéeres, he afterward findeth that all theſe ſmall peeces gathered together doe make a great hole. But bad huſbands will neuer enter into theſe accompts, becauſe it grieueth them to ſee ſuch a heape of follies.
               In olde tyme he was accompted a need
                     •
                  e Gentleman, and one

that deſerued not to bee thought ritch, that had not his houſe well furniſhed of neceſſarie things, and ſome good ſtore of ſiluer in his cloſet, for any ſudden neceſſitie, or to ſuccour ſome friend that were fallen into aduerſitie: or to make any ſuch haſtie iourney as his honour ſhould commaund him: for ſuch accidents can beare no delay. And becauſe the Nobilitie in thoſe daies was alwaies furniſhed of the meanes aforeſayd, they were euer able to accompliſh their deſires, where as we through our follie and waſting doe ordinarily faile in due debts. Thus wee ſee how euill huſbandrie maketh ritches as it were vnprofitable vnto ſome, when good huſbandrie maketh them moſt profitable.
               The meanes to attaine to the good vſe thereof, is to conquer Of the trew and right vſe of goods. the monſter called Opinion that lodgeth within vs, and whence hauing expelled Prudence (who is the guide of our actions) he handleth thoſe in whom he hath ſet foote, at his pleaſure. There be two great proppes that holde him vp: namely, the example of the mightie and cuſtome. But if we were well purged of vanitie he ſhould haue no ſuch power as he hath. It is too great ouerſight at other mens appetites, in imitating them, to ſeeke to buy diſcommoditie, and ſo conſequently pouertie. Many accompt nothing to be more infamous to a Gentleman then couetouſneſſe, and my ſelfe doe confeſſe it: Howbeit, to the ende to eſchue it, a man muſt not enſnare himſelfe in the nettes of prodiga
                     •
                  itie. And although that be a farre leſſe imperfection then the other, yet is it ſtill a ruinous miſchiefe which muſt bee eſchued, otherwiſe it were, according to the prouerbe: for the auoiding of the feuer to fall into the who
                        •
                      miſchiefe. The couetous perſon loueth no man, becauſe he hateth himſelfe: and indureth many miſeries in the middeſt of all his haboundance. But the waſtfull and ſuperfluous man by ouerlouing himſelfe runneth into pouertie.
               The true way therfore is to guide himſelfe in the meane, which The remedies againſt the aboue ſaid intemperance. bringeth neither trouble of minde nor repentance, becauſe it doth expell neceſſitie out of mens houſes, and repleniſh them with haboundance. It were a goodly matter if men could ſuffer reaſon ſo to rule them, that they would yeeld to the true exhortations to thē made, as well by the writings of the learned as by their friendes counſayles. And truely it were hard but they that reade the braue bookes of the auncients, namely of Plutarke (which entreate of the true vſe of ritches, of thrift, of not taking vpon vſurie, & how to exerciſe liberalitie) & withall do conſider ye examples of

                  Epaminondas and Fabritius, ſhould bee inuited to eſchue all ſuperfluities. Secondly, the friends ſpeeches ſhould be of ſome force. For when we imagine: This man warneth me for my good: for he is my kinſeman: he loueth me well: he is one that knowes the true rule 
                  Frends. 
                  how to liue: he is a man of iudgement and experience: He muſt beof à very bad diſpoſition that will take no profite of ſuch inſtructions. But the moſt part are ſo diſpoſed that what ſo goeth in at one eare, commeth preſently out at the other, and ſo they turne to their olde liues. I will not denye but men muſt frame themſelues to their countrie cuſtomes, euen in ordinary things, howbeit with this condition, that they eſchue all diſorder and ſuperfluitie. Finally, the beſt ſchoolem
                     •
                  iſter that man can haue is Neceſsitie: for moſt are made wiſer by her then by any doctrine or reaſon. Of Neceſsitie 
                  Neceſſitie. there be two ſo
                     ••
                  s. The one that haingeth inconueniences: The other that threatneth deſtruction. The firſt vrgeth, the ſecond forceth amend. So as we may ſay that vntill our owne experience hath perſwaded vs as well as the wordes of the wiſe, all the miſeries of fooles ſtand vs in ſmall ſtead. Happie therefore are thoſe that can in ſo good tyme order themſelues that they bee not afterward forced to keepe a ſtraight dyet of 
                     •
                  iue or tenne yéeres long, for the repayring of thoſe breaches which their exceſſe haue made▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   vs ſpeake ſomewhat of thoſe that are thought well to adminiſter Of ſuch as encline to the extremitie contrary to the former. that which they poſſeſſe. If we looke well we ſhall ſee that many of them doe but appropriate their wealth to their owne glorie and pleaſures, as hauing ſmall care of charitie: and they do thus diſcourſe with themſelues. I am neither couetous nor prodigall: but I ſprud my goods honestly to my owne contentation and the encreaſe of my houſe. Who then can blame mee? Thoſe that thus gouerne themſelues deſerue ſome commendation: but to beſtowe all onely vpon themſelues is a defect, and that no ſmall one. This prouerbe is rife in many mens mouthes: Charitie begins with a mans ſelfe, neither muſt we vnclothe our ſelues to couer others. But theſe be ſuch errors as extinguiſh al bountie. Nobilitie ought to eſchue them becauſe they corrupt the integritie of maners. And as the ſame is more bound then the common ſorte to exerciſe it ſelfe in liberall actions, euen ſo is it to make it ſelfe to ſhine (meaſuring affection according to habilitie) as wel for it owne contentation as for the preſeruing of good renowme. But if we liſt well to examine the rules, of Chriſtianitie whereto eſpetially we ought to ſubmit our actiōs, many ſhall finde themſelues farre enough from the precents thereof.

Yet are there but fewe that thinke vppon, and hauing thought of it once a weeke, it vaniſheth as doth the image when a man turneth his glaſſe: and ſo returning to their accuſtomed manner, they conceiue ſome imagination that to vſe riches according to the commaundements of the diuine preceptes, is as much as to depriue themſelues of the moſt parte of the honour, profit, and pleaſure that they bring. But it is but a falſe imagination: for there is no perfect inſtruction that teacheth the true vſe of riches, but the ſame is therein deſcribed. Hee that ſeeth himſelfe rich, ſhoulde A certaine rule in the vſe of riches. often conſider whence his abūdance commeth. And although that ordinarily it ſeemeth to proceed from the parents labors, yet muſt we cōfeſſe that it was brought forth by the bleſſing of God, who as Salomon ſayth is the author of riches. The rich and the poore are mette, and the Lord made them both. Moſes lykewiſe vppon this point giueth vs a verie holie admonition, as well generally as perticularly, Pro. 22. ſaying: Let not thy heart be puffed vp, neither forget the 
                  Deut. 8. 
                  Lord thy God, that thou ſayeſt not in thy heart: My power and the ſtrength of my hand haue gotten me theſe goods, but remember the Lord thy God, that it is he that hath giuen thee this power. Nowe when we haue this liuely impreſſion in vs, yt it is hee that giueth goods, we therevpon doe conclude, that it is his will they ſhoulde be iuſtly and truely adminiſtred. For our ſelues are but ſtewardes thereof, And ſo oft as we heare the poore crie in our eares, it is as if God ſhould ſummon vs of our duetie, which is, to ſuccour the needie. But if we ſtop our eares, they are as many condemnations agaynſt vs: Which the rich glutton wel proued, who being plunged in a ſea of delights, reiected the grones of Lazarus. Heereby may we knowe that riches doe ſo beſot thoſe that ſuffer themſelues to bee maiſtered by them that they forgette what they ought to doe.
               
                  Plutarke recordeth that the Scithians in the middeſt of theyr A notable aduertiſement to the rich. banquets were accuſtomed to ſtrike vpon & make their bowſtrings to ſounde, ſo to reclaime theyr ſpirits which they feared to mollifie & looſe among the diuerſitie of ſo many delicates: euen ſo likewiſe theſe worldlings that abounde with ſo many temporall bleſſings ought ſometimes to make ſounde in their eares this ſaying of Ieſus Chriſt (That it is more eaſie for a Camell to paſſe through a needles eie, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen:) ſo to waken them out of theyr deepe ſlumber and want of charitie procured by the vapours of wealth. I knowe well inough that

ſome of thoſe that ſet before their eyes nothing but worldly pompe will ſcoffe at this aduertiſement, and ſaie that wee muſt preache magnificence and valiancie to yong Gentlemen, rather than theſe ſmall duties of pietie, which are more fit for old men that haue not aboue ſome three or foure yeres to liue: which is as much as if they ſhould ſaie, We in our youth will paſſe awaie our time in delights and vanitie, and when we grow into age we will take order for better gouernment. But to them I will make no other anſwere, but onelie aduertiſe them that to end well they muſt beginne well, and that death doth as ſoone catch him that is but twentie yeres old, as him that is ſixtie.
               The wiſe alſo wil reiect theſe ſcoffes, in conſideration that it is no vncompatible thing to vſe goods as a Chriſtian and as a vertuous perſon: for the one wel fitteth the other, but the worthieſt muſt march firſt becauſe that Euangelicall preceptes are to bee preferred before thoſe that proceede from Philoſophers rules. The one pulleth downe our charitie euen to the pooreſt, and the other ſtretcheth out our liberalitie to our friends, and to thoſe that deſerue it: wherein there is not ſo great difference as ſimilitude, in that euerie of the ſayde actions are well done, which likewiſe ought to proceede of heartie good will. Theſe were good and profitable expenſes, wherein the nobilitie ought to imploie parte of their abundance, Honorable & and neceſſary expenſes. rather than in many vnprofitable vanities, for ſo ſhould they not be without reward as Salomon ſheweth ſaying: He that hath pittie vpon the poore lendeth vnto the Lord, and it ſhall bee paied him againe. In reſpect of other liberalities, I lyke of Alexander, whē 
                  Prou 19. one aſked him where he hid his treaſure. I commit it (ſayde hee) to the cuſtodie of my friend: thereby ſignifieng that whatſoeuer was diſtributed vnto honeſt mē was not loſt, becauſe the reward of perfect amitie or loiall ſeruice, which thereby hee retained in their harts, was farre more precious than the golde or ſiluer that he diſtributed among them. But withall, we muſt note that liberalitie muſt be vſed with diſcretion, in meaſuring the giuers abilitie, and not prophaning it vpon vnworthie perſons. Who ſo therefore is deſirous to learne the good vſe thereof, let him reade Seneca his treatiſe of benefites.
            
            
               
               The ninth Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the Frenchmens great affection to foreine warres, is at this time more hurtfull than profitable.
               
               
                  AMong ye 
                  French nation, armes haue ben euermore Armes the exalters of the French nation. in ſpecial recommendation: and the common opinion is, that by the ſame it hath obtayned that great glory that it hath a
                     •
                  chieued, & according to the varietie of times is increaſed or diminiſhed. Euen the nobilitie which is abundantly crept out of this innumerable a
                     ••
                  heape of people maketh (as it ſeemeth) no ſuch account of anie fame, as of that which hath proceeded from the ſword, which neuertheleſſe hath coſt both them and their neighbours deere, by reaſon of the great warres that they haue maintained. The Romaines haue aboue all nations in the world exceeded in earneſt deſire to this exerciſe, Their vſe and abuſe. which they haue greatly affected, to the ende therewith to bring vnder the yoake of their vnſupportable ambition, thoſe that gladly would eſchue the ſame. A moſt violent cuſtome which ſince hath had continuall courſe. In the firſt ages force was put in vſe to repell the iniuries whereinto humaine mallice was ouer flowen: But in theſe daies it ſerueth rather to doe iniurie than to defend therefro. So farre doe all things by little and little decline to corruption. Neuertheleſſe no man looketh ſo neere thereto, for the moſt parte doe thinke that as weapons, if they bee not often made cleane, doe ruſt, ſo lykewiſe they muſt bee often occupyed, leaſt mennes courages through the ruſt of cowardneſſe ſhould be daunted, as haue bene throughly tried among vs within theſe 35. yeres. Which notwithſtanding, ſo farre are ſome from beeing ſatiſfied with warre, that yet after ſo manye ruines and loſſes, wanting it in theyr houſes, they trauayle to ſeeke it elſe where, farre or neere.
               Thoſe that among the reſt are readieſt to depart are certayn ſouldiors & new captains, who in ye ciuil wars hauing liued licentiouſly & vpon the ſpoile, & now are loth to return vnder the yoke of the laws which repreſſe inſolencie, & withal vnderſtanding yt their good

mother Nurce is elſe where, are yet deſirous to goe and ſucke her breaſts. Some of them likewiſe are allured by foreine paie: and others becauſe they will not become artificers at home, will liue abroade lyke ſouldiours. Theſe are the ordinarie cauſes that make them to take the fielde, although moſt of them pretende the winning of honour. As alſo ſince the beginning of theſe diuiſions, orders haue not bene ſo ſtraightlie obſerued as afore time: for who ſo liſt, may departe and no man taketh anie care thereof, as if they were euill humours that purged away.
               Now theſe men that make account that they cannot liue but in the warres, and doe ſo vowe themſelues thereto, that they make of that profeſſion (which ſhoulde bee as it were extraordinarie) ſuch The error of ſuch as make the bearing of armes a perpetual occupatiō
                   a perpetuall vocation as they exalt it aboue all others, are greatlie deceiued: as not knowing, or at the leaſt, not willing to knowe that man ought principallie to ſhoote at peace and tranquilitie, to the end to liue more vprightly. For ſo long as the ſame beare ſwaie, all thinges as well publike as priuate, are in farre better order than when the confuſions of warre haue as it were reuerſed all manners and lawes.
               In this my ſaying, I meane not neuertheleſſe to condemne the lawfull warres whereinto neceſſitie conſtrayneth men to enter for theyr defence: for ſo is it no blemiſh to vſe them. Neyther will I anie whit contemne the ordinarie bandes of Princes and common wealthes: becauſe they bee the gardes of the lande, who alſo for the moſt parte doe liue in reſt. But they of whom I minde to ſpeake will neuer bee in peace, neyther doe they care when they ſerue or wherefore, ſo as they may finde fatte paſtures. There is a pretie Spaniſh ſaying which manye times they bee, and I haue tranſlated it thus.

                     Warre is my Countrie, my harneſſe, my houſe,
                     I am readie at all times to fight for a ſouſe.
                  
               
               What more could a bad Phiſition and a worſe iudge, which wiſh the Citie to be full fraught with maladies, mortalitie, and ſtrife, to the end to haue good doings, ſaie? For theſe men likewiſe ſeeke nothing but alteration of eſtates, that they may gorge themſelues with the deſtruction of the ſame. In this our age wherein wee liue, it is impoſſible for anie to exempt themſelues from warre, becauſe ambition, couetouſneſſe, and reuenge, are as fruitfull as euer they were to ingender the ſame: and when it comes, good men doe ſwallowe it lyke a moſt bitter pill. But to delyght in

ſo troubleſome a cuſtome, is to do as he that ſeeketh to be tormented continuallie vpon the ſea: Whome a man may iudge to be verie crooked and peruerſe.
               Moreouer, theſe perpetuall warriours doe (as much as in them lie) ſhake off all ſuch dueties as are moſt requiſite in a good Citizen, as that to their Countrie, wherein they ſtaie no longer than it is troubled, &c. to their parents whome ſome doe, after they are growen prowd by armes, diſdaine becauſe of their pouertie. Concerning the perticular care, that euerie one ought to haue to the erecting of a familie, to the end to leaue children to his Countrie, they neuer thinke of it, as ſeeking rather to haue ſome baſtard by their gentle goſſips that followe them, for whom afterward they take but ſmall care. Theſe imperfections be the dependaunces of that choice of lyfe, wherein the moſt of thoſe that haue embraced it, doe wrap themſelues, and finallie after long labour, if they can attaine thereto, they periſh againſt ſome rocke, or vpon ſome coaſt as a rouers ſhip.
               There are, will ſome man ſaie, ſome that riſe thereby, true: but not one of the fiftie. And hee that woulde gather a Catalogue of thoſe that ſuffer ſhipwracke vppon that hope, muſt haue a long roule. Another obiection is this: many beeing brought vp 
                     •
                  ong in the warres, and ſcarce knowing of whence they are, cannot but followe that trade whereinto they are faſhioned. This were not to bee blamed, if hauing reaped ſome fruite of their labours, they would, as ſome doe, ſtaie themſelues when they are meetelie well: But inceſſantlie to runne heere and there, as rauens after carren that they haue ſmelt, is, as a man ſhoulde ſaie, to tranſforme themſelues into rauenous beaſts or foules of praie. The French ſouldiour ought in warre to ſerue his king, and his Countrie, and when peace commeth he muſt ſeeke, if hee may, to get into the entertayned bandes, whereto if hee cannot reatch, hee ſhould not neuertheleſſe vppon a deſperate minde, caſt himſelfe headlong into vnconſiderate enterpriſes, as if the Realme were not able to keepe him, or himſelfe to finde meanes whereby to liue in the time of peace.
               It is a wofull matter to thinke vppon the number of men that ſo caſt awaie themſelues. For the pettie piracies of Perow doe ſwallowe vp aboue fiue hundred euerie yeere, and other foreine warres more, although the groundes bee vnlyke: ſo as in fiue or ſixe yeeres eight or nine thouſande braue ſouldiours do ſhrinke awaie,

who might better haue ſerued ſome other time (if they could haue had the patience to ſtaie) the neceſſitie of the common wealth.
               I haue heard that at the battayle which Sebaſtian king of Portugal loſt, hee had certayne French harquebuts with him, as alſo that in the armie of the Moores that ouer came him, there were ſome lykewiſe. Is not this a mad luſting after warre, to runne ſo farre to ſeeke it, yea, and to ſerue vnder Infidelles▪ I thinke when thoſe men fall into anie premeditated perill, they bee ſomewhat touched with repentance for theyr raſhneſſe: but it is then verie late.
               Thoſe who for profite onelie doe flitter about, like a birde at the Of thoſe that for money doe runne into forren warres. call, are more to bee excuſed than they that I haue ſpoken of. For when ſome Captaynes haue ſpedde, and the ſouldiours paſſed ouer their neceſſitie, they returne home agayne, although it many times fall out, that as well the one as the other are defrauded of theyr hope, in that the paie proueth ſo ſmall and rare, that they are not able to holde out: yea, and in place where paie is rifeſt, the ſouldiours taſte but little thereof: It is onelie for a fewe Colonelles and Captaines, who beeing licorous of ſuch foode, doe deuoure it, and leaue the ſouldiours in lyke caſe as Colliers and Smiths, who are all blacke and full of ſweate, while none but their maſters that ſet them on worke, doe gather the profite. Which cuſtome is farre different from that of our aunceſtours, who appointed to the Captaines the honour, and to the ſouldiours the ſiluer. But of all that profite by payes, none doe ſo well helpe themſelues as the Reyſters: And to ſaie the truth, wee are but clownes in reſpecte of them, though ſome thinke themſelues more actiue: For they are ſo perfecte in Arithmetike, that they neuer ouerſhoote themſelues in accounts.
               Lykewiſe they keepe poſſeſſion of the Priuiledges that they haue obtained, namely, high parlies, and will alwayes bee payed their olde billes. And beſides all this, they are wonderous polytike to liue in the fielde. But I praie you, will ſome aunſwere, doe the French aduenturer ſleepe in his ſentinell: dooth hee not plaie his parte well inough? Truelie wee muſt confeſſe, that he that is an vnthrift and corrupt, helpeth himſelfe brauelie, and vnderſtandeth it better than moſt of the Prieſts of Lymoſin
                   doo theyr Dominus vobiſcum: But in deed they can neither write nor reade. Yet do they not come neere theſe others, in the vnderſtanding of this martiall

practiſe.
               Now a worde or two of thoſe that had rather runne alwayes abroade, Of thoſe who hauing once borne armes will neuer doe other worke. than returne to theyr occupations, or ſerue: ſome there are that thinke ſuch delyberations to proceede of generoſitie. Which I cannot graunt, vnleſſe to a verie fewe: for it is not vnlyke but among a greate number of common people exerciſing handie ceaftes, there maye bee ſome that are indued with a noble minde, and well diſpoſed to vertue. Setting aſide therefore this ſmall number, I will ſpeake of the reſt, of whome I will ſaie, that it is more lykely that the 
                     •
                  ainglorie wherewith, after they haue ſerued a while, they bee puſ
                     •
                  ed vp, together with idleneſſe and ſouldierlyke libertie, dooth breede their vnwillingneſſe to returne to their former trade of life. For they imagine that ſuch as ſee them trauayle and get theyr liuinges with their handie worke, eſpecially after they haue ben Corporals or Serieaunts, will ſcorne them: but withall they conſider not that in ſeeking to eſchue this imaginarie ſhame they doe manye times by a voluntarie conſtraynt plunge themſelues in robberyes, deceites, and couſo
                     •
                  
                  nings.
               
                  Neceſſitie, ſaie ſome, doe ſometimes compell the poore ſouldior for his lyfe, to borrowe of them that haue ouermuch: yea, according to the law of Neceſſitie. But lykewiſe according to the ciuill lawes, if they bee caught, they paie deerelie for it. It were more for theyr profite to imitate a great number of other Souldiours, who after they haue valyauntly handeled their weapons, doe not diſdayne their olde accuſtomed vocations. And my ſelfe haue knowen them in Gaſcogne (whoſe ſtomackes are haughtie enough) whome in the time of peace we ſhoulde ſee in Townes working in theyr ſhoppes, and yet in the time of warre had charge and commande ouer companies. And the ſame is the practiſe in all the Townes of France, eſpeciallie ſince the ciuill warres beganne.
               For in as much as during the troubles all the Townſmen haue bene in armes, alſo that for theyr ſafegards ſo many tooke weapon in hande, it muſt needes followe that all this multitude in time of peace ſhoulde returne to theyr firſt trades, ſauing ſome fewe. But before it was not ſo, for it was ſome trouble to furniſh againe thoſe that had abandoned them.
               And euen at this time among ſuch of the Spaniards as liue in their

bandes, it is a reproch to trauayle in Mechanicall artes. Wherein they haue reaſon: becauſe that they endeauouring to faſhion, maintaine and increaſe themſelues in footemen, and withall ſo continuing ſome twentie or fiue and twentie yeeres without anie care of returning into their owne Countries, it becommeth them not amiſſe.
               I will alſo aduowe that among vs he that hath ſome long time profeſſed armes, delighteth in them, and is in the waie to attaine thereto, in ſeeking a place among the ſtanding companies, or ſome other good fortune, dooth but his dutie. But when ſuch commodities fayle him, hee 
                     ••
                  uſt not thinke himſelfe diſhonoured though he labour for the maintainance of himſelfe and his familie, if he haue anie, as euen to this daie they doe in Germanie, Zuitzerland, and Flanders. All theſe ſo common exāples ſhould rather induce thoſe that be gone affraie to imitate them, than to doe as they doe. But if anie doe thinke that the ſetting vp againe of their occupations, doth abaſe them, let them goe ſerue the Gentlemen. Which in my opinion they cannot refuſe to doe, conſidering how the poorer ſorte of gentlemen can ſettle themſelues to that calling: howbeit if they be out of taſt herewith, they muſt be let runne, and tarie till time amend them.
               We lykewiſe finde ſome of the bodie of the Gentrie, who moued by diuerſe reaſons doe alſo ſet the feather in the winde, and go Of French Gentlemen that goe to ſerue in forrein countries. to ſeeke the like aduentures. Among which the youth is moſt to bee excuſed, who driuen by a certaine deſire to learne and to winne credite, doo goe whereſoeuer occaſion may ſerue. They wanting iudgement to diſcerne which enterpriſes are lawfull and which not, ſo ſoone as the winde bloweth in the ſayles of theyr deſires, which are large, doe ſpred them, and ſo are eaſily carried awaie. It is pittie ſo many are loſt in ſuch places, where beeing neither knowen nor guided, they paſſe vnder the miſeries of the multitude. Thoſe that haue authoritie ouer them ought to be careful to counſayle them well.
               Others there are whome pouertie driueth from home: for beeing noble, the exerciſes of Mechanicall artes and traficke woulde turne to their reproch, and therefore they muſt ſeeke the liberall and honourable, among whome weapons doe walke. Neuertheleſſe though this profeſſion bee conuenient for them, yet muſt they not abuſe it as they that I haue ſpoken of. For ſo are they the more to be blamed, in that the noble Gentleman is ſtraightlyer bound

to liue vertuouſly than the peaſant. What ſhall hee then doe, if you will not let him ſeeke his fortune? I anſwere, that in our France poore Gentlemen haue no cauſe, as deſperate perſons, to take diuerſe partes, conſidering what meanes they haue to attayne to honour and wealth.
               Firſt the men of armes were inſtituted for the maintainance of theſe, to the end theyr valour ſhould not periſhe, but bee reſerued for the benefite of the ſtate. Then haue they the Eccleſticall offices whereto they may aſcend, as alſo the iuſticeſhip which in olde time they exerciſed. The cōmendatories of Malta do alſo releeue ſome: likewiſe the ſeruice of Lordes with whome not onely they were brought vp as pages, but alſo being men they haue their maintainance is a good refuge for them.
               Finally, the bands of footmen doe retaine many. Wherefore the wiſe ſhould rather ſettle themſelues to the beſt of theſe, than by thinking to profite abroade to looſe their liues. Some will ſaie that death catcheth not ſo many as wee ſpeake of, but they deceiue themſelues: for I haue noted the number to be greater than we weene for, & of meere compaſſion that I take of them, I would that through good inſtr
                     •
                  utions or other remedies, the miſchiefe might bee preuented. Yet doe I not meane that orders ſhoulde be ſo ſtrict, that none may go forth without leaue. For in ſuch a great populous kingdome as this, that lawe cannot be eſtabliſhed. And if there were but foure or fiue hundred voluntaries as well of the Gentrie as communaltie, that of theyr owne perticular motions would yeerely go into the warres, as foule to theyr haunt, it were but a ſmall matter & not to be ſpoken of. But there go many more of that ſorte as I haue ſayd. And many Gentlemen alſo of account and greate credite who are readie inough to march: and whenſoeuer they moue, they incite many other. Wherfore before they ſo do, it were theyr parts well to examine the cauſes, which being vnlawfull, as being moued by nothing but their owne profite or honour, they ſhew that they haue ſmall care of their friends, in counſailing them thoſe things that tend more to their own particular intereſt, than to common equitie. In this caſe men muſt be wiſe to chooſe rather than willing to depart.
               Now are we to looke what fruite our Nation reape of theſe martiall voyages, which they take vppon them rather of iolitie Of the fruites of theſe martiall voyages. than any good foundation. I take it to bee verie ſmall. Firſt in▪ theſe dayes moſt of them through the libertie of ciuill warres, beeing

growen into wonderfull diſcordes, going abroade, doe nothing but laie open theyr imperfections, which they ſhould ſeeke eyther to amend or hide. Some are blaſphemers of God: others adulterers, quarellers, and diſſolute perſons, and many diſobedient to their Captaynes: of whome lykewiſe ſome do eyther for their owne profite or through ignaraunce breake good lawes and order. So as when men ſee that the effects bee not anſwerable to the French name, they growe of liking with them.
               On the other ſide, thoſe people that are driuen to beare theyr inſolencies, I meane of the lawleſſe, not of the modeſt, (albeit euermore there bee good and valiant men mingled among the greate number) doe growe to hate the whole Nation for the mallice of ſome, thinking it incompatible: and in their harts doe powre forth continuall curſes agaynſt the ſame: ſo as although there be ſome Captaines, Gentlemen, and Souldiours, who through theyr good behauiours doe become agreeable vnto them, yet are they not able to ſuppreſſe the generall miſlyke. And heere is yet another inconuenience, namelie, that if there happen anie miſhappe in the warre, rather through the ſtrength of the enimie, than anie preſumption or inſufficiencie of the Captaines, eyther through the diſobedience or ſmall valour of the ſouldiours, than doe the peoples tongues euen teare in peeces thoſe whome hauing begunne to hate, they afterwarde vtterly contemne.
               Now it is moſt certayne, that in this counterfaite diſcipline loſſes are as common as good ſucceſſe or rather more. Which truelie ſhoulde make theſe that haue charge to beleeue, that it is harde to eſcape ſtumbling in ſo rugged a quarrie. Whoſoeuer therefore purpoſeth to goe on warrefare in a foreine Countrie, let him make greate account of vertue, for according to the ſame hee ſhall be eſteemed, and many times a little ſhall bee accounted off. Whereas contrariwiſe if men cary new vices, eſpeciallie ſuch as offende, no man will receiue them for ſeruauntes, much leſſe for Maiſters: and without affoording them anie thing, will laugh at them, & which is yet worſe, they ſhall be feared as much as if they were open enimies.
               This together with the miſeries afore touched maketh mee to Armes ought eſpecially in a forren contry to be accompanied with vertue. beleeue that vntill that manners and martiall diſcipline bee in better ſtate among the French nation, they ſhall atchieue ſmall credite and leſſe good will among our neighbours whome they ſhall goe to ſerue. Truelie it is in vaine to thinke that force onelie

can worke anie greate effects: for not beeing accompanyed with iuſtice, faith, and modeſtie, it is vnperfect. But by the demonſtration of vertue the heart is wonne, which is a ſure and glorious conqueſt, examples whereof the Romaines haue lefte vnto vs.
               I knowe well inough that as well the Gentleman as the Souldiour maye obiecte to thoſe that ſet them on worke manie things worthie conſideration: namelie, that they hazarde theyr liues, receiue bodilie woundes, ſpende their goods, and endure great paine for their ſeruice: all which will neuertheleſſe looſe their grace and bee of no account, if theſe deprauations continue. For the people whome the Souldiours dooth oppreſſe will not ſo much excuſe them for defending of them, as they will curſe them for deuouring them, as burying the remembrance of the benefite in the ſmart of the euils. But thoſe that performe theyr duties to the beſt of theyr powers as well in fighting as in good life, they loue and excuſe.
               Some will ſaie, in theſe foreine warres that they they go to ſeeke, Aunſwere to certaine obiections. they may learne much. I confeſſe it: But withall wee muſt note, that from the ſiege of Maſtricht, which was the notableſt in our time, there eſcaped but tenne French Souldiours, and not foure from that of Harlem, in which two Townes there were enough, as I haue heard.
               I am not ſo ignoraunt but I knowe that the propertie of warre is ordinarilie to deuour at the leaſt the fourth parte of thoſe that followe it: but when of the fiue partes it catcheth foure, as often times it doth, is it not too rauenous? This haue I ſayde to the end that thoſe that goe as vnfeathered boultes into places of great noiſe, may remember yt eaſely they depart, but verie hardly returne agayne. Thoſe that weene that when France hath had peace for two or three yeeres, ſhe ſhoulde neuer haue warre agayne, doe deceiue themſelues. For if they conſider what hath paſſed ſince the yeere 1494. they ſhall ſee that ſhee hath not beene long in reſt ſince.
               To be briefe, they that bee wiſe (if they will follow my counſaile) ſhal enter into theſe voluntarie purpoſes with leaden heeles, yea, euen the Gentlemen, as calling to minde that to goe raſhlie and put their liues in more dangerous than neceſſarie aduentures, (which they ſhoulde neuer doe but vppon good occaſions) is an

argument of French raſhneſſe, an engendering of parents teares and a weakening of the ſinowes of the ſtate. But when theyr enterpriſes are vnderpropped with iuſtice, and that the lawe full commaundements of Kinges wealthes doe ſet in foote, who in reſpecte of alliaunces doe ſende helpe to theyr confederates, and vppon any other neceſſarie occaſion doe ſuccour and releeue the oppreſſed: then muſt wee not conſider of anie daungers or diſcommodityes. For in dooing our duetyes, whether wee ſuffer, or whether wee periſhe, our labour or loſſe is alwayes well imployed.
               Nowe will I diſcourie vppon a certayne polytike rule, vſuallie alleadged in ſuch lyke affayres as this. Which many verie excellent An examination of the rule of certain politicks who are of opinion that a great kingdome ſhould neuer be with out warre againſt ſome ſtranger. perſons both haue and ſtill doe allowe, to ſee howe the ſame may agree with vs. This is it, A great eſtate repleniſhed with warlike people, ought ſtill to haue ſome foreine warre wherewith to keepe it occupied, leaſt beeing at quiet they conuert their weapons each againſt other.
               
               The maintayners heereof doe alleadge the example of Scipio Naſica, who counſayled it to the Romaines. Concluding that Carthage ought not to bee razed, to the end ſtill to haue an enimie whome to feare and bee alwayes buſied withall: For (ſayde he) if this feare and cauſe bee taken awaie, they be in danger to moue one againſt another in their owne land. Heereto they adde, that experience hath taught, that when we haue appeaſed our foreine warres, we haue entered into ciuill which haue almoſt beaten vs quite down.
               
               
                  Moreouer, that our Nation beeing inſolent in peace, impatient of tarrying long in the houſe, full of generoſitie, and deſirous of glorie, must of neceſſitie exerciſe it ſelfe in armes, to the ende to diſcharge ſo many conceites of the minde, without the Realme, and not within.
               
               Finallie, that the badde humours remayning of our ciuill diſſention (by theſe humours meaning corrupted perſons) had need to be purged, and therefore that we ſhould ſuffer them to go out of themſelues, if wee ſee them ſo diſploſed, or elſe to force them foorth by arte, least they ſhoulde breede anie new diſeaſe. And this hath beene put heeretofore in practiſe at the ende of our warres agaynst the Engliſh Nation. Trulie I dare not denie but we are to attribute much to the obſeruations of antiquitie, of things that haue had good ſucceſſe when they haue bene vſed in time conuenient. But withall, I dare aduowe that euerie time to applie the ſame to an eſtate, and not to

conſider the ſeuerall diſpoſition thereof, is to miſtake. Likewiſe the better to know how to applie this vnto vs, let vs looke in what ſtate it now ſtandeth. In truth it is ſo euill at eaſe, that the miniſtering of ſo vigorous a lawe, in ſteade of a remedie, were the waie to weaken it more and more. Euerie man knoweth that our troubles began aboue 24. yeres agoe, which haue beene no warres, but butcherly ſlaughters, & who ſo liſt to beleue a booke printed vnder the name of Frumenteau, which layeth open the chiefe deſolations of our land, how can be but wonder at ſo terrible deſtructions? Aboue halfe the Nobilitie is periſhed: As for ſouldiours we muſt count them by legions, the people vniuerſally waſted, the treaſuries ſucked The ſtrange miſiries of our ciuill Warres. drie, debts increaſed, diſcipline neglected, godlineſſe periſhed, manners depraued, iuſtice corrupted, men diuided, and all thinges in ſale. Be not theſe braue preparatiues to build new purpoſes? It is as if a man in lieu of ſtones ſhould take clots of earth, and myre in ſtead of lime, and then chooſe a mariſh ground to builde a Caſtle vpon: whom we might with good reaſon wiſh to renue his wits, to conſider the defects of his ſtuffe, and to ſtaie vntill hee were better prouided. Likewiſe in that ſtate wherein we now ſtand, to enter of a iolitie into anie great warre before that foure or fiue yeres haue renued our youth, were it not as a man ſhoulde ſay, as much as to let him bloud againe that hath alreadie loſt almoſt all his bloud? And to vndertake the ſame wtout diſcipline, is as much as to builde without rule. Neither is it any leſſe inconuenience to be vnprouided of money. For ſooner might a man make a ſhip to ſwim without oares or ſayles, than proſecute a warre without wealth. Who then would be ſo farre ouerſeene as to counſayle vs to beginne the thing that muſt haue a bad end, which neceſſarilie will enſue of the defects aforeſayd?
               I am ſure that Scipio Naſica aforementioned, neuer meant to wiſh them voluntarily to begin an enterpriſe whereof they coulde reape nothing but loſſe and infamie, neither would aduowe ſuch a one to bee profitable to a lande alreadie halfe buried in miſeries: For hee feared not the Romaines aduerſitie, but theyr proſperitie, which brought with it pride and inſolencie. And this we are to note, that foure yeere after that Publius Cornelius Scipio had ouercome Hannibal, and made peace with the Carthegenians, the Romaines grewe ſo haughtie, ſeeing themſelues crowned with ſo many victories and triumphes, that theyr ſkinnes coulde not holde them. Then was not diſcipline anie whit out of frame. The

common treaſurlie was mightilie increaſed as well with the riche ſpoylos of Carthage as of Spaine, neyther had they anie want of men. This was the cauſe that moued the Senate to thinke it conuenient to be doing with Philip of Macedon which was a verie wiſe practiſe of ye rule aforeſaid. But what conformitie is there between our preſent ſtate and the ſtate of the Romaines at that time? As much as betweene a rich, ſound, and well ordered man, and a poore, ſieke, and buruly perſon. Let vs then firſt cure our diſeaſes, before wee imitate their dooinges in theyr full force and ſtrength.
               Many doe thinke France to bee as well repleniſhed with men as euer it was. Wherein they deceiue themſelues. And in my opinion Whether Fraunce be well furniſhed of men of warre. the matter that deceiueth them is, that they ſee the moſt of thoſe that ga
                     ••
                  e vp and downe make great bragges in words, habite and co
                     ••
                  tenaunce: For if a cobler hath beene a ſouldiour but two yeeres, hee will thinke himſelfe worthie to weare a guilte ſwoorde (which our Fathers woulde haue beene loath to permitte to anie vnder the degree of knighthoode) yea, and hee will weare it if hee can come by it eyther by hooke or crooke, as alſo his ſilke neatherſtockes, which good King Henrie the ſecond neuer ware: whereto lykewiſe his ſpeech ſhall bee correſpondent. For if this ſouldiour doe but looke awrie vppon a man, hee is by and by dead at the leaſt. This is it that blindeth ſuch as take in payment ſhews and lookes, who peraduenture applying to them the Prouerbe that, One man is worth an hundered, doe imagine that our France doe ouerflowe with men of armes and warriours. But my opinion heerein is, that yet wee haue a good number both Gentlemen and commons: Theſe beeing well kepte, and to them adioyning the youth which ſixe yeeres may bring forward, wee maye trulie ſaie, that it ſhall ouerflowe with ſuch men as ſhall neede no great pricking forward to make them to ſtirre. Leſſe time can we not haue to redreſſe our warfare and repleniſh our coffers, but eſpecially to reſtore our vertues.
               But, will ſome ſaie, if anie good occaſion ſhould fall out, ſhal we let it ſlippe? That is the maiſters parte to iudge of, and peraduenture the Ladie may be ſo beautifull, that ſhee may haue a good Of warres with our the realme. looke. Yet will it be hard for vs to lyke of anie, vntill we haue put on agayne our auncient ornamentes. As for the purgation aforementioned, meete to caſt foorth the dregges which the ciuill wars haue lefte behinde them, I doubt it will proue lyke to Antimonie,
                  
which expelleth both good and badde humours together: As wee maye ſee by that which euen lately wee haue to our domage tried.
               Our weakneſſe longeth rather after reſtoritiues, than thoſe things that purge violentlie. For, ſo to thinke that France cannot bee pacified without ſending awaie fiue or ſixe thouſand diſordered ſouldiours, is but to winke with one eie. But let vs ſtirre them a little, and wee ſhall ſee that wee muſt goe farther, and that theſe little bells doe not ſound before the great ones haue rong out. We muſt thinke that moſt Frenchmen, yea, euen thoſe that follow aduentures are wearie of ſuffering ſo many miſchiefes, as the Romaines were of the ſlaughters of Marius and Silla: lykewiſe that they miſlike not of reſt, becauſe they knowe it to bee neceſſarie for them, which after they ſhall for a while haue inioyed, they wil afterwarde be but ouer-readie to imploie themſelues where a man liſt. But now had they no other enterpriſes in hand, yet were it vnlikelie that anie coulde proſper vntill the imperfections as well publike as perticular, which burie our auncient fame, were baniſhed, good order reeſtabliſhed, and vertue honoured.
            
            
               
               The tenth Diſcourſe.
               
                  
                     
                        Of the three falſe opinions that miſleade ſundrie of the Nobilitie.
                        Firſt, that the chiefe marke whereat a Gentleman ſhould aime is to become valorous.
                        Secondlie, that the Gentleman which keeping home, trauaileth not abroad to ſeeke aduentures, inioyeth ſmall contentation, and is but baſe minded.
                        Thirdly, that although the Prince command things vniuſt to his ſubiect, he muſt neuertheleſſe put them in execution.
                     
                  
               
               
                  THe Phiſitions doe ſaie, that olde diſeaſes are of hardeſt cure. Which the politikes as well A generall and meete preface to the whole diſcourſe. as they, may iuſtly affirme concerning thoſe errours that through long vſe haue taken déep roote. For whatſoeuer is fixed in the minde, hath, as a man ſhoulde ſaie, more bandes than that which is tied to the bodie: ſo as it is needfull to beſtow whole yeeres in the rooting of them out. And as the firſt doe temper ſundrie ſimples to applie to bodily iufirmities, euen ſo ſhould the ſeconde out of the rules of wiſedome drawe profitable inſtructions to reforme the manners of thoſe thāt liſt to vſe the ſame. Howbeit, ſome woulde ſaie the Phiſition to bee verie preſumptuous that ſhould come to a Patients houſe vnſent for, but in the care of ſpirituall diſeaſes and euill cuſtomes, hee that ſeeth his Countrie afflicted and taketh compaſſion thereof, maye in my opinion, freely diſcourſe and write of the ſame, ſo long as he wayeth hir diſpoſition, and hath in himſelfe anie tender regard toward the ſubiect whereto he would apply it.
               I will begin with the firſt opinion which hath not ſprong out of any bad fountaine, but from the vniuerſall diſpoſition of the nobilitie, Examination of the firſt opinion. which time out of minde hath meruailouſly celebrated déeds of armes, as worthy inſtruments to aduance them to great honour, but the ſame haue by little and little ſo exceeded that in the end, vnder the pretence of valiancie, ſhe hath ſubdued and confounded the reſt, as if one kind did comprehend them all in generall. This falſe opinion hath attained euen to our dayes wherein the ſayd pretence is worſe vſed than euer it was. For now men ſeeke rather to win

a little fame through that only, then a great deale by diuers ioyned together. I thinke it no abuſe to eſteeme of the thing that ſo deſerueth, no more then to like of ſome pearle that a man hath bought: but if any mans affection thereto ſhould be ſo addicted, as therefore to diſdaine all other precious ſtones, were it not a token of a peruerſe iudgement▪ The like is it with vertues, whereof the leaſt is ſo neceſſarie, that we may ſay that the want thereof breedeth great diſcommodities. If a man might ſerue his turne with one of them as well as with one garment, his life would not peraduenture bée ſo troubleſome. But it ſhould likewiſe leeſe a great parte of the beautie and commoditie in being deſpoyled of all the fayreſt ornaments. For as the more a garden or medowe are planted and enritched with diuers kindes of fruite and flowers, the better they are eſteemed, euen ſo ſhould he be that hath moſt vertues: without the which his life is but obſcure. Neuertheleſſe, it is good that euery one ſhould conſider his owne vocation, to the end to apply thervnto that which may be moſt conuenient for himſelf, the vſe wherof ſhould alſo bee to him moſt familier. As to the politique man, diſcretion: to the Deuine, humilitie: to the Lawyer, iuſtice: and to the Souldier, courage. But as for the Nobleman, whereto ſhall we tye him? Eſpecially him whoſe aunceſtors haue bene an honor to his age.
               I am not of opinion that Gentlemen ſhould ſtay vpon one onely That Gentlemen ſhould be adorned with ſundry vertues. vertue, but alſo grow in loue with many. For ſuch loue is lawfull and theſe virgins are neuer ielouſe. Painters doe vſe to ſhadowe all the Muſes in a troope, as neuer habandoning one another: with like reaſon might they ſo doe by this worthie ſocietie, wherein the aſſociates doe greatly delight to dwell: whereof wee are to learne, ſith ſo willingly they walk together, ſtill to kéepe our doores open, that when the one entreth ſhe may bring in all the reſt with her. I knowe that Fortitude (by ſome named Proweſſe or 
                     •
                  aliancie) is an excellent vertue, beſeeming the beſt as well as the inferiours, without the which their liues are of ſmall valure, but the ſame being deſtitute of Iuſtice is hurtfull to the good. If Temperance doe not moderate her ſhe will turne into rage, and not guided by diſcretion will labour out of ſeaſon. Wherein wee ſee there is a league betwéene them, and each affordeth mutuall ayde to other, which cannot be altered without perticuler preiudice to euery of them. The Martiners doe not thinke one Anchor ſufficient to ſtay and hold a Shippe tite. The like may we ſay of Nobilitie,

who muſt haue more then one vertue to confirme their reputation: which is not vnknowne to thoſe that are learned in morall diſcipline, of whome the number is very ſmall, by reaſon that the error whereof wee now entreate hath made the greater multitude too partiall: as appeareth in the titles that many take vpon them, as calling themſelves The arme of the country, the mainteyner of armes, and the terror to the enemies: which titles I blame not, notwithſtanding in my opinion the name Profeſſor of Vertue, would comprehend much more and yéeld them greater honor.
               It is moſt certaine that for the well handling of the weapon it The error of ſuch as ſuppoſe proweſſe only to be ſufficient to the proſeſſors of armes. were requiſite to be endued with much boldneſſe & generoſitie: as alſo to ſuch as haue bene furniſhed therwith haue redounded much commendation, which hath cauſed many ſo to admire this profeſſion: which neuertheleſſe through ouer much praiſe haue bred this error, namely, to make ſmall accompt of all other vertues. For it is not vnknowne that in our grandfathers daies, if a gentleman had giuen himſelfe to ſtudie the Greeke tongue or Latine, his companions would ſay that he muſt be made a clarke, alſo that a ſword beſeemed him not. Wherof grew this prouerbe, that it was enough for a Souldier to be able to write his owne name, as if knowledge had bene a hinderance to his valour. I thinke they were of opinion that he that ſhewed himſelfe audacious, expert in his weapon, and prone to quarrelling, was ſufficiently armed for the attayning to ritches and honor: and ordinarily they that were noted to bee ſuch, obteyned both. I will not vtterly reiect theſe things, which beare I wot not what fayre ſhewe: yet will I ſay thus much, that not being accompanied (as is aforeſayd) with other good qualities, they be not ſo commendable as men think for. Howbeit, although ſome one chaunce not to abuſe this vertue of Valiancie, yet ought he not to burie himſelfe therein, conſidering that the vſe of the reſt is more neceſſarie for him. If he fighteth once in a moneth, it is all, neuertheleſſe, if he liſt he may daily put in practiſe other good gifts to the benefite of others and his owne commendation. It is no ſmall matter to be accompted a Souldier, but when honeſtie is thereto adioyned it is much more. And thus are we to make our perticuler profeſſion to leane to the generall vocation, that is, to liue well, whereunto all men are bound. And whoſoeuer forgetteth this vniuerſall rule to ſtay himſelfe onely vpon the obſeruations there vpon depending, it ſhould ſeeme that he is rather led by profit or
                     〈…〉
                  bition

(wherevnto men of all ſorts doo aſpire) than by anie true affection to vertue.
               
                  Hanniball of Carthage was one of the moſt famous Captaines Proweſſe deſtitude of other vertues deſerueth of the name of vertue. that euer were, yet being deſtitute of pietie and faith, and withall a cruell and deceiptfull perſon, it bred him the name to bée a moſt wicked man. How much greater commendation deſerued Scipio Africanus, who was both an honeſt man and as good a Captaine withall: This neuer boaſted ſo much in his valiancie, as to deſpiſe the thing that made him not onely a true Citizen but alſo a good houſeholder. For, to bee iuſt to his friends and terrible to his enemies, are no ſuch contraries, but that they may very well concurre together, becauſe the originall of them both proceedeth from one ſpring.
               Well, I will confeſſe that in a man of warre proweſſe is commendable, but in the well borne Gentleman, his ſtudie, exerciſe and pleaſure ſhould ſhoote at all the vertues, eſpecially at thoſe that are moſt to bee preferred, conſidering that Nobilitie is a participation in all thoſe good thinges. I thinke no man will gainſay but Pietie, Truth, Temperance and Iuſtice muſt march before Fortitude, notwithſtanding ſhe alſo helpeth the reſt. For the vngodly, lying, diſſolute or vniuſt perſon, whatſoeuer goodly cloke of proweſſe that may bee giuen him, is neuertheleſſe eſchued and hated, as being much more hurtfull to his friendes then dreadfull to his enemies, although he knowe neuer ſo well how to helpe himſelfe with his weapon. For this cauſe ought Noblemen firſt to learne thoſe thinges that are moſt neceſſarie, and ſo by degrees to diſcend to thoſe that may better be forborne: ſo ſhall they eſcape this error which ſtayeth them vppon one ſimple prize, and hideth from them many other more precious, wherein they haue no leſſe intereſt.
               It might peraduenture beſeeme a poore Souldier, who hauing It becommeth a Gentleman to profeſſe diuers vertues. nothing, hath by his weapon and deſert hath atchieued meanes to liue, neuer to depart the bounds of proweſſe, but highly to extoll it, as euery artificer will doe his arte. But the Gentleman to whome as well this as many other waies are yet open, wherein to exerciſe himſelfe and to atteyne to honor, yeeldeth himſelfe as it were priſoner, yea euen guiltie, in ſeeking to march only vnder the one, ſith he is bound to walke in all.
               I remember an aunſwere to this purpoſe once made at the Court to one whoſe continuall talke was of warre, yea euen in

the tyme of peace. When the warres begin againe, ſaid one to him, you ſhall be ſet on worke, but now ſeeing you are destitute of ciuill and peaceable conditions, I would wiſh you to ſhut vp your ſelfe in a cheſt, ſo to keepe you from ruſt vntil tyme ſerue: either els to temporiſe at this time.
               
               The former error is ſomewhat tollerable, becauſe it may be amended: Againſt ſuch as abuſe their force and valeancie. and it is to bee hoped that he which will endeuour to doe one parte of his duetie, being better taught will employe himſelfe in the reſt: but he that abuſeth that one onely vertue that he hath choſen is wonderfully out of the way. And whereas Gentlemen do weare their ſwords girt to their ſides, firſt they do it in the defence of their Countrie, and next to employ them vnder the authoritie of the lawes to defend the weake and innocent from the vyolence of the oppreſſors: alſo to preſerue their owne perſons from outrage: So farre is the practiſe now from following the ſayd rules, that contrariwiſe many as well noble as vnnoble doe vſe them to doe more harme to their friends then hurt to their enemies. This is a goodly valiancie that ſerueth onely to deſtroye it ſelfe: and villanous are the Tryumphes which are erected of the ſpoyles of Peaſants, alſo of the weapons and blood of neighbours and companions.
               Some man will ſay, that Fortitude is an other maner of thing Wherein valeancie conſisteth. and ſhineth principally in the warres: I graunt it, but not in theſe which ſeeme it to be vnperfect in all places. Valiancie among other things conſiſteth in vanquiſhing rather then to flee, and in ſuſtaining of labour freely. Concerning the firſt poynt what doe we ſee: Loſſes ordinarie, and victorie rare. And as for the ſecond, there néede but two daies rayne and fower and twentie howers want, to raiſe a w
                     〈…〉
                  egiment into a mutinie. Thus by litle and little many doe wander and ſtray from this vertue, notwithſtanſtāding they aduow that they haue ambraced it. And if the French Princes, Lords, famous Capteynes, and Gentlemen which doe well vſe the ſame doe not endeuour to reſtore it into the former dignitie and to take away the abuſes, they ſhall many tymes finde themſelues as well at the Court as in the field farre abuſed. And our nation which heretofore hath through true Valiancie gotten ſuch fame, ſhall behold it ſelfe ſlaue to thoſe that heretofore haue obeyed it. This may ſuffice to ſhewe that Nobilitie ought to ayme at all vertues, and not at one alone: Likewiſe that they muſt not peruert that vertue which ought to be the piller of their armes.
               
                  
I would haue made ſome deſcription of this vertue of Fortitude 
                  Of trewe and falſe valcancy. (which cannot bee too well knowne to thoſe that exerciſe the ſame) but that Ariſtotle in his Ethickes hath largely diſcourſed therof, wherevnto they that delight in reading may haue recourſe, eſpecially well to vnderſtand the difference betwene ſuch as is true in deede and that which doth but beare a ſhewe thereof, onely I will ſay this by the way, that he ſetteth downe fiue kindes of counterfait Fortitude. The firſt, that which is grounded vpon hope of reward: the ſecond, vpon feare of puniſhment▪ the third, vpon experience: the fourth, vpon wrath: and the fifth, vpon ignorance of daunger. But the true is when a man in the middeſt of the greateſt daungers and moſt terrible things, yea euen of death, ſheweth him ſelfe ſtedfaſt and without feare: whereinto he hazardeth himſelfe in a iuſt and honeſt cauſe, and of theſe there be few, and yet to be truely poſſeſſed with Fortitude he muſt be ſuch a one.
               The ſecond falſe opinion is not ſo hurtfull as the firſt, howbeit Examination of the ſecond opinion. it moleſteth many and to no purpoſe, in cauſing them to ſeeke felicities rather apparant then true, and to iudge amiſſe of the condition of many. I miſlike not that men ſhould commend that kinde of life that any hath choſen: becauſe it liketh the chooſer: but raſhly to condemne other mens, argueth a little pride and want of conſideration. Now, the cauſe why ſome doe ſo greatly commend trauailing The ſpring thereof. abreade, procéedeth of a conceiued opinion that 
                     •
                  iuilitie is better learned abroade, as alſo that reputation and ritches are obteyned by haunting of diuers places and keeping companie with diuers perſons. I would not greatly argue againſt their opinions if they comprehended no more but this, yea my ſelfe would counſaile yong men to go (as I haue already ſayd in an other diſcourſe) into places where any thing that is honeſt is to bee learned. Likewiſe ſuch as are poore and haue quicke wittes being capeable to ſerue either publiquely or priuatly, may ſeeke their aduentures through al places, and thoſe likewiſe that haue met with them and are bound vnto them by any bond of ſeruice, of office, or of arte to goe neere or farre, ought not to faile in perfourming theſe dueties. But before I enter any farther into any other exceptions, I muſt confeſſe yt I meane here to excuſe certaine Gentlemen, who being alreadie poſſeſſion of houſe, famelie and meanes, and withal are not to ſeeke what vertue and knowledge meane, are neuertheleſſe deſpiſed (becauſe they are reſolued to ſpeade their liues at home) by thoſe that make as it were an ordinary occupation to be continually

vpon the publique theaters of Courts, Cities, Warres, & 
                     •
                  orrei
                     •
                  e Of thoſe that cannot keepe home. lands. Of theſe will I ſpeake one word by the way. That is, that ſome there are that trot into all places onely vpon curioſitie: others doe alſo goe to the ende aforeſayd, namely to bee better inſtructed. Concerning the firſt: They hauing no other meaning but an outwarde and vayne pleaſure, reape nothing but vanitie and ſuch a con
                     •
                  ontation as is of no continuance, as hauing no other foundation but winde. Only they can pra
                     ••
                  le a little among ſimple people of things that they take for wonders, in that they want knowledge, and that is all. Likewiſe will I there leaue them, becauſe in their doynges they beare no other affection, but as it were to goe ſee a Maygaine. But with the ſecond it is otherwiſe▪ for they learne goodthings and ſometymes to encreaſe, ſo as we ſee the good 
                     〈◊〉
                   of their 
                     〈◊〉
                   appeare. Butias the wood worme engendreth in wood, 
                     〈◊〉
                   happen 
                     〈…〉
                  , the more they haue att
                     •
                  yned, them or 
                     〈…〉
                   doth the 
                     ••
                  rrogance en
                     •
                  teaſe▪ where of enſueth contempt of their equalles that imitate them not. Youth that hath not yet experience of the ſeuerall kindes of life doth eaſely ſtumble into theſe raſh iudgements vntill it be reformed: but there are ſome whom neither age nor reaſon can diuert from ſuch imaginations: wher
                     〈…〉
                   they ſhewe that they haue profited but little in ſtrayings 
                     •
                  o 
                     〈◊〉
                   from 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ Alſo as 
                     〈◊〉
                   knowledge doth neuer paſſe vp it ſelfe, but maketh the perſon the more humble and lowly, ſo ſhould vertue make it the more diſcreet.
               Now let vs ſee wherewith they blemiſh the countrie common The reproaches of theſe runnagates againſt the country and ſtayed lyfe. courſe of life. It giueth, ſay they, ſmall content, and extenuateth the force of courage. They doe likewiſe perſwade themſelues that thoſe which are nothing mooued in the preſence of great obiects, neither ſtirred vp by emulation of their equals, muſt of neceſſitie ſtoope to ſuch actions as may be termed ſeruiſe. Alſo the moſt of theſe hauing bene brought vp in theſe ſtately Courts, doe thinke that the excellencie and beautie of vertue doe neuer ſhine but where it is beſt floriſhed out and with greateſt traynes: ſo that perceiuing it o
                     •
                   clothed of thoſe outward ornaments and in ſimple aray, they doe but winke at it, as men of 
                     •••
                  y doe at their friends when they be fallen into extreme pouertie. And therefore marking thoſe that neuer ſtirre from home, but lye ſtill as it were hidden and without any ſhewe, they would thereby inferre that they want good qualities, as thinking that if they had any, the ſame would force them foorth as the ſailes doe force, the Shippe into the maine Sea:

But in their wordes they make many falſe conſequences. For to ſay that that vertue ſeemeth obſcure which beareth but her owne ſimple ſhewe; likewiſe that he that hath enough; if he proclaymeth not abroade, I haue vertue to ſell, ſeemeth to haue but little: Alſo that contentment dependeth vpon the knowledge, and fauour of the mightie and the multitude, is to be blinded with the apparance of outward things, which bleare the ſight of thoſe that are inward. The Philoſophers doe holde that true felicite conſiſteth in the participation of vertue, likewiſe that the ſame may be found in all ſortes of men and in all places. Which is ſo true that none can denye it. Wee muſt therefore before we contemne any kinde of life, how baſe ſoeuer it ſeemeth, looke whether no portion of vertue ſhineth therein. For if there doe, wee ought not to condemne it at randon.
               Well, the better to iudge thereof, let vs more neerely examine Commodities of countrie life. this maner of countrie life, and wee ſhall peraduenture ſee that it bringeth foorth very good and fayre fruites both for it ſelfe and others. Firſt, he that hath choſen it may in theſe ſome what ſolitarie places more deuoutly exerciſe-the dueties of Religion, and with leſſe hinderances thoſe of charitie then among the great ſocieties, where Princes or vanities doe for the moſt part detaine the minds in thraldome, and withdrawe them from ſuch meditatious as are neceſſarie for all: and when Godlineſſe, which is the foundation of life, is well vnderſtood and perfectly practiſed, there enſueth great contentation. Next, the minde findeth greater tranquilitie in ſuch places then in Courts and Cities, where it is tormēted with moſt vyolent verturbations: as ambition▪ raging loue, reuenge, wrath, papine and enuie. For in the countrie life thoſe obiects that ſtirre vp inward rage doth not commonly haunt. As for delight, it is as much, in that there is no cauſe but a man may finde as good reliſh in the ſmalleſt things, the taſte whereof is ſo farre from thoſe that are are intangled among the ciuill multitude, that they do not ſo much as perceiue them. Dauid although a great Kind did neuertheleſſe ſometyme delight in theſe ſmall countrie ornaments, which are in the 65. Pſalme very well deſcribed, where he ſayth.
               
                  In places playne the flockes ſhall feede.
                  And couer all the earth:
                  The vales with corne ſhall ſo exceede,
                  That men ſhall ſing for mirth.
               
               Now let vs proceede to the commodities: which truely are of

two ſorts. For firſt ſuperfluitie, the only ſepulcher wherein many rich houſes are buryed, is in maner vnknowne in the countrie life. Secondly, houſehold orders are well obſerued, and although the vſe of thrift bee the ordinarie rule, yet doth liberalitie ſhine in the middeſt thereof, and honeſt ſufficiencie who is ſtill neighbour to aboundance neuer departeth: the contrary wherof appeareth where prodigalitie rai
                     ••
                  eth. For her followers doe often tymes trye the ſame that Shippes doe in a ſtorme, whome the waues doe ſometyme lift vp to the Clowdes, and by and by bring downe to the bottome of the Sea. Euen ſo they hauing made ſtately cheare for the ſpace of ſome eight daies, muſt remaine halfe a yeere pinched with al kinde of penury. As for the cōmoditie that the others reape by the preſence and frequentation of that whereof of I ſpeake, it is likewiſe to bee conſidered. For to begin with his famelie, there is no doubt but, according to the prouerbe, Such maiſter ſuch man, if he be endued with many vertues, he ſhareth them with his, eſpecially with his wife and children, deſcribing in his priuate famelie the forme of a well ordered Commonwelth. His ſubiects likewiſe, what comfort doe they alſo conceiue in comming to trye his a
                     ••
                  abili
                     •
                  ie and good will▪ Entring farther into the courſe of his life, what an example is he to make them the better? Finally, ſuch a mans neighbours and kindred may among their greateſt commodities note this, that they may be ordinarily conuerſant with him, and ſo to taſte of ſundrie goodly fruites of learning and amitie. Who ſo liſt farther to learne the commendations of the countrie life, let him reade thoſe bookes that are purpoſely written thereof. For my parte it is enough that I haue in a word touched it by the way, as well not to bring out of liking thoſe that vſe it well, as alſo to ſhew to others that diſdaine it, that it is not deſtitute of vertue, honeſtie, and ſolace.
               Now let vs ſee whether it deminiſheth proweſſe as ſome doe Whether the country life quaileth proweſe. ſuppoſe. For my parte I thinke not in any in whom the loue of vertue is not quite extinct. For in whatſoeuer place they bee, they ſtill thinke it conuenient for a Gentleman to beare a mans ſtomacke. On the other ſide, the exerciſe of the Horſe, the running at the Ring, hunting and the haquebut are portraitures and inſtrumēts of warre which waken the courages and maintaine them in force. But communication with our like doth alſo greatly helpe thereto: becauſe the ſpeeches both of the one and other doe tend only to contemne towardlike demeanours and to exalt the valiant: ſo

as hereof wee make a counterpoize againſt that delicacie which by little and little is engendred in thoſe perſons whoſe liues are free from daunger. I knowe well enough that the Nobilitie that houldeth reſidence a great parte of the yeere in frontier Garriſons, is (through continuall exerciſe in warlike diſcourſes) more ſtirred vp to the loue of proweſſe, then that that kéepe home. But all cannot be there maintained, neither doe thoſe that are depriued of that exerciſe, conſidering the reputation of the reſt, but make inwardly ſome ſmall prouiſion of that which is the cauſe of obtaining the ſame. Moreouer, it followeth not that becauſe they are not ſo ſkilfull in militarie profeſſion as others, yt they are therefore voyde of courage: For he that hath good ſeede in him, with a little cuſtome maketh it well to fructifie. How many braue Capteynes haue in our fathers daies bene ſeene neuer to ſtirre from home after the warres were once ended? And yet when occaſion ſerued that they muſt to it againe they were nothing inferiour to any of the reſt. Thus much muſt I needes ſay that like as martiall exerciſe maketh not all that practiſe it valiant, no more doth dwelling at home ſo daunt the courages of thoſe that vſe it, but that they can alwaies be well enough diſpoſed to doe their parts when honor commaundeth. As for the reſt who euen burye themſelues by perpetuall kéeping home in their owne houſes, to the ende onely to ſtoope to effeminate pleaſures and ſloth, either els to haue the better opportunitie to practiſe violence or couetouſneſſe. I will ſay no more, but only wiſh that among the Nobilitie there were Cenſors eſtabliſhed as in the Romaine Commonwelth: that through publique ſhame their faultes whether ſecrete or open might be corrected. For it is a ſhame for the goodly title of Nobilitie to be made a cloake to vnworthie actions. Now were it not amiſſe to examine whether the felicitie of thoſe that goe vp & downe to ſeeke it thus euery where, and who weene to haue more then others, be ſo great as they ſay for: But I will not ſtay therevpon to the ende to diſcourſe vpon the third falſe opinion.
               Many there are that reproue it, others alſo that put it in practiſe, The cenſure of the thirde opinion. either thinking it not to want a good foundation, or els becauſe that by the vſe thereof they reape profite and preferment. But how ſoeuer they liſt to take it, they are not to be excuſed. For our opinions muſt agree with that that is iuſt, and our commodities bee purchaſed without iniuſtice: which euen thoſe ought to knowe that make accompt to excéede the common people in dignitie and wiſedome:

to the ende they by their example may conforme themſelues to fulfill whatſoeuer the duetie of all. And as it is an eaſie matter from liberalitie, which teacheth vs the maner to giue in place and ſeaſon conuenient, to fall into prodigalitie which ſheweth how to doe the contrary: ſo without diligent heede from true obedience we ſlide into falſe, which in counterexchaunge of a matter due, maketh vs to doe that that is not due.
               This queſtion haue ſundrie learned perſonages at large treated vpon, of whoſe iudgements wee ought not to bee ignorant; to the ende alwaies in our ſelues to bee reſolued of a matter of ſo great waight. I will therefore (following their ſteppes) ſpeake only two or three words according to my capacitie, eſpecially vſing the inſtructions taken out of Gods worde. The ſame teacheth vs that God hath ſet vp the mightie that haue dominion ouer the nations, to rule and gouerne them in pietie and iuſtice: whom likewiſe he commaundeth vs to haue in ſinguler honor and to obey, whervpon S. Paule ſaith: Let euery ſoule be ſubiect to the ſuperiour powers, for there is no power but of God, and the powers that are, are the ordinance 
                  Romans. 13. 
                  of God. This only place might ſuffice to enſtruct as well the one as the other in their dueties. For herein are the ſuperiours warned to remember the ſacred dignitie wherewith they are adorned, that they neither abuſe nor prophane it by crueltie, couetouſneſſe, or voluptuous luſt. Likewiſe the inferiours to bowe their neckes vnder thoſe authorities as vnder the yoke of God, not only in patience, but in ioye alſo. For as S. Paule in the ſame chapter ſayth. They that reſiſt the powers, doe reſiſt the ordinance of GOD. Whereto he afterward addeth, That the Prince beareth the ſword for the benefite of his ſubiects whether for their defence or correction. Which reaſon ought to make vs thinke obedience ſweete, becauſe in yeelding the ſame wee both pleaſe God and reape profite. If Princes would well conſider the goodly titles and large prerogatiues that God giueth them, they would amende and their commaundements ſhould be more iuſt. For by the mouth of his Prophet Dauid he ſaith: I haue ſayd, ye are Gods, and children to the moſt higheſt▪
                   herein ſignifying that as in them ſhineth the image of Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe Empyre is both in heauen and earth, ſo ought they to imitate him in well doing rather then in hurting and deſtroying: but becauſe the moſt part of them do neglect or contemne theſe moſt worthie inſtructions, they growe to degenerate, in ſuch wiſe that euermore that eſtate hath bene moſt happie, wherein the

moſt of thoſe that haue ſit vpon the throne haue beue vertuaus. The places likewiſe by me alleadged ought to retaine the people from ſtirring not onely in vniuſt cauſes, but alſo in ſuch as are vnneſſary, when they contemne thoſe whō 
                  God hath ſo exalted. Alſo when a good and mercifull Prince raigneth, if his Subiects doe through diſobedience prouoke him, they make themſelues guiltie before God and man, and thus much I thinke fewe can gainſay.
               But the queſtion is, of one that maketh ſmall accompt of the lawes or iustice ſhould commaund that thing that were wicked, whether 
                  The examination of the principall queſtion. 
                  wee ought to obeye him. Hereto I aunſwer that if this iniquitie conſiſteth in rayſing of taxes and tributes vpon the ſubiects goods, (which many haue often tryed) either in the encreaſe of the labours layd vpon their perſons, (as Pharao delt with the Hebrewes) in ſuch a caſe wee can doe no better then to humble our ſelues before God, and cratte of him pardon and deliuerance from ſo vyolent oppreſſion. For notwithſtanding it proccede of his crueltie and mallice that is author therof, yet are we withall to marke Gods ordinance, who vſeth ſuch ſcourges to tame the imperfections of thoſe whom he will amend. Why? will ſome man ſay, what honor can he deſerue, who from a iuſt principalitie is fallen into tyrannie? who in liewe of ſhearing his ſheepe doth flea and deuour them? Sith alſo he ſo villanouſly peruerteth publique order, is he not vnworthie that any ſhould yeeld him reuerence? God in his worde ſayth, that notwithſtanding he greatly diſlike this oppreſſion, which procéedeth of mans frailtie and luſtes, kindled by the deuils mallice, yet doth it not aboliſh the ſubiection due to ſuperiorities and pollicies, wherein we muſt ſtill marke the footpathes of his decree. Otherwiſe were the ſaying of S. Paule in vayne, that the powers that are, are the ordinances of God. Neither ſhould S. Peter haue any reaſon to commaund vs to honor the King. But if any ſay that this had relation to the good, I muſt anſwer yt neither of thē were ignorant what men Tyberius & Caligula were, either Nero, all which we might rather name horrible Tyrants then true Princes. If therfore among theſe horrible politique confuſions they cōmanded vs to looke higher & to humble our ſelues, this precept ſhould admoniſh alpeople that ſuffer violence through the pride or couetouſneſſe of their ſuperiours, to thinke once or twiſe before they kicke againſt the prick. For vndoubtedly God ordeyned the bad Princes as well as the good, according to the ſaying of the Prophet Oſeas: 
                  Oſee. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  In my rage will I giue thoe a King, and in my wrath take him away.
                  
Alſo Eſdras, I will giue them children to be their Princes, and effeminate 
                  Eſay. 13. 
                  perſons ſhall beare rule ouer them. Likewiſe Iob: He maketh the hipocrite to raigne for the ſinnes of the people. If all theſe goodly Iob 34. rules were well conſidered, many there are that would not bee ſo haſtie to ſtriue againſt the rod: for whenſoeuer the ſtripe commeth, our firſt worke ought to bee to haue recourſe to God, as is aforeſayd, and to appeaſe him: and next to enter into our ſelues and amend. Thirdly, to ſeeke lawfull remedies againſt the miſchiefe, which if they faile vs, then to waite in patience. And hauing well diſcharged our ſelues in all ye aforeſayd, then to haue good hope of wiſhed ſucceſſe. If wee are in any affayre to obſerue moderation and wiſedome, then in this eſpecially. The precepts of Philoſophers and auncient cuſtomes of the Romaines and Grecians, (the moſt ciuill and wiſeſt nations among all other) did graunt more libertie to the oppreſſed then Chriſtian Religion doth. For they did ſo hate and abhorre tyrannie that they could in no wiſe away with it. Which notwithſtanding it be euen to this day moſt odious, yet muſt Chriſtians haue more patience then others, becauſe that he which ſo ſtrictly commaundeth it, doth withall promiſe in tyme conuenient to prouide for their miſeries: whereby wee may ſee of what force and power the doctrine of the Goſpell is, to print in mens mindes the lawe of obedience and reuerence toward the ſuperiours.
               This if ſome Princes were perfect in, they would not peraduenture ſo readily followe the counſailes of diuers Churchmen, 
                  Againſt the violence of ſome Clergy men. which make them with all extremitie to purſue the profeſſors therof. They be, ſay theſe ſollicitors, iustly puniſhed, for they be hereticks. Truely my maiſters your words are not receiuable. It is the olde ſong which is now out of vſe, ſince the Scriptures bewrayed your pot of Roſes, that is to ſay, your abuſes, at the moſt whereof euen ſome of your owne men doe make a ieſt and giue them no credite. Force them not then to reuerence them leaſt they aunſwer you with the Apoſtles: It is better to obey God then men. They deſerue, will you ſay, to be rooted out by armes, becauſe they take armes. 
                  Actes. 3. Such as bee at their eaſe are ſoone angred and take ſmall care or none for the afflicted. See whether you bee none of them. If any man had but pricked you, you would fall out with him, yea and peraduenture ſtrike him too. And can you not conſider that the Proteſtants in France did patiently, for the ſpace of foretéene yeeres, and the Flemings fiue and fortie, ſuffer all ſortes of ſpirituall torments

and bodily paynes vpon falſe accuſations: and yet will you not that they ſhould ſeeke any remedies to exempt them from ſuch intollerable and cruell miſeries.
               But now I thinke of it, I haue degreſſed from my purpoſe, to Of duety. ſpeake of the furies vſed againſt the conſciences. But I will ſay no more, but returne to my firſt path, againe to confirme my former ſaying, that bodily charges though heauie, ſhould bee borne. For as Samuell ſayth: Kings ſhall ſometymes be very readie to oppreſſe 
                  1. Sam. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  their people, and although they crye out, ſayth he, yet will not God heare them. And this ought to admoniſh them to ſuffer ſo long as it ſhall pleaſe God to withdrawe his fauorable hand from them. All that I haue hetherto alleadged to exalt the mightie and their dignitie, tendeth not ſo to puffe them vp that through diſordered licence they ſhall exceede the boundes of iuſtice. For if they would, yet can God chaſtize them as he did Roboam and Saule, and prouide lawfull remedies to deliuer thoſe that are oppreſſed. Neither doe I beléeue that there is any ſtate but hath lawes to repulſe oppreſſors when their vyolences are ouer grieuous or continuall.
               Now, in theſe corrupt Kingdomes many men there are that Of ſuch as doe whatſoeuer they are commaunded. neede no great compulſion to worke wickedneſſe, as thinking that their obedience due to Princes couereth all that is amiſſe in their actions. Yea ſome that haue publique offices doe take themſelues to be double bound not to refuſe to do any thing that may be commaunded them, in that they are not only ſubiects but alſo officers. Theſe preſuppoſitions are the occaſion that a miſchiefe conceiued by a fewe and embraced by many hath a more long and larger courſe. They hold that if the great doe commaund, they muſt yéeld and obey: for notwithſtanding the matter were vniuſt, yet is the executer thereof excuſable and the commaunder aunſwerable. But theſe obſequious mates are much deceiued in couering themſelues with a ſacke betymes, and leauing all the blame to their maiſters. Others there are likewiſe in this miſerable world, wherein wickedneſſe playeth her laſt prize, that runne yet faſter, proclayming that whatſoeuer the Princes will, is lawfull for him. Theſe ſecond are vnworthie to haunt among the good, either to bee their domeſticall ſeruants, for that with their extreeme flatterie they corrupt their ſoules. More meete were they to haue ſuch maiſters as Pope Alexander the ſixt, and Caeſar Borgia, his Baſterd, who in all crueltie, diſſolution, and infidelitie were equall with the auncient

                  Sicilian tyrants, that they might entreate them as they did ſome of their catchpolles: of whome when one vnder colour of Iuſtice and at their commaundement had executed all kinde of crueltie in Romagnia, they cut off his head. And whoſoeuer had ſtollen too much, or met with any fayre dame vnder the defence of their fauour, was many tymes forced to giue them a ſhare: wherein they had but their due: for hauing either inſtructed or confirmed their maiſters in this falſe principle of ſuperfiuous power, rather then abſolute, it is but meete themſelues ſhould taſte of the fruite thereof, as Phalaris delt with Perillus who had inuented the braſen bull to pleaſe him withall. If men would well conſider that it is the part of good Kings to doe and commaund things that be iuſt: they would thereby learne that the dueties likewiſe of good ſubiects or ſeruants is to frame their obedience by this true rule. For the will of God, who preſcribeth lawes to all, tendeth to make vs doe; well and eſchue euill. How then can ſome excuſe themſelues for committing vnlawfull deedes, vnder the pretence of commaundement, ſith God forbiddeth it? The thrones are polluted and the miniſter of Iuſtice is couered with reproach.
               I ſuppoſe that none, except the ſlaue of ſome Tyrant, dare aduowe A more expreſſe explication of the former diſcours. that if a Prince ſhould commaund ſome one of his ſubiects to ſlay his father, to habandon his wife to the Stewes, or to blaſpheme God, but he ought therein to denye him obedience, and the reaſon is, that the lawes both of God and Nature, whereto all men are ſubiect, doe prohibite ſuch things. It followeth therefore that the inferiour is not alwaies bound to fulfill whatſoeuer his ſuperiour commaundeth.
               But as theſe with other ſuch like vniuſtices ſo apparantly wicked are but ſieldome commaunded, vnleſſe by ſome barbarous hart and minde, as alſo that fewe there are but will abhorre to commit them, ſo doe the wilier ſorte couer their miſchiefes with a faire vaile, euen as men couer poyſon with gold, to the ende men ſhould not ſpare to proceede farther: and therein it is that thoſe that will not contaminate their honeſties, ought to open their eyes, leaſt vnder colour of good faith they bee deceiued. Others there are who through ſome vehement paſſion doe commaund vyolent things, neither doe either the one or the other want fit men to put them in execution. And to this purpoſe I will alleadge two examples: the one of a wicked Emperour, & the other of a good, both Chriſtians. The firſt was the Emperour Phocas, who ordeyned that the Biſhop

of Rome ſhould be called the head of the vniuerſall Church, where before he was but a Metropolitaine. This wicked murderer through his ambition cauſed the Emperour Maurice whoſe officer he was, together with his wife and children to bee ſlaine, to the ende to obteyne his place, neither could that ſacred dignitie ſtay his hands. Herein was agreement betweene the maiſter and the ſeruants, who were the one as good as the other, neither did any of them ſay that the deede was vnlawfull, but they did all yéeld voluntarie obedience. Dauid would not doe ſo: for although Saule 
                  1. Sam. 24. purſued him to haue ſlayne him, yet when himſelfe fell into his handes, he ſayd: I will not ſtretch foorth my hands againſt my Lord, for he is the Lords anoynted. Who then could commaund Dauid to ſlay his innocent friend, ſith he would in no caſe offend his guiltie enemie?
               The ſecond example is of Theodoſius, who in a franticke furie commaunded that the Theſſalonians that had committed ſundrie ryots ſhould all be hewen in peeces, and to that ende ſent a whole legion of Souldiers who ſlewe ſeuen thouſand, that is to ſay, many more innocents then guiltie perſons. Whereof the good Emperour was afterward moſt ſorowfull and ſolemnely confeſſed his offence. His indignation was too much diſordered, but the crueltie of his miniſters, was no leſſe, who might haue mitigated the puniſhment: which correction of puniſhment would afterward haue rather liked then diſpleaſed their maiſter, and better ſatiſfied their owne conſciences.
               Hereof I meane not to inferre that the ſubiect ought to controule How the inferior is to conſider of his ſuperiors commaundement. his Lordes commaundement: But if it ſeeme to import great vniuſtice, were he not better cunningly to excuſe himſelfe then to fulfill it? or to endeuour to mitigate the puniſhment, rather then to defile his hands in blood, as the Sowe would doe in the myre? To this purpoſe is the dealing of the ſecond Plinie to bee noted, who through his humanitie and diſcretion, notwithſtanding he was a Paynim, ceaſed the perſecution which he was commaunded to raiſe within his Prouince. By the aforeſayd examples ſuch as are in ſubiection ſhould learne not to proſtitute their obedience to ſuch commaundements as are manifeſtly vniuſt. For ſo ſhould they make the ſame adulterous in bringing foorth baſterdly actions in liewe of lawfull.
               Two notable examples of two Paynims am I yet conſtrayned to ſet downe, the one for a rule to the mightie, the other to the inferiours.

The firſt is of the good Emperour Traian who was termed What both the one and the other are to conſider. 
                  the good Prince: He on a tyme deliuering the Sword to one whoſe office reſembled a high Conſtableſhip, ſayd vnto him. So long as I minister iustice, employe this Sword in the vpholding of my aucthoritie: but if I fall into tyrannie, vnſheath it againſt my ſelfe. How many Chriſtians ſince adorned with royall Dyadems haue in liewe of ſo ſaying, done contrary▪ Among whom, ſome peraduenture would haue amended, if that goodly patterne had oft bene ſhewed vnto them. The ſecond, which may be applyed to perticuler perſons is of the great Lawyer Papinian, whome the Emperour Baſsianus his maiſter commaunded to write ſomewhat in his defence for killing his brother 
                     
                        •
                     eta. But he refuſed ſo to doe, ſaying, that it was an eaſier matter to commi parricide then to excuſe it. Which although it coſt him his life, yet hath he left to the poſteritie a teſtimonie of his valiant hart, in that he choſe rather to dye then to defend and allowe an execrable abhomination.
               The flatterers that ordinarily attend vpon Princes, euen vpon thoſe that bee endued with ſome goodneſſe, doe endeuour to perſwade The fraude of flattering Courtiers. them that thoſe men that would ſo binde them to vertue, do ordinarily controule and gainſay their pleaſures and abſolute authoritie, and thus with their faire wordes they doe at the firſt blind them: but I thinke that at length ſome of them doe finde that thoſe are their faithfulleſt ſeruants which accounting the royall dignitie to bee ſacred and vnuiolable will not pollute their ſoules or taint their hands in ſo vnworthie ſeruice. And as for the reſt that are ſo readie to be miniſters of all vniuſtice, I wonder how ſundrie Princes can repoſe in them ſuch confidence. They might imagine that thoſe men that ſo raſhly and commonly contemne God, being full gorged will not make any great accompt of their maiſters.
               This Diſcourſe is vnperfect.
            
            
               
               The eleuenth diſcourſe.
               
                  Whether there be any meanes ſo to reforme the order of the ſters of France as to reape anie ſeruice of the ſame.
               
               
                  SUch mightie kingdomes as ſometimes are A neceſſary conſideration for France. accuſtomed to handle their neighbours roughly, ought to haue eſpeciall regarde that they ſuffer not their forces wherewith they haue attayned their fame ſo to degenerate, as no parte thereof remaineth in heart. For vppon their decaie or ſlothfulneſſe, the others calling to minde what hath paſſed, doe the more boldly attempt agaynſt thoſe that did beate them, and oftentimes do terrifie and hurt them as much as themſelues haue bene endomaged. Which hauing euermore bene ſo, ought to waken Princes and gouernours of common wealths, to the end to prouide that one arme at the leaſt may alwayes be ſtirring to ſerue when time ſhall require. Truelie I wo
                     •
                   not to what eſtate I may better applie this counſayle, than to our France, which being at reſt hath played the pampered kicking horſe. But being afterward growen weake (as now we ſee it) hath it not ſufficient cauſe to feare the readineſſe and diligence of thoſe from whom it hath meanes ſufficient to defend it ſelfe, if it liſt to do whatſoeuer is conuenient for the ſafetie thereof?
               Our neighbours ſleepe not, neither haue they but too much intelligence of our diſorders, which as it ſeemeth, we reſpect not, letting Reaſons for this. paſſe euen whole yeres without ſeeking anie remedies, either great or ſmall. For we muſt not thinke that great and redoubted power of men of armes that we had in the time of king Frances the firſt (wherein conſiſted the chiefe ſtrength of the Realme) to be ſtill in force. It is ſince that time much altered: neither are the footmen ſo good as in the time of king Henrie. Now they reſentble, as a man ſhould ſaie, olde garmentes, torne and halfe worne awaie with the tediouſneſſe and violence of ciuill warres, and therefore

ſtand in need of peecing vp again with new. Neither muſt we, beſides al this, 
                     •
                  aue to help our ſelues wt al other forces yt we may, wherwith to hide our nakedneſſe: yt is to ſaie, to keep yt ſtranger frō cōming euē into our bowels to foray vs as he hath done & ſtil threatneth. The French power in old time conſiſted of ye proper ſubiects of the realme, who ſerued our ancient kings with all loyaltie. But within theſe 60. yeres we haue begun to mingle ſtranger's among vs, & ſo long as mony laſteth, we cannot want them: whereas to the contrarie, if yt faileth, we may be aſſured to haue our men to ſeek: wherfore ye ſureſt way were to 
                     〈…〉
                  nd yt which we haue in our own land, to the end therof to make a ſure poſt to truſt to, & then to hope for what we can get from abroad. Alſo in as much as in diuerſe reſpects it is vnpoſſible to redreſſe both ye men of arms & the footmen (which are the beſt ſtrength of the ſtate) at once, but by litle & litle, we muſt in this neceſſicie as it were 
                     •
                  eed vp new forces: namely, ye ſame that haue bene vtterly contemned, whē the reſt flouriſhed. For the more arches & pillers yt ſtate vp ye building, ye ſtronger it wil be. By theſe I meane the general muſters of France, wherto may be Of the reſtabliſhing of the muſters. adioyned the Legionaries: but my intent is not to treat of them in this diſcourſe, wherein I meane to ſhew that thoſe olde reliques of nobilitie which we ſuffer to wallow in the duſt, being a little reduced into good order, would bring forth fruit, & peraduenture more than we think. When a Gentleman hath ſpent the moſt part of his goods in riot, & that pouerty approcheth him, in liew of his gay veluet garments that he was wo
                     •
                  t to weare, he goeth to ſeeke to put on courſe cloth, whereto he ſo accuſtometh himſelfe, that ſauing for his fancie, he maketh as much vſe of the laſt as of the firſt, & ſo may we doe with many things that are of no account, in making them through vſe both to be eſteemed of & profitable. It were verie good, would ſome man ſaie, if it might be done, to make that thing profitable that is vnprofitable: But what likelihood is there to compaſſe it in theſe muſters which haue bene ſo little ſet by, ſince the time of Charles the ſeuenth, that they haue bene as it were banniſhed the warres for their cowardlineſſe▪ Hereto I ſaie, that although they haue in reſpect of their imperfectiō ben much contemned, yet muſt nothing be vtterly reiected before all meanes haue ben proued to ſée whether it wil ſerue or no. For I ſuppoſe this hath not ben earneſtly dealt in, becauſe there was no great need thereof: but now yt we are put to take all kinds of wood in band, like him yt new buildeth his houſe which the fire hath halfe cōſumed, it were a point of negligence

not to ſeeke among our old ruines, for ſome good ſtuffe yet remaining, to the end to apply the ſame to good vſe.
               Before yt k. Lewes the 11. hired ſtrangers, the footmen that we That they may be put in vſe. vſed in our wars were of ſmal effect: & as I take it, were tearmed Francharchers or Franctanpins. Since we haue ſéene how by exerciſe they haue faſhioned thēſelues, ſo as if any man ſhould bring in one of the ancient Franctaupins in their kinde of furniture, among theſe old & braue regiments of our footemen in theſe daies, who of them, vnles he had euen death betweene his teeth, could for be are or abſtaine frō laughter▪ And yet haue both the one & the other bene gathered in one ſelfe field, as being all bred in France: Euē ſo now if you conſider the ordinarie muſter it is a poore thing. But rule it & vſe it, & you ſhal ſee it grow into reputatiō. We haue an old French prouerbe yt ſaith: In a hundred yeres a banner, & in a hundred yeres a carter: which was inuented to ſignifie that euery thing hath his riſing & falling. Euen ſe it happened to our muſters: for hauing ben a long time in great credite and force, afterwarde when the men of arms were inſtituted, maintained, & ordinarilie vſed, yt others were quite reiected, reſeruing vnto them only their auncient name with a verie weake effect. Howbeit I will not blame the inſtitution of the men of armes, which haue brought forth ſo good effects, & ſtill may bring forth more, nay rather I wil alow it: but likewiſe I wiſh to ſee a good order among all that deale wt armes. The difference between thē conſiſteth not in ye men, for yt ſame nobilitie yt in time paſt ſerued after one manner, doth now ſerue after another. The diuerſitie reſteth in the warfare which is changed.
               The better to vnderſtand theſe changes, & to know the dueties of Their originall. ſeruice, we muſt take things farther of, & climbe euē to their original. Thoſe that haue written of the affaires of France, eſpeciallie the L. of Haillan do aduow that our fees were inſtituted vnder the firſt line of our kings. By which fees he meaneth a certain quantity of land which they gaue (to ſome more to ſome leſſe) to ſuch gentlemen & famous warriors as had ſerued thē in the wars, to holde the ſame vpon their faith & homage, & to come & ſerue them a certaine time of the yere at their own charge. To the end alſo that theſe noble & innobled perſons ſhould be the better able to maintaine thē
                  ſelues, they licenſed thē to let and demiſe their lands to the peſants for rent and yerely penſion. Moreouer they granted thē both high, meane, and lawe iuſtice ouer their men and vaſſalles, the appeales whereof were reſerued to their ſoueraigne iuriſdiction.

Thus had the high Iuſticer his lawe and inferiour Iuſtices vnd er him, whom he tearmed his men of warre, for they were bounde to wait vpon him as vpon the Lord of their fee, and the others he tearmed peaſants. Theſe landes thus giuen vpon condition aforeſayd, ſuch a fee was to ſet out one man of armes, ſuch a one an archer, ſuch a one a third, and ſuch a one a fourth, who were bound to meet at a place appointed, ſo oft as by the dukes or earles (who were but ſimplie gouernors of the prouinces & townes) or their bailiefes or ſtewards yt ſucceeded thē, they ſhould be commanded. Theſe aſſē
                  blies were called Ban or Heriban, which after ſome ſignifieth crie or outcrie. This order ſeemeth to haue bene confirmed in the time of Charlemayn, vnder whoſe poſteritie the fees & Lordſhips, which Theyr order. vnder our former kings were but benefits giuen for tearme of life, were through fauour continued from the Father to the ſonne, and ſo grew to be patrimoniall and hereditarie. Heereby it appeareth, what goodly priuiledges haue bene graunted to the nobilitie, but withall we are to conſider that the bonds are verie ſtrict. For they muſt alwayes come armed in defence of the Realme, and be readie to repulſe the aſſaultes and violences of ſtraungers abroad. Theſe were the auncient ſtrength of France, where with our kings for the ſpace of ſeuen hundred yeeres did many notable deedes vntill the yere 1454. wherein the men of armes were inſtituted.
               But who ſo is deſirous more perticularly to ſee theyr auncient The difference of the members whereof they were com poſed. order, let them read Froſſart, who deſcribeth the difference between the Barons, Bannerets, and high Iuſticers, as alſo of thoſe that might beare banners (which were ſquare Enſignes) and of thoſe that might carrie but penons. Likewiſe the armes of knights and manner of fight as well ioyntly as ſeuered, with the rewards and martiall puniſhments: neither doe I doubt but hauing ſeene all this, he will iudge our aunceſtors to haue beene braue fellowes.
               The Lord of Haillan like wiſe in his diſcourſes of France, dooth ſhew how fees came to be alienated, which were not amiſſe to bee Of the alienation of fees. knowen. The firſt cauſe proceeded of our parents deuotion. For they being by the Cleargie dayly perſwaded, that they that gaue moſt to the beautifying and enriching of the Church, had the higheſt places in paradiſe: ſuch of them as were able founded Abbies, Priories, and Chappels, al wel prouided for, of good rents, therby thinking ſufficiently to diſcharge themſelues. Then followed the imaginations of Purgatorie, where they were tolde that for a mortall ſinne they muſt burne ſeuen yeres in a moſt violent fire:

howbeit yt they might be deliuered therefro through abundance of meſſes and praiers. Wherevpon he that had but one hundred ſhillings of rent, gaue twentie for ſinging and praying as well for his owne ſoule as for his kinſfolkes and parents deceaſed. Thus came aboue the ſixt part of the fees of France into the hands of the Clergie. The ſecond cauſe was, the vioages vndertakē for the conqueſt of the holy land, whereat whoſoeuer bare anie valiant minde would not faile to be, the rather for yt our kings thēſelues went in perſon. And becauſe that ſome laſted three or foure yeres, the nobles ſolde part of their fees, ſo to get money to maintaine themſelues withal. Beſides all this, they alſo made their wills, wherein they bequeathed (in caſe they died) a good portion thereof to be praied for: ſo as many dying in thoſe dangerous and long iourneies, a greate number of the fees were ſtill alienated to the Church. The third cauſe hath growen of the continual warres with the Engliſhmen, where through many Gentlemen haue bene forced to ſell their fees to the vnnoble, who had permiſſion of the kings to buy the ſame, for with out ſuch licenſe they could not before haue anie proprietie therein. All which alienations ſet together, haue pulled the third part of fées out of the bodie of the nobilitie, whereby they are fallen as it were into dead hands, that is, into their hands who cannot in perſon diſcharge the auncient duties belonging to the ſame. Likewiſe ſince that time the Lawiers, Receiuers, & ſome Merchants haue ſo wel huſbanded for themſelues, that they alſo haue laide holde vppon a good part of the ſayd fees, ſo as we may truly ſaie that the nobilitie doe not now poſſeſſe aboue the one halfe. Which notwithſtanding our kings in the meane time haue ſtill had the vſe of their Arrierbans: wherin were but few Gentlemen, who all almoſt ranne into place where paye, honours, and martiall rewards were ſhared out, ſo as there remaine none but men of ſmal experience: neither were they imploied but in the defence of thoſe prouinces that lay fartheſt out of the danger of warre.
               Moreouer, many of all ſorts of people both great and ſmal haue purchaſed exemptions frō the charges wherto their fées are bound, which haue bred as great weakning both in men and money. Our kings Frances the firſt and Henrie the ſecond, ſeeing all theſe inconueniences, which they ſought to redreſſe, made notable decrees for the reducing of the ſaid Arrierbans into ſome order: which for lacke of well obſeruing haue not much profited. Thus much in briefe of the ſucceſſion of theſe matters.
               
                  
Some man may now tell me yt I labour in vaine in giuing counſaile Whether it be vnpoſſible to redreſſe the Arrierbans. to redreſſe that thing which the experience of many yeres haue taught to be ſo weake and feeble, that it is vnpoſſible to raiſe it vp againe. This argument hath in deede ſome apparance, howbeit I will yet better examine it: then if reaſon will me to yeeld I will be content. Shall we, hauing ſo long practiſed with our French Florentines, who through their ſubtil wits haue bene able to wreaſt a quinteſſence out of the moſt vnprofitable things, ſeeme ſuch doults as to haue retained no one precept of theirs? It hath bene already ſhewed yt in old time bailiefs & ſtewards were charged with ye leuie & cōduct of the Arrierbans. It is their office euen to this day. And in place where there bee none of the ſhort roabe, they chooſe Captains (as in Britain) to gather their men together after the proclaiming of the kings precepts: but becauſe in ſuch offices there conſiſteth no great honor, none but ſuch Gentlemen as neuer ſtir out of the Country wi
                     •
                  take them, yea, & thoſe rather for the benefit thā for any other reſpect: they alſo, although they be honeſt and ſuch as may be imploied, yet hauing for the moſt part but ſmall experience in armes, take no great heed of thoſe that come to them: and to the end to pleaſure their neighbors & friends, doe accept of all that are offered. Now is there great difference betweene the troups, when they appeare at the muſters in the chiefe towne, & when they march whether they be commanded. For at the muſters we many times ſee Gentlemen well prouided, who appeare onely to ſaue their fées from ſeazure, & as it were to ſay that they are ready to do their ſeruice: but whē the ſaid troups are appointed to go forth, thē ſhal we ſee yt the one halfe of thē are but great lubberlike boies, with a foot of beard, who wil daily deuour halfe a mattō, & do march for their maſters. Then ſay you whether the king be not wel ſerued: So in a companie that ſhould contain at the leaſt 60. horſe of ſeruice, ye ſhal ſcarce finde ten that may paſſe. How is it then poſſible that they ſhould worke any good effect, conſidering the diuerſitie of men ſo meanly armed. For we ſhal find ye ſpeares, piſtols, & harquebuts on horſebacke very ſimple ones, & others, armed only with breſtplates: likewiſe croſbowes on foot, harquebuts, & others, armed only with a ſhirt of maile & a ruſtie iaueline, wherof ſome wil ſay they be men of armes, others archers, but in deed few of them good ſouldiours. There is not ſo expert a Captaine but would find himſelfe ſhreudly troubled to ſet the whole generation of them in araie to fight: ſo as euen they that command ouer them may wel iudge that it is hard

to get any good ſeruice at the hands of ſuch diſordered troups. In ye time of k. Henrie the L. of Iaille was made Colonel, who in an expedition into the fontiers of Picardie, had ſo bad hap yt his men fled (as it is ſaid) before they came to battel, which brought the Arrierbans into ſuch contēpt, yt euery man laughed them to ſcorue. Since the L. of Sanzlay hath gottē that office, to whō it ſhould appertaine to purchaſe redreſſe. In the meane time my ſelfe will groſely trace this purpoſe that tendeth to the ſame end, leauing to him and others more ſkilful than my ſelfe the adding of the draughts of perfection, as alſo the correction of any thing wherein I may erre.
               In old time the Arrierbans were bound to ſerue the king but ſixe Of faultes commuted in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      in queſtion. weeks, & only in defence of the realme, neither might he detain thē longer without pay: then alſo were wars ſhort & commonly decided without battel. But in ye decrees ſince made it ſeemeth ye time to be proroged to 3. moneths: as wel in reſpect of trauailing to the place where the ſeruice is to be done, as alſo for their ſo
                     •
                  ourning there: wherin there is ſome reaſō in reſpect of the extēt of ye realme. Now wil I proceed to ſpeak of the abuſes, eſpecially of one yt is cōmitted in the taxing of fees: wherin it is often ſeene yt a manor worth 2000 franks rent, ſhal pay but 40. franks toward ye 
                  Arrierban, & others leſſe. Neither know I whence thoſe errors ſhould proceed, but only frō thoſe yt are charged with the ſaid taxes, who vpon their perticular conſideration do defraud the common. In theſe daies moſt of thoſe that owe the ſeruice, both noble & vnnoble, do acquit thēſelues with money. For he yt ſhould ſet out 2. or 3. men of armes, ſhal cō
                  pound for ſome ſmalſūme, & thoſe are rare fellowes yt ſet forth meet men for ſeruice. True it is that when a ſmall fee oweth but the 3. or 4. part of man, they muſt take money, but ſo ſhould they not for higher fees. Then all that money (as I vnderſtand) is afterward cōmitted to the treaſorer of the Arrierbans, who diſpoſeth thereof according as either the ſupertor or inferior Captaines do appoint. Whether ther be any fraud vſed therin I wot not, but do refer it to ye iudgemēt of others. Notwithſtanding al theſe defaults, yet when theſe troups are leuied (whatſoeuer mixtiō there be) we ſtil ſee ſome good portiō of that old ſhipwrack, wherby I deeme yt if they might be purged and furniſhed againe, we might reap ſome commodity at their handes. I did once enquire what number of ſuch men euery prouince was able to furniſh, one with another: wherevpon I was certified that Britain, which is one of the greateſt, might eaſily furniſh 300 good horſe, then conſidering with my ſelfe of the reſt, each

according to the proportion either for largeneſſe or ſmalneſſe, I gathered that all France by cōuerting the kind of men into horſmen, was able to bring into ye field 2500. horſe, which is no ſmal power. This ancient order is yet in practiſe in the Turkiſh Empire. For there the moſt part of the horſmen are entertained of the lands that are giuē to euerie horſman for his life time, which is called Timar, and it is a tenure ſomwhat reſembling our fees, exceyting the priuiledge of Iuſtice. And when the Beglierbei (who are gouernors of prouinces) do ſend for men, they al come to yeeld their ſeruice, as being therevnto bound in paine of depriuation from the benefite receiued. Without the diligent obſeruing of this rule, the Turke could neuer be able to bring halfe ſo many horſe into the field as he doth: neither to maintaine warres ſo long. Whereby it appeareth that the barbarous nations haue better obſerued the conſideration of their eſtate than we. Froſſart writeth, that in a iourney that K. Charles the 6. made againſt the Flemings whom ye k. of England fauored, at his entry into their country had aboue 22000. ſpeares, ſuch a number as ſufficiently teſtifieth the plentie of nobilitie theu in France: as alſo the good order to call them together, which conſiſted in the Ban and Arrierban. But ſince the men of arms were inſtituted, I aſſure my ſelfe there were neuer ſeene together 2000. ſpeares, except at the iourney to Valenciens. This exāple haue I alleaged to the end to driue thoſe that know not of what ſtrength & power the ancient things haue ben, from finding fault with them.
               Now is it meete that I diſcourſe of the meanes how to reſtore theſe old ruines, as men do ſuch houſes, as in proceſſe of time are almoſt fallen downe: but when they fall into a good huſbands hands, he trimmeth vp ſome ſmall corner of them, making it habitable: euen ſo muſt we alſo, if it be poſſible, deale herein, which were eaſie to do, if the maiſter of the houſe would bend his affection any whit thereto. For when our kings are willing and do but ſpeak, the diſpoſition The meanes to reſtabliſhe the Arrierbanes. to obedience is great. The firſt thing wherby I thinke it were good to beginne, were to create ſome Prince or Marſhall of France, generall of al the Arrierbans of France. And notwithſtā
                  ding at the firſt bluſh it ſeemeth ridiculous to commit vnto ſuch great perſonages a charge accounted ſo vnworthie, yet is it all but cōceit: for if it may be reſtored I wil proue it to be honorable: & we muſt think that the credit of the Captaine is of great force in this caſe: for whereas now a number of Gentlemen do diſdain to march vnder the banners of the Nobles, then would they willingly come

in, if they might ſee Princes or ſuch other greate eſtates be their guides & conducters. And they likewiſe reſpecting their honours, would labor to iucite the better ſort of men to enter the ſame dance: neither is it to be doubted but their motions & example would win many, conſidering the French honour which is readie to embrace thoſe things wherin there is any likelihood of winning praiſe. Next it were requiſite in euery gouernment that comprehendeth diuerſe bailiwicks to eſtabliſh one Captaine to cōmand ouer thoſe perſons that ſhould be therin taken. And where we haue alredy ſhewed that out of Britaine might be brought 300. good horſe, which counteruaile three companies of men of arms, & out of leſſer gouerumēts 100. at the leaſt: are theſe to be accounted a ſmall charge? yea, I wold who euer it were, that he were ſuch a one as might be thought to deſerue it. It is moſt certain yt in euery Prouince there be ſuch like that are vnprouided for, & would be glad to take vpon thē ſuch functions, when they ſee themſelues vnder the gouernment of the mightie, & withall would delight, each one in his quarter, to beautifie their troupes. So would it follow that the ſimple Captaines of bailiwickes would alſo amend, knowing that their men ſhoulde march in the armies and not be alwaies tied to keepe the houſe. If therefore the Captaines were ſuch, the nobilitie would of neceſſitie gather to thē, as is aforeſayd. And for my part I will neuer diſpute whether being well led they would not ſufficiently do their duties. It wer likewiſe requiſite to obſerue one ſtraight rule, which is, not to admit into the companies that are erected in Bailiwickes anie other than ſhall be fit for armes, & to reiect thoſe that being ſent are incapable. For it is moſt certaine that abroad in the countrie there dwell poore gentlemen enow & other braue ſouldiors that haue but ſmal liuing, & wold be glad to be inrouled, & when any of the aforeſayd that ought to ſend one or two, ſhould chaunce to ſet forth ſome great lubber to ſerue in his ſtead for his owne commodity, the ſame ſhould be reiected, & one of the aforenamed put in his place. For ſo do the decrees of k. Henrie as I remember, import. Yea, they exempt not the L. of the fee from this perſonall ſeruice, but in caſe of ſickneſſe or age. But if we ſhould ſee ſome one vnfit & not greatlie affected to warres, the ſame ſhould be excuſed from marching: neither were he ſeruiceable for ought. So did Scipio when he paſſed into Sicil, for with the armaurs of 300. Sicillians that ſhunned the wars, he armed 300. Romains yt did him great ſeruice in Affrick: Neither is it inough that the men admitted be & beare the face to be

good, but they muſt alſo haue fit furniture, as horſe, armor & piſtols, for in theſe cōpanies I wold not wiſh anie but piſtols, as wel for yt thoſe armes are more eaſie to handle than the ſpere, as alſo to auoid the diuerſitie of weapons now a daies brought in, which breed confuſion. It may be ſayd that it were a hard matter to bring them to this order, cōſidering there are many that are charged but with an archer which coūteruaileth an harquebut on horſback; others with a footman, others wt the 3. or with ye 4. part of a man of armes. The remedie herein were to conuert thoſe duties into coin, wherwith to to hire & furniſh ſuch as I ſpeake of: but they that were bound to a whole man of armes ſhould ſet him forth at the full. But it is to be noted, that beſides the paie, the furniture muſt alſo be prouided▪ for the duty is, a man furniſhed & paide, & not a ſimple paie onely. This difficultie may alſo be propounded, viz. that it will be hard to finde a ſufficient number of poore gentlemen or notable ſoldiors to ſupply the roome of the others, becauſe that ſo ſoone as warre is once proclaimed, euerie man ſtraight taketh a part: but they that make this obiection haue not ſufficiently conſidered the multitude of men in France: for ſtil we haue enow that keep home, which my ſelfe haue many times noted, & therfore this need is not to be feared. Alſo order once ſet downe, & that the piſtoller ſhould haue giuen him 30. crownes to arme himſelfe, & other 30. for his 3. moneths paie, wee ſhould ſee men enough readie furniſhed of horſe or armour, or both, come to offer their ſeruice. And better to haue in a troupe but 25. good men than 100. ſo armed as is aforeſaid, which ordinarily are good for nothing but to ſkarre the peaſants and deuoure victuals. Thus woulde I wiſh them to bee furniſhed: with blacke Corſlets ſomewhat light (for the heauy doe but cloy them) Taſes, Pouldrons, and Burgu
                        •
                     nets, than a good & long Piſtoll, and the Bauldricke full of charges, but no caſſocke, for the true Reiſter ſhould ſhew foorth nothing but yron and fire. Their march after the manner of Reiſters, that is, three and three, and to fight in ſquadrons, for who ſo vſeth otherwiſe, is deceiued. And thus ſhould the bailie or ſteward order his men to bring them to the Captain of his prouince. Likewiſe this order ſhould be obſerued: that every 6. ſcore horſe, or 100. at the leaſt might raiſe a banner & make a companie. Of the vſe of well ordered A
                        〈…〉
                     bans & the meanes to maintaine them. So that if in a bai
                     •
                  ywick there ſhall be but 20. or 30. than to ioyne 3. or 4. together, afterward to agree vpon a lieuetenant & Enſigne. Al things aforeſayd put in effect the Arrierbans would no longer be vnprofitable people, but grow to a power of horſe compoſed of

many Gentlemen & good Captaines that would not faile in their duties: wherof in ye armies but one halfe were to bee vſed for feare of vnfurniſhing the prouinces, and the ſame would amount vnto about 1200. horſe. And in my opinion that Prince were farre out of taſte that would diſdaine to command ouer ſuch a companie which vpon neceſſity might ſeeme to ſight in flanke of a king in two great ſquadrons. Neither is it yet al to haue propounded this braue patterne and ſet downe orders: for ſmall fruit would ariſe hereof, vnleſſe we ſhould prouide for two pointes of great conſideration. The one to make a more iuſt valuation of that which the fees ought to coutribute: the other to cut off vnneceſſarie exemptions. Concerning the firſt, many abuſes are therein committed. For ſundry doe ſpare themſelues, and burthen their neighbours, or fauour others.
               I remēber that once I heard of a fee not worth aboue 400. franks by yere, belonging to an ancient Gentleman, that in his youth had done verie good ſeruice, rated at 80. franks for the Arrierban. And of another goodly manor hard by it, worth 1800. which a 
                     〈◊〉
                   Aduocate had ſcratched in with 4. hands, rated but at 35. This is the goodly equality many times obſerued in ſuch affaires. Wherfore to preuent all ſuch deceits, it were requiſite in euery bailiwick to choſe ſix men of the three eſtates, honorable & honeſt men (becauſe at this daie the fees are diuided amōg them) to aſſiſt at the taxing, to ye end to draw thē neerer to reaſon: ſo do I imagine that if we ſhould take but the tenth part of the ſayd fees the king ſhould be well ſerued, & the priuate parties haue no great cauſe to complaine. It were alſo good to haue regard to the perſons: For there were no reaſon as much to charge him, who after a ſorte ſerueth the common wealth, or is vertuous, or that hath bene employed in good ſeruice, as a greate feed vſurer, at whoſe gate the poore die for hunger, or a pettie fogger that continually troubleth his neighbours. Thus might men that would incroch fees be accuſtomed to abandon their euill manners that hurt others. Anſwere to thoſe that wil haue no reformation.
               
               I knowe verie well that vpon this reuiew, ſundry will crie out, and that peraduenture with ſound heart, ſaying: What doo ye ſeeke to alter? My fee for this hundred yeeres paide but ſo much (which is peraduenture but the thirtieth or fortieth part) and now you aſke me more, this violence is not to be borne. If this plaintiefe be a Gentleman, hee is one that eyther goeth to the warre, or that tarrieth at home.

If he be a warriour, he complaineth wrongfully, conſidering that going to ſerue he is exempt frō paiments. If he go not to the war he is either vertuous or vicious: if vertuous, he will conſider that if it be a point of diſhoneſtie to denie priuate bonds, much more diſhoneſtie is it to denie publike. And then it is to be ſuppoſed, he wil yeeld to reaſon. But if hee bee one of them that doth but beare the name of gentilitie which he blemiſheth wt vicious actions, I would ſet before him the cuſtome practiſed by our ancient Gaules, in the time of Iulius Caeſar, which was this. After the precepts directed forth for the aſſembling of the nobilitie, he that came after the time limited, not letted but by his owne negligence, was put to death in ſight of the whole armie, thereby to warne the reſt to be more diligent. For ſo might he gather, that if in thoſe daies they did ſo ſeuerely puniſh their ſloth that were willing to ſerue: their ingratitude that will neither helpe in perſon nor in purſe deſerueth much greater puniſhment. As for the vnnoble that haue fees, ſuch as haue anie iudgement, or are endued with any indifferency or knowledge, either be put in office, ſhould not murmure when they are called vpon to giue ſome ſmall portion to be exempt from perſonall ſeruice whereto they are vnmeet. Neither wil they in anie wiſe refuſe ſo to do. But as for thoſe who as much vpō an earneſt deſire to be called Lords, as for couetize, do nothing but heape fee vpon fee, & do neyther ſerue the common wealth, nor vſe charitie, & yet would excuſe thēſelues frō diſcharging thoſe moſt ancient duties, which I doubt whether euen the Kings can bee excuſed of, ought to bee charged double, like the Aſſe yt hath a ſtrong back, to teach them to bee more willing. Should they not conſider yt they are vnworthy the prerogatiues & honors of fees, ſith they are vncapable of military actions which ought to accōpanie thoſe yt do poſſeſſe them? They that ſéek nothing but ſtarting holes, will yet ſaie that the king raiſeth ſubſidies of the people for the paie of his men of armes, which ſheweth that noble mens lands ſhould be quite diſcharged. Truely they doe wel fulfil ye rule of iuſtice, making it to yeld to their owne profit, & ſtraining it to the ouerthrow of others. I thinke if anie man would euen flay the people, they could be content, ſo thēſelues might haue ſome morcel of the ſkin. It is the cōmons pouertie that ought to be pittied, & not their abūdance yt cannot be ſatiſfied. One word yet of exemptions, which in ſuch a caſe as this that concerneth the preſeruation of the Realme, are but ouer common.
               The harme is the kings who is ſtil ye worſe ſerued. But as himſelf Of exēptions.
                  
is the cauſe of this diminiſhing through the lyberalities, which without giuing to him to vnderſtande the conſequences, they force at his handes: ſo is it his part alſo to enquire what may iuſtlie be granted, and to cut off whatſoeuer is vnneceſſarie. Wherfore it were requiſite the Captaine generall ſhould be carefull to obtain of him a declaration, for a rule in the Prouinces. For as theſe dueties are no new matters, but verie auncient and meete for the vpholding of the crowne and maintainance of the French Nation, ſo muſt they be diligentlie ſeene into before they bee diſpenſed withall.
               The Romaines, who did but ſeldome oppreſſe their ſubiectes with great tributes (had neuertheleſſe, when any great warre came vpon them, eſpecially agaynſt the Gaules) no reſpect of perſons, neyther were their Prieſts, whom they eſteemed ſacred, exempt from common contributions: ſo carefull were they for the publike benefite. The lyke regard ought we to haue of ours, and not to let thoſe helpes that ſerue to that end runne into decaie, which neuertheleſſe we ought not to vſe to the murthering of our ſelues, but rather to repulſe the chiefe enemies of this eſtate, who doe but watch occaſion to deſtroie vs. For this cauſe ought wee of our pouertie and neceſſitie to make a vertue, leaſt we be circumuented. For if we ſuffer our ſelues to be beaten, our neighbours will ſaie, that we ſhall haue wrong: but if we well defend our ſelues, as wée may, (if wee redreſſe the forces of our Realme) they will be affeard to come and aſſaile vs.
            
            
               The twelfth Diſcourſe.
               
                  Of the multiplying of priuate quarels, with the abuſes therein committed, which greatly want reformation.
               
               
                  THe true ſpring and originall whereof ſo many quarels The originall of quarrels. doe ariſe, which are now more common among the French nation than euer heeretofore, are Pride and Wealth. Two moſt vehement paſſions that ſo farre tranſport them as to diſſolue the bonds of amity

and friendſhip which held them vnited together. And not withſtanding many do labour to reſtraine them, yet are they in great force by reaſon that euill cuſtomes in liew of quenching do kindle the fire of the ſame, whereby no man can well exempt himſelfe from iniurie: yea, euē the nobilitie which hetherto hath alwaies ben moſt readie to all braue enterpriſes, is at this day the formoſt in maintaining theſe abuſes. To them therefore do I direct my ſpeech, to the end to aſſaie by ſome meanes to diuert them from purſuing the errors that moleſt them, and tend to their confuſion.
               Many men of iudgement there are that thinke ſo many braules & The obiection of ſuch as thinck quarels to be neceſſarie. quarelles as ordinarily fall out, to be neceſſarie euils, which it were meete ſomewhat to tollerate, ſo to auoide others farre greater. For they imagine that this heate being very naturall to our nation muſt of neceſſity diſſolue and euaporate in ſmall matters, leaſt otherwiſe it proue an occaſion to caſt vs into ciuill diſſention: yea, they affirm that proces of law tend alſo to the ſame end, becauſe they be occupations, during the which the abundaunce of choler weareth awaie. This opinion truly 
                     •
                  auoureth ſomewhat of a paradoxe, in being alleadged Aunſwer. in ſuch a ſeaſon as ſeemeth no whit to fauour it. Yet had it borne ſome likelyhood if it had ben propounded in the daies of our former kings. But ſince ſuch terrible ciuill warres haue ouertaken vs, we haue greater reaſon to think that they haue ingendered theſe perticular diſorders, rather than to imagine ye ſame to haue alwaies bene ſuch as we now ſee them, either that they haue ben accounted as preſeruatiues againſt greater miſchiefs. I knowe well in ought that warlike mindes are hardly reſtrained, alſo that it is neceſſarie to entertaine them in ſome kinde of exerciſe, whereby to alaie the heat of their courages. But to ſuffer them to hurt, or by armes to aſſault each other, and not to reſtraine them, we haue verie few examples, vnleſſe among the barbarous nations. For ſo ſhould wee ſubmit the lawes, which are rather made to ſuppreſſe violence, to the imperfections of men. In Italie where are the greateſt politikes, the common Courtiſans are ſuffered to dwell in euerie Towne, to the end through ſuch libertie to eſchue other more hainous leudneſſe: Wherof notwithſtanding, no good cōmeth, but rather it ſeemeth that al intemperancie doth ouerflow. Such v
                     •
                  ces as in ye 
                  
                     •
                  ight of God are abhominable, as whooredome & murther ought neuer vnder colour of eſchuing greater incouneniences, to be permitted.
               But ſome man will ſaie, Are not combats forbidden in France? Yes, ſuch as are made with lawes & publik ceremonies (which likewiſe Of Combats.
                  
the Pope hath forbidden ſo farre as his dominion ſtretchech) & it is a good lawe, howbeit that notwithſtanding wee are not yet at reſt. For now all reſpect being taken awaie, they appoint theyr cō
                  bats without authoritie, and go to fight whenſoeuer the toy taketh them in the heads, as wel againſt thoſe whom they hate, as againſt their owne friends, as if all were good ware. And if we ſhould diligently account how many are yerely ſlain by ſuch priuate braules, we ſhould find that there haue bene battels fought wt leſſe loſſe both of gentrie & ſouldiors. Thoſe that conſider but the preſent time, or Their originall. are but young as neuer to baue ſcene other, do peraduenture think that men haue alwaies ſo liued in this Realme, wherein they are greatly deceiued. For it is not yet fortie yeeres ſince quarels were rare among Gentlemen, & who ſo was noted to be a quareller, was ſhunned as a kicking 
                     •
                  ade: which proceeded in that their manners were more pure, and the true points of honour better knowen than at this day. Thus are the euills that in old time were ſmall, toward the end of this age wonderfully increaſed, ſo as we may ſay them to be rather our ſinnes than the ſinnes of our fathers.
               Some haue imagined that our troubles haue bred thē, by extinguiſhing The diuers cauſes of Combates. the ancient cōcord & exaſperating the minds of ye 
                  French natiō: which I confeſſe to be in part true: but my opinion is, yt many other occaſions haue holpen as much or more to procure the ſame. Firſt a preſumption yt many haue conceiued of their owne ſtrength & dexteritie, which haue made them more readie to doe iniurie. For ſince ye exerciſe of fencing, which of it ſelfe is comēdable, came to be vſed, alſo yt yong mē eſpecially haue found thēſelues to be perfectly inſtructed therin, they haue imagined yt they might braue it out at their pleaſures, & obtaine reputation of valiancie, conſidering that experience teacheth, that he that is perfect in the vſe of his wepon, & withall wanteth no courage, hath almoſt alwaies the better hand of him that is ignorant, and in deed there is no doubt but the ſkilfull hath great aduantage of the vnſkilfull. Thus are men entered into a foule abuſe, in vſing ſuch ſkill as they haue attained vnto, to the wronging of others: which ought not to be imploied, but to the preſeruation of life, & that in caſe of neceſſity. The 2. cauſe is, the exā
                  ple of ſome Lords & notable courtiers, yt haue ben ſeene fight both in the court & in the middeſt of the chiefe townes, wherby other gentlemen (who are very diligent imitators of exāples either good or bad) haue ben induced to caſt off all regard of ciuilitie & to ſeeke to decide their cōtrouerſies, as they ſee others do. The 3. is impunity.

For ſeeing ſuch diſorders to eſcape without puniſhment, it hath emboldned them not only to fight one with another, but alſo to put in execution moſt villanous reuenges.
               The fourth hath growen, becauſe men haue tied honour to the mangling of arms and legs, & mayming or killing one of another, which ye nobilitie hauing noted (as couetous of glorie) haue ſought by ſuch meanes to attaine thereto.
               Of all theſe cauſes, together with the had affections which theſe Of what partes the monſter named Quarel doth conſiſt. long ciuill warres haue ingendered, is this hideous beaſt Quarell formed, which intruding it ſelfe among the nobilitie, dooth vnperceiued by little and little deuour the ſame. What a deede was that of the ſixe Gentlemen of the Court, who appointing to meet at the Tournels were ſo fleſhed each vpon other, that foure of them there remayned, and the other two were ſore wounded. There were among them ſuch as in time might haue attayned to great dignitie, & yet lead by extreame follie, choſe rather to periſh in the flower of their age, which was lamentable. Diuerſe other cōbats there haue ben both in Paris and at the Court, which haue ſent many valiant perſons to the graue. In the meane time throughout all the other Prouinces euerie one haue not bene at reſt, for ſome of them haue we ſeene diſquieted and ſpotted with the bloud of gentrie. In this ſtate are we at this daie in France, whereinto our owne follies, together with the tolleration therof, haue brought vs. And vnleſſe the kings diſcretion and authoritie doe prouide ſome remedie all will ſtill empaire.
               Now although I may freely reproue the corruption of our time, Of the aunciēt Combats and thoſe of our dayes. yet will I not thereof inferre that in time paſt men liued without quarels. For men are men and ſubiect to wrath and reuenge. But vndoubtedly they had verie few, neither wold they be moued without great iniuries: where now a word of nothing or in 
                     •
                  eſt bringeth the lie, a ſharpe looke ſhall be accounted an iniurie, and a ſlaunder or falſe opinion call for a combat: ſo tickliſh and pricking is our dayly conuerſation, which proceedeth of a falſe imagination conceiued, that true honor conſiſteth in ſurmounting others with force and making them to tremble vnder vs. A man may ſeeke aduauntage and victorie ouer his companions by playing at his weapon, leaping, vaulting, running at the ring, and ſuch lyke exerciſes: but that he ſhal not be eſteemed vnleſſe he deuour them, aſſaulteth their liues, or ſheddeth their bloud, it is a moſt pernitious opinion? This haue made men ſo incompatible, that haunting together, they are

forced to practiſe this prouerbe, To day a friend, to morowe an enemie: Among all ſhames, nay rather infamies, this is not the leaſt, that a Gentleman, euen vpon a friuolous occaſion, ſhall tain
                     •
                   his ſword in the blood of his friends, with whom before he made but one bed, one table and one purſe. And yet if any would diligently enquire, he might finde aboue a hundred ſuch examples within theſe twentie yeeres: yea euen neere kindred cannot dwell long together without braules, which after bring them to blowes.
               I thinke that theſe diſorders are much encreaſed through the Encreaſe of Combats in our dayes. libertie of youth, which being crept into credite haue reiected all feare of lawes and counſaile of their elders, and taking bit in the teeth haue bred great abuſe herein, which cuſtome hath but too much confirmed. But wee are not to finde it ſtraunge that the firſt age which is accompanied rather with heate then diſcretion doth ſometymes diſorder it ſelfe. Rather ſhould we wonder that wiſe men and magiſtrates can cloſely cōſent and ſuffer ſuch things as they ought ſharply to repreſſe, to haue free courſe. I haue ſhewed with what inconſtancie men vſe to make quarels without any ground, alſo with what furie they afterward fight head to head. But yet is not this all the worſt, for others, which are no leſſe then theſe, doe enſue. One taketh amends with aduauntage: an other taketh cruell reuenge: one procureth the killing of his enemie in treazon with the ſhot of ſome Dagge or Harquebut: others doe make great aſſemblies reſembling pettie warres: and many tymes one quarell breedeth fower, and twentie dye for one mans offence.
               Theſe are vnworthie actions for Gentlemen, but among the The ſtrange confuſions of the Combats. reſt, priuie murders are deteſtable. But moſt of all I wonder at an other abuſe now in great courſe among the moſt gallanteſt, that being ſo pernitious, it hath ſo long continued. That is, that when any is diſpoſed to fight, he that is his ſecond, as we terme it, or his third, muſt alſo fight to extremitie with the ſecond or third of the contrary part: yea they euen ſtriue who ſhall bee one. Theſe men (in truth) may be termed ſcourges to themſelues rather then thoſe who clothed in linnen, with whippes in their handes, goe vp and downe with heauie cheare daintely ſtriking their delicate ſkinne. Can there be any more fond folly then to ſee a Gentleman againſt his companion of Court without any cauſe of hatred, yea peraduenture hauing ſome ground of amitie, and ſometymes his kinſman, yet through a certaine brauerie, goe cut his friends throate▪ In my opinion theſe doe but badly knowe the true office of ſeconds

in a controuerſie of honor. For as I thinke, they ſhould reſemble the Iudges that are choſen in Combats: who are to aſſiſt their friends: firſt as pledges of their faith giuen, as alſo to ſee there bée no fraud in ſuch an action, neither on the one part nor on the other, whereof they are to aunſwer. And next to bee witneſſes of the valour of thoſe whom they conduct: moreouer to agree them or part them in the field, as ſometnmes it happeneth, after blood drawne. But now in liewe of doing theſe dueties and fearing to quench their heate, theſe men doe helpe to kindle them more and more, ſometimes to their owne deſtruction: a moſt deſerued penance for ſuch an ouerſight. Some ſay theſe faſhions are brought out of Italie. I referre that to the truth thereof, but now the vſe is ours, and if Iuſtice were reſtored and royall authoritie better regarded we ſhould become more ciuill. But I will alleadge one example to prooue the lewd conſequence of quarels, which is that vpon a cōtrouerſie growne betweene two gentlemen of the court, almoſt all the Princes and Lords with their fautors tooke parts, ſo as the King was driuen to ſend his guard to kéep them aſunder and cauſe them to depart. Now if theſe had met I leaue to your iudgement what a bloodie folly it had bred.
               It ſeemeth wée haue entred déepe enough into this laberinth of How to remedy the confuſion of Combates. miſchief which hath coſt vs deere, & brought too much diſaduantage to deſire any more experience therof. And as the gentrie hath bene the greateſt fauorers & nouriſhers therof, ſo muſt it be the firſt that ſhould helpe to deſtroy & baniſh it, eſpecially if it mind the recouery of ye good reputatiō which it had in the daies of ye great K. Frances. Then was it a goodly matter to ſee the good agreement among the gentry. Then was applyed vnto thē this Spaniſh prouerbe: To the friend as ſoft as waxe, but to the enemy as hard as ſteele. By which enemies were ment none, but thoſe that were ſo reputed in time of warre. Thē was there great modeſtie among thē: ſocieties of ſundrie companions did long continue, & friends obſerued the rules of perfect fidelitie. If any cōtrouerſie did ariſe, they al ranne to quēch it, where now they fuffer it to encreaſe, to ye end to haue the paſtime of the combat. So yt when I think of it, we muſt no more ſpeake of thoſe daies, leaſt ye vnlikelineſſe of ours therto do make vs to bluſh for ſhame. Such as by nature are giuen to peace & withall are endued with any diſcretion, do find it very rude. For notwithſtanding they ſtudie to ſhunne all contention, yet are they ſometimes entangled therein through other mēs arrogancy, which is ſo intollerable

that it ouercōmeth all patience. Thus are they forced to follow the wicked cuſtome, leaſt they ſhould be altogether diſdained. Albeit many times it falleth out yt they free themſelues from ſuch braules with as great honor, as their prouokers. Well was it ſayd of him that termed proweſſe and quarels two bad beaſtes: for worſe are there none to be found. I haue heard of a gentleman yt reported that for The miſchief by quarrels. ten yeres ſpace he was much troubled with 4. horrible miſchiefes: frō which God had deliuered him. The 1. a proceſſe in law, whervpon the one halfe of his liuing did depend: the 2. a diſeaſe thought incurable: the 3. a bad wife: & the 4. a quarell grounded vpō great iniuries: among all which he affirmed yt the quarell had bred him moſt cares & diſquiet, with continuall torment, where in the reſt he had ſome reſpite & eaſe. And this may well be: for he that perſwadeth himſelf that vntill he bee reuenged euery man ſkorneth & diſdaineth him, dare ſcarce ſhewe his face in any cōpanie. He is ſtill in care how to find meanes to haue amēds of the iniurie that he hath receiued. His hatred to his enemie ſtil ſtingeth his hart & the deſire of reuenge leaueth him no reſt. Likewiſe when he conſidereth the fortune of Combats, the feare of infamy moleſteth him. Finally, if he haue any feeling of godlineſſe or religion, & that he thinke vpon the euident danger of his ſoule, if his body ſhould periſh in the purſuite of ſo mortall reuenge, may not all theſe troubles be compared with the furies that the auncients haue ſo much ſpoken of? And to ſay the truth, it is the very puniſhment of quarellers, whom Gods iuſtice permitteth to be continually moleſted, becauſe themſelues will not ſuffer others in reſt. Many miſchiefes there are that light vpon vs, wherof we are in ſmall fault: but this our ſelues doe forge and take vp vpon our ſhoulders, at the leaſt they that will not liue without controuerſies. There be gentlemen enow that hauing had 1000. or 2000. crownes rent, haue ſpent it all in this miſerable exerciſe. If a man ſhould aſke of ye quarellers, What is it that ſo troubleth you, and cauſeth you to encurre ſo many hazards and perils, and to waſt your ſelues in ſo great expences? It is, will they ſay, the reſpect of our honor. Truely that is ſuch an honor as bringeth many miſeries: where it ſhould rather bréed content & pleaſure. But I doubt if we ſhould more néerely conſider hereof, wee ſhould finde that the cauſe of this miſchiefe conſiſteth in our owne errors and follies. The ſpring of the cauſes of ſuch miſchief. And as the ambitious (as Plutarke ſayth) to the ende to hunt after a phantaſticall glorie, doe habandon the true: ſo haue we formed to our ſelues a falſe honor, that is obteyned by a certaine valiancie

(which yet were commendable in warre againſt our enemies) conſiſting but in braueries, bragges, iniurious ſpeeches, outrages, ſtripes and murders, and all againſt thoſe that before were our companions and friends. This is a briefe deſcription of that magnificent honor which is now adaies ſo rife in our mouthes.
               Herevpon will ſome man ſay: Why muſt I beare wrong & ſtripes 
                  Of true honor. 
                  and not reuenge my ſelfe againe? Hereto I aunſwer, that my entent tendeth not to will you to ſuffer all: but rather that you muſt in no wiſe commit ſuch iniuries. What then is true honor? It is a goodly praiſe and commendation, by good men attributed to ſome in reſpect of their vertue which by diuers good effects they make demonſtration of. And this conſiſteth in the vſe of wiſedome, iuſtice, proweſſe, temperance, truth, courteſie, and ſuch other vertues: wherof it enſueth that the ground of honor conſiſteth in the poſſeſſion of vertue, wherewith he muſt be clothed that mindeth to atteyne to the fruition thereof. Thoſe therefore are deceiued that thinke themſelues woorthie to tryumph of the one, and haue ſo ſmally profited in the knowledge of the other: for it is as much as to ſeeke to haue the ſhadowe without the bodie, or the barke without the tree. I aſſure my ſelfe that the wiſe will chooſe to thriue by the waies afore recited, rather then by imitating the abuſe of cuſtome, wherewith they ſhould helpe themſelues onely in great extremities, as men doe with corroſiues, and not otherwiſe. For it may ſo fall out that a ſober gentleman ſhall be ſo grieuouſly wronged through the inſolencie of an other, that he cannot brooke it: ſo is he after a ſorte compelled ſomewhat to frame himſelfe to the cuſtome, vntill ſuch good order bée reſtored as men neede not to encurre the reproach of cowardlineſſe or baſe mindes. It was an old prouerbe, That men ſhould flee a hundred miles from an aſſault, and runne a hundred miles to a battell: which with greater reaſon may be ſayd of quarels, wherein there is leſſe honor to bee gotten then in an aſſault. It is but ſmall honor to ſet vpon and ouercome him that is weaker then my ſelfe: but if I maime him that is taken to be a braue fellowe, euery man will bewayle his miſhap and accuſe my valour, as hurtfull to my owne nation: likewiſe if it bee my friend and I kill him, who will not accuſe me of inhumanitie? Wherefore, for my inſtitution it were requiſite that all men ſhould know that the aforenamed, did force me to proceede ſo farre, which circumſtances doe but ſieldome happen. France hath at all tymes had many couragious gentlemen, of whom wee haue, euen in our

daies, ſeene ſome ſhewe wonderfull proofes of valiancie in priuate quarels: neuertheleſſe they haue not bene any thing ſo much commended therefore as for other their valour ſhewed in ſkirmiſhes, aſſaults and battels. In the warres are wee to diſplay our forces and liberallie to hazard our liues, which they that caſt them ſelues headlong into quarels doe ſeeme to make ſmall accompt of.
               Here might I yet note other abuſes in theſe caſes committed, Of remedies for the aforenamed miſchiefes. but they are ſo common and ſo well knowne that it would but breed tediouſneſſe to heare thē repeated. And more meet it were to diſcourſe of the fitteſt remedies, for the baniſhing or helping of the ſame: wherof if ſome had bin ſooner applyed, they might haue done more good: for the longer wee delay, the deeper roote doth the miſchiefe take. Howbeit, it is yet curable, if we will begin our cure rather by the cauſes thē by the accidents. The maner hath bene that if any honorable perſon had chaunced in any quarell to bee killed in the Court, by and by there were decrees and orders ſet downe to preuent the like inconuenience againe: which was diligently obſerued for ſome moneths ſpace, and then all was forgotten. This was as a man ſhould ſay, after meate muſtard: or when the man is dead, ſeeke the Phiſition: as alſo the preſeruatiue was too weake for the tyme to come. But we muſt remember that the miſchiefe is vniuerſall, and that the remedies ought alſo ſo to be: likewiſe that all the parts grieued, both neere and farre ſhould taſte of the benefite of the medicine. Sundrie bookes haue bene publiſhed which being tranſlated out of Italian doe entreate of iniuries, amendes, combats, &c. which alſo doe teach Gentlemen how to ſhunne quarels, and preſcribe meanes when a man is in, how to get out again without loſſe of honor: among yt which, Mutio doth beſt deſerue to be read. Howbeit, al this put in one of the ſkales, the other conteyning corrupted cuſtome, hath wayed it downe, euen as a Portegue ſhould way downe a French crowne: wherein it appeareth that cuſtome is much ſtronger then the written lawe. It is the Kings duetie to vndertake the conqueſt of this mōſter which glutteth her ſelf with blood. For ſo ſoone as he beginneth in earneſt to ſet hand to the worke, the Magiſtrates will doe the like, and then ſhall the inferiours bee forced to obey. But ſith the queſtion concerneth the rules and deciſions of honor, wee muſt not ſeeke or admit any other then from the Court: for whatſoeuer is there practiſed, is receiued and allowed in all the other Prouinces. The firſt foundation of this reformation muſt therefore be there layd, which

cannot at the beginning but ſeeme deformed, becauſe this great miſchiefe is very hard to bee pulled vp but by diſcending through ſmaller euilles, vntill men may be in ſtate to embrace ſuch good precepts as teach that all theſe combats are not onely wicked but alſo deuilliſh, inuented to the deſtruction both of bodie and ſoule, & therfore by no Prince to be lawfully permitted.
               But to proceed in my purpoſe: Concerning preſent remedies, Of perticuler remedies. this I muſt ſay, that it were good his Maieſtie, the Princes and Lords ſhould in their ordinarie ſpeeches which they vſe publickly, reproue quarellers, in liewe of commending them after they haue tainted their weapōs with blood, and withall giue them to wéet that they deteſt them as men that haue no delight but to riſe by others hurts. That they ſhould admoniſh all men to gouerne themſelues with modeſtie & diſcretion, & threaten the tranſgreſſors with moſt grieuous puniſhments. Then if at the Court any ſhould ſo farre preſume as to appoint place to iniurie other, the ſame ſhould be ſeuerely puniſhed and not to ſpare any whoſoeuer. For 2. or 3. examples of iuſtice would correct aboue 500. And this is moſt ſtraightly obſerued in the Court of Spayne. Some are empriſoned in Caſtles: others are baniſhed for a certaine time: others are condemned to the warres of Barbary againſt the Moores: & others are forced to make publicke ſatiſfaction: yea if the offence be great, the loſſe of goods or death do depēd theron. Sith alſo in our France this noyſome humour is ſo rooted, it were méete the purgation were ſomewhat ſharpe, yet would it not breed ſedition. There are that hold opinion that it were good the K. would referre the puniſhment & correction of theſe ordinary quarellers & murderers to the Iuſtices, & himſelf not to meddle therein: neither can I miſlike it ſo farre as it tendeth only to moſt villanous wilfull ſlaughters, & ſuch like as daily are cōmitted. But ſith this matter concerneth honor & armes, likewiſe that either good or bad inſtructions are learned in the court or in the warres, my opiniō were that thence likewiſe ſhould proceede order & correction. To this end alſo it were requiſite his Maieſtie ſhould aſſemble ye 
                  Marſhalles of France, with the moſt auncient Capteines to make ſome good decrée for this matter, to order diuers things miſunderſtood & worſe practiſed: & to ſhew how they ſhould behaue thēſelues in poynts of honor, which done, to publiſh the ſame throughout the Prouinces, their euery man being aduertiſed might conteine himſelf in his duetie: ſo would good examples, conioyned with ſeuere puniſhmēt, be no doubt of great force to ſuppreſſe

the preſent confuſions and errors. As alſo it were meete the ſame were carefully obſerued in the Court, at Paris, & wherſoeuer there is any bodie of men of warre: for the youth from all partes of the realme do draw thether to learne, & if abuſes do there raigne, at their returne home, they ſow the ſame all ouer: as contrariwiſe ſéeing good cuſtomes, they doo imitate & make thē manifeſt to others. The Gouernours likewiſe are to haue expreſſe charge ſo ſoone as any quarell ariſeth within their gouernmēts to ſend for the parties to ſeeke to agree them, & if they be men of great calling & the matter very difficult, to enioyne thē without delay to haue recourſe to his Maieſtie to the ende he may prouide therefore, as hauing great intereſt when his ſubiects do liue in diſcord: alſo if any ſhould procéede to villanous outrages, to purſue them ſtoutly & without reſpect of perſons. And indeed I ſuppoſe that neither the one nor the other will be ſo blind as to beare with wicked actions. Some man will ſay: Hath not the King publiſhed ſuch commaundements enow? Yes, I confeſſe he hath: but they haue no whit profited, for want of putting in execution: & how ſhould thoſe that dwell farre of obey them, when they ſee them euen in the Court vtterly contemned. For there all ſorts of iniuries both in word & deede, all trecheries, reuenges and ſet combats are openly practiſed euen in euery mans view, without any great reprehenſion. If we wiſh good orders to take place, our Magiſtrates muſt bee the firſt that muſt obſerue them, and then cauſe others to doe the like.
               Something would I ſay of poynts requiſite to bee conteyned Order how to make the remedies to ſerue. therein, were it not that I might ſéeme to enterpriſe vpō thoſe that ſhould be appoynted to doe it, whoſe ſufficiencie I imagine to be ſuch as not to need any inſtructions, ſith it is their parts to giue thē to others. Howbeit, to ſatiſfie the mindes of the curious (who I thinke would bee glad to ſee ſome) I will propound onely 7. or 8. which firſt come to mind: namely, That ſlight iniuries proceeding of ſudden chollor or otherwiſe, muſt not bee refelled with the lye, in that the ſame is a word now too odious, but with ſome more modeſt deniall, whereto a man cannot reply with the lye. He that ſhall giue it, vnleſſe vpō ſuch an iniurie as being proued might breed to the gentlemā that ſhall haue receiued it either infamy, or deſert of death, ſhall be driuen to amends. He that ſhall without cauſe wrong any man in worde or deede, ſhall be forced to ſatiſfaction. He that ſhall haue receiued any iniurie, ſhall not aſſigne any place to his enemie, neither procure him to bee chalenged vnder payne of moſt ſeuere puniſhment, as well

to himſelf as to the chalenger: but ſhall come before the King, the Gouernour, or the Captaine of the Prouince, to craue leaue to redreſſe his wrong by armes: then if the partie that offereth the iniurie appeareth not within the third ſummons of his ſuperiour, he ſhall by publicke placards bee baniſhed the Court, the Armies and the capitall Cities: and the other reſtored to his honor, as well in respect of his obedience, as for amends, and diſcharge of the combate, although the author by ſecret meanes ſhould labour to come thereto. And touching all ſuch quarels as the Gouernours and Capteynes cannot agree, they ſhal not neuertheleſſe haue authoritie for the deciſion therof, to graunt the ſinguler combate, but ſhall referre the parties, with ſtraight prohibition not to hurt each other, vnto his maieſtie, to whom onely belongeth the graunt thereof. Whoſoeuer ſhall by himſelfe or by any other, ſtrike a Gentleman with a
                        •
                     udgell, ſhall after ſatiſfaction be alſo puniſhed by limited baniſhment or ſome other grieuous payne, becauſe it is a boyiſh iniurie. If the partie iniuried practiſe any trecherie for the recouerie of his honor, the ſuperiour ſhall force him to amends for his cowardlineſſe. Likewiſe for thoſe who in the Prouinces through their quarels ſhall make any great aſſemblies, or with open force purſue their aduerſarie: becauſe ſuch are but ſparkes wherewith to kindle warres. Many other ſuch like articles may be hereunto added, which digeſted into order, would beare ſome grace. But after ſome good reſolution taken for their well obſeruing, they may ſoone enough bée reuealed. For this tyme it may ſuffice to runne ouer theſe ſmall peeces, which I haue layd together to awaken many good wittes that I knowe in France, to the ende they may ſay better then I haue done, correct that which I haue ſet downe, and ſhew the great ones that it is their dueties by all meanes to ſeeke to reduce the Nobilitie into the way from whence it hath ſtrayed: for ſo long as it ſhall remaine wandring both in word and deede, it ſhall ſtill prophane Uertue and Armes and waſt it ſelfe, whereas contrariwiſe if good diſcipline may force it to reenter into the carrier of our aunceſters, eaſely it may atteyne to the end therof, where the crownes of true honor are diſtributed.
            
            
               
               The thirtenth Diſcourſe.
               
                  That his Maieſtie ought in the tyme of peace to enterteyne at the leaſt fower regiments of footmen, reduced into the number of 2500. men, as well for the preſeruation of martiall diſcipline, as to bee alwaies aſſured of a great body of olde Souldiers.
               
               
                  WOrthely is King Charles the ſeuenth commended, How neceſſary it is to haue footemen. for his ſo profitable eſtabliſhment of the men of Armes, whereof he was the author. Neither doth the great King Frances deſerue leſſe praiſe, in that imitating the auncient diſcipline, he could finde meanes among his owne ſubiects to forme a mightie bodie of footmen, wherewith the more to furniſh out his warſare: For before there was but ſmall accompt made of them, as is aforeſayd. But ſince the ſetting downe of good rules, and that the exerciſe thereof hath enſued, they haue faſhioned themſelues, and are growne more obedient and valiant. Harquebuts came but little before into vſe, which haue made them very terrible and ſo neceſſary as they may not be miſſed. Sith therefore the experience of many warres haue taught that it is not poſſible to proſecute them well without a good number of footmen, were it not a great ouerſight not to lay any foundation of them: Conſidering that a meane hath bene found how to forme ſo ſtrong a one of Horſemen? For the ſame reaſons that moued our auncient Kings to ordeyne the one, may vrge them that now raigne to eſtabliſh the other. In olde tyme the chiefe differences of warre were decided in the plaine field: where now they conſiſt in ſurpriſes, aſſaults, and defence of Houlds. Wherein the Harquebuts and Pikes are not only profitable but alſo neceſſarie. Now, if wee liſt to conſider the number of Footmen that France mainteyneth in the tyme of peace, they will ſeeme to be fewe in reſpect of the Horſemen, who in the tyme of King Henry the ſecond were aboue ſixe thouſand ſpeares. For excepting the Garriſons of Citadelles and Caſtles which are there to bee ſettled, the reſt is a

ſmall matter. But for the procuring of a well ordered warfare it is requiſite there be ſome proportion betwéene the parties and ſortes of men of warre whereof it conſiſteth, as there is betweene the mē
                  bers of a mans bodie: For either ſuperfluitie or want doe breed deformitie. And notwithſtanding the men of armes doe in dignitie ſurmount the others, yet doth it not thereof enſue that they ſhould in quantitie ſo farre excéede. The arme is more honorable then the legge, yet is the legge as maſſiue and great as it, yea and as profible in his function. In my opinion therefore it ſeemeth there were ſome reaſon in tyme of peace to entertaine fower regiments of footmen of ſixe hundred in each, ſo to concurre with the force of the Ordinances, notwithſtanding the ſame now conſiſt but of 4000. Speares. I will not ſtand to ſhewe what neede France ſtill ſtandeth Why France alwaies ſtandeth in neede of any army. in of an armed arme: for all men of iudgement doe ſufficiently know that the Eagles of Auſtrich would come and eate vp her Chickens if martiall order were extinct. But many doe thinke the French nation to be ſo well enured to warres, that they neede but ſtampe on the ground (as Pompey ſayd) to bring foorth whole legions armed: Howbeit they are deceiued, neither is there any truſt to be repoſed in that: For if diſcipline and enterteynment faile, the more men there be, the more is the diſorder and confuſion. Such as ſuffer themſelues to be abuſed with the noyſe of many Drums, with the ſight of many Flagges wauing in the wind, and with the view of a field couered with men, doe not wéene themſelues to bée deceiued, becauſe they thinke that euery one ſhould be as readie to doe his duetie as he is to make a bragge: but at the proofe we many times finde that a ſmall troope of reſolute enemies doth ouerthrow all this. Haue not wee alſo within theſe twentie yeeres ſufficiently felt the ſpoyles that a diſordered multitude doth worke, euen to their friends? All theſe experiences might perſwade vs that a few olde Souldiers doe profite more then a great ſort of rawe and vnſkilfull.
               I knowe that no man will ſay but wee ought alwaies to maintaine That footmen are neceſſary: alſo how to forme them. a good number of men of armes: but for Footmen ſome thinke that in time of peace they may well enough be ſpared: becauſe the Realme for want of habilitie had néede to ſpare many things. But I will ſay, that if the Realme bee poore it will bee contemned: if it be contemned the more will practiſe againſt it: which ought to moue the mightie well to vnderproppe it with counſaile and force. I will be aduiſed how I will thinke our pouertie to be ſuch as not to

be able to maintaine fower thouſand Speares and fiue and twentie hundred Footmen in ordinary, beſides the garriſons and warders of Caſtles. Wee might doe more, but when a little will ſuffice, a great deale is ſuperfluous. Now doe I wiſh that the bodies of regiments ſhould ſtill bee in force, to the ende the arte of warre bee not forgotten, not in ſpeculation but in practiſe: as alſo to preſerue many men of commaundement. I haue guided companies of 60. men, which in my opinion would bee ſufficient in time of peace. For when occaſion ſhould fall out to augment them, putting into euery companie the full number, they will in two moneths, as well through the diligence of good Capteynes, as by vertue of good orders, bée trayned to doe good ſeruice. But ſo will not the newe leuyed regiments: For if the Colonell bee a man of ſmall experience, he maketh but bad choyſe of Capteynes and they of Souldiers. Then as well the one as the other guyding them ſelues rather after their owne phancies, then after any good militarie order, it is not to bee meruailed though ſuch bad beginnings haue worſe ends. The like may alſo happen to this warfare: for if the Colonell, louing the Court will not remaine with his companies: and the Capteynes do for the moſt part keepe home, likewiſe that as well the one as the other to the ende to furniſh themſelues doe make their prouiſion of halfe their Souldiers pay, all will bee corrupted. In a matter of ſuch importance we ought to be very diligent, and the more that abuſes doe multiplie, the more ſeuerely are they to be looked vnto.
               The fower regiments afore mentioned would I wiſh to bee The Ordering of the companies of footmen and the benefite that will ariſe therof. put in garriſon in the frontiers of Picardy, Champagne, and others of protection, there to ſerue as well for the cuſtodie of ſome places of importance as Metz and Calais, as alſo to bee Schooles where young Gentlemen growne from Pages, and other youth might goe to learne the arte of warre: but the chiefe ende indeede, is to haue alwaies a ſtorehonſe of old ſouldiers readie prouided for euery neede. For ſo ſoone as warre were proclaymed and the King ſhall haue cōmaunded to encreaſe the companies to their full number, amounting to two hundred a peece: we ſhould within ſome ſixe or ſeuen weekes be able to bring forth into the fielde two thouſand Corcelets & ſixe thouſand Harquebuts, which ioyned with a parte of the men of armes would beare a good brunt, vntill the comming of the reſt of our power. Now, if euer, it is neceſſary to reforme our footmen, ſith the ciuill warres haue ſo corrupted them yt either they

cannot or will not almoſt obey: onely breeding terror where they march and ſcath where they continue. In theſe daies when a yong man commeth newly into a regiment of Footmen, I preſume that he learneth ſome feates of warre, alſo to be the more couragious: but it is to bee feared leaſt in the ſame Schoole he get as great imperfections, which darken all the good that he had learned, as I haue ſhewed els where. Where cōtrariwiſe theſe fower regiments would be as it were great ſprings from whence would flowe none but fayre and cleere water, which ſhedding it ſelfe all ouer the Realme would clarifie thoſe that are troubled. For diſcipline being eſtabliſhed and obſerued, ſuch as followe the ſame, ſhewing themſelues euery where gentle to their equalles, obedient to their ſuperiours, courteous to the commōs, and ſtout againſt the proud, eſpecially againſt their enemies, ſhould cauſe all men much more to admire them therefore, then for their bigge lookes: beſides the fame of ſo braue an inſtitution being ſpred abroad, all noble harts will deteſt the accuſtomed corruptions, and withall deſire to ſubmit themſelues to the ſame. Had I not heretofore ſeene the like effects proceede of the like cauſe, I would not ſpeake ſo boldly as I doe. I remember that in the beginning of King Henry the ſeconds raigne, when certeyne Capteynes and Souldiers that had lyen two yéeres in garriſon in the townes of Piedmont returned into France, they were greatly eſteemed, becauſe they ſhewed them ſelues ſo ciuill, and courteous, nothing iniurious, and ſpeaking ſo orderly of the exerciſe of armes, which cauſed many young men to runne thether in hope of the like inſtructions. Yea, my ſelfe haue ſeene the Earle of Charny (one of the moſt vertuous and honeſteſt Lords of this land) weare the Corcelet and goe to warde as duely as one of the meaneſt Souldiers, euen in the tyme of peace.
               Now may ſome good huſband obiect that this multiplicitie of Aunſwer to thoſe who vnder pretence of huſbandry doe hinder good orders. Capteynes and Companies, will much augment expences, which though they be ordinarie doe neuertheleſſe growe grieuous in the ende: alſo that it were better to mainteyne but tenne compleat. To whom I will aunſwer, that my entent is not to forme one full regiment: for alwaies as affayres growe on, it ſhall bee but one regiment: but I looke to lay the foundation of many, which being good, all that ſhall be built thereon will take the like goodneſſe, that is to ſay, Valour. As alſo it would followe thereof that we ſhould haue thriſe ſo many men, which is one of the drifts that I tend vnto. For, as hath bene aforeſayd, theſe fower bodies ſhould maintaine

eight thouſand Souldiers, all which being incorporated therein, might be tearmed olde. They ſhould moreouer be ſhops, out of the which we might fetch Capteynes for our footmen: for in three or fower yeeres exerciſe, euen in the tyme of peace, a man of any capacitie might grow worthie to commaund through often conference of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of warre, and practiſing the offices of thoſe that deale therein, 
                     〈◊〉
                   alſo by continuall viewe of ſome image thereof before his eyes. As for the charge I confeſſe it would amount vnto about fower thouſand crownes at the moſt by moneth. But withall we ſhould mainteyne a hundred or ſixe ſcore men of commaundement: whereof many might in tyme doe ſuch ſeruice as could not bée recompenced. What braue Colonels haue the Infantery bred within theſe fiue and twentie yeeres▪ of whom I will name but a fewe, as Charry, Gohas, Cauſſeins, Sarlabous, Pilles, Mounans, and the valiant Montbrun. It is to bee thought that this good order will raiſe vs vp more ſuch. Wee ſhall doe our maiſter no hurt in giuing him counſaile to ſpend a handful of money, to reape againe ſo good intereſt for it. The Colonels of theſe regiments being well and without fauour choſen, muſt alſo wee ſubiect to dwell fower or fiue moneths of the yeere among them: neither may the Capteynes haue leaue to bee abſent aboue three or fower moneths at the moſt. For when the officers be away, diſcipline is neglected and obedience loſt. Likewiſe were it requiſite the aſſignations of payment were certaine, to the ende the Souldier bee not corrupted in being driuen to ſeeke his liuing abroade. Thus would 15000. crownes by moneth ſuffice, which is ſuch a ſomme as our Kings ſometyme doe giue to ſome one man in one day. Likewiſe where our Souldiers will now a daies weare no Corcelets, the ſame To reſtore the vſe of Corcelets. might by this meanes be brought againe into vſe and eſtimation: which is more eaſie to bee done then men weene for: but then the Capteynes muſt begin, who haue reiected the vſe of the Pike: for they muſt bee enioyned to take it againe together with the Millan Corcelet. If they will they may alſo haue the Sword and Target of proofe againſt aſſaults and ſkirmiſhes. In the Companies one quarter ſhould bee Corcelets, (and that ſhould neuer faile) and the reſt Harquebuts. And notwithſtanding this were not a fit proportion which requireth to conſiſt of as many of the one as of the other, yet muſt we come as neere it as wee may. Alſo the better to bring our Souldiers into taſt with the ſayd Corcelets, they ſhould haue thoſe that ſhould bee well made and grauen to the ende the

beautie might allure their affections. Thus whē they ſhould ſée the examples of their Capteynes together with the great payes therto alotted, alſo that the Gentrie were brought to weare them, they would not looke for much entreatie. The Harquebut is good to trayne young men, and when they haue gotten ſome reputation and experience therein, they muſt bee afterward allured into the other degree which muſt be made as honorable as the firſt. It is in my opinion a poore exſcuſe to ſay, The Souldier will not do this or that: for although in ciuill warre it muſt many tymes paſſe for payment: yet in a tyme of rule and reformation it is meete to commaund with authoritie, ſo to make the Souldiers more readie to frame themſelues to whatſoeuer is conuenient. The Spaniſh Infanterie although it hath ſtooped to the ciuill warres of Flanders did neuertheleſſe neuer habandon the Corcelet: and the third parte of their beſt men doe ſtill weare it. Beſides it hath alwaies continued the obſeruation of orders: ſo as it deſerueth this commendation, that in Chriſtendome there is no better Souldier. But will ſome man ſay: What accompt make ye of the French man? Forſooth I ſay yt being well inſtructed he yeeldeth to no nation, as likewiſe for want thereof he ſeeldome doth any thing worthy remēbrance.
               I would wiſh they would practiſe ſome of the Spaniſh cuſtomes, Goodly cuſtumes obſerued among the Spaniards. which in my opinion are very good. One is that when any newe Souldier commeth into their bands, the olde doe inſtruct him in his duetie: if he tranſgreſſeth they reproue him: and if he be meanly apparelled they helpe him, leaſt he ſhould bee a diſhonor to their nation: and he likewiſe taketh theſe admonitions as courteouſlie, where we doe the contrary. For if a yong man newly come into a companie committeth any folly, they all doe laugh him to ſcorne: and if he haue any money, he is preſently plumed either by play or ſome other practiſe: whereby many through this bad beginning doe ſtart backe againe. Neither will I here conceale an other fault of our youth: which is, when any man ſeeketh amiably to reproue them, they ſpurne at it, and take all in euill parte, as if their age were not ſubiect to doe amiſſe. Secondly, among the Spanyards ye ſhall not haue a braule in ſixe moneths: for they diſdaine quarellers and delight in modeſtie: ſo as if any doe happen, they endeuour diligently to take them vp: and yet when they cannot bee ended without blowes, they diſcharge themſelues honorably. The French Souldier is much more diuers, and can hardly liue without braules, ſhewing himſelfe but ouer couragious againſt his

companions. Thirdly, if a Souldier among them be hurt, he that hath but one crowne will giue him halfe. Fourthly, if any one doe any notable act, all his companions will praiſe and honor him, and ſeeldome doe they through enuy conceale any vertue. This likewiſe is good in them, that in their militarie commaundements euen the braueſt Souldiers and of greateſt calling will obey a ſimple Serieant: ſo pliable are they to their officers. As alſo when they are called to haue any charge, they doe as well keepe their authoritie. Finally, in the bodie of their guard they will not ſuffer any inſolencie, but the ſame are as Schooles where their ordinary talke is of the dueties of Souldiers, Capteynes, Honor, and ſuch like matter concerning Armes. More might be here ſayd: but this is ſufficient in that ſuch as goe newly into the bands may knowe that theſe bee no cuſtumes of Munckes, as the prouerbe goeth, but of excellent Souldiers. If the Capteynes of the regiments aforeſaid would likewiſe take a little paynes, they might inſtruct theirs in like ſorte: and labour no leſſe to faſhion them then a horſe courſe
                     •
                   doth to breake his horſe: And it were a great ſhame that we ſhould not haue more care of men then of beaſtes.
               
                  The humour of French youth, will ſome ſay, can hardly away 
                  Aunſwer to an other obiection of ſome that would haue no martiall diſcipline. 
                  with patience and modestie. Truely I had as liefe they ſhould ſay that ſith it is ſomewhat enclined to raſhneſſe and heddineſſe, it muſt be let runne. I thinke no nation to be more capeable of vertue then ours, if it bee taught, and vrged to put it in practiſe. And vndoubtedly if Colonels and Capteynes would growe to commend and aduaunce theſe Souldiers whom they ſee well diſpoſed to followe their exerciſes, and to make no accompt of ſuch as are giuen to their belly and idleneſſe, the moſt parte would imitate the good. Ordinarily they propound vnto them ritches, which I miſlike not ſo that they firſt preferre honor, for that is a bridle to holde them from ſtumblig, and a ſpurre to ſtirre them vp to valour. I dare affirme that of 
                     •
                  ower regiments ordered as aforeſayd, we may haue more ſeruice then of tenne ſuch as they now be. For firſt we ſhould be ſure of two reaſonable battels of Pikes whereof our Infantery ſtandeth in neede: which is a great want.
               I remember in the third troubles the Lorde of Acier brought How neceſſary the armed pikes are, and the ſruict that may procede of the order propounded in this diſcourſe. 18000. good and braue Harquebuts Proteſtants: but if they had met in the fielde with ſeuen or eight hundred Speares, I would weete whether they would not haue bene all ouerthrowne? More do think yea thē nay. Howbeit if they had had but fiue or ſixe thouſand

Corcelets among them, a whole armie ſhould hardly haue broken them. To be briefe, the Harquebuts without Pikes are as armes and legges without bodies, which were monſtrous. Secondly, if this ſmall number were thus trained: the ſouldiers would bée more obedient; would not ſcatter ſo much; would beare more, and would fight more cheerefully: which we may without farther proofe, eaſely iudge. This order likewiſe practiſed three or fower yeeres would ſtand the newe regiments, that vpon occaſion might be leuyed, in great ſtead. For moſt of the officers being taken out of ſuch a Schoole, would endeuour to cauſe thoſe that had before but heard ſpeaking of it, to obſerue the ſame diſcipline: ſo as by little and little the vſe of pilferie with ſuch other bad cuſtomes would be ſuppreſſed. Oh what a goodly matter it were to ſee the peaſant out of feare of the Souldier, who is in theſe daies a horror to the Villages! Likewiſe to ſee humanitie in ſuch credite among them that they would at their hoſtes houſes behaue themſelues as in their owne! Theſe be none of Platoes Idees, that is to ſay, imaginations, for the French men for certaine yeeres practiſed them in Piedmont. Hereof ſhould the Capteynes reape honor and the Souldiers both profite and content: for they ſhould no longer bée ſhunned, as is aforeſayd, but louingly receiued, ſtill finding plentie where now ſometymes they meete with pouertie onely and want: and withall his Maieſtie ſhould be much better ſerued.
            
            
               The foretenth Diſcourſe.
               
                  Of the French Legionaries.
               
               
                  THE name Legion was in olde tyme in The intent of King Frances, by eſtabliſhing the legionaris: alſo how neceſſary their reformation is. great honor and credit. And a man may truely ſay that by thoſe proude and valiant bands all the world was ſubdued and the Romaine Empyre exalted to that greatneſſe whereto it grewe. It vſed theſe orders and auncient names vntill the barbarous nations ouerthrew it: for then were many things confounded and buried vp, euen in the arte of warre. Afterward the bands of Souldiers were termed by ſundrie other names, as yet they be. But our great King Frances deſiring to ſtrengthen and eſtabliſh

his realme by al practiſable meanes, deuiſed to eſtabliſh legions, to the end, as occaſion might ſerue, to haue men alwayes readie, & not to be forced to begge for aide. The Lord of Langey ſayth, that in euerie Prouince he tooke order for one, conſiſting of 6000. men, who all ſhould once in the yeere meete ſeuerally to be muſtered. Now as this mightie Prince after the imitation of his elders inſtituted this braue order, according as the diſpoſition of his people and affaires could beare: ſo I ſuppoſe that after his example we ſhoulde ſeeke to redreſſe ſome ſmall bodie of theſe olde and great relickes, fit to offende and defend as well in the field as otherwiſe, whoſe maintainance would in the time of peace be of ſmall charge: for it were but a follie to ſecke in euerie point thereof to reſtore the auncient inſtitution, conſidering that France being ſo much weakned, cannot be able to ſuſtaine ſo heauie a burthen, and therefore. muſt haue no greater charge than it is able to beare.
               If his Maieſtie would entertaine foure legions, and that after How many legions doe ſeeme neceſſary at this time, alſo to wat ende this order tendeth. the auncient manner, I thinke it would be too much, as well in reſpect of the charge, as for the oppreſſion of the people: for one moneths wages for 24000. men, would amount to 250000. frankes: beſides that, their march to & fro at the aſſemblies would (now that ſouldiours are ſo farre out of order) endomage the people a hundred and fiftie thouſand. To be briefe, this warfare would yerely amount to 400000. franks, which al would not make the men much better than thoſe yt are ordinarily leuied when wars come on. Ho
                     •
                   beit the ſound of this great number of people dooth at the firſt dazell mens eies: but we muſt not truſt to them, better it were to practiſe the Spaniſh prouerbe, that ſaith: Poco y bueno, which is, A few and good. But I woulde wiſh wee might haue three eſtabliſhed, one in Picardie, one in Champagne, and one in Burgundie, each conſiſting of 2000. men: and this eſtabliſhment would be erected principally to theſe ends. Firſt to induce the Gentrie to inroule themſelues among the Infanterie: ſecondly, to reeſtabliſh Corcelettes therein, and thirdly to helpe to fill vp the bodies of our armies.
               Concerning the firſt point, experience teacheth, that nothing hath Whether it be requiſite ſome of the gentry ſhoul be enrowled among the Infantery. more corrupted our Infanterie, than that our Gentrie haue with drawen themſelues therefro, diſdaining not onely to beare the harquebut and pike, but alſo many times to take anie charge. Wher by are entered pettie Countrie Captaines deuoid of all reſpect of honour, and ſuch as ſeeke to inrich themſelues with the generall ſpoiles of our warres. Yea, if any olde regimentes haue obſerued

ſome ſorte the auncient diſcipline, yet are there many diſorders crept in among them. The cauſe that maketh the Spaniſh Infanterie at this daie to be in ſuch eſtimation, is for that their Gentry are ſo willing to ſerue therin, yea, rather than among the horſe. For there will they ſerue out theyr apprentiſhippe of warre, to the ende to attaine to be Captaines, which degree they make as great account of, as we doe of the Colonelſhip of a whole regiment. It were therefore good to commit the charge of the companies to notable Gentlemen, who lykewiſe might chooſe to bee their Liuetenants and Enſignes, ſuch other Gentlemen their neighbours of whome there be enow in the Prouinces, as might be capable therof.
               Thus through theyr credites they might bring in for ſouldiours other that beare the ſame title of Gentrie as themſelues. The Lord of Langey witneſſeth that the Captaines of the legions of Normandie and Picardie were all men of good houſes, and nameth the Lordes Bacque-ville, Cantelow, Mally, and Lanny, with others bearing office. Wherefore to reſtore into honour ſuch as we would eſtabliſh, it were requiſite the Colonels thereof were of perſon valorous, in warre experienced, knowen in Court, and worth 12. or 15000 frankes rent, co the ende through their owne eſtimation to bring the office into credit. And although I heare yoke wealth with vertue, yet doe I make it but as her handmaide, for the exerciſe of liberalitie, which is neceſſarie among ſouldiors. We ſee that in the lowe Countries the chiefe Lordes doe not diſdayne to take the regiments, as the Earles of Egmont, Arembergue, & Barlaimont, the valiant Marques of Renty, with the gallant Earle Charles of Mansfield.
               
               As touching the ſecond point for the reeſtabliſhing of Corcelets 
                  Of the reeſtabliſhment of their elects and Pikes. & Pikes, I haue alreadie ſhewed that the Infanterie that is thereof vnprouided, is vnperfect: howbeit that there are meanes to remedie it. Whereof the moſt ſoueraigne, in my opinion, is to bring men to it voluntarilie rather than by compulſion, which may eaſily be done if the Gentrie through obedience will begin to leade the waie to the reſt, who will not bee behinde when they ſhall ſee their Captaines which command them, take vpon them the vſe of the ſame weapon that they appoint to them. It were good alſo that the orders of the ſaid legions were ſuch, as the third part of the men of whome they ſhould conſiſt, to be pikes, and the fourth harquebuts, ſo ſhould the three legions containe 4500. corcelets, and 1500. harquebuts.
               
                  
Now to come to the third point, I ſaie that this number is ſufficient Of the compoſition of the bodies of the armies. to make three battailes, wherof euē one would withſtand a regiment of Germains: for although it ſhould contain but 1200. corcelets, yet doe I ſuppoſe it 
                     •
                  urſt fight with two thouſand, conſidering the qualitie of the men therein contained. Neither doe I doubt but we ſhould finde 1050. Gentlemen in euerie one, who being placed in the three firſt rankes, what man can ſaie but they would giue a 
                     •
                  aliant onſet. Such an opinion haue I of the French Gentry, that being lead by a good and ſkilfull Captaine, I aſſure my ſelfe they would paſſe through fire and water. Thus would theſe three legions deſerue to haue place in the right and left winges of the army, becauſe their bodies would bee both bigge and ſtronge enough to ſtand, Such as will medle with warre, eſpecially in the field, muſt not deceaue them ſelues, but thinck that armies without battailes of Pikes are as armes and legges without bodies, which are moſt neceſſary to beare vp the ſaid members. Now let vs ſee whether this ſmale principle and order that I would lay in time of peace, may in time of warre make them as good as I haue deſcribed them. For my parte I thinck they will not want much. Which neuertheleſſe I referre to the iudgement of thoſe that haue more ſkil than my ſelfe, after they haue ſeene the end of this diſcourſe. They are to remember that I fit the ſhooe to the foote, that is to ſaie, the charge according to our pouertie: for if wee were able to doe more, I would not be againſt it. But whatſoeuer our eſtate be, we ought ſtil to prouide inſtruments wherwith to defend the Flower de luce, leaſt ſome pleaſant fellow delighting in her ſmell, ſhould plucke away the branches thereof.
               His Maieſtic hauing choſen for Colonels to the three legions, 
                  The meanes to order well the Captaines and chief mē
                     bers of the legions. ſuch men as I haue deſcribed, (For vertue and authoritie are neceſſarie in ſuch reformations) they likewiſe ſhall each of them in the Countries limitted, choſe nine good Captaines and themſelues to make the tenth to gouerne the companies, wherin they ſhal imploy all their credit, to the end to inſtall ſuch honourable gentlemē their friends or neighbors as ſhall be worthie. And no doubt many ſeeing themſelues requeſted by ſuch qualified Colonels (whome they doe both knowe and loue) will be readie enough to accept of the offices which otherwiſe they would diſdayne. Yea, it may peraduenture ſo fall out that ſome Gentlemen of two or three thouſand Frankes rent, (but valyant and couragious, which is the principall) finding themſelues conducted by a Captaine that is both their companion

and friend. will not refuſe to march with him. If anie man deſire to know why I craue ſuch fellows, it is to the end that by theyr example and credite, other more meane & poore Gentlemen ſhould ioyne themſelues to the ſame bodie, as is aforeſayde, as beeing aſſured when a good foundation is layde, wee maye the more ſafelie builde therevpon, and our worke will be the ſurer. Then ſhould the ſayde Captaines chooſe for their Lieuetenants and Enſignes other Gentlemen ſkilfull in the ſeruice of Infanterie, and withall fiue others to be alwayes in ſouldiours roomes, who were eaſie to bee founde. Theſe▪ are all that ſhoulde make the bodie of a legion in the time of peace, who lykewiſe ſhould be retained with ſome meane fee wherwith to binde them to this vocation, and to diſpoſe them to beare the rules of ſuch a warfare. For it were follie to thinke without expenſes to make men ſubiect, either that without ſtudy in whatſoeuer, as wel by ſpeculation as practiſe, an many may grow perfect. The Captaines wages ſhall be fiue hundred Frankes by yeere, the Lieuetenants three hundred, the Enſigns two hundred, and the fiue ſouldiours each of thē one hundred, which to euery companie would amount to 1500, Frankes. Hereto might I a
                     •
                  de for the Colonels wages, and many other his neceſſarie expenſes 500. Franks. Likewiſe for ten braue Serieants, whome I thinke alſo neceſſarie to be prouided for, 1000. Frankes, and for a Serieant maior 300. ſo as the whole ſummed together, this entrie and grounde of a Legion would amount but to 5600. Crownes by the yere, & ſo all the three to 16800. All which is but the paie of three ſcore men of armes, and yet in the ſayde three legions wee ſhould haue aboue 240. Gentlemen bound and ſworne. Now as this maintainaunce ſhoulde not bee giuen them to fat them vp in their houſes (ſo it were loſt labor) ſo lykewiſe ſhoulde they not bee put to keepe gariſons, or to trot vp and downe whenſoeuer others liſt to ſend for them: but heerein they ſhoulde vſe ſuch a meane, that in receiuing yeerely all inſtructions requiſite, they might by little and little prepare themſelues rather for the ſeruice to come, that is, when warres ſhoulde come vpon vs, than for the preſent. Euerie yeere vpon a daie limitted, the Colonell, Captaines, and Souldiours, ſhould al meete in ſome great Borough neere to the chiefe Towne of the Prouince, or in anie other conuenient place, to muſter in armour, and receiue the paie aboue mencioned. Halfe the Captaines paie to bee employed to the buying of fayre Corcelets and Pikes, which ſhould bee alwayes kept in the Townes aforeſayde, notwithſtanding the

propertie ſhould reſt in themſelues; whereby in foure yeres euerie legion ſhould haue 80000, frankes worth of armour, which would be a great helpe to the furniſhing of them. The ſouldiours lykewiſe ſhould leaue their furniture in the ſame places, as well to eaſe them of the carriage of it to their owne houſes, as alſo to keepe it from embeſeling, for both going and comming they muſt lodge in hoſtries. Thus ſhold not the people be any whit moleſted: which were a matter both iuſt in it ſelfe and honourable to the King, which alſo would purchaſe a good name to the Souldiours. So do I thinke that euerie man at his returne home may haue halfe his paie cleere, except the Captaines that ſhall haue bought the armour.
               But, may ſome man ſay, yt remainder of this ſmal pay will ſcarce Aunſwere to the common obiection of thoſe that ſhoote at profit rather then honor. buy a paire of hoſen, or make a man good cheere one daie. In deede I confeſſe that gluttons ſhall finde this ſhooe too little for theyr foote: But Gentlemen noblie minded will account ſuch maintainance, proceeding from the king, for an acceptable benefite exceeding their paines and ordinarie ſeruice. Wee muſt direct our actions after the auncient orders that agree with reaſon, and not after the manner of the depraued cuſtomes of ciuill warres. My ſelfe knew a ſimple ſouldiour, namely an Argolet that had not aboue fiftie ſous rent, who had ſo well huſbanded his ſmall buſineſſe, that he kept eight horſes in his traine, a cart with three horſes, twelue ſeruants and ſixe dogs, in all thirtie mouthes, and yet when time ſerued he was not too good to carrie the Harquebut, and had but one page.
               But to returne to my purpoſe. I thinke that it were inough for Continuation of the ordering of Capteins & chief members of legions. them to ſoiourne in the place appointed for the muſters (where euerie one ſhall be lodged by tiquets, and paie according as ſhall bee rated) eight or ten daies, for I ſuppoſe yt in that time they may ſufficiently know their men: inſtruct thē by the diſcourſes & writings of ſkilfull Captaines in warlike affaires: prepare them for time to come: exerciſe them, and by liuely exhortations print in their harts the goodly portraiture of honour, to the ende afterward they might doe things worthie their fame, and obtayne the commendation to haue brought into eſtimation thoſe orders that had ben contemned: likewiſe to breede loue and confidence betweene them, which both are neceſſarie in a troupe. To be briefe, the Colonell ought to imploie his whole minde and purpoſe with himſelfe to beſtowe thoſe few daies in good inſtructions, and not in vaine riots, which I imagine

would be of great vertue. This done, euerie man to be licenſed to depart vntill the next yeere, and ſo ſhoulde the reſt bee vſed. Now is the queſtion whether through this ſmall diſcipline the aforenamed might growe more capable of their offices: Truely I doe no whit doubt, but as well the commaunder as the commaunded ſhould be the better learned therein. For euerie man comming to this martiall ſchoole would bring in the beſt that hee had collected out of the deeds of our aunceſtours, which by continual conference, adioined to practiſe, wold be both ſeene & grauē in memory. But the greateſt difficultie conſiſteth in knowledge whether when Aunſwer to an other obiection touching the whole body of the legions. the legions ſhould be perfected vp to their ful bodies, ſuch perſons as ſhould be added coulde in ſhort time bee trained. Heereto I ſaie, that it is greatlie to bee preſumed that ſuch wildinges as ſhoulde bee grafted into this free and well pruned tree, by taking theyr releefe therefro, woulde come in ſhort ſpace to beare the lyke fruit. And lyke as good Pilots and ſhippe maiſters do ſoone make their Mariners fit for nauigation: ſo, well taught Captaines doe ſoone giue their ſouldiours good inſtructions. Some will ſaie that our legions cannot be good for want of maintainance. I confeſſe they might be the better, but we muſt withall conſider that it would coſt aboue 900000. Frankes by yeere, which is the reuenue of a good Prouince, whereas after my rule ſet downe they ſhall not ſpend in time of peace aboue 16800. crownes, which to a king is but foure ſets at Tenis, or the bad luck of two houres play at Primero. Wel, warre being proclaimed, and the Colonels charged to fill vp their number of men, they ſhould wiſh their Captains to put in as much Gentrie as they might: and wee muſt thinke that by their credite many would be willing, yea, as many as I haue ſayd, that is 150. to euerie legion. Afterward they ſhould alſo chooſe other good ſoldiours enow fit for the pike & Corcelet, & although many were but ſo ſo, yet hauing ſo proud a head, they ſhould ſhew themſelues wretches if they would not followe ſo good guides. As for harquebuziers, they ſhould neuer be aboue fiftie in a companie: and we ſhall finde of them thouſands. It were alſo requiſite his Maieſtie ſhould deliuer to euerie legion flue hundred Corcelets, for the which he to paie part of the mony aforehand to the merchants, and appoint paiment of the reſt at the muſters. And ſo doth the K. of Spaine ſometimes when he Ieauieth anie Germaine regiments. For he prouideth the moſt part of armour, otherwiſe the Captaines ſhoulde not be able to doe it on ſuch a ſodaine. During the warres they ſhould

be maintained as the ordinarie hands and at their feete, as alſo they ſhould obey the generall of the Infanterie. Likewiſe their Captaines being men of honour and able to liue, as alſo ſufficiently inſtructed by their Colonelles of the infamie growing of diſordered militarie proulings & pilferies, ſhould ſtudie how to keep their cō
                  panies as compleat as might be, and not exceſſiuely to rob them as ſome do: yea, to helpe their poore ſouldiours in their greateſt neceſſitie: but withall, when the warre were ended, they ſhould be paide their charges. If this order might come to perfection the king could hardly be ſurpriſed by anie euimie whatſoeuer, for in 6. weeks the foure regiments afore ſpoken of, together with theſe three legigions may be brought into the field, and their bodies furniſhed with 14000 braue ſouldiours, whereof to make foure goodly battailes of pikes which are ſo neceſſarie. Alſo if part of the men of armes and light horſe were ioyned vnto it, it would be a meetly ſufficient army of our own natiō to defend our borders vntil ſtrangers might be leuied. I know ſome wil peraduenture ſaie that few meane ſoldiours will ſerue in ſuch bands wherein we looke to haue all chiefe officers taken out of the bodie of the Gentrie: but for preuenting this inconuenience, I thinke it were not amiſſe to leaue ſome honours for the vnnobls, if by vertue they may growe worthy the ſame: as the Serieant maiors office, the Lieuetenantſhips of companies, & meane ſerieants roomes. Thus may they be contented: But the Lieuetenant, Colonell, the Captaines & Enſignes ſhould alwayes be Gentlemen. Concerning the difficultie, ordinarily propounded, which in deed is not ſmall, how to induce the common ſoldiours to take the pike: I ſuppoſe it would ſoone be decided, when they ſhould ſee (as I haue ſaid) the Captaines & gentry practiſe the ſame weapon: & vpon occaſion to fight, ioyne with the body of the battell, ſauing ſuch as ſhall be appointed to lead the ſhot: as alſo to imitate the Spaniard who alloweth the Corcelet greater pay than the ſimple harquebuze.
               I haue heretofore heard ſome Princes counſailours, who ſought Aunſwer to an other obiection. to make their maiſters too thriftie, miſlike the maintaining of many militarie officers in the time of peace, and peraduenture there be yet ſome of them that may ſaie that it were more meete to hyer one hundred good ſouldiers that might keep a frontier towne, than to enter into charges for that which I haue propounded. To theſe will I make no anſwere, but euen referre them to the Marſhalls, Montmirencie and Biron, two olde Captaines of Fraunce,
                  
who vnderſtand more of the arte of warre than my ſelfe, and if they condemne me I yeeld: but I imagine that I ſhal not looſe my plea: for euen of themſelues I haue heard that the good Captains make the good ſouldiours, becauſe they be the preſeruers of good order & diſcipline, which others do ſoone neglect, yea, euen contemne, vnleſſe they be bound thereto. But, will ſome man replie; can your ſelfe well performe the thing which yee tell others may be done ſo eaſily: Truly I think that it properly appertaineth to thoſe which now beare the title of Colonels of the Legionaries, and are better ſeene in the arte of warre than my ſelfe, to labour in it, and to reape the honour therof. As alſo I beleeue that in France there be 1000 Gentlemen more ſufficient than my ſelfe, and can better diſcharge it. Nowbeit, that they ſhall not thinke that I would ſet downe things that cannot be practiſed, and like vnto paradoxes, whereof I will diſcourſe (and yet are ſo ſtrange) I ſaie that if my King ſhould command me to try ſuch a matter (notwithſtanding I coue
                     •
                   not anie offices, whether great or ſmal) I would thinke within two yeres to forme ſuch a bodie, as therewith I durſt wraſtle with anie other regimēt whatſoeuer, ſo it were of ſuch a nation as beare vs no great good will. And I aſſure my ſelfe the Zuitzers, who helpe themſelues with the pike as well as anie ſouldiours in the world, would be gladde to haue the aſſiſtaunce of ſuch a legion. This is my opinion. Wherein if I ouerſhoote my ſelfe, let men conſider that I am a French man, whoſe eares doe ſo gloe with hearing my nation ſet at naught, that I would wiſh it to do that which I know it is able, if it were holpen: to the end men might perceiue that induſtrie and valour are not quite periſhed in France.
               
            
            
               The fiftenth Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the auncient manner of aranging the horſe in haie or file, is now of ſmal vſe. Alſo that it were neceſſarie they ſhould take the vſe of ſquadrons.
               
               
                  THe Frenchmen, who are verie readie to embrace Inconſtancy of the Frenchmē. nouelties, and to abandon olde things, haue not alwaies ſo obſerued that rule, but that they haue continued ſteadfaſt in ſome auncient cuſtomes which they haue accounted ineete to be retained. But growing to a more diligent examination, it appeareth that as in ſome they

haue left the worſe to embrace the better, ſo in others, it ſemeth they haue contemned that which was rather to bee receiued, than the ſame whereto they haue tied themſelues. As alſo it hath fallen out that in one ſelfe thing they haue be wrayed their good & bad iudgement. For when they might make ſome thing both profitable, faire, and eaſie, they haue bene contented with the firſt, and in liew of the other two haue intruded vncomelineſſe and difficultie. Whereof Example of armes. I will alleadge an example, in matters of armes. For where they had ſome reaſon in reſpect of the violence of harquebuzes & dagges to make their armor thicker and of better proofe than before, they haue now ſo farre exceeded, that moſt of thē haue laden themſelues with ſtithies in liew of clothing their bodies with armour. Lykewiſe all the beautie of the horſeman, is conuerted into deformitie. His head peece reſembleth an 
                     •
                  ron pot. On the left arme hee weareth a great gantlet vp to his elbowe, and on the right a pouldron, that ſhal ſcarce couer his ſhoulder: and ordinarily they weare no Taſes: alſo in liew of Caſſockes, a Mandilion, and no Speare. Our men of armes in ye time of K. Henry made a farre fayrer ſhew, wearing their Sallet, Pouldrons, Taſes, Caſſocke, Speare, and Banderol, neither was their armour ſo heauie, but they might welbeare it 24. houres, where thoſe that are now worne are ſo waightie, that the peize of them will benumme a Gentlemans ſhoulders of 35. yeres of age. My ſelfe haue ſeene the late Lord of Eguillie, and the knight of Puigreffier, honourable old men, remain a whole daie armed at all aſſaies, marching in the face of their companies, where now a yong Captaine will hardlie continue two houres in that ſtate.
               But hauing determined to treate of the order of horſe, I haue Of the maner to arange horſemen. dwelt too long vpon this point. I ſaie therefore that the order hetherto obſerued in the aranging of them woulde be left, to the ende to take another which reaſon willeth vs to followe, as beeing the better. But I doubt ſome will controule this propoſition, ſaying that olde cuſtomes are not raſ
                     •
                  ly to be altered: alſo that when the men of armes moſt flouriſhed, this was their manner of fight. Likewiſe that ſith the late Duke of Guiſe or the late Lord Conſtable, who were ſo excellent Captains, made no innouation therin, it ſeemeth that it ſhould be ſtill ſo vſed. For if alterations in matters of ſtate (as Plutarke ſayth) be dangerous: like wiſe the tha
                     •
                  nging of martiall orders, bringeth inconueniences. But when a man hath by proofe found the profit ariſing by the new order, and the defects

of the olde, is it not high time to forſake the one and laie holde of the other? The Romaines, who may be ſayde to haue ben ſoueraigne maſters in the art of war did many times y• like. Moreouer, becauſe the men of armes haue had good ſucceſſe when they were ra
                     ••
                  ged in a haie, doth it followe that now they ſhould ſo range themſelues? No, for many things haue ſince happened, that may compell vs to change our faſhions: as we haue done in fortifications ſince the inuention of Artillerie.
               
                  Froiſſart who in his Hiſtoric treateth at large of the French warres, dooth greatlye commende the horſemen of his time, which was fortie yeres before the erection of the Ordonances. And by his diſcourſe it ſeemeth that they fought in file: hee there deſcribeth thē to be well armed, mounted vpon mightie iades, & hauing ſtrong ſpeares, whereby they might giue a great puſh. I doe alſo ſuppoſe that they choſe this order, becauſe the ſame horſmen conſiſted onely of Gentrie, ſo as euerie man woulde fight in front, and neuer continue in the laſt ranke, euerie one eſteeming himſelfe to be in valour no leſſe than his companion: as alſo it is to bee preſumed that in thoſe dayes other Nations obſerued the lyke order. Afterward when ye men of armes were erected they follow the ſame, & ſo continued vntil the middeſt of the raigne of king Henrie the ſecond, with much happie ſucceſſe. But toward the end of his raigne our loſſes taught vs, that in parte they proceeded of the weakneſſe of our ſaide order, and the firmeneſſe of that of our enimies. Then did the ſquadrons of ſpeares growe into credite, who (as I haue heard) were ſo aranged by the Emperour Charles, who meeting our files of men of arms did eaſilie ouerthrow them, which alſo the ſquadrons of Rheitres haue ſometimes done: neither is it much to be meruailed that it came ſo to paſſe for natural reaſon ſheweth it, which willeth that the ſtrong carrie awaie the weake: Alſo that ſixe or ſeauen ranks of horſemen ioyned together ouerthrow one alone.
               Some make this obiection. That when a companie is ſo ſtretched forth, they doe all fight, whereas being in ſquadron ſcarce the Anſwer to thoſe that would haue the horſe ſtretched forth in file. ſixt parte doe ioyne, viz. ſo much as in the fore front. Hereto I anſwere, that in the aranging of a troupe, we muſt not care ſo much, that euerie one at the meeting ſtrike one blow with his ſpeare: but rather that it may bee able to ouerthrowe all that come agaynſt it, which is much brauelyer done when it is in the ſquadron? It may lykewiſe bee replyed that the ſquadron cannot ouerthrowe aboue fifteene or ſixteene horſe at the moſt of the troupe that ſtandeth in a

haie, which is true, but thoſe ſhall be about the Enſigne, where the Captaines and beſt men are placed: which being carried awaie, al the reſt ſhaketh, and although that parte that hath not bene touch
                     •
                   doe cloſe vp the flankes of the ſquadron, yet doth it ſmall harme, in that it cannot enter vpon the men that are thus in a heap vnited together: who likewiſe in their ſhockes doe ſtrike thoſe as well as the firſt, and breake them.
               Yea, although three or foure troupes of horſe be araunged in a haie one at anothers heales, yet ſhall a ſquadron ouerthrow them all almoſt as eaſilie as the boule doth many rankes of ſcailes: So that there muſt be one force to withſtand another
                     •
                  . If a Captaine hauing one thouſand Corcelets to ſet in battayle araie ſhoulde not make paſt two or three rankes of them, euen the ſouldiours would laugh him to ſcorne, becauſe by reaſon euerie battaile muſt haue his conuenient thickneſſe.
               The like conſideration almoſt is to bee had of the horſe, and I wonder it hath no ſooner beene ſpied: For if the two notable Captaines aforenamed, had liued, they woulde peraduenture haue taken order for it. It is not vnknowen to thoſe that were in ye kings armie at Vallenciens that there were nere 10000 French ſpeares: alſo that comming before the forte where the imperiall were intrenched, I noted that a bodie of three hundred men of armes aranged in file, tooke almoſt 1000. paces in length, & the reſt of the horſes kept an infinite ground. But if the ſayd 300. men of armes had bene ſet in 3. ſquadrons, they would not haue occupied aboue ſixe ſcore paces in length, and the order had bene far better: for to the end to archieue ſome notable feare, the men muſt bee cloſe, and the better to helpe each other, they muſt not be ſo ſca
                     •
                  
                  red a ſunder. Our men of armes haue in our ciuill warres well peruſed the forces of the Reiſters ſquadrons: for notwithſtanding they alwayes gaue the onſet couragiouſly, yet could they neuer breake them, for they are ſo thicke that there is no meanes to get through them. At S. Quintaines and Graueling they were throughly: taught what great ſquadrons of ſpeares are able to doe, by whom they were eaſilie ouerthrowen. All which proues may be ſufficient to induce our great ones to correct the imperfections of our orders.
               Yet one example more I wil allege the better to diſ
                     ••
                  ſe thē therto: namely the battel of Montcontour, where ye kings horſe being brought into ſquadrōs of ſpeares, at their ioyni
                     •
                  s wt the proteſtāts,

who were ordered in a haic and without ſpeares, might ſee how eaſily they were ouerthrowen.
               Yet will I better examine theſe matters, beginning with a ſquadron A proofe that the horſemen ought to be brought into ſquadrons. formed of a companie of fiftie men of armes compleat. Hee that liſt to make ſeuen ranks, his foremoſt ſhal containe at the leaſt fifteene ſpeares. Now is it like that thoſe whom wee ſet foremoſt are choice men, and the ſecond doe wel ſecond them in valour: and it is a miſerable companie that hath not at the leaſt 25. good men in it. As for the reſt whō I preſuppoſe not to be ſo valiant, they be placed as it were in couert vnder the ſhadow of the former, which maketh them to followe the more cheerefullie to the charge, as knowing that the head muſt beare all the daunger and hurt, which if it breake the enimie, they ſhall be partakers of the ſame honour. So that it is a notable ſigne of cowardlyneſſe, when a troupe ſobrdered dare not ioyne. Conſidering that the valour of the firſt ſhould vrgè them to the onſet, and the aſſurance of the laſt to follow and thruſt in. But when a troupe is ſet in a wing, although the good, which ordinarily are the ſmalleſt number, do march cheerely to the onſet, yet the reſt that are not ſo willing to bite, (which faine to bleede at the noſe, to haue a broken ſtiroppe, or to haue their horſe vnſhooed) doe ſtaie behinde, ſo as within two hundred paces of waie, we ſhall ſee glaſſe windowes in that long file, & great breaches wil appeare therein, which greatly incourageth the enimie: and many times among an hundred horſe, ſcarce 25. doe enter in: who afterwarde knowing themſelues to haue no ſupporte, when they haue broken their ſtaues and ſtroke one blowe with the ſword, (if they be not ouerthrowen at their firſt comming,) do retire. And this ſheweth what difference there is betweene one kinde of fight and another. When I conſider of what maner of people the companies of other nations do conſiſt, and of what people ours are full, I wonder that wee paſſe them not in goodneſſe. For if we marke the Burguinion men of armes, which are in great reputation, we ſhall not finde much gentrie in their companies. In the Italian and Spaniſh troupes, which at this daie are the beſt, there be fewer: True it is there be verie good ſouldiours. But in one of our bandes of Ordinance of fiftie ſpeares which ſhould containe about an hundred and fiftie horſe, we ſhal finde notwithſtanding the corruption creapt in, aboue 60. Gentlemen, who reſpecting their honours ought to doe better than others of meaner calling: not that I will affirme this rule to be alwaies true, though for the moſt part. Now the meanes

thereby to furniſh out our men of armes with Gentrie, conſiſteth in maintaining it as in time paſt: alſo to make it inuincible, is to vſe it to fight in ſ
                     •
                  uadrons. And for my part I ſuppoſe that 100. varlets armed, manned, and guided, keeping this order, will ouerthrowe 100. Gentlemen fighting in haie.
               Some doe thinke it to be a hard matter to bring our Nation to The meanes to put this counſell in Practize. vſe this order, which is true in reſpect of great Lordes and wilfull Gentlemen, for that euery man coueteth to be formoſt in the march and fight: But in one of the companies of Ordinance the Captain doth purchaſe obedience, either by loue or force. And when this maner hath bene a little practiſed, euerie one wil frame himſelfe therto. One thing we muſt note, that men when they come to fight wil neuer keepe their rankes well, vnleſſe they be firſt vſed to it in their ordinarie march, for from the leſſer men grow to the greater, and he that is perfecte in one is the readier to acquite himſelfe in the other. We ſee the Reiſters and their varlets, who haue no more deuotion than our French Gentlemen, religionſly obſerue this order. And to ſaie the truth, this manner of march is verie commodious, and our ſelues doe commend it in them. But endeuouring to practiſe it, as a nouelty it doth by & by grieue vs, as being too ſolemne. Which riſeth of our impatience, that neuer leaueth vs one quarter of an houre in one ſtate. But this may the Captaines authoritie in time remedie. Some will ſaie that three hundred ſpeares in file, maketh a greater ſhew than three ſquadrons of the like number, which cannot be denied. But for the fight (whereat we muſt chiefely aime) they are of no ſuch effect. And this is it that ſhould be well beaten into warriours heads. For the Captaines ought by inſtructions to make them halfe ſouldiours, and by experience to perfect them.
               Let vs now ſee whether the auncient order bee in theſe dayes no whit to be practiſed. I think it may be vſed in two occaſions. Firſt when we ſend forth twentie or thirtie ſpeares, for that troupe being ſo ſmall may better fight in haie, where it maketh moſt ſhew. Secondly, when wee come to charge the footmen, it is good to diuide a ſquadron into many ſmall troupes in file, which may aſſayle in ſundrie places. But except theſe two occaſions, I would wiſh the horſe alwayes to keepe this order of ſquadrons. Beſides, if we conſider how meanely many are in theſe dayes mounted, and how vncoward at the ſpeare, we wil be aſhamed to put them into a ſimple bodie, which were as much as to ſet them to bee beaten for the

nonce. Now let all ſuch as haue had experience of the warres iudge whether the for
                     •
                  e that I haue propounded, which the Spaniards, Italians, Burguinions, and Germaines doe vſe, be not better than the olde. Many other queſtions might be demaunded, as how many rankes ſhould make a ſquadron, what number it ſhould contain, & whether 2. ſquadrons of 250. ſpeares a peece would counteruaile 300. as good as one of you? Concerning the ranks, I would order thē after the valour of the men: which the greater it were, the fewer would I make, and the leſſe the more. As for the number conuenient for a ſquadron, we muſt in part haue regarde to our enimies order. For if theirs be great, ours muſt not be ſmall, and in my opinion, except againſt the Turkes three hundred ſpeares will ſuffice. And the third queſtion is eaſily decided. For two meane troupes hauing good coreſpondence, & charging in ſeaſon, are, in my mind, of more importance than one great.
            
            
               The 16. Diſcourſe.
               
                  Of the vſe of Camarades, which among the Spaniſh footmen are of great account.
               
               
                  THe Lord of Langey in his hooke of martiall What Camarades are and wherfore erected. diſcipline maketh mention of Camarades, which in our French ſpeech he tearmeth Chā
                     berers, making them to confiſt of ten ſoldiors a peece, giuing to one the preheminence ouer the reſt, and him hee nameth Captaine of the Chābre. Wherin he imitateth the Romaines, who in their bands tearmed Cohortes, wherof ten made a legion, had their Decurions, yt is to ſay, their Tens with their Captaines ouer ten, which as I thinke they vſed for three cauſes. Firſt for order, which ſhould be obſerued euen in the leaſt matters. Secondly, by their ſmall rudiments to inſtruct the ſoldiours in their commandements. And thirdly, that by this continuall conuerſation & participation in the ſame fire, table, and bed, they might ingender faith and loue. Now the Spaniards do not erect theſe ſmall ſocieties for

anie of the two firſt reaſons, but for the third onely, ſo as that which the L. of Langey willeth to be done eſpecially for order, they practiſe for the commoditie onely which therein they reap. And I think that this kind of footmen, which is vſually 150. or 200. leagues out of their owne Countrie, was brought to that cuſtome through ſuch great neceſſities, as they are ſometimes forced to fight againſt, for ſome remedie whereof they inuented this fit meane, which in truth is verie good, for certainly there is no better, or more aſſured ſuccour, care, or comfort, than of a perfect friende or loyall companion.
               It had bene peraduenture more mee
                     •
                  e in ſpeech to haue deliuered Why this diſcours is put in writing. ſuch ordinarie, and (as a may may ſaie) childiſh things, than to ſet them downe in writing. But the cauſe that moued me heereto, is my owne knowledge of the greate want that our footmen haue of the vſe heereof among them: for the bringing of them in liking whereof, I thought good to make this ſmall deſcription, which I wiſh ſhould not vaniſh awaie with the ſound. For if ſome at the leaſt by the contemplation thereof could well perceiue the goodly fruite ſpringing out of theſe militarie ſocieties, I ſhould not thinke theſe my vnperfect labours (which haue bene the hidden paſtimes of my long miſeries) to haue bene altogether vnprofitable.
               Among the Spaniſh footmen there be (ſo far as I can learne) two The firſt kinde of Spaniſh Camarades. ſorts of Camarades. The firſt are they whom the chiefe officers of the companies do aſſociate with themſelues, whom they doe defray with their ſeruants and horſe, if they haue any, ſo as coſting them nothing, they haue their whole pay come freely in, and commonlie a Captaine wil haue 5. or 6. whom he termeth his Camarades, (for ſuch are the cuſtomes of Spain) which do in the armies ſeke meanes to maintaine themſelues worthily, & to grow to preferment. Theſe through their daily conuerſatiō with the Captains, who are graue, modeſt, & diſcrete, doe learne ſo wel that in ſhort ſpace a man would deeme them worthie not onely to beare the corcelet or harquebuze, but alſo to commaund, as my ſelfe haue thought of ſome of thoſe whome I haue ſeene. Their loue and regard to him that maintaineth them, is verie great: as alſo for his part hee eſteemes of them almoſt as well if they were his owne kinſmen. To bee briefe, they alwaies keepe the Captaine honourable companie in his lodging, and ſerue and ſtand to him in his affayres, beeing accounted as Shelmes, if they ſhoulde abandon him. Their Serieauntes, who among them are in farre greater eſtimation than ours haue

alſo for their Camarades, ſome couple of braue ſouldiours whome they choſe, who like wiſe doe giue them the third part of their paie to helpe toward their owne maintainance: and although they ſeeme thereby to be but as pencioners, yet do they beare them loue & honour as they ought.
               The ſecond ſort of Camarades is the ſame which is practiſed The ſecond kinde of Camarades. among the ſouldiours, a matter ſo vſuall among them, that he that kepeth himſelf long out of ſuch aſſotiations is accounted as a ſtubburne iade that cannot abide among his fellowes. The leaſt conſiſt of two, and the greateſt of ſixe, in euerie whereof wee may ſee the goodly images of brotherhood to ſhine. And this is ſo much the more to be eſteemed as it happeneth among ſouldiours, who might ſeeme to ſeeke diſcord rather than concord. Thus in the middeſt of the generall amitie which the ſouldiours beare to their Captaines and companions, is formed this particular heere ſpoken of, which is more liuely than the other: the originall whereof proceedeth of their mutuall knowledge, and increaſe of ordinarie conuerſation, & the ſtedfaſtneſſe and confirmation thereof, of mutuall benefits. And for my parte I thinke it no ſmall ſtrength to a companie to haue therein ſome duzen of ſocieties of friends, or more, that haue care each of other. Plutarke diſcourſing vpon the ſacred bond of ye yong Thebans, which was otherwiſe called The band of friends, did iudge it therefore to be the more valiant. And in deede they all died one after another in the battell.
               Moreouer, there groweth great commodity in ordinarie expenſe by liuing together: for foure ſouldiours may honeſtly maintaine themſelues with a ſmall matter, according to their callings, where one yonker hauing his ſeuerall table ſhall ſpend more than all they and not fare ſo well.
               The Spaniards doe vſe in their Camarades to allowe to each his The Diſcipline and commodity of the ſecond ſorte of Camarades. weeke to prouide and keepe account of charges, and hee that beſt huſbandeth it, is thought the wiſeſt, which is the thing that they moſt ſtudie for. For they gape after praiſe euen in the ſmalleſt matters as well as in the great. Seldome doe they incurre any want, for ſtill one of them either by hooke or crooke catcheth ſomewhat, which he liberally imparteth to the reſt, neither can they abide that anie of them ſhould be badly clothed, rather will they faſte to apparell him. But one of the chiefeſt fruites of theſe ſocieties appeareth when one of them is ſicke, for ſuch is theyr charitie, that they will one helpe another as brethren to their power. Thus much I will

ſay more, that this ſmall priuat life is almoſt alwaies pleaſant, becauſe of their domeſticall conuerſation which findeth them paſtime enough. Neither is it cauſe of leſſe honeſtie, for one alwaies ſeeing another, euery man brideleth his affections as wel as he may, from doing any infamous deede, for feare leaſt he ſhould growe into contempt and ſo be baniſhed the companie of thoſe that eſteeme of honor. And to ſay the truth, I finde ſolitarineſſe to bee hurtfull to many Souldiers, who reſemble Apes, which when no man ſeeth them, are alwaies about ſome miſchiefe: and ſo doe they imagine to doe. Whereto is to be added, that if any of the ſayd Spanyards be ignorant in this or that, the reſt will inſtruct him with as good will as hee will receiue not onely their inſtructions but alſo reprehenſions. This is in briefe the benefite that they reape of their Camarades.
               
               Now let vs ſee how wee may ſo practiſe the like cuſtome, that The meanes how to practiſe the like diſcipline in France. we may gaine any profite therein, wherof others do finde ſo much. Concerning the firſt ſorte, I iudge our Captaines cannot ſo well fit themſelues therein as the Spanyards, in reſpect that they muſt then breake an other cuſtome, which hath taken ſo deepe roote that it would hardly be extinguiſhed. And that is, that they haue vſed to haue their tables furniſhed according to their abilities, ſometimes for one and ſometime for an other of their Souldiers, who would thinke themſelues contemned, if with that and ſuch other like familiarities they ſhould not be enterteyned. For the French Souldiers are perſwaded that their Captaine muſt not debarre thē either his table or good countenance, ſith they ſpend their bloods for his ſake, and he who for ſparing ſheweth himſelf ſlack herein is accompted a Chicheface or niggard: for wel for to diſcharge himſelf herein, he muſt not ſpare expences. So as if our Captaines ſhould finde three or foure Camarades aboue their other charges, they were not able to performe it without ſtealing from the Souldier vnreaſonably, which would redound to their ſhame. The Spaniſh Souldier do not goe ſo freely to his Captaines table, except vpon great neceſſitie, or that he be inuited: as hauing diſcretion enough to conſider that they haue other charge ſufficient, as in deede they haue. For ſuch there are among them as haue in their families aboue twentie mouthes, and thirteene or foureteene horſes. But their beſt comfort is, that their King as they ſay, will neuer leaue them poore. Thus we may ſee things fit for one, which in diuers reſpects that make the difference will not ſerue an other. But concerning

the ſecond, I am not of the ſame minde: for I thinke it requiſite that our Souldiers ſhould put it in practiſe, yea that they ſhould bee earneſtly perſwaded thereto, as well for the reſpects afore mentioned, as alſo to accuſtome them to grow more tollerable each to other. Beſides, that in ſome one of our companies we ſhall finde that ordinarily the third part of our ſouldiers ſhall in the firſt weeke haue eaten vp their whole moneths pay, where if they were thus aſſotiate together they would learne one of an other to line, and withall each enſtruct his companion to ſhuune braules, wherewith our Regiments are ſo ſore infected that in ſome one day you ſhall haue three or foure, whereas contrariwiſe the Spanyards doe deteſt it among themſelues. I haue heard ſome of the Captaines of that braue Tertio, wherein Peter de Paſſe doth commaund, affirme, that in eighteene moneths they haue not had one, whereof neuertheleſſe they were not exempt through any want of ſtomack, for they haue as much as any men, but they are endued with modeſtie, and doe knowe that their ſwords ought to bee employed in fighting againſt their enemies, and not in murdering one another.
               This Diſcourſe is vnperfect.
            
            
               The 17. Diſcourſe.
               
                  Of the rewards ordinarily beſtowed vppon the Spaniſh ſouldiers when they haue done any notable peece of ſeruice: which they tearme their Aduantages.
               
               
                  I Am not of the opinion of thoſe men, who peraduenture Whether Princes owe any rewarde to the braue ſoldier. flattering their Princes, do vphold that ye rewards which they vſe to giue to their ſouldiers doe proceede of their meere liberalitie, and that thereto they are no way bound. And their reaſon is: for that he hath his pay for his good ſeruice, ſo as whatſoeuer he getteth more proceedeth of fauour. Truely they peize the ballance 
                     •
                  o much to the one ſide, which I would faine bring to ſtand equall: and that may eaſely bee done by putting as much waite to the merite

of the inferiour as to the goodwill of the ſuperiour. But if we conſider the martiall lawes and cuſtomes, we ſhall find that in ſuch actions there is more of duetie then of grace. And I hould that rule good which willeth that as the pay goeth before the ſeruice, ſo the reward muſt followe the merite. Truely if any men in the world doe labour and encurre great hazards in ſeruice, the ſouldiers do it. They muſt not therefore be defrauded of the rewards which euen the meaneſt doe hope for and the greateſt cannot be denied of. For their valour ſhewed hath a certaine attractiue power which wreſteth praiſe and garlands out of the mouthes and hands euen of the ignorant, of the couetouſe, and of the vnthankfull.
               Now, theſe Aduantages whereof I purpoſe to ſpeake do conſiſt Wherein theſe rewardes do conſiſt. in coyne, and are ſmall recōpences, which the Catholicke King or his Lieutenants generall doe diſtribute to thoſe that haue done any valiant exployt: The leaſt are two crownes, and the greateſt eight. Alſo this is moreouer to bee noted, that if a ſouldier once rewarded doth againe any extraordinarie ſeruice, he is againe recompenced. And my ſelfe doe remember that I haue ſeene ſundrie that at ſundrie times had ſo gotten ſome twentie, ſome fiue and twentie crownes Aduantage, beſides their ordinarie pay, which in my opinion is both a good helpe to the maintenance of a Souldier and a honeſt token of his valour. Yet ſome doe ſet downe theſe rewardes vnder the title of profite and not of honor. But if they marked the cauſe which purchaſed them as well as the qualitie of the thing purchaſed, they ſhould perceiue them to bee as honorable as profitable. Commonly the General doth aſſigne them, becauſe that being in place he better knoweth thoſe yt are worthie then the King who is farre of. Likewiſe when any hath giuen his ordinance, he may goe where he will ſo he ſerue among ye bands of footmen which are deuided into diuers parts of his Empire, ſtill he ſhall haue his pay: for ſuch debts are woonderfully priuiledged.
               I could neuer learne when this cuſtome began, but I geſſe the Their originall and comoditie. Emperour Charles was the author therof: for he being perſonally in many armies & exployts, thought them neceſſarie for the maintenance and encreaſe of his ſouldiers valour: & by the fruites which both haue and doe yet appeare, wee may iudge them to haue bene grounded vpon good reaſon. Wherin is verified the ſaying of one that ſayd, that where much honor was ſowne, great vertue ſpringeth vp. For the ſouldier that ſeeth his aſſured reward as it were before his eyes, neuer feareth, if occaſion ſerue, to hazard himſelfe to all

perilles, thereby to ſhewe his courage and deſire of fame: whereof it alſo followeth that he is the better affected to forme his life well. I haue heard that honorable olde man Peter de Pas report, that to his Tertio or regiment, which cōſiſteth of 23. Spaniſh Enſignes, there were giuen monthly aboue 1200. crownes in Aduantages, which well teſtifieth that the ſame was repleniſhed with valiant men.
               It may be ſome ſeuere Cenſor will herevpon exclaime and ſay. Is it not an exceſſiue prodigalitie to giue away 14000. crownes by yere 
                  Aunſwer to ſuch as thinke the money to be euil beſtowed in ſuch recompences. 
                  extraordinarily vnto one regiment? Might not 250 good ſouldiers be maintained therewith? My friend, what ſtandeſt thou ſo much vpon the number? I graunt thou maiſt haue ſouldiers, but good ones I deny. For to the ende to make them ſuch, they muſt be well vſed. I meruaile thou canſt caſt thy niggardly eyes ſo farre into the lawfull rewardes of other mens ſo long labours, and yet turne them from thy ſelfe. For what els doeſt thou but liue delicately, taking no payne but to ſtuffe thy coffers with the riches of the Commonwealth, which doe farre ſurmount that which thou thinkeſt ſuperfluous, and which thy ſelfe wouldeſt faine catch? Hould thy peace I pray thee, or els my counſaile ſhall be to ſend thee to view the firſt breach that ſhall be made. But if any man ſhall thinke that I would ſeeke out among forreine nations onely all that is well ordered, to the ende thereto to giue due commendation and proceede no farther, he is much deceiued. For hauing ſet downe that which ſo deſerueth, I will ſtirre vp our great men to imitate the order that yéeldeth ſuch fruite to others, thereby to encourage our footmen, who being wel ordered and vſed, doth giue place to none in the world.
               When I call to mind the ſmall order obſerued in the rewarding Of the ſmall order obſerued by the Frenchmen in reſpect of rewardes. of our French ſouldiers, I am aſhamed that ſo much wiſedome as we haue among vs could neuer perceiue that it was requiſite to do more then we haue done. I know that he which ſheweth forth his valiancie may climbe to the degrees of the companies. Likewiſe haue I ſometime ſeene that when ſome had done any notable act, he was rewarded with tenne or twentie crownes at a time, though but ſieldome. Wherefore it were good either to eſtabliſh ſome more firme and continuall order, or els to accuſe our recompencers of ingratitude. But dare I ſpeake of the ingratitude often ſeene when there is any queſtion of the poore maimed, or ſuch as haue growne ould in our warres, which craue that we ſhould take ſome compaſſion of them? If tenne of the hundred be gratified, it is all, and yet

how is that? With the roume of a lay Monck in an Abbay, where after the poore ſouldier is come in, before he hath bene a fortnight among them, the moſt of the Monckes (as ſcorners of labour, danger, and ſtripes, and louers of idleneſſe, and bellie cheere) doe ſo croſſe and moleſt him, that he is driuen to compound for ſome fiftie or ſixtie Frankes pention, and ſo get him ſome other where. Theſe examples doe diſcourage our ſouldiers and bring them to take bad waies, which would not ſo often fal out, if the order here propounded might be eſtabliſhed among our bands.
               But becauſe our France hath not at this day any ſuch yeerely A meane how to eſtabliſh this diſciplines fléetes out of both the Indies, as this great Empire which threaten it, it were meet, though we cannot do ſo much, yet to do ſome parte of that which were requiſite, ſo to make thoſe that beare the pike and the harquebuze to defend it more brauely and willingly. If to a regiment of ten Enſignes we ſhould aſſigne only 4000. crownes by yere for Aduantages, which ſhould not bee giuen but vpon notable ſeruice, and in tenne regiments would amount vnto 40000. crownes, were it ſo euil huſbandrie for the time of warre? I think, to ſome ſmall Duke it were too much, but to a King of France, ſuch a charge were to bee accompted ſmall, in reſpect of the good that would redound thereof, which would appeare in that the ſouldier ſhould growe both the better warriour and the better liuer, when he ſhould ſee his labour and diligence recompenced. It is hard to thinke what a bad opinion ſtrangers haue conceiued of our French Souldiers, ſeeing them in their iorney into Flanders and warres in France; ſo diſordered in the fielde, & ſometimes to fight ſo faintly, which although it hath in part procéeded of giuing them the bridle too much and their bad pay, yet may wee withall ſay that the ſmall recompence which they hoped for and hath bene giuen them, haue diſcontented them and cauſed them by all meanes to ſeeke their profite, ſith they were denied the rewards of honor. Let vs therfore growe more readie to amend our faults, and knowing our paſſed negligence followe good order, ſhewing to thoſe that being commanded doe ſo liberally hazard their liues that we hould them in ſome eſtimation: ſo ſhal we both conquer others and keepe our owne. I might here ſay ſomewhat of the great rewards and other honorable apparant tokens that appertaine to thoſe braue Captaines and gallant Knights which atchieue braue enterpriſes: But I will forbeare, becauſe my ſelfe am forced here to diſgeſt the bitter pilles of an apparant likelihood of perpetuall empriſonment.
            
            
               
               Foure Militarie Paradoxes.
               The 18. Diſcourſe.
               
                  The firſt Paradoxe.
                  
                     That a Squadron of Reiſtres ſhould beate a Squadron of Speares.
                  
                  
                     THE learned do knowe that Paradores are ſentēces or propoſitions repugnant to common opinion, and in ould time there were Philoſophers which propounded ſome that they had gathered in the doctrine of the Stoickes, were it to ſhewe that men might gather fruite of that which ſeemed vnfruitfull, or for exerciſe of their wittes. Howſoeuer it is, I haue thought good, imitating their examples (to ſet downe to ſundrie braue Captaines matter whereon to diſcourſe) to propound theſe, thinking that when they haue bene well examined, ſome may peraduenture giue as much credite to them as to common opinion. Among thoſe that profeſſe armes, it is ſo aſſured a principle that a troope of Speares ſhould beate and ouerthrowe a troope of Piſtols, that who ſo ſeemeth to doubt thereof is taken to be but a meanly practiſed ſouldier. The Spanyards & Italians doe alſo make leſſe doubt thereof then the French. And although they be ſuch men as with iudgement can alowe or diſalowe whatſoeuer is ſet before them, yet doe I thinke that herein they leane rather to ſome ſmall experience, then to any other ground of reaſon. But in this as in many others matters, it oftentimes manifeſteth ſuch effects, that when we haue throughly conſidered their cauſes we find that they ſhould fall out otherwiſe. The Reiſtres ſhould rather thē any other, be the defenders hereof, for yt their reputation conſiſteth herein: & peraduenture if they had at all times ſhewed themſelues firme and diligent to doe it with their hands, they might now with leſſe difficultie haue defended it with their tongues.
                  
                     
We muſt yet grant them the honor of being the firſt yt brought The Reiſters actiue with the Piſtoll: & what aduantage they ſeem to haue of the Speares. the Piſtols into vſe, which when a man can well handle I take to be very daungerous. They are a diſcent come from the harquebuziers, and to ſay as it is, all theſe inſtruments are deuiliſh, inuented in ſome miſchieuous ſhop to turne whole realmes and kingdomes into deſolatiō, & repleniſh the graues with dead carcaſes. Howbeit mans malice hath made them ſo neceſſarie that they cannot be ſpared. To the end therfore to profite by them it is requiſite to haue a merueiſous care, which no nation doth approach any thing ſo nere vnto, I meane for Piſtols, as the Germaines, & that is the cauſe that I wil ſpeake of thē, as of thoſe who amōg all ſorts of horſmen that vſe this weapon, do carie away the prize. I will not ſtand perticulerly to deſcribe al the ſorts which the Reiſtres vſe, for they are but too well knowne. It is enough to ſay that the offenſiue are as good as the ſpeare mens, but the offenſiue do farre paſſe them. For the man of armes vſeth his ſpeare but for one blow, where ye 
                     Reiſtre carieth 2. piſtols wherwith he may ſhoot 6. or 7. times, which if he doe it in ſeaſon, doth great hurt. Euery man likewiſe carieth his ſword, whoſe effects may be equal. Sith then ye piſtol can pierce the defenſiue armes, which the ſpeare cannot, we may cōclude that the Reiſtre hath ye aduantage in the offenſiue & is equal in ye defenſiue.
                  In fauour of the ſpeare man, it may be ſaid that he is better horſed, What aduantage the ſpeare ſeemeth to haue ouer the piſtoll, eſpecially head to head. and hath his ſeate ſurer then the other: alſo yt the ſpeare, when it is ſeene a farre of with the banderoll wauing & ſhaking, doth terrifie: whereto I aunſwer, that the maſſiue & cloſe order of the Reiſtres doth ſupplie the weakneſſe of their horſe & ſtayes. As for the terror of the ſpeare, it is not of ſo great efficacie as is the aſtoniſhment that the piſtoll bringeth at the cracke. Let vs, will ſome man ſay, bring theſe two champions to fight one againſt an other, and he that getteth the better ſhall teach which of the two Squadrons ſhall ſo be. This obiection beareth ſome faire ſhewe, but it may be falſe. For herein perticuler reaſons doe differ from the generall. It is as if a man ſhould ſay, that becauſe in the field one harquebuzier may kill a pike man armed with his corcelet, it followeth that in pitcht fieldes the harquebuziers ſhould ouerthrow the battailes of pikes: which neuertheleſſe falleth out cōtrarie, for it is certaine that for the moſt part thoſe battailes do giue the victorie. But admit the ſpeare man and the piſtoll doe ioyne, the iſſue will be doubtfull, although I thinke if the piſtoler can keepe himſelfe frō ioyning head to head with the ſpeare man he may haue the aduantage of him, by

reaſon of the great offence growing of his weapon. If any man reply, that among the gentrie it is houlden for a principle, that a good man of armes may eaſely beate a Reiſtre, I will aunſwer, that the Germaines thinke the contrarie: namely, that a braue Reiſtre ſhould ſ
                        •
                     ay the man of armes that commeth to aſſaile him, and carie away his horſe: for they muſt ſtill catch at ſomewhat. Thus we ſee that on both ſides euery one will keepe his honor, yea euen to priuate combats.
                  Howbeit, the principall poynt conſiſteth in ſhewing what the euents Which of the 2. Squadrons ſhould haue the aduantage. of them in groſſe ſhould be. For the better iudgement wherof, we are firſt to conſider of the valour of the men. Herevpon the ſpeares will ſay, that their companies being better furniſhed of Gentrie then the others, muſt likewiſe be more valiant: but withall wee muſt note, that in the cornets of Reiſtres there bee ſome fewe gentlemen and a number of trayned ſouldiers: and for the Captaines, becauſe they haue bene often employed by diuers Princes, they muſt needes bée ſkilfull in the arte of warre. Wherefore to make the quicker diſpatch, I preſume that in courage, experience and number both the ſquadrons are equall. Let vs then ſee which of them beſt keepeth order: for that obſerued as it ought at the going to charge giueth a great gird to the victorie. Herein wee muſt ſay, that the Germaines exceede all other nations, becauſe they ſeeme to bee not onely cloſe, but euen glewed each to other: which proceedeth of an ordinarie cuſtome that they haue to keepe alwaies in bodie, as hauing learned as well by naturall knowledge, as by profe, that the ſtrong alwaies carie away the weake. Alſo the more to teſtifie that they ſieldome fayle in this, whenſoeuer they be broken, in their retire and flight they ſtill remaine vnſeperate and ioyned together: which the ſpeares do not, but rather for the moſt part euen in the ſhocke doe bring themſelues out of aray, which procéed of that that they muſt haue ſome ſmall carrier to ſtrike with their ſpeares: but they take it too long, eſpecially the Frenchmen, whoſe heate is ſuch, that when he commeth within 200. paces he beginneth to gallop, and within 100. to runne amaine, which is an ouerſight, for they neede not ſo much ground. Sith therefore that it is one principle that ſquadrons doe breake with the vyolent ſhocke which they ſuſteyne, may we not therevpon inferre, that thoſe that keepe themſelues cloſeſt and doe ſtrike with the whole bodie conioyned, doe worke the greateſt effect: It is hard to denie it: and who doe better practiſe thoſe rules then the Reiſtres?
                  
                  
                     
Many there are that will not graunt this, but doe obiect that if Anſwer to the obiection that the Reiſtres haue diuers times ſuffered the ſpeares to beate them. there had bene ſo great vertue in the Reiſtres order, they would not haue ſuffered themſelues to haue bene ſo often beaten. Hereto I ſay, that the fault proceeded not of their order, but rather of ſome euill demeanour which ſome of them, comming to the combate, haue vſed. The firſt is, that comming within twentie paces of the enemie they haue turned their flanckes to them, and ſo diſcharged their volee of Piſtols vppon them: for thus (ſay they) more may ſhoote then if they runne on front: And then if the enemie turneth his backe, vndoubtedly they vſe him badly: but if he abide it, they fetch about a great circuite either to charge a newe, or to take newe Piſtols. Whereof it hath often come to paſſe, that they haue not had leiſure ſo much as to turne their heads: for their turnes and returnes haue bene taken for a flight: wherevpon they haue bene ſo hotly purſued that they haue taken their carrier out right. This Ouerſights of the Reiſters. euill inuented maner is more fit to play at baſe then to fight. And I merueile that their leaders could neuer remember that the Piſtoll worketh almoſt no effect, vnleſſe it bée diſcharged within three paces: as alſo that the troopes doe neuer breake vnleſſe they bee ſharply aſſailed. An other cuſtome by them obſerued is, that when the firſt ranckes of the ſquadron begin to ſhoote, all the reſt doth likewiſe diſcharge, and moſt of them in the ayre. Peraduenture they imagine their great noyſe ſhould terrifie the enemie, which perhaps it would doe if they were ſheepe or crowes. But French men and Spanyards are not ſo eaſely daunted. The inconuenience that riſeth hereof is this, that the laſt ranckes which ſhould thruſt forward the firſt, ſeeing that they haue diſcharged in vayne, doe in liew of going forward, ſtand ſtill, and are ſooner amazed then they that be at the head and in all the daunger: wherefore it is nothing ſtraunge that theſe euill kindes of fight haue engendred euill ſucceſſe. But who ſo liſt to marke the other Reiſtres that haue ioyned as they ought, ſhall finde that they haue made ſlaughters and ouerthrowne the ſpeares, whereby their Captaines haue learned wit, and doe now make them to keepe better orders.
                  Now let vs ſpeake of the meeting of two ſquadrons: whervpon Of the effect of two Squadrons when they come to charge. I will ſay, that although the ſquadron of Speares doe giue a valiant charge: yet can it worke no great effect: for at the onſet it killeth none, yea it is a miracle if any be ſlayne with the ſpeare: onely it may wound ſome horſe, and as for the ſhocke it is many times of ſmall force, where the perfect Reiſtres doe neuer diſcharge their

Piſtols but in ioyning, and ſtriking at hand they wound, ayming alwaies either at the face or thigh. The ſecond ranck likewiſe ſhooteth of ſo as the forefront of the men of armes ſquadron is at the firſt meeting halfe ouerthrowne and maymed. Alſo although the firſt rancke may with their ſpeares doe ſome hurt eſpecially to the horſe, yet the other ranckes following cannot doe ſo, at the leaſt the ſecond and third, but are driuen to caſt away their ſpeares & helpe themſelues with their ſwordes. Herein wee are to conſider two things which experience hath confirmed: The one, that the Reiſtres are neuer ſo daungerous as when they bee mingled with the enemie, for then be they all fire. The other, the two ſquadrons meeting, they haue ſcarce diſcharged the ſecond piſtoll but either the one or the other turneth away. For they conteſt no lenger, as the Romaines did againſt other nations, who oftentimes kept the field two houres fighting face to face, before either partie turned backe. By all the aforeſaid reaſons I am driuen to aduowe that a ſquadron of piſtols, doing their dueties, ſhall breake a ſquadron of ſpeares.
                  It may hereto bee replied, that the man of armes carieth alſo one piſtoll which he vſeth when his ſpeare is broken. It is ſoone ſayd, but coldly practiſed: for the moſt of them ſcarce caring to charge, doe referre that to their men, who haue no greater vſe of it then themſelues, and when they come to fight the one halfe doe faile, as hath bene oft enough tryed, or at the leaſt through euill charging doe no hurt. He that will haue any vſe of thoſe weapons, muſt bee as carefull of them as of a horſe: whereto it is hard to bring other nations, which accompt this a baſe and ſeruile occupation. Some man may in the fauour of the men of armes ſay, that they may in ſuch ſorte ioyne the ſquadron of Reiſtres that they may ouerthrowe them. That is, that comming within 80. paces they may ſende foorth their three laſt ranckes of ſpeares gallantly to aſſaile their flancke, ſo ſhall they open it, breake the force therof, and bring ſuch a feare vpō them that-the ſquadron of ſpeares may the better deale with them. Hereto I aunſwer, the obſeruation is good, though not greatly in vſe. Neuertheleſſe, it is a matter common as well to the one as to the other. For teach it to the Reiſtre, and he will pay you in the ſame coyne, by ſending foorth parte of his troope to ſtrike into your ſides: ſo ſhall your inuentions be a remedie to him, and peraduenture he ſhall preuaile more therewith then your ſelues. Now, notwithſtanding whatſoeuer I haue herein

diſcourſed, my entent is not to bring the French nation in diſlike with the ſpeare, which I take to be wonderfull proper weapons for them ſo long as their mindes are no otherwiſe diſpoſed then yet they bee. And vntill they haue learned more ſtedfaſtly to keepe order, and to be more carefull of their weapons, they will neuer worke the like effects with the piſtoll, as the Reiſtres. Such as imagine the piſtoll to bee ſuch a terrible and offenſiue weapon, are not greatly deceiued: neither will I gainſay them, in caſe it come in valiant hands.
                  The ende of the firſt Paradoxe.
               
               
                  The ſecond Paradoxe.
                  
                     That 2500. Corcelets and 1500. Harquebuziers may more eaſely retire three French leagues in a plaine fielde then 2000. Speares.
                  
                  
                     AMong all militarie actions accompted notable, this Why moſte men do reiect this Paradoxe. hath the firſt place as one of the moſt difficult, as alſo it is a great teſtimonie of the ſufficiencie of the. Captaine that can compaſſe it. And as there are fewe willing to vndertake it, for feare of fayling: ſo peraduenture ſhall we finde fewer that will beleeue that it may be done, becauſe it is a thing that happeneth ſo ſieldome. Neither would I reproue their opinion if they ment that in the weakeneſſe wherein our infantery now cōſiſteth it were vnpoſſible to attaine to yt effect. For hauing no vſe of the pike & voyd of diſcipline, I do not thinke that 10000. harquebuziers taken frō thence durſt ſhew themſelues in the plaine before 600. ſpeares. But with the 4000. men of whō I meane to ſpeake, all of our owne nation and of no other, reduced into good order and obedience, and in their auncient armes, I will vphould that the retraict propounded may be performed.
                  Such as will gainſay (of whome there are many) will propound Proofes hereof may be performed by the notable examples taken out of the ſtories of our time. an argument gathered of experience, ſaying, that no Hiſtoriographer ſetteth downe any ſuch example, at the leaſt none of thoſe that haue written of the warres happened ſince the yeere 1494. hetherto, which haue bene very notable: alſo that theſe proofes appeared only in the time of the Romaines. Whereto for my aunſwer, ſith they beate me with experience, I will defend my ſelfe by the ſame and ſay, that it maketh no more againſt me, then with me. For regarding what is paſt, we may note ſuch happes as

verifie my propoſition not to bee vnpoſſible. Firſt I will alleadge The firſt example. the braue retraict of Don Aluares of Sande in Afflicke. He had, as I haue heard, 4000. Spanyards, ſouldiers of great valour, and to come where he purpoſed, he was to paſſe a plaine of foure or fiue miles, which (truſting to his men) he aduentured to doe. But he was not ſo ſoone ſet forward, but eightéene or twentie thouſand horſe of the Moores were at his heeles, who coueted to catch him in this bad aduantage. He then hauing ordered his battaile and exhorted his men, went forward on his way where all theſe horſe did fiue or ſixe times ſet vpon him, but he bare their brunt and ſo brauely repulſed them, that with the loſſe of 80. men at the moſt he brought the reſt into ſafetie, and ſlew ſeuen or eight hundred of the enemies. Some will ſay, that they wanting armour did not pearce ſo ſharply as do the Chriſtian horſemen, who doe farre paſſe them in courage. I graunt ours are more valiant, but theirs did not aſſaile very ſlackly, or els they had not loſt ſo many. And by this exployt it appeareth, that footmen reſolute and well led may paſſe any where. Guicciardine alſo in his hiſtorie reporteth a gallant retraict The ſecond example. of 2000. Spanyards after the Frenchmen had broken their armie at Rauenna: for being ioyned againe into their bodie, although the horſemen did follow and charge them, yet did they ſaue themſelues, yea and ſlewe Gaſton de Foix the conquerour that purſued them.
                  In theſe retraicts here do appeare great determinatiō but ſmall That ſuch reſtraites may be made when the arte of warre and in ſtruction of the Soldiers is ioyned with bould reſolution. arte, which neuertheleſſe is very neceſſarie in ſuch affayres: wherto I will alſo adde the inſtruction of the ſouldiers. For when all theſe three things ſhall concurre in one troope, I doubt not but it may worke greater meruailes then the former. Some will ſay, that the Frenchmen can at this day hardly helpe themſelues with the pike, which is true, neither do I merueile thereat: for in deliuering both it and the corcelet to any man, men looke to no more, but whether he hath good ſhoulders, as if it were to carie ſome coffer like a moyle: and as for the gentrie they haue quite giuen it ouer. This is the reaſon why I wiſh the reſtoring of martiall diſcipline, as alſo that they would againe practiſe the pike, wherewith to fight at hand and open, and to leaue to the youth and poore Souldiers the handling of the harquebuze, becauſe that therewith they ordinarily fight a farre of and in couert: for the one is farre more honorable then the other. Captaines in ould time, venturing vpon ſome difficult enterpriſe, wiſhed to haue their Souldiers not only well ordered,

but alſo old beaten warriours, becauſe their aſſurance is the greater. For it were but an ouerſight to attempt any perillous aduenture with newe men. Now will I come to Inſtruction, which is (as I haue ſayd) merueilouſly requiſite in extraordinary matters. And yet we now ſee that the Souldier contemneth it: and the Captaine careth not for it. But admit a Souldier bee valiant, and that whereſoeuer he be placed he will doe his duetie: thinke you he will not doe it much better, or that he will not fight more reſolutly, when before he hath by good reaſons bene perſwaded that the horſe cannot force a battaile in the face: likewiſe that for the flancke they muſt vſe ſuch fortification as I will hereafter ſet downe, then if he were vtterly ignorant and wiſt not what might happen? I thinke no man will denie it: for certainly ignorance is in parte cauſe of the feare that many men of warre doe oftentimes conceiue: For that ſeeing the enemie in their faces, they thinke they ſhould, according to the prouerbe, euen eate yron charets. I know that practiſe teacheth to knowe the true from the falſe, but there is much time ſpent therein, vnleſſe it bee holpen by familier and ordinarie documents, which thoſe captaines that ſeeke to haue the beſt companies doe diligently giue to their ſouldiers.
                  Hauing thē the number of Footmen afore The ordering of the footmen aſorenamed to withſtand the horſe in the fielde. mentioned, readie trayned and inſtructed, they ſhould be arāged in this maner. I would make two battailes of them each of 1250. corcelets, & 750. Harquebuziers: If any man aſke why two rather then one, I ſay, to the ende the one to fauour the other, as may bee ſeene in the figure hereto adioined for the better cōprehending thereof.

                  
                  The ordering of the footmen aſorenamed to withſtand the hotſe in the fielde.
                  
                     
For marching but 80. paces aſunder and coaſting each other, it followeth that the head of the battaile marked A can hardly bee charged, becauſe the ſide of the battaile marked 3 doth flancke it, as likewiſe the ſayd head doth as much for the ſayd flancke: by the ſame reaſon alſo one of the heads of the battaile marked 2. and the flancke of the other marked D doe alſo ſuccour each other by their harquebuziers, ſo as it is very daungerous for the horſe to aſſayle in ſuch places which enterflancke each other. But may ſome man ſay, although the two battailes cannot be aſſaulted but each vpon two ſides, why is it not as good to make but one onely, which cannot be aſſailed in any more places? For it ſeemeth the reſiſtance would bee more gallant, becauſe that force vnited is much greater then deuided. I am of opinion that in theſe actions, it is not ſo requiſite to looke to the greatneſſe or ſmalneſſe of the battailes, as to the difficultie and hinderance when they finde themſelues aſſayled on euery ſide. For it is a great aduenture but there will growe ſome diſorder when one bodie muſt make defence in foure places: but when they neede not to looke but to two ſides, the men doe frame themſelues thereto with greater eaſe and much better order. This reaſon ſhall content me for the verifying of my ſpeech, notwithſtanding I could alleadge others.
                  Concerning the ordering of the battailes, I would wiſh euery Of the ordering of the battailes. rancke to conteyne fiftie Corcelets, whereof there ſhould be ſeauen at the head, which would make three hundred and fiftie, then tenne ranckes of harquebuziers, and in the middeſt of them the rancke of Enſignes, afterward for the tayle ſixe ranckes of Corcelets, which in all make ſixe hundred and fiftie Corcelets and fiue hundred harquebuziers placed in foure and twentie rankes. For the flanckes, wherein al the difficultie doth conſiſt, they ſhould be ordered in maner following. I would neuer place there any harquebuziers as hath hetherto bene vſed, but make ſixe rankes of three hundred Corcelets, in each fiftie men which ſhould ſerue to make head on thoſe ſides. The enemies being néere, they ſhould march otherwiſe then the reſt, namely cloſe and carying their Pikes vpright leaning againſt their ſhoulders, which is now ſufficiently in vſe. Whereas at the heads of the battaile, when any thing is to be done, in their march they trayle them, which maketh much diſtance betweene their rankes,
                  Now, theſe ſixe ranckes when the charge is offered, after they ſtand ſhall doe nothing but make halfe a turne, and ſo continue in

their array with their face to the enemie, and by my aduice, they ſhould take but threeſcore common paces in length, which properly ſhould bee the ſame which the battaile being cloſed to fight, may haue open by the flanckes. Thus ſhould they bee armed to withſtand the horſemen, which cannot bee well done but with Pikes: for the harquebuze ſhot without couert wil eaſely be ouerthrowne. There remaine yet two hundred and fiftie harquebuziers to bee placed in the battaile, counting the Muſkets whom I would wiſh to bee diſtributed into foure partes, in each threeſcore and ſomewhat more to ſtande as it were looſe before the Pikes, and at the charge to arange themſelues vnder thoſe of the firſt ranckes on the foure ſides of the battaile.
                  Some will miſlike I ſhould make the heades ſo weake and Anſwer to the obiection againſt the former aduice. only of ſixe ranckes of Corcelets, thinking them too fewe to beare the brunt of a whole hande of horſe. To whom I may ſay, that if there were tenne it were the better, but I haue cut my coate after my cloath: howbeit, I thinke ſuch frontes ſufficient to reſiſt the horſe, which may eaſely bée done, if the men haue courage and will be ſure to ſtand ſtrongly, and fewe battailes haue wee ſeene ouerthrowne by any aſſault of the horſe at the head. As for the flankes which I haue deſcribed in ſuch ſorte as before, they be as ſtrong as the heades, ſo long as they can keepe their order. And this order I would wiſh them to keepe in their fight. Firſt, while the horſe were farre of, it were good the battailes did goe forwarde, but ſeeing them readie to charge, to ſtay to the ende the better to ſettle themſelues in order and with good footing to beare their firſt brunt.
                  The firſt rancke of Corcelets to plant the endes of their Pikes How the battailes ſhould beare themſelues either to fight or to retire. ſure in the ground, and not to ſtirre though a horſe ſhould goare himſelfe thereon: alſo to hould them about the middeſt, and vnder the foreends ſhould the threeſcore Muſkets and Harquebuzes appoynted, arange themſelues, with one knee on the ground to ſhoote the ſurer, as alſo to be ſomewhat defended. The other ranckes of Corcelets to ſtande vpright almoſt cloſe with the firſt rancke and to make the bodie of the battaile. Then the horſemen comming to charge, I doubt not but they ſhall finde themſelues ſhrewdly anoyed by the Harquebuziers, which ſhooting within twentie pa
                     
                        •
                     es, iuſt in the face of the horſe, in my opinion will mayme the whole firſt rancke of the ſquadron: but if any thinke them in ſmall ſuretie there; I will aunſwer, that they can no where bee better

placed at the head then here: for they muſt bee where they may anoye at the firſt brunt, and although the Speares or breaſtes of the horſe doe ouerthrowe ſome foure or fiue on a ſide, it were but a ſmall loſſe. For it is moſt certaine that when a Squadron of horſe ſhall ſee nine or tenne horſe fall downe at the firſt comming, ſuch as followe will haue an eye to their conſciences. Thus after the Squadron ſhall haue borne this ſharpe welcome, it muſt likewiſe ſtrike vppon the Pikes of the firſt rancke, or els moderate the firſt heate, as alſo becauſe the firſt gored horſes ſhall bee forced to ſtande, and ſo ſtay the reſt that followeth. And although this defence might ſomewhat yeeld, yet ſhould they ſtill finde the bodie of the battaile readie to beare their brunt, wherein conſiſteth the principall force. And in trueth I ſhould thinke it vnpoſſible (if the Souldiers would not bee afeard) to ouerthrowe ſuch a barre: for we muſt thinke that though the horſes runne with great force, yet a ſmall thing letteth them, the ſmoake and noyſe of the Harquebuziers ſcarreth them, hurtes ſtoppe them, mens conceiued feares doe make them to pull backe, and the crye of the battaile hath ſome effect, notwithſtanding the greateſt of all proceedeth of the reſiſtance of the Pikes. Beſides all this, ſome rancke of Harquebuziers placed in the middeſt of the battaile might likewiſe ſhoote ouer the heads of the Pikes, who bending themſelues to the fight doe ſomewhat ſtoope, whereby parte of the horſemans bodie may be ſeene.
                  Some peraduenture will ſcorne hereat and ſay, that all theſe Aunſwer to another obiection founded vpon the impoſſibilitie. ſmall obſeruations were more fit to bee practiſed in Dances and Maſkes rather then in the warre, likewiſe the ould cuſtome haue alwaies bene beſt, though wee trouble not our ſelues with ſo many impractiſeable nouelties. But I am not of their mindes, for they put me in remembrance of many of our fathers that laughed at ſo many inuentions for the fortifying of the Houlds, tearming them Italian deuiſes, affirming that one good great Rampier would ſuffice to warrant men from the force of the Canon, vppon the which they might defende themſelues Pike to Pike. And yet experience hath taught vs that then townes were taken within eight daies, where now we cōſume almoſt a whole ſeaſon, ſo often muſt wee fight before wee can winne a Raueline, then the ditch, then the Rampier, then the inwarde trench. For if in the ſhould there bee one ingenious perſon and a Souldier withall, ſuch a one as was Captaine Baſtian in Maiſtrict, he maketh them

that are without to ſweate water and blood. I would thinke that that which I require in our battell, ſhould not be ſo hard to practiſe, ſith our newe Souldiers when wee traine them, doe make many more turnes and returnes for pleaſure. Why then ſhould not the olde Souldiers labour to learne any thing that may breede their honor and ſafegard.
                  Two other obiections may yet be here made. The firſt: that the Aunſwer to two other obiections. flankes of the battell ſhall ſtill be much weaker then the heads: becauſe the couer that I haue giuen them, conſiſting in ſo difficult an order, it is eaſie to bee diſordered. I confeſſe that the ſaide flanks ſhould be too weake to aſſaile, becauſe the battelles doe ſtill march forwarde and not ſideling: but ſtrongly to beare a brunt I thinke that obſeruing the ſame which I haue ſet downe, they ſhall be able to doe it, as well as the heades. To the ende likewiſe the conduct may be the better, I would wiſh to each flanke two Capteynes, with the pike; and of the notableſt ſouldiers. The ſecond obiection is that the fower corners of the battell, though cloſed, doe yet remaine ſomewhat open and weake, as it were for the ſpace of ſeuen or eight ſteppes, where the horſe may get entrie. Truely this conſideration is not amiſſe, and for the remedie hereof it were requiſite in theſe corners to place ſeuen or eight of the braueſt Harquebuziers, who ſhould not diſcharge but vpon great neceſſitie, as alſo to appoynt the Corcelets of the 4. 5. and 6. rankes that ſhould be néereſt thereto to turne their Pikes that way to beare the brunt when they ſee the enemie approach. The greateſt daunger to all the ſayd footmen conſiſteth in the two firſt charges of the horſe, which it is to be preſumed, will bee braue: but being borne out, they may conceiue great hope, in that they haue quenched the firſt heate of the enemie, and ſo march forward ouer the field, caſting forth ſome loſe moſquets to keepe the horſemen a loofe, but when they ſee it come vpon them then wholy to cloſe. And bearing themſelues thus, I am verely perſwaded they may make a gallant retraict.
                  The better to comprehende this matter, the Colonels who in A meane to proue what aſſurance is in this paradox: alſo a remedie to the difficultie propounded there againſt. their regiments haue many Pikes, ſhould ſometimes proue in fayned things how this order ſtandeth with reaſon, and peraduenture they ſhall finde them ſelues the better ſatiſfied, when they ſee a picture and liuely repreſentation thereof concurre with that which they may haue imagined, according to this reporte. Some man will replye that the horſemen may ſo vndiſcreetly aſſaile the footmen, that they may indeede ſaue themſelues before them, but if

they would charge them in ſmall troopes (namely of one ſquadron of 300. to make 3. each of 100. which might followe one after an other) it would much ſhake the battaile. For the Harquebuzery hauing diſcharged vpon the firſt (as it cannot bee denyed, but it will greatly endomage them) the two other ſquadrons following ſhall haue great aduantage, in being exempt from that daunger, and ſo there is ſome likelihoode that they may ſhake them. Truely this kinde of charge is very good, but it may be prouided for: for ſome of thoſe Harquebuziers that ſhould lye vnder the firſt rancke of the Pikes, may haue charged againe before the ſecond troope commeth vpon them, alſo from the two ſides that are not charged, or from the one, the harquebuzers may be brought to ſuccour that which may bee in daunger, as alſo ſome of thoſe in the middeſt may likewiſe ſhoote which being handſomely performed, the Corcelets ſhall ſtill haue ſuccour from their Harquebuzerie▪ for without this their defence would be but colde. To conclude, I rather feare that wee ſhall want occaſion to attempt ſo braue a retraict, either that wee ſhall ſcarcely finde any Captaine that will be the firſt to proue it, then that I doubt but it may be put in execution.
               
               
                  The third Paradoxe.
                  
                     That it is expedient for a Captaine to haue ſuſteyned an ouerthrowe.
                  
                  
                     
                        PLutarke among his ſmall workes in a The generall ground of this paradoxe. treatiſe intituled, Of profite to be taken of enemies, doth ſomewhat verifie this propoſition, where with great arte and eloquence he generally ſheweth the ſame which I pretend to deſcribe perticulerly, though rudely: but this opinion of myne I thinke many Captaines (blinded peraduenture with the apparance of things which by nature are hurtfull) will gaineſay: howbeit when I haue diſcouered the fruites there vnder hidden, they ſhall, as I ſuppoſe, though not wholy, yet in parte be ſatiſfied. And therefore without farther circumſtance of words I wil come to the principall matter. The perticuler ground hereof. Such as attaine to militarie offices doe ordinarily climbe thereto by two waies: The one called merite or deſert: and the other fauour.
                     
Some of thoſe that haue trodden the firſt path, ſeeing themſelues in authoritie do grow proude: and others that haue come by the ſecond I doe imagine to be ignorant, which are very great imperfectiōs, as eaſie to bee knowne in others, as hard to be eſpied by thoſe that are poſſeſſed with them. And as to diſeaſes engendred in mens bodies, the remedies muſt bee applyed according to the rules of Phiſicke: the like doe theſe that are of the minde ſtande in neede of. But many times neither arte nor counſaile can preuaile, but the accident, which more properly ſeemeth to bee hurt and deſtruction, then remedie. Howbeit, if any doe meruaile how any profite can be found in things hurtfull, let them conſider the Scorpion who carieth in her both the ſting & poyſon that infecteth the deadly wound, and the medicine that cureth the ſame. So alſo may wee ſay, that militarie miſhaps doe ſometimes worke the like effects. For by bringing vpon vs an apparant calamitie, they doe thereby ſerue for an inſtruction to heale the hidden euill that bred the other. This inward euill whereof I purpoſe to ſpeake, is Pride, which ordinarily breedeth in thoſe that are endued with ſufficiencie and valour, and bringeth their ſoules as farre out of faſhion as the Dropſie doth the bodie: wherof enſueth an vnreaſonable ſelfe-eſtimation and contempt of others, which are two ſuch errors as oftentimes doe caſt thoſe that followe them into moſt manifeſt deſtructions. And as all men ought to beware of ſtumbling vpon ſuch great inconueniences, ſo muſt they take in good part the vnlooked for corrections, which make thē wiſe, to take héed another time.
                  The firſt example that I will alleadge of ſuch as I thinke to Example of Captaines that haue benefited by the ouerthrowes that they haue ſuſteyned. haue gayned thereby, ſhall be of Gonſales Fernando a Spanyard and moſt notable Captaine, who hauing bene vnder Ferdinand of Arragon the chiefeſt inſtrument to tame and driue the Moores out of Granado, was ſent into the Realme of Naples, which that King chalenged againſt the French men. Comming thether with an armie againſt them, he thought peraduenture that the French, men of armes, would as eaſely haue bene broken as the Moores Genetairies, alſo that his fame alreadie obteyned, would terrifie them. But he was deceiued, for they ouerthrewe his troopes: And himſelfe loſing that field, which the Lord of Aubigny wonne, he afterward ſhewed that he had gathered inſtruction by ſuch an ouerthrow: for he guided himſelfe with ſuch arte and diſcretion that he ouerthrewe the Frenchmen in ſundrie encounters, and finally expelled them the Realme.
                  
                     
That great Iulius Caeſar, who in the arte of warre ſurpaſſed all An other example in Ceſar. Capteynes that euer were, after he had driuen Pompey out of Italy, & encloſed him in Dirachium, waxed proud & cōtemned him, ſo as vndertaking to entrench a great countrie wherby to cloſe him vp the ſtraighter, Pompey knowing his aduantage, came forth and flew the chiefe part of his armie, and had like to haue wonne a full victorie. This ſhrewd blowe made Caeſar ſo warie and diligent, that he neuer after gaue Pompey any oportunitie againſt him, but with his 
                        〈…〉
                     ted pollicies brought him to the ſame poynt that he required, and ſo ouercame him.
                  Theſe two examples, the one olde and the other newe, may ſuffice The vſe of theſe examples. to giue to vnderſtande that the greateſt, giuing themſelues euen to the leaſt pride, doe ſometimes encurre an ouerthrowe by this imperfection: but withall they haue this good thing in them, that hauing receiued of their enemies ſome chaſtiſement for their negligence or raſhneſſe, they will ſoone amend. Many Capteynes therefore now liuing muſt not bee aſhamed to confeſſe that in proſperitie they may bee ouer ſeene, ſith thoſe that haue bene endued with ſuch modeſtie haue ſo farre ouerſhot themſelues.
                  The firſt cauſe of this miſchiefe conſiſteth in our ſelues, and is The firſt cauſe of preſumption. our had inclination, which corroborated by cuſtume tēdeth to exalt vs aboue meaſure, ſo as if an occaſion falleth out of a quarter long, it ſtretcheth it to an ell. Which appeareth in all profeſſions of arte and knowledge, but chiefly in the arte of warre, the profeſſors whereof doe make great account of themſelues, becauſe they exerciſe the actions of Fortitude and Magnanimitie. Many times among the Spaniſh bands you ſhall heare a newe Souldier of three crownes pay, ſay, I am as good as the King: let vs then thinke what a Capteyne that hath bene in ſundrie aſſaults and battailes will doe: He will ſtraight way ſay, I am better then the Pope. Thus doe wee ſee militarie preſumption ſwell euen aboue the thing it ſelfe. The commendations of friends are an other cauſe that helpe to The ſecond cauſe. encreaſe it: for they not able to forbeare prayſing thoſe whom they loue, who alſo doe deſerue the ſame, by powring plentie of this liquour vpon them, doe ſometimes make them drink ſo much therof that they be halfe giddie therewith. Herein they that are too free in attributing doe ouerſhoote themſelues at vnawares, and they that are ſo curious in the receipt thereof are willingly ouertaken.
                  Flatterers alſo which followe ſuch as are in authoritie as the The third cauſe. ſhadowe doth the bodie, doe greatly helpe to giue to Pride her true

ſhape. For with their deciptfull and windie words they puffe vp the ſoule like a bladder. If a yong Lord doth any valiant act, they ſtraight compare him to Gaſton de Fax. If he be an expert Captaine, they tell him he paſſeth Bertrande du Gleſquin. And if they haue any better hap, they make him equall with Scipio and Marcellus. To him whom in hope of profite they would allure, they ſay, he muſt proceede in his good fortune, ſith the mightie doe eſtéeme of him, the Souldiers doe loue him and the people haue him in admiration. Hereto they adde alſo that his fame is ſo diſperſed among his enemies, that when they knowe him to be in the fielde, they feare him as the Shepheards in Barbary doe the mightie Lyon when he commeth out of the woods. And that for their parts they are glad to ſee him in ſo good a way to atchiue moſt worthie tryumphes and meanes whereby to recompence thoſe that are his ſeruants.
                  By this ſweete harmonie of ſpeech, this man who peraduenture The effectes of pride enflamed through our owne bad nature and the diſcourſes of our frendes & flatterers. before preſumed enough of himſelfe, now coueteth to preſume too much, and ſo to ſeeke nothing but warre and battaile. Yea the moſt modeſt who miſlike flatteries, euen in the reiecting of them, do ſtill ſwallowe downe ſome ſmall portion, wherewith to feede that little vanitie that dwelleth in them. It is not to bee enquired what diſcourſes they make in themſelues, what they ſhall doe, or how high they ſhall climbe, but to take theſe for extrauagants. In this diſpoſition nothing ſeemeth vnpoſſible, and the more boldneſſe and experience they haue the more doe their preſumption encreaſe, wherby they diſdaine their friends, contemne their enemies, and refuſe all others counſaile in whatſoeuer they vndertake. Theſe bee the bad humours which this windie collick of Preſumption and Flatterie doe engender in a Captaine.
                  I thinke no man dare denye but it were neceſſarie to ſee them Remedies againſt theſe effectes. purged. Howbeit, diuers doe finde my remedies to be very bitter and troubleſome: but ſay what they will, they are moſt conuenient. For theſe humours being too deeply rooted, the remedies wherewith to plucke them vp muſt be very ſtrong. Theſe medicines are of an other ſorte, then thoſe that are vſed againſt diſeaſes of the bodie, whoſe propertie is to worke to the good of the partie vpon whō they be miniſtred: For being conſidered in their owne nature, they are as hath bene ſayd méere ruines of the bodie: but conſidered accidentally, they may bee termed drugges that heale the aſtoniſhment of the minde. The Phiſitions alſo that miniſter theſe medicines,

may be compared to him whom Plutarke maketh mention In his treatiſe of profit to be taken of enemies. of, who thinking to haue ſlaine his enemie, by thruſting his ſword into him, pearced an Impoſtume which he had within him, and ſo ſaued his life, that he ſhould ſoone after haue loſt through his ſecrete ſickneſſe, if the other miſhappe had not happened, which was to him a healthſome remedie.
                  The wiſe Captaine therfore that ſeeketh to profite in the knowledge An exhortation to Captaines, with a deſcription of the good which the vertuous do reape whiles the viti ous and ignorant doe empaire and confound them ſelues. of armes, when he incurre any miſhaps, hauing diſgeſed the firſt bitterneſſe thereof, muſt ſeeke to vſe the reſt as the expulſiue vertue of ſome Eaſterly roote, to expell out of his minde the proud vapours thereinto aſcended: and the greater operation that this worketh in any, ye leſſe neede hath he of any other medicine. As for the Captaines that are furniſhed with ignorance, they likewiſe do growe into preſumption, whereto the good clawbacks, that follow thē (as wel as the former) are a great helpe. But for the others, being better guided by vertue, their loſſes doe happen after a more valiant ſorte; where theſe ignorant men doe fall into miſhappes accompanied with ſhame: Now to ſpeake of the eſtate as well of the one as of the other, they that amend, be happie in miſhap: but moſt vnhappie are thoſe that will neuer acknowledge their error, but impute it either to others or to fortune, and ſo continue their pride in the middeſt of their miſerie. For in ye ende they remaine engaged vnder the burthen of ſome great blowe whether their want of diſcretion hath led them: which the firſt doe ſhunne by finding their imperfection in time, after they haue receiued ſome ſmal one. Hereby may wee eaſely iudge that the aduerſities which bring vs into the path of wiſedome, are better then the proſperities that tranſport vs therefro. I could alleadge the domeſticall examples of ſundrie of our Capteynes, who to their friends haue not denyed but that they haue reaped commoditie out of theſe extraordinarie corrections. But ſith I imagine that ſuch as followe the warres may haue tryed ſomewhat, or heard others ſpeake thereof, I will forbeare: only I will admoniſh them both ſooner and neerer to looke to their owne faultes then to other mens: for ſo ſhall they learne to ouerſhoote themſelues but ſeeldome.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth Paradoxe.
                  
                     That daylie experience haue taught ſuch meanes to fortifie Holds, as are moſt profitable in reſpect of the ſmall charge thereof, and no leſſe defenſible then ſuch ſtately ones as the Ingeniors haue aforetime inuented.
                  
                  
                     THE Italians deſerue the commendation Where to coſtly fortifications doe ſerue. of being the firſt inuenters of diuers ſortes of gallant fortifications, which ſince they haue reduced into ſuch an arte as hath bene eſteemed honorable, neither hath it bene of leſſe profite to thoſe that haue delt therein. And peraduenture this laſt poynt hath partly bene the occaſion that they haue perſwaded Princes that ſuch and ſo many things were requiſite to bring a peece of worke to perfection and worthie them. Wherein they haue not bene altogether vntoward: for through great & long expences the water is come to their mil. I know it beſeemeth great Princes to doe great workes, becauſe they haue great meanes and therefore the ſmall will not content them; but withall they ſhould prize them in the ballance of commoditie, leaſt the deareneſſe of the one hinder the ſetting hand to the other. I ſeeke not herein that To whom thoſe of ſmale expenſe are profitable. which is ſeemely for a fewe, but that which may bee commodious and profitable to all: Eſpecially for their ſakes who being weake, had neede for their owne fafetie to fortifie themſelues, and yet through pouertie are driuen to ſpend but little. I take that to be a fruitfull peece of worke which is performed quickly, eaſely, and with ſmall coſt, and yet in goodneſſe doth counteruaile an other whereto they cannot attaine without contrary meanes. I meane not in this my treatiſe to comprehend ſuch places as are ſtrong by nature, but only thoſe which may be ſo made by arte.
                  The firſt place that here I will bring to view, ſhall be the Citadell of Antwerpe, wherein wee may ſay that nothing hath bene Fortereſſe which haue ſo much.
                     
forgotten, either in wealth, diligence, inuention or plentie of ſtuffe: ſo as in all Chriſtendome a goodlier peece of worke for fortification hath no man ſeene. But on the other ſide if wee conſider that the building thereof coſt 1400000. Florins, and yet, had it bene aſſaulted, would not peraduenture haue held out much better then Oudenarde or Maeſtricht which were fortified but with earth, it will make men ſomewhat curious to examine theſe matters more exactly. Eſpecially ſmall Potentates and little townes are to looke very néerely hereto: for if they ſhould meaſure their defence by the ell of theſe great Princes, they ſhould bee peraduenture empouriſhed, yea vtterly ouerthrowne before they could bee halfe fotified. The Citadell of Mets coſt aboue a million of Franks, and I ſuppoſe that that of Turin drewe néere to 300000. Crownes. Which I ſpeake not as miſliking that theſe great Princes ſhould employ ſo much vpon theſe ſmall Caſtles: for they waſt much more vnprofitably: but only to the ende to let men ſee that for the fortifying of ſuch a towne as Malines or Orleance, which in greatneſſe are alike, after that order the charge would amount vnto aboue fiue millions of Florens: alſo that for the furniſhing of money they ſhould bee driuen either to ſell one of their Eſtates or make peace for a hundred yeeres with their neighbours, that they might worke at leiſure.
                  Some man may ſay, it is but a ſmall matter for the Kings, who Againſt thoſe that like of ſuch expenſes. in the ciuill warres of Flanders and France, haue each of them ſpent aboue 70. millions of golde. But I will to the contrary conclude by the ſame reaſon: for hauing waſted ſuch innumerable ſummes, a little will be found to be a great deale. If we ſhall looke all France ouer, I thinke wee ſhall ſcarcely finde (except a fewe Caſtles) any towne halfe finiſhed after the engeniors rules. Some doe beare themſelues herein like vnto certaine Brides, who being perſwaded that a gowne of cloath of golde will make them more beautifull then one of taffatie; doe thereby force their huſbands to conſent that half their dowrie be conſumed in beautifull ornaments for their mariages: but afterward they haue ſower ſauce to their ſweete meate, as being driuen to a long pennance for their ſumpteous vanitie. It were much more profitable for both to know what were méete, and to goe no farther. When I compare the townes that were beſieged in the time of King Frances & his ſonne Henrie, with thoſe that haue bene aſſaulted in our ciuill warres, I am forced to confeſſe that theſe laſt haue bene better defended, notwithſtanding

they haue bene aſſayled with greater arte, and yet moſt of them were neuer furniſhed with any of theſe ſtately fortifications: which ſheweth that ſo many great expences are ſuperfluous, ſith they bring foorth no better fruite then thoſe that are leſſe.
                  The ingeniours will ſay that notwithſtanding men fortifie but How to helpe our ſelues with the Ingeniors deuiſes, and yet auoide exceſſiue expenſes. with earth without any of their ſupporters of Stone or Bricke, (which are no leſſe beautifull then neceſſarie) yet ſtill they followe their precepts. Wherto I aunſwer that in many things men may helpe themſelues therewith: howbeit they are rather to ſticke to newe experiences which haue taught very good kindes of fitting and defending themſelues. The firſt is the ſame that I haue alreadie mentioned, namely fortification with earth: which coſt tenne times leſſe then great Maſondrie, and is neuer a whit worſe. For proofe hereof I will alleadge the towne of Gaunt, which in two yeeres was finiſhed and furniſhed with Rauelins, ditches & counterſcarpes, (although it be of as great circuite as Paris within the walles) and coſt not aboue 300000. Florins: But if the King of Spayne ſhould haue made this fortification according to the written rules, he muſt haue ſpent aboue ſixe millions and twentie yeres at the leaſt. In diuers places the townes haue bene taken, before they haue bene a quarter fortified after theſe great platformes. The ſecond thing which experience hath made many to allowe of, is to loſen the Baſtions from the Courtines, yea and to carie them without the ditch. For although they be not defended with the Artillerie from any lowe Caſemates, yet doe the Harquebuzery ſufficiently ſhield them from the Curtines which is a continuall anoyance that cannot bee taken away, where the flankes of the Baſtions may bee pearced or broken when the ſhoulders are weake. Alſo if one of thoſe rarelines that I ſpeake of ſhould chaunce to bée taken, yet is not the place therefore ſo loſt, but that the enemie may very well be put backe, where contrariwiſe it is a neceſſarie conſequence to thoſe that haue ioyned them to the Rampiers. The third is the vſe of intrenching, which is a marueilous profitable remedie, though ſmally practiſed in times paſt, but in our ciuill warres, men haue learned to vſe it very well. Though they bee weake and but ill made, yet doe they preſerue from being forced on a ſudden, and procure ſome reaſonable compoſition. But if they be large and well made, either they wholy preſerue or at the leaſt doe giue a moneths reſpite (which is a ſoueraigne purchaſe to the beſieged, when

the enemie muſt winne it by little and little) during which time they may light vppon ſome fauourable accident for themſelues. Hereto will I adde one ſleight which practiſe hath taught, namely, to ſtriue for a drie ditch after the Counterſcarpe is wonne, and ſo to defend a Rampier a fewe daies, though the enemie be lodged in the Parapet. For with ſundrie pollicies haue men learned to fight each with other, ſome more, ſome leſſe: as hath bene ſeene in diuers Sieges both in the Lowe countries and in France. All which inuentions doe conſiſt as much in remouing the earth, as in any other manuall defence.
                  Now will I ſhewe how I would the place which I propound An aduiſe vpō the meanes to fortifie with ſmale coſt. ſhould be prouided for, preſuppoſing ye ſituation to be in ye plaine as are the ſituatiōs of moſt of the townes in Flanders. Firſt I would not haue the Rampier raiſed too high: For ſuch as are ſo vnreaſonable high, as they are in moſt places about Bruxelles, Tournay, Orleance, and Rochell, are rather Mountaines then Rampiers, and bee within as I thinke thirtie foote high. For herein they be hurtfull, that being wonne, there is no more meanes to defende, becauſe the defendants cannot entrench behinde to any purpoſe, when their trench ſhall bée ſo ouer awed. As for the ditch, I would wiſh it to bée full of water if it might bée, ſo to eſchue ſurprizes, as alſo that it is more troubleſome to the aſſailant then the drye. Counterſcarpes doe after a ſorte ſerue, and the couert way to them ſhould bée large.
                  Likewiſe I would thinke an other pathe to be profitable, which ſhould be behinde or vnder the firſt, being ſixe foote broade and as many high: Which ſhould ſerue to the ende that when the Counterſcarpe chaunced to bee wonne by vyolence (as was that of Vulpian in Piedmont, where all the Souldiers were drowned and ſlaine) the defendants might ſaue themſelues. As for the Rauelins they would be fitly placed without the ditch, and made ſo large that they may beare a good entrenching. For ſo ſhall the enemie, although he haue wonne the poynt, haue a fortnights worke. But the inner ditch, if it were poſſible, ſhould be drye, to the ende the Souldiers might in the beginning of the Siege bee kept there for iſſues: which I thinke to bée neceſſarie for the beſieged, as well to the encreaſe of their courages, as in reſpect of ye great hurts which the enemie ſhall thereby receiue. For theſe are meetly ſafe enterpriſes for a cunning Captaine, and will amaze the aſſailants when they ſhall finde themſelues aſſailed.
                  
                     
Whoſoeuer vndertaketh to aſſault ſuch a place, muſt of neceſſitie The way how to deſcend a place that is beſieged. begin with the Rauelin, which is a moſt aſſured warning that he will beate the Courtine on that ſide. Wherefore omitting all other matter they muſt fall to entrenching, whereby in time they may make as it were a newe towne, in caſe they haue people enow and a ſkilfull Ingeniour.
                  I ſuppoſe that in a place where there are Souldiers a Rauelin ſhould hold out one month at the leaſt, yea euen againſt the Prince of Parma, who is the ſkilfulleſt aſſaulter of townes that I know. The rampier and paſſage of a ditch full of water will be as long: and the inner trench, being almoſt equall with the heigth of the rampier that is beaten downe may be kept as long or longer, prouided alwaies, that it be made 60. or 80. foote from the Courtine. Now I take this at the worſt: for there bee ſuch weake aſſailants of Houlds, as ſhall labour two moneths about the winning of a Raueline. There are that thinke it an eaſie matter to keepe them from paſſing the ditch, but for my parte I thinke it harde, for they will enter either by night or day. Thus when a frontier towne ſhal haue ſtopped a mightie armie ſo long as I haue ſayd, it ſhall haue quit it ſelfe well (for there bee fewe townes inpregnable) and the Prince that may haue loſt it ſhall haue this comfort: That as the fencing of it had coſt him little, ſo his enemie ſhall haue ſpent much time, many men, and money enough in the winning of it.
                  Some Ingeniour may ſay that water vndermindeth the foundations Againſt ſuch as thinck water to be hurtfull to rampiers of earth. of a Rampier, and that from tenne yeeres to tenne yeeres they runne out: which they do not if they be walled within. It is ſo indeede where the water is a running water: but the repairing coſt little, as alſo doe the props that beare vp nothing but earth. Howbeit, I ſay that a man may fortifie a whole ſmall towne with earth with the charges of one encloſure to a Baſtion made of bricke or ſtone with the countermynes thereof. This maner do I here alow for an other reſpect: which is, that Potentates & Commonwelths are better able to prouide for the inward fortifications, which muſt accompanie the outward, & do conſiſt in al kinds of neceſſarie prouiſion that want in many townes, though not in whole, yet in parte. And as many are loſt through this default as for lack of Baſtions. They may likewiſe ſpare great ſommes, which are ſpent in theſe great workes, and with the ſame maintaine a ſufficient armie, through want whereof the ſtrongeſt places are taken, as hath bene ſeene in Flanders. Many thinges more may bee obiected

to beate downe this our Bulwarke, which is much more profitable to the weake then beautifull to the mightie Monarkes. In the meane time ſuch as ſhall followe this conſtruction, ſhall not finde themſelues the worſe thereby: as the future experience peraduenture will teach better then the paſſed.
               
            
            
               The ninetenth Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the continuation of the wicked proceedings of the warres of theſe daies doe make a iuſt cauſe to ſeeme vniuſt.
               
               
                  
                     PHilippe Comines in his remembrances reporteth that the Duke of Guyenne, 
                  The Duke of Burgundy an Image of ſuch as haue no delight but in troble and cō
                     fuſion. the brother of King Lewes the 11. ioyning with Duke Charles of Burgundy in the warre for the Commonwealth: when he conſidered the number of the wounded and ſlayne at the battaile of Montleherie, with the ſpoyles that the Souldiers made all ouer the Countrie, was merueilouſly daunted thereat, and tolde Duke Charles that it had bene better neuer to haue begunne that warre that bred ſuch miſchiefe and ruine: who aunſwered him, that thoſe things were not to bee meruailed at ſith ſuch were the naturall fruites thereof: But being afterward alone among his familiers, he ſcorned that yong Prince which brought pitie and compaſſion vnto the Theaters of Mars, where rigour and vengeaunce doe holde their ſoueraigne Empyre. In theſe daies wee heare ſome make almoſt the like aunſwers to many that curſe our ciuill ſtormes: for they tell them, It is the warre, and ſo doe weene that that word being heard ſhould make them to ſhrinke vp the ſhoulder after the Italian maner, and prouide to ſuffer worſe matter. But in my opinion ſuch reaſons are to bee ſuſpected, as procéeding from thoſe that hauing no other delight or ſuſtenance but in other mens ſpoyles, would make men to accompt warre to be a neceſſary euill, to the end they

ſhould not be ſlacke in giuing to them that foode which they do deſire. Truely theſe men are not altogether to be beleeued, leaſt wee confound crueltie and iniuſtice with equitie and humanitie, and ſo of an extraordinarie accident make an ordinary cuſtume. Neither muſt we print in our phantaſies the imaginations of many others, who wiſh to ſée a warre exempt from the things that of long time haue bene proper thereto, and are as it were eſſentials, namely, rapine, diſorder and crueltie: for in theſe daies wherein wee liue, vertue being tyed vp and vice let looſe, wee cannot atteyne to this perfection.
               What ſhall we then ſay hereof? For ſooth, that to the ende well The meanes which doe ſeeme neceſſary to be houldē in the conſideration of the preſent eſtate of the Realme to reſtabliſh it. to meaſure the matters whereof we now ſpeake, wee muſt take the olde rules, not of Iron, which cannot bend, but of leade, which are ſomewhat plyable, and frame them to the crooked and difformed ſtones whereof our ciuill warres are compoſed, that is to ſay, to our confuſions: and then finding what is ſomewhat 
                     •
                  ollerable, as alſo what is to bee reiected, to patch vp againe ſo well as wee may this houſe of bondage, wherein ſo many perſons within theſe fiue and twentie yeeres haue bene tormented: or els quite to raſe it to the foundation by an aſſured peace, which were the better way. I meane not here curiouſly to examine or way the right or wrong of thoſe that are in armes, becauſe I will not offend any. Only I am content generally to ſay that ſuch on either ſide as loue godlineſſe or vertue, doe for the ſatiſfying of themſelues either inwardly or outwardly, vnderproppe their actions with iuſtice. Neither ſhould any warres bee vndertaken without that good faundation, leaſt otherwiſe wee bee found guiltie before God, who will not that men vſe ſuch vyolent remedies but vpon great neceſſitie, neither guide them after their owne diſordinate affections.
               Now in theſe controuerſies and publique quarelles as well ciuill The miſeries of warres eſpecially ciuill. as others, furiouſly raiſed through mans mallice, it often falleth out that all the right lighteth on one ſide and all the wrong on the other. Sometimes that both parties are led by like mallice: and ſometime that he which in deede hath the right, doth ſeeme to haue the wrong, and ſo to the contrary. As alſo that ſometimes in ſome one of the poynts thereof a man may be in the right and in all the reſt in the wrong, of all which differences I meane not here to entreate. Only I would aduertiſe the readers to note them in reading the hiſtories, wherein the diuerſities of ſo many martiall purpoſes are liuely ſet out. But for my ſelf I wil procéed in diſcourſing

vpon my firſt propoſition of the euill behauiours which are to bée ſeene in our ſayd ciuill warres, together with their conſequences. I thinke they cannot bee better compared then to an ouer flowing brooke, which with the vyolent force thereof not only deſtroyeth the whole 
                     •
                  roppe of a plaine, but alſo carieth downe the trees, buildings and bridges where it goeth, ſo as neither arte nor diligence are able to preuent it. Whoſoeuer would walke through France and Flanders might ſee (euen vpon inſenſible things) the footſteps of our daily furies, which are not neuertheleſſe the greateſt domages, for thoſe that waſt our good and valiant men, and corrupt perticuler maners & politique orders are much worſe. Truely we haue great cauſe to wonder at our negligence: which on euery ſide is ſuch, that no man laboureth ſo much as to qualifie theſe ſo terrible furies, which greatly offend all thoſe that are beholders of our miſerable tragedies. Yea many of thoſe that be vpon the theaters hereof, and are endued with ſome integritie, are no leſſe offended thereat. Thucidides ſaith, that in ſeditions men may ſee the image all miſchiefes, but in our warres men may ſay that euen the miſchiefes themſelues doe come in poſte, to the ende to feſter them with eternall reproach: Yea euen the extraordinarie ones which were hidden and durſt not haue appeared fiftie yeeres ago, do now come to bragge among vs. No yeere eſcapeth free without ſome note of treaſon, treacherie, murder, poyſoning or barbarous vyolence: yea ſometime the terrible monſter Maſſacre ſtriketh through and with the mightie blow of her talents ſmiteth thoſe that thinke not vpon her. Oh what ſtraunge things are theſe!
               A Spaniſh Gentleman reported vnto me, that when the Forte Examples of theſe miſeries of Warre. of Frezin Ferry was wonne from the French, there was a Wallon Souldier, being found there, taken priſoner: and when the chiefe Captaine commaunded to put al to the ſword, the ſaid ſouldiers owne brother, ſeruing in the Spaniſh Campe
                     •
                  , ſtepped foorth and ſhewing a cruell countenance ſayd: This wretched traytor to his King muſt dye of no other hand but mine owne. Neither was his wrath appeaſed vntil he had diuers times thruſt him through, notwithſtanding he pitifully kneeled to him. Had the dead mans offence bene fower times as great, yet ſhould he haue abhorred to foyle his hands in his brothers blood. We reade in the ciuil warres of Silla that a Romaine ſouldier hauing in 
                     •
                  ight ſlaine his enemie, ſtripping him found him to be his owne brother, who was on the contrary partie, which when he perceiued, he was attached with

ſuch ſorowe, and ſo ſpited his vnfortunate ignorance, that himſelfe ranne vpon his owne ſword and ſo fell vpon the others bodie. And although that was a very corrupt world, yet many commended that furious pietie of the poore Paynim. But the deede that here I haue rehearſed of this Chriſtian of our daies (which is ſo farre vnlike to the other and ought to be buried in obliuion) had not peraduenture any fewer allowers thereof. If this déede were true, it deſerueth to bée yoked with an other as bad or rather worſe of a notable murderer of Paris, who, as ſome haue written, began his rage with two of his owne niep
                     •
                  es of twelue yeeres of age, whom he ſlewe while they embraced his knees and cryed him mercie. I am aſhamed to ſpeake of theſe parricides, which neuertheleſſe theſe men were not aſhamed to commit.
               But being entred this carrier I will performe my race, and reueale Other miſeries of ciuil warres. yet one miſchiefe which is but too well knowne, for I haue touched others in other my diſcourſes. It is the villanous ſacking of poore countrie people, yea euen friends and partakers: for notwithſtanding their continuall labour, as well for their owne ſuſtenance, as to ſatiſfie thoſe whome iuſtly wee may tearme warlike Harpies, yet do they not ſpare to eate thē vp, ſometime all at once, ſometime by little and little with vnſpeakeable boldneſſe and contempt, neither can they be reſtrayned therefro by any conſideration that they ſerueth ye ſame partie, or that their deuotion is tyed therto. Uyolence wrought againſt the enemie breedeth no wonder, neither néedeth any excuſe, although there ſhould bee a little meaſure obſerued: but theſe are inexcuſable, as meanes to deſtroy them ſelues, and to bring common hatred vpon their ſuperiours, which out of the fieldes is ſowen in townes and cities. The ſayd ſuperiours ſhould remember that into this great troope the poore, the widowe, and the Orphan (whom God houldeth ſo deare) are in corporate, who in their ſorowes haue no other recourſe but to ſobs and ſighes which aſcend into his preſence, where they are moſt fauourably receiued. And it is a bad ſigne, when ſuch as ſhould bleſſe doe curſe, and euen plucke downe Gods wrath, and caſt it vpon thoſe that in outward apparance doe ſeeme to defend them, but in deede doe deuoure and eate them vp. Theſe are in part the exercices of our ciuill warres which daily do empayre: which alſo are the occaſiō that many times the wiſeſt, who do imagine that they haue the beſt cauſe, in ſeeing ſo many miſerable maners of proceedings, which teach to commit all miſchiefe without remorce, doe growe

into ſuch doubts, as doe in maner ſhake the foundations of the firmeneſſe that they had leyed. If then they doe ſometimes totter or reele, thinke what the ſimple ſhall doe that vſe to allowe or diſalowe of the cauſes of warres according as they be well or euill ordered.
               If wee ſpeake of words, wee heare nothing but Gods honor, 
                  The ſtrāge offence of the moſt of thoſe that beare armes in ſuch warres. 
                  the Kings ſeruice, Catholick religion, the Goſpell, our Countrie. All which goodly titles doe binde the miniſters of armes to endeuour that their workes may concurre with their words. But when afterward wee ſee the moſt part take a contrary courſe, and as the prouerbe of the Tennis court importeth, play at bandy and ſcraping, yea & that rather vpon the friend thē vpon the enemie, that is to ſay, glut their vengeance, ambition, couetouſneſſe and auarice vpon whatſoeuer the warre doth make to ſtoope to them, wee muſt not thinke that they will bee mumme that ſuffer all theſe things.
               If ſuch a peaſant as he that dwelt vpon the bancks of Danow, 
                  An exhortation to thoſe Frenchmen that are banded one againſt an other. who was ſaid to haue come in the time of M. Aurelius to the Romane Senate to complaine, ſhould now riſe among vs, I imagine his ſpeech ſhould tend to this purpoſe. Oh ye Christians that doe ſo cruelly deuoure each other like fierce and angrie beasts, among whom pitie ſeemeth to be dead, how long ſhall your rage continue? Why do ye graunt no truce or releaſe to the reſt of your miſerable liues, to the end at the leaſt to creepe into your graues in ſome quiet? What violent cauſes are thoſe that ſtirre you vp? If Gods glorie, then conſider that he taketh no pleaſure in ſacrifices of mans blood: but detesteth them and loueth mercie and truth. If your Princes ſeruice, you muſt thinke ye doe them ſmall ſeruice in ſlaying one an other, for ſo doe you deminiſh and plucke away the chiefe ſenowes of his Realme. If religion moueth you, it ſeemeth ye knowe not the nature thereof: for ſith it is all charitie, the ſame ſhould induce you to meekeneſſe. If your Countrie, behold your fieldes are almoſt all deſert, your villages burnt, your cities ſacked, your ritches in ſtraungers hands, and your glorie vtterly loſt. Seeke then no more excuſes to lengthen your calamities: rather cut them off, then alleadge ſuch neceſſities as doe impoſe other neceſſities. This were eaſie to bee done if ye would practiſe this ſoueraigne rule of eſtate which excelleth the moſt excellent. Giue to Caeſar that belongeth 
                  To the Souldiers. 
                  to Caeſar, and to God the things that appertaine to God. But when I remember my ſelfe, how can you, you Souldiers fulfill this, who haue forgotten the arte of rendering and can doe nothing but take?

Who ſometimes doo ſaie well and alwayes liue euill? What are your troupes and armies in theſe dayes, but ſhoppes of all vice, which where they paſſe doe leaue more horrible footſteps than doe the Graſhoppers where they liue continuallie? Your enimies do hate your crueltie, your friends doe feare your ſackings, and all people doe flie from before you as from the flouds? Who wil beleeue that your cauſe is iuſt, when your behauiours are ſo vniuſt? And although it were iuſt, doe not you yet hazard it to all rebuke and ſlaunder? To be briefe, learne to liue better, or thinke not much that no man beleeueth your wordes, but cry out againſt your deeds.
               
               This truly were a very free ſpeech, which neuertheles I think to approch ſo neere ye truth, yt I wil not giue it the lie, leaſt they yt haue To whome the aforeſaid calamities are to be imputed. indured it ſhould come in for witneſſes againſt mee, and ſo returne my lie vpon my ſelfe. Out of this ranke I will exempt the honorable and good mem that profeſſe armes, as well noble as others, of whome there be yet many abroad. Neither muſt the whole blame of theſe diſorders be layde vpon the ſmall, whoſe wantes doe oftentimes ſtirre vp their mallice. For there be great ones, who becauſe they care not for moderating or ſuppreſſing them, muſt haue their parts: & thoſe eſpeciallie are moſt guiltie, that had rather ſee whole riuers of miſchiefe than looſe anie part of their reuenges or dominion. If anie man aſke the ſouldiours why they make ſuch hauock, they will anſwere, that want of paie compelleth them, which is a reaſon to be conſidered of. If they tel the Princes yt theſe behauiors ſauour verie euill, and muſt be taken awaie with golde, they wil ſay that all the Indias will not ſuffice for ſo many high payes, and other ſubtill proulings. Which cauſe muſt be well waied. In the meane time vnder theſe excuſes the miſchiefes doe on both ſides continue and feede vpon the infortunate Prouinces that beare thē, which cannot poſſiblie be eſchued, ſo long as the mightie ones are ſo obſtinately bent to make the wars perpetuall by keeping great armies all Winter and Summer in the fielde, whereof it followeth that in the ende, moſt of the men become rauening beaſtes, the country is diſinhabited, the treaſure is waſted, the great curſe themſelues, and God is diſpleaſed.
               If we ſhould call to minde how in the wars betweene the French The ſtate of warres in ould time cōdemne thoſe of our dayes. and Spaniſh, eſpecially in Piedmont, we ſhould often ſee a Cornet of ſpeares paſſe through a village where they might ſee banqueting & dauncing, & the people without anie force come & bring them all kinds of refreſhing. Againe within halfe an houre after another

troope enimie to the former, to paſſe in like ſort, and to receiue all kinds of curteſies. Alſo theſe 2. troops within a while after to meet and beate each other well fauouredly. Then the conquerer to carie into the ſayd village the ſore wounded, as well of the one partie as of the other, to be dreſſed and to lie all in one hoſtrie, the vanquiſhed vpon their faiths, and the vanquiſhers in the cuſtody of the aforenamed, vnto their ful 
                     •
                  nre, when each ought to returne to theyr Captains. Thus ſhould we ſee that theſe and ſuch maner of proceeding purchaſed to both nations great fame among ſtrangers, and more amitie than is now to be found among pareuts. This I ſay being reported vnto them, they would account for fables, becauſe our preſent cuſtomes are cleane repugnant thereto. And yet if in any wars ciuill behauiour be to be practiſed, than in theſe wherein fellow Citizens after they haue ben together by the eares in their natiue ſoile doe fall agayne into familiaritie and loue one with another: which neuer happeneth with ſtrangers: for the controuerſies ended, they neuer lightly haue occaſiō to ſee one another again: yea, they ought to behaue themſelus herein as kinſmen, who among their hatred & force doe intermingle equitie and honeſtie. Finally, ſuch as do better note pollicie and good order, and withall doe ſhew themſelues moſt curteous, doe giue the lookers on to thinke that they haue the better cauſe, who therefore do fauour them with their prayers, and themſelues likewiſe by their good actions are the more ſatiſfied and confirmed in their opinions, which make them the bolder. Contrariwiſe, thoſe who through their diſſolutions doe make their warre, (which of it ſelfe is terrible) vtterly deteſtable, notwithſtanding the cauſe be neuer ſo iuſt, God will not fayle to puniſh for proſecuting it by ſuch ſiniſter meanes.
            
            
               The 20. Diſcourſe.
               
                  That a king of France is of himſelfe mightie enough, though he neither couet nor ſeeke other greatneſſe than his owne Realme doth afford him.
               
               
                  ALL ſuch as profeſſe the reading and diligent examination The ambition of Princes and common welths, cauſe of great calamities. of hiſtories, doe with one voice confeſſe, that moſt of the calamities & miſeries fallen vpon diuerſe lands and nations haue proceeded of the ambition of

Princes and common wealthes, who haue rayſed ſuch warres as 
                     •
                  red the ſame.
               To auoide all the doubtes whereof, reade but the liues of Philippe of Macedon, Alexander, Pirhus, and Demetrius, with the warres of the Romaines againſt the Catthaginians: wherein ye ſhall finde that nothing is more true. And although time by little and little ſuppreſſeth the force of the ſtrongeſt things, yet coulde it neuer much extinguiſh the flames of ſo vehement a paſſion, which paſſing from the Father to the ſonne, heaping the former ages with miſchiefe, hath reached euen to ours. I will forbeare to ſpeake of things happened within theſe fifty yeres in reſpect of ſo many people yet liuing, which may haue conſidered thereof: but of foure ſcore yeres ago Phillip Commines & Fran. Guicciardine doe yeeld ſuch teſtimonie, that wee may ſay that the deſire of dominion haue cauſed infinite diſorders, which haue diſfigured the beautie of politike gouernment. It cannot be denied but ours haue danced at the feaſt among others, and peraduenture oftner: but it hath likewiſe ſoone after mourned for it as wel as ye reſt, as hauing reaped no other commoditie of the greate warres of Charles the eight and Lewes the twelfth (which neuertheleſſe were not quite deuoide of all grounds of iuſtice) but waſt of money and conſumption of men. Which might admoniſh all Princes to undertake none but ſuch as be neceſſarie, & vtterly to reiect thoſe that containe no neceſſitie.
               I knowe they haue a wonderfull quick deſire to increaſe, which Whar conſiderations ought to moderate the deſires of princes. neuertheles they maye moderate by a repreſentation of the miſchiefes and difficulties of warres, were it not that they find themſelues ſtrengthned and vnderpropped with the counſayle of the young, together with cuſtome: which not onely maintaineth it in force, but alſo dooth greatly increaſe it. For aſſuredlie the mightier that a Prince is, the more is hee pricked forwarde with ſuch ſtings, as leaue him but ſmall reſt vntill that hee hath chaunged other mennes mindes: whereby he entangleth himſelfe in many cares and wantes, which he might well inough forbeare. Howbeit thoſe men are happie who in the middeſt of ſuch diſordered broiles, falſe perſwaſions, and wicked cuſtomes, doe guide themſelues by wiſdome and diſcretion: for ordinarilie they paſſe on the waie without ſtumbling and attaine to ſuch endes as breede their contentation. Our good King Henrie the ſeconde hauing practiſed and tried the vanitié of couetouſneſſe and warres,

was determined to paſſe ouer the reſt of his daies in tranquilitie, and content himſelfe with that mightineſſe that to him remained; which was not ſmall, but it pleaſed God to call him. And although all things haue ſince greatly decayed throughout this Realme, yet I thinke our king hath cauſe enough (preſeruing and accommodating that which yet remaineth) to account himſelfe mightie & happie, though he neuer ſeeke with yron, fire, and bloud, the forced dominion ouer his neighbours.
               By this propoſition I bring the ambitious into the liſtes, who Anſwer to the obiections of ambitions Counſailers. ſaie, That the incloſing of our kings heartes within the accuſtomed bounds, is the waie to quaile their courages, and to depriue them of all trophees and conqueſts, the goodlie inheritances wherein theyr aunceſtours meant they ſhould participate: likewiſe That it is vnpoſſible when they conſider the dominions of Charlemagne, which as all good hiſtories doo teſtifie, ſtretched into Italie, Germanie, France, che lowe Countries, & Spaine, euen to the riuer Ebro, but they muſt needs bluſh for ſhame, thinking how themſelues lurke at home & do nothing. Trulie theſe be high wordes, which in my opinion, doe reſemble the furious Northerne windes that ſtirre vp the greate tempeſts: for by theyr often blowing in kings eares, they prouoke their mindes, whereof doe enſue the torments of warres which drowne ſo many people. If they could weigh the diſſimilitude between old and new vertue, they would bee more ſtayed: For as ſayth Plutarke in his ſmall workes, it is as much follie to applie the heroycall deedes of thoſe that are paſt, vnto men preſent, as to put vpon the head & feete of children of ſixe yeres of age their grandfathers hats and ſhooes. But men ought to propound things conuenient to that age wherein a man liueth, ſo long as they bee iuſt and honeſt. We Frenchmen ſhould thinke that France is paſt her greateſt grouth, and that wee are come to the time of her declination, wherein wee ſhall doe much if wee can but keepe her well, which we ſhoulde endeauour to performe, and not to feede vppon her paſſed glorie and mightineſſe, becauſe we are deſtitute of ye power, occaſion, and good happe that lead our aunceſtours thereto.
               Some there are that thinke that a Prince cannot bee tearmed Aunſwere to an other obiection touching the mightineſſe of Prinſes. mightie or great, vnleſſe hee ioyne newe Prouinces to his eſtate, and make his neighbours to feare and ſtand in awe of him, through his weapons, which doe incourage him to enterpriſe and threaten greate thinges, wherein they followe the common iudgement, which as ſayth Plutarke alſo, doe admire the Thunder and

lightning, and make ſmall account of the ſweete Zephirus: for they making no reckning but of whatſoeuer procedeth of force do leaue behinde them any thing proceeding of iuſtice, notwithſtanding the one be to be preferred before the other. Many Emperours & Kings there haue bene, who haue indeauoured to purchaſe fame through their conqueſts, and yet thoſe that had bene content to take paines to bee good, and ſo to make their people, and well to rule and gouerne them, haue purchaſed another greatnes, if we iudge vprightly, no leſſe thā the former, ſeeing it alwais profiteth, where the other doth ordinerilie hurt. Yet doe I not meane that a Prince ſhoulde tread armour vnder his feete, or contemne it, for ſo ſhoulde hee but giue himſelfe to be a praie: but that he ſhould vſe it onely to keepe himſelfe from taking of harme, and not to doe hurt to others.
               I will therefore begin to ſhew forth the greatneſſe of our king Conſideration of the greatneſſe of a king of France. by the extent of his Realme, which in length containeth aboue two hundred French leagues: For from Bayone to Mets, it is more: and from Cales to Narbonne almoſt as much. But from Morles in Britaine to Antibe in Prouence it is at the leaſt 250. which is the longeſt waie. True it is that from Roche
                        •
                     
                   to Lyons which is The extent of the realme. a ſtraightning made in the middeſt of Fraunce, is but ſixe ſcore leagues. But be what it will, it is a goodly peece of ground & well The fruictfulneſſe. inhabited. As for the fruitfulneſſe thereof, it is ſuch as all thinges neceſſarie to mans life, doe ſo abound, that onely for Corne, Wine, Salt, and Woad, tranſported into foreine lands, there is yeerelie brought in in counterchaunge therof aboue 12. millions of franks. This is our Peru, Theſe are our mines which neuer drie vp: and peraduent ure from the Weſt Indies which are ſo rich, the Spaniards doe not yeerely receiue much greater treaſure. But the principall that we are to conſider, is the multitude of people wherwith it is repleniſhed: for turne which way ye wil, the people do ſwarme as they did in the Countie of Flanders before the laſt tempeſt waſted the inhabitants, their wealth & ſtately borowes. The peaſants The people. are verie ſimple and obedient, the Towneſmen painfull, induſtrious, and affable: alſo the men that giue themſelues to learning both diuine and humaine, are moſt learned. The Nobilitie is very valiant The contry and curteous, neither is anie eſtate in Chriſtendome ſo plentifully ſtored therewith. More might I ſaie, had I not ſpoken therof at large in other places: but this we may affirme, that vniuerſallie they are giuen to rebellion: which is the teſtimonie that Caeſar gaue of the auncient Gaules. If anie man ſhould doubt thereof,

I would preſent him the deuotion of our Fathers which haue engenderd aboue an hunderd Archbiſhops and Biſhops ſea
                     •
                  , about 650. Abbies of the order of Saint Barnard and S. Benet, beautified with good kitchins, and aboue 2500. Priories. For then did the chiefe holyneſſe conſiſt giuing to the Oleargie. Neither were it any lie to ſaie, that at this day they poſſeſſe aboue 20. millions of frankes in rent. Who then can tearme that land waſt, where in one of the members is ſo great; fat, and plentifull.
               
                  Hold your peace wil ſome forren ſenſor ſay, and labour no more to 
                  Aunſwere to thoſe that emblaſon and abaſe France becauſe of her miſeries. 
                  exalt & ſet out that ſtate which hath neither godlines, iuſtace, weath, concord, martial diſcipline, nor order. But haue patience a while, will I anſwere, vntil I make a reuiew of this great and olde veſſell which the ſtormes and tempeſt haue caſt vpon the ſands, then hauing ſhewed vnto your hat the chiefe members there of which haue bene ſo toſſed and ſeabeaten, haue yet ſome force and power, alſo that it is no harde matter to redreſſe the whole, you wil peraduenture be of another mind, and confeſſe the verie relickes to be great. I wil begin with deuotion, 
                  Of godlineſſe. which, as I haue ſaid, our fathers (as they thought) did ſtedfaſtly embrace, for the manifeſting whereof they ſpared not their goods. The ſame by the lyke reaſon ſhould now be more liuely; ſith for the defence therof we ſpare not our liues. Theſe marks although they be good, be not the principall. For the beſt and moſt aſſured in this point, wherin our doe honor & ſeruice to God doth conſiſt, is to yeld to his holy will reuealed vnto vs in the Scriptures. As for ye other part of deuotion, which hath relatiō to our neighbors, our cōtentions hath wonderfully indomaged it: yet muſt wee returne to this paſſe, that the Frenchman take the Frenchman not only for his felow countriman, but euē for his brother: & grieuing at his hurt, wiſh his good. I think that yet among our diſſipations there be many yt practiſe this rule: ſo as if peace might gouerne any time, we ſhould not find in all Chriſtendome any better Catholikes & Goſpellers than in France. Some there be yt cannot graunt therto: for hearing any ſpeech of Frenchmēs pietie; they ſmile & ſay that ye proteſtants know but little, & the Papiſts if they know it, doe yet cloath it with hypocriſie. But I wil make thē no other anſwere, but yt albeit our nation be no longer the Popes minion, yet this old trée which in the time of Charlemaine ſpred out ſuch goodly branches alouer Chriſtendome, may ſtil 
                     ••
                  d forth the like to ye benefit of many. For Iuſtice, in no coūtry in the world is better eſtabliſhed & knowen than Of Iuſtice. in ours ſo as the corruptions yt haue infected her be
                     •
                  ing purged awaie,

ſhe will ſhine forth agayne. And where are there at this daie goodlier portraitures of theſe ancient Senates & iudiciall courtes than in our parliaments. The 3. point concerneth our treaſury, 
                  Of the treſury. (which is much ſubiect to pinching) whereof we are thought to be halfe ſpoyled, yea, euē of ye cōmon. But it is an error to ſuppoſe that it may bee dried vp in this realme. For beſides our 4. ſortes of A
                     •
                  ammant ſtones afore mencioned, there be many other ſmaller kinds yt continually draw them in & make them to fleet vpon the ſeas. So as, were it not that one part therof do afterward through a certaine hiddē attractiue power flow to Rome, & another through violēt puls into Germanie, we ſhould many times ſee euen great tides. In the time of Henry the 2. the cōmon treaſury was ſuch, as by ordinarie meanes he yerely raiſed vpō his cōmons 15. milions of franks, part wherof was ſince paied forth for debts, which not withſtanding, our k. doth at this day gather as much. Now would I demand whether a king in ioying ſuch a reuenue may be ſaide to bee beggered? The holy father yt liueth in ſuch glory & pompe, & princelike cōmandeth ouer diuers ſtates & prouinces, hath not 150000. crowns reu
                     •
                   of al yt his late predeceſſors good huſbandry hath purchaſed for him: for of the patrimonie of S. Peter he inioyeth but a net to fiſh withall, & of S. Pauls, but a cloke. Thoſe men therfore are miſinformed that report the k. of France to be at beggers dore. For albeit he owe 50 millions of frāks, they may be all paied in 10. yeres, by winning his ſubiects harts, for hauing ye harts he hath yt goods alſo. What ſhal Of the Frenchmens concord. we ſay of cōcord, which is ſo great a help to ye increaſe of all eſtates? Forſooth yt ſhe was like to haue gotten from vs, & to haue gone elſe where: but now ſhe beginneth to inhabit again, & to ſoūd forth ſome anciēt agreemēts: which maketh to vs hope yt ſhortly we ſhal heare her perfect harmonie; in caſe we wold abandō forein counſel, which vnder faire pretēces go about to kil her, as knowing well inough yt 
                  Frāce cānot ſtoop to thē, before it be diuided in it ſelf, & therfore they ſecretly thruſt it into ſuch diuiſions, to yt end to ouerthrow it, wherby themſelues may afterward fall vpon the ſpoile. I am aſſured it would be loth to bend the neck to their authoritie, wherfore it were good to tell them in time, My maſters neuer let your mouths run on water after ſo daintie a morſell, for you may not taſt of it: It is ſo hot it will burne your lips, and therefore retire to your owne quarters.
               
               As for martiall diſcipline wee muſt confeſſe that of late it hath Of Martiall diſcipline. bene ſo ſicke, as to be driuen to keepe the chamber and not to come abroad: but peace may by little and little reſtore it to health, & if her

medicines would worke earneſtlie, it would ſoone be on foot again. Our Cenſors we ſpeake but too much of the abſence thereof from among vs, ſaying that our footmen fight fayre & far of, & our horſe-men are verie furious at the firſt, but afterwarde can fauour themſelues well inough: yea, they 
                     •
                  oaſt that with three thouſand ſpeares they will fire the Milles at Paris. I cannot denie but there is much bad matter among vs: but withall I will aduowe that there is ſome verie good. But thoſe men are deceiued that will aſſeſſe iudgement vpon the ordinarie and well ordered forces of a mightie ſtate, by the extraordinarie & voluntarie forces which the abundance Of the chiefe martiall Capteyns. thereof hath vpon occaſion caſt forth.
               And ſith this ſpeech forceth mee to laie open our wares, I ſaie that of ſo many our battailes and combats, we haue yet remaining ſixe braue Princes, as well of the bloud royall as others, who haue many times commanded whole armies, of whome ſome haue giuen great ouerthrowes, and both defended & taken townes of account. Next vnto them ſhal come our Marſhals of France, who haue many times ben imployed, among whom the Lords of Montmorency & Biron may be commended for the two beſt experienced Captains that we haue. Twentie other good Captaines of the men of armes may we finde, who hauing ſeene the warres of Henrie the ſecond doe deſerue to leade an auantgard. How many other Lordes and Captains be there, who hauing ſeene but the ciuil wars, or part of them, haue diuerſly teſtified their valiancy and good conduct. Likewiſe from among our great numbers of Captaines of footmen, I ſuppoſe we may well chooſe halfe a dozen good and worthie Colonels. Hereby it appeareth that we are not cleane deſtitute of men of command, which is the principall part of our warfare. I wil not ſpeake of the reſt of our nobilitie and ſoldiours: for leade them well and they will ſhew valour ſufficient, neither can anie warre weare What meanes the King hath to defende him ſelfe againſt any Prince his neyghbour that liſt to aſſaile him. away either the one or the other.
               If our king ſhould perceiue anie neighbour readie to plaie with his frontiers, I thinke he might eaſily make an armie of 60. companies of men of armes, twentie Cornets of light horſe, and fiue companies of harquebuziers on horſebacke, to whom he might 
                     •
                  ode three or foure hundred Reiſters, aboue 100. Enſignes of French footmen, and fortie of his good friends the Zuitzers, and all this notwithſtanding, the reſt of the frontires to be ſufficiently furniſhed of men, as well to defend in the forts as to offende in the fielde. This armie being in the field, it would bee ſome what harde to goe

burne the windmils at Paris, and it may be, thoſe that are of that opinion, will then be ſo curteous as to be content with the firing of that at Catelet. So mightie an armie, will ſome oran ſaie, would deſerue the kings preſence: neither ſhould it want if any other king ſhould come to aſſaile him: for he is no apprētiſe in matters of war, neither ſhall we at this daie finde anie that with the ſwoord in his hands hath bene ſo victorious in two battailes as he, or that in the ditch of a beſieged towne hath receiued the harquebuze ſhot, which maketh me to thinke that he will neuer ſuffer anie vpon preſumption to curtall his coate. Sith therefore he is yet able to bring ſuch a power into the field, there is no wiſe man that will thinke him redie to play banquerout (as ſome men doe make account) but rather Of the reſtoring of order in France. to be a moſt mightie Prince.
               It reſteth that we ſpeake of order which in many other matters is verie diſordered among vs. But the kings owne hand muſt bee the true meane to reſtore it, which can as well do that as handle the ſword: But he muſt haue the aſſiſtance of time and peace, without the which it is vnpoſſible hee ſhoulde attaine thereto: for adding to them both his owne diligence and good example, the worke will be performed: in ſuch wiſe that where now it is called France decaied, it ſhall be tearmed France reſtored. I would extend my ſpeech farther, were it not that I remember I may be accuſed of cogging with ſtrangers, and flattering my owne nation. Rather woulde I wiſh the firſt to knowe that as ſtronge bodies doe through theyr owne riot ouerthrowe themſelues: ſo likewiſe by a certaine hidden power in them they riſe againe, examples whereof we haue enow. For ſuch conſiderations may make them wiſer to iudge of matters of eſtate and of other mens, and not vnder the pretence of a few diſeaſes to condemne a man to death.
               As for the ſecond, I ſhould be glad to ſee them affected to maintaine themſelues vnited vnder the authoritie of this crowne, wherof would inſue the greatneſſe and felicity of the ſame, which we ought as much to deſire, as heretofore we haue taſted of the ſwetnes therof: But if God wold vouchſafe vs ye grace to ſee ye beginning of this goodlie world, it would redo
                     ••
                  d to our great cōtentatiō, & after we haue wreſtled againſt ſo many calamities, to finde our ſelues in the middeſt of our domeſticall goods, which were almoſt vaniſhed awaie, we ſhould haue no cauſe to waken our couetous deſires, neither to whe
                     •
                   our ſwoords to goe with great labour to ſeeke goods other where, for we ſhould find ſufficient in our own houſes. To conclude,

we muſt not thinke that true greatneſſe conſiſteth in getting much land, but rather in poſſeſſing much vertue, which is ſuch a prize as when a king hath coueted and obtained it, both he and his realme may be tearmed mightie.
            
            
               The 21. Diſcourſe.
               
                  That aliances of Chriſtian Princes with Mahumetiſts, the Capitall enimies of the name of Chriſt, haue euermore beene vnfortunate. Alſo that we ought not to enter anie firme confederacie with them.
               
               
                  THe great Orator Demoſthenes in one of his What the groundes of publike actiōs ought to be. Orations, ſayth: that Like as the maiſter ſhipwrights going about to build a ſhip, do lay ſtronge and ſteadfaſt foundations thereof: ſo the principles of publike actions ought to be iuſt and honeſt. This peraduenture is not vnfitly alleadged in the beginning of this ſmall diſcourſe, for the better repreſenting to thoſe that gouerne great eſtates, thoſe neceſſarie rules whereby they ought to compaſſe their affayres. And like as for the moſt part thoſe men doe amiſſe, who cleauing too much to their owne opinions, doe go from the lawfull wayes: So do they ſeldome ſtraie, who borrowing good examples of ye inſtruction and wiſedome of the elders, doe followe the ſame. In the meane time whatſoeuer care man maye take to containe himſelfe within the bounds thereof, yet can he not alwayes bee exempt from tranſgreſſing the rules of equity through the imperfection of his iudgement, and force of his paſſions. Howbeit he muſt at the leaſt take heede of encurring thoſe great faultes that breede bad conſequences, as diuerſe Princes both afore time and ſtill haue done and doe, whereby there haue growen irrecouerable loſſe to theyr eſtates.
               A Prince ſeeing himſelfe oppreſſed and his Countrie in neceſſitie, The groūd of confederaties with Turkes. deuiſeth with himſelfe, and hath thoſe that do alſo counſaile him to ſeeke all meanes to preſerue it: which peraduenture hath made men too free to make leagues with barbarous Nations, the fruite whereof hath neuertheleſſe bene ſo ſmall, that few there haue bene but haue ſoone repented their raſhneſſe.
               But before we propound anie examples of theſe wretched confederacies, The originall of the Turkes; their increaſe, behauiours & gouernments, as well in reſpect of the ſoules as of the bodies. I thinke it requiſite in a word to teach the originall of the Turkiſh nation, their increaſe and terrible behauiours. Iohn Carion
                  
in his briefe Chronicle of the world faithfully corrected out of al hiſtories, ſayth the Turkes to be deſcended out of the ſtraightes of the mount Caucaſus. And that (as ſome reporte) they diſpearſed themſelues out of the North into ſome ſmall corners of Aſia about two hundred yeres before the comming of Chriſt, where they remayned almoſt vnknowen vnto the time of the the Emperour Heraclius, who raigned in the yere 612. Then Oriſmada king of the Perſians finding himſelfe aſſayled by the Sarazens, called to them for ſuccour whome they aſſiſted. But after his death ſeeing the Sarazens had ſeaſed vpon the Realme, the beautie and fruitfulnes of the land ſo allured them, that they ſtayed about the Caſpian ſea, in that place which in olde time was called Hircanie, and finallie ſo compounded with the Caliph of Babylon; that he ſuffered them to poſſeſſe and till the land where they had ſtayed. There alſo they imbraced Mahumets religion, and obeied the Caliph a long time. Afterward the Sarazens growing into diſſention and warres among themſelues, the Souldan finding himſelfe too weake to defend his partie called the Turkes to his helpe, and expulſed the Caliphes. After this victorie the Turkes demanding their paie, he denied it, which ſo prouaked them, that they ſet vpon him, ouerthrew him, and braue him out of his Realme. Thus did they eſtabliſh theyr dominion in both the Armenies, whereto they adioyned Capadocia, Galacia, and Bithinia, which by little and little they conquered, and this was about the yere of Chriſt 1050. Shortly after the Tartarians tooke awaie the Turkes dominion, and brought them into ſubiection to them, vntill that in the yere 1300. they rebelled, and fortified themſelues, deſtroying the Tartarian Empire. Then (the other ancient families hauing through enmitie & domeſticall wars deſtroied each other) begāthe race of the Ottomans to beare ſway. Under this race grew the Turkes to that mightineſſe wherein we now ſee them. Thus the name and Empire of the Sarazens decaying, this nation got the dominion of all the reſt. Carion ſaith, that this famely at the firſt was but ſmall, but through I wot not what deſtinie, it grew to this vnreaſonable greatnes wt wonderful ſpeed & proſperitie, as a cruel people whō God would haue to beare ſway all ouer, to puniſh the ſins of all other Nations. Furthermore, the occaſion that moued the Turkes to inuade Europe, as alſo of the victories that they haue obtayned, hath growen of the diſſentions, wickednes treaſons; diſloyalties, idlenes, couetouſnes, raſhnes, and miſtruſt of all ſtates Chriſtian; from the leaſt to the greateſt▪
                  
And the reuoltes of Chriſtians haue wonderfully increaſed the Turkes. For many vnthrifts from time to time through the libertie of warres, ſeeing the flouriſhing eſtate of ye 
                  Mahumetiſts, haue forſaken the Chriſtian Church, to cleaue to their ſect, as well in reſpect that libertie is of it ſelfe agreeable to mens fanſies, as alſo becauſe their wils do incline anie waie where they ſee things proſper well.
               It will be needleſſe here to number the Empires, Realmes, and Prouinces by them conquered within theſe two hundred yeres: for ſuch as haue bene conuerſant in the world, or that haue peruſed the hiſtories will confeſſe that they poſſeſſe much more land than all Chriſtendome doe containe. Their ſect is repleniſhed with all impietie and blaſphemie againſt God and againſt Chriſt Ieſus and his doctrine, and their gouernment with the moſt horrible and cruell tyrannie that euer was: as being (as it ſeemeth) erected rather to ouerthrow all lawes, diſcipline, and honeſtie, than to maintaine them. Thus much briefly concerning the eſtate of the Turkes, the knowledge wherof may tend greatly to the opening of that which ſhall hereafter be ſpoken of.
               The firſt Chriſtian Prince puniſhed for all ſuch confederaties, What Chriſtian princes were the firſt that repented their confederaties with the Mahumetiſtes. was Guy of Luſignian, the laſt king of Hieruſalem. For hee hauing a quarell with Reymond Earle of Tripolie, and finding himſelfe too weake to follow it, made a couenant and called to his aide Saladin the gouernour of the Sarazens, who hauing ouerthrowen Reimond, did afterward expulſe Guy, and ſo ouerthrow the ſtate of the Chriſtians in Siria, and finally ſuppreſſed the realme of Hieruſalem. And albeit the Sarazens and Turkes are not all one, yet did they concurre in Mahumets lawe and all trecherie. About ſixe ſcore yeres after Iohn Paleologue Emperour of Conſtantinople, being moleſted by ſundrie Lordes of Greece, whome the Bulgarians 
                  Ihon Paleoi
                        •
                     gue. fauoured, determined to enter league with Amurathes the firſt, then ruler of the Turkes, and craued his helpe, which was graunted.
               Herevpon they paſſed into Europe, whereof inſued the deſtruction of Greece. For theſe Lords preſumption being ſuppreſſed, the Turkes remayned in gariſon in the townes of Greece, and ſhortly after Amurathes allured by the beautie of the Countrie came into Europe with 60000. men. and ſeaſed vpon Philippopolly & Adrionople, with other places, whiles Peleologue bewayled, and too late confeſſed his fault that he had committed in entering

a league with ſo traiterous an enimie, whereby he ſawe his Countrie become a praie vnto thē. Theſe vnfortunate beginnings might haue bene a warning to other Princes their ſucceſſors, not to be ouer haſty of the acquaintance of ſuch a nation, according to the prouerbe which ſayth: Happie is he whom other mens harmes can make to beware. But his next ſucceſſors forſooke not the ſame path, neyther had they other payment than he. For after that Emanuel Paleologue had made a ſteadfaſt league with Baiazet, the tyrant bearing him no long good wil, beſieged Conſtantinople, which when he coulde not winne by force, hee determined to famiſh, and had ſo done, had not the comming of Tamberlane preuented his purpoſe. Two or three other Emperors following were through the errors and bad examples of their predeceſſors conſtrayned, as it were, to cleaue to theſe barbarous people, vntill they inuaded the Empires of Conſtantinople and Trapizond, before in the poſſeſſion of the Greeke Princes. Whereby wee ſee that the thing which in the beginning was done of an vndiſcreete free will, grew in the end to be followed of forced neceſſitie. But howſoeuer it was, wee may ſaie that the vniuſtice of ſuch actions hath beene the cauſe to bring in great miſhaps.
               It may be obiected, that within theſe three hundred yeres ſundry Anſwer to the obiection of ſuch as vnder coulor of couenants euel kept among ſome Chriſtian princes, doe alowe of con
                        •
                     ederaraties of Infidels, ſo as therin men be wiſe and circumſpect. weake Chriſtian Princes haue made confederacies with ſuch as haue bene ſtrong, thinking by the ſame the better to preſerue themſelues, & yet haue found that they haue turned to their deſtruction, becauſe the others haue vſed thoſe occaſions to oppreſſe them: and therevpon would conclude, that onely indiſeretion hath bene cauſe of their miſhaps, when they haue called to their helpe, coueted to ioyne neighborhood, or confederated themſelues out of ſeaſon with ſuch a one as hath bene mightie, or deſirous to climbe, for ſmall faith raigneth in ambitious perſons.
               Heereto we may anſwere, that in truth in ſuch deedes there is want of iudgement and conſideration, and that the hiſtories, though we ſet not down the examples, do beare witnes of many that haue tried the hurt proceeding of ſuch follies. Neuertheleſſe wee muſt make a difference and haue other regard when we come to ioyne amitie with the Princes afornamed, either with tyrants, whether to aſſayle the Chriſtian Princes, or to defende our ſelues from them. For when a Prince through ambition or diſloyaltie vſeth confederacies to the end to deceiue, the infamie ſtill 
                     ••
                  eaueth to him, and as for him that hath bene too ſimple and ſo circumuented

or indomaged, wee doe rather pittie than accuſe him. But in all ſuch leagues as wee make with theſe deſtroiers and ſcourges of the worlde, in whom treaſon, impietie, vniuſtice and crueltie, haue their continuall habitation, there is alwayes errour, eſpecially if we exceede certaine bounds preſcribed by reaſon, becauſe it is in no caſe lawfull to confederate with them, except for matter of ſmall importance, and ſuch as bindeth not the hearts with any ſtrict amitie, neither the perſons in anie great bond. For what ſtedfaſt ſocietie What treaty may be made with Turkes: alſo what difference is betweene ſuch treaties and true alliance with the danger of ſtedfaſt conſederaties with tirants. can there be with thoſe whoſe continuall imaginations tend onely to ſubdue you to vngodly bondage, & ſo to deſtroy you. Wee cannot neuertheleſſe here inferre that no man may enter anie treatie with them, becauſe ſomtime neceſſitie induceth vs to grow therto with the moſt diuelliſh enimies that we can imagine: as to craue truce or peace, to agree controuerſies for Lordſhips or territories, to demand amends for iniuries, and to deale for trafick & aſſurance for merchants. In theſe caſes it is lawfull to deale and & treate with theſe tyrants. Who ſo therefore would compare theſe agreements with thoſe true and lawfull leagues which are vſually made betweene Princes, to the ende each to helpe other againſt all that ſeeke their trouble, ſhall ſee a wonderful difference betwéen them. For theſe are grounded vpon equitie, and tend to the preſeruation and maintenance of ciuill amitie betweene them, whereas Princes do vſe the other agreements vppon neceſſitie ſomewhat to bridle their rage, whereof doe grow ſome aſſurance to their ſubiects and their affaires.
               The Wallachians, Moldacians, Tranſiluanians and Sclauons, haue bene forced to proceede farther, as to ſubmit themſelues to the Turkes, to the ende to eſchue their furious cruelty, for want of meanes of defence, and of them wee ought to take compaſſion. Some would peraduenture think that this proud nation would be loth to enter amitie with the Chriſtians: But the contrarie is moſt true: For albeit they be barbarous, yet doe they herein imitate the auncient pollicie of the Romaines, who vnder coulour of confederacies ſet foote in Greece and Gaule, which afterwarde they ſubdued.
               The lyke would theſe doe if they might: but at the leaſt in their haunting among Chriſtians, they diſcouer our affaires, diligently conſidering our forces and meanes, which afterward doe the more kindle their deſire to enterpriſe againſt vs, neither doe our men through their conuerſation among them, reape any other fruit than

apprentiſhip of moſt wicked cuſtomes which doe infect particular perſons with corruption and entangle the mindes of thoſe whome they gouerne with tyrannous precepts.
               I will yet alleadge other of the moſt notable examples of ſuch as Other latter examples of the danger that is in confederaties and truſt to Turkes haue abuſed thēſelues & found inconuenience in repoſing too much confidence in Turkiſh infidelitie. One ſhall bee of the laſt king of Hungarie named Iohn, whome the Hungarians choſe after that Lewes was ſlaine in battaile againſt the Turkes. This king ſoone after his election did Ferdinand expulſe vnder ſome pretended title to the Realme: which forced him to haue recourſe & to put himſelfe into the protection of Sultan Soliman, who thereby had a good occaſion: For he waited only how through the meanes of the Chriſtians, to get acceſſe into thoſe places where he ſought to eſtabliſh his greatneſſe. Thus hauing for the time reſtored him into his dignity, and beaten Ferdinandes men, he kept not his promiſe long: for after the deceaſe of Iohn he diſpoſſeſſed the Queene his widow & his orphane, who had craued his helpe againſt Ferdinand, that had beſieged them: and euer ſince haue the moſt part of Hungarie continued in the hands of the Turkes. In this their deede the grieuous iniuries offred by yt aforenamed, may to ſome ſeeme to excuſe their ſubmiſſiō to Soliman: howbeit they were not free frō blame, in that for their owne particular intereſt they were the cauſe on that ſide to aduance the deſtruction of the Chriſtians, peraduenture 30. yeres ſooner thā it would haue happened, beſides that, they ought rather to haue ſummoned the Chriſtian princes to take order for their controuerſies, or elſe to haue growen to compoſition with Ferdinand.
               
               But how ſhould theſe confederaties be other than miſhaps to thoſe Other examples. that put them in practiſe, ſith ſuch Princes as haue made them only to the end to reuenge themſelues of, or reſiſt their enimies haue come to euil ends? Of whom Alphons king of Naples is one, who fearing the power of Charles the 8. king of France, did after the imitation of Pope Alexander the 6. who before had done the like, ſent his Embaſſadors to Baiazet to craue helpe. As alſo Lewes Sforza, who to the end to moleſt the Venetians, ſought to ye Turks of whom he brought a certaine number into Italy: but neither of thē attained to their pretences, as being preuented by the ſubiection of themſelues and their eſtates.
               It is no meruayle that ſhame and deſtruction doe followe ſuch deliberations, and who ſo liſte well to conſider the cauſes

thereof, ſhall ſee that a vehement deſire of reuenge ſtirred vp theſe How many miſhappes haue bene hatched out of the confederaties of Chriſtians wihch the Turkes. Princes to call them in. Is it not as much as if a man ſhould go into the woods to hier theeues to murther his kinſeman or friend in his owne houſe, for ſome debate riſen betweene them? Either to open the windowe to the wolfe, and ſo to bring him into the flock to deuour the ſheepe? Thoſe that were at the firſt war in Hungarie, when Soliman came in perſon, doe affirme that in that one onelie voyage there were aboue 200000. perſons of that onely Realme, either ſlaine or caried awaie captiue, which violences together with innumerable other more haue bene ſuch paſtimes as theſe horrible monſters haue within theſe two hundred yeeres taken, to our coſts. Who is he that reading or hearing of the cruelties, villanies, & torments, which the poore Chriſtians indured at the taking of Conſtantinople, but will euen faint for ſorrow and pittie: In this ſhipwracke neither the greatneſſe, nobilitie, and affabilitie, neither the teares nor lamentations of the olde, yong, women, or children could any whit mitigate their crueltie, vntill that hauing glutted theyr deſires and reuenges with the bloud, riches, & beautie of the youth of each kinde, they graunted ſome ſmall releaſe to thoſe miſerable perſons that remayned of that furie, who had ben farre more happy to haue bene ſwallowed vp among the reſt.
               I could heere adde ſundrie other deeds wherewith to deſcribe the fierceneſſe of this nation, but it ſhall not greatly neede, becauſe wee The originall and occaſion of the alliance of the French Kinges with the Turkes. are to beleeue theyr proceedings to haue bene almoſt alwaies alike, as if theyr onely drift tended to tread all mankinde vnder their feet. Our neighbours alwayes haue and ſtill doe thinke it wonderfull ſtrange how ſuch learned wiſe men as haue continually floriſhed in France, could counſayle our kings to enter league with theſe, yea, and ſo long to perſeuere therein, conſidering how infortunate ſuch confederacies haue bene. Some auncient perſons haue in this ſort reported the cauſe. That king Frances the firſt ſeeing himſelfe ſtil beſet with the Emperour Charles a mightie Prince, Henrie king of England, and diuerſe other enimies, who oft brought his ſtate in to daunger, was for his owne ſaferie counſailed to confederate himſelfe with Sultan Seliman, to the end when they ſhould moleſt him, to oppoſe agaynſt them ſo mightie an enimie. And this treatie was concluded about the yeere 1535. by vertue whereof wee haue often times had ſuccour from the Turkes, which haue greatly hindered thoſe that troubled France, and without the which it muſt needes haue indured much more through the ambition of them that ought

not to haue brought our Kings into neceſſitie to employe ſo terrible armies. All theſe accuſations and iuſtifications haue moued me to peruſe ſome hiſtories, to the ende to ſee what profite or hurt wee haue reaped by their ſuccour.
               I haue noted three or fower armies by Sea brought into Chriſtendome 
                  What ſeruice the Turkes haue done to France. at the purſuite, as they ſay, of the French men vnder the conduct of Barberoſſa and other Admiralles, who haue bred great terror. The moſt notable of al their exployts, in my opinion, was the taking of Boniface in Corſe. But I haue laboured to learne of diuers auncient Captaines and other ſkilfull perſons both Italians and Spanyards, what their nations either thought or ſayd of theſe Turkiſh tempeſtes: who all reported vnto me that theſe barbarous people wrought lamētable deſolations, as hauing burned, ſacked, yea and led into perpetuall bondage a merueilous number of poore Chriſtians: for the moſt part, which was worſe, were forced to renounce Chriſtianitie and to embrace the falſe doctrine of Mahumet, a moſt lamentable deſtruction truely of ſo many ſoules fallen into ſuch horrible gulfes of perdition! Neither is it almoſt to bee imagined how grieuouſly theſe miſchiefes haue moued all countrie people both to ſpeake and write in the reproach of the French nation. What then might, ſayd they, the kindred and friends of thoſe that were led into this miſerable bondage doe? One loſt his father and mother: an other his wife and children: this man his brother, that man his coſen. It is very likely that their iuſt ſorowe haue wreſted from them infinite complaints, teares and lamentations, which haue peraduenture knocked at heauen gates. This confederacie ſeemeth to haue bene the cauſe of the deminiſhing of the glorie of ſo floriſhing a Realme as France: for euen at the death of King Henry the ſecond it was fallen from a great parte of that greatneſſe which fortie yeeres before it did enioye. And although other cauſes might ſet forward this declination, yet doe many thinke this to haue bene none of the leaſt. Yea, ſay they, if 
                  How 
                        •
                     ore this league hath blemiſhed the glory of the French nation. 
                  we ſhould compare the commoditie reaped by all this Turkiſh ſuccour with the onely tainting of the French good name among all nations in Europe, we muſt of force confeſſe that the reproach doth farre exceede the profite. For what is the winning of two or three townes to the reproofe of ſo many people for actions ſo vniuerſally condemned? Yea our ſelues can yet testifie that at the concluding of the peace betweene the two Kings of France and Spayne Anno 1559. the common ſpeech of Germany, Italie and Spayne was that one of the chiefeſt cauſes of our

miſfortunes proceeded of confederating with the Turkes, & bringing in and fauouring them to the hurt of the Christians. To whome I aunſwered: That they did too ſharply taunt thoſe things which in ſome reſpects might be borne with, neither were ſo vnlawfull but that vpon neceſſitie they might bee vſed: likewiſe that the offence was in him that forced others for their ſafegard to haue recourſe to ſuch meanes. But they replyed: That it is one thing to confederate with a Christian Prince though vniuſt and ambitious, and an other with theſe barbarous people which are the instrumēts of Gods wrath. Alſo that thoſe which ſeeke to excuſe theſe errors, ought to ſhew what wiſedome there is in backing our ſelues with the ſuccour of ſuch as blemiſh the Princes fame and bring him into reproach. Moreouer, whether it be not mere blindnes to paſſe the ſame way wherin we ſee euery man encurre ſhipwracke? Finally, that their opinion was, that no wiſe man endued with any conſcience could much gainſay ſo euidēt a truth, but would rather yeeld and grannt not onely to condemne that which was ſo vnlawfull, but alſo to abstaine from perſeuering therein. Theſe in brief were the reaſons that they propounded, which alſo I could not finde to be much impertinent. Neuertheleſſe, for my better ſatiſfying, I thought good to trye the opinions of ſome Deuines which came to viſite me, whether Chriſtian integritie were empaired by ſuch confederaties. To this queſtion they aunſwered: that Daniel in his prophetie, ſpeaking of the 4. Monarchies which ſhould 
                  How farre ſuch confederaties doe preiudice chriſtiā religion. 
                  be in the world, and deſcribing them vnder the ſhape of 4. beaſtes, ſheweth that toward the declining of the fourth which was the Romaine, there ſhould ſpring vp a little horne, that is to ſay a kingdome, which ſhould be more mightie then the reſt, alſo that this horne ſhould haue eyes & a mouth. That the eyes ſignified a law craftely inuented, & the mouth blaſphemy againſt God, alſo that this power ſhould fight againſt the Saincts and haue great victories. This did they affirme to ſignifie the doctrine of Mahumet houlden firſt by the Sarazens, and then by the Turkes. That if we liſt well to conſider the Turkiſh kingdome, wee ſhould finde it to be a terrible tyrannie, whoſe ſubiects were wonderfully enthralled: their warres deſtitute of all good foundation: their politique gouernmēt being wel examined to be but a bare name: their Eccleſiaſtical regiment to be none: but in liew thereof wee ſhould ſee a wicked prophaning of the name and ſeruice of the true God: their houſehold affayres ſubuerted with Poligamy & other diſorders which diſſolued all humaine ſocietie. And as for their trecherie and crueltie the hiſtories together with experience & the matters afore alleadged

doe yeeld ſufficient teſtimonie to make vs to beleeue that prophetie to belong to them, as being therein ſo figured as they are.
               
               
                  Now preſuppoſing the premiſes to be true, ſay they, we would weete 
                  Whether confederaties with the Turkes be lawfull. 
                  how a Chriſtian Prince can confederate or make any ſtedfaſt league with ſuch barbarous nations as are as it were marked and appoynted to be the ſcourges to Chriſtians? For as we thinke, they can hardly be vſed without offence to pietie. In olde tyme God expreſſely forbad the Iewes to enter amitie with the Canaanites or Amorites, people whom for their abominable vice he did abhorre. Neither were the compariſon amiſſe in ſetting the Turkes downe for the one, and our ſelues for the other: whereof it muſt of neceſſitie followe, that the ſame defence ought to ſtand vs in ſtead of a lawe to reſtraine vs, leaſt we pollute our ſelues in their abominations. Then did I tell them, that I much meruailed how ſo many Cardinalles, Biſhoppes and Doctors endued with great learning, of whome France had no want, could brooke this league, or made no meanes to breake it. Hereto their aunſwer was: that many tymes Princes made the gownes to yeeld to the ſword, and the counſaile of the Clergie to the neceſſitie of the ſtate. And ſo wee brake off our conference: which hauing ſince well conſidered, hath forced me to ſay: That theſe barbarous people are the ſame againſt whome the Pope ought to turne his excommunications, and all Chriſtian Potentates their wrath and weapons, rather then againſt them ſelues or their Subiects, to whome very raſhly they impute Hereſie, when they ſhould haue in much greater abomination all Turkiſh infidelitie. Againſt thoſe ſhould they drawe their Swordes, not to conuert them (for the Goſpell taketh no roote in mens mindes, but by preaching and holineſſe of life) but to repreſſe their crueltie and tyrannie: and theſe warres would bee as neceſſarie as our domeſticall bee vnneceſſarie.
               But there are ſome, who ſeeing the Turkes proſperitie to continue ſo long, and to encreaſe rather then deminiſh, are as it were Anſwer to an obiection grounded vpon the conſideration of the Turkes proſperitie. confounded in themſelues, and cannot thinke their dominion to bée ſo deteſtable, conſidering that God powreth not his wrath vpon them, but rather his fauour. I doubt not but ſuch as want inſtruction in Gods prouidence, are ſometimes, when they enter into diſcourſe hereof, euen ſhaken: but they ought to bee aſſured that this power can haue no perpetual continuance, which hath her bounds, as had the Sarazēs that is ended, together with their name, ſo that theſe many yeeres we haue heard no newes thereof.
               
                  
Theſe rods doth the Lord entertaine to the ende only to puniſh and chaſtiſe thoſe who bearing the glorious title of Chriſtians, doe neuertheleſſe through their iniquities diſhonor him, neither neede we elſewhere ſeeke the cauſe of the Turkiſh proſperitie then in our owne ſinnes, the continuance whereof doe thereto miniſter ſuſtenance and ſtrength: where contrariwiſe our amendment would bée an occaſion that the Lord ſhould pull it downe. I would wiſh all ſuch as are familier with Princes, often to put them in minde that lawfull Monarchies, which ought to be ſupported with Pietie and Iuſtice, cannot bee preſerued by any meanes repugnant to theſe vertues, ſo to reſolue them the more, not to ſeeke any profite in actions vtterly ſeperate from honeſtie.
               I knowe there may be ſome that will ſay that France is now ſo Aunſwer to thoſe that thinke it no time now for the Frenchmen to breake their league with the Turkes. weake and brought ſo low, that it were not meete it ſhould for ſake thoſe leagues which ſeeme to retaine her enemies in any feare, who would peraduenture be eaſely enduced to ſet vpon her ſo ſoone as the proppe, which is to them a terror, ſhall be taken away. Firſt the Germaines would redemaund the imperiall townes: Then the Spanyard, who hath ſundrie both olde and new quarels, would alleadge ſome one or other: and it is to bee doubted but ſuch mightie enémies would deale hardly with her. Indeede this requireth conſideration. But the Germaines will aunſwer: That their nation is not ſo hot to entangle the Empire in ſo great a warre which they would not wiſh to bee mightier then it is, leaſt it ſhould gripe them as did the Emperour Charles the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue. Neither would they aduance the ruine of France, which they knowe to bee a good counterpaize for the inner ſide of Chriſtendome, and a ſtrong ſhield for the outer ſide. The Spaniards do ſay that the long peace betweene their King & France, together with his affayres in the Low countries, doe ſufficiently declare that he intendeth not to moleſt her with warres: For it is enough for him that ſhe daily decayeth through her owne ciuill diſſentions: whereby now he no whit feareth her power, which aforetime hath bene a terror vnto him. So as it were rather to be beléeued, that if the Princes her neighbours might ſee France for an vniuerſall benefite, to giue ouer their league with the Turkes, they would like very well of ſo commendable a worke which they haue long deſired.
               Howbeit, I referre my ſelfe to the matter as it is, and to conclude, The concluſion of this diſcourſe. doe ſay, that our Kings in olde time ſhewed forth their affection

to the rooting out of the enemies of Chriſtendome: for them ſelues trauailed perſonally together with the flower of their Subiects euen into Aſia and Affricke to fight with them: namely, Lewes the yong, Phillip Auguſt and S. Lewes: as alſo Godfrey of Bolein, with moſt of the Princes that accompanied him in his voyadge to Ieruſalem, were for the moſt part French men. Likewiſe long before them what ſcourges were Charles Martell and Charlemaigne to the Sarazens, who being the Lords of ye 
                  French nation obteyned mightie victories againſt that terrible people? Wherevpon I conclude, that vpon good occaſion, with condition and aſſurance ſufficient vnto our King that none would attempt againſt his ſtate, I thinke we ſhould not finde him to haue any whit degenerated from his aunceſters zeale to wiſedome and valour.
            
            
               The 22. Diſcourſe.
               
                  That the Chriſtian Princes well vnited, are able in fower yeres to expulſe the Turkes out of Europe.
               
               
                  IT might better beſéeme ſundry excellent Captaines The excuſe & occaſion of this diſcourſe. whome I take to bee yet liuing, as the L. Iohn Dorie the Italian, Lazarus Schuendy the Germaine, or the Knight of Romegas the French man, who haue bin employed in diuers warres againſt the Turkes, to diſcourſe of ſuch meanes as may beſt ſerue to ſuppreſſe their power, then mee who neuer ſawe their ſtreamers waue in the wind either by ſea or by land, neither looked vpon their frontiers. Neuertheleſſe, ſith yet they haue layd open no parte of their goodly conceipts in this argument (howbeit I cannot thinke but they haue imparted ſome to their friends) I haue thought good as well for mine owne content, as alſo to inſtruct others, who peraduenture haue not employed their cogitations vpon ſuch an hautie exployt, to ſpeake ſomewhat thereof: and that the rather becauſe I ſuppoſe it to be moſt iuſt and neceſſarie to the vniuerſall benefite of all Chriſtendome. Yet not that I would men ſhould thinke I

would at randon put forth any ſpeeches depending onely vpon my owne imaginations: for ſo might they conteyne ſmall aſſurance. But hauing read and ouer read the hiſtories that entreate of their warres, & therwith noted what hath happened in our time, I haue accompted ſuch a ground to bee ſufficient to beare vp whatſoeuer we liſt to build therevpon. Here might I haue occaſion to rehearſe the originall and encreaſe of this tyrannous and vnpitifull Turkiſh Empire: but ſith I haue alreadie declared it in an other ſmall treatiſe, I will vſe no repetition. Such as are neighbours thereto doe A brief Deſcription of the Turkiſh dominion. bat too much feele the waight thereof, neither ought they that bée farther of to bee ignorant that it is a horrible ſcourge of Gods vengeance, which hauing many yeeres agoe ouerthrowne the floriſhing Eaſterne Empire, and ſet deepe foote into the Weſterne, doth yet threaten the reſt to bring it vnder the intollerable yoake therof. The conſideration of the greatneſſe of this perrill which is ſo neere might bee ſufficient to terrifie, and waken eſpecially thoſe that are in chiefeſt dignitie, to ſtraine themſelues to prouide for cō
                  mon preſeruation. For the fire by little & little taketh hold, & hath alreadie conſumed the ſuburbes of Chriſtendome, namely Hungarie, with all the great coaſtes of the Adriatick ſea, cōmonly called Sclauonia: So as by ſea wee haue theſe barbarous people at the mouthes of our hauens, & vpon the land in our gates. Certaine it is that had it not bene for the famous victorie of Don Iohn of Auſtrich, a moſt valiant and noble Prince, together with the warre of Wallachie, wherein died 50000. Turkes, & now their laſt with the Perſian, which hath coſt them very deere, we ſhould haue felt their forces. Al which loſſes notwithſtanding, yet do they hold the Ile of Ciprus as a glorious monument of their tryumph, hauing withall quite raſed to the very foundations the proud fortereſſe of Goletta in Affrick. Herein do we ſee yt as they haue loſt men, they are able for euery one get 4. & where we haue loſt land, by our vſuall procéedings it is almoſt vnpoſſible to recouer it out of their hāds. Thus do their loſſes breed their cōmoditie, whereas ours doe leade vs to deſtruction. Now to thoſe that knowe them not, they ſeeme to be Of their hatred and conſpiratie againſt Chriſtēdome. on ſleepe or letted for a great while: whereas contrariwiſe they do but take breath & prouide, neither tendeth their delay to any other ende but to gather force wherby their firſt aſſaults may be the more furious. One of the firſt ſolemne othes that all theſe tyrants of the houſe of Ottoman at their entrie into the Realme, do make, when they take their vſurped ſcepter, importeth, that they ſhall bee irreconſiliable

enemies to the name of Chriſt: alſo that by continuall warre and all ſortes of crueltie they ſhall endeuour to roote it out, wherwith as yet their effects haue euermore very well concurred: which courſe we are to beleeue they will ſtil continue. I haue heard of ſome that haue haunted among them, that if their Emperours ſhould but a while ſurceaſe their inuaſions againſt the Chriſtians, they ſhould encurre much reproach among their Prieſtes and men of warre, who perſwade themſelues that the ſword of Mahumet muſt bring al the world into ſubiection to their Lord. Theſe follies doe ſo puffe them vp and encourage them, that they ambitiouſly couet and embrace as much as euer did Alexander.
               
               It may bee alleadged that they ſuffer the Chriſtians to liue vnder why they ſuffer Chriſtians among them. their dominions, which is true: But no otherwiſe then we ſuffer the Oxen and Sheepe to liue in our fieldes, for the profite that we reape by them. Neither make they any other accompt of them then as of bruit beaſtes, and ſo doe vſe them euen in their moſt vile ſeruice, whereto they dare not gainſay: for had they bene willing to diſenhabite the land, long ſince had it bene deſert. But they are not ſo vnaduiſed as to doe that: albeit a valiant minde would preferre death before the calamities and reproaches which they make them to endure. This might be vnto vs a goodly portraiture, ſtill to behold, to the end the horror of ſo many cruelties might encreaſe our care, and watching for feare leaſt we fall into the ſame eſtate: For our own daunger conioyned with the compaſſion which we ought to take of their miſeries, will haue the greater power to induce vs to ſeeke all conuenient remedies.
               All this throughly conſidered, there is no fitter way then to vnite The meanes to ſuppreſſe the Turkes inſolēcie alſo the cauſe why it is propounded. all the Chriſtian power together, and to goe and aſſaile thoſe that are our deſtruction: for of all warres, this is the moſt neceſſarie. It ſhould not be made vpō ambition, or deſire of glorie, neither in reuenge of any ſmall iniuries, but for the preſeruation of many thouſand ſoules from the mortall infection of Mahumets doctrine, and to ſet the bodies free from the moſt horrible bondage that euer was. Likewiſe for the defence of lawes, honeſtie, vertue, knowledge and diſcipline, which the rage of theſe barbarous people doe pretend to burie in obliuion, and in liew therof to bring in impitie, vice, ignoraunce and thieuerie. This likewiſe reuealeth an other poynt worthie the noting in all humaine actions, namely Iuſtice, which ought to bée the foundation of them all. But it appeareth ſo cleerely as none can gainſay it.

Hereto alſo I will adde this word, that no act can be more iuſt then in that ſubdued parte of Europe to purchaſe the redreſſe of politick order, which in it comprehendeth all kindes of Iuſtice, publick and perticular. I ſuppoſe, if wee could either in eye or Image beholde only two ſorts of the vyolence (beſides innumerable others) which theſe barbarous wretches do practiſe againſt the poore Chriſtians, our ſloth would be turned into zeale. The firſt, that yeerely in the Prouinces that they haue ſubdued, they pull away, euen out of the mothers boſomes, fiue or ſixe hundred ſmall children, whome they tranſport to Conſtantinople, there to be inſtructed in their ſect and armes. The ſecond, that yeerely in their courſes and roades here and there, they take at the leaſt twiſe ſo many poore Chriſtians whom they ſell againe: whereby the father is caried one way, the ſonne an other, the huſband into the Eaſt, the wife into the Weſt, there to bee ſlaues all the daies of their life, without hope of euer ſeeing one an other againe: ſuch a ſeperation as is made with incomparable teares. Neither doe I here comprehend the ſpoyles of warres, which in ſome one voyage ſwalloweth vp 40. or 50000 ſoules. This is only the ordinarie that I ſet downe, the continuance whereof in tenne or twelue yeeres will breede, if we well note it, a great extraordinarie.
               Many there are that confeſſe this to bee true, and there ſettle Againſt thoſe that thinke the Turkiſh tirannie to be ſo farre of as it can neuer reach vnto them. themſelues, without proceeding any farther, as imagining the miſchiefe to bee ſo farre of that it can neuer come neere to them, and therefore doe leaue to thoſe that are neerer thereunto, the feeling that they ought to haue thereof. This is no ſmall ouerſight, which ſheweth that they regard only their owne intereſt, a matter at this day too common among moſt men: for there are ſo fewe that take care either to pitie others, or reſpect Iuſtice, as humanitie and equitie doe ſeeme to be vtterly extinguiſhed. In like error remayned our forefathers, I meane thoſe that were neere neighbours to the Countries now left in pray: for through their retchleſneſſe & ſmall care to fauour them, they are loſt, and haue left their neighbours in perpetuall feare of falling into the like inconuenience. Alſo as euery man is readie to ſeeke goodly cloakes to couer his faults, ſo are there ſome, who to the ende to excuſe their ſloth, would perſ
                     •
                  ade vs that the Turkiſh power is ſo limited with Seas, Mountaines and fortified Frontiers. that it can encreaſe no farther. We are to pray that it be ſo, but for the more certaintie, to beleeue the contrarie, for feare of ſurpriſing: and I ſuppoſe that ſuch as ſhall peruſe

the hiſtories will ſcarce cleaue to theſe mens aduice. For they ſhall finde that in two hundred and eightie yeeres it hath ſtretched one way from the Caſpian portes vnto Strigon, a towne on the hether borders of Hungary, which are almoſt fower hundred leagues of ground. Truely we muſt haue very ſtrong borders to ſtay thoſe whom neither the mountaines of Armeny, the ſtraights of Helleſpont, neither the great riuer of Danow
                        •
                     , could ſtoppe from their paſſage. Neither is this any great matter in reſpect of the Empires, Nations, Realmes and Armies that they haue deſtroyed in approaching vnto vs. It is then but meere flatterie to imagine that they will thus ſtay pitched in ſo fayre a way, and a ſigne of ſmall iudgement to thinke that vnder colour that they are yet a great way from vs, wee ſhould be free from feare, and refuſe to aſſiſt thoſe that doe continually beare their impetuoſitie.
               I knowe that ſometimes a great power ſtayeth a time without How terrible the Turkes power is at this day and why. doing any great exployt, as wee ſee that for theſe fortie yeeres they haue not much encroched toward Germany, but likewiſe that not many yeeres before they conquered almoſt all Hungary and made Tranſiluany tributarie. And thinking well therof I finde that they ſhall neede ſo ſmall ſucceſſe to terrifie all Chriſtendome, that I do alreadie apprehende that inconuenience. It is well knowne that Sultan Soliman twiſe beſieged the towne of Vienna in Auſtrich, which Charles the 5. ſuccoured. But if at this day Solimans ſucceſſors making the like enterpriſe ſhould carie it away (for we muſt thinke it to be neither vnpoſſible, neither vneaſie, to thoſe that can bring into the fielde 200000. Horſe, to force a towne) what would followe but the forrage and deſtruction of all Germany, and the Turkiſh warres to be tranſported to the ſhores of Rhine? As alſo for Italy, ſhall they not haue a fayre paſſage through the Alpes to goe to ranſacke it? Or what Armie durſt make head againſt ſuch a multitude after they haue ouerthrowne our Frontiers? Wee muſt confeſſe that it is well with vs that GOD is our watchman and rampier: for had he not ſo bene, wee had alreadie felt that which we ſhall not faile to feele hereafter, vnleſſe we helpe our ſelues with thoſe remedies which GOD of his goodneſſe putteth into our hands.
               Now let vs ſee to whom it appertaineth to care for the vniuerſall To whome it belongeth to ſuppreſſe the tirannie of the Turkes. good. Wee may eaſely iudge that it is to the Emperours, Kings, Princes and Commonwelths, vnder whome God hath ſubdued the Nations to yeeld them obedience: In reſpect whereof

they ought to gouerne them in Iuſtie, and defend them from oppreſſion. And like as the Shepheard ſtill watcheth that the woolfe ſurpriſe none of his flocke, ſo ought they by continuall diligence to ſtop the horrible 
                     〈◊〉
                   that this cruell nation cōtinueth againſt their ſubiects. If we looke well about vs, we ſhall ſee that there are fewe countries crempt therfro: For the borde
                     •
                  s of Poleland, Germany, Spayne and France on the ſide of Prouence and Languedocke, doe often enough trye how grieuous the bondage of theſe barbarous people is. That is the whole bodie of Chriſtendome▪ The reſt are but Iſles, as England, Scotland, Denmarke and Sueden, 
                  What letteth princes from thinking therof, alſo the meane to ſet this matter in hand. which are in maner almoſt Ilands, This doth the more aſtoniſh me, that hauing ſuch warnings wee ſtill are ſo drouſie. Now the matter that maketh Princes ſo ſmally affected hereto, is that they grow altogether attentiue to their own perticuler greatneſſe, whereof enſueth the forgetting to doe things beneficiall to Chriſtendome. Another cauſe, in part depending vpon this firſt is feare & ſuſpition that each hath of other, which do engender ſuch priuat miſchiefes, as make them to negle
                     ••
                   the publique calamities. Thus do we ſee how couetouſneſſe and domeſticall mallice do hinder honorable and profitable reſolutions. And ſo 
                     •
                  eng as their harts ſhal be thus diſpoſed, it will be hard to enterpriſe enterpriſe any matter of importance. It is therefore neceſſarie for the remedying hereof to ſeeke meanes not vtterly to plucke from them all theſe hurtfull paſſions, (for ſo muſt they bee a
                     •
                  ewe caſt againe) but to deminiſh them in them, to the ende they afterward the more at their eaſe put on thoſe affections which they ought to heare to the common cauſe.
               The beſt way to draw to this effect were, if they that beare greateſt Who they are that ought to begin to ſette the reſt on worke. ſway in Chriſtendome could with liuely perſwaſions and diligent ſollicitations, ſhewing to all men how neere and ſharpe the Lyons teeth & talents are, open their eyes and vnſtop their eares: for that were a good beginning to compaſſe the principall poynt of remiting their willes. The firſt perſon that ſhould effectually perſwad
                     •
                   ought The Pope. to bee the Pope, whoſe dignitie is in great reuerence among Catholique Princes, whom he ſhould ſolemnely ſend vnto. For they ſeeing him leaue his ordinary crye after them which he yet vſeth, ſaying: Cut the throates of ſuch of your ſubiects as will not acknowledge me, and that his phraſe were 
                     •
                  ee
                     •
                  ed, would bee much perſwaded by the vertue of theſe inductions, as Princes were by other Popes in the firſt voyages for the recouerie of the Holy land. The ſecond perſon neceſſarie is the Emperour, for albeit his power The Emperor.
                  
doth not now concurre with his title, yet ought that ſacred dignitie wherewith he is clothed to bee in great reuerence among all Chriſtian Potentates: whoſe exhortations would likewiſe be of great eff
                     〈…〉
                   throughout all Germany. The third perſon meete & The King of Spayne. neceſſarie 
                     〈◊〉
                   the reſt ſhould be the K. of Spayne, in reſpect of his mightneſſe & power, whervpō his word being builded, the very feare of his euill will would make euery one to be the readier to doe well. Theſe in my opinion being well vnited, might eaſely lay the foundations of ſo ſtately a practiſe. In olde time mens-zeale was framed to diuers iuſt matters, or ſuch as ſo ſeemed: for then one perticuler perſon endued with eloquence and experience was able to ſtirre them vp, as did Peten the Hermite, who hauing diſcouered all ye Eaſt countries led thether the firſt troopes. But now that euery man looketh but to himſelfe, it is requiſite to wordes to ioyne authoritie and feare: therein imitating Themiſtocles, who comming to certaine confederates of the Athenians to craue money at their hands, the ſooner to perſwade them, tolde them that he brought them two Gods Loue & Force. Euen ſo who ſo deſireth to doe any good in this matter, muſt in laying open the neceſſitie ſpeake Magiſtratlike, as we tearme it. Who ſo doubteth that theſe thrée perſons cannot be linked together in this deſire & purſuite, is deceiued: for the ſtate as well of the perſons as of the affayres doth inuite them, rather thē force them backward, as we may eaſely ſee.
               But in this which I am now about to ſay conſiſteth more difficultie, How other princes may be induced to ioine with the three aſorenamed. namely in framing the other Princes to ioyne with them, among which the moſt Chriſtian King is moſt neceſſarie: for he being vnited with the reſt, who would afterward bee behinde, ſith almoſt all other Potentates are confederate vnto them? Or who durſt doe any thing contrary to their power, but ſhould immediatly be oppreſſed? Whervpō I gather that if this perticuler league betweene theſe 4. were once well knit, the general would vndoubtedly ſoone enſue. Now the moſt Chriſtian King cannot be hereunto bound before he be wonne to conſent to breake his league with the Turke: which I feare will hardly be compaſſed without great reaſons and good aſſurance: for peraduenture he wil be loath to plucke downe the outward proppes which his father and grandfather of happie memorie reared vp for the aſſurance of their eſtate, which hetherto haue not bene ſhaken: beſides that his Counſailors will feare in ſo waightie a matter to make any raſh alteration.
               This therefore they may alleadge in this caſe, whereof I haue

briefly ſpoken other where. Namely, that King Frances the firſt finding England, Spayne, Germany, the Low countries, & ſome Reaſons for the leagne betweene France & the Turkes. partes of Italy to bee confederate againſt him for the oppreſſing of his eſtate, whereof enſued the loſſe of the Dutchy of Millan, with the denyall of his ſoueraigne rights to Flanders and Arthoiſe, and therewith hauing the warres oftentimes within the bowels of his Realme, fearing more hurtfull loſſes, was forced for his ſafetie to haue recourſe vnto extraordinarie remedies: namely to enter league with Soliman Emperour of the Turks, ſo to anoy his enemies: likewiſe that the feare hereof hath many times ſeemed to reſtraine them frō the execution of greater purpoſes againſt France. That his ſonne Henry being to withſtand the like endeuours, did alſo vſe the ſame forraine fauour, wherein he had good ſucceſſe. That if the Realme when it floriſhed and abounded in all things ſtoode in néede of ſuch helpe, much more neceſſary is it now while it is deuided, weakened and poore; becauſe the auncient hatred of thoſe that ſeeke the abaſing thereof may yet gather ſtrength and force. This mooueth them to feare perpetuall reproach with manifeſt daunger to the ſtate, if they ſhould counſaile their maiſter to depriue himſelfe of ſuch ſuccour, the loſſe whereof may embolden the neighbors to more willingly the aſſaile him. That they are not ignorant but that the confederacie with the Turke beareth apparance of vniuſtice: howbeit for counterpaize thereof, that the profite which it yéeldeth is ſo great, that in theſe daies wherein wee liue, which are repleniſhed with ſuſpition & ſurpriſes, it may without infamie be tollerated: conſidering that the Catholique King, whatſoeuer regard he hath to conſcience and honor, maketh no doubt of confederating himſelfe with the Perſian, who is a Mahumetiſt as well as the other: And who can tell, wil they ſay, whether the moſt Chriſtian King, when vnder colour of vniuerſall benefite he may haue made of his friend his foe, if he ſhould bee afterward aſſailed, be aſſured of the loue of thoſe Princes with whome he hath bene at ſo great controuerſie▪ Without manifeſt teſtimonie therefore of a good reunion and aſſurance to his Realme, they would be loath to perſwade him to abandon his auncient confederaties. Moreouer, yt although al Chriſtian Princes ſhould vnite themſelues to aſſaile the Turkes and atchieue great victories againſt them, yet is it likely that all the fruites of their labours both by ſea and land ſhall redound to the profite of the houſe of Auſtrich, which alreadie is clambred ſo high, that all the neighbours begin to ſtand in feare

thereof, and ſo ſhould their maiſter reape nothing but labour and coſt, which poynt is to be conſidered of. Theſe, in my opinion, are the chiefe reaſons that our Kings officers can alieadge, which it Anſwer to the reaſons and allegations aforeſayed. were requiſite to ouerthrowe by better before wee bring them to the league aforeſayd. I thinke if the Princes afore named would proceede ſincerely, & vnto words adioyning good demonſtrations, this might be compaſſed. For beſides the equitie of the matter, the deſire of many good men which ſeeke no more but the exaltation of the name of Chriſt ſhall accompanie them. But if they labour with ſubte
                     •
                  tie (as men doe many times) there will no fruite come of it, but they ſhall be requited with ſubteltie. Howbeit, I will beléeue that they meane very well: which if they doe, there reſteth no more but to aunſwer to that which hath bene propounded, and ſo to decide the difficulties aforeſayd: whereof I will not ſpeake, in that I can ſay little in reſpect of that which ſo many heads as well in Spayne as Italy are able to ſet downe: neither doe I doubt but theſe Princes would graunt to the moſt Chriſtian King good aſſurance, to induce him to enter into this confederatie. For if there ariſe any controuerſie vpon this ſaying: The aſſurance is not ſtrong enough, or vpon the aunſwer, we can giue no other: the ſame were an euident token of a bad minde to the common benefite, in him whō we ſhould ſee vnwilling to yeeld vnto reaſon. For if it ſhould happen ſuch a King as he of France to bee aſſotiated, it would afterward be an eaſie matter to make all the other Potentates to enter into the generall vnion, yea euen the King of Poleland now raiguing. And withall if any one would be ſlacke when he ſhould ſee the whole bodie ſet forward, the ſame ſhould deſerue to bee forred thereto.
               Yet were all this in vaine and to no purpoſe, vnleſſe withall order That it is requiſite to vnite Chriſtian princes, before they meddle with the Turkes. be taken to appea
                     •
                  e all preſent warres, alſo to prouide for ſuch as may ariſe as well betwene Prince and Prince, as betwene them and their ſubiects. It ſeemeth that at this day there is ſmall cauſe of controuerſie betweene them, ſith the Duke of Anieow is deceaſed, who was at debate with the Catholique King, hauing wonne for all his paines the onely towne of Cambray, which ſome may thinke to bee rather an occaſion to breede diſcord betweene the two Kings, of Spayne and France: which neuertheleſſe I cannot beleeue; for they will neuer ſo farre ouerſhoote themſelues, as for ſo ſmall a matter to hazard both their Realmes into charges, calamitie and deſtruction. Neither (to ſpeake as a Chriſtian) ſhould

any man wiſh two ſo mightie Monarchies to goe together by the eares. For ſo ſhould they bring their confederates to partaking, and of a priuate controuerſie make a generall warre. And no doubt the Turke would thereof take occaſion to worke wonderfull practiſes againſt vs, which for want of withſtanding through our domeſticall diſſentions, would breede our great hinderances. Some man will adde that the ſmall Potentates will bee glad the great ones ſhould feede each vpon other: truely if the great ones ſhould ſeeke to deuoure them, they might haue great reaſon to wiſh it: but ſeeing them willing to vndertake to do that which may profite all, all ought likewiſe to wiſh their good and to helpe them therein. The true meanes therefore to take away the feare from ſome and couetouſneſſe from other ſome, were ioyntly to employ themſelues in theſe high enterpriſes.
               As for the warres of Princes againſt their ſubiects, it were good Of the vnion of princes with their ſubiectes and the ceaſing from all acts of hoſtilitie and ciuill warres within their lands. (if it were poſſible) to quench them: becauſe they are ſufficient to diuert them from all other intents. To which purpoſe I ſay that ſubiects are to remember that their ſoueraigne Princes are as the viſible Images of God, whom he hath eſtabliſhed vpon the earth as his Lieutenants, to driue men to liue in Pietie, Iuſtice and honeſtie, and to defend them from oppreſſion. In reſpect whereof they are to yeeld vnto them all honor, fidelitie, ſeruice & obedience, as alſo the Princes are to beare them like goodwill as a father doth to his childe, and neuer to driue them into neceſſitie, leaſt they enter into diſpayre. Through the maintenaunce of this goodly concord, ſtates doe floriſh; whereas contrariwiſe the breach thereof haſteneth their deſtruction, as hath bene lately tryed to the great hurt of all France, and is yet in practiſe in Flanders to the deſolation therof. It is a lamentable matter to ſee thoſe that worſhip one ſelf Chriſt thus to purſue each other with fire & blood like wild beaſtes, and the whiles to ſuffer theſe Mahumetiſtes to tryumph ouer the liues, lands, and ſpoyles of the poore Chriſtians of the Eaſt countries. For if this alteration of the Low countries were ceaſed, all Chriſtendome ſhould ſeeme to be at peace. But this reconſiliation Of the neceſſitie of peace in the Low coū
                     tries, and how the King of Spaine may and ought to graunt it. will not be 
                     〈…〉
                  y purchaſed: howbeit, al lets muſt be ouercome, to the ende to creepe out of theſe long miſeries that make both the aſſailants and defendants miſerable. The Catholique Maieſtie, who, as it is ſayd, is very courteous, and thereof daily ſheweth great proofes in moſt but my ſelfe, ſhould diligently looke hereto: for all this bloodie tragedie is played at his coſts. Now is there no

queſtion of ſtate, but only for religion: whereof, albeit no man aſketh my counſaile, neither wil beléeue me, yet I will ſpeake a word or two. The way were, in my opinion, to proceede by gentleneſſe, not to iudge by foreiudgement: and to frame the lawes according to the natures, and not to leane ſo much to the reportes of ſome, as to the iuſt complaints of many ſubiects: as being aſſured that conſciences cannot bee forced without merueilous force. Finally, the ſucceſſe of things paſt may haue taught that thoſe princes who by warres haue endeuoured to accompany the vehemencie of their Prieſts, haue diſfigured their dominiōs & deminiſhed their greatneſſe. And what Ieſuite is there, how ſkilfull ſoeuer, that is able to perſwade thoſe that bee no Ieſuites, that God delighteth in ſo much blood as on both ſides is ſhed? The people of the Low countries are of a free nature, the affections of whoſe hearts are remooued by clemencie and vnfayned humanitie: but by ſtripes and iniuries they be prouoked and alienated. The ſureſt counſaile therfore were to graunt to thoſe that are in armes the permiſſion which they craue to ſerue God, to the ende they may yeeld alſo the obedience that man doth require: for it is to be ſuppoſed that if this bee not willingly done, time will wreſt it by force: which may as well breede fauourable accidents to the loſers, as it hath done to the winners. The liuelieſt ſting and ſharpeſt pricke to mooue the Spanyards to peace, is the remembrance of the folly of France, wherby they may ſay: We haue ſcaped fayre. This difficultie ſhall not let Vpon what conſideration the enterprize againſt the Turke ought to be of great commendation among all Chriſtian princes. me from proceeding in my diſcourſe, and by diuers examples to ſhewe that this enterpriſe againſt the Turkes, ought to be vnto vs in great recommendation. Our grandfathers had courage enough to aſſaile their grandfathers euen in their owne cities and fieldes, which they watered with the blood of theſe miſereants: which prooueth that the children are not inuincible. Wherfore the better to ſee thoſe notable victories, we may reade the hiſtorie of Paulus Aemilius, who treateth of the conqueſt of the Holy land. It is merueilous to ſee how zealous euery man then was to employe himſelfe in theſe forrein expeditiōs, wherfro neither the dangers could terrifie the yong, nor the tediouſneſſe of the way the old: but both ſorts either ſold or morgaged part of their goods to furniſh & ſet forth thē ſelues therin. Euen that excellent Prince Godfrey of Bollein to ye ſame effect ſould his Dutchy to the Biſhop of Liedge: He was the firſt Weſterne Prince that gloriouſly tryumphed as well of the Sarazens as of the Turkes, in taking from them the realme of Ieruſalem,
                  
and driuing them away. Many other vayages haue ſince bene made by diuers Emperours & Kings which haue had good & bad ſucceſſe: wherof I will ſpeake in time conuenient. At this time it ſhall ſuffiſe to beholde in theſe by oyles the zeale of ſo many noble perſonages: the conſent of nations: the magnanimitie of gentrie: the liberalitie of all men: & finally the high proweſſe & conqueſtes of ſo many warriors, to the end by the motions therof our affectiōs now as it were aſleepe, may awake & buſtle themſelues to ye ſame ende which our aunceſters ſhot at. For it were a great ſigne of degenerating from the auncient vertue, if we ſhould not ſtirre againſt theſe our terrible enemies that approach euen to our doores, ſith they trauailed aboue 600. leagues out of France to ſeeke them. And yet are wee to feare them much more then they, becauſe their power is fower times as much againe as it was then. This may bee a warning to Princes (being reſolued to enter into this enterpriſe) to be the more carefull to lay the foundations ſo ſure as they may not be ſhaken. For if through negligence or haſte there ſhould happen any default, it would be ſomewhat troubleſome to redreſſe, and it would fall out as to thoſe that build a beautifull Bridge vpō weake pillers, who are afterward for the repayring thereof driuen to breake it downe againe.
               I haue here afore made mention of two foundations, conſiſting Hauing treated of the foū
                     dations of this warre, it is here ſpoken of the proceeding thereof, and firſt of the generall aſſembly for the entire reſolution of the affaires. the one vpon the iuſtice of the warre, the other vpon ye 
                  neceſsity: which both are throughly to bee conſidered, becauſe by ſeeing the grounds to be good, we conceiue the better hope of the ende which we pretend. Now it remaineth that we proéeed in the reſt, the principall whereof dependeth vpon the will of the Princes, whence the generall vnion muſt grow. For yt is it which beareth vp the whole frame and maketh it to moue. And in as much as the matter that may hinder it is to bee ouercome (as wee haue ſeene) we are to beleeue that after diuers negotiations and iourneys too and fro, the Princes may in the ende growe to reſolution. This compaſſed, it were good to ſummon ſome notable aſſembly wherein to deliberate vpon the whole, & to ſweare to whatſoeuer may be concluded. And ſith ye Emperor ſhould be one of the chief dealers & withal of greateſt dignitie, he to appoynt the place (ſo as the Pope would not be ielous) where the Embaſſadours of the greateſt Princes might méete, whether alſo the meaner will come in perſon, for that the Emperour himſelfe ſhould be there. To which purpoſe the towne of Auſbourg (in my opinion) might well ſerue for them all, where

alſo with the aduice of many other ſkilfull Captaines they might better determine all matters.
               Hauing formed ſuch a confederacie, it were requifite to go on & to prouide fit means to continue the warre at the leaſt foure yeres, Of the meanes to continew the warres diuers yeares. to yt end none might giue it ſoouer ouer without incurring reproch and diſpleaſure of al the other Princes, either elſe not to enter therinto at all. For to begin this warre, and then to leaue it vnfiniſhed, would breede too great inconuenience, as hauing forced a mighty enimie to play double or quit, wherinto being entred, he might peraduenture attempt ſuch deuiſes as before he neuer thought vppon. True it is that it is hard ſo ſure to bind thoſe Princes which depend but of themſelues, howbeit, all that might be muſt be done: for ordinarie experience teacheth, that onely three or foure leagued together, can hardly long agree. And ſometime before the firſt peece be performed, ſome one ſhrinketh, who then wanteth no reaſons nor excuſes therefore.
               Then muſt they prouide for treaſure, for forein wars are neuer wel Of treaſure to maintaine this warre. conducted without abundance, & want doth oft make them to decaie. In the firſt warr againſt yt 
                  Mahumetiſts, the zeale & affection was ſo great yt moſt men waged thēſelues of their owne goods. Afterward they were holpen with ye treaſure which through yt 
                  Croiſats that the Popes publiſhed, was leauied in ſundrie realmes and prouinces. This help, whether it now proceeded of the Popes or of the authority of princes, & were tearmed either Croiſade or contribution, would be neceſſarie to helpe the Potentates to defray their charges. For hauing gathered among their ſubiects an extraordinarie ſumme (yet not immoderate) & thereto laying part of their ordinarie reuenues, it would ſuffice to maintain great armies. Howbeit ſith in our ſmal wars we ſtil find want of money, it were meet to lay a good foundation for treaſure a yere before the enterpriſiug of any thing: for beeing of ſufficient abilitie before they begin, they ſhould afterward hardly incurre any want. It may bee ſaid that to threaten the enimie ſo far before hand, were as much as to giue him time to prouide: but hauing well waied all, it were a greater inconuenience, according to the prouerbe, To take ſhipping without biſquet. Beſides, it is to be imagined that their pride & glory is ſuch, & they ſo much contemne the Chriſtians, that they will take it to bee rather ſome brag to terrifie thē, than any preparation to aſſaile thē. As for power, I thinke no man can denie but that Chriſtendome is at this daie verie mightie. For all Countries are full of men theſe Of forces neceſſitie for the executiō herof.
                  
domeſtical warres haue greatly exerciſed in armes. The art of war is alſo better knowen than it hath bene theſe 150. yeeres, whereto the knowledge of hiſtories both Greeke & Latine, conioyned with experience, haue bene a great helpe. We ſee likewiſe that their courages are no whi
                     •
                   quailed, as wee doe but too often proue to our great griefe and loſſe. Of ſouldiours therefore hauing both 
                     •
                  now & good, we muſt looke for Captaines, for they bee the men who thorough their wiſedome & magnanimitie are great helps to the winning of the victories. In this point we of force confeſſe that Chriſtendome hath not now any of ſo great experience, as euen in our daies we haue ſeene: as the Duke of Alua, the Duke of Guize, the Conſtable of France, the Admirall of Chaſtillion, and for the ſea Andrew Dorie. Howbeit we cannot likewiſe ſaie that it is vtterly vnprouided▪ for although thoſe that remain be but yong, yet do they follow the ſteps of the others, neither want they any thing but the ſubiect of a braue war, the more to diſplay their vertue: beſides that many times good hap accompanieth young heads, as appeared in Don Iohn of Auſtria at Lepanto, the Duke of Anguien at Seriſolles, the Duke of Sanoy at S, Quintins, the Earle of Aigmōt at Graueling, & eſpecially the Prince of Parma in Flāders. We are to thinke that we liue in a time wherin the large ſchooles are open for Captaines to learne to frame themſelues & grow good. Let vs therefore content our ſelues with thoſe that yet liue, & hope well of their conduct. I will name none particularly, for they be ſufficiently knowen, who in Spaine, France, Italy & Germany haue purchaſed fame.
               Now are we to looke to diſcipline, wherof I wil ſay thus much, Of Martiall diſcpline. that without great care that it be diligently obſerued & kept, we are not to look for any good iſſue of the war. We ſee how ye ciuil wars haue quite corrupted it, and the infection is ſhed ouer all nations, though ouer ſome more than otherſome. It were meet therefore at the firſt to eſtabliſh rules which may be put in practiſe, & thereto to ad both a puniſhment & reward: for if we carry our accuſtomed diſorders into theſe wars, we ſhal ſoone become a praie to the Turkes. Titus Liuius diſcourſing how ye 
                  Romaines attained to their great conqueſts, among other things attributeth it to their good obſeruation of order & diſcipline. Yet do I not herein require as great perfection as in thoſe daies, but rather to fit the coat to the bodie, & the laws to the vertue. I doubt not but ther is yet enough ſpred abroad among our Chriſtian nations: Whereof if a great part were gathered

into one armie, it would ſuffice to bring forth good fruit. Theſe Of other preparatiues requiſite to beginne withall. be the principall preparatiues which the Princes ſhould conſider of betimes. For the reſt, which neuertheleſſe are neceſſary, as wepons, veſſels, artillerie, & munition, they are much eaſier to bée gotten. Philip of Macedon Alexander the greats father prepared for ſuch things as he needed for his wars a yere or two before hand: but he died before he could begin, & his ſonne finiſhed them: & yet it ſerued his turne wel, that he found all things redie, but eſpecially he made great account of fiue or ſix old Captains whom his father left him. Another Philip the father of Perſeus, purpoſing wars againſt the Romaines, made no leſſe preparation, though his ſonne imploied it but badly. And we are as greatly to feare the Turkiſh nation as they did the others, for it holdeth at this day the greateſt Empire in ye world. Many there are yt being badly informed of their cuſtomes, Againſt thoſe that thinke the Turkes eaſy to be ſubdued. do take thē to be barbarous people, giuen to cruelty, & wanting all other good qualities, wherin they are deceiued: for among all ſoldiers in the world, they ſhew themſelues moſt ſober, obedient of their Captains, & diligent. For a while they had ſmall vſe of the harquebuze, but now they can help thēſelues therewt againſt vs, & do begin to arme their horſmen with certain light breaſtplates & morions to couer the foreparts of their bodies & heads, although they retain the vſe of the bow & target: & it is a great meruaile conſidering how many Chriſtian ſoldiers do daily go to them & denie their faiths, yt they haue no ſooner taken our faſhions which are better thā theirs. Footmen with the pike & corcelet they haue none, which in my opinion is our aduantage, as being a verie profitable kind of ſoldiers. All this ought to haſten vs to preuent thē before they conforme thē
                  ſelues to vs in things wherin we exceed thē: neither is to be doubted but in time they will imitate Pyrrhus & Hanibal, who brought their ſouldiers to take vp many of the Romaine faſhions both in wepons & diſcipline, as hauing by experience in their wars againſt thē, found the ſame to be better than their own. I leaue it therfore to any good Captains iudgement, if they ſhould thus doe (conſidering their great numbers of people) whether it were poſſible to ſtande before them: if they ſhould arme but 50000. horſmen after our maner, ſurely the ſame would ſuffice to fight with al the horſe in Chriſtendome: but they put in their general armies well neere 200000 which is an incredible matter.
               I heard a French Gentleman yt was at Sighet when Sultan Soliman 
                  Of the great power and habilitie of the Turkes. beſieged it, ſay yt there he ſaw 150000. which 
                     •
                  raue him into

admiration, ſeeing all the earth couered with horſe & men as thicke as trees in a large forreſt. When we in our ſmal warres ſee 10. or 12000. horſe, we thinke them able to fight with the whole worlde, what then would we ſaie if we ſhould ſee theſe wonderfull troops? They haue euermore vſed to march thus: yea, the Sarazens whome they ſucceeded in ye law of Mahumet vſed mightie armies, though not ſo ſtrong in horſe. I will not ſtand vppon the deſcription of the large extent of their dominions, as being a thing ſufficiently knowen, onely I will ſaie that in Europe they holde more land than all France, Spaine & Italy doe containe, from whence they take theyr beſt men of warre, where alſo they keepe them, partly in garriſons and partly vppon their conquered landes which they diuide among them, with charge to bee alwayes readie to ſerue vppon anie the great Lords commandements, ſo as out of the ſayd Prouinces of Europe, they are able to bring into the field neere 100000. horſe, which is a token yt the barbarouſneſſe that we take to be in them, is not altogether deuoide of wiſedome and pollicie. They vſe not to fortefie many holdes, for no man dare enterpriſe to aſſault anie of their chiefeſt, but he ſhall ſtraight waies be aſſured of a mightie power at hand readie to make him giue ouer quicklie. As their lande power is great, ſo is not their ſtrength by ſea anie whit ſmaller, which now they are more iealous to keepe well than euer heeretofore, through the remembrance of their great loſſe receiued by the good hap and proweſſe of Don Iohn of Auſtria. They neuer empoueriſh themſelues in warres as Chriſtian Princes doe, for their warfare and order of paie doth ſomewhat differ from ours, and the coine that theyr Emperour taketh out of his treaſurie at Conſtantinople in the time of warre, hee ſupplieth againe in time of peace. To bee briefe, they be moſt mightie enimies: againſt whom whoſoeuer ſhall deale, he had not neede to forget anie thing at home (as wee vſe to ſay) but doe as they that enter the liftes, who before they do come, loke to increaſe their ſtrength & courage: to ſee to ſee their defenſiue armes ſit, and their offenſiue ſharp, to the end either to ouercome, or die valiantly.
               Now are we to enter into the chiefe point of this matter, which is, of the meanes how to aſſaile theſe terrible enimies, in what places, Of the manner how to aſſiuill the Turkes: in what places and with what power. & with what power, to the end within the time afore noted to atchiue a happie concluſion. And although in ye aſſembly before mencioned, wherat ſhould appere ſūdrie princes & Captains, they may argue of this point to ye end to grow to ſome reſolution: yet will I

not let as briefly as I may, to ſaie my minde, according as I purpoſed at the firſt, alwaies ſubmitting the ſame to the cenſures of ſuch as are more ſkilfull than my ſelfe, to correct the imperfections therof. My diſcourſe tēdeth rather to kindle ye affections of valiant perſons to enterpriſe, than to giue anie counſayle in the proceeding in ſo haughtie a purpoſe, whoſe euents may not eaſily bee forſeene, wherin the chiefeſt Captaines (whoſe poore ſcholler I ſhal account it an honour for me to be) ſhall not bee too ſufficient to giue aduice. The better neuertheleſſe to behaue our ſelues in ſuch a warre, I thought good to ſet down ſome examples of but anceſtors, who ſundrie times fought againſt the ſame nation, to the end that what they wiſely executed may be to vſe a rule, by fitting it to our time, as alſo we may eſchue and auoid their ouerſights.
               I will not enter into ſearch of matters beyonde Godfrey of Bolleine (albeit there were greate warres before betweene the Emperours of Conſtantinople and the Saracens) in whoſe daies the Chriſtian Princes beganne to confederate themſelues agaynſt them. The firſt armie that was ſent went vnder the leading of Peter the Hermite, who paſſed euen into the leſſer Aſia, and at the firſt acchieued a few valiant exploites: but he and all his men were afterward ouerthrowen by the Souldan of Nicee. Likewiſe two other armies as they marched, were broken by the Hungarians, a nation which at that time had ſcarcely attayned the rudimentes of Chriſtianitie, and as yet did holde of the auncient fierceneſſe of the Hunnes: ſo as theſe firſt expeditions yeelded ſmall fruit and great hurt. The cauſe of which diſorders & inconueniences proceeded (as I thinke) of the want of authoritie and experience of their leaders, who vpon a zeale, aſſembled al theſe troups gathered out of diuers nations, in whom peraduenture they founde not conuenient obedience, and wanting foundation both in purpoſe and prouiſion, could not long holde out, neither among their friendes, neither agaynſt their enimies.
               The hiſtories reporte that in the firſt expedition there were unleſſe than 100000. able men. And the Hungarians ouerthrew the others (which were not ſo many) becauſe by the way they 
                     •
                  ell to ſpoyle, which argueth that they vſed ſmall diſcipline. Wee can therefore make no account of the greacneſſe of a multitude, if there be no order among them, which eſpecially fayleth when their Captaines be either inſufficient or want authoritie. Shortly after did Godfrey of Bolein tooke vppon him his notable voiage about

the yeere 1086. toward the end of the raigne of the Emperor Henrie the fourth. This voyage was better looked to and ordered than the former, and had many more excellent Captaines: for beſides himſelfe, who was alreadie a famous Captaine, he had his two brethren Baulduine and Euſtace Earle of Flanders Hugh, Philippe the French kings brother, Robert of Normandie, the ſonne of William King of England, and many other Lords & Gentlemen: yea, if we liſt to beleeue ſuch as haue written the particularity, therof, we ſhall find there were in that armie aboue 40000. horſe and 150000, 
                     〈◊〉
                   al fighting men, a great part wherof (which was me
                     〈…〉
                   about their owne expenſes.
               So ſoone as they were aſſembled they marched forward, and ſo How longe our aunceſt
                        •
                     rs were in their warre: alſo whether it bee harder in theſe daies then in thoſe. followed their buſineſſe, that they finiſhed their conqueſt in 3 yeres ouer a great part of the leſſer Aſia, Siria, & Meſopotamia. In this warre they had many reencounters, but the moſt notable were two great battailes which they woune, and two principall ſieges Nice & Hieruſalem, where they were the conquerours. Many Chriſtians were alſo once beſieged at Antioch, but they ſharply repulſed yt 
                  Sarazens and Turkes, with great ſlaughter. Finallie, hauing expulſed them out of the fartheſt Prouinces, they eſtabliſhed the Realme of Hieruſalem, where Godfrey of Bolleine raigned and his ſucceſſours after him: who ſo liſt nowe to conſider the time that was ſpent in ſo great a conqueſt, ſhall find it but ſhort for the winning of more land than all Germanie and Scotland doe containe. Great was the defence & aſſalt, but 2. great battels & 2. ſieges yelded the whole victory, wherby we may beleeue yt the hardeſt enterpriſes are ouercome with valor & good order. Neither wil I let ſlip the inconueniences of thoſe long iourneyes: for the tediouſneſſe of the way, the diſtemperance of the aire, & the continual trauaile bred ſundrie diſeaſes among thoſe great troopes, which were holpen forward by the exceſſe of the mouth too much vſed in theſe north parts. Theſe brought the loſſe of many, euē of the better ſort yt wanted no abilitie. Now haue the Turkes taken order yt we ſhall not need to go ſo far to ſeeke them, for they are come abroad euē to ſome of our gates, others haue them within fiftie leagues of them, and the fartheſt within an hundred. We ſhall not neede to feare the hearts of Aſia, for our batable grounds ſhall be in as good a temperature as France: yea, euen Conſtantinople ſtandeth in the ſame climate as Strigon, ſo as we ſhal need to feare no more but our enimies yron.
               But to proceede, we are to vnderſtand that after the poſteritie of

                  Godfrey of Bolleine had inioyed the lande aboue 80. yeeres, ciuill What was the cauſe that our forefathers loſt the aduantage they had of them, & were driuen out of the eaſt. diſſention crept in among them, and ſome of them calling the Sarazens to their aide, grew ſo ſtrong that they droue out the reſt. This afterward moued diuerſe Chriſtian Princes to ioyne againe in the recouerie of that which was loſt ſo as in fiue or ſix ſcore yeres they made ſixe or ſeauen notable voiages. wherein went perſonally the Emperours Fredericke Barbaroſſa, Frederick the ſecond, Conrade king of Germanie, ſome kings of France and of England, wherof neuertheleſſe grew ſmal profit. At the beginning the Chriſtians had goodly victories, but in the end they had the foile, & were neuer able to expell the Turkes and Saracens out of the lands that they had recoueres. All theſe later loſſes proceeded of ſundrie cauſes, as of particular warres leauied by ſome of the princes that ſtaied behinde in their lands that were gone yt voiages: of want of wine & other prouiſion: of the ſmall perſeuerance of them that were leagued, of the peſtilence that fell in the armie: & finally, of ſuch hinderances as the Emperors of Greece did vnderhand work to the weſteru forces: enuying, as it ſhuld ſeme, their generoſity, & being loth they ſhuld conquere the land which yt 
                  Sarazens had won frō the ſaid Empire. Theſe are the deformities of the former enterpriſes, which ought to be warily ſhunned for feare of diſgracing the preſent: for it is a double fault, to know the former ouer ſightes, & yet to fall into thē again. Other princes yt followed the aforenamed haue but defē
                  ded The warres of thoſe princes that ſucceded Godfrey and others againſt the Turkes. & yelded to ye Turkiſh rage, which ouerflowing in ye family of the Ottomans, hath for theſe 300. yeres ſtil increaſed to our great loſſe & deſtruction: howbeit euen in the middeſt of our diſorders we haue not wanted ſome excellēt perſons, who with very ſmal means haue withſtood the meruailous force of theſe barbarous nations, & whiles life hath laſted, ben a rampier to all Chriſtendome. One was Iohn Huniades the Father of Mathy Coruine, choſen to be king of Hungary. Another Scanderbeg Prince of Albania, who both were ſurnamed The ſcourges of the Turkes, becauſe of the great ſlaughters that they made in thoſe battailes that they won. Wherin we are to note Gods power & wiſedome, who with weak & ſmal things can pluck down the pride of the mighty. They like wiſe haue held long wars vpon the ſeas, yea, the Sarazens haue ben ſo ſtrong therin, ye oftentimes they haue made great diſcents in the coſtes of Chriſtendome, and haue taken land in ſundrie places, as in Spaine, the moſt part whereof they poſſeſſed a
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  t 780. yeeres alſo in Sicil where they remained aboue two hundred 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  res.

But the Turkes great power vpon the ſeaneuer appeared ſo much as after the loſſe of: Conſtantinople: For hauing ſo commodious a harborow, they thereof tooke occaſion to thinke vppon ſea matters, ſhewing themſelues terrible in the conqueſt of Ilandes and firme land, where they haue deſcended. The Chriſtians alwaies, ſo much as they might; withſtoode them, but in the end by litle & litle were through their great force oppreſſed, ſo as for theyr more aſſurance they haue bene driuen 
                     〈◊〉
                   them with the Mediterranean and Adriaticke ſea: abandoning vnto them almoſt all that is beyonde the ſame.
               Diuerſe are the reaſons that leade me to thinke the time to ſet vppon Why the time is now conuenient to ſett vpon the Turkes. them as conuenient now as euer. Firſt the want of experience in their greate Lord, who is ſayde to be rather a Philoſopher than a ſouldiour, as neuer wearing armour as his grandfathers Selim and Soliman, the conquer
                     •
                  rs of ſundrie countries did. For the Turkiſh nation hauing ſuch leaders doe notable things. Then their loſſes in the Perſian warres haue much weakened them, whereof we are to gather that their great proſperitie which ſo long hath accompanied them, doth now begin to droope. Thirdly, Don Iohns victory hath eaſed vs of one errour wherein wee were, which is, that wee thought thē to be by ſea inuincible, & withal taught vs what aduā
                  tage in ioyning we haue ouer them: wherein wee ſhould ſcarcelie haue bene confirmed but by this experience. All this together conſidered ſhould the more incline vs to take the occaſion when it is offered: for we muſt imagine that time altereth things, & men grow into experience, good hap returneth, & inuentions increaſe. I know our ſinnes are the chiefe cauſes that God vſeth them as ſcourges to ſmite vs, but we neede not doubt but they haue like wiſe fourefolde procured his wrath. And who knoweth whether their time bee not come to receiue the ſame that they haue inflicted vpon others? We ought to be aſſured that in his iuſt iudgementes toward his, hee alwayes mixeth his abundaunt mercie with his wrath, and they that be veſſelles of his wrath, ſhall ſoone or late feele his vengeance without mercie.
               To this purpoſe I will alleade a fooliſh Prophetie contained in their Alcaron where I haue read it, not that I thinke anie truth Prediction of the Turkes Alcoran. to be harboured in theyr falſe Oracles vnderpropped with lies: but becauſe ſometime the wicked haue at vnawares foretolde thinges that haue afterward come to paſſe: This it is. In the later dayes it ſhal come to paſſe, that the Muſulmans, that is to ſay, the Turkiſh nation,

ſhall ſtraie from the lawes of the great Prophet Mahumet, giuing themſelues to all iniquitie: Then ſhall the Chriſtian ſwoord ariſe and thruſt them out of their Empire. Such as haue ben conuerſant among them do report that their wiſe men doe ſometimes ſet theſe ſpeeches before them, and they feare them: as indeede they ought, ſith they were neuer ſo corrupt as at theſe dayes, or ſo worthie grieuous puniſhment.
               I haue bene long before I could ſpeake of the meanes to aſſayle The meanes to ſet vpon the Turkes. theſe ſo mightie aduerſaries: and the rather becauſe I haue imagined the former matters verie requiſite for the better vnderſtanding of that which I wil ſaie. To begin therefore I wil ſet to your view ſome counſayles of our forefathers, out of the which we may gather good inſtructions, who for the like cauſes haue often beene ſtirred vp to frame braue purpoſes. Guic ciardine the hiſtoriographer, who well noted ſuch things as happened in his time, reporteth that when Selim had conquered all Aegypt, and obtayned ſundrie victories elſe where, all Chriſtendome grew into great feare. His owne wordes becauſe they deſerue conſideration I will ſet downe. The Pope (ſayth he) with all the Court of Rome aſtoniſhed at ſuch ſucceſſe, 
                  Guicciard. lib. 13. 
                  and to the end to prouide againſt ſo great a miſchiefe, ſhewing that he would firſt craue Gods helpe, commanded ſundrie deuout proceſſions at Rome, wherin himſelfe went barefoote: Then calling vpon the help of men, hee ſent his Mandats to all Christian Princes, admoniſhing them of this great danger, and perſwading them to laie aſide all diſorders and contentions, ſpeedely to attend to the defence of religion and their common ſafetie, which was continuallie oppoſed to great danger, if with courage and vnited force they tranſported not the warre into Turkie, and ſo inuaded not the enimie in his owne Countrie. Here vppon the opinions of ſundrie ſkilfull men of warre and others that knew the Countries & diſpoſitiō as wel of the Princes as of the power of the Turks, being taken, it was thought neceſſary to make great prouiſion of money by the voluntarie contributions of Princes & an vniuerſal impoſtio be leuied ouer all Chriſtendome. That the Emperour with the Hungarian and Polonian horſemen, warlyke nations & ſuch as were practiſed in continuall wars agaynſt the Turkes, as alſo with ſuch the ſtrength of Germanie as might beſeeme ſo great an enterpriſe, ſhoulde ſayle along Danowe into Boſina in olde time tearmed Miſia, and ſo into Thrace, and to approch vnto Conſtantinople, the imperiall ſea of the Ottomans. That the French King with the forces of his Realme, the Ʋenecians and other Potentates of Italy, accompanied

with the footmen of Zuitzerland, ſhould paſſe from the port of Brunduſe in Albanie, a very eaſie and ſhort cut, to inuade Greece, a landful of Chriſtian inhabitants, as well in reſpect hereof, as for the intollerable yoake of the Turkes, moſt readie to rebell: That the kings of England, Spaine, and Portugall, as well in their nauies at Carthagene, and the hauens thereabout ſhould take their courſe with 200. ſhippes full of Spaniſh footmen & other ſouldiors to the ſtraights of Gallipolis, thence to make roads to Conſtantinople, hauing firſt ſeazed vpon the Dardanes, that is, their Caſtles ſtanding vppon the mouth of the ſtraight. That the Pope ſhould take the ſame courſe with an hundred great gallies. With theſe preparatiues ſufficient to couer both ſea and land, the Turkes eſtates being inuaded in ſo many places, who make their chitfeſt account of defence in the plaine field, it ſeemeth (eſpecially adding therto the innocation of Gods name, that of ſo holy a warre there could not be hoped but a happie end.
               
               This deliberation of the moſt excellent Captaines then liuing. I To what vſe the former diſcourſe of Guicards may ſerue, & what is to be altered in theſe daies. finde to be ſo well grounded, that I thinke we might borowe much of theirs but had the execution thereof inſued, we ſhould the better haue ſéene what it had ben, howbeit the death of Selim comming on, aſſwaged the feare of theſe Princes, & ſo conſequently their deſire to proceed, whereby they paſſed but to wordes. Now as ſince there haue followed great alterations, ſo are we to frame our ſelues according to the diſpoſition of matters, & ſomwhat to vary from this platforme, but rather in the particularities, than principall pointes thereof.
               Firſt we may be certaine that it is to ſmall purpoſe to inuade the Turkes by lande onely, or by ſea onely: for leauing them either of thoſe gaps open, they will thereby ſo moleſt vs, as that they will turne vs from the other, in kindling the flames farther within our houſes, than we can do in theirs. In reſpect wherof it is requiſite to ſet their whole eſtate in Europein combuſtion, by following the wars in euery part thereof, which is vnpoſſible to be performed wtout a mighty power as wel by ſea as by lād, which our anceſtors thought expedient, as alſo it is (as Guicciardine ſaith) the perfect meanes to abridge any warre: for being ſtrong, ye ſhal ſoone bring your enimies to reaſon either by victory or compoſition: Wheras contrariwiſe when it is weakly followed, it groweth ruinous. Whē 
                  Caeſar inuaded Pompey, who had ſeazed vpon all Greece and the Eaſterne Prouinces he made himſelfe ſtrong both by ſea and land, wherein neuertheleſſe his competitor exceeded him. The like did

                  Auguſtus againſt Marke Anthonie, who poſſeſſed the ſame countries which now ye Turks inioy, & both of thē had neere 1000. veſſels, & aboue 35. legions by land. But becauſe it is an eaſie matter to know, that for the well inuading of thoſe countries, both ye powers muſt be matched together, I wil ſpeak no more therof. As for ye partition of theſe princes forces, which Guicciardine mentioneth, it is not amiſſe, nor the inuaſiō of 3. ſides: albeit I think it were better for vs to ſtick to two. For I conſider that ye whole defence of the Turks lands conſiſteth in 2. great armies, the one vpon the land, yt other vpon ye ſea, neither hathhe anie fortified places as we haue, ſo as ye loſſe of one of theſe props is ye opening of a gate vnto vs, which is ye reaſon why I would wiſh we ſhould make but 2. ſtrong bodies wherwith to attempt our enterpriſes. Moreouer, if we ſhould ſtrike into Slauonia or Greece wt a body of 18. or 20000. men, they wold ere we were aware, fal vpō vs with ſome 100. or 120000. wherby we wanting aſſured places of retreat, this bodie would be quite ouer whelmed. This other reaſon wil I alſo adde: that if both our armies as wel by ſea as by land do ſhoot at Conſtantinople, and by winning litle & litle do attaine therto, muſt it not needs follow, yt in performing this purpoſe, they ſhal ſeaze not only vpō 
                  Slauonia, but alſo vpon all the land of Romagnia, which ſhal be a pray to toe conqueror.
               The Chriſtian forces would I wiſh to be thus diuided. The K. of How to deuide the Chriſtian forces, alſo to what number they ſhould amoūt 
                  Spain, as the mightieſt prince Chriſtian, to arme as many gallies & galeaſſes as he were able. The Pope, ye 
                  Venetians, wt other the potentates of Italy to ioyne with him, & I think, if they liſt to ſtraine thēſelues, they be able to ſet forth 300. galleis & 12. galeaſſes, beſides other ſmal veſſels for ye tranſport of victuals & horſe, which be but the dependances of ye campe. If any demand whether ye number may ſtay the Turks power by ſea, I thinke yea: for Don Iohn had but 200 galleis whē he wan ye battell againſt thē. As alſo when the armies, whether by land or by ſea do excéed a competēd quantity, ye reſt do but bréed confuſiō. The ſoldiers for the furniſhing of the ſaid veſſels might be leuied in Spain & Italy, notwithſtanding it would amoūt to 30000. For ye land, the Emperor likewiſe ſhold prepare a mighty army, to inuade through Hungary, conſiſting of the power of all Germany, the low countries, Sueden, Denmark, Boheme & Hungary, thereto alſo adioining his that now raigneth in Pole. lande, which vnited together woulde vndoubtedly amount vnto 35000 horſe, and 30000 footemen and 10000 pioners.

The other part of the land forces to come from the moſt Chriſtian king of France, the Queene of England, the king of Scots with the Suitzers and Griſons, who vnder ſome notable Captaine ſhould ioyne with the Emperor, and in my opinion, would amount vnto ſome 20000. footemen & 5000. horſe. This power would I take to be ſufficient to obtayne ſome braue victorie, containing at ye leaſt 125000. fighting men, which ſeemeth to be a great number, but if we alſo conſider all Chriſtendome, it is to be thought verie ſmall: neither doe I thinke they will be grieued with maintaining it foure yeeres, ſith ſo they may reape this benefit, to inioy fortie in peace and ſafetie. Charles the fift onely of his owne and part of the Empire brought before Metz 80000. men, and the armie that Maximilian laſtly raiſed againſt the Turks in the yere 1556. amounted vnto 60000. ſo as we ſhall performe no newe thing, but onely in the continuance thereof.
               Concerning Captaines ouer the Hungarians, the Emperour himſelfe might command, who cannot imploie his higneſſe in anie What Captaines were meet to command in the Chriſtians armie. act more worthie his greatneſſe, and he to be accompanied with his vnkles and brethren. The Dukes of Saxonie, Caſimire and other Germaine Princes, Earles, and Colonels, among whom he ſhould finde both proweſſe and good conduct. As for the French and what ſhould thereto be adioyned, we may eaſily finde Princes enowe to command: but I will name but two, whome I take to bee moſt meete, namely, the king of Nauarre, who in deſire of wel doing and courage, giueth place to none: and the Duke of Lorraine, whoſe aunceſtours hauing bene ſcourges to the Turkiſh nation, it is to be preſumed that their auncient good hap may accompanie his valor. So as it ſhould reſt in the King to appoint which of them ſhoulde haue charge, or if he ſhould commit it to them both alternatiuely, I am ſure neither of them ſhould want a goodly traine, as wel of the one as of the other religion. The nauie likewiſe woulde haue ſome mightie Captaine. And in as much as many doe certainly beleeue that the Duke of Sauoy (a Prince of great expectation & an imitatour of his Fathers magnanimitie) will enter alliance in Spaine, it may be the Catholike king may honour him with that office: for that authoritie is requiſite to rule ſo much nobilitie and Gentrie as ſhould there be found of both nations, who are not eaſie to be gouerned. Howbeit conſidering what experience ought to be in ſuch a head, I knowe none more capable than the Prince of Parma, who iuſtly deſerueth to be commended for the beſt Captain in Chriſtendome.

But I feare that euerie mans deſire to be employed in this expedition, would moderate the iealouſies of the firſt and ſeconde places, alſo that ſuch debates would eaſily be decided.
               When I conſider what Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, Captaines Of the principall members of this army. and notable Souldiours ſhall be in theſe expeditions, I knowe not how ſuch power can poſſiblie be beaten: For if in al Chriſtendome there were anie vertue, diſcretion, magnanimitie, arte or induſtrie, the moſt exquiſite thereof would vndoubtedly be brought thether by thoſe, who enflamed with a deſire of well doing, would liberallie in ſo noble an aſſemblie ſhew forth whatſoeuer the faireſt of their perfections, one would ſeke by coūſel, another by boldnes, another by diligence, each to outgoe his companion. The like ſhall wee ſee among our nobilitie: not coutentious enuies, but honeſt emulations, who might be moſt notable in well obeying and better commaunding. When ye haue in an armie a number of ſuch people as can leade the waie to others, and take ſure holde without letting goe, they make all the reſt to fight well. Neither can I thinke that there be many ſuch among the Turks, who being for the moſt part ſlaues doe fight for feare of puniſhment, rather than for loue of true glorie.
               Theſe armies ſhould be readie as well by land as by ſea, to march At what time the Chriſtian power ſhould begine their warre & how. whereſoeuer they ſhall be appointed at the beginning of May. But al the difficultie reſteth in knowing how to inuade, for we may proceede therein after ſundrie manees. I would thinke that the Chriſtians ſhould wholy purpoſe at the beginning of their war to grow to battayle with theſe barbarous people: for ſith their Empire conſiſteth onely vpon the good will of nations, we ſhall ſee wonderfull alterations, if at the firſt ariual they may in
                     •
                  ur
                     •
                  e anie notable ouerthrow: But it is a queſtion whether they maye bee eaſily drawen thereto: for commonly we ſee that if the enimie perceiue his aduerſaries deuiſes, he will ſtill ſeeke to leade him to contrarie purpoſes. This doe I confeſſe to be often put in practiſe: but we are to hope with ſo mightie and proude enimies as the Turkes, that it wil fall out as with a greate Boare whome the dogges haue het: for what ſoeuer he firſt ſeeth, man or dogge, by and by he maketh towarde it with wonderfull furie.
               We neuer found in writing that they haue bene ſlowe to battayle, for that they ſtill ſeeke to vphold the reputation of their name and armies. When they heare of the Chriſtians preparation to wars, they proceede in lyke ſort, and before we can come within 50.

leagues of their frontiers, they are ſo diligent that they haue ſacked halte ours. Whereby we know that they would ſoone couer the viſard, as we ſaie: and hauing throughly conſidered heereof, I finde that it would be a great aduantage vnto vs: for the heare and furie of Northerne nations is at the firſt verie forcible, but by delayes quaileth.
               Now let vs ſee wherein the land armie ſhould conſiſt, namelie, in 18000. Reiſtres, 10000. ſpeares armed after the French & Italian The troupes of the army that ſhould march by lande. manner, 2000. harquebuzes on horſeback, and 10000. Hungarian and Polonian ſpeares to ſerue for light horſemen. For the power muſt be receiued, each after the manner of his owne nation. The footmen to be compoſed of 20000. harquebuziers and 30000 ſpeares, in all amounting to 40000. horſe and 50000. footmen, all fighting men.
               Likewiſe for artillerie for the fielde, twentie Canons, and twentie greate Culuerines, accompanied with the pioners aforeſayd, and virtuall ſufficient for ſuch an armie. The thinking of all this maketh vs to reioyce, but when we dreame vpon the expenſes, it danteth vs: for it will require monthly 800000. Crownes, which riſeth to a great deale in a whole yeere. Furthermore, leaſt ſuch an armie if it ſhould go farre from the great riuers, or enter into the land, ſhould be much hindred for want of victuals and forage, it ſhall be forced to keep along the riuer of Danow, and there to begin their firſt purpoſes, ſo might they abound in all neceſſarie prouiſion, which ſhould be brought by the ſame. It is alſo meete to haue a bridge of boates accompanied with armed gallies to follow it, ſo to keepe both ſhores of the ſaid riuer as well for forages as for the ſiege of ſuch places as ſtand thervpon.
               I thinke that Strigonia is one of the firſt places that the Turks Their firſt endeuors. holde: but neither it, nor anie other that they poſſeſſe are (as I vnderſtand) of any ſtrength: for when they doubt that any ſhall be aſſalted they put in 8. or 10000. ſouldiours, and looke for no other fortification: and it is harde with ordinarie meanes onelie to wreaſt from them anie that is in theyr handes. Wherefore whether they ſhould fortune to bee the firſt or the laſt in the fielde, I am of opinion, to the ende to binde them to fight, it were good to make ſhew and that in earneſt, to ſet vppon ſome places of importaunce, thereby to make them to approche with theyr armie, ſo as they ſhoulde hardlie eſcape battayle, when they are come ſo neere with theyr carriage, footemen, and artillerie. For when they come but with

thirtie or fortie thouſande horſe to ſuccour what ſo is beſieged, they cannot by anie meanes be ouercome by reaſon of the ſwifteneſſe of theyr horſe, which neuertheleſſe dooth greatly moleſt a campe. I woulde alſo lyke verie well, that in tenne or twelue dayes before Their exerciſes. the armie ſhoulde marche, the Captaines euerie other daie ſhoulde caſt them into ſeuerall orders of battayle, whereby to chooſe the beſt to help themſelues withall when neede ſhoulde require. For it doe much better conceiue the trueth of thinges by liuely repreſentations, than by forecaſt figured vppon paper: And by them is the generall the better reſolued in his conception, and the inferiour Captaines to bee the better prouided to the practiſe.
               Heerein doo wee in our pettie warres ordinarilie faile, in that wee neuer looke to the ordering of battayles vntill within two dayes before wee muſt fight: and then dooth the Generall ſette downe a fayre order in writing howe bee will haue it, which hee ſendeth vnto the leaders of the regimentes as well of the horſemen as of the footemen. For ſuch ordering many times, as beeing made ouer raſhly and without ripe deliberation, proueth verie vnfit. The ordering therof in warre.
               
               It is verie requiſite that a Generall bee in minde verie perfecte in the order which hee purpoſeth to obſerue as well in the large fieldes as in the ſtraightes, leaſt hee bee amazed, or driuen into much conſultation when his buſineſſe commeth vppon him. For the chiefe groundes beeing well layde, if through anie accident the order bee to be altered, it is eaſilie performed. There bee ſome that will ſaie, that in ſo dooing wee ſhall warne the enimie of our order, whereby hee maye prouide to preuent vs.
               I graunt if wee ſtill vſe but one forme, it may be ſo. But when wee practiſe ſundrie, wee ſhall put all men in doubt which we will cleaue vnto, ſauing the Generall, who is to reſerue the beſt in memorie. For the well ordering of this armie, it were good to haue the aduice of ſuch Captaines as hauing ſerued in Hungarie, doe by experience beſt knowe the moſt conuenient formes. And ſith I am entered ſo farre into this point, I am content for the ſatiſfying of thoſe yt be curious, to deliuer my opinion concerning whatſoeuer may ſerue agaynſt theſe barbarous people. In this caſe we are to cōſider of two kinds of coūtries, ye one large, ye other

ſtraight. Concerning ye large or plaine, as we terme it, which is the moſt parte of Hungarie, the battayle may be ſo aranged, that the enimies innumerable ſtrength of horſe (which wil amoūt to 200000 at the leaſt) ſhall not without great loſſe endomage them, and verie hardly breake them.
               The order were to diſpearſe the horſemen among the footmen, as Their order in a large contry. vpō the like conſideration the late Duke of Guize did at the battel of Dreux. I woulde therefore make a ſtrong bodie of my armie conſiſting of eight battayles of footmen, each comprehending 2500 pikes, ſo as the ſayd rankes ſhould euerie of them containe ninetie men, & be 28. men thick, beſides the Enſignes, & to the flanks wold I ioyne 1000 harquebuziers. They ſhould be all ordered in an equal front with ſufficient ſpaces to ſet in araie 2000. horſe in foure ſquadrons, each of them of fiue hundred men, & fortie horſe in front, two ſomewhat for warder than the other two. Theſe ſeauen ſpaces might ſerue them for places of aduantage, and aſſured retraits to fall into order againe: for it would be too hot to come vpon them into place where they ſhould be ſo ſuccoured by the harquebuzerie and pikes: yea, in my minde it were meere raſhneſſe. Likewiſe in as much as the flankes of the battayles are not commonly armed but with harquebuziers, which is but a weake defence againſt a great armie of horſe, I would thinke it were good both the flankes of the two battayles ſtanding vppon the wings of the armie to bee fortefied with ſome other inſtrumentes like vnto thoſe which the Duke of Alua inuented and vſed when the Prince of Orenge paſſed ouer Meuſe or better, which might be eaſily brought thether by two hundred pioners, and thoſe ſhould ſuffice for one of each flanks: as for the reſt they ſhall neede none, as well for that the force of this order ſhall ſupplie that want, as alſo becauſe it would be ouercumberſome. On the right and lefte point without the battayles ſhould ſtand at each ſixe thouſand horſe, euery ſquadron of one thouſand, and in two bodies the one to ſupport the other. And if anie man aſke wherefore I make them ſo great, I ſaie, it is becauſe the Turkes, as I haue heard, doe make theirs (eſpeciallie in any great combats) of fiue or ſixe thouſand ſpeares, which ſwallowe vp three hundred horſe, as a lion would doe a mouſe. And therefore we muſt ſette ſtrength agaynſt ſtrength. Then woulde I diuide my 5000. harquebuziers into ten troopes, placing ſixe, as it were, for the aduenturers, at the heads of the battayles toward the wings, and the other foure at the taile. I would alſo place two thouſand harquebuziers

on horſeback at ye head of the horſemen vpon the wings to ſerue in the firſt ſkirmiſhes. Thus doe ye ſee in this great bodie 28000. horſe, 20000. Corcelets, & 13000. harquebuzes aranged which as I thinke, will not take aboue 4000. cōmon paces in length, wherin there is no great diſproportion: and I haue thus ſtretched it out to the ende to debarre the enemie from all hope of encloſing it. There would be likewiſe in ye firſt ranke of this great front almoſt 1900. men, which is ſufficient. The reſt of the men I would thus appoynt. I would make two ſmall bodies, which ſhould be ſet in aray 800. paces behinde the two winges of the armie: becauſe the firſt ſhockes doe begin there. In either of them would I place 4500. Corcelets in two battailes and 2500. Harquebuzes: then in the ſpaces and poynts 4000. horſe in eight ſquadrons, which for the two bodies would amount vnto 22000. men: euery wherof ſhould ſtirre when they perceiued any of the firſt troopes to yeeld: for vndoubtedly they ſhould ſo make them to holde faſt. I would alſo place betweene theſe two troopes and 500. paces behinde them 3000. horſe in three ſquadrons, whom the Emperour, or in his abſence his Lieutenant ſhould accompanie when it were requiſite to fight: And this ſhould be the Holy ancker, as we tearme it, which ſhould vpon great neceſſitie moue forward. Yet doe there remaine 1000. Corcelets, 2000. Harquebuzes, and 1000. Reiſtres or Hungarian horſemen, that ſhould be appoynted to the keeping of the Campe, which the Pioners ſhould fortifie with ſmall trenches for the ſafegard of the cariages: for if through negligence the enemie, who might appoynt twentie or thirtie thouſand horſe to doe the feate, ſhould peraduenture be ſuffered to ſacke it, wee ſhould afterward bee driuen through the inconueniences both generall and perticuler to breake vp our Campe. This armie thus ordered were able in my opinion to ſtand in a plaine fielde againſt ye whole power of the Turkes, who being deſtitute of Corcelets, Pikes and armed ſquadrons, can hardly ouerthrowe our battailes. Wee ſee likewiſe how our horſe are ſurely prouided for in the ſpaces: wherby I ſuppoſe that either the enemie muſt be endued with an extraordinarie valour, or our men ſhewe great cowardlineſſe if they loſe the battaile. This order haue I not here ſet downe as the beſt of all: for other men may peraduenture deuiſe ſome more conuenient: but it is done to the ende to inuite ſundrie Captaines to ſeeke what may be more profitable.
               The Chriſtian armie thus in preſence of the Turkes, they after

a few Canon ſhot I preſume they will begin, both becauſe they be Of the battaile by lande betweene the Chriſtians and Turkes. very proude, and alſo that they bee ordinarily fower againſt one, which greatly embouldeneth them, and will peraduenture come with ſome three or foureſcore thouſande horſe to charge gallantly vpon the flanckes of our formoſt horſe, yea euen in the middeſt of the head: but I would thinke they ſhould at this onſet be well beaten and repulſed with ye loſſe of ſome fower or fiue thouſand horſe: howbeit their horſe being very ſwift, they wil returne behind their maine battell to fall in aray againe. Then I imagine that hauing diſcharged ſome two volees of their Artillerie, whereof they haue plentie, they will giue a ſtrong charge with their whole bodie: whereof ſo much as ſhould ſtrike into the battailes or ſpaces would bée handled God knoweth how. But peraduenture the horſemen on the flanckes may bee ouerthrowne: which ſo happening, the other 2. ſmall bodies appointed for their ſupport ſhould mooue: who finding the victorers in diſorderly purſuite (which alwaies for the moſt part happeneth) ſhould ſo brauely inuade them, as alſo ſhould ſome of the Squadrons, who ſtepping out of the ſpaces aforeſaid, ſhould come vpon their ſlanckes, that they ſhould bée quite broken. So ſhould alſo their Harquebuzerie, being ioyned with ours, beare the puniſhment of their raſhneſſe. Neuertheleſſe, the Chriſtians ſhould not vndiſcréetly purſue them, for they are very ſkilfull in rallying themſelues, and would peraduenture ſo doe within two Canon ſhot, and ſo encloſe fower or fiue thouſand of the moſt eager vppon the chaſe, as their forefathers did D. Iohn of Burgundie, and all the French Nobilitie in their battaile againſt Amurathes. Wherefore, it were requiſite for the whole Chriſtian armie to march and ſende after them ſome twentie thouſand horſe by ſquadrons, each ſupporting other, except the Hungarian and Polonian horſe, who might goe more diſperſedly in chaſe. And it may ſeeme enough to chaſe them thus one league. To be briefe, I ſuppoſe that in ſo notable a iourney they might bée defeated of halfe their footmen, all their Artillerie and cariages, and aboue twentie thouſand horſe: but in caſe but one quarter of ſuch an exployt were at the firſt performed, yet would it breede great reputation, and in the Souldiers harts confirme a confidence to ouercome. For he who in warre winneth the firſt aduantages, conceiueth a great hope of the iſſue.
               Now muſt wee ſpeake one worde of the ſtraight countries. It Of the ordring of the army in the ſtraights. ſeemeth the armie to bée there in more ſafetie then in the large, by

reaſon of the great numbers of their footmen: and there if the enemie ſhould offer vpon them, they might alter their order according to the places, being ſtill diligent to keepe their aduantages of the Woodes, Uallies and Artillerie. But eſpecially they ought to beware of aranging their bodie in any ſuch ſorte, that the firſt ouerthrowne ſhould ſtrike into the ſecond: for that was the loſſe of the battaile of Poictiers, where King Iohn had fiftie thouſande men, and the Engliſh were but tenne thouſand. This ſo fauourable ſucceſſe once obteyned, no doubt afterwarde (the reſt of the great Artillerie prouided at Vienna being cauſed to march) wee might in three moneths take from them fower or fiue of the beſt townes ſtanding vppon Danowe, as Strigon, Bude, Peſt and others, which the enhabitants there about do better knowe. True it is there would be great lettes, and the Turkiſh armie, being refreſhed, would not faile to fauour their places, where wee might ſee braue ſkirmiſhes. In the meane tyme, wee to keepe that earneſt for our firſt yeeres worke: I leaue to your imagination whether all Chriſtendome would reioyce, when they ſhould heare of ſuch a victorie obteyned ouer thoſe who for theſe two hundred yeeres haue but tryumphed of our deſtruction. Yea euen the ſmall babes would ſing foorth the praiſes of ſuch valiant perſonages, by whome ſuch notable exploytes ſhould haue bene performed.
               Now let vs come to the Nauie, which being ſo mightie muſt Of the exploits of the nauy. not the whiles lye idely in the Hauens, but make ſaile to execute matters worthie thereof. My beſt counſaile were that it ſhould conforme it ſelfe to the lande power, in trying to bring the enemie to a daie of battaile: which peraduenture might bee eaſely done, as being of no leſſe pride by Sea then by lande: ſo as ſeeing vs drawe towarde Greece, they will by and by bee vpon our armie, neither ſhall wee neede to counterfaite the beſiedging of any place to bring them thereto. And ſith the battaile of Lepanto hath made them wiſe, the Chriſtians muſt alſo bee well reſolued in their inuentions and other neceſſarie meanes to attaine to the victorie. There are other reaſons, beſides the equitie of a cauſe and vrgent neceſſitie, that ſtirre vp men to fight couragiouſly: As the preſence of noble perſons which deteſt cowardlineſſe and exalt proweſſe: ſecondly the Captaines orations, wherein they exhort their ſouldiers to behaue themſelues manfully in ſolemne iorneys: Thirdly, confidence which encreaſeth when we ſee men well diſpoſed

and the armie well ordered: Finally hope of reward, which is a good ſpurre to ſuch purpoſes. And aboue all other the Spaniſh and Italian Captaines are meeteſt to take order herein, in whom, being accompanied with choiſe of valiant perſons, we are to thinke that neither order, courage, nor prouocation ſhall want. I will forbeare to diſcourſe of the putting of Nauies in aray, as one not ſo ſkilfull in Sea matters, notwithſtanding the order by Don Iohn obſerued at Lepanto, I haue alwaies thought to bee moſt conuenient and well inuented.
               Some too fearefull or ouer circumſpect perſon may ſay, that the That the armies as well by land as by ſea ſhould inuade, and how. hazarding of all our ſtrength at once is the way to bring all Chriſtendome into great daunger. Whereto I aunſwer, that he which voluntarily entereth the carrier, doth purpoſe to runne: and ſo he that ſhippeth himſelfe in a warre, as the aſſailant, muſt aduenture, otherwiſe all his former preparations and threates are in vayne. For it is a greater daunger to ſuffer a mans ſelfe to be by little and little deuoured and to do nothing. An other as farre too eager, conſidering of all this power, would to the contrary that wee ſhould march directly to Conſtantinople, and not to ſtay els where: but as this ſpeech is a token of courage, ſo is it a ſigne of ſmall experience (at the leaſt as I thinke) becauſe armies march not in poſte. Moreouer, they doe ordinarily meete with barres and ſtops which they muſt firſt breake. For vndoubtedly the Turkes being certified of theſe great preparations of the Chriſtians both by ſea and by land, will ſet againſt them three hundred thouſand fighting men, againſt whom they muſt march with leaden héeles and Iron hands, and take as great heede of ouerſight by raſhneſſe as by retchleſneſſe, eſpecially in actions of great importance.
               Now preſuppoſe the Turkes Nauie doe offer to fight with vs: I muſt not thinke our Souldiers to bee by ſea any whit of leſſe diſcretion, courage and felicitie then vpon the land: for I make certaine accompt of their victorie. But admit theſe barbarous people purpoſing onely to trye our men ſhould fight neere to their aduantages, and then hauing loſt twentie or thirtie gallies ſhould retire to the couert of their Townes and Caſtles: yet ſhould we ſo winne great fame and bee thought bolde that durſt aduenture to inuade them euen in the face of ſome of their Houlds. Then if any mans courage ſo encreaſed as needes he would to Conſtantinople, wee might tell him that beſides the reaſons afore named, we ſhould bée too farre of, and that the Turkiſh armie will ſtill be as ſtrong as the

Chriſtian. Againe, that although we had more fauourable ſucceſſe, yet were it too much preſumption to thinke at once to winne that proude Citie, without any armie by lande, within two hundred leagues thereof: as alſo that if they ſhould perceiue that wee would take that courſe, they would preſently thruſt in twentie thouſand Souldiers, and bring as many horſemen into the fielde to fauour it, all which they might raiſe in Natolie. And herevpon wee are to note that Mahumet the ſecond at the taking thereof beſieged it with two mightie armies, one by ſea, an other by land: the Chriſtians hauing at that tyme but fifteene or ſixteene thouſand men to defend it. But our beſt counſaile were to beſtowe the time vntill the ende of September in conquering of Moroca, inuading the ſame at the head, namely by Coron & Modon, either by thoſe Caſtles that kéepe the mouth of the gulfe of Leganto, to the end afterward to fortifie it after our beſt maner at the falling of that peece of an Ile where the famous citie of Corinth was in olde time builded. The like enterpriſe made Andrew Dorie in the yeere 1532. who by force tooke Coron, Patras, & Lepanto, places which were afterward loſt againe for lacke of ſuccour. Hauing therefore left a ſtrong garriſon of footmen in the conquered places, ſeuen or eight hundred horſes, and prouiſion of victualles ſufficient with thirtie gallies, whoſe ſlaues might ſerue for Pyoners, the reſt of the Nanie might bee diſmiſſed vntill the ſpring. Theſe through Gods great fauour might be the effects of the firſt yeere.
               Now are we to diſcourſe of the effects of the ſecond yere, when The continuation of the warre in the ſecond yere with the order to be taken as well by ſea as by lande. I thinke wee ſhould not finde the Turke ſo proude as before: but much more warie and aduiſed: for experience teacheth thoſe things which otherwiſe we neither would nor could knowe. The armies ſhould be readie to march in the beginning of May, with like purpoſe againe to come to battaile if the Turkes would offer it. But if they liſt to take a ſurer courſe and not to attempt any thing out of ſeaſon, then muſt the Captaines ſhewe forth their braue pollicies, whereby to force them to the combate without their Houlds, as Hanniball did, who by ſubteltie drewe the Romaines to three battailes, which he wonne ſoone after his ariuall in Italy. The moſt ordinary meanes to be practiſed to that entent, is to beſiege places of importance: for if this mooue not the enemie to hazard himſelfe, it is a ſigne of ſmall courage and leſſe force. I doubt not but into thoſe which they minde to vſe to delay vs withall, they will put 8. or 10000. Souldiers, well victualled and furniſhed with all ſortes

of munition,, whiles themſelues will lodge their armie ſome ſixe leagues of to relieue them as aportunitie may ſhall ſer
                     •
                  is. And to ſay the truth ſuch exployts will bee difficult, chiefly for any towne ſtanding vpon this great Riuer: But that muſt bee no let but that we proceede and with plentie of Pyoners, and inſtruments enowe to ſet teme thouſand men on worke, we raiſe trenches both offenſiue and deſenſiur, and builde as many Fortes as may bee requiſite for the more conuenient aſſaulting of the beſieged, and ſafe defence againſt the enemies armie, vſing withall whatſoeuer our bridges. And I think certainely that vp planting fiftie Canons before ſuch places as may be but weakely fortified, we ſhall in fower daies ſee breach ſufficient for a horſe to goe in at. Then comming to haudie blowes with them, wee being ſtrong and they weake, and withall hauing the aduantage of the qualitie and goodneſſe of our armour, may eaſely he we them in peeces, vnleſſe Chriſtian courteſie liſt to ſpare any. During theſe actions it will ſtande our horſemen on hande to bee very watchfull, in going to ſafeconduct the bictuall and forrage: wherein may bee braue enterpriſes, and either parte may lay great ambuſhes, to trye the ſufficiencie of the Captaines, together with the baliancie of the younger ſorte. And if the firſt yeere wee may reach to Bude; I thinke that, in the ſecond wee may reach vnto place where Draue falleth into Danowe. This don
                     •
                   the imperiall power ſhould bee placed in fome conuenient ground to vnderprop this newe couqueſt, vntill the townes conuenient to bee kept for the aſſurance of paſſage bee fortified and made defenſible: then to retire to their garriſons to paſſe ouer the wiuter. Concerning the Nauie, tyme of yeere comming on it ſhould ſet forwarde to the Ile of Negroponte, to put the Turke therefro: which if their armie ſhould peraduenture offer to let, then the ſame to be fought withall: For in this expedition, the watch word ſhould bee Fight: but if they lye aloofe, then to goe forwarde with their enterpriſe. But ſtill this is to be noted, that aſſailing the land, they muſt alwaies bée prouided as if themſelues ſhould be aſſailed by ſea. Then hauing diligently fortifled the beſt Hauens with men, virtuall and veſſels, the armie might ſco
                     ••
                  e ſome parte of the entries into the great Ocean, and ſo to rec
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  e to wintering.
               Hetherto haue I ſaide nothing of the enhabitants of Greece, 
                  Of the nations of Greece: the Turkes bondmen. who haue long groned after their deliuexie, becauſe I wot not what ſeruice may bee rea
                     •
                  ed at their handes▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , as the boyce goeth, their courages are ſo quayled through the great tyraunie

that mo
                     •
                  eſſeth them, and they ſo vnprouided of weapons and martiall knowledge, that I dure not ad
                     •
                  owe that they would make any great ſtirre ſo ſoone. In all thoſe Prouinces; lying on this ſide of Conſtantinople, which together are at this day called Romania, there bee many more Chriſtians then Turkes: and in many places for fower Turkiſh families wee ſhall finde aboue ten Chriſtian: but they bee ſo quayled and terrified, that when they be layd on with ſlaues they dare not complaine.
               Some man will laugh at me ſore for iudgeing the euents of warre, as if they ſhould fall out as I preſcribe them: But I am not ſo preſumpe
                     •
                  ous as to imagine that men can forſee the things that are to them vnknowne. For I doe onely diſcourſe here vpon by likely reaſons, leaning vnto certaine rules and experiences as men are accuſtomed in humaine affaires: as alſo I ſpeake of Coū
                     tries, Townes, Riuers, and Paſſages; not that I haue bene there, but by noting their 
                     ••
                  ituation in the Cardes: and withall to cauſe the common forte to conceiue-good hope in this enterpriſe, knowing well enough that in matter concerning battailes, men doe ordinarily take counſaile in the field, and it is the proper duetie of the Captaines there preſent to deliberate vpon ſuch matters.
               The third yeere comining on, I thinke the like cheerefulneſſe Of the exploits and behauiors of both the Chriſtian armies the third yeare. as had moued ſo many braue warriers to employe themſelues in the two former, would ſtill bee of like force in them. And albeit the enemies Iron, their owne paſſed labours and ſickneſſe ſhall haue taken ſome away, yet many other, who hetherto ſhall not haue ſtirred from home, being deſirous to perticipate in the common commendation, would goe to ſupplye the emptie roumes, ſo as there would bee no want of men. The tyme to take the fielde thus drawing on, the armie by land hauing paſſed Draue, ſhould march to the riuer of Saue, whether it is not paſt twentie Hungarian leagues: here doe I not thinke that the barbarous people will meete with them in groſſe by the way, but rather employe their whole ſtudies and endeuours to ſtoppe their paſſages ouer the riuer, which is ſuch an aduantage as (being good Captaines) they will preuaile of. Uppon thoſe tearmes may a man ſee on both ſides the practiſe of all ſortes of braue pollicies and inuentions. But becauſe experience hath alwaies taught that a mightie riuer can hardly bridle a mightie armie (for if they can not paſſe vnder the fauour of ſome commodious place together with their Artillerie; they will doe it by ſubteltie, dallying in one parte

while they caſt their bridges and doing their endeuours in an other) I will ſpeake no more thereof, ſauing that I am perſwaded that they may compaſſe it in eight daies. This done, the moſt profitable exployt will conſiſt in the aſſault of Belgrade, a famous towne ſtanding vpon the fall of Saue into Danowe, neither haue any action be
                     〈…〉
                  , in my opinion, of greater difficultie then this. For beſides that wee ſhall finde the-towne well prouided for defence, wee muſt alſo haue an eſpeciall eye to the Turkiſh armie, which will not bee farre of: keepe ſome great bridge vpon Saue: haue an other paſſage on the ſide of Danowe: make Fortes and Trenches: and goe ſafely on forraging with conducts, ſo as the taking of it were a notable peece of worke. And to iudge thereof, may wee not boldly ſay that thoſe that are accuſtomed to conquer, will ſurmount all theſe difficulties: This place once wonne, muſt ſpeedily bee repayred and a ſtrong garriſon left therein: as being the moſt conuenient place to eſtabliſh a great ſtorehouſe wherein to gather all neceſſarie prouiſion. There about doe there fall three great riuers not farre aſunder into Danowe: namely Draue, Saue, and Tibiſe, which ſpringeth about the borders of Tranſiluania, which are as great at the Rhine or Menſe, By theſe fower chanels might wee bring all commodities, in caſe wee firſt take order that the Turkes remayning in ſome places in the harte of the countrie moleſt not the boates. Alſo becauſe wee ſhall not haue ſpent paſt halfe the yere, the reſt may be employed in driuing them forth, which peraduenture may be eaſely done.
               Hauing thus ſpoken of the exployts of the land power, we muſt The exployts of the nauy. likewiſe ſay ſomewhat of the Nauie, which in the beginning of May ſhould make ſaile toward the conquered Ile of Negroponte: where if the Turkiſh were deſirous of battaile, it ſhould not be refuſed: but if it would not aduenture, but lye in waite for good oportunitie, the beſt deuiſe were to ſurpriſe and force the towne of Salonike, in olde tyme called Theſſalonica, which is in the borders of Macedon vpon the ſea coaſt, and being but weake might ſoone bée wonne. Then by all meanes poſſible to deuiſe how to make it defenſible, becauſe it were good there to leaue a ſtrong garriſon both of footmen and horſemen to ſcoure the countrie. Here it is to bée noted, that whatſoeuer were to bee left in the conquered Houlds ſhould bee an ouerplus of men aboue the number: for the armies both by ſea and land ſhould ſtill retayne their number furniſhed according as is preſcribed, to the ende to bee alwaies prepared to the

battaile. Wee might as well haue enterpriſed vpon the coaſtes of Sclauonia, where the Turkes doe keepe many townes, but by ſeaſing vpon theſe, which are more eaſie to be taken, we ſhall come behinde them, and ſo make them thinke as well vpon flight as fight. Hauing thus ſoiourned there one moneth or two, it might ſcoure the Iles of the maine ſea, as well to the ende to ſacke all the Turks there to bee found, as alſo to aſſure the Chriſtian enhabitants. It may bee the Turkes fearing the firſt heate of the Chriſtians, may ſuffer our armie to trye it ſelfe two or three moneths in the ſiedges of Forts, and then while they be al occupied about ſome one place, to come vpon them freſh and luſtely as they did at Gerbes where the Spaniſh forces were defeated: for the which the Spanyards likewiſe toward the ende of the ſiedge of Malta in parte requited them and ouerthrewe fiue or ſixe thouſand Turkes. For this inconuenience I hope the Captaines will well enough prouide for being ſurpriſed: and before our armie withdrawe to their wintering, it were good to leaue fortie gallies in the Ile of Candy, there to bée readie vpon neede. In the winter time likewiſe it were not amiſſe on the edge of Hungary to deale with the Walachians and Moldanians, the Turkes ſubiects, though his great enemies, in reſpect of their remembrance of the iniuries and miſchiefes lately inflicted vpon them, to procure them to riſe againſt them, and to ſend ſome choyſe of men waged to ioyne with the Chriſtian forces, or to worke any other profitable commotions. As for the Tranſiluanians, the Turkes tributaries, they will alſo be eaſely ſtirred vp: ſo as this ſupplye would ſtande vs in great ſteade to withſtande the Tartarians, if peraduenture the Turkes ſhould procure them to inuade Chriſtendome, to the ende to turne away our power from them. For 50000. Duckats by moneth they can cauſe 50000. horſemen to march, who as Graſhoppers doe make innumerable waſte. It were good alſo at the ſame tyme to practiſe with the enhabitants of Greece to declare themſelues at the next ſpring, whē they ſhould ſee the armies both by land and ſea ſet forward, and ſo fall vpon the Turkes ſcattered and dwelling in thoſe Prouinces.
               The effects of the fourth yeere which wee haue appoynted for Of the exployts and effects of both the armies in the fourth and laſt yere of their warres againſt the Turkes. the ende of this glorious conqueſt, ſhould be more notable then the former: wherefore it were moſt expedient that the good vnion of the Princes ſhould continue, leaſt neceſſary prouiſion ſhould fayle. Neither is it likely but it ſhould perſeuer, conſidering that proſperitie hauing alwaies accompanied theſe enterpriſes, euery man repleniſhed

with hope would ſtraine himſelf to attaine to the wiſhed ende. With greater courage therefore and the ſame men of other yeeres ſhould the whole armie by land take the fielde more tymely then aforetyme. At Belgrade ſhould there bee alreadie prouided plentie of munition for the Artillerie, with a ſurpluſage of two thouſand horſe to performe the furniture therof, and three hundred Chariots for victuals at the leaſt: for going from thence they muſt giue ouer the riuers. Thus ſhould they march to performe their worke toward the towne of Sophy, which is the beginning of Bulgarie: for that doe the Cardes ſhewe to bee the direct way to Conſtantinople, not paſt two hundred french leagues therfro. It ſtandeth in a plaine and is vnfortified. It is likely the Turkes will not there make their head, but hauing gotten out the enhabitants, and either conſumed or tranſported the victuals, that they will leaue quite emptie and goe to Philippopoli, there to make vp their whole campe. The ſame is a towne of Thrace, & famous through the battaile that Brutus and Caſsius there loſt. It ſtandeth in a fruitfull ſoyle vppon a ſmall hill, at the foote whereof runneth a ſmall riuer ſcarce wadeable. This were a fit place and well choſen to make great reſiſtance, yea and to hazard a fielde: for it is not ſo neere their Empire that by the loſſe of a fielde they may being in feares bee preuented, neither ſo farre of but that they may, if Fortune ſo farre frowne vpon them, there gather vp good relliques of their armie: wherefore I ſuppoſe they will fight there, yea and their Emperour came thether in perſon: And how can he ſuffer vs to inuade him euen to his denne and not defend himſelfe after the examples of the nobleſt beaſtes? Albeit alſo that this nation bee repleniſhed with al vniuſtice and crueltie, yet are they withall fierce and hardie, and ſuch as make great accompt of their reputation. The Chriſtians likewiſe ſhould haue matter whereon to encreaſe their hope, conſidering there are no more great Riuers or ſtrong Houldes before they come to Conſtantinople: their onely hinderance will bee a mightie armie to reſiſt them, whereat valiant perſons doe reioyce: neither is there any other thing that troubleth them but when they are forced to fight againſt Hunger, Thirſt, Sickneſſe, great heate or extreme colde, becauſe there is no vertue but may be ſuppreſſed by ſuch inconueniences.
               The Chriſtian armie may, as I ſuppoſe, ariue at Philippopoli about the middeſt of June, where if the Turkes ſhould be entrenched, and lodged in any ground of aduantage, it will be hard pulling

of them foorth: But becauſe they haue neuer vſed ſo to doe, eſpecially their Emperour being preſent, I will rather preſume that they wil after their wonted maner come bouldly into the field, as did the firſt Baiazet againſt Tamerlane, notwithſtanding his armie were innumerable. I thinke the Turkiſh power would amount vnto 220000. men, and the Chriſtians to foureſcore thouſand: for ſome muſt haue bene left in the laſt warres in garriſons, and ſome to ſafeconduct victualles, &c. And I dare aſſure that as well the one parte as the other will bee well bent to ouercome, becauſe this battaile ſhould bee as it were a definitiue ſentnce of the whole warre. Of the order I will not ſpeake, for if the ſame which I haue before preſcribed bee not good, they may deuiſe of a better, and there referre the euent to God, who (as wee are to hope) will fauour thoſe that worſhippe him, againſt ſuch as doe diſhonor him.
               When I conſider with my ſelfe of this great warre and ſtately Of what importance this warre againſt the Turke is in reſpect of all other warres. armies, and conferre them with our ſmall ones in theſe partes, I remember the aunſwer of Alexander to Antipater, whom he left in Macedonia at his going to the conqueſt of Aſia. Antipater wrote vnto him that certaine of his enemies were riſen againſt him and had alreadie brought into the fielde tenne or twelue thouſand men, and therefore did deſire him to ſende him ſuccour: he returned him this aunſwer: All your ſmall warres in Macedonia, now that I fight againſt the mightie armies of Daryus, and am conquering of the great Empire of Aſia, doe ſeeme vnto me to bee battailes betweene Cattes and Rattes, and therefore reſiſt them as well as you may.
               
               Some man may ſay, that ſometime in our ciuill warres we may note ſome braue martiall exploytes, albeit with ſmall power, as at the battailes of Dreux, S. Denis, Montcontour fought in France, with the ſiedges of Roan and Rochell: alſo ſeuen or eight great ouerthrowes in Flanders, with the ſiedges of Harlem, Maiſtrict, Tournay and Oudenard: I graunt it: howbeit they are no whit to be compared to the battaile of Lepanto which D. Iohn wonne. As alſo I beléeue the ſiedge of Malta which withſtoode foure ſcore thouſand Canon ſhot, and that of Nicoſia in Cyprus, which as ſome write bare out fifteene, are to be preferred before the afore alleadged. The wars againſt Infidels are the ſame which our braue Captaines & ſouldiers ought to ſeeke 100. leagues of, where they ought likewiſe to flee 50. from the ciuill, which by their continuall

courſe doe deuoure and conſume, and that with ſmall huſbandrie the flower of kingdomes and Commonwelths.
               I neede not to deſeribe the maner of this great battaile, for wee muſt imagine that in the former conflicts were neuer ſeene ſuch Of the principal battaile againſt the Turkes. ſtomackes or ſo furious charges. To be briefe, after three howers fight I ſuppoſe they will leaue vs but a bloodie victorie: But ſuch as may there periſh, ſhall build to themſelues more honorable ſepulchers than thoſe that are purchaſed by perticuler quarels, wherin the ſoules doe for the moſt parte encurre ſhipwracke. In this caſe ſhall their deſire be iuſt, and their cauſe good, both which conioyned with that excellent courage that many ſhall haue here ſhewed, will breede perpetuall renowme, which ſhall yet crowne the poſteritie of noble perſons that ſtill may remayne. The Turkes thus ouerthrowne and their campe ſpoyled, wee ſhall bée driuen to ſoiourne eight or tenne daies at Philippopoli, which after this great loſſe would make no reſiſtance, to reſt our ſelues and prouide for the wounded: and there were it requiſite to hazard ſundrie Greekes ſeuerally to goe to carie newes of this good ſucceſſe to Salonike, as alſo to ſende the Nauie worde, to the ende the ſame might drawe toward Conſtantinople: for it were hard to beſiedge it without both the powers togethers. The Turkes loſſe in this battaile cannot bee ſuch but he ſhall ſaue 130000. men, of whome ſome may ſcatter ouer the countrie to ſee to the preſeruation of their families which they may haue left ſo abroade, but the great bodie will drawe toward Conſtantinople with their Emperour, there to make their laſt reſiſtance, for in the plaine fielde dare they ſhewe themſelues no more. Becauſe alſo the towne is nothing ſtrong, we muſt imagine they would with all diligence raiſe fortifications of earth, make their planes, & erect their ſpurres to plant their Artillerie vpon: All the victuall alſo there about would they take into the towne, leauing for the defence thereof at the leaſt fortie thouſand men: but for their great Lord, it is to be preſumed that he would paſſe forward into Natolia, which is the leſſer Aſia, with all his treaſure and Concubines, there to prouide for newe ſuccour.
               Our power by land according as they could make their preparations, The following of the victorie. ſhould by little and little ſet forward, leauing a ſufficient garriſon in Philippopoli to keepe the waies. Thence ſhould it paſſe to Adrianople, a great Citie, which being very weak, would neuer make reſiſtance: where alſo it were good to leaue ſome garriſon,

and there to lay vp whatſoeuer victualles might bee gotten, wherof, through diligence we ſhould neuer want. This order were likewiſe to be obſerued, That the Souldier ſhould neuer ſpoyle any but of the Turkiſh nation: alſo that all Chriſtians ſhould bee exempt from pillage and ſeruitude: ſo would they bring you in virtuals from fiftie leagues about. Alſo good order and ſeuere iuſtice ought to bee eſtabliſhed in great armies, otherwiſe through the multitude of wicked and vnthriftie perſons all would runne into confuſion, were not their mallice by ſuch meanes brideled and puniſhed. During three or fower daies reſt at Adrianople, wee muſt cauſe our Nauie to ſet forward, whereto, hearing of this good ſucceſſe it will not be very ſlack. It ſhould draw toward the ſtraights of Helleſpont, where it is likely the Turkes remembring their loſſes and not willing raſhly to hazard, vſing the aduantage of the place, will ſettle themſelues to fight, where they may bee flancked with the artillerie of the Caſtles: beſides that they ſhall haue that commoditie that they cannot bee aſſailed without fower ſcore or an hundred gallies in front.
               The firſt day that our armie ſhould ſhewe it ſelfe to the enemie The exp
                        〈…〉
                      of the Nauie in good order to behould their countenance they will diſcharge ſundrie Canons, which muſt be aunſwered with the like: and ſo to retire conſidering the ſtrength of the place. In the euening they ſhould take counſaile, and the expert Marriners to giue their opinions how to attempt nothing out of ſeaſon. Finally, the Captaines ſhould reſolue to land ſome of their men and artillerie on the ſide of Europe to beate and take ſome one of the Caſtles, to the ende to diſplace the Turkes from this aduantage: conſidering they ſhall there finde but fower or fiue hundred horſe on that ſide, where on the ſide of Aſia they ſhall meete with aboue two thouſand. By breake of day they muſt put forth fower thouſand Corcelets, ſixe thouſand Harquebuziers, and thirtie Canons out of the gallies, landed by the forſats or gallie ſlaues. While they ſhal thus march, the enemies horſe will come to prouoke them, but the number of Muſket ſhot ſhall ſcatter them well enough: So ſoone as night is come they ſhall make their approaches to the fortereſſe and the artillerie bring planted, they ſhall by breake of day fall to beating of it. This will make the Turkes to prouide to bring vppon them twentie thouſand men to cut them in péeces: or els with ſome 150. gallies to inuade our Nauie there to doe the like, ſith they ſhall finde it vnfurniſhed. But the Turkes liking beſt of this ſecond

counſaile, will ſeeke to put in execution. Which our armie perceiuing, they muſt goe on halfe the way with their furniſhed gallies, which may bee about two hundred, and ſo each armie deuided into three parts to ioyne bouldly: but after a long houres fight our men hauing the victorie, ſcarce the third parte of the enemies gallies ſhall ſaue themſelues. The ſame tyme alſo may the Caſtle that our men ſhal haue beſiedged, after the brunt of a furious aſſault be taken. Thus ſhould wée become maiſters of this proude paſſage where Xerxes built a wonderfull bridge of veſſelles, and ſuch as ſhall bée eſcaped, amounting to ſome one hundred gallies, may carie the newes of their miſhappe to Conſtantinople. Our men hauing then ſoiourned there fiue or ſixe daies, as well to prouide for their wounded, as to take the other Caſtle, hauing put good garriſons into both ſhall take the way to Conſtantinople, where they may ariue within two daies after the armie by lande. Then on both ſides knowing of the arriuall of their long looked for and victorious forces, it is not to bee demaunded what ioyes there will be.
               But wee may in trueth affirme this laſt deede to bée more difficult then the reſt. For a battaile, though well fought is but one Of the ſiege, aſſaults and taking of Conſtantinople. daies worke, whereas the forcing of ſo many men, couered with rampiers and prouided of all prouiſion to be atchieued in two moneths, is a teſtimonie of the experience of the Captaines and valiancie of the Souldiers. The land armie being come within two leagues of the towne, the beſt Captaines with 20000. horſe and 7. or 8000. Harquebuziers ſhould goe within halfe a league therof to diſcouer the lodgings, and well to conſider what may anoye or empeach their ſafetie. Neither is it to bee doubted but they may thereby growe to a hot ſkirmiſh: for the Turkes being ſo ſtrong in the towne will ſhewe their couragies and ſmall aſtoniſhment. The next day they ſhall come to take their lodgings betime, and to furniſh themſelues with ſome ſleight trenches at the head and middeſt of the flanckes. To the ende alſo the Nauie may conferre with the land power, and ſafely ſende their prouiſions, it will bee good at euery thouſand ſteppes to make ſmall fortes with trenches for the ſafetie of the paſſages from the ſea, about which workes both the Pyoners and the moſt parte of the Souldiers may labour 7. or 8. daies. This done, they ſhould goe neerer to diſcouer the towne, whereon they muſt ſtay at the leaſt fower or fiue daies: for my ſelf haue ordinarily ſeene that of haſty and raſh diſcoueries haue enſued

great ouerſights. Now muſt wee looke what way will bee beſt to giue the aſſault, which I would wiſh to doe but in one place: for ſeparating the armie the garde of the trenches may proue too weake, and ſo not bee able to beare their ſailies. I would not thinke it amiſſe to place 6000. Corcelets, and as many Harquebuziers at the leaſt, with 3000. horſe vpon the flanckes in ſome place vnder couert, hauing alſo the whole bodie of the armie to ſupport them, which ſhould not be aboue a Canonſhot of. The firſt trench ſhould bee made a thouſand paces from the Campe in forme defenſiue, with conuenient flanckers, and two long wings of fiue or ſixe hundred paces ſtretching toward the campe: alſo to the ende not to be eaſely enuironed behinde by any ſudden ſailie, it ſhould bee made large enough to take 10000. men. The ſecond ſhould come within 500. paces of the towne, in forme offenſiue, & at euery 100. paces ſome ſmall circuite of Gabions for ye Enſignes to retire into, with a ſtrong guard where they may fight a whole quarter of an houre. Within 20. paces farther they ſhould place 25. Canons on three Gabions to ſhoote at the defences, the ſame to be defended by day with the harquebuzery of the trenches, and by night by ſome ſmall defenſiue trench on each ſide. Now thinke ye how many of their peeces may be diſmounted in 5. or 6. daies from of their new fortifications made in haſt. In this ſiedge it will be requiſite to procéed with all diligence and force: for when they giue a mightie people time, the ſame doth in one moneth build a newe towne, hauing to worke but the length of 500. paces. Being once ſure of the artillerie within, they ſhould begin to make the great batterie, bringing their peeces within 200. paces of the wall, and there planting them with all poſſible aſſurance, they ſhould make but two breaches, howbeit thoſe to bee both large and reaſonable, wherevpon fiftie Canons aſſiſted with the fauour of ten long Culuerings hauing plaide ſome ſixe daies, it is likely that the horſes may paſſe. I will not ſpeake of their ſaillies, ſkirmiſhes and other kindes of combats ordinarily to bee performed, as being generally better to bee imagined then perticulerly foreſeene. Then ought the olde to giue counſaile: the young to aduenture: and thoſe of middle age to preſerue: In ſomme, euery man ſhould looke for a ſhare in the well doing. By Sea likewiſe other enterpriſes as well great as ſmall wherewith to ſurpriſe were to bee delt in, in ſuch ſorte as this mortall and bloodie tragedie might bee beautified with the diuerſitie of ſo many newe actions.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
fortie yeeres in this barbarous nations poſſeſſion, ſhall bee reſtored to the auncient owners. Their Emperor Mahumet was 54. daies about the winning of it, & we ſhall not be much more than two moneths, not withſtanding it were defended with a farre greater power. But he in his victorie vſed all kind of crueltie, inſolencie and v
                     •
                  
                  lanie, which are vtterly to be ſhunned: and to the contrary we ought to vſe all gentleneſſe and moderation to warde the people: as wiſhing rather their conuerſion, and Ieſus Chriſt honored in their temples, than to ſee their bloudie bodies ſcattered all ouer the ſtreetes, although it be to be preſumed, that many will be ſlayne in the heats thereof: neither will the ſouldiours be ſlacke in gathering vp ſo plentifull a praie, as in deede they ſhall haue deſerued ſome recompence: but the valyant mindes will neuer ſtand therevpon, but bee content with the honour and ſome fauſhion, or ſuch like thing to bring home and hang in theyr cloſets, that their children ſeeing ſo honorable ſpoyles of their parents conqueſt in ſo honorable a place, may remember to initate their vertue.
               The hyſtories do report that three dayes after the winning thereof, The behauiors after the Conqueſt. 
                  Mahumet went to the temple of Saint Sophie to giue ſolemne thanks to his falſe God: much rather ought yt Chriſtians therefore to ſing holy Hymnes to the true God whome they worſhip: and to ſound forth the ſame, not in the temples onely, but alſo in the highe wayes and open fields for his fauour in atchieuing ſo triumphant and long wiſhed a victorie. Then order being taken to preuent all mutinie among the nations for the pillage, and hauing limited thē a time to ordaine thereof, the ſouldiors ſhould be ſent to lodge each in his quarter, except ſuch as ſhould bee choſen to keepe the Towne, & then ſhoulde they alſo take order for the enhabiting thereof with gouernement conuenient. In as much alſo as great numbers of the Turkes may bee retired into ſundrie townes in the inwarde parte of the lande, it were good to ſend two armies, each conſiſting of fifteene thouſand men, with artillerie conuenient to ſcoure the ſame. Like wiſe to ſend forth an hundred or ſixe ſcore Galleies to bring all the coaſts vnder the Chriſtian obedien
                     •
                  e. The pioners al, ſo to be retayned for the for tefying of Conſtantinople, wherein it were good to lodge ſiue regiments of footemen for the gard thereof with two thouſand ſpeares, and to leaue fifty Galleyes in the hauen.
               Farther, if Autumne ſhould be anie thing begun, in which ſeaſon it is no good trauayling either by ſea or by land, the armies ſhould

bee diuided into garriſous in the moſt meete places in Greece, Thrace, and other Prouinces: neither were it amiſſe for the Emperours maieſtie there to keepe his Winter with the aſſiſtance of the counſayle of the Princes confederate, to the end their countenance might cut off ſuch diſorders and inſolencies as vſually wait vppon proſperitie.
               Theſe things thus executed, it were good (as is ſayde in the beginning) Partition of the Conqueſt. to looke to the partition of the lande that ſhall haue beene conquered: and according to the expenſes of each Prince and common wealth in theſe conqueſts, to adiudge to them theyr iuſt deſert. Like wiſe to reſerue ſundrie places for ſuch braue Captaynes as may haue behaued themſelues valiantly and done anie notable ſeruice. But I thinke it were better to ſtay the diuiſion vntill we haue the thing, rather than now to diſcourſe thereof in vaine, ouely wee are to imagine, that if wee agree in the conqueſt, wee will not fall out in the partition.
               But ſome man may heere ſcoffingly ſaie, that I haue diſcourſed brauely in paper, and my ſelfe will confeſſe as much: howbeit hee cannot denie but ſuch a troope as I haue heere deſcribed, beeing in the field, woulde become it better, and I am ſorie we are not alreadie come to it, that wee might with the ſwoorde perfourme that which I haue nowe ſhadowed with the penne. My intent is onely to waken the Chriſtians, and to beate it into them, neuertheleſſe if in my ſpeeches I haue ſtrayed in ſome points thorough want of knowledge of the places, faſhions of the people, qualities of Potentates, or any other thing meete for this or for that, I will neuer denie my fault, whereinto my good affection hath made me to fall.
               To bee briefe, this will bee in my minde, the iſſue of ſo iuſt and The concluſion of this diſcourſe. neceſſarie an enterpriſe. And in caſe all Chriſtian Princes had not ſo many controuerſies among themſelues, and withal would haue taken more compaſſion of the miſeries of thoſe that reclayme the name of Jeſus Chriſt, long ſince had wee brooken off halfe the ſcorges which doe nowe ſtrike vs. This warre would breede no remorſe of conſcience, neyther ſhoulde wee ſee the miſchiefes and confuſions wherewith ours are repleniſhed: but euerie thing woulde bee guided by martiall orders: and puniſhmentes, and rewardes miniſtred according to reaſon. Neyther is it to be doubted but ſuch a voyage woulde bee as notable as euer was Godfreyes of Boullein.
                  
The onely faulte why it is not put in practiſe, reſteth in the Kings, Princes and Potentates that beare ſoueraigne dominion ouer the people, and much more profitable and honourable would it bee vnto them, than to ſtand quarrelling with their neighbours, or to ſuffer ſo much of their ſubiects bloud to be ſhedde vnder coulour of pietie, and ſo make their warres domeſticall and perpetuall. I knowe wee haue ſome controuerſies in religion among vs, which notwithſtanding, the Proteſtants and Catholiks are ſtill brethren, and grafted vpon one ſelfe ſtocke Ieſus Chriſt. But with theſe prophane Mahumetiſts, who worſhippe an imaginarie God, which is (as the Scripture ſayth) rather a deuill, and do pollute al honeſtlie and ſack the world, what coniunction or fellowſhippe can we haue? Agaynſt theſe enimies, the rauiſhers of our goods, tormentours of our bodies and poiſoners of our ſoules are wee to ſtriue with our ſwoords. But among thoſe that beare one ſelfe title, all controuerſies ought to be ended in modeſtie and truth.
            
            
               The 23. Diſcourſe.
               
                  Of the Philoſophers Stone.
               
               
                  AFter that through the knowledge of good Letters The fruits of learning. (which by Gods eſpeciall goodneſſe are diſpearſed in ſundrie places in this latter worlde) the artes and ſciences had recouered their auncient beautie, diuerſe men hauing ſeene the glimpes of this light, which for many yeeres had, as it were layen buryed, haue therewith holpen themſelues in the ſafe conduct to the ſearch of difficulte and hidden ſecretes: and according to the greater light that eache hath receiued, ſo hath he penetrated fartheſt into the deapth of ſuch wonderfull ſecrets as are diſpearſed throughout the whole worlde.

Yea, euen at this daie, who ſo liſt to beholde anie Countrie whatſoeuer, ſhall in diuerſe perſons perceiue the lyke affection and diligence as haue beene in their predeceſſours to finde out the perfection of thoſe things that other men had in their dayes ſought for. But as when many archers do ſhoote, few doe hit the marke, ſo are there not many that can atteyn to that that in their imaginations they had conceiued: which default is rather to be attributed to the weakneſſe of mans braine, than to any imperfection of the arts and ſciences, the which he that can wel vſe and reduce to their true end, doth attaine a great part of his deſire.
               Among thoſe that are (but ouer curiouſlie) giuen to the purſuit Of ſuch as are to curious in the ſearch for gould by Alcumie. of diuerſe obiects, there are none that ſtande in greater need of admonition, than ſuch as profeſſe with continuall blowing to make their furnaces yeeld forth great treaſure, which they imagine their long proofes ſhould reueale: for wee ought to take compaſſion of thoſe whome we ſee in errour to ſpend their yeeres and looſe theyr labour, without reaping any fruit whatſoeuer, which haue mooued me to giue thē this ſmal aduertiſement, which they may vouchſafe to take in good part: wherein I pretende by common reaſon eaſie to comprehend, and according to my abilitie, to ſhew them that they are deceiued in thoſe meanes that they take to attaine to their wiſhed end. Afterward I will ſpeake one word to ſome learned Philoſophicall The ſumme of this diſcourſe. 
                  Alcumiſts, that proſecute the ſame obiect, as alſo ſhew what is to be iudged of their ſo rare and vnknowen purpoſe. Finallie, hauing confeſſed that there is a true Philoſophicall ſtone (but rather ſpirituall than materiall) I will declare what it is, alſo that being diligently ſought, it may be found, and found will bring incomparable treaſure and contentation.
               There be, as I take it, in theſe dayes three kindes of men which deale in ſeeking for golde by Alcumiſtrie. The firſt, beeing poore, Three ſorts of men that deale Alcumie. are through neceſſity that oppreſſeth, driuen to haue recourſe to this art, hoping thereby to find remedie for their want. The ſecond beeing learned, are by the curioſitie of their minds moued to ſearch into natures principall workes, but thereto eſpecially driuen by lycorouſneſſe of profite. The third are mightie Lordes, whoſe deſires (ſtill tending to greatneſſe and wealth) are through other mennes perſwaſions ſo ſtirred vp, that for the compaſſing as wel of the one as of the other, they are diſpoſed to vſe this art. Now by the examination of the cauſes that moue each part, we may iudge who hath the beſt intent. But in the meane time it is greatly to be preſumed

that they all ſhoote and draw at the deuill of ſiluer.
               I haue hard ſome of them diſcourſe in this manner. There haue bene (ſay ſome of them) in time paſt ſundrie learned perſons as Mercurius Trimegiſtus, Geber, and diuerſe Arabians, that haue imployed their time in the conſideration of both naturall and ſupernatural things, who in their bookes haue left written diuerſe goodly inſtructions concerning the Philoſophers ſtone or pouder of proiection, which is of ſo wonderful a vertue, that albeit their ſpeeches be verie darke, yet are they of ſuch ſort, that ſundrie excellent wits haue ſince vnderſtood them, & plainly expoūded their higheſt conceits, in putting in practiſe that which others haue bene content to ſee into by ſpeculation: for both theſe conioyned they haue by ſūdry proofes deliuered to the view of the ſenſe that which in old time was cōprehēded only in imaginatiō whence haue proceeded the diſcouerie of wonderfull ſecrets. Truly theſe ſpeeches bere a goodly ſhew and are built vpon the authorities of very braue perſonages, which theſe puffing bellowes do diligently note, to the end to ſet the better gloſſe vpon their merchandiſe. Neither can I tell whether I dare alledge that which one of their learned Alcumiſts did on a time tell me, namely, That they were the heretikes of their ſect: but I referre my ſelfe to the truth thereof. Now if the conſiderations of antiquitie haue ben able as ſparkles to kindle in their hearts the deſire which wee ſee doth conſume them, the receites and books written in our dayes of the like argument cannot but haue greatly increaſed the ſame, and experience moſt of all: in ſuch manner as ſome do ſeeme to be euen rauiſhed in diſcourſing vpon the excellencie of this art.
               Now will I proceed in the courſe of their reaſons which are as doe follow. That God hath not in vaine indued man with the vnderſtāding, which he hath giu him to the end to conſider of the greatnes and beautie of his diuine workes, and thereof reape ſo much fruite as ſhoulde bee vnto him permitted, that afterward he might yeeld to him all praiſe. That in time paſt he reuealed infinite, wonderful, and ſingular things: alwaies reſeruing to himſelfe neuertheles ſūdry new ſecrets to diſcloſe, by the varietie whereof the more to ſtirre vp euerie man to confeſſe that the abundance of his workes are incomprehenſible. That the Weſt Indies which ſeeme to incloſe the whole treſures of the earth, vntill, before vnknowen, were not diſcouered within theſe hundred yeeres. Likewiſe that in theſe later yeeres the art of tranſformation of vnperfect mettals into perfect, & the multiplying of the quantity therof, which barbarouſneſſe and ignoraunce had long buried, is as it were

reuiued agayne. Alſo that men haue learned with fire to drawe forth the eſſence of ſundry things, whereof they haue conpounded moſt ſoueraigne medicines as well to preſerue health, as to cure diſeaſes. By which ſpeeches it ſeemeth the Philoſophers ſtone to conſiſt in ſuch tranſmutation and multiplication: and this doe all the ſchollers of this arte together with their bookes affirme: A matter of ſufficient admiration, which alſo miniſtreth argument ſufficient to diſpute vpon. But firſt I muſt declare ſome of their principles: They ſaie Their principles. that according to the opinions of ſundrie auncient Philoſophers, the earth hath in her bowels encloſed a certaine ſubſtance common to all mettalls, and apt to receiue whatſoeuer the conuenient formes of the ſame. Alſo that the ſayd ſubſtance warmed with a certaine heat, ſhut vp in the ſame earth; doth in long proceſſe of time purge and waxe lyquide, afterward that it congealeth and groweth hard. Thus hauing by little and little in this ſlow generation loſt the vnperfect qualities, in the end it attaineth to this perfection, whereto nature laboureth to bring euerie thing. This is their opinion of the ingendering of mettals; which frō vnperfect do afterward grow to perfection: among the which Golde hath the firſt place, and Siluer the ſecond. Theſe foundations thus laide, ſome ſpeculatiue minds haue imagined that it is poſſible by art to imitate nature, & firſt that the matter requiſite and neceſſary may be found: next; that euen in ſhort time, with artificial fire that thing may be made, which the earth is long about with her naturall heat. With theſe goodly perſwaſions haue many as well in times paſt as now, made infinit experiments whereby to finde, as the Prouerbe goeth, where the beane is hidden.
               Truly ſuch men are to bee commended as doe dedicate their labours Their curioſitie examined. to the ſearch of whatſoeuer may tende to the reliefe of mans life, and wherein we doe ſee the euident tokens of Gods wiſedome to ſhine: but withall it is verie requiſite that they which finde that agilitie in their minds, do not vndertake to enter ſo far into the wilderneſſe of ſo many vnknowen ſecrets, vnleſſe for their guides they haue vpright iudgement & diſcretion, leaſt wandring amiſſe they loſe thēſelues as many haue done, who through a deſire of knowing too much, being caried vpon the wings of their raſhneſſe & ſoaring too high, haue fallen down headlong with Icarus. Experience hath taught yt many things haue ben inuented as ſoone as ſought for, as Printing & Artillery, neither is there any mētion yt they were long in deuiſing. Others there be yt for theſe 2000. yeeres cannot be yet throughly vnderſtod: as the proportiō the diameter to the circūferēce

thereof, the cauſe of the ſaltnes with the ebbing and fl
                        •
                     wing of the ſea, and the reaſon of that high motion called Trepidation: which may be a ſufficient rule to ſtaie vs vpon thoſe things that are poſſible, and to cauſe vs to ſhun the vnpoſſible. Of which number our blowers will auſwere, y• that which they ſeeke is none, albeit it be a ſupreme ſecrete. Truly I confeſſe it is a great ſecret, cōſidering that no man could euer yet finde it out: but that it is one of the goodlyeſt ends of philoſophie, as they perſuade thēſelues, I denie. And the better to know it, I will firſt diuide it: into morall and politike, and then into ſupernaturall: afterward into that naturall, which hath relation to all elementarie matters?
               The firſt and ſecond part thereof which concerne manners and Of the partes of Philloſophie alſo whether Alcumie hath relation to any of the ſame. pollicie, and celeſtial motions with the ſubſtances ſeparate from al matters, doe import a farre more worthie argument than this is. For no mettall is any whit comparable to the beautie of the heauens, or excellencie of the vertues. This beeing moſt euident, that part of Philoſophie which hath reſpect to naturall cauſes, muſt of force haue but the third place, which notwithſtanding, if anie man ſhould aſke thm whether the good that they labour for be not to be accounted among the ſoueraigne felicities, many wil anſwere yes. Which what elſe doth it ſignifie, but to place mās felicity in earthly things? Which is a matter vtterly repugnant to ye dignity therof. For Gold is created to ſerue man, not to hold his affections in ſer
                     •
                  itude, as it doth moſt of thoſe that take it for their moſt beautifull and profitable ſhoot anker whereto they can attayne. In olde time the lyke couetouſneſſe as we now ſee moued diuerſe to ſearch the darke caues of the earth, alſo to digge and pearce the ſame, to the end to fet forth this mettall, as yet they do in ſome regions: but theſe new inuentions to ingender it in fornaces, doe ſhew the deſire thereof to be now more vnreaſonable than euer it was: ſo deepelie rooted in mannes heart is this perſwaſion, that he which poſſeſſeth plentie of golde is happie. Which opinion experience hath verie well confirmed to be moſt falſe: for if we lyſt to looke into auncient Empires and common wealthes, wee ſhall ſet that together with Golde vi
                     •
                  e came in: alſo that vertue flouriſhed ſo long as onelie braſen money was in vſe.
               Gold did by ciuill warres almoſt ſubuert the Romaine Empire, That habundancie and plēty of Gould hath done more harme then good in the world. and ſince through the ſuperfluities and diſſolutions that it bre
                     •
                   ouerthrew it. The Empires of the Aſſyrians and Medians were changed and extinguiſhed, when Sardanapalus and Darius ſwimming

in Golde, conteinned the thinges which they ought to haue had in greateſt eſtimation. When did the Lacedemonian common wealth flouriſh more then whiles their monie was of 
                     〈◊〉
                  ? For it began to decaie when Golde began to growe into vſe and eeſtimation. I knowe none that will extoll Caligula (who in two yeeres ſpent aboue 67. millions) aboue Fabritius, who hauing neither Golde nor Siluer in his ſmall houſe, was neuertheleſſe for his iuſtice and valiancy the guardian of the Romaine common wealth. Who liued a more contented life whether Plato the Philoſopher, diſcourſing in his Academy, or Dyoniſius the tyrant in the middeſt of al his treaſures? He it was who through his doctrine made men good, and not the other who with his wealth corrupted them. Trulie it hath bene alwayes ſeene that Gold hath made more men miſerable than happie: for few doe knowe howe both to get and vſe it well. Theſe examples one I not alleadge to bring. Golde into contempt: but rather to giue men to vnderſtand that to ſuch as want diſcretion it is hurtfull, and that many other things are to bee preferred before it. For when men ſhall ſee that in all worldes it hath bene a fatall inſtrument, which hath ſo terriblie moued mens affections, likewiſe that it hath hatched ſo many miſchiefes, they wil be better aduiſed how they ſubiect themſelues thereto, conſidering it is made to ſerue or not to raigne.
               How
                     •
                  eit in commendation thereof I will alſo ſaie that it is an Of the cōmoditie and vſe of gould, alſo of the miſchiefes ariſing of the abuſe thereof. excellent mettal, endued with goodly qualities, and verie neceſſary to helpe with greater facility in the traficke of euerie thing, ſeruing both for a common price for whatſoeuer we liſt to exchange, and for an ornament to thoſe that are in greateſt dignitie. We ought therfore to eſteeme of it according to the commoditie that it yeeldeth, and to attribute no more thereto: but when couetouſneſſe dooth ſo rage in vs, that in liew of well vſing it in ſuch ſort, wee grow to exceſſiue extolling therof, it is conuerted into poyſon. For it breedeth murther, enmitie, riot, and wantonneſſe: It is alſo the occaſion of warres and 
                     •
                  illage, and for the moſt part infecteth men with vile auarice. Heerevpon did Lycurgus baniſh it out of Lacedemon, and therewith alſo all vaine pleaſures, the deadly plagues of common wealths. It may be replied in fauour thereof that when the auncients ment to commend the firſt age of the worlde, they tearmed it, The Golden world: but wee are to vnderſtande that thereby they ment onely the integritie of ſuch as then liued, which they compared to the purenes of Gold, as they did the daies inſuing vnto ſiluer

and braſſe. For us it ſurpaſſeth all other mettalls in perfection, ſo alſo were the firſt men more excellent in all goodneſſe, than their ſucceſſours, who haue & ſtil doe degenetrate. But if any man were diſpoſed to intitle our age with the crowne of the golden world, he might haue ſome reaſon thereto. For Gold is now ſo cheriſhed and worſhipped that by it all things are obtained, & without it nothing is doue. He that hath Gold ſhal be honored, but he that hath none is counted but an outcaſt. Yea, the mightie men are not content to be clothed therewith, but their houſes muſt alſo gliſter thereof: but if we conſider the manners of men we ſhall find them ſo far altered yt they may be trulier termed maners of yron thā of gold. An ancient good Biſhop complaining, ſayth, When the Church veſſels were of wood, the Biſhops were of golde, but when the veſſels grew to gold, the Biſhops were turned into wood. This doth ſufficiently teſtifie what change it br
                     •
                  edeth in the poſſeſſers therof, for in the end it ouercommeth the owner, and plungeth him that hath it in all pride and iutemperan
                     •
                  ie, vnleſſe he be reſtrained by the bridle of good doctrine.
               Some man may ſaie that many other things may bee likewiſe How dangerous the abuſe of Gold is, alſo in what eſtimatiō and vſe it is in theſe dayes. abuſed, as Lawe, Women, and Wine, which are more neceſſarie for mans life than it, whoſe vſe (notwithſtanding their abuſe) is not forbidden. Neither wil I wt 
                  Lycurgus conclude that it muſt be vtterly forbidden, only I wil ſhew yt it is a verie ſlippery path wherein we may ſlide as ſoone as they that walke vppon Ice. And in deed Golde is the verie Iſe where vppon our hearts do ſlide when wee ſo farre let ſlip the reines of our deſires that we cannot pluck them back againe. Many men hold opinion, that wealth, if it be not 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  
                  tified with plentie of gold, is but like a cloud & too ſimple. In deed it cannot be denied but it ſetteth on a fairer gloſſe, but the ſame is likewiſe ſo courſe that it peruerteth our iudgements, in yt ſo highly it alloweth of ſuperfluous things, that it contemneth thoſe that be neceſſarie. A man may haue his houſe plentifully furniſhed with al Of the miſchiefes proceeding of thoſe mens vanitie, who becauſe they haue much Golde doe thinke themſelues to be rich. things meete and conuenient for the vſe of his owne family, the entertaining of his ſcience, and the reliefe of ſtrangers: howbe it if he haue no precious veſſels & moueables with other like ſuperfluities hee ſhall be accounted poore: for cuſtome hath ſo farre incroched vpon men; that wealth is accounted to conſiſt in needles things rathar than in thoſe whoſe vſe we cannot forbeare. How be it what euer men thinke, this great diſcōmoditie doth gold breed, yt it cauſeth a man ſoone to ouerthrow himſelf: for if his mind longeth after ye follies of theſe daies, he will waſt 1000. franks re
                     ••
                   vpon one maſke,

two or 3 garments for himſelfe, one banket, ſome game, or in preſents to his miſtres; before he be aware. Before yt gold was ſo plentiful, ye vſe of cloth of gold, ſiluer, & ſilk were vnknowen, & precious ſtones moſt rare, enē a prodigall perſon could hardly in many yeres ſpende his goods. Nowe wee haue a thouſande vanities which leade vaine perſous to impoueriſh themſelues in one daie. Rabelais reporteth that Panurge in his voiages into Italy learned aboue 78. inuentions to colne by money: but after he had a while haunted the Spaniſh & French nations, he was perfect in aboue 100. gallant waies to ſpend it, which made him continually to eate his corne in the blade, which good cuſtome is yet in practiſe among vs. After yt the barbarous nations had inuaded as well the Eaſt as Weſt Empire, & ſacked all the treaſurs of the ſame, gold & ſiluer were for certaine ages almoſt vnknowen: but after that the Spaniards & Portugals had diſcouered ſo many new landes, this minerall wealth & ſtones, grew as a vehemēt ſtorme to be ſhed throughout all the prouinces of Chriſtendome, ſo as euen to this day they do abound. And what is there growen but a general flame of couetouſnes, with extreme auarice of ſome, & exceſſiue prodigalities of others, wt ſo many ſuperfluities which cuſtome hath brought in, yt 1000. Hercules ſhould haue inough to do to ſ
                     •
                  ay all theſe monſters. To be briefe, all this gold & ſiluer for ten men yt it hath inriched, haue impoueriſhed 10000. To what purpoſe then is it to attribute therto the power to make men happy? Plato & Ariſtotle intreating of goods, & wherto they ought to tend, do not go to ſeeke thē in the bowels of the earth, as ſhall be hereafter declared. Theſe blowers therfore are to be reproued, in that they indeuour to perſuade the end of their are to be of ſuch excellēcie, wherby they leade many into error, who of thēſelues are already too much inclined to ſeeke their contētation in material things. The poore ſauages of Perow before that our couetouſneſſe Gold hath brought the barbarouſneſſe of ſauages into Europe, and finally made the ſauages very wilde men indede. robbed them of their Golde, had ſo much, that they made all implements of houſehold thereof, eſteeming it no better then of yron: for they neuer tooke care or laboured to gather, kepe, or otherwiſe vſe it. But ſince that they were taught, & that they perceiued the imperfectious which we
                     •
                  cō
                  
                     ••
                  it for Golde, they grew as miſerable as our ſelues, & haue made, as a man may ſay, their Gods of ye ſame ſtuffe which before they troad vpon their feet. When we firſt began to traficke with them▪ they gaue for a knife or anie other cutting toole, double or treble ye waight in Gold, making more account of the cō
                  modit 
                     〈◊〉
                   of that mettall, which we eſteeme ſal
                     •
                  iſe, thā of ye other yt we

thinke ſo precious. And who ſo liſt to ſpeake with reaſon, muſt of force confeſſe that yron, conſidering it is an inſtrument without the which few artes conſiſt, is much more neceſſarie to the vſe of mans life than Golde. Howbeit pride, ſuperfluitie, pleaſure, and mannes curioſitie haue bredde the extreame admiration of Golde. which neuertheleſſe, as I haue ſayde) is not altogether to bee contemned.
               Now are 
                     〈…〉
                  e to anſwere to their arguments, whereby they indeuour to proue the meanes to performe their worke to bee both eaſie Aunſwer to the allegations of the Alcumiſts concerning the ſubſtance of mettall. and poſſible. They ſaie there is a certaine mettallicall ſubſtance 
                  
                     •
                  it and conuenient to be tranſformed into perfect mettalls, which is the true ſeede that yeeldeth the Gold, and the ſame (as the principal ground whereon they muſt build) it is requiſite to know verie wel. That in time paſt few men knew it, but that nowe ſome excellent ſchollers in this art are nothing ignorant therein: alſo that it is likely not to be ſo ſtrange and vnknowen a thing, conſidering that euen meane men are perfect in the knowledge of the ſubſtance, ſeed and vertues of plants, hearbes, and foules. Like wiſe that albeit moſt of theſe goodly operations of nature bee hidden in the deapth of the earth, yet is mans ſpirit able to penetrate into ſuch ſecretes, ſith it can alſo mount aboue the heuens. To deny the ſubſtance that they ſearch for I dare not, becauſe wee ſee the effects: but to affirme that it is knowen, there reſteth the difficultie: for although wee knowe many, as the aforenamed, yet followeth it not thereof that wee are able to comprehend the other, which hath ſo long beene hidden, excepte by the diſcourſe of our imagination, vntill experience hath taught vs the truth of this matter. Some common Alcumiſtes haue in their pamphlets gone about to deſcribe the ſaide ſubſtance. One aſſureth it to be quicke ſiluer or brimſtone: the other egges or bloud: and others haue named ſundrie other kinds, which haue procured a thouſand and a thouſand experiments, all which haue proued falſe. Some of them doe affirme that the true matter muſt of neceſſitie haue in it a great vegetatiue power, and ſome ſimilitude with that ſubſtance whereinto it ſhoulde be tranſformed. Concerning ye, vegetatiue power theyr ſpeech doth ſtand with ſome reaſon for ſith nature muſt be an agent and worke in this action, the matter muſt likewiſe haue the ſame propertie, and not reſemble a ſtone or a peece of wood. As for the ſimilitude, it is likely alſo that the ſubſtance that ſhould yeeld Gold muſt haue ſome correſpondence therewith: for it were a plaine mockerie to imagine that an

egge ſhould bring forth a tree, or an acorne a bird. Theſe two properties then are verie neceſſarie for the matter which we ſpeake of: neuertheles by ye onely diſcourſing vpon things conuenient therto, it is not founde, no more than is the Philoſopers wiſedome, albeit they haue in their diſcourſes qualified and formed it.
               But admit I graunt, they knowe the true ſubſtance (which neuertheleſſe Whether they can miniſter any forme to the thing by them imagined. is a deepe point) yet are they to proue by what artificial meanes, that is to ſaie, by what regiment or helpe they can enforce their wiſhed forme, which is not eaſy to be done: for albeit that arte doe imitate nature, yea, that in ſome thinges it can euen helpe her, yet dare not our common Alcumiſts affirme, that it can growe equall with her. Heereto they replie that experience teacheth that the vertue of the arte, duelie fitted with the force of nature, doth ſo helpe it, that thereof inſueth the bringing forth of the kinds in likewiſe as Nature alone may haue brought them forth. As in Egges which are the ſubſtance whereof foules are bredd, a man may miniſter to them an arteficiall heat ſo temperate: either in an ouen or by other meanes, that wee ſhall ſee them yeeld forth the like foules as nature woulde haue ingendered: as alſo in the Salte pits wee ſee that arte together with the ſea water and helpe of the natural heate of the Sunne formeth the Salt. If therefore in liuing things, yea euen in dead things, it hath ſo much power, why may it not lykewiſe worke in the ſubſtance of mettalls? Heereto I aunſwere, that this is but a bad kinde of arguing, of a few particular examples in things knowen to make a generall rule for thinges as it were yet vnknowen: for that which may agree with one cannot agree with many. Wee may eaſilie ſee that there is great difference betweene the manner by nature obſerued in the ingendering of mettals, and the other kindes afore noted. For hauing made the ſeede of plants, hearbes, and foules ſo common vnto vs, ſhe alſo ſheweth vs the facilitie of their generation: But in mettalles it is another caſe, for if their ſubſtance hath bene hetherto as it were hidden, it is no meruayle that their procreation is vnknowen. Who ſo liſt to conſider how a Wheate kirnell bringeth forth a fayre and greate eare, ſhall neuertheleſſe therein ſee but ſmall helpe of arte, ſauing ſome trauayle and tillage of the ground with the ſowing therof, which cannot properly be ſayde to be the principall cauſe of the generation: for it is onely nature, who hauing receiued the ſeed into the ground as into a matrix, doth heate & putrifie it, alſo it maketh it to ſprout, growe, and take that forme whereto it is moſt proper. The lyke effect

is to be noted in the generation of mettals, which is performed by the onely vertue and power of nature, neither can art worke any great matter therein. And whoſoeuer ſhould take the ſubſtaunce of them out of their matrixe, wherein nature by hidden meanes worketh, weening through art to make perfect the ſaide mettalls, ſhall greatly deceiue himſelf: for ſo would it looſe the whole force and become lame.
               This might the Empirical Alcumiſts haue therby learned by ſo To what vſe experience may ſerue the Alchumiſts. many their falſe experiments made ſo long time: which neuertheles haue not yet vtterly diuerted their mindes frō promiſing to thē
                  ſelues ſomwhat more: for they affirme that this pouder of proiection once performed, they may by caſting a little of it among a greate maſſe of imperfect mettals reduce ye whole into gold. Now thy proceed thereto by degrees, ſaying that one once of this pouder is able to cōuert a thouſand ounces of other mettal into gold: & that which is better purified will conuert ten thouſand: but that which is once brought to perfection, will multiply, as they tearme it, from one waight to 100000. Theſe be the braue fruites which they make the trees of their garden to beare, whereof the leaſt wil be worth 9000 crownes, & the greateſt about 900000. Truly if theſe effects were as true as the diſcourſes of them are braue, wee ſhall ſee many gardens giuen themſelues to the tilling of ſo fruitfull a ſoyle.
               The common opinion of man doth account this ſame to be a prodigious The examination of the multiplication of their pouder. matter, yea, ſundry learned men do meruaile how ſo many can ſuffer thēſelues to be lead away with ſuch perſuaſions, of whom if a man aſke how this great augmentation can come to paſſe, they will anſwere that that ſhould not ſeeme ſo ſtrange, conſidering that daily we ſee as great matter as that after the ſame manner: for (ſay they) ae candle once light is able to impart her light to 100000 more, & yet neuer diminiſh it ſelfe one whit: ſo likewiſe the vertue of this power is ſo great, that it communicateth the ſelfe ſubſtance thereof to other mettals apt to receiue it. This ſimilitude, in my opinion, is no great proofe hereof: for the tranſmutation of a maſſe of Lead into a maſſe of Gold, which is a conuerſion of ſubſtance, doth far differ from miniſtring vnto fire any matter that may nouriſh or maintaine it. Yea, it doth better appeare in this, that the fire hauing conſumed ye matter miniſtred, they both doe periſh: whereas by the alleadged tranſmutation ſo perfect a mettall muſt come of it as may haue a continual being. They muſt therefore bring in better reaſons & exāples to verrefie this multiplicatiō. Beſides, if this were ſo, it muſt needs

follow yt art ſhould ſurmount nature, becauſe in ſhort ſpace it ſhould worke ye thing which nature is many yeres about. Thus much haue I thought good to anſwere to the common arguments which they ordinarily vſe in their diſcourſes & deuiſes, wherby a mā may iudge what a ſmall foundation they haue to build ſo high a worke vppon. Such as being ſufficiētly learned, liſt to peruſe their pāphlets may be able with greater grauitie & more at large to diſpute with thē, to ye end ye truth being diſcloſed, many may by abādoning their errors find profit therin. For my part I ſhal ſtill think thē to be deceiued in Whether any of the 
                        〈◊〉
                      writers did euer find out this ſecret. ye waies yt they take, vntil experiēce hath reuealed yt wherof we are in doubt, which is one reſon yt we do many times lay againſt them, ſaying: yt 
                  ſith it doth not appeare that any of the ancient Writers could euer with all their furnaces finde out this ſecret, why do they ſo obſtinatly proceed in the ſearch therof? But (ſay they) in old time many did know it, as Salomon, in whoſe daies gold was ſo plentiful, that all his pallace was therewith adorned, & ſiluer as common as yron: which abundance could neuer haue ben ſuch, had he not practiſed this hidden Philoſophie, wherein through his great wiſedome he was moſt expert. Hereto do they ad yt K. Midas, who, as it is ſaid, turned all yt he touched into gold, was alſo ſkilful herein. Likewiſe yt 
                  the ancient Poets, ſpeaking of the goldē fleece, ment therby the Philoſophers ſtone, which alſo was not altogether vnknowen when the Romaine Empire was in greateſt pride. Howbeit that euer ſince it hath as it were lien dead together with many other things vntil theſe later daies, that ſome men ſearching among the pouders of antiquitie found out ſome ſmall fragments of this wonderfull treaſure, affirming that ſome haue made demonſtration therof, as Coſme of Medicis, and K. Edward of England, who receiued this benefit at the hand of Reimond Lully a Catelaeunia: Others haue concealed it as Arnold de villa noua, & Theophraſt Paracelſe. To be briefe, leuing a multitude of like exāples, they accoūt thēſelues to be followers not of imaginary matters, but of things Examination of the examples of antiquitie with the Alcumiſtis doe aleadge. alredy practiſed. Truly I ſhould neuer maruel to ſee the nouices in this art, yt haue ſmal practiſe in hiſtories, ſomtimes to feed vpō theſe vanities: but when the maiſters thēſelues ſhal go about to perſuade the others yt theſe imaginatiōs are true, it cannot but breed paſtime to ye hearers. Wherfore to anſwere thē, firſt I ſay yt the aleaing of ye exāple of Salomō
                   turneth to their diſgrace: for Dauid was he yt heped vp moſt of his treaſures, neither is it written yt euer man had ſo much. The Scripture teſtifieth, yt he left him toward ye building of ye tēple 100000. talēts of gold, & a miliō of ſiluer: which amoūtech to

120. millions of crownes as Bude ſummeth it. But almoſt all that treaſure did riſe of the ſpoyles and ouerthrowes of the Canaanites and Amorrheans, whom Dauid according to Gods appointment made an ende of rooting out. And as for Salomon, hee was a King endued with perfect wiſedome, but he neuer vſed the ſame to theyr pretended effects, yea, in the holie Bible we find whence he had his Golde and ſiluer. It is ſayde that his ſhippes ſayled with the ſhips of Hyram king of Tyre into Ophir, which ſome interprete to bee the Indies, to fetch and the number of Golde that they brought did mount to ſix hundred ſixtie and ſixe talents of gold. Nowe the Hebrewes talent of golde, as ſome doe affirme, was worth ſeauen thouſande Crownes, ſo as all this ſumme ſhoulde riſe almoſt to fiue millions of Golde, which in thoſe dayes was a maruelous treaſure. But ſome of theſe men doe imagine that the gold of Ophir was the ſame that was fetched out of their fornaces, which impudent affirmation deſerueth no anſwer. But I will vſe the example of Salomon to prooue their arte to be falſe: for if he whoſe wiſedome was incomparable, who alſo was perfect in all whatſoeuer coulde fall into mans capacity, neuer writ that he gate this ſecrete by blowing: but contrariwiſe ſetteth downe ſome of the meanes whereby he attained to his wealth, ſhall not we preſume that it is an euident abuſe to leaue to their experiences? Neither is the example of Midas of any greater credit then the other. For in his perſon the ancient writers purpoſed to ſet before vs a couetous prince, whoſe treaſure through his owne vice grew hurtfull to him ſelfe. And by the golden fleece the poets ment the veynes of golde or ſiluer which the Greeke Princes fetcht out of Chalochos in the ſhip of Argos. Now let vs come to the Romaines. For it can not be denied but the Empire of Rome ouerflowed with wealth: howbeit it proceeded of the ſacking of all the world, and not elſe where, as teſtifie the hiſtories. The alleaging of great Coſme of Medicis is but a little tickling to cauſe vs to ſmile. For he was a man iſſued from a very wealthy family, and with all diſcreete, a great dealer and of muche traficke, whereby he mightily increaſed his goods, and afterward vſed very ſtately liberality and expenſes as did Lucullus at Rome and Cimon at Athens. Concerning Edward king of England, who coined ſo many Roſe nobles, no hiſtorie reporteth it to haue bene done with Raymond Lullyes philoſophical gold, which maketh me ye rather to thinke that he dealt with minerals. As for Theophraſt Paracelſe and Arnold de Villa
                  
noua, no man can denye but they were learned both in Philoſophie and Alcumie, and found out great ſecretes: but I am aſſured that in any their bookes it cannot be found that the ſubſtance of artificiall gould doth reſemble the ſame whereupon our common Alcumiſtes doe worke, either that the forme thereof is to bee performed in Fornances: beſides, if we conſider of their liues, wee ſhall in the ſame ſee the tokens of pouertie, and not of aboundance: whereby it is likely they rather laboured to finde what were neceſſarie for the health of mens bodies, then to reueale any ſuch matter as might encreaſe their couetouſneſſe. Beſides, if either themſelues or any other had bene ſkilfull in this tranſmutation, I thinke they concealed it as well for their owne ſafeties and quietneſſe, as alſo to the ende to eſchue ſo many inconueniences as ſuch plentie of gould might haue engendred by falling into cruell and ambitious hands.
               I would therefore entreate thoſe that are ſo hot in the purſuite Of the miſchiefes wherin the Alcumiſtes doe plague themſelues. of theſe crooked waies, to conſider how many ritch men haue within theſe hundred yeeres beggered themſelues in theſe miſerable experiments. May not ſo many ſhipwarackes reclaime them: but they muſt néedes runne headlong after their owne phantaſies: yea, they are ſo fleſhed in this buſineſſe, ye it wil be fower tymes more worke to withdraw them therfro, then to fetch a Maſſing hedge prieſt out of a Tauerne: ſo as wee may ſay that in this arte there lyeth a certaine hidden power which charmeth thoſe that doe exerciſe it. And it is likely that ſuch as ſo vehemently doe hunt after theſe extraordinarie meanes, are thereto prouoked rather by their owne diſordered affections, then by any well guided motions of the minde. As alſo we ſee that for puniſhment to their errors all their labours vaniſh in ſmoake. Neither is that all: for ſome finding themſelues in this extremitie doe coyne counterfaite money: others trot vp and downe to deceiue thoſe that are readie to beléeue their goodly motious, which they make in ſeeking to catch them in the ſame ſ
                     •
                  are wherein themſelues haue bene taken. It ſeemeth to be a puniſhment of God layd vpon thoſe who contemning ſo many honeſt exerciſes and lawfull vocations, doe thruſt themſelues into ſuch laberinths as they can neuer eſcape without their owne loſſe. Some man may ſay that euery one that giueth himſelfe to this ſcience doth not caſt away himſelfe, no nor take any harme thereby: for we ſee Lords and Princes that haue not ſould one Crownes worth of land for it, but are deſirous only to learne, as it were in ſport, whether

the thing that they imagine may be compaſſed. I graunt they be wiſe in reſpect of the reſt, but the number of them is ſmall: wheras of thoſe that waſt themſelues in theſe deſires there bee many. Truely he that could learne the goodly diſcourſes that they make to themſelues what they would doe when they had atchieued their purpoſe, ſhould ſee mounts and meruailes. One would be a King, and an other a Duke: One would make warres whereby to exalt himſelfe, an other would build Townes and Caſtles, and the moſt part would liue in pleaſures and ſuperfluitie. To be briefe, ſuch as are the affections, ſuch would the effects be. But I can neuer think that any ſecret can be reuealed to thoſe that beare ſo bad mindes.
               Howbeit, if men would vſe this arte only to attaine to ye knowledge Of the vſe of true Alcumie. of diuers vertues and properties of nature, it were commendable in thoſe that would ſo employ themſelues: but there are but fewe that keepe themſelues within thoſe boundes, and yet doe they only reape the true fruite thereof that vſe it to finde out remedies for ſundrie inconueniences & diſeaſes, whereof (as is aforeſayd) by fire men haue found moſt ſinguler. Ladies & Gentlewomen may, when they are at home, occupie themſelues in diſtillations of waters and eſſences drawne out of all ſortes of hearbs, rootes and flowers, as well for their owne domeſticall vſes, as to impart to their poore neighbours & ſubiects that may ſtand in neede therof. Were it not alſo an honeſt exerciſe for Lords and gentlemen, who loſe ſo much time, ſometimes to recreate themſelues in ſuch extractions, not of hearbes only, but alſo of minerals and other ſubſtances, out of the which they may draw ſuch oyle and vertue, that two or three drops thereof may profite more then a whole heape of Apoticarie drugges? How many other braue ſecrets may be found out by the vſe of fire, whereof euen the greateſt Princes ſhould not diſdaine to be ſkilfull? Diuers printed bookes doe ſhewe of things yéelding both admiration, delight and profite. He then that liſt thus to vſe this arte ſhall bee free from repentance thereof, whereto all thoſe are ſubiect which ſeeke to make it by ſtrange deuiſes to bring forth gould, which is as much as if a man for his owne appetite ſhould ſeeke to fetch Manna from heauen.
               But admit a man ſhould haue conuerted al the ſtones about his Of the vanitie of thoſe that aſpire to haue heapes of gold and Siluer. houſe into gould, what hath he then done? Truely he may peraduenture haue built himſelfe a ſumptuous ſepulchre wherein to burie his vertues, or a proude theatre wherevpon to diſplay his vices, as it often happeneth thoſe to doe that are ſtored with great welth.

Be thoſe the documents which the Philoſophers ment to leaue to the poſterity? It is not likely: conſidering that they thinking mans ſoule to haue had her originall in heauen, would neuer miniſter vnto her any obiect wherein to contemplate and depende vpon that were vnworthie her ſelfe: neither doth it appeare in their writings that among the reſolute and perfect good they euer harboured this earthly felicitie after the which many doe ſo hunt, euen vnto death. If wee liſt to credite the ſaying of Ariſtotle in his treatiſe of felicitie, we ſhall finde that he firſt placeth it in the treaſures of the mind than in thoſe of the bodie: and laſtly in thoſe of fortune, vnder the which he comprehendeth ritches. Socrates and Plato do alſo ſtirre vp men to vertue and ſpirituall things, & withdraw them from the earth: which ſhould moue theſe poore deceiued perſons to folow the ſteps of thoſe whō they accompt their great fathers, who through the obſeruing of ye precepts of good doctrine, haue not gone aſtray.
               Some there are ſo obſtinate in their opinions, that all that may Who it is that in deed cōuerteth mettals. be ſaid is not able to diſſuade thē from the poſſibilitie of conuerfion of mettals. Truely to pleaſure them I will beléeue thē, but in ſuch ſorte as once a ſcholler in that arte at Paris tould me: that the great Alcumiſts labored by fornaces vnder ground. This poore apprentice herein was of my acquaintance, & had in three yeres ſpace blowen away a goodly houſe of his owne with ſome 1000. or 1200. frankes rent, & kept no more but the ſkinne and bones, yea the fire had drawne away not only ye quinteſſence, but in a maner ye whole eſſence of all the apparell that he ware. Which when I had conſidered: Well my yong maiſter, ſaid I you are now in good caſe to learne to flye, for you haue nothing to loade you or hinder your lightneſſe. Oh ſir, ſaid he, you ſhould rather take pitie of thoſe that vnawares haue made ſhipwracke. Truely ſo I doe, ſaid I, ſith I ſee you ſo penitent, neither ſhall the helpe of my purſe bee denyed you to furniſh you a newe in ſome lawfull vocation, but now ſhewe me vnfaynedly what light or certaintie is there in your precepts? Our pamphlets, ſaide he, are full of ridles and obſcuritie, and our long labours and continuall expences, doe in the ende bring foorth but vntimely birthes and phantaſies. Haue you not, replyed I, any example either olde or newe of any that hath found out the ſecrete. I know, ſaid he, but one that euer attained therto. I pray you, ſaid I, tell me who that was? It is, ſaid he, he: Who? ſaid I, for I cānot know him vnleſſe you otherwiſe name him vnto me. It is he, ſaid he. Why, ſaid I, do you then mock me? Well, ſaid be, Then I muſt needes tell you. It is the holy father, who hath taught

all our blowers that they are but doul
                        •
                     es, which in many yeeres doe multiplye all their ſomewhat into nothing. Where himſelfe yeerely in France only tranſformeth and multiplieth fortie pound of lead, which may be worth two crownes, into 40000 pounds of golde which may be worth 600000. crownes, and then maketh attraction thereof euen to Roome. Truely, ſayd I, I will giue you tenne crownes the more for breaking your minde ſo plainly vnto mee: but I would wiſh you not to vſe much ſuch ſpeech in this towne, leaſt our maisters of Sorbonne immediatly deuounce you an hereticke of ſeuentene Carects and a halfe: Wherevpon wee parted, and glad he was that he had found ſome meanes to fatten himſelf againe, for he was as leane as a red Herring. And for my parte I began to conſider of the hidden propertie of this authenticall Caballe, and hauing throughly pondered therof, I fonnd that my iolly blower had better ſucceſſe in that which he had told me, then in all yt he had done. But becauſe the time was thē too hot to rehearſe this tale, I hid it in a corner of my memorie.
               Hauing thus diſcourſed vpon the falſehood that reſteth in this Of ſome Alchumiſtes who ween vnder pretence of piety to attaine to their purpoſes. 
                  Vulcaniſt arte, whenſoeuer it liſt to ſtretch to the forging of gold, I will ſpeake one word of certaine Alcumiſtes or rather Philoſophers, who being conſumed in Philoſophie, doe in their operations adioyne the power of nature with the neceſſarie ayde of the arte. I will tell you what one of them once ſayd vnto me concerning the matter wherevpon he had laboured, which now I haue called to minde. He tould me that the whole ſtudie and labour of man in the ſearch hereof was vayne, vnleſſe God would reueale vnto him things vnknowne. Alſo that for the attayning to perfection in this arte, it was requiſite firſt to be an honeſt man: ſecondly, to pray often to God to graunt him light in this darkneſſe: thirdly, to gather knowledge of the arte out of good bookes: and finally hauing found out the ſecrete, to keepe it ſecrete, and not to abuſe this treaſure, but to employ it in the reliefe of the needie, or in very good workes. Whereto I replyed, that I found it ſomewhat ſtrange that he would ſeeme to worke vyolence to nature, and ſubmit Gods order to mans will, which was vnlikely to obeye, becauſe euery man would giue ouer the artes and ſciences, to the ende idely to enritch himſelfe in things ſuperfluous and of beſt neceſſitie to mans life. He aunſwered, that in this operatiue ſcience, wee could not perceiue nature to bee any whit forced, but working with all facilitie, order and power: which ſo much the more declared the wonderfull power and wiſedome of God: likewiſe that he knew very well that in as much as this knowledge could not dwell but

in a contemplatiue ſoule not polluted with earthly affections, fewe men were perticipants therein. Of whom the moſt contenting themſelues that they had hit the marke, were very ſcrupulous in the publiſhing of that which rather by heauenly meditatiō then practiſe they had comprehended, either to vſe the fruites thereby atchieued, but in moſt neceſſarie occaſions. He, ſayd he, that is deſirous to learne the arte muſt marke what the Scripture ſaith. Firſt ſeeke the kingdome af God, and all things ſhall bee giuen you. Alſo this ſaying of the Pſalmiſt. The 
                  Pſal 2
                        •
                     . 
                  Lord declareth his ſecretes to thoſe that feare him. To this I aunſwered, that theſe places were ment of ſpirituall matters, and not of mettalles. True, ſayd he, ſuch is their proper interpretation: howbeit we may ſometimes ſee the effects in things materiall, when the former bleſſing goeth before: as appeared in Salomon, who vpon his prayer had the graunt both of wiſedome and aboundance of wealth. You beleeue then, ſayd I, that it is poſſible to transforme mettalles, alſo that ſome men haue attained thereto. They be both true, aunſwered he, for my ſelfe haue ſeene moſt euident proofes thereof, and as I thinke, there bee ſome yet liuing which be ſkilfull in the arte, and to the ende to gather ſome taſte thereof, I pray you reade good bookes, for in them you ſhall ſee not only beames, but euen very lights which will ſhewe you not only the errors of this blowing, but alſo the true likelihoodes of the metallicall Philoſophie. Herevpon I was blanke: for hauing finall experience in this doctrine, I was loth to aunſwer impertinently, and being halfe dazeled with ſo many goodly words, I thought it beſt to ſtay vntill by effect I might ſee the truth of this affirmation, before I would alowe or diſalowe thereof, which I yet waite for. Neither am I ſo franticke as to thinke that God cannot as ſoone extend his liberalitie to a good mā (albeit by extraordinary meanes) to vſe it lawfully, as he could giue to effeminate Sardanapalus 40. millions of gould, alſo to the monſter Caligula 67. by ordinarie meanes, which they waſted in all abominations.
               Thus much haue I thought good to ſpeake of the materiall Of the true Philoſophers ſtone, taught by Solomon. 
                  Philoſophers ſtone: now will I proceede to that which I take to be the true: for the knowledge whereof we can haue recourſe to no better writer then Salomon, whom, in my opinion, wee ought to beléeue, as him that was endued with perfect wiſedome, whoſe conceipts and ſpeeches were in many things guided by the ſpirite of truth, and therfore the rather cleaue to his deuine ſentences. As alſo I thinke that all Alcumiſtes doe giue the moſt credite to his teſtimonies, as of one who is often in their view, in reſpect that he

ſawe and had a taſte of thoſe miſeries which they ſo much reuerence. In ſome of his bookes he hath taught, that although man through his diſobedience hath here belowe enthralled himſelfe to many miſeries, yet God who is goodneſſe it ſelfe, would not leaue him ſo wrapped in miſchiefe, but that withall he hath prepared and offered to him innumerable benefites, to the end that crauing them at his hands he might ſeeke them, and by ſeeking euioy them, and ſo to reape ſuch contentation as may bee had in this life, and to yeeld him praiſe for the ſame. He deuideth them into two kindes. In his booke of the Preacher he ſpeaketh of ſuch as are earthly and Eccle 3. corruptible, affirming that notwithſtanding their beautie, yet they that truſt in them do finde more vanitie then pleaſure. I haue, ſaith he, built me houſes, and planted vineyards: I haue made me gardens: I haue had men ſeruants and maid ſeruants, a great familie and many flockes: I haue gathered gould and ſiluer, with the treaſures of Kings and Prouinces: I haue appoynted ſingers, and taken pleaſure in the ſonnes of men: and in wealth I haue excelled all that haue bene before me in Ieruſalem. Neither haue 
                        〈◊〉
                      forbiddē my hart to reioyce in the things that I had prouided: but when I turned to behould all the works of my hands, & the labors wherein I had ſwet, I found nothing but vanitie and anguiſh of mind, alſo that nothing vnder the ſunne is permanent. This may be a good inſtructiō to al thoſe that ſixe their felicitie in things fraile & tranſitorie, to admoniſh thē moderatly to vſe thē, & to caſt ye anckors of their cōtentation vpō ſolide ſubſtāces, which the chaunge of fortune, as wée tearme it, cannot carie away.
               Such are the ſecond ſorte, mentioned in the booke of Prouerbs, That the true goodes are ſpirituall and vncorruptible. and deſerue to be called, goods, for they are ſpirituall, vncorruptible, ſtedfaſt, and doe yeelde perfect ioye. They therefore that liſt to followe the precepts of this great King ſhall not goe aſtray, as the followers of the rules of our common Alcumiſtes, ſo as the ſchollers that are willing to learne, be endued with humilitie & docilitie, which are ye firſt preparatiues to yt entry into this ſtudie. For Alſo the meanes to attaine thereto. he that with worldly preſumptiō, puffed vp with vaine knowledge ſeeketh to ſubmit this ſo worthie & pure a matter to his ſences, ſo farre is he from reaping any fruite thereby, that he cannot ſo much as perceiue the beautie thereof. Theſe be his words: Happie is the man that findeth wiſedome: It is more precious then riches: & nothing 
                  P
                        •
                     o. 3. 
                  that we can deſire may be compared therto. This is the declaration of this ſecret, which many neuer ſeeke for, and others doe ſeeke indirectly & by crooked paths. He yt can know it & apply it to himſelf,

may be aſſured he hath found the true Philoſophers ſtone, that is to ſay, plentie of all goods, which do as greatly enrich & delight the ſoule as the bodie. I doubt if ſome of theſe blowers (mad to ſee his Anſwer to thoſe that loke only vpon earth. experiēces vaniſhed in ſmoak) ſhould chance to read this, he would exclaime & ſay: Oh, how are we fallen from a feuer into a hot burning ague? ſith they here propound vnto vs as great a paradoxe as they account our owne to be! What reaſon is there, ſith we be of earth, enhabite the earth, & liue of earthly things, that they ſhould feede vs with ſpirituall & inuiſible ſubſtance? Let vs firſt baniſh this terrible monſter pouertie, which continually tormenteth vs, and then we will ſee to the reſt. To this man will I make no other aunſwer, but wiſh him to repaire his broken fornaces, baniſh his wrath, & again ſeaſe vpō his right wittes, which peraduenture he had forgotten in ſome of his Limbeckes, then will I teach him that the deuine teſtimonies which I vſe in this proofe are as true as his tranſubſtantiall imaginations are falſe. Let vs therefore heare Salomon, the image of perfect wiſedome ſpeake, who diſcourſeth thus. The Lord hath poſſeſſed 
                  Prouer. 8. 
                  me from the beginning: before he made any thing I was ordeyned from euerlaſting: before the earth, the ſeas, the hils and the riuers were I was conceiued and brought foorth. When he prepared the heauens I was preſent: when he inuironed the ſea with her ban
                        •
                     kes and laide the foundations of the earth I was with him, making all things: and I delight to bee with the children of men. Who ſeeth not here that wiſedome tooke her originall in heauen, yea euen in the higheſt heauen, which is aboue all yt we do ſee? Notwithſtanding, to ſpeak properly, ſhe is without beginning: for ſith that by her we are to vnderſtand the ſame of God, who is the eternal wiſedome of the father, we cannot imagine in him either beginning or ending. It is the word, whereby all things were made, & which illuminateth all men. The moſt learneſt contemplatiue Philoſophers, as the Academickes, which haue bene illuminated with ſome ſmall beames therof, did knowe (and yet knew not truely) & in their writings teſtifie, that this wiſedome whereby the whole world was created and formed and in ſo good order gouerned, haue of al eternitie bene reſidēt in the deuine eſſence. To be brief, yt it is God, who through his deuine wiſedome hath declared himſelfe vnto men after ſundry ſortes: but wonderfully in the worke of reſtauration, when he conuerted the mortal imperfectiōs which man had purchaſed into thoſe perfections that he hath liberally imparted & giuen vnto them. And albeit they had loſt ye iuſt poſſeſſion of the land, yet hath he granted

them the inheritance of heauen, wherevpon Salomon ſayth. That wiſedome is a tree of life to all that will take hould thereof, and happie 
                  Prouer. 3. 
                  ſhall he be that can keepe it. Truely the excellencie therof doth ſhine in that it aboundantly excelleth in all things.
               But becauſe moſt men are ſo little moued toward that which is The excellency of heauenly wiſdome. ſpiritual, in that that being wrapped in earthly things, their ſences hould them downe to thoſe that be corporall, let vs now as it were viſibly ſhewe it them by the fruites and effects thereof, to the ende they may the better comprehend it. Salomon who hath written a booke in commendation thereof ſhall performe this duetie. I loued (ſayth he) wiſedome, and ſought her from my youth: ſhe taught mee 
                  Wiſdome. 8. 
                  the diſcipline of God and choſeth his workes: I preferred her before Kingdomes and Thrones: and in compariſon of her accompted riches to bee nothing, neither haue I compared the precious ſtone vnto her: for all gould is in reſpect of her but grauell, and ſiluer ſhall be eſteemed as durt. I haue loued her aboue health and beautie, and haue purpoſed to take her for my light: for her brightneſſe cannot be extinguiſhed: and all my goodes are come together with her, and wonderfull honeſtie through her hands. She teacheth ſobrietie, diſcretion, iuſtice and fortitude, which are things moſt profitable to the life of man. If any man couet after plentie of knowledge, ſhe knoweth things paſt, and iudgeth of ſuch as are to come: ſhe is ſkilfull in the depth of ſpeeches and ſolutions of arguments, in the chaunge of maners, deuiſion of times, the courſe of the yeere and order of the ſtarres, in the natures of beaſtes, the ſtrength of the windes and the imaginations of men: in the difference of plants and vertues of rootes: and of her I haue learned all ſecrete things, and thoſe that were neuer ſeene before: for wiſedome the workmiſtris of all things hath taught me: for her ſake I ſhall be wonderfull in the preſence of the mightie, and the countenances of Princes ſhall meruaile at me. When I come home I ſhall reſt with her, for in her conuerſation is no bitterneſſe, neither is ſhe accompanied with enuie, but with ioye and mirth. Moreouer, by her I ſhall obtaine immortalitie, and leaue an euerlaſting remembrance to thoſe that ſhall come after me. If I could into ſeuen or eight verſes haue abridged all that is here deſcribed, I would haue done it, but, in my minde, wee ſhould neuer bée wearie of reading ſo high and true miſteries, which neuertheleſſe are but a ſmall parcell of all that Salomon ſetteth downe. The Alcumiſtes doe ſay that one ounce of their power of proiection is able to conuert a thouſand ounces of other mettall into gould: what then ſhall wee thinke that one graine of

this heauenly pouder ſhall doe? Betweene gould and mettall there is ſome affinitie and correſpondence: but betweene vice and vertue, ignorance and knowledge reſteth a manifeſt contrarietie: and yet is that the place wherein wiſedome doth worke, for it tranſformeth the wicked powers thereof into good, and as is aforeſayd, teacheth thoſe principall vertues which Cicero in his offices ſo highly extolleth: But what man is ſo groſſe and ſenceleſſe, as to compare euen the greateſt maſſe of gould with the leaſt portion of temperance or iuſtice? Plato the Philoſopher ſaith, that if with our bodily eyes we could perceiue the beautie of vertue, we would be rauiſhed with perfect loue thereunto: But the vaile of pleaſure and ignorance ſo blindeth vs that we cannot ſee it. And I like well ye iudgement of Solon, who preferred the felicitie of a poore citizen named Telus, that was endued with wiſedome and vertue, before the good hap of K. Craeſus, who flowed in power and wealth. Here muſt we ſtay, as hauing no neede to dilate vpon the ſayings of Salomon, conſidering how amplie he expreſſeth the benefites proceeding of wiſedome: & ſith ſhe bringeth the knowledge of heauenly matters, humaine actions, & naturall effects, & withall giueth honor, riches, vertue, praiſe, health, mirth and fame, what can a man ſay more?
               Now, God imparteth not theſe benefies onely to the mightie: How liberally God doth communitate this treaſure to all men: alſo the vſe and abuſe of the ſame. for euen the meaneſt doe participate therein, ſome more and ſome leſſe, according as it pleaſeth him to endue them with this ſoueraigne cauſe: as being aſſured that the knowledge of Mechanicall artes, induſtrie of Merchants, and experience of labourers, are no other but the ſmall effects thereof, which doe alſo appeare in the order of the gouernment of ſmaller families, and temperance of the maners of the pooreſt. But who can make a better ſhewe of the brightneſſe of this light then the very diſcourſes of the Alcumiſts? For ſometimes they wade into the depth of the earth, then doe they conſider the operations of nature, & ſometimes for the extolling of their arte they climbe euen to the ſpirituall ſubſtances: And what hath opened their eyes to knowe ſuch difficult matters but that wiſedome which after an excellent maner doth ſhine in their vnderſtandings? In the meane time, in liewe of ſuffering them ſelues to bee guided thereby they vſe it as a ſlaue, in ſeeking continually to enthrall it to earthly buſineſſe, as in ould time condemned perſons were thruſt into the Mynes. Thus doe they recompence it badly, and ſeeme to haue ſmall knowledge of the vertue thereof, which tendeth rather to aſcende then deſcende.

Thoſe men alſo are in an error that accompt him vnhappie that hath any want of the goodes which wee tearme of Fortune. And yet the poore man yt with patience beareth his pouertie, is without compariſon farre more happie then the ritch man that burneth in couetouſneſſe. To bee briefe, there is no eſtate that can make him miſerable that hath any portion of this wiſedome, which may bee tearmed a very feare of God, or true paſsion of vertue. To him therefore muſt we haue recourſe, who diſtributeth ſo much thereof as is expedient to thoſe that by prayer, humilitie and perſeuerance doe cra
                     •
                  e ſome ſuch beame, as may ſuffice to augment their contentation. Surely I take this to bee a farre more pretious felicitie, then the knowledge how to multiply whatſoeuer quantitie of gold or ſiluer: which the couetous and encroaching perſons, can by wicked artes doe as well. It is therefore better to ſtay vpon the ſearch and purſuite of the true Philoſophicall ſtone of wiſedome, which enſtructeth, comforteth, enricheth, contenteth and ſaueth thoſe that haue found it, then to hunt after the vayne hope of our blowers in the ſearch of things whereof they growe ſad, poore, and into decay, and yet can neuer méete withall.
            
            
               The 24. Diſcourſe.
               
                  Againſt thoſe that thinke that Godlineſſe depriueth man of all pleaſures.
               
               
                  GReat is the number of thoſe men that The ſubtiltie of the Epicures. at theſe daies are enfected with this falſe opinion, which they ſ
                     •
                  ylie publiſh in all places where they haunt: And they are, in my mynde, ſuch a kinde of people as wée may well tearme Epicures and Libertines, who eſtabliſhing their ſoueraigne felicitie in pleaſures, doe endeuour onely to contemne Chriſtian life, burdening it that it breedeth nothing but continuall ſorowe, ſo to make all ſuch as liſt to hearken vnto them vnwilling to walke in the paths thereof. Their arguments are wonderfull plauſible to

thoſe in whome ſenſualitie beareth ſway, which is the cauſe that many ſimple perſons, yea and ſome of the wiſer ſorte doe ſuffer themſelues ſo to bee led away therewith, as ſomewhat to fauour the ſayd opinion: and thus doe they with their malicious ſpeeches turne many from walking according as the duetie of the name that they beare doth require. There is an old prouerbe that ſaith, Euill wordes corrupt good maners: which is often verified. Howbeit, if any man doth doubt hereof, and wiſheth ſome more euident proofe, let him repayre to the ſchoole of theſe doctors, from whence he ſhall be ſure to returne farre worſe then he went: for as droppes of ynke caſt into fayre water by continuance doe not onely defile, but euen blacke the ſame, ſo yong ſoules harkening to ſuch inſtructions doe gather a bad diſpoſition, which afterwarde enhabiteth within them.
               Now in this age wherein we liue, which is ſo plentifull in wickedneſſe, How dangerous they are: alſo how to beware of them. it is hard to bee conuerfant among men without hearing ſuch ſpeeches: In reſpect whereof wee ought to bee furniſhed with good preſeruatiues, as in the time of the plague, to keepe away the euill ayre. The ſame may eaſely be had and without any great coſt: For as well Chriſtian as humaine Philoſophie do offer them for nothing to thoſe that liſt to take ſo much paines as to cull them foorth, as they would in a fayre medowe cull ſuch flowers as they beſt like. Howbeit, ſith all men will not finde ſo much leiſure, this my ſmall labour ſhall ſupply the default of thoſe ſlothfull perſons: wherein they ſhall finde the flowers readie gathered, which are ſo ſweete as no filthie ſtench ſhall be able to offend them.
               I ſuppoſe we ſhall neede no perticuler marke to knowe theſe of How they may be knowen. whome wee ſpeake, for their owne ſpeech will bewray them as the fruite doth the tree: neither to note the places where to finde them: onely this ſhal ſuffice, that although they be ſcattered euery where, yet are there three principall fieldes wherin they do moſt proſper: the Court, the Armies, and the Townes: and ſo long as vertue was in eſtimation their number was but ſmall, but through contempt thereof, they haue abounded. Neither is it any meruaile: for as thornes ſpring vp among Roſes, and darnell with wheate: ſo doth vice intrude it ſelfe where vertue doth, or ought moſt to ſhine, to the ende to blemiſh the ſame. Among the three ſortes of enhabitants in the places aforeſayd, wee may peraduenture finde ſome difference in their diſcon
                     ••
                  es and maner of proceedings, albeit they all ſhoote at one thing, as an Archer, a Croſbowe man,

a Croſbow man, & a Harquebuzier ſhooting all at one but, though with ſundrie Inſtruments, yet in intent doe agree.
               The Courtiers are very delicate in their ſpeeches and pleaſant Of the Epicures of the Court. quippes, powring foorth their reaſons ſo ſweetly and with ſuch a facilitie that a man ſhall be catcht ere he be aware. Neither do their countenances or courteſies, which are great helpes to perſwaſion, any whit varie therefro. Thus with theſe goodly ſpeeches they couer whatſoeuer is vnperfect in their opinions, not that they thinke them vnperfect: for they doe followe them, wiſhing others alſo to embrace the ſame. The ordinarie life that is led in thoſe Courts that are alienated from vertue, is in parte the cauſe of encreaſe of corruption in theſe men: for ſéeing pleaſure ſo highly eſtéemed, they are the more enflamed to enioy the ſame: alſo through lōg cuſtome in wiſhing and plunging themſelues therein, they doe eſteeme nothing els, and to the ſame ende doe referre all their actions. Thus by little and little of ſchollers they growe to be maiſters in an arte that draweth thoſe that put it in practiſe into deſtruction. Among theſe doe I not meane to place the vertuous Courtiers, whome I take to bee as vnlike vnto them as gould is to leade. But I wiſh only they were admoniſhed not to permit their puritie to be contaminated with others corruptions. Albeit we are not to thinke pleaſure to bee ſuch an outward imperfection, as faſteneth hould vpon vs ſo ſoone as we come neere to ye ſame. For the ſeeds therof are in our ſelues, where they redily doe ſproot and fructifie according as they be hett by ſuch obiects as preſents themſelues to our ſences, vnleſſe by the power of reaſon they be reſtrayned. Whoſoeuer ſendeth or councelleth a yong man to goe to the places afore mentioned to learne any thing, ought firſt to admoniſh him that there he ſhall finde fewe good men, but many bad: alſo that the firſt ſorte will coldly induce him to al honeſtie, but the latter will continually ſollicite him to whatſoeuer is vnhoneſt, ſo may he preuent the danger and prouide to reſiſt the ſame. For theſe ſubtile doctors haue no better ſporte then to meete with ſuch game, whome they aſſure themſelues of, if they but once giue them the hearing. Howbeit, although they hate true vertue, yet doe they ſometimes in wordes commende it, to the ende to daunt none, but by their deedes they ſhewe that they doe not much regarde it, as hauing no care but to take their pleaſures.
               Their ordinarie ſpeeches to thoſe whom they ſeeke to drawe to Their ſpeches to thoſe whō they ſeeke to ſeduce. their opinion are theſe. Mans life is ſhorte and repleniſhed with diuers

troubleſome euents: we are not aware that it is at an ende before we knowe how to guide our ſelues to finde any comentation. For ſome led by common custume and others by ignorance, doe entangle them ſelues in diuers miſeries which they might wel auoyde, and ſo doe leaue behinde them many pleaſures which they ſcarce perceiue: and without the which mans life is a waightie burden to him: yea and repugnant to nature who by her ſecrete motions procureth all liuing things to delight in their being, and to ſeeke after that which may delight them. That as among all other creatures, man is the moſt excellent, ſo hath he moſt priuiledges: whereof one of the principall conſiſteth in recreating himſelfe in the beautie and varietie of whatſoeuer is ſcattered ouer the face of the earth. That his minde is capable to learne and comprehend: but it many times happeneth that all haue not like good happe to meete with good ſchooles: which are to be found in the courts of Princes and good townes, the principall ſeates of conuerſation, where the beſt poliſhed mindes do chooſe to enhabite: howbeit that the Court only beareth the name, as the place where not good inſtructiōs only are to be had, but alſo all ſortes of obiects that may delight doe make their reſidence. That the country man who keepeth home, ſpendeth his daies in hunting ſome beaſt, or in eating the wortes of his garden, where as thoſe that flow in aboundance doe continually be hould goodly things, heare al melodies, & ſmell all good ſauors: yea if there be any ſweet delights in the world the ſame are with them to be found. Likewiſe that whatſoeuer may tende to the exerciſe or contentation of the minde, is there more plentifull, as delightfull companie, amitie, courteſie, honor, fauor, wealth, rewardes, offices, dignities, commendations, tryumphes and all magnificence. To be briefe, which way ſoeuer a man turne him ſelfe, all doe laugh and reioyce: Theſe are the things which wee ought to ſeeke in this life, to the ende to burie ſuch heauineſſe as happen therto by ſo many vnlooked for accidents: And whoſoeuer taketh any other courſe reſembleth the couetous perſon, which hauing (as a man may ſay) all felicitie in his coffers, cannot enioy it: but daylie encreaſeth his cares and miſeries: ſo farre are his ſences out of frame. That it is great folly to preſcribe to mans life (as many doe) ſuch ſtraight boundes to coope it in, as a man would doe a priſoner: for ſo doe they make it like vnto death, which is repugnant vnto nature: and deuotion doe bring it into that ſtate. For we ſee ſome of theſe Protestants that make a conſcience to laugh: on the other ſide, the Charterhouſe Munke dare not ſpeake, and the Nunnes doe nothing but weepe. But if no man may without thoſe paſſions haue place in the chambers and

ſtately halles of Paradize, they are well content to leaue the preeminence vnto them, and for their partes to take ſome roume in the ſmall corners of the outer courts. That thoſe men are too ſpeculatiue with in regard of things to come, do ſet themſelues in the ſtockes in this world, and reiect ſo many preſent benefites which are not created but to bee vſed. Theſe are the ſhort ſermons which theſe good Courtiers doo preach in good and poliſhed ſpeeches vnto the nouices whom they purpoſe to entrappe: neither is it to be doubted but they be drawne by this Epicurian doctrine, which is in theſe latter daies very plauſible to many. All theſe wordes, with many more deliuered with a grace and dexteritie in the middeſt of theſe theatres of pleaſure, vnto thoſe ſimple ſoules that yet doe walke in the pathes of youthfull innocencie, are of wonderful force to reſtraine them from all good motions, and certainely the moſt part are ſhaken and infected with the ſame. Wherefore it is neceſſarie in this our age to repleniſh the veſſels of our ſoules with all good liquours, to the end thoſe that bee poyſoned and ſtill flowe in many places may finde no entrie. Here would I anſwer the propoſition of the falſe Courtier, were it not that wee muſt alſo ſuffer his companions to vtter their ſpeeches, which are not much different from him and tende both to one ende: and then aunſwer them both together.
               Now let vs bring vnto the ſtage the enhabitants of the townes. Of the Epicures and Libertines which enhabit the Townes. One ſorte termed the careleſſe children, which are a kinde of people that paſſe not their legge of mutton, their flagon of wine, and a game at ſcailes I will not ſpeake of: but I purpoſe to make mention of the other ſorte which want neither learning, eloquence, nor ciuilitie: men worthie continual conuerſation, were not their ſoules polluted with this vayne Philoſophie, which tyeth true felicitie to ſenſible and corporall things. They doe ſome what differ from the Courtier that ſpake before, for he doth not vtterly reiect labour, but delighteth in diuerſitie of actions, & doth ſomewhat aſpire to high matters: wheras theſe men loue idleneſſe, which they terme Tranquilitie, ſeeking to eſchue all cauſes of griefe, which is one of the priucipal fruites of the Epicurian doctrine: who alſo doe diligently obſerue the precept proceeded out of the ſame ſchoole: Hide thy life. Now ſome of them being learned doe eaſely, by the ſubtletie of their arguments, drawe to them many ſchollers. But their ſtrongeſt meanes is the practiſe of the delicious life that they leade. For ſo ſoone as any haue once taſted of the liquorous morcels that it yeeldeth, it is a great aduenture, but he euen glutteth himſelfe: And

the better to induce him thereto, they drawe him in with theſe ſpéeches following. That men for the moſt parte haue bene wrapped in ignorance, which is one of the chiefeſt diſeaſes of the ſoule: whereof it 
                  Their ſpeeches. 
                  hath followed that many times they haue taken the falſe for the true: yea euen in the choyſe of the life that is beſt for them they haue bene greatly deceiued: but that thoſe whoſe mindes haue bene illuminated with the documents of Philoſophie, haue better perceiued what were good for them to chooſe. That in them they haue learned that among all temporall things ſubiect to the ſundrie blaſtes of fortune, the meaneſt are the ſafeſt. For proofe whereof, that wee ſee the higheſt towers and trees moſt beaten with thunder, likewiſe the loweſt medowes for the moſt parte drowned with great floodes: but that the meaneſt buildings are freeſt from all ſuch inconueniences. Euen ſo is it in mans life. For ſuch as trot after the greatneſſe therof are toſſed with a thouſand paſſions, and oftentimes with ſudden destruction: On the other ſide, the meaneſt ſorte are ſubiect to many oppreſſions and iniuries: But thoſe that keepe the meane, doe without the enuie of the one ſorte and contempt of the other, beſt preſerue themſelues, and withall enioy a ſweete peace both in bodie and minde, which conſisteth in the vſe of all delectable things, and in the want of ſuch as may bee noyſome. That albeit they enhabite the great townes, where they may ſee a vehement flowing and ebbing of wordly folly yet doth not the ſame toſſe this out corner of the world, where their nauigation doth lye, and where it is almoſt alwaies calme, whence they behould the motions of all, and ſmile at the vaine hope and diſordered deſires of the one ſorte, and bewaile the ſimplicitie that circumuenteth the other, while in the meane time they let the world ſlide, which paſſing in her wonted courſe, moweth downe all that hath had being: wherefore the beſt counſaile that a man can take is to poſſeſſe himſelfe, and not to become a bondſlaue to diuers things, which to no purpoſe doe bereaue him of that ſmall libertie that he hath, which alſo he ſhould make ſo deere accompt of. That it is not in vaine that this braue ſpeech, Too much of nothing hath bene had in ſo great reputation, as being a ſentence that cutteth off all exceſſe in humaine actions, and not onely the bad, but alſo thoſe which vnder colour of goodneſſe, doe tende to transformations againſt nature, ſuch as many endeuour to perſwade to themſelues, who but ſimplie conſidering of the weakeneſſe and frailtie of man, doe imagine that they can liue heere belowe as Angelles, and to the ende to attaine thereto, doe endeuour to binde themſelues to vnpoſſible rules and obſeruations,

albeit their bodies be compoſed of the elements and ſubiect to the alterations that followe that ſubstance: but they weening to aduance them ſelues doe recoyle backward, as the hammer wherewith a man ſtriketh too hard vpon aſlithie. For, ſay they, what els are ſo many ſuperſtitious custumes, ſuch austerities, deuotions, and propounded feares, but rauiſhments of ioye and recreation whereto mans affections doe tende? adding, that in ſeeking to make it perfect, they make it vnſenſible, after the maner of the Stoikes, which is, to destroy their owne figure: That the beſt way therefore is to followe the rules which agree with nature, who is to bee guided without violence and left free: alſo that who ſo vſeth it otherwiſe, burieth himſelfe before he bee dead, which is a puniſhment that thoſe men haue well deſerued that haue ſo badly vſed the goodly priuiledges of life. Theſe bee the firſt ſpeeches that they propound: and then when a man is growne into domeſticall familiaritie with them, they doe more at large diſcloſe the ſecretes that before they durſt not reueale: For (as ſaith Plutarke, ſpeaking of ſuch Epicures) they feare the people, and for a ſhewe doe embrace the religion allowed, to the ende to bee tollerated, although in corners they ſcoffe thereat.
               Let vs now heare alſo thoſe that are brought vp in the warres, Of Epicures and Libertines brought vp in the warres. for now is it their turne to ſpeake. But firſt I will ſay thus much: that I meane not to condenme the lawfull profeſſions wherto men apply themſelues, but only ſuch corruptions as fall out. The great labours of theſe warriours, together with the daungers whereinto they haſard themſelues, do procure them earneſtly to long for pleaſure, as a moſt ſweete medicine for their paynes: alſo to eſchue all ſorowfull obiects, as being but too much affrighted at the images of death which they ſee ſo often. And when they haue catched ſome good bootie, it is not to be demaunded whether they ſtudie to make good cheere: for both daies & nights are too ſhort for them. And this prouerbe which by the ſcripture is applyed to prophane perſons, is vſually in their mouthes, Let vs eate drinke & be merrie, for peraduenture to morow we ſhal dye. This is a cloſe approbation of the periſhing of the ſoule together with the bodie, which they will repleniſh with all earthly goods, for that they be ignorant of the heauenly. When a yong gentleman cōmeth to learne the feates of warre, they faſhion his ſoule after a terrible maner, if he cleaue too much to them. Their ſpeech is not ſo much painted as the former, but as it Their ſpeeches. were enterlaced and full of ieſting. The Souldiers (ſay they) muſt aime at both pray and pleaſure, and eſchue all melancholy, which they

returne to the couetous miſers and Hermites, for couetouſneſſe and deuotion can haue no abiding with the ſouldiours, the one making them to hate, the other to feare: likewiſe that they muſt not feede delicatlie, for that quaileth their courages. To be briefe, that thoſe which minde to bring into the Theatres where Mars playeth her bloudie tragedies, faſtings, portuaiſes, & contemplation, doe but put forth themſelues for mocking ſtockes, conſidering that there is nothing to be looked for but triumphs, rewards, and commendations, which are atchieued by contrarie waies. Theſe be the pettie rudiments of their ſchooles wherby we may perceiue how all three ſortes doe agree in the reiecting of pietie, which is the worthieſt and moſt precious ornament of our ſoules.
               I know ſuch wicked ſpeeches do deſerue to be buried in ſilence, Why the ſpeeches of the Epicures are heere ſet downe: alſo the meanes to eſchue the infection of the ſame. alſo that neither the mouth of man ſhould vtter them, neither the paper beare them: but now other farre worſe are ſo common, that we need not to make any doubt of reuealing thē, ſo as we do it onely to the end to warne others to beware, & to ſhew the meanes how. For as men ſet manifeſt markes in certaine places in the greate ſtreames where the rocks do lie hidden vnder water, that the ſailers may eſcape them, ſo hauing marked the places where theſe dangerous ſhelues are harbored, I thought good to ſet downe ſome ſmal deſcription of their forme. Many there are who beeing ignorant of theſe dangers do thruſt through the middeſt them: and theſe are to be moaned as much as the others are to be blamed, who perceiuing them, doe ſeeme to haue a pleaſure to make ſhipwracke thereon, as taking their beginning to be verie ſweet, though the end be ſower. The beſt way to ſcape without ſcath, is to carry with them the quadred, that is, wiſedome, and the card, which are the goodly precepts to diſcerne the true from the falſe. For when the vaile that couered this falſe life is taken awaie, and that the filthineſſe thereof appeareth, that man is verie beaſtly that immediatly flieth not from it for feare of polluting himſelfe in ſo filthie a puddle. We haue alreadie ſcene the beautifull ſhew of this vayle which ſhineth in the painted and ſweet ſpeeches of theſe teachers: and eſpecially in thoſe which they make to runne downe ſo ſweetely in the beginning: for men woulde thinke they ſhould bring them to heauen: but when they gather to theyr concluſions, they make a ſodayne ſtoppe, taking the waie not to anie pleaſant places of the earth, but euen to the darkeſt dens therin. And in the meane time their intermingling of the fayre with the foule, and of the good with the badde, doe dazell

the eyes of the ſimple, and dim their iudgements, wherby they cannot at the firſt perceiue their iutentes, which in deede they ſeeke to couer, becauſe they cannot catch the birdes without counterfaicing ſuch pleaſant calls.
               But leaſt we might be deceiued, it is not amiſſe to ſhew the fallacies of their intangling argumentes, reducing them into a more briefe and manifeſt forme.
               The Courtiers is this. The inſtructions of the Court, with the examples of the quiokeſt wits doe teach man to follow ſuch things as miniſter 
                  A more briefe order of the diſcourſes of the ſundry ſortes of theſe Libertines. 
                  pleaſure & contentation, as a benefit greatly to be deſired in this life: and contrariwiſe toteſchue all ſuch as are ſorrowfull and noiſome, which alſo make it miſerable.
               
               
                  But deuotion and the ſtraight rules of religion doe plunge it in 1000 anguiſhes, make it melancholy, and hinder it from attaining to this ende.
               
               
                  We muſt therefore reiect them, and enſue thoſe that bring more delight.
               
               The ſecond argument gathered out of the Epicures ſpeeche is this.
               
                  The beſt rules to mans lyfe are the naturall motions of the ſoule, ſomwhat holpen with the precepts of Philoſophie.
               
               
                  But the ſuperſtitions which tranſport man to imagined perfections, ſtrange to mans reaſon doe turne it out of this waie.
               
               
                  We are therefore rather to follow that which is according to nature, and conformeth it ſelfe thereto.
               
               The ſouldiers is this. Thoſe things that effeminate the mindes and daunt the courages of the ſouldiers, taking from them their wonted cheerefulneſſe which they ought to haue, doe in no wiſe agree with their profeſſion.
               
               
                  But the rules of religion which commend humilitie, forgetfulneſſe of iniuries, & a feareful meditation of death, do work all theſe effects.
               
               
                  They are therefore vnconuenient thereto.
               
               By this abrigement of ſpeech we may (as I thinke) better comprehend The examination of the arguments or ſophiſmes aforegoing. the ſpeakers meaning, as ſeeing it naked and cleere from that which before kept it diſguiſed: neyther doe I ſuppoſe that anie man, pare deaie that theſe argument are grounded vpon impietis and intemperancie: for as well thoſe mennes purpoſes tend onelie to let goe the bridle to bodilie affections, to the ende to wallowe and glut themſelues in all pleaſure, and to reiect the lawes and admonitions that labour to reſtraine them within the boundes

of vertue. But if we doe more neerely marke their arguments, we ſhall ſee that all their concluſions are falſe, as alſo are the moſt part of their propoſitions, which muſt not ſeeme ſtraunge, becauſe that in the approbation of wickedneſſe wee cannot proceede but by falſehoode and lying.
               The principall thing that ye propound to dazell mens eies withal, is that all creatures doe long after whatſoeuer may reioyce them, and eſchue whatſoeuer may make them ſorrowfull. This doe I with them graunt to be true, and that nature teacheth euerie reaſonable ſoule the ſame leſſon: howbeit with this condition, that eueuerie one vſe it as to him ſhall be moſt conuenient. In beaſts this appetite is ruled by certaine inſtinctions which nature hath giuen them, whereby they order themſelues: and vſually wee ſee them ſeldome change this order: But man is indued with reaſon to guide his actions, whereto he yeeldeth verie ſmall obedience: which alſo albeit it were much greater than it is, yet could it not eſcape ſ
                     •
                  umbling and falling into things vicious: conſidering how reaſon her ſelfe hauing bene in a manner blinded by originall ſinne ſtandeth in neede of a guide, ſo farre is ſhee from beeing altogether capable of the conduct of affections: but is it poſſible to finde anie man whoſe affections are ſo wel ordered as to reioice at nothing but that which is good? Such a one muſt wee ſeeke in the other worlde: for in this, wickedneſſe, vanitie, and delightes, doe pleaſe farre better, euen without compariſon, than that which is good: ſo as this vniuerſall deſire (which in beaſts is ruled after their being) is verie vnperfect in thoſe that haue the vſe of reaſon, vntill it bee after a ſorte reſtored through heauenly humiliation.
               This is their goodly foundation which taketh more of the bad than of the good, howbeit they neuertheleſſe proceed to lay a great Confutation of the Libertines argumet touching the pleaſure. building therevpon. For (ſaie they) the delightfull ought to be a moſt ſoueraigne felicitie to man, ſith his owne forcible deſires are ſo liuely bent to ſuch an end.
               
               Heetevpon if a man ſhould deuiand of them, what is the delight of the intemperate perſon, they dare ſcarce be acknowen, for ſhame forbiddeth them to ſaie impudicitie or gluttonie: wherein wee may brholde the beautie of their braue Philoſophie, which maketh mannes ſoueraigne felicitie lyke vnto that of a hog or goate. Neither is it to any purpoſe for them to replie, that they can well inough ſhun ſuch villanous exceſſe: for experiēce doth but to plainly teach, that when man fixeth his felicity in bodily pleaſures, he doth

extreamly exceede in the vſe of the ſame: and heerein doth all the vice conſiſt, when wee exceede the meane, whether in wiſhing or enioying: beſides that, whatſoeuer is of it ſelf wicked, we ought neither to wiſh nor labour for. The doctrine of Philoſophers teacheth that there bee three ſortes of good, The pleaſant, the profitatable, and the honeſt. Alſo that as the profitable are to bee preferred before the pleaſant, ſo the honeſt are to bee eſteemed aboue them both, as farre exceeding them in all excellencie: and theſe doe properly pertaine to man, who onelie among all creatures is capable of vertue. Who ſo therefore preferreth pleaſure before and ſetteth vertue which is the true honeſt good: laſt committeth a great errour, and placeth himſelfe among bruite beaſts, who do reſpect no more but to ſatiſfie theyr luſts. Neither will I forgette to ſaie that the good of pleaſure commeth behinde the good of profite, but that which accompanieth the honeſt is without compariſon the moſt perfect, neyther is there anie falſehoode hidden therein as in the others, which for the moſt parte doe breede ſorrowe and ſacietie: whereas thoſe which conſiſt in the enioying of vertue are pure and cleane, not ſubiect to alteration, but continually yeelding content. This ſheweth the blindneſſe of our Libertines ſpeeches, when they ſaie that pleaſure is aboue 
                     〈◊〉
                   things to be deſired, meaning of inferiours, for they ough
                     〈…〉
                   adde the honeſt to make their propoſition the more receiueable. The ſecond part of the confutation touching the ſorow which the Libertines doecōdemne.
               
               Now let vs ſpeake of the other part thereof, which ſo earneſtlie perſuadeth to eſchue whatſoeuer may breed griefe or ſorow: for therin doe they account the greateſt parte of their felicitie to conſiſt. Heerevpon we may ſaie that the principle of ſuch affection is bad, ſith it tendeth onely to eſchue the thing that altereth the temperature of the bodie, & breedeth diſcommoditie to the minde, becauſe the ſame ſeemeth to be a peruerting of the order of nature: but they haue other conſiderations. For as they referre almoſt all to the body, ſo they thinke it a great inconuenience to ſuffer, whereof alſo inſueth another, which they thinke to be no leſſe, that is, a hinderance from inioying of pleaſures: which their falſe opinions doe miniſter vnto them double torments. I will not denie but he that profeſſeth wiſedome, ought ſo far forth as he may, to eſchue all griefes. Howbeit when they happē vnto him, he muſt not make the accident greater than it is, but by the valyancie of his courage diminiſh the ſame. Whereas theſe men to the contrarie doe imagine euerie worde of ſorow to be ten, ſuch a delycate felicitie haue they forged thēſelues.

They alſo ſhew themſelues to bee of ſmall iudgement in that they ſeeke to ſhunne ſorrowes and griefes, & yet doe wallow in all pleaſures which draw them after them by douzens. It is as if a man to keepe himſelfe from wet, ſhould runne vp to the chin into the riuer, whome we might well ſaie to be beſides himſelfe. Wherevpon Eraſmus verie 
                     ••
                  tlie ſayth, that pleaſures at theyr comming doe flatter, but at theyr departure doe leaue vs full of ſorrowe and heauineſſe.
               The Towne Libertines doe incomparably feare theſe inconueniences The cowardlines of thoſe Libertines that enhabit the townes. more than the other, becauſe that hauing choſen the more effeminate life, themſelues haue through cuſtome grewe as tender as the waxe that melteth againſt the Sunne, which in them is a great token of puſilanimitie ſo ſore to feare that which ſo many vile and baſe perſons doe beare with ſo greate facilitie. Yea, we ſhall ſometimes ſee women and young children make ſo ſmall account of the griefes that pricke them, that you ſhall not heare one lamentable voyce proceede out of theyr mouths, which are the goodly fruites of conſtancie. But who ſhould better know this than they that thinke themſelues in fineneſſe of wit & knowledge to paſſe all others? In reſpect whereof theyr opinions in the ordering of theyr liues ought in ſoundnes and truth to paſſe the common ſort. They imagine that they haue layde a ſure foundation, in ſaying that wee Anſwere to their argument concerning the motions of nature: alſo whether it be well done to hide their liues. muſt followe the motions of our nature, wherto neuertheleſſe they alſo adde the helpe of precepts, wherby they ſhew that they account it vnperfect. But it were better for them freely to confeſſe the great imbecilitie & weakneſſe thereof, than by extolling it ſo high, to put it in hazard of a greater fall, & themſelues doe but too often try how much it is inclined to euill rather than to good. Howbeit although it were much purer and ſounder than it is, yet woulde they through the bad ſuſtenance wherewith they feede it vtterly corrupt it. And what maner of Philoſophy is this of theirs, which ſeketh to ſtraighten crooked things by thoſe that be more crooked: This is the occaſion, in my opinion, that they ſo loue to hide their life, leaſt men ſhould perceiue their diſordered manners. I will rehearſe vnto you the admonition of Plutarke to ſuch people, for the ſame wil ſuffice. Plutarke in his treatiſe, whether this common ſpeech Hide thy life, be well ſaide. 
                  It is (ſayth he) a poynt of diſhoneſtie ſo to liue as none ſhall know howe thou haſt liued: for if thou beeſt endued with vertue thou oughteſt to let it appeare. If with vice, to ſeeke to haue it cured. Whom then may this Prouerbe Hide thy life profite? The ignorant, the wicked, or the fooles? No. It were as if thou ſhouldeſt ſaie to them. Hide thy

ague, or thy phrenſie, let not the Phiſition know of it. Goe creepe into ſome darke corner where no man may ſee thee or thy paſſions: Goe hide thy ſelfe with the incurable and mortall diſea
                     •
                  e of thy vices: couer thy enuie, thy adulterie, and exceſſe, as a haſtie and lof
                     •
                  ie poulſe, leaſt thou be ſhewed and deliuered to ſuch as are able to admoniſh, correct, and cure them: Let vs alſo looke what commoditie the hiding of a mannes ſelfe, and not to let anie in an knowe him, doth breede to the honeſt. It is as much as ſayth Plutarke, as if a man ſhould ſay to Epaminondas: Take no charge of the armie: to Lycurgus, Trouble not thy ſelfe about the making of lawes: to Thraſibulus, Kill not the tyrants: to Py
                        •
                     hagoras, Teach not: or to Socrates, Make no diſcourſe.
               
               Heereby wee may verie eaſilie comprehende that thoſe which ſeeke to perſwade others to liue in theſe ſmall corners, haue no luſt to make men to amend their imperfections, or to ſerue the the common wealth, but rather that they ſeeke to glut themſelues with all pleaſure. But as for him whome wee ſee ſo diſpoſed, and paſt amendement, wee may well applie vnto him the ſaying of the ſame Philoſopher to the brother of Epicurus. Goe and hide thy ſelfe with thy harlot Hedia and other thy yonckors, ſith that contemning all honeſtie thou placeſt thy felicie in the pleaſures of the fleſh. Truely ſuch endes are to bee buried in the darkneſſe of the night, leaſt their wicked example ſhould ſtirre vp others to filthie imitation.
               The Courtly Libertine differeth from theſe men in this, that he Aunſwer to the errors of the courtly Libertine. ſeeketh to liue in more light and to bee knowen: how be it hee is ſo ſlie, that hee forgetteth no deuiſe wherewith to couer that which he doth well knowe many will reproue. But he ſpeedeth as well as ye woman, who to couer her nakedneſſe putteth on a white, thin and fine lawne vaile, whereby ſhee may bee ſeene as playne as before: for euen ſo may wee eaſilie beholde the mudde that is in the bottome of theyr water: and it is greate pittie hee employeth not his ſo many qualyties and exerciſes as well in the vſe of vertue, as of his pleaſures. But after a man hath ſuffered himſelfe to bee by this ſorcereſſe bewitched, it is verie harde for him to abandon her, ſo many hookes hath ſhee to with-holde thoſe that doe followe her.
               Wee haue alreadie ſeene how hee alleadgeth the example of Courts and fineſt wittes, fayning that as well the one as the other doe all tende to that ende. But I denie it. For although

men doe there ſeeke pleaſant matters, yet are not thoſe theyr principall endes, but vnderlings thereto, and as it were, ſome ſweete refreſhing to life, after it hath bene too much wearyed & toiled with cares. For I thinke there be fewe (but theyr lyke) that will preferre the pleaſure of melodious muſicke, before the goodly harmonie of ſundrie commendable amities there contracted: eyther glut themſelues with a pleaſant banquet, rather then ſaue theyr deere friende out of preſent perill, leaſt ſo ſhoulde they ſeeme to haue but ſmall regarde to the contenting of theyr ſoules: for their bodie beeing filled they are ſatiſfied. Yea, they make it a bond-ſlaue, ſayth Plutarke, in forming the contemplatiue parte thereof, not to thinke vpon any other thing but the bodie, which is as much as for to hale it down with ſenſuall concupiſences, and becauſe in his ſmal workes he hath eloquently diſcourſed agaynſt many other Epicurian opinions, I will referre the Reader for his better ſatiſfaction vnto him.
               Nowe muſt I ſaie ſome what alſo of our warlyke Epicure, A refutation of the errors of the Souldierlike Libertine. who, as the nature of warie is to diſorder all things, ſo woulde hee bring ſuch a confuſion vppon the moſt profitable ſenſes that remayne in his ſoule, as they might not keeepe him downe, but ſuffer him for to followe his furious appetites, whereas hee is ſo euylly accuſtomed in theſe corrupted ſchooles, that nothing but the glutting of himſelfe therwith can delight him, euen as the Fiſhers nettes are haled into the bottome of the water with ſmall morſelles of Lead therevnto faſtned. He maketh a goodlie brag, as if he would tread vnder foot whatſoeuer he thinketh may ſeeme to leade him vnto feare and delicacie, and yet hee marketh not that moſt of his paſtimes are of lyke nature.
               For when he hath ſuffered a lyttle, what is his delyght, but to wallowe in the puddles of Bacchus and cloſettes of Venus, vntyll that griefe, weakneſſe, or pouertie doe pull him foorth agayne? O what a goodly meane hee hath to maintaine the vertue of Fortitude in ſtrength, by nouriſhing it in diſhoneſt pleaſures! Neuertheleſſe to the ende to moderate the rudeneſſe of martyall lyfe, I will ſette downe an argument cleane contrarie vnto his, and conclude that it is neceſſarie many times to vſe ſuch thinges as may mollifie and appeaſe it: but with what drugges muſt it bee done? With pietie, humanitie, and temperaunce, which neuer quaile the courage, whereas that meate wherewith he feedeth his ſoule doth make it both dull and ſauage.

Our aforeſayd Libertines in whom particularly there is ſmall diſagreement, doe in generall verie well agree among themſelues to Whether Chriſtian profeſſion doe baniſh ioy out of the harte. contemne and reiect the Chriſtian life, as beeing perſwaded that it baniſheth all ioy out of the heart, and keepeth man all his life time in as demure a countenance as the ſame which a bride counterfaiteth for one day onely. And becauſe they dare not openlie ſpeake euill of it, they reuenge themſelues by ſlandering it ſecretly among ſuch as are of theyr owne fraternitie. This monſtrouſneſſe of theſe later dayes might be thought berie ſtrange, were it not that I conſider that the antiquitie of the Iewes engendred the Saduces who denyed the reſurrection of the dead and immortalitie of the ſoules, which maketh mee not to wonder ſo much at the imperfections of our time: for if we be Gods people, ſo were the Iewes: albeit we ſée yt as well yt one as ye other haue gone verie far aſtraie. In Plutarks time, there were many ſuch people: but the ſame were heathen men blinded with ignorance and pricked forwarde with their deſires, to whome vpon this point he ſpeaketh ſo parti
                     •
                  ently, that I woulde take his ſpeech to be ſufficient to awaken and amend thoſe that liue in our dayes.
               Theſe be his wordes. The Epicures do ſcorne the ſacrifices and 
                  In his treatiſe that by the doctrine of Epicurus no man can liue merely. 
                  ceremonies which we vſe to the God, ſaying that thoſe that aſſiſt therat, doe it not of any pleaſure that they conceiue therein, but for a certaine feare that they haue of them, which is manifeſtly falſe: For in truth there is no proſperitie that more delyghteth good men than that which they conceiue in the temples, neither any time more ioyfull than thoſe feaſts, neither can they ſee or doe any thing that better pleaſeth them than when they ſing or aſſiſt at the ſacrifices to the Gods. For is not there the ſoule heauy or melancholike as if it had to deale with ſome tyrant, but rather whereſoeuer it weeneth that God is, there doth it ſooneſt put away all feare and care, and giue it ſelfe to mirth. Afterward he addeth. Now ſayth Diogenes, all belong the Gods, & among friends all things are còmon, but the good are friends to the Gods. It is not thē poſſible but that the deuout & ſuch as are friends to the Gods: muſt withall bee happy, neither that the vertuous man, as hee that is temperate and iuſt, can be without deuotion or religion. Is not this very wel ſpoken of a heathē who neuer had but falſe inſtructiōs, to conclude that he, which hath a liuely impreſſion of religion can not be without felicity and ioy▪ Let therefore our Libertines of theſe dayes, who make themſelues ſo blinde in the middeſt of all this heauenly light at the leaſtwiſe receiue the inſtruction of this philoſopher

(euen they that ſo much eſtéeme of prophane writers) who did ſee more clearely in thoſe paſſed darkneſſes, then theſe men wil do in the perfect light. I am of opinion that who ſo liſt to reade this his ſo excellent a a treatiſe thorow, out of the which I haue ſhredde theſe ſmall morcels, it will ſuppreſſe in him a great part of theſe falſe opinions, by ſéeing them ſo ſufficiently confuted, which ſhall excuſe me from repetition, referring the readers to the originall. We ſhall not néede (as I thinke) any other doctors then the Philoſophers to confute theſe people which doe thus falſely pollute the pureſt principles of mans life: for it were too great an honor to thē to haue the heauenly rules alleged againſt thē. Howbeit in as much as they dare in their corners make their ſkoffes therof, it is very requiſite by the ſame to diſcloſe the filthineſſe of their diſorders and returne their atunts vpon them ſelues.
               They imagine that they haue gotten a great aduantage of other The confutation of the Libertines alligations againſt the terrors of hell. men, in ſaying, that they be not terrified with the fantaſticall imaginations of the torments of tell fire, which ſay they, are but deuiſes inuented to reſtraine ſuch as exceede and liue againſt nature. But I would aſke them, (albeit their falſe propoſition were true) to whome thoſe propounded terrors may better be applied then to them ſelues, who liue as much againſt the nature of men as conformably with that of beaſtes. Truely they cut their owne throates with their owne knife: & alſo whatſoeuer countenance they beare to fear nothing, yet we ſée no people that ſtand in more fear of bodily puniſhment and death then they. And whereof may that procéede, but of a naturall feeling printed in their conſciences, which vnder temporall corrections and calamities doe repreſent vnto them the eternall paines prepared for ſuch as flée and reuolt from God? And that is it which Solomon ſaith, The wicked doe flee when none doe purſue them, and vnto them is death terrible. Haue not the philoſophers alſo ſayde that the moſte gréeuous and aſſured puniſhment of wickednes is a continual remorſe in the offender, which leaueth him no reſt? The aforeſayde thinges, which euen they of whom we ſpeake doe trye, are as it were demonſtrations and ſenſible approbations of Gods iudgements after this life. Some do indeuour ſo much as in them lieth to haue no féeling hereof in themſelues (becauſe it is the continuall diminiſher of their ioy) but they can not poſſibly cōpaſſe it. And they are farre deceiued to think yt good men be ſo terrified with the remembrance of hell: for although they abhorre it, yet are they heereof aſſured, namely that there is no condemnation

to thoſe that are in Ieſus Chriſt and walk not according to the fleſh that is which liue not as Epicures. Moreouer, they know that hell, with all the power there of was lead captiue in the A conſolation to the good againſt the apprehenſion of hell: alſo how fore affliction tormenteth the Libertines. triumph of our redeemers reſurrection, and therefore cannot ſwallow vp anie of thoſe that are partakers in the benefite of this victorie. Wherevpon they ſtande in no feare for themſelues, albeit they take compaſſion of others whom they ſee to take the waie towarde this gulfe which is to them inuiſible. Let vs a litle conſider how the Epicures and Libertines whenſoeuer they ſuffer anie aduerſitie, whereof they be not exempt, doe beare the fame, as alſo what conſolations they vſe. We may ſaie that they take them as vnwillingly as children doe the rod: for ſith of the depriuation of ſorrow they make a wiſhed felicitie, it muſt needs follow that the preſence therof is vnto them a verie odious miſhap. Neuertheleſſe they can yet comfort one another, ſaying: If it be violent they ſhall be ſoone deliuered from it, and that being reduced to nothing, they ſhall no longer feele anie thing: but if it be bu
                     •
                   ſmall, they will ſeeke to laie al the fault ſometimes vpon men, and ſometimes vpon the elements, as if all creatures ſhoulde bee contributories to the preſeruation of their bodily felicities: Al theſe conſolations do far differ from thoſe of the true Catholiks, who are inſtructed in the truth: for whē they The comforts of the true Catholicks both in affliction and proſperitie. fall into anie tribulation, their ſoules are not troubled, as knowing aſſuredly that it is God that viſteth them after a fatherly manner, for their good & amendment, as not willing they ſhoud periſh: aſſuring themſelues that after their humiliation, and calling vppon his fauourable goodneſſe they ſhall finde ſuch remedie as may be moſt conuenient for them. Yea, although the greatneſſe of the perill, or vehemencie of the miſhap ſhould euen carrie them away, yet would they not ſorrow without meaſure for abandoning a fraile and tranſitorie life, for one fullie repleniſhed with all eternall goodnes. Neither doe theſe men guide themſelues otherwiſe in proſperitie than in aduerſitie, meaſuring them according to the pleaſure which they breede vnto the bodies, as alſo they meaſure the other by the ell of their bodily ſorrowe. But the Stoike Philoſophers whome they ſcorne, are ſufficient to reproue them: for they ſaie that to ſpeake properly, vice onely may be termed miſhap, becauſe it tranſfigureth man into a wicked deuill or beaſt, which griefe dooth not, for it oftentimes maketh them better: likewiſe that the true good which giueth perfect contentment, is that of the ſoule which conſiſteth in the goodly actions of vertue, and the high ſearches of the truth.
               
                  
But in as much as this is well inough knowen, I will perſiſt no The abuſe of the Libertines in the vſe of the thinges that they feele after, & wherein they ground their ſchcitie. farther therin, but returne where I left, pretending to ſhew the abuſes which the Libertines do commit in thoſe things that they ſeek after and delight in. Let vs put the caſe ſome good ſucceſſion or other benefit be fallen to one of them. The firſt thing that then hee ſhould doe, if hee were as hee ought to bee, were to giue thankes to God, as to him that is the author of all goodneſſe. Secondly, to reioyce for being freed from pouertie, and beeing better able to exerciſe thā before the actions of vertue, as charitie & liberalitie. Thirdly, to vſe this riches conueniently or honeſtly, as wel to the benefite of others, as to his owne cōmoditie & recreation: but what doth he, but refer all to himſelfe, neglecting al acknowledgement to God, (of whom he taketh ſmal keepe) and his other duties, and then ſaith to himſelfe and his coadiutors. Come let vs prepare our ſelues to all 
                  The Chriſtanmanes delight. 
                  kindes of pleaſures, ſith we now haue meanes to inioy them, and caſt awaie care: for the pleaſures receiued will neuer be loſt, and the remembrance thereof is ſtill pleaſant. But the true Chriſtian mans pleaſure is farre other: for ſo ſoone as he receiueth any benefite, by and by his heart riſeth to God-ward, and he confeſſeth and acknowledgeth that he hath heard him, yea, that of his bounteous liberalitie he hath preuented him, or that although for his ingratitude hee deſerued to be chaſtiſed, yet hee hath ſo farre fauoured him as to graunt him all things neceſſary for his preſent life: & meditating vpon theſe things in his ſoule he reioyceth, and with Dauid ſingeth: The Lord is my onely ſupport, and he that doth me feede. How can I then lacke anie thing whereof I ſtand in neede? He doth me folde in coates moſt ſafe, the tender graſſe faſt by: And after driues me to the ſwarmes which runne moſt pleaſantly, &c.
               
               In the court we may ſee many who when their maiſter hath giuen them any reward, doe neuer ceaſe praiſing of him, ſaying: O what a good maiſter we haue, that giueth vs ſuch rewards? Are wee not bound to loue him heartely, and withall fidelitie to ſerue him? If men can then ſo delight in the acknowledgement of humane benefites, what are they to doe for diuine? Undoubtedly thoſe that bee well taught do delight much more in heauenly: for they know that a Prince loueth to day & hateth to morow: but ye 
                  God neuer hateth thoſe whom he hath regiſtred for his in ye booke of life, but loueth thē with a moſt perfect loue. Another pleſure alſo yt enſueth this, is whē yt which a man hath gotten he vſeth by rules of vertue. For if I be a magiſtrate & haue preſerued diuers innocents frō vniuſt oppreſſion:

that my prince fauoureth me, and I haue reported the trueth vnto him: eyther that hauing had wealth I haue releeued thoſe whome pouerty was ready to thruſt downe into their graues: will not all this be vnto me an occaſion of greater ioy then if I had vſed theſe commodities to hurt my enimies, to eate more delicate morſelles, or to be coſtly clothed all ouer to make men gaze vpon me, as vpon as vpon an Oxe crowned whom men vſe to leade vp and down the ſtreetes? I referre it to the iudgement of the wiſe. A Chriſtian ſhal alſo finde further occaſion to reioyce when by outward benefites as well his mind as body are freed from ſorrow & ſufferance which proceede of the want of theſe goods: but this is with a moderate ioy which continueth and reſembleth a calme and ſtil running water, wheras the ioy of the Libertines doth rather reſemble the inundations of a ſwift ſtreame.
               I dare affirme that euen the bodily pleaſures (I ſpeake of ſuch That the pleaſures of the body which the Chriſtians do enioie, are more delectable and firme then thoſe wherin the Liibertines doe plague themſelues. as are lawfull) which they ſo ſtorme for, are not ſo pleaſaunt vnto them as vnto thoſe whome they take to be ſo entangled in ſorowe. The firſt place will I attribute vnto thoſe which they receiue in taſte and feeling, which are the two ſenſes that they ſeeke ſooneſt to ſatiſfy, notwithſtanding nature hath placed them further from the vnderſtanding then the reſt, as thoſe which are moſt repugnaunt thereto. In this carrier doe I already perceiue ſome not only running but euen dying after one Flora or Lays: but in their ſuch purſuites, yea and enioyings, they ſhall hardly perſwade me that their pleaſures doe ſurmount their paynes: for if there be any purgatory in the worlde, a man may ſay that it is there. One cryeth out that he burneth, another that he freezeth: one will goe hang him-ſelfe, another will baniſh him-ſelfe: thus doe they pay beere for ſuch wares. Such loues wil ſome man ſay, do not pierce ſo violently: but I ſay yes. For vnchaſte flames doe burne, where the ſhame-faſte do but heate onely. Againe, after they haue enioyed their purpoſe, what followeth? two very contrary effectes, according to the diuerſities of humors. For we ſhal ſée ſome not to loue women, but euen to worſhip them as Goddeſſes, ſubmitting them-ſelues to ſuch vile bondage, that eaſily they growe moſte vilely to vnworthy actions: Is not this then a worthy pleaſure that maketh the ſoule ſo ſenceleſſe & aſtonied? Others contrariwiſe, after they haue once taſted of this foode doe diſdayn it: not to the end to taſte no more, but to long after chaunge. Wherein they very well declare the vanity and ſhortneſſe of bodily delights. Yet is not the tragedy ended, the

miſchéefe whereof we may ſay to conſiſt in the Cataſtrophe. For moſt of thoſe that haue beſt played their parts do finde themſelues rewarded according to their works, namely with debility of members, gowtes, pockes, paines in the ſtomache, and which is more, their life is ſhortned and their hearts and mindes weakened. Theſe be the fruites that growe in this goodly garden of pleaſure which theſe our maſters doe ſo honor: where in the beginning they gather a fewe roſes, but after they haue a while ſported them-ſelues, they ſtep before they be aware into a Laberinth of pricking thor
                     •
                  s, the comming foorth whereof is perillous, and the torment perpetuall. Now let vs match vnto theſe ſuch men as deſire honeſt pleaſures, ſo ſhall we the better ſee the difference betweene them. Whē in theyr youth the ſparkes of pureſt loue haue ſomewhat warned their minds they ſeeke 
                     〈…〉
                  eet obiects, vſing for theyr load ſtarre honeſtie, and for their quadrant the remainder of their reaſon. Being thus guided they eſcape ſhipwracke, and oftentimes haue a verie calme nauigation, I meane thoſe which lawfullie doe labour after lawfull things, haue their pleaſures not full of launchings foorth, but ſeaſoned with ſweetneſſe, repleniſhed with ſteadfaſtneſſe, and ſuch as leaueth behinde it neither remorſe nor repentance, as do the others. Theſe amities may alſo be tearmed the kirnelles, which bring forth the fayre & great families, whoſe end is ordinarily crowned with contentation. Neyther doe thoſe men that are taken with the furies of Bacchus gouerne themſelues any better than theſe diſciples of Venus. For ſome there are whom a man cannot ſaie to be borne to liue, but to liue to eate and drinke: others are not ſo deeply plunged in this gluttonie, but in lycorouſneſſe and delicacie. The firſt are ſo diſpoſed, that their belly ſeemeth to be a cauldron, and theyr ſtomack a turne, for they be continuallie nayled and chained to the table, where they fill both the one and the other, vntyll the loade be ſo waightie that it ouerturneth his man, or carie him away vpon all foure. But who ſo ſhould thinke them to be any whi
                     •
                   aſhamed therof, ſhal be greatly deceiued: for they account it a great glorie after their long ſtrife in ſo ſweet a combat, to be caried away triumphantly into a bed, where they recouer new forces. And then they knowe verie well theſe two great Captaines White & Claret to be inuincible, alſo that the braueſt muſt of force ſtoope vnto them, as a Pigmean might do to Hercules. In opiniō they conſent with that good fat Abbot of olde time, who when his friendes tolde him that ſuch lyke exerciſe would ſhorten his daies, made them this

anſwere: My friends take no thought for me, for as it is an honor to a good knight to die in the battayle: ſo it is an honour to an Abbot to burſt at his table. I will not ſpeake of the pleaſure that they take in theſe continual and reiteratedtepaſts, becauſe they bee but too wel knowen, eſpeciallie to ſuch as haue trauayled ſome partes of the North countries, where ſuch exceſſes are more common than with vs: albeit it might beſeeme thoſe that are endued with pietie, and yet doe practiſe it, to leaue the abuſe thereof to the Libertines of whom we ſpeak. The ſecond ſort are not ſo diſordinate as theſe, but do intertain themſelues with much more ciuilitie and deſicacy, and in liew of ſwallowing downe all that they eate & drinke, they will onely taſte of it, to the end thereof to haue the longer delight before they be ſatiſfied. Theſe men be ſomewhat carefull to hide the filthineſſe of dronkenneſſe, but moſt diligent to ſeeke meanes of diuerſitie of all meats, that by ſuch varietie their appetites may find more delight. If they can meete with a good cooke, he is better thought of among them than euer was Plato or Ariſtotle in the Academy of Athens. All their meditatious conſiſt in inuention of licorouſneſſe, and calling to minde their paſſed good cheere, and thus ſtill aiming at their firſt marke, they pollute themſelues in the like puddle. But they doe it with more cunning, as knowing better how to inioy bodily pleaſures thā ye others, alſo to couer their filthines. As for their Bacchanalean rewards, as wel the one as ye other are partakers of them: and it is hard to haue continued that courſe long, but they ſhall feele the forerunners of ſickneſſe who followe after, and are as peruerſe as the former alleadged. Likewiſe we may ſee what gaine is to be gotten in ſeruing a maiſter that is ſo liberallin all kindes of ſorrowes to thoſe that chooſe to cleaue rather to their bellies than to abſtinencie. Farre other is the pleaſure of thoſe that doe moderatly vſe the gifts of God which he ſendeth for our ſuſtenance. For taking the ſame in ſuch ſorte, their ſoules are neuer indangered with abuſe of them: ſo that remaining free in the conduct of their ſenſualitie, they ſometime giue it the raines, and ſometime reſtraine it neither more nor leſſe, but as a man would doe when he walketh a young horſe in the fields. And in ſo doing as wel ye ſoule as the body doe reioyce in the inioying of thoſe benefites whereof it only hath the vſe, when ſhe ſeeth them fettered within the bounds yt ſhe hath preſcribed. But what more gracious & goodly a banquet can there be than the ſame wherein as wel the one as the other be ſatiſfied▪ Whith is alwaies practiſed among ſuch as be adorned with pietie

& vertue. Yet do they not diſdain exquiſite food, neither pleaſant wines, but do eſteeme of thē as of other neceſſary things, which whē they want, & haue not euen thoſe things yt are common to ye 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  er ſort, they do neuertheles not ſtorm or languiſh after thē, as knowing that a ſmall thing wil ſuffice nature. But one of their chieſeſt conſiderations is to make theſe meanes to ſerue for the inioying of the conuerſatiō of their like, & more & more to knit vp amitie, & to heare ſuch good & pleaſant ſpeeches as do both inſtruct & delight. For as Plutarke ſaith, the proper worke of Bacchus conſiſteth not in dronkennes, Plutarke in the banker of the ſeuen Sages. neither in drinking of wine or taſting of delicious food, but in the reioycing affection & familiaritie yt it breedeth betweene one & other. For vnto diuers who before ſcarce knew each other, hauing as a man ſhould ſay, mo
                     〈…〉
                  d & ſteeped the hardneſſe of their harts in banquets, euen as pron is mollified in the fire, it hath giuen thē a beginning of commix
                     •
                  ion & incorporation of one among another. Thoſe men yt thus behaue themſelues I ſuppoſe to haue much more pleaſure than the Libertines, yea, then they who can haue but litle, except when they are inuited to ſome ſtately feaſt, where they heare the ſound of the Cornets in a great hall, with the murmure of the troope there preſent, & ſee euerie thing gliſter with rich furniture, with the diuerſitie of dances & maſques. Truely all this dazeleth, yea, & bringeth on ſleepe the ſenſes, rather than reioyce the ſoules, euen of thoſe yt are well diſpoſed, yet are there many yt ſéed onely vppon ſuch food. Now in the vſe of other temporal goods we may affirme Of the contentation of Chriſtians in the vſe of temperall goods. yt the man which profeſſeth Chriſtian life taketh like pleaſure as in the former. For ſith he confeſſeth yt receiuing of them at Gods hands who is the ſame God of them, ſo doth he grant him the ioyful inioying of them. And how ſhoulde hee not reioyce in the good, ſith the euil can neuer terrefie him as it is written in the 112. Pſalme. No tidings ill can make him quaile, who in the Lord ſure hope dooth ſet: his hart is firme, his feare is paſt, &c. For when they happē vnto him, he receiueth thē as merciful chaſtiſementes, & ſtudieth to reap profit in thē. Wherto we ſhal hardly perſwade theſe men yt we now haue to do with, vntil experience hath giuen them ſome taſt. As alſo our whole ſpeech tendeth onlie to giue thē an appetite to taſt therof: for if theſe ſmal delights, which periſh almoſt as ſoone as they be borne, can ſo be w
                     ••
                  ch their ſenſes; what effects ſhall ſo many & ſundrie delectations, as pietie & temperance do bring foorth, worke in theyr ſoules, except to purge & cleanſe them frō all thoſe blemiſhes and errours, which almoſt 
                     ••
                  mme all the brightneſſe of the ſame▪
                  
Let them therefore abandon this life that hath but ouer much affinitie with brutiſhneſſe, and embrace the ſame, which for want of knowledge they reiect: for they may already perceiue by my former ſpeech that there is as greate difference betweene theſe two, as betweene a handful of mire and a handfull of pearles. Concerning the point whereof they ſtand in moſt doubt, which is, whether of the two is the more pleaſant, it is alreadie proned to be the Chriſtian: If they ſaie that in the paths thereof they many times finde pricking thornes, with many ſmall ſtones to ſtumble at, I muſt needs anſwere, that that is but a ſmall matter, ſith they haue alſo the remedies at hand. But in the wayes wherein they walke, as well ſecretly as openly, let them conſider howe many ſerpents lye hidden that bite them, and how many deepe pits they finde, the falling whereinto is moſt dangerous, yea, and mortall. And the moſt horible matter of all they come to in the ende, viz. a moſt filthie and abhominable name, wherwith oftētimes: they heare themſelues blaſed euen whileſt they yet liue, and afterward a headlong downefall into the eternall gulfe where is no redemption. And contrariwiſe they which haue pittie and vertue, beeing a ſweete ſauour to their like, are aſſured after the end of their long iourney vpon earth to be worthily receiued into the celeſtiall habitations.
            
            
               The 25. Diſcourſe.
               
                  That euerie man according to his capacitie and vocation may vſe contemplation.
               
               
                  MAny euen in old time held opinion that Contemplation 
                  Againſt thoſe that haue depriued moſt men of contemplatiue life. properly appertained only to the Philoſophers, whoſe number could then be but very ſmall, as alſo they did lykewiſe meruaylouſlie commend ſuch actions of the mind, yea, and that life which was deſtined onely therevnto. The lyke doe ſome men in theſe daies attribute

vnto thoſe who being withdrawne out of the world do liue in Monaſteries and Hermitages, in that being thus ſeparated they may the better tend to ſpirituall exerciſes: which doe in quantitie farre ſurpaſſe the others. And they be in parte induced thus to iudge, becauſe they imagine that the common ſorte knowe not almoſt what contemplation meaneth: and withal that they ſee many wiſe men diſdaine it, as if it were ſome vnpleaſant or very difficult miſterie. Moreouer, they heare the Munkes, who bragge that they haue taken it vpon them, ſay that it doth belong to them onely. All this hath cauſed them as it were inſeparably to vnite ſuch actions vnto thoſe liues which ſeeme altogether freed from earthly cares. This ſo goodly and high a matter would deſerue that wee ſhould begin more grauely to diſcourſe thereof: but I would not (neither peraduenture could I) as wiſhing others to goe ſeeke to bee inſtructed therein, in the writings of the learned where they bee perfectly examined, as my ſelfe haue done: Wherefore my intent is to ſpeake meanely thereof according to my abilitie, ſo to helpe thoſe that flye no higher then my ſelfe. And this is it that hath cauſed me firſt to ſet downe common opinions, that afterwarde wee may with the more eaſe climbe to the truer. Now as wee accompt him a ſpoyler which appropriateth that thing to himſelfe that ought to bee common, ſo is it a kind of vſurping, when by ouer free iudgement many are made vnworthie the benefites, wherein they may haue part, and the ſame adiudged to a fewe Munkes vnder colour that they attribute it to themſelues onely. We muſt not therefore doe either the one or the other, but rather endeuour to make all perſons capable of ſome portion of this ſpirituall benefite. Experience teacheth That all men are capeable of cōtemplation. that the giftes which wee tearme to bee of nature, are diſtributed with as merueilous indifferencie as is obſerued among mettalles. In the meane time, when by good doctrine we are taught to preuaile of whatſoeuer is in vs, we may reape ſuch vtilitie as may bee profitable to euery mans condition. For, to ſpeake by ſimilitudes, they whoſe mindes are as it were gould or ſiluer, may lift them much higher than they that haue them but of copper or yron: Albeit that when the moſt baſeſ
                     •
                   ſubſtances are poliſhed, they alſo yeeld ſome beautie. Euery man will confeſſe that among men the countrie clowne is moſt abiect and of leaſt accompt, and yet he that liſt to ſtudyvpō it may make moſt of them by little & little to comprehend that there is an eternall deuinitie, which hath created the world: that there be immortall ſoules: and that after this life there

ſhall bee a more happie life for thoſe that haue beleeued in Chriſt the Sonne of GOD. Then they afterward comming to thinke and meditate vpon theſe things, what els doe they but enter into the pathes of the higheſt Contemplation. No man therefore ought to thinke himſelfe vtterly vnworthie: for he ſhall make himſelfe a bruite beaſt by thinking that hee can not participate therein.
               But what ſhall wee ſay of thoſe who being endued with good wittes (as many gentlemen and others) do a many of them in liew The miſerie of many 
                        〈…〉
                      ſake their parte of this priuiledge and reprooue it. of lifting vp their mindes, bow them downe and captiuate them to earthly mixe, rather then make them walke at libertie through the heauens, there to behould the diuerſitie of beauties that doe reioyce the ſoule which is a priſoner in this mortall bodie? Truely wee are to mourne for them, that they are ignorant of this goodly priuiledge, either if they bee not ignorant, that they make no accomp
                     •
                   of it. Some there are which tearme Contemplation a high folly and the vizard of Mouckiſh idleneſſe, and ſcorne the ſame as they vſe to doe diuers other good things which they reiect, euen as the man that is out of taſte reiecteth good foode, No man néede to wiſh them any other puniſhment then they inflict vppon themſelues in denying the enioying of a benefite which they will not knowe, and yet doe contemne it as ſome miſchiefe alreadie knowen.
               By this that I haue ſaide, it appeareth that the vſe of Contemplation is not tyed to that life only which ſeemeth to be wholy vowed thereto: for there bee many Monckes that fall to ryot, and many Artificers which contemplate: and without this benefite which fewe ſeeke to enioye, humaïne miſeries and continuall cares would take from vs the greateſt parte of that felicitie which we labour for. This may be a beginning of aunſwer to the afore alleadged opinions: for in my mind it is more auaileable to declare what this contemplatiue power is and the true obiects thereof, to the ende wee may the better knowe how to helpe our ſelues therewith, and the neede that we haue thereof.
               The reaſonable ſoule (to ſpeake familierly) conſiſteth of two partes: the one which is exerciſed in the baſe things of this world, Of contemplatiue power and the true obiects thereof. which being in maner innumerable may happen after ſundrie faſhions in reſpect of the mutabilitie of the ſubſtances, varietie of appetites, affections and operations of men: And they which beare themſelues well in theſe matters are termed 
                     ••
                  creet and wiſe men:

But the other parte which is the ſame whereof I now meane to ſpeake, ſeeketh higher then theſe bodily eyes can penetrate: for it comprehendeth the ſubſtances, notwithſtanding the ſame be ſpoyled of all matter: then ſporting it ſelfe in the meditation of things which daylie doe fall out, it ſtayeth vpon yt that is deuine & eternal: The participants herein be termed learned men & of great knowledge, becauſe yt thereby, as by a ſure guide, this moſt noble part of their ſoule, which is endued with moſt perfect intelligence, is led into thoſe places where it may ſomwhat comprehend thoſe things wherewith it hath ſome correſpondence & ſimilitude: for that which is ſpirituall delighteth in ſpirituall things: & herein conſiſteth the excellencie of the creatures that participate in reaſon, aboue all other mortal and earthly creatures: that they can from farre though vnperfectly diſcerne things immortall and heauenly. This ought to ſollicite them not to ſtifle in them that naturall power which is giuen them to bee well employed. As for the obiects: the moſt ſoueraigne of them is God, beyond whom no man can looke, becauſe he is the ende of all endes and the cauſe of all cauſes, and that in him all fulneſſe of perfection doth abide. But there bee many other inferiour as the Angelicall natures, the heauenly motions, and whatſoeuer is immutable in the order of nature, wherein is a very large ſcope to exerciſe the ſame facultie, which by continuall vſe groweth the more perfect.
               To ſee therefore how this may bée put in practiſe, wee are Of ſuch perſones as may entend thereto. to conſider of what perſons euery politique bodie is compoſed: which I will deuide into three orders. In the firſt ſhall come the Noble men and Gentrie: In the ſecond, all that beſtowe their time in deuine or humaine learning: And in the third, all other the dwellers both in towne and countrie. As for the firſt, they ſeeme to bee borne with more quicke and plyant inclinations then The Gentrie. the others: becauſe their fathers hauing atteyned to honor through vertue as well intellectuall as morall, as it is to bee preſumed, haue left vnto them ſome ſmall ſeedes thereof (as neere as nature can forme them) meete to ſpring againe, ſo long as their bringing vp bee no hinderaunce thereto: for confirmation whereof wee doe many times ſee the children of Princes, Lordes and Gentlemen at ſeauen yeeres of age ſhewe foorth euen pettie miracles of the ſoule. She bringeth them foorth in place where ſhe findeth the agents which ſhe vſeth to bee beſt diſpoſed: euen as wee ſee in a Lanterne that the brighter the glaſſe is, the more doth the inward

light thereof appeare, and being dimme, ſmall brightneſſe may be ſéené. Theſe therefore hauing ſo good groundes doe want but good inſtructions to bring them to the knowledge of the dignity of man, which conſiſteth in the lifting vp of his minde vnto the author of all his good. Whereto alſo their noble calling ought to exhorte them. And as in the actiue life that they leade, they keepe it ordinarily occupied in diuers honeſt and profitable things, ſo ſhould they goe forward and thence aſcend to ſpirituall: for he that is deuoyde of ſuch apprehenſions maketh his condition very bad.
               If any man ſaith: Why, are not we preſent at the religious ceremonies: Aunſwer to a common obiection touching contemplation. It is but a colde excuſe, becauſe the moſt excellent parte of religion conſiſteth in the inward man. And this doth the ſcripture teach vs, when it ſaith that God is a ſpirite and will be woorſhipped in ſpirite and truth. And how may it be poſſible to caſte of the heauenly miſteries, if this ſpeculatiue power ſhould not bende as a bowe to the ſearch of ſo high trueths, more neceſſarie for the ſuſtenance of the ſoule then bread is for the bodie? Howbeit, there be but fewe of that degree that are very hot herein: whereof it commeth that many are ignorant of that which they ought eſpecially to knowe, and are ſkilfull in that which they ought rather to bee ignorant of. For proofe I will alleadge onely one example of a neighbour of myne, who in certaine companie talking of religion ſayd: Theſe Hugnenots would ſeeme to be great doctors, but knowe no thing. If you diſpute with them, they preſently denye Purgatorie: but then denye you the Trinitie and you neuer ſee men ſo amazed. This, I ſuppoſe, he ſayd thinking to haue ſayd very well: howbeit it is a lamentable caſe to ſee that he that ought to haue taught others, had neede to haue gone to ſchoole to learne the firſt principles of Chriſtianitie and Godlineſſe, ſith in matters of ciuilitie he was ſufficiently ſeene. The bodily exerciſes which tend to honeſtie are very conuenient for gentlemen, but they droope toward the ground if they be not ſuſteyned by the ſoule, which being deuout, doth betweene times eſtraunge it ſelfe from this element. Hereof are wee admoniſhed in the fourth Commaundement of the lawe, wherein God declareth that it is his will wee ſhould reſt the ſeauenth day, that is to ſay, that wee ſhould forget all worldly cares, and applye our whole minds to meditate vpon his wonderfull works, as well of our creation and conſeruation as redemption. Wherein we ſee that contemplation is a common duetie, whereto we may aduowe thoſe to be moſt bound that haue receiued moſt kinds of benefites.
               
                  
Now to ſpeake of the ſecond order which proceedeth from the Of the contemplation that beſeemeth Student
                        •
                      Lawiers and Churchmen. firſt and third order, namely the Gentrie and Communaltie: Wee may well ſay that many of them are thruſt forward voluntarily to learne the ſciences, as wel through a deſire they haue of knowledge as alſo to profite others. But there are alſo and that the greateſt parte whom profite and neceſſitie doe ſtirre vp. Among theſe ſome there are whoſe onely contemplation hath regard to their coffers: which the firſt ſorte regard not, as ayming at better endes. And in deede the chiefeſt duetie of a Philoſopher is to whet his wictes to the knowledge of whatſoeuer exquiſite things in the whole world: whoſe contentation, the higher that the ſpirite penetrateth, the greater it is. As for deuine knowledge which they that haue the Eccleſiaſticall offices doe perticulerly profeſſe, the ſame doth require a ſoule free from worldly bonds and lettes, becauſe that in ſo high an argument it is to employ whatſoeuer the agilitie thereof. And to them more properly then to any doth contemplation appertaine. Not that I meane that they ought continually to bee therein occupied as a quadrant to behould the ſunne, for ſo in vaine ſhould they be in office, if they diſcharge not themſelues to the benefite of thoſe that are to receiue the vſurie of ſuch ſpirituall talents as GOD hath imparted vnto them, namely, ſound doctrine. Thus doe we ſee that actiue life ought not to bée ſeuered for euer, or any long time from the contemplatiue. And this did the beſt Philoſophers well knowe. Alſo that great Deuine S. Auguſtine well allowed this orderly compoſition of the one and the other. For although the ſpirituall actions are more worthie then the corporall, yet muſt they not be ſeparated.
               I knowe very well that the Munkes, eſpecially the begging Aunſwer to the obiection of ſuch as imagine the contemplatiue life to belong onely to them ſelues. Fryers and Charterhouſe (for thoſe of S. Bennet and S. Bernard are ſomewhat better companions) will gainſay this, affirming that the continuall contemplation which they haue choſen, not being interrupted by mortal cares maketh both ſoule and bodie more perfect. Truely it is a goodly matter to ſeeke to attaine to ſome ſmall perfection according as mans frailtie can beare: But ſith S. Paule (who attained to ſo high holineſſe) with his high and profound ſpeculation, continued neruertheleſſe in continuall action to the edification of the Church, I am driuen to aduowe that it is better to ſtay vpon his example, then of any of the reſt. And to the end the better to lay open this matter, I will ſet downe the liues of the auncient Munkes who liued within foure hundred yéeres after

Chriſt, in ſuch maner as a very learned 
                     〈…〉
                  hath gathered them out of the writings of S. Auguſtin. Contemning, ſaith he, all worldly delights and pleaſures, they doe together leade a moſt holy and cha
                        ••
                      life, paſſing their time in prayer, readings and conferences, without puffe of pride, contempt, debate or enuie. No man houldeth anything in proper, neither is any man burdenſome to his neighbour: with their hands they doe ſuch labour as may maintaine their bodies, and not hinder their mindes from attending vnto God: Then doe they commit their labours into the hands of thoſe whom they call Deanes, who of the money which they make thereof be accomptable to him that is called the father among them. Theſe fathers are ſuch perſons as are not only holy in life, but alſo excellent in the doctrine of God, and hauing preheminence in vertues as well as in power doe gouerne their children without any pride: and as they haue authoritie to commaund them, ſo are their ſonnes as readie to obey them. Toward euening euery man commeth foorth of his cell, and yet faſting do meet together to heare their father, which done, they take their bodily refectiō, as much as is requiſite to maintaine health: Euery man reſtrayneth his lustes, ſo to vſe it in all ſobrietie, yea euen the foode that is ſet before them, which is neither much, nor very delicate. The ouerplus aboue their ſustenance (for they leaue much, as well in that they labour diligently, as alſo in respected of their ſobrietie) is destributed to the poore which care not greatly for earning it: They force not of aboū
                     dance, but care only to reſerue no parte of their ſuperfluitie. In this auſteritie of life, ſaith he, no man is forced to a heauier burden then either he can or is willing to beare, and him that is weaker then the reſt doe they not therefore condemne, for they all knowe the commendation of Charitie, as alſo that all meates are cleane to thoſe that are cleane. Their only induſtrie conſiſteth, not in reiecting any meates as vncleane, but in taming their lustes and maintaying themſelues in good loue together. As for bodily exerciſe, they knowe the ſame to profite but for a while only. Charitie doe they especially obſerue, framing thereto their foode, ſpeech, apparell and countenances. Euery of them doe conspire in one charitie, and doe abhorre the 
                        〈…〉
                     olation thereof. He that reſisteth this is expelled, and who ſo contrarieth it, ſtayeth not one day among them.
               
               Thus farre the wordes of S. Auguſtine, who there maketh a Whereto Monaſteries did in old time ſerue. goodly deſcription of the auncient kind of Monaſteries, which then ſtoode the Monckes in ſtead for a preparation to a more excellent eſtate. For their Colledges and aſſemblies were as it were nourceries

to furniſh the Church of good miniſters, and out of the ſame were Gregorie Nazianzene, Baſil, Chriſoſtome, and many other notable perſons called to be Biſhops. It appeareth therefore that their liues were as well actiue as contemplatiue. For although moſt of them liued in ſolitarie places, to the ende the leſſe to bee diuerted from their ſtudies and morall diſcipline, yet did one of their principall purpoſes tende to make them meete to ſerue in that bodie whereof they were but ſmall members. Then being admitted into Eccleſiaſticall functions, it was lawfull for them to marie: Of Monaſteries of our daies and of Moncks contemplations. neither was mariage in thoſe daies forbidden. Howbeit, although this auncient maner of Monaſticall life, when ſuch ſimplicitie of rules and hartes reigned, did beare a goodly ſhewe, yet may wee, and that truely, ſay that it was grounded rather vpon the inuentions of men then any examples taken out of the ſcriptures. But all theſe things are, by little and little, altered and corrupted: as by comparing them with our daies we may eaſely perceiue. For if we marke well what moſt of our Monckes haue ſtudied within theſe threeſcore yeeres, wee ſhall finde it to bée nothing but this, Hang and burne, whom: Euen thoſe men who by brotherly admonition wiſhed them not to ſtoope vnto ſo many corruptions as were crept in among them, and did not allowe of their newe found deuotions.
               Thus are their chiefe contemplations conuerted into fire and blood, which euen to this day doe beare great ſway, though rather in will then effect. Rabelais who in his writings mentioneth ſundrie braue Monckes of his time, doth paint vs them out more moderate and tractable: for ſo farre were they from ſclaundering and hurting, that contrariwiſe they ſought to bee merie and make good theere with all men. Among the reſt he ſpeaketh of Frier Bernard Lardon, reſiant in the good towne of Amiens, whoſe like was not to be found againe in 36. Monaſteries. His ſuperiour contemplations, ſaith he, remained in the autenticall raunges of the ſame towne, & his inferiour in the deepeſt ſellers in Laon in Laonoiſe, which were beſt furniſhed with good wines. Moreouer, this good Frier was alwaies merie and liuely as a pretie vntamed Aſſe, and as learned as his portuiſe could extend.
               This is the fruite which theſe late worlds haue brought foorth, namely, to haue chaunged the integritie of ould time into the impuritie of theſe daies. The firſt Monkes of whom I haue ſpoken, being repleniſhed with charitie did good to all: moſt of them

that haue ſucceded them within a fewe ages, bearing more affection A comparation of the ould and newe Monckes. to their bellies then to the holy ſcripture, caring for none, haue had regard but to themſelues: But many of thoſe of our daies, abandoning themſelues too much to hate and reuenge, doe hurt many. Yet will I not ſay but that among that multitude which ſwarmeth al ouer the world there be many, who groning vnder the burden of ſo many traditions, do wiſh the reformation to the auncient obſeruations endued with great moderation. Yea my ſelfe haue in my impriſonment knowne many courteous perſons of them. I pray to God for them that he will vouchſafe ſo to ſtrengthen them that they may in mouth ſing, and in deede practiſe this Pſalme of Dauid. I did in harte reioyce, to heare the peoples voyce, in offering ſo willingly: For let vs vp ſay they, and in the Lords houſe pray: Thus ſpake the flolke full louingly, &c. Wel, leauing theſe abuſes, we muſt confeſſe that they which dedicate themſelues to heauenly things, doe chooſe an excellent matter, as ſayth S. Paule, if they well diſcharge it: and they may thinke their contemplations to be fruitfull and true, if thereby they feele their ſoules more deuout towarde God, and their harts more redily bent to helpe their neighbours. But as for ſuch as delight onely in the ſolitarineſſe of the deſerts, fewe there are of them but are infected with hypocriſie.
               I will now ſpeake a little of humaine ſciences which I haue too Of the contemplation of the Students in humaine ſciences. long ouerſlipped: Truely ſuch as apply their minds to them, haue a large fielde wherein to walke their ſpirites, albeit not ſo worthie as the other: For the Deuine is the miſtris, and theſe are her inferiour handmaidens, the profeſſors whereof haue had contemplation in honor, whome they haue affirmed to be the mother of wiſedome. Neither haue they bene therein deceiued, for it is very difficult to penetrate into high and deepe miſteries but by daily meditation. The Platoniſtes haue highly magnified this contemplatiue facultie of the ſoule, whoſe operations they haue thought to be moſt worthie in reſpect of themſelues, as proceeding from a perfect cauſe, and embracing moſt perfect obiects, the higheſt whereof was God. Plato alſo ſpeaking of the ſoueraigne felicitie ſayd, that it conſiſted in a ſimilitude and coniunction of the ſoule thereto: which it did in parte attaine, when abandoning all tranſitorie matters, it ſtayed vpon the conſideration of the ſupreme beauties who afterward rauiſhed it into ſo great felicitie. But this matter is vnto vs Deuine rather then Philoſophicall, wherefore I will ſpeake no more of it, but onely commende theſe poore ſoules, who ſo zealouſly

ſought a felicitie which they could neuer finde by any naturall reaſons: and accuſe our owne blackiſhneſſe, who hauing it before our ſpirituall eyes will ſcarce vouchſafe to looke vpon it. But the Philoſophers ſtudies tend to baſer matters: & I wel like ſome mens deuiſions thereof, namely into reaſonable which teacheth to ſpeake well and encreaſe: into morall, which inſtructeth how to liue well, which alſo comprehendeth the politicall: and into natural, which giueth vs knowledge of nature and euery thing that hath being. Who ſo therefore li
                     ••
                   to profite in all the ſayd doctrines, muſt vſe often meditation, to the ende the better to perceiue the perfections of the ſame. For whatſoeuer it be which the mind doth but lightly paſſe ouer, it is but a touching of the minde: but when it ſtayeth vpon it, it penetrateth through the thickneſſe of the wood euen to the marrow. He that ſhall conſider of ſpeech which is proper to man onely, will thinke nothing to bee ſo common and familier: but if he aſcendeth to the inward worde, which is the conceipt of the vnderſtanding, in which receptakle a thouſand images perfect and vnperfect, true and falſe bee reſident and paſſe to and fro, which afterwarde be reuealed by the ſenſible ſpeech, he cannot but wonder at Gods ſo wonderfull workmanſhip. Thus ought wee from terreſtriall matters to aſcend into celeſtiall, and againe from the higheſt to returne to the loweſt. For what els is the compoſition of man but celeſtiall and terreſtriall, which by a moſt excellent and inimitable workmanſhip are conioyned together, whereof wée gather this inſtruction, that the contemplatiue and actiue life doe very well agree together: and to ſeeke to deuide them is as it were to force nature.
               Some may ſay, that although Contemplation beſeemeth the Whether contemplation beſeemeth Princes, Soldiers, Lawiers and thoſe that haue the care of bodely health. 
                  Philoſopher, yet the Prince, Captaine, Iudge & Phiſition ought rather to labour, for that at their hands we are to expect only good effects. Hereto I aunſwer, that effects proceede of conſultation and conſultation from diſcretion, whereto wée firſt attaine by experience, then by meditation. When he that poſſeſſeth the royall dignitie ſhal often thinke with himſelfe that mercie and truth doe merueilouſly preſerue the King, and that his throne is vphoulden by gentleneſſe, as Salomon ſaith, will he not bee more diligent in his duetie then he that thinketh himſelfe to bee ſet vp as a paynted Image vpon an Aulter, to be admired and magnified? Thoſe alſo to whom is committed the adminiſtration of Iuſtice and regarde of health, in liewe of employing their whole mindes in the filling of

their purſes; ſhould then not doe better ſometimes in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   to occupie themſelues, the 
                     •
                  udges in meditating vppon▪ this goodly ſaying of King Iehoſapht, who ſayd, to thoſe of his time. Conſider 
                  2. Chron. 14. 
                  what ye doe, for y
                        •
                      exerciſe not the iudgement of man; but of the Lord: And all your iudgements ſhall redound to your ſelues. Alſo the Phiſitions in the ſaying of Eccleſiaſticus. The ſoueraigne hath giuen knowledge vnto 
                        ••
                     on to be honored in his merueiles. For by often conſideration of theſe admonitions they will growe more duetifull to men and obedient to God, whoſe 
                     ••
                  ttie inſtruments they are to make thoſe vertues which he freely beſtoweth vpon them, which neuertheleſſe they ſell full deere, to ſhiue here vpon earth. But ambition which is properly tearmed an honorable torment, and couetouſneſſe which is a ſhamefull hell, doe withdrawe as well the one as the other from ſo high thoughts, whereof enſueth confuſion in politicke order.
               Concerning the third order, which is tearmed the third eſtate, I will deuide it into two parts. The worſt whereof is the countrie Of contemplation meete for the commonoltie both of the towne & contrie. people, who ſeeme to be led as much by affection as by reaſon, and is ſo groſſe that although it be taught, yet a man would ſay that it either contemneth or is vtterly ignorant of the ſuperiour exerciſes of the ſoule, and that the ſame are no more conuenient for it then is Magnificat for morning prayer. But charitie ſhould make vs to iudge that God doth nothing in vaine, alſo that hauing giuen them a like ſubſtantiall forme as to the higheſt, he hath in no wiſe forbidden them the vſe of whatſoeuer may make them partakers of the benefites which are offred vnto all and conſiſt in the knowledge of him. And if we well note what the Scripture ſaith, we ſhal finde that he reuealeth himſelf to the lowly and is hidden from the wiſe. Math. 11. Herof we ſhould learne to be modeſt in the iudgement of this matter, ſith faith, which is a ſupreme contemplation is not denyed the verieſt clownes: wherein we ſee Gods wonders, in that he maketh many of them learned to ſaluation in a ſcience which ſeemeth vtterly vnlearned. The towne dwellers are more capable of inſtruction, and beſides their deuotions doe alſo apply their mindes to the artes, whereof ſometimes groweth ſuch perfection of workmanſhip, that many are driuen to confeſſe that the boyſterous hand could neuer haue performed them, had not quickneſſe of wit bene the guide. And whereas the ſoule abaſeth it ſelfe in the matters which we touch (which is much vnworthier then that that is materiall) yet doth it not ſo before it hath bene long ſtayed vpon the

conſideration of the formes wherewith
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  othe it, alſo vppon the meere
                     •
                   to attaine to ſuch an 
                     〈…〉
                   to inuent the inſtruments neceſſary thereto.
               Cobre 
                     〈◊〉
                   by the deduction afore ſayd we ſee, firſt that it is The concluſion conioyned with a notable aduertiſment to ſuch as giue themſelues to vice and pollution. mee
                     •
                  e for all men to contemplate more or leſſe in deuine miſteries. Secondly, that it may alſo in part be applyed to inferiour things. Thirdly, that
                     〈…〉
                  member our ſelues from ciuill ſocietie, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſtable or liue aparte, to the entent the better to attend thereto: for in all 
                     〈…〉
                   priuate or publique he that hath leiſure and will, hath alſo vſe thereof. But before I ende this diſcourſe, I haue thought good to vſe this ſmall admonition to thoſe that care ſo little for ſubmitting thoſe noble partes of their ſoules not to workes of ſmall accompt, but euen to horrible vice, and to ſet before their eyes the ſaying of Dauid. Man being in honor 
                  Pſal 42. 
                  hath no vnderſtanding, but is compared vnto the beaſtes that periſh and is made like to them. For when they diſdaine to enioye the goodly priuiledges graunted vnto them, and chooſe rather to burie this light in earthly pleaſures, as a man would doe a precious diamont in mire, then doe they as a man ſhould ſay, tranſforme them ſelues into beaſtes, which is a iuſt puniſhment due to their ingratitude and blockiſhneſſe. I will alſo aduertiſe others which are quite contrary to theſe, becauſe of the quickneſſe of their vnderſtandings, not to ſoare ouer high beyond the limited boundes: But to remember what God ſaid to Adam touching the tree of good and Gene. 3. euill, Thou ſhalt not eate thereof, for in the day that thou ſhalt eate thereof thou ſhalt dye the death. Hereby ſhould they learne to content themſelues with that wiſedome which he hath vouchſafed to impart vnto thē as wel cōcerning deuine as humane cauſes: which is (if we take it right) moſt wonderfull. Leaſt contemning the perſon of ſo excellent an Apoſtle as S. Peter, we tranſforme our ſelues into a Simon Magus, or diſday
                     •
                  ing an Ariſtotle become a phantaſticall Stoike.
               
               Thus much of Contemplation may ſuffice me to haue ſpoken who neuer went to Monckiſh ſchoole, and he that liſteth to knowe more, let him repayre thereto, if he ſo thinke good.
            
            
               
               CERTAINE OBSERVATIONS OF DIVERS THINGS HAPpened in the three firſt troubles of France. Together with the true reporte of the moſt parte of the ſame.
               The 26. Diſcourſe.
               
                  The firſt Troubles.
                  
                     That the Proteſtants, but for the late accident at Vaſſie, had bene preuented in the beginning of the firſt Ciuill warre.
                     
                        
                           FRance, notwithſtanding the agreeing vpon and concluding of the Edict of Ianuary 
                        The beginning of the firſt troubles. in the preſence of the King, by the aduice of a very notable aſſembly of the wiſeſt politicks of the Realme, who thereby entended to prouide ſome remedie againſt the diuers and vniuerſall cō
                        motions thereof, and to conforme it to the cōmon lawes, was not yet brought into tranquilitie: as well by reaſon the Proteſtants were ſo earneſt to eſtabliſh and confirme themſelues in that libertie which they had obteyned, as alſo through the generall feare of the Catholickes, who could not endure ſuch a noueltie. Some of the Princes and Lordes that held this parte being greatly agrieued at the ſight of ſuch encreaſe, did make a ſecret League to ſuppreſſe it. And whiles ſome of them were on their way to Paris, where they purpoſed to ioyne to their generall bodie fell out the diſorder at Va
                              •
                           si
                              •
                           , where many being at the ſermon were murdered, which deede being by other Hiſtoriographers alreadie deſcribed, I will meddle no farther with. For my entent is only to note not ſo much ye grief that it bred to the Proteſtants, as the inſtruction, which they tooke together with the fruite that vnto them did redound thereof. The Lord

                        Prince of Condé was at Paris about the eſtabliſhing of the publicke exerciſe according to the Kings Edict, when this newes was brought him: which made him to growe into conſultation with the wiſe
                           •
                        t Lordes and Gentlemen of his companie, who iudged this ſmall ſtorme to bee an aſſured forewarning of a greater, and therefore wiſhed to looke farther then to things preſent. Immediatly he gaue notice to ſome of the chiefeſt in the Court of that that had happened, who therof tooke an alarum and counſailed him to ſeeke ſome preſeruatiues and remedies for himſelfe and the eſtate. He alſo warned all the French Churches to looke to themſelues: of whom the moſt parte imagining to haue alreadie obteyned ſome aſſured reſt, were more ententiue to the building of Churches, then to thinke vppon Militarie prouiſion for their owne defence. This bruite did wonderfully waken the gentlemen Proteſtants abroade in the Prouinces, and made them readie to prouide horſe and armour, waiting what would bée done at the Court and how Paris would take it.
                     Shortly after there ariued the Lord of Guize, the Conſtable, 
                        The Princes retire from Paris. and the Marſhall of S. Andrews, alſo the King of Nauarre whom they had drawne to their League, who forced the Prince of Coudé to retire into the towne of Meaux with a good traine of Nobilitie and Gentrie. Being come thether, with all ſpeede he ſent word to the Lord of Andelot and the Admirall, that not want of courage but of ſtrength had driuen him to forſake Paris, wiſhing them with all diligence to march toward him. For Caſar had not only paſſed Rubicon, but was euen ſeaſed of Rome, and his flagges began to waue abroade in the fieldes. Which preſently they did with all their friends and furniture, howbeit not yet manifeſting their armes as the League had done. There ſtaied they fiue or ſixe daies as well to deliberate of their affayres, as becauſe of adminiſtring the ſupper, which was to be celebrated at Eaſter. The Lord Admirall, no nouice in matters of eſtate, foreſeeing that the game waxed warme, ſhewed that it was requiſite either in all diligence to ſtrengthen themſelues with men, either els to take them to their heeles: yea that he was afrayed they had alreadie ſtayed very long. But whiles they ſtoode vpon thoſe poynts, many gentlemen came in from all parts vnlooked and vnſent for: ſo as in foure daies they were abont fiue hundred. This refeſhing cauſed them to reſolue vpon their departure, and that for two purpoſes. The one to trye whether they might winne the Court, and ſo enſtall themſelues about

the King and Queene, or, not able ſo to doe, to ſ
                           ••
                        ſe vpon Orleans, there to forme a maine head, if they chaunced to bee driuen to come to handie blowes. Hauing therefore in ſixe daies gathered a greater troope then they looked to haue gotten in a whole moneth, they tooke their way toward S. Claud, where their troope was refreſhed with three hundred good horſe, where alſo they were aduertiſed that the Lord of Guize and his aſſotiates had ſeaſed of the Court, which diligence falling out well for them, brake the Prince of Condees firſt purpoſe, who ment to haue done the ſame and ſo to haue authoriſed his doings vnder the Kings fauour for the preſeruation of himſelfe and the reſt of the Proteſtants. From S. Claud they marched toward Chaſtres and Angeruile, and by the way met fiue or ſixe troopes of gentrie. This bred ſome aſtoniſhment to the contrary parte, when they began to conſider the ſudden encreaſe of our bodie, which conſiſted not of leſſe then a thouſand gentlemen, who made 1500. good horſe better armed with courage then Corcelets. Then drew they toward Orleance, which was taken in ſuch maner as the Hiſtoriographers doe ſet it doune. This we muſt note, that if the Prince of Condé had at that time had but a ſmall power, he had bene oppreſſed or beſieged: but when they perceiued him to bee ſo mightie as to keepe the fielde in ſubiection, alſo that he ſpake as boldly to his aduerſaries as coldly to his King, they were not very earneſt vpon him, whereby he had oportunitie to preuaile in ſundrie attempts. This profite did he reape of being ſtrong in the beginning.
                     Some men haue imagined either that theſe things were long Occaſion of the aſſemblie of his troupes. before premeditated, or els to haue ſo happely fallen out through the dillgence of the Captaines: But I, as one that was preſent and made curious ſearch into the cauſes, dare affirme the contrary. True it is that moſt of the Nobilitie, hearing of the ſlaughter at Vaſsie, partly of a voluntarie good will, and partly for feare, determined to drawe toward Paris, imagining (as it were at aduenture) that their protectors might ſtand in ſome néed of them. Thus did the moſt renowmed depart out of their countries with ſome tenne, ſome twentie or thirtie of their friends, ſecretly armed, and lodging in Hoſteries or Uillages, where they payd truely for euerie thing, vntill they met both with the bodie and cauſe together. Many of them haue aſſured me that this only reaſon moued them: and I haue heard my Lords the Prince and Admirall many times confeſſe, that had not this benefit happened, they had bene in daunger

to haue taken a bad courſe.
                     Hereby it appeareth what fruite is ſometimes gotten of hurtfull things, which at the firſt bluſh appearing ruinous, doe neuertheleſſe A notible cō
                           ſideration vpon the former diſcourſe. after the euent giue vs to weere that they bree our good inſtructions. Men may alſo learne, yea euen the beſt Captaines, not to attribute too much to their owne wiſedome in the conduct of affaires either publique or priuate: For ableit it be a moſt neceſſarie inſtruction, yet ſometimes it is as it were vayled, ſo as among many waies and proceedings they can hardly tell which is the beſt to leane vnto in ſuch vnlooked for ſtormes and troubles. And this falleth out to the ende to humble them, and to make them from elſe where to ſeeke the cauſe of good ſucceſſe. Silla, with whom no man now liuing dare compare for militarie knowledge, gaue out that himſelfe through the benefite of fortune had bene ſaued and exalted. And yet are there ſome at this day that will ſay that the fortune of the auncient heathen (which was vayne) and the order that God taketh in the conduct of inferiour matters (which is aſſured) are but cloakes where-vnder men doe ſhroude their ignorance: alſo that man himſelfe, according as he guideth his doings either well or ill, breedeth his owne miſhap or felicitie, albeit ſundrie experiences be therto repugnant. They ought therfore to purge their mindes of ſuch opinions, and to perſwade them ſelues that notwithſtanding man imagineth and purpoſeth, yet is it God that giueth accompliſhment to his enterpriſes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Whether the Lord Prince of Condé in the firſt troubles committed ſo great an ouerſight as many haue giuen out, in that he ſeaſed not vpon the Court or Paris.
                     
                        
                           I
                         Wil not denie but many ſkilful perſons were The Princes intent in theſe beginninges. and peraduenture ſtill bee of that opinion, as alſo my ſelfe was a while: But after I had throughly wayed and conſidered what happened at the beginning of this tragedie, as alſo what fell out afterward, I was reclaymed to the knowledge of thoſe truer matters which ſhall appeare in the progreſſe of my ſpeech. The Lord Prince of Condé ſeeing how his brother the King of Nauarre was by little and little ſlipt into a delicious kinde of life, and had ſuffered himſelfe ſo much to be abuſed by the vayne and ritch promiſes and apparant honors of thoſe that ſkorned him, that he was growne ſo farre as to giue ouer his partie, whereof enſued a wonderfull quailing to many which both openly and ſecretly ſeemed to fauour him, and as great an encouragement to the leagued to withſtand him: did not thinke it good to leane to ſo rotten a foūdation, but rather to lay a better els where. In as much alſo as the Court and Paris are the two great lights of France, the one reſembling the Sunne, the other the Moone (yet both ſubiect to ecclipſe) he imagined that hauing ſome light from the one, he ought to ſeeke for the light of the other: and therefore endeuoured to plant the preaching of the Goſpell in Paris: to the ende the ſame knowledge which before was hidden, and lay as it were buryed among the innumerable multitude of people, might bring forth aboundance of fruite, as ſoone after did it appeare: for ſometimes ye might ſee at the aſſemblies thirtie thouſand perſons. Theſe goodly beginnings cauſed thoſe of the Religion to ſeeke meanes to eſtabliſh it, wherein neuertheleſſe they ſhewed themſelues ſomewhat negligent. But when the effects of the League brake forth, they euidently perceiued that it was meet to do that which through ouer much forflowing, was not now eaſely to be done: whereabout neuertheleſſe they ſomewhat employed themſelues, albeit with very ſmall hope.
                     
                        
Hauing more narowlie examined this matter, I finde that as the execution of this purpoſe to anie profite was in the beginning nothing eaſie: ſo in the end it was moſt difficult. I will firſt therefore ſpake of Paris, and ſhewe the lettes therein to be found. Euerie man knoweth it to bee the ſeate of Iuſtice, which is of meruaylous authoritie, and as the fauour thereof woulde haue ſtoode the Proteſtants in great ſteade, ſo would the miſlyke haue bredde wonderfull damage. Nowe all the Senate with their whole trayne, except a verie fewe, did alwayes ſhewe themſelues their capitall enimies
                     The Cleargie of that Citie beeing moſt mightie and in greate reuerence, were euen madde to ſee thoſe thinges common which touched them ſo neere the quicke, and vnder hande wrought a thou, ſand practiſes there agaynſt. The bodie of the Townehouſe fearing alterations, which they imagined to proceede of diuerſitie of religion, endeauoured to banniſh and driue it awaie. To the ſame ende tended the moſt parte of the Uniuerſitie, and in manner all the inferiour and common people, with the fauourers and ſeruauntes of the Catholike Lordes and Gentlemen. Neyther doe I yet ſpeake of ſuch as might happen to haue recourſe to the Citie out of other places, but onelie of thoſe that were then preſent. As for the aſſured ſtrength that the Proteſtants made account of, it conſiſted of three hundred Gentlemen, and as manie trayned ſouldiours, foure hundred ſchollers, and a fewe voluntarie Burgeſes of no experience. And what elſe was all this agaynſt in manner an infinite number of people, but a ſmall flie agaynſt an Elephant? I thinke that onelie the nouices of the couentes, together with the Prieſtes wenches, comming ſodainelie vppon them with fagot ſtickes in theyr handes, had beene able to haue withſtoode them: and yet notwithſtanding theyr weakneſſe, they ſette a good face vppon the matter vntill that the open force of the leagued Princes and Lordes did conſtrayne them to giue euer.
                     But had they buckeled in the Towne (as conſidering the ſecret driftes of theyr enemses, they ſhoulde ſoone haue beene forced) coulde the Proteſtants haue beene able to fight three dayes, as they did at Tholouze? Truelie no, nor three houres as I thinke: neyther had there beene anie waie to maintaine them, but the preſence of the King to fauour his Edict. Some will ſaie that the Prince of Condie abandoning Paris, committed the lyke errour

as Pompey: But if they marke it well, they ſhall finde that Pompeyes ouerſight was without compariſon greater than his: For hee had all Rome at his becke, where the Prince had ſcarce a handfull at Paris.
                     
                     Before wee applie thoſe auncient examples to the deedes of theſe dayes, wee muſt conſider of the lykelyhoode betweene them. All the aforeſayde difficulties doe perſwade mee that the endeauouring to eſtabliſhe the exerciſe of religion at Paris, was a haughtie and valiant attempt▪ but without the helpe aforeſayde to confirme it, it was vnpoſſible, as that which hath ſince fallen out, hath well declared.
                     Nowe let vs looke into the diſpoſition of the Court. It is wel Why he could not poſſibly be the ſtronger about the: Kinge and courte. inough knowen that at the conference at Poyſſy the doctrine of the Goſpell was propounded withall libertie, wherevpon many both greate and ſmal began to haue a taſt thereof: But as a fire of ſtraw maketh a greate blaze, and is by and by out againe for want of ſubſtaunce: ſo after that that which they had receiued as a noueltie was a lyttle growen olde in their heartes, theyr affections thereto quayled, and moſt of them retourned to the former courſe of the Court, which is more fit to procure mirth and paſtime and to breed wealth: yea, euen ſome Huguenots turnd theyr coates and followed this path.
                     The Court wee are in generall to take for the true image of the Prince: for as hee is, ſo is his traine. If hee bee wiſe, ſo will it bee: but if hee delyght in follie, it will alſo imitate him. And in caſe a houſeholder through vſe ſhapeth the manners of his children and familie by the patterne of his owne, what ſhall a King doe, in whome it lyeth to raiſe and caſt downe? Heerevppon the Courtiers ſeeing the King, his Brethren and Mother more inclined to Romiſh religion, alſo the King of Nauarre reuolted, conformed themſelues to them, which redounded to the greate diſgrace of the Prince of Condie, and thoſe whome hee maintained.
                     Beſides that, if hee had come firſt, hee coulde not haue ſoiourned there long without incurring much hatred: for if to a Court you propounde reformation, take awaie vaine pleaſures, and entangle it in buſineſſe, it will hate you euen vnto the death. Finallie, hauing manie enemies therein and more abroade, hee coulde not but haue verie ſmall aſſuraunce. This maketh mee to thinke that the fouudation of the Court was not of anie more

certayntie than that of Paris. Howbeeit hee attempted another deuiſe, (but it was not put in execution) in my opinion of more apparaunce: which was his moouing of the Queene mother, to goe and carrie the King to Orleance: and ſome writers doe ſaie that it was motioned to her when ſhee feared the motions of the league, alſo that ſhee hearkened thereto: but all vaniſhed awaie in ſmoake: neuertheleſſe I ſuppoſe that if the effect heereof had enſued, all theyr weapons had beene ſheathed vp agayne.
                     For had the Court beene in place where it coulde not haue beene ſurpriſed, in reſpect of ſuch force as might haue ben brought, and where it ſhoulde not haue beene forced, for no man durſt haue diſcharged the Canon agaynſt the walles that enuironed the King, they might haue parleyed and dealte on horſebacke vntill the affayres had beene ſomewhat reeſtabliſhed according vnto the Edict of pacification: not withſtanding euen to imagine that this remedie coulde haue vtterly extinguiſhed the warres, I dare not preſume: onelie it had ſufficed if it had but delayed them for a while.
                  
                  
                     Of three things which I noted that happened before the armies tooke the fielde. The one pleaſaunt, the other arteficiall, and the thirde lamentable.
                     
                        THE Writers of greate Hiſtories, who are to That Hiſtoriographers cannot poſſibly note all perticularities. repreſent more matters than there bee leaues vppon a ſpread Oake, cannot alwayes expreſſe and

note euerie the perticulars that accompanie them: for if they ſhoulde binde themſelues thereto, for euerie volume that they publiſh, they ſhoulde bee forced to ſette out foure, and therefore it is enough for them to declare whatſoeuer is moſt notable. Wherefore my ſelfe, if in reading things paſt I meete with ought eyther much or little, wherevppon a man to the ende to bring it into taſte or reape anie profite, might dilate, doe ſomewhat delight ſo to doe, eſpeciallie in thoſe thinges whereof I haue beene an eie witneſſe, which alſo may peraduenture ſomewhat ſerue to the vnderſtanding of the ſtorie, which is the rich ſtorehouſe, whereto they that couet goodly ornamentes ought to haue recourſe: for that which I heere ſette downe is but a Pedlers packe, conteyning wares of meane price, albeit vnleſſe I bee deceiued, not falſefied or counterfait.
                     The firſt matter that I meane to ſhew, is in what ſort the Prince How the Prince of Conde ſeaſed vpon Orleance. of Conde and his troope ariued at Orleance. The daie before hee came hee ſent the Lorde of Andelot to take the Towne, who comming vnknowen, perceiued there woulde bee ſome lette▪ wherevppon hee ſent worde to the ſayde Lorde to make ſpeede to aſſiſt him, for hee was lykelie to haue ſome bickering. Nowe the whole companie beeing loth to looſe ſo good a morcell deſired not to trot, but euen to galloppe, which was no ſooner ſayde but it was done. For ſixe leagues off beganne the courſe: The Prince hauing with him as well in maiſters as ſeruauntes aboute two thouſande horſe, taking the greate galloppe, the whole bodie did the lyke, and ſo continued euen to the verie gates.
                     Innumerable were the people that they mette by the waie going to Paris, who beholding the myſterie of this courſe, and withall, that none aſked them anie queſtion, did for the moſt part at the firſt thinke that all the fooles in Fraunce had beene there aſſembled, or elſe that it had beene for ſome wager: for as yet there was not anie noiſe of warre: Howbeit thinking better thereof, and conſidering both the number and nobilitie, they grewe into greate admiration, yet ſo as they coulde not but laughe at ſo forcible a motion, which did not beare downe the trees as the windes of Languedocke, but ſeemed rather to beare downe it ſelfe: for ordinarilie by the waie they might behold ſeruants caſt downe, horſes ſhouldered and tyred, and ſumpters ouerthrowen, which bred continuall ſporte euen in thoſe which did runne.
                     
                        
But they that the ſame daie were thruſt forth of the towne did Catholikly bewaile, their diſpoſſeſſion from the ſtaple of the pleaſanteſt wines in France.
                     
                     Concerning the ſecond point, the matter is of more grauitie, as conſiſting in both generall and priuate accuſations, defences, reaſons, Of writinges publiſhed for the taking of armes in the firſt troubles. and other pollicies to perſwade: which were the weapons wherewith ſo many great Captaines for the ſpace of two moneths fought together, as alſo to comfort and hearten their confederates and partakers. For in theſe ſo new and extraordinarie alterations of eſtate, it was verie requiſite to aboliſh all bad opinions out of the minds of thoſe that knew not the drifts of the enterpriſers: and as the aſſault was great, ſo was the defence forcible, as may appeare by reading the actions as well of the one part as of the other, which are inſerted into the Annales. Some there are that weene if their cauſe be good, that it will ſo ſhew it ſelfe to all men, and therefore will not publiſh the truth thereof: wherein they ouerſhoote themſelues. For albeit iuſt and true matters doe in time ſhew forth their light, yet is it in ſundrie occurrences meete to anticipate them, and that men ſhould betimes knowe that that will at length appeare, though not with ſo much fruit. Alſo as weedes doe many times for want of pulling vp, choke the good hearbes: ſo if the ſlanders which the aduerſaries doe ordinarily obiect agaynſt ſuch things as bee good, be not refelled, they would no doubt many times thereby bee ſuppreſſed, beſides that we are the more ſupported when (in whatſoeuer caſe) we haue proued that we walke vpright and labour with an euen hand.
                     To be briefe, in this world men are ſo ſlothful in publike duties, that without continuall calling vppon, they remaine immoueable. But they that haue but a bad cauſe in hand, haue more need of arteficiall ſpeeches to cloake that which being reauealed will bring it out of fauour: neither do I thinke them to be tongue tied, whereby we may perceiue that eloquence reſembleth a two edged knife: but whatſoeuer men ſaie, it is a hard matter to diſguiſe falſehood or blemiſh the truth.
                     The third point conſiſteth in the parley néere to Toury in Beauſſe, 
                        Of the parlie betweene the Queene mother and the Prince of Condie. betweene the Queene Mother, the king of Nauare, & the Prince of Condie, to deuiſe vpon ſome meanes to appeaſe the controuerſies fallen out. Many did imagine that the preſence and conference of the greateſt woulde bee of more efficacie than the ſundrie embaſſages from part to part: and albeit euteruiewes be ſometimes

dangerous, yet was it concluded, the rather at the Queenes inſtance, with the limitations enſuing: That on each ſide they ſhoulde bring one hundred Gentlemen with armour and ſpeare: That no troops ſhuld come within two leagues of the place appointed: That thirtie light horſe on each part ſhould ſixe houres before their meeting diſcouer the fielde, which was as playne as the ſea: That at the appointed houre the Queene and King of Nauarre ſhould bee on horſe backe in the place appointed, where the Prince and Admirall lykewiſe on horſebacke ſhoulde mee
                              •
                           e them to intreate together of the publyke affayres.
                     
                     In the meane time the two troopes conſiſting of choice men; and for the moſt parte Lordes to houer eight hundred pates aſunder: the Marſhall de Anuil commaunding ouer the one, and the Earle of Rochefoucault ouer the other. Hauing thus beheld eyther other for the ſpace of halfe an houre, each coueting to ſee one his brother, another his vnkle, couſen, friende, or olde companion, they 
                           •
                        raued leaue of theyr ſuperiours, which was hardlie graunted, in reſpect that at the firſt they were forbidden to meete for feare of iniuryes and affrayes. But ſo farre were they from quarelling, that contrariwiſe there was nothing but ſalutations and embracings of ſuch as could not forbeare ye demonſtration of amitie vnto thoſe whome parentage or honeſtie had vnited vnto them: notwithſtanding the contrarie tokens that they bare. For the King of Nauarres troope was clothed in caſſockes of crimſon veluet and redde ſcarfes, and the Prince of Condes in white. The Catholikes imagining the Proteſtants to bee loſt, exhorted them to ſee to themſelues, & not to enter obſtinatlie into this miſerable warre, wherein neere kinſmen muſt murther one another: heereto they aunſwered, that they deteſted it, howbeit if they had not recourſe to theyr defence, they were aſſured of lyke intreatie as many other Proteſtants had receiued, who were cruellie ſlaine in ſundrie parts of France.
                     
                     To be briefe, each prouoked other to peace, and to perſuade their ſuperiours to hearken thereto. Some who a parte did more deeplie conſider of theſe things, bewayled publike diſcord as the ſpring of future miſchiefes: Then waighing with themſelues that all theſe greetings would bee conuerted into bloudie murthers, vppon the leaſt token of battayle that the ſuperiours ſhoulde giue: that the 
                           •
                        iſeardes being ſhut and readie, furie hauing 
                           •
                        ayled their ſight, one brother woulde ſcarce pardon another, the water euen ſtoode

in their eyes. My ſelfe was then among the Proteſtants, and I may truelie ſaie that on the other ſide there were a douzen of my friendes: whome I accounted as deere as my owne brethren, who alſo bare mee the lyke affection: In the meane time as well conſcience as honour bounde each one not to fayle in the one or the other. Priuate amitie did as thē liue, but ſince theſe great calamities had courſe, and conuerſation diſcontinued, it is euen dead in many. The Queene and Prince of Conde hauing conferred two long houres together, when they coulde growe to no agreement, departed, each verie ſorie that they had no better ſucceſie.
                  
                  
                     Of the Prince of Condies promiſe ſomewhat raſhlie made to the Queene mother that hee would depart the Realme of France, and why it was not performed.
                     
                        AFter the ariuall of a great number of the ordinarie The approches of the two cō
                           trary armies. bandes and parte of the olde infanterie at Paris, the King of Nauarre, the Conſtable and the Duke of Guize, who contemned the Proteſtants as rebelles, thought themſelues ſtrong inough to make them afrayde, and in battayle araie marched towarde Chaſteaudun. The Prince vnderſtanding heereof craued the aduice of ſuch Captaines as accompanied him, what were to bee done: who all with one conſent declared, that ſith they had hetherto as well in deedes as wordes ſet ſo good a face on the matter, if nowe they ſhoulde at the beginning of the warre ſuffer themſelues to bee ſhutte vp and beſieged in a Towne, it would bee ſome teſtimonie of cowardlyneſſe, and greatly diſgrace the Proteſtants affayres

as well with foraine nations as with ſuch of the Frenchmen as tooke: heir partes: withall conſidering that their power alreadie grew well toward ſixe thouſand footmen and two thouſand horſe, alſo that by the report of the ſpies the enimies were not yet aboue foure thouſand footmen and three thouſand ſpeares: to whom notwithſtanding they were not ſo well armed, they were no whit inferiour in courage: that nothing ought therefore to let them from taking the field with all ſpeed, and fighting with the enimie, if occaſion might ſo ſerue: for they could neuer haue them at a better aduantage, conſidering how theyr power would from time to time increaſe.
                     Upon this reſolution ehey encamped a league and a halfe from Treatie of peace. 
                        Orleance, whether the Queene ſent new Embaſſadours to enter parley: for both ſides did greatly feare the vniuerſall deſolations enſuing of warre, if once it were begun. At the two firſt meetings they argued ſufficiently, though to ſmall reſolution: onely it was agreed, that the Catholike and leagued Lordes and Princes ſhould depart each to his owne home, and then would the Prince of Condie obey whatſoeuer the king ſhould command for the wealth of the Realme. Soone after they marched to Chaſteaudun and no farther, which the Proteſtants preſumed to bee but a diſſimulation. Some will ſaie, that in the ſayd parlies the Prince of Conde hazarded himſelfe into ouer great peril: but he was ſtill ſtronger than the enimie, and his men too warie to be deceiued, albeit in one point they ouerſhoot thēſelues vpon ſimplicitie: which was in deliuering to ye king of Nauarre when he came to ye parley the towne of Boiſgencie (which was nothing worth) for his fafety, but was neuer reſtored them again: this did greatly chafe them, as perceiuing that thence forth they muſt talke with the bridle in hand. Now as daily there came ſome from the Queene to the Prince of Conde, to perſwade him to peace, which hee ſeemed greatly to deſire, among the reſt was imploied the Biſhop of Valence, a man in learning and eloquence moſt excellent, when he lyſt to ſhew forth eyther the one or the other. Hee with his fayre ſpeech ſo qualyfied the Prince, that he increaſed his deſire of a good accord: and finally told him that in as much as many reproched him to be the author of the war, it were his part to make euident his iuſtificatiō by al good offers & braue effects: alſo yt if at the next enteruiew he wold tel ye 
                        Queene yt rather than to ſée ye real me hazarded to fire & ſword, he wold be cōtent with his friends to depart the ſame, ſhee could haue nothing to anſwere,

much leſſe his enimies who had promiſed to returne to their habitations▪ likewiſe that of this motion might enſue ſome good reſolution that ſhould ſtay all wepons, which being laid downe, all things might after ward be eaſily reeſtabliſhed. This ſayd he departed, leauing in the Prince (who was loth to be conſtrained to fight agaynſt his owne nation) & certaine impreſſion to followe this counſayle, which he imparted to ſome that were deſirous of peace, & therefore gainſayd it not.
                     It was agreed that two dayes after he ſhould meete the Queene 
                        Of the Princes offer, made to the Queene. a league and a halfe thence, ſo to proue if any thing might be determined, which he did. There after many ſpeeches the ſaid Prince did in the end make her the offer aforeſaid, namely to depart the realme, ſo to teſtifie his zeale to the quiet thereof: which ſhe tooke holde of before the word was out of his mouth, telling him that that in deed was the true meanes to preuent all miſchiefes feared, for the which all France ſhould be bound vnto him: alſo that the King comming to his maioritie would bring all into good order, wherby euery man ſhould haue cauſe to be content. Nowe although the Prince was a man that would not be eaſily danted, neyther wanted his tongue, yet was he at this time aſtoniſhed, as not thinking to haue bene taken ſo ſhort: & becauſe it waxed late, ſhe tolde him that in the morning ſhe would ſend to knowe what conditions hee would demand. Thus ſhe departed in good hope, and the Prince returned to his campe laughing (but betweene his teeth) with the chiefe of his Gentlemen which had heard all his talke. Some ſcratching their heads where they itched not: others ſhaking them: ſome were penſiue, and the younger ſort gybed oue at another, each one deuiſing with what occupation he ſhould be forced to get his liuing iu a forein land. At night they determined the next morning to call all the Captaines together to haue their aduice in ſo waightie a matter.
                     In the morning they entered into counſayle, where the Admirall 
                        The counſell and aduice vpon this matter. propounded, that in as much as this matter concerned all, it was in his opinion, good to impart it vnto al, which was done, and the Colonels and Captaines were ſent to demaund the aduice as well of the Gentrie as footemen: But they imediatly aunſwered, thatſith France had bredde them, it ſhould alſo be their ſcpulture, likewiſe that ſo long as anie drop of bloud reſted in them, it ſhoulde bee imployed in defence of their religion. With all they requeſted the Prince to remember his generall promiſe that hee would not forſake

them: This being reported to the Counſaile ha
                           •
                        ted the concluſion of thoſe that were there to deliberate, who conſidering of the generall diſpoſition of all, were the rather confirmed in their opinions, which did concurre wt the ſame▪ neither were there aboue three or foure that vſed anie ſpeech, the matter being ſo euident: and I do yet in part remem
                           •
                        er the particularities there deducted. The Lord Admirall declared vnto the Prince, that albeit he ſuppoſed that the Queene in accepting of his offer meant no harme, as one that deſiring to deliuer the ſtate out of miſerie means conuenient
                              〈…〉
                           ot that he thought thoſe which had weapon on hand, did circū
                           
                              •
                           ent her to the end to betraie him: that he neither ought, neither could performe that that, was propoūded & himſelf, had promiſed, in reſpect that beforè he ſtoode bounde in ſtronger bandes: and beſides all this, that if he ſhould now abſent himſelfe, he ſhould vtterly looſe his credit & condemne the cauſe that he had takē in hand, which beſides the equitie therof, being authoriſed by the Kings edict, ought to bee maintayned euen with hazarde of life. The Lord of Andelots ſpeech was this: My Lord the enimies power lyeth but fiue ſmall leagues hence: if it perceiue
                              ••
                            amōg vs either feare, breaking vp, or other alteràtiō whatſoeuer, it wil with 
                              •••
                           ord and ſpeare driue vs euen into the Ocean ſea. If you none ſhoulde forſake vs it will bee ſayde that yee doe it for feare, which I knowe neuer▪ harboured in your heart. Wee are your poore ſeruantes, and you our maiſter, diuide vs not then, ſith wee fight for religion and life: ſo many parleyes are but ſnares layde to intrappe vs as appeareth by the effectes elſe, where: The beſt waie therefore to come to a ſpeedie agreement is, that you will vouchſafe to bring vs within halfe a league of thoſe that, wiſh vs to departe the Realme: ſo may wee peraduenture within an houre after growe to ſome good reſolution: for wee can neuer bee perfect friendes before wee haue ſkirmiſhed a little together.
                     
                     Then ſtepped foorth the Lorde of Boucarde, one of the braueſt Gentlemen in the Realme, whoſe head was fraught both with fire and Lead. My Lorde (ſayde hee) hee that either giueth ouer or putteth of the ſet looſeth it, which is more true in this matter now in hand than in the tenis court: I haue alreadie ſeene fiftie yeeres, in which time I may haue learned alittle diſcretion: I would bee loth to walke vp and downe a foraine lande with a tooth picker in my mouth, and in the meane time lett ſome flattering neighbour bee the maiſter of my houſe, & fatten himſelfe with my re
                              ••
                           newes. God willing for my parte I will die in my Countrie in defence of our alters and hearthes:

I beſeech you therefore my Lorde, and doe wiſh you not to abandon ſo many good men that haue choſen you, but to excuſe your ſelfe to the Queene, and imploie vs with ſpeede while we are willing to bite. Little more was there ſpoken, except a generall approbation of all men.
                     Then the Lord Prince began to ſpeake, and for the iuſtification of his offer ſayd, that he made it, becauſe they went about couertlie to taxe him, with the cauſe of the warre; as alſo for that if his abſence might breede theyr peace he would thinke himſelfe happie, as not reſpecting his owne particular affayres: lyke
                              ••
                           ſe that hee did well perceiue ſeeing the enemies power ſo neere, and theyr reſolution, that they woulde impute his humilitie to cowardlyneſſe; whereby it ſhould breed no reſt but rather deſtruction to the cauſe that hee maintayned: and that in conſideration thereof hee was reſolued to followe theyr counſayle, and to liue and die with them. Thus ſayde, they all ſhooke handes in confirmation thereof.
                     At the breaking vp of the Counſaile Theodore Beza with others of his companions made vnto him a verie wiſe and pi
                           •
                        hre exhortation to comfort him in his reſolution, alleadging vnto him the inconueniences▪ enſuing the departure from the ſame, and ſo beſought him not to giue ouer the good worke hee had begun, which God, whoſe honour it concerned, woulde bring to perfection. About the ſame time came the Lorde of Frenſe, Robertet, Serr
                           •
                        
                        tarie of the commaundementes, whome the Queene had ſent to knowe, vppon what conditions the Lorde Prince woulde departe: Whoſe 
                           •
                        unſwere was, That it was a matter of waight, neyther was hee yet reſouled thereof, in reſpect that many murmured thereat: but when it was concluded hee woulde eyther ſende or bring the Queene worde himſelfe. But Roberter by ſome particular ſpeeches perceiued that matters were altered, and ſo returned to the Queene, whome hee certefyed that ſhee muſt haue more than paper to thruſt him out withall, who afterwarde went her waie.
                     Heereby may Princes and great Lordes learne in matters of Obſeruations vpon this matter. importance not to binde themſelues by promiſe before they haue throughly conſulted thereof with the wiſe: for albeit their meaning may be good, yet may a man after ſome forte ſtumble, becauſe the ſodainneſſe of the matter may make him neglect diuerſe circumſtaunces therein to bee conſidered▪ Yea, although one ſhoulde thinke vpon all that were requiſite to bee noted, yet may many doe it much beter. The worthineſſe alſo of the matter in hande

may be ſuch, and the number of confederates ſo great, that euen the cheefeſt muſt haue reſpect as well to the one as to the other, As likewiſe they muſt imagine that they to whome they promiſe, although thinges vnreaſonable, will neuertheleſſe vpon want o
                           •
                         performance finde themſelues greeued, and complaine thereof.
                  
                  
                     By what occaſion the warre did firſt breake foorth betweene the two armies.
                     
                        DUring the parlies afore mentioned, there The Princes reſolation to ſette vpon his enemies. was as it were a truc
                           •
                         betweene both armies, which cauſed that there was nothing enterprized at Paris or Orleance: But when the Prince of Conde and his aſſociats did well per
                           •
                        eiue that wordes were to weake to remedy the preſent alterations, hee determined to adde effects, and ſo immediately after the reſolution vpon the offer made vnto the Queene, hee called aſide 
                           •
                        eauen or eight of his cheefeſt captaines, and conſulted vpon the moſt conuenient meanes to buckle with the enemy, for the truc
                           •
                         was ended the daie before) who all were of opinion that they muſt be preuented by diligence, conſidering that they had two aduauntages: the one that the Duke of Guiſe, the Conſtable, and the Marſhall of S. Andrewes were then abſent, and ſo none but the king of Nauarre with the armie: the other, that the companies of men of armes were lodged ſcattering from the maine battaile: That if they ſhoulde march forward by daie, theyr light horſe or forragers might giue them warning, and therefore it were beſt to vſe greate diligence in the night, and ſo come vppon them in the dawning: for thus might they vndoubtedlie be ſurpriſed: likewiſe that becauſe they had not ordinarily vſed any camizadoes, they might nowe the more eaſilie put this in execution, while the enimy leaſt doubled anie ſuch thing. As for the waie, it was moſt eaſie, as being al plaine fields between them.
                     
                        
About one houre after the campe departed, and came betimes to Fe
                              •
                           te, where the Generalles opened their intents to the Captaines, willing them to cauſe their ſouldiours to put on ſhirtes, and reſolue them to beare themſelues manfully in this ſo valyaunt an enterpriſe. By eight of clocke at night the troops were in the field, who after publike praier (as was then vſed among the Proteſtants) began to march with ſuch a courage, as I may in truth affirme, that in ſouldiours I neuer ſee greater. Before the departure did a gentleman commit a moſt villanous act, in forcing of a maiden, whoſe calling together, with the ſhortneſſe of the time were cauſes that it could not be puniſhed. This did many take to be a bad ſigne in this enterpriſe. Preſuming to finde the enemies in their lodginges, the order to fight was this.
                     Firſt the Lord Admirall marched formoſt with eight hundred ſpeares, to ouerthrowe whatſoeuer horſemen hee ſhoulde finde in armes: then followed 1200. harquebuts in foure troopes, with charge to aſſayle the watch of the enimies footmen, and thence to enter theyr quarters. Next marched eight hundred harquebuts, ſupported with two great battayles of pikes, to ſeaze vppon their artillerie: after all came the Prince of Condee with one thouſand horſe in foure ſquadrons, and the reſt of the harque buzerie: Now are we to vnderſtand that conſidering at what time they ſet forward, they ſhould by all reaſon haue reached to the enimies lodging by three of the clocke in the morning: for the waie lay ouer a playne field, neither was there any ſtraight paſſage, but that the footemen might march a whole league in an houre and a halfe: but when they had gone two leagues, the guides perceiued that they went wrong, and thinking to recouer their waie, they ſtrayed farther out, remayning as men amazed, and not knowing where they were, to the no ſmall diſcontent of the Captaines. To be briefe, hauing thus trauayled vntill one houre after daie, they found themſelues a long league of from the enimies lodgings, whoſe ſcoutes deſcried the head of the Princes armie, and ſo returning with al ſpeed gaue a great alarum. Heerevpon tooke they counſayle what was beſt to bee done: but in the meane time they hearde the Canon diſcharged in the enemies campe, for a warning to call in their horſemen, which brake theyr deuiſe for paſſing any farther, as well for that they we
                           •
                        e deſcried, as alſo that they had yet a great waie to goe, albeit if they had bene within halfe a league, they were reſolued to haue gone forward and fought. Thus was this enterpriſe which in ontward appearaunce

ſeemed verie certaine was vtterlie broken of.
                     I haue aſked the opinion of ſundrie good Captaines then preſent in the aduerſaries campe, what ſucceſſe might haue followed if Now this enterpriſe might haue ſucceded, and what happened the next daie. the Proteſtants had come in time, who all affirme that they woulde haue fought, albeit they were preuented by their ſeparation from their moſt affectionate Captaines, and the greateſt parte of theyr horſemen. The Lorde Marſhall of Anuille, a watchfull and verie ſkilfull Captaine, was with his light horſe lodged at the head of the Catholikes armie, wo tolde mee that hee waked and was in armes almoſt all the night, neuertheleſſe if our whole power had come in time, theyr armie had beene in daunger, which is not in deede to bée doubted: for albeit the hazardes of warre bee vncertaine, yet the aduauntage of a ſurpriſe, doth import apparaunt loſſe to thoſe that ſuffer themſelues to bee ſo farre ouertaken. All the faulte was layde vppon the guides, who to cleere themſelues ſaid that the Lord of Andelots putting the footemen in araie at the departure from the lodgings made their march the flower: but I thinke this excuſe more ſubtil than true, conſidering there was neither buſh nor hedge to ſtoppe them. In deede if the Countrie had beene ſtraighter, it might haue had ſome likelihood. Both armies, albeit ſomewhat aſunder ſtoode in araie vntill two of the clocke afternoone. Afterwarde the Prince of Condie went to lodge at Lorges, a ſmall league of: and the King of Nauarre with all ſpeede certefied the Lorde of Guize and the Conſtable, who laie at Chaſteaudun of all that happened, who immediatlie came to him. Then fearing to be aſſayled by night, becauſe the Princes armie was ſtrong in footmen, and their owne lodgings verie vnfit for horſemen, they made at the head of theyr battayle grounde vppon the comming in, fiue or ſixe great heapes of fagots with ſtrawe inough vnder them, to kindle if they were aſſaulted, to the ende by the light thereof to diſcharge three or foure vollees of artillerie, which woulde haue greatly annoied the aſſaylauntes: There are that diſdayne ſuch inuentions, albeit they may ſometime be to good purpoſe. In the morning they fell agayne into araie, but ſee not one another, neyther did anie but the light horſemen ſkirmiſhe. The Captaines of both ſides perceiuing that it was harde to ſurprize one another, alſo that theyr lodgings were verie diſcommodious, and moued by a certayne kinde of neceſſitie to get ſome townes which might ſtande them in greate ſteade to continue the warre, as Bloyſe and Boiſgencie, did in the morning ſende awaie their carriage and artillerie,

and in the afternoone followed, parting after this ſort without bactaile or loſſe. An accedent fauorable to the Princes enemies.
                     
                     Heere will I declare an accident which happened two houres after this ſeparation, which if it had fallen out when they were together, the Prince of Condie had beene in daunger to haue beene ouerthrowen. It was this: There fell ſuch a horrible raine and tempeſt, continuing almoſt an houre, that I am aſſured that of his foure thouſand harque buziers, ten coulde not haue diſcharged: beſides that, moſt of them ſought to the couert, which was ſuch an occaſion of victorie to the Catholiks, as well in that they were ſtrong in horſe, as alſo for that the winde and raine ſo beate in their enemies faces, that euen the fierceſt had inough to doe to withſtande the rage of the weather. This is the truth of all occurrences among the Proteſtants in this expedition: but the particularities of the King of Nauarres armie are they that were preſent, and ſo may haue knowen them, to deſcribe.
                  
                  
                     Of the good diſcipline which for the ſpace of two moneths onelie, was obſerued among the Prince of Condies troopes both of horſemen and footmen. Alſo of the originall of Picoree or prouling.
                     
                        IN the beginning of this warre the Generalls The cauſes of good diſcipline. and Captaines had yet freſh in their remembrances the goodly martiall diſcipline obſerued in the armies of King Frances, and his ſonne Henrie, which ſundrie Souldiours alſo had not forgotten, the memorie whereof did ſomewhat containe thoſe that nowe tooke armes, in their dueties: howbeit the continuall exhortations of their Preachers, who admoniſhed them to beware of oppreſſing the poore commons, together with the zeale of religion where with moſt of them were led, being then in ſtrength were of greateſt force in working this effecte.

Thereby were al men without conſtraint voluntarily brideled from committing thoſe actions which often times horror of puniſhment is not able to reſtraine: but chiefely the nobilitie in this beginning ſhewed themſelues worthie their name: for marching ouer the Champion Countries (where they haue without compariſon greater libertie to ſpoyle, than in the Townes) they neyther ſpoyled nor miſuſed theyr hoſtes, but were content with a little: & their heads and moſt of themſelues that had brought anie wealth from home paide honeſtly for all things: Then ſhould we not ſee anie running out of the villages, neither heare any cries or complaintes. To bee briefe, all was a well ordered diſorder. If anie one in anie troope had committed any offence, he was imediatly baniſhed, or deliuered into the executioners hands: yea, his owne companions durſt not excuſe the offender, ſo much did they deteſt miſchiefe and 
                           •
                        oue vertue. In the campe at Vaſſadoune alſo, neere Orleance, where the Prince of Conde ſoiourned a fortnight, the footmen made demonſtration how they were touched with the ſame feeling: they were lodged in the fieldes, and conſiſted of ſixe and thirtie Euſignes at the moſt.
                     Then did I marke foure or fiue notable accidents. Firſt, among The notable perticularities of the ſame. all this great troope yee ſhould neuer heare Gods name blaſpheamed: for if anie rather rather of cuſtome than mallice chaunced to doe it, he was ſharply reproued, which greatly repreſſed the reſt. Secondly, there was not a paire of Dice or Cardes, the fountains of many braules and thefts, walking in any quarter. Thirdly, all women who neuer vſe to haunt ſuch places, but for diſſolution, were baniſhed. Fourthly, no man forſooke his Enſigne to goe on forraging, but were content with ſuch victualles as were diſtributed among them, or the ſmall paie that they receiued. Laſtly, euening & morning at the ſetting and raiſing of the watch, they vſed publike prayer, and the Pſalmes ſounded in the aire. In theſe actions might wee perceiue Godlyneſſe in thoſe that are not much troubled therewith in the warres: and albeit Iuſtice was ſeuerely executed, yet did few feele the rigour thereof: for there were but fewe diſorders. Truly many wondred to ſee them ſo well diſpoſed, and my late brother the Lord of Telignie and my ſelfe diſcourſing therof with the Lord Admirall, did greatly commend it, wherevpon he ſayd vnto vs: It is in deede a goodly matter if it would continue: But I feare this people will powre foorth all their goodneſſe at once, ſo as within theſe two moneths they will haue nothing but mallice left: I

haue a great while gouerned the footmen and doe knowe them. They willfulfill the prouerbe, A yong ſainct an olde deuill. If this faile we may make a croſſe vpon the chimney: wee ſmiled hereat, but tooke no farther 
                           •
                        eede thereof, vntill experience taught vs that herein he was a Prophet.
                     The firſt diſorder happened at the taking of Boiſgency which The begining of diſorders. the Prouincials wonne by two holes that they mined in the wall, where they practiſed more crueltie and ſpoyle againſt the Proteſtants there dwelling that could not get foorth, then againſt the Catholicke Souldiers that held it againſt them: ye
                           •
                         they euen forced ſome women. This example became a br
                           ••
                        ge to the Gaſcoynes, who ſoone after ſhewed that in playing with their handes they would not be ſurmounted. But the Lord of Y
                              •
                           oyes regiment conſiſting wholly of French men, did ſkirmiſh herein 
                           ••
                        eter then the t
                           •
                        o former: as if there had bene any reward alotted to the worſt doer. Thus did our footmen loſe their virginitie, and of this vnlawfull coniunction enſued the procreation of Ladie Picoree, who is ſince growne into ſuch dignitie that ſhe is now 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Madam: yea, if this ciuill warre continue I doubt ſhe will become a Princeſſe. This peruerſe cuſtome immediatly crept in among the Nobilitie: whereof parte hauing taſted the firſt delicates here adminiſtred, would neuer after eate any other meate. Thus the perticuler miſchiefe grewe generall, and ſtill wo
                           •
                        ne more and more into the whole bodie. Sundrie remedies did I ſee miniſtred, in The remedies applied. hope to reſtrayne the mallice of this humour, which albeit they ſomewhat profited, yet were they not ſtrong enough altogether to expell it. Among others, the Lorde Admirall tooke paynes therein, who was a fit Phiſition to cure this diſeaſe: for he would not be entreated, neither were the friuolous excuſes of the guiltie, which he eſteemed not of, able to breede their eſcape. In his iorney into Normandie he heard of a Captaine of the Argoulets that had ſacked a Uillage, whether he preſently ſent, but could catch no more but the Captaine with foure or fiue ſouldiers, who immediatly had their condemnation, and were truſſed vp booted and ſpurred with their caſſackes on their backes and their clout for an Enſigne, where alſo to the enriching of the monument, he cauſed to be layd at their féete their conquered ſpoyles, as womens apparell, ſheetes, and table clothes, entermixed with hennes and gammns of bacon: which was a warning as it were written in great letters to all others of the ſame trade, to beware of the like

behauiour. Neuer did you ſee wiſer men then the reſt were for a moueth after: but then they returned to the practiſe of their good cuſtomes, which without ſeueritie will not be forgotten. As alſo in fauour of the Catholickes this I will ſay, that at the beginning they likewiſe were well ordered, & did not much anoy the cōmons, whoſe nobilitie did alſo ſhine among them: Howbeit, I cannot well tell how long they ſo contiuued: but I haue heard that they alſo did by and by ſpred their ſayles and tooke the ſame courſe as the other. Thus albeit our diſorders may ſomtimes procure ſport, yet haue we greater cauſe to weepe when wee ſee ſo many of thoſe that deale with armes, through their bad behauiours, deſerue the name of theeues rather then ſouldiers.
                  
                  
                     Of the reaſons that mooued the Prince of Condées armie to breake vp after the taking of Boiſgencie: alſo how he conuerted that neceſsitie into profite. And of the purpoſes of the King of Nauarre.
                     
                        THE principall Captaines and ſuch as were beſt practiſed in worldly affayres, Diſcontentment in the Princes armie. did well for eſee that their armie would not long continue whole, becauſe they did in parte want the neceſſarie foundations thereof, ſo as they feared this diſſipation, as men feare leaſt the fall of ſome great Dake ſhaken with ye windes ſhould light vpon ſome wall and caſt it downe, or vpon a number of ſmall plantes bearing fruite: which cauſed them to giue counſaile while it was in force to hazard th
                           •
                         fielde, whereof they miſſed. Now after the taking of Boiſgencie, when they ſee the contrary power placed at Bloys which ſtandeth vpon the riuer of Loyre, and that the warre grewe long, their firſt heate began to coole, as alſo at the ſame time began their treaſure wherewith to wage Souldiers (who had alreadie conſ
                           •
                        med all

that they had gathered as well a
                           •
                         
                        Orleance as els where) to faile.
                     This neceſſitie opened the gates to diuers diſcontentmens, whereof the moſt parte had but ſimple foundations, albeit the principall motion proceeded of the naturall impatiencie of the French nation, which if it by and by ſee not the imagined effects, doe grow out of liking and murmureth. Neither will I conceale but that ſome euen of the chiefe of the Nobilitie, too much affected to their goods, either endued with ſomwhat an ambitious hope, or els ouer delicate and tender, endeuouring to hide theſe defaults, did call the equitie of the warre into queſtion. This being knowne, they were requeſted to departe, leaſt their ſpeeches ſhould alienate the minds of others. As for the greater parte of the Nobilitie and Gentrie, which could not bee maintained or placed in the neereſt Garriſons and might ſerue els where, it was thought good to employe them in their owne countries, where debate began to breake foorth betweeene the Proteſtants and Catholickes, eſpecially in Poictou, Xaintogne, and Angoleſme. Thether ſent they the Earle of Rochfoucault: to Lyons the Lord of Soubize: and to Bourges the Lord of Iuoy with his regiment. Alſo ſeeing the Germaines, Sui
                              •
                           zers and Spanyards, did alreadie enter into France in fauour of the Catholickes, they ſent the Lord of Andelot into Germanie, and the Lord of Briquemaud into England to ſeeke for helpe and ſuccour: By this meanes did the towne of Orleance remaine freed and ſafe from that which would moſt haue moleſted it: forreine negotiation well eſtabliſhed: and the preſeruation of thoſe Countries, from whence they had ſuccour prouided for. Thus were the difficulties that happened among the Princes partie, determined, ſo as the hope of the ſucceſſe of this warre was not much deminiſhed, whereof I doe not much meruaile. For ſith in extremities, wiſe and valiant perſons can finde remedies, why ſhould they diſpayre in ſuch as are not ſo farre growne▪ In the meane time in matter of warre, want of money is no ſmall inconuenience, neither is it any loſſe to haue to deale with voluntarie perſons; which is a burden of it ſelfe hard to be borne, whereby a man is ſoone oppreſſed, and this doth none ſo well knowe as he that hath proued it.
                     The King of Nauarre and his aſſotiates conſidering that it was not good to loſe time, which ought to be precious to thoſe that Of the taking of Burges, and the counſaile to beſiedge Orleance. haue power at commaunde, encreaſed their campe as well with French men as Straungers, and beſought the Queene to bring

the King into the armie, to the ende the Hugueno
                              •
                           s, who 
                           〈…〉
                        ned it the King of Nauarres, or the Duke of Guizes, might be forced to call it the Kings campe, as alſo the more to 
                           〈…〉
                        horiſe the warre that was proſecuted in his name, which ſhe did: And they met at Chartres where they reſolued to ſet vpon Bourges, before it were fortified: for, ſayd they, ſo mightie a citie, not paſt twentie leagues diſtant from Orleance, did but too much benefice the Princes affayres. Thether they marched and aſſaulting it found no ſuch reſiſtance as was looked for, whereby it fell into their hands. Then being with this ſo ſudden victorie, which, ſayd they, was the cutting off of one of the Proteſtants armes, puffed vp and very ioyfull, they entered deliberation of their affayres. Many were very earneſt to beſiege Orleance, whoſe reaſons were theſe. That the two chiefe heades that moeued all this bodie, namely the Prince of Condé and the Admirall were there, ſo the ſame being taken they might eaſely make the reſt of the bodie immoueable. That the ſtrangers that looked vp and euen tickled to come into France, when they ſhould but heare of the ſiege thereof, would not bee very willing to ſet forward. That they had men enowe to begin the ſiege: for placing and fortifying two thouſandmen in the little gate to bridle the towne on that ſide, they ſhould ſtill haue tenne thouſand footmen & three thouſand horſe, who might ſuffice vnto the ariuall of other their power that was marching. Finally, that the towne was but weake, as being neither well flancked, nor well diched, and hauing no counterſcarpe: Onely there was a rampier wherein thirtie Canons would in ſixe daies make a breach of two hundred foote. But, ſayd they, if ye giue thoſe Huguenotes any respite to finiſh their fortifications, wherein they labour alreadie, wee ſhall not bee poſſibly able to winne it. That they ſhould remember that that towne was no ſmall thorne in the foote of France, but euen a very great darte which pierced the bowelles thereof and kept it from breathing.
                     
                     Others of the contrary opinion did thus replie. That by their intelligences 
                        The reaſons of thoſe that counſailed the fiedge of Roan, rather then of Orleance. 
                        in Orleance they were aſſured that the two regiments of Gaſcogns and Prouincials amounting to aboue 3000. ſouldiers were in it: Alſo fiue or ſixe hundred other ſouldiers of thoſe that had bene in Bourges and were now retired thether. Moreouer foure hundred gentlemen: Then the townſmen able to beare armes being no leſſe then three thouſand perſons. All together aboue ſeuen thouſand men, beſides ſuch as hearing of the ſiege, drawing thether, would likewiſe enter thereinto. That a towne furniſhed with ſo many men and great ſtore

of victuals was not eaſie to be taken. That in conſideration aforeſayd, it were to no purpoſe with twelue thouſand men to pitch their campe againſt it, conſidering how many ſeuerall campes for the well encloſing thereof they muſt make. Moreouer, that to vndertake ſuch a peece of worke without at the leaſt two hundred thouſand of poulder, twelue thouſand bullets, and two thouſand Pyoners, all which the Kings whole power was not able to gather together in one moneth, were as a man ſhould ſay, to take ſhipping without Biſcuit. That they had elſewhere more eaſie worke which was requiſite to be prouided for: namely, to take from the enemies the towne of Rcan whileſt it were yet weake, for that the Engliſhmen being by them drawne thether might there frame a great armie, to goe afterward where they liſt, in respect whereof that arme muſt be ſpeedily cut off. As for whatſoeuer power the Lord of Andelot might bring in, if they would ſend there againſt 1500. horſe and 4000. ſhot, the ſame vnder the fauour of the countries, townes and riuers might ſuffice either to ſtoppe or cut them in peeces. Then hauing atchieued al this, they ſhould haue a very fit time, without daunger of empeachment to plant a notable ſiege before Orleance, wherewith to winne it either ſpeedily by maine force, or at the length, by mynes and ſappe, or finally by building fortes round about it. This laſt counſaile tooke place and was followed, and to bee plaine with you, I take it was the better: for in the towne there were for the defence thereof aboue fiue thouſand ſtraungers, beſides the enhabitants: ſtore of munition: the Rauelines begunne and the fortifications of the Iles almoſt finiſhed. True it is the Lord Conſtable ſayd that he would haue nothing but ſodden Apples to beate them downe withall, but when he was brought to ſee them he confeſſed that he had bene miſenformed. Our Captaines did often growe into cōmunication of the ſiedge: but the Lord Admirall laughed at them, ſaying, that to a towne able to furniſh three thouſand men for an iſſue they could not approach without daunger, much leſſe bring their artillerie. Likewiſe that the examples of Mets & Padoa where two mightie Emperours in aſſayling ſuch bodies as were too ſtrong from them, had the foyle, were goodly mirrours to all ſuch as would goe about to beſiedge places well furniſhed.
                  
                  
                     
                     That but for the forreine ayde that the Lorde of Andelot brought in, the Proteſtants affayres had bene but in bad caſe, and many mens mindes ſhrewdly daunted, as well through the taking of Bourges and Roan, as for the ouerthrow of the Lord of Duras.
                     
                        GReatly did it grieue the Prince of Condé from time to time to heare of the The taking of Roan. voyadge of the armie againſt Roan, for that he had no meane to ſuccour ſo principal a towne whoſe apparant loſſe he plainly perceiued: for he tooke it to tende greatly to the empayring of his credite: neither could he doe any more then ſend worde oftentimes to the Lord of Andelot to haſten his returne, but eſpecially to beware that the power which wayted for him did not ſurpriſe him. Howbeit, as all negotiations in Germanie are long, ſo much time did weare away whereby the aduerſarie had oportunitie to preuaile againſt him, namely by the taking of the ſayd towne, which being couragiouſlie aſſaulted was as obſtinatly defended. The great Captaines who before had taken ſuch ſtrong townes as Dauuilliers, Mariembourg, Callais & Thionuille did imagine that ſo weake a place, ſo greatly commaunded and hauing no fortification of any accompt, would quayle at the firſt noyſe of the Canon: but by the reſiſtance which the forte of S. Katherin, that defendeth the hill, did make, they found that they ſhould haue ſomewhat to doe to driue all the Pigeons out of that Douecoate. Therein together with the Earle of Montgommerie were ſeauen or eight hundred Souldiers of the olde bandes, and two Enſignes of Engliſhmen vnder the gouernment of Maiſter Kiligree, who very well diſcharged their dueties, notwithſtanding the Artillerie that played in Courtine did greatly moleſt them: for vpon the day of the great aſſault, the defendants did thereby loſe aboue foure hundred Souldiers, which was a great number. There was alſo a fierce aſſault

giuen without any order, but at the third it was wonne. I haue heard that the Duke of Guize commaunded their leaders that albeit they forced the Rampier, they ſhould not neuertheleſſe runne ſcattered here and there whereſoeuer the ſpoyle of ſo rich a towne might drawe them, but to march in ſundrie troopes of two or three hundred men a peece ſtraight to the Market place: which if they found abandoned then the Souldier to ſeeke his aduenture: for he doubted that thoſe men who had fought ſo couragiouſly, would there yet worke their laſt ſpite, which neuertheleſſe they did not, albeit it was a wiſe foreſight. For it hath bene ſeene in other Townes, that when the aſſailants haue pierced euen to the Market place, they haue bene driuen backe beyond the Rampier with great ſlaughter of thoſe that were ſcattered abroad about pillage. It is alſo ſayd, that the ſpoyle laſted but three daies, which is ſuch an order as ought to bee taken with whatſoeuer townes a man liſt to preſerue: namely, one day to gather the bootie, an other to tranſport it, and the third to compound. Howbeit, in theſe affayres the ſuperiours doe lengthen or ſhorten the tearme as they pleaſe, or as they knowe that they may procure obedience: and this obedience doth much ſooner appeare in poore and ſmall houlds, then in great and rich townes.
                     This was one of the principall acts of our firſt tragedies, and ſo much the more notable in that there was a King ſlayne, foure thouſand men on both ſides either ſlayne or wounded, and the ſecond Citie in France for wealth, abandoned to the ſpoyle of the Souldier. This was heauy newes to the Prince of Condé, namely, in reſpect of his brother, as alſo he was greatly grieued at the hanging of three perſons famous in armes, Lawe and Deuinitie, viz. Decroze, Mandreuille and Marlorate: which reproach ſo prouoked the Proteſtants likewiſe, that they endeuoured to be reuenged vpon other priſoners whom they had taken, of whom one was a Counſailor in the Court of Parliament of Paris, and the other an Abbot. The King, ſayd the Catholickes, may hang his rebellious ſubiects: wherto the Proteſtants replied, that his name ſhrowded other mens mallice: wherefore according to the prouerbe, they would make ſuch bread ſuch brewiſſe. Albeit in the meane time we ought to be ſorie, yea euen aſhamed of ſuch rigorous reuenges: and much more ſhamefull is it for ye ſatiſfying of perticuler wrath. to make an entrie to new crueltie. But ours were no ciuill warres, if they ſhould not bring foorth ſuch fruites.
                     
                        
Shortly after the Prince of Condé heard of the ouerthrowe of Of the ouerthrowe of the Lorde of Duras troupes. a ſmall armie of Gaſcognes which the Lord of Duras was bringing vnto him, conteyning at the leaſt fiue thouſand perſons, defeated by the Lord of Mouluc, which encreaſed his care, notwithſtanding in all theſe aduerſities he quayled not either in courage or countenance. This miſhap, as I haue heard, light vpon the Lord of Duras, through two eſpeciall reaſons. The one, that to the end to bring with his troopes two Canons he marched heauely: the other, that vpon the commoditie of this ordinance he ſtayed by the way to beate certaine Caſtles repleniſhed with great booties. Thus had his enemies oportunitie to ouertake him, whoſe ſtrēgth conſiſting in horſe did by and by ouerthrowe him: for ſuch as are to bring any ſuccour muſt alwaies free themſelues from comberſome cariage, and crowne their expeditions with diligence.
                     During theſe affayres I remember I once heard the Lord Admirall, 
                        The execution of the Prince of Condes purpoſes ſtaied through the ſuccour that the Lorde of Andelot brought in. talking of theſe matters, ſay vnto the Prince of Condé, That one miſchiefe followeth an other: howbeit that he muſt yet expect the third aduenture, meaning his brothers paſſage, which would either lift them vp againe or quite caſt them downe. As in deede if it had miſcaried they looked to haue bene beſieged, which ſo happening, they were very ſecretly reſolued that one of them ſhould haue gone into Germany to haue endeuoured there to haue yet raiſed ſome power, being of opinion that the Prince of Condé, in reſpect of the greatneſſe of his familie, ſhould bee the beſt able to perſwade the Proteſtant Princes of Germany to aſſiſt him in a cauſe wherein themſelues did partly participate. Howbeit, all the difficultie conſiſted in the conueying of him thether ſafely: wherevpon ſome gentlemen there preſent did euidently declare that going from one of his partakers houſes to another, and alwaies marching by night, and reſting all day, he might eaſely paſſe with twentie horſe and no more. But he was not put to that plonge: for within tenne or twelue daies after they had newes that the Lord of Andelot hauing paſſed the chiefeſt difficulties of his iorney, was come within thirtie leagues of Orleance: which was alſo ſupplied with a ſecond comforte, viz. that the Earle of Rochefou
                           
                              •
                           ault accompanied with three hundred gentlemen, and the remainder of the Lord of Duras armie would very ſhortly ioyne with him. Wherevpon the Prince of Condé ſayd: Our enemies haue giuen vs two ſhrewde checkes in taking our rookes (meaning R
                              •
                           an and Bourges) but I hope that now we may catch their knights, if they take

the fielde. Neither is it to bee demaunded whether euery man reioyced or was glad at Orleance: for commonly the Souldier the more oportunitie that he hath to hurt and moleſt his enemie that iniureth him, the gladder he is, ſuch ſway doe wrath beare among thē. And how ſhould not their affections be ſometimes alittle ſpotted with blood, when many Clergie mens are ſo red with the dye of reuēge, in whoſe harts ſhould nothing but charitie be harbored.
                  
                  
                     Of the Prince of Condées purpoſes when he ſawe his forreine ſuccour approach, and how he came before Paris, from whence after he had there ſoiourned eleuen daies & done nothing, he departed toward Normandie.
                     
                        IN as much as good counſailes are the fountaines The Princes armie marched toward Paris. of good exploytes, and encreaſe of force the inſtruments to atteyne thereto, the Lords Prince of Condé and Admirall finding their ſuccour to be at hand, deuiſed with themſelues vpon the choyſe of ſome good purpoſe: Finally, with their moſt truſtieſt they reſolued to march toward Paris, not meaning to force it (for they doubted that the enemies would immediatly thruſt in their armie thereinto) but only to terrifie the Pariſians whome they accompted the bellowes of the warres and kitchen that fedde the ſame, as imagining that they ſeeing their countrie houſes forreyed and burnt and ſo many inſolent Souldiers lodged euen within their towne, would either vrge the King and Queene to hearken vnto peace, or els ſo quarel with thoſe that ſhould be ſo encloſed within their walles, that they ſhould euen force them into the field, where they might finde oportunitie to fight with them, and ſo recouer that aduantage that they loſt at the ſkirmiſh of Tally: and that in the meane time they would ſend into Normandie, to make readie the hundred and fiftie thouſand crownes which (as the voyce went) were borowed of certaine Engliſh Marchants, and vpon good pawnes: for therevpon did their only hope to wage the forreine armie wholly depend: as alſo becauſe neceſſitie conſtrayned them to cauſe it to liue out of their
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
Thus did ſpite & ſhame reſolue them to attempt a difficult matter, which before vpō ripe deliberation, whē it was more eaſie, they A Camiſado enterpriſed againſt the ſuburbes of Paris, alſo the retreat of the Princes army. accompted vnprofitable: and the like haue I ſeene happen many times, euen among many good men of warre. At night therefore order being giuen out, euery man armed himſelfe and marched by by waies toward the ſide of the Suburbes of S. Germain, where they vnderſtood that the trenches were ſmall and the gard weake, which was true. Now the Lord of Guize had ſome inckeling of this enterpriſe, that it ſhould be performed at midnight: whervpon he kept all his horſemen and footmen in armes al the night long in the trenches euery one in his quarter appoynted: But when the clocke had ſtroke foure in the morning and that they perceiued no noyſe from our campe, they all ſayd that it was but ſome falſe allarum, and that the Proteſtants harts would not ſerue to ſet vppon them, alſo that it was to no purpoſe (conſidering the extreame colde) to freeze them vp a whole nights ſpace vpon a ſimple ſuſpition, peraduenture without any ground. To be briefe, one after an other they all returned each one to his lodging, ſo as there remayned no more but ye ordinary guard. The Proteſtants in the meane time fetthing a great compaſſe for feare of deſcrying, loſt themſelues, ſo as they could not come néere the place that they ſhould aſſayle before broad day: wherevpon perceiuing themſelues diſcouered and the alarum great, they retired: but had they come three quarters of an houre ſooner, it was likely they might in that place haue forced the trenches. In this enterpriſe we may ſee how ſome mens impatiencie had like to haue put them to a great foyle, alſo how the ſmall foreſight of the others in the conduct of their men made them loſe the occaſion that they had vndertaken, and ſo remaine a ſcorne to their enemies. I haue heard that the Lordes of Guize and Conſtable did feare the forcing of thoſe Suburbes rather for the ſhame then for the hurt, as affirming that the ſame would haue bene the deſtruction of the Proteſtants if they had taken them. For whiles they had bene diſperſed about the ſpoyle, they made accompt to haue ſent foorth at ſundrie ga
                           •
                        es and other places foure or fiue thouſande Harquebuziers, and two thouſande Corcelets to fall vpon thē, who ſurprizing them would haue ſlaine a great parte and put the reſt to flight. We did ſo farre ouerſhoote our ſelues as three daies after to purpoſe the like againe, and I beleeue we ſhould haue bene well beaten. But at the chaunge of our watch one of our chiefe Captaines retired to ye 
                        Catholicks, which

ſtayed the execution thereof. The firſt day he was much made of: The ſecond they laughed him to ſcorne: and the third he repented that he had forſaken his friends. The Prince of Condé fearing leaſt he ſhould bewray the wants in his armie, departed the next morning, wherein he did wiſely, for the Lord of Guize (whoſe Spanyards and Gaſcognes were now come) was determined with his whole power the next morning by breake of day to haue ſet vpon him if he had ſtayed but one day longer: And conſidering of the maner of his purpoſed proceeding (as I haue bene enformed) I ſuppoſe he would haue brought vs into a bad caſe by reaſon that wee were lodged too ſcatteringly being ſo neere to them: which is one bad cuſtome engendred by theſe ciuill warres. The Prince thus departed, directed his courſe toward Normandie for the purpoſes afore mentioned, and within two daies after the Kings armie followed, ſtill coaſting of him vntill they came to the plaines of Dreux where both the armies met.
                  
                  
                     Of ſixe notable occurrences in the battaile of Dreux.
                     
                        AMong all the battailes fought during our ciuill A notable battayle. warres in France, was there none more notable then the battaile of Dreux, in reſpect as well of the experimented Captaines there preſent, as for the obſtinacie in fight. Howbeit to ſay the truth it was an accident worthie lamentation, through the powring foorth of the blood of aboue fiue hundred gentlemen of both ſides into the boſome of the ſea▪ together with the loſſe of ſundrie Princes, Lordes and ſufficient Captaines: but ſith things are ſo fallen out, wee are not forbidden to applie them to our inſtructions, albeit it were better neuer to returne to the like folly, that coſt ſo deere. Now, many things there happened, which euery man did not peraduenture note, and that is it that hath cauſed me to ſet them downe, to the ende that ſuch as ouer ſleightly doe paſſe ouer the notable feates of armes without conſideration of whatſoeuer may profite them, may be more diligent hereafter: for that is the way to learne to be a Captaine.
                     
                        
The firſt thing that happened, albeit it were not of any great 1 The countenaunce of both the armies. importance, may yet be noted as an extraordinary matter. That is, that although both armies were aboue two long houres within a Canon ſhot each of other, as well to put themſelues in aray, as to comtemplate their aduerſaries, yet was there not any ſkirmiſh ſmall or great before the generall battell, albeit in many other battels that haue bene fought the ſame haue bene the for
                           〈…〉
                        mers, as at Ceriſolles, Sienne & Graueling. Neuertheleſſe, ſhee may not ſay that the battels muſt of neceſſitie beginne by ſuch actions, but for the moſt parte men are led thereto by the qualitie of the place, either when they finde themſelues ſtrong in ſhot, either to trie their enemies, either vpon ſome other conſideration. There euery man ſtoode faſt, imagining in himſelfe that they that came againſt him were no Spaniards, Engliſhmen, or Italians, but Frenchmen, and thoſe of the braueſt: among whom were their companions, friends and kinſefolkes, as alſo that within one houre they were to ſ
                           •
                        ay each other. This bred ſome horror, neuertheleſſe without quayling in courage they thus ſtayed vntill that the armies mooued to ioyne.
                     The ſecond notable matter was the generoſitie of the Suitzers, 
                        2 The Generoſitie of the Suit
                           
                              •
                           ers. whom we may ſay to haue there made a worthie profe of their valour: for the great bodie of that battell wherein they were, being at the firſt onſet ouerthrowne, and their troope ſhrewdly endomaged by the Prince of Condées ſquadron, yet ſtood they faſt in the place where they had bene aranged, albeit they were alone and that their horſemen had forſaken them. Yea a pretie way from the auantgarde, three or foure hundred of the Proteſtants Harque
                           •
                        uziers ſeeing them ſo fit, ſet vpon them and flewe many, and yet could not make them giue place: A battell of Launceknights likewiſe did aſſault them, whom they ouerthrewe and followed beating vppon them aboue two hundred paces. They were afterward alſo beſet with two Cornets of Reiſtres, whom they withſtoode, and laſtly with one of Reiſtres & Frenchmen together, who made them to retire, albeit with ſmall diſorder, towarde their men that had bene behoulders of their valour. And notwithſtanding their Colonel and almoſt al their Captaines were left dead in the place, yet did they by ſuch reſiſtance purchace great glorie.
                     The third act was the Lord of Guizes long patience, whereby 3 The Lorde of Guizes patience. cauſe of his victorie. he attained to the victorie: for after the bodie of the battell which the Lord Conſtable led was wholy ouerthrowne except the Suitzers,
                        
and himſelfe taken, the ſayd Lord ſtood faſt, waiting whether they would rome to ſet vpon him: for as yet the Prince of Condées footmen had not fought, whereto alſo parte of his horſemen ſtill gathered into aray beſides thoſe that yet houered: but this auantgard thus ſetting a good face on the matter, the Proteſtants durſt not bite: In the meane time ſome of them ſtayed to charge the Suitzers, as is aforeſayd: others to purſue thoſe that fled, and many to ſpoyle the cariages, wherein they ſpent an houre and a halfe. Sundrie euen of the Lord of Guizes parte ſeeing him ſtand ſtill ſo long while they that were ouerthrowne were purſued, wiſt not what to thinke of him, as if he had bene beſide himſelfe: and I beléeue ſome accuſed him of cowardlineſſe, as the Romaines did Fabius Maximus almoſt in the like caſe: euen ſome of his aduerſaries began alreadie to crye that the victorie was theirs: but I remember that I heard the late Lord Admirall aunſwer: We are deceiued, for by and by wee ſhall ſee this great clowde diſſolue vpon vs: And it ſo happened ſoone after, wherevpon enſued the chaunge of fortune. Hereby did the Lord of Guize well ſhewe that he did but watch for oportunitie: and could patiently behould the diſordering of the Prince of Condées great troopes (which at the beginning being ioyned againe might haue troubled him ſhrewdly) about theſe ſmall actions afore rehearſed: But after he did ſee them ſo ſcattered, he marched with ſuch a bould countenance that he found but ſmall reſiſtance. Wee are not therefore ſuddenly to iudge of the entents of theſe great Captaines: for the effects doe afterward diſcouer their conſiderations to bee otherwiſe then many would imagine.
                     The fourth thing worthie memorie was the long continuance of 4 The long continuance of the battell. the battaile: for ordinarily in battailes in one houre we ſee al wonne and loſt, yea that of Montcontour laſted not ſo long: but this beginning about one of the clocke after noone laſted vntill fiue: yet muſt wee not imagine that they fought all this while, for they had many pawſes, and ſometimes gaue ſmall onſets, and ſometime great, which caried away the beſt men, and this continued vntill darke night. Truely the courage on both ſides was wonderfull, as the great number of the dead did ſufficiently teſtifie, which as many men ſay, amounted to aboue ſeauen thouſand men, of whome the moſt were ſlayne rather in fight then in flight. But the chiefe cauſe of the prolonging of it was as I thinke becauſe the Kings armie was ſtrong in footmen, and the Prince of Condées in horſemen.

For the one could not breake the great battailes, neither the other driue away the horſes. If wee doe well conſider all battailes that haue bene fought ſince the Suizers battell, which fought againe the next day, wée ſhall finde none comparable to this, yea the battell of S. Laurence was ended in halfe an houre.
                     The fifth accident was the taking of the two Generalles of the 5 The taking of the two generalles of the armies. armies, a rare matter, becauſe that they ordinarily doe neuer fight but in the ende and vpon extremitie: and many times a battell is almoſt wonne before they came to this poynt. But theſe ſtayed not ſo long, for in the beginning each of them endeuoured to ſet his men an example not to dallie. The Lord Conſtable was firſt taken and ſore wounded, hauing likewiſe bene wounded in ſeauen battailes that he had bene in, which is teſtimonie ſufficient of his courage: and the Lord Prince was likewiſe taken toward the ende and wounded alſo. Herevpon may growe a queſtion, whether a Generall ought to aduenture ſo farre? Whereto it may bee aunſwered, that this is not to be termed aduenturing, when the maine battaile marcheth to the charge, and ſo he departe not out of his place: Beſides that theſe hauing good ſeconds, did the leſſe feare the daunger of their perſons: for the one had the Lord of Guize, and the other the Admirall, who both alſo were farre enough in the conflict.
                     The ſix
                           •
                         was the maner how both the armies parted, which many 6 The retraite of both the armies. times happeneth otherwiſe then there it did. Wee lightly ſee that the end of a battaile is the flight of the partie ouercome, which is withall purſued two or three leagues, and ſometimes farther. But here we may ſay was no purſuite, but the Proteſtants retired an eaſie pace and in order, hauing yet two battailes of Reiſtres and one of French horſemen, in all amounting vnto about 1200. horſe. But the Lord of Guize, who was weake in horſe, not willing to abandon his footmen, was content to haue followed fiue or ſixe hundred paces after them. Thus as well the one as the other being wearie, the night comming on parted them. He tooke his lodging in the fielde where the battaile was fought, and the Admirall went to a Uillage a long league of, whether his footmen with all his cariages were retired. Some hould opinion that the battaile was not loſt becauſe the loſers were not quite diſordered, but therin they are deceiued. For he that getteth the field, winneth the Artillerie and taketh the footmens Enſignes, hath tokens enowe of the victorie: albeit it may bee ſayd that it was not at the full, as if

plaine flight had enſued. If anie man ſhould replie that often times they had ſeene the two armies retire each from other in good order, as at Roche-abeille, alſo the fridaie before the battail of Moncontour: It is true, but then had they not had any maine fight as heere, but onely great ſkirmiſhes, wherein eyther parte kept their aduantage of the ground. There are yet liuing many Gentlemen & Captaines able to remember what was there done, & ſtil to deliuer ſome obſeruations thereupon.
                     Finallie, I thought good to ſet downe yet one thing aboue my How the Lord of Guyze intreated the Lord Prince of Conde. number, as alſo it happened after the battaile, which was the curteſie and honeſtie that the Lord of Guize beeing the conquerour vſed toward the Lord Prince of Condie his priſoner, which moſt men of each parte did not thinke that hee would haue done: for it is well enough knowen how odious in ciuill watres the chiefe of either faction is, as alſo what things are imputed vnto them, ſo as if they fall into their enimies hands, after many reproches which they are forced to beare, their liues alſo are in daunger. Howbeit here it fell out contrarie: for being brought before him, hee ſpake reuerentlie vnto him, and with verie modeſt ſpeeches, wherein hee coulde not gather that hee meant to gird or checks him. Alſo ſo long as he ſoiourned in the campe, he oftentimes did eate with him: likewiſe becauſe vppon this daie of battayle they coulde haue but few beds brought, the rather for that the carriages were halfe rifled and ſcattered, be offered him his bed, which the ſayd Lord Prince would not accept, but for the one halfe. Thus did theſe two mightie Princes beeing as it were capital enimies, both in one bed, the one triumphing, the other a priſoner, take theyr reſts together. It may be ſayd that the Lorde Marſhall of Anuill
                              •
                           
                         hauing him in cuſtodie (for to him he yeelded himſelfe) would not ſuffer him to haue any iniurie offered, becauſe his father was alſo a priſoner: I confeſſe he would haue done what in him had lien, but ſurely if the Lorde of Guize woulde haue hurt him, his credite and reputation was then ſuch as no man coulde haue letted him. Such braue actions are not, in my minde, to bee buried in obliuion, becauſe that all that profeſſe armes ought to ſtudy to imitate them, and to abondon all crueltie and vnworthy deme a
                           ••
                        res whereinto in theſe ciuil warres ſo many doe fall for that they either cannot or will not bridle their malice. To the enimy that reſiſteth we are to ſhewe our ſelues haughty: but being ouercome honeſty willeth that we ſhew him curteſy. Some man might yet croſſe me and ſay that hee might well ynough ſhewe him this

curteſy, conſidering what hee had before procured at Orleance againſt the ſaide Prince: To whome I will aunſwere that heare I meane to commend the beautifull actions of vertue when by chance I mèete with anie; but not to ſpeake of other's which are not to my purpoſes: ſo that when I ſee them ſhine in what man ſo lower, I will honour them.
                  
                  
                     Of the 
                           〈…〉
                         Lord of Guizes laide to O
                           •
                        leance: alſo of the 
                           〈…〉
                         Admiralls iourney 
                           〈◊〉
                         Normandie.
                     
                        GRem hope had the Duke of Guize now The foundation of the Duke of Guizes hope. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         what a go
                           •
                        dly victorie hee had obtained, albeit 
                           〈◊〉
                         coſt him deere: as hauing taken the Generall of his aduerſe partie, and did remaine without companion, hauing the whole gouernment in himſelfe. Neither was he ſlack in publiſhing it abroade, as alſo he tooke good order to refreſh his armie, whereto he saide himſelfe conſtrayned. In the meane time all his imaginations tende
                           •
                         to the preparing of all ſortes of engins and prouiſion to aſſayle the towne of Orleance, giuing out that the denne whereinto Foxes retyred being once taken; they might afterward hunt them all ouer France. Neither had the Lord Admirall leſſe neede to reſt his people, who grieuing that they were beaten did many times finde cauſe of mutenie. Wherefore he paſſed ouer the riuer of Loire, as well to refreſh them as to furniſh them a new at the charges of diuerſe the enemies ſmall townes, but meanely defended, and a good quarter paie, where the ſouldiour had the 
                           •
                        rdle ſomewhat at will, to the end in parte to recouer his loſſes. This en
                           •••
                        aſe of libertie encouraged

them a freſh & put them in better hope. Heereto hee condeſcended, partly by counſayle, and partly vpon neceſſ
                           •
                        ite, ſo to auoide mutu
                        
                           •
                        ie, euen of the Reiſters, whome the Catholikes did with greate promiſes vnder hand labour to retire: as alſo he feared the retrai
                           •
                        t of ſome of his French ſouldiours, who in aduerſities were readie inough to turne their coates.
                     After this he came and pitched at Iargeau, a towne ſtanding vppon The Lorde Admirals reſolution, the Siege of Orleance and the notableſt perticularities of the ſame. the riuer of Loire, hauing a bridge, to the ende ſo to haue a free paſſage ouer, and thence reſolued to march into Normandie, there to receiue the money that was alreadie come out of England: for his Reiſters threathed to take him priſoner. His cariages were left at Orleance, to the end to make the more ſpeed, where his brother the Lord Andelot was left to gouerne. The Duke of Guize perceiuing this departure, came & pitched his camp before the towne & his firſt attempt was to winne the ſuburbs at the foot of the bridge, commonly called Portereau, ſo to ſtop all ſaylies on that ſide. The Lord of Feuquiers had intrenched it, as meaning there to haue ſafely lodged the Germaines and French footmen that eſcaped from the battell of Dreux, vntill they had bene forced awaie, & it might haue bene kept foure or fiue dayes agaynſt all handie blowes, ſo as there had come no ordinance. In the meane time while it was aſſaulted there felt ſuch a hap that the towne had lyke to haue bene taken (ſo wonderfull are the euents of warre) but eſpeciallie through the default of the Lancek nights. The Duke of Guize minded not that daie to force it, but rather to marke the countenaunce of thoſe that were within: Howbeit as a warie Captaine he came furniſhed both with needle and threed as we ſaie, not onely to be prouided for euerie occaſion, but alſo to frame occaſions wherby to preuaile. Wherfore hee committed to the Lord of Cipiere an excellent Captaine one thouſand and two hundred French harquebuziers, two light Culuerines, and ſix Cornets of horſe, and marched after him ſelfe with another ſmall troope. At their comming (which was vppon the Gaſcognes quarter) they found them abroade at the ſkirmiſh, and their trenches and barriers wel furniſhed: but while they held them plaie there, certaine ſtraglers abrode certefied them that the Lanceknights quarter ſet no great countenaunce on the matter, wherevpon they ſent foure or fiue hundred harquebuziers together with ſ
                           •
                        me horſe to
                           〈…〉
                        e that corner.
                     As the ſame inſtant the Lord of Cipiere diſcharged his artillerie into the barriers of the French: The Launceknightes
                        
at the mouing and ſounde thereof were aſtonied and giuing ouer their guard fled, at which time the Catholique ſouldiers entred the ſuburbs, & ſo came behind the French men who defended thēſelues brauely: by this meanes went all to wracke, neither is it poſſible to imagine greater diſorder then was there: for ye bridge being peſtred with the ſtuffe that they were conueying into the towne, they that fled could not get by; Neither could they ſhut the turne pike gates, or lift vp the draw bridge, whervpon the moſt part fell to ſwimming ouer the riuer. Thus through yron, fire, and water aboue eight hundred men were loſt: But the feare that was brought into the towne was greater than the hurt, and it was openly ſayde that the Iles which they had fortefied were wonne, yea, that they fought at the chiefe gate, which daunted euen the boldeſt. The Lorde of Andelot (who was a knight without feare) ſeeing ſuch a confuſion and feare ſayd: All that be Gentlemen followe mee: for wee muſt either driue backe the enimie or die for it. They can but one waie come to vs, and there but ten men in front: with one hundred of ours wee may beate a thouſand of theirs. Be of good cheere and let vs goe. As hee went he behelde the feare, ſlight and diſorder, hee heard a thouſande lamentable cries, & had as many aduices giuen him: In the meane time without anie feare he paſſed the bridges and came to the turn
                           •
                         pike verie glad that the enemie was no farther forwarde: but lykewiſe it was time for him to come, for they were at the drawe bridge readie to enter amaine, which neuertheleſſe was drawen, and the gate ſhut with ſhall loſſe. Now it is to bee noted that it was a long halfe houre from the enterpriſe againſt the ſuburbes and the comming of the Lord of Andelot thether, all which time the gate ſtoode open and no man to keep it, which not withſtanding the Catholikes entered not, whether it were that they ſtaied to ſpoyle and kill, eyther elſe that they wanted ſome valyant Captaine to guide & leade them. But vndoubtedly if in the beginning they had made a general head agaynſt the town, they had wonne it, ſo great was the feare and ſo ſmall the remedies: At the leaſt they had beene ſure of the Iles, which had bene as much as to haue had the towne within fifteene dayes after. I haue ſince demanded of ſome good Captaines of the Catholikes how it chanced that they perceiued our aſtoniſhment no ſooner: But they told me that themſelues were alſo amazed to ſee that they had ſo ſodainly conquered ſo much people. But that they thought that a certaine bruite rayſed among them that we had purpoſely forſaken the turne pike, which was filled with

pouder wherewith when a great number of them had beene paſſed, to haue made them to leape, did ſtate them. Thus did the Catholikes looſe a braue occaſion, and the Proteſtants eſcape as great a daunger. Theſe extraordinarie euents ought to quicken vp the foreſight of the defendants, & to prouoke the aſſaylaunts to diligence, to the end the firſt put not off that which ought to be done this day vntill to morrow, and the other remember to accompanie their troops that giue the onſet with ſuch Captaines as can readilie perceiue, and ſpeedely take aduauntage when it is offered. Of ſo good ſucceſſe did not onelie the Duke of Guize, but alſo his whole armie, which exceeded twentie thouſand, conceiue great hope. Whereas contrariwiſe many of them that were within were ſhaken with as ſh
                           ••
                        ude an a
                           ••
                        aint, and would gladlie haue beene content that the Lord Admirall could haue flowen backe vnto them: but by litle and litle the Lorde of Andelot cured the feebleneſſe of ſuch apprehenſions with haughty and perſuaſiue ſpeeches.
                     Long time was afterward ſpent in aſſaulting the turne pikes, The woūding and death of the Duke of Guize whereof enſued the pacification of the firſt trobles alſo what the Lord Admirall did in Normandie. (which ſince were ſurpriſed through the negligence of ſome of thoſe that were within, and in playing vppon the defences of the Iles. The Duke of Guize determined with twentie Canons to pla
                           •
                        e two daies vpon them and to giue a fierce aſſaulte, and in reſpect of their weakneſſe in my opinion, he would haue wonne them. But in the meane time there fell out a chaunce vnlooked for, no leſſe ſtraunge and rare than the former, which troubled the whole feaſt: which was the wounding of the ſaide Duke by a Gentleman named Poltrot, and his death within a few dayes after. This quailed their o
                           •
                        rages and hope of all the ſouldiours in his armie, to ſee themſelues depriued of ſo notable a Generall. Inſomuch that the Queene beeing wearie of ſo many miſeries and notable ſlaughters, vndertooke the treatie of peace: and thence foorth was there nothing but patleyes on eyther ſide, vntill it was concluded wherein the Lorde Prince of Condie and the Lorde Conſtable were the chiefe inſtrumentes and dealers. Nowe let vs ſpeake of the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Admiralls expedition, who fearing the forcing of Orleance 
                        
                           •
                        e ſolued wholie vppon diligence, as alſo in ſixe dayes hee marched 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ie leagues with his power of horſemen, who conſiſted of two thouſand Reiſters, fiue hundred French horſe, and one thouſande 
                           ••
                        arq
                           •
                        ebuziers on horſebacke, as alſo they had onelie one thouſande and two hundred horſes, but no cart for their carria
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
In this ſort we vſed ſuch diligenee that ſometimes we preuented the fame of our comming in diuerſe places where wee ariued. The ſayde Lorde Admirall beeing come to Cane, aſſaulted it with the helpe of certaine Engliſh men, whome the Earle of Warwicke & Beauois la Nocle, who were in Newhauen, had ſent him. The Caſtle being furiouſly beaten did yeelde vppon compoſition. Therein was the Marquez of Elboeuf, to whome wee vſed all curteſie. Our Reiſters alſo receiued their paie, which they liked better than the Normandie Cidre: and as wee prepared to returne to ſuc
                           •
                        our Orleance, the Prince of Condie writ to the Admirall that the peace was concluded, which news conuerted his deſire to fight into another deſire, namely to viſite his houſe. This was the end of the firſt ciuill warre, which had continued a whole yeere: A tearme that ſeemed rather long than ſhort to the natural impatiencie of our nation, which in ſome places ouerflowed in cruelties more mee
                           •
                        e for barbarous people than Frenchmen: whereof the Proteſtants did indure the moſt part. And this peace did many good men like of a great deale the better, becauſe it ended all theſe inhumanities.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond troubles.
                  
                     Of the cauſes of the taking of armes in the ſecond troubles. Alſo how the purpoſes where vpon the Proteſtants had built themſelues proued vaine.
                     
                        MAny are the writings that haue beene publiſhed in iuſtification of the leauie of The cauſes of the taking of armes in the ſecond troble. armes in the yeere 1507. as alſo others contrariwiſe to condemne them, whereof ſuch hiſtories as intreate of things paſſed haue at large diſcourſed, to the which all ſuch as gladly woulde exactly ſearch the particularities of all theſe publike actions are to ha
                           •
                        e recourſe. For my part I am content briefly vpon this point to touch

ſome ſuch as are as true as the ſame that haue ben publiſhed, which I haue learned of thoſe that on the one ſide had in part the conduct of the affaires. The edict of pacification concluded before Orleance had greatly ſatiſfied almoſt all France, as well in appearance as in effect, becauſe thereby all miſeries ceaſing, euerie man inioyed reſt with ſafetie of bodie & libertie of minde. Howbeit the hatred & enuy of ſome, as alſo the miſtruſt of others was not quite extinguiſhed, but lay hidden and vnperceiued. But as time doth commonly bring all things to perfection, ſo theſe ſeeds together with many worſe, brought forth ſuch fruit as returned vs into our former diſcords: the chiefe of the religion who looked to the ſafetie as well of thēſelues as of other made a general collection of all that was wrought & ſtil practiſed againſt them, affirming that vndoubtedly their enemies endeuoured by little and little to vndermine them, & then euen at once to giue them their deaths wound. Of the cauſes that they alleaged ſome were manifeſt, and ſome ſecret. Concerning the firſt, they conſiſted in the razing of ſundrie townes, and the building of Citadels in the places were they had their publike exerciſe: alſo in murthers in ſundrie places cōmitted, & the ſlaughter of diuerſe notable Gentlemen, whereof they could haue no iuſtice. In the ordinarie threats that ſhortly they ſhould not lift their heads ſo high: & eſpecially in ye comming of Suitzers, albeit the Duke of Alua was already paſſed into Flanders, vnder a cloked feare of whoſe paſſage they were leauied. And for the ſecret they propounded certaine intercepted letters comming from Rome & Spaine, wherin the purpoſes that ſhould be put in execution were more plainly diſcouered: The reſolution concluded with the Duke of Alua at Bayon to root out all the Huguenots in France, and the Rogues in Flaunders, whereof they were aduertiſed by ſuch as were not doubted of. All theſe things with many more that I omit did greatly waken thoſe that were loth to be taken ſleeping: and I remember that the chiefe of the religiō met thriſe at Vallery & Chaſtillon, whether came 10 or 12. of the notableſt Gentlemen to determine vpon theſe preſent wars, alſo to ſeeke ſome lawfull & honeſt meanes of ſafetie among ſo many terrors without proceeding to the vttermoſt extremities. Howbeit rather by the counſaile of the L. Admirall than of anie other, euery one was deſired a while to haue patience, for that in ſo waightie affaires as theſe, which brought with them many miſchiefes, men ought rather to be drawen by neceſſitie, than to runne headlong vpon will: withal that in ſhort time they ſhould ſee more.

But at thirde meeting which was within a moneth, their braines were better heat as well vpon the conſiderations aforeſayde, as thorough new aduices giuen them, namelie one which the Prince and Lord Admirall did affirme to proceede from a Courtier greatly affected to the Proteſtants, who aſſured them that there had bene a ſecret counſayle holden, wherin it was determined to ſeaze vpon them two, the one to be put to death, the other to be kept priſoner: at the ſame time to place 2000. Suitzers at Paris, two thouſand at Orleance, & the reſt to bee ſent to Poictiers: Then to diſanull the Edict of pacification, and to make an other vtterlie contrarie thereto: and not to doubte thereof. This was eaſie to be beleeued, and the rather for that alreadie they ſee the Zuitzers, who they had beene ſo of
                           •
                        en promiſed ſhould bee ſent backe, march toward Paris. Wherevpon ſome more ſenſitiue and impatient than the reſt grewe into theſe ſpeeches▪ 
                        What? ſhall wee tarrie vntill they come and binde vs hande and foote and ſo drawe vs vnto their ſcaffoldes at Paris, there by our ſhamefull deaths to glutte others crueltie? What aduice ſhall wee yet expecte? Doe wee not alreadie ſee the foraine enemie march armed toward vs, and threaten to bee reuenged on vs, as well for ſo many iniuries done to them at Dreux, as alſo for thoſe harms which in our defences we haue done to the Catholikes? Haue wee forgotten that aboue three thouſand of our religion haue ſince the peace endured violent deaths, for whome (whatſoeuer our complayntes) wee can haue no redreſſe but friuolous aunſweres and fraudulent delayes? Yet if it were our Kings will wee ſhoulde bee thus iniuried and contemned, wee might peraduenture the better beare it: But ſith wee know that all this is wrought by thoſe who ſhrouding themſelues vnder his name doe purpoſe to debarre vs all acceſſe vnto his perſon, and to alienate his good will from vs, to the ende that beeing deſtitute of all ayde and ſupporte we may remayne theyr bonde men, and bee a praie vnto them: ſhall wee beare ſuch inſolencies? Our Fathers did patientlie for the ſpace of fortie yeeres and more ſuffer, vppon whome they made proofe of all ſortes of puniſhmentes for the name of Ieſus, which cauſe our ſelues doe alſo defende. And now that non onelie families and boroughes, but alſo whole townes haue vnder the authoritie and benefite of two royall edictes manefeſtly declared theyr fayth, wee ſhall make our ſelues vnworthie theſe two goodlie titles Chriſtian and Gentleman, which wee eſteeme to bee moſt honourable ornamentes, if thorough our neglygence and cowardlyneſſe in looſing our ſelues▪ wee ſuffer ſuch a multitude of people to periſh. Wherefore we beſeech you that

haue taken vpon you the common defence to enter ſome ſpeedie reſolution, for the matter will heare no longer delayes. Other aſſiſtaunts at this counſayle were moued, not ſo much at the vehemencie, as truth of this ſpeech.
                     But as there are alwayes ſome full of conſideration, the ſame did replie that they perceiued the eminent daunger, howbeit that the ſafegard was from them hidden. For if we will (ſayd they) flie to complaintes & ſupplications, it is moſt euident that the ſame do rather prouoke thoſe to whome they be exhibited, than procure anie remedie. If likewiſe we take armes with how many reproches, ſlanders, & curſes ſhall we bee ouerwhelmed by thoſe who imputing vnto vs the blame of the miſeries enſuing, when they cannot diſcharge their rage vppon vs, will eaſe their choller vppon our poore families diſpearſed in diuerſe places? howbeit in as much as among many miſchiefes we muſt alwayes chooſe the leaſt, it ſeemeth there is leſſe inconuenience in ſuffering the firſt violences of our enemies, than in beginning with thē & ſo become guiltie of a publike & general cōmotion. Then ſpake the Lord of Andelot and ſayd: Your opinion my maiſters that ſpake laſt is grounded vpon ſome diſcretion and apparant equitie: But the principall phiſicall drugges, meete to purge this exceeding humour which now aboundeth in the vniuerſall bodie of Fraunce, namely Fortitude and Magnanimitie doe therein want. I woulde therefore weete of you, if you carrie vntill wee bee baniſhed into forraine Countries, lie bound in priſons, lurke in forreſts, ouerrunne by the people, contemned by the ſouldiours, and condemned by the authoritie of the mightieſt, (all which we are not farre fro) what will all our paſſed patience and humilitie ſtand vs in ſtead? What profite can wee reape in our innocencie? To whome ſhal we complayne? Or who wil vouchſafe to heare vs? It is time to ſee that wee be no longer deceiued, and to haue recourſe to our defence which is as iuſt as neceſſarie, neither to care though they tearme vs the authours of the warre: for themſelues are they that in ſo many ſortes haue infringed the publike agreementes and couenants, and that haue brought euen into our bowels ſixe thouſande forraine ſouldiers, who in effect haue already proclaimed it againſt vs, ſo as if we giue them ſuch aduantage as to ſtrike vs firſt, our miſchiefe will be paſt remedy.
                     
                     Small ſpeech was there afterwarde, other than an approbation The reſolution to take armes, alſo the difficulties in the beginning. to take force in hande, ſo to preuent the imminent deſtructition. Howbeit if there were any difficulties in the roſolution heereof, ſo was there no leſſe in learning howe to proceede in this newe

approch. Some wiſhed the Captaines to ſeaze vpon Orleance, & confederate towne, and then to certefie their maieſties that perceiuing the approch of ye 
                        Suitzers, they were thether withdrewen with theyr friends for their ſafeties: alſo that by returuing them home, they would likewiſe depart euerie man to his owne houſe. Hereto it was aunſwered, that theſe men had forgotten how that at Orleance there was a great gate fortefied and kept by a ſufficient number of Catholikes, whereby they might alwayes let in men of warre into the towne: alſo that nowe it was time to defend themſelues with yron and ſteele, and not with wordes or writing. Others thought it good abroade in the Prouinces to ſeaze vppon as many townes as they might, and then to ſtand vpon the defenſiue, whoſe aduice was not admitted neyther, becauſe that: (as it was ſayde) in the firſt troubles of a hundred that the Proteſtants helde, within eight moneths they had not twelue lefte, for want of power to ſuccour them. Finally, they concluded to take armes, & in the beginning of this warre to obſerue foure things. Firſt to ſeaze vpon fewe townes, but the ſame to bee of importaunce: Secondlie, to frame a Iuſtie armie: Thirdlie, to cut in peeces the Suitzers, vnder whoſe fauour the Catholikes would alwayes bee the maiſters of the field: Laſtlie, to indeauour to baniſh the Cardinall of Loraine from the Court, as him whome many did imagine to bee a continua ſalliciour of the King to root out the Proteſtants. Great difficulties were there propounded concerning the two laſt pointes. For, ſayde ſome, the Cardinall and the Suitzers did continuallie march with the Kings perſon, ſo as aſſayling the one, and endeauouring to terrefie the other, euerie man woulde affirme their enterpriſe to be directlie agaynſt the royall maieſtie and no other: but they were decided by this aunſwere: That the euent ſhoulde diſcouer their intentes, euen as they gaue teſtimonie of King Charles the ſeauenth, who beeing but Dolphine tooke armes, but neyther againſt his Father nor the Realme. Moreouer, that it was well knowen that the French in bodie had neuer attempted againſt their Princes perſon: Finallie, that if this theyr firſt ſucceſſe fell out fauourable, it might cutte off the courſe of a long and ruinous warre, in that they ſhoulde haue opportunitie to open vnto the King the truth of matters, which yet was concealed from him, whereof might enſue a newe confirmation of the ediots, namelie, when they that purpoſed to preuent ſhoulde finde themſelues preuented.
                     
                        
This was the reſolution taken among thoſe men that were then preſent, who albeit they were indued with great knowledge, experience, valour, and diſcretion, yet al that they had ſo diligentlie forecaſt and examined, when it came to effecte, was wonderfull wide from their expectation, & other things almoſt vnthought of, as accoūted eyther to ſure or difficult, redoūded to their greateſt benefit. Whereof it followeth that wee may heereby perceiue that good ſucceſſe doth not alwayes followe good deliberatious. Howbeit all this haue I not heere ſpoken to the ende to controll thoſe that I haue named, of whoſe vertue I haue euermore greatly admired, neither to cauſe men in their affaires to neglect diſcretion or diligence, but onelie to aduertiſe them that the accompliſhment of anie our workes conſiſteth not in the purpoſes of man, but in Gods diſpoſition.
                     Now let vs marke the ſucceſſe of theſe enterpriſes. For the firſt Of the ſucceſſe of the Princes attempts. points which concerned the townes it was determined to ſurpriſe onelie three, viz. Lions, Tholouſe, and Troy, and that for the commoditie in diuerſe reſpects enſuing of the ſame. But the purpoſes of thoſe that vndertooke the charge of ſeazing vpon them fell out to be in vaine. Concerning ſtrength of the field, the Proteſtants were in the beginning ſtronger than the Catholikes, but within a moneth and a halfe after the taking of armes the Catholikes were the mightier, whereby they forced them to haue recourſe to ſtraungers whom they had called to their ſuccour. The execution of the Suitzers had as bad ſucceſſe, as well for that this purpoſe was diſcouered, as through want of power. Now reſted no more but the fourth point, which beeing of ſmalleſt importaunce was brought to paſſe, and that was the parting of the Cardinall of Loraine from the Court, who notwithſtanding was of as greate authoritie there as before time. But thereof grew another inconuenience to the Proteſtantes. Which was, that they ſtirred vp the Kings hatred and indignation agaynſt them, in that by theyr occaſion hee was forced with feare and ſpeed to retyre to Paris, ſo as euer after he bare them a grudge. This had beene but an vnhappie beginning of the warre vnto them if other effectes had not recompenſed the firſt defaultes: which neuertheleſſe happened rather by the motions of diuerſe particular Gentlemen, together with the diſpoſition of ſundrie the inhabitants of townes, than through anie the great deliberations afore mēcioned, wherof enſued the ſeazure of ſundry both good & had, of which the neereſt were Orleāce, Auxerre & Soiſſōs.
                        
True it is that ſecretly they were warned to ſhirre vpon one prefixed daie, albeit there was no great account made of other than the afore rehearſed.
                  
                  
                     That the Prince of Condies attempt of three things for a proud face vpon the beginning of his enterpriſe, wherat the Catholikes at the firſt were aſtonied.
                     
                        MAns courage vrged by neceſſitie doth increaſe, 
                        The firſt. A generall taking of armes vpon one ſelfe day. as alſo his former apprehenſions beeing ſome what quailed, he ſtandeth in the leſſe feare to hazarde himſelfe vnto whatſoeuer difficult and dangerous attempts, as it then happened to the Proteſtants. For they ſeeing the naked ſwoord threatning of them, reſolued to ſaue themſelues rather with the arme than the legge and therefore winking at ſundrie reſpects thought it beſt valiantlie to beginne. Their firſt and principall act was a generall taking of armes vppon one ſelfe daie, which bred great aſtoniſhment euen to ſome of their owne parte, who were ignoraunt of the matter, & much terrour to the Catholiks, who peraduenture 
                           〈◊〉
                         if they had begun firſt, haue dealt more rigorouſly thā ye 
                        Proteſtants did: neuertheleſſe in the meane time it grieued them to ſee ſo many townes taken, which they diſſembled: albeit ſome of them ſayde, The brethren haue now taken vs tardie, but the daie will come that wee ſhall haue our reuenge, wherein they ſhewed themſelues as good as their wordes: For before the yeere was ouer, they gaue them to weete that they had, ſayde but the truth. Some helde opinion that ſo many aduertiſementes as were to bee giuen to the Prouinces, woulde breede the diſcouerie of the enterpriſe, ho wheit that happened in fewe places, neuertheleſſe in thoſe of moſt importaunce: much more vnpoſſible is it in theſe dayes ſo to proceede in reſpecte of mannes indiſcretion, the which is ſuch as it can conceale nothing. Wee may note in auncient time examples in manner much lyke vnto this (excepte that the one did 
                           •
                        ende

to offend, the other to defend, as when Mithridates within his dominions vpon a lyke daie procured the ſlaughter of fortie thouſand Romaines. Likewiſe when three ſcore townes of Greece were by a certayne daie appointed by the Romaine Conſul ſeazed & ſacked by his legions without anie fore knowledge or perceuerance of one or other vntill the verie time of the execution thereof. But ſuch actions happen but ſeldome, by reaſon that they which haue once beene caught and ſcaped agayne, doe grow ſo vigilant and ſuſpitious that euen the wagging of euery leafe doth waken them, and each ſhadow make them to ſtart.
                     The ſecond notable action conſiſted in that with leſſe than fiue The ſecond. hundred horſe, they durſt aduenture vpon ſix thouſand Suitzers, and make them to retyre. True it is that according to their platforme Their courage in ſetting vpon 6000. Suitzers. they ſhould haue bene more, viz. a certayn number of harquebuziers on horſebacke, who fayled them, not in comming into the fielde, but of comming in time to the place appoynted, ſo as in reſpect of theyr ſmall power the Captaines of the Proteſtants ſtayed and duiſt not aduenture vpon a generall charge againſt this greate troope which ſeemed a forreſt. Moreouer, theyr great race that they had runne, had almoſt tyred all their horſes, and yet haue I heard them affirme that had their troope of Picardie which conſiſted of an hundred and fiftie horſe come in time they would haue hazarded the field, in making their harquebuziers to alight, and charging with their ſquadrons on three ſides. Howbeit although they had ſo done, yet had the euent bene doubtfull. All paſſed in ſkirmiſhes, wherin ſome of each part were ſlaine and wounded. I haue heard that this great battayle ſet a countenance worthie Suitzers: for without any feare they ſtood faſt a while, and then retyred cloſe ſtill turning their head as dooth the wilde Bore whome the hunters doe purſue, vntill that ſeeing no lykelyhoode to force them, they gaue them ouer.
                     The third deed was the occupying of the towne of Saint Denis, and two other ſmall villages at hande which the Prince of Condie 
                        The third. The taking of Saint Dennis. cauſed to be entrenched, where he planted himſelfe with al his power to laie ſiege to that ſide of Paris. All theſe effects comming into conſideration euen of the beſt Captaines of the Catholikes, they grew aſtonied, as imagining that the Prince did ſpedely expect ſome great force, and had verie good intelligences as well in Paris as in the Court. Otherwiſe
                         (ſayd they) being ſo weake, he neuer durſt come ſo boldly to lodge ſo neere vs, neither would the Admirall (being a moſt warie and good warriour) without ſome hidden groundes haue counſayled

it. This made them to forbeare vntill they had aſſembled their power. Diuerſe there were that thought it hard (conſidering that theyr ſtrength was good as conſiſting of almoſt ten thouſand men) to ſuffer this ſmall handfull of people by theyr dailie and continuall ſkirmiſhes to face them euen to their gates, thinking it a great ſhame that an Ant ſhoulde beſ
                           •
                        ege an Elephant. But in my opinion the others conſiderations were the wiſer, who affirmed it to be a manifeſt token of follie, by a battayle which is vncertayne agayuſt fooles (for ſo they tearmed vs) who nowe haue no counſayle but deſpayre, or treaſure, but their horſe and armour, to hazarde the whole bodie of the ſtate, which is as it were encloſed within the walles of Paris: alſo that hauing in their handes ſo ſacred a matter as the kings perſon, they muſt doe all things ſurelie: and that ſhortly they ſhoulde perceiue moſt honourable fruites proceede of this aduice. Thus betweene the wiſedome of ſome and the raſhneſſe of others, there was as it were a diſcordant concorde betweene them for a fewe daies, yea, euen vntill the greate game was playde, which was ſo rude, that the Proteſtants were forced to forſake theyr lodgings: He therefore yt vpon this example ſhoulde goe about to builde auie greate or aduenturous purpoſes might peraduenture commit an incurable errour: For the matters which wee would compare doe not alwayes in euerie parte reſemble: beſides that theſe accidents are ſuch as it is much if a whole age bringeth forth two or three.
                  
                  
                     Of the moſt notable occurrences happened at the departure from Saint Denis.
                     
                        IT doth many times fall out yt 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         mightie Captaine The Prince of Condies firſt entent to force his aduerſaries to harken to accorde. albeit he cannot attaine to his purpoſed intents, doth neuertheleſſe in his proceedings ſhew forth ſuch valour, yt men cannot but commend him as they did the Prince of Condie for his braue exploits during his aboade at S. Denis. Due of his purpoſes tended to bring

the Pariſians into ſuch want of victuals, & other wiſe ſo to mo
                           •
                        eſt thē yt as well themſelues as ſuch others as were thether retired, ſhould he forced to hear
                           •
                        en to peace, Here of grew the enterpriſes of Charenton bridge, S. Claude & Poyſſy, whereby to bridle the riuer, which neuerthelſſe were to ſmall purpoſe, & was like to haue bred the deſtruction of the Proteſtants. Some would metuaile how ſuch excellent Captaines, who could not be ignorant what great armies had afore time (w
                           〈…〉
                        ning to performe the like attempt) loſt their labore, as did that of Duke Charles of Burgundie, which I thinke they had not quite forgottē, wold vndertake ſuch an enterpriſe. But they did it, as finding themſelues in place where occaſion inuited them to attempt that which the cōmon voice cried vpon them to do. Moreouer, they ſuppoſed that to lie ſtil & enterpriſe nothing would be a great diminiſhing of their credit: beſides that, ſeeing their people ſo well diſpoſed; they accompted moſt difficult enterpriſes, eaſie to be compaſſed.
                     The Prince of Condies ſecond intent was to draw the army that The ſecond and third cotent. layin cloſed in Paris to battel, in hope that the ſame being won the warre would be at end, which his purpoſe ſpedde no better than the former. As for the third, he made account that albeit he were forced to abandon S. Denis, yet the townes which ſhould be ſeazed as well vpon the riuer of Marne as of Seine, might faour & ſupport him in the placing of his power vntil the comming of his Germaines whō he had ſēt for for to aſſiſt him. But this purpoſe alſo in reſpect they could ſurpriſe but two, viz. Lagny & Montereau, as the reſt vauiſhed in ſmoke. The L. Conſtables attempts were brought to better effect. His firſt purpoſe was after the refreſhing of his power to force the Proteſtants to battaile thinking that he muſt needs ouercome them in reſpect of the aduantages he had them at, which hee had almoſt done. He alſo made account to diſappoint them of their lodgings, and to ſend them farther from the Pariſians, who had no great onlight that ſuch good huſbands & ſo diligent to cleere them ſhoulde looke to their accomptes: But death debarred him that benefite: and to ſaie 
                           •
                        roth if hee had liued and had his health, hee would haue made them to haue made more haſt than they did. Truly as wel the one as the other bare themſelues as great Captaines but tending to diuerſe endes, viz. to defend and offend, theyr actitions likewiſe were in parte different.
                     It well be ſeemed the Proteſtants to bee oft on horſebacke, to The Lord Conſtables purpoſes. enterpriſe ſometimes to ſome purpoſe, ſometimes deſperatelie,
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
him that their heartes or hope were not yet daunted: and therefore bringing their ſmall armie well reſolued into the fielde, they ſhewed themſelues before the ſuburbs of the citie, burning a village and ſome windmilles within view of the towne, ſo to teſtifie them that all the Proteſtants were not all deade: alſo that there was yet ſome exerciſe prouided: but no man iſſued by reaſon (as it is to be preſumed) of the loſſe of the Lorde Conſtable. This the Proteſtants bragge preſerued their credit: how be it perceiuing that their ſoiourning there would be their ouerthrow, the next morrowe they raiſed their campe and marched toward Montereau, whither they ſent for the reſt of their power that Iay at Eſtampes & Orleance, to come to them, which greatly increaſed their armie.
                  
                  
                     Of the voiages of both the armies toward Lorraine, but to ſeuerall intents.
                     
                        SO ſoone as the French power which ye 
                        P. of Condie expected were ioyned The meanes that were practiſed to ouerthrow the Prince and his armie. wt him the contrary armie wherof the D. of Aniow was generall, dailie increaſing, followed him at the heeles. Diuers Catholiks my good friends haue aſſured me that vpon anie fit occaſion he meant to haue fought: for the olde Captaines that counſayled him therto, very wel foreſeeing that if the Proteſtants ſhould ioyne with their Reiſters (who were alreadie ſetting forward) the war would grow long, or els they muſt fight an vncertaine battayle, were vpon theſe conſiderations earneſtly princked thereto. But withall when they beheld the importance of their Generalls perſon who reſted vnder their weapons, alſo the diſpaire of their aduerſaries, the ſame did ſomewhat ſtay them. They vſed two cunning pollicies as well to ſtay them as to ſurpriſe thē: for in warre ſuch ſubtilties are allowed, at the leſt they are practiſed: The firſt was a parley of peace, wherein ye moſt notable of the Ptoteſtāts (as the Car. of Chaſtillon) were imploied: which ſtil cooled the heat of the battell. The other was two abſtinences from wars each for 2 or 3. daies, to the end, as it was ſaid, the better to confer of the articles

propounded. The one was neere to Montereau, the other by Chaalons: but the laſt had like to haue ben verie preiudicial vnto ye 
                        Proteſtants, by reaſō the P. of Condy ſtaied in a very bad lodginge & ſore ſcattered while the Catholiks armie did approch, & had it not ben for the County Briſſacks enterpriſe againſt certaine cornets of harquebuziers on horſeback whō he ouerthrew, the ſaid Prince had ſtill ſoiourned there 2. daies, where vndoubtedly he had bene fought withal, & peraduenture ſurpriſed by his aduerſaries who were very ſtrong, the rather through the ariual of 1500. Burguignion ſperes, who under the conduct of the Earl of Arem bergue, one of the famouſeſt Captains of the low countries, were ioyned vnto him. But when during the abſtinence he ſee ſuch ſlaughter, hee thought it no greate ſafetie to truſt to wordes, & therefore in 3. daies ſpace marched aboue 20. leagues through the rain, & ſo bad waies, that it was to be wondered how the carriages and artillerie could follow, for there was nothing loſt either in the one or the other, ſo good was ye order & ſo greate the diligence. Monſieur his armie ſeeing this departure purſued no farther: yea, ſome of them boaſted that they had driuen the Proteſtants out of the realme: others hauing better foreſight perceiuing that they could no longer be ſtopped from ioyning with their Germains thought it beſt to let them go & then to ſeeke how to keepe them from comming in again. But there were ſome likewiſe, & they no ſmall number that laide great fault in diuerſe of Monſieurs counſailors for ſuffring them ſo to eſcape with out battaile, ſaying that the Admirall had ſecret intelligence with them, which was a very falſe imagination, wherat himſelfe vſed to ſcorne, & many times he aſſured me there was no ſuch matter, neuertheleſſe he would endeuour ſtill to maintaine thē in ye ſuſpition.
                     Now will I rehearſe ſome ſtirs & follies of the Proteſtants during their ſmall abode in Lorraine: as alſo the voluntarie liberalitie The behauiors of the Princes armie in Loraine. whereof they made demonſtration in the middeſt of all their pouertie that there inuironed them: an action which I take in theſe daies to be vnpractiſeable. Many were perſuaded (as alſo the voice ſo went) that they could not ſet foot in Lorrain but they ſhould heare the Reiſters cockes ſing: but hauing there ſoiourned 4. or 5. daies they had no more ſpeech of them than when they were before Paris, which bred ſundrie mutinies, euē among ſome of the nobilitie, who in their ordinarie ſpeeches did ſomewhat rudclie gird at their Generals: ſo great is the impaciencie of our nation: But they vnderſtanding hereof endeuoured to remedie it.

Likewiſe as men can hardlie abandon their naturall inclinations, ſo the perſwaſions which their heads vſed were different: for the P. of Condie beeing of a pleaſant diſpoſition did ſo conuenientlie gird theſe chollerike and buſie perſons that hee made euen thoſe that moſt exceeded either in the one or the other to laugh. On the other ſide the Admirall with his graue ſpeeches did ſo ſhame them that in the end they were forced to appeaſe and quiet themſelues. At the ſame time my ſelfe aſked him of his beſt counſayle in caſe Monſieur ſhould followe vs? We would march, ſayd he, towarde Bacchara, where the Reiſters ſhould make their aſſemblie: alſo that it were not for vs to fight without them, and that after the enimies firſt heat was ſomwhat quailed: But, what if the Reiſters were not there, would ſome man ſaie, what coulde the Proteſtants then doe? I thinke they coulde haue blowen theyr fingers, for the weather was verie colde. Now was all the Towne ſoone conuerted into mirth when as they vnderſtoode certainelie that Duke Iohn Caſimire, (a Prince endued with all Chriſtian vertues, and one to whome the Proteſtants are highlie bound) did march and was at hande. Then was there nothing but ſinging and leaping, yea, they that had moſt cried out did leape higheſt. Theſe their behauiours did verie wel verefie the ſaying of Titus Liuius, that ye 
                        Gauls are ſoone angrie, and ſo conſequently ſoone merrie againe, which paſſions if they be not, after the imitation of the ſages, moderated by reaſon do eaſilie exceede.
                     The Prince of Condie vnderſtanding by his agents in Germanie that the Reiſters looked vppon theyr ioyning with him to A notable hiſtorie. finger at the leſt 100000. crowns, was in greater care than before he had bene for his mennes mutinies, becauſe hee had not 2000. There was it expedient for him to make of neceſſitie vertue: and as well himſelfe as the L. Admiral being in great credice with the Proteſtants, employed all their cunning, credite, and eloquence to perſwade euerie man to depart with whatſoeuer his abilitie would beare toward this ſo neceſſarie contribution, wherevppon depended the contentation of thoſe whome ſo diligently they had waited for. Hereof thēſelues gaue the firſt example in giuing their own ſiluer veſſel: The miniſters in their Sermons exhorted heereto, and the moſt zealous Captaines prepared their men: for in ſo extraordinarie a matter they had neede to vſe all kindes of inſtruments. There did ſundrie of the Gentry ſhewe a greate readineſſe to diſcharge themſelues loyallie: But the chiefe brunt of this

battaile appeared whē they came to vrge the ſcholers of Lady Picoree, whoſe propertie it was to be readie to take, and ſlacklie to forgoe: howbeit partly by loue & partly by feare they quit themſelues better than men looked for: yea, this liberalitie was ſo generall, that euen the ſouldiours lackies and boies gaue euerie one ſomewhat, ſo as in the end it was accounted a diſhonour to haue giuen but little. Some ſuch of theſe there were as made the Gentlie aſhamed in parting more voluntarilie with their gold, than they had done with their ſiluer.
                     To bee briefe, the whole beeing gathered together there was in monie, in plate, and in chaines of golde aboue foure ſcore thouſand Frankes: which came in ſo good ſeaſon, that without it they could hardly haue appeaſed their Reiſters. I knowe that many of them were vrged to giue by example, ſhame, and perſuaſions, but certainlie a great part did it vpon zeale and affection, as appeared in that they offered more than was required of them. Was it not a deede worthie wonder to ſee an armie vnpaide, and vnprouided of all meanes, who thought it a meruaile to part with their ſmal commodities for their owne wants, now not to ſpare to furniſh others therwith, who peraduenture did giue them no thanks? Now would it be vnpoſſible to doe the lyke, for that all Gentlemanlike actions are almoſt out of vſe.
                  
                  
                     Of the returne of the two armies toward Orleance and Paris: alſo of the courſe that the P. of Condie tooke in victualling, marching, and lodgiug of his men.
                     
                        AFter the ioyning of the Reiſters there needed A meane to attaine to peace. no long conſultation to knowe what were beſt to be done. For the generall voice imported to tranſport the warre to Paris. This did ſome deſire peraduenture the rather to the ende to ſee their owne houſes, but the moſt part knewe it to be the beſt waie to attaine to peace: neither were the Generalles ignorant that to continue the warre, their armies

could not miſſe artillerie, pouder, money, and other commodities that are to be wreaſted from the marchant and the artificer, whereof vnleſſe they drewe towarde Orleance (which was their nource mother) they ſhould be depriued, which made them to yéeld to the common deſire. In this good minde did the Proteſtants returne, beeing of opinion that the enimies armie would coaſt them, as well to debarre them from diſmantelling diuerſe ſmall and weake Townes, as alſo to ſpie occaſion to intrappe ſome one of their troopes. Then did Fraunce abounde in all ſortes of virtualles, and yet were they to vſe greate arte and diligence to feede an vnpayd armie of aboue twentie thouſand men, whom the Countrie fauoured not as they did the other, beeing but meanely furniſhed with munition. The Lorde Admirall had an eſpeciall care aboue all things to haue expert commiſſaries, and to cauſe them to haue carriage according to the Proteſtant want, and was wont when ſo euer there was anie queſtion of forming the bodie of an armie, to ſaie: Let vs beginne the ſhaping of this monſter by the bellie.
                     
                     Nowe becauſe our horſemen did commonlie lodge ſcattering The Lord Admirals care for the entertainement of the armie. abroade in the good villages, the ſayde commiſſaries beſides theyr ordinarie carriages kept ſtill in euery cornet a baker and two horſe of burthen, which came no ſooner to their quarter but they fell to making of bread, and ſo ſent it to the footemen. All theſe ſmall helpes proceeding from fortie cornets (for there about wee then were) being gathered together, amounted vnto a great deale: yea, and thence ſometimes they ſent both fleſh and wine, whereto the Gentrie were ſo affectionate that from their lodgings they would not ſpare their carriages for conduct of whatſoeuer was requiſite. The ſmall Townes that were taken were reſerued for the munitionaries, and they threatned the reſt that kept no garriſons to fire all a league rounde about if they ſent in no prouiſion: whereby our footmen who lodged cloſe were ordinarilie well prouided. I doe not heere ſpeake of the booties which as well the footemen as horſemen wonne from the aduerſaries, neyther is it anie doubt but this denouring animall paſſing through ſo many Prouinces, could ſtill finde ſoule paſture where with was ſometimes mixed the poore mans garment, yea, and the friendes to, ſo ſore did neceſſitie and deſire to catch incite thoſe that wanted no excuſes to coulour their ſpoile. Of theſe fruites were many prouided of thoſe things which beſides foode the ſoldiour is to buy, as garments & weapons

which are moſt ne
                           •
                        eſſarie things.
                     Now muſt I ſpeake of the lodging of the armie which they were Of the lodging of the armie. forced to ſcatter abroade, and that for two principall reaſons. The one for the commoditie of virtuall, the other that it might be vnder couert, whereby to be defended from the iniurie of the winter: for without this help it could not conſiſt. I know this to be a verie bad kinde of lodging: alſo that in imperial & royall warres men would beware of committing ſuch ouer ſights, leaſt they might be ſtraight wayes ſurpriſed: But in ciuill warres both partes were forced and accuſtomed ſo to doe, at the leaſt in France. The footmen were lodged in two bodies, viz. in a maine battayle and an auantgarde, and the horſemen in the villages next to hand. Uppon anie earneſt allarum the horſemen drewe to their quarters: likewiſe if one ſeuerall lodging were aſſayled, the others went ſtraight to the reſcue.
                     Among the Cornets there were many harquebuziers on horſback, and when they were come to their quarter, all the wayes were very well fortefied: and many times they prouided themſelues in the Churches and Caſtles, ſo to holde out two good houres vntill they might haue ſuccour. I haue ſometimes ſeene one of the Generals march with fiue or ſixe hundred men and beate back the enimie that had aſſayled ſome lodging. Howbeit notwithſtanding whatſoeuer watch on all ſides, yet there happened many ſurpriſes, albeit the waies were beaten both night and daie. Many times wee had our beſt aduice from the Picorers, who buzzing abroade like flyes did ordinarilie meet with the enimie, and ſo ſome one brought in word, for theſe men to flie are as ſwift as hares, and when they goe about ſome bootie they euen flie. The head towarde the enimie who had light horſmen did commonlie conſiſt of fiue hundred good horſe, and as many harquebuziers on horſebacke, with ſmall ſtore of carriage, except horſe of burthen, which was done to the end to keepe the enimies buſie, that they ſhould make no enterpriſe, alſo that the armie might alwayes haue warning.
                     Concerning the order of the march, all the troopes had theyr meeting nominated at a certaine houre in place conuenient, for the The march. diuiſion of the lodgings: and thence they repayred each to his quarter, as alſo they vſed greate ſpeede when they were to trauayle ſundrie wayes. One inconuenience there was in marching thus ſcatteringlie, namelie, that oftentimes they did vſe many falſe allarums. Neuertheleſſe it was neuer noted that the

                        Prince of Condie had euer anie notable ſurpriſe. Neither woulde I that anie man ſhould build anie rule vpon theſe examples which neceſſitie engendered, vnleſſe vppon the lyke reaſon as then bare ſwaie: for ſo may they be vſed in accomodating them to time, place, and perſons. But the ſureſt waie were to reforme our cuſtomes by the ancient militarie rules, wherin is more perfection than in thoſe which wee now a dayes doe practiſe. Yet muſt we not ſaie that theſe great Captaines ought to haue done otherwiſe than they did, for they neuer fayled in ought that either could or ſhould be done. As alſo their moſt notable actions are ſince their deathes vaniſhed away.
                  
                  
                     Of the new forces out of ſundrie Prouinces that met at Orleance, which inuitéd the Prince of Condy to vndertake the voiage to Chartres.
                     
                        IN the firſt ciuill warres moſt of the Into what Difficulties the Proteſtants were reduced during the ciuill warres. 
                        Proteſtants, namely their heads, toke this for a principle: That it was hard without an armie in ye field to make anie honourable warre or profitable peace. In conſideration heereof they exhorted their partakers to helpe to make a braue power, the benefit wher of ſhould redound to the whole body, which was the reaſon that made ſo many readie to come in. But they found an inconuenience in abandoning to this effecte ſuch good places as before they held in the prouinces, for afterward they had no place of retreate, as alſo they haue ſomtimes failed in the other point, viz. by keeping ouer many. Wherin we may learne to auoid all extremities. Which notwithſtanding, yet were not the prouinces free frō war as wel in the firſt troubles as in theſe. Yea, who ſo liſt well to conſider the dealings of the Baron of Adrets, and other the braue exploites of ſundrie Captaines both Catholikes and Proteſtants, recorded in the hiſtories, ſhall ſee miſerable matters valiantly and wiſely executed.

But becauſe I haue tied my ſelfe to ſpeake of no more than I haue either ſeene or learned in good places, I haue abſtained from entering the carrier of vnknowen Countries for feare of ſtumbling. Now the Prince of Condie being enformed that his forces out of Gaſcoyne and Daulphine amounting neere to ſixe thouſand men were ariued at Orleance thought it good to imploie them, & therefore ſent them worde to be ready, as alſo to prouide pouder and ſhot with three or foure bad peeces of artillerie that were left: for albeit the Catholiks accounted the Proteſtants fierie people, yet were they alwayes but meanelie prouided of ſuch inſtrumentes, neither haue they, as themſelues, anie Saint Anthonie, whome men ſaie to be preſident of this element. His intent was before his enimies knew his purpoſe to haue enuironed the town that he meant to beſiege, whereof he thought none ſo commodious for his affayres as Chartres, which being taken he purpoſed to fortefie, ſo to keepe a continuall thorne in the Pariſians foote, and vnder the fauour therof ſomewhat to preſerue his Countries which were behinde. To The beginning of the ſiege of Chartres. this effect being aboue twentie leagues of he ſent three thouſande horſe to encloſe it, which diligence turned to no greate profite, for a regiment of footmen which lay but foure leagues off did neuertheleſſe enter thereinto, which was the ſafegard of the towne. The L. of Ligniers did commaund therein, who had in all two and twentie companies, neyther did anie man ſpare for all remedies for fortification, which are vſuall in ſuch lowe places as are preuented. The aſſailants alſo for their parts noted thoſe places that ſeemed moſt aſſaultable, which on euery ſide were ſo bad, that it was hard to ſay which was worſt, and hauing diſcouered a mountaine which commanded vpon the flanke of a Courtine, without farther conſideration they tooke it, and at the firſt bluſh it promiſed much, howbeit the remedies there agaynſt were eaſie: For the Prince hauing but fiue field peeces and foure light Culuerines, what were they able to do agaynſt ſo many men of defence and labour as were therein. And in two daies and two nights it was ſo croſſed and entrenched, that they durſt not enter vpon them. The French man is ſo ſodain, that he will immediatly diſcouer yt which cannot be found without long ſearch. And through this redineſſe I haue ſeene the diſcouerers of places commit ſo many ouer ſights, that I thinke it a moſt profitable rule to looke twice, yea thrice vpon a thing before we reſolue or ſettle our iudgement thereof. After the breach was made, we knew that to giue the aſſault on that ſide was to looſe our men wilfullie:

and as we were preparing for a new batterie in ſome weaker place the peace was concluded, which ouerthrew all militarie actions. True is the Prouerbe, that there is no well to the good men, for the place muſt be verie bad wherein they cannot find meanes to accommodate themſelues. Men ſhould neuer keepe anie long ſiege agaynſt ſuch places, in deede to let an armie lie before it 3. weekes or a moneth it may be done, whiles another is leauied in fauour of the beſieged.
                     During our abode there the Lord Admirall attempted a braue A counter enterpriſe of the Lord Admirales during the ſeege. enterpriſe, which was determined in manner enſuing: The contrarie armie being beyond the riuer of Sein, durſt not (I wot not why) approch the Princes maine power, yet would it not omitte anie opportunitie to fauour the beſieged. And to the ſame effect was the Lord of Vallet a famous Captaine, ſent with eighteene cornets of horſemen to ſurpriſe one of our troopes in their lodgings, to hinder our forage, to breake off our victuals, and to keepe vs in often allarums. He approched within foure leagues of the camp, and lodged verie cloſe, from whence he began greatlie to moleſt vs: The Lord Of Chartres. 
                        Admirall haere of aduertiſed, tooke vppon him to prouide remedie thereto. And vſing commonlie to march ſtrong, for feare ſayd he, of want of game, he tooke 3500. horſe, & departed ſo earlie, that by the Sunne riſing he was in theſe horſmens quarters, of whom many, notwithſtanding their good watch kept in the fielde, were ouertaken, ſo as there were foure cloutes taken but few men ſlayne. The Lord of Vallet who lodged in Oudan gathered together foure or fiue hundred horſe, with whom albeit a thouſand of ours did folow, he retired in good order, often making head agaynſt vs, as indeede he had both ſkill and experience. Hereby we ſee that it is not good ſoiourning long in the face of a ſtrong power of horſe vnleſſe a man be as ſtronglie lodged. For before he be aware he may be ſurpriſed as it were with a ſodaine ſtorme: and the ſame may be vpon him in manner as ſoone as his ſentinels, ſcoutes, or diſcouerers: for it marcheth aſſured, ſeareth nothing, and ſtill ſayth to the foremoſt, On, charge and follow all that thou findeſt. In ſuch affayres the wiſeſt and moſt circumſpect are ſometimes ouertaken.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſecond peace concluded at Lon-iumeau.
                     
                        THroughout the whole troubles in Fraunce wee The ſecond peace, cauſe of more miſchief then the warre it ſelfe. haue ſtill ſeene it fall out that they haue ſpoken of peace in the middeſt of all the war, ſo willing was euerie man to ſhew himſelf to like of ſo health ſome a matter: as alſo there haue ben diuerſe concluded, but none worſe to the Proteſtants than this. The treatie hereof was againe begun while the Prince lay before Chartres, who ſent the Cardinall of Chaſtillon with other Gentlemen, to meete with the kings deputies at Lon-iumeau, where they ſo folowed it, that the articles were agreed vpon which were ſent ſome to Paris & others to Chartres, there to decide the chiefe difficulties ariſing therein. Now as a good peace was not onely greatly deſired, but alſo as neceſſarie, ſo were there few that ſtaied to conſider what maner of one this was: but as if ye verie name had alſo brought the effect, moſt of the Proteſtants were fully reſolud, yt it muſt bee accepted: And to ſpeake plainly that was it that forced the P. & Admiral, who ſaw ſuch readineſſe euen in the nobilitie, to condeſcend therto & to accept of it. It was as a whirle winde which they could not reſiſt, but that it carried thē awaie. True it is that the P. was of himſelfe ſomwhat inclined vnto it, but the Admiral ſtil doubted of the obſeruation thereof: for he almoſt perceiued that they meant to be reuenged of the Proteſtants for ye iniurie receiued at the iourney of Meaux. Yea, euen then ſome ſuch of the Catholiks as could conceale nothing, gaue out openly that ſhortly they would haue a day. One of our agents alſo for the peace, ſending word that hee had oft heard ſuch ſpeeches, & perceiued great indignation hidden in ſome of their hearts with whom they did conferre, wiſhed it might be loked vnto, as noting ſome ſingular euent. Some likewiſe euen of the court, who ſometime ſtole ſpeeches out of the cloſet, ſent their friends & kinſmen word yt vndoubtedly they would be deceiued vnleſſe they wrought ſurely: which might haue ſufficed to wakē thoſe yt ſlept ſo ſoundly vpō ye ſweet pillow of peace: but notwithſtanding al aduice, ye brook which alredy ouerflowed could not be reſtrained. It may be meruailed yt theſe Captains being of ſuch credit wt their partakers, could not perſuade thē to that which was ſo profitable:

howbeit if we conſider what theſe voluntarie perſons were, alſo the violent deſire to viſite a mans home, we ſhall perceiue yt the anchor of apparant neceſſitie being broken, the ſhippe that is driuen with ſuch vehement windes cannot be ſtaied.
                     Sundry whole Cornets and diuerſe perticular perſons euen before the raiſing of the ſiege from before Chartres were departed Part of the Proteſtantes cauſers of their owne miſchiefe. without aſking leaue toward Xantoigne and Poictou. This humour alſo tooke place among the footmen, euen thoſe that dwelte fartheſt off. Many alſo ſayde that ſith the King offered the laſt Edict of pacification, it might not be refuſed: Other of the Gentrie gaue out that they would retire into theyr owne Prouinces for the preſeruation of their families whome the enimies cruelties oftentimes murthered: The footmen complayned of the want of paie, and that ordinarily their victuals failed them. Thus might not the Generals of the Proteſtants cleaue to ſuch aduertiſements as they receiued, and ſo reiect the peace, leaſt they ſhould haue remayned ouer weake. Heerevppon they ſometimes diſcourſed in this manner.
                     
                        That the moſt of their French forces abandoning them, they ſhould be driuen to ſtand vpon their defence: but it would bee a great diſgrace vnto them, in that it now was the time of yeere that armies vſed to take the field. To part with their Reiſters whome they ſhould diſtribute in their townes they would not doe it, for ſo they ſhoulde deuoure themſelues: likewiſe to lodge them in a fortefied campe, that remedie would laſt but a while. To be briefe, that they muſt trie the hazarde of a peace. Then could they haue wiſhed to haue had ſome townes for the aſſurance therof: but when they requeſted anie other pledge than the edicts, oathes & promiſes, they were diſmiſſed as men that did deſpiſe or contemne the authoritie roiall, which cauſed them to accept that which was vſuallie offered. Thus did the Proteſtants diſmiſſe their ſtrangers, retire into their houſes, and euery man perticularly lay awaie their weapons: weening (at the leaſt the common ſort, that the Catholiks would haue done the like: who were content onely to promiſe it, but in effect to performe nothing: but remaining ſtill armed, kept the townes & paſſages ouer the riuer, ſo as within two moneths after they had the Proteſtants as it were at their diſcretions. Yea, ſome of them that inſiſted moſt vppon peace were forced to ſaie: We haue committed follie, and therefore muſt not thinke much to taſt thereof, albeit this drinke be like to be verie bitter.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The third troubles.
                  
                     Of the Proteſtants diligent retrait in the laſt troubles: alſo of the Lord of Martigues braue reſolution when he came to Saumure.
                     
                        HUmane affaires are ſubiect to many alterations, The notable reuolution of theſe warres: alſo of the Princes retrait. for the better repreſenting of the inconſtancie whereof, the Ethnikes haue figured a turning whéele whereon things are ſometime vp and ſometime downe: and who ſo liſt well to note the diſſimilitude of the ground of this warre with the former, ſhal perceiue the ſame. For in the former the Proteſtants did preuent and proudlie aſſayle, where in this they were preuented, and retired vpon ſhamefull neceſſitie, abandoning thoſe Prouinces and Townes which before had ſerued for their preſeruation. When they ſee tenne companies of footmen brought vnto Orleleance, they well knew that their buſineſſe went amiſſe: but moſt of all were they moued to departe the Prouinces about Paris becauſe the Prince had like to haue beene beſette in his owne houſe by ſundrie companies of men of armes and footemen that eaſily approched towarde him. Himſelfe alſo hauing giuen aduice heereof to the Admirall and other his neereſt neighbors, did together with them and their families retire to Rochel by wading through the riuer of Loyre at an vnaccuſtomed foode. Likewiſe he warned the Proteſtants farther off to take armes, and ſauing themſelues ſo well as they might to drawe towarde him, ſeeking paſſage ouer the riuer by foord or boate: The Catholikes ſcoffinglie tolde him that he néeded not haue taken ſo hotte an allarum, alſo that they had practiſed nothing agaynſt them, whereto he anſwered, that hee had

rather leaue them the neaſts than they ſhold haue caught the birds: alſo that if he had wel remembred their promiſe to be reuenged for Meaux, like wiſe that they would make the brethren ru
                           〈…〉
                        e when theyr turne came, he wold haue departed ſooner that he might haue gone an eaſier pace. Theſe were their common ſpeeches: for the grauer matters on either 
                           〈◊〉
                         are written in the hiſtories: I know that warre is miſerable and with all bringeth many miſchiefes: but this vile ſmall peace that laſted but ſixe monethes was farre worſe for the Proteſtants, who being murthered in their houſes, durſt not defende themſelues. Theſe and other matters prouoked and diſpoſed them to ſeeke theyr ſafetie in aſſembling together.
                     The Lord of Andelot being in Britaine was aduiſed to aſſemble all the power that he might, and to march into Poictou: wherevppon he gaue them order to meete him in Anieow, which was The Lord of Martigues braue reſolution to gette to Saumure. done: and when all were come together, his troope conſiſted of no leſſe than a thouſand good horſe and two thouſand harquebuziers, wherewith hee turned his head to the riuer of Loyre, to the end to ſeeke ſome commodious paſſage. But the ſame daie that bee came to the ſhoare therof, there fell out an vnlooked for aduenture wherfro the Catholikes eſcaped with honour. Hee was lodged verie ſcatteringly, as hauing no greate allarum of enemies, and had giuen the Captaines of his troopes charge, after they were ariued in their quarters, to ſeeke for ſome foorde or wadeable place, but two houres after they were lodged the Lord of Martigues who was going to the Duke of Montpenſier at Saumure, was aduertiſed that a number of Proteſtantes (without naming of anie) were come to lodge in his way.
                     Now hee hauing alreadie paſſed a ſmall riuer called Sorgne by boat, thoght it to late to retire, & therfore yt it was requiſit he make way with the ſword whatſoeuer ſh
                           〈…〉
                        ld happen, his cariages he had ſent awaie on the other ſide of Loire and his troop conſiſted of three hundred ſpeares, and fiue hundred harquebuzieres. Alſo in as much as hee was driuen to march a long a banke of earth which kept in the riuer, where there coulde but tenne men or ſixe horſes paſſe in front, hee placed at his head an hundred Gaſcogne harquebuziers of his garde, and two bundred others: his horſemen in the the middeſt, then the reſt of his footmen behinde, and fiftie ſpeares for ſcourers.
                     This done he ſayde vnto them: Companions and friendes, the Proteſtants are vppon our waie: wee must eyther goe ouer them or

bee loſt: for flie wee cannot: Let euerie man therefore prepare to fight well with his arme and march gallantlie with his feete to winne Sanmure, wee haue but eight ſmall leagues thether, and ſhall not bee in ſafetie before we come there.
                     
                     This ſayde, they all promiſed not to fayle in theyr dueties, and in this reſolution they marched on. The two firſt troopes that hee mette were two companies of horſemen that were taking their lodgings, whome hee eaſilie ſcattered, and Captaine Boisuert was ſlayne in the fight: There hee hearde that the Lorde of Andelot was at hande, wherevppon hee haſted the more to preuent him: But not withſtanding whatſoeuer his diligence, hee founde him horſed with a fewe men, as hauing had the allarum by ſome runawayes. There was giuen a braue charge, wherein the Lord of Martignes lieuetenaunt was ſlayne, and the Lorde of Andelot forced to permitte him free paſſage. He ſuffered not his ſouldiours to ſpoyle the carryages that ſtoode in the waies, but made them to march on. Within one league of the ſame place hee mette a companie of Captaine Cognees horſe marching, whome with harquebuze ſhotte hee ſent backe a pace: agayne a quarter of a league from Roſiers there mette him two hundred harquebuziers whome the Lorde of la None ſent towarde the allarum to ſuccour the reſt: but the Lorde of Martigues footemen beeing all olde ſouldiours and the others newe, did ſo diſorder them as they were forced to abandon the village, and leaue him free paſſage.
                     Finallie, within two leagues of Saumure hee founde yet another companie of footemen lodged in a Church, whome hee forced and tooke theyr Enſigne, and ſo at the ſhutting in of the euening came ſafe with his men well wearyed with fighting and marching, hauing loſt but twentie of them, but ſlayne foure times as many of his enemies, and ſcarred aboue a thouſande.
                     This exploit did I thinke good to ſette downe, as ſeeming to bee repleniſhed with a braue determination: albeit it was 
                           •
                        o meruayle that the Lorde of Andelots troopes entered not within them: for they were ſodainelie ſurpriſed, beeing all ſcattered a ſunder, beſides that the horſemen were in too ſtraight a roome to fight well, and although they had beene gathered agayne together▪ yet were the enemies alreadie in ſafetie.

Thus do we ſee how much it ſtandeth a body in hand both to march in order and to be well determined: and this is it that cauſeth thoſe ſmall troopes that are willing in valour to ſupplie their weakneſſe, ordinarily to ouercome.
                     Notwithſtanding this checke, yet was not the Lord of Andelot paſt hope of paſſage ouer the riuer: hauing therfore cloſed his men in two bodies, he cauſed them to trye euery where: In the ende they found a foord as it were miraculouſly, where no man had in mans memorie paſſed: and the next morning both he and all his being very glad that they had met that which they hoped not of, he paſſed ouer vnto the other ſide. Remaining in theſe vncerteynties, I could him that it were good for vs to conſider what wee had to doe if our paſſage were ſtopped: wherevpon he aunſwered. What can wee el
                              •
                            doe but take ſome extreeme partie, either to dye as Souldiers, or to ſaue our ſelues as Souldiers? My opinion is, ſayd he, that wee all ioyne and ſo retire ſeauen or eight leagues hence into the open countrie, and thence to aduertiſe the Lordes of Montpenſier and Martigues that we be fled & are ſcattered, euery man ſeking to eſcape the daunger, which they will ſoone beleeue. In the meane time we will encourage and prepare our men to ouercome: Then if they approach neere vnto vs, as vndoubtedly they will (rather to ſpoile than to fight) let vs valiantlie ſet vppon them, ſo ſhall we b
                              •
                           eake them, and afterwarde will no troope for one moneths ſpace bee ſo bolde as to come before vs, thus maye wee eaſilie gette into Germanie, or vp the riuers.
                     
                     This readie and couragious counſayle of ſo gallant a knight, is no more (in my opinion) to bee concealed than the braue determination of the Lord of Martigues, two perſonages vndoubtedly worthie the beſt militarie offices. The laſt wo
                           •
                        ne farre greater honour in his paſſage, and the firſt much more profite, as getting him and his into ſafetie: For within eight dayes after hee ioyned with the Prince of Condie, which was a greate ſtrengthening vnto him. This the Proteſtants ſo badde a beginning and enterie into the warre by ſuch headelong retreates was a foretoken, that they would vſe theſe remedies in the continuation thereof, which alſo came to paſſe, albeit in the former they had but verie ſeldome had anie ſuch happe, whereof if there bee anie that deſire to knowe the cauſes, I will ſet them downe.
                     It proceeded of the contempt of diſcipline, and the multiplication of vice, the which dooth breede greate diſorder, and

engendreth bouldneſſe in many (not in all) who vnder colour of neceſſitie doo take vpon them too much libertie.
                  
                  
                     That the reſpite which his Maieſtie gaue to the Prince of Conde, without ſending any armie againſt him, was a meanes for him to preuaile of a great Prouince, without the ſupport whereof he could not haue continued the warre.
                     
                        THE Proteſtants whole refuge in theſe laſt What helpe the towne of Rochel was to the Prince and his, who therby became maiſters of a large country. troubles cōſiſted in retiring to Rochel, which hauing embraced the Goſpell and reiected the doctrine of the Pope, reſted alreadie at their deuotion. The towne is reaſonable large and wel ſeated vpon the ſea coaſt in a ſoyle abounding with victuals, full of rich Marchants and good artificers: which was very profitable for the preſeruation of ſundrie families, & the reaping of al commodities neceſſarie for the Souldiers and whole armie, both by ſea & by land. Now, after the Lord of Andelots arriuall, the Captaines were aduiſed to loſe no time: ſo as hauing taken ſome artillerie out of Rochell, they aſſayled the townes of Poictow and Xantoigne, which then were but weake and meanly prouided of garriſons, and ſo became maiſters of as many as they might: as Nyort, Fontenay, S. Maixant, Saintes, S. Iohn d'Angely, Ponts, and Coignac. Afterward they tooke alſo Blay and Angoleſme, ſome being wonne eaſely, others with batterie and aſſault. To bee briefe, in leſſe then two moneths, of poore vagabonds, as at the firſt they were, they had gotten into their hands meanes ſufficient to cōtinue a long warre. In all theſe places they lodged about thirtie companies of footmen, and ſeauen or eight cornets of horſe, which was a great eaſe to the countrie, and ſo formed a braue politicke and militarie order as well for the Frenchmen as for the guiding of the armie. Herein do I conſider how neceſſitie being followed by occaſion the Proteſtants could helpe themſelues with both. Being oppreſſed with the firſt, they layd open all inuentions of the minde and ſtrength of bodie to eſchue deſtruction. And when the ſecond came in place they found

themſelues readie to embrace it. I ſometime heard the Lord Admirall applie the goodly ſaying of Themiſtocles to the ſtate of the affayres of that time, viz. We were loſt, if we had not bene loſt: thereby meaning that had we not fled, we could not haue recouered that good ſpring, which was farre better then the ſame that we had before. I knowe not how it fell out that the Catholikes did no ſooner knowe that they whome they had driuen from about them did ſettle themſelues a farre of, and ſo ſend remedies there againſt, for vndoubtedly if they had it might haue cut off halfe our conqueſtes: but I thinke that at Paris they were ſo glad to ſee thoſe Prouinces and Townes which before had made them ſo ſharpe warre abandoned, that many of their harts were ſo puffed vp, that afterward they diſdained the Proteſtants effects who thought Rochell only able to reſiſt them, wherein in three moneths they might bee ſhut vp. Theſe be the forecaſtes of man after ſome fauourable accident.
                     The Queene of Nauarre perceiuing theſe ſtirres, was very diligent The arriuall of the Queene of Nauarre and her children in the armie: alſo of the troupes of Daulphine. to draw to thoſe quarters, bringing with her her childrē and ſome good power, which ſerued as well to authoriſe the cauſe as to ſtrengthen the armie. She feared leaſt ſtaying in her owne countries ſhe ſhould bee forced as well by the commotions of her ſubiects as by other power to let her ſonne go to the Court, where vndoubtedly at the leaſt in outward ſhewe he ſhould be driuen to change his religion. In conſideratiō wherof ſhe made no difficulty, for the keeping of their conſciences vnſpotted, to leaue her countrie for a pray. A moſt rare example in this world wherein wealth and honor are in ſuch accompt, that vnto many they be euen a domeſticall God whom they ſerue. Now likewiſe, a maruellous encreaſe vnto the Proteſtants armie were the troopes which the Lord of Acier brought out of Daulphine, Prouence, and Languedoc. The Prince had before written as well to him, as to others the moſt notable in the ſayd Prouinces to ſend him ſome good power to ſuccour him and to withſtand the armie Royall which came vppon him, leaſt ſo many Princes and excellent Captaines ſhould encurre ſo great diſaduantage as to ſee themſelues beſieged in the townes: Whereof ſo farre were they from fa
                           ••
                        ing, that it ſeemed they had diſpeopled the places; they came from: ſo many men did they bring: for they were not leſſe then eighteene thouſand bearing armes, who vnder the conduct of the Lord of Acier marched. But as the ſame was one way the 
                           〈…〉
                        ole ſupport of the armie, ſo on the

other, it was the loſſe of ſundrie places which the Catholikes after their departure ſeaſed vpon. And many times I haue heard diuers Colonels reporte their departure in ſuch numbers as if they ſhould haue gone to ſeeke newe habitations: for had the halfe onely come yet had they bene too many.
                     Theſe could not neuertheleſſe ioyne with the Prince of Condé 
                        The ouerthrow of the Colonels Mouuans and Pierre-gourd without a great inconuenience that befell them: for two of their regiments were ouerthrowne by the Duke of Montpenſier: the cauſe ariſing (as I haue vnderſtoode) of that the Lords of Mouuans and Pierregoord finding ſome diſcommoditie in lodging ſo cloſe as vntill then they had bene forced, would needes ſcatter, wéening that hauing two thouſand harquebuziers no leſſe then an armie could ſerue to offend them. The ſaid Mouuans was as braue a ſouldier as any in the Realme, but his great valour & experience brought him to attempt that which turned to his deſtructiō: which is it alſo that many times bréedeth the loſſe of both Captaines and troopes: He tought valiantly, and both he and his fellow with two thouſand of their men dyed in the fielde. The Catholikes haue reported vnto me one courſe that they then tooke, which I like well of: That was, that fearing leaſt the Lord of Acier, who lodged but two leagues of, ſhould come to the reſcue, they did at the ſame time that they charged vpō the ſaid Mouuans quarter with their whole footmen, ſende into the Lord of Aciers quarter eight or nine hundred ſpeares and many harquebuziers on horſebacke, with a great ſound of Trumpets crying Battaile Battaile: which they did, to the ende to make him thinke that their drift was againſt himſelfe. Thus did they linger him while they performed their enterpriſe, wherefro they caried ſeuenteene flagges. This loſſe grieued the Price and his partakers: howbeit, the comming in of ſo many other regiments did ſoone blot out his ſorow. For the man of warre euen during his action againſt the enemie, endeuoureth to aboliſh the memorie of all ſorowfull accidents, leaſt the ſame ſhould deminiſh this firſt furie which being in him doth ſometimes make him terrible.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the firſt progreſſe of both the armies, when being in their prime they ſought with like deſire to fight.
                     
                        AFter the ouerthrowe of Mouuans the Catholicke 
                        Of the power of both the armies, which albeit they deſired it could neuer haue opportunitie to ioyne. armie retired to Chaſtellerault, fearing leaſt the Proteſtants being ſo mightie would come vpon them in ſome bad ground. There was alſo the Duke of Anieow who brought other power very reſolute in that their Captaine to whome they bare great honor and reuerence was ſuch a Prince. And in my opinion there had not of long time bene ſeene ſo many Frenchmen in both the armies. The Prince of Condé his places furniſhed, had in his eighteene thouſand Harquebuziers and three thouſand good horſe: and I take that in Monſiers were at the leaſt eighteene thouſand Souldiers and foure thouſand Speares, beſides the Suitzers: ſo as on both ſides might haue bene found aboue fiue and thirtie thouſand Frenchmen, all trayned, and peraduenture as bould Souldiers as any in Chriſtendome. The Proteſtants finding themſelues ſtrong would haue ſought to ioyne, and came within two leagues of Chaſtellerault: But the Prince hauing aduice that the other campe was planted vppon a ſtrong ground almoſt enuironed with a ſmall mariſh, whereto was in ſome places adioyned a ſlight Trench, ment not raſhly to attempt any thing, but ſought meanes to drawe them foorth to battell. Hereto was he enuited by the heate that he perceiued in his ſouldiers: likewiſe by his great number, for he doubted that ſuch an armie wanting pay would not long continue great, as alſo that the ſharpeneſſe of winter would ſoone deminiſh it. It may be that in the Catholike army ſome of theſe conſiderations might likewiſe take place. But there was a good vniformity in this, that both the generalls were touched with equall deſire to ioyne and like purpoſe each to goe liue vpon his enemies land, ſo to preſerue his owne from the extreeme ſpoyle which whole armies doe make.
                     
                        
Thus they both raiſed their campes and tooke their way to Luſignan, 
                        The Duke of Ani
                              •
                           ous armie loſt a braue opportunitie to ouerthrowe the Lord Admirall an d
                              〈…〉
                            Andelot. neere whereto was a ſmall quarter of land, good in all perfection, where each entended to lodge: and albeit they were both neere together, yet could neither heare newes of other, which is not very ſtraunge, for we ſee it many times come ſo to paſſe. Both parties therefore hauing appoynted their generall meeting at a great borowe named Pamprow, plentifull in victualles, the Marſhals of both the campes came thether much about one time with their troopes, from whence they beate each other forward and backward twiſe or thriſe, ſo deſirous was euery man to catch that bone to knawe vpon, which in the ende was giuen ouer. Howbeit, either of them knowing very well that they ſhould haue ſupport, ſtood ſtiffe, and would not flee but retired a quarter of a league of, where they ſet themſelues in battaile aray: Afterward came the Lord Admirall and d'Andelot with fiue Cornets of horſe onely, and on the behalfe of the Catholickes came ſeauen or eight hundred Speares. It is now, ſayd the Lord Admirall, no ſpeaking of lodging but of fighting: and with all ſpeede aduertiſed the Prince, who was a long league of, to ſet forwarde, in the meane time he would ſet a good face on the matter. He commaunded them to ſtand in aray vpon a ſmall riſing, ſo to take from the enemies the viewe of a valley leaſt they ſhould diſcouer him: and this did he to the ende to make thē think that we had ſome great power both of horſemen & footmen hidden therein. Being thus in aray within a Canon ſhot each of other, he willed a Captaine of harquebuziers on horſeback to ſet forwarde fiue hundred paces, and to ſtay neere to a hedge, which he did: But as theſe people albeit they can diſcharge running are not neuertheleſſe ſkilfull ſouldiers, ſo had they not ſtayed there ſixe paternoſters while but halfe of them moued to ſkirmiſh, and after marched their whole Cornet to ſupport them: The enemies ſeeing this, imagined they would haue comen to them, which made them to cloſe themſelues & with three or foure great troopes of Speares begin to ſet forward. Truely at that time I ſaw theſe two Captaines very ſorie that they had not foreſeene the folly of that foole, but more becauſe they wiſt not what counſaile to take, ſeeing their enemies much ſtronger then themſelues: Howbeit, when they came to conclude, each of them concluded otherwiſe then his nature or cuſtome did import. The Lord of Andelot who neuer found any thing too hot, ſayd that they ought to retire the pace: that the enemie being the ſtronger would giue vs the foyle:

and that wee ſhould not reſpect the ſhame, conſidering that he that ſcapeth the perill, beſides the profite that he reapeth doth alſo enioy the honor. The Lord Admirall, a man of great conſideration, was obſtinatly bent to abide, ſaying that it was neceſſarie with a good countenance to hide our weakeneſſe, and immediatly ſent to reuoke the harquebuziers, wherevpon the enemie ſtayed.
                     Now, albeit this counſaile was profitable, yet was the Lord of Andelots the ſurer and to be preferred; at the leaſt in my opinion, Aduice vppon the aforeſaid aduenture. who thought it good to rehearſe this ſmall action ſomewhat at large, to the ende that ſuch as would bee inſtructed in deedes of armes may reape this fruite, viz. When any action of importance commeth in queſtion to remoue the Argolets out of the front, and in their place to commit ſome warie Captaine accompanied with good Speares: For he that hath this place is a guide to the reſt; and vpon his aduice they all doe mooue, and who doth otherwiſe doth erre as he who marching in an vnknowne countrie doe commit the conduct to ſuch a guide as knoweth not the way. Herein wee may alſo note that albeit there bee no ielouzie betweene Captaines, yet, euen in a very euident, matter wee ſhall ſee contrarietie of opinions. But herein my moſt wonder is that each of them contraried his naturall diſpoſition and vſuall maner of proceedings. For the one being as actiue as a Marcellus determined verie wiſely: and the other ſlawe and very conſideratiue as a Fabius did giue a very aduenterous opinion. To reporte the cauſe hereof I cannot, except that vppon ſudden motions men doe not alwaies obſerue the order accuſtomed in their actions. Wee may alſo ſee how bouldneſſe ſometime ſtandeth vs in ſteade: But according to the prouerbe, Theſe things may well bee done once, but it is not good to vſe them often in reſpect of the daunger. I did ſince aſke the Lord of Martigues, who commanded ouer this troope of ſpeares, whether be knewe that the Lordes Admirall and Andelot were among theſe fiue Cornets▪ He tould me no, for had he knowne it it ſhould haue coſt them all their liues but they would haue had them quicke or dead: and that they tooke them to haue bene the Marſhals of the lodgings troopes, which alſo they would haue charged, had it not bene for a doubt leaſt they had bene ſupported by a maine power of harquebuzerie, which to their ſeeming appeared in a village behinde, who in deede were but varlets that attended the comming of their foo
                           •
                        men.
                     
                        
Within one houre after each parte looked for a greater game: The Prince loſt the occaſion to ouerthrow the enemies Auantguard. for on all ſides they might diſcerne the Footmens Enſignes come in
                           •
                        arthing on with the ſquadrons of horſemen, and it was late before all were come, ſo as there was nothing done but a great ſkirmiſh; which the night brake of. There was but the Catholikes 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ntguard who ſeeing the match but euill made of them onely againſt the Proteſtants whole campe vſed a proper pollicie wherewith to make vs ſuppoſe that their maine battaile had bene there: for they cauſed the Drammes of their French Regiments to ſtrike vp after the Suitzers maner: which confirmed our opinion that their whole power was preſent, neither was there any ſpeech but of battaile in the morning. As alſo they charged that none of their bands ſhould ſtraggle foorth: likewiſe that they ſhould in fight ſtande onely vppon the defenſiue, leaſt by the taking of any priſoner the trueth might bee reuealed: all this if wee had knowen they had bene ſet vppon the ſame night. They ſtrooke vp the watch and cauſed to make great fires, but hauing taken their repaiſt with ſmall noyſe they departed, ſome to Iaſnueil where Monſiere was lodged with the battaile, and the reſt to the Borrowe of Sanſay which is but a league of. At three of the clocke after midnight was the Prince aduertiſed of their departure, and at fine followed vppon their tayle with his whole power, doubting that all theirs was not come thether. Thus doe wee in one day ſee two braue occaſions loſt, the firſt by the Catholikes, the ſecond by the Proteſtants, albeit neither of them are greatly to bée blamed, as being hard to bee diſcouered at the inſtant, and in two or three houres they were paſt. True it is that ſome aduice would haue bewrayed them at the full, but this is a benefite of good happe which dependeth not vpon the ſufficiencie of the Captaines.
                     All that I haue reported of the former day is yet but a ſmall Of the iourney of Iaſnueil. matter in reſpect of that which happened the next day at Iaſnueil, and it ſeemeth yt the guider of all things purpoſed for certaine daies to laugh to ſkorne ſo many excellent Captaines there preſent: for many things which then happened and fell out were rather by chaunce and in a maner vnlookedfor, then through any counſaile. The Proteſtants were determined to follow the enemie euen into ye bodie of his armie, alſo to fight with him wherſoeuer they might find him. Herevpō the L. Admiral followed their ſteps which were euident enough, and the Prince marched after. But where as there

were two waies, the one leading to the borowe of Sanſay, the other to Iaſnueil, the Prince through a miſt that aroſe afore breake of day, ſtrayed and tooke the way to Iaſnueil. The forefront which being ſtrong, the Lord Admirall had ſet before him, about eight of the clocke in the morning came vpon the borowe of Sanſay, where fiue or ſixe hundred horſe were lodged, who were forced to retire more then the pace, loſt all their cariages, and were purſued very farre. In the meane time the Prince continuing the way that he had taken, after he had marched two leagues lighted vpon the forefront of Monſiers armie, not hearing any newes of his aduant-guard. Then ſeeing himſelfe beſet, he thought it beſt to ſet a good countenance, and ſeeing the countrie was ſtrong, he placed his Harquebuziers, who were aboue twelue thouſand, formoſt and began the ſkirmiſh: he alſo ſent word to the Admirall (albeit he wi
                           ••
                         not where he was) that he had bene forced to make as if he would fight, ſeeing himſelfe ſo neere the enemie, willing him with all diligence to returne to him. Before the meſſenger was in the midde way, the Lord Admirall heard the Canon rore, wherevpon he doubted of that which was happened, and marched toward the noyſe with all that he could gather: but when he came to the place the Sunne was going downe, whereby they could haue no time to conſult, diſcouer, or enterpriſe any matter in groſſe: But al went away in great ſkirmiſhes as braue as any that had bene ſeene of long time, which ſomewhat amazed Monſiers armie by reaſon it ſtood vpon a very diſcommodious ground, which notwithſtanding it ſtill ſet a good face on the matter. They ſee not one an other, as being hidden with hedges and ſmall vallies, neither was there any but the looſe Shot perceiued. I could well note that our men were full of courage, but the conduct was not alike: for they diſcharged as it had bene for ſalutation and remayned too cloſe together, yea a whole regiment aſſailed at once, where contrariwiſe Monſiers came ſcattered ſhooting ſlowly and marching in ſmall troopes, ſo as two hundred harquebuziers could keepe a whole regiment of Proteſtants occupied. Howbeit, they could not keepe ſome of ours from entring euen into the firſt tentes, which their heate coſt them dere: for the Lord of la Valette twiſe charged them with three hundred Speares, and ſlewe ſome hundred and fiftie. Now may ſome man aſke, if the Princes whole armie had come with him what would haue enſued? I am of opinion that the other would haue bene ſhrewdly ſhaken, for their battaile ground was ſo

ſtraight that they had not enough to haue ſet them in aray: when they ſhould haue come to fight wee might haue caſt vppon their flanckes (which was al vpon a ſtrong ground) tenne thouſand harquebuziers, ſupported with one thouſand horſe: Then with the reſt of the footmen and aboue one thouſand & fiue hundred horſe haue charged vpon their front, who could hardly haue borne it. The Catholick Captaines there preſent, if they liſt to ſay the truth cannot greatly gainſay this, for they neuer were ſo, peſtered as then, as my ſelfe haue heard euen of the beſt, who haue not concealed it from me. The night comming on the Prince went to take his lodging at Sanſay, which was but a league and a halfe of.
                     One thing worthie laughter which then happened I will not A pleaſant chance which troubled many. ſuppreſſe: and it was this. While wee houered, all our footmens cariage came and ſtayed along a woods ſide not farre from the taile of our men of warre, and there prouided them ſelues, weening they ſhould haue pitched in that place, & making aboue 4000. fires they perceiued not the retiring of the armie by reaſon of the night, whereby many maiſters had but had ſuppers. Some of the Catholickes watch haue confeſſed vnto me, that ſeeing ſo many fires and hearing ſuch noyſe they tooke it certainly to be our armie and expected the battaile in the morning: wherevpon they were the more diligent in fortifying all the waies. The late Captaine Garies alſo could me that himſelfe offered to goe and diſcouer what it might bee: but they would venture nothing againſt thoſe braue Souldiers. About midnight the Prince was aduertiſed that all the cariages were as it were encloſed and it was accompted loſt, neuertheleſſe, he ſent foure or fiue Cornets to get it away, and an houre after commanded one thouſand horſe and two thouſand harquebuziers to goe to the reſcue if the enemie followed. The firſt commers found our maiſters the 
                           •
                        arlets and lackies camped very orderly, warming themſelues, ſinging and making good cheare, yea a farre of men would haue thought them to haue bene 10000. men, neither were they any more afeard then if they had bene in ſome ſtrong towne: They began to laugh at this raſcaldrie, which for the moſt part is as fearfull as a Hare euen in place of aſſurance: and yet there in the middeſt not of great daunger onely but euen of death, was nothing but mirth: for they had very well ſupped with their maiſters victuals. They came to the head of this braue campe where the valianteſt lackies and boyes had ſet their watch and ſentinels, who from as farre as they could perceiue any, albeit a hundred
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
began to play into the ſquadrons which ſometimes it 
                           ••••
                        maged. There might a man ſee aboue 40000. men (the moſt French) in aray and not farre aſunder, their courages as fierce as their countenances braue, and many of them did but waite for the token of battaile.
                     Now muſt ye vnderſtande that vetweene the two armies there The extreame could kept the 2. armies from executing their pretenſes. was but a plaine fielde without any aduantage, which may make ſome man maruaile why they ioyned not: But on the other ſide ye muſt weete that there had not bene ſo ſharpe a winter ſeene in 20. yeeres before, neither was it only a hard froſt but withall there fell ſo terrible a ſleete that a footman could ſcarce march without falling, much leſſe the horſe, for it was ſo ſlipperie that a horſe could not paſſe a bancke of three or foure foote high. And whereas betweene the two armies there were many ſuch made for partition of lands, the ſame were as good as trenches: ſo as who ſo had attempted to aſſaile muſt of force haue bene wholy diſordered. This cauſed them to ſtand faſt each looking who would firſt begin this hazard or rather follie. No man would trie the paſſage, only there was ſome ſmall ſkirmiſh, and one houre before night they retired each into his quarter. The next morning they ſet themſelues againe in battaile aray diſcharging their artillerie as the day before: ſome alſo that went to ſkirmiſh, either brake or put their legges or armes out of ioynt, and more there were hurt by this incōuenience then by any harquebuze ſhot. The third day they ſhewed the like countenance, but could finde no meanes to ioyne without falling into great diſaduantage. But the fourth day Monſier retired a league of, not to refreſh his men (as we vſe to ſay) but to warme them vnder couert againſt the iniurie of time, for they were no longer able to beare the colde which killed diuers as well of the one as of the other. It is a manifeſt abuſe obſtinatly to labour to ouercome the ſharpneſſe of the weather: for ſith euen the hardeſt things are thereby broken, much more muſt man who is ſenſible giue place: as alſo that which followed teacheth that we ought not, but vpon great neceſſitie, to make the ſouldier beare more then he may. For within a fewe daies ſuch violent and lanquiſhing diſeaſes ſeaſed vpon them, that in one moneth I am aſſured there dyed aboue three thouſand of ours, beſides thoſe that retired home: and I haue heard that on the other part there were as many or more that tooke the ſame courſe. Euery mans deſire to fight, together with the preſence of their Generalles, made them to beare euen to extremitie:

howbeit, if I ſhould not lye, Monſiers parte endured moſt through want of the couert and victuals that we had. Some Cornets of horſe of both campes were lodged within halſe a league or three quarters of a league each of other: howbeit when they returned to their lodgings they were all ſo ſterued with colde that they had no mindes to moleſt their enemies, not ſo much as to giue one alarum, as if there had bene ſome perfect truce betweene them.
                     On the morowe after the departure of Monſiers armie there The Lord Admirals enterpriſe voide of his pretended effect. fell out a braue occaſion, which the Lord Admirall had before foreſeene, and was reaſonably hotly purſued, which neuertheleſſe had not the hoped ſucceſſe. He geſſed that the Catholickes, who the daies before were lodged half along the hedges, would (being gotten a little aloofe) ſcatter into the good villages, which in déede they did, ſo as in the bodie of the armie there remayned none but Monſiers owne perſon, the artillerie, the Suitzers, three or foure hundred horſe, and about twelue hundred harquebuziers. The reſt were ſome one league, ſome two leagues of. Now, about nine of the clocke in the morning, ſo ſoone as the Princes horſe were arriued, they ſent foorth twelue or foreteene thouſand harquebuziers with foure ſmall peeces, determining to ſet full vpon the bodie of the enemies armie, which was but a ſmall league and a halfe of. They knewe well enough that there was a ſmall brooke with diuers foords ouer it, which by the report of their guides they tooke not to bee very difficult: alſo hauing ouer night diſcouered and taſted the guardes thereof they found them forceable. Thus they marched making a braue head: and when they came to the paſſage which was within a quarter of a league of their campe, they found it kept by ſome footmen, who doubted no ſuch matter. The ſame did they charge very liuely, but could not force it, & ſo ſtayed there vpon the ſkirmiſh. Their campe hauing hereof taken a very hot alarum, began to ſhoote of Canon after Canon to call in their ſcattered people, and very certaine it is that at the beginning they were greatly aſtonied: then their Captaines prouided for the reenforcing of the guard of this paſſage: howbeit, within a good quarter of an houre after the Lord Admirall ſet vpon an other paſſage which was alſo as well defended: but could they haue bene wonne there was ſome likelihood that their armie might haue bene ouertaken: For before they could haue had the ſuccour of a thouſand men, wee ſhould at the firſt comming haue ſet in their faces 1500. horſe and 6000. harquebuziers, which would haue ſhaken them

ſhrewdly. About two houres after, being encreaſed they planted ſome peeces vpon a riſing: and after ſome ſhot on each ſide the colde cauſed euery man to retire.
                     As well the gentrie as common Souldiers on both ſides did The retract of both the armies through the extreamitie of the colde. much murmure againſt their Captaines, in that without any profite they were made a pray vnto the froſtes and colde, as alſo they complayned that famine aſſaulted them, ſo as if they would not prouide for them in ſafe & fortified places, they being no loger able to endure ſuch extremities, would place themſelues. Hereto was there no contradiction, for their Captaines entents did concurre with their deſires. The Catholicks went to lodge beyond Loyre, about Saumure: The Proteſtants returned to Montreuill-bellay and Touars. In this laſt action I conſider that many good occaſions doe fall out when the armies are lodged ſcatteringly, which ſhould diſpoſe their leaders to watch diligently for feare of trying one vnfortunate houre. At the leaſt ought they to labour to be able with Alexander to ſay: I haue ſlept ſoundly, for Antipater hath watched for me. Some there are that thinke that the readers can gather but ſmall inſtruction in the view of things not performed, which they tearme vnperfect workes: but I am not of their minde. For whenſoeuer any action together with the circumſtances thereof is truely ſet downe, albeit it reacheth but halfe the way, yet may there ſtill bee ſome fruite gathered thereof: euen as men may take ſome examples by ſuch as liue but to the third or fourth parte of the common courſe of mans life: for vertue will ſomewhat appeare in all parts of mans age or actions, and this ſhall cauſe me yet to ſet downe here one bould attempt, which albeit it came not to effect, is neuertheleſſe worthie to be knowne.
                     The Countie of Briſſack was the dealer and attempter thereof The Earle of Briſſackes bould enterpriſe and what came of it. during the aboade of both armies. He was bould, and for his age very wiſe: but his exceſſiue deſire of glorie did euen rauiſh him to high and difficult attempts. The Lords Admirall and Andelot were lodged in the towne of Montreuill-belay with their cornets which were great. In one of the ſuburbes at hand was there alſo two cōpanies of footmen in the rou
                           〈…〉
                        e of a ſimple watch, as well before their lodgings as at the gates. The gentlemen did onely keepe the rounds euery houre about the walles, and this ſeemed to ſuffice. For by reaſon that vppon the way from Saumure there were in a great ſuburbe beyond the riuer ſixe or ſeauen regiments of footmen, the towne was couered on that ſide: On the other ſide

there were great mariſhes a league about, which could not be paſſed but in certaine places, alſo nine or tenne Cornets of horſemen lodged in the villages on the hether ſide, who beate the waies both night and day. All this ſo aſſured the towne as there was ſmall likelihood that it could fall into any daunger. Now as in theſe ciuill warres men haue alwaies had good aduertiſements, by reaſon that the ſecrete enemies are ſtill hidden in the parties bowels, ſo the ſayd Countie was firſt aduertiſed of the ſmall watch kept in the towne: ſecondly that by going two leagues about out of the high way he might come, without the daunger of our horſemens watch. Howbeit he would not truſt hereto: but for his better aſſurance requeſted a French Captaine and an Italian by night to goe and diſcouer the truth. One of them did aſſure me that they came to the foote of the wall, and with a long pike and a corde with an yron hooke vpon it, they gat vp (for it was but lowe) and about nine of the clocke at night came euen to the Lord Admirals lodging, and returned againe vndeſcried. He vnderſtanding of this facilitie was very glad thereof, and therevpon layed his purpoſe aforeſaid in maner following. Himſelfe would with a thouſand choſen and nimble harquebuziers & fiue hundred horſe depart in ſuch time that he might come to Montreuill-bellay by three of ye clock in the morning, ſo to haue at the leaſt two houres of night to fauour his retraict if he ſhould faile of his purpoſe: but in caſe he did compaſſe it he ſhould haue made great fires about the Caſtle, ſo to aduertiſe the Catholicke armie which was at Saumure to march with all ſpeede to his ſuccour, as aſſuring himſelfe not to be forced without the Canon, neither is it to bée doubted but in ſixe houres they might haue bene there. So doing he ſhould take two notable Captaines in the middeſt of their aſſurance, and 100. gentlemen of name: moreouer he ſhould diſperſe this aduantguard there lodged, which would neuer haue abidden the comming of the Catholicks ſuccour, ſo ſore would they haue bene aſtonied, yea & peraduē
                        ture other inconueniences might haue enſued. I for my parte who was then there & haue wel viewed both the inſide & the outſide, alſo the ſtate of the affaires do not think the execution therof to haue bene vnpoſſible: But as it is requiſite that God ſhould watch ouer thē that ſleep & vpon the preſeruation of cities: ſo when the Countie was vpon his way to performe his enterpriſe, he light vpon an vnlooked for miſhap which ouerthrew all his entent. For hauing to yt effect ſee forward with 12. ladders & his men well reſolued, being

within two good leagues of the towne, by chaunce he met with two hundred Proteſtants horſemen that were going to beate about who ſeeing this great troope of horſemen and footmen in the fielde, did ſuddenly returne and giue the alarum both to the towne and to the other quarters of the horſemen, whereby the Countie was forced to retire. Afterward the Lord Admirall cauſed greater watch vpon the waies and to beate the fieldes oftner, albeit he neuer knewe of this enterpriſe nor my ſelfe neither, vntill after the peace concluded. Truely I doe greatly commend this valiant enterpriſe of this yong noble gentleman, to whom the only daring to attempt it was an honor. Howbeit, I meruaile not that the Lord Admirall neuer doubted any ſuch matter, for he muſt, as a man ſhould ſay, haue foreſeene it by inſpiration. Neuertheleſſe, it is good for a man when he is neere a great power and ſuch reſolute Captaines to haue a double care, and to thinke that the deſire of honor will furniſh them of wings.
                  
                  
                     Of the death of the Prince of Condé at Baſſac.
                     
                        THE Proteſtants hauing in the former What happened before the battaile of Baſſac. daies endured much, founde the more ſweetneſſe in their aboade in Poictow, whether they were retired: where they were aduertiſed that Monſiers armie was in the field, marching toward Angoleſme. There were newly come to him two thouſand Reiſtres, and as I ſuppoſe to the end the ſooner to ende the warre he purpoſed to force his enemies either to fight, or els to ſhut vp themſelues in the townes. In the one he had the aduantage: in the other he deminiſhed their reputation. The Prince and Admirall vpon this aduice cauſed their men to cloſe, determining to keepe themſelues along the banckes of the riuer of Charente, ſo to behould their countenances, but to hazard nothing: as alſo to fauour their Houlds for the furniſhing wherof with men they muſt

diminiſh there armie. There was nothing done worthie remembranee vntil the Catholiks came to Chaſteaunueuf, which ſtādeth vpon the ſame riuer, where at theyr firſt comming they tooke the Caſtle which had but a bad keeper: And becauſe the bridge was broken in two places, the Admirall himſelfe to the end to diſcouer their countenance and the paſſage would needs come thether with 7. or 800. horſe & as many harque buziers, hauing the riuer ſtill betweene thē, where he began a ſkirmiſh with ſome people whō they had ſent ouer either by bôate or vpon ſome plankes ſodeinly laide, which laſted not long: In the meane time it might bee eaſily perceiued that they would labour to paſſe ouer there.
                     The Lord Admirall deſiring as much as he might to preſerue The euell keeping of the paſſage and their ſmale diligence to ioyne together cauſe of the ouerthrow ſhortly enſuing. his credite, and to giue his enimies to vnderſtand that he would not giue them ground: foote by foote that he purpoſed to ſtop their paſſage yet for one daie: & in the ſame place appointed two regiments of footmen to lodge within a quarter of a league of the bridge, and eight hundred horſe a little behinde. This done, with the reſt of the auan
                           •
                        gard he retyred to Baſſac, which was a league of, and the Prince came to Iarnae which is one league farther, but his commandement was not performed: for both horſemen and footemen ſeeing that in the places appointed there were fewe houſes and no virtuals or forrage, hauing quite forgotten the cuſtome of the camp and wanting of prouiſion at home, tooke their quarters elſe where. Thus moſt of the troop departed to take their lodgings, ſo as there remayned but few vppon the place who ſetteled themſelues halfe a league from the paſſage: whereof it enſued that the gard was very weake, neither could it approch neere inough to heare or giue allarum to the enemies gard from time to time according as was deuiſed, ſo to haue made them beleeue that our whole auantgard had bene there lodged. The Catholikes who were reſolued, albeit our whole campe would haue letted them, to ſeaze vppon this paſſage, through the diligence of the Lord of Biron not onelie repaired the olde bridge, but alſo made a new of ſuch beates as are ordinarilie tranſported in armies royall, which was alſo finiſhed before midnight: and then they began to paſſe ouer without anie noiſe both horſemen and footmen.
                     The Proteſtants that watched there did ſcarce perceiue their paſſage before breake of daie, whereof immediatly they certefied the L. Admiral, who vnderſtanding that moſt of his men were lodged ſcatteringlie, euen on the ſame ſide that the enemies came, ſent

them worde of their paſſage, warning them to drawe to him withall ſpeede ſo to retire together, in the meane time that hee woulde houer at Baſſac: he alſo commaunded the carriages and footemen to retire which was performed. Now if then, yea an howre after his whole troopes had beene come together, they might eaſily haue departed, euen a ſoft pace. But the delay of time being at the leaſte three howres, while he ſtayed for them, was the cheefe cauſe of our miſhap: neither woulde hee looſe ſuch troopes conteining eight or nine corners of horſe-men, and ſome enſignes of foote-men, whoſe captains were the County of Montgomery, the Lord of Acier, and Colonell Pluuiault.
                     
                     In the end beeing all ioyned with him except Colonell Acier 
                        The battaile of Baſſac with the taking and cauſe of the Prince of Condees death. who tooke the way to Angoleſme, the enimies that ſtill paſſed ouer weare waren ſo mighty, and come ſo neere vnto vs, alſo the ſkirmiſh ſo whot, that it appeared that needes wee muſt fight. Hereupon the Prince of Condee, who was already a good halfe league vpon his retraict, vnderſtanding that they ſhoulde be forced to buckle, hauing the ſtonracke of a Lion woulde needes haue a ſhare. When to the end to retire we forſooke, a ſmall brooke, which coulde not be paſſed but in two or three places, the Catholicks ſet forwarde the flowre of their horſemen vnder the conduct of the Lordes of Guize, Martigues and Briſſac, who ouerthrew fower cornets of Proteſtants, beeing vpon the retraict, where my ſelfe was taken priſoner: then did they ſet vpon the Lord of Andelot in a village, who bare their brunt wel ynough: hauing ouerpaſſed him they perceiued two great battailes of horſe, among whome were the Prince and Admirall, who ſeeing themſelues beſet prepared to charge.
                     The Lorde Admirall gaue the firſt onſet, and the Prince the ſecond, which was fiercer then ye firſt: at the beginning they forced al yt came to turne their backs, & truely it was well fought on euery ſide. Howbeit in as much as the whole army of the Catholicks, ſtill came on the Proteſtants were forced to flee after they had loſt in the field, about a hundred Gentlemen, but eſpecially the Princes owne perſon, who being borne downe coulde haue no ſuccour, and hauing yeelded himſelfe to the Lorde of Argences, there came a Gaſcoigne Gentleman named Monteſquion and diſcharged a piſtoll through his head whereof he died.
                     His death bred wonderfull ſorrowe among the Proteſtantes, and as great ioy to ſome of his aduerſaries, who ſuppoſed they

ſhoulde ſoone ouercome the whole body, nowe that they had cut of ſo good a head, howbeit, as ſome did greatly blame him, ſo others there were that commended his valour. As alſo this commendation The praiſe of the Prince of Conde: alſo what happened after his death. may iuſtly be giuen him that in bouldneſſe or curteſy no man of his time excelled him. Of ſpeech hee was eloquent rather by nature then art: he was liberall and affable vnto all men, and withall an excellent Captaine, although he loued peace. Hee bare him ſelfe better in aduerſity then in proſperitie. His greateſt commendation of all was his ſtedfaſtneſſe in religion. My beſt is, to holde my peace for feare of ſaying to little, albeit I thought good to ſpeake ſomewhat, leaſte I ſhoulde be accounted ingratefull to the memory, of ſo valiant a Prince. Many a worthy perſon both Catholike and Proteſtant, whome our ciuill ſtormes haue caried away, are to be lamented: for they honored our Fraunce and might well haue holpen to encreaſe it, had not diſcord prouoked the valour of the one to the deſtruction of the valour of the other. After this blowe the Proteſtantes army was wonderfully aſtonied, and it fell out well for them, that the country whereinto they were withdrawne was all full of water: for thereby were the Catholicks reſtrained, and they had time to recouer themſelues▪ Hauing atchieued ſuch a victory the Catholicks imagined, that ſuch of our townes as were not very ſtrong woulde bee amazed: But the Admirall had placed in them the moſt part of his footemen, thereby breake this firſt fury: ſo as when they ſet forward to aſſalt Coignac they well found that ſuch catts were not caught without mittens: for therein were fowre regimentes of footemen, but as when they had ſent three or fowre hundred ſhot vnto the parkeſide to diſceuer that part, they that were within ſent foorth 10, or 1200, who ſent them ſo quickly away that they came no more: as alſo they had in their army but ſowre Canons, and as many Culuerines. Monſieur contenting him ſelfe with his victory, and perceiuing that hee coulde not performe any greate matter, in his tender youth triumphing ouer moſte excellent captaines, as alſo hee had good counſaile and aſſiſtaunce of other worthy Captaines that accompanied him, retired to refreſh his men.
                     In this action we are to gather that in whatſoeuer waighty and daungerous attempt, it muſt not bee followed to halues: for we muſt either quight leaue it off, or elſe employ whatſoeuer our ſenſes and force.

Moreouer, this is to be noted, that when armies are lodged ſcatteringly, they incurre viuerſe inconueniences which the ſufficiencie of the beſt Captaines is not able withſtand.
                  
                  
                     Of the notable paſſage of the Duke of Aipont from the borders of Rhine, euen into Aquitaine.
                     
                        MAny that ſhall heere ſee it ſet downe as it were for a meruayle that a forraine enimies armie coulde pierce ſo very far into the realme of France, wyll not peraduenture thinke it ſtraunge: becauſe that conſidering other examples, namelie that of the Emperour Charles the fifth, when hee came to beſiege Saint Deſier, they will not take ſuch expeditions to be ſo extraordinarie as we wold make them beleeue for. Howbeit if they liſt well to waigh the length of the iourney, alſo the mightie and continuall lets and hinderances that this had, I doubt they wil be of another opinion. Yet will I confeſſe that ciuill warres doe greatly fauour the entrie of our neighbours, who otherwiſe without the ſupport of one of the factions neuer durſt haue enterpriſed the ſame. But when on the one ſide the fauour is ſmall, and on the other ſide the reſiſtance great, we are the more to admire the deeds of thoſe that haue ſo aduentured.
                     Touching that which is alleadged of the Emperour Charles, I will aunſwere in fewe wordes. Firſt, for his perſon hee was the mightieſt Captaine in Chriſtendome: then for his campe it conſiſted of fiftie thouſand men: laſtlie, that at ſuch time as hee came in the King of England had alreadie taken Bollein, which cauſed King Fraunces, who woulde not aduenture anie thing raſhlie, to leaue the paſſage more free. Nowe the Duke of Biponts caſe is farre otherwiſe: for notwithſtandinge he were a valyaunt

valyant Prince, yet did he not any thing neere approch the militarie ſufficiencie of the other: and a great helpe and eaſe it was for him that he was accompanied with the Prince of Orenge, Countie Lodowicke, & Countie Wolrad of Mansfield, beſides other braue French Captaines, and two thouſand footmen and horſemen of the ſame nation that ioyned with him. His number of Germaines was fiue thouſand Lance knights and ſixe thouſand Reiſters. With this ſmall armie did he paſſe forward in purpoſe to ioyne with the Princes power.
                     The King vnderſtanding that he prepared for their ſuccour, did The lets to keepe the Duke of Biponts army from ioining with the Princes. immediatlie appoint a ſmall armie vnder the leading of the Duke of Aumale to withſtand him: and doubting of the weakneſſe therof, he alſo ioyned thereto another vnder the gouernment of the D. of Nemours. Theſe two bodies vnited did in footmen exceede the Duke of Bipont, but in horſe were inferiour vnto him. They determined not to ſtate his comming into the realme to moleſt them, and therefore marched euen into the borders of Germanie, and toward Sauerne ouerthrew the regiment of one named Le Coche, compoſed of certaine ſtraies gathered together who meant to haue ioyned with him. Neuertheleſſe he entered into France on the ſide of Burgundie, whether they came to coaſt him, and vntill he came to the riuer of Loire which was little leſſe than foure ſcore leagues they neuer gaue him ouer, but ſtill were either on his flankes or tayle, yea, many times the armies were in ſight each of other, and had great ſkirmiſhes.
                     I haue oft heard the Prince of Orenge report that he meruayled in ſo long and difficult a waie that the Catholikes could neuer finde anie fit occaſion to their aduauntage, for ſometimes they had fayre offers by reaſon of the peſtering with ſtore of carriages. Neither can I omit this, that beſides the braue forces of the Kings armie, they had other aduantages which were not ſmal, as the fauour of the townes, Countries, and riuers, yea, and one point more was to be noted, that is, their notiſe of the enemies purpoſes which conſiſted in making of way and winning by power or pollicy ſome paſſage ouer Loire. For albeit both the Dukes of Nemours and Aumale were braue Captains, yet notwithſtanding all their pollicies and endeauours this armie gate to the ſayd riuer. Some Catholikes reporte that the diſcorde that fell betweene them hindred diuerſe braue enterpriſes which they might haue executed if they had ſtill agreed. I wot not how it was, but if that were true it was no

meruaile that they fought no
                           •
                        , or rather that they were not fought with all▪ but thus 
                           〈◊〉
                         I haue learned, that the enimies had ſmall notice of their braules. This great barre, the riuer of Loire might alſo haue bene a ſecond & verie great difficultie to ſtaie this Dutch armie, in that ſo lowe it was not wadeable, beſides that all the townes ſtanding thervpon were enemies: but the paſſage ouer was in neceſſarie for them, that it ſo doubled the diligence, raſhneſſe, and inuentions of the French Proteſtants that they aſſayled the towne of Charite which had a goodly bridge, and finding it but badly furniſhed with men, they preſſed ſo ſore vpon it, that what with countenaunce and threates, before anie ſuccour came they had carried it awaie, which was vnto them a wonderfull ioy. For had not that ben, they were in a verie b
                           ••
                         caſe & muſt haue ben forced to haue ſought the head of the fai
                           •
                        riuer, which would haue lengthned their way 60 leagues, and which was worſe, taking that courſe they ſhould haue peſtured themſelues in a hilly and wood Countrie where their horſmen could haue ſtood them but in ſmall ſtead.
                     I haue ſometimes heard the Lord Admirall diſcourſing hereof among his familiars, account this paſſage of the ſtraungers almoſt impoſſible For (ſayd he) we cannot helpe them by reaſon of Monſiers armie which lyeth in our waie, and as for them they haue another vpō their arm; alſo ſo difficult a riuer to ſtop their courſe, that it is to be feared that they ſhal not wel void this inconuenience without ſhame or loſſe. Agayn albeit they had paſſed it yet the 2. armyes ioyned together wil haue ouerthrowen them before we can come neere by 20 leagues to ſuccour them: but when we hard of the ſucceſſe of La Charite, alſo yt they were determined to trie al dangers to ioyn with him, he grew into better hope and ſayd: This is a Princes good prognoſtication, les vs by diligence and reſolution perfect it. This cauſed the Lordes, Princes of Nauarre & Conde the ſame, who had allowed and receiued leaue for generalles of the Proteſtants to march toward the marches of Limoſin, ſo to drawe neere the armie of Monſieur, and to keepe it ſtill occupied: and to ſaie the truth wee were dayly as it were in a foure waiting when we ſhould heare that two ſuch mightie armies had oppreſſed our Reiſters: but it fel out otherwiſe: for they watched their opportunitie ſo 
                           •
                        itlie and ſpeedely, that beeing guided by their French troopes, wherein the Lorde of Auy bare Of the ioining of the Germaines with the Princes. himſelfe moſt valyantlie, they out went them and drew to the place where the Lorde Admirall had ſent them worde that he woulde meet them with ten thouſand harquebuziers, and two thouſand and fiue hundred horſe.
                     
                        
Thus did theſe two armies ioyne with greate 
                           ••
                        a
                           •
                        ulation. I will not heere 
                           •
                        axe the Generalls and braue Captaines of the Catholikes for ſuffering them to paſſe, becauſe I 
                           〈◊〉
                         not what reaſons they had to diuert them, neither will I extreamely command thoſe that paſſed, but rather muſt thinke it to haue ben a great good hap for them, the lyke whereof doe ſometimes appeare in militarie action: where in great Captaines in their warre are to learne in their greateſt extremities not to abandon all hope: for one onely fauourable accident which commonly followeth the diligent and ſhunneth the ſlothfull, may ſuffice to free them. Both the armies being then verie mightie (for there were in the Kings campe aboue thirtie thouſand men, and in the Princes full 25000.) were forced for theyr better commoditie of virtualles to ſeuer themſelues (for the countrie of Limoſin is but barren) but they drew togither ward againe about Yries La Perche.
                     
                     The Lord Admirall perceiuing that the barrenneſſe of the The occurrences betweene both the armies at Rochell. Countrie forced them to lodge ſc
                           ••
                        teringlie alſo that beeing craggie and full of wood, the places for the armies were oftentimes verie diſcommodious, determined rather to preuent then to bee preuented. Wherefore hee counſayled the Princes to goe and ſurpriſe the Catholike armie which was not farre of at a place called Roch-labelle. They ſet forward before breake of daie, in purpoſe to giue battayle, and came ſo fitlie that before anie allarum taken, they were within a quarter of a league of the enemies front, who were lodged ſtrongly, and the Lord of Stoſſy at the noiſe comming in with fiue hundred harquebuziers to ſupport three hundred of his men who kept watch at the chiefe entrie, found the ſkirmiſhe verie hot. And wee may well ſaie that hee bare himſelfe verie valyantlie: for hee helde foure thouſande Proteſtant harquebuziers plaie a long houre, which time ſtood the Catholike armie in good ſtead to ſet themſelues in order.
                     The Lorde Admirall meruailing that they could not force the paſſage, ſent thether Captaine Bruel a ſkilfull man. Hee by and by perceiued that our ſhotte endeauoured to ouercome the others rather by multitude than by arte, wherefore to make ſhort worke, hee ſpake to the Captaines, and hauing ordered the troopes, aſſayled their flanks, and withal ſetting forwarde foure Cornets to ſuſtayne them, he beganne a ſharpe onſette wherein our men hauing broken certain caſemates that couered the enimies did ſo diſorder thē that ſoone after they fled, leauing diuerſe of their

men
                           •
                         dead with 22. of their officers: alſo their Colonell priſoner, who that daie had done Monſieur good ſeruice: for had it not bene his reſiſtance the Proteſtants had come without le
                           •
                        te to their ordinance: But becauſe it rayned all the daie, and the Catholike army was placed vpon the aduauntage, they could not worke anie great effect and therfore retired, hauing ſhewed themſelues too rigorous in their execution, for they tooke verie fewe priſoners, wherea
                           •
                         the Catholikes were 
                           •
                        ore prouoked, and reuenged themſelues intime and place. It is a commendation to fight well, but it deſerueth no leſſe praiſe to b
                           •
                         genele and courteous to thoſe whome the firſt fur
                           •
                        e of our weapons haue pardoned, and into whoſe handes our ſelues may another time fal, vnleſſe there be great cauſe to the contrarie. And in ſkirmiſhes ſkill and pollicie is in my opinion as neceſſarie as violence, which experience doth 
                           〈◊〉
                         coufirme. For if the lande be ſomewhat couerd, a man may vſe ſundrie aduantages, which the Spaniards and Italians can verie wel practiſe, as being ingenious people: but it is alwaies moſt profitable to order their men in ſmal troopes, to aſſayle on the flankes ere they bee aware, to place the troope that beareth the brunt verie well, and finallie to come reſoſolutely to the ſword.
                  
                  
                     The ſiege of Poictiers.
                     
                        MAny enterpriſes doe men attempt in the The purpoſe of the Princes army before the ſiege of Poictiers: alſo the taking of Luſignan. wars, which were neuer premeditated, as alſo they giue ouer others long before thought vppon, which proceedeth of the alterations which time bringeth foorth: and as it is a ſigne of valiant
                           •
                        e well to execute, ſo is it alſo a token of wiſedome well to deliberate, both which partes are neceſſarie in a Captaine: albeit there be none ſo perfect in this art, but that ſometime they erre and ſtumble, eſpecially in ciuill warres: which may the rather excuſe the errour that the Proteſtants are ſayd to haue committed in beſieging Poictiers. Thus ſtood the caſe. After the departure from

                        Roch-labelle either armie both needed and were alike deſirous to refreſh themſelues in ſome fatter Countrie than Limof
                              •
                           n, to which generall diſpoſition their Captaines were forced to yeelde (for in ciuill warres ſome time the cart goeth before the horſe) and therefore recoiled drawing toward thoſe quarters that had not ben ea
                           •
                        ē. The Lordes Princes and Admiral conſidering that in their abſence the Countie of Lude had aſſayled Nyort (which through the diligence of the Lord of Thelignie, who tranſported his forces thether, was reſcued) and being grieued that anie man ſhoulde come to moleſt their Prouince from whence they had all their commodities, which was to them of as great importance as to drie vp their milch cowe, did determine to purge it and ſeaze vppon Saint Maixant, Luſignen, and Mirebeau (making as then no mention of Poictiers) to the end the ſayd Prouince might monethlie yeeld them 60000. franks, all garriſons paide, beſides the profits of the ſea, which alſo amounted to a great deale: the ſame to ſerue for the ſtraungers who cryed continuallie for money. This performed they went to take Saumur, which ſtandeth vpon the riuer of Loire and is verie weake. The ſame did they purpoſe to fortefie to the end ſtil to haue one paſſage aſſured, and the reſt of Summer and Autume to tranſport the warre toward Paris which they ſuppoſed woulde neuer encline to peace vntill ſhe felt the ſcourge euen at her gates. Being returned into their Countrie they thought that Luſignen which was but a caſtle would not ſo long withſtand them as Saint Maixant, wherin was an old regiment vnder the conduct of Onoux: beſides their deſire to haue ſixe Canons which the Lord of Lude had left in the ſayd Caſtle, did the rather inuite them to aſſault it, as they did, and in few dayes caryed it awaie. The towne of Poictiers, hearing the ordinance walke ſo neere, furniſhed it ſelf with men: yea, the Lords of Guize and Maine came in with fiue or ſix hundred horſe, rather as it was ſayde, to moleſt the Proteſtants armie, then thinking to be beſieged.
                     The Proteſtants about the ſame time chaunced to ſurpriſe the The cauſe of the ſiege of Poictiers. towne of Chaſtelleraut, which cheered their hearts and cauſed many to encline to the ſiege of Poictiers, for that on the moſt daungerous ſide, the ſame couered thoſe that ſhould beſiege it. Two meetings were there for reſolution, & ſundry miſliked yt aſſailing therof, namely the L. Admirall who wiſhed them to proſecute his firſt platforme: alleadging that it was too well furniſhed with men of calling, that ordinarily ſuch great cites are but ſepulchres to theyr

armies: and that it were beſt to returne to Saint Maixant, which might be forced in eight daies. But the chiefe Lords and Gentlemen of Poictou laboured them earneſtlie as well in the counſayles as elſe where, not to looſe ſo braue an occaſion, affirming the towne to be verie weak: that the more people therin, the more bootie: that they ſhould not want artillerie: that taking it, they ſhould fully obtaine all that rich Prouince, and put the Catholike Gentrie, which by continuall roades troubled all that we poſſeſſed there, from their place of retreate. To this opinion did the chiefe of ſhe counſaile condeſcend, who peraduenture had not ſufficientlie conſidered that euerie man is not onelie affectionate, but alſo paſſioned to ſet his owne Countrie free: as alſo it was added yt the taking of the Lords of Guize and his brother, two great Princes, and redieſt to moleſt vs, would be a braue priſe. To be briefe, in this deliberation were at large ſet downe whatſoeuer the fruites redounding of ſuch a conqueſt: but of the inconueniences which, inſuing hereof, we ſhould encur there was no mention, as in deed that ſtring is ſ
                           •
                        arch touche when men will not be diuerted from their purpoſes. Afterwarde they ſent with all ſpeed to Rochell for pouder and ſhot, and ſo departed to cloſe vp Poictiers. This ſiege being at large deſcribed by other hiſtoriographers, I will not ſtand vppon to recite: onelie I will note a few particularities which peraduenture ſhall not be ſuperfluous.
                     The firſt touching the ſ
                           •
                        ituation wherein we ſee one thing that The notableſ
                              •
                            perticularities of the ſiege of Poicters. greatlie anoyeth the towne, and another that benefiteth it as much. The annoiance are the mountaines which in many places do inuiron it, and are ſo nere that a man can ſcarce be in couert, but that he ſhall be deſcried and hurt, as well in head as courtine, not onelie by the artillerie, but euen by harquebuze ſhot: for in ſome places they lie not aboue foure hundred paces of. The benefite are other mountaines within it which ſerue for large platformes, alſo the riuers that inuiron the wals: ſo as ſtil they haue that great ditch to paſſe, which is a verie ſore let, & were it not for that, I had rather be without with 4000. men to aſſault it, than within with as many to defend it. In ſumme, it is a very bad place and worthie to honour the defender. The Proteſtants deſtruction was their ſmall draught of artillery, munition, & pioners, for when they aſſailed it in one place, they were not able therby to proſecute the battery or other affaires, but giuing the Catholikes two or three daies reſpite, they prepared fit remedies: and then they muſt begin new batteries in other places, where they had the like ſucceſſe. In my opinion it were the P.

of Parmaes part to aſſaile forts & the Proteſtants to defend them: for ſo doe they oftentimes performe their partes moſt valiantlie. I wot not whether I ſhal be beleeued if I report a kind of aſſault and defence propounded by the beſiegers and beſieged when they beate vpon the Abbeſſe medow ſide. The Proteſtāts had won the breach in the wall, and the Catholikes had a verie ſmal trench within 300 paces of it, and behind them a great voide ſpace of one thouſand paces long and fiue hundred paces broad, all vnder the command of a mountaine. Our Captaines meant hauing with 400. Gentlemen and eight hundred harquebuziers, who might eaſily haue forced the ordinarie gard, driuen the Catholikes from that trench to haue ſent after them two hundred horſe vnder the Lord of Moüy to take the fielde, which they muſt needes paſſe before they came to the houſes: then ſhould alſo their main power led by the Lord of Briguemaud, Marſhall of the campe haue followed. This counſayle was taken vpon a certaine aduice which they had that the Lorde of Guize had appointed 200. ſpeares to that place there to fight: and alreadie in the former allarum, we had ſeene diuerſe ſpeares there: But this camiſado was not performed by reaſon the daie came vpon vs, and ſo we were diſcouered. Howbeit howſoeuer the matter had fallen out, had it not bene wonderful in an aſſalt to ſee the horſemen fight among the footmen on either part? There alſo happened another matter contrarie to that which ordinarily chaunceth in townes not forced: that is, that they within loſt more than they that were without: neuertheleſſe ſuch as were loſt it was with great commendation, for we might plainlie ſee them come boldly, and aſſuredly preſent themſelues with the Canon and harquebuze ſhot.
                     In the ende Monſieurs armie did the Proteſtants greate honour, Vpon what occaſions the ſiege was raiſed from before Poicters. in comming to aſſayle Chaſtellerault. For the ſame was to them a lawfull occaſion to raiſe the ſiedge, with neuertheleſſe they woulde haue raiſed, becauſe they wiſt no longer of what wood to make their boultes, and I beleeue that the beſieged were no leſſe buſied. Concerning the ſiege of this towne, thus much I will ſay, that the captaynes doe eaſily yeelde to any high attemptes, for hauing great ſtomackes they aime at obiectes of the ſame nature: howbeit the ſureſt way is to rely vpon the prouerbe, He that gripeth too much, ſtraineth but little. The D. of Guize & his brother purchaſed great fame in kéeping ſo weake a hold, conſidering their youth. Some made no leſſe accoūt of this act thē of yt of Mets Others ſaid yt the Admiral he ſtaied ther purpoſely to catch thoſe▪
                        
Princes whome they preſumed to be perticularlie his enimies: but himſelfe hath often tolde mee that if the towne had beene taken, ſo farre woulde hee haue beene from ſuffering them to bee anie waie miſuſed that contrarywiſe, he would haue cauſed them to haue bene honourablie intreated according to their dignities, as hee had done their vnkle the Marques of Elbeufe when he fell into his handes at the taking of the Caſtle of Cane, and my ſelfe do remember that at the capitulation he ſent me, becauſe I knew him, into the Caſtle to aſſure him from hauing anie harme, which was obſerued. Monſieur ſeeing our armie, fraught with ſpight, riſe to come towarde him, hauing in vaine attempted one aſſault againſt Chatellerault where the Popes Italians, who were nothing ſlacke in their duties, were receiued according to that good affection that the Proteſtants doe beare to theyr maiſter, did retire. We folowed weening to haue conſtrayned him to buckle, but ſtill hee kept a riuer in our faces to coole our heate. When an action tending to diuerſion fayleth in the acceſſaries, and is executed in the principall, it is not to be complayned of: for the great fruit of the one dooth ſufficiently recompence the ſmall loſſe of the other: as alſo we are to note that wee ought to ſtudy thrice or foure times before we vndertake to beſiege any great towne once.
                  
                  
                     Of the battaile of Montcontour.
                     
                        SOme will ſay that this battaile was a conſequence of the ſiege of Poictiers, becauſe the Diuers cauſes of the ouerthrow of the Princes armie at Montcontour. 
                        Proteſtāts power was much weakned before: which in troth happened rather through ſickneſſe and the retiring both of Gentlemen and ſouldiers then by any violent death. Indeed this was one of the cauſes of our miſhap, but there were others, as our ſeiourning at the borough of Fay La Vineuſe,
                        
while the armie of Monſieur grewe ſtrong at Chinon. Whereto we were all forced, becauſe then all our draught horſe for our ordinance were ſent awaie to carie to Luſignan part of that artillery which had ben emploied at the ſiege of Poictiers, & had euer ſince remained in a Caſtle, which returned ſo iuſt, that had they ſtaied but one daie longer, we ſhould haue bene driuen to haue forſaken ours by reſon of the approch of Monſieurs army to London, which was within three leagues of vs. Alſo becauſe we were in a deuoured ſoyle and but badly ſeated, the Lord Admiral thought it better to goe lodge at Montcontour, where the lodginges were commodious and victualls more plentifull: and I beleeue that as well he as many other were deceiued, in that no man ſuppoſed that they whome we had forced to ſo long a retreate & that in the night, from before Chaſtelleraud, could ſo ſoone haue bene readie to ſeeke vs. Thus on the fridaie he departed, ſending his carriage one waie while himſelfe with the armie went another.
                     Now neere to a village called Saint Clere, the one hearing in The charge & ſ
                              •
                           irmiſhes about Saint Cler. manner no noiſe of the other, the head of the Catholikes armie led by the Lord of Biron met with ours as we marched, almoſt vppon our flanke: he ſeeing opportunitie with one thouſand ſpeares gaue a charge vpon the Lord of Mouie, who was vpon the retreate with 300. horſe and two hundred harquebuziers on foote. Theſe hee ouerthrew and put to flight, and there were loſt the moſt part of the ſayd ſhot, and about fortie or fiftie horſe: This happening ſodainlie and at once with the ſound of foure Canons that were diſcharged, bredde ſuch a terror among our men, that without telling who had wonne or who had loſt, euerie man at the onelie noiſe they heard behinde them fled as halfe afraide. One thing I will aduow (not that I will ſpeake it to our reproch, but rather to ſhew preuention to be a cauſe of great diſorder, alſo that the hazards of warre are dangerous) that is, that had it not bene for a paſſage which was founde in time, where there could but twentie horſe paſſe in front, and ſo ſtaied the Catholikes, our whole armie had bene ouerthrowen at this firſt encounter. The Lord Admiral ſéeing this, ſhewed himſelfe to his men & gathered togither his troopes, ſo as at this paſſage, there were giuen two or thrée great aſſaults & repulſes of 1500. or 2000 horſe at a time: and whoſoeuer paſſed ouer, was ſoone driuen back: there did Countie Lodouicke & Countie Wolrad of Manſfield behaue thēſelues very wel. The two armies planted themſelues in battell araye, the one on the one ſide, and the other on the other,

within a good muſket ſhot together, where ours was ſomewhat in couert, neyther did I euer ſee any ſo neere together, and not to fight a maine battell. No man durſt aduenture any more ouer the paſſage, in reſpect of the daunger thereof, for ſundry ſquadrous would haue oppreſſed that which ſhould haue aduentured. But the Catholikes hauing their ordinance there, and ours beeing already at Mon
                              •
                           contour, they vſed it and therwith ſlue about 100 men in the ſquadrons, who neuertheleſſe ſet a good countenaunce, and had not the night come on vnder the fauour wherof euerie man retired, we had had more hurt. That at S. Denis, & this came wel for vs. In the morning Monſieur cauſed to diſcouer ye lodgings at Montcontour, and to taſt the Proteſtants, but he found them verie well forteſted in the ſuburbes, hauing no other comming thereto, where was a ſkirmiſh both of horſemen and footmen.
                     The ſame time it happened that two Catholike Gentlemen ſtragling came and ſpake to ſome Proteſtants in place where there A notable aduertiſement giuen before the battaile but not followed. was a ditch betweene: My maſters, ſayde they, we weare the badges of enemies, albeit we hate neither you nor your party. Warne my L Admirall to beware that hee fight not: for our armie through newe ſupplies is wonderfull mightie and verie reſolute, wherfore let him forbeare but one moneth onely, for all the nobilitie hath ſworne and tolde Monſieur that they will tarie no longer, howbeit if he employ them in that time they will do their indeuors. Let him remember how dangerous it is to iuſtle agaynſt the French furie which neuertheleſſe wil ſodainly be ouer: Thus if they haue not ſpeedie victory now, they ſhall vpon diuerſe conſiderations be driuen to peace, & the ſame to your aduantage. Tel him that this we haue leanred in place of credit, & were deſirous to aduertiſe him thereof. Thus they departed, & the others immedlatly came & made report hereof to the L. Admirall who liked it. They alſo told it to others of the principall of whom ſome thought it not to bee reiected but wiſhed it to bee followed: but the moſt parte tooke it to be a pollicie to aſtoniſh vs, ſaying moreouer that albeit it had ſome apparance of goodnes, yet in that proceeded from ſuſpected perſons, accuſtomed to vſe guile & deceit, it was not to be eſteemed of. This was another cauſe of our miſchiefe, in yt we to much neglected ye thing which ought to haue ben noted.
                     Then did they meet to learne what were beſt to be done: ſome propounded to goe & winne Eruaux, & ſo to put the riuer betweene vs & ye enemy, alſo to depart about 9. of ye clock al night, & ſo to march al night to get ſafe thether, becauſe we were ſo neere thē: but others

replyed, that theſe night retreates do print a certaine feare in thoſe that marke them, deminiſhe their credite, and embolden the enimy, The Counſells and difficulties in the Princes armie whereof enſued the meanes to the aduerſaries armie to aſſaile them. ſo as it were better to depart at breake of day, whoſe opinion was followed. Now was the Lord Admirall ſore troubled, as fearing leaſt the Reiſters ſhould raiſe any mutiny for want of pay, alſo ye 2. or 4. regiments of his own dwelling farre off, who already had aſked leaue, ſhould forſake him: he knew alſo that ſundry gentlemē of the countries in our poſſeſſion were already gone home: wherefore to the end to containe the army in duty, as alſo to refreſh it, he had requeſted the Lords Princes, who lay at Partenay, to come to thē, which they did & brought with them about 100 & 50 good horſes. In the morning we were on horſback by break of day, to march ſtraight to Exuaux, euery man with a white ſhirt, the better to bee known if we ſhould be forced to fight: But our Launceknights ſaid they would not march without mony: a quarter of an howre after fiue cornets of Reiſters ſayd as much, ſo as it was aboue an howre and a halfe before this tumult was appeaſed, wherof followed that we could not reach into a place of aduantage which had bene diſcouered nere vnto Exuaux where we might haue ſould our ſkinnes dearer, neither was this any of the leaſt cauſes of our loſſe. Hauing gone about a quarter of a league we perceiued the enimy comming towarde vs, ſo as wee had no more leaſure but to order our ſelues and get into a little cloſe vnder couert from the Canon. An other inconuenience alſo chanced vs in yt when the L. Admiral perceiued The battaile fought and wonne by Monſiers army ye 
                        Catholikes auantgard make ſtraight toward him, which was ſo ſtrong (for it conteyned nineteene cornets of Reiſters in two ſquadrons) he ſent to County Lodouicke, who led our battell to ſuccour him with three Cornets, he did ſo: but himſelfe brought them and at the ſame inſtant began the fight where hee remained faſt tied: for hereof it came to paſſe yt the ſaid body wanting a leader, wiſt not howe to behaue it ſelfe, and it is thought that if hee had beene there, he woulde haue done more, conſidering that beeing without both captein & order it had neuertheles almoſt ſhaken Mounſiers. The fight laſted ſomewhat more then halfe an houre, and all the Proteſtants army was put to flight, the Princes being yet young, were retired a little before. Almoſte all our footemen were cut in peeces, the artillery and enſignes taken and County Lodouike chaſed almoſt a league, who made a braue retreat with 3000 horſe in one body, neither was the L. Admiral ther, for he was wounded in ye beginning. The ſlaughter was great, for the Catholicks were

fore fleſhed through the cruelties vſed, ſayd they, at Roch-labelle, but eſpeciallie for the death of Saint Columbe, & others ſlaine in Bearn. Many alſo of our priſoners did they diſpatch for ſatiſfactiō. My ſelfe likewiſe in the heate had like to haue gone the ſame waie, had it not bene for the humanitie of Monſieur, who was an inſtrument of Gods bleſſing for the preſeruation of my life, which in my opinion I ought not to conceale. By this exploit wee may ſee that the ſame roiall armie which we cauſed ſo ſwiftlie to retire from before Chatelleraud, and that in the night, was able neuertheleſſe within three weekes after to ouercome vs, becauſe wee made ſome difficultie to retire by daie: alſo through ſtaying vppon the maitainance of our reputation in ſhew, wee loſt it in deede, which is one point ſometime to be thought vpon by all ſouldiours as well young as olde.
                  
                  
                     That the ſiege of Saint Iohn d'Angelie was the ſpringing againe of the Proteſtants.
                     
                        AS the ſiege of Poictiers was the beginning of the Proteſtants miſhappes, ſo was that of S. Ouer ſight of Mōſieurs army after their victorie. 
                        Iohn d'Angelie the ſtaie of the Catholikes good fortune. And had they not ſtaied therevppon, but purſued the relikes of the broken armie, they had brought it to naught, conſidering the aſtoniſhment therof and difficulties falling out. The Princes and Admirall retired with all that they could gather together ouer the riuer of Charent, & in the meane time tooke order in haſt for the keeping of the townes in Poicton, which laie next to the batterie: But fiue of them were at the firſt abandoned, viz. Parthenay, Nyort, Fontenay, Saint Maixant, and Chatelleraud, and the ſixt which was Luſignan at the ſight of the Canon yeelded. This ſo puffed vp the hope of the conquerours, that they imagined in ſhort ſpace to get all thoſe Prouinces, except the capitall towne which they tooke to be Rochel. Wherevppon they ſtill marched forward, imagining that all other townes after the example of theſe would haue yeelded. They directed their courſe toward Saint

                        Iohn d'Angelie which was not much ſtronger than Nyort, but being ſummoned would not yeeld: for the Lorde of Pilles beeing entered thereinto with parte of his regiment was deſired to fight.
                     I haue heard that at that time the chiefe Captaines that accompanied Monſieur wer called to know what was to be done. Some A notable counſaile houlden by the chief Captaines of this armie, and ſo their reſolution. ſayd: Sith that all the Princes footmen were cut in peeces, and ſo they had none but horſe & most of them Reiſters, who alſo were diſcontent and halfe marred for loſſe of their carriages, their aduice was to purſue them hotlie, ſo ſhoulde they come to one of theſe two points: either quite to ouerthrowe them or elſe to force them to parley for their returne into Germanie, which might eaſilie be compaſſed by giuing them two moneths paie. We alſo (ſayd they) knowe the Admirall to be one of the moſt politike Captaines in the world, & moſt ſkilfull in winding himſelfe out of aduerſitie if he may haue anie leaſure: He will repaire his power, and thereto adioyne more out of Gaſcogne & Languedock, ſo as in the ſpring we ſhall ſee him appeare with a newe armie wherewith he will harrie our Princes, moleſt vs, and burne euen to the gates of Paris. Moreouer the Princes of Nauarre and Condie comming among theſe conquered people will by their preſence by little and little cheere them vp againe, and waken many other flomackes as yet daunted in diuerſe places, vnleſſe with diligence we take frō them almeanes to preuaile of the time. They concluded that Monſieur with the two thirds of his armie ſhould follow them, for ſo he might vndoubtedly in ſhort ſpace force the Captaines for their refuge to enter ſome weake holde, which might finiſh the warre.
                     
                     Others being of another opinion, ſayd that they now reaped one of the principall fruites of their atchieued victorie, in the conqueſt of theſe townes, wherof they had alreadie wonne ſixe in ten daies: that now they ſhould ſet vpon & get the reſt conſidering in what feare they now were, that the Proteſtants woulde neuer bee quiet ſo long as they had any places of retreate, which being taken from them they woulde haue no great deſire to ſtirre: that there reſted no more but a few townes in Xantoigne & Angonlucis in that quarter which could not aboue two moneths holde out agaynſt the force of their victorious armie and Monſieurs good hap: that afterward Rochel ſeeing it ſelfe naked of all couerture would quake. As for the remainder of the conquered armie wherwith the Princes and Admirall had ſaued them ſelues, the ſame did flie & would ſcatter of it ſelfe howbeit to haſten it thereto they might ſend after it a thouſande horſe and two thouſande
                     
                     
                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                        
Two leagues within the ſea there lie certaine Iles which fauour her: the inhabitants giuen as much to warre as traficke: the magiſtrates diſcreete and all wel affected to the reformed religion: as for the fortifications experience hath taught what they are, & therefore I ſhall not neede to ſaie anie more of them. Well, I will confeſſe that Orleance to him that is ſtrong in the field is a place more proper to aſſayle: but if it be for defence Rochel is farre more profitable: ſome there are that note the inhabitaunts of rudeneſſe, but how euer it be, they be loyall: the ſame may be ſpoken of the people of Namure, who are with their rudeneſſe loyall. And when the imperfections of a man or citie are much leſſe than the good qualities, they may be borne well enough.
                     The ſuccour which the Princes had thence in this third warre, doe ſufficientlie teſtifie it to be a good ſhop and well furniſhed: neither What helpe Rochel hath miniſtred to the Princes and their warlick affaires. doe I alleadge this to the end great townes ſhould bee puffed vp with pride, but rather to prouoke them to praiſe God for thoſe plentifull commodities that he hath beſtowed vpon them. (For hee that exalteth himſelfe ſhal be brought lowe either earlie or late.) Among all others that they had thence this is to be noted, that ſhe furniſhed and armed a certaine number of veſſels which fetcht them in ſundrie rich prizes yeelding great treaſure to the generall cauſe: for albeit they then tooke but the tenth for the admiralty, yet did the profit thereof amount vnto aboue 500000. frankes. Afterward in the next warres which began in the yeere 1574. neceſſitie conſtrayned them take the fifth, & it was thought that this would haue reſtrayned ſea faring men from ſeeking their aduentures in ſuch hazard: howbeit this exerciſe was ſo pleaſant vnto them, that notwithſtanding this exceſſiue tribute, they could not deſiſt therefro: albeit oftentimes it hapned that in thoſe booties which their talents had griped, the nailes of the land Picoree or prouling gaue terrible pinches whereby we may ſee what wealth the ſea warre dooth miniſter to anie Countrie.
                     Now if the land warre be iuſt, ſo ought this alſo to be: howbeit when we come to examine diuerſe the perticular actions thereof, Cōmodities of warres by ſea: alſo the abuſes therein committed. we ſhall therein finde wonderfull abuſes at the leaſt among vs: for moſt of theſe aduenturers doe make ſmall difference betweene friends and foes: and many times the poore enemie hath had fauour when the rich friend hath bene robbed and committed to the ſtreames by them that preſumed through crueltie to conceale their coueteouſneſſe. But heauen hauing both eies and mouth ſeeing

theſe ſecret inhumanities, reuealeth them openly, and with al more iuſtlie caſteth ſome of the cōmitters therof headlong into the gulfes wherein they had vniuſtly buried the innocent marchant. But bee this ſpokē without iniury to thoſe that do behaue themſelues lawfullie in their vocation: for my ſpeech I direct onelie to ſuch as are diſordinatlie affected to robbe the whole world. I haue heard of the Spaniards who were at the ouerthrow of the Lord of Stroſſie that halfe his armie conſiſted of pirats and rouers, who forſooke him at his moſt neede, ſuffering him euen in their view to periſh, together with ſuch braue perſons as accompanied him to the battaile: alſo that they meruayled that of fortie ſaile that went with him there fought not aboue ſixe or ſeauen, but as they commended the valour of theſe, ſo did they blame the cowardlineſſe of the reſt, notwithſtanding it redounded to their profit. This teacheth vs that the affections to ſpoile, and the affections to fight do worke contrarie effects. For my part I ſhall ſtill bewaile this valiant Captaine, my verie good friend, who both in his life and death was an honour to our Fraunce.
                     
                  
                  
                     That in nine moneths the Princes army marched almoſt three hundred leagues compaſſing in manner the whole Realme of France: alſo what ſucceſſe they had in this voiage.
                     
                        FOrce it was for the Lords, Princes, and Admirall after their ouerthrow to goe By what meanes the Princes armie was reſtored. farre enough from the victorious army, as well for their owne ſafeties as vpon ſundrie other reſpects afore, as it were by the way, mencioned, which counſaile redounded to their profite through the follie of the Catholikes, who ſuffered this ſmall ſnowball without let to roule ſo long, that in ſhort time it grew as great as a houſe: for the authoritie of the Princes ſtirred vp & gathered many: the L. Admiralls foreſight and inuention compaſſed profitable things, & the bodie of the Reiſters which amounted to 3000. gaue credite to the armie.

they endured much vntill they came into Gaſcogne where they ſtrengthened themſelues with ſhot, wherof they ſtod in great need, eſpecially for the warranting of their horſemen from ſurpriſes by night which in thoſe quarters through the neighbourhoode of both townes and caſtles are verie cōmon. They diſpearſed them among the cornets of Reiſters & other French troopes, ſo as as wel in the open as cloſe Countrie they were ſtill readie to defend themſelues. He that giueth a notable Captaine reſpite to bring forth that which his imagination hath conceiued, he doth not onelie heale vp his old woundes, but alſo miniſtreth ſtrength to his languiſhing members, & therefore he ſhould rather endeauour ſtill to diuert & combet him, ſo to break the courſe of his purpoſes: The longeſt aboad yt this half army made in anie place was about the quarters of Agen & Montauban, where it ſpent almoſt al the winter, & through the good entertainment that it there had, it was reſtored as it were with new mens bodies. Heereto ought all ſuch as haue anie militarie offices to haue regard, and not to do as the couetous labourers, who granting no releaſe to their lands doe make them barren: for when for the increaſe of their owne glorie they doe euen tier their ſouldiours for lacke of refreſhing, they doe vtterlie ouerthrowe them. Alſo if the North winde together with the moiſture of the Moone, doe euen weare the ſtones, how much ſooner will the delicate bodie of a man bee worne out with ſuch labours & rigorous toyles▪ Wherefore the beſt rule is infayre weather to emploie themſelues well, and in foule to take ſome reſt, except extreame neceſſitie conſtrayneth to the contrarie. In this voiage they verie well followed the rule of Hanniball in Italie, which was to giue the enemies Countrie to be a praie to their owne men, ſo often as occaſion required that they ſhould bee contented: for who ſo liſt to aduenture wanted no commodities: ſuch plentie raigned in thoſe Prouinces.
                     The firſt power that ioyned with the Princes was the Countie of Montgomeries, who returned victorious out of Bearne, which Of the forces that ioyned with the Princes. truly was a braue exploit and is at large ſet downe in the hiſtories: for through his diligence he preuented the power of the L. of 
                           
                              •
                           erid who beſieged Nauarrins which alreadie was tired with his long abo
                           •
                        de therabout, neither is it to be demanded whether he was wel welcommed at his comming. About the ende of Winter they marched toward Tholouze, where began a kinde of moſt violent warre in reſpecte of the fires permitted, howbeit onely againſt the houſes of thoſe that belonged to the Court of Parliament. The

cauſe heereof was ſayd to be for that they had euermore bene moſt ſharpe in burning the Lutherans and Huguenotes, as alſo for the beheading Captain of Rapin a gentlemā Proteſtant who brought them from the king the edice of peace. They found this reuenge to be verie hard, howbeit it was ſayd that it might bee a warning for them to be more moderate afterward, as in deed they haue ſo ſhewed themſelues. This companie is one of the moſt notable in the realme, & many learned men therein, albeit they might haue vſed more clemencie. The L. Marſhall d. Anuil was then in the ſayde towne with a good power, & was bitten by ſlanderers who reported that he had intelligence with his cooſen the L. Admirall, & yet throughout all that voiage no man warred ſo ſore vpon the Princes armie as he, for he ouerthrew foure or fiue companies of their horſe. This report was vndoubtedly falſe, and that I well knowe, notwithſtanding whatſoeuer may ſince haue fallen out. The army The voiage of the Princes armie. went on euen into the County of Rouſſillon, where albeit it belonged to the Spaniard it vſed ſome ſome ſacking. Thence it marched along Languedocke, and comming neere to Rhoſne Countie Lodowicke went ouer with part of the armie to aſſaile ſome holdes: But the chiefe intent of theſe Captaines tended to get ſome footmen out of Daulphine to the increaſe of their bodie, as alſo they thought to haue done out of Gaſcogne & Languedock, which deſire could not be brought to anie good effect: for when the ſouldiers vnderſtood that it was to march toward Paris and into the heart of France, withall that they conſidered the miſeries which thēſelues▪ & their companions that had bidden by it had indured the laſt winter, euerie man fled from it as from a deadly downfall, deſiring rather without cōpariſon to ſtay & folow the war in their own countries, neuertheleſſe they gathered together aboue 3000. ſhot determined to paſſe any whether: which were diſtributed among the regimēts, but they were al on horſback. Neceſſity forced thē ſo to do in reſpect of the tediouſneſſe of their iourney & ſharpneſſe of the winter: & albeit it ſometimes bred peſturing, yet came there profit of it, in yt as occaſion fell out their footmen were alwaies Iuſtie & freſh, neither was there much ſickneſſe among them in reſpect yt they were euer wel lodged & entertained. The L. Admirall a man of great experience in ſuch affaires well perceiued, albeit there were ſome treatie of peace, that yet it was harde to purchaſe any good vnleſſe they did approch to Paris, and therewithall knowing that beyonde the riuer of Loire, hee ſhoulde finde greate fauour and helpe,

did haſten the voiage: but the difficultie of paſſing the mountains of Sauenes and Viuarets were ſome ſtay, but more his ſicknes that tooke him at S. Steuens in Foreſt, & was like to haue caried him awaie: which if it had fallen out, peraduenture there woulde haue enſued change of counſayle: for hauing loſt the henge where vpon the whole gate was turned, they could hardly haue found ſuch another. True it is that Countie Lodouicke was a braue Captaine and well thought of among the French, howbeit hee was not yet come to the authoritie & experience of the other, neither dare I affirme, if he had died, whether they woulde haue proceeded in theyr carrier or not. In the end God ſent him health to the great contentation of all men: after the which the armie marched ſo ſwiftly that it ariued at Rhene le Duc in Burgundie. There had lyke to haue ben giuen a terrible ſentence for the peace, which neuertheles was but good for the ſetting of it forward.
                     The L. of Marſhall of Coſſe gouernor of the kings armie was The meeting of both armies at Rhene le Duc. expreſly charged to keepe the Princes army from comming nere to Paris, yea to fight if he ſee the game fayre, wherevpon he coaſted it in full deliberation ſo to doe: Finding it placed in a reaſonable ſtrong ſeat, he thought with his artillerie, which the other wanted, to take awaie the aduantages thereof, alſo by ſkirmiſhes of ſhotte to make them forſake certaine paſſages that they had. Onelie one ditch did they at the firſt abandon, where happened great charges & recharges of the horſmen, wherin either part when their turn came were purſued. The Captaines which on the Catholiks part gaue the firſt onſette, where the Lordes of La Vallette, Stroſſie, and Chaſtre who bare themſelues wel, & on the Proteſtants ſide thoſe that bare the firſt brunt were the Lord of Bricquemaud Marſhall of the fielde, the Countie Montgommerie and Genlis: and in this action did the Princes (albeit as yet verie young) in theyr countenaunces, ſhew theyr deſires to fight, wherby it was thought that in time they would proue moſt excellent Captaines. In the end the Catholikes ſeeing how hard it was to force their enemies, withdrew to their lodginges, as alſo did the Princes who hauing conſidered that their ſtaie might be hurtfull, as alſo that they wanted pouder, marched by great ionrneis vnto La Charitee and other Of the third peace. townes their partakers there to furniſh themſelues anewe with all commodities neceſſarie.
                     Shortlie after there was a truce taken betweene both armies, which grew to a peace, wherevpon euerie man laid downe his weapons.

It had bene verie noiſome lieng ſo long in the field, in heate, in colde, in bad wayes, and almoſt alwayes in the enemies lande, where the verie peaſant made them as ſharp warre as the ſouldier, which inconueniences many times troubled that great Captaine Hannibal when he was in Italie. It is therefore a braue ſchoole point to marke how men can fit their counſayles to neceſſitie: ſuch labours are in the beginning ſo odious, that they make the ſculdiours to murmure againſt their owne Captaines: but being a litle accuſtomed & hardned in theſe painful exerciſes, they begin to grow into a good opinion of themſelues; when they ſee that they haue as it were ouercome yt which terrefieth ſo many, & chieflie the delicate. Theſe be the braue galleryes & beautifull walks of the ſouldiours, & then their bed of honour is the graue wherinto a harquebuze ſhot may haue ouerthrowen them. But in truth all this is worthie reward & commendation, namely when they that tread theſe pathes, and endure theſe labours, doe maintaine an honeſt cauſe, and in their proceedings ſhew themſelues repleniſhed with valor and moneſtie. Of the behauiors of the Lord Admiral during the three firſt ciuil waries.
                     
                     Now if anie man in this woful warre laboured ſore both in bodie & minde, we may ſaie that it was the Admirall: for the waightieſt part of the burthen of the affaires and military labours did he with great conſtancie and facilitie beare, as alſo hee bare him ſelfe as reuerentlie among the Princes his ſuperiours, as modeſtie with his inferiours. Godlineſſe he alwayes helde in great eſtimation, and bare greate loue to iuſtice, which made him to be eſteemed & honored of all that part which he had taken: he neuer ambiciouſly ſought offices or honors, but in eſchuing them was in reſpect of his ſufficiencie and honeſtie forced to take them. When hee dealt with weapons he ſhewed himſelfe as ſkilful in them as anie Captaine of his time, and alwayes couragiouſlie hazarded himſelfe to all daungers. In aduerſities he was noted to be endued with magnanimitie and inuention to get out, and ſhewed himſelfe alwayes free from gloſing and diſſimulation. In ſumme, he was a man worthie to reſtore any weake and corrupt eſtate. Thus much I thought good by the waie to ſaie of him, as hauing knowen and kept his companie, yea, and profited in his ſchoole, and ſo ſhould doe him iniurie if I ſhould not make true and honeſt mention of him.
                  
                  
                     
                     The cauſes of the third peace. The compariſon thereof with the former: alſo whether the ſame were neceſſarie.
                     
                        NOne of the three ciuill warres laſted ſo long as this, which cōtinued two whole Sundry cauſes of this mention of him: this third peace, as well on the one ſide as on the other. yeres, where the firſt was ended in one yere & the ſecond in ſixe moneths, and many doyet thinke that had not ye 
                        Proteſtants drawē toward Paris it would not haue bene done ſo ſoone: of which experience they haue gathered this rule, that to purchaſe peace war muſt be brought beere this mightie Citie: which I alſo take to haue ben one of the chiefe cauſes to help it forward, for ye ſtripes which threaten the head do greatly terrefie: the Catholike ſtrangers hauing alſo waſted innumerable coin, had left ſuch want that they knew not how to furniſh paie. Ruine and robberie was rife euerie where. Moreouer, good hap ſeemed to begin to raiſe vp thoſe that had ben wearied. For the Princes armie had made a braue head againſt the Kings at Rene le Duc. Gaſcogne, Lāguedock & Daulphine held ſorer than war before: Bearne was recouered: & in Poictou & Xantoigne the Proteſtants had ſpead well in ouerthrowing the two old regiments and taking ſundrie townes. Al theſe things gathered together, which other ſecret & perticular oceaſions diſpoſed ye King and Queene to grant to the peace which was publiſhed in Auguſt. The Proteſtants alſo deſired & ſtood in great need of it: for hauing neuer a crowne wherewith to ſatiffie their Reiſters, their neceſſitie would haue driuen them to abandon the Princes, as by the Countie of Mansfield they gaue them to vnderſtande. Likewiſe ſeeing them neere their owne Countrie, it was to bee feared leaſt they would haue reſolued ſo to doe, which falling out would haue beene the ouerthrow of their affaires. Many other diſcommodities which I omit vrged heereunto: among the reſt the miſrule of our ſouldiours was ſuch as it could not be remedied: Inſomuch that the Admirall

who loued good order and hated vi
                           •
                        e, did many times ſince ſaie that he had rather die than fall into the like confuſions againe, and to ſee ſo many miſchiefes committed before his face. To bee briefe, the peace was accepted vpon tollerable conditions, alſo for ye aſſurance thereof was added, that which in the former they neither durſt demand, nor coulde obtaine: namelie foure townes.
                     The beginning of this communication was after the ſiege of S. 
                        When they beginne to breake of peace, alſo what is to be noted therein. 
                        Iohn d'Angelie, wherin were emploied the Lords of Thelignie & Beaunois la Nocle, gentlemē endued wt diuerſe vertues, who faithfully diſcharged their duties: and if before when the Proteſtants affaires were at a latter hand, the Catholiks had offered ſmaller conditions, I thinke they would haue bene taken. But when they ſaw that they would not graunt them anie exerciſe of religion, but onely a ſimple libertie of conſcience, it brought them into ſuch deſpaire, that they made of neceſſitie vertue. And as time breedeth alterations, ſo thoſe that enſued turned ſo far to their fauour that their courages were raiſed and their hope corroborated. The beſt time then to treate of peace is when we haue the aduantage in war. But that doth ordinarilie ſo puffe vp men that they will not heare thereof, howbeit either earlie or late the king did wiſer to graunt it: for the continuation of warre depriued him of his pleaſure, ſupplanted the loue and obedience due vnto him, for
                           •
                        aied the Countries, ſacked the treaſurie, & conſumed his power. But may ſome man ſay, the king of Spaine hath not done ſo in Flanders. Truely may another aunſwere, he hath not wonne much, and per aduenture in the end, for the ceaſing of theſe troubleſome tragedies hee will followe the ſame counſaile that his neighbours haue done.
                     Now albeit peace was neceſſarie for the Proteſtants, yet haue Conſideration vpon theſe th
                              〈…〉
                            pacifications of the ciuill warres. this 
                           •
                        ſhap almoſt euer enſued, that the ſame haue not continued, neither ſo much as beene eſtabliſhed according to the couenant. I will ſpeak firſt of that which was framed before Orleance, & laſted foure yeeres and a halfe, & was nothing neere ſo profitable for them as the edict of Ianuarie: howbeit it followeth not but that it was at that time acceptable: for theyr affayres were not in ſtate to refuſe it, and time diſcouered the fruit that it yeelded. Concord, good manners, and obedience to the lawes were al
                           •
                        eadie in ſo good forwardneſſe throughout Fraunce, that it ſeemed to bee wholie reſtored, but diſcorde with her ſecrete driftes troubled all. Concerning the ſeconde it was a peace, but no peace: neyther had it anie more than the name, for in effect it was ſecrete warre: It

may be tearmed The reward of the Proteſtants follie, becauſe that not withſtanding all aduertiſements that it wold be very bad, they would neuertheleſſe receiue it.
                     The third was much deſired in reſpect of the ruines paſt, the neceſſitie preſent, and that euery man was wearie of labour and trouble: for as the Frenchman is vnpatient, ſo doth he fit the warre to his owne humors. And in as much as the conditions were equall, or rather better than the former, it ought in my minde to be tollerable to the Proteſtants, conſidering withall yt there was no meanes to haue anie better. Like wiſe for the two yeeres that it laſted fewe can complayne, except at the very breach thereof, which was in ſuch horrible ſort as it deſerueth to be quite buried vp. Nowe who ſo euer ſhall conſider all theſe peaces in their iuſt obſeruation, hee will as I ſuppoſe, iudge them to haue beene a profitable and neceſſarie remedie vnto all: but if hee haue reſpect but onelie to their endes, he cannot chooſe but name them diſſembling peaces. And this hath made ſome ſo time rous that they beleeue that ſtil there is ſome poiſon hidden vnder the faire gloſſe of this golde. In Fraunce wee haue alreadie had ſixe generall, like as wee had in the ciuill warres of Burgundie and Orleance, and as well the one as the other were infringed: but the ſeauenth which was concluded at Arras was durable and holpe to reſtore Fraunce: by which example it may bee inferred that our ſeauenth ſhoulde bee good: albeit it were to be wiſhed wee neuer came to thoſe tearmes: for to wiſh to bee ſicke that wee might recouer health may ſeeme impertinent. I beſeech God to prouide therefore according to his good pleaſure: Trulie euerie man ſeeing the Realme flaming in warres ought to ſet before his eies Gods wrath and diſpleaſure, and the ſame againſt himſelfe rather than agaynſt his enemies: where nowe ſome doe ſaie Theſe bee the Proteſtants who through their hereſies doo ſtrrre vp Gods wrath againſt them: Others doe replie: They bee the Catholikes who with their Idolatries do prouoke the ſame. And thus in theſe diſcourſes no man accuſeth himſelfe. In the meane time the firſt thing that wee ought to doe is in theſe vniuerſal calamities to examine and accuſe our owne imperfections to the end to amend them, & then to loke vpon others mens faults. Likewiſe when we ſee a ſhort & counterfait peace, we ſhould ſaie yt we deſerue no better, becauſe yt, according to the prouerb, when we are ouer the bridge wee mocke the ſaint, & moſt of vs returne to our vanities and accuſtomed ingratitude.
                     
                        
Howbeit it is a commendable affection which deſireth peace, I meane a good peace (for ye bad are verie cut throats) becauſe therby The diuers affections of thoſe that long after warre and how they haue bene prouided for. pietie and vertue doth ſeeme to reuiue: whereas contrariwiſe ciuill warres are the ſhops of all wickedneſſe, which good men doe abhorre. The time hath bene that of both parts their haue ben diuerſe that toke no great delight in hearing peace ſpokē of; of whom ſome ſayd, That it was an vnworthie and vniuſt deede to make peace with rebols and heretikes who deſerued grieuous puniſhment: yea, they perſiſted in their ſpeeches vntill their diſeaſe were cured on this ſorte. If they were warriors they were inioyned to march formoſt at an aſſault or in a ſkirmiſh, ſo to kill vp theſe wretched Proteſtants: of which puniſhment by that time they had twice taſted, they ſoone changed opinion. As for the reſt which were either cleargie men or of the long robe, by telling them that they muſt part with halfe their rents to paie the ſoldiour they conſented to the peace. To be briefe, whatſoeuer their pretence were, whether pietie or iuſtice, ſure their paſſions were cruell. Other there were euen among the Proteſtants which did no leſſe reiect the peace as tearming it to bee nothing but treaſon, but had it bene neuer ſo good they woulde haue ſaid as much, becauſe the warre was their nurſemother and riſing. One good waie to reduce them to reaſon were to propound (in reſpect of neceſſitie thereof) the cutting off of their paies, or the leauiing of ſome lones of them, ſo would they long after ſome good end: For take from many of theſe people their profites and honour, then will they iudge more ſincerely of matters. Alſo for counſayle in waightie matters we ought to chooſe thoſe that ſerue God and are endued with greateſt diſcretion, for they ſtill preferre the common wealth before their owne commodities and affections.
                     I will likewiſe ſpeake of another ſort of people who indifferentlie Againſt ſuch as like of euerie peace and miſlike euery warre. do like of all kinds of peace, and miſlike of euerie kind of warre: who if they might be aſſured in quiet to eate their wortes and laie vp their crops, could well enough let euerie time ſlide, yea albeit at euerie of the foure quarters of the yere, they ſhould haue halfe a dozen good baſtonadoes. Theſe haue in my opinion, locked vp & hidden their honours and conſciences in the bottome of ſome coffer. The good Citizen ought alwayes to beare a zeale to the common wealth, alſo to looke farther than to liue in ſhamefull bondage. To conclude, in theſe affayres reaſon ought to be our guide, which doth admoniſh vs neuer to enter wars vnleſſe a iuſt cauſe and great neceſſitie conſtraineth vs, for warre is a moſt violent and extraordinarie

remedie, which in healing one wound maketh more, and therefore is not to bee vſed but extraordinarily: whereas contrariwiſe we are alwaies to wiſh for peace: I meane not ſuch peace as may be preſumed to be ſtedfaſt & not vniuſt: for the falſe ons do not deſerue ye title but rather to be tearmed traps & ſnares, as was the ſame of the ſecond troubles. The reſt, may ſome men ſay, were not much better, becauſe they laſted not long, but I am not of that minde, for A doe thinke that vntill they were broken they were moſte proſ
                           •
                        table; & ſo doth experience giue vs to vnderſtand, neither is that any better argument then to ſay: This man was naught, becauſe he linen but fifteene yeéres: but I will argue and pleade to the contrary: ſaying, they were good, becauſe men woulde not ſuffer them to laſt any longer: for had they bene noiſome to the Proteſtants, they would haue 
                           •
                        et them haue had their courſe. God graunt ſo good a one to France, nowe torue with ruines, and deſtitute of good manners. that ſhe may renue in beauty, and be no longer the fable of all nations, but an examplary of vertue.
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
            
            INPRINTED AT LONdon by Thomas Orwin for Thomas Cadman and Edward Aggas. 1588.
            
         
      
   